Theophilus and Philodoxus, OR SEVERAL CONFERENCES BETWEEN TWO FRIENDS; The one
A true Son of the Church of England, The other Fallen off to the Church of Rome.

Concerning,

1. Prayer in an unknown Tongue. 2. The Half Communion. 3. The Worshipping of
Images. 4. The Invocation of Saints.
By GILBERT COALS, D. D. Fellow of Winchester College.

At the THEATER in Oxford, MDCLXXIV.

Imprimatur

RA. BATHVRST, Vice-Cancel. OXON.
Julii 10. 1674.
TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, GEORGE Lord Bishop of WINCHESTER.
Right Reverend, and my very good Lord,
I Am bold to entitle these First Fruits unto your Lordships Favor and
Protection, as being conscious how much they need it, to shield them from this
Censorious Age: wherein impotent Men (who ought to learn and become Disciples,
and reap the Fruits of others Labors) usurp the Chair, and sit as Judges, most
severely to censure and condemn. A Generation furnished only with Principles
destructive; to pull down and not to edify; to except against what is Written,
and superciliously smile at the Authors folly (as they have concluded) whilst
they are wise in their own Conceits, and secure themselves from public Censure,
by doing nothing that would become a public Spirit: through detestable Ignorance
or Idleness, betraying the Truth unto their Industrious Adversaries, yielding
up a Righteous Cause to the Lusts of Men, for want of Zeal or Courage to defend
it.

Now we must needs acknowledge your Lordships great Example and Encouragement
has not bin wanting to the contrary. Your Clergy of this Diocese might have
learned from you to Preach and Speak boldly in the Defense of Truth, to reason
with, and convince Gainsayers. And for mine own particular, having had the
favor sometimes to stand before you, and hear your familiar Communications, in
great humility and condescension with such as were far inferior and subject to
you, I declare, That from your Lordships occasional Intimation and Discourse, I
took the Cue and Invitation to write in the Defense of the Church of England,
against her Adversaries of Rome: and having reason to distrust my self in so
great an Undertaking, I was confident to commit these poor Endeavors unto your
Censure; and lo! through your Tenderness and Indulgence, they are improved into a
favorable acceptance and Approbation. Whereupon I am encouraged to present them
unto public view, and humbly beg, They may pass into the World under the Wing
of your Authority and Veneration; and then, no doubt, the malevolent will be
sober.

That Almighty God would lengthen your date of Life to rule his Church, and do
much good in an evil Generation; and finally Crown your Piety with Immortality
and Glory, is the Prayer of,

Your Lordships Most humble and obedient Servant, Gilbert Coals.

THE PREFACE To the READER.
I Make no other Apology (Christian Reader) for my committing these Papers to
the Press, but this: The Love of Truth constreined me; and a just indignation
against those Emissaries of Rome who lately swarmed among us, and have not yet,
we fear, taken their slight, notwithstanding the Law has banished them. But
the Laws of Princes oblige not them, against the Mission of their Superiors:
hither they will come, and here they will abide, compassing Sea and Land to
make Proselytes. They flatter themselves (or at least the simple) with
expectation of great Success of their Labors. Observing our sad Divisions, and
great Corruptions, they find good Fishing in Troubled Waters; and conclude, The
general Debauchery of Men's lives, will dispose them to entertain a Religion
suited to their Vicious Inclinations, wherein they may have Indulgencies, and
Pardons, and perfect Absolution upon easy terms. They well know, That only our
Sins can bring such a Judgment upon this Island (which God avert) as to let in
Popery; and as they see our Iniquities abound, so their Hopes and Confidences
improve to make us corrupt in our Religion, as in our Lives.

But we hope better things from a Gracious God, and Invincible Truth, That the
Church of England shall stand against all Underminers at home and abroad. Only
let such as love the Lord hate evil, and let the Truths of God be more precious
in our Eyes, then to be Sacrificed unto the Lusts of Men. And when we shall
observe such Industrious Designs set on foot to bring in Errors: Good God! How
earnestly should we contend to keep them out?

Formerly we had Stout and Learned Champions of the Reformed Religion, who put
our Adversaries well-nigh to silence by the advantage of their Cause, and their
indefatigable Industry and Piety. But, however it comes to pass, the Scene is
altered: The Envious one sows his Tares, and few appear to weed them out; the
Truths of God are contradicted, and we are filent.

Since a Puritan Faction made the Schism, disturbing the Peace of Church and
State; approving themselves better skilled at their Weapons then their
Arguments; instead of Writing against their Adversaries, Fighting against their
Friends: Since the Venerable Fathers of our Church were driven from their
Habitations, bereft of their Libraries and of their Lively-hoods, forced to
seek for succors, many of them, in Foreign Parts: Since the Presbyterian and
Independent Chaplains had learned the Merchandise of Plundered Books, selling
whole Libraries upon easy terms unto Popish Factors: Since our Universities
were Garrisoned and Reformed, All the Fellows and Students of Colleges thrust
out to seek their Fortunes; a Generation of Seekers, and puny Discipies
succeeding: I say, since the year 1642. there has bin a sad long Vacation in
England from studious Reading and Writing of Books; and thereout our
Adversaries of Rome have sucked no small advantage. They are bold in Challenges
and Disputes, and Controversial Pamphlets, whereunto the true Sons of the
Church of England could not rejoin, for want of necessaries and Books; the
Presbyterians, for want of Learning.

Since His Majesty's miraculous and happy Return, The Church has had time to
breath, and all things move in their own Sphere. But Learning and Judgment come
not in per saltum, the Intercision of twnety Years is sadly sensible, and to be
lamented: Our old Divines, through desuetude, and the infirmities of Age, are
indisposed to enter into the List of Controversies; our young Divines, are
unfurnished with Materials. Thirteen Years (since His Majesty warmed the
drooping Genius of this Nation with his nearer Influence and Protection) being
too short a term for men to traverse the Cycle of the Arts and Sciences, to
revolve the Learned Volumes of the Fathers, to be versed in the Councils and
Histories of the Church, and to wind themselves out of the Labyrinth of the
Schools. And there are very few of the middle sort: For when the Glory of the
Land was departed, and the Virgin Daughter of Sion did sit in the dust; our
military Schismatics committed an horrible Rape upon Religion and Learning, all
things were prostituted to their Interests and Lusts, our new modeled
Universities studied nothing but Politics and Pamphlets, compendious Systems of
New Philosophy and Divinity: so that the Institution of two or three Years, was
more then sufficient to qualify them for the Pulpit and the Press, and to vent
their extemporary Notions to a deluded People.

The chief point of their Wisdom, appeared in the choice of such Pygmies as
themselves to sight with. The Presbyterian Learning was of a just size to match
Enthusiasts and Phanarics: A Generation hatched under their wing, and when they
were fledg, they served to peck out the Eyes of their Dam, and make Past-time
to the Spectators with their Puppet like Contentions and Disputes.

But our Adversaries of Rome were too strong for them to wrestle with: or
rather indeed, they were their Friends, affording them Principles to justify
Rebellion; and Politics, to carry on their Design against the common Enemy, The
genuine Sons of the Church of England. Nay unto this day (with grief we speak
it) they both appear to shake hands, and set their shoulders on both sides,
with all their might to unhinge our Settlement and Security.

From this sad Prospect, you may take the Measures of our Disadvantage:
Insomuch, that if one of a thousand, against the Genius of the Times, did bend
his Studies to search after Truth in the Records of Antiquity, to read the
Primitive Fathers of the Church, and furnish himself with Arguments against
Romes Innovations: upon his first Adventure to appear in public, he is beset
with numerous Adversaries and Opponents: Some Writing against his Book, and
more against his Person. They take their several Parts, as their Genius leads
them, either unto Contumely or Sophistry; despairing to give satisfaction to
his Arguments, they will wound his Reputation, and vex his Righteous Soul;
entangle the Discourse with Subtleties and Fallacies, that so the Reader may be
at a loss in such Mists which they have cast about him.

Now it is great pity they should have such leisure to send forth Legions
against single Persons: were all of my mind, we would carve out more work for
them. Relying upon Divine Assistance, and the merits of the Cause, let us not
fear their numbers, but examine their pretensions, and we shall have
encouragement enough to enter into the Lists: For Error is weak and
indefensible.

Let us therefore follow the steps of our Forefathers, who have brought their
deceitful Wares to the Light, and weighed their Motives in the Balance, and
lo! they were as inconsiderable as the dust upon the Balance They decline very
much the Holy Scriptures, because they appear against them. They brag of
Antiquity, but in those things wherein we differ, fall very short of that
account. They build upon the Rock of their Churches Infallibility; but when we
manifest their Errors in many Particulars, it will be an accumulative
Demonstration against that Fundamental Article.

Now this is the Design in General of this Conference, to bring the Innovations
of the Church of Rome unto the Test of Holy Scritpure, and of Venerable
Antiquity: and when the Reader shall find her so much to swerve from the
Infallible Rule, we will leave him to judge of her Infallible Spirit.

I have taken Bellarmins Motives principally into consideration, because he is
esteemed a Pillar, and doubtless speaks the sense of his Church as fully as any
others, and he had a Cardinals Cap for the reward of his Polemics. And here I
call the great Searcher of Hearts to witness, that I have not hitherto, neither
hereafter will concele from the Reader any Argument which the Cardinal brings,
either in his own Defense, or in opposition to his Adversaries, which I judge
material; for I will not prevarieate in the Cause of God.

One Word more, Gentle Reader, touching the form of this Discourse by way of
Conference and Dialogue. Designing, by Gods help, to profit my Countrymen, and
keep their feet out of the Snare; to write for the benefit of the Vulgar,
rather then of the Learned, who can help themselves. I have made choice of this
familiar way, to insinuate Truths, and to invite and recompense the Readers
patience with the Pleasure and Divertisement of these Interloculories.

And so I leave thee, by the Blessing of God, to reap the Fruit of my Labors.
G. C.

Theophilus and Philodoxus, OR A CONFERENCE Between two FRIENDS and NEIGHBORS:
One, A true Son of the Church of England. The other, Fallen off to the Church of
Rome.
Theoph. SIR, You have of late declined that familiarity we have formerly
maintained as Friends and Neighbors; and I now give you the trouble of this
visit, to understand the reason.


Phil. Not for want of good will and affection (worthy Theophilus) have I
sequestered my self from the sweetness and advantage of your Society: nothing
less, I do assure you, then the greatest concern in this World, has for a time
confined me to my most reserved and serious Thoughts and Studies; making me
neglect the due Ceremonies of Friendship, whilst I have been in pursuit after
the Vnum necessarium, the only true Religion and way of Gods Worship.


Theoph Dear Sir, You have in few words given full security to my fears, lest
some discontent had made you a Stranger: but now I will easily grant, that all
other circumstances and business must give place unto the care of Religion. Are
you therefore now at leisure to give your Friend an account of the success?
Religious Conferences are more becoming and suitable to our Christian
Profession, then the accustomed emtiness and vanity of our Communications.


Phil. Your goodness, Theophilus, has given the opportunity which my heart
desired, to declare what the Lord has done for my Soul, in bringing back the
straid Sheep to his Fold, and opening to me a door of entrance into the true
Church, out of which there is no salvation, and against which the gates of Hell
cannot prevail.


Theoph. Be pleased to be more particular and express, that I may understand
you.


Phil. With a very good will. I have been long wavering and unsettled, and in
the studious search of Truth; and now I have found the Jewel: the wandering Star
is fixed in its proper Sphere, and I am become a Convert to the Roman Catholic
Church.


Theoph. It seems by your acknowledgment, the Church of Rome is the proper
Sphere for wandering Stars, for such as waver in the Faith. And herein I approve
your Judgment: for I ever thought it impossible, that the thoughts of
reasonable Men could be settled on that foundation which Rome has laid; or find
any satisfaction in those Arguments, which her great Champions do produce to
confirm those Points wherein we differ from her.


Phil. The prejudice, Theophilus, of your Education is great: and doubtless,
you have not sufficiently consulted your Adversaries, as you esteem them,
otherwise they would have given you sufficient Reasons of their Doctrine and
Practice, and removed the Scruples and Objections you have entertained against
them.


Theoph. The holy Scriptures in this case are the best Oracles to be consulted;
and withal, our Learned Writers appear to manifest the full consent of
Antiquity, Fathers, and Councils, within the first 600 Years of Christianity,
against the Innovations of the Church of Rome. But seeing your self have
received such satisfaction from their Books, and from their Priests, as to
become a Proselyte to Rome; I pray be ingenious and free to communicate and
impart your new discoveries unto your, Friend.


Phil. The rule of Friendship and of Charity obliging, I am much devoted to
this good service, and most willing to lead such a Friend and Neighbor in the
way of Truth and Holiness.


Theoph. You suppose the new way, wherein you have lately chose to walk, to be
the right; and it will much concern you to make it plain, and remove those
stumbling blocks and rocks of Scandal which lie therein, before you can expect
that I should follow you.


Phil. Engage, Theophilus, that you will not stumble at straws, and I will
undertake to remove all other Obstacles out of your way.


Theoph. I shall not design to trifle in a serious Discourse, and therefore
will propose only such Objections against your new way, as I judge material.


Phil. Upon this condition I am ready to answer.


Theoph. I will first give you in such Exceptions which are obvious unto the
meanest Understanding, and wherewith your self was much dis-satisfied, before
your new discoveries; viz. 1. With the Latin Service of the Church of Rome. 2.
With her half Communion. 3. With her worshipping of Images.


Phil. I must confess these things gave great offense unto me, before I was
better informed; but now I can give a reason of the Churches practice, and
answer your Objections against it.


Theoph. We will therefore take them in their order into consideration. First,
The Church of Rome, where she has Authority, requires the public Offices of
Prayer and of the Sacraments, to be performed in the Latin Tongue, although it be
unknown and nor understood by the common people: and this is contrary unto the
reveled will of God in Holy Scripture, and to the great end of public Prayer.


Phil. Make your Arguments and Prooss, and I will answer them.


Theoph. St Paul, in that known passage to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 14. speaks
expressly to this point, that in the Church and public Assemblies of the Saints,
All things should be don to edification, ver. 12. and that he that preaches or
prophesies, should utter words easy to be understood by the hearers, that it
may be known what is spoken; otherwise he speaks into the air: ver. 9. and if
I know not the meaning of the voice (says the Apostle) I shall be unto him
that speaks a Barbarian, and he that speaks shall be a Barbarian unto me,
ver. 11.


Phil. We grant that Homilies and Sermons should be made to the People in a
known Tongue, that they may understand and receive instruction.


Theoph. The same reason holds for Prayers and Spiritual Hymns and
Benedictions: that the People, who are obliged to be present, and to hold
Communion in the Prayers of the Church, should understand them. For St Paul in
the same Chapter says expressly: He that prays in an unknown tongue (that is,
unknown to himself) his understanding is unfruitful, ver. 14. and therefore,
says he, I will pray and sing with the spirit, and with understanding also,
ver. 15. and he immediately adds, when thou shall bless with the spirit (that
is, with such a Tongue as the Holy Ghost has by an extraordinary gift enabled
thee to speak) how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned, say Amen
at thy giving of thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say. For thou
verily give thanks well, but the other is not edified, ver. 16, 17. and
therefore he declares, That although he had the gift of Tongues more then they
all, yet in the Church he had rather speak five words with his understanding,
that by his voice be might teach others also, then ten thousand words in an
unknown Tongue.


Phil. You are not ignorant how the Learned have sufficiently answered all
these Arguments taken out of this Chapter.


Theoph. That they have not sufficiently answered them, I know full well; and
that it is impossible they should. I pray impart that satisfaction which they
have given you.


Phil. Bellarmine, Tom. 1. Lib. 2. De verbo Dei, cap. 16. plainly shows, That
the Apostle in this Chapter does not speak of the common Forms of Prayer, and
Hymns of praise, but of some particular Prayers and Benedictions, which by the
gift of the Spirit, by immediate Inspiration, some were enabled to speak in a
Tongue unknown to most of the hearers, and sometimes not understood by
themselves.


Theoph. How does he prove the first part of his Answer, that the Apostle in
that Chapter does not speak of public Prayers and Benedictions, and reading of
the Scriptures. For these are his words, Vera sententia est, Apostolum hoc loco
non agere de divinis Offici is, nec de publica Scripturarum Lectione.


Phil. He proves it thus. Because, says he, out of: doubt the Corinthians had
the Scriptures read in the Church in Greek, and the Divine Service in the same
Tongue which they understood. Scripturae sine dubio legebantur Graece, and
Divina Officia^fiebant graece in Graecia. Ibid de verbo Dei, cap 16.


Theoph. This we readily grant, and make no more doubt of it then himself.
Corinth was an eminent City in Greece, and the Greek was the vulgar Tongue with
them, and therefore doubtless all their public Service was in that Tongue,
understood by all. And because the Apostle would always have it so, in this
Chapter he forbids everyone to disturb that good edifying way of the Church;
That none should pray or bless in public, or speak in an unknown Tongue,
because thereby the People, who did not understand the Language, could not be
edified. But that which Bellarmine puts out of all doubt, and we easily grant,
That the Corinthians had their public offices of Prayer and reading of the
Scriptures in Greek, I pray, observe well how he proves it. Graece in Graecia,
therefore they had their Service in Greek, because they were Grecians. And the
Argument concludes alike for every Country, that doubtless they had their
public Service and Worship of God in their own Language: Graece in Graecia, and
Anglice in Anglia; because they were Grecians, they had theirs in Greek; and
because we are Englishmen, we have ours in English: and so every Country in
their own Tongue. For set aside the reason of this Chapter, That St Paul
requires the public Service should be in the vulgar Tongue, to the end that all
the People may understand and be edified, and be able to say, Amen, (and
Bellarmine could never prove what he takes for granted, That the Corinthians
had their Divine Service in Greek:) by his leave, the Chapter shall serve our
turn as well as theirs; That, according to the Apostles general rule, in
England we should serve God in English.


Phil. But you will find how Bellarmine puts a vast difference between the
first Age of Christianity, and those which followed. Christians were then few,
and in their. Assemblies they sang Hymns together, and had their parts and
mutual responds in the Divine Service, and so it was then necessary that all
the People should understand the common Service, that they might readily join
therein, and make their answers. But when the multitude of Believers increased,
the Offices were divided, and the Common Prayers and Bymns in the Church were
left only to the Priest to be performed: for so run his Words, Divisa sunt
Officia, and solis Clericis relictum est, ut communes preces and lauds in
Ecclesia peragant. Ib. deverbo Dei, c. 16. And therefore it suffices, that the
Priest understand the public Offices, who presents the public Prayers unto God
as the mouth of all the Congregation.


Theoph. It was no fair division between them, when all was left only to the
Priest. But have the People then no partnor share in the Divine Service and
public Prayer?


Phil. Yes, the Priest, as the mouth of the People, prays to God for them, and
offers up the Sacrifice of the Mass on their behalf.


Theoph. So he does for such as are absent, and for the dead; and therefore why
does the Church so strictly oblige every one to be present at public Service,
more especially at the Mass, upon every Festival, under the guilt of Mortal
Sin? as we may read in the Casuists, particularly in Martin Aspilqueta, the
famous Doctor of Navar, in his Enchiridion or manual of Confession, chap. 21.
Farag. 1.


Phil. Because the People of God have great advantages by their presence at
such public Offices, therefore are they obliged by the Precept of the Church to
afford their presence: For many do understand the Prayers of the Church; and
such as do not, may pray with the Spirit, although not with their understanding.


Theoph. But Saint Paul says, He will pray with the Spirit, and with
understanding also. And I know not what you understand by your expression of
praying with the Spirit, and not with the understanding. The heart cannot pray
or sing except it understand: For Intellectus est sonus cordis, the voice or
sound of the heart is the understanding, says St Augustine, in the 8th Tome, in
his Exposition upon the 99 Psalm. And he quotes a Text out of the 89. Psalm,
ver. 15. Beatus populus qui seit jubilationem, Blessed is the people that know
the joiful sound, or jubilee. O let us run after this blessedness, let us
understand what we sing: (as he proceeds in the Exhortation) To what purpose is
it to sing and not to understand; that our voice should chant, without the
heart?


Phil. Such as frequent the public Service, may soon learn by observation when
to Confess, when to Adore, what to Answer, when to Stand, when to Kneel, when
to say, Amen: For the Priest pronounces the last clause of his Prayers, Per
Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum, Through Jesus Christ our Lord, with a more audible
and solemn Tone, that the People may have warning given to say, Amen. He
elevates the Host above his head, when the People must fall down and worship
it. And the Responsals are short and easily learned. Nay, those secret Prayers,
in the Mass, which the Priest is enjoined to utter with a silent murmur, they
conclude always with this clause, Per omnia saecula saeculorum (throughout all
Ages and Generations) which words the Priest must pronounce with a loud voice,
that the People present may say, Amen. Sic finiunt omnes Orationes secretas,
per omnia saecula saeculorum; quae quidem verba, licet Orationes ipsae tacito
quodam silentio fuerint recitatae, alta voce proferuntur, ut populus astans
respondere possit, Amen. Azorius Institutionum moralium, lib. 10. cap. 34.


Theoph. Alas! these you speak of are Circumstances, nor the substance of
Divine Service: when, not, what. I pray tell me what benefit will it be to me,
if I know when the Priest makes a Prayer of Confession, when I cannot join with
him in that Confession, because I understand not what he says. And for
answering Amen to Prayers which we understand not, the Apostle says, we cannot
do it, 1 Cor. 14. 16. How shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned,
say Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say?
And as the People actually join in the Divine Service with the Priest, in the
Responsals, and saying, Amen; so should they intentionally and cordially
accompany him in every Prayer and Benediction thro-out the Service. And the
Priest is enjoined often to exhort the People so to do, saying, Oremus, Let us
pray. I demand therefore, whether by this Exhortation, Let us pray, the Priest
calls upon the People to join with him in the common Prayers which he then
publicly makes to God, or only gives warning to every one present to put up his
private Petitions to the Almighty, whil^st he himself makes public Prayers for
them all?


Phil. Doubtless, he exhorts the people to join with him in the common Prayers
of the Church, otherwise there would be no Communion in the Service; neither
could the people be all ready together to say Amen to the public Prayers, if
they were permitted and exhorted every one to make his private Prayer unto God,
at the same season.


Theoph. You have said well, and showed very good reason, why we should
conceive that the Priest, saying, Let us pray, exhorts the people to join with
him in the public Prayer. But when we shall read the Casuists upon this Point,
and observe the general practice of the Church of Rome, we may alter our
Judgment. Navarrus the famous Casuist before mentioned, determins the case, in
the 21. Chapter of his Euchiridion, the 8th Paragraph, Potest quis eodem
tempore satisfacere praecepto de Audiendet Missa, and de dicendis horis
Canonicis, aut aliis votis juratis, vel in poenitentia injunctis, modo non adeo
uni rei intendat, ut alteri necessariam intentionem adimat. A Man may satisfy
the Precept of the Church to hear Mass, and at the same time repete his
Canonical hours, or other parts of private duty, whereunto he has obliged
himself by Vow, or has bin enjoined by his Confessor; if so be the performance
of the one, does not hinder the due execution of the other.


Phil. But how conceive you that can be, seeing his private Offices of Prayer
must needs interrupt his due intention unto the public.


Theoph. He shows you how. Quia nemo levitur expraecepto audire, and minus
intelligere verba Sacerdotis: quia satis est e longinquo Missanti adesse; and
actualiter, vel intentionaliter, exoptare ut Sacerdos a Deo audiatur, qui pro
omnibus loquitur, orat and sacrificat. By the Precept of hearing Mass (says
he) no Man is obliged to hear, much less to understand the words of the Priest:
for it suffices to be present at a great distance from him that officiates,
and actually or virtually, to wish that the Lord would please to incline his
ears unto the prayers of the Priest, by reason of his far distance, or because
the Priest speaks with a submiss and whispering voice (as he is sometimes
enjoined) or when himself is deaf, or the like: and he might well have added
one cause more, when the public Offices are not understood, being performed in
an unknown Tongue. I have singled out this great Oracle of his Age, as one for
all; who was consulted about Casuistical Solutions from all parts of the
Western-Church, and set forth this Enchiridion, or Manual of Confessors, after
many previous Editions, revised and perfected in the 90th Year of his Life, as
himself declares in his Epistle Dedicatory to Pope Gregory the 13th. And
hereunto exactly suits the practice of their Church: The people are solicitous
to afford their presence at Mass in their solemn Feasts, but it matters not at
what distance from the High Altar they place themselves; for if they hear the
Prayers, yet generally they understand them not, and therefore they apply
themselves, some to Auricular Confession in corners of the Temple, unto the
Priests they have made choice of: others mumble over their bead-role of Prayers
which they have bin enjoined by way of Penance: others, who had not leisure to
pay their Morning Devotions at home, recollect them in the Church, only when
the Mass-Priest with a loud voice concludes the Prayers, they are accustomed to
answer, Amen; and when he elevates the Host, they have warning given them to
Adore and Worship.


Phil. You may reckon these as personal abuses and corruptions against the
pious intention of the Church in her public Offices.


Theoph. They are too general, to be accounted personal. And it is evident, the
public Service being not understood, the great Doctors of the Church judge it
reasonable and charitable to allow the people their private Devotions in the
Church; and therefore it is a mockery for the Priest to exhort the people to
pray with him, when they understand not his Prayers, and are permitted to pray
by themselves.


Phil. The opinion of private Doctors, or the corrupt practice of private
persons, is insignificant. Show the Authority of the Church for this permission.


Theoph. I show how the Church gives the occasion by performing the Service in
an unknown Tongue: for if the people must join in common Prayer with the
Priest, they must understand it, that they may devoutly and affectionatly
discharge the duty together with him.


Phil. However, I have showed you before how the Priest is the mouth of the
people, putting up the common Supplications, and offering up the great
Sacrifice of Christ unto the Father in the Mass for them.


Theoph. And so the people are excluded, and in vain invited to join in Prayer
with the Priest; and there is no communion in the Service, which your self, not
long before, acknowledged to be an absurdity. And you will find the Primitive
Fathers of the Church speaking expressly to this point, Of the peoples joining
with the Priest in public Prayer, and of the efficacy of such Prayers as more
available with God, when the Congregation with one heart and voice did make
their common Supplications, and sing Praises to him. Tertullian, in the 39th
Chapter of his excellent Apology for Christians, resembles them, when assembled
together in common Prayer, unto an Army, manu facta, as he speaks, making an
assault upon the God of Heaven, and by a Sacred Violence wresting Concessions
from him. Haec vis Deo grata, This is an acceptable force to the Almighty. St.
Basil compares them unto the rushing of many Waters, in his Hexameron, the 4th
Homily. If the Sea (says he) be beautiful in the sight of God, how much more
is such an assembly of the Church as we have here; in which the mingled sound
of Men, Women, and Children, making their common Prayers, ascends unto our
God, as the noise of Waves beating against the Banks. St Ambrose insists upon
the same Metaphor, in his Hexameron, the 3d Book and first Chapter. Been mari
comparatur Ecclesia in Oratione totius plebis, etc. Appositly may the Church be
compared to the Sea, when all the multitude in their Prayers make a noise like
the flowing Waves; and in the Responsals of the Psalms, and in the Hymns of
Men, Women, Virgins and Children. St Chrysostom shows, how the people in the
public Prayers contribute much to such as are possessed, and to the Penitents.
For the Prayers of the Priest and of the people (says he) are common. All say
the same Prayer: (...). Homil. 18. in secundum Epistolam ad Corinth. With what
show of reason therefore can ye exclude the people from understanding the
public Service, and joining with the Priest therein.


Phil. This course you have mentioned out of Antiquity, continued not many Ages
in the Church.


Theoph. For 600. Years, as appears by Isidore Hispalensis, Lib. 10, de
Ecclesiast. Officiis, cap. 10. Oportet ut quando Psallitur, psallatur ab
omnibus, cum oratur, oretur ab omnibus, etc. It is necessary that this rule
should be observed in Church Service, that when they sing, All should sing;
when they pray, all should pray; when the Lesson is read, All being silent
should hear. And therefore the Deacon with a loud voice commands silence;
that whether they sing, or the Scriptures be read, unity be preserved, and that
which is spoken to all, should be heard of all.


Phil. But the general practice of the Church prevails with sober Men against
all Testimonies whatever.


Theoph. What is the general practice of the Church?


Phil. In every Nation under Heaven, to have the public Service in one of the
three Sacred Languages. In Hebrew, Greek, or Latin.


Theoph. Is one Language holier then another?


Phil. Not in it self, but in the effect; because the Holy Ghost chose to
communicate unto the World the Holy Scriptures in these three Languages.


Theoph. You have made an ill Argument for the Latin Tongue: for I do not find
that any part of Gods Word was originally written in Latin.


Phil. Yes, Bellarmine asserts it. Bell. Tom. 1. l. 2. de verbo Dei, cap. 15.
Let us be content (says he) with those three Tongues which Christ has
honored with the Title of his Cross, and which excel all others in Antiquity,
amplitude, and gravity, and wherein the Holy Scriptures were first written by
their Authors. Quibus ipsi libri divini ab Autoribus suis initio scripti
fuerunt.
And he brings a great Authority for the proof, even Hilary in his Preface to
his Commentary upon the Psalms. His tribus linguis Sacramentum voluntatis dei,
and beati Regni expectatio praedicatur.
In these three Tongues the mystery of the will of God, and the expectation of
the kingdom, is published.


Theoph. This Testimony of Hilary comes not home to the point; he says, In
quibus praedicatur, In which three Tongues the Gospel was preached, not in
which they were first written. And although Bellarmine here be positive, yet in
the same Chapter afterward he speaks doubtfully of the Latin Tongue. Vt quidam
volunt Latin, etc.
They did write the Gospels and Epistles only in Hebrew and Greek, and, as some
will have it, in Latin. For there are some who conceive that Saint Mark did
write his Gospel at Rome in Latin, and afterward translated it into the Greek
Tongue. And for the proof, he first sends us to Pope Damasus his Pontifical,
his Book of the Lives of all the Popes his Predecessors in the Sea of Rome:
where in the Life of Peter we are told, Hic scripsit duas Epistolas, quae
Canenicae nominantur, and Evangel Marel, etc.
That Peter wrote two Epistles, and the Gospel of Saint Mark: for Mark was his
Disciple, and his adopted S(...)n his Baptism. Now if Peter did write that
Gospel, as this Testimony asserts, how is it called the Gospel of St Mark, more
then the other two Canonical Epistles? And yet so far we have nothing said
concerning the Tongue wherein Mark did write his Gospel: but it immediately
follows, Posi omnem quatuor Evangeliorum ^^ntem, quae ad interrogationem and
testimonium Petri firmata sunt, dum alius Grace, alius Hebraice, alius I alive
scribentes consonant, omnia ejus Testimonio sum firmata. A piece of Latin which
I cannot make sense of; only we may guess the meaning. That by Peter's Testimony
all the four Gospels were confirmed, and confirmed (for the greater
confirmation of Peter's supreme Authority, the word firmata is, without sense,
twice inserted) while one of the Evangelists writing in Greek, another in
Hebrew, another in Latin, they all were consonant. Now by this wise Enumeration
there were but three Evangelists, one writing in Greek, another in Hebrew, and
another in Latin; in what Tongue the fourth Evangelist did write, must be
reserved as a secret in due time to be reveled, when France or Spain, or some
other Catholic Prince (as they will have it) has attained an Universal
Monarchy, and then the Language of his Country shall be adopted into the Sacred
Number.


Phil. I must confess, this passage in the life of Peter is set down something
imperfectly, we may suppose an Error in the Printing.


Theoph. The whole deserves a deleatur. For how could Peter by his supreme
Authority confirm the four Evangelists, when it is generally acknowledged that
John wrote his Gospel long after Peter's Martyrdom under Nero, even in the Reign
of Nerva Emperor of Rome, who released him of his banishment in Patmos, whither
Domitian had condemned him. John returning to Ephesus, upon the persuasion of
the Asian Bishops, did write his Gospel against Cerinthus, and Ebion, and other
Heretics, who denied Christ's Divinity Aug. Tom. 9. Praefatione in Joannem.
Occiso Domitiano, cum permittente Nerva de exilio red^sset, compulsus ab Episc.
Asiae, etc.
But in truth, this Pontifical is by themselves accounted spurious, and falsely
ascribed to Damasus, as Binius asserts in the first Tome of his Edition of the
Councils, in a Note before Peter's Life. Hujus libri Pontifex Damasus author
non est, quod in unoquque fere Pontifice pugnantia contineat.
Damasus is not the Author of this Pontifical; for almost in the Life of every
Pope, it contains thing; repugnant one to another. And he quotes Bar onius and
Possevinus for his Judgment. Now we may easily believe Bellarmine was too great
a Scholar, not to discover the Imposture and the Contradictions of the Book,
yet after his usual course, when a Testimony makes for him, he will take it,
although himself be not ignorant of the forgery.


Phil. You find Bellarmine in that place brings other Authors to prove Mark did
write his Gospel in Latin, Adrianus Finus, and Antonius Beuter.


Theoph. Writers so obscure, that I cannot find their Books; and Tirinus a
Jesuit, a in his Index Autorum, shows the first to be a Writer of the last
Century, making no mention of the second.


Phil. Baronius likewise affirms, that Mark wrote his Gospel in Latin; and
proves it, because he was, as Jerome calls him, Peter's Interpreter, and did
write for the use and benefit of the Romans, as Nazianzen affirms, Nazianzen.
in carmin. de 4. Evangeliis.
(...), and therefore probably he wrote in the Latin Tongue.


Theoph. You may urge the same Argument, that Paul did write his Epistle to the
Romans in Latin.


Phil. But Baronius observes likewise, some Latin words adopted into the Greek
Copy of St Mark's Gospel (...). cap. 6. ver. 37. and (...), ver. 27.
: which makes it more then probable, that the Greek Copy was translated out of
the Latin.


Theoph. This Criticism will not help him: for we find (...) in all the other
Evangelists, Matthew. 18. 28. Luke 17. 41. John 6. 7. We find many other Latin
Words in the Greek Test. (...), Act. 19. 12. (and yet St Luke is observed, of
all the sacred Writers, to write the purest Greek) (...), Matthew. 26. 53. And In
Comment. in Epist. 1. ad Cor. cap. 10. ver. 25.
Benedictus Justinianus a Jesuit, derides this Argument, instancing in many
other Words of the like nature, (...), etc. Leaving therefore these critical
and new Discoveries, will you hear what St Jerome and Augustine, c Adrianus
Finus Ferrariensis edidit flagellum Judaeorum, An. 1537.
two Latin Fathers, say to this point? Jer. in Praefati. in 4. Evangelistas. De
novo Testam. non lequor, etc.
I speak not of the New Testament, which without doubt is all Greek, except the
Gospel of Matthew, which be first set forth in Judea in the Hebrew Tongue.
Augustine affirm's the same. Aug. Tom. 4. l. 1. De consensis Evangelistarum,
cap. 2.
Of these four Evangelists, only Matthew is said to write in Hebrew; ceteri
Graeco eloquio, the others in the Greek Tongue. To these accord many of their
own Writers. Biblioth. l. 1. Breve grace sermon scripsit Evangelium.
Sixtus Senensis says expressly, Mark wrote a brief Gospel in the Greek Tongue.
And you may observe by this passage, and many others, how Baronius and
Bellarmine, two great Pillars of the Roman See, little regard the Testimony of
the Fathers when it crosses their great design, to advance the reputation of
the Church of Rome. However, I presume it appears by what you have heard, that
no part of the Holy Scripture was written in Latin originally, and therefore
the Latin Tongue in that respect is not Sacred, and to have the pre-eminence
above others.


Phil. But in the forementioned place, Bellarmine instanceth in other
excellencies of the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, above all others, in antiquity,
amplitude, and gravity Bell. l. 2. de verba Dei, cap. 15. Omnium consensis hae
al^is praestant antiquitate, amplitudine and gravitate.
.


Theoph. For the Antiquity of the Roman Language, let the Grammarians discourse
it. For the amplitude and universality thereof, I acknowledge, that it did
spread far with the Roman Conquests, especially in the Western Empire, which
was called, Orbis Latinus; so that it became the vulgar Tongue unto many
Nations. In Africa we have those Noble Orators, Tertullian and Cyprian, living
in Carthage, writing Tracts and Epistles in Latin unto all sorts; unto Men and
Women, Lay and Clergy: which shows, that Language was then vulgarly understood.
Tertullian wrote two Books to his Wife in Latin. A third, De habitu muliebri.
A fourth, De cultu seminarum, unto Women. A fifth to Virgins, Develand.
Virginibus. Cyprian writes his familiar Epistles to the Martyrs, and diverse
others; many of them of the common people. Augustine, Bishop of Hippo in Africa,
made all his Homilies and Lectures unto the people of his Congregation in
Latin, and therefore that Language was commonly understood: (for your self
acknowledged, that we ought to Preach in a known Language to the People) nay,
he expressly tells us, Lib. 1. Retract. cap. 20. Volens causam Donatistarum ad
ipsius humillimi vulgi, and imperitorum at que idiotarum nobitiam pervenire,
psalmum qui ab ^is canttur latinas literas feci. Ipse psalmus habetur, Tom. 1.
cap. 1.
That being willing the Donatists cause might be understood, even by the
unlearned, and vulgar sort of People, be composed a Psalm according to the
Latin Alphabet, to be sung by all the people, wherein the choice Heads of
their Schismatical pretentions were contained. The Psalm begins thus, Ipse
Psalmus habetur, Tom. 7. cap. 1.
Omnes qui gaudetis, etc. The Latin Tongue therefore, was become as the vulgar
in Africa; and so the Learned show of many Countries in Europe, by reason of
the Roman Conquests and Colonies, which for brevity I omit. But in after Ages,
through the Incursions of the Goths and Vandals, and Lombards, Gauls and Sarazens
into the Western Empire, there arose a great change and variety of Languages,
insomuch that neither in Italy it self, nor in any other Country, did the
people understand the Latin Tongue; and therefore the Argument of Universality
for that Tongue now cease. For the Gravity of the Latin Tongue, wherein that
consists, I do not understand: and when Kemnitius urged (as we do) that the
Latin was neither more sacred nor venerable then other Tongues, Non dicimus
eam graviorem aut sanctioram si ^ererba spectemus, sed hoc ipse esse gratiorem
and magis venerandam quod nonsit vulgaris. Lib. 2. de ver. Dei, cap. 15. ad
sinem.
Bellarmine acknowledges it to be true, if we consider the words themselves;
but the Latin is more grave and venerable, because it is not the vulgar
Tongue. Which answer of Bellarmine, if it has any show of Truth and Reason,
does as well prove the English Tongue to be more grave and venerable in France
and Spain, etc. then their own proper Tongues, because unto them it is not the
vulgar Tongue. And yet this is one of his special Arguments which he urges,
why the Majesty of Divine Service and public Offices should be in the Latin
Tongue, which is not understood, because it requires a more grave and venerable
Language, then are the vulgar Tongues of every Country Ibidem. Videtur omnino
majestas divin. offic requirere linguam ^agis gravem and venerandam, quam sunt
illae quibus vnlgo utimur.
. We see wise and learned Men, in the defense of palpable Errors, sometimes are
put to shifts, and urge Arguments of no weight and consequence, to amuse only
Children and Fools. For ought therefore that has bin offered to prove it, the
Latin Tongue appears not to be more grave and venerable then others.


Phil. Here has been a long digression to no purpose.


Theoph. Confer notes, and you will find it pertinent to the present business,
and it will be useful to other purposes hereafter.


Phil. I cannot divine what will be your future intendments, neither can you
deny the Latin Tongue, to be the common Language in Europe, better understood
then any other, at least by the Learned: so that with that Tongue you may
travel into all parts, and meet with many who understand it.


Theoph. It is believed of late, the French Tongue will carry us farther then
the Latin: but what Inference will you make, if we grant your Postulatum, that
the Latin is the most communicating Language understood by the Learned in
every Country.


Phil. It is most agreeable to the Communion of Saints in all parts of the
World, that public Prayer should be made, in lingua communissima, as Bellarmine
speaks, Ibidem. Alias tolletur communicatio Ecclesiarum, etc.
In that Language which will most communicate with other Nations and Churches;
that when Strangers and Travelers come among us, some of them may understand
our Service, and join with us therein: otherwise, neither the learned nor
unlearned will ever come to Church, but in their own Country.


Theoph. This is an Argument of great charity toward Foreigners, and of little
regard to Natives: that the Service of the Church should be at home in an
unknown Language, in Latin, to the end that Strangers when they travel in any
Country may understand, some of them, the Service, and so be encouraged to come
to Church. And in truth this Argument concludes for us, that public Prayer
should always be in known and vulgar Tongues; for if Foreigners will not come
to Church if they understand not the Service, for the same reason our
Countrymen will not come to Church, if the Service should be performed in an
unknown Tongue.


Phil. However, the Latin Tongue has had long possession thro-out the Western
Church in the Divine Service of every Country, until some new Masters and
Reformers in diverse places did thrust it out; and the general practice of the
Church should much prevail with sober Men. Epistola 118. Si quid herum per
^rbem frequentat Ecclesia, quin ita sit faciendum disputare insolentis. insania.
St Augustine says, It is most insolent madness to dispute whether that should
be don, which the Church thro-out the whole World does practice.


Theoph. I have showed you how the Service of God, in an unknown Tongue, is
contrary to Gods Word. Si divinae scrip. praescribii autcritas non est
disputandum, etc.
And Augustine in the same Epistle, immediately before this Quotation of yours,
had concluded, That if the Holy Scriptures have prescribed what is to be don,
it is not to be doubted but we must do as we read and are directed. Again, I
have showed how the Service in an unknown Tongue is contrary to the great end
of public Prayer, wherein all the People of God should join with heart, and
affection, and understanding, and devotion, putting an acceptable force upon
the Almighty, by the fervency and importunity of the whole Congregation. I have
likewise occasionally showed before, how the Latin Tongue was propagated with
the Roman Conquests by their Colonies, and in time became even vulgarly known
in many parts of the Western Empire: but upon the Inundation of the Goths and
Vandals, etc. And upon the decay of the Roman Empire, the Roman Tongue every
where gave place to the Conqueror, and now there is no Nation or People in the
World who generally understand it. Now then, seeing the Latin Service was in
use in diverse Countries, because it was vulgarly understood; and for that
reason only, as we may well suppose, the case being so apparently altered, and
no common People now understanding the Latin Tongue, it ought in every Country
to give place to that Language which is understood. And it is the insufferable
Tyranny of the Pope and Church of Rome, so strictly to keep up the old custom
of Latin Service in several Countries, when the reason of the first possession
cease, and the Language is not understood. And therefore in this case
Augustine shall give an Answer to himself: De Baptism contra Donatistas, lib 3.
cap. 6. Plane respondeo quis dubitet veritati manifestae debere consuetudinem
cedere.
I answer plainly, says he, who doubts, but that custom must yield unto
apparent truth?


Phil. If any Nation find it a grievance, they may peaceably apply themselves
to the Pope and his Cardinals, or to a General Council, and without doubt may
have Indulgence and leave granted to have the Service in their own Tongue. For
so I read, how Cyril an Hermit, who was a great Instrument under God, to
convert Moravia to the Faith of the Gospel; having first instructed and
Baptized Suatocopius their King (who was overcome in a signal Battle by
Arnolphus the Emperor, and lived an Exile in the Wilderness;) Aen^as Sylvius,
hist. Bohemica, cap. 13.
The History shows how this Cyril went to Rome, and earnestly solicited the
Pope, that in Divine Service he might use the Sclavonian Tongue, which was in
Moravia the vulgar, and it was granted.


Theoph. But why do you concele the most memorable Passage of the Story,
namely, That when Cyrils request met with great opposition in the sacred Senate
of Cardinals, a voice was heard as from Heaven, saying, Omnis spiritus laudet
Deum, and omnis lingua confiteatur ei. Ib ad finem capitis.
Let every one that has breath praise the Lord, and let every Tongue consess
unto him. And so they were in that Senate miraculously convinced of the Truth
now controverted between us, That every Nation should serve God, and praise him
in their own Tongue, even in the public Service. Now you cannot deny the Story
to be credible, seeing your self have made use of the first part; and it was
written by a famous Cardinal, who was afterward chosen Pope. But as for
Encouragements to ask leave, we shall find very few. For in the next Century,
Hildebrand, a furious and turbulent Pope, known by the name of Gregory the 7th,
flatly denied the same Request made by the Duke of Bohemia, Vuratislaus, in the
behalf of his Subjects. And whereas in most of their Churches the People had
before taken the liberty to use their own Language in the public Service, the
Pope strictly inhibits it by the Authority of Peter; giving the Duke a charge
for the honor of the Omnipotent God, with all his power, to resist such a vain
and rash attemt. And the lower we descend in Church History, the more stiff we
find the Sea of Rome to make any Concessions unto the People. The Immunities of
the Clergy must be enlarged, and the Laics kept under a blind obedience; and to
this end, their little or no understanding of Gods Worship, and of the
Mysteries d Binius, part. 1ma. 7 Tom. Conc l 6. Epistolarum Greg. Pap^ 7.
Epistola 11. Ne fiat quod a vestris imprud. exposcitur autorit. beati Petri
inhibemus, etc.
of Religion, and of the Holy Scriptures, is very subservient.


Phil. You are proud, and of a Schismatical Spirit, and so pretend great
difficulties to excuse good manners.


Theoph. It is the usual course with Men of your Church to supply their defect
of Arguments and Reason with railing: I have all this while wondered at your
patience, but you have not bin long acquainted with their ways. But in answer
to your reproof, I will tell you, It is no part of good manners, to ask leave
to serve God in that way which he has prescribed, with the heart, and with the
lips, and with understanding also. Lib. 30. cap. 5. contra Fauseum Manich.
neque evim cenceditur secundum Veniam, nisi peccatum.
St Augustine tells us, Indulgence is given to such things as are not lawful in
themselves. Prove it unlawful to understand our Prayers, and we will ask your
leave to do so. And that we do not pretend difficulties, is manifest: for your
Church is so far from allowing the public Service in a known Tongue, that it
scarce permits any to use their own Language in their private Devotions;
training up their Proselytes, Men, Women, and Children, to say their Pater
noster, the Creed, the Penitential Psalms, their Ave Mary's in Latin; and so
like Parrots, they are taught to speak what they understand not in particular;
to utter broken Latin, and many Incongruities; the intention of heart and mind
all the while being not determined to those Petitions which they make with
their lips. For although they have a moral persuasion that they say the Lords
Prayer, when they mumble out the Pater noster, yet for the distinct Petitions
they are altogether to seek, as I have had occasion to make the trial. For when
a Female Proselyte of Rome gloried, that she could say her Prayers in Latin,
rehearsing her Pater noster; when she came to the fifth Petition, Demitte nobis
debita nostra, I interrupted her, and demanded what that Petition was, which
the then put up to God; she answered, She could not tell distinctly, but she
knew in general that she said the Lords Prayer. Now certainly, it is necessary
that the heart should know when the tongue asks forgiveness of Sins, that so it
may be smitten and deeply affected with a sense and shame of sin in general,
and with some particular sins, which lie as a burden upon the Conscience, and
would come into remembrance at that instant when we with understanding beg
pardon. And the same reason holds for all requests made to God, we ought
distinctly to understand them, that we may be suitably affected with a due
sense of our wants. Did you never read the complaint which the Lord made to his
Prophet Isaiah, chap. 29. ver. 13. This People draw near to me with their
mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart far from
me.


Phil. Yes, and Lib. 2. De verbo Dei, cap. 16.
Bellarmin shows clearly, the Text is understood of those who profess Religion
and the fear of God, but their hearts are full of iniquity; or such as do not
heed their Prayers, their thoughts wandering about Worldly affairs, whilst they
pray to God with their lips.


Theoph. These Interpretations are good and pertinent, and yet exemt not such
also from the reproof of the Text, who understanding not their Prayers, cannot
possibly mind and follow them with devout and affectionate hearts: such
Petitioners can never be acceptable unto God. And you may observe the Artifice
of Bellarmin, and other Schoolmen, to shift off Objections with some nice
Distinction, and so to make the World believe, they have sufficiently answered
them: as tho (for instance) because that forementioned Text was a just reproof
in Bellarmine's sense, therefore it was of no force in our sense, against such
as pray with their lips, but understand not with their hearts. To conclude this
Point, I desire you seriously to answer this question, Whether your Reason and
your Conscience do not tell you, that a Prayer which is understood, is more
beneficial to him that makes it, and to be preferred before a Prayer which is
not understood?


Phil. I do easily grant it, and so does Lib. 2. De verb. Dei, cap. 16.
Bellarmine expressly in his Answer to Calvin's Objection. Ex Oratione non
intellecta nulla est utiliras, quia Apostolus ait, men's sine fructu est. There
is no benefit from a Prayer not understood: for the Apostle faith, My
understanding is unfruitful, 1 Cor. 14. 14. says Calvin. Whereunto Bellarmine
answers, In that place the Apostle does not condemn a Prayer which is not
understood, but he prefers before it a Prayer which is understood: for, the
Apostle does not say, My Prayer is without benefit, but my mind is unfruitful.


Theoph. This is sufficient for my purpose: For seeing by their own confession,
Prayers which are understood, and in a known Tongue, are to be preferred before
Prayers not understood by the people: Why should the Church of Rome so
pertinaciously cleave to that which is worse, and forsake the better part? And
you cannot in reason condemn us, who have wisely chosen the better part.


Phil. I have given you other Considerations and Reasons to justify herein the
practice of the Church of Rome. I refer you to them.


Theoph. And I refer you back to my Replies, and must for a Conclusion declare,
That all you have said has bin so far from giving me the least satisfaction,
that I am almost persuaded, your own Reason and Conscience is not fully
reconciled to your pretentions and plea for the Church of Rome.


Phil. I abhor such Dissimulation: whether I have failed in my Judgment and
Abilities, I know not; but I am sure the sincerity of mine Affection and of my
utmost Endeavors, have not bin wanting.


Theoph. I leave that to God and your own Conscience. And now we are warm in
this Discourse, before we dismiss it, if you please, we will take into
consideration the reading and hearing of Gods Word: Whether all the People of
God are not bound to be conversant in the Holy Scripture? And so by
consequence, Whether the Bible should not be Non reprehenditur, etc.
translated into the vulgar Tongue of every Nation, that all may read and
understand it.


Phil. Will you undertake that all who read the Holy Scriptures in their own
Tongue, shall understand them?


Theoph. Better, then if they do not read them; or if they were locked up from
them in an unknown Language.


Phil. St Peter says, 2 Pet. 16. They who are unlearned and unstable, do wrest
St Paul's Epistles; as also the other Scriptures, to their own destruction.


Theoph. He speaks there expressly of some things hard to be understood in St
Paul's Writings, which they that are unstable and unlearned do wrest, etc. but
do you find that Peter, upon this consideration, either forbids or discourageth
the unlearned to read the Scripture. The Text implies, that the unlearned did
read Paul's Epistles, notwithstanding their difficulty to be understood: Does he
there, or any where else, to prevent the danger of wresting the Scriptures to
their own destruction, take order they should not read them?


Phil. I do not find any such prohibition.


Theoph. Do you not find he does encourage and command them in the same Epistle?


Phil. There is a passage which your side usually quotes, 2 Pet. 1. 19. We have
a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well, that ye take ^eed, as unto
a light that shines in a dark place. But we may (...), ^^e give heed as well,
yea more safely, unto the Word of God Preached and Interpreted by the Church
and her Ministers, then when we read it our selves: and therefore this Text
does not infer, that the People should read the Scripture, but only give heed
unto those things which are Preached.


Theoph. We may give heed to the Holy Scriptures also when we read them, and
therefore your Interpretation does not exclude ours: but it is your usual
shift, to show how a Text may be taken in one sense which you allow of, and so
think to exclude all other senses which you do not approve. But in earnest,
Would you have the People know no more of the Scripture, then what they hear
the Priest Interpret and Preach upon? The Epistles and Gospels, and the
Lessons, are publicly read in the Churches, but in an unknown Tongue, in
Latin; and little Preaching you have, or reading the Holy Scripture to the
People in a Tongue they understand: you scarce allow any vulgar Translations of
the Bible into the Language of every Country.


Phil. You are forward to lay these things to our charge; but Concedi Lectionem
ejusmodi Libr. iis qui utiliter, and cum fructa cauti possint, and qui facult.
ab Ordin. obtinnerint, l. 2. De verbo Dei, cap. 15.
Bellarmine shows out of the Index Ex purgatorius, set out by Pope Pius
quartus, in the 4th Rule of the Index, That the reading of Bibles translated
into the vulgar Tongue, is granted to such as can read them with benefit, and
have a faculty from the Ordinary so to do.


Theoph. Yes, such as pretend to moderation in your Church, would seem to allow
Translations of the Holy Scripture into the vulgar Tongue of every Country, and
the common People to read them, but with great caution. First, the Translations
must be made out of the vulgar Latin, and not out of the Original Hebrew or
Greek; so the Rhemish Testament in English, and the Lovain Translation in
French. Secondly, None may use or read these Bibles thus Translated, without a
License from the Bishop of the Diocese, and he judges they may read them with
benefit.


Phil. Would you have a License granted unto them, who would read the Holy
Scripture without benefit?


Theoph. No: but this License granted to some, implies a general restraint upon
all from reading the Scripture without leave in a known Tongue; as tho to read
the Scripture were a thing in it self unlawful, and prohibited unto all, and
only allowed to some by Indulgence upon special Considerations. You heard
before out of St Augustine, Nihil enim conceditur secundam veniam nisi peccatum.
Nothing is granted by an Indulgence and after the way of Pardon, but Sin. And
withal, to show that those of your side are no real Friends to vulgar
Translations, and to the common Peoples reading the Scripture, you will find
that Bellarmine, who pretends to moderation in this Point, yet urges his
Arguments both against vulgar Translations, and the vulgar reading of the
Scripture, as unprofitable and prejudicial; in the same manner, as do the most
rigid sort of Papists, who bitterly inveigh against, and openly condemn the
common Peoples reading the Scripture, and Translations in their Language to
help them, as I will show hereafter. And upon this account, few there are who
take out a License: but the People are altogether strangers to the Word of God,
and entertain a prejudice against reading the Scriptures, as being not able to
understand them, and being in danger to wrest them to their destruction: and
they find they are more in favor with their Priests and Confessors, when they
do not desire to look into the Bible, and are persuaded it would hurt them.
Nay, the Learned are very ignorant of the Scriptures, and altogether neglect
them. Claudius Espencaeus, a Parisian Doctor, in his Comment upon the first
Chapter of Titus, about the middle, tells us, that he remembers how a noble
Italian Bishop told him, That Conterrances suos quodamnodo abhorrere a studio
Theologico, ne sic fiant Haeretici, quasi vero Haereses ex Scripturae studi^^,
ac non potius ex neglectu ac ignorantia nascantur.
his Countrymen did abstain from, and abbor to study Divinity (or the
Scriptures) least they should become Heretics; as tho (says Espencaeus)
Heresies did spring from the Holy Scriptures, and not rather from the ignorance
and neglect of them. And Robertus Stephanus respons. ad Censuram Theolog.
Parisiensium, in praesatione page 9. Respondebant se illud apud Hierenymum ^ut
in decrelis legisse, quid vero novum Testamentum esset, ignorare.
Robert. Stephens declares, that in some Conflicts and Discourse with the
Sorbon Doctors, when he asked them, Where, in the New Testament, such a thing
was written; they answered, They had read it in Jerome, or in the Decretals;
but what the New Testament was they knew not. Again he reports, how one of the
Sorbon College was wont to say, I wonder that these young men allege to us the
New Testament, Perdiam ego habebam plus quam quinquaginta annos cum nesciebam
quid esset novum Testamentum.
By this Light, I was above 50 years old before I knew what the New Testament
was.


Phil. When you examine well the Reasons which the Learned give against the
Peoples reading the Scripture, you will not so severely condemn them.


Theoph. In due time I will take an account of them: But in the first place I
will show how the Holy Scripture, and the Holy Fathers of the Primative Church,
are directly opposite to the practice of your Church, and the Opinions of your
Learned Men, in withholding the Scripture from the People.


Phil. You are a Man of great undertaking.


Theoph. Let the World judge of the performance. First, The Jews were the chosen
People of God, unto whom were committed the Divine Oracles. Now Moses, in
Deuteronomie, giving unto them a brief recapitulation of Gods Law, and of all
the Statutes which he had commanded them, once and again declares unto all the
People, Deuteronomy. 6. 1. These are the Commandments, the Statutes, and the
Judgments, which the Lord your God commanded to teach you, that ye might do
them, etc. And these words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy
heart, and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall talk
of them when thou sittesi in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and
when thou lie down, and risest up. And thou shall bind them for a sign upon
thy hand, and they shall be as frontlets upon thine eyes, etc. ver. 6, 7, 8, 9.
We have likewise the same charge given in a following Chapter, Deuteronomy 11. ver.
18, 19, 20. Therefore ye shall lay up these my words in your heart, and in your
soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand, that they may be as frontlets
between your eyes. And ye shall teach them your children, etc.


Phil. These Exhortations may seem to relate unto the ten Commandments which
were given in the 5th Chapter of Deuteronomie; and which they were all obliged
to learn by heart, and to write upon their Frontlets and Phylacteries: but not
to the whole Law of Moses.


Theoph. Observe how the word is varied: These are the Statutes, the Judgments,
and Commandments, etc. to show how it apparently includes the whole Law of God
given by Moses, to be kept and observed by the Jews. But to proceed, the
Prophet David declares, Psalm. 1. verse 2 The man to be blessed, whose delight
is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does meditate day and night.


Phil. Meditation is not reading: we meditate upon those things which we have
heard, and have bin taught, to fix them in our memories.


Theoph. And so we may meditate upon these things which we do read. This is the
old Fallacy, to thew how a Text may be taken in one sense, and so think to
exclude all other senses. But the Author of the Commentaries usually attributed
to St Jerome, shows wherein this Meditation consists: In legendis Script. and
faciend. iis quae scripia sunt.
In reading the Scriptures, and doing them. And Basil shows in the same
Psalm, how the Duty and the Blessing concern Women as well as Men. (...), etc.
Why, does the Prophet pronounce only the Man blessed? Has he excluded the
Women from this Blessedness? God forbid. Their virtue is the same, as their
Creation was equal, and the reward shall be alike to both. Again, our Blessed
Savior sends the Jews to the Scriptures, which testify of him, John 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they have
testified of me.


Phil. Relect. controvers. 5. qu. 3. art. 4.
Stapleton shows, how this direction was given to the Scribes and Pharisees,
the Learned of the Jews, and not to the multitude: For in the 33d verse of this
5th Chapter, our Savior says to them, Ye sent unto John, and he bare witness
unto the truth: Now in the first Chapter it appears, that the Scribes and
Pharisees sent unto John.


Theoph. Nothing less: We read 1 John 1. 19. ver. 24. the Jews sent Priests and
Levites to ask him, Who art thou? and that they who were sent were of the
Pharisees; not that the Scribes and Pharisees sent them. And (...) 10. (...),
etc.
Cyril expressly says, That Christ gave the exhortation to search the
Scriptures, unto the People of the Jews: and the 5th Chapter thro-out, shows
our Saviors discourse was with the People; some opposing, and others believing
him.


Phil. Stapleton gives another answer to that Text: Christum non constituit
generale praeceptum aut necessarium and perpet. quod omnes and semper obliget.
That it was no general Precept necessary and perpetual, which should always
oblige all men; that it was given by way of indulgence to the Jews now, because
of their unbelief. For he had before stated the Grassantibus Haeresibus tetam
spript permitendam aliquibus.
Question, and granted, That when Heresies did abound, all the Scripture should
be allowed to some.


Theoph. He was so over-seen in his first answer, that he gives the second with
very great caution: No general Precept, necessary and perpetual, which should
always oblige all Men; so many limitations to help him at a dead lift. But as
to the later part of his Answer, if because of their unbelief they were
exhorted to search the Scripture, and when Heresies prevail and Errors; then
now certainly as much as ever: and they should not envy us the Scripture in our
vulgar Tongue, who are so hard to believe their new coined Articles, and
therefore by them reputed Heretics: Neither should they withold the Scripture
from their Laity, seeing Errors so much abound in the World. But leaving these
shifts, will you hear what Origin says to this Text. Homil. 2. in Isaid.
Vtinam omnes faceremus quod scriptum est. Scrut. Script.
I would that all of us would observe, and do that which is written: Search the
Scripture. hear also what Basil says, Lib. 2. de Bapt. cap. 4.
(...); let us bear with our Lord, saying, Search the Scripture. Hear what
Augustine, Sermon. 45. De verb. Dom. Judaeis dicit caput nostrum, quod vobis
Corpus, Serut. Script.
Christ the Head said to the Jews, what his Pody the Church says unto the
Donatists, Search the Scripture. You see St Augustine urges the Enemies of
Truth and of the Church to search the Scripture, as the best way to reclaim
them. You have heard how the Jews were exhorted by Moses, and David, and by our
Blessed Savior, to search and read the Scripture. In the next place we will
consider Believers under the Gospel: we shall read Acts 17. 11. how they of
Berea were commended, in that they received the word with all readiness of
mind, and searched the Scripture daily, whether those things were so, as Paul
and Silas taught them. The Holy Ghost says, These were more worthy then those
of Thessalonica, etc.


Phil. The Greek word is (...), more noble; Men of better parts and abilities;
and to such we allow the reading of the Scripture, as not being so much in
danger to be led by the Word of God into Error.


Theoph. I had thought the Word of God would lead Men into Truth, rather then
into Error.


Phil. Yes, sober, wise, and learned Men: but the unlearned wrest the Scripture
to their destruction, as you have heard.


Theoph. I have already answered that place of Peter; but for your Criticism
upon the Original Word (...), Men of more eminent Parts and Learning; you may
observe how the commendation is given to the Synagogue of the Jews at Berea,
and their eminency was, That they did mind Paul's Preaching, and compare the
Scripture, as in truth, True Piety is the best Nobility, and I may, with better
color, invert your Argument, Because they were Men of Eminency and Learning,
they did search the Scripture, say you: because they did search the Scripture,
they were Men of Eminency and Learning, say I. But Chrysostom In locum. (...).
gives the best Interpretation of the word: They were more noble, that is, more
gentle and courteous then those of Thessalonica; who as we read, verse 5. Being
moved with envy, took unto them certain lewd fellows, and set all the City in
an uproar; and assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring Paul and Silas
out to the people, etc. but these of Berea were not of such a persecuring
turbulent Spirit, and therefore they were more noble. Again, St Paul exhorts
the Coloss^tns, Col. 3. 16. Let the word of God dwell in you richly in all
wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord.


Phil. The Text answers it self: Such as must teach and admonish others, must
be well versed in the Scripture: but it does not follow, that such should be so
who must learn and hear.


Theoph. This is a mere shift: the Original Words are, (...); and your vulgar
Translation renders it, vos metipsos, reaching and admonishing your selves: or
if the scope of the Words favor our Translation, Teaching and admonishing one
another. You see it is mutual, and implies the duty of all Christians within
their own Sphere, to instruct others; one Neighbor another in mutual
conference; Parents their Children; Masters their Family: And to this end the
word of God should dwell in them abundantly. Observe what Chrysostom In Locum.
(...). etc.
says upon this Text, directly against your Interpretation: Hear all ye who
are immerst in the Affairs of the World, and have Wife and Children to take
care of, how you especially are exhorted to read the Scripture with great
diligence.


Phil. The Word (...), rather signifies Permission, then Exhortation.


Theoph. And so should you permit secular Men to be conversant in the
Scripture: but this will not help you, for the Exhortation, or rather Command,
runs not by way of permission, but of duty. In the same Homily Hom. 16. In
Epistolam ad Coloss. (...), etc.
he tells every one of his hearers, That he should not wait for any other
Teacher: Thou have, says he, the Oracles of God, none can instrust thee like
them. And then it follows, (...), etc.
I beseech you, hear ye men of the World: Buy you Bibles, which are the souls
physic; if not, purchase the New Testament, or Paul's Epistles, or the Acts of
the Apostles, or the Gospels, Masters that will never intermit Instruction. And
then he rounds them in the ear, (...).
This is the cause of all evils, not to know the Scripture. And lastly, in
order to their instructing one another, he tells them, That they ought to help,
and not leave all the burden upon him: They were sheep, and must be fed; but
they were not brute Beasts, but a rational Flock, (...).
and might so learn as in due time even to instruct their neighbors. And so I
hope this holy Father has fully answered you.


Phil. Lib. 2. de verb. Dei, c. 16. Chrysostom. amplificat, in concionibus
utebatur.
Bellarmine, and others, observe Chrysostom to have bin a great Orator, and to
use Hyperbolies and Amplifications according to the occasion: and he gives an
instance pertinent to your purpose out of another place, where he says, g It
is impossible any one should obtain salvation, unless he be always conversant
in reading Spiritual Books: which you know cannot be true in a strict sense;
for many that cannot read, may be saved.


Th. The Father speaks of Men that can read, and by their neglect exclude
themselves from a possibility of Salvation; and that others who cannot read,
might be diligent to hear others reading the Scripture, in the Church, and in
their Families: And if this be your way to answer the Fathers when they fully
declare against you, to say, They speak not Doctrinally, but like Orators by
way of Amplification, you must needs carry all before you. Put you will find in
the Homily upon Lazarus, how Chrysostom makes it his great business to exhort
all his Congregation (in the Preface) to study the Scripture: This, says he, I
Preach in public, and this I exhort in private, and will never desist from so
doing, (...), etc.
That not only in the Church, but also in your houses, ye should diligently
read the Scripture: (...).
And I hate, says he, that frigid answer, and worthy all condemnation, That
because ye have Trades, and worldly Business, and Wife, and Children, therefore
ye cannot be so well versed in the Scripture: And that in your Opinion, I
should rather give this charge to study the Scripture, unto Men separate from
the World; unto Monks, and Hermits, and the Clergy. What say thou man? (as
the Father goes on) Is it not thy business to attend unto the Scripture,
because thou art encumbered with myriads of worldly affairs? I tell thee, for
this very reason thou should apply thy self to the Scripture, more then such
who are free from cares; for amidst thy multiplicity of business, thou do
want the help and conduct of the Scripture, more then they who are secluded
from the world: Thy Wife may vex thee, thy Children grieve thee, thy Servant
anger thee, thy Friend envy thee, thy Enemy beset thee with snares, the Judge
oppress thee, thy Neighbor curse thee; and against all these and other
assaults, how necessary will be the Panoply of the Scripture, the only Physic
against all the maladies of the World. After all this, judge whether
Bellarmines shift will serve his turn, touching Chrysostom' s Oratory and
Amplifications: No, it was the good Fathers business, and principal part of
Doctrine, in many Homilies to recommend the study of the Scripture unto his
Congregation.


Phil. But you may read another answer Bellarmine gives to these vehement
Exhortations of Chrysostom, Quoniam dediti erant homines t^^atris spect.
aliisque (...), and script. divinas nunquam legebant.
Because the People of that great City, Constantinople, were much given to
Plays and Sights, and other trisling Divertisements; and such as were sit and
able did not look into the Bible, therefore he was so solicitous to quicken
them. a Hom. 3. in Lazarum, Tom. 5. etc.



Theoph. Does not the same Cause ever enforce the same Exhortation? Are not Men
too much addicted to the Vanities, and Lusts, and Cares of the World, and
therefore need these sacred Divertisements? But by these whiffling Answers, you
may perceive how your great Bellarmin is a Trifler, and so are all his Seconds,
who have the confidence, without show of reason, to shift off Arguments and
Texts of Scripture, which are as clear as the Sun against them: But such weak
Answers fortify our Objections, and do in truth manifest, They are so
convincing, that Men must be frivolous or silent in their Solutions.


Phil. I ascribe this Triumph before the Victory, and this insulting over your
Adversaries, unto the partiality of your Judgment in your own cause.


Theoph. To decline this Imputation, I shall choose to submit all to the
impartial Reader; and pass from the testimony of Holy Scripture, unto the
testimony of the Holy Fathers of the Church, who exhort all Christians to the
search and study of the Scripture. And although we meet with great variety of
Testimonies collected by learned Protestants out of the ancient Fathers, yet
for brevity sake I will produce only such as I have had the opportunity to read
my self, and if occasion serves, will hereafter be ready to produce the rest.
Lib. de spectaculis, ad finem, Script sacris incumbat Christianus fidelis, ibi
inveniet condigna fidei spectacula
Cyprian willing to withdraw Christians from the Roman Theaters and Sports,
having condemned them for their Idolatry and Impurities, he directs Christians
to the contemplation of Gods Works, in the excellent frame, and beauty, and
order of the Creation, and more especially to read the Scripture. Let the
Believing Christian, says he, make the holy Scripture his study, where he
shall find excellent discoveries agreeable to his precious Faith.


Phil. This Testimony of Cyprian, justifies Bellarmins former Answer, That
because the People were much given to frequent the Theaters and Scenes, full of
obscenity and vice, therefore for that season Chrysostom did divert them, by a
better imploiment, exhorting them to study the Scripture: But this proves not
that they should be always read by the common people, but only upon such
special Considerations.


Theoph. When such Motives and Considerations are wanting, let Men and Women
lay aside their Bibles; but as long as we live in a wicked World, there will be
always need of the light and conduct of Gods Holy Word, to lead us out of the
works of Darkness and way of Unrighteousness. But I pray hear others: Homil 9.
in Levit. Oplamus ut operam detis non selum in Ecclesia, etc.
Origin tells his hearers, We do heartily wish, that ye would labor not only in
the Church to hear Gods word, but also in your houses to be exercised in his
Law day and night. And he proceeds, In vain do ye complain that the flesh is
weak, while ye neglect to nurish and fortify the spirit, by reading the Holy
Scripture, and by Prayer, and hearing the instruction of the Word. And
elsewhere, as you have heard before, he passionatly wishes, Homil. 2. in Isaia.
Would God we all would follow that which is written, Search the Scriptures.
Lib. 12. de praepar. Evang.
Eusebius Caesariensis assigns the reading of the Holy Scriptures both unto
Babes in Christ, and unto strong Men, with this difference, The first sort must
simply read and believe the Scripture as most true, and the infallible Word of
God: But Men of mature Learning and Judgment, should dive into the profound
Mystery and meaning of the Scripture: you may read his words in the first Page
of that Book. The same Eusebius wrote three Books, as Jerome reports, of the
Life of Pamphilus his great Friend, which are not extant. But Lib. 1. Apol.
adversus Ruffinum. Script. Sanctas non ad leg. sed ad habendum tribuebat, non
solum viris sed and feminis.
Jerome cites this Passage out of the third Book, in commendation of Pamphilus:
Who is virtuous, and not a Friend of Pamphilus, who supplied food and
necessaries to the poor, and distributed the Holy Scriptures, not only to Men,
but Women, who were desirous to read them, for which end he purchased many
Bibles? In Psalm. 1. (...). etc.
Basil the Great tells us, All Scripture is written by Divine Inspiration, and
profitable, and therefore given by the Holy Ghost, that every one of us might
choose a proper remedy for his disease, as out of a common Apothecaries shop, f
r his Soul.


Phil. As the Holy Scriptures have Physic for all Diseases, so the Application
should be well made by our Spiritual Physicians, otherwise the Patient may
miscarry; and therefore we hold the People should hear and receive the
Scripture from the Priests mouth.


Theoph. This gloss contradicts the Text, for the Father says, (...).
Every one should choose his proper remedy out of the common Tresury. Again,
Lib. de Parad. c. 12. Gentiles aut, etc.
Ambrose directs a Gentile who would believe, or a Catechumen who would receive
farther Instruction, unto the living Waters of the Holy Scripture, without the
corrupt Channels of Interpreters. You see the Holy Scripture ought not to be
withheld from Unbelievers, and Unbaptized. But Jerome for the Latin Church,
and Chrysostom for the Greek, speak so fully to this Point, that we may
supersede all other Testimonies. Jerome writes many Epistles to Virgins, to
Women, concerning themselves and the Institution of their Children, the
Government of their Families; and above all, commends to them the diligent
reading of the Scripture. In his Epistle to Laeta, a Noble Dame, De Instit.
filiae. nec alibi reperiant nisi in adyto script. Prophet. Apostolos de
spiritualibus sciscitantem, etc.
He gives in charge to inure her beloved Daughter to the study of the
Scripture, That none should find her in the way of the World, amidst the throng
and tumult of Play-fellows and Kins-folk, but in the recesses of the Holy
Scripture, consulting the Prophets and Apostles about Spiritual concerns.
Instead of fine Clothes and Jewels, let her love the Book of God; let her learn
the Psalter, and divert her self with those Songs. In the Proverbs of Solomon,
let her learn Morals. In the Ecclesiastes, to despise the World. In Job,
Patience and Virtue. Let her proceed to the Evangelists, and never lay them out
of her hands; and so to the Acts of the Apostles and their Epistles: and having
enriched her heart with these Divine Tresures, let her commit to memory the
Prophets, and the Pentateuch, etc. And at last, without danger, let her learn
the Canticles. In another Epistle to a Virgin, Al Demetriadem. de Virg.
servanda. Spendeounum illud tibi, nata deo, praeque dominibus unum praedicam,
and repetens, etc.
O thou that art born of God, says he, This one thing above all, I must give
in charge, repeating it over and over again, That thou possess thy heart with
the love of reading the Holy Scripture. Love the Bible, and wisdom will
assuredly love thee. In an Epistle to Salvina, persuading her to keep her self
a Widow, he faith, Semper in manibus sit divina Lectio.
Let the Bible be always in thy hand to read it. In an Epistle to Celautia
concerning the government of her Family, he presses the same Exhortation,
Semper in manibus, and jugiter in mente volvantur.
Let the Holy Scripture be always in thy hand, and in thy mind. In Marcella's
Epitaph, Epistola ad Principiam div. Script. ardor erat incredib. semper que
cantabat, In (...)rde meo abscondo eloq. tua, ut non peccem, etc.
he gives this commendation of her, She had an incredible thirst after the Holy
Scripture, and ever sang, I have hid thy word within my heart, that I might not
sin against thee, etc. and that she became an Oracle to resolve doubts
concerning the Scripture. I might collect many more such passages out of this
Author, but I will content my self with one general Exhortation, to read the
Scripture instead of all. Praefatione in Epistelam ad Ephesies, si quiequam est
quod in hac vita, etc.
If there be any thing, says the good Father, which should make a wise man
choose to live, and weather out the storms and troubles of our present state,
it is the knowledge and meditation of the Scripture. For whereas (as he goes
on) herein we chiefly differ from other living Creatures, that we are rational
and can speak, and all Reason and Language is contained in the Holy Scripture,
whereby we know God, and are not ignorant wherefore we were created, I marvel
any there should be, who either out of sloth and negligence, will not learn
themselves these excellent things, or think others worthy reprehension who do
study them. And now tell me, Have you not enough of Jerome? Would he not
marvel, think you, at your new Doctors, who as much discourage the People from
reading the Scripture, as he with all his excellency of Grace and Eloquence
does excite them?


Phil. I must confess. I never looked to hear so much to this purpose.


Theoph. Have a little patience, and you will find Chrysostom as full and
emphatical. Like advice he gives to Gaudentius for the Education of Pacatula
his Daughter. f Let her learn the Psalter by heart, and before she f Discat
Psalterium memoriter, etc.
comes to maturity of age, let her make the Books of Solomon, the Evangelists,
the Apostles and Prophets, her chief tresure. In his first Tome, he tells his
hearers, Hom. 10. in Genesin. (...), etc.
We may at home, before and after meals, taking into our hands the Holy Bible,
feed our Souls: for as the Body does want corporal nurishment, so does the Soul
spiritual, we being thereby strengthened against the assaults of the flesh, and
our restless enemy, who sets upon us to captivate our Souls. And therefore,
says he, the Prophet David calls him Blessed, who meditates in the Law of the
Lord day and night. And then he adds, This is our salvation, this our spiritual
wealth, this our security. If we arm our selves daily by spiritual bearing and
reading, and discourse, we shall never be over come, but frustrate all the
devices of the evil Spirit, and obtain the kingdom of Heaven. Again, speaking
of the Holy Scriptures, he tells them, (...), etc.
They are spiritual food, the nerves and sinews of Ratiocination, making the
soul vigorous and in tune, and more Philosophical, not suffering her to be
carried away with brutish passions, giving her a swift wing, and translating
her (as I may so speak) into Heaven: Wherefore I beseech you, let us not
deprive our selves of such advantages, but in our own houses let us give all
diligence in reading the Holy Scripture. In his Tom. 2. Hom. 29. (...), etc.
He upbraids them of not minding the Scripture, And who is there, says he, of
this great Congregation, that, being required, can say one of David's Psalms, or
any other part of Scripture? Hom. 2. in Matt. ad finem.
And what do ye plead for your excuse? I an no Monk, I have a Wife and
Children, and the care of a Family, etc.


Phil. He justly reproves such, who out of supine negligence had learned none
of David's Psalms, or other parts of the Scriptures: but our Church recommends
the Penitential Psalms, and many others, to be learned by heart.


Theoph. That which follows, expressly mentions reading the Bible: (...), etc.
This mars all, says ^e, that ye think it belongs only to Monks to read the
Word of God, when as ye want the comfort of the Scripture more then they: such
as are conversant in secular affairs, and every day receive wounds, do most
stand in need of Physic. And he goes on to tell them, (...), etc.
That if there be a sin greater then the neglect of reading Gods Word, it is
this, To be persuaded we need not read the Scripture. This is the studied
suggestion of the devil; whereas Paul tells us, These things were written for
our instruction, 1 Cor. 10. 11. I must needs declare to you, Philodoxus, It
makes my heart even to bleed, to think how such sa^anical suggestions (as
Chrysostom justly called them) should now become the avowed Doctrine of a
Christian Church, if I may in Charity be allowed to call her so.


Phil. Your Zeal, Theophilus, transports you beyond all reason. (...), etc.



Theoph. I would to God I had no reason for this Zeal and Indignation, but I
have much more to produce out of this Father. In another Homily he gives
advice, that Hom. 5. Matthew. (...), etc.
They should not immediately fall upon worldly business after a Sermon, but call
their Wives and Children together, and take the Bible, and make them partake of
those things he had heard.


Phil. This we approve well, that such as come to Church should heed what is
taught them, and carry it with them; and in their Families, repeat and instruct
those that were absent.


Theoph. But there is something more then you allow, (...), etc.
That they should have Bibles in their Houses, and take and read to their Wives
and Children at home the Text and Proofs, etc. Again, in the same Tome, Hom.
32. in Johan. ad finem. (...), etc.
from the example of the Woman of Samaria, enquiring of our Blessed Savior
about the true Worship of God, etc. he condemns his hearers of negligence and
indifferency in matters of Religion: And then he proposes the Question, Which
of you, being in his house, will take into his band the Book of Christianity,
(...).
and search what is contained therein? You shall find Dice in every House, but
the Bible in few: and such as have the Scriptures, are as tho they had them
not: They clasp them up, and lock them in their Chests, and are solicitous for
the finest Paper, and the fairest Letter, but not to read them. They boast they
have the Bible in Golden Letters, and know nothing of the Contents. But the
Scriptures were not given, that we should have them in our Books, but engraven
in our hearts. I speak not this, says he, forbidding you to have Bibles, (
(...).
I exhort and earnestly beg, you would procure them) but I desire also the
sense and words of Holy Scripture should be carried in your minds. And if the
Devil dares not enter into an house where there is a Bible, much less will he
draw near to a soul that is fraught with Sentences of Scripture; neither sin,
nor the evil Spirit, will attemt a mind so well furnished. (...), etc.
Sanctify therefore thy Mind, and sanctify thy Body, having the Holy
Scripture always in thy Heart, and in thy Mouth. In his third Tome, (...), etc.
in his Preface to the Epistle to the Romans, he grieves his hearers were not
better acquainted with Paul and his Epistles; and tells them, If they would
with alacrity give themselves to reading the Scripture, they should want no
other thing: or, if I mistake him not, no other Interpreter. For the promise of
Christ shall never fail: seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened
unto you. Soon after he tells them, (...), etc.
From hence dospring up myriads of evils, even from the ignorance of the
Scripture: from hence pernicious Heresies, neglected lives, and labor in vain.
For as they who are destitute of the light, cannot make strait paths; so such
as do not take along with them the light of Gods Word, in many things
necessarily do off end and stumble, as walking in utter darkness. But more then
all this we may read in his fifth Tome, in the third Homily upon Lazarus, and I
have already instanced in several passages of that Sermon, where he also tells
us, That as Workmen cannot be without their Tools, so neither a Christian
without the Holy Scripture. And he concludes the Preface of that Homily
(wherein all these passages are to be found) with this asseveration, (...), etc.
It is impossible, I say it is impossible, that any one who gives himself up to
read the Holy Scripture with due observation, should lose his labor. And now
after such full and frequent Exhortations of the Holy Scripture, and of the
Holy Fathers, made unto all sorts and conditions of Men, to search, and hear,
and read the Scriptures, and to be conversant in them, Would you think it
possible a new Generation of Doctors should arise, and discourage, and forbid
the People to study the Scriptures, urging Arguments to show the great and many
Inconveniences of so doing; as much as they can restraining the Translations
of the Bible into the vulgar Tongue of every Country?


Phil. What the sad experience of later Times had taught them, they have reason
to declare, and to suit their Canons and Prohibitions to the season, as the
wisdom of the Church did judge most expedient; and when you examine well their
Arguments and Reasons, perhaps you may be constrained to allow of them.


Theoph. There must be a strange transformation of Men's minds and manners, when
the Holy Scriptures, which were written for our Instruction, and to make men
wise unto Salvation, shall prove pernicious unto their Souls.


Phil. As wholefom Food unto sick Stomachs.


Theoph. But the Holy Scriptures are both Food and Physic to the Soul, and were
certainly written for all times, and for all conditions of Men.


Phil. I pray have patience to hear their Reasons, before you answer them.


Theoph. I expect first you should return a sober Answer, unto the Holy Fathers
of the Primitive Church, who (as you have heard) do so seriously recommend the
study of the Scripture unto all Men.


Phil. I did not expect you should use so many shifts and subterfuges, and I am
almost persuaded, that being conscious to your self, of their convincing
Evidence, therefore you decline to hear their Arguments.


Theoph. That will appear in due time and place: but have you in earnest no
Reply to make, unto those Exhortations of the Fathers to read the Bible?


Phil. Your principal Quotations are out of Chrysostom; and Bellarmine has
told you, He was an Orator, and used to speak Hyperbolies to affect his
Auditory.


Theoph. And I have showed, how this good Father, thro-out his Works, so
frequently recommends the study of the Scripture, as a substantial point of
Doctrine and Duty, which he pressed upon his hearers, not as an embellished
flower of his Rhetoric. But I pray, What Answer does Bellarmine, or any other
Champions of your Church, give unto the other Fathers?


Phil. I do not find they have taken much notice of the rest; they suppose,
perhaps, one Answer will serve them all.


Theoph. As one Shoe will sit every Man's Foot. And this indeed is very
observable, That Bellarmine in his great reading should omit Jerome, and Basil,
and Origin, and the rest, and take notice only of Chrysostoms Expressions, and
thift them off as Rhetorical Flashes and Hyperbolies, and not serious
Exhortations to read the Scripture. His subtilty, without doubt, promted him to
concele the others for the advantage of his Cause, least the pregnant
Testimonies of so many Fathers, should prevail with sober Men to search the
Scripture, more then all the Prohibitions of their Church, and novel Arguments,
to restrain them from it. And it is his Artifice, that he might seem Ingenious,
to take notice of one Father opposing him, that so the unwary Reader being not
well versed in the Fathers, might suppose all the others to have been silent,
or on his side in the Controversy.


Phil. You are pleasant with your own Conceits, but their Arguments will make
you work to answer them.


Theoph. I have great confidence in the merits of the Cause, and do not despair
of a ready Answer unto all opposition that shall be made against such a mesur'd
Truth, which we defend.


Phil. Bellarmine Lib. 2. De verbo Dei, c. 15.
shows, how the Old Testament was publicly read to the Jews in the Hebrew
Tongue, when the People did not understand it; because in the Captivity the
Jews had forgotten their own Language, and learned the Chaldee and the Syriac:
And therefore after their return into Judea, it is written, Nehem. 8. 7, 8, 9,
12. how the Priests and Levites caused the People to understand the Law. They
did read in the Book distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to
understand the reading. Nehemiah, and Ezra, and the Levites, taught the People:
and all the People made great mirth, because they had understood the words that
were declared unto them.


Theoph. Here is not one word to show the People did not understand the
Language wherein the Holy Scriptures were read, but that the Priests and
Levites gave the sense, interpreted to them the Law of God, and caused them to
understand the meaning of the Words: nay, it is expressly said, ver. 2. That
Ezra brought the Law before the Congregation, both of men and women, and all
that could hear with understanding. And again, ver. 3. before those that could
understand, and all the People were attentive unto the Book of the Law. Neither
may we well suppose that they had forgot their Mother Tongue in the time of
their Captivity, but only mixed, and corrupted it, in some Words. Seventy Years
is too short a date to change the Language of a People. Withal, it might be
remembered that some Learned Men of the Roman Communion, have said, That the
Jews were not so long Captives in Babylon; that from the desolation of
Jerusalem, when Nebuchadnezzar burned the City, and the Temple, until Cyrus his
command for the Jews return, there were but 30. Years: And that the term of 70.
Years, so much spoken of by the Prophet Jeremiah, did bear date from the 13th
Year of King Josiah's Reign, about the time when Ninevy was destroyed, and the
Assyrian Monarchy was translated to Babylon; and those great Neighbors proved
very terrible, and by the Prophet were pointed out to be the destruction of
Jerusalem. And withal, we know the three last Prophets, after the return of the
Jews from Babylon, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachy, encouraging the People to build
the Temple, and the City, spoke unto them in the Hebrew Tongue, and therefore
doubtless the People understood it. Nay we read expressly, Acts 22. 2. St Paul
spoke to the Jews, gathered together in a great multitude and tumult, in the
Hebrew Tongue, and therefore for a while heard him with patience; when they
heard that he spoke in the Hebrew Tongue to them, they kept the more silence:
And it is manifest by that which follows, ver. 21. that they understood him.


Phil. Bellarmine brings a Confirmation, that the Jews did not understand the
Hebrew Tongue, out of the Gospel of St John, Joh. 7. 49. But this people, that
know not the Law, is cursed.


Theoph. Both he and you may blush to own such a simple Proof. The Scribes and
Pharisees there pronounced the multitude that followed Christ accursed, not
because they know not Hebrew, wherein the Law was written; but because, in
their account, they mis-applied the Prophesies of the Messiah, to Christ. And
if the Hebrew Tongue was forgotten among the Jews, why did Matthew write his
Gospel, as is supposed, in Hebrew, for the better Information of his
Countrymen?


Phil. Bellarmine likewise shows, how even to this day, the Jews in their
Synagogues have the Scriptures read in Hebrew, although most of them understand it
not.


Theoph. Let the Synagogues of the Jews, and the Church of Rome in this regard,
lay their heads together, to justify their unreasonable practice by the
Authority of one another.


Phil. But what say you to this next Argument, which seems demonstrative: The
Apostles and Disciples preached the Gospel unto all People, Nations and
Languages, and yet they did write the Gospels, and their Epistles only in
Hebrew and Greek. Nay Paul, you know, wrote his Epistles to the Romans in
Greek, which was not their vulgar Tongue.


Theoph. There is a great difference to be observed between Preaching the
Gospel, and committing it to Writing. The Apostles were endowed ^ See Tirinus
his Chronicon ^actum, c(...). ^5.
with the gift of Tongues, that whither soever they should come, they might
Preach the Gospel of Salvation unto the People in that Tongue which they
understood: But being to leave the Records of Holy Scripture unto all
succeeding Generations, they did write them in that Language which was then
most common in the World; viz. In Greek, that in every Country the Learned who
did understand the Greek, might Translate the Holy Scriptures into their own
Language, for the better understanding of the People. And without doubt, most
of the Saints at Rome, who believed the Gospel, and unto whom Paul did write
his Epistle; were not Natives and Italians, but Strangers and Foreigners,
either transported by the Conqueror, or choosing to follow him into the great
Metropolis of the World. Many Jews were at Rome, when Claudius banished them;
and we may believe, more Greeks: The names of those Saints, whom in the 16th
Chapter he salutes, show they were not Romans, but only Saints at Rome. And
this may be a particular Consideration why Paul did write in Greek to the
Saints at Rome, for we may probably suppose more of them understood the Greek
Tongue, then the Latin; but as need required, Translations were made. For a
long season the Jews were the only chosen People of God thro-out the World to
know his will, and they had Moses and the Prophets in their own Tongue; but
when the time grew nigh, that the Gentiles also should be received into
Covenant with God, be Fellow-heirs with the Jews, and of the same Body, and
Partakers of his Promise in Christ by the Gospel; (as the Apostle speaks Epb.
3. 6. to prepare the way for their conversion,) God stirred up the Heart of a
Mighty Prince, to bring about that famous Translation of the Old Testament into
Greek, by the 70. Interpreters: and other Greek Translations followed: and many
more into Latin, both of the Old and New Testament, as Augustine shows, Lib.
2. de Doct. Chris. cap. 11. Qui Script. ex Hebrae^ in Graecam vorterunt,
numerari possunt, Latins autem Interpretes millo modo, etc.
We may number those who have Translated the Old Testament out of Hebrew into
Greek; but the Latin Interpreters are without number.


Phil. We do not disapprove Translations in Greek or Latin.


Theoph. And why do you stick at other Languages, seeing all was don for the
better understanding of the Holy Scriptures by the People in every Country; and
you have already heard, that one Language is not more grave and venerable then
another, notwithstanding Bellarmine would persuade the contrary. And to
balance his great Authority in this case, I will give the ample Testimony of a
Pope against him. Bin. Council. Tom. 7. part 1. Epist Johan. 8. 247.
We find among the multitude of Epistles written by Pope John the 8th, (as he
is called by the Champions of Rome, who exclude Pope Joan out of the Catalogue
of Popes) otherwise Pope John the 9th. One Epistle there is written Stento
pulchro glorioso Comiti, To a Prince of Moravia, whose Subjects did speak the
Sclavonian Tongue; and be commands they should have the Holy Scripture, and
their Service in their own Language. Vt in eadem Lin. Christ. Dom. nost.
praeconia and opera enarrantur, jubemu neque, etc.
Giving his Reasons the same with us, For we are required, says he, by Sacred
Authority to praise God, not only in three Tongues, but in all, Psalm. 117. O
praise the Lord all ye heathen, praise him all ye nations. And the Apostles in
every Tongue did speak the wonderful works of God, Acts 2. 11. Hence Paul, that
celestial Trumpet, proclaims, Let every Tongue confess, that Jesus Christ is
Lord, to the glory of God the Father, Phil. 2. 11. of which Tongues he gives
his advice manifestly, 1 Cor. 14. That all should be done to edification. Nor
is it any way opposite to Faith or sound Doctrine, if Mass be sung in the
Sclavonian Tongue, or the holy Gospel be read, or any other Lessons of the Old
or New Testament, being well Translated. For he that made three principal
Tongues, the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, has created likewise all the rest for
his own praise and glory. I have set down this ample Testimony at large,
because it commands what we practice, and gives the same reasons as we do, to
justify it. And we may wonder Bellarmine, and all other Creatures of the Popes
of Rome, should not subscribe thereunto. But although I mentioned only
Translations of the Bible into Greek and Latin, which you approve; we early
read of other Languages whereinto the Holy Scriptures were Translated. The Old
Testament by Onkelos, and Jonathan the son of Vzial, was Translated into the
Chaldee. Socrates Ecclesiast. Hist. cap. 27.
Vlphilas, Bishop of the Goths, found out the Gothic Letters, and translated
the Holy Scriptures into that Tongue, that the Barbarians should have the
Blessed Word of God. The Septuagint into the Dalmatie, by Jerome. The whole
Bible by Chrysostom, into the Armenian Tongue (as Sixtus Senensis Lib. 4.
Bibliothecae Sacrae. cum in Cucuzum, etc.
affirms) when he was banished into Cucuzum, a City of Armenia, for the benefit
of the People, that they might the better understand the Holy Scriptures, he
translated the Old and New Testament into the Armenian Tongue. Bellarmin has
the confidence to doubt, whether Jerome translated the Septuagint into the
Dalmatic, the vulgar Tongue of his Country: but Ibid. usque in hanc diem
utuntur hujus translationis Lectione, summa cum utilitate.
Sixtus Senensis tells us, that unto this day they make use of the Translation
with great benefit. And Lib. 1. cap. 13. Contra Haereses.
Alphonsus de Castro acknowledges it, although a great Adversary against vulgar
Translations. Theodoret, The Learned Bishop of Cyrus, Lib. 5. (...), de curand.
Graecorum affectibus, (...), etc.
triumphs over all the obscure Books of the Heathen Philosophers, in comparison
with the Holy Scriptures, because these were universally received among all
Nations, and translated into their Language. We, says he, evidently
demonstrate the efficacy and power of Prophetical and Apostolic Doctrine, in
that every Nation under the Sun is full of the Divine Oracles. The Hebrew
Tongue, (i. e. the Old Testament) being translated not only into the Greek, but
into the Roman, Egyptian, Persian, Indian, Armenian, Scythian, Sauromatian
Tongues. and to sum up all, into all the Languages which the Nations thro-out
the World do speak.


Phil. Theodoret here speaks of the Old Testament translated into all
Languages, but not of the New.


Theoph. If one, we may suppose the other; where the New Testament, being
written in Greek, was not understood, doubtless it was translated; seeing
Moses, and the Prophets Writings were communicated in all Languages unto the
World, principally to give testimony unto the Gospel. But not to heap up
Quotations in vain, your own Friends acknowledge it. Lib. 6. Biblioth. Annotat.
152. Ad id quod haeretici contendunt, etc.
Sixtus Senensis gives a reason why such Transtations useful before, should now
be prohibited for their inconvenience. When Heretics urge, that the Holy
Scriptures should be translated into the Mother Tongue of every Nation, because
heretofore they were so, to the great benefit of the Church, I answer, This is
a foolish Argument; for many other things were formerly instituted, which
afterward were abrogated for their inconvenience. So pleads Alphonsus de
Castro, loco citato.


Phil. I have several times intimated this Plea, That the Church, because of
inconveniences discovered, has as great reason now to withold the Scriptures
from the Peoples reading, and to forbid vulgar Translations, as the former
times had to encourage them.


Theoph. This is your only Sanctuary to fly unto, in this and many other
Controversies between us, That the Wisdom of the Church is the best Judge of
times and seasons, and upon due considerations, has power to alter and change
the state of things, even against the Primitive Rule, and the Primitive
Practice. And because I will not interrupt our present Discourse, I will
reserve this Point unto another season, and now expect you should produce your
due Considerations and Reasons against vulgar Translations of the Holy
Scriptures, and the Peoples reading them. I must tell you, they had need be
demonstrative, to conclude against the Testimony of the Holy Scripture, of the
Holy Fathers, and against the practice of the Church for nine hundred Years,
for that Declaration I produced of Pope John the 9th, was in the end of the 9th
Century.


Phil. When you hear them, you may judge. Lib. 2. De verbo Dei, cap. 15. Vt
publicus usus Script. sit in lingua communiss.
Bellarmine shows it necessary unto Church Communion, and Unity thro-out the
World, That the public use and reading of the Scripture, should be in the most
common Language in the World, that Churches may communicate one with another.
For this cause the Holy Scriptures were first written in Greek, which then was
the most universal Language: whereunto the Latin Tongue now succeeds, as being
understood by the Learned of every Nation. By this means General Councils are
held, wherein generally they understand and speak Latin.


Theoph. We deny not that the Scripture should be read in Greek or Latin, by
those that understand them; mean while, for the benefit of the common People in
every Country, they may have the Scripture in their vulgar Tongue, and never
obstruct Catholic Communion, or General Councils. And withal, we know the
Bishops of the Greek and Latin Churches have held many Councils together,
their diversity of Tongues not impeding; where they did not mutually understand
one another, they had Interpreters. But I grant, in such General Learned
Assemblies, the most common Language is most useful.


Phil. But Ibid. populus non intelligeret Proph. and Psalm. etc.
Bellarmin reasons farther, That vulgar Translations for the Peoples reading
the Scripture, would not be beneficial to them, because, when translated, the
People cannot understand them without Interpreters; for we who understand the
Latin, are often forced to consult learned Expositors, says he.


Theoph. This indeed is one Artifice of your Church, whereby she satisfies her
Children without the Divine Food of Gods Word, and makes them be content
without the Holy Scripture in their own Tongue. You persuade the People, they
cannot read the Scriptures and understand them, unless they be min^'d and
carved to them, by the Nursing Fathers of the Church, their Priests and
Pastors, As Mothers chew the Bread and Meat they give to little Children, not
commiting to them the whole morsel Matres dant infant. panem dissect. and
praemansum, non integrum and solidum, Lib. 2. de Verb. Dei, cap. 16.
. And thus you hold them always in their Infancy, as Children and Babes in
Christ, and feed them neither with strong Meat, nor the Milk of Gods Word,
except they draw it out of the Churches Breasts: for they must not read the
Holy Scriptures, where they are plain and easy to be understood, because of
some hard places which they may misunderstand. Now we approve, that the Word of
God should be rightly divided unto the People by the Ministers of the Gospel;
and withal, according to the Tenor of Holy Scriptures, and the Holy Fathers, we
exhort the People to search and study the Scriptures themselves, and draw
Waters out of the Wells of Salvation: to drink the Waters of Life out of the
Fountain, as well as through the Conduit of Preaching and Interpretation. But Tom.
5. Homil. 3. in Lazarum. (...), etc.
Chrysostom has long since answered your Objection, To whom are not all things
in the Gospel manifest, says he? Who, when he hears, That blessed are the
meek, the merciful, the pure in heart, and the like, needs an Interpreter; and
withal, the signs, and miracles, and the hisiories of Holy Scripture, are they
not obvious to every understanding? and therefore it is a mere excuse and cloak
of your Idleness, to say, You cannot understand, and therefore you do not read
the Scriptures. Do thou not understand what is written? How can thou, when
thou will not look into the Bible? Take the Book of God into your hands, and
read, and make use of what thou understandest, and that which is obscure will
follow: or if thou can not find out the meaning of any place by the context,
and often reading; repair to one more Learned, ask thy Teacher, communicate
with the Guide of thy Soul about such things: show much diligence to find the
Truth, and God will not despise thy watchfulness and care; and if man should
not interpret right, God himself would revele the Truth. And so he proceeds in
the Exhortation, and gives an instance in the Eunuch, who even in his Journey
in his Chariot did read the Prophet, and God sent him an Interpreter. And now I
pray, observe the difference between the Fathers of the Primitive Church, and
of yours. They exhort earnestly all sorts and conditions diligently to read the
Scripture, that they may get Wisdom and Understanding; and assure them, That
God will Crown their diligence with knowledge. You altogether discourage and
forbid the People to read the Scripture, persuading them, that they cannot
understand and profit themselves thereby.


Phil. Do you believe that all things written in the Gospels are plain and
easy, as you bring Chrysostom to affirm? By this you may judge of his
Hyperbolical Expressions, which I before observed out of Bellarmin.


Theoph. You must not take his Words so strictly, but that for the most part
what is written is clear; and when we understand not, he advises us to
consult. Meanwhile, it is very unjust to withold such an inestimable Tresure,
as is Gods Holy Word, from the People, because some passages are obscure and
hard to be understood; whereas the far greater part of the Holy Scriptures
(being Historical or Moral, or the plain discovery of Divine Mysteries, and
fulfilling of Prophesies, matters of Faith, and matters of Practice) is most
evident, and condescending to the meanest capacities. If in some difficult and
deep places of Holy Scripture the Elephant may swim, i. e. the most Learned may
find work enough to fathom them; in other places, the Lamb may wade, i. e. the
meanest understanding may apprehend them, as Augustine has made the Allusion.


Phil. Lib. 2. De verb. Dei, cap. 15. Eo sunt obscuriores quo magis in
peregrinis Ling. transferuntur.
Bellarmin shows, How the Scriptures become more obscure by their Translations,
one Language being not able to express the Idioms of another.


Theoph. This Argument proves more then he or you would have it, even against
your Darling vulgar Latin Translation. We easily grant the Originals, as the
Fountain, to be most clear unto those who can understand and consult them. Yet
Translations made with Learning, and Judgment, and Fidelity, give the full
sense of Holy Scriptures, although they may come short of some Elegancies and
Proprieties of the Originals. And unto the People who understand the Language
of the Translation, the Word of God is certainly more manifest, then if it were
locked up in an unknown Tongue, although it be the Original.


Phil. Ibid. Populus non solum non capit fructum, e Script. sed and
detrimentum; occasionemsc. errandi tum in doctr. fidei, tum praecept. vitae.
Bellarmin in his great Wisdom and Observation looks farther, and discovers,
How the People instead of reaping Fruit, usually receive detriment by reading
the Scripture, easily taking the occasion of Errors, both in matters of Faith,
and Precepts of Life, and moral Conversation. From reading the Holy Scriptures,
and not rightly understanding them, spring up Heresies and corruption of Men's
manners.


Theoph. Praefatione in Epistolam ad Romans
Chrysostom in his great Piety and Fidelity, assures us the contrary. For (as I
have cited him before) upbraiding his hearers with their supine negligence in
reading and studying the Holy Scripture, he tells them, Hence arise myriads of
evils, even from the ignorance of Gods Word. And to cross point blank
Bellarmines division of Corruptions in Doctrine, and in Manners, from reading
the Scripture, he tells them, That by the neglect of reading and understanding
the Scripture, have proceeded the pest of many Heresies, the neglect of Men's
lives, and the corruption of their manners.


Phil. We grant, these Evils spring from the ignorance of the Scripture, which
are Chrysostoms own words: (...).
and that may be from the misunderstanding of them, and therefore we withold
them from the People, least they should wrest and prevert them.


Theoph. But this is the plain way to make them altogether ignorant of the
Scripture. And you will find in that place, Chrysostoms complaint was, Not that
they did misinterpret, but that they did neglect to read the Scripture: And he
had asked the Question before with indignation, (...), etc.
How can thou understand, who wilt not vouchsafe to look into the Scripture?
And in another place, Homil. 8. in Epistolam ad Hebraeos, (...), etc.
he sadly complains for the growth of the Manichecs Heresy, and lays it to the
charge of his Hearers for negleding the Scripture, None of you, says he, heed
the Scripture; for if we did so, we should not only keep our selves out of the
snare of Deceit and Errors, but free others also, and draw them out of the pit
wherein they were taken. Observe, I pray, the direct opposition between your
Doctors, and the Primitive Fathers. The Peoples reading of the Scripture in the
vulgar Tongue is a great cause of Heresy, and corruption of Manners, say you:
The neglect of reading the Scripture is the cause, say they.


Phil. It Is in vain to urge Authority against Experience. Loco cit. supra.
Bellarmin shows, how Sects and Heresies have swarmed, where the vulgar sort
read and study the Scriptures: He tells you, how David George knew no other
Language but the Dutch, and yet could prove himself out of the Scripture to be
the Messiah, and the Son of God. And that Aeneas Sylvius, who wrote the
Bohemian History, ascribes the gross Errors of the Thaborites and Orebites, and
the other Sects among the Bohemians, unto the common Peoples studying the
Scripture: and therefore Lutherus Scrip. Librum Hereticorum vocavit.
Luther, says he, called the Scripture, The Book of Heretics.


Theoph. For David George, that Dutch Monster, although I do not understand the
Language, yet I am persuaded his Mother Tongue never promted him to such
horrible Blasphemies; neither did the Holy Scripture, which he read in his
Dutch, give the occasion; unless by Prophecy and Prohibition. Christ had
foretold, how Deceivers should come in his Name, and in his Person, Mark 13.
21. That false Christ's should arise, and men should say, Lo here is Christ, and
there is Christ; but go not after them, and believe them not. You see therefore
how the Scripture would have fore-warned and fore-arm'd him against such a
Blasphemous attemt, had he not bin given over to reprobate mind. You may as
well say, our Saviors converse with Judas made him the Traitor. As for the
Bohemian Heretics, (as your Doctors commonly call them) we know the Court of
Rome was much perplexed with their clamor and demands, to have the Scripture in
the vulgar Tongue, and the Communion in both kinds, etc. and so bitter things
are written against them: but when you shall instance in any particulars of
their damnable Doctrines (as you suppose) I will undertake to clear the
knowledge and reading of the Holy Scripture from the imputation, That they did
err, because they knew the Scripture. Ye do therefore greatly err, because ye
know not the Scripture, Mark 12. 24. says our Blessed Savior to the Sadduces.
The Bohemians did therefore err, because they did read and know the Scripture,
say you. As for Luther's calling the Scriptures the Book of Heretics,
Bellarmine cites not the place; and if they do not belly him (according to their
accustomed dealing with him and others) we do blame him, and think not our
selves obliged to justify the fumes of heat and choler, or the infirmities of
good Men. But now what will you say, if I turn the Scales, and show you how
Heresies and damnable Doctrines have bin minted in the Brains of subtle Clerks,
and not of the simple Laity, in comparison. Marcion and Arrius were Priests.
Nestorius, Sergius, Dioscorus, Patriarchs and Prelates. Eutyches, an Abbot; and
all these Broachers of Heresy. And such Men of Learning and Reputation, are
likely to do much more mischief in seducing the People, then some obscure and
simple Phanatics. And we have cause to fear, that some Mercurial Wits beyond
the Seas have laid the Scenes, and come over Incognito in the mist of our
Distractions and Troubles, to act their parts, and give Life and Motion to the
Phlegmatic Humors of our Separatists; who whilst they dream of Popery, and
mightily declaim and fight against it, are led by many of the Principals and
Priests of the Church of Rome: upon your account therefore, wise Men should
withold the Scripture rather from the Learned, who are able to do most
mischief, then from the multitude. But we affirm, neither one nor the other,
That either Clerks or Pesants should be restrained from reading the Bible for
their Instruction and Salvation, out of a panic fear they should wrest and
pervert them to their own destruction, and others. Every thing that is most
useful, may become pernicious. Will you keep no Fire in your Chimney, for fear
you should burn your House?


Phil. Loco praedict.
Bellarmine gives another considerable Argument, That in the Holy Scriptures
there are many seeming Contradictions, which if the common People in reading
should observe, not knowing how to reconcile them, they may be apt to question
the Infallibility and Truth of the Scripture.


Theoph. These seeming Contradictions do not easily fall within the Observation
of the vulgar, but of the Learned; and withal, they ought to read the Holy
Scriptures with veneration, and due acknowledgment that they are the infallible
Word of God, and dictates of his Holy Spirit, who cannot lie nor contradict
himself: and upon this ground, when we apprehend any contradiction in Gods
Word, we must distrust our own Judgment, and not question the truth of Holy
Scripture in any place, but our own apprehension, and apply our selves to the
Learned for reconciliation and better satisfaction. But as to the other part of
Bellarmines Assertion; Is it possible any should conceive that the Holy Word of
God should contribute to the corruption of Men's manners, and debauch the Lives
of such as study it?


Phil. Yes, of the unwary Reader. For he instanceth in that passage of the
Canticles, Cant. 1. 2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth. And in
another place, Cant. 8. 3. His left hand should be under my head, and his right
hand should embrace me. He instances in David's Adultery, and Thamars Incest, in
the Patriarchs Concubines. Now the ruder sort may make ill use of such
Expressions and Examples.


Theoph. And so may a carnal Priest, Tit. 1. 15. For unto them that are
defiled, says the Apostle, nothing is pure, but even their mind and conscience
is defiled. But unto the pure, all things are pure. And therefore in such
cases, evil unto him that thinks evil. We ought to give unto Spiritual Songs a
Spiritual sense, and not a sensual. Psalm. 51. David's Adultery is recorded, and
his most signal Repentance; the Vices of the Patriarchs, together with their
Virtues, to show they were Men of like Passions with us, and subject to
Infirmities. And the whole design of Scripture, tends unto our Sanctification
and holiness of Life, and therefore, one would think, may prove a sufficient
Antidote against the Infection of such Examples: and withal, many who never
read the Scripture may hear these Stories, and not be so well fortified against
them. Bellarmine, I know, made himself mirth with a Story related (as he says)
by a credible Person, Loco cit. supra, audivi ab homine fide digno, etc.
That a Calvinistical Minister of the Church of England, reading the 25th
Chapter of Ecclesiasticus, in the vulgar Tongue, where much is spoken of the
malice and wickedness of a Woman; one of his hearers, a Woman, rose up and
said, Is this the word of God? nay rather of the devil. Whereunto I answer,
That perhaps the poor Wretch, before the happy Reformation in England, being
kept, more Romano, in great ignorance of the Scriptures, thought it strange to
hear such passages against her Sex, and was promted to Blaspheme; whereas, had
she bin conversant in the Word of God, she would have learned to Bless and nor
Blaspheme, to govern her Passion, and rule her Tongue, and to keep silence at
the Church, the Apostle not permitting her there to speak.

Leo decimus, qui dissolute respondit Cardinali Bembo, Quantum nobis profuit
haec fabula Christi, satis est omnibus seculis notum. Job. Balaeus centuria 8va
illustrium scriptorum Britanniae, page 636.
And withal, the Pope, who called the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ a Fable,
was the more notorious Blasphemer. As for his taunt of a Calvinistical Minister
of the Church of England, he knew well, that our worthy Reformers chose not
Calvin for their Master. We are bound to honor him for his great Learning and
Labor in the Work of the Lord, but not to subscribe in all Points unto his
Doctrine or Discipline: and yet, without doubt, John Calvin compared with
Ignatius Loiola, the Father of Bellarmines Order, was a Saint.


Phil. These are Impertinencies to vent your spleen. But what say you to
Bellarmines next Consideration, That if vulgar Translations be permitted, they
must be changed every Age with the Language of the Country, and so there would
never be an end of Translating; and fit Men to undertake that great Work, may
probably be wanting.


Theoph. I say that Bellarmine wanted Modesty and Consideration to assert that,
which the Experience of all Ages contradicts; namely, That the vulgar Tongue of
every Country changes for the most part in the compass of an hundred Years;
whereas his most part must be contracted into some few Words and Phrases, every
Age refining, but not changing or destroying the Language of a People.


Phil. The last Argument of Bellarmine is this, That the Majesty of Divine
Service (and we may add, of the Holy Scripture) requires a more grave and
venerable Language, then is the vulgar. And this part of his Argument I have
already proposd, but that which follows is considerable. Loco citato praesertim
cum in Sacris Mysteriis multa sint quae fecreta esse debeant.
Especially seeing, in Holy Mysteries, many things there are which should be
concel'd from vulgar apprehensions. And this Pope Gregory the 7th urges, as a
reason of his denial unto the request of the Duke of Bohemia, that his Subjects
might enjoy their public Service b Istudne est verbum Dei? imo potius diaboli.
in the Sclavonian, i. e. the vulgar Tongue, Ex hoc nempe saepe volventibus
liquet non immerito sacram script. omnipotenti Deo placuisse, etc. Bin. con.
Tom. 7. part. 1. Ep. Greg. l. 7. Epist. 11.
Upon due consideration, says he, I have observed, that Almighty God was
pleased that the Holy Scriptures should be obscure in some places, least that
being evident to all Men, they should be cheap and contemtible.


Theoph. This is in truth an occult cause, the usual refuge of such as can give
no reason. I may call this the mystery of your Church, if not the mystery of
Iniquity: That God designed some things in his Word and in his Service should
be concel'd from the vulgar, least they should breed contemt. I had thought the
Word of God, the more it was understood and discovered, the more veneration it
would procure; and so all the Mysteries of the Gospel. The Jews indeed had
their veils and partitions; and into the inner Tabernacle, only the High Priest
did enter once every Year, and into the outward Tabernacle the Priests every
day, and the People stood in the outward Courts: The Holy Ghost thus
signifying, Heb. 9. 8. That the way into the Holiest of all was not yet mado
manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was yet standing, says the Apostle.
But then speaking of their condition under the Gospel, he adds, Heb. 10. 19,
20. But we, Brethren, have boldness to enter into the Holiest by the Blood of
Jesus; by a new and living way which he has consecrated for us. When Christ
was Crucified, the veil of the Temple rent from top to bottom, that which was
hidden was made manifest, Prophesies fulfilled, and Mysteries revel'd: The
Gospel is the Revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ, the great Light of the
World, whose property is to discover, not to concele; and least the Majesty of
such glorious Truths and Mysteries revel'd should dazzle the Eyes of our
Understanding, lo, they are clothed in Scripture with humility of speech. And
St Augustine Tom. 2. Epistola 3. ad Volusianum. Invital omnes humili sermon,
quos non solam manifesta Pascat, sed and secreta exerceat veritate.
tells us, The Holy Scriptures invite all to read and understand them, by their
great condescension to our capacities; feeding all, not only with manifest
Truths, but also with hidden verities. Let us therefore never speak of designed
concelements in the Gospel of Christ, wherein the mystery which has bin hid
from ages, and from generations, is now made manifest unto the Saints, as St
Paul speaks, Coloss. 1. 26. And the same Apostle expressly tells us, 2 Cor. 4.
3, 4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost. In whom the God of
this World has blinded the minds of them which believe not, least the Light of
the glorious Gospel of Christ. who is the Image of God, should shine unto them.
And now, I pray, tell me, Have you found your Arguments unanswerable? never
believe the wit of Man can bring Demonstrations against the Truths of God. Your
great Champion Bellarmine has not brought a probable Argument against the
Peoples reading and hearing the Holy Scripture, and Divine Service in the
vulgar Tongue, which is at present the Controversy between us.


Phil. If your self be Judge, the Question is determined. But I have not yet
done, until I have proposed two serious Considerations more against publishing
the Holy Scriptures in the vulgar Tongue, wherewith Peter Suitor, a Carthusian,
has furnished me. The first is this, Mulierculae in Lect. Bibl. versantes
curam rei domesticae negligent. Idiotae huic negotio dediti non curabant, etc.
De tralat. Bib. c. 22. p. 96.
It will make Laborers, Men and Women, neglect their business, whilst they
spend the time in reading the Scripture, which they should employ about their
household affairs, and necessary occupations.


Theoph. This is a great Crime, tending to the ruin of many Families. But
alas! too general experience proves the contrary, that Men and Women are not so
easily drawn from the cares and business of the World, to mind Heavenly things;
from idle Communications, to the Holy Scriptures. You have heard how Chrysostom
complains of the contrary, That such as had Bibles never looked into them,
bound them up in costly Covers, and locked them up as hidden Treasures; and
they pretended the Encumbrances of the World for their excuse. Our Blessed
Savior, in the Parable of the Sower, shows, Matthew. 13. 22. How the cares of
the world, like thorns, choke the good seed of Gods word. And your Monks fear
is, least reading the Word should hinder the necessary cares and business of
Life. It seems of late, the World is much altered for the better, that the
hearts of Men should be so endeared unto the Holy Scripture, that if they be
not withheld from them, Men would neglect their Callings. But these are fond
Imaginations; you know the Holy Scriptures strictly enjoin every one to follow
his calling, 1 Cor. 7. 20. Promise the Blessing of God upon the diligent band,
Prove. 10. 4. and 12. 24. Command, That such as will not labor, should not eat,
2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. And Solomon, in the last Chapter of his Proverbs, has set
forth a good Housewife so excellently, that it is not possible a wise Woman,
minding that Chapter, should neglect her business. But what is your Carthusians
second Consideration, against publishing the Holy Scripture in the vulgar
Tongue.


Phil. It seems you want work, and you do so please your self with your
conceited Answers, that I am unwilling any longer to tickle your humor, and to
propose any more Objections.


Theoph. It is high time indeed to draw to a conclusion, and therefore I did
hasten you to that which you reserved, and it is my request it may be your last
Proposal.


Phil. If you will needs hear it, it is this: If the common People should be
permitted constantly to read the Holy Scripture in the vulgar Tongue, Facile
plebs nuomu^^bit cum sibi tot onera imponi comperiet praeter Scripturam. Pet.
Suitor, ib^^lem.
They would murmur against so many Burdens and Impositions of the Church,
which they find not required in the Book of God; and so may become stubborn and
disobedient to the commands of the Church.


Theoph. This has hit the nail upon the head. Never any Man spoke more to the
purpose in this Point. It is a most ingenious confession, That if the Scripture
were permitted to be read by all sorts, farewell to all the intolerable
Burdens, and superstitious Impositions of Rome. As he that does evil hates
the light; so your Church requiring many unwarrantable superstitious things of
her Children, wisely keeps them from giving heed unto the Word of God, which
soon would discover her Impostures.


Phil. I beseech you, Theophilus, do not end a Controversy with a Quarrel. You
are my Guest and Friend, and after these heats of Disputation, it will concern
me to divert you with such Civilities, and slender Entertainment, as the House
at present will afford. I hope you will resolve to tarry some time with me, and
give your self and me the opportunity to debate the other Points in difference
between us. You are as welcome as your Heart can wish.


A SECOND CONFERENCE CONCERNING The half Communion IN THE CHURCH of ROME.
Theoph. SIR, I am much obliged to you for your kind and civil Entertainment,
and much more for that freedom of Discourse which your great Moderation has
allowed me, when sometimes in the defense of Truth, and through a flaming Zeal
that you should recover it, I have neglected the Ceremonies of Friendship, to
hold the substance; I have not sought so much to please, as to convince you.


Phil. Truth is a Jewel, which all are concerned to purchase and hold fast; but
where this Tresure is to be found, is the great Question: I have bin diligent
in the search, and the Providence of God, as I believe, has not been wanting
in conducting me unto the Catholic Church, the great Repository of Divine
Truths.


Theoph. Doubtless, the Holy Catholic Church is so, the Truth it self has
promised to be with her unto the end of the World. The Catholic Church will
always hold the Catholic Faith; and by this Rule we judge, particular National
Churches to be true Members of the Church Catholic, as they hold the Catholic
Faith.


Phil. I mean the Roman Catholic Church, whose Faith, as Peter's, cannot fail;
and which has always laid a just claim to be the Catholic Church, wherein the
Truths of God, and Eternal Life, are conserved as her peculiar Tresure, and
none, who do not communicate with her, can share in them.


Theoph. That which you call a just claim, will in its due place appear a most
intolerable Usurpation; and such as make the Catholic Church and the Roman
Church to be reciprocal terms of the same amplitude and extent, have forfeited
their Logic and their Reason together. The Church of Rome at best, was a part
and Member of the Church Catholic; and now since, through her manifold
Corruptions, she has well-nigh forfeited that Interest: lo! with an
unparalled Insolence, she flies at all, and prescribes to the name of
Catholic more solicitously, perhaps out of a jealousy the Catholic Church
should totally exclude her, and out of a consciousness she has deserved it.
But this digression would usher in a large Controversy, besides our present
purpose, and I design first to insist upon the manifold Errors of your Church,
one after another, as our occasions will permit; and then, if you please, we
will dispute the Point, Whether the Church of Rome can be the only true
Catholic Church, which has so many ways departed from the Catholic Doctrine.


Phil. Your confidence, Theophilus, is no proof.


Theoph. I hope it shall appear to you and to the World, that my Reasons and my
Proofs have made me confident. You may remember a second obvious Exception,
which I proposed against the practice of the Church of Rome, was her half
Communion, in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, Her denying the Cup unto the
Laiety. If you please, we will now take it into Consideration.


Phil. Most willingly: For I find a great noise and clamor is raised about it,
and the Grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome is proclaimed out of the Pulpit
and the Press; and from some appearances of Truth, your severe Imputations and
Calumnies pass for current with the undiscerning multitude.


Theoph. These appearances of Truth (as you are pleased to call them) are no
less then Demonstrations, carrying so much Light and Evidence in them, that
even the undiscerning multitude in reading the Holy Scriptures, are able at
first sight to discover the incongruity of your Practice with the Rule; how,
teaching for Doctrines the commandments of men, you evidently transgress the
commands of God:


Phil. This Artifice of yours, and Industry, to court the People into a
prejudice against us, is to me a Demonstration, that you put no great
confidence in the merits of your Cause. Do not so peremtorily conclude, before
you have entered upon the Proof:


Theoph. I will prove your giving the Bread in the Holy Communion, and not the
Cup unto the People, to be against the Institution of Christ, the end of the
Sacrament, the practice of the Apostles and of the Church Catholic, for
twelve-hundred Years.


Phil. You have proposed a good Method of Discourse, and I desire you would
follow it.


Theoph. First, our Blessed Savior, immediately before his Passion, instituted
the Sacrament, and gave it to the Disciples present in both kinds, as three
Evangelists record, Matthew. 26. 26. As they were eating, Jesus took Bread and
blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and said, Take, eat,
this is my Body. ver. 27. He took the Cup and gave thanks, and gave it to them,
saying, Drink ye all of it; for this is my Blood of the New Testament, which is
shed for many for remission of sins. So we read in Mark 14. 22, 23. and he
expressly testifies of the Cup, That he gave it to them, and they all drank of
it. Saint Luke after the same manner. And adds moreover, the command of Christ,
This do in remembrance of me, Luke 22. 19.


Phil. I pray observe how that command is given, only when the Disciples
received the Bread, and not when they took the Cup. The Words are these, He
took Bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them, saying, This is
my Body which is given for you, this do in remembrance of me. Likewise also the
Cup after Supper, saying, This Cup is the New Test ament in my Blood which is
shed for you, ver. 20. And Tom. 3. Lib. 4. cap. 25. de Sacramento Eucharist^ ut
intelligeremus, etc.
Bellarmin observes it as an instance of Gods wonderful Providence to make
Heretics unexcusable, And that we may understand it was the command of Christ,
that the Sacrament should be distributed to all under the species of Bread, but
not so under the species of Wine.


Theoph. St Luke says, Likewise also the Cup: Intimating the same Institution
for one and for the other.


Phil. We are not much concerned in your gloss upon the Text.


Theoph. But you are in St Paul's, who declares, That after the same manner he
took the Cup when he had supped, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my
Blood, 1 Cor. 11. 25. the very Words of St Luke. And then expressly adds the
words of command of our Lord Christ, This do, as often as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me. Now what say you to the word of command given by Christ, to
do this in remembrance of him, as well when he gave the Cup, as when he
distributed the Bread unto the Disciplos?


Phil. Bellarmin observes a difference, Ibid. Post panis consecrationem
absolute penitur, post calicem, cum condition.
This do in remembrance of me, is put absolutely even in St Paul's relation,
after the Consecration of the Bread; but after the Cup it is repeated with a
Condition, ^his do, as often as you drink it, in remembrance of one: not
intimating, that the Cup must of necessity be given or taken; but if it be
given or received, it should be done in remembrance of the Lords Passion.


Theoph. These are pitiful shifts; the words rather imply. Christians should
often drink of the Cup in remembrance of their Savior. And the very next Verse
confutes this conceit of Bellarmin, wherein Paul puts the condition, as often,
both to eating and drinking, ver. 26. For as often as ye eat this Bread and
drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come. And withal, while you
triumph in St Lukes relation, where the command of, Do this, is expres'd only
when our Savior gave the Bread; you do not consider that St Matthew relates our
Saviors charge when he gave the Cup, Matthew. 26: 27. Drink ye all of this. And
St Mark records, Mark 14. 23. He gave the Cup to them, and they all drank of it.


Phil. To whom did Christ give this command, Drink ye all of this?


Theoph. To the Disciples, who did eat the Passover with him, and supped with
him; and after Supper he Instituted the Holy Sacrament, and gave the command to
observe it.


Phil. But these Disciples were the twelve Apostles, as is manifest from St.
Lukes relation, Luke 21. 14. When the hour was come (to keep the Passover) he
sat down, and the twelve Apostles with him. Now we grant, that the Apostles,
and the Bishops and Priests their Successors, must receive in both kinds, but
not the People. Bellarmin reasons thus, Ibid. Dedit selis Apostolis, eo dixit
s(...) Apostolis, bibite ex hoc omnes.
He gave the Cup only to the Apostles, and therefore only to them he said,
Drink ye all of this.


Theoph. By this subtilty you altogether exclude the People from being
concerned at all in Christ's command to receive the Sacrament: for to whom he
said, Take, eat, this is my Body, to them he said, Drink ye all of this (...)
that is, as you say, only to the Apostles. Upon what account therefore do ye
administer the Lords Body unto the People?


Phil. To this you have Ibid. Etsi non dedit, non prohibuit.
Bellarmins Answer. Although he did not give the Sacrament unto the People, he
did not for bid it should be given to them.


Theoph. So neither has he forbidden the Cup should be given to them. But I
pray hear what one of your own Benedictine Abbots, P^s^hafius, in his Book De
corpore Christi, c. 15. (as Bellarmin quotes him) says, as a Comment upon
those Words, (...) ex hoc omnes, tam ministri quam reliqui credentes.
Drink ye all of this; All, as well Ministers as other Believers, Hear what
another of your own side says upon the Text, and Bellarmins Comment Gerardus
Lori^hius, de Missa publica proroganda.
, There be some false Catholics, that fear not to stop the Reformation of the
Church what they can. These spare no Blast he mies, least that other part of
the Sacrament should be restored to the lay People; for, say they, Christ
spoke, Drink ye all of this only to the Apostles; but the words of the Mass be
these, Take and eat you all of this, Here I would know of them, whether this
was spoken only to the Apostles; then must Laymen abstain likewise from the
element of Bread, which to say, is an Heresy, yea, a pestilent and detestable
Blast hemy. It is therefore consequent, says he, that both these words (Eat
ye, Drink ye) were spoken to the whole Church.


Phil. It seems the Doctors vary in their Opinions. But the Truths of God, and
the Canons of the Church, depend not upon the humors of Men, and private
Interpretation.


Theoph. You seem all along to take Bellarmin's Words for Truth, his Answers
for Oracles: And do you now except against private Interpretation? But what say
you to that Argument wherein Ibid. De hoc argumento Lutherus triumpha^.
Bellarmin observes Luther so much to triumph? The Blood of the New Testament
was shed for the People, as well as for the Apostles; and our Savior gives the
Cup unto all for whom he shed his Blood; nay, and for that very cause, bids
them drink all of it, Matthew. 26. 27, 28 For this is my Blood of the New
Testament, which is s^ed for many for remission of sins. If Christ's Blood was
shed not only for the Apostles, but for many for remission of sins; the Cup
ought to be given not only to them, but to many others. Who dares say, says
Luther, [that Christ's Blood was not shed for Laiks? and therefore who should
dare to withold the Blood of the New Testament from them?


Phil. As you have taken the Objection out of Bellarmin, so you may his Answer,
Ib. Si sanguis Domini dandus esset omnibus pro quibus susus esi, dandus esset
Turcis, Judaeis, Ethnicis, etc.
That if the Blood of Christ must be given in the Sacrament to all those for
whom it was shed, then it must be given to all men; Turks, and Jews, and
Ethnics. For his Blood was shed for all men, as he proves from the Text, 1 John
2. 2. And he is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but also
for the sins of the whole world.


Theoph. This is a Cavil. The Sacraments are the Seals of the Church, und
appertain only to Church Members; and when Turks, and Jews, and Pagans, shall
be converted and received into the Church of Christ, they shall partake of her
Tresures. I am amazed to see your Learned Champion make such irrational
Replies, but his baffled Cause will afford no better.


Phil. Do not conclude him foiled, before you have tried his strength.


Theoph. It is my design thro-out, to examine his Objections and Answers, and I
have hitherto found them so inconsiderable, that I am almost confident for the
future.


Phil. Keep your confidence to your self, and produce your Reasons.


Theoph. I have one Argument more to urge for the Communion to be received by
all in both kinds, from our Saviors words, John 6. 53. Verily, verily, I say
unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye
have no life in you. This Text the Bohemians most insisted upon in the Council
of Basil, when their Delegates there desired the Cup might be allowed them. And
Aeneas Sylvius Hist. Bohem. cap. 35. Literarum doctrina and morum praestantia
juxta clarus.
relates, how Petrus Dresensis, a Schoolmaster in Prague, repaired to the
Preacher of St Michaels Church, by name Jacoballus, eminent for his Learning
and Conversation, asking him, How interpreting the Holy Scripture to the
People, he had not so long taken notice of a grand Error which would ruin the
Church, in giving the Sacrament only in one kind; whereas our Savior, in St
John, has said expressly, Unless ye eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his
blood, etc. Hereupon, this Learned Preacher searched the Fathers, and finding
the giving of the Cup unto the People approved, especially by Dionysius and
Cyprian, he earnestly exhorted the People of Prague, no longer to neglect or be
content without the Communion of the Cup, without which they could not be
saved: and so multitudes were promted to receive in both kinds, and importunate
with the Council of Basil to have it allowed. Many Heretics, as he says,
rejoicing that they had found an Article grounded upon Scripture, whereby
either the ignorance or impiety of the Church of Rome might be discovered. I
have given in this Story, to show of how great consequence, in the judgment of
the Bohemians this Text was, to prove even the necessity of receiving the
Sacrament in both kinds; and therefore let me hear your Answer.


Phil. Bellarmin takes notice of all these Circumstances, and gives three
Answers to that Text, Except ye eat the flesh, etc. His first Answer is this,
Lib. 4. De Sacram, Euch. c. 25. vim hujus praecepti in re quae sumitur, non in
modo sunendi, consistere. Sumuntur tam corpus quam sanguis sub qualibet specie.
The weight of this Precept does lie in the receiving the flesh and blood of
Christ, and not in the manner of receiving it. Now the body and blood of Christ
are truly received in either kind; whole Christ being communicated in the
bread, as also in the Cup, and therefore the People are not deprived of the
virtue of the Sacrament, and shall live by it.


Theoph. The Text expressly speaks of drinking his Blood, and that you cannot
pretend to do by receiving and eating his Flesh only in the Sacrament, although
his Blood and Soul be there also (according to your Opinion) by concomitancy.
Of which we shall say more hereafter.


Phil. If you stand so much upon the letter of the Text, which seems to imply
the receiving of Christ's Flesh and Blood distinctly, one by eating, and the
other by drinking, then we answer ou another way. That in Holy Scripture many
times In Script, conjunctio, and, accipitur pro disjunctiva.
the copulative is put for a disjunctive; as when Peter said to the impotent
Man at Solomon's Porch, Acts 3. 6. Silver and Gold have I none; the meaning is,
he had neither Silver nor Gold, for either would have sufficed for an Alms. And
if the Text be so Interpreted, it will not hurt us, Except ye eat the flesh of
the Son of Man, or drink his blood, etc.


Theoph. This is to make of Gods Word a Nose of Wax; to put the Holy Scripture
out of Joint, to help a broken Cause. This way would serve a Jesuit in another
case of Conscience. Is any one scrupulous of rebelling against his Prince? The
Father will satisfy him with that of Solomon, Fear God, or honor the King: if
you do one, you may omit the other. But what God has joined, let not Man put
asunder, says our Blessed Savior. Never turn a Copulative into a Disjunctive.


Phil. Well, If these two Answers do not please, Bellarmin will sit you with a
third. There are many Precepts in Holy Scripture, which are given to all, and
yet are designed to be observed only by some; as that Blessing upon Mankind at
first, Increase and multiply, and yet all Men are not obliged to Marry and get
Children. And so this saying of our Savior, If ye eat not the flesh of the Son
of Man, etc. it is spoken to the Church Universal, and yet if observed by some,
it suffices. The Priest taking the Sacrament in both kinds, shall convey Life
through Christ unto his whole Church.


Theoph. This Answer is not unlike the two former, if twisted together all are
not worth a rush: they only publish to the World the Objection is unanswerable,
and so rather then they would be silent, they would put their Ciphers together,
without one tittle of sense and reason to make them significant.


Phil. This is a quick way to answer an Argument or Reply, by saying it is
insignificant, and so dismiss it.


Theoph. If I omit any thing that is material, I desire no favor: I know I
shall hear of it with both Ears, for those of your side are used to give no
Quarter. Mean while I will follow my intended course, and show, in the next
place, how your half Communion is against the end of Christ's Instituting the
Sacrament.


Phil. Christ instituted these Holy Mysteries to confer Grace to the worthy
Receivers; to feed them with the Celestial Food of his precious Body and Blood,
to convey unto their Souls remission of sins. So much the words of Institution
imply, Take, eat, This is my Body which is given for you; and drink ye all of
this, for this is my Blood of the New Testament which was shed for many for
remission of sins. Now all this is communicated as well under one kind, as
under both: for whole Christ, his Body, and Blood, and his Divinity, is
exhibited under the Species of Bread. For Christ expressly says, It is my Body:
and if so, it is his Blood, and Life, and Divine Nature also. For Christ now
lives for ever, and the Union between his Soul and Body is indissoluble;
wheresoever one is, the other must be, by a necessary concomitancy. And then
for the Godhead of Christ, since the great Mystery of his Incarnation, that
can never be separated from the humane Soul and Body, which he assumed into one
Person and subsistence with Himself. So the Council of Trent has determined.
Sess. 13 c. 3. Statim post Consecrationem verum Domini nostri corpus, verumque
sang. una cum Divinit. existere sub specie panis and vini, etc.
Immediately after the Consecration, the very Body and Blood of our Lord, do
exist under the Species of Bread and wine, together with his Soul and Divinity.
The Body indeed subsists under the Species of Bread, and the Blood under the
Species of Wine, by virtue of the words of Consecration; but by virtue of a
Natural Connection, whereby the parts of Christ's humane Nature are, since his
Resurrection, for ever inseparably united, under the Species of Bread, there is
likewise the Blood of Christ, and under the Species of Wine, his Body, and his
Soul under both; as also his Divinity, by reason of the Hypostatical Union. And
therefore the Council concludes, Veriss. est, tantundem sub alterutra specie
atque sub utraque contineri, totus and integer Christus.
That as much is contained under either Species, as under both; even whole
Christ entirely.


Theoph. This is a new Model of Divinity. which was about two hundred Years in
fashioning and preparing, by their sworn Servants, the Schoolmen, for the
Fathers of Trent to make use of, to under-prop the declining State of the
Church of Rome. But I pray tell me, Why did our Blessed Savior so distinctly
say of the Bread, This is my Body; and of the Cup, This is my Blood, etc. if in
either kind, both Body and Blood are included and received.


Phil. The Council, as you have heard before, answers this exactly, Ibid.
Corpus existit sub specie panis, and sang. sub specie vini, vi verborum, a(...)
vi naturalis connexionis and concomitantiae, etc.
By the words of Consecration, the Bread is changed only into the Body of
Christ, and so the Wine into his Blood; but then by a natural connection and
concomitancy, each kind includes the other. The Body, and Blood, and Soul, and
God head of Christ, are inseparable.


Theoph. But why did Christ Institute the Sacrament in both kind, if to
receive in one kind be as beneficial to the Soul?


Phil. The Essence of the Sacrament, Lib. 4. de Euchar. c. 22. Species panis
and vini n^n tam essentiales quam integrales parts sunt.
as Bellarmin shows, is communicated in one kind, to wit, the Body and Blood of
Christ: but as to the integrity, both are necessary.


Theoph. You shall never find a School-man, without a nice Distinction to salve
the matter. However, hereby you acknowledge the Sacrament in one kind to be
maimed and imperfect, wanting one of the integral parts. But I will not
entangle the Discourse with such Niceties: You know our Blessed Savior
expresses one end of the Sacrament, That in remembrance of him it should be
given and received. And Paul shows, in what regard chiefly Christ is
commemorated in the Sacrament, as he was Crucified, For as often as ye eat this
Bread, and drink this Cup, ye show the Lords death till he come, 1 Cor. 11. 26.
Now you all grant, that the representation of Christ's death is made by both
kinds in the Sacrament. The Bread and Wine apart, represents Christ Blood
separated from his Body. Breaking of Bread signifies, how Christ's Body was
wounded, and bruised, and broken. So Paul renders the words of Christ's
Institution, 1 Cor. 11. 24. This is my Body which is broken for you, and
therefore the Sacrament should be given in both kinds, for a sensible
representation of Christ's death.


Phil. The Church holds the commemoration of Christ's death exactly in the
Sacrifice of the Mass; and this belongs only to the Priest, who of necessity
must consecrate Bread and Wine, and receive both; for this very reason, That he
may so represent Christ's death, and offer up his Body and Blood in Sacrifice;
his Body as crucified, and his Blood shed. So a great Doctor of our Church,
Lib. 6. Advers. haereses. Mem. Dominicae mortis agit Sacerdes in altari, non
pop. quaprop. Sacerd. quoties celebrat non consecrat unam si eciem sine altera,
etc.
Alphonsus de Casiro, The Priest commemorates Christ death upon the Altar, and
not the People receiving the Sacrament. And therefore, says he, the Priest of
necessity must consecrate both kinds, and receive them; because, although Christ
is wholly contained in one kind, yet by one he is not signified and represented:
for the Species of Bread only signifies and represents his Body; and that of
Wine, his Blood, etc.


Theoph. We will not examine this new Doctrine of Alphonsus and the Schools,
touching whole Christ in each Species, etc. but we will take his Concession;
That one kind does not signify or represent whole Christ, and his Death and
Passion; and therefore such as are bound to remember and show the death of
Christ, his Sacrifice upon the Cross, and the Work of our Redemtion by his
Blood shedding, they must of necessity receive the Sacrament in both kinds
apart.


Phil. What will you conclude thence? seeing he has told you that the Priest
is concerned, and not the People, to hold the remembrance of Christ's death in
the Sacrament, which he daily performs in the Office of the Mass.


Theoph. But what care we what Alphonsus has told us, or any of your New
Doctors, seeing St Paul affirms the contrary? For writing to all the Saints of
the Church of Corinth, he expressly tells them, As often as ye eat this Bread, and
drink this Cup, ye show the Lords death till he come. And doubtless, as all
Christians are concerned to keep a thankful remembrance of Christ, and of his
Passion, so we must do it as he has appointed, by receiving the Sacrament in
both kinds: for only so as you have heard, his Death and Bloodshedding is
represented to the Life. The Elements apart, showing how his Blood was
separated from his Body; breaking of Bread, showing how his Body was bruised
and broken. In this respect we may believe St Paul said to the Galathians, That
even before their eyes, Jesus Christ had been evidently set forth crucified
among them, Gal. 3. 1.


Phil. This suits Bellarmines Observation well, that the People may see Christ's
Death represented in both kinds upon the Altar, and one separate from the
other, and so hold the commemoration of his Passion, although they do not
communicate in both kinds: and he observes, the Eye is the quicker sense to
affect and raise our Meditation, rather then the Touch or Taste.


Theoph. Notwithstanding the subtle Observation of your Doctors, you shall give
us leave to follow Christ's direction, to receive the Sacraments in both kinds
in remembrance of him: and we will believe the Apostle, That by eating this
Bread, and drinking this Cup, we show the Lords death; and not by seeing the
Wafers, and the Cup upon the Altar. And withal, the Sacrament is called the
Lords Supper, wherein he Feasts our Souls with his Flesh, that is Meat indeed;
and with his Blood, which is Drink indeed. Now to complete a Feast, there must
be Meat and Drink, Esculenta and Poculenta. And one of your Doctors says,
Franciscus a Victoria, de Euch. qu, 87. Non est perfecta refectio sub unica
specie.
Under one kind of the Sacrament, is no perfect refection.


Phil. These things hold in Natural Food and Refections, but not in Spiritual.
Hunger and thirst in Grace, are not distinct Appetites, but have the same
Objects, as, Blessed are they which do bunger and thrist after righteousness,
Matthew. 5. 6. And we read, how our Blessed Savior entertained the multitudes in
the Wilderness with the Loaves, without Wine or Water.


Theoph. Those are pretty subtleties for Jesuits; but our Blessed Savior
Instituting his Sacraments for all Believers, as well Idiots as Learned,
designed to confirm their Faith in Spiritual Truths by sensible Signs, and
therefore chose those two Elements of Bread and Wine, to represent unto us,
that as these naturally nurish the Body, so should his Body and Blood exhibited
in the Sacrament, in a Spiritual manner nurish the Soul. And therefore you
would do well to leave the Signs and the Sacrament complete, and not deprive
your ignorant People of such Helps and Representations. Your own Schoolmen
acknowledge the Sacrament to be maimed and imperfect, as to the Sacramental
part, and the signification without both kinds. Part. 3. qu. 80. Art. 12.
Exparte Sacramenti convenit quod utrum que sumi(...) in utroque perfectio, etc.
Nullo modo debet corpus sumi sine sane.
Tho. Aquinus determines, That in regard to the Sacrament, both kinds are
necessary; for the perfection of the Sacrament consists in both, and therefore
by no means the Priest that consecrates, must receive the Body of Christ
without the Blood. Exparte sumentium req. summa rea. and cautela.
But in regard to the Receivers, reverence and caution must be had, least any
undecencies should happen, whereof the greatest danger is in receiving the Cup,
least the Wine be spilt. And so after the like sort Bonaventure.


Phil. Ib. ad 3. In persona omnium sang ossert and sumit.
Aquinas there tells you, how the Priest offers and takes the Cup in the behalf
of the People. And so in the Priests communicating the Sacrament retains its
perfection; in the Peoples communicating in one kind, it retains its reverence
and due caution, least any thing should happen irreverently.


Theoph. We shall hereafter consider your great Reasons why you withold the
Cup from the Laity. At present I will follow my design, and show that the
practice both of the Apostles and of the Church, for twelve hundred Years, was
to administer the Sacrament unto the People in both kinds, as our Savior gave
the Cup unto the Apostles. St Mark expressly says, They all drank of it, Mark
14. 23. so they administered the Cup unto the Saints.


Phil. You have been already showed that they received the Sacrament at our
Saviors hands, as Apostles and Priests, and so they had the Cup.


Theoph. Not so, for they Communicated then as Receivers, and as the common
People; for our Blessed Savior was the Priest in that Administration. This some
of your own Doctors affirm: for as when our Blessed Savior was Baptized by
John, he condescended to represent the Person of a Disciple, and John was the
Master in that Scene: so when he gave the Sacrament to his Disciples, he was
the Priest, and they as the People receiving in both kinds for a standing Rule
and Example unto all Posterity.


Phil. Vivendum Legibus non exemplis
We must live by Laws, and not by Example, as the Lawyers wisely determine in
all Cases.


Theoph. I had thought our Blessed Saviors Example had been a Law and Rule to
Christians, in such things as fall within the compass of their imitation. Learn
of me, says our Blessed Savior, for I am meek and lowly of heart. But
moreover, the Apostles then receiving the Sacrament in both kinds, had express
command, hoc facite; so to give the Sacrament unto others, as he had don to
them.


Phil. When you Comment upon a Text, it shall not fail to speak your sense and
do your work: But what will you say if our Savior himself administered the
Sacrament in one kind. I hope this Practice and Example will satisfy you.


Theoph. Let me hear the Instance, and I will give my Answer.


Phil. In Emaus he gave the Sacrament unto those two Disciples, with whom he
communed in the way. And St Luke observes, Immediately their eyes were opened,
and they knew him, Luke 24. 31. And it follows in that Chapter, ver. 35. He was
known of them in breaking of Bread. This wonderful effect shows it was the
Sacrament; and yet we read only of one kind which he consecrated and gave unto
them. The Text says, v. 30. He took Bread, and blessed it, and brake and gave
unto them; the Ceremonies exactly which our Savior usd in his consecration of
the Sacrament.


Theoph. This will not prove what you desire, That our Savior now gave the
Sacrament to these two Disciples; for these Circumstances of giving Thanks, or
Blessing, or breaking of Bread, were usual at ordinary Meals: whereof we have a
full proof in the Acts of the Apostles. We read there, cap. 27. how in a great
Tempest the Soldiers, and Marirers, and Prisoners, in all 276 Souls in the
Ship, had fasted fourteen days (we may suppose, so long they had made no
setting Meals), and Paul, being assured from God of all their safety, he
exhorted them to be comforted, and to take some meat for their health sake: and
when he had thus spoken, he took Bread and gave thanks to God, and when he had
broken it, he began to eat, ver. 35. Here you have the same Ceremonies of
taking of Bread and blessing and breaking, and yet doubtless it was a common
refection: sure the Apostle did not give the Sacrament to so many Infidels in
the thip.


Phil. The Case is not the same, neither the Expressions. For in Luke the word
is, (...), He blessed, the same which our Savior usd in the Institution of the
Sacrament. But in your Instance it is, (...), He gave thanks: only said Grace
before a Meal.


Theoph. Your Criticisin will help you little. You know the Sacrament is called
the Eucharist, (...), the very word which Paul used.


Phil. But those two at Emaus were Disciples, and such a notable Miracle
ensuing, that their eyes were open to know Christ at that instant in breaking
of Bread, this proves it was the Sacrament they received.


Theoph. That was an accidental Dispensation. Our Blessed Savior, upon their
importunity, turned with them into the Inn, sat down to eat, and immediately
before he vanished out of their sight, he was pleased to discover himself unto
them.


Phil. L 3. de cons. Evangelist. c. 15. Facta est permissio usque ad
Sacramentum panis, ut unitate corp. ejus participata removeri intellig.
impedimentum inimici, ut Christus possit agnosci.
St Augustine affirms it was the Sacrament, and tells us, That through the power of
the devil their eyes were holden not to know Christ, who was pleased to permit
it until they came to the Sacrament of Bread, that we should understand all
impediments of the enemy against knowing of Christ shall be removed, when we
are united to his Body.


Theoph. In this Passage Augustine does not clearly assert what you would have
him, but according to his usual Expressions elsewhere, calling any mystical
thing by the name of Sacrament: he calls this, Sacramentum panis, because it
had a mystical signification, being accompanied with that notable Circumstance
of the Disciples eyes being opened to know him: And the allegorical or mystical
signification is this, That such as in the Church receive the Sacrament
devoutly, shall have their understandings opened to know the Lord Christ more
perfectly. But I can demonstrate to the Doctors of your Church, from their own
Principles, That our Blessed Savior did not give the Sacrament to his two
Disciples at Emaus, because he did not pronounce those words which make the
Sacrament, and change the Bread into his Body, viz. This is my Body, which you
maintain to be the essential words of Consecration. The others, of blessing and
breaking Bread, and giving to them, being but circumstances in comparison.
Again, he did not consecrate in both kinds, which your Doctors also account
necessary to the Sacrament, That the Priest should consecrate Bread and Wine,
and receive them.


Phil. A negative Argument out of Scripture holds not good, because it is not
expressed in the Relation that our Savior said, This is my Body, and that our
Savior did consecrate the Cup, as well as bless the Bread, Because these things
are not expressed, you cannot therefore conclude they were not don.


Theoph. Now I have brought you where I desired: you say a negative Argument
out of Scripture is not of force. If I should grant it was the Sacrament which
our Savior gave to the Disciples at Emaus, How would you prove they received it
only in one kind, the Bread which he gave them? How will you prove he did not
bless and give the Cup to them? Only by your negative Argument, because the
Holy Scriptures speak nothing of it: which way soever you turn the wind, this
Knot will hold you fast. By this way which you have first showed, we answer
several Arguments of your Doctors out of Scripture; and in many places of
Scripture, say they, the Sacrament is described by this character of breaking
Bread; as in this passage of St Luke, and some others in the Acts of the
Apostles. Now from this denomination they would infer, that they received the
Sacrament in one kind. We say no, but that one part is put for the whole, by
the Figure Synecdoche, breaking of Bread is expressed, and drinking of the Cup
is implied and understood.


Phil. By such Figures, when it shall serve your turn, you may make a strange
supplement to the Holy Scriptures; if they do not express what you would have
them, it shall be understood however.


Theoph. You showed the way. Neither had I entered upon this digression, but
that you excepted against a negative Argument out of Scripture, when I did
prove that Christ gave not the Sacrament unto the two Disciples, because he did
not say, This is my Body, and did not bless the Cup; both which, your Doctors
account necessary to the Sacrament. Your answer was, That we must not conclude
these things were omitted by our Savior, although they are not recorded by the
Evangelist: but whatever you think of it, we are sure many of your own Doctors
are of our Opinion, That breaking of Bread, etc. at Emaus, was no Sacramental
action, but blessing and giving common Bread at that Meat to the Disciples. So
Lyra upon the place, Sicut consueverat ante passionem.
He blessed the Meat before they eat, as be usually did before he suffered.
Dionysius Carthusianus, Accepit panem and benedixit, nan autem in corpus conv.
sicut in coena, etc.
He to^k Bread and blessed it, and gave to them; but he did not change it into
his Body, as in the Lords Supper, but after the custom of blessing the Meat:
instructing us before Meals to say Grace. So Pro more sibi familiari, etc.
Jansenius Concord. c. 146. He blessed the Bread after his usual manner. And
afterward he tells us, That some were of the opinion, that our Savior, under
the Species of Bread, did give unto them his Body; Ea sent. non est certa, nec
multum verisimilis.
but that Opinion is not certain, nor very probable.


Phil. We are not concerned in the Opinion of some Doctors; St Augustin's
Testimony will outweigh them all.


Theoph. You have heard, That St Augustine came not home to your purpose; he
speaks mystically, and by his side you would walk in a mist. But I proceed to
show the practice of the Church in the Apostles time. It is manifest, That the
Saints at Corinth received in both kinds, according to St Paul's direction, 1
Cor. 11. 23. He first declares, Christ's Institution of the Sacrament in both
kinds; and adds, his command even for the Cup (which you observed was not in St
Lukes relation) Do this as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. St Paul
after gives a general Rule for all Christians, Let a Man examine himself, and
so let him eat of the Bread and drink of the Cup, ver. 28. And afterward
declares the danger of unworthy receiving, But he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, ver. 29. You see there is
no evasion, he speaks to all the Saints, and enjoins eating and drinking
together: And who are you, that you should separate them?


Phil. Lib. 4. de Eucha. c. 25. Fcclesia Cor. utobatur utraque speie.
Bellarmin does acknowledge, that the Church of Corinth did receive the
Sacrament in both kinds; because Paul, either from Christ's Example, or for some
other Reasons, had declared it lawful for them so to do, but he never taught
them it was necessary: Neither did he urge the Precept of Christ, which you so
much insist upon, Drink you all of this.


Theoph. But he added another Precept to the Cup, which St Luke omitted, This
do as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me. But you are put to this
pitiful shift, when we prove the practice of the Apostles, and of the primitive
Times, to give the Cup in the Sacrament to the People, to answer, That it is
lawful and may be allowed, but it is not necessary to give the Cup: whereas our
Lord Christ his Example in the first Institution of the Sacrament, delivering
it in both kinds, his command, Drink ye all of this, St Paul's relation of
another Precept, This do, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me, And
the signification of Christ's death in the Sacrament, whereunto you confess both
kinds are necessary to be received asunder: all these do imply a necessity and
command in the judgment of all who are not blinded with prejudice and interest.
However, my business at present is to show the practice of the Church in the
Apostles time, to receive the Sacrament in both kinds; and Bellarmin
acknowledges it so in the Church of Corinth, and Annotatione 27. in 6.
Johannis. Antiqua consuetudo tempore Apostolorum sub utraque spei, etc. in hac
assertione nulla controversia.
Cardinal Tolet in other Churches. It was the ancient custom in the Apostles
days, in the Church, to take the Communion in both kinds. And he adds, in this
Assertion there is no Controversy, and his Proofs for it are many.


Phil. But Tolet's Non minus antiqua Ecclesiae consuetudo sub una sola specie,
modo sub una, modo sub utraque.
second Assertion comes home to our purpose, It was no less ancient custom of
the Church to communicate under one kind, even in the Apostles time; sometimes
under one, and sometimes under both, and his proofs you will find very
considerable.


Theoph. We value not his confident Assertion, wherein he exceeds all his
Fellows: But what are his Proofs?


Phil. He shows how our Savior himself gave the Sacrament in one kind, unto the
two Disciples at Emaus.


Theoph. A baffled proof, as I believe your self will acknowledge seeing many of
your own party have done so.


Phil. But his second Argument is very considerable out of the Acts of the
Apostles, cap. 2. ver. 42 They continued stedfasily in the Apostles Doctrine
and fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayer. Here says he, by
breaking of Bread is meant receiving the Sacrament, Nemo ratione utens negare
potest, panem hoc loco esse Eucharistiam, etc.
every one that has reason must acknowledge it; Si cibus esset communis non
jungeretur medio loco cum doctrina and oratione.
otherwise, had it bin common bread and refection, it would not have bin put
between the Apostles Doctrine and Prayer.


Theoph. Although I do not fear the Cardinals censure, if I should deny it,
neither can he or any other make it more then probable, that in that place by
breaking of Bread is understood a Sacramental Action; yet because it is
probable both in this Text, and in the 20th Chapter of the Acts, ver. 7. Upon
the first day of the week, when the Disciples came together to break Bread,
Paul preached. Therefore some of our Divines do allow your Interpretation: yet
your Doctors conclusion will not hold, That they received the Sacrament only in
one kind, although the Bread only is expressed, for here a part is put for the
whole action of Communicating: for mark you, breaking of Bread was the Apostles
or Priests act, so to distribute it to the People: and many other actions must
concur to make up the Sacrament, as Blessing, and Consecrating, and the like;
and you sind these are not expressed, but implied: and so also must
consecrating the Cup be implied also; for otherwise, if the Apostles did
Consecrate the Bread and not the Cup, the Sacrament was null by the
acknowledgment of your own Doctors. They conclude, the Consecration of both
kinds necessary, insomuch that Part. 3. q. 74. art. 1. ad 2. Nec propter
desectum alterius est unum sine altere consecrandum.
Aquinas holds, If one part of the Sacrament cannot be procured (suppose it
Wine) the other part ought not to be Consecrated. And he gives the reason,
Because the Sacrament would be imperfect. And Dispui. 123. c. 30. Necessarium
jure divinout ex disp. Pentif. etc.
Vasquez holds it necessary, jure divino, so that by the Popes Dispensation the
Sacrament cannot be consecrated in one kind, both in respect of the Sacrifice
and the Sacrament. We conclude therefore, that the Apostles, who did break
Bread in these Texts to the People, did before Bless and Consecrate it, and
after Consecrate the Cup; and you cannot say they did not, although these things
are not expressed.


Phil. I grant all this: But how will you prove they gave the Cup to the People.


Theoph. It is your part to show they did not, otherwise you do not make good
that the Sacrament was given only in one kind: Now all your proof is, because
the Cup is not expressed, as the breaking of Bread is. And you know, that it is
a weak negative Argument, and if allowed, it would overthrow your first
Postulatum, that by breaking of Bread is understood the Sacrament; seeing many
necessary actions to complete a Sacrament, as you have heard, are not expressed
but only implied: although it is not expressed, yet you take it for granted, That
when the Bread was broken, it was blessed and distributed, and that the Cup
likewise was consecrated: And why will you not give me leave to take it
likewise for granted, that the Cup was given to them, although it be not
expressed? Does the Expression of breaking the Bread exclude giving the Cup?


Phil. No: but being expressed, and the other not, we may suppose the one
without the other.


Theoph. What you may suppose I know not; but this I am sure, neither the
Cardinal nor you can prove any thing against us out of these Texts. And before
I leave this passage, I cannot but observe a contradiction of your practice
unto this Expression of breaking of Bread, which you make very much of, as the
denomination of the whole Sacramental Action (and in some places we do not
gainsay it) and yet when you administer the Sacrament, you do not break Bread;
you omit that significant Action which is expressed in our Blessed Saviors
Institution, and you give unto the People Wafers whole and single, which cannot
represent Christ's Body bruisd and broken, or the Peoples Communion of the same
Loaf, which St Paul insists upon, 1 Cor. 10. 17. We being many, are one Bread
and one Body, for we all are partakers of that one Bread. If you had not
studied to go against Christ's Institution, you could not have omitted breaking
of Bread, and giving the Cup unto the People in the Sacrament.


Phil. You have an Art to amplify and aggravate, and to lay heavy things to
our charge.


Theoph. I am solicirous for your sake, that you may recover out of the snare,
and be timely sensible of your Error. Tolet has other Arguments as weak as
Water, to make good his impudent Assertion, That in the Apostolic and Primitive
Times, the Church administered the Sacrament indifferently either in one or both
kinds, as she thought fit. I shall meet with them in due place. For I now
proceed, as I proposed, to show the practice of the Church for many Ages, both
from the restimony of the Fathers, and the Learned in every Age; and from the
acknowledgment of your own Doctors, to give the Communion in both kinds unto
the People, according to the Institution of Christ, and the Tradition of the
Apostles.


Phil. You love to take that for granted, which is the Question: Whether
Christ's Institution and Apostolical Tradition be on your side? For although our
Savior gave the Sacrament in both kinds to the Apostles, it does not appear he
appointed them to administer it so unto the People, as a rule unto succeeding
Generations.


Theoph. The practice of the Church, will best interpret the commands of
Christ, and duty of Christians: If the Church Catholic for 1200 Years gave the
Communion in both kinds, thereby they declare the mind of Christ, and our
obligation to follow them.


Phil. We reverence the Authority of the Church, and desire nothing more then
your submission thereunto.


Theoph. I speak of Church Practice, and you divert unto Church Authority: As
tho the Holy Fathers, who gave the Sacrament in both kinds unto their
Congregations, did therein follow the Canons of the Church, and not rather the
Institutions and Command of Christ.


Phil. The Essential parts of the Sacrament we remit to Christ and his
Institution, but do believe the Church always had power to appoint and alter
Circumstances.


Theoph. Where Christ has left them undetermined. But more-over, we account
the Elements of Bread and Wine, to be material and substantial parts of the
Sacrament, Instituted by Christ, and therefore not to be accounted
Circumstances, and left to the determination of the Church. But I perceive,
while you contend so much for the Authority of the Church, you are not willing
in this point to hear the constant Testimony of the Church.


Phil. Not so; but we most cordially embrace it, knowing that we derive full
confirmation of our practice in one kind (whatsoever you think of it) from the
usage and testimony of the Primitive Times.


Theoph. I will first show you what they say for us, and then do you produce
your Evidences for your selves. In the first Century, we read diverse Liturgies
ascribed to some of the Apostles and Evangelists. The Liturgy of St James, of
St Peter, of St Mark; in them we find the Priests and Deacons, and all the
People, give Thanks to God and the Lord Jesus Christ, (...), etc.
That he has vouchsafed unto them, the favor to partake of his Body and Blood.
We read, they speak of the Mysteries altogether in the plural, Partaking of the
pure Celestial life-giving and dreadful Mysieries. We read, how the Deacons
after Consecration take the Patin and the Chalice, to distribute the Bread and
Wine unto the People.


Phil. You account those Liturgies spurious, and not made by the Apostles; and
you take them for proofs against us.


Theoph. It Is truth, we cannot believe they were compiled by the Apostles, for
then it would have bin presumption for after Ages not to conform to them, but
unto Liturgies of their own framing. Your Ordo Romanus should have been exactly
conform unto Peter's Liturgy. However, they were set forth not many Ages after,
and pretend to the Apostolical Times and Practice; and where they agree, give
some light to Posterity of their Customs: and against you their Testimony holds
good, because you account them Legitimate.


Phil. It is sport for Children to fight with wooden Daggers.


Theoph. They are sharp enough to foil your pretentions unto Antiquity. But
this is but fencing about, I will close with you instantly, and produce
unquestionable Testimonies of the Sacrament given unto the People in both
kinds. (...), etc.
Ignatius, St John's Disciple, in his Epistle to the Phila^ delphians, tells us,
It is one and the same Flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the same Blood which
was shed for us. One Bread broken for all, and one Cup distributed to the whole
Congregation. Apol 2. prope finem. (...), etc.
Justin Martyr, in the next Century, giving account of the Rites of their
Christian Service and Communion, he tells the Heathen Emperors, to whom he
makes his Apology for Christians, The President of the Assembly, or Priest,
giving thanks, and all the People congratulating; they who are called Deacons,
give to everyone present to partake of the Bread and Wine, with Water blessed;
and carry those Elements abroad to such as are not present. And this nurishment
is called the Eucharist. In the end of the same Century, 2do Lib. ad Vxorem, c.
4. De cibo and poculo invadere, etc.
Tertullian exhorting his Wife after his death, if at all, only to marry in the
Lord, i. e. a Christian, Otherwise, says he, how will thy Husband, if a
Heathen, suffer thee to go to that Feast which is so much defamed, to take the
Bread and the Cup. And afterward, Libro de lapsis, De cujus manu desiderabit;
de cujus peculo particip.
Of whose hand will thou receive the Bread, of whose Cup will thou drink. Now
Pamelius and de la Cerda, in their Notes upon Tertullian, acknowledge both these
places to be spoken of the Eucharist; and both kinds are expressly mentioned and
received. Praesente ac test meipso.
Cyprian follows his Master Tertullian, and has many passages to our purpose.
He gives an account of a strange accident, whereof he was an Eyewitness, That
a young Maid being at the Sacrament, when the Deacon brought the Cup to her, she
turned away her face; shutting her mouth, and refusing to drink: Reluctanti
licet de Sacramento Calicis infudit. Sequitur singultu and vomitus, etc.
but the Deacon forced her to take down some of the Wine, and presently she
vomited. The Holy Eucharist could not stay in her Mouth and Stomach which was
defiled. For we read before, That when she was an Infant, the Heathen took her
from her Mother, and by force put into her mouth Panem mero mixtum de
immolatione perceptum.
Bread mingled with Wine, taken from the Idol Sacrifice. And because of this
Pollution; through a Divine dispensation in these severe Times, followed that
abhorrency of the Sacrament. Now here is mention made of the Sacramental Cup,
but not of Bread, delivered to the Damsel, tho unwilling. And from this, and
such like places, we may as well prove they administered the Cup without the
Bread, as they from other places conclude the Bread was given without the Cup.
Another notable Passage we have Epistola 54. Cornelio papae fratri, ques
hertamur ad praelium non inermes, etc.
in his Epistle to Cornelius the Pope, his Brother in the Lord: He writes his
mind to him, That in those difficult times of Persecution, it was expedient to
reconcile Penitents lapst, the sooner to Church Communion, and with more
Indulgence: That by the Blood of Christ received in the Sacrament, they may be
fortified against assaults, and be encouraged to shed their Blood for the
Testimony of the Gospel. And immediately after he says, Quo modo prevocamus eos
in confess nominis sang. suum effundere, etc.
How shall we exhort them to shed their Blood in the Confession of his Name, if
we deny them to partake of his Blood. He adds immediately after, Quomodo ad
Martyrii poculum idences facimus, si non eos prius ad bib. in Ecclesia pocul
Domini jure communicationis admittimus.
How shall we fit them to drink the Cup of Martyrdom, if we do not before admit
them to take the Cup of the Lord in the Church, by right of Communication.
Observe the right of Communicating.


Phil. Lib. 4. de Euch. c. 26. Jus Laic^r. ad communicandum a Sacerdot. etc.
Bellarmin shows, how this Epistle of Cyprian, is a full confutation of your
Opinion, That the Church cannot withold part of the Sacrament from the
People, seeing she has power to exclude from the whole Sacrament. For Cyprian
writes to Cornelius, for some Indulgence for those who were excluded.


Theoph. Do you believe his first Position, That the Peoples right to the
Sacrament, is given by the Priest to them, and by him may be taken from them?


Phil. Yes, when they are Criminals, it may be withheld from them by the power
of the Priest; and upon their repentance, again be restored.


Theoph. So it is with the offending Clergy, as well as with the People: upon
some great offense, they may be suspended from the Sacrament; and therefore why
does he say, the right of the People to the Sacrament, etc. and your answer
supposes an offense, whereupon the right may be taken away. But Bellarmin
speaks absolutely, Jus Laicorum, etc. The right the People have to the
Sacrament, is from the Priests concession, I thought it had bin from Christ's
Institution and command. And Bellarmins Inference is insufferable, that as the
Church and the ^ishops have power to keep Offenders from the Sacrament
altogether, so can they dispose of, and give the Sacrament under one kind, or
both, as they think fit: And the absurdity appears herein, Christ has given
power to his Church to Excommunicate Offenders, but not to alter his
Institution of the Sacrament. If we had not found it written, we could not
believe a Man of Learning should make such Inferences, absurd and irreligious.


Phil. If you like not this Answer, you may his second Thoughts Ib. Habuissent
certe ex censuet. illius temp. ergo cum sit contr. consuet. introducta non
habent amplius jus illud.
That if in Cyprians time the people had a right to demand the Cup, they had it
certainly from the custom of that time: and therefore seeing now another Custom
is introduced, and a Law made for the Sacrament in one kind, they have no claim
or right to the other.


Theoph. It Is horrible insolence in Bellarmin to assert, That if the People had
a right to claim the Cup, certainly they derived it from Custom, and to take no
notice at all of Christ's Institution, and the Apostles Tradition and Practice.
And that he should presume to balance the custom of so many former Ages of the
Church, with a custom not many Ages introduced; and withal, not to allow one
grain unto all we read of both kinds in the Holy Scripture, to turn the Scale:
And why does he take so great pains to answer the Testimonies which we bring
out of the Fathers, for the giving of the Sacrament in both kinds, seeing he
might cut all off with this stupendous Solution? It was the custom of so many
Ages to receive the Communion in both kinds; it is our custom to receive the
Communion in one kind. But notwithstanding this compendious answer of your
Doctor, I will go on to prove the practice of the Church to give the Cup, and
then I will make the Inference. Hom. 6. in Numeros. dicam vobis quis sit Pop.
qui in usu habet sang. bibere, non solum Sacr. ritu, etc.
Origin gives a full Testimony on our side, I will show you who are the People
who are accustomed to drink Blood, not only in the Sacrament, but in hearing
the word of God.


Phil. Ib. In usu habet non praecepto.
Bellarmines answer to this Testimony, is short and full. They are accustomed,
but not commanded.


Theoph. De Caena Domini. Lex prohibet ejus sang. Evangelium praecipit ut
bibatur.
Cyprian shows the Precept as well as the use: The Law, says he, forbids to
eat with the Blood; but the Gospel commands that we should drink it.


Phil. Praecipit ut bibatur, at non ab omnibus.
Bellarmin answers, The Gospel commands that the Blood of Christ should be
drank, but not by all.


Theoph. Christ's words are, Drink ye all of this. And Qu. 17. in Levit. ad
bibendum sang. omnes exhortantur qui volunt habere vitam.
Augustine says, All are exhorted to drink this Blood who will have life. In
the fourth Century, the Fathers of the Greek and Latin Church are all for us.
Epist. 289. ad Patriciam Caesariam. (...), etc.
Basil the Great, writing to a great Lady, tells her, It is good to Communicate
every day, and to partake of the holy Body and Blood. Regul^ 80. c. 28. (...),
etc.
Again elsewhere he puts the Quest: What is proper for a Christian? And he
gives the Answer, To cleanse himself from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit,
and perfect Holiness in the fear of the Lord, and so to eat the Body of Christ,
and drink his Blood. Oratione 42. (...), etc.
Greg. Nazianzen gives advice, Without doubting, eat the Body, and drink the
Blood, if thou desire Life. Homil. 18. in 2. ad Cornith. (...), etc.
Chrysostom has a memorable Passage to our purpose, I can show you, says he,
where the Priest differs not from the People, when we enjoy the dreadful
Mysteries; for we are all alike vouchsafed them: One Body and one Cup, proposed
to all.


Phil. k Bellarmin shows, how Chrysostom understands the thing that is
Communicated, and not the Signs: and so all receive whole Christ, although under
the Species of Bread.


Theoph. Seeing there is express mention made of one Cup offered to all, you
cannot understand thereby, receiving Christ's Blood only by Ib. Rom Sacramenti,
etc.
concomitancy with the Body of Christ, under the Species of Bread. And whereas
Bellarmin faith, Both the Priest and People did eat of the same Sacrifice under
the Law, and therefore the difference between us under the Gospel, and them,
could not herein consist; That as well the People, as the Priest, equally share
in the Sacrament. I answer, that in the Peace Offering, he that brought it had
his part, as the Priest his; but they were different heterogenial parts, the
wave-breast and heaveshoulder were the Priests share, Lev. 7. 34. whereof he
that brought the Offering did not eat. And so the Shewbread belonged to the
Priest to eat, and not to the People. Now at the Lords Table there is a clear
parity between Priest and People, alike partaking of homogenial things, eating
the same Bread, and drinking the same Cup. And this was Chrysostoms design to
show, in these words, Ib. (...), etc.
Not as under the Law the Priest eat some things, and the People other; and it
was not lawful for the People to partake of those things which were assigned to
the Priest.


Phil. Ib. Manifest patet, etc.
Bellarmin shows plainly the custom in Chrysostoms time to receive in one kind,
by a miraculous. Instance related out of Sozomens History, Lib. 8. Of an
heretical Woman, who would dissemble Catholic Communion, and received the Bread
in Chrysostoms Church, but kept it by her and eat common Bread, which her Maid
brought with her; and it became a stone in her mouth. Now says Bellarmin, If
she must also have received the Cup, How could her first juggling about the
Bread concele her?


Theoph. Such Legends as these prove little: If truth, she might think in the
throng to escape the Cup; or else set her lips to the Cup, and drink nothing:
and so Bellarmins manifest patet, is manifest latet; in a sinking Cause, he
lays hold of every Reed to support it. Other Testimonies we have out of
Chrysostom, Hom. 23. in I ad Cor. (...), etc.
comparing the Jews Sacraments and Mysteries with ours, he says. As thou
eatest the Lords Body, so did the Jews eat Manna: as thou drinkest the Blood of
Christ, so they water out of the Rock. Another out of the 32d Homily upon St
Matthew, near the end, exciting to love, he says, We have all one Table spread
before us, we all drink of the same Liquor; and not only so, but out of the
same Cup. Ambrose says, Mi^ (...), etc.
If as often as Christ's Blood is poured out in the Sacrament, it is shed for
remission of sins: I must always receive it, that my sins may be always
forgiven. He seems to imply, that if we stand in need of remission of sins, we
must take the Cup of Salvation. De Sacramentis, l. 4. c. 6. Debeo illum semper
accipere, ut sensperper mihi pecc. dimittantur.
Again, speaking mystically of the Priests of the Gospel, he says, The Priest,
by the word of God, touches the rock, and the waters flow, and the Lords
people drink f Ib. l 5. c. 1. Verbo Dei tangit petram and fluit aqua, and bibit
populus Dei.
thereof. Theodoreti hist. lib 5. c. 18. Qua audacia poculum sang pretiosi ere
tuo participabis? etc.
Again, his Speech to Theodosius the Emperor, when he came to receive the
Sacrament after that great slaughter of many thousands, committed by his
command at Thessalonica, proves our Point, With what confidence can thou
receive with thy mouth the Cup of Christ's precious Blood, with such
blood-guiltiness, etc.


Phil. Lib. 4. c. 26. Fatemur datam utramque speciem in aliq. locis; sed non
Jure Divino.
Bellarmin answers to these Testimonies of the Fathers, That in some places the
Sacrament was administered to the People in both kinds, but not by any
Divineright.


Theoph. It Is enough for us at present to prove the practice of the Church, and
that he confesses. In Malach. c. 2. Sacerdotes Euch. conficiunt, and sang
Domini populo distrib.
Jerome says, The Priests consecrate the Eucharist, and distribute the Blood
of Christ unto the People. And to this Bellarmin confidently answers, Nihil
novi. This is no news: It is in truth no news, to hear the Fathers witnessing,
that the Cup was given to the People: Where do they say, the Bread was given
without the Cup?


Phil. You shall find we have sufficient proofs of that out of Antiquity.


Theoph. Such manifest Proofs as Bellarmin brought but now: Legends, and
reservations, and half proofs, but I will suspend my judgment till you offer
them, and I go on to show the Testimonies of every Age in this Point, although I
may weary your patience and mine own. Decret. part. 2. causa 33. q. 3. c. 37.
Dum frangitur hostia, dum sang. de calice in or a fidelium funditur. Ib. c 36.
Ibi vos estis in mensa, etc.
Gratian has collected several Passages out of St Augustine, and the Sentences
of Prosper, While the Host is broken, and the Blood is poured out of the Cup
into the mouths of the Faithful. Again, Ye are together with us at the Table,
and in the Cup; we drink together, because we live together. This evidently
shows both kinds distinctly and apart, distributed to all the Communicants, the
Priest and People eating and drinking together at the Lords Table, as all were
partakers of the same Spiritual Life. In the fifth Century, we have a full
proof before the fourth General Council, of the Communion given in both kinds.
Samuel, and other Pri^sts, put in Articles into the Council of Calcedon,
against Ibas Bishop of Edessa: the 9th Article was this, That upon complaint he
had neglected to punish some Officers, Bin. Tom. 3. Council. part. 2. Conc.
Chalced. Action 10, (...), etc.
who upon a great Festival had provided but little Wine, and that not good, for
the Sacrament to be distributed unto the People; so that at the time of
administering the Cup, they were constrained to send for more to the Tavern: and
when that sufficed not, the Bishop gave a nod to those that administered the
Bread, to come up to the Altar, and for bear giving the Body of Christ, because
there was not Wine enough to come after. This ample Testimony, proves the Cup
was of necessity given to the People, and that the Bread could not be given
without the Cup: for they who delivered the Bread, were commanded to cease,
because for want of Wine others could not follow them with the Cup. And this
the whole Council approved, admitting the Charge against the Bishop; never
answering, more Romano, That the People might receive the Body without the Cup.
This agrees well with that saying ascribed to St Augustine, Al^erus l. 2. c. 8.
De Sacrament, nec car^ sine sang. nec sang sine carne jure communicatur.
by Algerus a Benedictine Monk, Neither can the Flesh be of right distributed
without the Blood, nor the Blood without the Flesh.


Phil. Lib. 4. c. 26. Ea sent. non est Aug. at Paschasii.
Bellarmin says, It is not the saying of Augustine, but of Paschasius.


Theoph. We will not dispute that: But what says he to the words themselves?
For Bellarmin acknowledges the Testimony of either to be good.


Phil. He says, They speak not of the signs, but of the thing signified, The
Body and Blood of Christ, and they are always communicated together by a
concomitancy.


Theoph. This is the usual shift, but it helps him nothing: For in this sense,
one cannot be given without the other: But the words say, Non jure communicatur.
One without the other cannot of right be communicated, implying, that
injuriously it might be.


Phil. Bellarmin applies those words (non jure communicatur) to the Persons
receiving, not to the things received. Non jure commun. qui sentit unum accipi
sine al(...).
They ought not of right to communicate, who think they can receive the Body of
Christ without his Blood.


Theoph. This is an Application at random, against the scope and the express
construction of the words, but you shall never find him without an Answer;
something he will say to amaze the People. But I proceed: About this time Pope
Leo the first makes a Decree, That some Manichees should be observed strictly,
who dissembling Church Communion with Catholics, would come to the Sacrament,
and receive the Bread but not the Wine; because they esteemed Wine a Creature
of the Devil. Vt vobis hujusmodi homines ex his manifest^tur indiciis.
Now by this mark, he would have them discovered, if they refused to receive
the Cup, and so cast out of the Church. Not long after, Bin. Tom. 3. In not is
advitam Gelasii. Aut Sacramenta integra percipiant, aut ab integris arceantur,
etc. Divisie uninus and ejusdem mist. etc.
Pope Gelasius seconds the Decree: We have heard, says he, That some receiving
the Body of Christ in the Sacrament, forbear the Cup, I know not upon what
superstitious ground, but let those either take the Sacrament entirely, i. e.
in both kinds, or let them be excluded altogether. And he gives a reason most
observable, The division of one and the same Sacrament, cannot be without grand
Sacrilege


Phil. Bellarmin shows out of Gratian, That this Order was made only for the
Priests, who are obliged to receive in both kinds.


Theoph. He might with more reason say, It was made for the Turks, who with the
Manichees, abhor Wine: Can it be supposed, That Manichees could be Priests of
the Catholic Church, and so be commanded to communicate in both kinds? no, it
was made for their discoveries, when they thrust in among the People, and would
appear as Catholics?


Phil. It appears by this Passage, that the Church then gave the Sacrament
without the Cup, otherwise how could the Manichees hope to counterfeit Church
Communion, because refusing the Cup must needs betray them.


Theoph. By this we prove the contrary: For how could they be discovered by
refusing the Cup, if it were not given to the People?


Phil. Those two Popes decree, the Cup should be given at that time on purpose
to discover these Heretics.


Theoph. No such thing: The Decrees were made for stricter prohibition and
observation; perhaps some negligent Priests before might let them pass without
the Cup, or they might take down none of the Wine when the Cup was brought to
them, only put it to their Lips, or the like: But how do you answer Pope
Gelasius his reason of the Decree, and free your selves from grand Sacrilege?
One and the same Sacrament cannot be divided without grand Sacrilege.


Phil. I must confess, in that place Bellarmin takes not any notice of that
considerable passage of the Decree.


Theoph. Because it was unanswerable. This is the first time I have found him
silent, and so I may the better proceed without interruption. In the Year 589.
in the third Council of Toledo, we read how the pious King Reccaerdus, held a
Council of all the Bishops of Spain and Gallicia, when Pelagius the second was
Pope, principally that the Goths in his Dominions might abjure the Arrian
Heresy: Among other things, the King gives direction to the Bishops, That
after the Oriental Custom, all the People should rehearse the Articles of their
Belief, Bin. Tom. 4. Page 501. Ei sic corda fide purif. ad Christi corp. and
sang. percip. exhibeant.
That so their hearts purified by Faith, might receive the Body and Blood of
Christ.


Phil. If they received in one kind, they received the Body and Blood of Christ.


Theoph. Alas, your Doctrine of concomitancy was never heard or thought of, in
those Pious Times. In the next Council of Toledo, Anno 633. when Honorius was
Pope, Sisimundus being King, it is ordered in the 18th Canon, Bin. p. 587.
Conjunctio panis and Calicis.
That after the Lords Prayer, and the Bread and Cup joined, a blessing shall be
pronounced upon the People, and then the Sacrament received by all in their
several places: first, the Priest and Deacon at the Altar, the other Clergy in
the Quire, the People without the Quire. You see therefore the Sacrament was
given in both kinds to all the People, by the Decree of these Councils in all
the Dominions of Spain. And because the Consecration of the Bread and Wine (as
we may conceive) is called in the Canon, Conjunctio panis and calicis, The
conjunction of the Bread and the Cup. I might observe from this Expression,
they should not be separated. In the Year 736. Bin. Tom. 5. page 511. Epistola
2. ad Leonem. (...), etc.
Pope Gregory the second, writing to Leo Isaurus the Emperor, who was called
Iconomachus, for his zeal against Images; he thews the Emperor the Church
discipline toward Offenders, such as had given scandal to the Church. First,
we prescribe Watching and Fasting; and when they are chastised with hunger and
severe exercises, the Priests give unto them the venerable Body of our Lord,
and make them to drink of his holy Blood. This is a Testimony without
Exception, because of a Pope: and it prevents the usual Answer of Concomitancy,
for it mentions the Body and Blood given asunder, and it shows the practice of
the Western Church. This also is manifest by the Roman Order of the Mass: there
we read, Vid. Cassandri Liturgica.
When the Pope gives the Body, the Archdeacon confirms, i. e. gives the Cup;
and when the Bishops or Priests communicate, the Deacons follow and confirm.
And there is express mention made of the Sacrament Descendet pontifex and
commun. principes, and matres familias eorum, etc.
given to Princes and their Ladies, and to all the People. The same we find,
and more in another Ritual, called Ordo Ecclesiasticus, Ecclesiae Romanae. In
Epistolam 1 ad Cor. c. 10. Calix dicitur Communicatio sang. quia omnes ex illo
uno participant.
Haymo Bishop of Halberstate, says, The Cup is called the Communication of his
Blood, because all do partake of that one Cup. In 1 Epist. ad Cor. c. 11.
Theophylact Archbishop of Balgaria, says, This dreadful Cup is equally
communicated to all. (...), etc.
Oecumenius, upon the same Chapter, The Lord exhibits equally to thee, and to
the poor man, the Table and the Chalice of Christ's precious Body and Blood.
These in the 11th Century. In the next, Algerus a Monk, when Berengarius was
questioned for his Opinion against the Real Presence, Vt panis dum dentibus
teritur carnem Christi in pass, attritam: and dum vinum in ora fidelium
funditur, sang. de Christi latere fusum signaret.
and recanted. This Learned Monk wrote three Books of the Sacrament; and in the
second Book, cap. 8. he shows, how the custom of communicating in both kinds,
held in the Church from Christ, That the Bread being macerated with the Teeth,
might represent his Flesh torn in his Passion; and the Wine poured into the
mouths of the Faithful, signify his Bloodshedding, etc. with many such
passages in that Chapter; and so by good Autorities, out of the several Ages of
Christianity, I have showed the practice of the Church, to give the Communion
in both kinds to the People.


Phil. Although Bellarmin and other Doctors, except against some, and answer
others of your Testimonies, yet I have not interrupted you in most, because
those Answers unto some which I have brought already, will suit the rest.


Theoph. You have an excellent Art to make one Almanac serve for every
Meridian under Heaven. You have one or two Catholic Distinctions to help at a
dead lift. Concomitancy is a great Pillar of your Church, wheresoever the Holy
Scripture, or Fathers, speak of receiving Christ's precious Body and Blood, for
remission of Sins, and the nurishment of our Souls; you answer, In one kind
whole Christ is received, and all his Benefits by a Concomitancy. If we go
further, and prove the Elements were received distinctly by the People in the
Apostles time, and for so many Ages after. You answer, Vsu non praecepto, they
received it so by Custom, and not by Precept.


Phil. Yes: And upon this account we are not troubled with all your proofs of
both kinds administered to the People so many Ages of the Church, seeing
afterward that Custom generally ceased in the Western Church, and the contrary
Custom was introduced and confirmed by three General Councils, Constance,
Basil, and Trent.


Theoph. It Is truth, in the 13th Century, giving the Cup unto the Laity began
to grow out of use. Part. 3. Quaest. 80. Art. 12. Ex part Sacramenti convenit,
ut utrumque sumutur, etc.
Aquinas moves the Question, Whether it be lawful to receive Christ's Body
without the Blood. And concludes, That in regard unto the Sacrament it self, it
was convenient, that both kinds should be received, because the perfection of
the Sacrament consists in both: but in regard unto the Receivers, reverence and
caution was required; and that therefore in some Churches, it was well
observed, not to give the Cup unto the People. And yet before, the same Aquinas
had determined, Quaest. 74. Art. 1. Quantum ad effect, in unoquoque sumentium,
Sae^^mentum hoc vales ad tuicionem, etc.
As to the effect of every Receiver, the Sacrament secures both Body and Soul;
and therefore, the Body of Christ is offered for the salvation of the Body, and
the Blood, under the Species of Wine for the Soul.


Phil. He says, it is offered, to wit, by the Priest, but not communicated to
the People.


Theoph. Put the Proposition together, it is this, Bread and Wine are the
Materials of the Sacrament, required in regard of the benefit and effect in
every Communicate for the preservation of his Body and Soul, by the Body and
Blood of Christ. Well, Aquinas he starts the Question, Whether it was lawful to
receive in one kind? and determins the Point very tenderly. But after this
Angelical Doctor (as they call him) the Schoolmen follow the Cry with full
Mouth, That there is no Precept to receive in both, and no prohibition to
receive in one kind: That upon many Considerations, it is expedient to
withold the Cup from the Laity: That the Church has power to order things of
this nature: and, That after the express determination of the Church in some
General Councils, it is even become necessary to withold the Cup, and an
Heresy to dispute against it. Now to prepare the World for this new practice
of receiving only in one kind, that so it might be entertained in some places,
and get ground, and afford some plea of a Custom in the Church, the Schoolmen
started some preliminary Questions, and concluded, That whole Christ was
received under each kind; and he that received only the Body of Christ,
received likewise his Blood and Soul, and Divinity by a concomitancy. 2sy, That
the whole intent of the Sacrament, as to the People, all the Essentials
thereof, were communicated under the Species of Bread, with the Body of Christ.
3sy, That he who received in both kinds, had no advantage of those who received
only in one kind. Although we find this last Thesis not so generally admitted
among themselves, yet such as oppose must not be peremtory, least the People
should be sensible of some injury don them, in being deprived of that benefit
which should be exhibited more in both kinds, then in one.


Phil. By your own relation you give us opportunity to observe, how they
proceeded upon good grounds, and in a rational way to make good their Thesis,
and their practice of the Communion in one kind.


Theoph. It was necessary they should say something to endere the People unto a
compliance; designing to cheat them of one half of the Sacrament, they would
impose upon their credulity, and tell them, the other half which they received,
was as beneficial as the whole.


Phil. You are not ignorant how they show many good Causes and Considerations
for their withholding the Cup; and notwithstanding your pretensions and claim
to the practice of the Church for so many Ages on your side, our Doctors show
it was always free to communicate in one kind or in both, and show the early
practice of the Church for this half Communion, as you call it; and I hope you
will now give me leave to put in their Plea.


Theoph. Content: And if you can balance those Autorities which I have
brought, I will yield the Cause.


Phil. I am glad to see in you some hopes of Moderation, and that you will be
ruled by Reason and Authority.


Theoph. Taking Christ's Institution, and the Holy Scripture along with us.


Phil. It Is supposed, there is no express Precept of Christ, to determine the
Church in all Ages to give the Communion in both kinds; and where the Church is
left free, she may use her liberty, and determine as occasion serves.


Theoph. You beg the Question: and we have urged Christ's Institution, and
Example, in giving the Sacrament in both kinds, and his Command to them to do
likewise. We have urged the Traditions of St. Paul; the practice of the
Apostolical Tunes.


Phil. You have urged, and we have answered, and let the impartial Reader judge
between us; but besides these Instances of the Sacrament in one kind out of the
Holy Scripture, Luke 24. Acts 2. 42. and 20. 7. we have also Testimonies of the
Primitive Church, which speak on our side.


Theoph. We have proved our way abundantly by the practice of so many Ages, do
you so yours; and then I will grant we are left free in this case, every one to
do as seems good in his eyes.


Phil. Not so neither, when the Church has restrained this liberty, and forbid
the Cup.


Theoph. Whether your Church has done better in the restraint, then the Church
for so many Ages before in allowing that Christian Liberty, which you pretend
for, to receive in one or both kinds, let the World judge: but we deny any such
liberty taken by the Church, or allowed by Christ to communicate in one or both
kinds, as the Church should please; and we desire your proof.


Phil. First, Bellarmin proves it lawful to communicate in one kind, because
the Church never condemned it.


Theoph. You should prove that they allowed it: But how should they condemn
that which was not practiced? Could they divine a new Generation of Monks and
Friars should arise, and persuade the People by subtlety and craft to lose
their Spiritual Birthright, half the Legacy of Christ, or rather the whole, in
a maimed and undue Administration? And moreover, you have heard when the
Manichees, and other Heretics, would have brought up this custom, two Popes,
Leo and Gelasius, were wroth, and determined positively against them.


Phil. I will not interrupt the Series of my Discourse, by reflecting upon
bypast Passages, but proceed to show, how the Communion in one kind was in use
in the Primitive Times, and not condemned; and so by consequence allowed. Many
Customs of the Primitive Times, infer, the Body of our Lord was delivered to
the People without the Cup. In the days of Persecution, when they could not
assemble often to communicate in public Assemblies, it was usual to carry with
them part of the consecrated Bread, wrapping it up in clean Linen, and keeping
it in their Houses, until such time as they thought sit to eat it. Of this
Custom Lib. 2. ad uxorem, c. 5. Non s(...) maritus quid secreto ante omnem
cibum gastes, and si sciverit, non illum credet, qui dicitur.
Tertullian gives a notable proof, writing to his Wife, That if she inclined to
Marry after his death, she should be careful to Marry a Christian, not an
Heathen; otherwise, he will not know what thou eatest in secret, before all
refection; and if he know it to be Bread, he will not believe it to be that
which we call it, viz. The Body of Christ. Lib. de Oratiene, c. ult. Aecepto
c(...) Domini, and re(...).
And in another place, The Body of the Lord being received and reserved. So
Quaedam arcam, in qua Domini sanctum fuit indign. manibus, aperire tentavit,
and igne inde assurg. deterrita est.
Cyprian, in his Book De Lapsis, relates, How a Woman endeavoring with wicked
hands to open a Chest, wherein the Holy Body of our Lord was locked up, she was
terrified with Fire issuing out of the Chest. Qui festinas ad spect.
Eucharistiam inter obscoena corp. meretr. tulit.
And in his Book, De Spectaculis, he speaks of one with indignation, Who made
such haste to the Heathenish Plays and Sights, that he carried about him the
Holy Eucharist, amidst the throng of whorish and obscene Persons. Lib. de Obitu
frat. Satyri, c. 7. Ne vacuus mysterii, etc.
Ambrose, showing the Piety of his Brother Satyrus, tells us, That being at Sea
in a Storm, ready to suffer shipwreck, he earnestly begged the Sacrament of
one that was with him, and wrapped it up in a linen Cloth, and hanged it about
his neck; and being cast away, he was the first who escaped alive to the shore.


Theoph. What would you prove from these Passages.


Phil. That they carried, and kept by them the Body of the Lord, and when
occasion served, did eat it fasting at home; and in all these Passages no
mention is made of the Cup, or of the Blood of Christ.


Theoph. But I can give several express instances of both kinds, which the
Faithful carried from Church with them to their Houses. You have heard above,
how Apol. 2. Prope finem.
Justin Martyr told you, The Deacons give the Sacrament of Bread and Wine,
mingled with Water, to those who are present, and carry it unto such as were
absent. Oratione 11. (...), etc.
So Gregory Nazianzen shows of his Sister Gorgonia, If any where, says he, her
hand had treasured up any of the Antitypes of the Holy Body and Blood. In
Epistola ad Rusticum de Exuperio. Nihil illo ditius, etc.
And Jerome most distinctly, speaking of one Exuperius, says, No man can be
richer then he, who carries the Body of our Lord in a wicker Basket, and the
Blood in a Viol Glass.


Phil. But in most Instances, mention is made only of Christ's Body reserved;
and Ligari fecit in Orario.
Satyrus in St Ambrose, caused it to be wrapped up in a Linen Cloth, and bound
it about his Neck. Orarium, was a Linen Cloth on purpose, wherein to wrap up
the Sacrament, as Vice Comes shows, Lib. 2. de app. missae, c. 19. Orarium,
pannus quo caelestis Euch. involvebatur.
I hope you will not say he did wrap up Christ's Blood in a Cloth.


Theoph. Yes, he might wrap up the Holy Mysteries, the Bread, and the Wine put
in a Vial-glass, together. And Ambrose his Expressions look toward the Wine of
the Sacrament, when he says, Ib. Caeleste mysterium, haustum arcano pectoris,
and fusum in viscera.
He received the Heavenly Mystery, swallowed up, as in a draught, in the secret
Repository of his Heart, and diffused into his Bowels.


Phil. Flesh, when digested, may be said properly to be diffused into the
Bowels.


Theoph. But you know your Doctors allow not Christ's Flesh to be digested, and
turned into Chyle and Nutriment.


Phil. These are Niceties; I pray let me proceed without disturbance. You know
the Sacrament was usually sent unto the Sick, to be received upon their Beds,
Tanquam viaticum morientium, as Food for a long Journey, given unto those who
were passing from Earth to Heaven. And this was only in one kind, viz. The
Lords Body.


Theoph. I reckon the sick Principly among such who being absent had the
Sacrament sent to them, and have showed out of Justin Martyr, they had the
Mysteries in both kinds. What the Faithful received in the Church, the same the
Deacon carried to the Faithful in their Houses, when by reason of Sickness, or
any other justifiable occasion, they could not be present at the public
Solemnity. However, your Instances are only of the Communion in private Houses,
and the Mysteries reserved; and if one kind only be expressed, the other may be
understood. But have you any Testimony of the Church, which expressly shows the
Sacrament was given in the Church in one kind only; whereas we have brought a
cloud of Witnesses, for the public Communicating in both kinds.


Phil. Yes, many ancient Canons make express mention of the Laick Communion, as
distinct from that of the Clergy: So that Priests and Deacons, Criminals, were
censured to Communicate only as the People, not as the Priests, that is in one
kind, not in both. So the Eliberitan Council, Anno 305. in the 76. Canon,
speaking of any Deacon who shall receive Holy Orders, being conscious of a
great Sin he had before committed, Bin. Tom. 1. page 237. Si quis Diaconus,
etc. Post quinquennium acta poenit. accipiat Laicam Communionem.
If he discovers not himself after five Years penance, Let him be admitted to
the Communion of Laics. So the Council of Sardica, Can. 2do. concerning
Bishops highly criminal, Decrees, They shall not be admitted unto the Communion
of Laics, even on their Deathbeds. And so in many other Councils, mention is
made of the Communion of Laypeople.


Theoph. Yes, we do acknowledge it: But how do you prove that which you and
Bellarmin design thereby, That (...), was to receive in one kind. We know the
Canons by that expression imply. That Men in Holy Orders, committing scandalous
Offenses, should be degraded, and lie under the severities of Church Discipline
and Penance, proportionable to their demerrit; and if at all they are restored
to the Communion of the Church, they should be as Laymen, and not restored to
the Priests Office; they should receive the Sacrament without the Quire, with
the common People. b (...), etc.



Phil. Lib. 4. c. 24. de Sacramento Euch. Nulla distinctio notari potest, etc.
Bellarmin makes sport at this ridiculous Answer. Says he, This punishment was
sometimes so inflicted, that persons offending should not be reconciled and
admitted to this Laic Communion, but in peril of Death; nay not then neither,
as you have heard in the second Canon of the Council of Sardica: Now to sick
Men upon their Deathbed, what distinction can there be of place, or what
pre-eminence can a Priest have more then a Layman? and so Communio Laica, no
punishment.


Theoph. This is Wrangling, not Disputing: We say, as Epistola 52. Communicet
ut Laicus and non usurpet locum Sacerdotis.
Cyprian, A Priest so offending, let him become a Layman, and in that quality
admitted after repentance, unto the Communion, whether in the Church or in his
House, but let him not return unto the Priests Office. One of your French
Bishops, Gabriel Albaspinus, has sufficiently confuted Bellarmin, and all his
Disciples in this Point; showing, this Communio Laica, implied the condition of
a Lay-person, and not any difference from a Priest in receiving the Sacrament
only in one kind. Lib. 1. Observat. c. 4. de Communione Laica. Tempore Council.
quibus de Laica Commun. fit mentio, etc.
For, says he, in Cyprian' s time, and when these Canons forementioned were
made, the Communion was given to the People in both kinds. He brings many
Instances to prove it.


Phil. Ibid. constat. ab annis plus octingentis usum in quibusd. Ecclestis
communiionis sub una specie in publico coetu fidelium. Et constat Graecos,
nunquam hoc Latinis objecisse.
Bellarmin brings another Argument, drawn from the consent and testimony of the
later Ages of the Church, That it is evident for more then 800 Years, That in
some Churches, in the public Assemblies, the use was to give the Sacrament in
one kind. And the Greek Church, says he, never objected this as an Error to
the Latin Church; which is an Argument they accounted it lawful; for otherwise
they were willing and quick-sighted to discover all our faults.


Theoph. This shows Bellarmins confidence, To assert stoutly, and prove
faintly: How does he make good the use of 800. Years


Phil. The Councils of Constance and Basil say, It had been in use for some
long time, as you have heard before. And so Th. of Aquin. before this Council,
tells us, That in some Churches it was well observed to withold the Cup from
the People, for the greater reverence and caution.


Theoph. These proofs fall short by more then half of 800 years. Aquinas lived
in the 13th Century, and then the Communion in one kind had got but little
footing, only in some Churches, as he acknowledges. the Councils followed in
the 14th Century. We acknowledge the withholding of the Cup from the People,
began after 1200 Years after Christianity, in the Western Church, but never in
the Eastern Church. Bellarmin offers at another proof of a longer date in
Bernards time, related in the History of his Life; written by one of his
Contemporaries, one William an Abbot: but those Books of his Life are so full
of Legends, that I would not choose to rake in such a Dunghill. They make
Bernard to work as many Miracles as our Blessed Savior.


Phil. It is your securest way of answering our Autorities, by slighting them.
But I have one considerable Argument more out of Bellarmin, to prove the
Antiquity of giving the Sacrament in one kind, in the public Administration
thereof, out of the Ordo Romanus.
Roman Ritual, which is conceived to have bin composed by Alcquine, Tutor to
Charles the Great, above 800 years since.


Theoph. Out of which Ritual we have expressly proved the contrary already.


Phil. Hereby you may judge how slightly you examine things, and Books; for in
the Ordo Romanus you will find, That the Wine is consecrated in a little
Chalice, and the Pope drinks of it: and afterward, the Archdeacon pours out
some of the Consecrated Wine into a great Flagon, or Cup of other Wine and
Water, and so it is Sanctified for the Peoples drinking, but not Consecrated.


Theoph. This Passage proves the People did drink of the Cup, but the Pope it
seems must have some pre-eminence above them: and for the distinction of the
Wine Sanctified but not Consecrated, I understand it not. Ordo Romans vinum etiam
non consecratum sed sang. Domini commixtum, etc.
The Ritual says enough for the Cup which was given to the People: The Wine
not Consecrated, but mixed with the Blood of Christ (out of the first Chalice)
is Sanctified to all effects. And Bellarmin acknowledges it was called, The
Cup of the Lords Blood.


Phil. I come now to show the Motives which induced the Church to withold the
Cup.


Theoph. I wished long since you would come to this Chapter, for I did suppose
your Proofs and Testimonies out of Antiquity, would be insignificant; but if
there be sufficient reason for the practice, it might excuse in part, although, in
truth, no human Reason should prevail against Christ's Institution, in such
things, as are the Sacraments merely of Instituted Worship.


Phil. Gerson, the Famous Chancellor of Paris, eminent for his Books full of
Piety and Learning, was present at the Council of Constance, and has written
in defense thereof, and of their Act in prohibiting the Cup unto the Clergy;
and he gives the reason of the prohibition. First, Cas^aliquo profundi potuit,
circumgestari sine periculo nequit.
out of great Reverence to Christ's precious Blood, which if communicated to
many, might be easily spilt upon the Earth by the Deacons stumbling, who should
carry it to the People. Aliqui Latcorum barbas habent. Aliqui Paralytici sunt.
It might stick upon their Beards; and a Palsy hand might shake and spill it.


Theoph. These Inconveniences are accidental, and if involuntary, God will not
impure Sin to them. As for the Laymens Beards, the Priests are not such
Shavelings, but that they may be liable unto the same Objection. And the
Disciples of Christ at Supper with him, are pictured with very grave Beards.
And withal, these Inconveniences may follow the Bread Consecrated: It may
stick in their Teeth, and the crumbs may fall to the ground; and you know your
Doctors teach, that whole Christ, Divinity, Soul and Body, are contained in
every minute Particle of the Host. Out of such pretended Reverence, me thinks,
you might be as solicitous, That the Precious Body and Blood of Christ should
not be received into the fuming Caldron of the Stomach, and so keep the
Sacrament from us all, in your Patins and Chalices of pure Gold.


Phil. Another consideration is, Hyeme cito acescet Aestate putrescet.
That Wine will sooner grow sower, and breed Worms, if it be long kept; as the
Eucharist of Christ's Body will not.


Theoph. Yes, it will grow moldy and vinew'd; and besides, the Mice may,
without care, devour it. But what needs this reservation of the Sacrament,
either in the Church, or in our Houses? Blessed be God, we have Tranquillity and
Peace, and if our Hearts did not draw back, may Communicate often in the
Church. However, you do not hold, that Christ's Blood, under the Species of
Wine, can putrify, and what need you be so solicitous for the simple accidents
of the Element of Wine.


Phil. Another thing is considerable: Fastidium bibentibus afferet.
Some persons may nauseate Wine, and the common People are not used to drink
Wine; and so it may cause vomiting.


Theoph. Such an Instance seldom happening, cannot prescribe against a general
Rule of practice: If the Stomach, through an occult quality, should loath either
Bread or Wine, God would dispense with such a Man, and likewise the Church. And
although the common People do not drink Wine usually, yet Experience shows, that
little Wine they take in the Sacrament never disturbs them. Suppose I should
tell them, as you do, It is Christ's Flesh, and Christ's Blood really,
materially, this would cause an abhorrency and loathing. Men have not such
Ganibal Stomachs, easily to digest such Doctrines.


Phil. I pray forbear your Drollery, and let me proceed. In some remote In
quibusd. (...)i will (...)
Countries near the Pole, Wine cannot be had without great difficulty: And
shall they therefore forbear the Sacrament?


Theoph. Unto these Countries the Seas are open, and Merchants Trade, and Men
should take care, and be at some charge, to fulfill an Ordinance of Christ, for
the great benefit of their Souls. So in many Countries, there is no Corn to
make Bread, but what convei'd from other places. And now tell me seriously, Are
not these pitiful Shifts, and shallow Considerations? Reasons flowing from a
Man's Invention, rather then Judgment: Shall these things balance the
Institution of Christ and the Apostles practice, and of the Church for so many
Ages? the end and signification of the Sacrament, as we have manifested at
large. If ye had weightier Motives, most of your Doctors would not produce such
as these: and herein you do ingeniously declare, That the wit of Man, with all
the advantages of Human Learning, cannot speak a word of sense to justify your
unreasonable Practice against the Ordinance of Christ.


Phil. You make too much haste: I have reserved the best Arguments to the last.
Is there not reason the Clergy should have some pre-eminence above the People
in these great Mysteries: Alias dignitas Sacerdot. and I (...)um pa^ esset.
The dignity of the Clergy requires this difference.


Theoph. Their dignity appears in those things which Christ has left to their
Ministration: in teaching and ruling the People, distributing unto Christ's
Flock the Divine Food of his Word and Sacraments But the Lords Supper is common
to all Gods children, who are invited to feed at their Fathers table upon the
same Provisions: they all want spiritual Food and Nurishment for their Souls
and Bodies, and are all Invited to come and take the Waters of Life freely; and
they are Inhuman and Accursed who would forbid the Lords People to draw Water
out of the Well of Salvation, to cheer their Hearts with this Wine of
Consolation. Besides, it has bin declared before unto you, out of Chrysostom
and Theophilact, That in the Sacraments of the Church under the Gospel, the
Priests and People are equally concerned.


Phil. The last and weightiest Consideration is this. That seeing the Church
representative, in three General Councils, has forbid the Cup unto the People:
It proceeds in them from a turbulent and Schismatical Spirit, to be so
clamorous and importunate to have it restored, against the Canons of the
Church. I will produce the Canon of the Council of Constance, which first
determined the Sacrament unto one kind. Cana Koirn.
The Sacred General Council of Constance, lawfully Assembled in the Power of
the Holy Ghost, Declares, Determins, and Defines, That although Christ Instituted
the Sacrament after Supper, and gave it to his Disciples in both kinds,
notwithstanding this, the Sacrament ought not to be celebrated after Supper,
nor be received by the Faithful not Fasting. And likewise, although in the
Primitive Church the Sacrament was received in both kinds, yet to avoid some
Perils and Scandals, the Custom is rationally introduced, That the Priest
Consecrating should receive in both kinds, but the People only in the Species
of Bread. You see the Council fully approves the custom and confirms it, and
therefore past the severe Censure following: That no Priest, under pain of
Excommunication, Bin. part. 2. Tom. 7. Sessione 1^. Council. Constant. Council.
Sacrum generale Constans. in Spiritu sancto legit. congregattum declarat, etc.
shall Communicate the People under both kinds. And declares, That such as
pertinaciously affirm it to be unlawful, or sacrilegious, to give the Sacrament
in one kind, shall be proceeded against as Heretics. You consider not therefore
what danger you incur by arguing so peremtorily against this Point.


Theoph. We are not solicitous for the danger, in the cause of Christ and
defense of Truth; and we know, where your Church wants reason to justify her
practice, she has the argument of the Club, with severity above mesure to
maintain it. But let us reason calmly in the Point. What Motive induced the
Council to make such a Decree, notwithstanding the Institution of Christ, and
the practice of the Primitive Church.


Phil. Your Party generally design to load the Council with the envy of that
Expression, Non obstante; but you may observe, the Council therein only had
respect unto our Saviors giving the Sacrament after Supper, notwithstanding
which, the Church appoints it to be received in the Morning, and fasting.


Theoph. This was not the matter then in question, and needed no confirmation;
for in the Primitive Times, the Sacrament was given in the Morning, and to such
as were able to forbear, it was given fasting. But the great concern, was the
Communion in both kinds, acknowledged to be Christ's Institution, and that he
gave it to his Disciples in both kinds; and then immediatl^ follows, Hoc non
obstante, etc. And therefore shift it off as well as you can, the words of the
Council decrees for the Communion in one kind, notwithstanding Christ's
Institution and Example, and the practice of the Primitive Church. But however,
answer my question: What induced the Council to decree it?


Phil. The Motive is expressed, Cum firmissime sit credendum and nullatenus
dubitandum, etc.
Because we must not doubt, but steadfastly believe, That whole Christ, his Body
and Blood, is contained under either Species of the Sacrament: And therefore
such a custom of giving the Sacrament in one kind, introduced by the Church,
and the Holy Fathers, and observed for a most long time, let it be taken for a
Law.


Theoph. The first part is warily penned: Tam sub Specie panis, quam sub specie
vini veraciter contineri.
We must steadfastly believe, that whole Christ is verily contained, as well
under one Species as the other. So it may be, if it be in neither: and so we
hold, Christ is contained in neither singly, but he is signified and
Sacramentally represented, and really and spiritually exhibited by the
Sacrament in both kinds unto the Faithful Receiver. His Body that was broken
for us, is signified by breaking of Bread; and his Blood shed, by the Wine
poured out of the Cup, and separated from the Bread in the Sacrament: and
therefore at present, we will dismiss this School nicety, and, by the Councils
leave, not take it for granted, That whole Christ, Body and Soul, is in either
Species. Quod nullus Presbyter sub poena Excommunicat. communicet Populum sub
utraque Specie.
But the principal motive follows. Seeing such a custom of giving the Sacrament
in one kind, has been introduced and most long observed by the Church and
Fathers; we Decree it shall be taken for a Law, which shall not be changed or
reprobated without the Authority of the Church. Bin. Tom. 8. Council. Basil.
Sess. 30. Sub qualibet Specie est integer and totus Christus landab. quoque
consuet. commun. Laices, etc.
The Council of Basil makes and confirms the same Decree upon the same Motives:
Whole and entire Christ is under either kind, and the laudable custom of
Communicating the Laity under one kind, induced by Church and Fathers, and
hither to most long observed, and approved by Doctors skilful in Gods Law, and
in the Holy Scripture, and in Church Canons, long since. Let it be a Law, etc.


Phil. Yes: The Custom and Practice of the Church should prevail with sober
Men, not given to Faction; especially when confirmed by General Conncils.


Theoph. Why should not then the Custom and Practice of the Church, which we
have proved for so many Ages, prevail for administering the Sacrament in both
kinds, especially being exactly conformable unto Christ's Institution and
Command, and Apostolical Tradition.


Phil. Stay there: We absolutely deny any command of Christ, or of his
Apostles, or of the Church representative in a General Council, to administer
the Sacrament in both kinds, and we show two Councils forbidding it.


Theoph. You deny, but the Scriptures affirm: And the reason why no General
Council determined the Sacrament to be in both kinds, was, because the
Institution of Christ, and the Tradition of the Apostles, and the practice of
the whole Church, was so full and express for it. It was never put to the
Question, as I can find, until the 13th Century: and from that time, when the
Schoolmen began to swarm, most of them being sworn Champions of the Sea of
Rome: The laudable Custom, as the Council speaks, approved by Holy Fathers,
(viz. Monks and Friars) crept insensibly into the Church. And this must be made
a ground of Canons, to establish the Communion in one kind, and forbid the Cup,
and declare a Curse upon all those that shall dispute it. And now, when I shall
declare the reason, I hope your goodness will excuse that great trouble to my
self and you, in those numerous Quotations and Testimonies I have brought to
prove the practice of the Church for 1200 Years, in giving the Sacrament unto
the People in both kinds. It was chiefly upon this design, to manifest the
gross absurdity of those two Councils, Constance and Basil, who (as you have
heard) do ground their Decree for one kind, upon the laudable custom of the
Church, taken up not above 100 Years before, against the Institution of Christ,
and the conformable practice of the Church for 1200 Years. And withal, to
manifest their impudence in calling that a custom rationally introduced, when
such a Diutissime obs.
trifling Motives are brought to establish it. And in saying, it was diutissime
observata, for a long time observed, when they cannot show one clear Instance,
save in the Age immediately before, That the Sacrament was administered in public
in one kind in any Christian Church.


Phil. It does not become your Prudence and Moderation so to undervalue General
Councils.


Theoph. Alas, Those two pitiful Councils of Constance and Easil, you may call
them Ecumenical, but you give no more Authority to them, then you think fit: As
far as their Decrees suit the Genius of the Court of Rome, they are confirmed,
and no farther. Part. 2. Tom. 7. page 1134. Exparte Approbatum. in iis quae
consra Wicclesum, etc.
Binius, in his Notes upon the Council of Constance, tells us, It was approved
in part, in those Decrees against Wicliff, Husse, and Jerome of Prague.: But in
the determination of the Authority of a General Council above the Pope, it was
abrogated by two General Councils, of Florence, and the Lateran. Bin. Tom. 8.
S^ss. 34. C^n^. Basil. Tan suum Sim^niacum, and perjurum, incorig, Scismaticum,
fide devium, injurium and bonarum Ecclesi^e p^^ditor^m
So the Council of Basil deposing Eugenius the 4th from his Papacy, As a
Simoniacal and per^ jur'd Man, an incorrigible Schismatic, erring from the
Faith, injurious, and betraying the Goods of the Church; And choosing Amadeus
Duke of Savoy, Pope, called Felix the fifth, and Declaring, That a Council is
above the Pope, and has its Power immediately from Christ: Alas, for these
things, this poor Council is hist off the Stage of the World. Sess. 11. Bin in
notis in Council. ^asil. p. 526. Conciliabulum Schismat. etc.
And in the Lateran General Council, under Leo the 10th, It is called a
Schismatical and Seditious Conventicle, and altogether of no Authority. And yet
these are the Councils upon whose Aurority you so much depend to establish your
half Communion; and pronounce us all Heretical and Contumacious, for not
submitting our Reason and our Consciences thereunto, even against the Scripture
and against the Fathers of the Church.


Phil. But the General Council of Trent has no Exception, being held 18 years,
and confirmed by Pope Pius the fourth, and subscribed by his Cardinals, as
appears by the Bull of Confirmation. See the Council of Trent, set forth in
Latin by John Gallemart, D. D. and Professor at Douey.


Theoph. Of the Council of Trent, read the History of Father Paul, a Friar at
Venice, a Man of Learning, Judgment, and Piety, beyond compare; and there you
will find what just cause the World ^ath to decline the Authority and Decrees of
that Cabal: That great Ecclesiastical Body, whose Soul and Spirit was at Rome,
receiving day by day Orders, and Directions, and Determinations, from thence in
a Portmantle. The Bishops and Fathers of the Council, were acted more by
Reasons of State and Principles of Policy, then of Piety; and consulted the
Pope and the Conclave at Rome, more then the Holy Scripture and the Fathers of
the Church: And withal, you have no reason to urge us of England with the
Authority of the Trent Council, when none of our Bishops were there, except only
one fugitive. And as I take it, our Potent Neighbors of France have not yet
accepted that Council: and withal, the Council is of too late an Edition to
bear up its Authority against the consent and practice of so many Ages of the
Church. And therefore, being now grown weary of the Controversy, be pleased to
answer this Question, and we will conclude. Why does the Church persist so
stiffly to maintain the Communion in one kind, against so many advantages we
have showed, and you must acknowledge on the other side? especially, seeing in
the Council of Trent it was so much desired by the Emperor Charles the Fifth,
and by the Princes and People of Germany, well affected (so to make up the
breach, and keep many from falling away from the Church of Rome) that the
Council of Trent would allow the Communion in both kinds: yet we find it was
not granted, but referred wholly to the Popes determination, who never had
leisure to take his infallible Chair, and determine that Controversy.


Phil. To speak freely, The Fathers of that Council, and the Pope with his
Cardinals at Rome, in their Wisdom did well perceive, that such as moved for
the Communion in both kinds, were disaffected to the Church, and made this a
specious bait to catch the People. They saw their Concessions in this plausible
case, would but make way for many complaints more, and grievances to be
redressed: You know, not long before, the Germans published in Print their
first Centum gravamina.
Century of Grievances, every Article being as a Libel against the Church.
Hereupon they thought it the wisest course to justify the former Councils, and
stand upon their Authority, and require subjection from the true Sons of the
Church; and as for Heretics and Schismatics, either to subdue them by subtlety
and force, or else to slight them.


Theoph. This Observation of yours, confirms many Passages we read of Bishops
Joannes Baptista Hosius, Episcopus Rbeatinus, Lib. 4. Gonc. Trid. Sess. 2.
Ecclesia nunquam consueverit vel minimum indulg. heriticis, etc.
in that Council, giving their Vote upon the Question, who mightily opposed the
allowance of the Cup, and urged, That the Church was never observed to give the
least Indulgence unto Heretics, but to establish that which was diametrically
opposite to their Positions. Andreas Cu^sta. Episcopus Legionensis
Another Bishop seconds this Opinion with the Example of the first General
Council of Nice, wherein those 318. Holy Fathers would not yield one tittle to
the Arrians, although Constantine desired moderation; and the Controversy had
well nigh set in a flame the whole World. A verbis commoda interpretatione
molliendis ex composito abstinuerunt.
Nay, says he, they studiously rejected many Words and Expressions of the
Arrians, which were capable of a convenient Interpretation. And thus you see
with what intolerable Impudence they accounted their Christian Brethren as
Heretics, for following the plain Institution of Christ. The Arrians found no
favor in the Council of Nice from those Orthodox and Godly Fathers, nor the
least degree of compliance; neither must the Protestants in Germany from the
Council of Trent. But there was something more in the Wind that hindered the
Reformation of the Sea of Rome; namely this, That if upon the complaint of
Nations and People, the Pope should reform abuses, especially such as had been
Decreed in Councils: It would be a tacit acknowledgment, that the Church of
Rome had solemnly erred in making such unjustifiable Decrees; and so the
jealous People would begin to suspect and examine all her Determinations, and
be easily persuaded by their Schismatical Guides that in many things the Church
had miscarried, and Bills of exceptions and complaint would be put up one after
another, as the interest and malice of her Adversaries should contrive them:
and therefore, the safest way was ever found for the Church of Rome to stand
upon her Justification against the clamors of the whole World, and to put
Princes in mind of their Obedience to the Church, and the Obligation that lies
upon them by force of Arms to subdue their contumacious Subject's, and make
them submit unto Rules and Disciplines of the Churches. This was the sum of
that smart Council which Cardinal Soderine gave unto Pope Adrian, when the good
old Man was much perplexed with the Complaints and Demands of the German
Princes and their People, against the corruptions chiefly of the Court of Rome;
His Piety, and Simpllcity, and good Nature, being not well versed in the
Politics of Rome, promted him to endeavor satisfaction, and reform all such
Abuses as might give just occasion of offense and grievance to their
Adversaries. About this great Work of Reforming, he consults the Conclave, and
the necessity of the Times, and the public Scandal of Abuses, induced many of
the Cardinals to advise a Reformation of many things which were in question.
But at last, the subtle and experienced Cardinal Soderinus, who had been versed
in the Affairs of Christendom under three active Po^ds, Alexander and Julius,
and Leo the 10th, turns the Scale of their Votes, and absolutely disswades any
appearance or attemt of a Reformation. He rolls them, That never any Pope with
his Cardinals before, thought that a co^^enient way; but rather by the Interest
of Princes, and the power of the Sword, to suppress and extirpate unquiet and
schismatical Spirits. That no Pope cut off Heresies by a Reformation, Sed
cruciatis quas vocant; excitatis contra (...) Princibus and Populis Crucis
simbolo in signitis.
but by the ^rucrats, as they are called, the Princes and People being stirred
up against them, wearing the badge of the Cross upon their Coat of Arms.


Phil. I must confess, Experience has found this way the surest; for so Pope
Innocent the 3d suppressed the Albigenses in France; and Charles the fifth, the
German Protestant Princes.


Theoph. But through the Providence of God, you find the Lutherans are yet alive
in Germany; and several Princes, together with their Subjects, reformed
themselves in spite of all opposition, protesting against those Errors, which
the Church of Rome intends to justify only by the Sword, and by the
Inquisition: and the lower you draw your Observation, the more success you will
find God has given unto many Kingdoms and People, against the Tyranny and
Innovations of Rome.


Phil. The Judgments of God are a great deep; and you may not enter into his
Secrets, and judge of Truths, by the Success.


Theoph. No, my design only was to confute that politic Cardinals Observation,
and yours, viz. 1. That the Peace of the Church is better maintained by the
Sword, then by a Reformation of Errors and Corruptions. 2. That to acknowledge
no Errors, but to stand upon the Infallibility of the Church of Rome, is the
compendious way to cut off all Complaints and Objections against her. But
whilst your Doctors say, Your Church of Rome cannot err, we know she does err,
and that damnably. And hereof we shall make a Demonstration from the effect,
and overthrow her pretensions to Infallibility, by thewing, how in many
particulars of Doctrine and Practice she has miscarried, which is the design
of this present Conference; and by Gods help, and your permission, I will
proceed to other Articles and Points of difference between our Church and
yours, and let the World judge, upon which side the Word and Truths of God
determine.


Phil. You carve out work more then sufficient: However, at present, it is high
time to intermit these Severities of Discourse, and think of taking some
Recreation. A pleasant walk into the Grove will refresh us: And then to make
amends for your poor Entertainment, after we have past the Evening in
Familiarity and Friendship, you shall take your rest; and, if you please, to
Morrow we will enter again the Lists of Disputation.


THE THIRD PART. Of Worshipping IMAGES.
Theoph. SIR, I have found so much courtesy within Doors, that now we are come
abroad to continue a Discourse of Controversy, methinks it is not Manners and
Civility to oppose your choice and Judgment, and try your Patience, who have
given such Demonstrations of your goodness. But when all proceeds from a Zeal
to Truth, and from a cordial Affection to so worthy a Friend, and you have
charity to believe it, I am encouraged to proceed. Having therefore discussed
already two Points, I propose the third to Consideration. The great scandal
that is given by your Church of Rome unto sober Men and good Christians, from
Images and their Worship, so much pleaded for and defended by your Doctors.


Phil. This was indeed a third Objection, which in the beginning of this
Conference you proposed against the Doctrine and Practice of our Church, which
you suppose has given occasion of Scandal both to the Learned and unlearned,
as being obvious (as you said) unto every understanding: But where lie the
apparent Exceptions against this Point?


Theoph. The second Commandment appears at first sight to forbid worshipping of
Images, and you allow it.


Phil. So you make your deluded People to believe, designing to create a
prejudice and odium against our Church, that so you might keep them firm to
your heady separation from us: But your Learned know in their Consciences, that
we do not transgress this Commandment, neither in the thing forbidden, or in
the manner of Worshipping our Images; which are not included in the prohibition
of Gods Law.


Theoph. You appeal to the Learned of our side, as tho you would allow them to
decide the Controversy if they would speak the dictates of their Consciences.
But this is a slight and Artifice, to wipe off your own guilt, and lay the
charge of Dissimulation to our Doctors: But their Grounds and Reasons, when
produced, will manifest to the World, that the charge they lay against them of
transgressing the rule of Gods Word in this Point, proceeds out of Conscience
and not Design: you give a great scandal and offense to God and Man, and would
not have us zealous to reprove it.


Phil. Zeal without knowledge and discretion, has set the World in a Flame, and
you are forward to blow the Coals.


Theoph. We read, Isa. 6. 7. how a Seraphim took a Coal from the Altar, and
laid it upon the Prophets mouth, and so gave him commission and command to
speak. Now the word of God is this coal from the Altar, enkindling Holy Fires
in the Heart, and opening the Mouth of his Servants to adjust his will
revealed, against the Transgressors thereof.


Phil. You will in short time pretend to Euthusiasm; when we have beaten you
off from your strong hold, your supposed sanctuary in the Scriptures, that must
be your last refuge.


Theoph. Your Fathers and Founders of the several Orders, have showed the way,
and acted the Phanatic part so well, that you presume we must needs be taken
with it, and herein become their Disciples: but if it be Enthusiasm to follow
the rule of Holy Scripture, and show how palpably you do swerve from it; we
shall be ambitious of that reproach.


Phil. It is an ill Omen to engage in Quarrels and bitter Reproaches, before
one Argument has past between us. If you have any thing to object against our
Doctrine, or our practice concerning Images and their Worship, let us hear it.


Theoph. God, in the second Commandment, has forbid us to make and worship
Images; and your Church has mightily advanced the Trade of Painting, and
Carving, and Graving Images, and require veneration and worship to be given to
them.


Phil. Let us proceed by degrees to answer your Objection, which consists of
many parts: Do you condemn us for allowing and countenancing the Art of Imagery?


Theoph. If we did, we should not want the Authority of some Ancients, so
severely did they adhere to the Letter of the second Commandment.


Phil. You know, God himself commanded Moses to make two Cherubins for the Ark,
and to erect a brazen Serpent in the Wilderness, Exodus 25. 18.


Theoph. And you may know, That this was objected to Tertullian; and I pray
observe how he answers it, Lib. de Idolol. cap. 5. Been quod idem Deus
extraordinario (...).
The same Lord who forbad Images, by an extraordinary Precept may command them.
And he concludes excellently to our present purpose. Si eundem Deum observas,
habes legem ejus ne feceris simili(...) postea factie, etc.
If you observe the same God, you have his Law, not to make any likeness. If
you urge his command afterward, that Moses should make an Image (of the
Cherubins and the brazen Serpent) do then follow Moses example, make no Image
against the Commandment of God, unless the Lord expressly command thee. And
here, by the way, you may observe how in this place Tertullian, (and I could
show the like of many of the Fathers) makes no such distinction (as your
Doctors do) of Idols, which represent false Gods, and so are nothing in the
world, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 8. 4. and whereunto you precisely restrain
the prohibition of the Commandment, or of Images, which represent real Things
or Persons, God, Angels, or Men; for you see in Tertullians Opinion, even the
Cherubins, and the Brazen Serpent were included in the Commandment; and had not
God afterward expressly commanded them to be made, it had not been lawful for
Moses to have made them. And I must confess, I have purposely waved that
Controversy about the words and sense of the Commandment, because your Doctors
have so perplexed it with Notions and Distinctions, not intelligible to the
Hearer or Reader.


Phil. You will find, the same Tertullian shows, Lib. 2. Contra Marcionem, c.
22. Tanquam simplex ornamentum, etc.
The end of the second Commandment was to prevent Idolatrous Worship of Images;
as it follows in the Commandment, Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship
them. And that God commanding the Cherubins to be made for Ornament and
Furniture of the Tabernacle, it was no contradiction to his Law, having not in
them the causes of Idolatry, for which the making of Images were prohibited.
Such an answer he likewise gives for the brazen Serpent: It was made for cure,
to heal the People who were stung with Fiery Serpents in the Wilderness, and
for a Type of Christ, healing the Nations (as our Savior himself has applied
it) and a Type likewise of the Old Serpent the Devil, hanged and crucified upon
Christ's Cross. These things therefore were not against the Commandment, because
they were not made to be adored and worshipped.


Theoph. You have led me whether I desired: We do not conceive all Images, or
the making of them, to be forbidden by the second Comment, but only such as are
made for Religious Worship. Non sit nobis religio humanorum operum cultus.
Let not the worship of things made with hands become any part of our Religion.
And again, says St. Augustine, Aug De vera Rel, c. 5^. Tom. (...). non sit
nobis Rel. cultus hominum mortuorum:
Let it be no part of our Religion to worship Men that are dead; for if they
lived godly, says he, they will never desire or seek after such honors.
Honorandi sont propter Imitationem, non Adorandi propter Religionem.
They are to be honored for our imitation, not adored as to Religion. But alas!
your Doctors have left the old innocent Plea for Images, whether in Churches or
other places; That they may be useful for Ornament, for Instruction, for an
honorable Commemoration of holy Persons, and for Imitation. All this will not
suffice, but you will have Veneration and Adoration, and what not, be given
unto them: and so you have given occasion of Scandal to the Godly, and of great
Superstition and Idolatry to the more ignorant sort among your selves, who
cannot perplex themselves with such nice Distinctions, wherewith your Leaders
think to fence themselves against the charge of Idolatry: But we shall proceed
to show this by degrees: Mean while, least you should make too much use of my
Concession concerning Images made for such innocent uses as have been
mentioned, That they are not against the second Commandment; I must here put in
a solemn caveat against your Images of God, which against all Reason and
Religion you make and adore.


Phil. Bell. Tom. 2. l. 2. de Ecclesia triumph. c. 8. Non esse tam cereum in
Ecclesia an sunt fuciendae Imag. Dei, etc.
Bellarmin does acknowledge, That it is not so certain in the Church, whether
the Image of God and of the Trinity should be made, as whether the Image of
Christ and of the Saints.


Theoph. And yet in the same Paragraph he asserts positively, Licere pi(...)ere
etiam Imag Dei Fatris in ferm. (...)is senis, and Spiritum Sanctum inf.
columbae.
That it is lawful to picture God the Father in the shape of an old Man, and
God the Holy Ghost in the shape of a Dove, and cites many of your Doctors to
confirm his Opinion; and so your general practice does maintain it. Now I will
first urge the Holy Scripture against this Doctrine and Practice of your
Church, and then leave you to defend it. Moses gives a great charge unto the
People of Israel, Deuteronomy. 4 15, 16, etc. Take good heed unto your selves, least
ye corrupt and make you a graven Image, the similitude of any figure, the
likeness of male or female, the likeness of any beast or winged soul, the
likeness of any creeping thing upon the ground, or of any fish in the waters;
and least thou lift up thine eyes unto heaven, and when thou (...) the host of
heaven, should be driven to worship them and serve them.


Phil. This charge is levelled against the Idolatry of the Gentiles, and those
Nations whom God cast out of Canaan, who did worship graven Images of Men, and
Women, and Beasts, and creeping, things, for Gods.


Theoph. The Clause and Parenthesis in the first Verse of this charge: For ye
saw no manner of similitude on the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, I
say this Clause manifests, That God gave the charge, lest by any thing after
mentioned, they should attemt to represent him. It is truth, that the Heathen
did represent their false Gods in and by such Shapes and Images, and did
worship them. And the Almighty God, by a full enumeration of Creatures, forbids
any similitude to be made to represent and to worship him under it: And to this
effect, the Propher Isaiah expostulates with an Idolatrous People: To whom will
ye liken Gods or what likeness will ye compare unto him? Isa. 40. 18. The best
Image of God; is Man; an Image of the Lords own making, that this likeness and
similitude of God consists in the Soul of Man, with her noble Faculties of
Free Will and Understanding, and dominion over the Creatures, in that original
rectitude and holiness where with he was created but these things cannot be
represented by the linea(...) of a P(...) or an Image, which only represent the
dimensions and features of a Body; and therefore by the Image of a Man, God
cannot be represented, and much less by any inferior Creature. God is Infinite,
and Invisible, and Spiritual; and all Images are finite and material, and
terminated by visible dimensions, and therefore one cannot resemble another.


Phil. To this Bellarmin answers, Vbi supra, Tribus modis potest aliquid pingi,
etc.
That God cannot be represented essentially by an Image, but Historically and
Analogically he may.


Theoph. Your Doctors have vented new and dangerous Doctrines; and you may
observe what a fine Web they spin of nice and subtle Distinctions, to catch the
unwary People in the Snare: What a rumbling noise this makes in a Country-mans
ear, enough to put him in a Sound. God cannot be represented by an Image
Essentially, yet Historically and Analogically he may.


Phil. Our Church takes care, that the Priests should instruct the ignorant
People, and explain these and the like distinctions to them: and so does
Bellarmin explain himself in this Chapter.


Theoph. It were the nearer, and far easier way of Instruction, to leave the
People to keep the Commandment without any worship of Images, and without the
labyrinth of your perplexed Distinctions: But I pray show what Bellarmin means
by the Historical and Analogical Pictures of God.


Phil. You know, Gregory the Great called Pictures, The Books of Laymen: Such
as could not read or study the Scriptures, might behold many Historical
passages of Scripture, carved, and limn'd, and represented to the Eye. As to
see in a Picture our Blessed Savior wrapped in Swadling-clothes, and lying in a
Manger, and the Wisemen worshipping and presenting Gifts. So his Circumcision,
his Baptism, his Scourging and Crucifixion, effectually represented in
Pictures, may more sensibly affect the Heart, then bare reading the Histories
in the Gospel.


Theoph. But what is this to the Historical Image of God? Christ's Picture is
taken as he is Man.


Phil. Bellarmin explains himself as to that, In that Historical passage of
Gods appearing to Adam and Eve in the midst of the Garden, Genesis 3. after they
had eaten of the forbidden Fruit, to paint a Man walking in amidst the Trees of
Paradise; and our first Parents hiding from his presence, is to represent God
Historically.


Theoph. Or rather falsely and unwarrantably: For the Text says not, that God
did appear in an humane Shape; but only, That Adam and Eve heard the voice of
the Lord God, walking in the Garden in the cool of the day, and bid themselves,
ver. 8. How God was pleased to manifest himself to them, is not expressed: they
must draw the Image of a voice, to represent aright that History.


Phil. But there is another instance more opposite, of those three Men who
appeared to Abraham at his Tent door in the plain of Mambre, Genesis 18. It is
expressly said in the first verse, The Lord appeared to Abraham as he sat at the
Tent door. God therefore was represented by one of these three Men, who
afterward (as we read, ver. 17.) staid and communed with Abraham, when the
other two went to Sodom. Now to draw three waifering Men turning in to
Abraham's Tent, and entertained by him, whereof two departed toward Sodom, and
the third communed with Abraham, would be Historically to represent God under
the Image of a Man.


Theoph. We deny not, that three Men may be drawn coming toward Abraham, and
all the sequel of the Story: but we deny, that either of these thus pictured
would be the Image of God, representing him. God afterward manifested himself
to Abraham, in communication, in means unknown to us; whereas under the
similitude of a Man, he was altogether unknown to the Blessed Patriarch. You
may as well say, a Cloud is Gods Image, because he appeared to Moses and the
Israelites in a thick Cloud upon Mount Sinai, Exodus 19. 9. The same reason
holds, for the Holy Ghost descending upon Christ in the shape of a Dove: the
Dove was no Image of the Holy Ghost, had no similitude or representation of the
third Person of the Blessed Trinity, who is the Eternal Spirit, and cannot be
represented by Picture. If you saw the Picture of a Dove, you would not say,
This is the similitude or Image of the Holy Ghost.


Phil. The whole Scene of Christ's Baptism being represented in a Table, and
among the rest, a Dove descending upon Christ, it would put us in mind of the
Holy Ghosts descent upon him.


Theoph. So the Rainbow in the Clouds, puts us in mind of Gods gracious
Promise, never to drown the World a second time. These are Signs, but not
Similitudes or Images. Answer me this Question: Would you worship one of them
as God? If we saw the Baptism of Christ represented in Images, would you
worship the Dove pictured therein? or would you worship the shape of fiery
Tongues in Picture descending upon the Apostles?


Phil. I am not concerned to give an Answer to such Impertinencies.


Theoph. Well, if you will not be put out of your road, proceed: and show what
Bellarmin means by an Analogical Picture of God.


Phil. He tells us, Vt supra. Potest aliquid pingi ad explicand. etc.
That things may be represented and painted, and their nature explicated, not
by an immediate and proper similitude, but by Analogy, or a Metaphorical and
Mystical representation.


Theoph. Alas! with how much difficulty does your great Doctor express himself:
Fain he would say somewhat to the purpose, but knows not what: and therefore he
involves himself in a cloud of mystical terms and notions, very well suited,
doubtless, to the capacity, and for the Instruction of the People. I must needs
acknowledge, I comprehend him not, and much doubt whether he understood himself.


Phil. Your doubts and no understanding must be no rule to us. Bellarmine well
explains himself by following Instances: As we picture Angels, says he, with
youthful and fair Countenances, and with wings, to show their speed in Gods
service, and their flourishing state always in the spring of youth; as Christ
is pictured in the form of a Lamb to represent innocence and meekness: after
this Analogical way, Man is the Image of God, even extra historiam; and we may
picture God under an humane shape.


Theoph. Your Doctor derived this deep Theology from the Pythagoreans, or
rather from the old Idolatrous Egyptian Priests, who were much taken with
Hieroglyphics. But I pray observe, how his Instance in Man as the Analogical
Image of God, is the worst chosen of all the rest: For all Lambs are meek and
patient, and so may Hieroglyphically represent the patience and meekness of
Christ. But most Men are evil, like the Beasts that perish, as Lions, and
Tigers, and Wolves, devouring one another; as Swine and Goats for Lust, and so
are become rather Images of the Devil. And notwithstanding all this, must the
single Image and Figure of a Man, without any other thing to determine it,
represent God, and become his Analogical Picture? and let me observe to you,
how they deal worse with God, then with the Angels; for these they picture fair
and youthful, to represent their florid incorruptible state: but they picture
God, as the ancient of days, whom we read of in the Prophet, Dan. 7. 9. with a
gray Beard, and antique Countenance, as if he had one foot in the Grave.


Phil. That form sitly represents Gods Eternity.


Theoph. Any thing that shall please the fancy, where there is no ground in
Reason or Religion to determine it. The Heathen Poets made prodigious Deities;
and so do Christian Painters. But what Analogy can there be between the Divine
Nature and an Image? the one is Infinite, the other finite; the one a Spirit,
the other altogether material. An Hieroglyphic, or Image, which represents God
in one respect, must be infinitely defective in many other. The Egyptians
Analogically represented the great Deity of the World, by the Hieroglyphic of
an Eye, to signify his All-seeing Providence. But alas! the Eye sees, but
does not foresee. It is the Mind that is provident, not the Eye: And then
where is the Power, and Justice, and Mercy of God represented by that Emblem?
If all were an Eye, where is the Body? says the Apostle: And if an Eye shall
be the Image of God, where is the Hand of Power, and the Scepter of Government,
and the Scale of Justice, and Thunderbolt of his Wrath? Put all the Emblems in
the World together, and they shall represent God, as a shadow does the Sun. God
has clearly revealed himself to us in his Holy Word, and you have drawn a veil
upon him by your Dysanalogical Images, and Pictures: you take from the People
the Holy Scriptures, and teach them by Pictures, according to that memorable
Saying of a Pope, Pictures are Laymens Books. But God is a Spirit, says our
Blessed Savior, and Men must worship him in Spirit and in Truth, Joh. 4. 24.
And ^o! by your Pictures of God, you determine the Worship and the Imagination
of deluded People, to the shadow and representation of a Body: And because Man
is the most excellent of all bodily and visible Creatures, you have favored God
with an human shape; whereas the Heathen, vile wretches! worship him under the
shape of an Ox that eats grass.


Phil. If God was pleased to manifest himself in an human shape (as you have
heard:) Why may not we represent him so to the People.


Theoph. First, there is a great mistake in those Apparitions of God in the Old
Testament: you make use of them to represent God the Father in a human shape,
whereas the Fathers generally hold, that God the Son assumed those appearances,
and therefore they called them, Praeludia Incarnationis, the Prologues of his
future Incarnation; and so they cannot warrant your Picturing of God the
Father. But to come more close to our present purpose, such Visions of God
which we read of, were transient, cited only to the present purpose: as in that
of Daniel, concerning the ancient of days, it represented Gods dreadful coming
to Judgment; as you may read at large the 9th Chapter. Now you would make a
standing Representation of God thereby, to all ends and purposes whatsoever.
And again, when the Prophet had his Vision, it was also revealed to him what it
signified; otherwise, an old Man with white garments, and the hair of his head
like wool, could not have represented God to the Prophet. It was no Image that
did bear any Analogy or Resemblance of the Divine Nature, or of any Person of
the Trinity, and therefore cannot be made use of by it self to represent God.
3. Did. 9. Qu. 2.
Durandus, a great School-man, tells us, Such Forms wherein God appeared in the
Old Testament, were not assumed into one Person with the Divine Nature, as was
the Humane Nature of Christ; and when the present design was over, they were
laid aside, as we put off our clothes. And you may as well make a suit of
Clothes the Image of a Man, as these Forms the Image of God. Suppose any Man
should converse with you a day or an hour under a Vizar, would he like it, if
you should take his Picture, and the standing copy of his countenance from the
Vizar? When the Holy Scriptures mention the Eye of the Lord, and the Mouth of
the Lord, his right Hand, and his Holy Arm; will you take these parts, and set
them together, and make the Image of a Man to represent God, and bring these
Autorities of Scripture for your warrant? This is a ready way to make our
People Anthropomorphites; to create in them an Imagination, that God consists
of Parts and Members as a Man; and that his Image, after which God made Man,
was imprinted in the Body. In the Gatechizing of Youth, we find it an hard work
to take their minds off from such conceits, notwithstanding all the help of
Holy Scriptures, which expressly declare, That God is a Spirit, and not flesh;
invisible, and not a Body. When we tell them, that in such Expressions of Gods
Eye, and Hand, and Mouth, etc. the Holy Ghost descends to our capacity, and
speaks of God after the manner of Men: That he sees all things without Eyes,
he makes all things without hands; for he spoke the word, and all things were
made: and yet the Heavens are called his handywork, and so the whole Creation,
because Man performs several Operations by several Organs of the body,
therefore, for our better apprehension, these Members figuratively, and by a
Trope, are ascribed to God, although he works all things by himself, by the
Almighty Power of his will and pleasure. Now when we labor to explain these
things unto the People, they hardly sink into their hearts, to take them off
from terrene Cogitations of God; and much more would they be confirmed in such
low conceits of the Divine Nature, if they should constantly behold God
pictured, and worship him under an humane shape.


Phil. For no other end do we represent God under an humane shape, but to
descend unto vulgar capacities; and our Priests can instruct them, as well as
you, that God is an invisible Spirit.


Theoph. Such Images which you make of God, are not Tropes and Figures to
represent him to the minds of Men, but real Representations to the Eye; and so
are apt, in undiscerning Persons, to improve the imagination, that God is like
unto us in our Earthly Members: and for this cause, among others, he has
forbid such Images, and you transgress the Commandment of God, and endanger the
Souls of deluded People, in making and expressing such Pictures unto public
view and adoration. And it is worthy Observation, That although God would borrow a
visible shape to appear unto a discerning Patriarch and a Prophet, yet he would
not do so when he would manifest his prefence to the whole Congregation of
Israel, he descended upon Mount Sinai in a Cloud, in the voice of Thunder: and
he expressly makes the Observation to the People, when he prohibited any
likeness of God to be made, Take ye therefore good heed unto your selves, for
ye saw no manner of similitude, on the day that the Lord spoke unto you in
Horeb, out of the midst of the Fire, Deuteronomy. 4. 15.


Phil. Your worthy Observations must not think to carry the cause against the
Traditions and Determinations of the Church.


Theoph. I do not expect they should, when the Commands of God do little move
you: However, to keep others out of the snare, we will not spare to represent
the ill effects of your picturing God, when you usually draw the Image of the
Trinity after this manner, An old reverend Man, with a little Youth, and a Dove
to represent the Holy Ghost: here you conceive you have given us the three
Persons, but where is the one Substance? the one only true God? These Images
necessarily represent a diversity of Natures and of Substance, as well as a
distinction of Persons. And when you make God the Father ancient, and God the
Son as an youth, you sensibly confirm the Doctrine of (...).
Arrius, who maintained, That Christ the Son of God was younger then his Father,
and that there was a time when the Son of God was net. And therefore Abulensis
Cap. 4. Deuteronomy. qu 5. Erroris inductivae sunt, cum periculo Idolatriae and
Herefis, etc.
peremtorily determins against making Images of God, or of the Holy Trinity, as
being Inducements of Error, and with the danger of Idolatry and Heresy of
attributing unto God corporeity, and an essential distinction of Persons in the
Godhead: And although, says he, the Church has received such Images, or
dissembled them, yet they do not signify aright. And suitably hereunto, we
read how Pope John the 22d. declared some for Heretics and Anthropomorphites,
and burned others in the confines of Bohemia and Austria, because they made use
of such Tables to represent the Holy Trinity under the Pictures of an old Man,
a Youth, and a Dove. And now I will bring the approved Testimony of the
Ancients against representing God by any Picture. Defid and symbolo, cap. 7.
Credimus quod sedet ad dextrum Dei patris, etc.
Augustine says, We believe Christ sets at the right hand of his Father; not
that God is circumscribed with an humane form, or sits with his knees bended,
etc. least we should fall under that Sacrilege for which the Apostle accursed
those who changed the Glory of the incorruptible God into the likeness of a
corruptible Man. It is wickedness to set up such an Image in a Christian
Temple. Clemens Alexand. Pro treptico ad Gentes. (...), etc.
Another Father tells us, We have no visible Image of a visible Matter, but an
intellectual of a spiritual Substance: God is no sensible Spectacle. (...),
Lib. 5. (...), etc.
Again, Moses put no Statue or Image of God in the Tabernacle, intimating, that
God is a Majesty invisible and incircumscrib'd. (...), etc.
In the same Book he shows, how Moses was expressly commanded not to make any
graven Images, or likeness of God; that we might not look on things visible,
but intelligible, for the easiness of beholding him, vilifies the Majesty of
God; and to worship the intelligible Substance by a material Object, is to
dishonor God by our sight. It was the general great design of the Holy Fathers,
to take Men off from material and sensible Cogitations, when they apply their
hearts to God, to know him, and to worship him. 2a. Therapeut. (...), etc.
Theodoret shows, how God does manifestly teach us that nothing visible can be
liken'd to him: And he forbids all Men, says he, to make any Image of things
visible, so as to conceive it may become an Image or Statue of the invisible
God. Nay, the second Council of Nice, which first established the honor and
worship of Images of Christ and of the Saints, yet expressly declares against
any Image of God. Act. 5. (...), etc.
John, Bishop of Thessalonica, says, We make the Image of Christ as Man, not
as we believe him to be God by nature: for what likeness or Figure can there be
of him, who is incorporeal and interminable. Bin. ^om. 5. (...), etc.
Gregory, the second Pope of that name, in his first Epistle Aventinus Annalium
Priorum, lib. 7 page 601.
to Leo Isaurus the Emperor, says, Why do we not make the Father visible in
Picture? because we know him not: and it is impossible to represent in Picture
the nature of God. Crth. fidei lib. 4. c. 17. (...), etc.
And Damascen, a great favorer of Images, speaks full to this point, What
representation can be made of God, who is incorporeal, uncircumscrib'd,
invisible, and interminable. And he concludes, It is extreme folly and impiety
to figure God. You see how positive they are against any Picture of God.


Phil. Bellarmine takes notice of many of these Autorities and Arguments, and
shows how they are spoken of an Image of God, which should represent his
Essence; and he grants that to be impossible.


Theoph. In every Controversy he has a Catholic Distinction to help him at a
loss; as I have observed before: We cannot picture God essentially, says he;
no nor Man, nor any thing in the World, say I. A Picture gives only the outward
Lineaments and Features: but these Autorities which I have urged, say, There
can be no Image, not of his Essence, but of an invisible God; no Lineaments of
him who is Infinite: It is extreme folly and madness to attemt it. Nay,
Bellarmin himself acknowledges, that diverse Schoolmen are against making an
Image of God; but he will be of the right side: He resolved to be a Cardinal
against the rule of his Order, and so he will maintain Opinions to please his
Party, against the rule of Scripture: and we may believe, of his own
Conscience, what the Court of Rome does countenance, he must defend; otherwise,
against such evidence of Scripture and Reason, and the Testimony of the
Fathers, he would never have asserted the lawfulness of making a visible Image
of the invisible God, so to instruct the unwary People to become Idolaters and
Heretics, as one of his own Doctors has sufficiently observed Abulensis, ut
supra.
And so I leave this detestable Point of making a Picture and Image of God.


Phil. You observe this is not so generally defended by our Doctors, and
therefore you ought not so severely to lay it to our charge.


Theoph. Why does not your Church forbid it, but rather dissemble it, as
Abuhensis expresses it? If we must not say she does with full approbation
receive this abominable practice, yet in most Cathedral Churches we shall find
such Representations of the Holy Trinity, and Pictures of God the Father in an
human shape, and of the Holy Ghost in the shape of a Dove: We call for a
Reformation of these gross Errors, but you lend a deaf Ear, being given over
unto strong Delusions; and have found doubty Doctors, and sworn Champions of
your Church to defend the practice.


Phil. You should not be so severe in a disputable Case.


Theoph. Who made it disputable, when the Holy Scriptures and Holy Fathers
condemn it? In process of time, an Antichristian Generation may put it to the
Vote and Question, whether there be a God; and we, forsooth, must use
moderation in a disputable case.


Phil. All this has been a kind of digression, to load us with the greater
envy. Have you any thing to ob^ect against the Images of Christ, and of the
Blessed Virgin, and of the Saints to be received with honor and due veneration?
there lies the knor and difficulty between us: Councils and Popes have avowed
that practice, and your Doctors, with great impudence, declaim against it.


Theoph. I can produce an ancient Bin. Tom. 1. Concilii Eliberat. c. 36.
Placuit picturas in Ecclesia esse non dobere, ne id quod colitur and Adoratur,
in partete depingatur.
Canon of the Eliberitan Council in Spain, forbidding Images in Churches, It
pleases us, That Pictures should not be in Churches, least that which is
Worshipped and Adored, be painted on the wall.


Phil. This Canon may respect the Pictures of God, and not of the Saints, and
you have dismissed that Point.


Theoph. Your Church, however, is to blame to transgress this Canon, in
admitting Images of God and of the Trinity: But seeing you allow Worship and
Adoration to the Images of Christ and of the Saints, the reason given in the
Canon reaches them also. The Fathers would not have that which is worshipped,
pictured on the Wall.


Phil. You will find other Answers given to that Canon, That it prohibited
Images in the Church, because then the People were newly wean^d from Idolatry,
and might be apt to return: For the Council was held under Pope Marcellus, Anno
305. and withal the Heathen, among whom they lived, might suppose Christians
did worship Idols, like themselves, whilst they condemned them; and there was
danger least the Gentiles should break in upon them, and do despite unto the
Images of Christ and the Saints.


Theoph. The Reason given in the Canon, confutes these Answers, and manifests
them to be but shifts: That which is worshipped must not be pictured.


Phil. De Im. l. 2. c. 9.
Bellarmin having reckoned others, chiefly approves this Answer: The Canon
forbids Images upon the Walls, least they should be defiled and stained with
the moistness and mouldring of the Wall: but Pictures in Arrasor Tables are not
forbid, as not being so liable to such Inconveniences.


Theoph. He will say somewhat, tho to little purpose; such a ridiculous Answer
deserves no Consideration.


Phil. But withal, he shows how the Eliberitan Council consisted but of 19
Bishops: And what are they, if compared with such General Councils which
afterward established Images?


Theoph. This is like himself, when any thing makes against him, to slight it:
But this Council was always held in great esteem, for the Antiquity and Piety
thereof. Hosius presided therein, and the other Bishops were most of them
Confessors, and at that time assembled, with the hazard of their lives, to give
Rules and Directions to the People of God. And in those days Bishops were not
so numerous; the World being not subdued to Christianity. And lastly, Binius
acknowledges there were six and thirty Presbyters in the Council, besides the
Bishops.


Phil. Once more: Bellarmin shows, That Council did incline to Novatianism,
denying Reconciliation unto the Church, even at their deaths, unto some
Offenders, as appears in the three first Canons of that Council; whereas about
20 years after, the great Council of Nice, in the 13th Canon, Decreed the
contrary: Bin. Tom. 1. (...), etc.
We determine in general, That any one departing this life, and desiring to
receive the Eucharist, the Bishop, upon examination, shall give it him.


Theoph. Bellarmin doubtless was not ignorant, That Pope Innocent the first had
vindicated the Eliberitan Council from this imputation of Novatianism, and
reconciled the difference of the Canons, by the times wherein they were made.
Innocent. Epist. 1. c. 2. Cum illis temporibus crebrae essent persecut. etc.
In those persecuting Times, the Fathers of the Eliberitan Council were more
severe, least the easiness of Reconciliation to the Church should encourage
some to Apostatize; they Decreed, That such as did fall off, should not be
admitted to the Eucharist, even at their deaths. But when Constantine restored
Peace to the Church, and Persecution ceased, the Council of Nice released the
former Canon, and Decreed, The Communion should be given to such as desired it
upon their death beds. Now Bellarmin's brother Cardinal, Annal Tom Anno 305.
Fatetur se paulo liberius de hoc Council. loquutum, etc.
Baronius, taking into consideration this Justification of the Eliberitan
Council by Pope Innocent, makes acknowledgment, That he spoken too freely
against this Council in his Annals before; and Declares, That there could be no
suspicion of Novatianism in that Council.


Phil. Baron. Tom. 1. Anno Christi, 57.
Baronius suspects this Canon against Pictures, may be supposititious put in
among the rest by some, who had ill will to Images, in after times: Because,
says he, the Image-breakers take no notice of this Canon in their defense.


Theop. This is their constant practice, to suspect all that makes against
them: They have accustomed themselves much of late, to the corrupting of
Fathers and Councils, and would have us believe, they have learned that Art
from the Primitive Times. And withal, you may observe Baronius's cheat upon his
Reader. In the year 570. he much labors to undermine the Authority of this
Council, as being but a particular Council, of few Bishops, given to
Novatianism; and for this Canons sake, against Images all this indignation, and
therefore the Canon must be thought supposititious. Now when he has prepossest
his Reader with these prejudices against this Council, long after, in the year
305. as you have heard, he recants, acknowledging he had spoke too freely
against it, and that Pope Innocent had acquitted the Council of Novatianism,
etc. Do you not believe the Learned Cardinal knew as much of this Concern when
he wrote his first censure of the Council, as when he cries peccavi; only he
was willing to undervalue the Council in the first place, and might presume
many of his Readers might never go so far as to read this his Recantation. But
to proceed in Church History, concerning Pictures of the Saints in Churches, we
have a notable passage of Epiphaninus, a Learned Bishop in Cyprus, who going
toward Bethel with John Bishop of Jerusalem, in the way he turned into a
Church, in a Village called Anablatha, to Pray: And seeing there a piece of
hanging before the door of the Church, painted, and having the Image of Christ
in it, or some Saint, (for afterward, in his Letter to John Bishop of
Jerusalem, he says, That he did not well remember whose Picture it was) he cut
the hanging and Picture into pieces, and wished the Keeper of the Church to
wrap some dead Body in it, and bury it: When some of the Village standing by,
expostulated with him for the Fact, and said, That however he should buy
another piece of hanging before the door; he promised to do so, and sent it
afterward to the Bishop of Jerusalem, to be put up instead of the other. Now
in this Letter to the Bishop, who had Jurisdiction in that place, he gives a
reason of his action: Hierom. Tom 2. Epist. Epiphan. ad Jeannem Episc. Hiros.
cum vidissem in Ecclesia Christi contra Script. Autorit. hominis, etc.
When I saw in the Church of Christ, against the Authority of Holy Scripture,
the Image of a Man set up, I cut it in pieces. And in the close of his Letter,
he advises the Bishop, to command, That such hangings should not be admitted
into the Church, which are against our Religion, that so he might take away all
scandal, and scruple, etc.


Phil. Many Answers you will find given to this memorable Passage.


Theoph. Yes, it has troubled all your Doctors; and they mightily labor to
undermine the Testimony: but if you have any thing considerable to say, let us
hear it.


Phil. (...), etc.
Damascen answers thus, That which is rare and single, gives no Law to the
Church, and one Swallow makes no Summer; nor is one Man's judgment able to
overthrow the Tradition of the Catholic Church thro-out the World: Where you
may take notice, how he declares the Tradition of the Church thro-out the World
for Images.


Theoph. Damascen was a great Proctor for Image worship; for which Zeal, Leo
Isaurus put out his Eyes; and we shall hereafter try how his Catholic Tradition
can be made good. However, you find he acknowledges the Fact of Epiphanius,
who was a Learned Orthodox Bishop of the Primitive Church; and his Zeal was so
great against Pictures in Churches, That in another Diocese he took upon him
to reform.


Phil. Some conceive it was no Picture of Christ, or any Saint, but of an
Heathen, for Epiphanius speaks doubtfully; a Picture, Quasi Christi, aut Sancti
cujusdam.
as suppose of Christ or some Saint.


Theoph. You catch at every Reed in a sinking cause. Epiphanius, in his Letter
to the Bishop of Jerusalem, says, He had forgot whose Picture it was; but it
may be of Christ, or some other Saint: which he could not say, had it bin the
Image of some profane Person, and that had bin the reason of his zeal and
indignation against the Picture.


Phil. Many others, with Bellarmin, suspect this relation to be added to
Epiphanius his Epistle in the close (for there it is a Postscript) by some ill
affected to Images; and urge Reasons, first, out of the second Council of Nice,
the sixth Session, where Epiphanius a Deacon and Representative, or Vicar of
the Archbishop of Sardinia, in that Council undertakes to answer and confute
the Definition of the Council of Constantinople against Images; and shows, that
other Passages were falsely entitled to Epiphanius, even an whole Book against
Images. That Epiphanius, in his 80 Heresies which he published, includes not
the Heresy of making and worshipping Images; which doubtless he would have
done, (...), etc.
if he had thought it contrary to the rule of Christ. That Epiphanius his
Disciples, after his decease, erected a Temple in honor to him, and set up his
Image therein; which they would not have done, had they known his judgment to
be against Images.


Theoph. This is the usual knack, to suspect what does not please; but most of
your Doctors acknowledge the Fact, as you have heard of Damascen; and Alphonsus
de Castro reckons Epiphanius among the Image-breakers. As for the Deacons
asserting many passages of Epiphanius to be suppositious, we have no reason to
take his word, unless his Reasons carry it, and they are too weak to bear the
burden of his charge; for Epiphanius, in 79th Heresy, does expressly speak
against the Image of the Virgin Mary, as against her worship. And in truth, he
speaks against Images in general: (...), etc
The Devil creeping into the minds of Men, under a righteous pretense, sets
before their eyes the Image of Men, whom being dead, they worship; and their
Images had never life, and yet are worshipped likewise by adulterate minds,
withdrawn from the one-only true God. If the Story be true, that Epiphanius his
Disciples did set up his Image in a Temple, which they built and dedicated to
his honor; we answer, It is no new thing for Disciples to swerve from their
Masters Principles and Practice: The Deacons Arguments therefore do not prove
this, and the other passages of Epiphanius against Images to be forged.


Phil. Bellarmin has one or two Observations more, to make this passage of
Epiphanius suspected of cutting the Picture: Because, says he, the Adversaries
of Images do not mention it.


Theoph. I suppose he means the Bishops in the Constantinople Council against
Images: Now they having cited other passages against Images out of Epipharius,
Con^. Nic. 2. Act. 6. (...), etc.
declare expressly, That they had not brought all his Testimonies, but left them
to the diligent inquiry of the Learned.


Phil. Bellarmin cites Epistolarum l. 9. Epistola nona. Nullum Episcoporumante
Serenum fregisse Imag. Christi aut Sanctorum.
Gregory the Great, asserting, That Serenus was the first Bishop who brake the
Images of Christ and the Saints: and therefore Epiphanius did not so before him.


Theoph. The Pope was not Infallible, and perhaps might not read this passage
of Epiphanius. As this Orthodox Bishop showed his zeal against Pictures, so
about the same time a pious Emperor, Theodosius, by an Edict, did forbid even
the Image of Christ, Petrus Crinitus, de honesta disciplina, lib. 9. cap. 9.
Cum sit nobis cura dillgens in rebus omnibus supremi numinis religionem tueri,
signum salvatoris nostri Christi nemini concedimus pingere, sed quodcunque
reperitur tolli jubemus.
Having a studious care in all things to desend the Religion of the most high
God, we permit none to carve or paint any Image of our Savior Christ in
colors, stone, or any other matter, and command such Pictures to be taken away
wheresoever they are found, resolving severely to punish all such as do
contrary to our command. And so we are led unto another Instance of Serenus
Bishop of Marseils, who brake down all the Images and Pictures in Churches
thro-out his Diocese, about the year 600. when Gregory the Great was Pope; who
writes an Epistle to Serenus, reprehending the Fact, as proceeding from
inconsiderat zeal: Epistolarum l. 9. Epist. nona. Quid inconsiderato zelo
succensus Sanctorum Imagines confregeris.
And whereas the Bishop made his Plea, That he removed them out of Churches,
and brake the Images, because the People were prone to worship them: That he
forbid the worship of them, the Pope approves, for it is written, says he,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. And at
length he gives this advice, Si quis Imag. facere voluerit, minime probibe, etc.
If any destres to make, or to have an Image, forbid him not: But by all means
take care that no man worship them.


Phil. This Testimony of Gregory, approves the Images of the Saints for History
and Ornament, although he forbids the worship of them; and we are not yet come to
that point. Your Instances from the Eliberitan Canon from Epiphanius and
Serenus, are against the Images themselves, not their worship.


Theoph. Those Holy Bishops were offended with Pictures in Churches, because
they might be occasion of Idolatry, the People inclining to give Religious
worship to them; as Serenus made his Plea.


Phil. Notwithstanding such panic fears, you know, as Bellarmin shows, God
placed the Cherubins in the Ark.


Theoph. In the inward Tabernacle, over the Mercy-seat, where they were not
exposed to public view.


Phil. Lib. de Pudicitia, c. 7. 10. Procedant ipsae Picturae Calicum vestrarum.
Ib. Pa^tor quem in Calice depingis.
Tertullian shows, they had Pictures in the Church early: Let the Pictures,
says he, engraven in your Chalices be produced. Again, The good Shepherd whom
you Picture in your Chalice. He relates to the good Shepherd, bringing back
the lost Sheep upon his shoulders, which Parable was engraven upon the
Eucharistical Cup.


Theoph. These are pitiful proofs for Images in Churches, and their Worship, a
Parable engraven upon a Goblet, not visible, at any distance, unto the People,
so as to become the object of Adoration.


Phil. There is an account given by Nicephorus, Simeon Metaphrastes, and
others, how our Blessed Savior sent the Picture of his Face in a Linen cloth,
to Agabarus King of Edessa; who, hearing of our Savior and his Miracles, sent a
Painter to take his Picture; but his Eyes were dazzled with the Glory of our
Saviors Countenance, and his Art failed him: Whereupon, our Savior calls for a
Napkin, and wiped his Face, and left his Picture therein, to be conveyed to the
King; and thereby Miracles were wrought.


Theoph. We may conclude this to be a Fable, as from the Fabulous Authors: so
likewise, because Eusebius. l. 1. Hist. Ecclesiast. Prope finem.
Eusebius makes no mention thereof; and yet gives an account, how this King of
Edessa did send a Letter to our Savior, entreating him to come and heal him of
his Disease: and that our Savior returned an Answer.


Phil. But the same Eusebius, lib. 7. c. 18. speaking of the City Paneas of
Caesarea Philippi, mentions a report, That the Woman of the Gospel who was
cured of her Bloody Issue, was honorable and rich in that City; and in memory
of that Cure, caused her own Image to be made in Brass, kneeling toward
another Statue of a Man in Brass, stretching forth his hand to touch her: And
at the pedestal of the Statue there did spring up an Herb, which arising unto
the hem of the Coat engraven, had virtue to heal Diseases; and this Image was,
by all the Inhabitants, reported to be the Statue of Christ. And Eusebius gives
credit to the Relation, showing, it was the Custom of the Heathen People, to
honor with Statues those whom they accounted Saviors: and tells us, himself had
seen the Pictures of Christ, and of Peter, and Paul.


Theoph. You may observe, he says, It was the custom of the Heathen to honor
so their Benefactors: and therefore Christians derive this practice from the
Heathen.


Phil. But Divine Providence has set his Seal unto it, in those miraculous
Cures which the Herb wrought, that grew at the foot of Christ's Statue. And
Sozomen relates farther, lib. 5. c. 20. That the Apostate Julian in scorn took
down this Statue, and in the place set up his own, which was struck with
Lightning from Heaven, and broke into many pieces.


Theoph. These things came to pass by a special Providence; not to justify the
making of Christ's Statue, but in the sight of the Heathen to attest the Truth
of those great Things, which Fame had delivered of Christ whom they knew that
Statue represented: And to vindicate that Affront the Apostate Julian designed
to put upon our Savior.


Phil. We find, they had the Pictures of Christ and the Apostles very frequent
in St Augustins time: For some Enemies of the Gospel entitled Magic Books unto
our Savior, as by him written to his principal Disciples, Peter and Paul. Now
Augustine observes, how Paul was no Disciple of Christ in the days of his Flesh,
and so the Imposture was easily discovered: But because, says he, they had
often seen the Picture of Christ, and of these two chief Apostles drawn
together, they concluded them to have bin his most beloved Disciples, and so
were induced to bring in Christ as communicating his Secrets and Mysteries of
the Art of Magic to them.


Theoph. Bellarmin should have given you St Augustins observation upon this
passage: Lib. 1. c. 10. De cons. Evangelist. sic omnino errare meruerunt qui
Christum and Apostolos non in Sacris Codicibus, etc.
So altogether they deserved to be mistaken and err, who look upon Christ and
his Apostles on painted Walls, and not in the Holy Scriptures; and it is no
wonder to see such as are Forgers to be deceived by Painters.


Phil. The second Council of Nice, as Bellarmin shows, brings many other
Testimonies of the Fathers occasionally in their Books, making mention of the
Pictures of Christ, and of the Saints usual in their times.


Theoph. In the series of Discourse you have led us unto that Council, and I
shall choose to accept your Appeal, and thither we will go. But first, I will
prepare the way, and let you know, That we do not declare against Images in
themselves, but as they are occasions of Superstitious Worship. Men prize
ancient Pieces, representing Famous Men: Suppose Julius Caesar, or Tully, or
the Ancestors of their Family; and much more should we value Pictures of Holy
Men and Women, or of our Blessed Savior: But you must then show they be true
Resemblances and Copies, of their Countenance, Pictures very like them whom
they represent; whereas now in the Images of the Saints there is no regard had
to their likeness, but only to set up an Image that shall signify, and not
represent. An old Man with a Sword, stands for Paul; with Keys, for Peter; with
a Cross decussat, for Andrew: so in our Saviors Pictures you shall observe as
many Forms as there are Faces or Fancies of Men. If a Painter, designing to
draw our Ladies Picture, should take a Beautiful Courtizan for his pattern, it
would serve. Now such Pictures, which have no likeness to the persons
represented, deserve no regard, neither are they useful for Commemoration.
Should any one send you your Grandfathers Picture, much unlike him, and drawn
at all adventures, you would not honor it so much, as to hang it up in your
Hall or Parlor. But you and I both have been led out of the way, by those who
write upon this subject of Images; instancing in some who have altogether
rejected them, and in others who have approved them, whereas our chief Design
is, to show the unlawfulness of Image Worship, to allow no other use of
Pictures, then to put us in mind either of Things or Persons, or for ornament
of places: If you are content herewith, the dispute shall end between us,
always excepting against any Image of God, whether Historical or Analogical, or
by what term soever you may distinguish.


Phil. If you see the Picture of Christ, will you not worship him?


Theoph. When by occasion of his PIcture I am put in mind of my Savior, my
heart must honor and worship him, as at any other time when I apply my self
unto him in Meditation, without a Picture to help the memory: But we allow no
Worship or Adoration due unto the Image it self, putting us in mind of our
Savior: you have high reason to yield all civil honor and obeisance to your
Prinoe; but will you bow the Knee, or put of your Hat unto his Image in your
Coin, or to his Picture in your Closet?


Phil. Let me ask you also one Question: If any should stab the Image of the
King, or of your Ancestors, and show great indignation against them, would you
not be higtly offended?


Theoph. If the Circumstances declare that he did it out of despite and malice
to the person represented by the Picture, there is reason to take it as an high
affront.


Phil. By insensible degrees, I shall bring you to acknowledge as much as we
desire: If you should see any Man give honor and respect unto the Princes
Picture for his sake, would you not approve it?


Theoph. Yes, giving such regard as a pious Prince expects from us; not to put
a studied affront upon it; not to set it up in a contemtible place: we likewise
show a dutiful affection in highly valuing the Picture that resembles the King.


Phil. Why should you except against honor and respect given to an Image of
your Savior, or of his blessed Mother and the Saints?


Theoph. We do not; set aside the Religious Worship of an Image which may
lawfully be made; and we will not except against any respect you will give to
it, for his sake whom it represents: you must prove it lawful to worship Images.


Phil. To a Prince civil Worship and Honor is due; and so much you give
likewise to his Picture: by the same rule, seeing unto Christ as Man, in union
with the Divine Nature, is due Religious Worship and Adoration, you must give
Religious Worship to his Image.


Theoph. We never said, the same honor is due to the Picture of a Prince, as to
his Person: Do you all stand bare in the Parlor, because your Princes Picture
hangs there, or the Pictures of any of his Predecessors? And secondly, from a
civil Worship given unto a Creature, to a Religious Worship given unto a
Creature, there is no consequence to be drawn; and the reason is this, God has
forbid one, and not the other. Now the Pictures of Christ, and of his Cross,
and of the Saints, are Creatures, even the work of Men's hands, and therefore to
them no Religious Worship to be given.


Phil. There is a received Maxim in the Church, first taken from Basil the
Great, Vid. Damascen. Orthod. Fid. lib. 4. c. 17. 11 (...), etc.
The honor done to the Image, passes unto him whom it represents: and
therefore honoring their Images, you honor Christ and his Saints.


Theoph. It Is truth, what respect is given to a Picture, is only with regard
unto the thing or person represented by it, and therefore it is called relative
Honor: We prize the Picture of a Friend, and much more of our Blessed Savior,
and his Saints, if they be drawn to the Life: but however, to the Picture
itself, no adoration can in reason be given, and honor, because it is far
inferior to the meanest Man, who is the living Image of God; and a Picture
(suppose of Christ) but an inanimate Image. Honor est agnitio praecell^ntis.
Now Honor is given to things more excellent: Will you say the Picture of a
King excels in dignity the person of a Subject? or that a liveless Picture of
our Blessed Savior, is more honorable then a living Disciple of our Blessed
Savior?


Phil. Not in itself, but as it is the Image of Christ.


Theoph. I speak of it as his Image; and yet I do suppose, you dare not
maintain, That the Picture of Christ in the consideration, as his Picture, is
more to be esteemed then a Disciple of Christ: for suppose one of them were to
be destroi'd, Would you save the Picture, and leave the Man to perish? Again,
for worshipping the Images of Saints, it may be of St Peter; Is more honor to
be given to his Image now, then was to his person in the days of his Flesh?
When Cornelius fell at his Feet, and worshipped him, he received it not, but
said, Stand up, I my self also am a Man, Acts 10 26, instructing him, that no
such worship was due to a Man.


Phil. He would not receive such adoration as was due to God.


Theoph. Who told you, good Cornelius, a devout Man, intended such worship as
was due to God? Dare you say Cornelius in that act committed I dolatry, giving
the worship due only to God, unto his Servant Peter? he only designed to give
to him such high expressions of Honor and Worship, as to a Saint and Servant of
God upon Earth; and yet Peter would not accept of it, and intimates, because he
was a Man he ought not. So we read, St John fell down to Worship before the
Feet of the Angel. and the Angel said, See thou do it not, for I am thy
fellow servants, and of thy Brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the
sayings of this Book: worship God. Now it is to be conceived, John designed not
to commit Idolarry, and give Divine Worship to the Angel, but only some
inferior Religious Worship, as your Doctors use to speak; and yet the Angel
would not receive it, being jealous of his Creators Honor, and directs the
Apostle to worship God. Now if we must not worship Saints in their own Persons,
much less in their Images: If Angels will not accept worship from us, neither
will the Saints Triumphant; both instruct us to worship God, and not them,
although we should intend to give them only inferior worship.


Phil. The second Council of Nice, being the seventh Ecumenical Council, has
well stated this Point, and established the Worship proper to God, called
Latria, to be incommunicable to a Creature. But a second sort of inferior
Worship and Adoration, they determine must be given to the Images of Christ and
the Saints.


Theoph. I wish they had first satisfied you or me, why they should determine
inferior Worship and Adoration to be given to the Saints in Heaven, and to
their Images on Earth, seeing the Angel expressly forbids it, and directs us
only to worship God: But seeing you have appealed to that Council of Nice,
thither we will go, as being indeed the first Foundation of Image worship; and
if you please, I will give you a preliminary account and history of that
Council.


Phil. I pray do so: for it will suit with our present Discourse, and show the
rashness of those Enemies of Christ and his Saints, who brake down their
Images, and cast them out of Churches, as Heathen Idols, unto the Dunghill;
whilst the holy Popes of Rome successively wrote Epistles, and sent Legates,
and gave warning to the Emperors, whose Zeal without knowledge, gave
countenance and authority to such Sacrilegious Outrages.


Theoph. About the year of Christ, 720. Leo Isaurus, the 69th Emperor of Rome
from Augustus, observing the growth of Superstition and Idolatry among the
vulgar sort of People, in worshipping the Images of our Blessed Savior, and the
Virgin Mary, and the Saints, which were erected in their Temples and in the
Streets; he took a severe course, and brake down the Images, and commanded all
that had such Images and Pictures, under great penalties, to bring them forth,
and burned them in the Marketplace. He sent likewise to Gregory the second,
Pope of Rome, to desire his concurrence for a General Council of the Eastern
and Western Bishops, about this work of Reformation: and in a sacred Epistle to
the Pope, he urged Arguments to justify his course in taking away Images.
Whereunto the Pope returns an Answer, Bin. Edit. Council. Tom. 5. page 501.
(...), etc.
That whereas he had received frem him many sacred Letters, within the first
ten years of his Reign, full of Piety and Wisdom; together with an Orthodox
Confession of his Faith, denouncing a Curse upon those that should remove the
Boundaries of Religion which the Fathers had set: and for this cause, he tells
the Emperor, That he had given ample Thanks to God for committing the Empire of
the World unto so noble a Prince. But now alas! from his Epistle, and from his
practice, he sadly perceived how he was taken from the Truth, and had given
great scandal to the World. And so he sets himself to give satisfaction unto
some Particulars which the Emperor had mentioned in his Letter; telling him
beforehand, That he would write to him dull and illiterate Things, because thou
thy self (says he) art such. And in truth, the Pope is as good as his word;
for his Letter which he writes to the Emperor, is blunt and desultory, without
any reason or consequence, or good manners. He says, That God did forbid
Graven Images, such as the Canaanites made and worshipped; but he commanded
Moses to make two Cherubins, a Table and an Ark; and these were similitudes
made with hands for the glory of God. He tells him, That Moses prayed and
desired to see an Image of God, that he might not err; and the Lord answered,
That he could not see his face and live, but his back parts he should see: but
under the Gospel he has showed himself back and face. That the Truth is made
visible, and Christ has appeared and dwel'd among us, and where the carcass
was, that is, Christ in the Body, thither the Eagles came: True Believers
resorted to him, and took his Picture, and the Pictures of James the Brother of
the Lord, and of Stephen the first Martyr; and so of all the Martyrs, and
forsaking the worship of Idols, the whole World did worship these Images: not
with the worship due only to God, but relatively; a Distinction formed to
puzzle, not to inform. After this, he tells him, how our Blessed Savior sent a
Copy of his Countenance in a Napkin to the King of Edessa. It Is truth, says
he, we do not Picture God, because we know him not; but if we had beheld him,
as we do his Son, we would have made his Picture also, and try whether you
would call it an Idol. The love of Christ knows, says he. That when I go into
the Temple of Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, and look upon his Image, I am
brought to compunction; and as Rain out of the Clouds, so do my Tears flow
down. Then he tells the Emperor, how Christ restored sight to the blind; but
you put out the Eyes of the People by removing Images. You say, we worship
Stones and Tables: not so, but our memories must be rubbed up, and our dull,
and foolish, and illiterate mind raised. When we see the Picture of Christ, we
say, Thou Son of God, save us: so when we see the Picture of the Holy Mother,
we say, O holy Mother of God, Mother of the Lord, mediate unto thy Son to save
our Souls: and so to the other Saints and Martyrs. He bids the Emperor go into
the Grammar-Schools, and tell the Boys, I am he a (...), etc.
b Epist. 1. Greg. secund. ad Leonem Isaurum, Bin. Tom. 5. (...), etc.
who persecute and pull down Images, and see says he, whether they will not
hurl their Books at thy head. When the Emperor reflected upon that passage of
Hezekiah, breaking in pieces the Brazen Serpent, because the People did burn
Incense to it, 2 Kings 18. 4. How do you think he answers it?


Phil. I must confess, it was very apposite to his purpose, who pleaded the
Peoples Superstition in worshipping Images, as the cause of his removing them:
and therefore I desire to hear what satisfaction his Holiness the Pope gave
unto that Objection.


Theoph. He tells the Emperor, Ib. (...), etc.
Verily Ozias was thy Brother of like persuasions as thy self, and he played the
Tyrant among his People as thou do. Where you also observe, how the Pope was
so ignorant of the Holy Scriptures, that he ascribes that memorable passage of
breaking the Brazen Serpent, to Vzziah, and not to Hezekiah the King: and in
resembling the Emperor to Hezekiah, in the fact of breaking Images, he by a
necessary consequence approves the one, as the Holy Ghost in Scripture does the
other, for his zeal for Reformation, and Gods Honor.


Phil. I did not expect such a precipitate Answer to so considerable an
Argument.


Theoph. Give me leave to proceed: He tells the Emperor, and calls Christ to
witness, How mightily affected he was with sight of the glorious Images, and
Historical Pictures of the Holy Scriptures in the Churches; and that it had
been much better if the Emperor had bin an Heretic (denying some fundamental
Truth of the Gospel) then a Persecuter of Images: And gives his Reason, Because
Heretics erred through ignorance, and about things hard to be understood,
whereas thou errest in such things as are as clear as the Sun, and therefore
their Condemnation is not so great as thine. It appears in his Sacred Epistle,
that the Emperor did write to the Pope concerning a General Council to determine
the Controversy concerning Images.


Phil. That was the most likely way to settle the Truth, and the minds of Men.


Theoph. But the Pope answers, No: You did write to me for a General Council,
but it seems to me unprofitable.


Phil. I pray what reason did he give of his denial.


Theoph. He tells the Emperor, He consults his Honor, and that it were better
for him not to have his crimepublish'd: he was a desircier of Images, if he
would give over and be quiet, the scandal would be taken away, and there would
be no need of a Council. He calls God to witness, how he had communicated the
Emperors former sacred Epistles to the Princes of the West, and had much
commended him for his Piety; and they all had him in great Honor: but as soon
as they heard of this Fact of Image-breaking, they trampled his Laurels under
foot, and invaded some of his Territories in the West; had seized upon Ravenna,
and threatened Rome it self, the Emperor being unable to protect them: Ib.
(...), etc.
and all this through his own folly. Nay, says he, you threaten to fend to
Rome, and break down the Image of St. Peter, and carry away the Pope in Bonds:
but if you thus look big and threaten, I will not contend, but I will remove my
self but 25 miles, and then I shall be out of your reach, and you may go and
persecute the winds.


Phil. It Is much he had the courage to write so boldly to the Emperor, who had
Dominions and Forces near in Italy.


Theoph. The subtle Pope knew his own strength: The Lombards kept their
Interest in Campania, and other parts of Italy, in despite of the Emperors
Forces; and although they were many times very troublesome Neighbors to Rome, yet
thither, upon case of necessity, he would fly. After the same manner he writes
a second Letter unto the Emperor, among other things telling him: Although thou
do persecute us with a Military hand of Flesh, yet we being destitute of
carnal Weapons, do invoke the chief Captain of the Creation, Christ, sitting in
the Heavens over all Power and Dominion, to send the Devil into thee, as the
Apostle speaks, To give such an one unto Satan: and afterward, he thundered out
against him the Bull of Excommunication. And whereas the Emperor had demanded
how it came to pass, That none of the six general Councils had Decreed any
thing for the worship of Images, etc. what Answer, think you, gave the Pope to
that demand?


Phil. I cannot guess; but it was a material Proposal.


Theoph. He answers it thus, True, O King! neither did any of those Councils
make Decrees of eating Bread, and drinking Water, intimating, That it was as
evidently necessary to worship Images, as to eat and drink, and therefore no
matter for a Canon of a general Council. And withal he tells him, That the
Patriarchs and Bishops carried Images before them, when they went into the
Council; and none that did love Jesus Christ, would take a Journey without some
Images of the Saints, as their Fellow-Travellers. Now these things, and many
others, are urged by him without any offer of proof; and being not in his
Pontifical Chair, it seems he was not infallible: neither was it likely such
blind Stories, and fond Assertions, and foolish Letters, should prevail with a
Prince of great Power and Reason; and therefore he continued his course of
preventing Idolatry, by taking Images and Pictures out of the way, and so he
had the Surname given him of (...), one that did make war against Images. His
Son Consiantin follows him in the same severity, and the Monckish Historians of
that time, had a nickname also for him, Constantinus Copronymus: Because, say
they, when being an Infant he was Baptized, he defiled the Sacred Font with his
dung; and so gave an Omen of his future contemt and villainies against the
Saints and the Church. But that was not the reason of the Appellative and Name,
but rather because he much delighted in the smell of Horse-dung; the compound
name being derived from (...), which signifies dung, and (...), which is
Interpreted, I am pleased; whereas perhaps the dull Monks thought it was
derived from (...) and (...), which signifies, a Name. Now because they had in
vain sought the concurrence of the Pope and the Western Bishops, in a general
Council, Constantinus the Emperor summons a Council at Constantinople, Anno
754. where 318. Bishops assembled, and declared against Images and their
worship, and styled themselves, Sancta magna unversalis Synedus, etc.
The holy and great general Council of Constantinople, But we have no Record of
the Actions of this Council, otherwise then we find the definition thereof
mangled and confuted by parcels, in the Council of Nice succeeding. This being
the unjust and partial dealing of the Roman Faction, through whose hands (since
the desolation of the Eastern Church by the Turks) all Church History is
transmitted, to deliver nothing to Posterity (as far as possibly they can
stifle it) which makes against them. After Constantine, did succeed Leo his Son
in the Empire, who Reigned five years, and left his Son Constantine, being ten
years old, together with his Mother Irene, to rule the Empire. Anno 773. the
Monkish Writers of those times highly extol the Queen, Hierene piissima una cum
Constable. glorioso divinitus cepit Imperium. (...), etc.
stiling her, Most Pious, because Pope Adrian, by his Instruments, brought her
over to restore Images; and then the Pope promotes a general Council, which was
first summoned at Constantinople, but by reason of Tumults, (the People of
Constantinople making Insurrection against the Council, which should restore
Image Worship) it was prorogued for a year, and afterward translated to Nice:
whether the Pope sends his Legates, and all is carried as he would. Now here you
may observe a Scene of Popish subtlety: When the Emperor Leo Isaurus did not
concur in Judgment with Gregory the second, although a Council was desired. yet
the Pope would not consent, because he well knew, that the Countenance and
Authority of the Emperor, would carry all things against the Popes Judgment. But
when Irene the Empress, together with her Son Constantine, were made for the
interest of the Pope and for Images, Then Adrian mightily promotes the Council,
condemns the former general Council of Constantinople, which Decreed against
Images, as a mere Heretical Conventicle, and sets up this at Nice in its stead.
And he laid his design sure enough: for in the entrance of the Council he
writes by his Legates, both to the Emperor, and to Tarasius the Patriarch of
Constantinople That c he was made Patriarch against the Canons of the Church of
Christ, as being immediately taken from a Courtier, and a Layman, to the Sea of
Constantinople; but because he was satisfied of his zeal for Images, therefore
he would not except against his Consecration. And in the close of his Epistle
to Tarasius, he tells him plainly, If the Emperor and the Council shall not
restore Images, I cannot by any means admit of your Consecration. And this
Patriarch, in truth, was fit for the Popes turn, being liable to the exception
you have heard, and not learned, he would be ruled by the Popes Legates, and
some busy Monks in the Council, the sooner; and withal, many of the Bishops of
Asia and Greece had bin guilty of voting against Images in the former Council
of Constantinople; and none of them must be admitted into this Council, but
such as would submit, acknowledging their Error, and begging pardon, and
declaring strenuously against what they had established; and condemning the
Council against Images unto the pit of Hell. And with these preparations you
may easily judge, what would be the issue of the second Council of Nice, the
first that ever declared for Images and their worship.


Phil. These are your politic preliminary Observations, if possible, to blast
the reputation of the general Council: But have you any thing to except against
the Council it self? although indeed general Councils should not be liable unto
the insolent Exceptions of private Men.


Theoph. Hear and judge. In the first Session or Action of that Council, diverse
ancient Bishops are brought in as Criminals, for declaring against Images in
the former Council; and they acknowledge themselves miserable sinners, saying,
Ibid. (...), etc.
We have sinned and don wickedly, and have transgressed the Commandment, and we
beg pardon. One of those Bishops, Theodosius Bishop of Ammonium, makes an
Apostrophe to the Saints in Heaven, saying, I have sinned against Heaven, and
against you, I beseech you to receive me, as God received the Prodigal, the
Harlot, and the Thief. Then he pronounces Anathema's against all those who do
not diligently teach the People that love God, to adore the sacred venerable
Images of all the Saints that have pleased God since the Creation. All the
criminal Bishops acknowledge worshipping of Images to be an Apostolical
Tradition, and that they had no manner of excuse to plead for themselves in
what they had formerly done, but all was through ignorance and foolishness.


Phil. This strange palinody and recognition of their former Errors, shows,
they were not Men of Conscience and Judgment, that voted against Images in the
former Council.


Theoph. It manifests rather the Tyranny of this Council, who would admit them
to reconciliation upon no other terms. One John, a Monk, Representative and
Vicar of the Oriental Bishops (who by reason of the Saracens possessing their
Country, durst not come to the Council) declares publicly, That this Heresy
was greater then any other Heresy whatsoever: Woe to those who fight against
Images! And when they entered into Consultation about the degree and
heinousness of this Crime, Tarasius the Patriarch answers wisely, It is all one
in matters of Doctrine, whether you offend in great or small; for by either the
Law of God is abrogated. And so they examined former Canons of receiving
Heretics, whether Arrians, or Nestorians, or Macedonians; and in like manner
determined of these Bishops, as highly guilty and criminal, as the worst of all
Heretics. Insomuch, That Basilius, Bishop of Ancyra, declares in the Council,
being one of those Criminals, (...), etc.
I do from my heart and soul anathematize that Council of Constantinople
against Images, as being assembled out of mere folly and madness. Another of
them denounces an Anathema against all such who were of doubtful mind, and did
not from their Soul confess that Images were to be worshipped. This was fair
for the first Scene and Action of that famous Council. In the second Action,
Pope Adrians Letter to the Emperor, and to the Patriarch Tarasius, are
published and approved by the particular Testimony of every Bishop. In his
Epistle to the Emperor Constantine, and Irene his Mother, he congratulates
their embracing the Faith of the chiefest Apostles, Peter and Paul, promising
That these Saints shall be the Protectors of their Imperial Glory and Majesty,
and bring the barbarous Nations under their feet. He brings in a Fable of
Constantine the first Christian Emperor, how in a dream he saw Peter and Paul
come to him, and directing him to send for Sylvester, Pope of Rome, (who lived
in Banishment upon the Mountain Soracle, flying from the Persecution of
Constantine; and that good Pope should guide him to a Pool, wherein he might
wash and be healed of his Leprosy: whereupon Constantine awaking, sends some
of his Officers to the Pope, who alas! thought of nothing, but that by these
Messengers he was called forth to suffer Martyrdom. But the Emperor when he
came, entertained him with great courtesy, acquainted him with his Dream, and
asked who those Gods were, Peter and Paul, which appeared to him. Sylvesier
answered, That they were Servants of the most high God, great Instruments of
the Worlds Conversion to Christ. The Emperor demanded, whether he had their
Pictures, that he might know them; and a Deacon is presently dispatched to
fetch their Pictures: and as soon as Constantine saw them, he cryed^out, These
are the Men I saw in my dream; and so he was Baptized by Sylvester, and
cleansed of his Leprosy. Now it is strange, That a Pope should write such a
Fable, and that a whole Council should believe it, against the Evidence of all
History. For Constantine never persecuted Christians, never had a Leprosy; was
not Baptized by Sylvester at Rome, but by Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia: for the
Emperor designed to be Baptized in Jordan, where our Savior received the
Baptism of John, and in his Journey toward Palestine, fell sick at Nicomedia,
and was Baptized by the Bishop of the place. This, when need requires, shall be
made good, by many authentic Testimonies: and withal, it is most certain, That
Constantine was a sound Christian, and Defender of the Faith, in Miltiades his
Popedom, who was Predecessor in the Sea of Rome to Sylvester. It appears, he
committed that endless Controversy between the Catholics and the Donatists,
concerning Cecilianus Bishop of Alexandria, unto the hearing of Miltiades; and
how he should be a Persecutor of the Church in Sylvesiers Popedom, is a Riddle.
I must confess, Baronius would resolve it: He tells us, That after Constantine
was Christian, he sell away, and committed great Cruelties, and persecuted the
Church, insomuch, that Sylvester fled to Soracle; and that God smote him with a
Leprosy. And so the Story of his Dream forementioned, proceeded. But this is
an horrible Forgery, purposely designed to maintain Constantines Baptism at
Rome, and that large donation to the Church Territories in Italy, which they
pretend to hold from the great Charter of Constantine. But we have read, That
Julian was an Apostate; but never before, that Constantine was so: And withal,
the Fable confures it self; for if Constantine was a good Christian, as all
confess, in Miltiades days, how comes it to pass, that in Sylvesters time the
Emperor had never heard of Peter and Paul, who appeared in a Dream to him, but
asked the Pope, What Gods they were? It seems he had drunk of the River Lethe,
or rather that great Annalist was drunk with the Cup of Romes Fornications, so
as to forget the Truth, and vent, in this particular, nothing but Imposture;
against the rule of Piety, and Charity, and common Gratitude, to stigmatize the
first great Champion of Christian Religion, who brought Peace and Tranquillity
to the Catholic Church, with the Brand of Apostasy and Persecution of the
Saints: What will not a Cardinal say, for the advantage of the Court of Rome? I
have bin, in the Series of this Discourse, reduced to a necessity of this
digression. But I return, Hadrian, after many impertinent Passages in his
Epistle to the Emperor, he urges the threadbare Argument of Moses, being by
God himself commanded to make two Cherubins, and the Brazen Serpent: And he
most Ibid. (...), etc.
Logically infers, If the looking upon a Brazen Serpent could heal the
Israelites, much more shall such as behold and worship the Pictures of Christ
and of the Saints, be saved. Whereas he should have taken notice, how the
Serpent was erected by Gods especial command, and endowed with such an healing
virtue, whereas they can produce no such command to worship Images, or any
promise of Salvation by looking upon them. He cites from Jerome one strange
passage, but refers to no place, and I presume, it is no where to be found: It
is this, That as God permitted the Gentiles to adore things made with hands,
and was well pleased with the Israelites, who did adore the two Tables which
Moses hewed out, and the two golden Cherubins; so unto us Christians, he has
given the Cross, and the History, and Images of good Works, to picture and
adore them. Now such Forgeries and Fooleries past for Gospel among the Bishops
of that Council, who never examined any thing that was said, if it had any
tendence unto their great design to establish the worship of Images. Only there
is one memorable passage in his Epistle, which if well observed by all, might
help to end the Controversy for asking the Question: What honor of worship do
we give to the Images of Christ and the Saints? He Answers, Such as we sinners
give to one another in love and honor. We would not much contend about this
civil respect, if they had not trained the People to give Religious Worship and
Adoration to Images; although (as some will have it) of an inferior degree to that
Worship we give to God. The third Action of that Council, consists in hearing
and approving some Synodical Epistles, and contains nothing of moment to our
present business. In the fourth Action, they bring the Testimony of Holy
Scripture for Images: That the Lord commanded Moses to make two Cherubins, etc.
And then some passages of Fathers, who spoke of Images which they beheld, and
were much affected with them: they bring in diverse Legends of Miracles effected
by Images. I will, for brevity sake, give an account of one for all. Peter,
Bishop of Nicomedia, brings out a Book of the Passion of Christ, ascribed
falsely to Athanasius the Great; out of the Book he reads this Story. In the
City Berytus, in Syria, dwelt many of the Jews; and near unto their Synagogue,
a Christian hired an House, and dwell'd some time in it; and over against his
Bed he set up, at full length, the Picture of our Savior, drawn in a Table:
when he changed his dwelling, and took another House, it fortuned that he
forgot to take away the picture, with his other goods, but left it in the
Chamber. A Jew succeeding in the House for some time, never discovered the
Picture, until another Jew being invited to dine with him, cast his eye upon
it, and immediately expostulated with his Friend for keeping in his House the
Picture of Christ, and began to curse our Savior: but leaving the House, be
goes to the High Priest, and the Council of the Jews, and accuses his Neighbor
for harboring this Image: They take company with them, and came to the Jews
House, and find this Picture, and immediately cast him out of the Synagogue.
Then they spit it on the Face, and conclude to act over again all the
Indignities upon the Picture, which their impious Forefathers had upon the
Person of Christ; they pierce the Hands and Feet with Nails, put gaul to his
Lips, and smite the Head with a reed At last, they said, We have heard that our
Forefathers did pierce his side with a spear, and let not us omit that
considerable able Circumstance: forthwith, one fetching a spear, pierced the
side, and immediately issued out a seream of Blood and Water: at which sight,
they were all amazed and terrified; but recollecting themselves, they said, We
have heard Christians boast of many Miracles of their Savior, Let us make the
Experiment, and send for the lame and blind, and among the rest, for one who
was a ^aralytic from the womb; and lo, all of them, being anointed with the
Blood, were ^ealed; and such as were possessed with the Devil among them. By
this Miracle, the Jews of the City, Princes and People, were converted to the
Faith of Christ, and came to the Bishop of the place, professing their Faith,
and desiring Baptism, and their Synagogue was consecrated into a Temple of the
Lord, and great joy was over all the City. Now this Legend was received in the
Council with great acclamation, and glory was given to God who had brought to
pass such mighty things for the Conversion of the Jews, and for the
confirmation of the Saints in Image Worship. But Tarasius the Patriarch put to
the Council a seasonable Question: How comes it to pass that our Images do no
such Miracles? and he Answers, Because Miracles are signs to Unbelievers, and
not to Christians: and yet to see the luck of it, this very Miracle is at
length brought home to their own Times. Bellarmin acknowledges the Book of
Christ's Passion, out of which they did take the Story, was wrongfully ascribed
to Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, the great Champion of the Faith against
Arius. And so does Baronius, and gives his reason; for in the space of 400
Years between that Athanasius and this Council of Nice, some notice would have
been taken of this notable Miracle, which yet was never heard of, but in that
Book. And withal, Baron. Tom. 9. Anno 738. numero 31.
Baronius tells us, That in the Roman Martyrology, or Calender, there is
appointed an Holy Day to be kept in commemoration of this Miracle, upon the
fifth of the Ides of September, and that the relation thereof was devoutly read
in the Churches; and recorded to have happened in the Reign of Constantine and
Irene, the punctual time when the Council was assembled. And thus you see, when
they are brought to the Touchstone, Fables and Legends will appear what they
are, counterfeit Coin; and such as relate them, their Testimonies will not
agree: and yet the Council easily swallowed this, and many other Cheats and
Impostures, serving to erect their Images with their worship. Baronius gives us
one Note more upon the Passage, That the effusion of Blood from the Picture was
so great, that many Viols were filled therewith, and sent to the Churches of
Christ, East and West, to be kept as Sacred Relies. Now any one, that had his
Wits about him, might easily conceive the Story did confute it self: For it is
not probable, the Christian, removing Household Stuff, should leave behind him
unregarded and undiscovered the Picture of Christ at full length; and that the
Jew succeeding, likewise should not see it, until his Neighbor comes into the
discovery. In the fifth Action of this Council, they bring in many other
Stories and Fables, whereof the Reader may give himself an account in reading
the History of that Council, given by Binius in his 5th Tome; and there they
pretend to show how the former Council of Constantinople did impose upon many
of the Bishops then present, by corrupting Books and Testimonies, and forcing
their Votes to concur with them; and this by the confession, forsooth, of those
who had recanted, and now sat in this Council to condemn and pronounce the
other Accursed. In the sixth Session they come close to the Point, and examine
the definition of that Conventicle (as they are pleased to call it) against
Images: but not in the usual way of Councils by debating particulars among
them, but referring all to a malapert Deacon, one Epiphanius, The
Representative of the Archbishop of Sardinia, and he answers every Paragraph
with Exclamation and Railing, as the impartial Reader may observe. To give one
Instance, the Council of Constantinople, instead of the Picture of Christ,
sends us to the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, in commemoration of Christ
and his Passion; and calls the Eucharist Christ Image, wherein he was best
represented to his Church. Here the Deacon wonderfully insults and triumphs
over them, and calls this fancy of theirs, (...).
An extreme apoplectical Madness He declares unto all the World, That never any
of the Apostles, or Fathers of the Church before them, called the Holy
Sacrament an Image. Now when we shall consider, that the use of Images and
Pictures is chiefly for representation, and that in the Sacrament Christ's death
is represented, and himself commemorated, this Assertion of the former Council
might have well passed without such an outrageous Censure: and yet withal, to
see how confident men will soon be over-taken in their presumtions; we read in
Baronius (that great Darling of the Church of Rome) an account given of one
Stephanus, a Confessor and Martyr for Images, who expostulating with Leo
Isaurus for his Image-breaking, Bar. Tom. 9. Anno 765. number. 9. Audi corp. and
sang. Christi Antitypa proscrib. ab Ecclesia, ut quae Imag. and veram fig.
tenent, quae and adoramus, etc.
bids, him likewise if he thought good, proscribe the Antitypes of Christ's Body
and Blood, which contained the true Image and Figure of Christ, and were also
worshipped. That which was memorable in Stephanus, to call the Eucharist The
Image of Christ, in the Council of Constantinople was abominable; so partial
are Men who swerve from Truth, they have Men's Persons and Arguments in
admiration or contemt, merely for the advantage of their Cause: however, the
insolent Deacon was no telltroth, in saying, The Council had no president for
their Assertion, when Stephanus, one of his Martyrs for Images, had before
asserted the same. Now the Council of Constantinople, which this Deacon under
the Patronage of the Council of Nice fain would baffle into a Conventicle, as
far as we can discern by their Definition, which their Adversaries have set
forth only to be confuted (we given them thanks for it) this Council, I say,
designs in the Definition, to lead Men from sensible things unto Spiritual,
showing, that in this World we must walk by Faith, not by sight; and if we have
known Christ after the Flesh, from henceforth to know him so no more: That
Christians thoughts should not be drawn outward, and distracted with visible
representations from Spiritual intendments. They quote a saying of Gregory
Nazianzen, (...), etc.
It is an injury to have our Faith in colors, not in the Heart. And he adds,
That Picture which is engraven in the depth of the Heart, is amiable to me:
Pictures made in colors will wash away. They quote Chrysostom, saying, (...),
etc.
We enjoy the presence of the Saints in glory by their Writings, having the
Images not of their Bodies, but of their Souls: for those things which were
done by them, are the representations of their noble mind. They quote a saying
of Amphilochius Bishop of Ieonium, e We take no care to represent in Tables the
fleshly visage of the Saints by colors, but to imitate their virtuous
conversation. We (...), etc.
have no need of Pictures. They show how Eusebius Pamphilus, when Consiantia
Augusta desired him to send an Image of Christ to her, dissuaded her from it:
What Image, says he, would you have? of his God-bead? that is impossible; no
man has seen God at any time: of his Manhood? We believe the humane Nature of
Christ to be glorified, and mortality swallowed up in life: and how shall we
express his Glorious Body with liveless colors and shadows? The Disciples
being in the Mount, could not behold his transfigur'd Body whilst he was in the
Flesh, much less can we now represent or beh^ld him after his Ascension into
the highest Heavens. Other Testimonies they bring, but the Deacon excepts
against them as spurious; but these he allows as legitimate, and sets himself
to answer them, but with very little satisfaction to the Reader. Now I pray
judge, whether these are not more significant Testimonies against Images, then
the Council of Nice, or any others yet have produced for them. Now the
determination of the Council of Constantinople, after their confession of
Faith, upon the whole matter, is this: (...), etc.
We unanimously determine, That every Image, of whatsoever matter or color,
made by the wicked Art of Painters or Carvers, be cast out of Christian
Churches as alien and abominable. And in the next words, they condemn the Art
of Carving or Painting, as an ungodly and wicked Profession; and forbid every
one to keep a Picture in his House. The Definition of the Council of Nice
follows in the seventh Action. After profession of the Faith of the six general
Councils before them, and Anathema's denounced against Heresies and Heretics,
they declare, to hold incorrupt all Traditions of the Church written and
unwritten, (...), etc.
whereof they say, One Tradition is the making of Images suited to the History
of the Gospel, for confirmation of the Faith of Christ's taking flesh: and
therefore, say they, With all diligence and exactness, we define, That Images
of the Life-giving Cross, and of Christ, and of the Virgin Mary, and of the
blessed Angels, and all the Saints, shall be set up in Churches, and Houses,
and Highways, and wrought in Copes and Vestments; because the oftener these
Images are seen, the more they bring into remembrance and imitation such as are
represented by them. (...), etc.
We also Decree, To give Honor, Salvation, and Adoration, to these Images; not
that true worship of Latria, which belongs only to the Divine Nature; but as to
the Image of the Cross, and to the Holy Gospels, and that the Oblations of
Incense and Tapers should be made for their honor. And in the Close they give
the Reason: The honor of the Image redounds to the Prototype, and he that
worships the Image therein, death worship the Person of him that is represented
by it.


Phil. You have put your self to great trouble to give this large account of
both Councils; yet I observe you have been partial, laboring to represent the
one rational and serious, the other light and superstitious: yet when you shall
observe the definition of the Constantinople Council, condemning all Pictures,
and the Art of making them, as a wicked and ungodly Occupation, I cannot think
you do fully assent to the determination.


Theoph. You must allow something to the heats and passions of Men, and to the
present juncture of Affairs. The People, it seems, were given to the
Superstitious Worship of Images; and to promote the humor, Idle Monks made
Stories and Legends of miraculous Effects from Images and Relics; and the
Emperors, with the advice of their Bishops, being much set upon a through
Reformation, as to this particular, they altogether take away the occasion of
Idolatry, both out of Churches and Houses, and public Places, breaking down and
burning Images and Pictures, as Hezekiah used the Brazen Serpent, because the
Israelites burnt Incense to it, and forbidding every one to keep Images, and
any Artist to make them.


Phil. You make a Plea for them, which afterward in the Council of Nice many
of their Bishops did not for themselves: That they were so severe against
Images, because of the Peoples Superstition and proneness to honor them with
Religious Worship.


Theoph. You heard, the Emperor Leo Isaurus made that Plea in his Sacred
Epistle to Gregory the second. As for the Bishops, those who came to the
Council of Nice, and recanted their former Actions, they stood not at all upon
their defense and justification; they saw the Stream too great for them to bear
up against it, and therefore confessing, aggravating, condemning their former
proceedings, and begging pardon, they found that the securest way to be
received into the Council, and to retain their Bishoprics.


Phil. On the other side, your self have observed how the Fathers of the
Council of Nice declared against giving to an Image the Worship called Latria,
which they acknowledged due only to God, but only such Honor and Adoration
which we give to Men superior unto us, or to the Holy Gospels: and it is usual
with you (the Law of the Land commanding it) when you take an Oath to kiss the
Bible; and (...), which is rendered Adoration, signifies no more then
salutation, as the Patriarch Tarasius declared in the Council.


Theoph. This is something you say to justify that Council: but you must
observe withal, that charge of their Definition of offering Incense, and
burning Tapers at these Images; and Invocating the Saints whom they represent
for their mediation and assistance, praying to them, as well as falling down
before them: this exceeds all civil worship and respect, and can hardly be
distinguished from Religious worship due to God alone, especially in the
apprehension of vulgar minds, who have not subtlety to understand between
supreme and inferior worship, or in their practice to make any difference: and
withal, that Axiom upon which they grounded the Doctrine of Image worship,
That the honor don to the Image, redounds to the Prototype, would make Men
emulous to honor the Image in the same degree, as that which is represented by
it, and so the Image of Christ, with Divine Worship, as many Schoolmen
afterward expressly maintained. And withal, we read, Stauratius Bishop of
Chalcedon, declared publicly in the Council, (...).
That he did receive and adore Images, as the pledge of his salvation. And the
last Clause I urged of the definition of the Council of Nice, That he who
adores the Image, adores him whom the Image represents, seems to determine the
same Adoration to one and to the other. For such Reasons as these the Council
of Francford, soon after, assembled by Charles the Great, consisting of about
300 Bishops, did reject the Council of Nice, as setting up Religious Worship
unto Images, although likewise they did not receive the Council of Constantinople,
because they brake down Images, and altogether forbad them. And when Pope
Adrian had sent to Charles the Emperor a Copy of the second general Council of
Nice, he, together with the Council of Francford, set forth four Books, under
the Name of Libri Carolini, in Answer unto, and in confuration of the Nicene
Council, concerning Image worship.


Phil. I presume, you know many of our Doctors flatly deny, that the Council of
Francford did condemn the seventh General Council of Nice for Images, but that
they condemned the Council of Constantinople against Images. So Gregory de
Valentia, lib. 2. de Idol. c. 7. and Alphonsus de Castro, shows out of Platina,
That one Felix who was an Arian, was also an Image breaker, and the Council of
Francford was summoned to condemn the Heresy of Felix.


Theoph. All this is said, but not proved. Felix his Heresy was condemned,
because he held, That Christ, as Man, was the Son of God by adoption, and no
other thing was laid to his charge. And likewise, the Council of
Constantinople, for breaking Images, was condemned in short, but the Council of
Nice at large, for decreeing the worshipping of Images. And Baronius expressly
says, he was so far from denying, that he did absolutely maintain, that the
Council of Francford did condemn the Council of Nice, Tom. 9. Anno 794. And he
brings many undeniable Testimonies of those times to confirm it; only in some
Historians and Writers of those times, there was a mistake in calling it the
Synod of Constantinople, instead of the Synod of Nice: but they name the
Emperor, Constantine and Irene, under whom the Council was held; and they
expressly say, The Council of Francford condemned the Council which established
worshipping of Images; and the four Caroline Books made by that Council, and
owned by Charles the Great, which were sent to Pope Adrian, wholly determine
against the worshipping of Images. Hinemarus Bishop of Rhemes, tells us, He saw
that Book when he was a Youth in the Kings Palace, and did read it: and that
when Suarum puparum cultum vehementer pr^m, veret.
Hadrian did still persist in promoting the worship of Images, Ludovicus the
Son of Charles. together with the Council of Paris, did write more severely
against Images, and plainly reprehend the Indiscrete noscitur fecisse in eo
quod superstitiose cos adorari jussit.
Pope for establishing and defending their worship.


Phil. Concili abulum Parisiense.
Bellarmin calls this Council of Paris a Conventicle, because it durst reprove
the Pope.


Theoph. Alas! The new Doctrine of the Popes Infallibility, did not pass for
current Coin in those days.


Phil. But Baronius shows, how the Council of Francford proceeded upon a
mistake, and great scandal in their condemnation of the Council of Nice, being
made believe, That Council had determined Latriam, or that worship due to the
Blessed Trinity should be given to Images; and they likewise did suppose the
Pope had not confirmed that Council.


Theoph. Any thing to bear up the reputation and Grandeur of the Pope of Rome.
But I pray judge how incredible this is, that the Council of Francford should
mistake the Council of Nice, when Adrian had sent a true Copy of that Council
by his Legates, Theophilus and Stephanus, who were present in the Council of
Francford, and could rectify any such mistakes. Vid. Bin. Tom. 6. in Notis in
Council. Francford, page 185.
And upon these Motives, Binius, tho unwillingly, declares his dissent from
Baronius and Bellarmine, and professes himself to be of the Opinion, That the
Council of Francford never rejected the Council of Nice, or declared against
Image worship, and labor in vain to shift off the numerous Testimonies of
Writers of those Times, and of that Council. And so you may observe, how much
the Doctors of your Church are put to shifts, and fencing about, to ward the
blow given in the Western Churches unto Image worship by the Councils of
Francford and Paris.


Phil. How do you then believe the Council of Francford could proceed upon a
mistake, That the Council of Nice had established the same worship to be given
to Images, as to the Holy Trinity, seeing it has declared so expressly against
it?


Theoph. I have observed many passages in the Council, which fairly tend to
that Doctrine, notwithstanding sometime they mince the matter.


Phil. For the other supposal likewise, That the Council of Francford should
conceive that Pope Hadvian did not confirm the Nicene Council, it is
improbable, seeing his Legates were present in that Council, and could easily
have informed them better.


Theoph. I am not concerned to vindicate and reconcile your Doctors. But the
Popes Legates, perhaps, seeing the stream and zeal of the Council of Francford,
consisting of 300 Bishops, against the establishment of Image worship by the
Council of Nice, prudently concealed, and were willing to let them believe,
That the Pope did not confirm that Council, least upon that account they should
fall fowl upon the Pope; as afterward the Council of Paris, under Ludovicus,
did. And so I am willing to conclude this matter, and toil no longer in the
Labyrinth of these Councils, either for Images or against them.


Phil. I am willing you should take notice of one Consideration more of
Bellarmin, Lib. 2. de Imag. c. 12. Argument. 9. and 10.
That the Emperors who were against Images were desperately wicked, and had
signal Evidences of Divine Wrath and Vengeance in the times wherein they lived.
The first Founders of the Heresy being Jews, and Samaritans, and Mahumetans,
and Necromancers, as he proves out of Historians. And then he shows, how in the
Reign of Leo Isaurus, the great Image breaker, there was a great Pestilence in
Constantinople, whereof died near three hundred thousand persons.


Theoph. Leo reigned 24 Years, and in those parts great Plagues are frequent,
and therefore no evident demonstration of Wrath in such a fatal Concurrence.


Phil. Bellarmin observes, how Leo and his Successors, upon this occasion, lost
the Empire of Italy, and the West, and it was never recovered.


Theoph. He may thank Pope Gregory the second for it, who finding the Emperors
Power in Italy inconsiderable, applied himself to the Kings of France, and made
use of their Power, both against the Lombards, and against the Emperor; upon
this account he Excommunicated the Emperor, and forbad his usual Revenues out
of Italy to be paid unto him. And this was an Art of high Injustice, and
Usurpation, and Rebellion; for the Pope of Rome was the Emperors Subject.


Phil. Bellarmin proceeds to observe, how in the Reign of Constantinus
Copronymus, there were great Plagues and Earthquakes, and an horrid Frost,
wherewith Pontus was congel'd 100 Miles: and likewise, such great Droughts,
that many Rivers, and Fountains, and Wells, were dried up; by which Judgments,
God did restifie against them, for their detestable Sacrilege; and in one
Prodigy most visibly, because the Sign of the Cross, upon a time, was
miraculously imprinted upon Men's garments, either in their Houses, or walking
in the Streets, and upon the Vestments of Priests; as tho God Almighty would in
spite of Image-breakers restore the Cross.


Theoph. If you rely so much with Bellarmin, upon this Argument of Providence,
I may refer you to the several Apologies made for Christians for an Answer. In
the Primitive times, the Heathen imputed all public Calamities to the growth of
Christianity among them; that for the sake of Christians, the Gods did plague
the World. As Tertullian shows in his most excellent Apology: b If Tiber
sxells, and flows even to the Walls Cap' 40. Si Tiberis ascendit in moenia, si
Nilus non ascendit in arv^ etc.
of Rome: if the River Nile do not overflow the Fields: if the Heavens stand
and give no Rain, or the Earth move: if there be any Famine, or any Pestilence,
they cry out presently, Bring forth the Christians to the Lions. Methinks
Bellarmin should be ashamed to make use of the old Heathen Argument: and
withal, the intelligent Reader will find, That Bellarmin failed much in his
Observation, because the Emperors, who abolished Images and their Worship,
prosper'd in the World, and settled the Empire for some time upon their
Posterity; whereas before and after them, we read of slaughters of Emperors,
and sudden changes. He that had the greatest influence upon the Armies
rebelling against his Prince, and assuming the Empire. But Leo Isaurus, having
cast Theodosius out of the Empire, and caused him and his Son to become
Priests, possessed the Empire in great security 24 years, died in Peace, and left
the Government to his Son Constantinus Copronymus, who Reigned 34 years in a
flourishing State; insomuch that Baronius, showing, how in the 28 year of his
Empire, in great Triumph and Solemnity he Crowned his Wife Eudoxia Empress, and
his two Sons Christophorus and Nicephorus, Caesar's; breaks out into admiration,
saying, Quis consid. de foel. scelestiss. principis, Anno 768.
Who, considering the Felicity of this most wicked Prince, would not stand
amazed? To Constantine Leo his Son was Successor in the Empire, and Reigning
five years, deceased, leaving his Son Constantine ten years old, who, with his
Mother Irene ruling the Empire, called the Council of Nice, and restored
Images. You see therefore how long these Image breakers hold the Empire, but
Constantine the Restorer of Images soon lost it: His Mother Irene put out her
Sons Eyes, and he died, and she ruled alone for a season, until she was thrust
into a Monastary by Nicephorus, who succeeded her in the Empire of
Constantinople. But Pope Leo the third took from her the Empire of Rome before,
well rewarding her for her good Service in restoring Images. For we read, Abbas
Vspergensis, Anno 801. Carol^ Augusto a Deo coronato, magno and pacif.
Imperatori Romanorum, Vita and Victoria.
That Charles the Great, King of France, coming into Italy with a great Army to
desend the Pope against the Lombards; being at Rome on Christmas day at High
Mass, the Pope arose and put the Crown upon his Head, who thought nothing of
it, and declared him Emperor of the Romans, all the People making Acclamation,
and wishing, Long Life and Victory to Charles Augustus, Crowned by God, the
great and pacific Emperor of the Romans.


Phil. Upon this Historical Account which you have given, the Argument from
Providence and Success seems to hold for the Emperors who were against Images.
But in the second place, there is great notice taken of that Impiety of their
Persons: Leo Isaurus, and his Son Constantinus Copronymus, being cruel Tyrants,
Abbas Vst ergensis calls the Son, Antichristi percursor perniciosissimus, serus
and Agrestis, etc.
The forerunner of Antichrist, most pernicious, fierce, and barbarous, and
tryannical, delighting in Witchcraft, and all Luxury and (...) Sacrifices, and
Invocation of Devils, etc. Of his Father Isaurus the same Historian says, In
Christianes and Ecclesias Dei, ac religionem sanctorum impius fuit.
He was impious against Christians, and the Churches of God, and the worship of
Saints.


Theoph. The Historians of those Times were exceeding partial; most of them
superstitious Monks, who had great indignation against the Emperors who brake
down Images, hinc illae lachrymae: and this Abbot of Vs^ erg follows his
Leaders. But you have heard how Pope Gregory the second, writing to Leo
Isaurus, acknowledged, he had given in the first ten years of his Reign, great
Evidences of his Piety and Prudence before he fell into the Heresy against
Images; and therefore all these black Characters of Tyranny, and Luxury, and
Necromancy, were drawn upon the Emperors chiefly for their Zeal against the
Idolatrous worship of Images, through the blind superstition of the vulgar. On
the other side, they were all Saints who protected Images. The Abbot of Vsperg,
Irene piissima, una cum Constantino glorioso divinitus acceptat Imperium.
styles Irene, Most Pious; who with Constantine the Glorious, from Heaven
received the Empire And yet the same Historian shows afterward, how this most
godly Woman made her Son, much against his will, break a Contract of Marriage
made with the Daughter of Charles the Great, whom he entirely loved, and to
Marry another. Afterward, dissension arising between her and her Son, she laid
a Scene to take him, and put out his Eyes, wherewith he soon died, and she
Reigned alone five years; until one Nicephorus served her in her kind, usurping
the Empire, and confining her unto a Monastery which her self had built. Lo!
this was the Saint that restored Images.


Phil. You must not judge of Truths by the Persons that defend them, God can
bring much good to his Church by evil Instruments.


Theoph. Had Bellarmine taken your good advice, he had saved all this trouble
to answer his Heathen Arguments taken from Providence; especially, seeing in
this case (as you have heard) he had no reason to make the Observation: but he
will say any thing, true or false, to advance the Cause, presuming his Readers,
most of them, would take up all upon the credit of his Authority and Learning;
and for his Adversaries, he scorns and defies them as Heretics, not worthy
consideration. But to proceed, from the countenance of this famous Council of
Nice, and of the Pope and his Followers, the worship of Images is
superstitiously entertained in most parts of the Christian World: the Clergy
going too far in their bold Assertions, and giving pernicious example, and yet
supposing to salve themselves with subtle and nice Distinctions: and the common
People following them in the plain way of Idolatr^, being not able to
understand the subtleties of their Leaders, or to discern between degrees of
Religious worship, they kneel, and pray, and adore the Image, Soluta pace
nuptialis Foederis cum Francis.
as much as the Ignorant among the Heathen their Idol; especially to the
Blessed Virgin and her Image such Devotion and Adorations are paid, as tho she
were advanced into the highest Orb, endowed with Power to command her Son:
Visits and Pilgrimages are made from all places to her Chapel at Loretto, and
other eminent places: all sorts of Treasure and Ornaments are presented to
adorn her Chapels and her Images, to array her as tho she were the Queen of
Sheba, or of the Indies: the Marble steps of ascent unto her Image, in some
places, are worn away by Votaries, creeping upon their Knees to present their
Offerings; and we have Legends of miraculous effects of her Image. The
Schoolmen, to keep up this profitable honor of Pilgrimages, and Visits, and
Oblations, justify the practice, make Psalters and Offices of our Lady, and
bring her Worship and Invocation in such request, that the Honor and Invocation
of Christ, and of the Father, can hardly compare therewith: and so was there
let in upon the World an Inundation of Superstition and Idolatry, the People,
in simplicity of heart, following their Leaders into the snare.


Phil. You cannot deny, but that in this point of the Worship and Invocation of
Saints, and so much more in the Veneration of their Images, the Learned declare
a vast difference between the fear, and honor, and adoration, they ascribe to
God and to Christ, and what they give to the Blessed Virgin and the Saints.


Theoph. In general terms they do; but I do not find them forward to descend
unto particulars, which shows they would appear to say something to amuze the
World, but nothing to the purpose.


Phil. You know, they have made the worship of God, and of the Saints, and of
their Images, two opposite Members of that notorious distinction of (...) and
(...); the one supreme and peculiar to God and to Christ, the other infinitely
inferior, appertaining to the Saints and their Images.


Theoph. It Is true, St De Civit. Dei, lib. 10. cap. 1.
Augustine affirms, That the Learned appropriate the Greek word Latria (which
signifies and imports generally, any service due from an Inferior to a
Superior) unto the special Service we owe to God, perhaps from that
appropriation of our Blessed Savior, Matthew. 4. Him only shall thou serve. The
Original Words are, (...). But there is another word, says he, which signifies
the service we owe to Men, as when the Apostle says, Col. 3. Servants, obey in
all things your own Masters. Now because in that Text servants are called
(...), therefore the Schools call that service Dulia. But I pray observe, Ea
servitus quae debetur hominibus.
Augustine says, It is that service which is due to Men, to Masters from their
Servants: But now by the Schoolmen it is Translated to import, The Service,
and Worship, and Adoration, given to the Saints departed, and to their Images.
And I do not find in the second Council of Nice, the term of Dulia, opposite to
Latria; but Salutation and Adoration, (...). However at present we dispute not
the terms, but desire to know the importance of the known distinction, That God
only is worshipped with the worship called Latria; and the Saints with the
worship called Dulia. In the first place therefore, What is Latria? Lib. 9.
Instit. Moralium, c. 5. Cultus soli Deo, etc.
Azorius a Jesuit and Casuist, tells us, It is Service or Worship due to God
alone, whereby we subject our selves to him as to the supreme Lord, putting our
trust and confidence in him. In the second place: What is Dulia? Veneratio quae
civibus Coeli tribuitur.
That Veneration, says he, which is given unto the Citizens of Heaven. This
shows to whom it is given: but why does he not tell us what that Worship is,
and wherein it differs from Latria? And withal, seeing Dulia signifies
servitude, in the judgment of Tom. 1. l. de vera Relig. c. 55. Honoramus eos
charitate, non servitate.
Augustine, we ought not to give it to the Saints in Heaven: We honor them,
says he, with love, and not with servitude. No distinct peculiar Service or
Worship is due to the Saints in Glory: for herein lies the difference between
the Fathers and the Schoolmen. These appropriate a Service and Worship to the
Saints in Heaven, and call it Dulia; to the Blessed Virgin, and call it
Hyperdulia. But Augustine makes no difference between the Service and Worship
due to the Saints in Heaven, and the Saints on Earth: Lib. 20. Contra Faust.
Manich. c. 21. Colimus Martyrs eo cultu delect. etc.
We honor Martyrs with that worship of love and friendship, wherewith we honor
holy Men of God in this life; and we worship God alone with Latria. When the
Manichees objected, That Christians made Idols of their Martyrs, honoring their
Tombs, and erecting Altars before them, Quos etiam votis similibus colitis.
and making Vows unto them. Altaria erigimus Deo Martyrum, and quod offertur,
Deo offertur, etc.
Augustine answers, We erect the Altars to the God of those Martyrs, and the
Oblations are given to God who crowned the Martyrs: A Christian, with Religious
Solemnity celebrates the memories of Martyrs, to excite Imitation, and that he
may share in their merits, and be assisted by their Prayers.


Phil. This passage of St Augustine, shows a Religious Solemnity to be kept in
honor of the Saints departed; and that the living may share in their Merits,
and be assisted by their Prayers: these are Truths which you will not freely
acknowledge.


Theoph. We do acknowledge them: for by a Religious Solemnity, we understand the
Festivals which the Holy Church observes in commemoration of the Saints and
Martyrs. By the society of their Merits, we understand, that by imitation of
the Saints, we have a Fellowship in their Labors, and in their Crowns. And for
the last Clause, the assistance of their Prayers, we doubt not, but that the
Saints in Heaven do pray for the Church of God, and his Servants here on Earth;
but as for any knowledge of particulars, when we come to that Point, I can
show, how St Augustine doubts, Lib. de cura pro Mort. c. 15. Fatendum, nescire
quidem mortuos quid hic agatur.
Whether the Blessed Saints and Martyrs do hear the Prayers which are offered
up at their Shrines; nay, he confesses, that they do not know what is done
here below; and that when by the power of God, and Ministry of Angels, Miracles
were done at their Shrines, themselves might not know it, no not when they did
appear to some upon Earth; as Saul saw in a Vision one Ananias coming to him,
and putting his hands upon him, that he might receive his sight; but Ananias
himself knew nothing of that appearance to Saul, until the Lord declared it to
him, Acts 9, 12 God might please to act great things at the Monuments of
Martyrs, Cap. 17. Illis in summa quiet positis.
whilst themselves were in perfect rest, as he speaks. But this by the way, it
belongs to another Controversy, in due time to be assumed. However, you have
heard Augustine, after all that he had said, concluding, We honor Martyrs with
that worship of Love and Friendship, wherewith we honor Holy Men of God in this
Life; and if you will require no more Veneration to be given to them, we will
grant it: But then you must remember, That Paul, when living, did forbid
Cornelius to worship him; and so did the Angel prohibit the Apostle John; and
so would all the glorious Saints in Heaven prohibit your Adoration before their
Images, if they could communicate in speech, or any other way with you:
Religious Worship we deny to the Saints and their Images; civil honor and
respect we give.


Phil. Because the Saints and Angels of God are like him in their natural
Powers and Qualities, moral and civil honor is due to them; for honor is the
acknowledgment of some Excellency. But then in regard unto their supernatural
Gifts, and Spiritual and Religious Qualities, we must allow them Religious and
Spiritual Honor and Veneration.


Theoph. De vera Relig. c. 55. Vni Deo religamus animas nostras, unde Religio
dicta creditur.
St Augustine observes, how the very name of Religion strictly binds us to God:
and therefore all Religious Acts and Services are due only to him. Had not
Peter, and Paul, and the other Saints in bliss, while they were living in the
Flesh, supernatural Gifts and Excellencies? and would you have worshipped them
with Religious Worship? Cornelius attemted it, and was forbidden.


Phil. There is a great disproportion between the Saints in Glory, and the
Saints militant here on Earth.


Theoph. In regard of their Happiness and Fruition, they are excellent beyond
compare; but this is their reward: the Honor we give them, is in commemoration
of their Works and Excellencies in this Life, for our example and imitation.
And withal, Cornelius worshipping Peter in the Flesh, was sure Peter was
sensible of that Honor then given; and you know the Apostle refused it: but if
you worship him now, being in Heaven, you may rationally doubt, as St Augustine
did of the Saints in geneneral, whether he is sensible of that Honor more then
his Image before which you fall down and worship.


Phil. However, God accepts the Honor done to his Saints, as to himself.


Theoph. Yes, when done according to his rule: But where has God given any
command or direction to worship them? you bring no proofs of your Practice out
of Holy Scripture: we urge many Texts against it. Your Arguments run altogether
upon Analogy and Proportion; that much more honor is due to the Saints now in
Heaven, then when they lived in the Flesh, because they are much more
excellent, confirmed in Grace and Glory; the great Favorites of the King of
Heaven. So proceed your Arguments for the worshipping of their Images; we give
unto them, say ye, a relative, inferior, dependent honor, according to the
Analogy of Reason; he that loves the Person, will love his Image: But where is
the Authority of Holy Scripture? God cannot be offended, you will say, that the
Images of his Saints and Servants should be had in honor; and what is done to
the Image, redounds to the honor of the Saint represented by it; and of God,
who has highly honored him. But still you must keep within your Bounds: God is
jealous of his Honor, and will not permit any degree thereof to be communicated
to any other, whether Saint or Angel, much less to their Images. For instance,
Adoration, falling down and worshipping: the Angel refused it, and sends the
Apostle, to give that to God: Peter refused it: the Devil desired it upon great
promises, If thou will fall down and worship me (or before me) Luke 4. ver. 7.
(...).
all these things will I give Thee: but our Blessed Savior replied, It
appertains only to God: Thou shall worship the Lord thy God. The word is,
(...): and yet this Adoration and Worship ye give to Images, ye bow down and
worship before them.


Phil. But this Adoration we give, is infinitely inferior to the Worship of God.


Theoph. This you say; but many of your Doctors say otherwise: Part. 3. q. 25.
Art. 3. Imag. Christi cultu Latr. coli deberi, etc.
Aquinas, the great Oracle of the Schools, expressly holds, That the Image of
Christ is to be adored with that Worship, called Latria: and he gives the
reason, because the honor of the Image redounds to the Prototype; and according
to Aristotle, says he, the same motion of the mind tends to the Image as an
Image; and to the thing represented by it: and therefore, seeing Christ is
worshipped with Divine Adoration, so likewise his Image. Art. 4. Crux Christi
adoranda est adoration, Latriae. Quia in ca ponimus, etc.
In the next Article, he declares the same for the Crucifix: It is to be
worshipped with the worship due to God; and proves it thus, Because in the Cross
we put our hope of Salvation: For upon the Passion-day, says he, the Church
has taught us to say, All hail, O Cross! our only hope: Increase to the Godly
salvation, and give pardon to the guilty.


Phil. One Doctors Opinion signifies but little.


Theoph. If your Church do not approve it, why after so long a time do they not
censure it? But what do you speak of one Doctor? Lib. 9. Inst. Mor. c. 6.
Azorius, a Jesuit and Casuist, shows it is the common Opinion of the Doctors,
and quotes Aquinas, Bonaventure, Alexander Hales, Richardus, Albertus,
Paludanus, Almaine, Marsilius, Capreolus, Cajetan, and caeteros juniores; many
others after them. And whereas the second Council of Nice has determined, That
the Image of Christ and the Cross is not to be worshipped Latria, with that
worship due to God, but with such Veneration as is due to the Holy Bible, and
to Holy Vessels etc. It is plain, says he, that Council speaks of the Image
and the Cross as in themselves they are sacred things, and so to be honored as
holy Vessels, etc. but if we consider them as Images representing Christ and
his death, so we must worship them as we do Christ, with the same honor as the
thing represented is worshipped. And he brings the Council. Trid. Sess. 25. Honos
qui iis exhibetur refertur ad prot. etc.
Council of Trent to confirm his Opinion, saving, The honor given to the Image
is referred to the Prototype, so that by the Images which we salute, and before
which we uncover the head, and fall down, we do worship Christ and the Saints.
And because I am not willing to multiply Quotations, I will refer you to
Naclantus Episcopus Clugiensis, in Comment. in 1 cap. ad Romans propefinem.
Representatum est in Imag. sicut in speculo in quo cernitur and honoratur, etc.
one of your great Doctors, whose Works are dedicated to Pope Pius the fifth:
He tells us, The Prototype is in the Image, as in a Looking -- glass, wherein
it is both seen and honored; and therefore, seeing the Image contains the
exemplar, and does not only represent it, when we speak of the Adoration of an
Image, as an Image, referring unto and containg the thing represented; we,
without any scruple affirm that we ought to worship, not only before the Image
(as some would seem to speak cautiously) but to worship the Image it self, with
the same worship as we do the Prototype. In the same place he supposes the
Respiciebat populus serpentem religiose, and forte obtulit, etc.
Israelites in the Wilderness did worship the Brazen Serpent, and perhaps offer
Incense to it, and yet without fear of Idolatry, because it was a Type of
Christ; and therefore Moses and the seniors among them, who knew the Mystery,
might fall down and worship it Religiously, and be no Idolaters: and the People
also, who knew not the Mystery, believing as the Elders believed, and resolving
their Faith into the Faith of the Elders, might without sin worship the
Serpent, although they did not understand it to be the Type of Christ.


Phil. These are School-subtleties, arguing from the Image to the Exemplar, and
from a notion of Aristotle; and Naclantus going farther then the rest, is but a
single Testimony, fancying an Image to be a Looking-glass, and the thing
represented by it to be presentially contained in it. But you have heard the
plain determination of the Nicene Council b Loquitur de Cruce prout est res
quaedam sacra, non ut refertur ad exemplar.
was, That the Image of Christ, and the Cross, and so any other Image was not
to be worshipped with that worship due to God, but with a worship far inferior.


Theoph. You may perceive, by this, how much your Schoolmen value Fathers and
Councils, when they speak not for them: But why does your Church and after
Councils permit them to pass without censure, and an Index expurgatorius?
Naclantus dedicates his Book to the Pope, and therefore did presume upon his
allowance and protection.


Phil. Baronius excuses the Schoolmen and our Doctors, in maintaining the
Image of Christ, and of the Cross, are to be worshipped with the worship called
Latria, because, says he, they were mistaken, and did suppose, with the
Council of Francford, that the Nicene Council had determined Divine Honor to be
given to them.


Theoph. If this were so, it manifests your Doctors and Schoolmen to have been
grossly ignorant of the Councils. And secondly, That they are resolved to assert
whatsoever they believe a Council has determined, right or wrong; yea, although
it be against the dictate of their Conscience, and rule of Gods Word. But
leaving the Cardinals Excuses and Guesses to himself, Aquinas, and the rest,
give their own Reasons for their Opinions: the Church has taught us to put our
hope in the Cross, and therefore we worship it with Divine Worship; the honor
of his Image tends to Christ. The thing represented is in the Image as in a
Lookingglass, and therefore we adore it. Nay, Azorius takes notice of the
Nicene determination, and shows how in one sense it is true; in another, not:
take the Image of Christ materially, as a Consecrated thing, so it is not
worshipped with Divine Worship: but formally as an Image representing Christ, so
Divine Worship is given to it. Now such allowed Distinctions as these, and
Doctrines, have prevailed upon the unwary People to give the same worship to
the Image and the Exemplar; nay, to give Religious Worship to all Images. In
the Schools they tell us of diverse kinds of Worship, whereas in their Churches
there is no sensible difference; what Worship the People give to God, the same
they give to the Saints; they Pray, they fall down and Worship. And to our
purpose, In Psalm. 113. Quis adorat vel orat intuens simulachrum, qui non sic
afficitur, ut ab eo se exaudiri putet, and ab eo sibi praestari, quod
desiderat, speret?
Augustine proposes a serious Question: Who Prays or Adores, beholding an
Image, and is not so affected, that he believes the Image bears him, and hopes
to receive from it, that which he desires and prays for?


Phil. St Augustine speaks of the Heathen, and their Idols.


Theoph. And it is very applicable unto your deluded People and their Images:
for let us no longer hover in the Clouds, and in the general Notion of a Divine
Worship called Latria, due only to God; and of an inferior Worship, called
Dulia, given unto the Saints in Heaven and to their Images. You know the
saying, Dolus in universalibus, Much deceit usually lurks in general terms. We
will descend therefore to some particulars, what are precisely the Acts of
Divine Worship. a Azorius tells us, To put our trust and confidence in him, is
one special act of Latria, the peculiar Worship due to God. And yet Aquinas
has showed how your Church teaches us to put our only hope in the Cross, Ave
Crux spes Vnica.


Phil. This we must conceive to be a Prosopopoea, or Speech, made to Christ
upon the Cross, in the day of his Passion.


Theoph. The common People, doubtless, understands your Figure of Prosopopoea
singularly well: And why does your Church choose to speak to the Cross after
that manner, and not rather to Christ upon the Cross? And how comes it to pass
that Aquinas understood not this Figure? but supposes it to be spoken to the
Cross directly, and so frames his proof of Divine Worship due to the Cross,
because we put our trust in it? Again, for Churches and Temples built and
dedicated to the Saints, Tom. 6. lib. 10. contra Maximinum. Nonne si templum
alicui Sancto Angelo excellentiss. de ligno and lapide faceremus,
Anathematizeremur a veritate, and Ecclesia Dei, quonium Creat. exhiberemus eam
servitutem, quae soli Deo debetur?
Augustine says expressly, If we should make a Temple to any Holy and most
excellent Angel, either of Wood or Stone, Should we not be separated and
accursed from the Truth, and from the Church of God, because we exhibit to a
Creature that service which is due only to God? Hoc nunc fit quibuslibet Divis.
And Erasmus his Marginal Note upon this Passage of Augustine, is, This now is
every where done unto the Saints. Lib. 1. De vera Rel. c. 55. Honoramus cos
charitate non servitute, nec iis templa construimus.
Again, Augustine in another place speaking of the Saints, says, We honor them
with love, not with service; neither do we build Temples to them. Horae Virg.
Mariae secundum usum sacrum, Sancti Dei in quorum honor and commemoratione
haec Sancta est dedicata Ecclesia, and haec altaria consecrata, etc.
So at the entrance into the Church, Men are taught to direct their Prayers
unto the Saints to whom the Churches are dedicated, saying, O ye Saints of God,
in the honor and remembrance of whom this Church is dedicated, and this Altar
consecrated, etc. Now the Temple is called, The House of Prayer, and the House
of God, because to him only, who hears Prayer, we sheuld send up our
Supplications. Again, Altars, as well as Images, are frequently erected unto
Saints: and yet Saint Augustine says, An Altar implies a Deity; the Altar shows
they take the Statue for a God; and the Altars of the Blessed Virgin, and of
the Saints, are common, upon which their Votaries offer Gold, and Jewels, and
Pearl, and embroidered Garments, etc.


Phil. Bellarmin shows how the Altars are erected, and Churches Sermon 6. de
Verb. Domini, secundum Matthew. Quod pro Numine accip. illam siatuam Altar
testatur.
dedicated to God; and so the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, and of Prayer, and
Praises, are offered up to God in honor to the Saints, and they are called upon
in the public Prayers of the Church, etc.


Theoph. Bell. Tom. 2. lib. de Beat. Sanctorum, c. 7. Invocantur Sancti in
publicis Ecclesiae precibus, etc.
Bellarmin acknowledges enough to condemn the practice of your Church, in
ascribing more honor to the Saints, then the Holy Scriptures allow them. Christ
says, Do this in remembrance of me. And Bellarmin says, The Sacrifice of the
Eucharist is offered to God in remembrance and honor of the Saints. And withal,
you should do well to consider, That if these Religious Acts are performed to
God in honor of the Saints, they are terminated in them, as the finis ultimus,
the chief end. As when you say, The honor and worship of the Image redounds to
the honor of him whom it represents; and the honor done to the Servant,
redounds unto the Master: so the several acts of worship performed to God in
honor of the Saints, redound more to their glory, then to the glory of God;
they are the chief end, and his service but subordinate unto their honor. And
so you run in a Circle, and entangle your selves in a Labyrinth, to maintain a
gross and palpable Error of giving a Religious Worship to the Saints and to
their Images; calling the Cross, Our only hope; the Images of the Saints,
Pledges of our Salvation: lighting Tapers, and burning Incense to them, and
such like: and after all, you wash your hands of Idolatry, and tell the World,
That ye give inferior petty honor to the Saints and their Images, and to the
Cross; even such, as to sacred Utensils of the Church, or to the Holy Book of
Scriptures, or to the Chair of State in the Kings Palace, or to the Kings
Image, or to the name of Jesus, or to the Communion Table. Now if all that I
have said implies no more, I yield the Cause.


Phil. Lib. 2. de Idol. c. 1. Idololatriae genuina Ratio est Creaturae, etc.
Gregory de Valentia, seems to reconcile all the difference with this
Distinction: Formal Idolatry, is to give Divine Honor to a Creature, as to God:
If therefore I give Divine Honor to the Saints, or their Images, as Creatures,
not as God, I am not guilty of Idolatry.


Theoph. He was driven to this shift, to justify the practice of your Church,
and free it from Idolatry; but it will not serve, for Divine Worship is due
only to God, and therefore should not be communicated to a Creature upon any
account.


Phil. You will have the last word, and I yield to you, because the Night comes
on, and I suppose both of us are sufficiently tired with the length of this
Controversy; and you are almost fallen upon another Controversy, of the Honor
and Adoration of Saints, which will require another season to determine it.


Theoph. The honor of Saints and of their Images, having near affinity, have
bin some time taken into consideration together; but my chief design was
against Image worship, as giving great occasion of Idolatry and Scandal in the
Church. And what I have said, I leave to your serious consideration, giving you
many thanks for this opportunity and freedom of Discourse, and for my noble
Entertainmentall this time I have been your studious Opponent. There are many
differences between our Church and yours remaining; whereupon, when our
occasions shall allow us other. Meetings, if you are willing, we will treat,
with Gods Blessing, in Charity and Love.


THE FOURTH CONFERENCE, OF THE Invocation of SAINTS.
Phil. DEar Sir, Since our last Meeting I have been tumultuous in my thoughts,
and dis-satisfied with my self, That I could not give such full satisfaction to
your Arguments, as I at first supposed: However, I have learned of the Apostle,
Tit. 1. 9. To hold fast the faithful word, as I have been taught; and not
permit the Truth to be wrested from me by subtle, and perhaps, sophistical
Objections. I may go to Heaven in the plain way wherein Christ and his Holy
Church does lead me, without perplexing my self with emergent Difficulties and
Controversies: reserving them to be resolved until Elias (as the Jews speak) or
rather until our Blessed Savior shall come again.


Theoph. It seems you are resolved to hold to the Conclusion strongly, be the
Premises never so infirm: and hereunto, no doubt, your Doctors and your Priests
advise you, To yield an Implicit Faith to the Decrees of your Church, and not
dispute them. But upon the same Motive, you should always have subscribed and
kept steadfast unto the Articles of our Church (which was likewise yours) and
not have forsaken her Communion, for Scruples and Imaginations of your own, and
false Suggestions of others; I mean, Those creeping Emissaries of Rome, who
swarm among us, and buz into Men's Ears uncertain sounds, to unsettle their
minds, and take them off from sound Principles, and then infuse their
bewitching Sorceries and Delusions, making them drunk with the Cup of
Fornications; and then, forsooth, their besotted Reason must be charmed against
all attemts to awaken and to recover them. If Reason and Argumentation could
induce you to leave our Church, whilist you gave an easy belief unto our
Adversaries, give us leave by the same method to undeceive and to reduce you;
and do not brutishly resolve to hold fast those pretended Truths, which you
cannot defend against our Oppositions.


Phil. Your Church allowing her Disciples a liberty of judging, I suitably made
use of her Indulgence: but being now converted to the Church of Rome, I am
taught the obedience of an Implicit Faith, and not encouraged to dispute her
Articles.


Theoph. A rare Artifice and Policy to keep Men hood-winked and in Error, by
forbidding them to open their Eyes, and make use of their Reason and Judgment
to discover the Truth. Our Church may easily impose the like Credulity upon her
Children; but she dares not use Stratagems against the Truths of God, to do
evil upon pretensions of good; to keep her Sons and Daughters in ignorance,
that they may be obedient. The Holy Scriptures enjoin a search, and
examination, and trial. Prove all things, says St. Paul, and hold fast that
which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. But you would have Men tenacious of their
Opinions, without Judgment; hold to the Point, without the proof. St Peter
exhorts the Saints, 1 Pet. 3. 15. always to be ready to give an answer unto
every one that asks them a reason of the hope that is in them: but you are
against this rendering of Reasons, the Authority of your Church must suffice.


Phil Not so neither: The Church commands, and gives sufficient proof for her
prescriptions, and we submit to her account.


Theoph. Do you take the liberty, for your own satisfaction, to examine and
judge of the account?


Phil. Yes doubtless, the more to convince and settle us upon that good
foundation.


Theoph. But suppose upon the search and enquiry you do not find satisfaction
to your reason? Suppose your Heart and Conscience may suggest Exceptions
against the Doctrine and the practice of your Church, what then?


Phil. We may have recourse unto our Priests and Doctors for solution of doubts.


Theoph. Taking the Holy Oracles of Scripture along with you, that is not
amiss: but withal, you should do well to consider, That they will surely
resolve the Question on their own side, and your Church gives no liberty to
hear the adverse Party; and so Truths are not weighed in an equal balance, and
differences are determined, only one side being heard.


Phil. Good Theophilus, trouble not your self with the non-permissions of our
Church; it will appear at present you have no cause to complain, for I am
purposely come to requite your former visit, and to continue the debate in a
Friendly manner, concerning some other Points wherein we differ: and whereas
the last time you made choice of such Particulars to insist on, which you
thought most liable unto popular Exception; you shall give me leave now to
propose the subject of our Discourse.


Theoph. Sir, besides the equity of your Demand, the rule of Hospitality
requires, That in my own House I should design to observe you; and therefore be
pleased to make your Friendly Challenge, and appoint the Field and Weapons, and
I will answer you.


Phil. Upon this fair Concession, I will try your skill in one great Point,
concerning the Invocation of Saints: and because you shall not complain of a
surprizal, I will principally urge Eellarmins proofs, in whose Works you
appeared the last time to be so conversant.


Theoph. Our Church piously withholding none of our Adversaries Writings from
us, that upon due Examination we may judge of Truth; I have, I must confess,
proposed chiefly to my self the perusal of that great Cardinals Defense,
because I was assured of his great Abilities, and of his Zeal for your Church,
and that in him I should meet with all which rationally can be suggested to
uphold his Cause: Let us therefore hear how he has managed these Controversies.


Phil. Concerning the Point, Invocation of Saints departed: After some
preliminary Discourses, Tom. 2. Controvers. 4. de Eccl. Triumph. c. 18, 19.
Bellarmin undertakes to prove two things, one in order unto the other. 1. That
the Saints in Heaven do pray for us. 2. That we must pray to them.


Theoph. One of these does not necessarily follow upon the other. That if the
Saints Triumphant are sollicitous for, and do pray for the Church Militant in
general (for the triumph of their Faith, and their consummation in Bliss, who
being Fellow Members of Christ's mystical Body the Church, are yet within the
Lists, wrestling with great opposition and many trials) I say, it does not
follow, That if the Saints in Glory do pray for the Church Militant, that
therefore we should call upon them so to do: They are perfect in Grace, and
never wanting to their duty, or unmindful of their concerns. Upon this account,
methinks out of a Zeal to the glory of God, you ought as frequently to call
upon the Saints in Heaven, to laud and magnify the God of Heaven; as out of a
sense of your own wants to pray unto them to intercede for you. But withal, you
can never give us any infallible assurance, that they do hear our Prayers, that
so in Faith and with confidence we may call upon them. The Members of the
Church-Catholic thro-out the World do pray for one another, and yet one
National Church does not Invocate another, except it be by enter course of
communicatory Epistles. Direct me how to send a Letter to Saint Peter, and I
will not fail to put in my humble request, That he would help me with his
Prayers.


Phil. This great Point, concerning the assurance that the Saints do hear our
Prayers, will fall into consideration hereafter: mean while, it becomes you not
to mock and play the Droll in a serious concern.


Theoph. You may excuse me the rather, seeing you shall find in Tom. 5. page
513.
Binius his Edition of the Councils, a large Letter sent to Pepin King of
France, and Charles and Carlemain his Sons, from St Peter, by Pope Stephen the
3d, imploring and requiring their speedy assistance against the Lombards, in
the behalf of Rome, his Episcopal See, and of his Sepulcher and Temple therein.
And you may suppose, Pope Stephen could as easily have returned an Answer from
these Princes to the Apostle. I shall have occasion to produce that hereafter.


Phil. These are strange divertisements from our business: Are you seriously
afraid to enter into the Controversy, that you interrupt my Discourse with
such impertinencies?


Theoph. If I should answer your Question, you would complain of more delays:
Take your course therefore, and I will follow you.


Phil. Ib. Cap. 18.
Bellarmin proves, the Saints do pray for us from that passage of Holy
Scripture, Tho Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet could not my mind be
toward this People: Therefore (says he) Moses and Samuel being dead, did
usually pray for the People of the Jews.


Theoph. We have a rule in Logic, Suppositio nihil point: This Supposition, If
they should pray, does not imply, They did pray. The Text only designs to show,
Gods great indignation against his People the Jews at that time; insomuch, that
if those two Holy Persons, and greatly beloved, were alive, and should
interpose for them, they should not prevail. Tom. 4. Homil. 1. in primum These.
(...).
Hence St Chrysostom upon this Text, (...). If Moses, the first Lawgiver, who
often delivered the Jews by his Intercession from Divine Vengeance; if he were
now in being, he should not prevail. The like passage we have, Ezekiel 14. 13, 14.
Son of Man, when the Land sins against me, by trespassing grievously, etc.
tho these three men, Noah, Daniel and Job were in it, they should deliver but
their own souls by their righteousness. And so in diverse passages following in
that Chapter: Tho Noah, Daniel and Job were in it, etc. now as this Supposition
cannot infer these three Men were in the Land; for Noah and Job were dead more
then a thousand Years before, although Daniel was then living: So neither does the
former Supposition prove, That Moses and Samuel did pray for the Jews after
their decease. That place of St Paul, Gal. 10. ver. 8. Tho we, or an Angel from
Heaven preach any other Gospel to you, etc. in Bellarmins Logic must imply,
They did preach another Gospel. Let the Reader pity us, to see unto what a
drudgery we are put to answer such futile Arguments.


Phil. I well see, nothing will prevail against your prejudices, but express
and positive Texts, and therefore in the next Argument Bellarmine complies with
your humor. In the second Book of Maccabees, and the last Chapter, we read
expressly, How Onias (formerly their High Priest, and a virtuous and good Man)
prayed for the whole Body of the Jews, ver. 12. And that Jeremiah, the Prophet
of the Lord, did pray much for the People, and for the holy City, when Judas
Maccabaeus was engaging in Battle with Nicanor; unto whom, we read the Prophet
Jeremiah gave a Sword of Gold, as a Gift from God, wherewith to wound and
subdue his Enemies.


Theoph. This is out of an Apocryphal Book, and therefore no infallible proof
from Canonical Scripture: Now touching the Canon of Holy Scripture, we may
have, by Divine permission, another occasion to discourse. And although Bellarmin
pleases himself, that Calvin had no other refuge but to deny the Authority of
the Text; yet we will reflect upon other Particulars which appear to weaken the
Testimony. For it was but a Dream of Judas Maccabeus, which he told unto his
Soldiers to encourage them before the Fight; a Dream worthy to be believed, as
if it had been so indeed, says the Author, ver. 11. It seems therefore indeed
it was not so, and so the whole Testimony is from a Dream that had no reality.
In the 12th verse, it is called, A Vision, you may suppose a waking Dream; and
therein there was so much reality, that Jeremiah gave a golden Sword to Judas
to wound his Adversaries: but a golden Sword is no fit Instrument of War for
execution, and it is much, we never read it was laid up in the Temple for a
Sacred Relic: and much more cause we have to wonder, it is not at all mentioned
in the first Book of Maccabees, which is the more perfect History of those
Wars; and wherein the Battle with Nicanor is punctually related, 1 Macc. 7. 41.
and Judas his Prayer to God before the Fight: but of the Dream or Vision, ne
gry quidem. And now I pray observe, how your Doctors in those Instances are
inconstant to their own Principles: for they generally hold, That the Souls of
the Faithful departed, before Christ's Resurrection, did not enter into Heaven,
neither see the Face of God, nor know the State of things here above them; and
therefore it was not usual in the Church to call upon them, and say, Holy
Abraham, pray for us. Your Doctors hold, Bell. ib. c. 19. Notandum ante
adventum Christi, qui moriebantur, non intrabant in Coelum, non Deum videbant,
nec ordinary, poterant cognese, preces sapplicantium.
That the Spirits of the Patriarchs, and Prophets, and People of God, were shut
up in Limbo Patrum (as they call it) in a subterraneous place, the uppermost
verge of Hell, beneath us: without pain, and without joy in the Vision of God:
waiting for their redemtion out of that Prison by the coming of Christ, who
descended into Hell to set them at liberty, and to conduct them triumphantly
into Heaven. When we urge that Text, Isa. 63. ver. 16. Doubtless thou art our
Father, tho Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledges us not; to show
how the Saints departed know not the Affairs and Transactions here below, You
answer, So it was before Christ's Ascension: the Saints departed were not in
Heaven, until Christ opened the Kingdom to them; but they were shut up from the
Vision of God, and from all knowledge of the concerns of this World: and yet,
contrary to this their own Hypothesis, you see how they give Instances of
Moses, and Samuel, and Onias, and Jeremiah, praying for their People the Jews,
and sollicitous for them in their distress.


Phil. You may therefore observe the limitation of Bellarmine: Non poterant
ordinary preces cognoscere, etc. In that state they understood not ordinarily
the Affairs upon Earth, nor heard the Prayers of the People: but God might
reveal them, and so excite them to pray for the People: upon which account some
of our Doctors hold, Azorius Instit. Moral. lib. 9. c. 9. Medina de Orat.
Quaest. 4.
That Prayers might be made to the Fathers in Lymbo, yea even to the Souls in
Purgatory; because they are in a state of Grace and Charity, and by the gift of
God, or by the Ministry of Angels, they may hear our Prayers.


Theoph. Upon the same ground we may daily implore the Assistance and Prayers
of our Friends that are absent, living at a great distance from us, for God may
reveal our Desires and Petitions to them: but alas! these are weak props and
suppositions to uphold a feeble cause, and hitherto your Learned Cardinal has
not bin demonstrative in the point.


Phil. Before we conclude, I do not doubt but you shall change your note. In
the New Testament, we read, Rev. 5. 8. How the 24 Elders fall down before the
Lamb, having golden Viols full of Odors, which are the Prayers of the Saints.


Theoph. What Argument can Bellarmin or you frame out of this Text? I
understand not his design.


Phil. Bellarmin shows, how Interpreters understand, by the Prayers of the
Saints, Intercessions made by the Saints in Heaven, for the confirmation and
support of their weak Brethren upon Earth.


Theoph. It seems then, even the Saints in Glory make use of Mediators, of the
four Beasts, and the twenty four Elders, to present their Prayers to the Lamb.
The more general Interpretation of that place is, That these Odors, filling the
golden Vials, are the Prayers of the Faithful upon Earth, which are represented
in the Psalm, To ascend like the Incense, Psalm. 141. ver. 2.


Phil. This gives as full testimony to our purpose as the other: for thereby it
appears, the Prayers of the Saints on Earth are presented unto God, and to the
Lamb, by the Saints and Angels in Heaven. And to this effect we read, Rev. 8.
ver. 3, 4. how an Angel came and stood at the Altar, having a golden Censer:
and there was given unto him much Incense, that he should offer it with the
Prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar which was before the Throne. And
the smoke of the Incense which came with the Prayers of the Saints, ascended up
before God out of the Angels hand. Now this Incense offered up, with the
Prayers of the Saints on Earth, we may suppose are the Merits and Intercession
of the Saints in Glory.


Theoph. And we may suppose, they are the Merits and Intercession of Christ,
whom Primasius understands by the Angel in this place: we know it is said
expressly, Heb. 9. 24. That Christ is entered into the Holiest of all, into
Heaven it self, to appear in the presence of God for us: and that by him we
offer up to God continually our Sacrifices of Praise, Heb. 13. 15. and without
all peradventure, he is most properly said to add Incense and sweet Odours to
our Prayers and Praises, because for his sake only they are acceptable to the
Father. However, I cannot but observe what a leap your Cardinal has taken over
all the New Testament to produce his first and chiefest Arguments out of the
Revelations of St John, for the Saints hearing and presenting our Prayers unto
God, purposely to involve himself and others in mysteries and visions, which
can admit no clear Interpretation, neither become useful to lay the Foundation
of a Doctrine which takes up the greatest part of the peoples devotions in the
Church, viz. of the Invocation of Saints. In a like case St Augustine cried out
to the Donatists, A Ferte aliquid quod non egeat Interpret.
Bring forth such proofs as want no Interpretation. Suppose I should undertake
to prove That the Souls of the just departed are not in Heaven, neither do
enjoy a perfect state in bliss, Rev. 6. verse. 9. etc. because when the fifth
seal was opened, St John saw under the Altar the Souls of the Martyrs, of them
that were slain for the word of God and for the Testimony which they held, and
they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long O Lord Holy and true do thou
not judge and avenge our blood upon them that dwell on the earth, and white
robes were given unto every one of them that they should rest yet for a little
season, until their fellow servants and their Brethren that should be killed as
they were, should be fulfilled. Suppose I should from the same Text urge, that
the Martyrs do expressly pray for Divine vengeance upon their enemies; but no
mention is made of any intercession for their Friends, you would not well
approve Arguments drawn from such mysterious visions and Revelations; and
therefore do not your self make use of them. Tom. 30. in Epistolis ad Paulinum,
and ad Marcellam.
St Jerome tells us, That the book of the Revelations has as many mysteries as
words, and that the whole is to be understood in a spiritual sense, and not
literal.


Phil. These things were certainly written for our Instruction, and Bellarmine
very well argues, That if the Saints in Heaven and Martyrs do pray for jugdment
upon their Persecutors, much more for mercy and favor unto their friends and
brethren, for they are more inflamed with charity, then with an eager thirst
after revenge.


Theoph. I perceive most of the Arguments are probable diductions from Analogy
and proportion, but we expect divine Authority to establish such a principle
part of Worship which you make the Invocation of Saints.


Phil. We are not yet arrived at that point, but preparing the way unto it,
showing the Saints in Heaven do understand our affairs and pray for us, and
with your patience I will give other Texts to prove it.


Theoph. More pertinent I beseech you.


Phil. That passage of St Peter is full to the point. 2d of Pet. 1. 15. I will
endeavor after my decease that ye may be able to have these things always in
remembrance. Where the Apostle shows that after his departure he will endeavor
for them.


Theoph. This feat Argument is Bellarmines, and not St Peter's, he has changed
the order of the words, and so by consequence their meaning. The Original Text
manifests how the words should be read, not as you transport them. I will
endeavor after my decease that you may be able to keep in remembrance, etc. But
Thus (...), etc.
I will endeavor that every one of you may be able after my decease to have
those things always in remembrance. And this endeavor he did use in the days
of his flesh, in preaching the Gospel until his death, and leaving these
Epistles as remembrancers. Bellarmine indeed has the confidence to add to the
Text his Paraphrase that it might serve his turn. Dabo operam habere vos
commendatos, sive in Animo post obitum.
I will endeavor to have you recommended, or in mind after my death. And yet it
is observeable how he concludes this Text, after all his patching, Quam vis non
sit evidens, est tamen probabile argumentum.
to be no evident, but a probable Argument. Whereas, as he has shapt it, it is
clear and demonstrative to his purpose, but his conscience checked him for his
additions and transmutations, and so he would not lay any great stress upon it.


Phil. You will never leave your sinister Construction of his fair dealing, but
I hope his next Argument has evidence enough, That if Dives in Hell was
solicitous for his Brethren upon earth, and prayed Abraham to send Lazarus to
warn them least they should come into the same place of Condemnation, much more
are the Saints in Heaven sollicitous for their Brethren, the Church Militant,
and pray for their protection and assistance.


Theoph. Your Arguments a majori will not hold without some Authority to support
them. This of the rich glutton is but a feeble Crutch, Justin. Eucherius,
Cyril. Chrysostom.
many Intepreters take the whole passage to be a parable not an History, and
(...), etc.
Theophylact upon the place reckons the other, (that it is an History) a
foolish conceit. Now you know the maxim, Parabolae non sunt argumentativae.
parables are no Argumentative Topic, neither are they Narratives of things
done, but similitudinary representations to fix some Doctrines more sensibly
and effectually in men's minds. Again, if it were an Historical relation of
matter of fact, it would not prove the point; That Dives beindead and in
Torment knew the affairs of this world. Only he was sensible that he had given
an example of voluptuousness and uncharitableness unto his brethren, and that
their sins would contribute unto his Torment; and therefore he was solicitous
to have them reclaimed. When he shall urge his example for the Invocation of
Saints, I will answer, That you bring an ill president to confirm a Doctrine of
the Church; and withal when Abraham or any of the Saints in Heaven shall
undoubtedly appear and commune with you, you may desire their assistance.


Phil. Bellarmine has one material proof that the Saints in Heaven do pray for
the faithful upon earth; because the Church militant and triumphant do make one
mystical body whereof Christ is the head. And so there Ibid. Communio illa
exigit necessario, ut membra pro invicem sint sollicita and mutuo se juvent.
must be a Communion between the members, making them solicitous mutually to
help one another.


Theoph. He might have spared to urge the necessary mutual assistance; for we
do not pray for the Saints in Heaven, neither are we solicitous for them who
are immutably blessed, and of their affection toward us, their fellow members,
militant upon earth, we do not doubt; neither of their prayers for the Church
in general, That she may be victorious over all her Enemies, as also for the
filling up the number of the Elect, and their Consummation in bliss, but this
will not infer their distinct knowledge of things here below, or make for your
Doctrine of Invocation. For you know the Saints militant over all the world are
fellow members, and mutually solicitous for one another, and yet one National
Church does not invocate another in her public offices.


Phil. I pray give me leave to make the Inference when I have sufficiently
fortified the premises, you run away with the argument before it is perfect,
and so conclude it is invalid. For you shall find that our Doctors do not only
prove how the Saints in Heaven pray in general for the Church militant, and for
the Saints on earth; but that they pray particularly for them, for that is
Betlarmines next position. Ibid. Sancti qui regnant in coele crant pro nobis
etiam in particulari.
The Saints in Heaven pray for us in particular.


Theoph. Be pleased to let us here his Arguments.


Phil. He proves the Angels, have a special charge over us in particular, and
pray for us; and therefore much more the Saints in Heaven do so.


Theoph. How does he prove his much more, I doubt it will prove at length much
less, and the whole Argument a non sequitur.


Phil. His reasons seem demonstrative, our Savior says, the Saints in Heavin
are as the Angels. Luke 20. verse. 36. They always stand in the presence of
God, and most affectionately love us; and therefore want neither understanding
or will to be assistant unto their brethren upon earth. And in one regard they
may surpass the Angels in a promtitude to succor us, in that they have a nearer
relation to us as their flesh and blood, and have had experience of our dangers
and sorrows, and so are the rather qualified to compassionate our infirmities.


Theoph. Our blessed Savior shows how the Saints in Glory are like unto the
Angels, and equal to them in respect of their Immortality, (for they can die no
more) and in that they neither marry nor are given in Marriage, as you may
observe the place, but there is no demonstration the comparison should hold in
all things: and doubtless before the Resurrection, and the joyful union between
the Spirits of just Men and their glorified bodies; they are in some state of
imperfection; their appetite of Union being not fulfilled, and therefore you
may observe our Savior spoke of the Saints in the Resurrection expressly, as to
their likeness and Equality with the Angels, and concludes not any thing
before. They which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world and the
Resurrection from the Dead, neither Marry nor are given in Marriage; Neitheir
can they die any more, for they are equal unto the Angels. Luke 20. verse. 35.
36. That they want neither knowledge nor affection to assist us and take a
charge of us, although we should grant (to avoid disputes) yet we do not read they
have such a Commission from God to attend us, as have the Angels. It is written
Ps. 34. 7. The Angel of the Lord tarries round about them that fear him and
delivers them. Again. Ps. 39. 11 He has given his Angels charge over thee. It
is written. Matt. 18. 10. In Heaven their Angels do always behold the face of
my Father which is in Heaven. Again Heb. 1. 14. Are they not all Ministering
Spirits sent forth to Minister for them who shall be heirs of Salvation?
Produce such Autorities for the glorious Saints ministry and assistance, and
we will yield your consequence, that because the Angels of Heaven have charge
over the people of God upon earth, the Saints have likewise. It is written 1
These. 4. 16. That at the voice of the Archangel and the sound of the trump, the
dead shall rise. That the Son of Man shall send his Angels at the last day to
gather the elect, and sever the wicked from the just, the chaff from the corn.
Matt. 13. Dare you ascribe this office likewise unto the Saints in glory? And
therefore your Argument from the Angels to the Saints is groundless, a mere
invention of man, without any warrant from Gods word. Wherein it appears that
the Angels are Gods messengers, and Ministers between Heaven and earth; but not
so the Saints departed. Now as God Almighty imploies the Angels, so he imparts
unto them the knowledge and understanding of affairs below, so far as concerns
their business; and as they attend the Saints upon earth, so they know much of
their condition. And so they rejoice at the conversion of a sinner. But we read
not a syllable of the Saints in Heaven, of their knowledge, or their Joy, and
therefore you can draw no good consequence from one to the other.


Phil. You conclude well upon your own suppositions, but take our Doctors along
with you, and you will find That God has committed the charge of the Church
militant, and the Saints upon earth as well to the Saints as to the Angels of
Heaven, Bell. Ibid. A spiritibus beatorum regi and gubernard fideles, etc.
and that the faithful are governed and conducted by the Spirits of the Blessed.


Theoph. Show their substantial proofs, and not their confident assertions.


Phil. You read how the Son of God makes a faithful promise. Revel 2. verse. 26.
27. He that overcomes and keeps my words unto the end, to him will I give
power over the Nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron, as the
vessel of a potter shall they be broken in pieces. Again Rev. 3. 12. Him that
overcomes will I make a pillar in the Temple of God (to uphold his Church) and
I will grant to him to sit with me on my throne (to rule and govern, with
Christ his Church, and to preside over the world) now Bellarmine proceeds to
show how these promises are made to the Saints after this life; because they
are made to him that overcomes all the Temptations of life, and keeps
Christ's word until death. And that this government belongs to them before the
general Resurrection appears from that expression. He shall cule them with a
rod of Iron, and shall brake them as a potters vessel. These words imply a
pastoral regiment; the original is, (...) he shall feed them as a Shepherd his
sheep, and it is called an Iron rod, because inflexible from the rule of
justice, and therewith the refractory shall be broken in pieces, the same
expressions are given of Christ. Rev. 12. 5. She brought forth a man child who
was to rule all nations with a rod of Iron.


Theoph. Methinks your Doctors in there deep Theology fetch their proofs most
from the Revelations of St John. Your Doctrine of the Saints in Heaven
governing the World and the faithful upon earth, knowing our state, and hearing
our prayers, is a great mystery, (I had almost said) of Iniquity, and you
chiefly confirm it from some mysterious passages in the Revelation, an Argument
you want plain and positive proofs, and therefore fly unto obscure and
figurative and mystical expressions. All these promises, you have mentioned,
made to the Saints persevering unto the end serve to show their state of
transcendent blessedness and glory above their fellows, who in this life were
inferior to them in their sufferings, and in their graces. Like those in the
parable who according to the improvement of their Talents had authority given
them over many Cities. Luke 19. Or like the blessed servant, whom the Lord at
his coming shall find so doing. Verily I say unto you That he shall make him
ruler over all his goods. Mat. 24. 47. He shall place him in great honor says
Euthimius upon the place; and he gives a caution that we should not enquire too
far and with too much curiosity into these things: nor collect any thing from
such parabolical expressions, but what they necessarily imply. After the like
manner Theophylact upon the place, He (...), etc.
shall share in the more Honorable recompenses, to wit, in the Kingdom of
Heaven: for the Saints are Heirs of all that appertain to God. And so run the
general Interpretations upon the ten Cities, etc. Among the Ancients we find no
mention of this conceit, That Christ communicates the charge of his Church and
people, and the government of the world before the day of judgment unto the
Saints in glory.


Phil. However his proofs out of scripture may sail him, Bellarmine abundantly
shows from the Testimony of the Fathers, that the Saints in Heaven do govern
and take charge of the Saints on earth; and are therefore in this regard
likewise equal with the Angels.


Theoph. I will take the Testimony of the Ancient in due season, but I first
desire to hear all the Arguments together out of the Holy Scripture proving
That the Saints do particularly pray for us, and that we must pray to Them, for
I suppose the foundation of this Doctrine must be sure laid in the word of God,
or else all will fall to the ground.


Phil. The Doctrines of our Church are very consonant unto the Scripture, and
out of them you will find sufficient proof of our duty to call upon the Saints
in Heaven.


Theoph. Make that good, and I shall undoubtedly become your convert.


Phil. Remember this when we draw toward a conclusion: mean while I will not
spare to give the premises and proofs. Bellarmine undertakes to prove expressly
Quod Sancti, sive Angeli sive homines pie ac utiliter a viventibus invocantur.
That the Saints in Heaven, whether Angels or men are piously and profitably
called upon by us who are Living.


Theoph. Can you tell the reason why he puts his proposition in such unusual
terms, the common distinction is of the Angels and Saints in Heaven, but he
calls them Angels and men, and both by the name of Saints.


Phil. You cannot deny but that Angels are Holy Persons, and by consequence
that they are Saints.


Theoph. It is not material what they are by consequence, but you know the
Angels are not commonly called Saints, when you propose to speak of the Saints
in Heaven, none will understand you of the Angels, and then for the other
member of the distinction Sive Angeli sive homines.
Men, the Souls of just Men departed, are not men. The man is dead, his
immortal Spirit lives, and upon this Account when you call upon Peter and Paul
to pray for you, alas, Peter is dead, and Paul is dead, their blessed Spirits
are with God, but not their Persons, before the general Resurrection.


Phil. These are but frivolous exceptions, do not betray your fears by
diverting me from the Cardinals proofs. First he alleges that plain Text for
the Invocation of Angels: Genesis 48. 16. The Angel which redeemed me from all
evil, bless the Lads. You see the Holy Patriarch Jacob invocates the Angels
blessing upon Joseph's two Sons Ephraim and Manasseh.


Theoph. It is Jacobs Option, not a formal Invocation: his desire, not his
prayer, we may suppose rather that Jacob sends up his hearts desire to God,
that the Angel which did always deliver him might be a Guardian to these Lads,
when Isaac blessing Jacob said, Genesis 27. verse. 29. Let the people serve Thee
and Nations bow down to Thee: does he therefore invocate Nations and People, or
rather pray to God that he would bring it to pass? This answer suffices, if
Jacob by the Angel understood a created Spirit; but the context makes it
evident That the Angel stands for Christ the second person of the Sacred
Trinity, because he is joined in this Benedicton with the God of Abraham. God
before whom my Fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God that fed me all my
life long until this day, the Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the
Lads. Observe I pray what great Oratione quarta contra Arrianos.
Athanasius says to this place, having proved the unity of the Father and the
Son because they are joined in the same prayer. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 11. Now God himself
and our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ direct our way unto you. He proceeds
to declare, That no man can pray to receive any thing from the Father and from
an Angel or any other creature, no man will say let God and the Angels give
Thee, and then directly answers this Benediction of the Patriarch. That he did
not join a created Angel, with God that made him, in the blessing; neither
forsaking him that nurisht him, does he seek for an Angels blessing upon the
children, but stiling him the Angel that delivered him out of all his troubles,
he manifests that he did not understand any created spirit, but Christ the
word, whom he joines with God the Father in the blessing, knowing that he is
called The Angel of his great Council. (...), according to the Septuagint.
Herunto agrees These. l. 30. cap. 10.
Cyrill of Alexandria. The Patriarch of God, means the Father, and by the
Angel, the word of the Father whose name is the Angel of his council. Hemil.
66. in Genesis (...), etc.
Chrysostom makes God and the Angel to be the same, whose benediction Jacob
implores. A graceful Soul to God, says He, how does he retain the memory of
his favors fixed in his heart? He that nurisht me from my youth hitherto, he
that delivered me out of all evil, bless these Lads. It Is much the Learned
Cardinalshould take no notice of these signal Autorities; but bring a Text, in
two regards, impertinent to his purpose as you have heard, to prove the
Invocation of Angels, which would not however infer the Invocation of Saints
departed. Because Angels are Gods ministering Spirits, and more constant in the
affairs here below, then are the Saints in Heaven, of whose Ministry upon
earth we have no account given in the Holy Scripture, only that they sing and
Bless God and worship him incessantly in Heaven.


Phil. Give me leave to proceed and show how our Doctors prove the Invocation
of Angels, and then I will manifest likewise how it confirms the Invocation of
Saints, Bellarmine brings three Texts out of the book of Job, to show the early
usage of praying to the Angels. Job. 5. 1. Call now if there be any to answer
thee, and to which of the Saints will thou turn. Job. 19. 21. Have pity upon me
have pity upon me O my friends, for the Hand of the Lord has touched me. Job.
33. 23. If there be a Messenger with him, an Interpreter one of a thousand to
show unto man his uprightness, Then he is gracious unto him and says, Deliver
him from going down to the pit, for I have found a ransom.


Theoph. If these be proofs, nothing can miss the mark, if calling be
invocating, and Saints be Angels, then the first Text may stand the Cardinal in
some stead, and Eliphaz his Authority must uphold it. But the context shows the
meaning of the words, Eliphaz would have Job enquire and call any one that
fears God to witness whether any perished, being Innocent. Chap. 4. verse. 7. or
whether a man can be more pure then his Maker. Verse. 17. Job had complained
sadly of his affliction; and his friends designed to put him upon the search,
whether these severe Judgments did not fall upon him for some secret sins. The
second proof is as wide from the mark, as Heaven from the earth, his three
friends did persecute his Innocence with their grand error and mistake, That
God never afflicts but for sin; and Job entreats them to spare and pity him.
For why do ye persecute me as God, and are not satisfied with my flesh? as it
follows in the next. verse. 22.


Phil. Bellarmine shows how St Augustine in his Commentary upon Job refers both
these Texts unto the Angels.


Theoph. Read St Augustine in his second book of Retract. c. 13. and you will
find him doubtful whether he should call it his book (Liber, cui titulus
Annotationes in Job, utrum meus habendus est haud facile dixerim.) Or rather
his who collected his imperfect notes, he tells us his own copy was so faulty,
ut emendare non possim, nec editum a me dici vellem. And withal he asserts
nothing, but only says, here Job seems to call upon the Angels, or the Saints
that they would pray for him being penitent. Angelos postulare videtur, aut
certe Sanctos, ut pro paenitente orent. Now Bellarmine himself will not grant
the Saints deceased in those days should be invocated, besides the literal
sense which I have given is clear, and therefore we look not further to the
Allusions of Interpretors. The third proof is a Text full of obscurity: fit for
the Cardinal to amuze his reader with out of the Original we read. A Messenger
or Interpreter one among a thousand; who should show unto Man his Duty, and
bring him to repentance, and pray for him, that the Lord, may spare him. As
Isaiah prayed for Hezekiah being sick says Jerome. Gregory the Great found no
advantage or proof out of this Text for the Invocation of Saints or Angels
although he favored the opinion, but interprets that of Christ's Intercession. The
Septuagint mention a thousand Angels but not to your Cardinals purpose, but
against it, (...), etc. If there were a thousand destroying Angels, yet not one
of them shall wound him, if he seriously purposes in heart to return unto the
Lord. And thus you see what blind arguments your Doctors urge to maintain their
delusions; if you are not better provided to prove the Invocation of Saints,
then you have been of Angels, I could wish you to study our case, and the
reputation of your Doctors, by conceling them.


Phil. You are very pleasant, but I shall make you change your note, you read
how Moses did beseech God to spare his people for the sake and merits of their
forefathers. Remember Abraham and Isaac and Israel thy Servants, to whom thou
swearest by thine own self, and said unto them, I will multiply your seed as
the Stars of Heaven, etc.


Theoph. In this Text Moses prays to God, not to Patriarchs, and therefore it
does not confirm your Doctrine of Saints Invocation.


Phil. It shows that they did allege the merits of the Saints departed as an
help and advantage unto their prayers, as Theodoret upon the place, when Moses
thought himself insufficient to appease the wrath of God, he takes in the
patronage of the Holy Patriarchs. Therefore if they had not the benefit of
their prayers (as not being in the presence of God) they did reap the fruits of
their merits.


Theoph. There is a great mistake in this argument, Moses does not urge the
merits of their forefathers: but the Covenant God was pleased to make with
them, that he would multiply their seed, and give them possession of the
promised Land. Of this promise he puts the Lord in remembrance that he would
please to spare his people, and perform the promise made to their forefathers.
So God promises unto the righteous, that he will bless their seed unto many
Generations, Exodus 20. 6. Yet their children do not urge their Fathers merits,
but the gracious covenant of God. As for the Testimony of Theodoret, Bellarmine
has made it to his purpose, by interposing Patrocinium Faciens Patriarcharum
mentionem.
Patriarcharum the patronage of the Patriachs, instead of making mention of the
Patriarchs, and of the Covenant with them made, beseeching God not to break the
Covenant: for these are Theodorets words.


Phil. The Cardinal shows this general answer touching Gods Covenant with the
Patriarchs to be insufficient, Pactum Dei, and justitia Sanctorum simul
commemorantur.
because we shall find express mention made of their righteousness, together
with the Covenant, Lord remember David, and all his meekness, Psalm. 132. 1. and
ver. 10. For thy servant David's sake, turn not away the presence of thine
Anointed, says Solomon: For David's sake, and not only for the Covenant made
with David.


Theoph. Express mention of that Covenant immediately follows: The Lord has
made a faithful oath unto David; Of the Fruit of thy Body shall I set upon thy
seat: As tho he should have said, Lord, seeing thou were graciously pleased to
make a Covenant with my Father David, be pleased, upon the same Motives, to
make good that Promise. As for the first part, Remember David, and all his
mansuetude and virtue; so your vulgar Translation reads it: But according to
the Original it is thus rendered, Remember David and all his troubles. And then
immediately follows, David's vow to build an House unto the Lord; and Gods
Promise, That one of his Sons should build him an House: in remembrance
whereof, Solomon puts up his Supplication. And after all, you may consider how
these Texts are impertinently urged, making nothing for the Invocation of
Saints: the consideration of their Merits, may fall in more seasonably
hereafter.


Phil. Ib. c. 19. Hoc. Argumentum Adversarii nunquam solvere potuerunt.
Bellarmin has one Argument more for the Invocation of Saints, grounded upon
the Word of God, which he accounts unanswerable: It is this, We read, the
Faithful have requested the Prayers of the Saints living. God himself sends
Jobs three Friends to him, to intercede for them, Job 42. St. Paul beseeches
the Saints at Rome to help him with their Prayers, Romans 15. 30. and the like in
many of his Epistles: Therefore, says the Learned Cardinal, it is lawful, even
now, to call upon the same Saints reigning with Christ: For if it be not as
lawful to call upon them for the assistance of their Prayers now they are with
God in Heaven, as when they were living upon Earth, It is either because, First
they are not willing; or 2ly, are not able to pray for us; or that because
3dly, They cannot hear and receive our Prayers: or 4thly, Because their
Intercession would be injurious to the Intercession of Christ. The two first
cannot be supposed, because their Charity in Heaven is intended and enlarged,
and their Prayers more effectual: neither the third, Because as the Angels in
Heaven know our state, and can hear our Prayers, so likewise the Blessed
Saints: nor the fourth, Because as the Intercession and Prayers of the living
for their Brethren, and for all men, are not injurious unto Christ's
Intercession, so neither are the Prayers of the Saints departed.


Theoph. Alas! This Achilles will prove a very Dwarf: Your Cardinals
unanswerable Argument is of no force. First, To answer it in general, we must
tell you, That we have no warrant in Holy Scripture, either of President or
Precept, to recommend our selves unto the Prayers of the dead, as we have of
the living; and therefore the consequence holds not good from one to the other.
Bellarmine knew this well, and was so wise to take no notice of it; yet it is
the main hinge whereupon our regular Devotions must turn, even the rule of Holy
Scripture, wherein God has revealed how, and to whom we must direct our
Prayers. His Argument of four horns has little strength; but could he have
added to them this fifth Horn, That the Word of God approves the Invocation of
the dead as of the living, we must have fled before it. But alas! all the
attemts to confirm this Doctrine of your Church out of Holy Writ, have proved
so unsuccessful, that some of your own Doctors have had so much Ingenuity, as
to acknowledge. That it is not expressly delivered in Holy Scripture. So
Invocatio Sanctorum non express traditur in Script.
Eccius, in his Enchiridion of Catholic Confession, and therefore it must pass
for an unwritten Tradition, whereof Martin Peresius confesses, we have De
Trad. p. 3. consid. 7. Ne vestigium ante divum Cyprianum.
no footsteps before Cyprian.


Phil. Peresius gives a rational account (together with others) why the Holy
Apostles did not lay the foundation of this Doctrine: It was, say they, Causa
erat humilitas and mod. Apostolorum, nese Deos facerent.
out of their great humility and modesty, least they should appear to establish
in the Church their own Apotheosis, make themselves as Gods, by directing the
People of God to put up their Supplications, after their decease, to them.


Theoph. Methinks, That which prevailed with the Apostles not to deliver this
Doctrine of the Invocation of Saints, should likewise have prevailed with the
Church never to have established it: and without doubt, had it bin according to
the will of God, and profitable to the Church, the Holy Apostles would never
have concel'd it out of modesty and humility. St Paul declares expressly to the
Church of Ephesus, Acts 20. 19, 20. That serving God with all humility of mind,
he had kept back nothing that was profitable unto them. And doubtless, it was
presumtion and pride which introduced this Error, tho under show of voluntary
humility: for if the Apostles were afraid to recommend themselves as Gods unto
the People, by giving them directions to pray to them after their decease; the
Pope, who undertakes to Canonize Saints, and to encourage the People of God to
pray to them, in spite of the Apostles humility and fear, takes the boldness
upon him to make them as God.


Phil. You make so many Excursions, that you come not to the Point: How do you
answer the four Particulars of Bellarmins Argument?


Theoph. I have already cut off the four Horns with one blow: He says, That if
we may not pray to the Saints departed, as well as desire their Prayers when
living, it must be for one of those four causes forementioned; either they are
not willing, or are not able to pray for us, or they cannot hear our Prayers;
or their Intercession would be injurious unto Christ's Intercession: but I say
is enumeration is lame and imperfect, for I have showed a fifth reason why not,
because the Word of God obliges not to one, as to the other: It requires, that
we should desire the mutual assistance of one another Prayers living, but not
after our decease; all civil commerce being intercepted, by the will of God,
between the living and the dead.


Phil. Do you reckon our Invocation of the Saints departed, a part of civil
commerce: I thought it had bin a Religious act and duty.


Theoph. I grant Prayer to be such, and therefore a part of Divine Worship to
be given only to God: But that Invocation of Holy Men living (as you call it)
or as I term it, That pious desire and request which one Christian makes unto
another, that he may enjoy the benefit of his Prayers (from whence you draw an
Argument for Invocation after their decease) that, doubtless, is a civil
Request, wherewith Christians mutually call upon and oblige one another to
remember them in their Prayers. So likewise the honor which Subjects yield unto
their Prince, presenting their Petitions with bended knees, is civil. And so
Children, begging the Blessing of their Parents: these are formally Civil, not
Religious Acts. A good Christian indeed gives honor to his Prince, and to his
Parents, not only upon a civil account, but also Religious, it being a duty
required in the Word of God; yet the honor it self is civil; the motive unto us
wherefore we give it, is Religious, the will and command of God.


Phil. You are willing to involve the Discourse with subtle Notions and nice
Distinctions: Such honor as you give to Princes and Parents, vouchsafe to the
Saints in Glory, begging the assistance of their Prayers upon your knees, and
it shall suffice.


Theoph. Your self caused this Digression: You supposed the Invocation of
Saints departed, to be a Religious act; and so in truth you generally make it,
a great part of your Religion. I have showed how the desire and request which
Christians make to one another, whilst they are in the Flesh, mutually to be
remembered in their Prayers, is a civil request, and therefore no sufficient
ground for your Religious Invocation of the Saints in glory. But at length, you
are content we should make the same civil Requests to the Saints in Heaven for
their Prayers, as to the Faithful who are living: You may observe it generally,
such as are in the wrong, will accept of any composition: But we cannot grant
it for this reason, because Death intercepts all civil Obligations and Commerce
between Persons. Parents, when they are dead, cease to be provident for their
deer Children, and these expect it not from them: The rich Man departed, cannot
relieve the poor, nor lend him Money at his need. You formerly did urge, there
was a communion between the Church Militant and Triumphant; but that is
mystical, as Fellow Members of Christ's Body: But the civil communion between
Brethren and Neighbors, and the relation of Parents and Children, Masters and
Servants, Princes and Subjects, Husband and Wife, is interrupted altogether by
death; and so by consequence, all those acts which depend upon, or flow from
that communion: That Children should ask their Fathers Blessing after his
decease, I never yet did read your Doctors have asserted.


Phil. I am well confirmed by these your Digressions, That notwithstanding you
would appear to slight Bellarmins Argument, and pretend to cut off all the four
Horns at one blow, by giving a general answer; yet in truth, you do warily
decline the force of it, and are not willing to come to the four Particulars
whereupon he has insisted, That seeing the Saints departed are as willing and
as able to help us now with their Prayers, as when they were living amongst us;
and seeing they know our state, and can hear and receive our Addresses to them,
and seeing their Intercession now for us is not injurious to the Intercession
of Christ, therefore we have as much and more reason to Invocate them now in
Heaven, then when they were conversant with us upon Earth.


Theoph. Not excluding the confutation already given, I will now take these
four Particulars into consideration: The two first may easily be granted (if
there could be mutual communion between them and us) That the Saints departed
have as much charity to pray for us, and that their Prayers are as prevalent
with God: But alas! Death has intercepted former commerce. And his third
Particular must be well proved, or all will fall to the ground, namely, That
the Saints in Heaven do hear our Prayers, and know our particular needs;
otherwise, it will be in vain to call for their assistance. And this main
Point, your Cardinal does but slightly touch, and gives a short and fallible
proof of it: That because the Angels know the conversion of a sinner, and
rejoice thereat, according to the saying of our Blessed Savior, therefore
likewise the blessed Saints do know our state, and all our concerns. Now we
have already showed, how the Consequence is weakly drawn, from the knowledge of
the Angels to the knowledge of the Saints in Heaven; because the Angels are Gods
Messengers, ministering unto the heirs of Salvation; they are imploi'd about us,
and know much of our concerns: but of the Saints departed, no such things are
recorded. And moreover, doubtless the Angels themselves know not all the
affairs of particular persons, only of those about whom they are employed, and
so far as God shall impart to them in their Embassage and Emploiments.


Phil. As they know the Conversion of every Sinner that repents, and rejoice;
so do they know and hear the Prayers of all the Faithful, especially such as do
concern them, and are particularly directed to them.


Theoph. We are much in the dark as to the measure and extent of their
knowledge, and must not in these things so much above us, set one foot forward,
without the light, and conduct, and revelation of Gods Word. Now we read in
Holy Writ, That the Angels have charge over us, according as God has committed
us unto them, but how far, and in what particulars, is not revel'd. We read,
They rejoice at the Conversion of a Sinner; which way soever, or whenever,
for the improvement of their joy, God is pleased to manifest it unto them,
perhaps, by the relation of those Angels who were instrumental in the
Conversion. But from those Promises, we cannot infer their universal Knowledge
of Affairs here below, and much less the universal Knowledge of the Saints in
Heaven. Methinks the Learned Cardinal should not so peremtorily have handled
this grand Point, upon which depends the Invocation of Saints; for if they hear
us not, in vain certainly do we make our Prayers to them: If they understand
not our condition, they cannot recommend it unto God. If St Peter knows not of
any such Person as Philodoxus in being, to no effect shall we beg his
assistance.


Phil. Not so neither: Ibid. c. 20. Non frustra Sanctos a nobis Invocari
etiamsi nec audiant, nec agnos^ant preces nostras, aliquis alius eorum vice
fungitur.
Bellarmin expressly affirms, That we do not pray for them in vain, although we
shall grant they know not, neither hear our Prayers: for, says he, some other
may perform their office, and we obtain the favor. For many miraculous
Instances are given in Church Records, of many that have obtained their
Requests, whilst they have applied themselves unto the Intercession of some
Saint; and therefore, so we obtain our desires whilst we pray unto them, it is
not material whether they hear, or not, it will concern us to call upon them.


Theoph. He had done well to point out this Aliquis alius: Who is this Delegate
of the Saints in Heaven, to do their work, whilst themselves hear not our
Prayers? Whilst we Invocate the Saints, do the Angels help us? The surest way
then, would be to apply our selves to them: Does God help us, when we pray to
the Saints? (although it is high presumtion to make God the Saints Delegate, qui
eorum vice fungitur) however, if God helps such as pray to the Saints, the most
compendious course would be to call directly upon him: and so did Christians in
the Primitive and purest Times, Ad memorias Martyrum, at the Shrines and
Monuments of Martyrs they did pray to God, who was pleased to work many
miraculous Cures at their Tombs, in Testimony of the Faith which those Martyrs
sealed with their Blood. And this is the just account of the Miracles wrought
by the Saints and Martyrs in Heaven, at their Shrines here on Earth. The
Miracles were wrought by Almighty God, before the Monuments of the Saints,
themselves not knowing of it; as we shall show hereafter out of St Augustine
his Book, De cura pro Mortuis. And yet from this Assertion of Bellarmin
(wherein I suppose he stands single) That we pray not to the Saints in vain,
although they do not hear us. From this Assertion we must conclude him very
inconsiderable and forgetful, when immediately after he approves this
Consequence, Sancti recte in vocantur, ergo sciunt quod petimus.
The Saints are immediately called upon, therefore they know what we ask. One
Supposition destroies the other: If we may prudently and successfully pray to
them, although they hear us not; it cannot follow, That if we rightly call upon
them, they do hear us.


Phil. The first Assertion of Bellarmin was by way of supposition not granted,
although they hear us not, yet we may profitably pray to them: but he positively
maintains, That the Saints know humane affairs, and do hear our Prayers, Quae
solo cordis assectu proferuntur.
even such as are made only in the Heart; although there may be some dispute how
they know and hear, etc. and he gives you the several Opinions of the Doctors.


Theoph. His former Supposition, as we call it, was ill put, because it
directly overthrows the Consequence which he immediately after approves: That
because the Saints in Heaven are rightly Invocated, therefore they do hear us.
But I pray proceed to show, how the Saints attain unto the knowledge of things
beneath, and even of our mental Prayers.


Phil. Ibid. c. 20.
Bellarmin proposes four Opinions of the Doctors, about the manner how the
Saints in Heaven know Affairs beneath, and hear the Prayers that are made unto
them. The first, That they know them by the relation of Angels, who are
Messengers between Heaven and Earth. The second, That both Angels and Saints
are in a sort every where present by the celerity and agility of their natures,
and so they understand the Affairs of the world, and hear our Prayers. And he
cites St Augustine for the first Opinion, and Jerome for the second.


Theoph. He cites them very faintly, Innuit Augustinus, says he, St Augustine
intimates so much in his Book, De cura pro Mortuis: and there indeed the Father
tells us, The dead may hear of Affairs on Earth, by the relation of Angels; but
he affirms not they do so: and then they may hear some things related Non
quidem omnia sed quae sinuntur indicare.
but not all things. And afterward he declares, Fatendum est, etc. We must
acknowledge that the dead do not know the things that are don upon Earth. I
shall give you a full account of this Book hereafter. Next for St Jerome,
Bellarmin says, he seems to say as much in his Book against Vigilantius, where
in truth the Father does assert of the evil Angels, That they wander far and
wide thro-out the World, and by their celerity are every where present. But we
must of necessity understand him only in a comparative sense; their agility and
swiftness makes them instantly to pass from place to place, whereas gross
Bodies required a slow, and successive motion; but Ubiquity and Omnipresence is
an Attribute of God, Incommunicable to a Creature. Again, These evil Angels may
be conceived present in all places by their numbers and multitude, not by their
individual persons.


Phil. But Si Agnus est ubique, ergo and hi qui cum to sunt, ubique sunt.
St Jerome in that Book argues fully for the ubiquity of the Saints in Heaven,
because it is written of them, That they follow the Lamb whither soever be
goes, Rev. 14. 4. And if the Lamb be every where present, therefore they that
are with him.


Theoph. This Argument cannot hold; for then much more the human Nature and
Body of Christ, united unto the Divine Nature, should be omnipresent, which I
know none to assert, and therefore St Augustins Interpretation of that place,
is this, Lib. de Sancta Virginit. c. 27. Quid est eum sequi, nisi imitari?
To follow him, is to imitate him; not as he is the only Son of God, by whom
all things were made, but as he is the Son of Man, giving us an example of all
things necessary to be sollowed. Bellarmin knew well the Invalidity of St
Jeromes consequence, and therefore did not urge it for an Argument.


Phil. But that you love to contradict and spin out your Discourse, you need
not have perplexed your self and me with these Answers: For you know Bellarmine
approves of neither of these two ways of the Saints knowledge in Heaven,
Because, says he, celerity cannot suffice, but true ubiquity is required to
hear all the Prayers that shall be made to a Saint, perhaps in all places of
the World at the same time. And again, he says, That neither Angels nor Saints
in Heaven, although they were present with us, can naturally know our mental
Prayers.


Theoph. We account these to be substantial Arguments against the Invocation of
Saints and Angels, because they cannot be every where present to hear Prayers
made from all parts, and because they know not our thoughts and mental Prayers.


Phil. But these are answered by the the two next ways he proposes and
approves of the Saints comprehension and knowledge: One is, Sanctos in Deo
omnia videre, quae ad ipsos aliquo modo tertinent.
That the Saints do sec all things in God that concerns them, even from the
first instant of their blessedness.


Theoph. I pray tell me, why does the Cardinal (following Aquinas and other
Schoolmen) put in that term of Limitation, In the Face of God they see and
know all things that concern them. We know, all things are in God, and in him
represented as in a Glass and Mirror: and therefore Pope Gregory the Great asks
the Question: Quid est, quod ibi nesciant ubi scientem omnia sciunt?
What can they be ignorant of, who know him that knows all things? And
therefore, In speculo Trinitatis (as the Schools speak) in the Beatifical
Vision, one would think all things should be manifest to the Saints and Angels,
and not only such things as concern them.


Phil. The reason is plain: God is Speculum voluntarium, such a Glass as
represents according to his good pleasure, and what he thinks meet, unto those
who have the happiness to see his Face: And therefore the Angels, who always
behold the Face of God, yet know not all things; not the day of Judgment; not
the Mystery of Christ's Incarnation, and Man's Redemtion; not the calling of the
Gentiles, etc. until they learned these things by the Preaching of the Gospel
amidst the Congregation of the Faithful: so says St Paul, Ephesians. 3. 10. To the
end that now unto Principalities and Powers in Heavenly places, might be known
by the Church, the manifold Wisdom of God.


Theoph. Your Answer is rational, and excellently serves my purpose: Such as
see the Face of God, do not, in that Beatifical Vision see and know all things,
but only such things as pleases him to revele unto them. And therefore the
fourth Opinion which Bellarmin mentions, was, That God does revele unto the
Saints, in every instant, such Particulars as concern them; and so, when
Prayers are made unto them, the Lord makes the Blessed Saints to know and hear
their Prayers, by particular Revelation. Hereupon, I demand how this is proved,
That it is the good pleasure of God, constantly to revele unto the Saints
whatsoever does concern them; or all the Prayers that are made unto them.


Phil. I do not find the Cardinal attemts to prove this; because he had reason
to take it for granted.


Theoph. Or rather because he had no proof to offer: and in truth, he does not
so well approve this way of particular Revelation from God to the Saints,
because, as he argues well, Si indigerent Sancti nova revelatione, Ecclesia non
diceret omnibus Sanctis, Orate pro nobis, sed peteret aliquando a Deo ut eis
revelaret preces nostras.
If the Saints know our Prayers which we make to them, by Revelation from God,
we should not so constantly say to them, Pray for us; but rather sometimes
beseech Almighty God, that he would please to revele our Prayers to those
Saints we Invocate.


Phil. He prefers that Opinion as most profitable, That the Saints in Glory,
always standing in the presence of God, and beholding his Face, do in that
Beatificall Vision behold all things which rela^e unto them; and need no
particular Revelation, and therefore, in the Vision of God, they know and hear
the Prayers that are made unto them, even from the first instant of their
Beatitude.


Theoph. And so three ways Bellarmin does not approve whereby the Saints and
Angels are concerned to know our state and hear our Prayers. Now the fourth
which he sticks too, That from the first instant of their happiness, all things
which concern them, are manifest and revel'd unto them. This cannot be true,
for then the Saints must know when they shall reassume their Bodies (which
certainly concerns them) and so by consequence, They must know the Day of the
general Resurrection, and of Judgment, which we deny: They must also know all
the Prayers that shall be made to them unto the Worlds end, and so, by
consequence, the end of the World. So must the Angels, from the beginning, know
the Prayers that shall be made to them, the lapsed state of Man, and his
redemtion by Christ, and other Mysteries, which were made known unto them,
says the Apostle, in the Churches, by the Ministry of the Gospel. See Estius
in 4. Sent. did. 46. Paragr. 19. p. 294. And so while your Doctors, without
any warrant of Scripture, generally lay this for a Foundation, That the Saints
in Heaven do know our state, and bear our Prayers: when they come to the proof
and confirmation, every one abounds in his own sense, and they easily confute
one another Reasons and Opinions, and manifest unto their Readers, upon due
consideration, that they are full of uncertainties in the Point, which they
take for granted, and can urge only fallible Arguments to confirm that which
they would have received by all Men as a mesur'd Truth, but we have not learned
to subscribe to Men's Dictates. And you acknowledge, your Doctor makes not proof
of his Assertion, which is a great defect, this being the main Hinge whereupon
the Controversy turns. We conclude therefore, there is no reason we should
call upon the Saints when they do not hear us; as a Child does not ask his
Fathers Blessing when he is out of hearing. Now you assert with Bellarmin, That
the Saints in Heaven out of doubt do hear us, but you know not how. It is
probable, say you, that in the Face of God they see and know all things that
concern them, but give no reason of that probability: and is it fit that a
Doctrine of your Church, which takes up in that part the Devotion of all Gods
People, should be grounded only upon such a probability, whereof you can give
no reason: How can I call upon the Saints with Faith and Comfort, when I have
no assurance that they can hear me? I may, with as much reason, daily beg the
Prayers of pious Friends, who live far from me, and say, It is probable God
will revele to them that I desire the assistance of their Prayers.


Phil. Your Instance runs not parallel: Our condition here is a state of
ignorance; their's a state of comprehension: They can see the Face of God, and
live for ever: they certainly know all things which tend to their consummation
in Bliss, for they are arrived at the state of Perfection, and perfect
Knowledge is the foundation of their Happiness.


Theoph. The perfect knowledge of God is so: Here we know in part, says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. ver. 12. but there we shall know as we are known; i. e.
fully, perfectly: and this knowledge and Vision of God is Beatifical: But how
does this prove their knowledge of the necessities and Prayers of us poor
Mortals here on Earth, whom they have le^t behind them in the vale of Misery;
we may rather suppose, the wisdom of God has excluded them from the knowledge
of their Friends and Relations, and of miserable Man here beneath, least it
should prove a diminution of their Joy and Bliss. Your Angelical Doctor holds,
Aqu. part. 1. qu. 12. Art. 8. ad 4. Cognoscere singularia cogitata aut facta,
etc. non est de perfect.
It belongs not unto the perfection of a created Intellect to know particulars,
the thoughts or actions of Men. If God only be seen, it suffices to make men
happy. As St Augustine, ^ He is happy who knows Thee, although he have nothing
else. In a word, Cardinals Cajetane was a Learned Advocate of your Church, and
had studied the Point in hand much, and he concludes at last, That we have no
assurance that the Saints know when we pray to them, although we piously believe
it.


Phil. I well perceive you have a Spirit of contradiction, and please your
self, much in eluding such Arguments which our Doctors urge from Scripture, and
reason, to prove the Doctrine of our Church touching the Invocation of Saints.
I will therefore take a more convincing way unto such refractory persons, and
plainly show, by matter of Fact, and express. Testimony of the Ancients, That
this Doctrine has bin received in the Church Catholic from the beginning.


Theoph. I presume you mean not from the beginning of Christianity: you have
heard how the attemt of your Doctors to prove it out of Gods Word, has been
altogether unsuccessful: and some of your Doctors have confes'd, that it is
delivered in Holy Scripture very obscurely; and others have showed the reason,
even the humility and modesty of the Apostles, which withheld them from
publishing this Doctrine, least they should appear to make themselves as Gods
after their decease, by requiring the People of God to make their Prayers and
Supplications to them. Seeing therefore your Doctrine is not sounded in the
Holy Scripture, I could give a short Answer unto your pretended usage of the
Church, and Testimony of the Ancient: That which St Augustine gave to
Cresconius, urging the Authority of Cyprian, r I am not bound to the Authority of
this Epistle, for I do not hold the Writings of Cyprian as Canonical, but judge
of them by the Canonical Scripture; and whatsoever is consonant to the Holy
Scripture, I receive with praise; what agrees not, with his leave, (...)eject.
If you could prove what you have urged, out of the Canonical Books of the
Apostles and Prophets, I would not contradict: but seeing what you have is not
Canonical, with that liberty, whereunto God has called us, I do not receive
his Testimony, whose due Praise I can never equal, with whose Writings I dare
not compare mine own; whose Learning I embrace, whose (...)y I admire; whose
Martyrdom is venerable. Again, St Augustine to the same effect elsewhere: It is
not sufficient unto the Authority of Faith, and of the Dostrines of the Church,
to say. Thus Esaias, or thou faist, or he says; (...), Thus says the Lord. So
the Blessed Martyr, Gyprian himself: We must not been what any one has done
before us, but what He, who is before all Ages, has taught or communded to be
don. Once more I could answer you out of Gratian, t A Custom, without the Word
of God to back it, is not ^ B(...) qu^ T(...)scit. etiamsi alia n(...)t.
(...) sec(...) secundie them. qn. 88. Art. 5. Certaratione nescimus, an Sancti
vota (...)se.
(...) 2. contr, Cresconium. c. 32. Ego hujus Epistolae, etc.
(...)do sine verbo Lei, non esse veritatem sed vetustatem erroris.
Truth, but the Antiquity of Error. The Council of Cartbage resolved thus, ^
The Lord said in the Gospel, I am Truth; He said not, I am Castom.


Phil. Can you so easily trample upon the Authority of the Fathers: You have
formerly pretended much honor to the venerable Testimony of Antiquity, where
you conceived it consonant unto your Principles, and now you would decline that
Touchstone, because you know full well it is against you in this Point of the
Invocation of Saints.


Theoph. These Sentences I have produced are of the Fathers; and seeing the
Word of God does not establish your Doctrine and Practice, the Authority of Man
and Custom will prove too feeble to support it: And where I formerly produced
the Authority of the Ancients in any Point, I first had laid the sure Foundation
in the Word of God. However, it is not my purpose to interrupt your course,
fortify your Doctrine as well you can, and I will attac it.


Phil. I believe so, you have resolved right or worng: But I shall startle you
and your Reader, when you shall find the general Current of Antiquity allowing
and practicing the Invocation of Saints; and therefore it cannot be a damnable
Doctrine


Theoph. Hitherto I have not so called it: but when I shall descend to a more
particular consideration of those horrible Blasphemies we shall discover in the
practice of this Doctrine, you wall give me leave to say, it has proved
distructive unto millions of Souls: mean while, let it pass for a Doctrine full
of Superstition and Will Worship.


Phil. How easily do you make Councils and Fathers criminals, who have avowed
the Doctrine. For Bellarmin first shows; how in the fourth General Council,
that of Calcedon, the Holy Fathers unanimously cried out, Flavianus post mortem
vivit. Martyr pro nobis oret.
Flavian lives after death. I et the blessed Martyr pray for us.


Theoph. This Council was held above 400 Years after Christ, and yet I did not
expect to find so early a Testimony of the Bishops in such a General Council
for your purpose: Give me leave therefore to search the 11th Session of that
Council from whence Bellarmin brings the Testimony. In the third Tome of Tinius
his Edition we shall find it, and now I pray let your own Eyes be Judges. In
the Original Greek Copy there are no such words, only general Acclamations of
the Council, unto the pious memory of Flavian: (...), etc.
Let his memory be eternal; the memory of Flavian the Orthodox, etc. But the
words which Bellarmin quotes, are by a Parenthesis inserted in the Latin, and
nothing answers them in the Greek. This is a detestable Forgery, and I cannot
conceive the Learned Cardinal was not aware of it: however, you see what need
there is we should examine your Doctors Quotations, and here you find he is
extremely ^ Bin. Tom. 1. Council. Carth. 3. p. 182.
deficient.


Phil. It seems the Latin Translator deceived him; and it is strange such a
Clause should be put in, when there was nothing answerable in the Greek.


Theoph. Such legerdemain is usual with some Zealots of your Church to uphold
her Innovations.


Phil. Upon the least occasion given, you are very severe and uncharitable in
your Censures: But what say you to his next Quotation of the Bishops of Europe
to the Emperor Leo: We have ranked most holy Proterius in the Order and Quire
of the Holy Martyrs, and we desire God, by his Intercession, to be merciful and
propitious unto us. a Now you may understand, that Proterius was Patriarch of
Alexandria, and injuriously thrust out by Timotheus; and afterward, murdered
by his Accomplices, whilst he did himself in the sacred Font of the Temple.
Complaint was made hereof by the Egyptian Bishops, and the Clergy of
Alexandria, to the Emperor, who communicated their Letters to the Bishops
thro-out his Empire, desiring them to give their Judgment of the Council of
Chalcedon, against which Timotheus and his Faction had protested; and of the
matter of Fact concerning Proterius his death, and Timotheus his Intrusion into
the Sea of Alexandria: and among other things, the European Bishops in their
Answer to the Emperor, give this account of Proterius, That his death was
Martyrdom, and they desired the assistance of his Prayers.


Theoph. After this ingenious account given, your Testimony comes not home to
your purpose. Observe the words, They import no Invocation of the Martyr
Proterius, but a desire, That God would be merciful unto them, for his sake and
Intercession.


Phil. They supposed therefore, That the Saints in Heaven do make Intercession,
and pray for us.


Theoph. But why do you hereupon suppose, That we must pray to them? we deny
not, That they generally pray for the Saints militant on Earth, for their
Victory over all their Adversaries, Heretics, and Infidels, and Persecutors;
and that every true Believer, through the goodness of God, may reap the benefit of
their Prayers: but that we should pray to them, when we cannot be assured that
they hear us, and when we have no warrant out of Gods Word to do so, we dare
not consent. And withal, in this Quotation, I pray observe another Artifice of
your Doctor: he would have us believe, this was an Epistle to the Emperor, of
all the European Bishops, whereas it was only of four Bishops, whose
Subscription we find in Binius thus, John Bishop of Heraclea, Theophronius of
Aphrodiasis, Theotecnus Episcopus Cyclensis, and Babulas Bishop of
Theodosipolis. The other Bishops of Europe give their account to the Emperor in
other Epistles: and so this Testimony which Bellarmin pretends to be of a
Council, and entitles it to the European Bishops, sinks into a private
Testimony of four Bishops of inconsiderable Diocesses, joining Bin. Tem. 3.
part. 3. Concilin Calcedon.
in one Epistle to the Emperor, and comes not up to the Point neither, of
Saints Invocation, as you have heard.


Phil. You lie at catch for some exception or other: But in the next place,
Bellarmin brings an express Canon of the sixth general Council, Can. 7. Solo
Deo Creat. adorato, etc.
Requiring us to call upon the Saints, that they would vouchsase to intercede
for us with the Divine Majesty.


Theoph. It is evident, That the fifth and sixth general Councils made no
Canons, and the Learned generally acknowledge it: and therefore some Years
after, the sixth general Council at Constantinople was held and concluded under
the Emperor Constantine Pogonatus, and Pope Agatho, against the Heresy of the
Monothelites. Jusinian the younger, summons a Council in the Registery of his
Sacred Palace (which because of its famous, capacious Arch, was called Trullus;
and the Council, Concilium Trullanum, the Council of Trullo) in the time of
Pope Sergius, Anno Dom. 692. consisting of four Patriarchs, and 215 Bishops,
wherein were made 104 Canons, as a Supplement unto the former Councils which
made none: and the Council was called, (...), Bin. Tom 5. p. 419. In notis ad
consilium Ouini-sextum.
the fifth-sixth Synod, because it supplied what was wanting to them both.


Phil. This was indeed generally received, but some time after there were found
nine Canons ascribed unto the sixth general Council, whereof this which
Bellarmin quotes, is the seventh.


Theoph. Yes: Surius tells us, They were found in an old Manuscript of a
Monastery in Gaunt: but he also declares, That they are falsely ascribed to the
sixth general Council, as Binius shows, Tom 5. page 360. And here we may justly
stand amazed, to find your Learned Cardinal cite this Canon as of the sixth
general Council, when he could not be ignorant how that Council made no Canons;
only he was willing to found the Doctrine of Saints Invocation upon the
Authority of general Councils, and you see how shamefully he has pretended to
them: If this be the way to uphold their Church, Let not my soul enter into
their Councils. Your Doctor cites likewise the next general Council, the second
Council of Nice, of which I have given you formerly an Historical large
account. It instituted the worship of Images, and did allow the Invocation of
Saints; but this was held 800 Years after Christ, about which time this
Superstitious Worship of the Saints was publicly avowed. From the general,
Bellarmin proceeds to the Testimony of six Provincial Councils, which speak not
to his purpose. They appoint the Litanies of their Churches to be solemnly used
in the times allotted for them: now because the Saints are prayed to in their
new Litanies, therefore your Cardinal supposes, they were so in the old; and
wheresoever he finds a command for the use of Litanies, there he infers
Invocation of Saints commanded. And the Council of Bin. Tom 6. Council.
Moguntinum. c. 32. Adrogandum Deum, etc.
Mentz is one of them which your Cardinal quotes; and that Council held under
Charles the Great, Anno 813. tells us, That Litanies or Rogations are solemnly
appointed to beseech the Lord, and implore his mercy; viz. when some diresul
Calamities are eminent, not one word of calling upon the Saints.


Phil. Bellarmin in this place shows, how Walfridus Strabo, in the 8th Book of
Ecclesiastical Affairs, chap. 28. declaring what these Litanies were, mentioned
in these Councils, says, Litaniam, de qua agitur in bis Conciliis esse
Sanctorum Invocationem.
They were the Invocation of Saints.


Theoph. Turn to the place, and you will not find it so: First, Strabo gives an
account of the original and use of Litanies; and then for their matter, he
says, They are not only Invocations of Saints for help, In adiutorium ^um.
infirmitatis cuncta quae fiunt Orationibus.
but any Supplications to God are Litanies. He adds farther, That the
Invocation of Saints was brought into the Litany after St Jeromes days: but how
soon after, he asserts not, neither that those Councils which Bellarmin quoted,
did include the Invocation of Saints: you have heard, how the Council of Mentz
did rather exclude them. And therefore I pray now judge, upon a sober
recollection, of the Cardinals proofs from Councils: they are in part false, in
part impertinent. It is almost incredible, that in less then one page he should
manifest unto as many as shall examine him, so much deceit and imprudence; but
we impute all to his desperate cause, which can be no otherwise maintained,
then by imposing upon the unwary Reader. Farewell therefore unto the Testimony
of Holy Scripture, and the Testimony of any Council for more then 700 Years
after Christianity, unto your Doctrine of Saints Invocation.


Phil. I presume Bellarmin relied not much upon these Councils, as you observe,
he hudled them up in few lines: but his Testimony from the Fathers, are
numerous and significant.


Theoph. I presume, he well knew there was little in those Councils for his
purpose; yet he was willing to make his credulous Reader believe, he had the
Authority of all these Councils on his side: and I am much satisfied for my
great trouble and pains, in the full discovery of the contrary, being destitute
of any proof from Scripture and Councils, be pleased to produce his Allegations
from the Fathers of the Church, for the Invocation of Saints departed.


Phil. He cites a full Testimony of Dionysius the Areopagyte, who lived in the
Apostles days, Ecclesiast. Hierarch. c. 7.
That as he who puts out his eyes in vain, desires the light of the Sun; Sic
qui Sanctorum preces flagitat, etc.
so in vain do we desire the Prayers of the Saints, whilst we live and act
contrary to their purity.


Theoph. The passage refers rather to the Prayers of the Saints living, then of
the Saints deceased: such as neglect holiness of Life, shall not be benefited
by others Prayers. And he instanceth in Samuels Praying for Saul; and the
design of that Chapter principally concerns the Rites of Burial in the Church,
to show how our Prayers for the living, or for the dead at their Burial, avail
nothing, except the Persons for whom we pray are worthy. And for a second
answer, I must tell you this Book is falsely ascribed to Dionysius: it discovers
it self to be written after the Nicene Council, as I may have occasion to prove
hereafter.


Phil. However, Bellarmin takes his next Argument to be most evident. It is
taken from the early Testimony of Ireneus: Lih. 4. c. 19. ut Virginis Evae,
Virgo Marin fieret Alvocata.
As Eve was temted to turn from God, so Mary was well persuaded to obey him:
That the Virgin Mary might prove the Advocate of the Virgin Eve, Quidclarius.
What is more evident to the Point then this? says the Cardinal.


Theoph. It is his Artifice to set out a weak Argument, with the greatest
confidence, for this place does not prove the Point: He should prove the
Invocation of the blessed Virgin Mary and the Saints, and he attemts to show
her Advocation.


Phil. If she be our Advocate, we ought to implore her Intercession.


Theoph. Not so neither; as you have bin often told, the Saints in Heaven may
pray for the Church in general; the Blessed Virgin for the Generations of Adam
and Eve, and yet not hear our Prayers in particular, or be sensible of our
condition. However, this Passage out of Ireneus proves not so much, That the
Virgin Mary is the Advocate of the Virgin Eve, as the Fathers words seem to
declare: for the Blessed Virgin was not in being, until thousands of Years
after Eve was a Virgin. Neither can you conceive, that now she makes
Intercession for the Mother of all living. None of your Doctors can be so
cruel, as to keep our Mother Eve so long in Purgatory. Ireneus his plain
meaning is this, That as by the prevarication of the Virgin Eve, all her
Posterity did suffer; so by the obedience of the Blessed Virgin to the Angels
Message, and by the Blessed Fruit of her Womb, all Man kind is comforted and
relieved. We have not Ireneus his Works in Greek, as they were first written.
Suppose his word, he made use of, was (...), you know that signifies as well a
Comforter as an Advocate. The Virgin Mary has made amends for the
transgression of her Sex in our Mother Eve. This is the sense of that
comparison in the Father.


Phil. What sense you will fix upon his Words, I see must pass for current.
Bellarmin brings the Testimony of Pope Cornelius, in the third Century, between
whom and St Cyprian there past many Letters. In the first Epistle, concerning
the Translation of the Bodies of Peter and Paul, a Catatumbis, unto the places
where they now lie interred, (one in the Vatican, the other in vla Ostens^) he
has this passage, Praying unto God and our Lord Jesus Christ, that by the
Intercession of his two Holy Apostles, he would purge you from the stains and
pollution of your sins.


Theoph. You see the Prayer is directed to God the Father, and our Lord Jesus
Christ, and proves not the Invocation of these Apostles, but only their
Intercession. But alas! this Epistle manifests it self to be counterfeit, one
of your Roman Forgeries: the Argument of it, to wit, the translation of these
Apostles Bodies to their place of Burial, is a mere Fiction, Tom. 1. In Notis
ad hanc Epistolam, and in Not. ad vitam Cornelii.
as Binius does acknowledge, That it crept into the Epistle from the Lies and
Errors of Damasus his Pontifical Book. And they are constrained to confess the
Forgery, because the Apostles Corpse were removed to the places where they now
lie, 200 Years before, as appears by the ample Testimony of Epistolarum lib. 3.
Epistola 30. ad Constantiam Augusiam.
Gregory the Great, who gives a full account of their translation, unto the
Princess Constantia, After these Blessed Apostles were Martyred in Rome, some
of the Eastern Christians came over to carry with them the Sacred Bodies of
these Martyrs into their own Country; and having born them two miles from Rome,
they rested at a place called Catatumbae: and when they attemted to take them
up thence, and proceed in their Journey, they were so affrighted with dreadful
Thundrings and Lightning, and forced to desist from their enterprise, and leave
the Corpse behind them; which the Faithful at Rome soon brought back, and
honorably interred in the Tombs wherein they now rest. Anno Christi 221. number. 3,
4, 5, 6.
Baronius takes notice of all these Passages, and concludes, That the Epistle
of Pope Cornelius is not so creditable, as the Epistle of Pope Gregory. And now
I pray, what think you of this Fable of their translation in the time of
Cornelius, and of the Epistle which relates it: Your Cardinal could not be
ignorant of those things: but the Epistle, although grossly forged, must serve to
fill up the small number of his early Testimonies.


Phil. Bellarmins next Argument is taken out of Eusebius Caesariensis.


Theoph. I pray make not such have, but take me along with you: Methinks you
have soon past over 300 Years of Christianity (for Eusebius lived in the fourth
Century) and produced but three Witnesses, Dionysius, Ireneus, and Cornelius,
and all falsified or insignificant: and therefore we will now take it for
granted by the Cardinal, That in the three first Centuries, the Doctrine of
Saints Invocation was not delivered by any good Authority. And now to keep even
paces with you, we shall find out of Authentic Records of the three first
Centuries, account given of the Christian Practice in the public Offices,
without any Invocation of the Saints departed, by Justin Martyr, and by
Tertullian, and other Apologists for Christians. And e Ignatius, a Disciple of
St John, directs Holy Virgins to have Christ alone, and the Father before their
eyes in their Prayers, being enlightened by the Spirit. Again, Eusebius in his
Ecclesiastical History, lib. 4. c. 15. sets down at large the Epistle of the
Church at d Epistola 6. ad Philadelph. (...), etc.
Smyrna, to the Churches of Pontus, wherein account is given of Polycarpus
their Holy Bishops Martyrdom, and of his Prayer at the Stake: O Father of thy
well-beloved and Blessed Son Jesus Christ, through whom we have known thee. O God
of the Angels, and Powers, and of all sorts of just Men which live in thy
presence: I thank thee, that thou have graciously vouchsaf^d this day and hour,
to allot me a portion among the Blessed Martyrs, etc. You see here he
acknowledges the Angels and Just Men to stand in the presence of God, yet
offers up no Supplications to them. In the same Epistle there follows a notable
passage, that the malicious Jews, and others of his Persecuters, desired the
Pro-consul, not to deliver his Bones to the Christians, least they, leaving
Christ, should worship them. But the Church answers, We can never forsake
Christ, who died for the Salvation of the World, and we can worship none other.
The Martyrs we love, as Disciples and Followers of the Lord; we gather up his
Bones after his Body is burnt, more precious then Pearls, and bury them in a
fitting place, where God-willing, we being assembled, the Lord will grant that
with joy and gladness we may celebrate the (...).
Birthday of his Martyr, (the day of his death, being his Birthday unto
Glory) both for the remembrance of such as have been crowned before, as also to
the preparation and stirring up of such as shall strive. And this early
practice continued long in the Church, to assemble at the Monuments of the
Martyrs, and hold a thankful commemoration of their sufferings to the Glory of
God, and for the encouragement and imitation of the Faithful, both to live and
die in the Lord. Here are no tidings of the Invocation of Martyrs.


Phil. Seeing you will so exactly canvass the three first Centuries: I will
also follow you out of my road, and show how Origin, in the third Century,
acknowledges the Intercession of the Saints, and calling upon them for
assistance; and therefore the Doctrine was early received. although Bellarmin
urges not the Testimony of Origin, perhaps because in many things he is
Erroneous, and was condemned by the fifth General Council, Justinian the Elder
being Emperor.


Theoph. If his Works were condemned by a General Council, you cannot then say,
His Doctrine and his Opinion was received in the Church: but however, take your
course, and show where Origin teaches the Invocation of Saints.


Phil. In that notable Lamentation of his, and repentance after he had, through
fear, offered Incense to an Idol: wherein we have these Expressions, I will
prostrate my self, and beseech all the Saints, That they would succor me, who
dare not pray to God. Sancti Dei vos deprecor, etc.
O ye Saints of God, I beseech you, etc. And least you should pretend he called
upon the Faithful in the Church, who were then living Members upon Earth, he
proceeds, We unto me, Father Abraham, entreat for me, that I be not banished
from thy bosom, Again, in his second Book of his Commentaries upon Job, he
Prays, O blessed Job, pray for us.


Theoph. It Is much your great Champion should let pass these notable
Testimonies: But he well knew, as Origens Testimony would not be of any great
Authority, so that these likewise are none of his. Pope Gelasius declares
Origens Lamentation to be Apocryphal, and the Commentary upon Job appears to be
written by some Arrian long after Origen's death. And for a farther
Confutation, we shall find in his Works undoubtedly belonging to him, that
although in some places he dubiously allows the Intercession of the Saints in
Heaven for us Mortals, yet he no where approves their Invocation, but rather
the contrary: Hom. 3. In Cantieum Sol.
The Saints departed this life, says he, having a great love for those who are
in the World; it will be no inconvenience, if we say they have a care of our
welfare, and do assist us with their Prayers and Intercession with God. Again,
In cap. 13. Josue, Ego sic arbitror, etc.
I am of the Opinion, That all the Fathers who are asleep before us, are
helpful to us by their Prayers. And yet afterward he accounts this Opinion of
his Apocryphal Lib. 2. In Epistolam ad Romans Non procul a principio.
, (as being not manifest by good Authority) If such as are without the Body, and
now with Christ, do any thing for us after the manner of Angels who are
ministering Spirits, Habeatur inter occultanda mysteria nec chartulx
committenda.
let this, as a Mystery, be concel'd, and not published and committed to Paper.


Phil. Ibid. c. 20.
Bellarmin takes notice of this Passage out of Origin, and answers, That he
speaks of their daily and constant converse with us, which is not so certain,
as that they know our state, and Pray for us: whereof Origin asks the Question,
Homil. 26. in Numb. Quis dubitet? etc.
Who doubts of it? That the Saints do help us with their Prayers. and confirm
and encourage us by the example of their good Works.


Theoph. By degrees he proceeded from doubting to affirming: and yet the
Assertion only maintains, That the Saints do pray for us in common, which we
have not denied, but himself rejects the Consequence: That because the Saints
do pray for us, therefore we should pray to them. L. 8. Contra Celsum.
For when Celsus had objected, That it could not displease the Supreme Deity,
if inferior Demons, as Friends of God, should be worshipped and implored to
become the Advocates of poor Mortals with him. Origin answers, That Christians
acknowledge no such Demons, but know that the Angels are Gods Ministers, and the
Blessed Saints his Friends. And then he proceeds to show the practice of
Christians in Invocation: We humbly present our Petitions to the most high God,
through his only begotten Son; to whom also we make our Supplications, as being
the propitiation for our Sins, and as being our High Priest, to offer up our
Prayers to God. For God only, says he, is to be worshipped, and God the Word
our High Priest to be called upon, that those Requests which come to him, he
would please to present unto the Father. If we desire (as he goes on) the favor
and assistance of the Angels, they assuredly are Friends to such who imitate
their Holiness, and call upon God with devout hearts, and worship him, whom
they adore and worship. And therefore he shows the most compendious way is to
commit our selves to the great Ruler of the Creation, through Christ who has
taught us so to do; and from him to expect that help and protection, which by
the ministry of Angels, and by the Spirits of Just Men, is communicated to us.
And whereas Celsus had objected, (as your Doctors, many of them do unto this
day) that as in the Courts of Princes we make our Applications first to his
Nobles and Favorites, to appease his Displeasure and obtain his Favor; so in
our Address to the most High God, we should make our way by the Intercession of
his choicest Friends and Servants. Origin answers, Although in the Courts of
Princes so it be, yet to us, one only God is to be appeased with Piety and
Virtue, and his Favor to be desired: as for the blessed Saints and Angels,
their favor and assistance follows, (...), etc.
as the shadow the Body. They love and serve those who are in the favor of God.
This I do assure you, says he, when we have proposed to our selves great
things and made our Request known to God by Prayer and Supplication, All the
Heavenly (...), etc.
Powers, of their own accord, without our Invocation, do pray with us and for
us. Nothing could more be said against the Invocation of Saints and Angels, and
the Heavenly Powers: and this I am persuaded, was the principal reason why your
Learned Cardinal brought not the Testimony of Origin to confirm your Prayers to
the Saints departed; as others of your unadvised Doctors have done.


Phil. To proceed: We find in the same Century, how Cyprian, a Blessed Martyr,
was so far persuaded of the Saints Intercession in Heaven, that as he desired,
in his Epistles to him, the Prayers of Cornelius the Pope living. So farther,
That he would please to enter with him into a serious Engagement, That whether
of them, by Divine dignation, should first leave the World, he should be
mindful to persevere with God in servent Prayer for his Brethren, the Faithful,
left behind him. Tom. 2. l. de disc. Ethabitis Virginum ad finem.
Again, in his Book to the Virgins, he exhorts them, To hold out courageously,
to proceed Spiritually, and to obtain Happily: and then, says he, Remember us
when your Virginity shall receive the Crown.


Theoph. This is an Instance of Prayer to the living, for their assistance,
when they should be translated into Heaven; but nothing to the Point, of the
Invocation of Saints departed. It was his private Opinion, That the Saints in
Heaven might retain the remembrance and affection toward their Friends and
Relations whom they left behind, and commend them particularly in their
Prayers; but not distinctly know their condition, or hear their Prayers if they
should call upon them: this mutual stipulation before their decease, rather
implies, that they conceived they should not have opportunity after ones
decease, for the other to call upon him. And now good Friend, having conferred
notes together about the Testimony of the three first Centuries of
Christianity, there appears none for the Invocation of the Saints departed, not
so much as any footsteps of this Doctrine before Cyprians Martinussius Pere.
Ne vestigium quidem unte Cypriutum.
say some of your Doctors; and we have not found a word in Cyprian that does
confirm it. For a close therefore, we may answer all your Pretensions with our
Blessed Saviors words, Matthew. 18. 8. but from the beginning it was not so. And
taking in Tertullians Rule, Id verum quodcunque primum, id Adulterum quad
posterius.
That is truth which is first, what comes after is adulterate. We may conclude
your Doctrine to be innovate, and a fruit of Spiritual Fornication.


Phil. You must not so soon condemn so many of the Primitive Fathers, who have
delivered this Doctrine, and therefore I pray give your patience to hear their
ample Testimony. Bellarmin gives this notable Instance out of Lib. 3 praepar.
Evang c. 7, Votaque ipsic facimus, etc.
Eusebius, in the fourth Century: Honoring the Champions of the true Religion
as Friends of God; we come to their Tombs, and make Prayers to them as to Holy
Men, by whose Intercession we may be much advantaged.


Theoph. A notable Instance indeed, to manifest the corruption of Translators,
and such as follow them for the advantage of the Cause. Bellarmin might have
consulted the Greek Copy of the Council of Calcedon, and then he would not have
bin deceived by the Parenchesis in the Latin Translation, forged for the
advantage of the Cause, as you have heard before. And so now the Greek Copy of
Eusebius would have spared this proof of Cardinal Bellarmin: for Eusebius in
that Book, having showed out of Plato, That Men eminent for Virtue should be
honored after death, he declares the practice of Christians to be agreeable, To
honor the Champions of Piety and Religion, as Friends of God after their
decease: (...), etc.
Whence, says he, it is our use to frequent their Monuments,, and make our
Prayers there. We repair to their Tombs, and there make our Prayers, says
Eusebius. And so the Christians did frequent Memorias Martyrum, and call upon
God in those places. But the Translator, with Bellarmin, reads it, We repair to
their Tombs, and pray to them as to Holy Men. Again, Eusebius says, (...), etc.
We honor these Blessed Souls, and conceive we rationally do so. But the
cousening Translator leaves this passage quite out, and puts in a Clause of his
own: By whose Intercession, we declare our selves to be much assisted with God.
It seems George Trapezuntius, a wretched Translator, suited better Bellarmins
turn, then the Original Text of Eusebius, and therefore he chose to consult one
rather then the other. We see what reason we have to examine Bellarmins
Quotations; many times they pretend much, but prove nothing but Imposture.


Phil. Methinks you might satisfy your self with your pretended Confutations,
and leave out your uncharitable Censures. I proceed to the Cardinals next
Quotation out of the great Sermene de Annuntiatione ad finem.
Athanasius, who, with the People of God, puts up these Supplications to the
Mother of God: Incline thine ear unto our Prayers, and forget not thy People. O
blessed Virgin, we cry unto thee, Be mindful of us, O our Lady and Mistress,
the Queen of Heaven and Mother of God, Intercede for us.


Theoph. I must confess this is an ample Testimony: But your Cardinal knew very
well this Oration was a forgery, falsely ascribed to that Holy Father. It
discovers it self to have bin written after the opposite Heresies of Nestorius
and Eutyches, for it directly confutes them. And Cardinal Baronius Anno Christi
48. N. 19, 20.
acknowledges what I say, and Numb. 23. concludes like an Oracle, giving a
just reproof to Bellarmin, and the other Doctors who make use of Lies to uphold
supposed Truths: Existimamus Cathel. veritatem labre factari potius, etc.
We believe Catholic Truths rather to be weakened by such false Allegations,
then supported. And withal, holy Oratione 2. centra Arrianos, (...), etc.
Athanasius urges this Argument against the Arrians, to prove Christ's
Divinity, because we call upon him: and tells us, That the Saints do not call
upon any Created Being to be their help and succor. And so I hope you apprehend
the severity of my Censures to be due, being put to such an intolerable
Drudgery to search among the Rubbish of your falsified Records and Quotations;
it is the only satisfaction I have, to discover your Impostures, and expose
them to censure and undeceive the World.


Phil. Well, now you must take your farewell: These Autorities that follow are
without Exception. St Basil Oratione in 40 Martyrs.
has this Passage: He that is straightened with any necessity, let him fly to
them: He that has occasion to rejoice, let him call upon them; the one that he
may be delivered, the other that be may continue in prosperity.


Theoph. I wish you would make good your words, and bring Quotations fair, and
without Exception: For this of Basil is ill Translated, merely for your
advantage: (...).
The oppressed flies to these 40 Martyrs: It Is in the Indicative and not in the
Imparative Mood, showing the Peoples practice, not his precept. But that which
follows, shows your Doctors cheat: (...).
He that rejoiceth, comes to these, says Basil: and you say, Let him pray to
these. Now you have heard, it was usual for Men in every condition, to come to
the Monuments of the Martyrs, and there call upon God for help, and there offer
up their Sacrifices of Praise to him, not to the Martyrs.


Phil. What shift have you for In Psalmum 35.
Basils next Testimony: Of the Spiritual Powers, some are called Eyes, because
they watch over us; some are called Ears, because they c hear and receive our
Prayers.


Theoph. What Prayers? those which are made to them? that does not appear;
rather those Prayers which are made to God, which some of the Ancient, from
some passages out of the Revelation of St John, did conceive the Angels did
present to God: How does this prove the Invocation of Saints?


Phil. The next Testimony Bellarmin urges, is o. Quia nostras excip. preces.
Gregory Nazianzen, The (...), Oratione in Cyprianum.
Eminent Divine, as he is generally called: He relates how Saint Cyprian,
before his Conversion, was a Magician, and falling desperately in Love with a
Christian Virgin, and not being able to obtain her Affection, he made use of
Art-Magic, and Enchantments to compass his design: But, says he, (...), etc.
The Virgin made her Supplication to the Blessed Virgin, to help a Virgin in
distress, and so was delivered from the Enchanting Powers.


Theoph. Nazianzen took this Fable out of a Book called, Cyprians Repentance
and Conversion, where it is related: and that Book is declared spurious by Pope
Did. 15. cap. Sancta Romans Ecclesia.
Gelasius. In Catal. Script. Ecclesiast. (...).
St Jerome gives another account of Cyprians Conversion, showing how he was
Rhetoric Professor in Carthage, and Converted by the acquaintance and
persuasion of Cecilius, from whom he took the Surname, Coecilianus Cyprianus.
And Pamelius, and many others, who have written Cyprians Life, acquit him of
this Infamous passage, and Nazianzen was strangely credulous to assert it.


Phil. You are always severe against such as do not please you: But Bellarmin
shows farther, how that Holy Farther calls upon Cyprian in the end of this
Oration; upon Basil, in the close of his Panegyrie; and upon Athanasius, in
these words, Oratione in Athanasium.
Do thou graciously look down upon us out of Heaven, and direct this Holy
People, and feed and cherish us in peace, and in our conflicts guide and
supportus, and bring us unto the same state of Glory, with thy Self, and such
Blessed Spirits as are like Thee.


Theoph. Nazianzen was a great Orator, and makes such Apostrophe's severally to
the Saints upon whom he made his Panegyrics; and yet this will not infer, That
he did believe they heard him; or that he made this Application to them by way
of Invocation, no more then he did to Julian the Apostate after his decease,
unto whom he directs his Speech for a whole Leaf together, in the close of his
second Invective. Nay, you shall find this Orator sometimes to correct himself
by an Epanor thosis in the midst of his Rhetorical Apostrophes, in his first
Invective against Julian, in the words of the Prophet Isaiah, he calls upon the
Heaven and Earth to hear him: Ibid. (...), etc.
Hear, O Heaven; and give ear, O Earth. And then it follows, Hear O Soul of
Constantius the Great, if there be any sense in thee of these inferior things.
In his Fathers Funeral Oration he says, Now he advantages the Church of God
more by his Prayers, then before by his Doctrine and Preaching, if it be not
presumtion to say so. And in the Funeral Oration of his Sister Gorgonia, he is
more expressly doubtful, Whether this honor is given to the Saints departed, as
to be sensible of those things that are spoken of them.


Phil. Illudsi, non est dubitantis, sed affirmant.
Bellarmin takes notice of such Passages, and says, Those ifs, are not of one
doubting but asserting; as when St Paul said to Philemon: If thou count me a
Partner, receive him as my self, ver. 17. he did not doubt of Philemons
affection.


Theoph. The Circumstances show the contrary, and Bellarmin offers no proof of
his consident Assertion, but only because It may be so taken in one place, it
must be in these. If your Doctors groundless Shifts and Answers must go for
Oracles, you may carry all before you. For instance in the first, If of
Nazianzen in his Apostrophe to Constantius after his decease: Hear, O thou
Blessed Soul of great Constantius, If thou have any knowledge of these things I
speak, etc. Dares Bellarmin suppose that Constantius did hear Nazianzen? Or
that he was a Blessed Soul in Heaven, who was so great a Persecuter of the
Orthodox Christians in his life time, and Protector of the Arrians? and upon
this account, I much wonder how this Holy Father could make such honorable
mention of an Arrian Emperor, as to style him, c The most famous of Princes
that ever were, increasing the heritage of Christ to his power. For his zeal of
the Orthodox Faith, he is generally styled, Gregory the Divine. But here we
must reckon him to be a vehement Orator, and many of his Sentences must be made
good only by some Figures of Rhetoric, Hyperbolies, Apostrophes, and the like.


Phil. Is this your way to answer the Fathers: You formerly severely censured
this way in Bellarmin, when he said, Chrysostom in many places spoke like an
Orator: and do you now fall under the same condemnations?


Theoph. I have given an answer unto Bellarmins Arguments out of Nazianzen, and
now I make this necessary Observation to the Reader, for greater caution.


Phil. St Hilary lived in this fourth Century, an eminent Bishop in France, who
in his Commentary upon the 129 Psalm, tells us, That the Angels are Presidents
of Churches.


Theoph. He brings a strange proof of the Assertion, Rev. 2. 3. from the Angels
of the Churches of Asia; which are generally taken by Interpretors, for the
Bishops of those Churches: and they cannot possibly stand for the Heavenly
Powers and Spirits, because some Infirmities are imputed to them, Rev. 2, ver.
4. That the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, had left his first love, that he
should repent and do his first works. That the Angel of the Church of Laodicea
was lukewarm, cap. 3. 16.


Phil. I pray give me leave to urge the whole Testimony of this Father; he
says, We may in a probable sense call the Angels, The Eyes of the Lord, and
his Ears, his Hands, and his Feet; for they are his Ministering Spirits. And
although the Divine Nature, who knows all things, need not their information;
yet our infirmity in Praing to God, and deserving his savor, needs their
Spiritual Intercession.


Theoph. I pray, How does the Ministry and Intercession of Angels, prove the
Invocation of Saints? Such impertinent Quotations are only brought to fill up
the number, and weary the Reader.


Phil. Bellarmin shows how the same Holy Father, in Psalm. 124. speaks alike of
the Intercession of the Holy Apostles and Prophets.


Theoph. True, he does Allegorize the Mountains which stand round about.
Jerusalem, Nec leve praesidium in Apostolis vel Patriarchis and Prophetis, vel
potius in Ang.
to be The guard of Saints; or rather, says he, of Angels about Gods People.
But leaving St Hilaries Allegories, I pray observe what the Prophet David adds
immediately: As the Mountains stand about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about
his People from henceforth even for ever. And Hilary thereupon declares, Benum
quidem praesidium Angeli, sed melius Dei.
The safeguard of the Angels is good; but of God, much better. Mean while,
here is not one syllable of our Invocation of Saints or Angels, but only of
their Intercession and Protection. And by the way, you may take this note along
with you, That Hilary was as bitter in his Invectives, and had as great an
Indignation against the Emperor Constantius, as you but now heard Gregory
Nazianzen did extol him.


Phil. It is not my work to commit the Fathers: I proceed in Bellarmins proofs;
his next, out of St Ambrose, is full and without Exception: We must pray unto
the Angels, who are our Guards; and to the Saints and Martyrs, whose Patronage
we may challenge, as being of our own Substance: they can entreat for our sins,
who have washed away their own (if any they had) with their Blood. These are
Gods Martyrs and our Bishops, Overseers of our Life and Actions: let us not c
Lib. de Viduis ultra medium. Obsecrandi sunt Ang. etc. Obs. sunt Martyrs
Corporis pignora.
blush to admit these as Intercessors for our infirmities because They, when
they did overcome, were yet sensible of the infirmity of the body.


Theoph. Saint Ambrose was but a young Divine, a novice and Cathechumen when he
was chosen Bishop of Millam: he was trained up in Civil affairs, pleading
Causes, and as a Deputy of the Country administering justice; and therefore we
have no teason to ground our Faith upon his dictates. He speaks often piously,
but not always Orthodoxly: do you allow that passage of his in this very
proof? Qui proprio sanguine laverunt, si qua habuerunt peccata.
The Martyrs, if they had any sins, have washed them away with their own Blood.
The Blessed Apostle tells us, 1 John 1. The Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses
from all unrighteousness. Immediately before these words which Bellarmin quotes,
S. Ambrose has this passage. Infirma est caro, men's aegra, and ad Medici sedem
non potest debile explicare vestigium.
The flesh is weak, the mind sick, and feter'd with the chains of sin; and so
we cannot creep to the Physician, but must call upon the Angels and Martyrs,
etc. Where do you read in H. Scripture, that the sick, to wit, the sinner
cannot come to Christ the Physician? did he not come to call sinners, to invite
the weary and heavy laden to come to him, and find rest? you shall hear other
Fathers generally contradicting this Doctrine of Ambrose, and the Holy
Scripture much more; yet this is the usual pretense for Saints Invocation and
Intercession, That we are unworthy of our selves to draw near to an Holy God,
and to put up our supplications to him: of which more hereafter, and herein S.
Ambrose contradicts what he has piously commented upon the first chap. of the
Epistle to the Romans in the 4 chap. of his Commentary. Solent misera uti
excusatione, per istos posse ire ad Deum, ut per Comites ad Reg.
This is the miserable excuse, says he, that by Angels and Saints, we may have
access to God, being unworthy of our selves to come unto him, as we go to the
King by his Courtiers. For which he answers, Ideo per Tribunos and Comites,
itur ad Regem, quia homo est, etc. Ad Deum a. promerendum, qui omnium novit
merita, suffragatore opus non est, sed mente devota.
Therefore we come to the King by his Tribunes and Officers, because the King
is a man, and must receive information from others: but to obtain the favor of
God; who knows all men's deserts, we need no suffragants but a devout mind:
whenever such a one calls upon Him, he will answer him. Nothing could be more
directly opposed to your usual plea for the Invocation of Saints. The same
Father in his book de Isaac. and Anima cap. 5 tells us from the third chap. of
Canticles, and the third verse. Anima quae Deum quaerit transit custodes, enim
sunt mysteria quae etiam Ang. concupiscunt videre.
That a Soul seeking God passes by the keepers, for there are mysteries which
the Angels them selves desire to look into.


Phil. Do you then follow S. Ambrose's direction in one place, and I will take
his advise in the other. Bellarmin brings the testimony of many other Fathers
of the later Ages of the Church; and I must confess I am almost tired in
following him, especially seeing you so dextriously shift him off. Gregory
Nyssen speaks home to the point in the latter end of his Oration opon Theodorus
a Martyr, thus: We want many benefits, do thou become our Legate with the King
of Heaven. Thou art not ignorant of humane necessities, procure peace for us.
That we have bin safe and sound hitherto we ascribe it to thee. If you want
more assistance take in the quire of your Brethren the Martyrs. The prayers of
many Saints wash away the sins of Nations and People. In the like manner he
speaks in his Panegyricks of another Martyr.


Theoph. This is sufficient to your purpose; you need look no further. But I
pray tell me, do you take him for an Orator or Divine in these passages? Is it
possible he should in earnest ascribe the preservation of the Faithful all
along unto this Martyr, and hope for security from him for the future? and
never take into consideration the divine protection? Is it good Divinity to
say, That the prayers of the Just wash away the guilt of Nations and People,
and never mention the Blood of Christ, and his effectual Intercession?


Phil. That is to be supposed as the principal; the Blessed Saints may be
isntrumental in these Blessings.


Theoph. What you suppose is one thing, and what he expresses another. But it
is neither good Philosophy nor Divinity, to entitle the effect unto the
Instruments, and leave out the principal Agent. Should I make such an harangue
to an Artists Tools, and give them all the honor of the excellent work, he
would reckon me besides my wits, and himself put besides his due commendation
and praise.


Phil. You ask Questions instead of giving Answers. But I have now concluded to
favor you, and not overlade you with innumerable testimonies. The Authority of
the later Fathers perhaps you will except against in this point. Such as Bede,
and Anselme, and Bernard and Damascene; and the Elder I have hitherto produced,
and yet there remain two of the Greek Church, and two of the Latin Church
whose Authorities I will urge out of Bellarmin in confirmation of this point,
and then I shall give you respite. The Greek Fathers are Chrysostom and
Theodoret; the Latin Jerome, and Augustine.


Theoph. You have made a noble choice, and herein you much oblige me: (whilst
your wisdom and your zeal do prompt you to urge the most effectual testimonies
on your side) that you determine to let the others pass, which chiefly serve
to fill up a number.


Phil. Bellarmin quotes an eminent passage out of Homil. 66 ad pop. Antioch.
Chrysostom, but we easier find it in his 26 Homily upon the second Epistle to
the Corinthians, from whence we suppose the Homily was collected; it is in the
(...) of that Homily. The words out of Chrysostom are these. He that wears
purple goes and salutes the sacred bodies, and laying aside his state (...).
etc.
stands praying unto the Saints, that they would appear before God in his
behalf. He that wears the Diadem beesecheth the Tent-maker and Fisherman
being dead, to become his Advocates.


Theoph. This is (...), a passage whereunto we find not a second like it in all
the works of Chrysostom. Bellarmine refers to other p^^ces of this Father: but
(according to his accoustum'd manner) without truth and reason. It is strange
therefore if he were of the opinion, and the practice in his days was usual to
pray to the Saints before their shrines that any where else he should not speak
of it.; and therefore I must tell you that the original Greek does not
altogether warrant Bellarmin's translation, but equally admits another, which
will fall short of his proof. For (...), as well signifies standing in need of
the Saints Intercession, as praying for it; and so (...), He wants their
protection. Now we may stand in need, and may reap the benefit of the Saints
supplications in Heaven for the people of God here on earth, and yet have no
warrant to call upon them, except we could be better assured that they do hear
us. This therefore is a fallible and ambiguous proof, unless ratified by some
other passages out of Chrysostom.


Phil. The Cardinal refers to other places in that Father for the same proof.


Theoph. He does so to his great shame and disadvantage; to the demonstration
of his supiness, not of the point. He sends us to Chrysostoms fifth Homily upon
St Matthew; where the Holy Father in his (...), in the application or Moral
upon the text, presses much upon us the duty of being sober and watchful in
prayer to God for our selves, and not depend upon the prayers of others. For no
man may deliver his Brother, nor make agreement to God for him. Ps. 49. 7. He
instanceth in Moses that could not prevail for Miriam, nor Samuel for Saul, nor
Jeremy for his People. (...), etc,
If we our selves be negligent, others cannot help us: if we be watchful we
may prevail for our selves more then by others Intercession. For God chooses
rather to give his blessings to us for our selves, then for others praying for
us. For so, says he, he had compassion upon the Canaanitish woman, and saved
the harlot and Theif, (...).
none mediating or playing the Advocate to God for them. Would any sober man
believe Bellarmin should direct us unto this Homily for the proof and
encouragment unto the Invocation of Saints departed?


Phil. Perhaps he reflected upon Chrysostom's next word in that Homily. (...).
I speak these things, not that we should not desire the prayers of the Saints,
but that our selves should not be slothful. He would not discourage men from
suing to the Saints.


Theoph. To the Saints living, not the deceased. All his instances in the
Homily show this, in Samuel's praying for Saul, and Moses for Miriam, and
their prayers were unsuccessfull, because the persons for whom they prayed were
not worthy. In the next place your Cardinal sends us to the eight Homily,
where there is not a syllable for his purpose. There in his (...) he shows,
That neither the iniquity of our Fathers, nor of the place wherein we live
shall hinder us in the course of Virtue, if we will take heed unto our selves.
As Joseph lived virtuously in Egypt, and the three Children in Babylon, and
Hezekiah was a good Son of wicked Ahaz, and Abraham of Terah an Idolater. If
this proves the Invocation of Saints, let it be so. In the next place we follow
him unto Chrysostoms 43 Homily upon Genesis, where we have the former Text. No
man may deliver his brother, etc. if we neglect our selves, neither Father nor
Kinsman can stead us, no not the Saints and righteous men who have great
confidence with God. Only a Jesuit's chemical brain can extract the Invocation
of Saints out of these passages of Chrysostom. Come we now to the next place of
Chrysostom whether Bellarmin refers us, to his first Homily upon the first
Epistle to the Thessalonians: There the good Father exhorts us in his (...)
to be watchful and sollicitous for our selves, and then others prayers also
may benefit us. (...), etc.
It Is good, says he, to enjoy the prays of the Saints, but when we are
coworkers with them. Where he evidently speaks of the prayers of the living for
us, instancing in Peter's deliverance out of prison, through the servent prayers of
the Church, Act. 12. and in Paul's desire the Saints should contend in prayer
for him, Phil. 1. 19. And now tell me, is not this a great deceit and cheat
upon the Reader, when the good Father speaks of the prayers of the Saints
living which we should desire, for Bellarmin to transfer it unto the prayers of
the Saints departed? In the last place your Cardinal sends us unto Chrysostoms
Panegyric upon two Martyrs, Jubentius and Maximinus, tom. 5. And I suppose he
had an eye unto that passage of the Father. As Soldiers showing their wounds
received in war, appear with great confidence before the General or their
Prince, so these Blessed Martyrs presenting their heads, which were cut off, in
their hands, may easily obtain what they shall desire of the King of Heaven.
Now from hence what would you infer?


Phil. That as they can prevail much with God, we should the more importunatly
beg the favor of their Intercession.


Theoph. Why did not the Holy Father make that inference himself? or make his
Application to them in prayer? we say, because he did not approve the doctrine
of prayers to the Saints in Heaven. All that he exhorts his hearers unto in the
close of his Panegyric is this: To go unto the Monuments of these Martyrs with
faith and joy, that by the sight of their shrines, and remembrance of their
glorious sufferings they may reap much fruit, and so live, That they may share
in their happiness. Would he not have encouraged the people of God to pray unto
these Martyrs, if he had thought it beneficial or duty? And now I begin to
understand, That when your subtle Cardinal refers to a place by figures, and
quotes not the words at length; he well knew they would not serve his turn:
only to impose upon the credulous Reader, either to believe him, or to be put
to an endless trouble in the search and discovery. But I have bin content to
devour this trouble, and have with great indignation found him a deceiver: and
and yet before I leave St Chrysostom, I will refer you to one of Tom. 5. Hom.
60.
his Homilies; where in the (...) from the history of the Canaanitish woman, he
shows, (...), etc.
That we prevail most with God by our own prayers, rather then others
Intercessions. The Apostles, says he, interposed for that woman; but our
Saviors answer was a denial: I am not sent but unto the lost Sheep of Israel,
but her own importunity prevailed for her daughters recovery, which was the sum
of her desire. There Chrysostom expressly tells us, Thou have no need of
Mediators with God, to fawn upon others to pray for thee: but if thou art
destitute of all Protectors, thy self by thy self, calling upon God shall thou
obtain all can desire. He will not grant unto us, upon the request of others,
so as upon our own. He puts the objection which your Doctors usually propose,
That we are not worthy to appear in the Lords presence. (...).
What say thou? art thou unworthy? become worthy by thy perseverance in
prayer to God. Our Blessed Savior, says he, compared the woman of Canaan to a
Dog, unto whom the Childrens bread must not be given; and yet soon after he
cried out, O woman, great is thy faith.


Phil. You may as well urge these like passages of Chrysostom against the
Mediation and Intercession of Christ, and against any desire, That the
Faithful living should assist us with their prayers.


Theoph. You should not join together the Mediation and Intercession of Christ,
and of the Saints whether in Heaven or Earth. And you may observe the Father
speaks of (...).
Intercessors in the plural, as of many. Implying That one is our Mediator
between God and men, even the Man Christ Jesus. 1 Timothy 2. 5. And withal the
Testimony is sufficient against that fond conceit, That we are unworthy to draw
near to God in our own persons, but by others Intercession.


Phil. You will draw out your discourse in infinitum by your rejoinders and
remarks, but I have to an end. The second Greek Father I proposed was
Theodoret, a Learned Bishop of Cyprus, who in his History of the Lives of Holy
Fathers, concludes each Life after this manner: Huic narrationi finem imponens,
rogo ut per horum intercess. div. cons. cuxil.
I, putting a period to this relation and history, do pray and beseech, that by
the Intercession of these Saints, I may obtain Divine assistance.


Theoph. It is not here expressed that he did pray unto these Saints, but we
rather suppose to God, upon the opinion of their Intercession, That he might
reap the benefit thereof; and withal he was infected with the here^y of
Nestorius, and wrote bitterly against Cyrill of Alexanria his twelve Theses:
and that work of his was condemned in the fifth general Council; and himself
through the violence of oppositions, was compelled against his judgment to
pronounce Nestorius accursed: yet we honor his great Learning, and let his
memory be precious.


Phil. I am glad to discover your moderation, for there is another most
considerable testimony out of him, full to the point of Saints Invocation.
Libro 8. De curandis Graec, affectibus.
The Temples of the Martyrs are magnificent and beautiful, in them we often
keep festivals; and such as enjoy health, pray to the Martyrs to preserve it;
such as are sick desire health of them: Men and Women who are unfruitful, ask
of them Children: Such as go a journey desire their conduct, and after their
safe return they pay their thanks to them, owing their security to their
favor. Now, says he, they do not pray to these Martyrs as to God, but as unto
Holy men whose Intercession they desire, and that they often obtained their
requests; the numerous gifts devoted to these Martyrs do testify, hanging up in
the Martyrs Temples the pictures of theirs eyes and hands and legs, in gold,
which their votaries recovered by their merits, and prayers, and Intercession.


Theoph. These are high things, and great assignments unto the Martyrs.
Methinks there should of right have bin some reflections upon God in these
deliverances and cures, and sure there was something in the wind that Bellarmin
only refers to this passage, and does not set it down in full length; being so
full to his purpose. (in the 18th chap. he has part of this quotations, but
not the whole.) Perhaps the Cardinal was not fully satisfied with the person of
Theodoret: or rather with the book it self, which Niceph. l. 44 c. 54.
Nicephorus does not reckon up among Theodoret's Works, when he gives an
account of all his books; these 8 books De curandis Graecorum affectibus, are
not mentioned. (...), etc.
Those which he wrote are these, etc. And withal your Learned Cardinal knew
well, That what Theodoret (if this book were his) did build with one hand, he
pulled down with another, as to this point of Invocation of Saints or Angels:
For in his Commentary upon the 2d chap. of St Paul to the Colossians, verse. 18,
Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility and worshipping
of Angels. I say, Theodoret in his Commentary upon this place, cuts off the
sinews and foundation of Saints and Angels Invocation. He shows how some Jewish
Christians in Phrygia and Pisidia being zealous of the Laws, did worship Angels,
by whom the Law was given, and build Temples to St Michael and others; and that
this course continued long among them. Bin. Council. Lacd. Tom. 1. can. 35.
(...), etc.
And therefore that in the 4th Century, a Council of Bishops in Laodicea the
Metropolis of Phrygia, near neighbor to Colosse, did expressly forbid the
worship of Angels, calling it Idolatry. That Christians ought not to leave the
Church of God, and depart and call upon the Angels, and make assemblies, and if
any be found to be conversant in this hidden Idolatry, let him be accursed.
Now this voluntary humility which St Paul mentions, refers to that humble
pretense, That sinners are not worthy to draw near to God themselves, but by
the Intercession of Saints and Angels. Intruding into those things which he
has not seen, vainly puffed up in his fleshly mind, says the Apostle. That is,
says Theodoret, Propriis utens rationibus and cogitationibus.
using his own reason and imaginations, etc. now (says he) the Synodus volens
veteri illi morbo mederi, cavit ne precarentur Angelos.
Synod of Laodicea desiring to cure this old dicease forbids them to pray unto
Angels. And you will grant if we must not pray to Angels, neither to the
Saints. For you have derived chiefly the Invocation of Saints from that of
Angels.


Phil. Ibid. cap. 20.
Bellarmin has answered this passage of Theodoret, and of the Council of
Laodicea, and the Text of the Apostle together. Namely Apostolum damnare
haeresin Simenis Magi, qui decuit Angelos quasi minres, etc.
That the Apostle condemns the heresy of Simon Magus, who taught, like Plato,
that the Angels should be worships as lesser Deities, and that none could
please the invisible God but by the Angels. And he tells us That the Council
Concilium non damnat quamvis venerationem Ang. sed quae Deo propria.
did not condemn all worship of Angels, but only such veneration as is proper
to God.


Theoph. Observe the incongruity of this Answer, as to several particulars. He
says the Council condemns not all Veneration of Angels, but only such as is
proper to God the supreme Deity: and yet according to his own relation, Simon
Magas, and the Jewish Christians that worshipped Angels, did not worship them as
the Supreme Deity, but only as subordinate Intercessors. And St Paul and the
Council of Laoduea condemns this: That in voluntary humility they should
deprive them selves of that privilege to come to God themselves, and so make
way unto him by the Intercession of Angels. The Apostle therefore and the
Council sorbid this inferior worship, as Theodoret observes, Ne precarentur
Angelos.
That they should not pray to the Angels to make way for them unto the Great
God. And in the next chap. of S. Paul to the Colossians, verse. 17. the Apostle
commanding as Whatsoever we do either in word or deed to do all in the name of
our Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God, and the Father by him. Theodorets Comment
is, Deo and Patri gratiarum actionem emittite, per ipsum, non per Angelos.
Offer up to God your sacrifice of praise by Him, not by the Angels. Again we
find not one syllable either in Theodoret, or the Council of Laodicea
concerning Simon Magus or his heresy, but only those Christians which did
worship and pray to Angels. To conclude this Answer, It is the miserable device
of the Schools to shift off evident and unanswerable arguments, with obscure
and srivolous distinctions, giving no real satisfaction either to them selves
or others. So in the point of Image worship, They did not give to them the
worship of (...) which apparteins only to God: but an inferior worship called
(...): or if any were so bold to maintain, That (...) is due to the Cross, or
the Image of Christ, yet it is in a relative and inferior manner. So here the
Council condemns not all Veneration of Angels, but only such as is due to God.
Whereas the circumstances you have heard prove the contrary. The Council
forbids Invocation of Angels, as Intercessors for us to the supreme Deity.


Phil. You will never I see receive any satisfaction from us. I proceed unto
the two Eminent Fathers of the Latin Church. Bellarmin urges That prayer of S.
Jerome in the end of his Epitaph or Panegyric upon Paula. Vale o Paula, and
Cultoris tui ultimam senectutem orationibus juva.
Farewell o Paula, and assist with thy prayers the extreme old age of thy
worshipper.


Theoph. From other evident passages of that Father, we conclude This to be a
Rhetorical Apostrophe, and not the judgment and practice of S. Jerome to pray
unto the Saints departed. For in his book against Vigilantius, he first
asserts, That Martyrs are not to be worshipped. Quis aliquando Martyrs adoravit?
Whoever worshipped them?


Phil. Althou they are not worshipped as God, yet we may pray unto them.


Theoph. Prayer is a part of religious worship due to God, if you mean only
civil requests, such as one Christian makes to another to remember him in his
prayers, we would not deny it to the Saints in Heaven, could we be assured that
they do hear us. But to proceed, Jerome does not bring one syllable to assert
the Invocation of Saints; although, if his jugdment had inclined the balance that
way, he had occasion given by Vigilantius, whose Assertion was, That while we
live we may pray one for another, Post mortem nullus audet pro aliis deprecari.
but none prays for other after death. Against this Jerome rises with great
indignatien: If the blessed Apostles and Martyrs while in the flesh could pray
for others, how much more after they are crowned? Postquam cum Christo esse
cepermt minus valebunt?
shall they prevail less with Christ now they are with him? This is somewhat
for their Intercession, but not for their Invocation. Nay, in his funeral
Oration upon Nepotian dedicated to Heliodorus, Jerome says expressly: Quicquid
dixero, quia ille non audit, mutum videtur.
Whatsoever I say of him it is but silence, seeing he hears not. And in the
close of the Oration, he says: Cum quo loqui non possumus, de eo loqui nunquam
desinamus.
Seeing we cannot speak to him or with him, let us never cease to speak of him;
now making prayers to the deceased is speaking to them, and not of them.


Phil. If I should multiply Replies to your answers we should never conclude. I
have unto the testimony of S. Augustine. Bellarmin quotes 3 places out of this
Holy Father, to prove the Invocation of Saints: Tract. 84. in Joannem. Non sic
Mart. ad Mensam commemoramus, etc.
We do not so commemorate Martyrs, at the Holy Table, as we do others who rest
in peace, so as to pray for them, but rather that they may pray for us.. And
the second place is like unto it, De verbis Apostolorum, Sermon. 17. Injuria est
pro Mart. orare, cujus nos debemus Orat. commendari.
It is an injury to pray for a Martyr, unto whose Prayers we should be
commended.


Theoph. In these two parallel passages, St Augustine shows, That the
Commemoration of the Martyrs at the Altar in the time of Divine Service, must
not be construed a Prayer for them (for that would be an injury to them) but
rather a tacit recommendation of the Congregation, unto their Prayers and
Intercession. Here is no Invocation expressed, but only a recommendation implied,
and so they are dubious and imperfect proofs: and in the first he speaks only
comparatively, That Martyrs should rather pray for us, then we for them. And
yet withal I must acquaint you, That Epiphanius a Primitive Bishop (who did
much oppose the growing Superstition of Worshipping Saints and Images, both by
his Writings and Actions) Heresi 75. (...), etc.
be expressly tells us, We pray for Martyrs, and for the whole Order of Blessed
Saints, etc. That so we may distinguish the Lord Christ from all generations of
Men.


Phil. Make what use of your Observations you please. I pass to the third
Testimony, which Bellarmin brings from St Lib. de cura pro Mortuis, c. 4. Nisi
ad hoc, ut dum recolunt ubi sunt, etc.
Augustine, I do not see what advantage to the dead is the care of their Friends
to bury them near the Tomb of some Martyr; unless herein, That whilst they
remember where the Bodies of their Friends do lie, they may commend them unto
those Saints as Patrons, to be assisted by their Prayers.


Theoph. Notwithstanding this Testimony, we shall willingly be tried by this
Book, concerning St Augustins Judgment in the point of Praying to the Saints:
And I will therefore give you a short account of the whole Book. In the
beginning, St Augustine shows how he was consulted by Paulinus a Bishop, whether
it was any advantage to the Dead, to be buried in the Temple, or near the
Monument of a Saint or Martyr: The occasion was given by a Pious Matron, Flora,
who was very importunate to have her Son Cynegius buried in the Temple of St.
Felix. Hereunto St Augustine answers, That it is no part of our Misery, if our
Bodies should not be Interred, but exposed, by the Tyranny of Persecutors, unto
the Fouls of the Air, or to the Beasts of the Field: For, says he, our Blessed
Savior says expressly, That after Man has killed the Body, he can do no more,
not hurt the person after death. And when the Bodies of Martyrs were not
permitted Burial, it was no part of their Infelicity, but only showed the
cruelty of Tyrants, That so Christians, who contemned death, might learn much
more to contemn their Burial. He shows, That Funeral Solemnities, are Magis
sunt vivorum solatiaquam subsidia Mortuorum.
rather comforts to the living, then assistances to the dead. And then coming
near unto the Question, touching the advantage of being buried in a Martyrs
Temple: He answers in those words which Bellarmin cites, I see not how such a
provision can benefit the Person deceased, unless herein, That whilst his
Friends remember where his Body lies Interred, they may be apt to commend him
to the Patronage of that Saint for assistance with God.


Phil. This plainly proves the particular Invocation of Saints departed.


Theoph. Have patience, and St Augustine in the next Chapter, will show what he
meant by this recommendation. The pious Mother, says he, did desire her Son
should be buried in the Martyrs Temple, believing that so his Soul should reap
some benefit from the Martyrs merits: And then he immediately adds. Hoc quod ita
credidit suppli catio, etc.
This belief of hens was a kind of Prayer, and if any thing did profit her Son,
This, was it. You plainly see how doubtfully the good Father speaks concerning
the benefit of burial near a Martyr; and how he expressly interprets praying to
the Saint, to be, our believing that by his Merits we shall reap some advantage
to our Souls. He proceeds in that Book to show, That although there have bin
appearances of Ghosts, complaining, That their Bodies did lie unburied; yet
these things may come to pass by Divine permission, through the Ministry of good
or evil Angels: the Spirit departed knowing nothing of the Apparition. He gives
an Instance of an Executor, who after his Fathers decease, was much distressed
with the demand of a great Debt, which was supposd to have bin paid; but having
no Discharge to show, it was like to lie upon him: Meanwhile, his Father
appears to him, and directs him to the place where he should find the
Acquittance, and a full discharge of the Debt. Now by this Apparition, Men may
be apt to conclude, That the deceased Father understood and compassionated his
Sons condition, and came to his relief; and yet, says St Augustine, All this
might come to pass by Divine Providence, without his deceased Fathers
knowledge: And gives an Instance of himself, appearing to a Friend of his in
his Dream, whilist himself knew nothing of it. Eulogius was to read a solemn
Lecture before a great Auditory in Carthage, upon Tullies Rhetoric; and one
obscure passage there was which he did not well understand, and was very
solicitous how to interpret it: And lo! the night before, says St Augustine,
as Eulogius declares, I appeared to him in his Dream, and showed him an
apposite sense of the Words. This is in the 11th Chapter of the Book. In the
13th Chap. he concludes, That of such Apparitions, whether of Persons living or
defunct, are made to others, themselves being altogether ignorant thereof. And
he concludes farther, That there is no commerce between the living and the
dead, for otherwise, says he, my most deer Mother would have often appeared to
me, and manifested her care and love; for God forbid, That I should think she
is become cruel by her state of Happiness. And if our Parents and nearest
Friends have no communion with us after death, How should others they are
Strangers. St Augustine goes on to tell us. That the Children of Abraham
expressly say to God, Isaiah 63. 16. Surely thou art our Father, although Abraham
be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not. That Josiah was gathered to
his Fathers, that his eyes might not see the evil which should be brought upon
Jerusalem, 2 Kings 22. 20. implying, That after death he should not know it.
Therefore, says he, Ibi sunt spiritus defuncti ubi non vident quae hic
aguntur, etc.
The Souls of dead Men are where they do not see what things are done here
below; And how then can they see their own Tombs? And whereas Abraham did know
Moses, and the Prophets, and their Writings, when he directed Dives his
Brethren unto them, He might know them, says he, by their own Relation after
their decease. In the 15th Chapter he concludes fully, Fatendum est Nescire
Mortuos, quid hic agatur.
We must confess that the dead do not know what is here done, unless something
may be made known to them by the relation of Angels, or persons lately
deceased, And whereas, says he, at the Shrines and Monuments of Martyrs,
Miracles have bin wrought, and Martyrs themselves have appeared to the living,
yet they might not themselves know that they did appear; as we read, That
Ananias appeared to Saul in Damascus, himself knowing not of it, until the Lord
acquainted him therewith, The Lord said unto Ananias, Acts 9. 11, 12. Arise,
and go into the street which is called, Strait; and enquire in the House of
Judas, for one called Saul of Tarsus: for behold he Prays, and has seen in a
Vision a Man named Ana^ias, coming in, and putting his hand on him, that he
might receive his sight. At length he concludes, An ista fiant Dei nutu per
Angelicas potestates, in honorem, etc.
Such Miracles at the Shrines of Martyrs may be done, by Gods permission, through
the Ministry of Angels and Holy Powers, in honor of the Saints, and for the
benefit of Men; the Saints themselves being entered into the highest rest, and
attending unto more excellent things, being sequestered from us, and praying for
us.


Phil. St Augustine acknowledges, you see, that the Saints and Martyrs do pray
for us.


Theoph. Yes in general, as he expresses it in the 16th Chap. Ipsis in loco
suis meritis congruo ab omni mortalium conversatiens remotis, etc.
They being removed from the society of Mortals, in a place suitable to their
merits; and yet in general, praying for the indigency of poor Supplicants: As
we pray for the dead, with whom we are not present, neither know we where they
are, or what they do. Thus have I given an account of St Augustins Judgment out
of this Book, to show, That he did not believe the Saints departed knew our
conditions, or that Prayers were to be made to them. That which he mentions
concerning the Prayers of the living for the dead, that will fall into
consideration hereafter. Now as this excellent Father is voluminous, so are
there scattered in his Works many other Passages to take us off from the
Invocation of Saints, That even at their Shrines we ought not to pray to them,
but to God. Lib. 8. De civit. Dei, cap. ult.
He tells us, That whatsoever Religious Obsequies are used in the Temples and
Places of the Martyrs, they are Ornaments of their Memory: That we may give
thanks to God for their Triumph, and may encourage others to their Imitation,
from the renewing of their Memories, Eodem Deo invocato in auxilium.
The same Lord being called upon for our assistance. Mark it: God being called
upon for his assistance, that we may imitate the Martyrs Virtues. Lib. 20.
Centra faustum Manich. c. 21. Quod offertur, Deo offertur, etc.
Again he tells us, That which is offered at the Shrines and Memories of the
Martyrs, is offered to God.


Phil. This is true, as to Sacrifices, which belong only to God; but not as to
our Prayers


Theoph. Our Prayers are Christian Sacrifices, ascending up like the Incense,
and the Evening Sacrifice, Psalm. 142. 2. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay
thy Vows unto the most highest, and call upon me in the time of trouble, says
the Prophet David, Psalm. 50. 14, 15. So Tertullian Phraseth it, Lib. Ad
Scapulam. Sacrificamus Deo pro salute Imperat. sed prece pura.
We sacrifice unto God for the health of the Emperor, but with pure Prayer. And
in his Apology for Christians, Chap. 30. Offero opimam and majorem Hostiam
orationem de carne pudica, etc.
I offer to God, says he, a more excellent Sacrifice, even Prayer, proceeding
out of pure lips and an innocent heart, and from the Holy Ghost. So Clemens
Alexandrinus, Lib. 7. Stromatum, (...), etc.
We honor God by Prayer, and send up this best and most holy Sacrifice. Our
Prayers therefore, are the most acceptable Sacrifices from us to God. (Of your
transcendent Sacrifice of the Mass, we may, God willing, treat hereafter.)
Again in his first Tom. Lib. De ver a Relig cap. ult. he tells us. That the
service of the Body may be due to Princes; the service of the Soul, to God. He
tells us farther, Ecce unum Deum colo, quisquis Angel. diligit. hunc Deum
certus sum, etc.
Behold I worship one God, the Fountain of all things, and the Angels that love
God, I am sure they love me: Whosoever abides in him, and can hear the Prayers
of Men, in him he hears me, and in him he helps me. Religat ergo nos Religio
uni Omnipotenti Deo.
Religion therefore binds me to one Omnipotent God. The good Father often tells
us, That the Blessed Saints and Angels expect no such service from us, but
expressly, says he, they direct us to pray to God. Psalm 96. Tom. 8. Omnes
Sancti and Angeli, etc. Ad ejus cultum, etc.
All the Saints and Angels seek his glory whom they love, and they study to
draw all whom they love to his Worship, and to his Contemplation, and to pray
to him. To this effect elsewhere he tells us, Lib. de Pastoribus, c. 8. Sunt
montes boni, sc. autores divin script.
The Authors of Holy Scripture are good hills, and when we look unto them, they
will send you back to God, in whom stands your help. Si in iis spem posueris
contristabuntur.
If you put confidence in them, they will grieve: The Angel, says he, that
related many Mysteries to John, being worshipped by him, he calls him back to
God, Tanquam levantem oculos ad Montem, revocat ad Deum.
as one that did lift up his eyes to the hills, saying, See thou do it not;
worship God: I am thy Fellow Servants. Enar. upon Psalm. 64. 3. Solus ibi, ex his
qui carnem, etc.
Again he shows, How Christ is our High Priest entered within the veil, who
only, of all that lived in the flesh, there does make Intercession for us: And
this, says he, was shadowed under the Law, for in the first Temple, only the
High Priest entered into the Holiest of all, and offered Sacrifice for the
People, standing without. Once more, in the 10th Book of his Confessions, chap.
42. St Augustine speaks fully against Invocation of Angels, Quem invenirem, qui
me reconciliaret Tibi?
Whom may I find, says he, to reconcile me to thee, O God! Shall I go to the
Angels? With what Prayer, with what Sacraments? Many desirous to return to
Thee, and distrusting themselves, as I hear, have tried this way, and have
fallen into the curiosity of Visions, and became meet for Delusions. And now,
after all that you have heard out of St Augustine, I pray judge whether Bellarmin
had reason to appeal to him, for the confirmation of the Invocation of Saints.


Phil. Notwithstanding all your insulting Triumphs, what has bin brought by
Bellarmin out of St Augustine, has not bin impertinent. But you forget one
notable passage which Bellarmin quotes out of St Augustine, in his 18th Chapter
of this Book and Controversy (you promised to take these Testimonies into
consideration in your own season, but you have forgotten it) Aljuvet nos Cypr.
Orationibus suis. Lib. 7. de Baptism. Contra Donatist. c. 10.
It is a formal Invocation: Let Cyprian help us with his Prayers.


Theoph. It Is no Invocation of Cyprian, but St Augustins desire put up to God,
That the Blessed Martyr Cyprians Prayers might benefit him. It implies the
Supplication of the Saints in Heaven, for the People of God in general, and his
Prayer to God, That he, with others, might reap the fruit of their Prayers.


Phil. I will conclude with Bellarmins last Argument; the Miracles that have
attested this Doctrine, whereby the Saints and Martyrs have demonstrated, That
they do hear our Prayers, and can help us.


Theoph. For a general Answer hereunto, we have already showed out of St
Augustine, That Miracles may be done at the Monuments of the Saints, and
themselves may appear unto Votaries in their Temples, and yet know nothing
neither of the Miracle or the Apparition. God, by the ministry of Angels,
working Miracles and Cures at their Shrines, for a Testimony unto the Faith for
which these Martyrs died.


Phil. This general Answer will not serve: For the Learned Cardinal proves, out
of the 3d Book of St Bernard's Life, That the Holy Father, Preaching at
Toulouse, against such who denied the Invocation of Saints, before all the
Congregation blessed Loaves of Bread with the Sign of the Cross, and offered
this trial of his Doctrine, That if it were true, all who had Diseases in the
great City, eating of these Loaves, should be healed: And so multitudes were
healed of their Infirmities. Here you see, God did attest the Doctrine of
Invocation of Saints by Miracle.


Theoph. Bernard lived in the 12th Century, and so the Testimony runs low: But
withal, the Abbot who wrote those four Books, as a Legend of Bernards Life,
suited the fabulous, credulous humors of these Times; he makes him a
Wonder-worker thro-out. I well remember, That above 30 Years since, being a
Novice in the University, and reading this account of St Bernards Life, I could
not choose but abhor the notorious Forgeries of the Writer I pray read and judge.


Phil. I see you will not be convinced, and therefore I will proceed no farther
in vain.


Theoph. I give you thanks for your release. It has bin no small trouble to
search your Autorities, and discover in most of them either Impertinency or
Forgery. And withal, I pray observe, That as your Pretensions unto the
Testimony of Holy Scripture, of General and Provincial Councils for 700 years
after Christ; of Fathers for the three first Centuries, have bin altogether
ineffectual to prove your Doctrine of the Invocation of Saints: That as your
pretensions unto the Testimony of Fathers for the three next Centuries, many of
them have bin impertinent, others forged; and the rest contradicted, either by
themselves, or others in their time: So you have not attemted to show for the
practice of this Doctrine, That it was received by any Church in her public
Offices: and therefore, at most, it must pass for the private Opinion of some
Doctors, not the consent of the Church, until your Church did introduce it,
among other Innovations: You do not show how early, because you cannot within
600 years of Christ, and afterward the Superstition crept in upon the World
slowly, and by insensible degrees; one National Church following the example of
another. Niceph. lib. 15. c. 28. (...), etc.
We read indeed in the Greek Church, of one Peter Gnapheus, or Fullo (as the
Latins interpret) who in the latter end of the fifth Century, was by craft
Patriarch of Antioch; he was an Heretic and Theopaschite, maintaining, That the
Godhead suffered upon the Cross: and he added to that Trisagium (Holy is the
Lord, Holy is the Strong, Holy is the Immortal) who was Crucified for us. And
for this cause he was condemned for an Hereseic in a Council at Rome, Felix the
third being Pope, Anno Christi 483. This Peter Fullo, b E^n. Tom. 3. p. 600.
as Nicephorus likewise shows, appointed, (...), etc.
That in their Prayers Men should call upon the Mother of God, and Invoke her
Divine Name. Now it is observable, That Baronius speaks much of this P. Fullo,
and of his Heresy, and quotes Nicephorus; and yet takes no notice of his
introducing the Invocation of the Blessed Virgin, but tells us another blind
Story, How this Fullo consecrated one Xenaias a Persian Bishop of Hierapolis,
before he was Baptized, and said, Dixit, sufficere pro Bapt. Consecrationem,
Anno Christi, 483.
That his Consecration might suffice instead of Baptism. He farther observes,
how this Bishop Xenaias proved a great Eiconoclast, and destroier of Images,
and so glories, that the Enemies of Image worship had such a president, as a
barbarous Persian Unbaptized; mean while, never considering how it may be
retorted upon him and his Church, That an arch Heretic, Petrus Fullo, first
introduced the Invocation of Saints into some parts of the Church Catholic, in
the public Office of Prayers, That Simon Magus, and some Jewish Christians,
first Invocated Angels: That the Heathen Philosophy brought in the Intercession
of middle Deities. Will you now be pleased to hear some of our Arguments
against this Doctrine?


Phil. Willingly: For I expect they should be like your Answers, of no great
moment, and so put off with the less difficulty.


Theoph. You may please your self with your own conceits; but I am confident,
that upon serious consideration, they will perplex even the refractory, and
convince the Ingenious Reader.


Phil. Their goodness depends not upon your Testimony: Let me hear them.


Theoph. Our Blessed Savior taught his Disciples to Pray: He gave them a
Prayer, which should be a Form and Pattern to all succeeding Generations: and
therefore he said, After this manner pray ye, Matthew. 6. And Tertullian in his
Book De Oratione, calls the Lords Prayer, Legem Orationis, The Law and Rule of
Prayer. Now in that Prayer we have no Invocation of Saints, but rather
Direction given when we Pray, to call upon God the Father which is in Heaven.


Phil. Ibid. c. 20. Non de eo qui Orandus, sed de rebus quae petendie sunt,
admonuit Discipulos.
Bellarmin answers this Argument, saying, That our Blessed Savior here taught
his Disciples. not to whom they should make their Prayers, but what they should
ask in Prayer.


Theoph. Bellarmin says, but he does not prove. The Disciples request to
Christ, was, concerning the matter and manner of Prayer both, Lord, teach us to
Pray, Matthew. 69. And our Savior answers both, After this manner therefore pray
ye: and when ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. Luke 11. 2.


Phil. Yours, at best, is but a Negative Argument: That because our Blessed
Savior did not in this place teach us to desire the Prayers of the Saints in
Heaven, therefore we ought not so to do: Wherefore do you desire your Friends
that are living to pray for you?


Theoph. Because we have warrant so to do from other places of Holy Scripture;
But neither here, nor elsewhere, have our Savior or the Apostles taught us to
call upon the Saints in Heaven for the assistance of their Prayers.


Phil. By this Argument, as Bellarmin shows, we ought not to pray to God the
Son. or God the Holy Ghost, because our Savior has here taught us to say only,
Our Father.


Theoph. The Father is not in the Lords Prayer taken Personally, but as God.
The Blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and Spirit, is our Father by Creation, and
Redemption, and Adoption. Hence your Learned Jesuit Maldonate upon the place,
Magis illorum probo sententiam, qui totam hic Trinit. etc.
I approve rather their Opinion, who hold, That the whole Trinity is here
called, Our Father. And it is near unto Blasphemy to say with Bellarmin, That
the Exclusive or Negative Argument from this Prayer, holds as well against
Christ and the Holy Ghost, as against the Saints. The Father, Son, and the Holy
Ghost, are essentially one Creator and Father of all Men. The Saints are
Creatures, and no comparison between them, or consequence from one to the other.


Phil. You have used your self so much to bitterness of Speech, That it is
become even natural to you, to impute unto our Doctors Blasphemy, and Forgery,
and Impertinency, and Folly^; and what not? I pray produce your Arguments, and
forbear your Censures.


Theoph. As the Apostle spoke in another sense, so I, for an Apology, must say,
You have constrained me; but I forbear. The next Argument against Invocation of
Saints, is that of St Paul, Romans 10. 14. How shall they call on him, in whom
they have not believed? Seeing we must believe only in God and in Christ, not
in the Saints, therefore we must not call upon them: We may believe the Saints,
but not believe in the Saints. Now the words of the Apostle are, How shall they
call upon him, (...).
in whom they have not believed.


Phil. Bellarmin answers this Argument, by showing, That the Apostle speaks of
calling upon God. Now we must believe on him, before we can call upon him.


Theoph. Must we not believe also in the Saints, before we call upon them?


Phil. Yes, Non posse eum Sanctos invocare qui non suo modo credit in Sanctos.
Bellarmin tells you immediately after, That he cannot call upon the Saints, who
does not in some sort believe in them.


Theoph. Bellarmin says this, Suo more, to pervert the Holy Scripture with his
corrupt Glosses and Interpretations: The Fathers are positive, That to believe
in him, refers only to God. (...), etc.
Gregory Nazianzen tells us, It is not the same to believe in any one, and to
believe any thing of him; the one belongs to God, the other to any Creature. So
Ruffinus upon the Creed, By the syllable of this Preposition, In, the Creator
is distinguished from the Creature; and Divine, from humane things. We believe
in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: We believe the Holy Church. These were the
ancient Rules of Faith, until your Doctors gave us new. And yet Aquinas here
leaves you: Catena aurea. In Joannem, c. 14.
for upon Job. 14. 1. he observes, That Christ saying, Believe also in me,
testifies unto his Disciples, That he is their God: for although we may believe
another, we must believe in God only.


Phil. You multiply Quotations in vain: For you heard that Bellarmin did not
say absolutely, but that suo modo, We may believe in the Saints.


Theoph. It Is suo modo in truth: For the Ancients allow no such Qualification.


Phil. You may excuse the Expression, because he shows out of Holy Scripture,
that we may believe in the Saints. In St Paul's Epistle to Philemon, ver. 5.
Hearing of thy Love and Faith which thou have toward the Lord Jesus, and
toward all Saints. The Griginal is, Thy Love and Faith (...).
in all the Saints


Theoph He has found one place, and none like it, to justify his confident
Assertions: But you must understand that Text right, by a fit transposition of
the terms: Hearing of thy Faith in Christ; and of thy Love toward the Saints:
So Calvin reads it, and Firinus a Learned Jesuit, in their Commentaries upon
the place.


Phil. You will turn and wind every Text to your own purpose: But Bellarmin
explains himself concerning this believing in the Saints: Credere esse Sanctos
in iis, ut in patronis sperare, eosque ut tales diligere.
To believe that they are Saints, to hope in them as Patrons; and as such, to
love them.


Theoph. It seems by your Cardinals Interpretation of himself, these three
Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope. and Love, contrary to their Nature, must be
referred objectively to the Saints; and so Adoration, Invocation, acts of
Religious and Divine Worship, must have the Saints for their object, according
to your Doctors, who invert and pervert the frame and order of the ancient
Theology by their new Models, and modern Inventions. By this rule, in our
Ladies Psalter, as you call it, many Versicles of the 150 Psalms of David, are
Blasphemously perverted: The Name of God the Lord put out, and the name of our
Lady put in. O Lady, How are they multiplied that trouble me, Psalm. 3. ver. 1.
Ponder my words, O Lady, and consider my Meditations, Psalm. 5. 1. O Lady,
rebuke me not in thine Indignation, Psalm. 6 10. Unto thee, O Lady, lift I up my
Soul, etc. Psalm. 25. 1. Have mercy upon me, O Lady, who art called the Mother
of mothers, according to the tender Bowels of thy Compassions, cleanse me from
all mine Iniquities, Psalm. 51. 1. And so it is carried on throughout the whole
book of Psalms, until you come to the close, Praise our Lady in her Holiness,
Laud her in her Miracles, and Virtues. Psalm. 150. 1. This is the new mode more
Romano. This is the new Devotion of your Church.


Phil. Show where our Church does own or countenance such extravagancies.


Theoph. This Psalter is of Cardinal Bonaventures making; a Franciscan Friar,
zealous for the Virgin Mari's superlative honor, (as ever was the while order
of Franciscan's.) It is at larg printed in the fourth tome of his works, under
public License, Jussu Sixti quin ti permissu superiorum.
by the command of Pope Sixtus the fifth, and the license of his superiors, and
for this and other his Seraphical piety; he was afterward Canonized for a Saint.


Phil. It cannot be of that Learned Schoolman's Composure, 3. Sent. did. 3.
qu. 2. da. Cavendum, ne dum Matris Exoel. ampliatus. etc.
for he writes against such trancendencies ascribed unto the Blessed Virgin.
And gives this pious caution. We must beware least whilst the Fxcellency of the
Mother is amplified, the glory of the son be Eclipst; and so in Him she also be
provoked to anger; who desires more the honor of her Son, then of her self.
And he further answers that Objection, That the honor of the Mother Redownds to
the Son. No says He. Non omnis honor qui filio acbetur Maeri tribuendus.
All the Honor due to the Son must not be given to the Mother.


Theoph. He that says, all Honor due to Christ is not to be given to his
Mother, supposes that some Honor due to Christ is to be given to her. And that
must be divine Honor: and withal because he was not of the Opinion of other
Doctors, that she was Conceived without Original sin; he spoke these words, but
he concludes, She was bo^n without sin, Sanctified immediately after her
Conception in her Mothers Womb. That She never sined actually; and could not
sin after her Conception by the holy Ghost, because She was confirmed in Good
as the blessed Saints and Angels in Heaven. However it is evident, such a
Blasphemous Psalter there is, and (if ye will have it so) ^oisted into his
works, to procure the greater Reputation thereunto. And so you confess your own
Authors are corrupted for the advantage of your cause. Mean while, your Index
Expurgatorius, your high Commission Court of the Inquisition serves not, it
seems, to Expunge out of Authors Blasphemous Spurious Writings, if they any way
agree with the Genius of your Church; but to Expunge sound and Orthodox
Divinity, which sui es not with your new Principle and doctrines, but of such
Extravagancies hereafter. I pray tell me, can you Imagine so larg a Psalter
consisting of an 150. Psalms, together with other Blasphemous Hymns and
Additions, could be permitted to come abroad into the world under his Name, and
in his works, with so much License and Authority, if it were not well pleasing
to those in the greatest Authority in your Church. Now I have instanced in this
Psalter to show how ye do believe and hope in the Saints, and so Rationally
conclude that you ought to call upon them. But we have not so learned Christ to
believe and trust in man, least the curse of God should light upon us. To
proceed therefore in our Arguments against your Doctrine. We have already
showed that your Doctors can make no proof, or give any assurance that the
Saints in Heaven do hear our Prayers, and therefore that we should call upon
them in vain. But yet further as to our thoughts and mental Prayers, the Saints
cannot discern them, and therefore are not meet Objects of our Invocation,


Phil. Yes in the glass of the Trinity, even men's thoughts may be represented
to them.


Theoph. Never tell me what may be; but do you believe they do discern our
though's? you know in Scripture, to search the hearts, and know the thoughts of
men, is made an incommunicable property of the divine Nature. Thou even thou
only know the hearts of men, says Solomon 1 Kings 8. 39.


Phil. To this Bellarmin answers, that God only naturally, and by hiw own
virtue know's men's thoughts; but the Saints by Revelation, and the beatific
Vision.


Theoph. These are mere Dictates without proof. Devices to shift of
unanswerable Arguments. How can your great Doctor prove that God reveles the
thoughts of Men, and Women, and Children, and their mental Prayers to the
Saints in Heaven, or that they behold them in the Beatifical Vision: whereas he
is foret to acknowledge, that other things are conceled from them? for instance,
neither Angels, nor Saints, know the day of Judgment.


Phil. This wise discourse signifies but little. For if the Saints in glory
cannot difcern nor hear mental Prayer, let us put up vocal Supplications, unto
them.


Theoph. If you cry aloud, and they cannot hear you, what then? however there
is more in this consideration, then so. Would you have the blessed Virgin as
soon interceed for Hypocrites. as for sincere Christians? shall Peter admit you
all promiscuously into Heaven? such Mediators, as you make the Saints, ought to
be qualified for their high office, with a discerning faculty of the sincerity
of men's hearts, who call upon them, and withal when men are speechless upon
their deathbeds, and most need the help of their Fraiers, by your last
supposition, they must go without them.


Phil. Why is this Argument, of not discerning the thoughts of men's hearts; of
force against the Saints Intercession in Heaven, more then against the
Intercession, and prayers of Saints upon Earth for one another;


Theoph. Your selves make the wide difference between the Intercession of the
Saints in heaven, and of the faithful here upon Earth. And that shall be the
ground of our next Argument, against your Invocation of Saints and their
Intercession, because you make their Mediation much to derogate from the
Meditation and Intercession of Christ.


Phil. That indeed is a material Objection, but how do ye prove it? Ibid. Cap.
20.
Bellarmin says expressly. We do not call upon the Saints to perform the Offioe
of Christ; but only that they would assist us with their Prayers, the more
easily for us to obtain our requests from God through Christ. He acknowledges
Christ to be the one only Mediator between God and man, by way of Redemption
and satisfying the debt: and by Nature as being God and man: and because he
only stands in need of no other Mediator: whatsoever others obtain of God
either for themselves, or others, they obtain it through Christ. Now although the
Saints and Angels do not satisfy for our sins, and pay the debt, yet they may
beseech God for Christ's fake to forgive them.


Theop. If this were all, we would not much contend with them about the Saints
Intercession, as prejudicial to the Mediation and Intercession of Christ. But
the Doctrine of your Schools goes further. That the Saints intercede for us,
not only by their Prayers, but also by their merits; Sent. l. 4. did. 45. ad
finem.
so Peter Lombard the Mr. of the Sentences Interprets the Act of Intercession.
We pray to the Saints to Intercede for us. i. e. That their merits may become
our assistance, and Immediately before he says, Intercedunt merito. and
affectu.
The Saints interceed with God for us by their Merits, whilst their Merits
plead for us, and by their Love, desiring to have our requests granted.
Bonaventure explains him. Although, first he, the Saints in glory, Non sunt in
statu merendi, are not in a state of Meriting and are sufficiently recompensed
for their Merits in this life, In 4. Sent. did. 45.
yet because they did supererogate much, They have obtained such honor by there
Merits, not only to deserve beatitude, and glory for themselves, but also to
prove suffragans for others, so that he who was before unworthy; by Praying to
the Saints, through their Patronage becomes worthy. Now we say that through the
Merits of Christ, we who are otherwise altogether unworthy, have access, with
boldness unto the Father, and therefore we implore his Patronage, and
Advocation, and Intercession, and take him as the only Mediator between God and
man: and for all this we have the full and express Authority of Gods word. Through
Him, we have access by one Spirit unto the Father; In whom we have boldness,
and access with confidence through faith in Him. Ephe: 2. 18. and 3. 12. Again. If
any Man Sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, e
Quia multa supererog. suis meritis adepti sunt locum, etc.
and he is the Propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for
the sins of the whole world. 1 John 1. 2. Again. There is one God, and one
Mediator between God and Man,, the Man Christ Jesus who gave himself a Ransom
for us. 1 Timothy 2. v. 5. 6.


Phil. I have showed above how Bellarmin acknowledges Christ, to be the one
only Mediator, by way of Redemtion, and solution of the debt, but the Saints
may be Mediators by way of Intercession.


Theoph. If you meant only the Intercession of Prayers, it were tolerable but
your Doctors bring in the intercession of their Merits; and that implies,
satisfaction of the debt, at least in some part their Superogation supplying
our defect.


Phil. This refers unto another Point to be discust hereafter, touching the
Saints Merits, and Superogation; and therefore we will not now determine it.


Theoph. Mean while upon your own gross suppositions you make the Saints so to
Interpose with God for us, as to Entrench upon the Intercession of Christ, who
is therefore represented to be our Advocate, because, He is a propitiation for
Sin. 1 John 2. 1, 2. As our Mediator, because, He gave himself a Ransom for
all. 1 Timothy 2. 6.


Phil. You may take our Blessed Savior as the principal in Intercession, and
satisfaction; and the Blessed Saints may come in as Inferior Advocates, and
Patrons.


Theoph. This is the Rock, against which your Schole-men generally Shipwreck
Concience. First, They take all things taught or practiced in the Church of
Rome as infallibly true, and then when any thing is objected out of Gods word,
or the Testimony, of the Ancients against them, they salve themselves by a
distinction So you have in Saints worship, and Image worship, (...); a Supreme
and inferior religious worship, composeth the difference. So Christ is the
Invisible head of the Church Catholic, and the Pope the visible and
Ministerial. So the works of the Law do not justify together with faith, but
good works do. So you may hold two principles with the Manichees. For although God
be the only Author and Creator of good things; there may be any other first
principle of evil things. And thus we can have no standing rule and measure of
Truth, and Religion, as long as the wit of Man, shall adventure to delude them
by the subtlety of a distinction.


Phil. How can you attain to any true knowledge of things; if you take away the
use of distinguishing.


Theoph. Not the use but the abuse of distinguishing is our greivance; when
subtle men elude the most evident Testimonies of the Scripture, and the Fathers
against them, which distinctions minted in their own brains; and only serving,
to their present purpose.


Phil. Our Doctors excellently distinguish in this work of Mediation. Namely,,
That Christ is the Mediator between God and Man; and the blessed Saints, are
Mediators between us and Christ, 3 Sent. Did. 3. qu. 2.
So Bonaventure of the Blessed Virgin. She is the Mediatrix between us and
Christ, as Christ is Mediator between us and God. l. 9. Moral. Just. c. 10.
Sancti. apud Christum. etc.
And so Azorius asserts of all the blessed Saints. The Saints are our Advocates
and Patrons, with Christ, and Christ with God. And some of our Doctors give an
excellent reason, of this distinction They say, Christ is not only an Advocate,
but also a judge, examining the Merit of the supplicant; and how shall a poor
Sinner come unto him without an Intercessor to find Acceptance? so the Antonius
4. sum. titulo 15. Deus providet nobis. etc.
Archbishop of Florence, and therefore, says he, God has furnished us with
an Advocatrix, who is gentle, and sweet, without any mixture of sharpness,
according to that notable saying, of St Bernard, (which Antonius cites) O man
thou have a secure access to God, where the Mother stands before the son, and
the son before the father, the Mother showing her Breast, and Paps, and the son
his Side, and the Wounds unto his Father.


Theoph. This is a new Model of Divinity to the purpose, we had thought the
Love of Christ toward poor Sinners, could find no parallel. That the good
Shep-heard needed no solicitation, and mediation of others, to bring home the
lost sheep; he came down from Heaven to save it. We find he has graciously
invited the weary and heavy laden to come unto him; do ye find where he puts
them from him, since the work of our Redemption is perfected? The Apostle tells
us, he can have compassion of our infirmities, and be touched with a fellow
feeling, being in all points Tempted like as we are, yet without Sin. And
therefore we may come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain
Mercy. Feb. 4 15. 16. That we have a Merciful and Faithful High Priest, to make
Reconciliation for the Sins of the People. Heb. 2. 17. That he is able to save
them to the uttermost that come to God by him; seeing he ever lives to make
Intercession for them. Heb. 7. 25 All this and much more we Read to our
unspeakable Comfort, but nothing of his severe Inquisition, and Judging them
that come to him, before his second coming unto Judgment. And yet I must tell
you, you have bin too favouroble in the discovery,; this Mystery of Iniquity
works higher then you have Represented. The blessed Virgin must not only
entreat, but command her Son. It is a Notorious form of Prayer among you O
Felix Puerpera Jure Matris impera.
O happy Mother, upon a Mothers authority command thy Son. And although Ibin. c. 16
Qui^ nostrum hoc dicit.
Bellarmin asked who used that Form, as tho he were ignorant thereof: yet as
being conscious, he immediately after Exenses and justifies the Prayer. Si
Josh. 10. dicitur obedire. etc.
For, says he, if it be said Joshua the 10. The Lord obe^'d the voice of a
Man, why may not, after some sort, the Son of God be said to obey his Mother.


Theoph. Aliquo modo, Your Doctors can make any thing good, but in the first
place, it is not there said. That the Lord obei'd the voice of Man. So indeed
your vulgar Translation renders it, but according to the Original, we read it
thus. b That the Lord hearkened unto the voice of a Man. Josh. 10. 14. And so
the septuagint, and if God did obey the voice of a Man, yet we do not read that
Joshua did command the Lord; but only the Sun, and Moon, Sun stand thou still
in Gibeon, and Thou Moon in the valley uf Asalon, and therefore, Jure Matris
impera.
upon the authority of a Mother command thy Son; it was Intolerable to say so,
when Christ was in the Flesh, and subject to his Parents; much more now he
being ascended into Glory. You do not read that the Blessed Virgin laid any
command upon her Son on Earth.


Phil. You may take these as high Expressions of a devout Soul, manifesting her
confidence in the blessed Mother, to obtain any thing of her Son, and Savior.


Theoph. Such extatic devotion has led many of your Church beyond all reason,
and Religion, in their superstitious addresses to the Saints; and upon this
occasion given, I will insist more upon your Extravagancies, in the Invocation,
and worship of our Lady. You salute Her the Queen of Heaven, and Mother of
Mercies: and so your Doctors have assigned unto Her more then half the Kingdom
with the Father. As the great King Abassuerus promised unto Queen Ester. Gabriel
Biel, Supra Canon. Missae lect. 80. etc.
One of your Schoolmen tells us, That God reserving the execution of Justice to
himself, has granted to the Virgin Mother, the dispensation of Grace, and
Mercy. Bernardinus in suo Mariali. etc.
By another we are taught, to appeal from the Bar of Gods Justice, unto the
Throne of Mercy, of the Blessed Virgin. And whereas the Apostle exhorts, to
come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy. The Archbishop
of Florence tells us, That Mariah est thronus Christi. etc.
Mary is this throne wherein Christ rested, and that it is necessary all such
should be Justified and saved, unto whom she turnsher favorable countenance,
and for whom she, proves an advocate and Bernardinus further ^ (...).
assures us, That In Christo tanquam in capite influente, in Maria tanquam, etc.
as Grace is in Christ, as in the head and fountain, so is it in Mary as in the
neck transmitting; So that no Grace can descend from Heaven upon the sons of
men, but through the hands and conveyance of the Blessed Virgin. Lay all this
together, and you will soon perceive how by a strange emulation of her Votaries
the superstition is improved, even into the highest degree of blasphemy.


Phil. Our Church is not concerned in these follies of private persons and
superstitious Votaries.


Theoph. You have past a just Censure upon them, yet you will find they derived
their imaginations from others before them of great Authority in your Church.
You may turn Canisius the Jesuits Catechism, set forth in a large Folio, under
the license of Pope Pius the fifth. In his second chap. of the Lords Prayer, and
the Angel Gabriel's Salutation: quaest. 18 among others he cites out of
Damascen, Bernard, and Anselm, these passages. Domina peccatoris orationem
accipe, To solum gaudii spem habentis, etc.
O Lady receive the prayer of a sinner, who does fervently love and worship
thee as his only hope and joy, and pledge of Salvation. Shake off the burden of
my sins, and subdue temptations, and guide me in holiness, that by thy conduct
I may obtain eternal bliss. Invituperabilem Deipara spem tuam, etc. Omnipotens
auxtlium tuum.
I shall be saved under thine irreprovable hope; having your protection as a
brestplate, and your omnipotent assistance. Blessed Mother of God open unto us
the Gate of mercy, that trusting in thee we may not err and may be freed from
all evil: Tu enimes salus generis humani.
For thou art the Salvation of Mankind. Omnem spem meam in Te repono Matter
luminis.
I put my whole trust in thee, o Mother of Light. This he cites out of
Damascen. Out of Bernard he brings these passages. Praecessit nos Regina
nostra, praecessit, ut fiducialiter sequantur Dominam, etc.
Our Quen is gone before, received into her glory, that we her servants may call
after her. Draw us that we may run after Thee, because of the savor of thine
Ointments. Cant. 1. The Blessed Virgin ascending up on high, even she will give
gifts unto men. For what should hinder, seeing neither power nor a will is
wanting? She is the merciful Queen of Heaven, and the Mother of Gods only Son.
Let him forbear to magnify thy mercy, who has found thee wanting, when he
called upon thee. O thou Blessed, who can take the length and breadth and
height and depth of thy mercy? Out of Anselm this. Peripsam gratiam qua Te De
us omnipotens exaltavit, and omnia Tibi, etc.
We beseech thee o Lady by that grace whereby almighty God has highly exalted
thee, and given to thee together with himself all things possible, that Thou
would obtain for us such fullness of grace which thou have deserved to bring
us to Glory. Do thou only will our Salvation, and we shall be saved, help us
therefore most benign Lady, and not remembering the multitude of our sins
incline thy heart to pity us. Again, if your Church does not approve, how come
your Superiors to license such books? why does your Sacred College of
Inquisitors strein at Gnats in other'd men's writings, and swallow these Camels?
If your Doctors did abhor such blasphemies, they would expunge them, they would
bend their interests and their studies against them. But the naked truth is,
That the Orders of the Franciscan's, and the Jesuits most of them, have so
vehemently espoused the honor of our Lady, that nothing comes amiss to advance
it; and these having the greatest influence upon the Court of Rome, have in a
manner silenced all such as among your selves would have contradicted. For
Instance, in that great Question about the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed
Virgin in her Mothers womb, the Dominicans were Orthodox, and in the negative,
maintaining well, That all who descended from the loins of Adam by natural
generation were conceived in sin, infected with original corruption. That only
Christ was without sin; and therefore his Blessed Mother was not free at least
from original sin. That if Christ was her God and Savior, (as she acknowledges
in the first verse of her Magnificat,) therefore she was a sinner. For he was
therefore called Jesus, or Savior, because he should save his People from
their sins. But the other party effected that by power and interest, which they
could not make good by Argument: and by plurality of votes they prevailed in
the Council. Trid. sess. 5. Declarat tum haec sancta Synodus, non esse suae, etc.
Council of Trent, That the Virgin Mother should not be included within the
Canon of original sin; but the Constitutions of Sixtus 4tus the Pope should be
observed. The same faction had before prevailed upon the Pope and Court to
establish a Solemn Feast in memory of her Immaculate Conception; they procured
the Edict of Pope Xystus quartus, that none should write or dispute against it:
and so the opinion of the Immaculate Conception is fairly made a Doctrine of
the Church, seeing the Feast is solemnized by the Authority of the Pope. For
Pope Sixtus ano 1476 publishes his Bull Vid. Bin. tom. 8. page 1051, 1052.
to establish the Feast with great Indulgences to all such as should devoutly
keep the Feast, and be present at the solemn Offices and Services of it: and
seven years after he sets forth another Bull, severely forbidding any one to
speak or write against the Immaculate Conception, and the Council of Trent
Confirms that Decree of Xystus. You see therefore how matters are carried by
favor and affection, under show of piety, and devotion, and honor toward the
Mother of God; they have introduced heretical opinions and presumtious
blasphemies, whereof I have given some instances.


Phil. I pray forbear your railing, and keep close to the point of Saints
Invocation, and bring your exceptions against the public practice of the
Church, if any you have, and trouble not your self and me with personal
extravagancies and phancies.


Theoph. I thought a Popes Bull for the Celebration of the Feast of the
Immaculate Conception, and the confirmation thereof by your darling Synod, the
famous Council of Trent, had bin no personal extravagance.


Phil. What is that to the Invocation of Saints and the Virgin Mother? speak to
the point, or else conclude.


Theoph. Yes, the Bull of Sixtus the fourth confirms much such extravagancies.
For in that Decree the Virgin Mary is styled Bin tom. 8. p. 1051. Kegina Coeli,
Stella matutina, via misericord. etc.
Queen of Heaven; the morning Star, the way of mercy, Mother of grace, and the
comforter of Mankind.


Phil. Leave these digressions, and speak to the point of Saints Invocation.


Theoph. I am persuaded, as you do not approve, so you cannot justify such
passages and expressions, and therefore you have not patience to hear of them;
but I will follow your direction and contract my observations within the public
Offices and Breviaries. Ibid. c. 17. Maria Matergratiae, Matter misericordiae,
tu nos ab host, etc.
Bellarmin tells us the Church Catholic in her Hymn to the Virgin Mary, prays
thus; O Mary Mother of Grace, Mother of Mercy, Do thou defend us from the
enemy; and and receive us in the hour of death. If we may judge of words by
their signification, doubtless this prayer imports more then barely a desire of
her assistance by her prayers.


Phil. Bellarmin in the same place gives you a general rule against such
sinister constructions: Nos non agere de verbis, at sensis verborum.
We dispute not of the words, but of their sense Now the sense of our Church in
all such petitions, is, that the Blessed Virgin and the Saints by their prayers
and by their merits would procure these things for us.


Theoph. Although this may be the sense of your Church; yet it is not the
signification of the words; and methinks to avoid the just occasion of scandal
given to your adversaries by them, and the occasion of error and delusion
given to your undiscerning votaries, your Church should have expressed her self
in more inoffensive and justifiable terms. Bellarmine gives a 2d instance in
the Hymn of the Apostles, he says, the Church prays thus: Quorum praecepto
subditur, salus and languor omvium, sanent aegros, etc.
Let the Holy Apostles unto whose command both the welfare and languishings of
all men are submited; let them heal us who are morally sick, and restore us
unto a life of virtues. If Command here must signify Intercession and
supplication: your Church would do well and wisely to set forth a new
Dictionary, to interpret words and sentences, not after the common sense and
signification of them, but after the Roman gloss. Mean while an impartial Judge
must needs conclude these interpretations to be forced, only to salve the
inconveniences and absurdities of such prayers: and if your Church had
designed only to invocate the Saints in Heaven for their Intercession with God
by their prayers, she would have made use of more humble and suitable
expressions; but making the Intercession of Saints to consist as well in their
merits as in their prayers; calling upon them as well for their patronage, as
their Intercession. This, I say, has prepared the way for all those
forementioned presumtions and blasphemies in your addresses to them, and
Invocation of them. If God be the Father of grace and mercy, and Mary the
Mother, who would imagine otherwise, but that these heavenly blessings flow
originally and immediately from them both.


Phil. It is obvious that the Blessed Virgin is called the Mother of mercy,
because she is the Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the fountain of
Grace and mercy.


Theoph. Your Doctors do not teach you so to understand it, seeing they
represent Christ as a severe Judge toward a poor sinner, and Mary their
Advocate for mercy. You have heard how in the distribution of the Kingdom of
Heaven, the Province of Justice is allott'd to the Son, and of Mercy to the
Virgin Mother. Your Florentin Archbishop tells us; That upon the Assumtion of
the Blessed Virgin into Heaven, (as your Doctors have carefully imprinted that
belief in the hearts of the credulous people, the whole person of the Virgin
Mary, both Body and Soul, is taken up into Heaven.) I say we are told that when
she was translated into Heaven, the Seraphims attended upon her, and earnestly
solicited her stay and society with their sublime Order. But she deliberatly
answered; Non est honum hominem esse solum.
It is not good the Man should be alone, meaning her Son, and that She must
assist him in the Redemtion of Gods people by her Compassion, and in their
Glorification by her Intercession. That when for the Iniquity of the world her
Son should be ready to destory the Earth a second time with a flood, she may
appear as the bow in the clouds, to oppose his fury, and mind him of his
Covenant and promise. These are the luxuriant fancies of your Archbishop:
suitable hereunto I read of Vide Chemnit, exam. Trid. Council p. 3. de Invoc.
Sanct.
Pictures in your Temples representing Christ in his indignation, casting darts
and thunderbolts, and the Blessed Virgin standing between his wrath and sinful
men, and receiving the darts into her bosom.


Phil. Still you return to the fancies of private Doctors and Painters, your
promised more authentic proofs.


Theoph. What think you of that great promise made to uphold man immediately
after his fall, concerning Christ the seed of the woman; who should break the
serpents head, that is overcome the Devil and all infernal powers? Your vulgar
Translation (which must be more authentic then the Original) reads the Pronoun
in the feminine, Ipsa conteret caput. serpentis. Genesis 3.
She shall bruise his head: instead of, He shall bruise, as the Hebrew and the
Septuagint read it: And hereupon your Doctors refer the promise unto the Virgin
Mary, as tho in all things she must have the pre-eminence.


Phil. Bellarmin shows, how the vulgar Translation varies. Tom. 1. lib. 2. de
Verbo Dei c. 12.
He has seen a Copy which reads it likewise in the masculine.


Theoph. What he has searched and found we know not; but your Translation
generally runs in the feminine. And he acknowledges the Latin Fathers, being
misled by the vulgar Translation, take it in the feminine. And upon that same
account your Doctors refer the Prophecyto the Virgin.


Phil. Bellarmin shows in the second place, that he saw an Hebrew Copy which
had the feminine (...) not (...).


Theoph. This observation is like the former, upon some corrupt Copy, against
the general reading of the Hebrew Text. And he would leave the Scriptures
altogether upon uncertainties, that their Translation might not be liable to
reprehension.


Phil. He refers to Chrysostom a Father of the Greek Church, who, he says,
reads it in the feminine.


Theoph. He does so after his accustum'd manner to deceive his Reader. For it
is manifest the Homil. 17. in Genesis (...).
Father reads it in the masculine, perhaps here also the Cardinal consulted
some Latin Translation of Chrysostom which might serve his turn. He makes some
other inconsiderable pleas to justify the vulgar reading, chiefly because of
this modern reference unto Our Lady. Whereas some Fathers of the Latin Church
being ignorant of the Hebrew and the Greek, follow the vulgar translation, and
yet, as I can find, never reflected upon the Virgin Mary in that promise; only
your new Doctors, who, many of them, have knowledge of the Tongues sufficient to
discern the error of the translation, yet please them selves much therewith,
and make their advantage of the error, to improve the honor of the Lady, and
make her the prime subject of that grand Prophecy. By this way they may justify
the petition of your Churches prayer to Her: Tunos ab host protege.
That She would defend ut from our ghostly Enemy. Because as Eve was overcome
by him, so Mary should be victorious and bruise his head: and so the recompense
should be made unto mankind, by the same Sex which had transgressed.


Phil. I still must mind you of leaving these excursions, and show wherein the
Church of Rome offends in this point of the Invocation of Saints.


Theoph. I show you how she offends in owning the vulgar translation, and
giving occasion unto those usual blasphemies concerning the Virgin Mary.
However I will proceed and show how in her general Councils (as she esteem,
them) in her Popes, in her Liturgies, she has given great Offense and scandal
unto the Israel of God. In that great Lateran Council begun ano 1512, Julius
the second being Pope, and ended 5 years after under Pope Leo the tenth
consisting of 114 Bishops: we shall read in Bin. Tom. 9. in Conc. Lateran.
Binius his Edition of the Councils the 9th tome, how in the opening of the
several sessions of that Council, for the greater solemnity, Homilies were made
by men of great fame and Learning among them. Caietanus begins the 2d session
with his Oration or Sermon, and premiseth this address to the Virgin Mary.
Quoniam nihil est quod homo sine divino quxilio possit pollicori, ad gloriasam
ipsant Vi^ginem Dei Matrem, primo convertam Orationem meam. A^t Maria.
Because man can promise to himself nothing without divine assistance,
therefore in the first place I will address my prayer unto the glorious Virgin
Mother of God. Hail Mary, etc. So Balthazar Del Rio, in the opening of the
seventh session, begins his Sermon. Vt non inprata audire atque audita exequi
possitis, Deiparae Virg. Maria praesidium imploremus. Ave Maria, etc.
That ye may hear acceptable things spoken, and perform them, let us implore
the protection of the Virgin Mary Mother of God. Hail Mary full of grace, etc.


Phil. These are instances of no direful consequence. In the Solemn performance
of those holy exercises they implore the assistance of the Blessed Virgin; you
may suppose, the assistance of her prayers.


Theoph. We in our Homilies and Sermons apply our selves to the blessing of
Gods assistance; and you in the first place seek to the divine assistance of
the Blessed Virgin. (for so Caietanus appears to call it) however you see it is
the mode and form, even in the presence of so great Council, That the
Invocation of the Blessed Virgin, should justle out all supplication to God in
their Sermons: for otherwise they would not always have kept to this way. For
so in the ninth session Antonius Puccius, a Bishop and Clerk of the Apostolical
Chamber, having proposed great things to speak of. Antequam haec aggredior, per
Angelicam salutat. beatiss. Virg. opem suppliciter implorabo. Ave Maria, etc.
Before I enter, says he, upon these things I will humbly implore help from
the most Blessed Virgin in the Angelical Salutation, Hail Mary, etc. But the
last instance I will give in the tenth session is observable; the Homily was
made by a Venerable Archbishop named Stephen, 70 years old; and having designed
to insist upon considerable points out of the 48 Psalm, he prays in these
words. Ipsa Virgo beata, Angelorum. Domina, fens omnium gratiarum: quae omnes
haereses interemit, cujus epera magna Reform. Principum concord. and ve^t
centra Infid. expeditie feri debet.
May the Blessed Virgin, Lady of Angels, the fountain of all graces, afford her
help, who has slain all heresies, and by whose assistance the great
reformation in hand, the unity of Princes, the expedition against Infidels,
must be carried on. And because this was not enough, the good old man improves
his youthful Muse to compose an Ode unto the Virgin, to implore her assistance,
as well in Meeter as in Prose. He goes on in this mode of supplication.

Thou art the splendour, ornament, and Everlasting light of all Virgins, the
Mother of the most high, the glory of Mankind, Blessed Mary.

Thou alone o Virgin do rule the Stars, Thou art the light of Heaven and
Earth and the Sea, we beseech Thee to favor our attemts.

That I may unlock the sacred senses which^ly hid in these severe writings, And
Scale the high places of the Earth, Thou being our Captain.

Omnium splendour, decus, and perenne,
Virginum lumen, genetrix superni,
Gloria humani generis Maria
Unica nostri.
Sola tu Virgo dominaris astris,
Sola tu terrae Maris atque Coeli
Lumen, inceptis faveas, rogamus,
Inclyta nostris.
Vt queam sacros reserare sensus
Qui latent chartis nimium severis;
Ingredi and celsae, duce Te benigna,
Moenia Terrae.


You see the Authentic practice of your Church, before so solemn an Assembly.
These Applications made to the Blessed Virgin in solemn forms of Prayer, and in
such Terms, are inconsistent with the rules of Piety, and Religion.


Phil. You may let this pass upon the score of a Poetical License.


Theoph. In our Prayers we should be devout, and modest, not licentious and
bold; but alas if you look back upon his supplication in Prose, you will find
it more extravagant, his Luxuriant Fancy was not there confined to measures.
But from these instances you may take the measures of their Licensed, and most
authentic impiety. such Hymns made the best Melody, and were most acceptable
unto your Fathers of the Church, and all her Children in the Antichristian
times.


Phil. Your indiscreet Zeal transports you beyond the rule of Charity, which
might instruct you to put a fair gloss upon some harsh Expressions.


Theoph. I dare not call evil good, neither have I learned the Art of your
Doctors, to undertake the defense of great Impieties, and Blasphemies, and make
them plausible by a distinction. The next general Council (as you reckon) was
that of Trent: where we have the Doctrine of the Invocation of Saints
established, and all those declared Impious who think otherwise. And although the
Council penned the decree in most cautious terms, (being awakened with the
exceptions of reformed Churches,) Council. Trid. sess. 25.
yet we may plainly there discover, That it is not their Prayers only which we
must sue for, but also the help, and succor of the Saints in Heaven. It is good
and profitable humbly to call upon them, and to fly to their Prayers, and aid,
and help. If the council had intended only the Assistance of their Prayers,
they would not have multiplied terms without cause in their decree. But in
these words they have left open a Gap, for the Saints votaries to justify their
Prayers to the Saints for their aid, and protection, to expect effectual
favors from them, not only by their Prayers, but also by their Active powers.
These things will easily fall under this clause of the Decree, Ad eorum
orationes, opem, auxiliumque, confugere.


Phil. I have no reason to admit sinister constructions, any farther then the
words will necessarily force me. Now the later terms may be Exegetical of the
former, and well transposed thus, To fly to the aid and assistance of their
Prayers. And then tell me what have you gotten by this decree.


Theoph. Your practice will best interpret your Rule. If the public prayers of
your Church request more of the Saints in Heaven, then the assistance only of
their Prayers, you may suppose your Church intended, and understood, and
expressed more in her decree. You shall find your Church often to supplicate,
That as well by the Merits, as by the Intercession of the Saints, God would be
favorable unto them. In the Hymns above mentioned, to the Virgin Mary, she is
called the Mother of Grace, and mercy, and Protection from our Ghostly Enemy is
sought from her, and reception into Glory. So likewise in the hymn of the
Apostles, Grace, and Virtue is desired of the Saints for such as languish in
their Vices. And that by the command of the Apostles, as it is expressed, and not
by their Prayers. And yet Bellarmin has the confidence to interpret all these
things, according to the sense of the Church, as he speaks, That all these
things are expected from their Prayers, not from any other assistance. You
shall find several Popes in the Names of Peter, and Paul, promising great
things unto Princes, who shall engage in the defense, and cause of the Church,
and threatening dreadful Judgments from them upon such as are disobedient. Pope
Hadrian writing to the Emperor Constantine and Irene his Mother, Congratulates
their embracing the Faith of Peter, and Paul, Princes of the Apostles, and
promises, Binius Teme 5. p. 554. (...), etc.
They shall protect the Empire, make them Victorious, and bring the Barbarous
Nations under their feet. On the contrary we find direful threats from these
two Apostles. Pope Pius the 4th concludes his Bulls after this sort, Nulli
hominum liceat bane. etc vid. Council. Trid. edit. per Joan. Gallema^t, ad finem.
Let none presume to infringe this our Declaration. If any shall attemt to do
so, let him know he shall incur the wrath of God Almighty, and of his two
blessed Apostles Peter, and Paul. These things are Obvious, and I will not heap
Quotations to prove them, I will only give you an Account of one notable Letter
to this effect, which I mentioned in the beginning of this Conference, and will
now transcribe much of it for your sake, and the Readers, that ye may judge,
what your Popes opinion was of the power, and Parronage of the Apostles, and so
by consequence of the other Saints. Bin. Tom. 5. p. 55.
Pope Stephen the 3. being grievously streightened by Aystulphus King of
Lombardy, who with a Potent Army besieged Rome; sends a Letter in the name of
St Peter, unto Pipin, and his two sons, Charles, and Carloman Kings of France.
It begins thus, Petrus Apost. vecatus a Jesu Christo dei filio, etc.
Peter called to be an Apostle, by Jesus Christ the Son of God, etc. Grace,
Peace, and Power, etc. To you most excellent men, Pipin, Charles, and Carloman
3 Kings, etc. After the salutation he proceeds. Ego Petrus Apost. dietus a
Christo etc.
I Peter an Apostle being called by Christ, and the good pleasure of the Divine
Clemency, and ordained by his power to enlighten the whole world. Quamobrem
omnes, etc.
Therefore all Men who fulfill my Preaching, and command, must believe, That
their sins by Gods precept are forgiven in this World, and shall go into life
Eternal without Blemish, etc. Therefore I Peter, etc, Who have Adopted you for
my Sons, do exhort you to defend the City of Rome, and my Sepulcher, and Temple
there, against the Incursion of my Enemies. Pro certo confidite memet ipsum,
etc.
And know ye for certain that I my self will be present with you, to assist you
as tho I were present and visible in the Flesh, for although I am absent in the
Flesh, I am present in the Spirit. Now our Lady the Mother of God, the Thrones,
and Dominions, and all the Host of Heaven, with the Martyrs, and confessors of
Christ, with all obligations possible do adjure you, to assist my City, and
People of Rome, with your utmost power, and speed. Et ego Petrus in hac Vita.
etc.
And I Peter by way of recompense, will become your Brother in this life, and
in the day of Gods strict Judgment, prepare Mansions for you in the glorious
Kingdom of God, the reward of eternal recompense, and the Infinite joies of
Paradise, Nay whatsoever Protections and assistance you will ask, I will give
you. I therefore Conjure you by the most beloved living God, that ye permit not
my City to be sacked by the Lombards, least your Souls and Bodies be likewise
torn and tormented in everlasting Fire, with the Devil and all his Pestilent
Angels. Firmiss. tenete quod ego, etc.
Ye must firmly believe that heretofore when you Prayed unto me, I did help,
and give you Victory over your Enemies, by the power of God, when you were few
in number, in comparison of the Enemies of the Church. Ecce chariss. fili, etc.
He concludes. Behold my dear sons, I have warned you, if you obey with speed,
it shall be your great reward, and my suffrage shall help you in this life, ye
shall overcome your Enemies, and live long, and eat good things, and afterward
ye shall inherit Eternal life But if ye make any delay: know ye that by the
authority of the holy, and individual Trinity, and by the Apostolical grace
given unto me, ye shall be alienated, for the transgression of this my
Exhortation, from the Kingdom of God, and from life Eternal.


Phil. I have had the Patience to hear you, I pray let me now understand your
design in these Instances.


Theoph. Your Popes are public Persons, and you would have them thought to be
guided by an infallible Spirit; especially in their Bulls and Epistles and
serious agitations, not to err. And you see what power they ascribe to the
Saints departed, not only of Interceding, but Acting for us, and against our
enmies. And partly from thence your Doctors have taken occasion to instruct the
people to invoke them as Patrons, and Protectors, and Saviors out of trouble.
Now you have a rare art of Reduction, if you can bring all this under the
single head of Intercession; that they effect these things only by their
prayers to God, and not by a delegacy of his power to them.


Phil. It comes all to one, if by their prayers they obtain such power to save
and to destroy.


Theoph. Take your suppositions for granted, and the case is clear. Mean while
you put the poor ministering Angels out of Office, delegating their ministry
and powers unto the Saints triumphant: and yet I cannot let pass without a just
indignation and censure these forementioned Threats in the Popes Bulls and
Letters, That the indignation of our great God, and of his two Apostles Peter
and Paul, should be threatened together, as tho one were as much to be feared as
the other: and so likewise for the conferring of blessing, and the return of
thanks, they are directed to God and to the Saints. It is Bellarmin's close in
every Tome, Laus Deo and beatae Virgini.
Praise be given to God, and to the Blessed Virgin: and so all the Jesuits
conclude. Nay, Gregory de Valentia puts the Virgin before our Savior in the
close of many of his Books, Laus Deo and beatae Virgini Mariae, and Domino Jesu
Christo. Nay, we read how Pope Pius the fifth ascribed that famous Victory over
the Turks in the Battle of Lepanto to the Virgin Mary, and appointed a Solemn
Festum S. Mariae a Victoria, Octobr. 7.
Feast in memory thereof. We shall find likewise in Epistolarum lib. 12. Epist.
22. Speramus in c^nip. Dei virt. and in beati Petri Apost. Principis adjutorio.
Gregory the Great, such expressions as these: We trust in the power of the
most high God, and in the help of blessed Peter the Prince of the Apostles. Now
the holy Fathers taught us another lesson, (as I have intimated partly before)
not to join together almighty God and the Angels or any other Creature in our
supplications or benedictions, or threats or confidences. Oratione 4. contra
Apr.
Great Athanasius proves the unity of God the Father and of Christ, because the
Apostle has joined them in one prayer. God him self and our Father and our
Lord Jesus Christ direct our way unto you. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 11. And he proceeds, No
man must pray to receive any thing from the Father and from the Angels or any
other Creature, (...).
neither may any one say, God and the Angel give thee this. Upon this ground,
as you have heard, he concluded in Jacobs blessings upon the sons of Joseph,
that the Angel stands for the Son of God, the Angel of his Counsel, as the
Septuagint, read Is. 9. 6. So These. l. 3. c. 1.
Cyril of Alexandria, No man would endure to hear any one say, Would God and
some Angel would direct your course to us, etc. But alas in your Church your
ears are accustomed to such blasphemous conjunctions. Jesu Maria, is an usual
oath among you, and God help you and the Blessed Virgin, you wish: if a beggar
ask you Alms you say, God relieve and S. Peter. And so you have heard the
imprecations of your Popes, The indignation of God Almighty and of Peter and
Paul light upon you. Now, says holy Athanasius, Loco citat: (...), etc.
It suffices these things should come from the Father alone, no Creature
communicating. So ye make solemn vows unto God and some particular Saint in
trouble, and after deliverance pay to the Saint your vows. Nay, Cardinal In 2.
secundae q. 88. Art. 5. Eadem ratione votum sit D^o and Sanctis, nec obstat
quod sit actus relig. quia ejusdem virtutis est vovere and ^rare.
Cajetan maintains, That a vow is made to God and to the Saint in the same
manner, although a vow be a religious Act; for we may as well make vows to them,
as prayers. And therefore notwithstanding all your qualifying distinctions, and
(...), there appears little difference in the Invocation of God and of the
Saints: especially when you come to the practice of this Doctrine. These
Instances which we have already given are authority sufficient unto the
undiscerning people, to ask all blessings from the Saints, and to hope from
them to receive blessings as confidently as from Almighty God.


Phil. No, they are taught to expect blessings from God, for the sake and
Intercession of the Saints.


Theoph. And they are taught and accustomed to ask blessings of the Saints
without any such limitations, but in an absolute manner.


Phil. If the limitation be not expressed, it must be implied.


Theoph. It seems the ground of your peoples error is expressed, when the Hymns
and prayers of your Church ask grace and protection of the Saints, without the
reserve, that they should procure them by their Intercession. But that which
should undeceive them is suppressed, or (as you will have it) implied, that what
they ask absolutely of the Saints, they must understand it only in reference to
their prayers and Intercession. And so the ignorant people, who understand only
the plain words of the petition, and not the sense of the Church (which is
understood) are induced to hope in the Saints for their succors, and to fly to
them in trouble as to their chief Sanctuary, and to return their thanks and
their vows to them for their deliverance. ^omm in lib. 8. Aug. de C^v. Dei.
Multi Christiam divos divasque non aliter venerantur quam Deum, etc.
Ludovicus Vives complains that the common people highly offend in not
discerning between the worship of God and of the Saints; nor does their
opinion, says he, of the Saints want much of what the Heathen do believe of
their Deities or Idols.


Phil. What value we Ludovicus Vives? come to the point. What are these prayers
to the Saints, which you say our Church owns and prescribes, and are so
offensive to your tender ears, and such a snare unto the people of God among us?


Theoph. Such as have the opportunity to search into your Breviaries and
Missals have collected their gross absurdities: and your Doctors, as I can
find, have not bin sollicitous to answer them. I shall give you some instances
which I have taken out of one of your service books styled Ordinarium secundum
usum Sarum.
The Ordinary after the use of Sarum, printed at Paris by William Merlyn. In
the Office of the Virgin we have these passages, Tuum nobis impende solatium,
per te mereamur habere praemium, and cum electis Dei reenum.
Impart to us thy comfort, by thee may we deserve the reward, and the Kingdom
of Heaven with the Elect. Again, Tuo pio interventu, etc. ut per te redemti,
sedem gloriae, etc.
By thy pious intervention wash away our sins, that being redeemed by thee we
may climb the Seat of eternal glory. O holy Virgin thou alone have slain the
heresies of the World: Accipe quod offerimus, redona quod rogamus, etc.
accept what we offer, give what we ask, and excuse what we fear. Then follows
a Formal prayer or Collect: O Regina Mundi, Scala Coeli, Thronus Dei, Janua
Parad. etc.
O Queen of the world, the ladder of Heaven, the Throne of God, and Gate of
Paradise, hear the prayers of the poor, and despise not the sighs of the
miserable: Let our groans and our desires be brought by thee into the sight of
our Redeemer; which by our misdeservings are cast out. Dele peccata, relaxa
facinera, erige lapsos, solve compeditos.
Blot out our transgressions, release our sins, raise the fallen, and loose such
as are bound: Let the branches of vices be cut off, and the flowers of virtue
planted. Placa precibus Judicem, quem puerp. genuisti Redemt. etc.
Appease the Judge by thy prayers, whom thou have brought forth a Redeemer. That
as by thee he was made partaker of the humane nature, so by thee he may make us
partakers of the Divine Nature. One passage more near the close of the service
I will produce. The Catholic Church celebrates the holy memory of Mary Mother
of God, who stands in need for her salutary help without ceasing. Quoniam
reverent. quae Matri exhibetur Christo dofertur, ideo totis desideriis, etc. Vt
Matrem sentiamus piissimam, et felium ejus Judicemisereniss.
And because the reverence toward the Mother redounds to Christ; therefore
with all the desire of our heart we will insist on her praises; that the Mother
may be favorable to us, and the Son a serene Judge.


Phil. You see most of these passages do proceed upon her prayers and
intercession, that she would interpose for us and present our supplications and
sighs unto our Redeemer.


Theoph. But you shut your eyes, and not observe these absolute petitions,
which are put up to her: and where any reference is made to Christ, even there
it much derogates from his mediation and intercession; because it represents
Christ as a Judge by her prayers and mediation to be appeased, the blessed
Virgin becoming our Intercessor unto Christ. And so by the stamp of public
Authority, you see these extravagancies confirmed, which above you would not
justify, as being the fancies, as you called them, of private persons. Now in
confutation of such blasphemies the Holy Scriptures show Christ to be our
Advocate until the day of judgment, not a juige: A merciful and faithful
High Priest in things pertaining to God, Hebr. 2. 17. Hebr. 4. 15. 16. For we
have not High Priest, which cannot be touched with a feeling of our
infirmities, but was in all points temted like as we are, yet without sin: Let
us therefore come boldly, says the Apostle, unto the Throne of grace, that we
may obtain mercy. It is the design of Holy Scripture, to make poor sinners come
with confidence and comfort to Christ and to the Father. It is the design of
your Church to discourage them with a sense of their unworthiness, and to teach
them to look upon Christ as a severe Judge, that so they may fly to the Virgin
Mother, and to the Saints to be their Mediators and Intercessors. Nothing is
more opposite to the Covenant of Grace, to the Love of God, toward such as are
reconciled in Christ, to the tender compassion of our blessed Savior, and to
the gracious promises and Invitations of the Gospel. And upon this account I
may pronounce your Doctrine of the Saints Invocation and Intercession, to be a
damnable doctrine, destructive to the Souls of men.


Phil. Satis pro imperio. Doubtless you think your self as infallible, as we
the Pope; and you design to put Christ's Vicar besides the Chair, to place your
self therein, and magisterially declare against the doctrines of our Church.


Theoph. If our Declarations, like the Pope's many times, be against the Tenor
of Holy Scriptures, regard them not; but if the word of God condems your
practice, that which your Church teaches in her public Offices; Woe unto them
by whom offenses come. I have followed your prescription, and have kept close
to such instances as are approved among you by Councils, and Popes, and Missals
of your Church; and when you cannot refute the objection, you scoff at the
opponent. But because this Conference has bin spun out into a great length, I
will favor you and my self with the omission of many things: and give you only
one Instance more out of the same Ordinary and Missal, according to the use of
the Church of Sarum. In the Office of S. Thomas the Martyr, as you call him,
Archibishop of Canterbury, Chancellor of England. He was indeed a Martyr for
the Pope, standing so highly for his Authority in the justification of Appeals
to Rome, and not submitting the Clergy to the Laws of the Realm, that he
betrayed his Native Cuntry to a sorreign Jurisdiction, and became a rebel to
the King and Kingdom. Hereupon he was banished diverse years, and by the
interest of his great Patron the Pope in neigboring Princes, he created great
vexation and trouble unto his lawful Prince, King Henry the IId. After 7.
years a reconciliation was made by the mediation of the Pope and other Princes
between the King and him, and he returned into England, the King abiding in his
Territories in France. Upon his return, by the Popes Bull, he Excommunicates
the Archbishop of York, and those other Bishops, who in his Banishment
officiated in the Coronation of the Kings son Henry, according to his Fathers
command; alleading that the privilege of Coronation of Kings of England,
belonged to him as Archbishop of Canterbury. This and other insolences being
soon related to King Henry in France, he spoke passionately against the proud
Prelate; and immediately four Commanders in his Camp went over into England,
entered the Bishops Palice, and purfu'd him into the Chapel, and there
Inhumanly, and Sacrilegiously murdered him. See Gulielmus Nubrigenses, his
Hist. of England. l. 2. c. 16. p. 25. etc.
Hereupon by the Pope he was Canonized for a glorious Saint, and Martyr, and an
Baro. Martyr Romans in 29. Decembris.
Annual feast was Instituted afterward in memory of his Martyrdom, upon the
29th of December, a solemn office and service there is appointed for the day,
as we find it in the missal; wherein the Account is given that the first
Solemnity of his Translation was kept in the Cathedral of Canterbury, Henry the
third being present, and the Popes Legate Pandulphus; the Archbishop of
Canterbury, all the Prelates, and Nobles, in the Year 1220, Fifty Years after
his Passion, and that the Martyr Thomas of Becket honored his Translation with
many Miracles, Caecis ad visum, surdis ad Audit. etc.
Restoring sight to the Blind, Hearing to the Deaf, Speech to the Dumb, and
Life to the Dead. In the Office we have these Prayers. O Jesus Christ by the
Merits of Thomas Forgive us our Trespasses. Again, It Is per Thomae sanguin. etc.
By the blood of Thomas shed upon thy score, make us to follow where he is gone
before. Another Petition there is to the Martyr himself in that Office. e O
Thomas give us help. Strengthen those that stand, raise them that fall, Correct
our Manners, Actions, and Life, and guide us in the way of peace. In their
Hymn for that day, they declare Wonders.

All things obey, and veild to Thomas,
Plague, Diseases, Death, and Devils;
Fire, Water, Earth, and Seas,
Thomas has filled the World with glory,
The world to Thomas yields obeisance,
Thomas shines with new Miracles,
He restores the Members to the Gelt,
He adornes the Blind with sight.
Cleanses the Lepers and their spots,
And free's the dead from hands of death.
Thomae cedunt and parent omna.
Pestes; morbi, mors, and daemonia,
Ignis, Aer, Tellus and Maria,
Thomas mundum replevit gloria,
Thomae Mundus prestat Obsequia,
Novis sulget Thomas Miraculis,
Membr is donat Castratos masculis
Ornat uisu privatos oculis,
Mundat Leprae conspersos maculis
Solvis Mortis ligatos vinculis. Opem nobis O Thoma po^rige. Rege stantes. etc.

There is a farther account, how a Country Man going to visit the Martyrs Tomb,
was just led into the River by a Wagon on the Bridge. And rising, and sinking
five times, he was at last cast upon the Shore safe. For having called upon the
Martyr for his aid, and that he would not suffer his (...) Pilgrim to perish; a
grave Bishop a^pear'd, upholding and conducting him to land. This is the Legend
of St Thomas of Becket, which your Church has adopted into the Service and
Office for the Feast. And I have bin the more particular, that you may observe
well the gross Fables and Absurdities therein, that your Church should impose
such Stories of Miracles upon the credulous People: And is it possible you
should be reduced to such a low esteem of the precious Blood of Christ, that
you must Petition our Blessed Savior to bring you to Heaven by the Blood of his
Martyr Thomas? And for a Conclusion, I pray seriously consider this pretended
Martyr: He died in the defense of the Popes Usurpations among us, and the Pope
has requited him with a Saintship; whereas he had great success to go to
Heaven so immediately; with such Qualifications of a turbulent and haughty
Spirit. And this us^ers in another grievance and just Exception we take against
your Invocation of Saints, because you pray to some Saints of whom you have no
assurance that they are in Heaven; nay, of whom you cannot prove that ever they
were in being: what think you of the Beggars Saint, St Lazarus? Part. 3. Tom.
4. Tract. 2.
Salmeron assures us, That he is every where esteemed a Saint, and Protector of
the poor; Canonized by the Church, Baronius Tom. 1. Anno 33. N. 44. Multis
locis in memoriam Lazari, etc.
worshipped with Altars and, Images, and Prayers made unto him. And I have read
an Argument, some of your Doctors have urged, to prove it an History of Dives
and Lazarus in the Gospel, and not a Parable, because Lazarus is a Canonized
Saint, and therefore doubtless such a Person there was, of whom our Savior in
the Gospel gives an Historical account. But I have showed above, from the
judgment of diverse Fathers, that it is a Parable: Theophilact calls him fool
who thinks otherwise, and that by Dives and Lazarus only were represented the
Rich and Poor, by a Fiction of Persons suited to a Parable: and so your Jesuit
Maldonate affirms. Now for your Church to make a real Saint of this Parabolical
Representation, to whom you make your Addresses in Prayer, something resembles
your other kind of Devotion, Praying unto, or worshipping the Image instead of
the Saint. Your Church might as well have made the Prodigal Son returning, a
Saint. So for St George, you cannot make any Historical Demonstration, that
such a Holy Person and Martyr there was. George of Cap^adox was a fierce
Arrian, mightily opposing Athanasius, but he was slain for being a Christian
b(...)an ^eathen Prince; and so by his Heretical Faction esteemed a Martyr,
whom they represented for a great Champion and Captain under Christ, fighting
against the great Magician of Alexandria, as they impiously styled Holy
Athanasius; otherwise, we rather account Saint George, as he is constantly
represented in his Image, flaying a Dragon in rescue of a Virgin, to be an
Emblem of our Blessed Savior, overcoming the Red Dragon, our great Enemy the
Devil, and rescuing his Church as a chaste Virgin from his temtations and force.
Martyrol Romans Apr. 23. Symboli potius quam Historiae alicujus, etc.
Baronius acknowledges the Picture of St George on Horseback, armed cap-a-pe,
and flaying a Dragon, to be a Symbolical Image rather then a true History. And
that Jacobus de Voragine, He that made the Golden Legend, made it an History.
An Emblem, says Hyperius de (...) Stud. Theol. l. 3. c. 7.
Hyperius of Christian Magistrates, Who defend the Church of Christ as a pure
Virgin from the snare of the Devil, and his accursed Instruments: interposing
their power against the pernicious attemts of Heretics: and so by the Blessing
of God, St George shall be the Emblem of our most Noble Order of the Garter,
even unto the end of the World. What shall I say of the Giant St Christopher,
from the Etymology of whose name, you have derived a Fable, That being of a
vast height, at least 12 Cubits in length, he carried our Blessed Savior over a
deep and dangerous River; guiding himself by a Staff like a Weavers beam.
Hyperius citate.
Villavincent us makes him an Emblem of a Preacher of the Gospel, who holding
forth Christ in his word visible unto the People, is encompassed with Waves,
and Tempests, and Waters of Affliction and Persecution, but supports himself,
and wades through with the staff of his Christian hope, the expectation of the
exceeding recompense of reward. After this sort, to fill up your Calendar of
Saints, your Doctors might do well to go down into Egypt, and bring their
ancient Hieroglyphics to be Canonized and Worshipped.


Phil. You may do better to forbear scossing, and study the Defense which our
Doctors make against all the Exceptions your side have produced concerning
these and other Saints.


Theoph. I have searched, and find them so impertinent, that I lost my labor,
and shall not (until I be urged farther to it) trouble you and the Reader with
the discovery.


Phil. I thank you for sparing your self and your Friend together, for I begin
to be weary of this Discourse, which has bin drawn out beyond expectation, and
methinks, gives but little satisfaction.


Theoph. My serious endeavors to open your Eyes unto a discovery of the Errors
of your Church, are abundantly satisfactory unto my Conscience, although the
success should fail, and you still stop your Ears against the voice of the
Charmer. And yet I must trespass upon your patience in one more consideration,
touching the Canonizing of Saints: If an Error should be committed therein, it
would be diffusive, and spread all over your Church. Prayers may be made as to
a Saint in Heaven, whilst the Person himself who is invoked is miserably
tormented in Hell; excluded by a more infullible Judgment from the Beatifical
Vision for ever. For instance: Suppose Almighty God has not approved the
Contentions of Thomas of Becket with his Prince, but has past against him the
Sentence of Damnation for resisting the Powers, whilist the Pope has Sainted
him: What will become of all his Pilgrims and Votaries? how many Prayers would
be made in vain, to the shame and mockery of Religion? Although in truth all your
Prayers, even unto the undubitable Saints in Heaven, upon the supposition that
they hear you not, are altogether in vain; and so the greatest part of your
Religion is vain, and a sad account you must give of your Lip-labor and
Will Worship. I pray seriously study an Answer to that severe Question: Who
has required these things at your bands?


Phil. We are not sollicitous to answer that Question, because we proceed upon
a better Supposition, That the Saints do know our State and Condition, and hear
our Prayers to them, and do make Intercession for us. But in answer to your
conceit, of an Error that may be in the act of Canonizing. Eellarmin shows, how
that solemn Act appertains to the Pope, who proceeds therein with great
Deliberation, and mature Judgment, upon all Relations and Circumstances; and
ordinarily without the ample Testimony of Miracles effected by him a Saint is
not Canonized, and so there is no fear of Mistake and Error: and withal, great
preparation is made unto that solemn Act, by public Prayer and Fasting; and it
is not credible God should be wanting to his Church so well disposed in her
Devotions in a matter of so great concern.


Theoph. If they are Credibilities, however they are not Certainties, and so
your Prayers to many Saints must be without the assurance of Faith that they
are such. We may certainly call upon God th^^ the Meditation of Christ, and
have our Prayers heard, and Supplications granted; but you can have no such
assurance of your Martyr St Thomas. Bell. ibid. c. 7. Inebrietate occisum pro
Martyr Venerantes.
Bellarmine acknowledges, Time was, when the People of a City worshipped one
for a Saint, after his death; of whom holy Martin, who lived among them, was
suspicious, and earnestly prayed to God to discover to him the condition of the
person deceased: and behold, his Soul appeared and informed St. Martin, That he
had bin a Thief and a Robber, and was justly executed as a Malefactor, and now
tormented in Hell: And so, says he, Pope Innocent the third reprehends some
who honored one for a Martyr, that was slain when he was druak. And I will give
you one Instance more to this purpose out of our English Histories: b We read
how one William a Londoner, a factious and turbulent Person, of a smooth and
volutile Tongue, sets up himself to be a King and Savior of the poor People
from the Oppression of the Nobles, in the absence of King Richard: and so
gathers a multitude of Seditious Persons, and became a Preacher and a Captain
among them: but the tumult being soon suppressed by the Wisdom of the Kings
Council, and William, with other of his Accomplices, being Executed; a Priest,
that Gulielmus Neubrigens. lib. 5. c. 18.
was his Kinsman, takes the Chain wherewith he was bound, and pretends to work
Miracles, and diverse cures thereby. The unwary People entertain the Delusion,
and cut the Gibbet whereupon he suffered in pieces, keeping them as Sacred
Relics; and also the Earth which was sprinkled with his blood. They honor him
for a Saint, and make their Prayers to him, with great pretensions of success;
until time, and the Magistrates care and wisdom did undeceive them.


Phil. To prevent such horrible mistakes, two Popes, Alexander the third, and
Innocent the third, absolutely forbid any Saint to be worshipped, and Invocated,
without the approbation of the Bishop of Rome: whereas before, as Bellarmin
shows, any Bishop might Canonize a Saint within his own Diocese.


Theoph. Now it is reduced unto the Pope: what assurance have you of his
infallible Judgment? For it is observed, he has proceeded much by favor and
affection in this Affair, gratifying Princes in their Requests for their
Relations and Countrymen. And it has bin said, That if Henry the 7th had not
bin too renacious and sparing of his Tresure, when he made his Request, that
Henry the 6th might be Canonized for a Saint, he had not failed of his desire.


Phil. We know, the lying Tongue of Calumny and Slander has bin always
sharpened against his Holiness: but God will not be wanting to his Church in
matters of such moment and concern, and therefore we do not trouble our
Consciences with your Scruples.


Theoph. The Infallibility of the Pope in his Determinations, e Cathedra, which
you most unreasonably maintain, and whereupon you lay the Foundation of your
new-coin'd Articles of Faith, may fall into consideration (if God permit)
hereafter; meanwhile, the Objection turns not altogether upon that hinge: for
although the Pope were infallible in his Canonization, that is, for a general
Reception and Veneration; no Saint without the Popes allowance must be publicly
and generally called upon in Prayer: Yet Bellarmin grants the Invocation of
other Saints by private Persons, and says, It is the common Opinion of the
Doctors. Now I pray observe the Inconveniences from hence: A Wife who has
lost a deer Husband, or Children their Parents, they usually follow them with
passionate Affection, and prize them higher, being bereft of them, then when
they had the happiness of their Society. Now as other civil commerce is
intercepted by death, if communion with them by Invocation and Prayer may be
allowed, what will be the excess of their Superstitious Devotion in this case.
Affection and Charity, will conclude their Friends deceased are undoubted
Saints in Heaven, and their Piety will always promt them to call upon them for
assistance and protection, as being most assured of their readiness to help
them, even to the uttermost. And so when Men and Women should be instant in
Prayer to God Almighty, the stream of their Devotion will be carried on toward
their Relations who are gone to God before them: and so the highest act of
Religion, Prayer, with all its Pervors and Devotion, will evaporate in emty
Supplications made to those, of whose happiness Men have no assurance, but from
their fond and fallible Estimations: and so between the Invocation of Saints
that are, and of others supposed to be in Heaven, the God of Heaven is almost
forgotten in your Prayers, according to that proverbial Speech grounded upon
your intolerable Excesses in this Point, Non cognoscitur Deus inter Sanctos.
God is not known among the Saints. You have heard, how in the Virgins Psalter
ascribed to Bonaventure, the Names of God and Lord are expunged, and in their
place the name of our Lady is inserted. In the Virgins Rosary, after ten Ave
Mary's, or Angelical Salurations, Ave Maria grarid plenae, etc.
Hail Mary, full of Grace, the Lord is with thee: Blessed art thou among Women:
and Blessed is Jesus the Fruit of thy Womb. Holy Mary, Mother of God, Pray for
us sinners, now, and in the hour of our death. Amen. I say, after ten Ave
Mary's, follows one Pater noster, or the Lords Prayer: and fifty Ave Mary's,
and five Pater nosters, make a Rosary; so called, because it is interwoven with
Prayers and Salutations, Pater noster's and Ave Mary's, as a Garland with
Flowers. Now out of great Devotion some will treble the Rosary, and so make 150
Salutations, which they called the Ladies Psalter, until Bonaventure was so
bold, out of David's Psalter to compose another. and many Fraternities and
Companies were erected in several Chaunteries to celebrate and rehearse those
treble Rosaries, saying 150 Ave Mary's, and 15 Pater Noster's in one Service;
and so they became highly guilty of the Heathenish Battology, which our Blessed
Savior forbad, Matthew. 6. And to make this great Devotion general and public,
Pope Gregory the 13th appoints a Solemn Festum Rosari Beatae Virg. Sub 2.
majori officio ab omnibus, etc.
Feast of the Rosary of the blessed Virgin, to be celebrated by all in general,
and by every single person, with the double greater Office and Solemnity. You
see the grand Superstition of this Office, and the proportion ten to one,
between their rehearsing the Lords Prayer, and the Angels Salutation, or the
Ave Mary. So are likewise your Letanies now stufft with the Names of all the
Saints you can imagine to be in Heaven, and with the Orders of Angels, and the
Name of God and of Christ has scarce any room among them: whereas we read the
ancient Letanies were (...), Lord have mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon
us, Lord have mercy upon us. The People of God in great Extremities of
Earthquakes, and Tempests, and Plagues, and calling earnestly upon God in these
Forms: until in the fifth Century was added the Trisagion, Holy is the Lord,
holy is the strong, holy is the Sanctus Deus, Sanctus Fortis, Sanctus
Immortalis.
Immortal: Bin. Tom. 3. Episi. 3. Felitis Papae ad Petrum, Fullonem, p. 801.
which Form, (whilst the Church of God in Constantinople, upon a great
Earthquake, running forth into the field, called upon God for mercy) was taught
them from Heaven by a young Child, who was carried up out of their sight (the
Patriarch Proclus, of Constantinople, and all the People being Eyewitnesses)
and after an hour, was let down into the midst of them, and declared, That he
had heard the Angels sing that Hymn, and that he was commanded to bring it down
to them.


Phil. If all be Gospel that you say, it suffices, there needs no more
Additions.


Theoph. Those things are well known, and may be easily confirmed by
Testimonies: But I am willing to give you respite, and not multiply Arguments
and Testimonies, seeing you have acknowledged what has bin said to be
sufficient (as I suppose) to prove what I first designed, The Error of your
Doctrine of the Invocation of Saints, and the great Superstition and Idolatry
in the practice. And now, good Sir, give me your hand in assurance, that you
will pardon my Incivility, to hold you so long in an unacceptable Discourse
abroad, mean while, forgetting that respect and entertainment which is due to a
worthy Friend, who has most courteously given me a Visit. Will you please
therefore to walk in and recreate yourself with other Divertisements, and
better Company; and with such slender Provisions as we can make at present. I
hope you will be so kind to stay longer with us, and give the Opportunity to
make amends.


FINIS.

