A REPLY TO THE ANSWER OF THE Man of No Name, TO His Grace the Duke of
Buckingham's Paper of RELIGION, and LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE.

By G. C. an Affectionate Friend, and true Servant of his Grace the Duke of
Buckingham's.

LONDON, Printed by John Leake, for Luke Meredith, at the King's Head, at the
West End of St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXXV.

A REPLY TO THE ANSWER of the MAN of No Name, etc.
IT it the Case of Truth to be opposed, but to prevail; and of Error, though
defended, to be vanquished. Ill Causes cannot but be Ill maintained: They may
look like true, but that is Art, which cannot change Nature. An Ass can never
be a Doctor, nor a Fool a Solomon: Bulk given no Weight, nor Sound, good Sense.

And to say true, it was never much better proved, than in the Answer of the
Duke of Buckingham's Paper: At first it amazed me with a flash of Words; the
second Reading I came to my self; and at the last, I saw, they came to nothing:
began with false Wit, and ended with Noise and Fumble. And to show you a little
the Man in his Talents, Style, Arguments, and Humor, (for his own Book does it
best at large) take what follows.

I will begin with his beginning.

That I have Written this Pamphlet (says he) is plain. But who this (I) is that
Writ it, is not plain; for he has not told us his Name. However, it is plain,
it is writ; and so it is, that his Apology is against himself; which is, That a
Sore always wants a Plaster. In which we must either understand, He confesses
the Wound the Duke has given Atheism and Violence, to which he Consecrates a
Plaster; or that his Book is in it self a Sore, and he has a mind to cover it.
If the First, he has an Ill time of it: if the Last, it is Nonsense. But this
is but a part of his Excuse; he thinks he may Answer him, because the Duke
will not Answer himself, and act both Plaintiff and Defendant; as they do, that
turn with the times; shift Principles for Livings; and love to be Parson of
Bray still. But whatever that Noble Duke does, the Answerer has that faculty;
for he inveighs against Reason, page 12, 13. and yet p. 36. sends his Reader in
a warm Fit to Reason, not only to Choose and Establish to himself a Religion,
but to Convince others by.

And now he falls on with a Tantivy -- How Pernicious an Animal (says he) this
Mountain and wild Conscience has been to England, is too well known, and how
Fatal Toleration would be. What stuff is here! Could a Man fetch any thing more
savage out of the Highlands of Scotland, or from the Lakes of Canada? One would
think, 'twere Writing in shamm, and a Definition in Burlesque: Some Cipher, but
that there is no Key to it; for that a Mountain should be an Animal, and
Conscience a Mountain, has neither Matter, Figure, Rhetoric, nor common Sense
in it. Which, indeed, is the pitiful end of all Quacks and Pretenders. And
hence he turns Vintner too: for in a moment he reads you a Lecture of Ferments
and Lees, and the best way of turning the Wine of (Mount) Hope into the Vinegar
(of the Valley) of Despair.

The Gentleman, that he might Run far enough from the Duke's Lenity, has passed
the Line, and talks Antipode to common Experience. For with him Toleration
pricks; Persecution does not. I had thought that sweet and soft things had
prevented souring; and that therefore eager and lean Wines were fed with the
richest Malagoes. But the meaning of this admirable simile, is, The Gentlemen
of his Clan would keep the Wine to themselves: every body knows they love it.
But I must needs say, it is a Churlish and Guzling trick, to drink all: Right
Good-fellows are freer of their Liquor. And besides, it shows a mighty Ill
Nature, that other Folks drinking should make it taste sour with them: It Is
not the Liquor, but the Palate: The Gall overflows; the Humor vitiates the
Taste. Calvin's Predestination, in his Opinion, p. 16. is not worse natured than
This. Thunder sometimes turns Liquor; but I never heard it of fair and gentle
weather: Certainly, it must be an unnatural Subject, upon which the most
natural Things have an ill operation. And yet in some Ill tempered Children we
have seen the seeds of this sour Humor; who would not Eat or Wear a thing, if
others must have it as well as themselves. However, this Doctrine very
naturally arises from the Text, That some Men, if they may have their humor,
will be as sweet as Wine; and if not, will Turn as sour as Vinegar. The Use
and Application I leave to His Majesty.

But this is not all; he explains himself upon this point page 33. where he
dreads the Church of England's Receeding from her Active Loyalty in opposing
Diffenters, and the Terrible and unavoidable consequences of their betaking
themselves to a Passive Loyalty. I hope he has made more bold than welcome with
that Venerable Name; since it is to say, The Church of England's Loyalty is to
serve their own Turn, and the Prince's no longer than he will Ruin others to
humor Her. That she opposes Dissenters for that Reason: And is uncharitable to
all others: That though she Asserts Free Will, she will Force other Men's. That
she is not content with her Hoours, Employments and Profits, unless others are
Reprobated to a Civil Damnation: That she knows not where to stop, nor where to
End her Resentments and Severities: That Law only maintains her, and her
Establishment takes rise from humane Institution, and by humane Force is
upheld: Nay, That if she may not have her Will, let the Black Box prevail, and
the Oxfordmen come in if they will, Fight Dog, fight Bear, We will be Quiet; We
will be Passive. These are the Consequences of such Resolves: Things too harsh
and Idle to imagine of a Society of so much Wisdom and Integrity; and therefore
this Gentleman to be thought officious, if not scandalous in this attempt. And
I hope her best Members will think, That more Reason to the Duke, and
Discretion to the Church, had done better: for Scandalum Cleri with the one,
ought to sit as uneasy, as Scandalum Magnatum with the other.

I have done a little to snew his folly and uncharitableness; more follows: and
he that ruus may almost read it* He wonders, his Grace the Duke of Buckingham
should become a Champion for Whiggism, p. 1. And indeed so do I too: for I am
sure, it must be very lately; and it is an ill time to begin in. But is this his
Discretion, ( page 2.) that was to defend him from a Scandalum Magnatum? But
why a Whig? It seems it is, because he is for Toleration. A fine Conclusion:
and yet he makes this, but half a Whig neither. For he tells us in his
Character, That Persecution makes up the other half: so that a Right Whig is, a
Tolerating Persecuter. Upon the whole matter then, the Duke is but half a Whig;
and his Answerer it the other half, who tells us, That his opinions have ever
been Diametrically opposite to those of his Grace's Paper; and whose Book it
self is Persecution. And is it not a pretty thing to consider that the Bill and
Answer, the Plaintiff and Defendant (as he calls them) should make up one Whig?

But to do it, when Whiggism is super-annitated, and looks like a cast Mistress,
and is contemned of all, heightens the Man's Admiration: And perhaps he knew
the Duke, when he did not use to make such stale choices too. But to make him
amends, the Man places it to his Compassion, which is yet Satyr enough upon
himself, that not only has none, but makes it Whiggish in that Noble Person to
Pity, Age and Necessity. Mad he must be, or he would not yield away so great a
Virtue to so ill a thing. But is she super-annuated and cast? pray, why then
feared in one part, and loved so fondly in another, by this Knight of the Robe?
She is but half Cast; the Toleration side is only super-annuated with him;
the other is not above Eighteen yet, fresh, strong, and ruddy, in his Desires at
least: And that she may live longer a-that side, he is blowing Breath through
his Quill, as fast as he can.

And to say true, he has Air enough, to help her: But when all is done, he will
make an Ill Mistress of her; for she is to be Old and Cast (if not Dead) a one
side still: This is her Palsy, and his Frenzy. I am of Opinion, when he
thinks what he has done, he will (like his young Gallant, Page 6.) cry, a Pox
upon Consequences, I hate Consequences. So Pragmatical so Incongruous, and so
Indiscreet has the Gentleman been in his hasty Attaque.

But to come to the body of his pretended Answer. After telling us, p. 6. He
will not Anatomize, nor Dissect each Nerve and Muscle of His Grace 's Paper,
(though else where it has neither, in his Opinion) and that he hates Hashing of
Books, and serving them up with Limon and Anchovies, turning Chryrurgeon and
Cook in a breath: he says, He will deliver his thoughts in a lump; as if he had
a mind to a Pudding more than a Hash. The Truth is, he has little Shape, and
less Life: and therefore the Gentleman has in one word, Whiglike, turned Gossip
to his own Chits with more propriety, than is in all his Book beside.

But let us look upon his Lump a little further. First, he says, His Grace has
taken an Improper way to confute the wity Atheist, or Establish Religion. (And
why so?) Because the changeableness of the World does not disprove its
Eternity, any more than the Mutations of his Grace's Body alters him from being
that George D. of Buckingham, that he was Forty Years ago. But the D. of
Buckingham does not pretend to be the same Man that he was Forty Years ago; and
would give this Gentleman, Ten thousand pound to make him so. And to say true,
he that says, A changing World is Eternal, is not many removes from that which
we call a Changling. For though a Man be the same, as to his Faculties and
Properties: Yet we have fresh Spirits and Flesh; and this World has its
Alterations and Renewings too.

What the first Matter was, and how formed, and which way it subsists, are much
beyond us! yet the more we look into them, the more we are led from the Regular
Motions and Seasons of the Fabric we see with the distinct kinds and species
of Creatures therein, to Conclude and Admire a Prior and Superior Being. A Man
that is a Creature of time, may be said to be, and in some cases not to be the
same: for he is not the same in the same Being always; but an Eternal thing
cannot be so varied. And it is fallacious to argue from a Man's being the same
Man, under changes, to the World's being Eternally the same World under
Changes; since it were to say, That a thing were the same in that in which It
changes: for that were to be in that which is not, or is not any more that
which it was; The supeamest Nonsense a Man can be guilty of.

The Duke was not strict in this matter; and his Answer is stricter with him,
than wise; especially when he faults him in a thing Disputable, and yet
promises not to disturb, but improve his Arguments for a God. But so unhappy is
the Genius of this Gentleman, that he frequently breaks his Word, though be
breaks his Head with it. There are but three of four things the Duke goes upon;
That the World did not make it self: That he that made it is God: That he was
dignified Man with something more Excellent, than what belongs to other
Creatures: That this makes him look and hope beyond Death; therefore
Immortality, probable: That those that do well, shall be Happy; the contrary,
Miserable: That to this Choice they are free and uncompell'd. And lastly, That
none should Extinguish Men's Religious Impressions, by forcing them against
their Persuasion. These Sober and Worthy Thoughts might have been better
treated.

It Is true (he says, page 7.) his Notions are very fine, and many of them very
natural and true; but not too Logical. No matter for that; he Writ like a
Gentleman, and not a Pedant. But to see, how true this person is to himself,
within six lines after the Character of many natural and true Notions; he tells
us, without blushing, though not without confusion, That the Consequences which
necessarily follow the Duke's Conceptions, are greatly to the disadvantage not
only of Religion, but of the politic Frame and Government of the World. I
cannot imagine, which way; and he has carefully avoided to inform me. But I
cannot see, how the Government of the Great Turk, and the Great Mogul are
concerned in the Duke of Buckingham's Book? They may indeed, if they could read
it, because he Recommends to all Men the Christian Religion, ( page 18.) And,
if I know any thing, the Consequence of his Contradictory Assertion, is, That
the Mogul must be Infidel still, and the Great Turk must be a Mohammedan still.
For this good Christian goes upon this Principle, That the Religion Established
by Law, ought therefore to be Conformed to of all; and consequently, Liberty
even to Christian's Consciences is dangerous to the Political Frame of that
Government that is not Christian.

He proceeds to oppose the Duke's Deduction, in Reference to the Worship of
God, page 11, and 12. For in truth ( says he) if his Argumentation be allowed,
here is as fair a plea for the ALCORAN, as the NEW TESTAMENT; for PYTHAGORAS's
GOLDEN VERSES, as St. PAVL's EPISTLES. For, if I be not mistaken, in what his
Grace calls that Part of us, which is nearest akin to the Nature of God, and
the Instinct of a Deity, this must be humane Reason; not as Regulated by any
Public and Politic Reason of a Community, but as every private person's
Reason shall dictate.

But how unjust and precarious is all this? First, Assert; and then, If he
mistakes not, the Duke meant so. But if the Duke meant not so, then he is
mistaken: and the Duke could not mean, as he states his understanding of it.
For though he takes leave to mistake the Duke, the Duke does not mistake
himself: There is not one Word of Humane Reason in the Question, nor is Humane
Reason that Instinct of the Deity.

We have a Natural Capacity to apprehend Divine things; but it is that Instinct,
which gives us the Religious use of it. All Men that have Eyes, have the
Capacity of seeing; but without light they cannot see. Pray, who was he that
said; There is a Spirit in Man, but the Inspiration of the Almighty gives
Understanding? and that, Whatsoever may be known of God, is manifested in Man?
Romans 1. By what else is it, that the Prophet declares, That God tells unto Man
his thoughts? And St. Paul expressly says, That those that had not the Law,
became a Law unto themselves, (By what? if not by this Instinct, this
Synteresis?) their Conscience accusing or exeusing them before God. And St.
John goes farther, who says; If our Hearts condemn us, God is greater; but if
our Hearts condemn us not, then have we boldness before God. And does this make
as much for the Alcoran, as for the Scripture? and Pythagoras's Writings, as
St. Pauls's Epistles?

The Duke spoke to a peculiar Rank of Men: Wits without much Religion, to give
Religion the beginnings of Credit with them: He did not say, That was enough?
That Scripture or other external helps were useless, or not requisite: And yet,
when all is done, we must choose for our selves, and not by the Political Reason
of Community; or else we shall believe upon Authority and not upon Conviction;
which was not the Christian way. St. Paul bids us, Pray with understanding; and
if so, surly, our understanding ought to be satisfied, to whom, and how to
pray. And this Gentleman makes it an Error, not to pray knowingly; and if so,
certainly we should have some Reason for our Hope too.

And therefore, I cannot persuade my self to believe, that Noble Peer writ like
a Minor, when he proceds to this Deduction? That it is one of the greatest
Crimes a Man can be guilty of, to Force us to act against that Instinct of
Religion; and something a kin to the Sin against the Holy Ghost. This Notion
the Gentleman throws with scorn at the Quakers, (an Honest and well-meaning
People;) and if this be a Kin to their Doctrine, they are sounder than he that
despises them. And to say true, He does them greater Honor, than it may be, he
is aware of. But why not believe upon Conviction? For, Whatever is not of
Faith, (St. Paul tells us) is Sin: And Force upon any Man's Conscience, must
overthrow the Reason of this Fear, Faith and Hope. For how dark and feeble any
Man's Conscience is, Force brings no Light no Knowledge: It may distract,
doubt, and so damn.

But I cannot enough admire at the Conclusions this Gentleman draws from this
most Inoffensive and Orthodox Expression. The First is this: That Reason is the
Guide of every Man's Religion. This is spurious: For, though he that embraces a
Religion without Reason, has no more Religion than my Horse; yet a Man's own
Reason so rectified, is not the Guide of Man in his Religion: for his Reason is
that which is to be Guided.

His Second is yet more Extravagant, viz. That Divine Revelation is not
necessary to Salvation. In which he has bid boldly; for there is not a word in
the Duke's Discourse about it. He asserts the Divine Instinct; That it inclines
and disposes Men to be Religious; That they are to be commended, that beat a
sincere Respect to it. But not a word, that Men should not crave further Help,
or read the Holy Scriptures, that contain our Revealed Religion. On the
contrary, he tells us; He therefore waved the Use of them in this Discourse,
because of the Persons to whose Condition he calculated it. Were it not a sine
Conclusion in this Doctor, to say, A Man that goes to Rochester shall never
come to Canterbury, though it be in the Way, and the better part of it? Just so
Reasonable his Consequence is against the Duke.

But he advances in his Humor of perverting his Words; for the Third
Consequence he draws in his Name, is this: That it is a most horrid Sin, to
lead Men out of Errors, (page 13.) when there is not one word of Leading in the
Question. For the Duke says, [ To Force,] and he infers, To Lead. His Words
are; That it is one of the greatest Crimes a Man can be guilty of, To Force us
to act or sin against that Instinct of Religion; and something akin to the Sin
against the Holy Ghost. The Duke says, To force Men to sin; he says, To lead
Men out of Errors: As if Leading and Forcing were the same; when one is the way
of Persuasion, and the other of Fines and Prisons. I cannot tell what this
Gentleman would not say; he may as honestly apprehend a Beggar on the Road, for
an High-way-Man.

His Fourth and last Consequence he bestows upon this Noble Peer, is this, page
13. That Men, who believe a God, and follow the Dictates of Reason in his
Worship, may be saved in any, in all Religions; provided they know not a
better. And what, if he had said so? It had shown his Charity. Does not God
wink in times of Ignorance? And what is Knowing no better, but a State of
Ignorance? Is there no Allowance for Times, Places and Conditions? Certainly,
this Man thinks, Aristotle and St. Paul are as much below him, as he is above
the Duke of Buckingham. This is riding Tantivy, through thick and thin.

But to Answer his short, yet full: This Charge upon his Grace, charges
himself; First, That Faith in God, and the Dictates of Reason, can swallow all
sorts of Religion; for he excepts not the most Idolatrous; yet sets up Reason
elsewhere, to judge of true Religion, ( page 14, 36.) And Men must leave
Reason, when they fall under Superstition and Idolatry. Secondly, That this
Hero is for choosing his Religion without Reason: And that is not worth a Fig,
(with his leave.) Thirdly, That the Duke does not prefer Christianity, by the
Course of his Deductions: which he plainly does, page 18.

But after he has shown the Duke's Weakness or Mistake (in his Opinion) to
make him abler than he found him, and the Book worthier the Reader's notice;
with a Modesty, almost equal to his Reason, he tells us: NOW, IF I WERE TO
DISCOVRSE AN ATHEIST, (page 9.) and: IF I HAD BEEN TO FOLLOW HIS GRACE's BLOW.
I would have urged This; and, I would have done That, etc. By which, I
perceive, this Gentleman is better natured than Sir Jo. Falstaff, that being
called upon for a Reason for what he said, answered; That if Reasons were as
rife as Black-Berries, he would not give him one.

I have seen Cowards fight thus stoutly: Now, Sir, (says he) here I could have
you, Sir; and there I could have you, Sir: and, if I strike you, Sir,
infallibly I hit you, Sir: and, if I hit you, Sir, you will feel it, Sir: Are not
you of my mind, Sir? This Gentleman wanted something; and though the Duke be no
Minor, he has a mind to play the Senior upon him, and use him so: And what a
fine time he would have, to be Ward to such a Jewel?

Such Coxcombs I have seen in my time; for there is not so true a Mark of that
Animal, as Officiousness upon Mistake, to praeter do, or overdo a thing. Look
you, Sir; upon my word, Sir; you are out, Sir; you mean this, Sir; I know your
meaning, Sir, as well as if I were in you, Sir; alas, Sir, there is a better
way far, Sir; and then, Sir, you don't hit it neither, Sir; for, Sir, if you
aim at the end, Sir, you must aim at the means, Sir; and that I pretend to
know, Sir, as well as any Man, Sir; and therefore, Sir, by your favor, Sir, if
I had been to have followed your blow, Sir, I would have done no body knows
what, Sir; Gramarcy Doctor. It Is pity to think, what pains some Men take to
play the Fool.

His second great Head (and little Wit) is about the Anti-Christianism of
Persecution, opposing the Duke's Notion of it, thus page 17, 18, 19, 20. And
first, he says, That though to punish Professors of the true Religion, for that
only, whilst inoffensive in all things to the Civil Government, is real
Persecution, and truly Antichristian; as that of the Primitive Christians by
the Heathen Roman Emperors; yet to punish Dissenters, as Papists and
Phanaticks, is not so; because they are in the wrong, and offensive to the
Government. This in a Lump (as he calls it) and perhaps a little better
collected than his was. In all which he begs the Question of the Roman Emperors
for the Christians; and of the Dissenters for their Adversaries; though upon
differing terms.

For the Heathen Emperors had Ancient Rites to plead, and the Established Law
of the Empire, against the progress of Christianity; And that is all this
Gentleman has said here for himself, and against them. For he undertakes not to
prove the Points Controverted true against the Dissenters; but urges the
kn^cking Argument of the Jews, We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to die.
Nay, he sends the Duke to Lewis the Fourteenth, (page 29.) to ask, If it be
safe Tolerating another Religion than his own: By which he determines the case
against the Persecuted Protestants there, lest their Indulgence should
exemplarily make way for ours to the Dissenters here. Is not this a dainty
Protestant, that can cherish Cruelty against Men of his own Religion abroad,
rather than not act it at home upon Dissenters?

This is to make Religion a Politic Interest, and to Answer Worldly ends: A
greater Argument for Atheism, than any he has offered against it. The Primitive
Christians had died Idolaters upon this Principle: For Authority, not
Conviction, with him all along concludes the Point.

He begs the Question of the Dissenters; for he argues nothing about the
grounds of Dissent, but the Law; It Is the Religion by Law Established: And why
not by the Bible? but that it yields not to it the present Advantages of Force
and Worldly Authority. Now (as he says) If I had been to Dispute them, and
follow his blow, I would have Evinced their Error, before I would have
pronounced my Judgment.

But they are Factious, Seditious, and dangerous to the Government; therefore
severe Laws were made against Papists, Priests and Jesuits on the one Hand, and
Phanaticks on the other. Suppose this were as he frowardly Clamors; Is it to be
thought, that they would be dangerous, if they were Easy, and so endanger
themselves? they know better. And we see, this Gentleman fears the Church's
Receeding in her Loyalty, if there be but Indulgence to Dissenters; making her
Eye evil, if the Governments be good. Pray, what then would she do, if she were
Persecuted as they are? Can more, with Justice, be expected from Heretics and
Schismatics, than from the Orthodox? If they were more patient, I should begin
to fear, they would be quickly more Orthodox too. But I cannot tell how to
think that Men in their Wits would forfeit Ease when they have it; though to
get it they might be Indiscreet.

And one thing I must say, Roman Catholics have been Loyal in England and
Holland, and Bresbyterians in France and the German Principalities. So that
it is not necessarily true, they are not Seditious, as they are Dissenters: Men
go by their Interests. The Gentlemen that Tore the King's Declaration of
Indulgence from him, were high Churchmen; and they opposed his Political
Capacity to his Natural, on purpose to overthrow that Act of Grace, by which
distinction the late Civil War was made; so that 41. overtook 73. or that
returned to 41. And who knows not, that they were such as hardly knew how to
pray, but out of our Liturgy; that attempted to Exclude the Presumptive Heir to
the Crown upon the score of his Religion. And though this Jehu drives so
furiously upon Dissenters on that Account, if he will think (which I fear he
seldom does) he will find that an Heir is but a Subject; and the same Law
governs properly a-like in this Kingdom to all Ranks of Subjects. And that some
of the same Gentlemen, that formerly shook small Folks Property for
Nonconformity, had lately a mind, to Sacrifice the present King's for Dissent.
Wherefore let us make Men easy, take Temptations out of their way, and not lay
stumbling blocks before weak or peevish people, nor pinch them with those
Burdens or Yokes, that our Fathers could hardly bear, and we need not doubt a
Friendly success.

It is by this Nameless Author Objected in a Career of Criminations, That this
may suit a Republic, (page 28, and 29.) but is dangerous to a Monarchy. But
not half so much in my opinion, as his Objection is. For, doubtless, Monarchy
has as extended and saving a bottom to live upon, as any Republic in the
World; nay, rather the Power of more Mercy, Favor and Indulgence. For the
Number of Subjects is the Glory and Strength of a King; and that which makes
the People easy, makes the Government so to the Monarch. 'T were lavish to
prefer a Commonwealth to make it more capable of good to the various
conditions of Mankind than Monarchy. It is therefore his little skill in
Politics as well as Religion, that makes him quote the practice of the French
King ( p. 29.) for no body knows yet the consequence: His Cake is but Dough
still: It Is early day with the Project: See if his Son, ay, if He don't feel it
yet. For Uniformity is a mean Recompense for a thin and poor Country. What
might not an Union of Interests and Affections, under so great a Prince as we
have, recover and establish in the World? Wonders; for Miracles come from
Heaven.

Instead of this, old Sores are daily rubbed fresh; and new impressions of
former Tragedies are thrown abroad to prejudice us against the means of our own
Peace and Glory: God (if he pleases) avert the consequences of our own
bitterness and Animosity.

His last Head is about Toleration, (p. 25.) though included in his second;
this he labors with his usual pains; It Is neither (says he) good Divinity, nor
good Politics; and of this he is as certain as if he found a Mare's Nest.

The first Reason, why it is not good Divinity; is, That false Religions in a
Christian Dress, would then be Tolerated to the injury of Christian Religion
and Men's Souls, p. 26. But he does not consider, how many he will Damn by
Hypocrisy. But in that, perhaps I am out, he may not think that a Damnable
Sin; and that it is better be an Hypocrite, than a Dissenter; though One thinks
he is in the right, and the Other knows he is in the wrong; and so one of St.
Paul's true Heretics, viz. self-Condemned.

Be that as it will, Jesus Christ is against his Divinity, that is Lord of the
true. For he commands, That the Tares grow with the Wheat, till Harvest; which
he interprets, the End of the world, and Great Judgment: And forbad. Fire to be
so much as desired to be called from Heaven to hurt those that did not own his
blessed Messengers in their great Doctrine of the Kingdom he sent them to
preach.

For Toleration'^ being bad Politics, let him allow me the Liberty he takes
with the Noble Peer I defend, and I will send him upon an Errand, that shall
determine the Controversy presently. Let him go to the Prince of Orange, whose
Ancestor begun the Glory of that Country with it, to the Princes of the Empire.
And if this French King will be Impartial, ask him, If greater Feats were done
without, than with a Toleration? So far is it from being dangerous to Princes.

And if Opinions were yet worse than they are, there cannot (in my judgment)
accrue any danger to the Government that Tolerates them. For, First, the
Professors of them have, which they could be thought to Plot to get; but will
never Plot to lose. And, Secondly, if any such people could be, there are or
may be Laws enough to Crush and punish the least Appearance of Disorder. And
under favor, Public Assemblies are so far from being dangerous, tha^, truly
considered, they are the security of the Government.

What makes Men Dangerous? First, they cannot help their Dissent; for Faith is
not in a Man's own power. Next, so soon as he declares it, the Law cuts him off
from the Favor and Protection of the Magistrate. Is it then the Man that makes
himself dangerous, or is he made dangerous for that Dissent? And if that be it,
'twill not be hard to determine, how a Dissenter comes to be dangerous.

Forcing Men to Religions is as if it were in a Man's power to use his
Conscience as he can his Money. In that case I would be on the side of the
Penal Laws. But if a Man cannot believe as he will, and less, as other Men
believe, and (...) yet be safe to the Government, don't make him ^^safe under
it, and I Will warrant he does no harm: And this I think may be done.

I conclude, That Toleration is so far from being an Enemy to Religion and
Monarchy, That it gives God his due, prevents Hypocrisy, and restores Society
instead of Unity: And by an united Affection, Purse, and Hands Renders our King
Great and Terrible.

I now wait upon his Three Questions: the First has Four in the belly of it, (
p. 34, 35.) First: If Christ did not believe Sovereign Power might maintain the
order of Society by Rewards and Panishments. Truly I don't know his Belief, nor
how suitable it might be to him to believe, being the Object of ours. But he
commanded it, though with a salvo to the Religion he came to Institute. They
were his Sheep, 'twas his Kingdom.

The next Query is to the Duke, If he ha^ considered, That spiritual
Punishments are far more rigorous, than Temporal ones? I believe, as much as
this Gentleman has, Whether Temporal be less than Eternal? But what of all
that? Why, (next to follow his blow) he asks; If Jesus Christ then has not used
greater force to compel Men to his Religion, than all the Powers of the Earth
have done? But if it were so, I am of the poor Welch-man's mind; Let her alone
till (...) day comes: And of St. Taffy's too; I had ^ather fall into the hands
of God, than Man. But: is this proper, just, and adequate* Christ punishes
Spiritual Faults with Spiritual Punishments, Ergo, The Powers of the Earth
ought to punish the same Faults with Temporal and Corporal Punishments, such as
Prisons, Fines, Exiles and Death?

But in the next place, I don't think he has outdone the Heathen and some
Christian Persecutions, the Reason of both considered. For he decides the
Controversy by Good Works; They by Opinions: He cries, Come ye well-doers;
there are his Sheep: Go ye Workers of Iniquity; there be his Goats. But
Conformity makes an Ill-Man Grateful, and Nonconformity a Good Man Hateful:
here Good Works don't determine the point, as at Christ's Judgment.

Howbeit, it is monstrous to argue, That Men should be twice punished for the
same Offense; by the Magistrate here, and Christ hereafter: This is held
unequal among Just Men in all Governments. But it is no matter, let Zeal or
Interest Christen it, and its well enough for a Papist or a Phanatick. But if
this Gentleman were as much under their power, as they are now under his
Censures; and should they use him, as the provokes the Civil Magistrate to
treat them, I am of the mind, he would think and call it too Antichristian.

To this Second main Question (in substance Answered before) Whether there
being an hundred Monarchies happy without Toleration and Liberty of Conscience,
to one Republic that allows it with Restriction, whose future Fate we are
ignorant of; and whether that may not in time prove its Ruin; It be not an
hundred to one, that Monarchy shall be more flourishing, safe and lasting
without a Toleration, than with it? To this I say; he makes the ground of it
Fact; and that is false: There is not only no such thing, as an hundred
Monarchies that have been happy without it: but more have been happy with, than
without it, All the Eastern Monarchies, almost generally give it with success.
Next, the French. Monarohy was happier in Henry the IV. than Charles the IX.
and Ours in Queen Elizabeth, than in King Henry the VIII. for though Here Is was
not a Reign of Liberty, yet of less severity than His. He makes it Republican,
and knows not what he says: for as his story of Monarchies is untrue, so that
of Republics, a Fiction: there being Two Monarchies to One Republic that
gives it. What will be, we cannot tell: but Holland is a greater proof for the
Prudence of a Toleration, than any Country that can be named on the side of
Coertion; and the Effects that are, show what the same measures will do for the
time to come if kept to.

To the Third, and last Question, viz. Whether it be not Cross and Pile,
whether a Man, who may be of any, or all Religions, will be of any, or of none
at all? I must tell him, That they that can be of all Religions, have little or
none. And therefore I always thought those Clergymen that in Henry the
Eighth's time turned Trimmers, and Protestants in Edward the Sixth's, and
Papists in Queen Mary's, and Protestants again, with a witness, in Queen
Elizabeth's, had no Religion but their Benefices. And, as I take it, there were
not Three Hundred, of all Qualities, out of Ten Thousand, that stood out; to
say nothing of their Fountains that ran freely through all those Rubs and
Revolutions, I mean Oxford and Cambridge. If he please to remember what numbers
turned Presbyterians between the years Forty and Fifty, how many in Sixty
returned; and with what Oaths, Covenants, Engagements, and Abjurations they
maintained their Possession, will have cause to say, that it is, sometimes,
hardly Cross and Pile with too many, what Religion they are of, and those of no
small pretenses too.

And since he has put it upon that game, I cami't forbear saying, That he has
hit upon the aptest Allusion he could have made. For Cross and Pile in some
Countries stand Pope and King, and where they meet that Game is up.

If he thinks the business yet worth his while, I should be glad to see
something truly solid and Christian. In the mean time, I take the measure he
gives me in his Conclusion, to make my Choice by Reason and Virtue, To
discourage all Sedition and Disloyalty; to Tolerate none, that profess to cut
other Men's Throats for Conscience sake: Beseeching him to let me be even with
him in a few Questions and a Conclusion: They will be short.

I. If any Man ought to believe without Conviction? If not, then

II. Whether Conviction be in a Man's power to give himself or any for him? If
not,

III. Whether this does not of course put an end to Coertion?

I proceed to Three more upon a Christian Foot.

IV. If Christ's Law and Example are to be the Rule of Christians?

V. If by his Law and Example Christians should compel Conformity by Worldly
Force to their Religion?

VI. If Liberty to Conscientious Dissenters be not Advisable from Examples
Christian and Political?

The Conclusion is first Particular then General I would beseech the Gentleman,
to whom this Reply is made, to Avoid Prejudice, which is here (I fear) an Ill
Habit of Education. For he says, He was always Diametrically opposite to the
Duke's Opinion in the Points treated on: As if he had sucked it with his Milk.
Examination helps Judgment; it is Chewing and Digesting well; the other is
swallowing and not Concocting: and sometime a Man gets a Hook in his Throat
too. Let him have a Care of Tarantula's and the Itch of Answering, before he
considers well; for that will be as unaccountable, as, he says, his Wit is
poisonous Wit, (page 4.)

There are Two other things that make a Man heave and throw, and disorder
himself extremely; and that is the Fly and the Worm; especially in Springtime;
and this has been unusually dry and hot. But for all this, I will end well with
him; For what ever he thinks, I wish him as well as my self; and that we may
both live and die happily with a Toleration.

And now, Reader, it is fit I say something of this undertaking. The Love and
Honor I have for the Truths delivered by that Noble Person, and the easy,
plain, short, and yet full, I and strenuous way in which he has recommended
them to the World, obliged me to this Defense, such as it is. But I cannot but
wish, he had met with a Man that had deserved his own notice, because no body
can better Defend his Arguments: which the oftener I read, the Weightier they
seem to me; and his Adversary's looser and slighter. 'Twas a Respect I owed his
Person, and a Duty to his Essay.

And now, Reader, as Men that die, ask forgiveness of all the World, so do I. It
is true, it does not yet appear to me, that I have Injured any person or thing;
I would not do it for the World: And, therefore, am even with it: but I would
be Modest at least. I have Writ my Heart in the main; I hate serving of Turns:
I love Old England as well as any Man, and I would fain see her Happy. I have
long thought this the way, VERTVE OF LIFE and INDVEGENCE OF CONSCIENCE, for the
KING, for the Clergy, and for the People. And if our hopes of Immortality were
but half as strong, as we care they should be thought, we could not use one
another with so much Jealousy and Bitterness: We carry not a true Estimate of
the World with us, to be so easily and so often disordered for it. Let us not
then palliate our Fury, or Interest with the sacred Name of Religion: Let us
Answer for our own Faults; we shall, we must: and therefore let us mend them,
that we may have less to Answer for, when we come to Judgment.

God Almighty Bless the King and Kingdom, and send us Peace in our days, Amen.
G. C.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Luke Meredith, at the King's Head, at the West
End of St. Paul's Churchyard.
A Short Discourse upon the Reasonableness of Men's having a Religion, or
Worship of God. By his Grace, George Duke of Buckingham. 'The Third Edition.

The Duke of Buckingham His Grace's Letter, to the unknown Author of a Paper
Entitled, A short Answer to his Grace the Duke of Buckingham's Paper,
concerning Religion, Toleration, and Liberty of Conscience.

A Dialogue between a Pastor, and his Parishioner, touching the Lord's Supper:
Wherein the most material Doubts and Scruples about Receiving that Holy
Sacrament, are removed, and the Way thereto discovered to be both plain and
pleasant. Very useful for Private Christians in these scrupulous Times. By
Michael Altham. The Second Edition. To which is added, Some short Prayers,
fitted for that Occasion; and a Morning and Evening Prayer, for the Use of
Private Families.

Two Treatises: The First, Concerning Reproaching and Censure; The Second, An
Answer to Mr. Serjeant's Sure-Footing. To which are annexed, Three Sermons
Preached upon several Occasions; and very useful for these Times. By the late
Learned and Reverend William Faulkner, D. D.


