THE Incomprehensibleness OF Imputed Righteousness, BY HUMAN REASON, etc.

BOOKS Published by the same AUTHOR, and Sold by Tho. Cockerill.
1. A Sermon at the Funeral of the late Reverend Divine, Mr. Edward West.

2. A Discourse of Regeneration, Faith, and Repentance.

3. A Discourse of Christian Religion, in Sundry Points.

THE Incomprehensibleness OF Imputed Righteousness, FOR JUSTIFICATION, BY
HUMANE REASON, Till Enlightened by the SPIRIT of GOD.

Preached in TWO SERMONS at the Merchants-Lecture in Broadstreet.

By THOMAS COLE, Minister of the Gospel in London.

And Published at the Instance of many who heard Them.

London; Printed for Tho. Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultrey,
over against the Stocks-Market. 1692.

TO THE Christian READER.
IT IS a dangerous thing to stumble in Sion, by taking offense at the Mystery of
our Redemption by Christ, because we cannot comprehend it by our own Reason: We
are commanded to believe it, without consulting flesh and blood about it, but
humbly waiting for that anointing from the Holy One, that teaches us of all
things, and is truth, and no lie, 1 John 2. 20, 27. Such blindness is happened to
us since the Fall, that we cannot discern the deep things of God, 'till we are
spiritually enlightened; yet how many are there, in this disputing Age, who
leaning too much to their own Understanding, decry all Supernatural
Illumination, as mere Enthusiasm, counting Faith it self a blind irrational
thing, a bare act of the Will, to which the Understanding contributes nothing,
as if Believers had no real knowledge, or inward evidence of the things they
believe? Therefore to stop the mouths of Gainsayers, who discover their
deplorable Ignorance of the Mystery of Faith by their frequent Mutterings,
artificial Reasonings, and Sophistical Cavills against it; I shall plainly
declare what I believe to be true in this Case, viz. That Supernatural
Illumination which I affirm as absolutely necessary to a saving knowledge of
God in Christ, is a divine Light let down from Heaven into the Soul, by which
the mysterious Truths of the Gospel are made manifest to the eye of our
Understanding; as by the light of the Sun, things bodily, are made manifest to
the eye of our Body (so says Paul Baines on the Ephesians) This Supernatural
Light, is called the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge of
Christ, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. given to the Saints to instruct them in all Gospel
Mysteries: We may know this spiritual Illumination, to be a true heavenly
Light, because it agrees in all things with the Word of God, the same Spirit of
God shining in our hearts, that shines in the Word: Should any pretend by a
supposed inward Light, to be wise above what is written, and to know what is
not revealed in the Scripture, this were Enthusiasm indeed; therefore to the
Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is
because they have no light in them, Isa. 8. 20. We must not believe every
spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of God, because many false
prophets are gone out into the world: hereby we know the Spirit of God, every
one who confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God, 1 John 4.
1, 2. They who thus confess Christ, i. e. do from their hearts own and
acknowledge both the Person and Doctrine of Christ to be Divine, being inwardly
persuaded of the Truth of the Gospel, and brought under the power of it, not by
the wisdom of man, or by the strength of human reason, but by the inward
demonstration of the Spirit, enlightening the mind, and leaving it under the
evidence of things not seen, nor understood by humane reason, but plainly
discerned by this higher light of Faith; can such a Faith be the effect of
blindness? Can such a Faith be Enthusiasm? A Faith grounded upon the Word of
God, and acting from the highest Wisdom, the surest Knowledge, and most
undeceivable light that man can walk by; if this be a blind belief, then there
is nothing reasonable in the whole world; if this be a delusion, where are we?
What can we trust in, if not in that which we so know, and are upon infallible
grounds persuaded is truth, and no lie? That which renders Believers suspected
by carnal men, is because they cannot communicate that light to the hearts of
others, by which they themselves do see. It Is true, all have not Faith; and
it is as true, that some have Faith; pray, whence should such a Persuasion come?
How should such a Faith be wrought in any? -- I must come either from our
selves, from the Devil, or from God.

From our selves it cannot come; because Gospel Truths are above our. Reason,
contrary to our Lusts, and to all the Inclinations of corrupt nature in fallen
man, who cannot by his own power dispose himself to believe the Gospel.

From the Devil it cannot be, as any delusion of his; we call not that a
delusion which is above man's reason, but that which is quite beside the Word
of God, or contrary to it; and no man in his right wits can suppose the Devil
either able or willing to instruct men in the Saving Knowledge of
Gospel Truths, which are as contrary to him, as they are to a natural man; it is
his interest to suppress them, and he does his utmost to blind the minds of
them who believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should
shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4. 4. Is not the whole Bible from one end to the other,
written against the Devil, representing him as an adversary, a hater, and
destroyer of mankind, laying open his devices and stratagems against us;
exhorting us to resist him, to trample him under our feet, to figbt against him
wherever we meet him in any temptation; and can we think that Satan is so
divided against himself, as to promote the knowledge of that among men, which
is so much to his disadvantage? -- Whence I infer, If Faith be not of our
selves, nor from the Devil, it must be from God, and God owns it to be his
work, his Operation, his Gift; therefore let men have a care they don't
blaspheme this work of the Holy Ghost in the hearts of the Saints, setting up
their own natural reason in the room and place of supernatural Illumination,
without which the Mysteries of the Gospel can never be rightly understood.

Christian Reader, Having detained thee thus long from the ensuing Discourse, I
recommend both It and Thee to the Blessing of God.

T. C.

THE Incomprehensibleness OF Imputed Righteousness, etc.
Romans IX. 32, 33, For they stumbled at that stumbling stone; as it is written,
Behold, I lay in Sion a stumbling-stone, and rock of offense: and whosoever
believes on him, shall not be ashamed.
THE Apostle speaks at large in this Chapter of the Rejection of the Jews, and
the Calling of the Gentiles: In the close of the Chapter he shows why so few
Jews were converted by the Gospel, to whom it was first Preached, and how the
Gentiles came to be called. The Jews took offense at the Gospel, could not tell
what to make of the Righteousness of Faith, they were all for the Righteousness
of Works; but God rejects both them and their Works, and calls the Gentiles,
who lived in Profaneness and Idolatry; they followed not after Righteousness of
one sort or other; they knew neither Law nor Gospel; did nothing by way of
preparation to further their calling; but God, of his mere good pleasure, sends
the Gospel among them, and makes the Preaching of it an effectual means of
their Conversion to Faith in Christ. Christ in his Doctrine of Justification by
Faith, and not by Works, was a Stumbling stone to the Jews, as he is to many
nowadays upon the very same account; it is what is foretold in Scripture, and
what we must expect: This Child is set for the fall of many in Israel, and for
a sign which shall be spoken against, Luke 2. 34. So 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8. 1 Cor. 1.
23. The Apostles Preaching this Doctrine, were a savor of Death to many that
heard them, and perished under their Ministry by Unbelief; so now, some will
take offense at this Doctrine; but be it a savor of Life or Death, we must
Preach it.

I shall now show you from this Text, whence it is, that the Doctrine of
Justification by Faith in Christ, through the Imputation of his Righteousness,
is such a stumbling stone, and rock of offense to many.

The main reason, I conceive, is this, viz. Because the way of a Sinner's
Salvation by Faith in Christ, is a Mystery far above the reach of man's
understanding; no wonder then, that so many boggle at it, count it foolishness,
and set themselves to oppose it.

I shall couch what I have to say, under these Three General Heads; viz.

1. That the Mysteries of Faith are not comprehensible by reason; the way of a
Sinner's Salvation by Faith in Christ, is above a natural man's understanding.
This some count Enthusiasm, and cannot bear it, but truth is truth, and must be
Preached, whether men will bear it or no.

2. Why has God laid the way of a sinner's Salvation so high, that no humane
understanding can reach it?

3. Though the way of a sinner's Salvation by Christ be above the capacity of a
natural man to reach and take in, yet God can give us a true discerning of it.
Of these in order.

The first General Head; viz.
1. That the way of a sinner's Salvation by Christ is above man's
understanding: Therefore called the Wisdom of God in a mystery; hidden wisdom;
1 Cor. 2. 7. Ephesians. 3. 9. 10. And though this secret of the Lord be now outwardly
revealed in the letter of the Word, yet it is understood by none, but such as
are spiritually enlightened, Mat. 16, 17. Col. 1. 26, 27. To some it is given to
know these mysteries, to others not, Mat. 13. 11. Mat. 11. 25. 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10.
The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, Psalm. 25. 14. They are under
a special anointing, 1 John 2. 27. But for others, they understand not what God
is doing in the Gospel; it is so great a Mystery, that the Angels admire it;
seen of Angels, 1 Timothy 3. 16. They never saw such a sight before; they now
desire to look into these things, 1 Pet. 1. 12. are wonderfully taken with this
rare method of man's Salvation; and do observe with great delight, how this
design of Grace is carried on in the Church, Ephesians. 3. 10.

The Second General Head; viz.
2. Why has God laid the way of a sinner's Salvation so high, that no human
understanding can reach it?

There are Three Reasons of this, viz.

1. Because nothing that falls under man's understanding could save him.

2. Because nothing does tend more to the Glory of God's rich Grace, than to
fetch the Mystery of man's Salvation out of the depths of Infinite Wisdom.

3. Because nothing keeps man in a closer dependence upon God, than this. Of
these in order.

The First Reason why God has laid it so high; viz.
Because nothing that falls under man's understanding, could save him: The case
of fallen man was so desperate, that nothing less than Infinite Wisdom could
find out a way to save him; either man must eternally perish, or God must put
forth himself to the utmost, and go beyond the reason of man to find out a way
to save him.

There are four ways of Salvation, that a human understanding prompts us to,
some to one, and some to another, but all in vain, we are grossly mistaken in
every one of them.

1. Some think to be saved by the Covenant of Works, do rely simply upon that,
in a direct opposition to the Covenant of Grace. The Jews contended with Christ
and his Apostles about this. Paul speaks of such, in his Epistle to the Romans.
There is that Legal spirit in fallen man, that he still inclines to the Law of
Works, he foolishly thinks to be saved by that Law which has already condemned
him: It argues great Infatuation in Fallen Man, that he should still desire to
be under the Law, which has already concluded him under Wrath: and vet he
hopes for Mercy from that Law, that never knew what it was to show mercy:
Because it was once the way of Salvation for man in innocence, therefore he
thinks there may be some hope still; Alas! this is like the cry of a condemned
Man, upon whom Sentence of Death is already passed, his Cry signifies nothing,
he must away to Execution.

2. If Works alone will not justify, man will try what the Works of the Law, and
the Grace of the Gospel put together will do; he joins Christ and the Law,
hopes that way to save himself, partly by Grace, and partly by Works; so did
the Galatians, and so do some nowadays, mingling the two Covenants strangely
together, that way may be made for their good Works to help forward their
Justification. -- But if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing,
Gal. 5. 2. If it be of works, it is no more grace, Romans 11. 6. It must be either
all Works, or all Grace; there is no mingling them in point of Justification;
we cannot be under both Covenants at once. We are justified freely by his grace
(says Paul), Romans 3. 24. We should eye nothing in our selves, but only the free
Grace of God in our Justification.

3. If they cannot be justified by the Works of the Law, nor by joining the
Works of the Law and Christ together, then they will see what may be done by
joining the Works of the Gospel and Christ together; their own inherent
Evangelical Righteousness, and Christ's Imputed Righteousness, must go hand in
hand in the business of Justification. There are a sort of Latitudinarians who
seek to widen the straight gate of Faith, and have almost quite pulled it off
the hinges, to make room for their own Evangelical Righteousness, to join with
Faith in helping forward our Justification; what course they take to contrive
this, I will tell you (not in my own words, to avoid offense, but) in the very
words of a late Eminent Divine, now with God, viz. Doctor Owen, who, in his
Book, entitled, The Doctrine of Justification by Faith, through the Imputation
of the Righteousness of Christ; speaking there of the Conditionality of the
Covenant, and the ill use is made of it, page 144. expresses himself in these
very words. viz. After they have given the specious name of a Condition, and a
Causa sine qua non unto Faith, they immediately take all other Graces, and
Works of Obedience into the same state with it, and the same use in
Justification; and after this seeming Gold has been cast for a while into the
fire of Disputation, there comes out the Calf of a personal Inherent
Righteousness, whereby men are justified before God, vertute foederis
Evangelici; for as for the Righteousness of Christ to be imputed to us, it is
gone into Heaven, and they know not what is become of it. -- So far the Doctor.
This is a true Account of that new Scheme of Divinity that is so much contended
for.

Is it not sufficient to say, That God has called us to Faith and Repentance
in order to Salvation; has appointed faith, including a serious purpose of
turning unto God, as absolutely necessary unto Life, according to the Order of
the Covenant of Grace? Let us not trouble our heads, whether Faith be a
Condition or no, but earnestly beg of God to give us Faith, to bring our hearts
to an humble reliance upon Christ for all that is promised in the New Covenant.
It is easily proved, That whatever is promised to believing, is absolutely
promised; nay, therefore it is of Faith, that it may be of Grace; God promises
no more in the New Covenant, than what he intends freely to give; though he
gives one thing first in order to another, yet he freely gives all: To say they
don't mean by Condition, any Motive, or procuring Cause inclining God to give
us Life, is, in effect, to say they mean nothing by it; and therefore since it
is a word of so dubious a signification, liable to misconstruction, apt to lead
us into a conceit of some Self-righteousness as required unto our
Justification, the safest way is to lay that word aside altogether, contenting
our selves with Scripture-Terms and Expressions, with sound wholesome words that
offend no body's ears.

4. Since neither of the three ways abovementioned do take, some, wearied with
these Disputes, (and I must tell you, rational Disputes about things
superrational, will sooner perplex the minds of men, than satisfy them); I say,
some, finding no security in the forementioned ways of Justification, that the
Reason of Man suggests to him, they cast them all off; and knowing no better,
they fly to the general Love and Goodness of God toward his Creature Man,
think to come in for a share of that to relieve them in their extremity; and
now they think they have hit it, are in a right way of Salvation, having cast
themselves upon the general Goodness and Mercy of God. -- I grant God is kind
unto the unthankful, and to the evil, Luke 6. 35. his Benignity, or the riches
of his Goodness, should much affect us, Romans 2. 4. There is such a thing as
(...), and (...) in God, i. e. Kindness, Love or Pity toward man. Tit. 3. 4.
(...), signifies a proper peculiar love in God to Mankind, more than all the
Works of his Hands; yet this Love to man is but a general Love, and must not be
mistaken for special Grace; it is the Sun that rises on the evil, and on the
good; the Rain that falls on the just, and on the unjust, Mat. 5. 45. It does
not argue any special interest thou have in God more than others; you cannot
from thence infer, that you shall be saved, unless all men be saved; for that
Love you lay claim to, belongs to all men as well as you. Yet Sinners, to keep
off all Terrors of Conscience as well as they can, will sooth themselves up
with hopes from God's general Kindness and Love to Man; God is merciful and
gracious, and they doubt not but all will go well with them at last, though no
satisfaction be made for their Sins; they don't think of that, but look upon
God as if he were all Mercy, they quite forget his Justice; when that comes
into remembrance, then presently they sink again, they see their Plea will not
hold; and die at last, either under a judicial hardness, or in horrible
tormenting Despair. These are the false ways of Salvation, which for a time
Sinners may fancy to themselves; but there being nothing of true saving Faith
in all this, they are at last miserably disappointed, and die in their Sins,
which will be sure to sink them into Hell.

Since man is nonplust, cannot reach it, is out in all his thoughts about the
right way of a Sinner's Salvation; let us hear what God says. He that
believes, shall be saved, Mark 16. 16. Whosoever believes in him, shall not
perish, but have everlasting life, John 3. 16. It Is well for us that God's
thoughts are above ours, Isa. 55. 9. That what is impossible with Man, is
possible with God; when we have done thinking and contriving how to save our
selves, let us in a holy despair of our selves, refer the matter to God, whose
Understanding is infinite, he can find out a way for our escape, when we can
find none; while we are searching for Reasons why God should save us, we shall
have a thousand Reasons rise up in our minds why God should not save us; there
is nothing more rational for a convinced Sinner, to whom Christ is not yet
revealed, than utter Despair; the Law leads to it; and (in that case) not to
despair, does argue the greatest ignorance, or higest contempt of the Law
imaginable: should Fallen Man, (without the Light of the Gospel directing him
to Christ) set himself to find out a way for his deliverance, the Law of God
would rise up against him, and contradict every thought and imagination of his
heart, and bid him let that alone for ever, because it is out of his power, as
has been showed: nothing that falls under Man's understanding can save him.
This is the first reason of the second general Head, viz. Why God has laid the
way of a Sinner's Salvation so high, etc. viz. because nothing that falls under
man's understanding can save him.

The Second Reason why God has laid it so high, viz.
Because nothing does tend more to the Exaltation and glory of God's rich
Grace, than to fetch the mystery of man's Salvation out of the depths of
Infinite Wisdom, that it might be the more admired, and more highly prized by
us; such an unexpected discovery was very astonishing, no Tidings more welcome
than what the Gospel brings, Romans 10. 15. Wherein God shows the exceeding
riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ, Ephesians. 2. 7. Not
according to our Works (as men are apt to think) but according to his own
purpose and grace, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Man cannot say when he hears the Gospel, that
he thought beforehand, that God would take this way; no, he is amazed at it,
astonished at it; what manner of love is this? Here is a new thing created in
the Earth; It is the glory of God to conceal a thing, Prove. 25. 2. God never
advised with Angels, or Men, about the way of a Sinner's Salvation, but from
Eternity contrived it in his own breast. Who has been his Counselor? Romans 11.
34. This secret of the Lord is now revealed unto us in the Gospel. O how great
is the mystery of godliness, God manifest in the flesh.

The Third Reason why God has laid it so high, etc. viz.
Because nothing keeps man in a closer dependence upon God, than to see the way
of his Eternal Salvation wrapped up in such a Mystery, that none but God can
reveal unto him. Since this great undertaking of God to save Sinners, is a
business of that nature, of that high concernment to us, and also quite beyond
our skill, and above our knowledge to conceive a right of; how should we humbly
wait upon God for further light, that he would open the eyes of our
Understanding, etc. as the Apostle prays, Ephesians. 1. 18. To whom should we go?
thou have the words of eternal life, Joh. 6. 68. q. d. None can teach us the
way of Life, but Thou alone; O lead us in it, and suffer us not to depart out
of it. God has laid the way of a Sinner's Salvation so high in Christ Jesus,
that none would ever come to him, if the Father did not draw them, Ioh. 14. 6.
The Jews, those Builders of old, they set at naught the Chief Cornerstone,
Jesus Christ, built upon other Foundations, till at last the House fell upon
their heads: How positive is Peter about the only way of Salvation by Christ,
Acts 4. 12. He saw that naturally men went the wrong way, knocked at the wrong
Door, did not enquire for the right and only Savior of Sinners, no other Name
under Heaven, etc. -- So much for the Second General Head, viz. Why God has
laid the way of a Sinner's Salvation so high, that no Humane Understanding can
reach it.

3. The Third General Head, viz.
Though the way of a Sinners Salvation by Christ be above the Capacity of a
natural Man to reach, and take in; yet God can give us a true discerning of it,
and full saction about about it; inclining our hearts readily to comply with
it, and acquiesce in it; and this discerning God gives the Saints by his
Spirit, not in the Light of Humane Reason, but in the Light of a Divine Faith,
grounded upon the Word of God: Faith sees things as they are in God; in lumine
veritatis prima, in the Light of the first Verity, which is God himself; all
Gospel Truths are copied out from that Divine Original, and revealed to us in
the Scriptures: so much truth as we have in us, so much of the Image of God we
have upon us, and no more: an enlightened Mind ascends upwards, by that which is
revealed; to God himself, the first Exemplar of all truth, and sees sufficient
grounds for our faith and hope in him; God lets things into the Soul at another
Door than Reason does, which admits nothing but what first passes through our
Senses; Faith having to do with things Supernatural, consults not with Flesh
and Blood about them, but takes them in by a higher Light, God shining in our
hearts, and giving us that evidence of things not seen nor apprehended by the
Light of Humane Reason.

It may here be queried; Since the way of a Sinner's Salvation by faith in
Christ is so mysterious, so much above the reach of a mere Humane
Understanding, cannot be discerned but in the light of Faith, and that Faith
being not of our selves, but the Gift of God;

The Query is, -- Whether Man, without offering violence to the Principles of
his Nature, as a Reasonable Creature, be capable of such a Faith, that lifts
him up above his Reason, and carries him out to those things which a Humane
Understanding conceives not? This is the Quere which I am to say something in
answer to.

First, God compels none to believe; yet he makes things so clear to his
Saints, that they cannot but believe. Though God gives Faith, Ephesians. 2. 8. yet he
forces it upon none; Faith is voluntary: A Mind spiritually enlightened, sees
sufficient grounds of faith in Christ himself, and therefore out of choice and
judgment relies upon him only, rejecting all other confidences as vain.

Secondly, Faith is either Humane or Divine; We are naturally capable of both,
but with this difference: We may bring our selves to a Humame Faith, but not to
a Divine Faith; i. e. we may bring our selves to a Humane Faith, about things
we see, hear and understand; Reason and common Charity does this: there is no
man but believes something; I am not now speaking of a natural Faculty of
believing in a humane way; all men as men, have this; -- but I am speaking of a
Divine Faith, proper only to Christians; a faith in God and Christ about those
things that transcend our Reason. I say, no man can bring himself to such a
Faith; he has no natural Faculty or Principle in him, that leads him to such a
Faith, it is the work of God, that he believes in God. I grant Man as a
Rational Creature is passively capable of a Divine Faith, none else are, but
Reasonabe Creatures; and yet, I must tell you, nothing does more oppose Faith
than Reason does; you must know, that this natural Capacity that is in man for
Faith, does arise from the necessary subjection of his Mind to the Creating
Power of God; they who would resist his Will, cannot resist his Power, else his
Power would be no Power, far from Omnipotency, if it could be resisted by a
Creature; therefore he must needs have a passive Obediential Capacity or
Receptivity of any higher Principle that God shall think fit to create in him,
he cannot refuse, but must receive any further Light that God shall let in upon
him, and set up by his Almighty Spirit as a standing Supernatural Principle to
guide and direct him in all his ways: As it was in the first Creation; Let
there be light, and there was light; so it is in the second Creation, God
commands light to shine out of darkness, else there would be no possibility of
a Sinner's Conversion; for upon the Principles he now goes, and the present
Light he walks by, it is impossile to convert him; but by putting higher
Principles, and a higher Light into him, he may be converted; this God can do,
and none else, who calls things that are not, as though they were, and gives
them a being; he puts a new Supernatural Light into the heart of a man, and
then sets Christ before him; and by this Light, by this new Eye, or Principle
of Faith, he sees that in Christ he never saw before; and willingly receives
him, notwithstanding all the Objections of Flesh and Blood to the contrary.

Though Faith be above Reason, yet Faith has its Reasons and Grounds too, but
such as are not of our finding out: God shows them to us in himself, what good
grounds we have for our Faith in him, from his Veracity and Truth, from his
Goodness and Mercy, his Power and All Sufficiency, his Ability to save to the
utmost.

Though Faith be above Reason, yet it is not against Reason; nay, allowing the
first Principles of Religion, viz. That there is a God of Infinite Perfection,
Power, Goodness, and Wisdom, which may be discerned in some measure, even by
the Light of Nature, it rationally follows, that Omnipotency can do all things;
that Infinite Wisdom understands that which finite creatures cannot reach, nor
see any reason for; so that though the deep things of God, spoken of in
Scripture, be above our Reason, yet still there is reason sufficient, why we
should believe 'em: -- As for instance; That God should become man, is above
Reason, but not against it: That God should assume the pure and perfect Nature
of man, and give it an Existence in the Divine Person of his Son; this is a
great honor to man, and in the consequence of it, does much set forth the
Glory of God, both of his Justice and Mercy. God made man at first after his
own Image, to show how near akin man was to God; what a likeness and agreement
there was between them: Now if God will veil himfelf, and appear in this
created Image of himself, to man, that there may be a more familiar Society and
Fellowship between them, this is great condescension in God, and argues much
love to us, and delight in the children of men. If God will draw in the bright
beams of his essential Glory, because it is too great a light, too strong and
dazzling for any mortal eye to look upon, that we may have free access unto him,
behold his face, and live; shall this offend us? The more God lets us into
himself, the nearer he takes us to himself, the more should we rejoice, that we
are admitted into his Presence, and suffered to stand before so great a Glory,
which shines out upon us here, as we are able to bear it. If there were not
some distance between God and our Faith, in this state of absence, we should be
quite swallowed up of his Glory; we can now bear the Conceptions of our Faith
which is as much as we can do. Though we cannot yet bear the Vision of the
things themselves, we shall be more strengthened, more spiritualized in all our
faculties, in our bodies and souls, when that day comes. Now we have as much of
God, as is agreeable to this dispensation of Faith under which we live; we
shall see more hereafter, face to face. -- Thus much for that Query. Let us now
more particularly consider what there is in the Doctrine of Faith, that poses
natural men, that they take such offense at, is such a stumbling block in their
way, that they cannot get over: They stumble at many things in the Gospel, but
more especially at the Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone; it is said,
verse. 32. They stumbled at that stumbling stone; more especially at that.

1. I have already told you, Faith is not attainable by our own power; we
cannot persuade our selves, nor bring over our own minds to close in with
Gospel Truths; and what is not in our power, we are apt to think absolutely
impossible; and shall think so, till Faith comes; Faith when it comes, makes us
sensible of the Power of God in working it, and keeps us ever after in an
humble dependence upon God for all that he has promised: Nothing is more
unintelligible to a natural man, than this, That he who believes in Christ,
shall be saved; and therefore he counts the Doctrine of Faith, foolishness, and
rejects the whole Gospel; or else the Devil runs him into Presumption,
persuades him that is Faith; a false Faith does the Devil as much service, as
downright Infidelity; Faith in Christ is a strange Doctrine to natural men,
Acts 17, 18, 19, 20. Therefore they take offense at it.

2. The Justification of a sinner by Imputed Righteousness: -- Here they
stumble again; they cannot see how the Righteousness of another, should become
theirs by God's act of Imputation, supported (in the equity of it) by Christ's
perfect obedience for us; why should it seem strange, if that which Christ out
of mere love intended for us, be graciously imputed to us, for our use and
benefit? Certainly the best and only Plea for Justification in the sight of
God, is this, -- That Christ is our perfect Righteousness. The truth is, it is
the greatness of God's Grace that puzzles them; they except against that, which
makes most for them, if they rightly considered their own case; for there can
be no justification of a sinner any other way, according to Law, requiring
personal perfect obedience, it is impossible; the soul that sins must dye; but
the soul that sins, may live, says the Gospel, if he believe in Christ, with a
serious purpose of turning to God, and repenting of all his sins; which every
true Believer does, and must do: The Justification of a sinner in the sight of
God, is a strange Paradox; it sounds very high, a great deal higher than the
pardon of a sinner; it implies the perfect Righteousness of a sinner; imputed
to him, upon full Satisfaction given to Divine Justice for all his Offenses;
the Righteousness of the Law calls for it; Christ first deals with the offended
Justice of God, prevents the threatened Vengeance, so making way for the Grace
and Mercy of God to flow down upon us: The Righteousness upon the account of
which a sinner is justified, must needs be an imputed Righteousness, derived
from another; for he has it not in himself, he could not be a sinner if he
had; but all have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God, therefore all who
are saved, must go out of themselves to Christ for Righteousness, without which
we can never be justified; we are justified from sin, not in it, much less by
it: If our Justification were not grounded upon perfect Righteousness, it would
look rather like a Justification of sin, than of a sinner from sin: Our great
business is, to understand by what Righteousness we are justified: A sinner
has no Righteousness in himself, and we shall never be persuaded that
Righteousness without Works, will be imputed to us, till God persuades us, but
shall still go about to establish our own Righteousness, till Faith has better
instructed us: What is this Faith? What is this Righteousness of Christ to me?
says a sinner: He is equally ignorant of both, till Faith comes; then the
dispute is at an end, the man is of another mind now; he does immediately fall
in with his own Faith. What is the reason that carnal men do oppose the Gospel?
It Is because they don't believe it; when they do, the case is altered; they are
of the same mind with Christ, can set to their seal, That his Word is true, and
that every man is a liar, who says otherwise: When we know experimentally what
it is to believe in Christ with all our hearts, we shall be fully satisfied in
the Doctrine of Faith, how strange soever it seemed to us before. -- Let us not
go about to prove the fundamental Points of the Gospel by Principles of Human
Reason: Faith fetches all from the Word; whether there be reason, or no reason
for it; Faith will believe it, relying with a holy security of mind upon God's
Word, let what will be against it in Reason, Nature or common experience and
observation of all mankind; so did Abraham and Sarah. Faith is a great Mystery,
1 Timothy 3. 9. above all human wisdom, by the light of reason we cannot know
Christ, till he give us an understanding, 1 John 5. 20. Faith is much opposed
by the Devil, the world, and our own hearts; but we resist all in Faith, when
we continue to believe, holding fast our confidence, notwithstanding all
objections to the contrary: This is our Victory, even our Faith; that it stands
its ground still; nay, when objections come up nearer to us, get into the
Conscience, to the great amazement of the soul, yet Faith, well acted,
overcomes all Terrors of Conscience, and says triumphantly, The Lord is my
light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life,
of whom shall I be afraid? Psalm. 27. 1. Romans 8. 38, 39. Hope grounded upon
Faith, is a sure anchor of the soul, Heb. 6. 19. Col. 1. 4, 5. Faith is all the
evidence we have for our Salvation; we stand by Faith, 2 Cor. 1. 24. We hold by
no other tenure: It Is hard for Believers themselves to act Faith, because of
that mixture of Unbelief that is in them, and therefore it must needs be much
harder for Unbelievers to receive their first Faith; God by his Almighty Power
lets it into the heart, and keeps it there: Faith is not such a comprehending
knowledge as we have of those things that are subject to man's understanding;
it is above that, neither do we ever attain to it, till we are persuaded of
that which we cannot by reason conceive or understand, because it passes
knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 18. Calvin showing the Inst. l. 3. c. 2. Sect. 14.
difference between Reason and Faith, expresses it thus: Persuasum habet quod
non capit; i. e. the mind of a man is by Faith persuaded of the truth of that
which by Reason it cannot conceive or comprehend; and Calvin was no Enthusiast.
The knowledge of Faith stands rather in certainty, than in any clear,
natural, logical demonstration of the thing it self. Faith is more than
knowledge; i. e. more sure and certain; things that are not made evident by
their causes, yet are made sure and certain by Faith, which begets confidence,
Ephesians. 3. 12.

This certainty does not always keep us from doubting, but rather supports us
under it: We are flesh as well as spirit: Faith may be shaken by Temptations,
but it always opposes them, and at last overcomes them: Thus it is when the
work of Faith is fulfilled with power, 2 These. 1. 11. when the Truths of the
Gospel, which we hear and are enlightened in the knowledge of, are sealed by the
Spirit to our hearts, Ephesians. 1. 13. Faith comes by hearing; we must hear what we
are to believe, before we can believe it; and besides hearing, there must be an
inward conception of the meaning of those words, we take in the sense of them,
and then the sealing of the Spirit follows, settling and confirming us in the
belief of those Truths: We must make use of Reason to find out what is revealed
in Scripture; but it is Faith only that assures us of the truth of that: When we
are satisfied that God has so said in Scripture, let us then yield the
Obedience of Faith, without any further disquisition or reasoning about the
nature of the things themselves.

The Fundamental Principles of Christian Religion, as they are plainly laid
down in the Scripture, will admit of no dispute; they are peremptory
Conclusions, proved by the express word of God, not by any Principles of
Reason; here is nothing to be denied, nothing to be distinguished upon; we must
take them as they are laid down in the Word, yielding the obedience of Faith to
Divine Testimony: I grant we are to explain obscure, figurative, metaphorical
Texts, according to the Analogy of Faith, and according to the letter of
plainer Scriptures.

Object. There seems to be a contradiction in some Scriptures; as between Paul
and James.
Answ. There may seem to be a Contradiction, but no man who professes himself
to be a Christian, can say there is; for this would overthrow the Authority of
the whole Bible; we must not raise a Civil War in the Scriptures, setting one
Text against another: I don't believe that James contradicts Paul, or Paul,
James; there is a sense in which they do agree, though we may not presently
find it out; let us not rashly cry out, a Contradiction, but consider how to
reconcile these two Scriptures, to make out the truth of both; that Abram was
not justified by Works in Paul's sense, and Abram was justified by Works in
James's sense; that was, and was not, is not circa idem. Paul speaks of one
thing, and James of another, therefore no Contradiction; were they two to speak
together, they would agree, and justify one another's words: It Is a safe rule,
never to interpret Scripture into a contradiction to it self; while we think
the Scripture contradicts it self, we shall be under a temptation to make it
good, by all the Sophistry imaginable: we are not in a capacity to reconcile
the Scripture to it self, while we suppose a Contradiction possible, this is to
blaspheme the Word of God, contradicting; ends in blaspheming, Acts 13. 45.
They are hard put to it to maintain their own Opinions, who can do it no
otherwise, than by setting the Scripture at variance with it self, to make good
their Notions; we may differ in our Interpretation, but let us not so much as
suppose that the Scripture can differ from it self, but humbly wait upon God,
till we can better reconcile one Text with another; we shall find, that in so
doing, Gospel Truths will open themselves to our Faith more and more, we shall
by degrees come to that unity of Faith, and knowledge spoken of, Ephesians. 4. 13.

Faith seems unreasonable to all men 'till it be acted, then it goes forth in
its own light, carries its own Evidence along with it, it is persuaded of the
truth of the Word, and such a present persuasion, admits of no contrary
impression; if any Objections be suddenly started by the Flesh, they are as
suddenly answered by the Spirit of Faith; Faith will hear nothing against its
own present act, but on it goes, quenching all the fiery Darts of the Wicked
that fly thick about it; the supposed strength of reason, is nothing to the
real strength of Faith.

To set one or two single Texts against the general scope, and express words of
the whole Gospel, is so bold an attempt, that I wonder any should appear in it.

There is a Justification without Works, and there is a Justification by Works;
believe both to be true, without any contradiction, and let that end the
difference: To set Paul against James, and James against Paul, one Preacher
against another, what will this end in? We may preach up the Justification of
Abram's Person by Faith without Works, and not contradict James's, who speaks
of the Justification of Abram's Faith by his Works; -- we had need be well
satisfied in the truth of that Faith upon which the Justification of our
persons in the sight of God depends.

You see how difficult a matter it is to submit to the judgment of Faith;
Reason will be rising up against it, putting many Objections; If God do not
enable us to deny our selves, and to adhere to his Word, we shall be run down
presently; we are more for disputing, than believing; whereas Faith (if the
letter of the Text be plain) will admit of no dispute; but believes the Record
that God has given of his Son, and expects that every tittle of the Word
should be fulfilled accordingly: As Humane things require understanding, so
Divine things require faith; We believe, and are sure; Joh. 6. 69. not we know,
and are sure; nothing settles the mind in a firm persuasion of the truth of the
Gospel, but Faith, therefore Faith is absolutely necessary in all who desire to
be saved. -- Indeed men may eternally perish without Faith; but when Conscience
is awakened, and comes to be concerned about a Future State, there is no
securing our Souls into Eternity but by Faith in Christ; and this Faith stands
not in the wisdom of man, but in the power of God, nothing less can work it in
you.

Therefore if any Gospeltruth should now strike upon your Understandings, and
find no entrance, but seem dark and unintelligible, you should lift up your
voice for Understanding, and beg of God that he would not suffer the sound of
that Truth to pass thorough your Ears, and out of you Memories, before he has
given you some insight into it, and made you willing to receive it by faith; he
can do it, and will do it, if we wait upon upon him for teaching; did we hear
the Word under a Conviction of this, That it is utterly impossible to believe
the Mystery of the Gospel, unless it be given to us, we should look up more
earnestly to the Father of Lights for this great and rare gift of Faith.

After all that has been said, if any should stumble at the Doctrine of Faith,
and take offense at it, this does but verify the Text. -- Behold, I lay in Sion
a stumbling-stone, and rock of offense, whosoever believes on him, shall not
be ashamed.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the
Poultrey.
CHARNOCK's Works in Two Voll. Folio.

RUSHWORTH's Historical Collections, 2d Part, never before Printed; containing
the Principal Matters which happened from the meeting of the Parliament 1640.
to the end of the Parliament 1644. in 2 Vol. Fol.

Geography Rectified; or Description of the World in all its Kingdom,
Provinces, Countries, etc. Also Government, Commodities, Coins, Weights, etc.
illustrated with about 80 Maps. By Robert Morden. 4to.

The Morning Exercise at Cripplegate; or Several Cases of Conscience Resolved
by sundry Ministers. In 4to.

A Supplement to the Morning Exercise at Cripplegate. 8vo.

Speculum Theologiae in Christo: Or a view of some Divine Truths, which are
either practically Exemplified in Jesus Christ set forth in the Gospel, or may
be reasonably reduced from thence. 8vo.

Christus in Cord: Or the Mystical Union between Christ and Believers.

Precious Faith; Considered in its Nature, Workings and Growth. These Three by
Edward Polhill of Barwash in Essex, Esquire.

A Succinct and Seasonable Discourse of the Occasions, Causes, Natures, Rise,
Growth and Remedies of Mental Errors; with a Discourse of Infant Baptism, and
against the Antinomians.

A Discourse of the Reasonableness of Personal Reformation, and Necessity of
Conversion.

Mr. John Flaveli's Remains; being two Sermons: The one Preached at Dartmouth,
the other intended to be preached at a Meeting of Ministers. These Three by
John Flavell, late Minister of Devon.

A Demonstration of the First Principles of the Protestant Applications of the
Apocalypse, etc. By Drue Cressener, D. D.

The Conformity of the Ecclesiastical Discipline of the Reformed Churches in
France by Monsieur LaRoque. In English. Quarto.

Instructions about Heart-Work, what is to be done on God's part and ours, for
the cure and keeping the Heart, etc. by Mr. Richard Alleyn. To which is added
the Companion of Prayer; by the same Author.

A Discourse concerning Liturgies; by the late Reverend Divine, Mr. David
Clarkson.

The Evidence of Things not seen: Or diverse Discourses concerning the state of
Holy Men after Death: By Moses Amyraldus.

Gradus ad Parnassum; sive novus Synonimorum Epithetorum, Phrasium, etc.
Thesaurus.

God a Christian's Choice, completed by particular Covenanting with God;
wherein the Lawfulness and Expediency is cleared, by Samuel Winney, M. A.

Mr. West's Legacy; being a Discourse of the Perfect Man.

Poems in Two Parts, about the Creation and Recovery of Man. 12s. By Sam.
Slater.

A Discourse of Closet-Prayer, by the same Author.

A Practical Grammar; or the easiest and shortest way to initiate young
children in the Latin Tongue: By I. Philomath. Master of a Free School.

English Exercises for Schoolboys to Translate into Latin: By Joseph
Garretson, Schoolmaster.

The School of Manners, or Rules for Childrens behavior; by the same Author.

A Funeral Sermon on the Death of the Reverend Mr. West.

A Discourse concerning Regeneration, Faith, and Repentance.

A Discourse of the Christian Religion, in sundry Points.

These Three last, by the Reverend Mr. Cole.


