A ROD FOR THE LAWYERS: Who are hereby declared to be the grand Robbers and
Deceivers of the Nation; Greedily devouring yearly many Millions of the
Peoples Money.

To which is added, A Word to the PARLIAMENT; AND A Word to the ARMY.

By William Cole, A LOVER of his COUNTRY.

Isa. 10.1, 2. Woe unto them that decree unrighteous Decrees, and that write
grievousness that they have prescribed; to turn aside the needy from judgment,
and to take away the right from the poor of my people, that Widows may be their
prey, and that they may rob the fatherless.

Isa. 3.14. The spoil of the poor is in your houses.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread-Eagle, near the West
end of Paul's, 1659*

Courteous Reader,
HAd not my Affections to my Contrymen more engaged me, then any particular
Enmity I have against the Lawyers corrupt interest by any damage I have
sustained by them, I should have forborne publishing these ensuing Lines. But if
the very Heathens could say, Non solum nobis nati sumus: We are not only born
for our selves, but that next to the Duty we owe to God, we are bound every
individual man to be a helpful member to his Country: Why should I or any man
keep silence, whilst this pestiferous Generation of the Lawyers runs from City
to Country, seeking whom they may devour.

It is thy duty as well as mine, to cry aloud for justice against them: It is
thy duty and every honest English man's in the Land, to take care hereafter
never to choose any of that Generation to make Laws for us: I say, not to choose
them for Parliament Men: Were not there too many of them now in this present
Parliament, I should hope and expect far better things then now I do; but now
God is pulling down the High and Mighty, is discovering the wickedness of men
in Power, has (most miraculously) slain the glory of Princes, I can with
confidence say, Deus dabit his quoque finem. I do not altogether despair but
that before I dye, I may see the Inns of Courts, or Deus of Thieves, converted
into Hospitals, which were a rare piece of Justice; that so as they formerly
have immured those that robbed the poor of houses, so they may at last preserve
the poor themselves.

A ROD FOR THE LAWYERS.
THat the end of all Laws and Magistracy ought principally to tend to the ease,
safety, and well-being of the people governed, I presume no rational man, or
men will deny: And indeed therefore it is the usual cry and saying both amongst
the Masters of Oppression, the Lawyers, and the ignorant people that know no
better, That the Laws of England, as also the ways of executing them, are the
safest and best in the World; and whosoever shall alter the said Laws, or ways
of executing them, will unavoidably introduce a mischief instead of a benefit.
But to those is answered, That the major part of the Laws made in this Nation,
are founded on principles of tyranny, fallacy, and oppression, for the profit
and benefit of those that made them: For know this, that when William the
Bastard-Duke of Normandy, undertook to conquer this Nation, he was not singly
himself able to raise money or men enough to perform such a Design without the
voluntary conjunction of most of the Nobles and Gentry that were his Subjects,
who sold and morgaged almost all the Lands and Estates they had in Normandy, to
furnish them out in that design. Now therefore when the said William had
conquered this Nation, he was enforced to suffer those his Norman Peers to
share with him in the benefit, as they voluntarily did in the hazard: From
hence it came to pass, that he the said Conqueror and his Nobles made a
division of the Land amongst themselves, and whosoever were Tenants to the said
Conquerors, held all their Lands for a long space in vassalage under them,
merely at their will and mercy; whereupon all laws were made in French, and it
was accounted a base thing in England, to be called an English man: Then did
these Conquerors make such Laws as suited best to keep the people in slavery
and subjection, as the English now use the Irish, that they might have all the
benefit they possibly could screw out of the people. Hence came it to pass that
all penal Laws were made for the benefit of the King, the Lords of Manors, and
other great Officers who were the Kings creatures; this was, and still is the
ground and reason why the life of man, which assuredly by the Law of Reason is
sufficient to answer any crime, was not alone taken away upon conviction of
Treason, Murder, or Felony, but also the Estates of offenders were forfeited
by Law to the King, or Lord of the Manor; which has been the cause that many
an innocent has suffered, as Naboth, who was destroyed by Ahab, that so he
might enjoy his Vineyard: These Laws were not before the Conquest, neither have
been since the Conquest ever introduced in Kent; which County submitted to the
said Duke of Normandy, reserving to themselves their Laws and Rights; and
therefore it is the saying in Kent, The Father to the bow, and the Son to the
plough: And surely in that County is as little robbing, murdering etc. as in
other Counties; and therefore there is not such necessity for that Law, as some
Sophisters pretend, to keep the people in dread and awe: Neither indeed do I
think there is such an absolute necessity for the hanging men for theft, but as
heretofore in the Nation; there may be another way found out more agreeable to
the Laws of God and reason, for punishing of theft as selling to foreign
Plantations, or the like, etc. But if at last the Law to hang Thieves must
continue, I wish it may take hold of the great ones first, lest we renew the
practice once in Athens, where they hanged none but little thieves, and the
great thieves pronounced sentence, Verbum sat sapienti: I am more afraid of
those that rob by power of a Law, then those that sneakingly endeavor to take
my purse on the highway* Now although it may be alleged, (and truly that is
all for by reason it cannot be proved) that there is some reason for the
forfeiting the Estates aforesaid; yet at least let the party damnified be the
Injoyer, or the wife and children of the person murdered: But why there should
come forfeitures on ships cast away, driven up to full Sea-mark, to lose the
best cable and anchor; men to be carried away into slaverie, taken at sea, the
ship remaining with her lading firm and sound, to be forfeited to the Lord
Admiral for a Deodand to be forfeited; to say, if a horse drown his master, the
horse to be forfeited, and this to be pleaded for; or many such Laws to be
grounded on reason, is so ridiculous, that I think the first and grand deceiver
of mankind, cannot find sophistry enough to furnish the Lawyers with to plead
for it.

But some will say, That although we were conquered, et your Noble Ancestors,
by dint of Sword in the Barons Wars, regained their freedom, and enforced the
King to condescend to that famous Law, called Magna Charta.

For Answer, know this, That when the Nobles in those days found the King
altogether inclined to his Minions, and Flatterers, and thereby made Laws to
enslave the said Nobles as well as the Commons had been before, they saw there
was a necessity for them to stand up for their own Privileges; who being
popular, what by fear and love, they engaged the Commons with them in War, and
took the King Prisoner, forcing him to consent to all things that were
necessary, to preserve themselves from the Kings will, but never in the least
acted from any love to the poor Commons, but what they were absolutely
necessitated to; neither freed the said Commons from the bondage they were in
to themselves. Now as all the laws of the land have been made by the King, the
great Lords, Gentry and Lawyers, when the lower House, (one third part whereof
usually consisted of Lawyers) had gratitified the King and upper House; so also
did the King gratify the lower House, both the Gentry and Lawyers, and agreed
to Laws for their Advantage; for indeed is it not much for the advantage of the
Gentry, that seeing the Laws are so corrupt, and chargeable, they thereby can,
and indeed have done, and in most parts do still keep the poor in such*
subjection, that not only their own Tenants, but other poor that live near
them, must run and go, and work, and obey them as they shall please to command
them, else they run the hazard of being undone. And what advantage the charge
and delay of Law suits is to the great Lawyers; you may judge; how have some
Lawyers from being worth nothing but their Books, come to purchase thousands
yearly Lands, as it is commonly called by the sins of the people; this is the
reason why Parliaments have not made the Nation free, our pretending deliverers
have been our dstroyers, and indeed it was irrational to expect better things?
Who will expect Grapes from Thorns, or Figs from Thistles? Who will expect Ease
from Oppression, from Masters of Oppression, the Lawyers? if you will have
clean streams flow from the Fountain, you must be sure to cleanse the Fountain
it self.

That the Lawyers have only sought their own advantage, although to the total
impoverishing the Nation; consider this following.

I have often both in City and Country, made as near an Inquiry as possibly I
could in a general way, what number of Lawyers there might be in England and
Wales, in all Offices, as Judges, Masters of Chancery, Sergeants at Law,
Counselors, Atturnies, Solicitors, with the rest of the rabble; and I cannot
find by Calculation, but that there are great and small, Masters and servants,
by the best account I can estimate, above thirty thousand. Now consider at what
high rates the very meanest of these lives, see but a very Country Hackney,
and you will find he goes clothed in a Gentile garb and all his Family, he
keeps company with the Gentry, and yet usually quickly gets an Estate over
and above his expenses, which cannot possibly be less then one hundred and
fifty pounds per annum. Now if such Country Lawyers live at that rate, bringing
the Judges, Masters of Rolls, Counselors, Atturneys, Registers, Cum multis
Aliis, in the Common Law, Chancery, and Admiralty, and you will find that this
Mercenary generation, one with another, do not receive less yearly from the
people, in their Law-practice, I say, the number of thirty thousand, then two
hundred and fifty pounds per annum each man; What if some have but fifty, then
know some have thousands; Surely I believe that Prideaux and Maynard will not,
nor cannot deny it. Now at this rate, to say 250. pounds per annum to each
Lawyer, these thirty thousand receive seven millions and a half of money
yearly, which is seventy five hundred thousand pounds, and what a charge are
the people at to attend their tedious and vexatious trials. Consider what it
does cost to ride and go from all Countries and Towns to London, to attend the
terms, it cannot be less then one Million of Money yearly, and to what purpose,
observe.

Whosoever contends in Law against another either for Land, Debt or Trespass,
must by the Law try his Title, Debt or Damage, by witness after it has been
never so long delayed by Sophistry, quirks and quibbles of the Lawyers. Now
therefore it must be of necessity proved at the last: Why is it not better to
have it tried in the Neighborhood, while it is fresh, green and new, when the
Witnesses are alive, and in places wherein their lives and conversations are
known, then seven, ten, twenty, or thirty years after the suit is commenced,
when Knights of the Post may be taken as Witnesses, when the Lawyers shall
baffle and confound Witness and Jury by their impudent sophistry and prattle,
when things at great Courts and Assizes are passed over in hugger mugger for
want of time to examine them, there being more care taken to keep a precise
hour for a Dinner, then precisely and strictly to see the execution of Justice
and true Judgment in behalf of the poor, the fatherless, and when either party
sees he is like to have the worst by common Law, then they have liberty to
remove unto the Chancery, where a suit commonly depends as long as a Buffe Coat
will endure wearing* especially if the Parties have, as its said, good stomachs
and strong purses; but when their purses grew empty, their stomachs fail; then
when no more corn is like to be brought to the Lawyers mill, it is usual to
ordain some men to hear and end the business; but alas then its too late, for
then probably both parties, or at least one of them, are ruined utterly in
prosecuting the suit, want of his stock, and following of his calling. What a
folly is it, that all bargains in trade and commerce, foreign and domestic,
must unavoydably run into this channel, to be debated by Lawyers, that
understand it as little as they have uprightness, and be tried by Jurymen, of
which probably not one of the number has the least knowledge in Merchandise.
What an injustice is it that al Wills must be proved at London at such a vain
charg and distance from the place where the party deceased, where they
usually cannot know the truth of things, or little care whether they do or
no, so their sees be paid, where they often either take no security at all, or
if they do, it may be it is such that is as good as nothing, where every
Tapster or Chamberlain, etc. that pretends himself a Freeman, is legal
security; How many Fatherless, Widovvs, and orphans, are utterly ruined; by
this the scripture says, He is worse then an Infidel that provides not for his
family; and to what purpose is it in these times of corruption to work for
children, if men die while their children are young, then they choose some whom
they expect vvil prove shepherds to preserve their children, but if they prove
Wolves, where is the remedy; if men be in a way of trade, it is probable they
may have in goods twice or three times as much left in their hands, as they are
really worth, these goods the Executors or Overseers may and often have
procured means to be appraised at half or one third of the value, so
accordingly they pay debts with a Plene Administavit; these poor young children
or simple women think not of, neither know not how to prevent it; by this means
let a man die that is worth 1000. l. and the Goods in his custody worth 3 or
4000. l. his Creditors may be cheated of the most part of their Debts, and his
Children left a burden to the Parish, O England, England, why do thou
profess thy self the most sincere Nation for Christianity on the Earth, and
do suffer those things that the very Heathens have abhorred?

Object: But if men were not Contentious, they might speedi-and cheaply try any
Suit at Law, it is the fault of froward spirits, that cause the great charge
and delay, and not the Law it self: And it is just that the Law should be
chargeable, else every man would be at strife with his Neighbor when the
charge were little.

Answ. It is true, that injustice of one part or other, is undisputably the
cause of all difference, for both the Plaintiff and Defendant cannot be in the
right; but were the Law made according to the mind of God, for punishment of
those that do evil, and for encouragement of those that do well, then it would
be founded on principles of Justice indeed, it would suppress strife*
contention, and debate, it would quickly put an end to all suits and
Controversies* it would not protect the contentious spirits, nor nourish their
divellish nature, it would not suffer Might to overcome Right, as usually it
does in these days, it would not shelter great Landed men in prison in the
Upper-bench and Fleet, etc. that have large, real Estates, which they spend
voluptuously and riotously, whilst their poor Creditors lie starving in nasty
prisons: This is Monstrum Horrendum, an abomination that let what will be
pretended, for it is not tolerable under the Government of a right constituted
Commonwealth, how long soever it has been continued under tyrannical
Monarchy; But to sum up all in brief, the Law in the generality is unjust and
irrational, the execution desperately dangerous and chargeable, it is easier to
find a thousand evils in it, then one true principle in matter and form. What
if an Attorney or Council take cunningly a bribe from an Adversary, and make a
compact with him to cheat his Clyent, as it is too often practiced, and seldom
discovered.

What if a Judge accept of a Bribe, and by over-awing the Court, carry a case
against Law and right; if he make it a president, may it not be the ground to
cheat many after it. It is remarkable, when neither the letter of the Law, nor
reason can carry a business, then those that are subtle Counselors, and are
highly fed, (for without that nothing can be expected) usually produce
presidents; and these are imposed on the Jury for current Justice, when
probably the ground of them was bribery and baseness.

There is Law, Reason, or Equity in England to try and end all Titles, Debts
and Trespasses depending by suits in all Courts, or there is not: If there be,
let the Parliament appoint a certain number of knowing men, the most
conscientious they can think of, in several Cities and Counties, to make it
their sole business in a limited time, to hear and determine all old suits,
allowing them a moderate sallary by the pound, to be paid by him that is found
the offender; and let not things depend ad infinitum in Courts: There may be as
much injury suffered by the delay of Justice, as by denial of Justice. When all
old suits are ended, were there order taken in Hundreds and Cuunties to have
all Lands, Leases, Mortgages registered, and all those that should pretend any
title, to make their claim in such a limited time as in reason may be thought
fit, reserving some exceptions for some years for children, men in foreign
parts, etc. And when all old suits were ended, all lands registered, and none to
be leased, sold or morgaged, unless registered in each respective Hundred within
one Month after the contract, it would take away the cause of most contention;
and until the cause be taken away, the effect will never cease. Having often
discoursed with Lawyers and others, about the delays, burden and uncertainty
of trials at Law, I very seldom found any averse to Merchants Courts, in regard
that it is apparent, the affairs and dealings of Merchants cannot properly be
understood but by Merchants who know the mystery of Trade, which neither
Judge, Counsel, nor Gentlemen that never were educated therein, cannot possibly
do; for what a ridiculous thing is it; that the Judges in Chancery must
determine of Merchants Negotiations transacted in foreign parts, which they
understand no better then do their seats they sit on: And so they are as
capable to do equity therein, as a blind man to shoot a Hare. Now if Courts of
Merchants are most, nay, I say, absolutely necessary for deciding of
controversies in commerce; and the reason given for it is, because they best
understand it: The same reason holds good, that Country men, Clothiers,
Weavers, etc are most competent Judges of Country affairs of those callings
they live on, and understand; they better know the value of trespass that is
committed by Cattle on Corn, etc. then do the Citizens that hardly know how
Corn grows. Can the people of London, or Masters of Chancery, judge the equity
of things acted in Cornwall or Wales, better then the chief, able men of the
Neighborhood* Now if England were so happy to have respective Hundred-Courts,
and no appeals to be made further then the Quarter Sessions; were these Courts
rightly constituted, and strict penalties to be inflicted on the receivers of
bribes, as cutting off their noses, banishments, or the like (which is absolute
necessary for a false Judge, as both a thief and murderer) where none of the
Court (the Register excepted) should continue in power to judge but one year
together, where they should not be Mercenary, where a man might speak his own
cause, or employ his friend whom he pleased, to speak for him, there would be
then ground to expect Justice and Equity speedily; there would not be, neither
rationally could, lying, sophistry, or quibbles, to pervert the understanding
of the Court, there being always time deliberately to hear the business, and to
examine the Witnesses, when the matter was green and new. Were it ordained that
all Wills should be registered in each respective Hundred where the party had
his abode or Trade, that the Overseers of the Parish were bound by oath and
penalty forthwith to inform some members of the Court who had power, upon first
notice to appoint one or two able men to take care for the preservation of the
goods of the party deceased. That at a certain day all the movables were to be
sold to him that would give most; with this reservation made, that the Wife,
children* executor or administrator might, when the highest price were offered,
have liberty to take it at the same, that when the goods were sold, the true
value were registered in the Court, that no Executor should have any
Administration granted, without giving security to the Courts liking, of two
able men besides himself, that in case the Executor neither could nor would
give good security, that then the Court should be the Executor, and take care
for the discharging the Debts, providing for the Widow and Children. That the
Executor should yearly give an account how he did dispose and manage the Estate
to the Court; how he educated or bred up the Children, etc. That if the Court
remained in possession of the Estate, then that it might be lawful for the
Widow, Children, or Friends, to have redress by the Sessions-Court upon
complaint and proof of injury. That the Lands and Estates of all and each
respective person in the Hundred, were liable to make satisfaction for any
Widows, Fatherless, or Orphans Estate that were put into the Courts hands. This
would make the people take care in the choice of their yearly Court, called
Judges, or Juryes, or the like* Now if these Registers of Lands were kept, if
the Estates of the deceased were so to be secured; if all Debts were liable to
be recovered in each respective Hundred, this would prevent Lawsuits, this
would disable the cunning subtle people from finding out ways to cheat their
Neighbors; this would discover those that were contentious and troublesome, on
which people truly, I think it were but just to inflict some badge of disgrace,
whereas in these days, none are more encouraged by Lawyers, Counselors, etc.
but those that are most contentious.

A Word to the PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
I Do do not give this Title to flatter and collogue with you, but do really
hope that your future actions and designs will make you worthy of it: Ye have
now a great and weighty work to perform, even the restoring to life, the
liberty and security, a dying inslaved destructed Nation, whose utter ruin will
quickly ensue, unles ye work whilst its day unles you make use of the present
opportunity that God has put into your hands: Its not now time for ye to think
of framing a Common-wealth-Government by any president or practices of
Monarchichal laws formerly made by King or single persons which solely tended
to preserve themselves and their posterities in their unlimited Oppressions,
Monarchy is an absolute Antagonist to a free State, and so are all the Laws,
and Rules made by Monarchs. The Hollanders when they resisted the Tyranny and
Persecution of the Spanish King, (who had a far more Legal Title to be their
Sovereign, then the late Norman, Scottish Family had to be the English) Never
consulted with the Laws of their King to make Fundamentals for a Free State,
they Nobly, and Resolvedly shook off all the Props of Tyranny, as they had done
the Tyrant himself; And to their gallant Resolution, God gave such a blessing,
that from a poor miserable people, a distressed State. They are now become
Potent, rich and dreadful: Ye are now involved in a labyrinth of debts,
contracted by the late Usurper, not on necessity, but on ambition. The people
of the Land are almost generally impoverished and indebted, and yet we will
unavoidably be enforced to raise great sums to pay the Arrears of the Army and
Fleet. Now as ye are necessitated yet to continue some burdens on the people,
so also there is a like necessity in point of Justice and prudence for you to
ease the people of others. The Lawyers interest tends neither to the Honor,
safety, nor benefit of the people, nor your own in particular; Who have been
greater Enemies against the establishing a Free State then that Generation? Who
have done and still do more discourage the Nation from a cordial compliance to
this Government then they? How often have they cried up a necessity of the
executing Law in the name of a single person, alleging the Laws of England
could not be managed any other way; as their interest is engaged to Monarchy,
so let it fall with it, let them be condemned out of their own mouths, Nec lex
est justior ulla, quam necis artifices art perire sua: Must the people not
only pay for the charge of your Forces by Land and Sea, but must they pay also
Millions of Money yearly to a mercenary, corrupt, useless generation of Men, who
are worse then the Egyptian Caterpillars, for they devour not only the green
leaves, but hundreds of poor Widows, Fatherless, and Orphans. These are the
insatiate Canibals, whose Carcasses will never be full gorged with the spoil of
the poor and innocent, until the worm gorgeth himself on theirs. Those
Gentlemen of the Long Robe that are amongst you I hope cannot say less, then
that there is great reason to ease the people herein; What if they have
heretofore thriven highly by the practice of Law, Nunquam sera est ad bonos
mores via; Are they not thereby the better able to maintain their Port and
garb? Is it not now time to think of their latter end, to cease to do evil, and
learn to do well? I hope the Proverb will not hold true in them, the older, the
more covetous* Now its time for them and the whole Parliament, unanimously and
vigorously to do good, to vindicate their former almost (shall I say
deservedly) lost honor and reputation, and to secure their Estates to their
posterities: Ye have now the hearts and purses of a resolved honest party,
that will not only make addresses to you, like the late addresses to the
single Person, but will stand and fall with you in all just things; but if ye
turn back from the straight way of Justice, if ye seek to make your selves,
Families or Relations great by ruining or burthening your Country, if ye make
or maintain the Lawyers interest, turn aside the needy from Judgments, and rob
the Widow and Fatherless, then will ye be forsaken by God and all just men,
then will not your Mountains of Treasure, nor numbers of Lordships, nor fawning
flattering Parasites, any ways help you nor deliver you, Sed meliora spero.

A word to the Army.
SIRS,
YE have once more erected the words of Salus Populi, and declared it ought to
be Suprema Lex; the Good old Cause is now cried up: If your words and hearts go
together it is well, it will be the peoples profit, your honor and safety; But
if your zeal exceed not Iehu's, it will signify nothing, the Nation has been
too long abused and cousened by fair words, so that they begin to say, who will
now not only speak, but do us any good? who will prove such self-denyers, as
to prefer the Countries ease before their own honor or profit? This is that is
expected from all sorts, and satisfaction cannot be given to the people, but by
it; Its not now a time to cry out for Acts of Indemnity, which will
unavoidably burden and punish the Innocent, and let the guilty go free; will
ye have all the corrupt mercenary Creatures of the late Tyrants lust justified,
and all their ill gotten goods secured? is there no pity, remorse, nor
compassion dwelling in you in tenderness to the undone people? What means all
your glorious Declarations? What means all your pretenses of Religion? What
means your Fasts? will ye under pretense of long Prayers, devour Widows Houses,
consider what Fast God requires at your hands, Isa. 58.

But if at last nothing will divert you from this stream of Injustice, Give the
people who have long fed and clothed you, some satisfaction; As ye are willing
to excuse the guilty, so pray let the innocent go free; give the people an Act
of Indemnity, and free them from paying all, or any part of Arrears that
remain due to you for for your service in the Tyrants usurpation, especially
you that are the Grandees of the Army (who have sufficiently already gotten by
the poor Soldiery, in putting a necessity on them to sell their arrears to you
for a matter of naught) Think no more of enforcing or persuading the Parliament
by your Proposals (which are not worth --) to gratify a single Family and
interest, for doing those things that rather deserve punishment; Have ye so
much pity to a particular Family, that have a long space lived in pride and
voluptuousness, and have unwarrantable boons given so to continue, and is there
no dram of compassion left in you to the dying, starving Nation, O Tempora,
Omores: Neither alone would I have you to cease from pressing these things
aforesaid, but also to be instrumental to remove those grand, needless
Oppressions which lie on the Nation. Be you at last instrumental to free your
Country from the intolerable burden of the needless Lawyers, who love none
but themselves: Can ye forget that they were in the late great Protectorian
Parliament, using all means to ordain Laws to hang or banish you, and shall
they now be protected in ruining the Country by you? God forbid. Surely its
sufficient for the people to pay Millions yearly to maintan the Army and Navy,
and not to pay Millions yearly to that oppressing needless generation. I should
wonder what spirits do possess you, if you now at last after all the conviction
that you have declared, should think on nothing but clothing your selves in
vanity, in raising your Families to high Estates in insulting over your
brethren, the people of the Land, who have not Bread to eat, nor clothes to
cover their nakedness. It Is probable (and less then which I expect not) that
there will be many, or some among you that will passionately disrelish these
Lines; but if I am become your Enemy for telling you the truth, let it be so,
Me me adsum qui feci in me convertite ferrum; Think not but that many others as
well as my self, will still disrelish self-seeking and oppression in you, as
well as they did did in the King, Protector, etc* Let England never have cause
to cry out with the Poet, Rara fides probitasque viris qui castra sequntur.

A Word to the Lawyers.
YE have plowed Wickedness, ye have reaped Iniquity, ye have eaten the fruit of
lies, Hosea 10.13. The spoil of the poor and fatherless is in your Houses; ye
are weighed in the balance of Justice, ye are found as light as chaff, there
is a wind risen up that will blow your Interest into the Land of Oblivion, all
the mischiefs and evils that ye have done in secret, are now discovered on the
House top: The cries of the wronged and oppressed, the lamentations of the
Widows, Fatherless and Orphans, God has heard. Your Wickedness is now like the
Amorites, at the height; the Sword of Justice is ready to cut it down; the
Decree is passed against your legal Robberies; strive therefore now to learn
Peace and Patience; and an honester Calling, this will be your benefit and
content. But if ye still will resist and gainsay, know this, that assuredly you
will perish in the Attempt.

FINIS.

