A New Method of ROBERT COLEPEPYR, Gent. For speedy and effectual Preservation
of the Navigation on the River THAMES; and to Repair the WATER-BREACH in to
Havering and Dagenham Levels, in Essex.
This Proponent having many Years spent Thoughts on the Tendancies of Tides,
Ebbs, and Sands, for the Benefit of Navigation: Humbly proposes (To the Right
Honorable the BRITISH HOUSE of COMMONS in Parliament Assembled, that some New
Cutts be made in the Thames Bank, as the cheapest and speedyest Way to perform
the Works aforesaid, which if approved of as the best Method, he hopes to be
enabled by Your Authority, to proceed on the same, notwithstanding any Statute
to the contrary.
Gentlemen,
THE Damages to the said Navigation, Your Proponent apprehends are these
following,

First, The Water received by the Inundation or Basin, is thereby cut off from
the upper Part of the same River; this makes some abatement in Water-depth
there, but it must be inconsiderable; since taken from so many Miles of Length,
and the Breadth of Water that flows above the Basin.

Secondly, That Sand from the Basin damnifies Navigation, by subsiding in the
Thames, near the Breach.

And it is true, the Thames first entered this Basin by Failure of a Sluice,
and in time, enlarged that Passage to 100 Yards broad; and also to the Thames
depth, (viz. where the Bason's Water falls into that River.) But as it was
impossible the Tides could ever make high Water in the Basin, before it was so
in the Thames, they could not do it till long after that Time; before the
Breach was much widened, because the Basin was always the same to receive
Tides; but soon after the Innundation, the Breach gave far less Passage into
the Basin than afterward the Water made; therefore we may conclude, that soon
after the Inundation, the Water remained flowing into the Basin, a good part of
the time the Thames was Ebbing; before those Waters could come to a Par, and
that the Thames must be the lower, before any Water could ebb out of the Basin.

From the Reasons above, a great quantity of Water must remain in the Basin,
after the next Tide began to flow in the Thames: Yet this quantity did abate as
the Breach grew wider, however may not all be abated; therefore the Time that
remaining Water ebbs out of the Basin, and meets the first part of the next
Tide; those Waters stop, and swell up one against the other, and drop Sullage,
till the Tide prevails, and gives them a new Motion. For whatever does cause
Loss of Motion in Water, gives it a Tendency to drop Sullage; and the Sand of
this Sullage will subside where it drops, and will increase till want of Room
for Tides and Ebbs, will suffer it to rise no higher. For Storms there can
disperse little, if any Sand, though very useful at the Mouths of our Rivers,
where Winds have more Power. Yet to provide against this Second, and much
greater Damage to the Thames Navigation; the Proponent prays leave to observe
as follows, to wit, that

Four Miles of Bank were maintained, to keep the Thames from drowning the same
Level, therefore while not Imbanked, the flowing Water had four Miles to enter
this Level; whereon it rose in height slowly, as the Thames Water did, and so
abated at Ebb; therefore it must then be high Water at the same time in the
Thames, and on that then un-imbanked Land; and all Water would go off from the
latter, long before Low-Ebb: Therefore no Sand could then drop through long
Contests between Tides and Ebbs, when no Contest was. When at Ebb, the Water
was a Foot deep on the un-imbanked Marsh, that small quantity of Water was as
long in Ebbing off through its four Miles Passage, as the Thames was in abating
a Foot in height; therefore the little Speed the Water made to drown and drain
the Land last mentioned, bore a very small Proportion, with the Running of
Tides and Ebbs in the Thames; but if a Bank had been made gradually on that
four Miles Passage, it would as gradually have given more Motion to the Water
that flowed on, and ebbed off from that Land, to bring them to the same
Swiftness of running they had in the Thames; and since Low-VVater at the same
time in the Deep VVater-frett of the Basin and Thames, is necessary to prevent
Subsidence of Sand in the latter; therefore your Proponent would now make four
new Cutts in the Thames Bank for that benefit, and each of them as wide as the
Breach, though only cut down as low as Marsh Surface.

If the same Cutts, and the Breach, give as much room in proportion to the
Bason's Water, as the Thames Channel gives to the Water that flows above the
Basin, then we must have high and low. Water in the Thames, and deep Water
frett of the Basin at the same times; and little, if any part of an Ebb will be
lest in the Basin to meet the next Tide. So this Cutting of Banks is an
effectual Way to obviate such subsiding of Sand in the Thames, for it takes
away the Cause thereof. The Proponent would not cut so much Bank if less will
serve. However, these or wider Cutts he hopes appear able to answer his End
aforesaid, in few Days, to preserve the Navigation, and also abate Rapture in
the main Water-frett, that Materials for Reparation may be kept there, and
Benefits obtainable by cutting of Banks, are without Risque of Failure, since
Water builds no Banks.

The Proponent would raise Stops of small Wood in the new Cutts a Foot high;
and when Tides rise to the Marsh Surface, the Water will run in through these
Stops, and when risen a Foot higher, it will flow freely in over the same
Stops, till high Water, and much help the Breach to fill the Basin He can also
make a strong Wood Pile, and place the same about 40 Rods within the Mouth of
the Breach, to stand in all the deep Water there; and the shallower Water,
between the Wood Pile and Shoars, he can fill with sinking Faggots, to be made
as long as the Wood Pile shall be broad.

Over the said Wood Pile and Faggots, the Water shall flow several Foot more or
less, every Tide. And when it is Ebbed down to the Head of the Wood Pile, the
Water to the Thames, ward will have nothing in it is Way, so will run as fast as
the Thames Ebbs; but the Water to Landwards of the Wood Pile, etc. will have
the same to get through, and notwithstanding the Water has a Thousand Millions
of small Passages out, through, and by the Wood Pile, and other Stops, yet
those Stops will make Sullage subside within them every Tide; for all Sullage
that sinks below the Heads of the Stops, must go down to the Ground, and
subside there, for want of Water strength, to drive it through, or to the
Stops; and the same Sullage will in reasonable Time, fill all Water-fretts, and
raise the same fit for Imbankment, as has been done elsewhere by this
Proponent's means; and where all the difficult Parts of that Work were avoided:
The said Precedent was about 200 Acres, being the deepest part of a
Water-frett, had been made by a Basin of 3000 Acres, and was given for Lost by
those who regained the rest of it, by Fighting against the Tendency of Tides
and Ebbs.

No cutting of Banks was wanted for the Work above, for the Breach remained 500
Yards wide, with the Basin but 200 Acres; but if a Wood Pile be set in Dagenham
Water-fret, without Cutts, the Water will fret Soil from bottom and sides of
the Water-frett, where the Wood Pile shall stand, to make good the room it
stands in, because that Basin is 2000 Acres, or thereabouts, and but 100 Yards
wide.

The Cutts are also extremely serviceable for Repair of the Breach, and by the
last Quarter of a Tide, the Water may rise as high within the Basin, against
the back part of the Work, as it shall rise against the Front thereof, by
entering at the Breach. And after these two Parts of a Tide come to a Par, by
rising within and without the Wood Pile in the Water-fret, the Wood Pile has no
Water-weight against it, during the rest of the Tide; and it is the latter part
of a Tide (as highest) that presses hardest against Works that contend with it.

The Ebbs far exceed Tides, in being Destructive to Works that fight against
them; however their Waters on each side the Wood Pile ebb together, and keep to
a Parr, so as one Ounce of Water-weight lies not against the Wood Pile all the
Ebb, and thus the Works in Dagenham become less liable to Risque, than the
Precedent, or Work beforementioned; for Preservation whereof, no Cutts were
made; but any great Water Passages may be left in this Wood Pile, or between
the same and the Earth, yet they cannot wear wider, while the Water is on a Par
on both Sides, as aforesaid.

Till Dagenham Breach is well repaired, the Works there shall lie under the
said Guard and Protection of Tides and Ebbs, for Wood-stops in the Cutts shall
be raised a little slower than that in the Breach, and the making of new Banks
in the Cutts, on a good Foundation, shall be the last work for Draining the
same Levels.

Gentlemen, your Proponent is unwilling good Inventions should die as idle
Projects, and hopes he has explained his Methods for Preservation of the
Navigation, and Repair of the Breach aforesaid, so far as may show him able to
perform both, and much Cheaper than in the old Way of fighting against Water
Powers. If this Method succeed, as well in Essex as elsewhere, the same will be
an Established Way for all great Water-Breaches for the future, and many
Workmen will be made able to do it, whence no more Families will be ruined by
Water-Breaches: Besides, the Security to all Marsh-Land hereby, will
considerably raise their Value; and the less Money shall be spent on Repair of
your VVater-Breach, the more Serviceable will this New Method be to the Kingdom.

Gentlemen, The Cutts do appear as necessary to do the said Services without
any excessive Charge, as the Loss of a Leg to save a Life, which Operation is
often ventured by those who only hope to survive it on a Wooden Leg, but here
shall be good Banks again, when the Cutts have done their Service.

Some Objections will be made against the Cutts, which are proposed in this
manner, and answered as follows.

Objection I. That the new Cuts will become as deep as the Breach.

For Answer, the Proponent says, That the Breach did gain neither Depth nor
Breadth, for some Years before the last Stop failed, because it had gained
Passage enough, to fill and empty the Basin, by the moderate running
Marsh-Channels will bear, without enlargement.

For a further Precedent, when West Thorack Level was under Inundation, the
Westerly Winds that cause the highest Tides in the Thames, did destroy and
carry off several Parts of the Easterly Bank of the Level last mentioned, but
made those new Breaches little, if any lower than that Marsh Surface; because
all the Breaches there abated the Water's Restraint and Tendency to carry out
more Earth for a wider Passage. This Precedent is on the Thames, but few Miles
lower than Dagenham, and well in Memory.

In each new Cut may be two Rows of Boards driven into the Ground edge-way,
till only the upper edge appears, and these Rows to stand 8 Foot asunder; the
Water will run over the edges of these Boards without fretting them lower; nor
can it in running 8 Foot frett a Boards breadth into the Ground, because there
it must mount again, to pass over the second Row of Boards. These Boards may
ease doubtful Minds, but otherwise they seem needless.

A further Objection against Cutts is, That the Water entering only at the
Breach, did, at, and since the first Inundation, break a Bank three Times, and
drown a large adjoining Level, because Soil fit for Banks is wanting there, and
the Breach with Cutts may raise Tides a little higher against that feeble Bank,
and destroy the same.

Answer, The Basin has four Mile of Bank against the Thames, whose Repair has
been much neglected since the Inundation, and the Westerly Winds blow the
highest Tides from the feeble Bank, full against the Easterly Bank of the
Basin: however no new Breach is yet made quite through any part of that
Easterly Bank; and the Feeble Bank ought to have the Height and Strength of
the Thames Bank, since Tides flow as high against it; and then the Cutts may
make high Water in the Basin, just when it is so in the Thames, and damage no
Man thereby.

As to want of good Soil for the feeble Bank; the Earth, or rather Mudd used
for it, is much soaked every Tide, the same being taken out of the Basin: So
the said Bank when new repaired, is at least one third Part of it Water, as the
Proponent apprehends: For Water swells the Particles of Earth according to the
Quantity of Water that is in them. And as such a Bank dries, the Water is
Exhaled by Sun and Wind; and the Parts of Earth shrink one from the other in
drying, till the Bank cleaves and parts, or cones in many places, and receives
as much Air, as it formerly contained Water. A few Months after the last Repair
of this Bank, the Proponent was thereon, and sound very many Cones in it, some
of which Cones lying cross the Bank and Deep: And when a Tide rises high enough
to enter through these Cones, a Breach is soon made in such Bank. And beyond
Michaelmas Winds the same Bank will hardly stand, if not better repaired than
Mudd will do it.

Near the new Cutts, (and the better to repair the same,) the Proponent intends
to lay some of the Earth which comes out of the Old Banks and Forelands in high
Heaps, that the Sun and Wind may make it as dry and fit to be well Rammed, as
the upper two Foot of an Old Bank is. And the same way ought to be taken to
Secure the Level now in danger; either by its Owners, or the Government,
otherwise that Land will probably be added to the Inundation. Note, the Work
last mentioned will answer the Objection against Bank-cutting last made; viz.
That there is no Earth fit to repair the same Cutts. Therefore when the said
feeble Bank is well repaired, and Cutts in the Thames Bank made lawful as
aforesaid; then this Proponent hopes Water may faster, or in a greater quantity
be let into the Basin, without Danger to himself, or any Person.

FINIS.

