AN English Dictionary: EXPLAINING The difficult Terms that are used in
Divinity, Husbandry, Physic, Philosophy, Law, Navigation, Mathematics, and
other Arts and Sciences. CONTAINING Many Thousands of Hard Words (and proper
names of Places) more than are in any other English Dictionary or Expositor.
TOGETHER WITH The Etymological Derivation of them from their proper Fountains,
whether Hebrew, Greek, Latin, French, or any other Language. In a Method more
comprehensive, than any that is extant.

By E. Coals, Schoolmaster and Teacher of the Tongue to Foreigners.

Ben. Johnson. Much phrase that now is dead, shall be revived;
And much shall dye, that now it nobly lived,
If Custom please; at whose disposing Will
The power and Rule of Speaking rests still.
Hor. de Art Poet. LONDON, Printed for Peter Parker, at the Leg and Star over
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1677.

TO THE READER.
THE several Climates of the World, have influenced the Inhabitants with
Natures very different from one another. And their several speeches bear some
proportion of Analogy with their Natures. The Spanish and the Spaniard both are
Grave, the Italian and the Italians Amourous, the Dutch as boisterous as the
Germans, and the French as light as they themselves are. But the moderate Clime
of England has indifferently tempered us as to both: and what excess there is
in either, must be attributed to the accession of something Foreign. Our
changes are all professedly owing to the Conquests, especially of Sax and
Normandy.

The first was far the greater, and by virtue of That the body of our Language
is still Teutonick: But the Last is that which more nearly concerns us;
because, though its first irruption was not a violent Inundation, yet it forced
us to such a Communication with France, that our Genius is wrought into some
resemblance of theirs: and (to imitate them) we bring home fashions, terms and
phrases from every Nation and Language under Heaven. Thus we should fill one
another with Confusion and Barbarity, were it not for some such faithful
Interpreter as is here presented to the Prince of Isles.

Not that I am ignorant of what is already done. I know the whole Succession
from Dr. Bulloker, to Dr. Skinner, from the smallest volume to the largest
Folio. I know their difference and their Defects. Some are too little, some are
too big; some are too plain (stufft with obscenity not to be named) and some so
obscure, that (instead of expounding others) they have need themselves of an
Expositor. The method of some is foolish, and supposes things to be known
before they are explained. For when the Terms of Art are reduced to their
several Heads, you must know (in general) what your word is, before you can
possibly tell where to seek it; or else (as they say) you must look a needle in
a bottle of Hay.

Suppose you want the meaning of Belperopis or Dulcarnon, they are not in the
Common herd; where will you look them? In the Law-terms? they are not there.
Sure then they are proper Names; But they are not there neither. What Is to be
done? Why, look till you find and you will not lose your labor.

Some that pretend to correction and exactness, transcribe out of others (hand
over head) their very faults and all.

Hear how severely Doctor Skinner taxes one of them, -- Solens hallucinatur:
and again, -- Ridicule ut solet omnia: and in another place, -- ubi notare est
miserrimam Authoris ignorantiam, etc.

But that Man had but a little work, and so was bound to have done it well. It
is excusable in a World of Words to say that Contemptible and Contemptuous,
Ingenious and Ingenuous are all one: that Decomposit signifies Compounded of
two other words: Emberweek is the week next before Lent: Froise, a pancake or
tan^ie: Gallon, a measure of two quarts: Gomer, nine gallons (instead of one.)
Limbus Patrum, where the Saints reside till the Resurrection: Nazareth, the
place where Christ was born, Redstert, a Robin Red-breast, etc.

And a thousand more such, which simple Children would be apt to contradict,
but Men of Judgment (for whom they were not writ) know where the mistake might
lie. Yet sure 't would have made his worship smile, to have readd, how that
Argus King of P. for his singular wisdom and circumspection, was feigned by the
Poets to have had no eyes.

Custode admittendo, a writ for the removing of a Guardian.

Ejaculation, a yelling.

Eviration, a yielding.

Fidicula, a falling vulture.

Ichidian, the Motto of the Princes Arms.

Iopaena, a song of rejoicing.

Lungis, a tall slim m^n that has no length to his height.

Mayweed, like Cammomile in smell, but of a stinking savor, etc.

So many there are of this Nature and so gross, that (let the reason be what it
will) they are altogether intolerable.

In that which I have done, I do not warrant absolute perfection. The pains
that are taken in it, will appear at first sight. The addition that is made to
the number of words in former Authors of this kind, is almost incredible
(considering the bulk) being raised from seven in the Expositor to almost
thirty thousand here; which is some thousands more than are in Mr. Blunts
Glossographia or Mr. Philips World of Words. The order I observe is altogether
Alphabetical; for that best answers the design of Informing others. If any
would have the proper Names, Terms of Law, Navigation (or any other Art) by
themselves, they may go through the whole and (with delight and profit) reduce
them all to their particular Heads.

I am no friend to vain and tedious repetitions. Therefore you will often meet
with words explained in their dependence and relat^on to one another, and the
sense completed by taking them together: as for example,

Lupa, a She-wolf that nourished Romulus in the

Lupercal, a place near Rome, where were celebrated the

Lupercalia, Feasts in honor of Pan, performed by the

Luperci, Priests of Pan --.

Poetical expressions may be allowed to Poetical Relations and Fictions; yet
here and there I give a hint, to let you know, that I take them not for real
verities.

The history of the Bible I suppose to be so well known, as that I only give
the plain English of the Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriack and Greek Names.

Here is a large addition of many words and phrases that belong to our English
Dialects in the several Counties, and where the particular Shire is not
expressed, the distinction (according to the use) is more general into North and
South-Country words.

Here are also added all the Market Towns (and other considerable places) in
England, with all the places of note in other Countries, especially the
Neighbor Nations. Where it is to be observed, that (as Dr. Heylin says of
Hungary) it were infinite labor to express every little place which the seat
of a war gives occasion for History to mention.

It Is no disparagement to understand the Canting Terms. It may chance to save
your throat from being cut, or (at least) your Pocket from being picked.

I have not only retained, but very much augmented the number of Old Words. For
though Mr. Blount (as he says expressly) shunned them, because they grew
obsolete; yet doubtless their use is very great: not only for the unfolding
those Authors that did use them, but also for giving a great deal of light to
other words that are still in use. Those that I call Old Words are generally
such as occurr in Chaucer, Gower, Pierce Ploughman and Julian Barns.

And whosoever has a mind, instead of them (or other vulgar terms) to use
expressions that are more polite; he sees what words are marked for Latin, Greek
or French, and may himself make such Collections as will be far more
advantageous, than if they had been gathered to his hand.

Finally, that I might be the more comprehensive (for here is very much in very
little room) I have signified the derivation of the words from their several
Originals, and the Names of the Counties in which they are used, by one or two
of their initial letters; the meaning of which is expressed in the following
Table.

A Table explaining the Abbreviations made use of in this Book.
A. Arabic. Br. British. C. Canting. Chapter Chaldee. Che. Cheshire. Cu.
Cumberland. D. Dutch. Da. Danish. De. Devonshire. Der. Derbyshire. E. Essex. F.
French. G. Greek. Ge. German. Ga. Gallick, old French. H. Hebrew. I. Italian.
Ir. Irish. K. Kentish. L. Latin. La. Lancashire. Li. Lincolnshire. No.
North-Countrey Nf. Norfolk. Not. Nottinghamshire. O. Old Word. P. Persian. Sa.
Saxon. Sc. Scotch. Sla. Slavonian. So. South-Countrey. Sp. Spanish. Sf.
Suffolk. Ss. Sussex. Sy. Syriack. T. Tuscan. Tu. Turkish. W. Wiltshire. We.
West-Countrey. Y. Yorkshire.
To prevent a vacancy, I thought good here to prefix a Catalogue of the most
usual words, whose sound is the same, but their sense and Orthography very
different.
ALtar, for sacrifice. Alter, change. Are, be. Air, Element. Heir, to an
estate. Assent, consent. Ascent, of a hill. Ax, to hew with. Acts, Deeds. Baal,
an Idol. Ball, for play. Bawl, cry out. Bare, naked, or did Bear, carry [a
bear. Beer, drink. Bier, for a Corpse. Barbara, woman's name. Barbary, the
Country. Berberry, a tree. Base, vile. Bass-viol. Bows, bends. Boughs,
branches. Bouze, quaff. Buy, with money. By and by, anon. Berry, that grows.
Bury, the dead. Call, by name. Cawl, like a net. Cellar, under ground. Seller,
of wares. Chare, a work. Chair, to sit in. Cheer or Cheer, food. Clark, a man's
name. Clerk, a Clergy man. Collar, neck-band. Choler, anger. Currents, streams.
Corants, a fruit. Dam, stop up. Damn, condemn. Dear, costly. Deer, Venison.
Do, a Female. Dough, paste. Done, acted. Dun, color. Due, debt. Dew, of
heaven. Ear, of the head. Year, 12 months. Eaten, devoured. Eaton, a proper
name. Fain, earnestly. Feign, counterfeit. Fillip, on the forehead. Philip, a
Name. Foul, filthy. Fowl, a bird. Fair, comely. Fare, diet. Furr-gown.
Fir Tree. Forth, abroad. Fourth, day, etc. Groan, in spirit. Grown, in stature.
Guilt, conscience. Gilt, with gold. Hare, and hound. Hair, of the head. Hear,
harken. Here, in this place. Heard, for heared. Hard, as a stone. Herd, of
Swine. Heart, a deer. Heart, and Soul. Hallow, sanctify. Hollow, with holes.
Hire, wages. Higher, than you. Hole, a hollowness. Whole, entire. Holy, sacred.
Wholly, altogether. Home, house. Whom? what man? Holm, holly. Hue, a color.
Hew, to cut. Hugh, a man's name* Hymn, a Song. Him, that man. Her, that woman.
Hur, a man's name. I, my self. Eye, to see with. I Will, a walk, or I will. Isle,
an Island. Kill, destroy. Kiln, of bricks. Kiss, with the mouth. Ciss, Saul's
Father. Latin, Roman. Latten, Tin. Leper, a Leprous man. Leaper, a jumper.
Lessen, make less. Lesson, a Lecture. Lo, behold. Low, not high. Lose, forgo.
Loose, release. Manner, fashion. Manor, -house. Marten, a bird. Martin, a man's
name. Meat, food. Mete, measure. Mite, small coin. Might, Power. Moat, a broad
ditch. Mote, in the Sun. More, than they. Moor, a Black. Mues, Mews, for hawks.
Muse, to meditate. Nay, no. Neigh, as a horse, Nigh, near. Nid, a nest. Nigh, a
man's name. Naught, bad. Naught, nothing. Nether, lower. Neither, this nor that.
O, oh, alas! Ow, to be indebted. Oat, Corn. Ought, any thing. One, first
number. Own, proper. Our, belonging to us. Hour, 60 minutes. Pare, take off.
Pair, a couple. Pear, a Fruit. Parson, of the Parish. Person, any Man. Place,
room. Plaise, a Fish. Pole, for hops. Poll, the head. Pore, little hole. Poor,
needy. Pray, beseech. Prey, booty. Profit, gain. Prophet, foreteller. Rain,
water. Rein, of a bridle. Reign, of a King. Rice, Corn. Rise, advancement.
Room, space. Rome, in Italy. Red, in color. Readd, for readed. Roe, of fishes.
Row, the boat. Rue, of Trees. Ruff, a double-band. Rough, rugged. Rung, the
bells. Wrung, his hands. Rye, Corn. Wry, crooked. Rhyme, a mist. Rythm, in
verse. Rite, a custom. Right, not wrong. Write, with pen. Wright, workman.
Reed, that grows. Read, a book. Road, highway. Rode, did ride. Rhode, proper
name. By Rote, by heart. Wrote, writ. Wrought, did work. Sheep, a Beast. Ship,
at Sea. Sight, view. Site, situation. Cite, summon. Sink-down. Cinque, five.
Sloe, a fruit. Slow, tardy. Slough, old skin. So, thus. Sow, seed. Sew, cloth.
Some, part. Sum, of money. Sole, or Soal, a fish. Sole, of a shoe, or alone.
Soul, spirit. Sore, painful. Soar, aloft. Swore, did swear* Sound, whole.
Swoon, faint away. Succor, help. Sucker, young plant. Sun, that shines. Son,
of a Father. Stair, a step. Stare, with the eyes, etc. Slight, despise, etc.
Slight, of hand. Then, at that time. Than, in comparison. Tame, not wild.
Them, a Towns name. Tongs, for the fire. Tongues, languages. Time, and tide.
Time, Thyme, the herb. There, in that place. Their, of them. To, the
preposition. Toe, of the foot. Tow, to spin. Towe, hale the Ship. Too, also.
Two, in number. Throw, hurl. Through, through. Use, enjoy. Ews, not Rams. Ure,
practice. Ewr, and basin. Your, of you. Vain, idle Vein, of blood, etc. Vial, a
glass. Viol, for Music. Ware, Merchandise. Were, was. Wear, Clothes. Wast,
thou. Waste, spend. Waist, the middle. Wait, expect. Weight, burden. Way,
passage. Weigh, in scales. You, ye. Ewe, Sheep. Yew-tree. Ye, ye, you. Yea,
yes.
AA, The name of a River dividing Picardy from Flanders. Aaecius, The name of a
man. Aalac, A hill in Syria. Aarassus, A City in Pisidia. Aaron h. Teacher, or
Mountain of strength. Aba, A Tyrant of Hungary. Abaction l. Driving away.
Abacted, l. Driven away. Abactors, l. Stealers of Cattle. Abacus, l A flat
foursquare piece in Architecture. Abaddon, h. A Destroyer. Abae, A Town in
Greece, never guilty of Sacrilege. Abag^s Can, a king of the Tartars, who ate
the Turk Parvana Abaisance, f. Stooping down. Abalus, An Isle in the German
Ocean. Abandon, J S.F. Forsake. Abannition -ation l. Banishment for a year.
Abantias, An Isle in the Mediterranean Sea. Abarim, h. Passage. Abarimon, A
Country in Scythia, their feet reverted. Abarstick, o. Insatiable. Abas, The
son of Metanira, whom Ceres turned into a Lizard. Abase, I. Bring low. Abash,
Make ashamed. Aba^t, toward the stern or hinder part of the Ship. Abate A Writ,
Destroy it for a time through some defect. Abatement, Entering on an inheritance
before the right Heir, to keep him out. Abatos, An Island in Egypt. Abawed, o.
Daunted, ashamed. Abba, Sy. Father. Abbat or Abbot, The same to his; Abbacy or
Abbathy, as a Bishop to his Bishopric. Abbord, I. Draw near the shore, or
grapple with a ship. Abbreviate, l. Shorten. Abbreviation, l. Shortning.
Abbreviature, short draught. Abbreviator, He that shortens. Abbrochment,
Engrossing, buying up wholewares to sell by retail. Abbuttals, The buttings or
boundings of any land. Abdals, Religious Persians vowing poverty. Abdalmatalis,
Mahomets Grandfather. Abdelmonus, King of Africa. Abdera, A City in Thrace.
Abderite, Democritus who lived there. Abderian Laughter, foolish, incessant
laughter. Abdevinam. Head of the twelfth Mansion in Astrology. Abdi, h. My
servant. Father of Ki^h. Abdicate, l. Renounce, refuse, contrary to adopt.
Abdication, Dis-inheriting. Abdiel, h. Servant of God, or Cloud of Gods store.
Abdolonymus, A Gardener, made King of Sydon. Abdomen, l. The fat which is about
the belly. Abdominous, Unwildy, panch-bellyed. Abduc^, l. Lead or entice away.
Abduction, Taking away. Abecedary, l. Belonging to the letters, A, B, C, etc.
Abecedarian, which teaches or learns the A, B, C, etc. Abedge, o. Abide. Abel,
h. Vanity. In Abeiance, f. void, not in any man's present possession. Abent, o.
Steep place. Abequitate, l. Ride away. Aberconway, A Town in Ca^na^vonshire.
Abe^s^aw, A Town in Anglesey. Abergevenny, or, Aberg^nny, A Town in Wales*
A^erration, l. Going astray. Aberrancy, the same. Abessed, o. cast down,
humbled. Abet, Encourage or uphold in evil. Abettor, or, Abettator, He that
encourages, etc. Abgregate, l. to disperse or separate (from the flock.)
Abhorrency, l. Loathing, hating. Abib, h. Ripening [month.] Abidst, o.
Suffered. Abia, Hercules daughter. Abiah, h. The will of the Lord. Abiathar, h.
Father of the remnant, or of contemplation, or Excellent Father. Abject, l.
Vile, base, castaway. Abiezer, h. The Fathers help Abigail, h. Fathers joy.
Abii, Rude people of Scythia. Ability, l. power. Abimelech, h. My Father the
King, a common name of Kings. Abingt^n, A Town in Berkshire, and others in
Cambridge. Abintestate, l Without a will. Abishag, h. The fathers error
Abishai, h. The fathers reward. Abishering, Mish. Freedom from Amercements.
Abit, o. Dwells. Abition, l. Going away. Abjudicate, l. Give away by
judgment. Abjure, l. Forswear, renounce; forsake the Realm for ever.
Ablactation, l. Weaning, also graffing and keeping the Cyon for a while on its
own stock. Ablaqueate, l. To uncover the roots of Trees. Ablation, l. Taking
away. Ablative, l. Belonging thereto. Ablectick, l. Adorned for sale.
Ablegation, l. sending away. Ablepsy, gr. Blindness. Ablocation, l. Letting out
to hire. Ablution, l. Washing away, Abnegation, l. Stiff denying. Abner, h. The
fathers candle, Abnodation, l. Untying of knots, also pruning of trees.
Abaeocrites, A Captain of the Boeotians. Abogen, o. Bowed. Abolition, l.
Destroying, putting out of memory. Abominate, l. Hate, loath. Abone, f. Make
good, ripen. Aboard, Within the Ship. Aborigines, l. The oldest people of
Italy, also people born where they live. Abortion, l. Miscarrying in women.
Abortive, Belonging thereto A^radacarba, A Charm against Agues. Abraham, h.
Father of many A^ram, High Father. Abraham's baum, An Italian willow that bears
Agnus Castus, Like Pepper. Abracamins, Enchanters among the Indians.
Abram-Cove, c. Naked or poor man. Abrasion, l. Shaving away Abravanus, A River
in Scotland. Abrenunciation, l. Forsaking. Abric, Sulphur in Chemistry.
Abricot, f. or rather. Apricock, f. A plum ripened in the Sun. Abridge, f.
Shorten. Abrodiaetical, g. Curious in diet. Abrogate, l. Make void. Abrotanum,
g. Themistocles Mother, also the Herb Southernwood. Abrupt, l. Suddenly broken
off. Absalom, or Abishelom, h. Fathers peace. Absalonism, The practice of
Absalom, viz. Rebellion. Absession, l. Going away. Abscission, l. Cutting off.
Abs^onding, l. or Absconsion* Hiding* Absentaneous, l. Belonging to Absence.
Absentees, A Parliament at Dublin so called. Absis, The highest or lowest pitch
of the Planets. Absolve, l. Pardon, acquit. Absolute, l. Perfect. Absolution,
l. A pardon. Absonant, or Absonous, l. Disagreeing [in sound] Absorb, l. Sup up
all. Absorpt, Devoured. Absoris, A Town in Minervae's Isle, built by the
Colchians. Abstemious, l. Sober, temperate. Abst^ntion, l. Keeping the Heir
from possession. Absterge. l. Cleanse* wipe off. Abstersion, l. A Cleansing.
Abstersive, Cleansing. Abstinence, l. Temperance. Abstorted, l. Wrested by
force. Abstract, l. Separate, also a small draught of a greater work, also a
quality divided from the subject. Abstraction, l. Taking away. Abstrude, l.
Thrust away. Abstruse, or Abstrusive, l. Hid, secret, dark. Abstrusity,
Darkness, etc. Absurd, l. Foolish, harsh. Absurdity, Foolishness. Abvolate, l.
Fly away. Abvolation, Flying away. Abus, The River Humber in Yorkshire. Abism,
or, Abyss, g. Bottomless pit. Abysmal, Botomless. Abyssines, Aethiopians under
the Emperor Prestor John. Acacalis, One of Apolloes Mistresses, by whom he had
Philarides and Philander. Acacia, A shrub, and the binding gum thereof.
Academia, g. A place near Athens where Plato was born. Academy, g. Public
School or University. Academic, Platonic Philosopher, or Acad^mical, belonging
thereto. Acadinus, A fountain in Sicily wherein all false oaths writ on tables
used to sink. Acaid, Vinegar (in Chemistry.) Acaire, g. The mad-mens Saint.
Aca^^on, The bright star of E^idamus. Acastus, The son of Peleus King of
Thessaly. Acatalepsic, g. Incomprehensibleness, impossibility of being
comprehended. Accedas ad Curiam, l. A writ commanding the Sheriff to make
record of such or such a suit. Accedas ad Vicecomitem. l. A writ commanding the
Coroner to deliver a writ to the Sheriff Accelerate, l. Hasten. Accelerator,
The Muscle that opens the passage of the seed and Urine. Accension, l. setting
on fire. Accent, l. The tone or mark directing the lifting up the sound of any
syllable. Acceptance, or Acceptance, l. Allowing, or receiving kindly.
Acceptilation, l. An acquittance by word of mouth. Accerse, l. Call forth,
provoke. Access, l. Coming, passage, also [the fit of an] Ague. Accession,
Addition. Accessor, l. Comer. Accessible, Easy to come to. Acc^ssary, or
Accessory, l. Partaking in the guilt of a fault. Accidalia, Venus. Accident, l.
That which happens. Accidental, By chance. Accidence, or Accidents, The first
instructions for the Latin Tongue. Acoements, g. Monks of Constantinople, that
slept by turns. Acolastick, g. Riotous, lawless Acolyte, g. A Young Minister,
that serves the Altar with water, wine, and light. Aconick, Belonging to
Aconite, l. Wolfs-bane, an herb. Acorus, A sweet smelling plant, very
medicinal. Acontius, A young man of Cea, suitor to Cydippe. Acousti^k, g.
Belonging to or helping the hearing. Acquests, or Acquists, f. Purchases, [by
or for only one.] Acquiesce, l. Rest satisfied. Acquietandis plegiis, a writ
for the getting an acquittance. Acquisition, l. Getting. Acquittal, A
discharge. Acre, 40 Perches length of land and four in breadth. Acrimony, l.
sharpness, sourness. Acrisius, Son of Abas King of Argos, and father of Dana^.
Acroamatick, g. That gives or requires much attention, musical. Acroatick, g.
The subtilest of Aristotle's Philosophy. Acrocomick, g. Having long hair.
Acrostick, g. Verses beginning with the letters of ones name Acroteria, g.
Sharp and spiry battlements upon flat buildings. Achronychal, g. Belonging to
those stars that rise in the twilight. Acsah, h. Adorned, wantonness. Acteon,
Turned into a stag by Diana, and torn in pieces by his dogs. Acteoned, Horned.
Actifs, Friars that feed on roots. Action, l. Deed, also a suit at law.
Actisanes, King of Aethiopia. Actitation, l. Debating of Lawsuits. Active, l.
Nimble. Active voice, The way of forming verbs in o. Activity, l. Nimbleness.
Actium, Promontory of Epirus, whence Blackcherries are supposed to come. Actius
Noevius, Cut a whetstone in two with a Razor. Acton burnel, A Castle in
Shropshire Actor, l. Doer, Stage Player Actual, l. Belonging to Action.
Actuality, Perfection of being Actuary, l. The Register of a Convocation.
Actuate, l. Bring into act. Aculeate, l. with a sting. Acuminate, l. Sharpen.
Acuminous, Sharp-edged, pointed* subtle. Acupictor, l. Embroiderer,
needle-worker. Acute diseases grow quickly to a height, and so kill or decay.
Sharp, witty. Acyrology, g. Improper speech. Accius Tullius, Prince of the
Vols^i, warring against Rome. Acclamation, l. Crying out. Acclivity, l.
Steepness. Acco, Fell mad at her own deformity. Accolade, f. Clipping about the
neck. Accodrinc, sa. Drink made of Acorns. Accommodate, l. Fit, apply.
Accommodatitious, Proper, fit. A^complish, f. Fulfill. Accomptable, f. Liable
to give an account. Accordant, f. Agreeable. Accordance, f. Agreement. Accort,
f. Wary. Acc^st, f. To set upon [in discourse,] to draw near to. Accoutred, f.
Dressed. Accoutrement, Dressing. Accoy, o. Assuage. A^cretion, l. growing to.
Accrue, f. Grow, arise. Accroche, f. To hook unto. Accumb, l. Sit or lie down.
Accumulate, l. Heap up. Accurate, l. Exact. A^cusation, l. Blaming. Accusative,
l. Belonging to accusing. Ace, f. One in the Dice. Acephalic, g. Without head.
Acephalists, g. Heretics without an Author. Acer^ity, l. Sharpness or
soureness. Acerate, l. Coarse, full of chafe. Acersecomick, q. Whose hair was
never cut. Acervate, l. Heap up. Acetars, l. Sallets and Vinegar. Acetosity,
l. Soureness. Achaemenes, first King of the Persians. Achamech, Silver-dross.
Achan, h. Troubl^ng or Gnashing. Achat, or Achapt, f. To buy, also a bargain.
Achates, g. A stone of diverse colors like a Lions skin. Achelous, Son of
Oceanus and Terra, also a River in Epirus. Acheron, Son of Ceres, turned into a
River of Hell. Acherontick, belonging thereto, comfortless. Acherusia, a River
taken for the entrance of Hell. Acherusian, Belonging thereto. Achieve, f.
Perform. Achilles, Son of Peleus and Thesis, he slew Hector. Achior, h.
Brothers light, or Brother of Fire. Achish, h. Sure it is. Achor, Scald in the
head. Acid, l. Sharp in taste. Acidity, Sharpness. Acis, The Son of Faunus.
Ackele, o. To cool. Adacted, l. Driven by force. Adage, l. Proverb. Adagial,
Proverbial. Adah, h. Assembly of people Adam, h. Red earth. Adamites, l.
Bohemian Heretics that went naked. Adamical, Belonging to Adam. Adamant, l.
Diamond. Adamantine, l. Of or like Diamonds. Adamate, l. Love dearly. Adapt, l.
Make fit. Adarige, Salt Armoniae. Adashed, o. Ashamed. Adawed, o. Awaked.
Adcorporate, l. Join body to body. Addecimate, l. Take Tithes. Adderbourn, A
River in Wiltshire. Adders-tongue, An herb of one leaf, with such a stalk upon
it Addice, A Coopers Ax. Addict, l. give up, incline. Addiction, l. deliverance
of goods. Additament, l. A supply or Addition, adding one thing to another.
Additional, Added to. Addomestique, f. Tamed. Addoulce, f. Sweeten. Address, f.
Apply; also application, direction. Adelantado, Sp. the Kings deputy; the
General, or his deputy. Adeling, Sa. A Kings Son. Adelrad or Ethelred, Sa.
Noble advice. Adelman or Ed-, Sa, Gentleman. Ademption, l. Taking away.
Adecatist, g. One against Tithes. Adent, o. Fasten. Adeption, l. Getting.
Adeptist, That has got the art of transmitting metals. Adequate, l. Even,
equal. Adequitation, l. Riding toward. Ades, King of the Molossians, Cara's
father. Adfiliation, l. Adoption. Adhamate, l. Catch (with hook or net.)
Adhere, l. Stick to. Adhesion, Sticking to. Adjacent, l. lying near. Adiap^ory,
g. Indifferency. Adiaphorous, Indifferent. Adjective, l. Which is joined to a
substantive. Adjourn, f. Put off to a certain day. Ad inquirendum, l. A writ
for enquiry, etc. Adipal, l. ^at, gross. Adit, l. Entrance. Adjudication, l.
Determining. Adjument, l. Help. Adjunct, l. Joined to a quality joined to its
subject. Adjure, l. Command in Gods name, swear or make another swear.
Adj^ration, l. earnest charging, etc. Adiutant, l. Helping, helper. Adjust, f.
Set in order. Adjutory, l. Helping. Adjuvate, l. Assist. Adle, o. Empty; also
to earn. Admeasurement. f. A writ to* moderate ones share. Admetas, King of
Thessaly, Apollo kept his sheep nine years. Adminicle, l. Help. Adminicular,
Helpful. Administer, l. Dispose, order. Administration, l. Disposeing his
estate that dies intestate. Administrator, He, Administratrix, She that so
disposes, etc. Admirable, l. Wonderful. Admiration, Wondering. Admiral, f.
Chief Commander at Sea. Admit, l. Allow. Admittendo Clerico, l. A writ for
presentation. Admission, bringing in, entrance. Admixtion, l. Mingling
together. Admonition, l. Warning. Adnihiled, made void. Adnihilation, l. A
bringing or reducing to nothing. Ad octo, and octo. l. The highest degree (in
Philosophy.) Adolescency, l. Youth. Adolph, Sa. Happy help. Adonai, h. Lord.
Adoniah, h. Ruling Lord. Adonibezek, h. Lord of Bezek, or of thunder. Adonick
verse, Consists only of a Dactyl and a Spondey. Adonis, Son of Cinaras King of
Cyprus, turned into a flower. Adonizedeck, h. The Lords justice. Adopt, l. Make
a stranger ones child. Adoption, Making, etc. Adore, l. Worship. Adora^le,
Worshipful. Adornation, h. Decking, trimming. Ado^at, Four pound weight. Adoxy,
g, Shame, disgrace. Ad quod damnum, l. A writ to enquire what hurt would be to
grant a fair, etc. Adramelek, h. Kings Cloak or greatness. A^raming, o.
Churlish. Adrastia, Nemesis, Daughter of Jupiter and Necessity. Adrian or
Adriatique Sea, Gulf of Venice, parts Italy from Dalmatia. Ascititious or
Adsci- Falsely taken to ones self, counterfeit Ad terminum qui praeteriit, l. A
Writ of Entry. Advancement, f. Promotion. Advantageous, f. Profitable.
Advectitious, l. Brought from another place. Advent-Sunday is the nearest to
the feast of St. Andrew, coming (of Christ.) Advenatale, Coat of defense
Adventitious, l. Adventive or Adventual, l. Coming by chance. Adventure, f.
Chance. Adverbs, l. Undeclined words joined to Verbs for perfection and
explanation. Adverse, l. Contrary. A^versative, l. Belonging to something that
is contrary. Adv^rtency, l. Heed, carefulness. Advertise, l. Give notice.
Advertisement, giving notice Advesperate, l. Grow toward night. Advigilate, l.
Watch diligently. Aduiation, l. Flatery, fawning. Adulatory, pertaining thereto
Adult, l. Com'n to full age Adulted, The fame. Adulterate, l. To corrupt.
Adumbrate, l. To shadow* Adumbration, Rude draught; In Heraldry, the bare
proportion of outward lineaments, Transparency. Ad unguem, l. At his fingers
ends. Aduncity, l. Crookedness. Adunque or Adun^ous* hooked, Advocate, l.
Defender of Causes. Advowzen, or Advous^n, f. Reversion of a Benefice, or a
Right to present thereto. Advowee paramount, the King or highest patron.
Advoutry, Adultery. Adure, l. Roast, burn. Adust, Adusted, l. Burnt, parched.
Adustible, Burnable. Adustion, Burning. Adynamous, g. Weak. Aedile, l. A Roman
Officer that looked to Reparations. Aeacus, Son of Jupiter, Judge of hell.
Aedone, turned into a thistle. Aeeta, King of Colc^os. Aega, Jupiters Nurse.
Aegaeon, One of Jupiters giant enemies, who threw at him a 100 rocks at once.
Aegaeum or Aegaean, Sea, called commonly Archipelago, from Aegeus, King of
Athens, Theseus's father, who drowned himself therein. Aegiale, The wife of
Diomedes* an adulteress. Aegilope, g. A swelling in the great corner of the
eye. Aegina, Jupiters Mistress in the shape of fire. Aegipanes, g. Woody
deities with Goats feet. Aegisthus, Son of Th^estes. Aegle, Daughter of
Hesperus King of Italy. Aegles, A great wrestler. Aegrimony, or Aegritude, l.
Sickness. Aegroting, Counterfeit sickness. Aegyptus, The Son of B^lus, and
brother of Danaus. Aelia, Jerusalem rebuilt by Aelius Adrianus. Aelmf^oh, or
Almsf^oh, Peter Pence, which used to be paid the Pope. A^neas, Son to Anchises
and Venus, he came from Troy to Italy. Aeneator, l. Trumpeter. Aenigmatical, g.
full of Aenigmaes or dark riddles. A^olipile, Hermetical hellows, to try if
there be a Vacuum in nature. Aeolus, God of the winds. Aepalius, A King
restored by Hercules; who adopted Hercules's son his Successor. Aequanimity, l.
Equalness or evenness of temper. Equator, A Circle on the Globe, equally
distant from the two Poles. Aequilateral, l. Of equal sides. Aequilibrity, l.
equal weighing or Aequilibrium, Gold weight. Aequip^llen^e, l. equal power
Aequiponderancy, l. even poysing. Aequivocal, l. Of like sound Era, The term
from whence men reckon, as we from Christ's nativity. Aereal, l. belonging to
the air. Aerie, f. A nest [of Hawks] Aeromancy, g. divining by the air.
Aeromantick, Pertaining thereto. Aeruginous, l. Rusty. Aerumnous, l. Full of
troubles. Aesacus, Son to Priamus, turned into a dive-d^pper. Aesculapius, The
God-physician, Apollo's son. Aesia, The French River Oyse. Aesica, A City of
Northumberland upon the River Esk. Aestuate, l. rage like the Sea. Aestivat^,
l. spend the summer. Aetate pro^anda, l. A Writ to prove the age of a Kings
tenant. Aeternales domus, l. Eternal habitations, sepulchers. Aethalis,
Mercury's Son. Aetherial, l. Pertaining to the sky. Aethiopia, A Country in
Africa, so called from Aethiops, Vulcans Son. Aethon, One of the Suns horses,
also a great farter. Aetiologia, g. Showing the reason of a thing. Aetna,
Mongebel, The burning Hill in Sicily. Aetolia, Part of Greece. Affable, l.
Courteous in speaking to and hearing others. Affability, Such Courtesy.
Affair, f. Business. Affectation, l. Overcurious imitation. Affectionate, l.
Bearing good will, f^ll of affection. Affeerors, They that fine the offenders
in Court-Leets Affiance, f. Trust, confidence; also to make sure, betroth.
Affidatus, A Tenant by fealty. Affidavit, Deposition upon Oath. Affinage, f
refining of Metals. Affinity, l. Likeness, kindred by marriage. Affirmation, l.
Saying it is so. Affirmative, Belonging thereto. Affix, l. Fasten to.
Affluence, l. Plenty. Afflux, l. Flowing together. Afforest, To turn ground
into forest. Affray, f. Fright, fighting* tumult. Affri, or Affra, Bullocks or
plow-beasts. Affrica^ion, l. rubbing. Affront, f. wrong. Affrontedness,
Impudence. Affusion, l. Pouring, sprinkling. Afgodness, Sa. Ungodliness.
Af^i^a, g. One of the four parts of the world. Africa, African, Belonging
thereto. Aft, as Abaft. Aga, Captain of the Turkish Ianizaries. Agabus, h.
Grasshopper. Agag, h. Garret or upper-room. Agamemnon, King of Argos. Agamist,
g. Unmaried. Aganippe, Fountain in Boe^^ia, sacred to Apollo, etc. Aganippides,
The Muses. Agarick, A root that helps digestion, a mushrom good against phlegm.
Aghast, o. Amazed. Agate, Che. Just a going. Agaie, g. A precious stone for
hafts of knives. Agatha, g. Good, a woman's name. Agathocles, A Tyrant of
Sicily, a Potters Son. Agathonien, Lascivious, from Agathon, A wanton fiddler.
Agave, daughter to Cadmus. Age, ones lifetime, also a hundred years. Age
prier, f. Petition of one in minority, to stop the suit till he come of Age.
Agelastick, g. Morose, one which never laughs. Agelastus* only laughed when he
saw a mare cat thistles. Agemoglans, or Agiam Oglans, Christian Children taken
for the service of the Turk. Agent, l. Doer, also a dealer for another.
Agesilaus, King of Lacedemon: also an Athenian. Aggerate, l. Heap up. Aggested,
Heaped up. Agglomerate, l. Roll together. Agglutinate, l. Glue together.
Aggrandize, l. make great, Aggravate, l. To load, heighten, make heavy or
worse. Aggregate, l. Meet together, or gather together. Aggressor, l. He that
begins, sets upon, or strikes the first blow. Aggression, Setting upon.
Agility, l. Nimbleness. Agilt, o. Committed. Aginatour, l. Retailer of small
wares, from Agina the Ballance-beam. Agiograph, g. Holy writing. Agipe, o. A
Coat full of plaits. Agis, King of Lacedemonia, killed in prison. Agist, To take
strangers* Cattle into the Kings Forest, and their money. Agitate, l. toss up
and down, discuss. Agitable, That may be moved. Agitati^n, Frequent motion.
Agitators, Men chosen to manage any business. Aglaia, One of the graces.
Aglais, A very great She-eater, Megacle's daughter. Aglet, f. Tag of a point.
Agnail, Sa. Sore under the nail. Agnation, Kindred by the Father. Agnes, g.
Chaste, A woman's name. Agnition, l. Acknowledging. Agnize, l. To own. Agnodice,
A Maid-physitian. Agnominate, l. To Nickname. Agnomination, A Surname. Agnus
Castus, l. Seeds preserving Chastity. See Abraham's baum. Agnus dei l. The holy
lamb, with a Cross. Agonal feasts, kept at Rome the ninth of January. Agonarch
or Agonothete, g. Master of the Revels. Agonism, g. Reward of Victory. Agonist,
g. Champion. Agonistic, or Agonistical, Belonging thereto, warlike. Agonizants,
Friars in Italy assisting such as are in an Agony, g. Extreme anguish of mind
or death. Agramed, o. Aggrieved. Agrarian Laws, for dividing Lands among the
Romans. Agreat, Sa. By the great or lump. Agredge, o. Aggravate. Agrestical, l.
Rustical. Agricole* l. Farmer. Agricolation, f. or Agriculture, Husbandry.
Agrimony, An herb like tansy. Agrippa, (born with feet foremost) a man's name.
Agrise, c. Afraid. Ag^ose, o. Grieved. Agroted, o. Cloyed. Agryse, o. Make one
quake. Ahab, h. Brothers Father. Ahaz* h. Taking, possessing. Ahaziah, h.
Apprehension, or sight of the Lord. Ahiezer, h. Brothers help. Ahimelech, h.
Kings brother, or of the Kings Council. Ahitophel, h. Brother forsaken, he
hanged himself. Aholia^, h. Lords Tabernacle, or brightness of the Lord.
Aholibamah, h. My tent, or famous Mansion. Ajax, A Stout Grecian. Ai^oneus,
King of the Molossi, Proserpina's father. Ailesbury, A Town in Buckinghamshire.
Ailesford, A Town in Kent. Airy, A nest of Hawks. Ait, A little Island in a
river. Akmanchester (City of sick folk) Bath. Alabandic, A kind of Rose, not
very sweet. Alabandical, Barbarous, sottish. Alabandine, or Amandine, A blue
stone provoking blood. Alabaster, Clear white Marble. Alacrity, l.
Cheerfulness. Ala^ab, Ar. The Scorpions heart, a star. Alamac, Ar. The left
foot of Andromeda. Alamode, f. After the fashion. Alan, sla. (Greyhound) a
man's name, or as* Aelian, Sun-bright. Alary, l. Wingy. Alarm^, f. to your arms.
Alastor, One of the Suns Horses. Alata ^astra, Edenborough. Ala volee, f.
hastily. Alay, A sending fresh Dogs into the cry. Alba Julia, Weslenburgh in
Germany. Alba Regalis, Stolwissenbergh in Hungary. Albania, Scotland, also a
Country between Illyricum and Macedonia. Albanus, a River in Armenia, also the
first British Martyr. St. Albans, Verulam so called from him. Albe, l. the
Mass-Priests, old white Garment. Albeito, Ar. the Swans-mouth, a Star. Albert,
sa. all bright; a proper name. Albion, the oldest name of this our happy
Island. In Albis, l. in quires. Albor, l. whiteness. Albricias, sp. reward of
good news. Albuginous, l. belonging to white. Albumazar, a famous Arabian
Astronomer. Albutinus beat his servants before the fault, to be sure of
leisure. Alcan, Verses have two dactyles and two trochees. Alcali, A Spanish
University. Alcalde, sp. Sheriff. Alcals, Salts extracted from ashes. Alcander,
Servant to Lycurgus, very respectful. Alcanna, Ichthyocolla, Isinglass.
Alcathous, the Son of Pelops, adopted by Megareus. Alcatrace, a Fowl like a
Heron. Alce, a wild Beast like a Deer. Alceste, Admetus's wife. Alchahest,
Mercury prepared. Alchedi, ar. a star in the goat. Archenit, ar. a star in
Perseus. Alchimilla, l. the Herb Ladies mantle. Alcibiades, a Noble man of
Athens reclaimed by Socrates Alchobet, ar. Reception. Alchocodon, ar. Giver of
years. Alchorad, ar. a contrariety of the light of the Planets. Alchymist, g.
He that uses the Art of metals. Alcides, g. Hercules. Alcithoe, turned into a
Bat, for her slighting Bacchus Alcinaeon, Son to Amphiaraus, he killed his
mother. Alchols, Chemical Spirits. Alcoholization, reducing solid matter into
very fine powder. Alconor, a certain Grecian, against the Lacedaemon. Alcoran,
(Scripture) the Turks Bible. Alcove, sp. a close bedroom. Alcyone, Neptunes
daughter, turned into a King-fisher. Alduas-dubis, a River in Helvetia or
Suitserland. Aldebaran, ar. the Bulls south-eye. Alderanainim, Cepheus's right
shoulder, a star. Aldingham, a Town in Lancashire. Alcvromancy, g. Divining by
Barley and Wheat. Alecoast, the herb Coast-mary. Alecto, f. One of the Furies of
Hell. Alectryomachy, g. Cock-Fighting. Alectryomancy, g. Cock-Divination.
Alectorius, a precious stone in a Capons maw. Alectryon, Mars's pimp, turned
into a Cock. Ale-conner, Searcher of Alepots. Alehoof, Ground Ivy. Alegator, a
Iamaica Crocodile. Aleger, Sour Ale. Alembick, Ar. A Still. Aleph, the first [
Hebrew letter,] also a thousand. Aleppo, A City in Syria. Ale-silver, Paid
yearly to the Lord Mayor. Alestake, o. May Pole, Alet, The true Peru-falcon.
Ale-taster, He is to look to the goodness of Bread and Ale. Aletheia, g. Truth.
Aleuromancy, g. Cake-divination. Alexander, Conquered the world, and was
poisoned. Alexanders, An opening herb. Alexandria, N^. A Port-Town of Egypt.
Alexipharmacal, good against poison. Alexiteria, g. Medicines against poison.
Aletude, l. Fatness of Body. Alferes, Sp. Ensign-bearer. Alfred, Sa. (all
peace) King of England. Alfreton, A Town in Darbyshire. Algare^, Ar. The star
in the right wing of the Crow. Algarfe, a. Head of the 15 Mansion. Algate, o.
Altogether, if so be, notwithstanding. Algates, o. Ever, even now. Algebar, ar.
The left foot of O^i^n, a star. Algebhe, a. The head of the 10 Mansion.
Alge^ra, a. The art of Figurative Numbers. Algebraical, pertaining thereto.
Alge^raist, One skilled therein. Algerub, a. The right wing of Pegasus, a star.
Algid, l. Chill, cold, Algidity, Algor, Chilness. Algifical, making chill.
Algerines, People or pirates belonging to. Algier, A Town in Africa.
Algomeista, a. The little Dog Star. Algon, The head of Medusa. Algorism,
Algorithme, or Algrim, the same as Algebra. Algorist, as Algebraist. Algum, or
Almug-trees, of excellent wood in Lebanon. Alguze, a. Orions left foot.
Alhabar, a. A star in the great Dog. Alhidade, A ruler on an instrument, to
take heights and depths. Alias, l. otherwise. Alicante, A Town in Spain, whence
comes wine of Mulberries. Alihle, l. Nourishing. Alice, (Adilize, noble) a
Woman's name. Alien, l. Foreigner, stranger. Alienate, to estrange. Aliety,
otherness. Alifed* o. allowed. Aliment, l. Nourishment. Alimentation,
Nourishing. Alimony, l. The wives allowance when parted from her Husband.
Alimental, or Alimentary, l. belonging to nourishment. Aliath, a. A star in the
bear. Alkakengi, Winter-Cherry. Alkali, The herb Kali or Saltwort. Alkanet,
Spanish Bugloss. Alkermes, Confection of Kermes. Allaborate, l. Labor
vehemently. All-a-bone, o. a made request. Allantoides, g. The skin that covers
the chief parts of a birth. Allabanny, Albany, the Highlands, in Scotland.
Allar, Alder-tree. Allaud, l. To praise. Allay, Assuage. Also tempering metal
with a baser sort, Alloy. Allective, l. Alluring. Allectation, An alluring.
Allegation, l. Proving. Allegorical, g. belonging to an Allegory, Mystical
speech different from the literal sense. All^lujah, h. Praise ye the Lord; also
the herb Woodsorrel. Aller sans jour, f. To be dismissed the Court. Allevate, l.
Lift up. Alleviate, l. Lighten, diminish. All-good, Herb Mercury, Good Henry.
All-heal, Clowns Woundwort. All-hallowes, All Saints. Alliant, Allie, f. One
that is in Alliance, f. Relation, league. Alliciency, l. An enticing.
Alligation, l. A binding to. Allington, A town in Hampshire. Allision, l.
Dashing against. Alliteration, l. Repeating and Playing upon the same Letter.
Allobrogi^al, belonging to the Allobroges, Savoiards in France. Allocamel, g.
an Indian Camel with a Mules head. Allocation, l. Placing, also Officers
allowance from Superiors. Allocution, or Alloquy* l. Talking with one. Alnager,
Alnageor, Aulnager, f. Measurer of woollen [by the Elle] Now Collector of that
Subsidy. Allodial, [Lands] free from fines and service. Allot, Lay out,
appoint. Allude, l. Speak in reference to another thing. Allusion, Speaking in
reference, etc. Alluminor, f. (enlightener) who paints on Paper, or parchment.
Alluvion, l. Flood, flowing. Almain* A German, also a slow air in Music.
Almaine Rivets, Light armor. Almanac, ar. (the course of the year) a
Calendar. Almaner, a. A Planets Epicycle. Almantica, Zodiac. Almanzer* a.
Defender. Almerick. A Christian King of Jerusalem. Almadarats, Almicantharats
ar. Lines drawn through the Meridian, Parallel with the Horizon. Almner,
Almoner, Amner, f. Distributer of alms. Almnery, Aumry, f. Almshouse, also a
Buttery or Pantry. Almugia, ar. Planets facing one another in the Zodiac.
Almuten, The Planet of most Power, or Dignities. Alnath, A star in Aries horns.
Alnwick, Alanwick* Anwick, A Town in Northumberland. Alody, o. Lands of
Inheritance. Aloes, Juice of Sea-horsleek, or Bitterwort. Aloe Cicotrina,
Succatrina, or Zocatrina, brought from the Affrican Isle Zocatara. Alogick, g.
Unreasonable. Alogy, Unreasonableness. Aloof, Keep the ship near the wind, also
far off. Alopecian, Belonging to Alopecy, g. (Foxes evil) shedding of the hair.
Alosha, a Summer Spanish-drink of Water and Honey. Alpha, The first Greek
letter* the beginning. Alphabetical, Belonging to the Alphabet, g. The letters
of the Greek, or any Language. Alpharaiz, a. Pegasus's right Shoulder, a star.
Alph^^a, The bright star of the Crow. Alpheus, an Arcadian River; also a man's
name. Alphitomancy, g. Divination by barley meal. Alphonsin* Tables of
Astronomy devised by Alphonsus King of Aragon. Alphrad, a. The Bright star in
Hydra. Alps, High frozen hills between France and Italy. Alp, Nope, Bulfinch,
Sf. Alramek, a star in Boots. Aliacaba, ar. The Pole Star. Alresford, a Town
in Hampshire. Alta^est Paracelsi; a Body ^educed to its first Principles.
Altarage, Altar-profi^. Alteration, l. Changing. Altercation, l. Contentious
dispute. Alternal, the same as Alternate, Alternative, l. that which is done by
Alternation, Alternity, Changing by turns. Altiloquent, l. Speaking high.
Altemetrical, measuring of Al^itudes, l. heights. Altisonant, l. high-sounding.
Altitonant, l. high-thundring [Jupiter.] Altivolant, l. high-flying, soaring.
Alto and Basso, High and low, all kind of [differences.] Alveary, l. Bee-hives.
Alveat^d, l. Chanelled or trenched. Aluminous, l. like, or full of Alume, a
binding mineral. Alumbrado, sp. Phanatick, Enthusiast. Alumnate, l. Nourish;
feed. Alumnation, Fostering, feeding. Alutation, l. Tanning of Leather.
Alytarch, g. Keeper of order at public sports. Amain, Yield your ship.
Amainable, f. Tractable. Amalagmation, Amalgamation, or Amalgaminge* softening
metals with Quicksilver. Amalekites, Esau's posterity by his Grandson Amalek,
h. Licking people Amalthean, belonging to Amalthea, Jupiters nurse. Amand, f.
send away. Amanuensis, l. Secretary or Clerk. Amaranthus, g. Flower gentle.
Amaritude, l. bitterness. Amarous, l. bitter, froward. Amarulent, l. the same.
Amaryllis, g. shining. Amasa, h. Sparing the people. Amasia^, h. Burden of the
Lord. Amassement, f. heaping up. Amate, o. Discourage. Amatory, l. Belonging to
love. Amaurosis, a decay of the eyesight and no fault seen. Amazons, g.
Warlike Women of Scythia. Ambacti, Servants to the Gaullish Nobility. Ambage,
l. Far-fetched circumstance of words. Ambag^ous, Full of far etc. Amber, Hard
yellow gum. Am^ergreece, greese, or - grise, f. a sweet clammy perfume, found
by the Seaside. Ambia, A thick Indian liquor* Ambianum, Amiens in Picardy.
Ambidexter, l. that uses both hands alike, or plays on both sides [for gain.]
Ambidext^^ous, belonging thereto. Ambient, l. Compassing about. Ambifarious,
Having a double meaning. Am^iguity, l. doubtfulness. Ambiguous, doubtful.
Ambilevous, l. Left Handed. Ambiloge, Am^ilogy, g. a doubtful speech.
Ambiloquent, l. Double tongued. Ambition, l, An eager desire or thirst after
honor. Ambitude, l. Compassing round. Am^lothri^ium, A medecin provoking
travel before time. Am^lygone, g. a blunt angled triangle. Amboina, An
East India Island. Amboise* a Principal building in France. Ambosexous, Male
and Female. Ambracia, Lacta in Epirus. Ambresbury, A Town in Wilt-shire.
Ambrey, Cup-board. Ambrose, g. Immortal. Ambrosia, Wood-sage, also the meat of
the Gods. Ambrosiack, Ambrosial, or Ambrosian, Thereto belonging. Ambulatory,
l. A walk* also walking. Amburbial, [Sacrifices, l. which went first] about the
City. Ambuscado, sp. Ambuscade, f. an Ambush, laying in wait. Ambustion, l. A
burning about. Amaebean, [Verses] Dialogue-wise. Amell, Amel'd Among, betwixt.
Amen, h. Verily, so let it be. Amena^le, f. Tractable. Amendment, Correction of
an error in a process. Amenity, l. Pleasantness. Amenus^d, o. Diminished.
Ameos, Bishops-weed. Amercement, or Amere^ament, f. (at mercy) a fine at will.
America, The fourth part of the World [last discover'd] American disease, the
Great, Spanish, Naples or French Pox. Amery, (gr. always rich) proper name.
Amesse, f. A Priest's hood or cap in the Quire, See Amict. Amethyst, g.
(against drunkenness) a precious stone. Amfractuous, l. Belonging to
Amfractuosity, Intricacy, much turning and winding. Amiable, l. Lovely.
Amicable, l. Friendly. Amict, Amice, l. The Priests first linen vestment.
Amicted, l. Clothed. Amie, f. Beloved. Aminadab, h. free or vowing people, or
Prince of people. Ammishaddai, h. the People of the Almighty. Amission, l.
Losing. Amit, To lose or pardon. Ammodite, A sandy insect with bl^ck spots.
Ammon, Ammonites, people descended from Ben-ammi, h. the son of my people.
Ammoniack, a Lybia^ gum, and Affrican-Salt. Ammunition, f. Provision store.
Amnesty, g. Oblivion. Amnick, l. Belonging to a River. Amnios, The skin that
wraps the birth all over. Amnon, h. True, or Artificer, or Schoolmaster.
Amomum, g. A pleasant seed like Cardamoms. Amorets, f. Love-toys. Amorist,
Lover. Amorosity, Lovingness. Amoroso, I. Lover. Amort, f. Dead. Amortize, to
kill, also to alien Lands. Amos, h. Burden. Amotion, l. Removing aaway. Amoz,
h. Strong. Ampelite, g. Black earth to kill worms in Vines. Ampelusia, A place
in Mauritania. Amper, Sf. A flaw in Cloth. E. a swelling. Amphiaraus, was
swallowed up alive at Thebes. Amphibion, Amphibious, g. which lives both by
water and land. Amphibolous, Amphibolical, or Amphibological, g. Belonging to
Amphibology, Doubtful speech. Amphictions, The chief Counselors of Greece.
Amphion, An Excellent Musician, who built the walls of Thebes. Amphionize, To
do like him. Amphipolis, g. a City compassed round. Amphiscians* g. Who living
under the Equator have shadows both ways. Amphitheater, or - tree, g. A perfect
round Theater. Amphitrite, g. Neptunes Queen. Amphitrio, Alemena's Husband.
Amphiction, King of Athens Amphid^omical, g. Belonging to the fifth day after
birth when the Child was purified and named. Amphoral, Belonging to the
Amphora, contained (if Italick) five gallons* (if Attick) seven and a half.
Ampliation, l. Enlargement, also deferring the trial. Amplification, l. An
enlarging. Amplitude, l. Largeness, also dignity. Amplivagant, l.
Far-stretching. Ampullous, l. Swelling [like a bottle] proud. Amputation, l.
Cutting off. Amram, h. High people. Amraphel, h. Speaking Judgment. Amsanctus,
a noisome fen in Italy. Amstelodamum, Amsterdam in Holland. Amulet, l. a Ball
about the neck to keep from poison or Witchcraft. Amulius, King of the Latins.
Amuse, f. Put one in a dump. Amycus, King of the Beb^ycij. Amylum, g. white
stuff like starch made of German wheat. Amymone, One of Danaus's 50 Daughters,
Mother of Nauplius by Neptune. Amyris* One of Sybaris in Italy, who foretelling
its ruin fled from thence. An^, g. Of each alike. Anabaptists, g.
[Baptizers-again] they Baptize none, till they can give an account of their
Faith. Ana athrum, g. Any place to which we go up by steps. Anabrochism, g.
Binding with Cords. Anacardium, g. A Malacca-bean, like a little birds heart
Anachoretal, Anac^oretical. g. belonging to Anac^orite, Anchoret, g. A Monk.
Anacephalize, g. To repeat the heads of a matter. Anac^ronism, Anac^ronitism,
g. False computation or reckoning of time. Anacoenosis, g. Arguing the case
with others. Anacr^ontick, Belonging to Anacreon, a Greek Lyrick Poet, choakt
with a Raison-husk. Anacrisis, g. Questioning, or racking of Offenders. Anadem,
g. Garland. Anadesm g. A swathe. Anadiplosis, g. When a verse begins with the
last word of the former. Anoetis, a Lydian Goddess. Anaglyphick, Anagleptick,
g. belonging to Carving, etc. An^gnostick, Anagnostian, g. A Reader. Anagogick,
g. or Anagogical, Deep-learned. Anagrammatism, g. The art of making Anagrams,
Transposing the letters of a name into something else. Anagraph, g. A Register,
or an Inventory. Anag^if, -greph, Fornication Anah, h. Answering, singing or
poor. Anak, h. Giant. Analects, g. Scraps, Collections. Anal^mme, g. an
instrument to find the height. Analeptick, g. Restorative. Analogical,
Analogous, g. belonging to Analogy, Agreement, proportion. Analogism, g. An
unanswerable argument, from the cause to the effect. Analogists, g. Tutors not
accountable for their Wards Analphabetical* g. unlearned. Analytick, -call,
belonging to Analysis. g. resolution, unfolding. Analyze, to unfold [doubts.]
Anamnesis, g. Calling to mind. Ananiah, Ananias, g. The Grace, cloud, or
divination of the Lord. Anapestick, g. belonging to Anapest, a verse of two
short syllables and one long. Anaphora, g. The same beginning of several verses
or sentences. Anapologetical, g. Inexcusable. Anarchick, g. Belonging to
Anarchism, The Doctrine of Anarchy, Confusion, without Governor. Anarand,
Honoratus, br. proper name. Anastomosis, g. an opening the mouth of the Veins.
Anastrophe, g. preposterous placing of words. Anat^ema, g. any consecrated
thing. An^thema, g. excommunicated-ation. Anathematize, g. to excommunicate.
Anatiferous, l. bringing the age of old Women. Anatocism, g. yearly taking
usury, and interest upon interest. Anatomical, belonging to Anatomy, g. cutting
up a body. Anatomize, to cut up, etc. Anauntrins, if so be. Anaxarete, a
hard-hearted virgin, turned into a stone. Anaximander, a Milesian Philosopher.
Ancaeus, Neptunes Son killed by a wild-Boar. Ancaster, a Town in Lincolnshire.
Ancestrel, done by the Ancestor, l. forerunner. Anchises, Aeneas's Father.
Anchoral, l. belonging to an Anchor. Anchovy, a small Spanish Fish. Anchoress,
a Nun. Anchurus, rode alive into the gaping Earth. Ancient, Ensign. Ancienty,
Eldership. Ancile, l. a short shield like a decrescent moon. Ancona, a City in
Italy. Anchorage, duty for anchoring in Port. Ancus Martius, fourth King of the
Romans. Andena, l. a swath in mowing. Andaluzia, a Country in Spain. Andover, a
Town in Bucks. Andradswald, a wood in Sussex, once 120 miles long. Andrago, g.
a manly woman. Andrastes, Andate, Goddess of victory among the Bri^ans. Andrew,
g. Manly. Andromant, g. a precious stone. Androgynal, belonging to Androgyne,
g. Male and Female. Andromache, g. [manly fight] Hectors Wife. Andromachus, g.
[fighting man] Nero's Physician, who added viper's flesh to Mithridate.
Andromeda, Cepheus's Daughter. Androna, g. a place only for men [in ships.]
Andronicus, g. victorious man. Anelate, a wood-knife. Anemone, wind-flower.
Anent, sc. over against, concerning. Anewst, su. almost. Anfractuosity, l.
intricate turning and winding. Angel, ten shillings. Angelica, an herb.
Angelical, belonging to an Angel, g. Messenger. Angelot, small french cheese.
Angularity, the being Angular, having Angles, l. corners. Anglicism, l. Speech
proper to Anglia, England. Anglesey, an Island in Wales Angole, a Kingdom of
Aethiopia. Angor, l. anguish, grief. Anguineous, l. Snaky. Angus, part of
North- Scotland. Angust, l. narrow. Anhelation, l. shortness of breath.
Anheled, l. broken-winded. Aniented, f. made void. Anity, Anility, l. Women's
old age. Animable, l. which may have life. Animadversion, l. attention,
observation, correction. Animality, the being of an Animal, l. a living
creature. Animalio, sp. a little one. Anima Saturni, l. extract of lead
Animate, l. give life. Anime, a West-Indy* Gum. Animosity, l. stoutness,
wilfulness, heart-burning. Anlace, o. dudgeon-haft-dagger. Annalist, l. he that
writes Annals, yearly Chronicles. Annaldale, part of South- Scotland. Annarian
Law, l. concerning the age or year of bearing Office. Annates, l. first fruits
of Spiritual Livings. Anna, Anne, h. Gracious. Annas, h. as Anah. Anneile,
Anneal, a Barbary Commodity for Diers. Anneiling of glass, baking the colors
quite through. Annexation, l. uniting, joining. Annibal, a Carthaginian Captain.
Annicrians, Philosophers, Disciples of Anniceris, Paraebates's Disciple.
Anniferous, l. bearing [fruit] every year. Annihilate, l. reduce to nothing.
Annihilation, reducing, etc. Annise, an herb like smallage. Anniversary, l.
yearly. Anno Domini, l. In the year of our Lord [Christ.] Annon, A Carthaginian
that Taught birds to say, Annon is a God. Annosity, l. agedness. Annotation, l.
marking, observing. Annoy, f. to hurt. Annueler, o. secular. Annual, l. yearly.
Annuity, l. yearly pension. Annul, l. make void, frustrate. Annulais, l. the
ring finger Annulated, l. ringed. Annulet, l. little ring Annunciate, l. to
bring Annunciation, news, message. Anodynous, belonging to Anodynes, g.
medicines to assuage pain. Anoisance, f. damage. Anomalous, belonging to
Anomaly, g. irregularity. Anonymal, or Anonymous, g. nameless. Anopsy, g. want
of sight. Anorexy, g. want of appetite. Ansulary, l. belonging to a small
handle. Ant, Pismire. Antaeus, Son to Neptune and Terra. Antagonist, g.
adversary. Antal, a small Sea shel-fish Antalope, Antilope, a Beast begotten
between a Heart and a Goat. Antanaclasis, g. (beating back) repeating the like
word in a different sense. Antarchy, g. opposition to Government. Antartick, g.
South, contrary to Artick [pole, circle, etc.] Antares, The Scorpions heart, a
star. Anteacts, l. bypast acts. Anteambulate, l. walk before. Anteambulation,
such walking. Antecedaneous, the same a^ Antecedent* l. foregoing. Antecede, l.
go before, excel Antecession, going before, etc. Antecessours, l. Forefathers.
Antecursor l. fore-runne* Antedate, l. date before the time. Antediluvian* l.
being before the flood. Antefact, l. former action. Anteg^^ital, l. born
before* Antegressi^n* l. a going before. Anteloquy, l. preface, also the
Players Cue. Antemiridian, l. before ^oon* Antenor, a Trojan, founder of Padua
in Italy. Anteoccupation, l. preventing or seizing first. Antepone, l. set
before, prefer. Anterior, l. foremost. Antevene, l. prevent, come before*
Anthem, g. a Divine song. Anthima, Anthine, g. made of flowers. Anthol^gie, g.
Treatise of flowers, choice Collections. Anthologick, belonging thereto.
Anthony, g. flourishing. Anthera, a medicine for sore mouths. Anthora,
Antithora, g. a counterpoison to Thora or Wolfs-bane. Anthrax, g. a
Carbunclesore. Anthropologie, g. a discourse of Men. Anthropomorphites, g.
Heretics holding that God has a corporeal shape. Anthropomorphitical, thereto
belonging. Anthropopathy, g. having the passions of men, or speaking after the
manner of men Anthropophagy, g. Eating of Man's flesh. Anthropophagi, g.
Men-eaters. Anthropophagize, to eat Man's flesh. Antiaxiomatism, g. that which
is against any known a ^iom. Anti-Camera, g. Anti-cham^e^, f. an outer-chamber.
Anti Christ, g. Opposer of Christ. Anti^hronism, g. false Chro^icling.
An^icthones, g. the same as Antipo^es, g. who is feet are (...) against ours.
A^tipodal, thereto belonging. Anticipated, l. prevented. Antic^^a, g. the
Mother of V^^sses. Antidate* as Antedate. Antidi^ marians, Heretics against
the Virgin Mary. Antidote, g. medicine against poison. Antigonize, to play
Antigonus, one of Alexanders Captains, and King of Macedonia. Antigrapher, who
keeps the Antigraphy, g. Copies, Counterpanes of Deeds. Antic, l. old,
strange, confused. Antilogie, g. Antiloquy, l. a speaking against.
Antimetabole, g. turning of words upside-down. Antimetrical, g. against the
rules of verse. Antim^ny, a purging stone found in silver Mines. Antinomians,
g. Heretics against observing the Law. Antioch, g. a City in Syria. Antiochus,
g. King of Syria. Antiaeci, g. North and South dwellers under half the
Meridian, and parrallels equally distant from the Equator. Antipagments, g.
garnishings in posts or doors, or stone. Antipas, a Contraction of Antipater,
g. against the Father. Antipast, the first part of a meal. Antipathetical,
belonging to Antipathy, g. a secret and natural contrariety. Antipelargy, g.
requital of kindness. Antipendium, the cloth before the Altar. Antiperistasis,
g. the strengthening of a quality against its contrary. Antiphrastical,
belonging to Antiphrasis, -sie, g. when words have a meaning contrary to their
Etymology. Antiphonary, a Book of Antiphones, g. Anthems. Antipilanes,
Antipilani, l. Soldiers in the front of the Roman Army. Antipil^ptical, against
the falling sickness. Antiptosis, g. putting one case for another.
Antiprestigiation, l. contrary juggling. Antiquate, l. abolish. Antiquated, out
of date. Antique, l. out of fashion. Antiquary, l. skilled in Antiquity.
Antisabbatarians, Heretics against the Sabbath. Antiscions, degrees beholding
one another equally distant from the two Tropicks. Antistrophe, g. when several
parts of a sentence end with the same word. Antistoechon, g. putting of one
letter or word for another. Antithesis, g. the same; also an opposition of
contraries. Antithets, g. contraries. Anti-Trinitarians, Heretics against the
Holy Trinity. Antitype, g. an example like the pattern. Antivestaeum Penwith,
our utmost Western Promontory. Antlier, the lower branch of an Hearts horn.
Antonians, Monks of the Order of St. Anthony an Egyptian. Antonius, a Roman
name. Antonomastically, by the figure Antonomasia, g. putting another name for
a proper name. Antrim, a County in Ireland. Antwerp, a City in Brabant. Anubis,
Mercury, worshipped in Egypt in the shape of a dog. Anweald, sa. Authority.
Anxiferous, l. bringing Anxiety, l. grief of mind. Anyger, a Thessalian River.
Anzigues, Canni^als that eat their own friends. Antroma^^y, g. Divination by
consulting the dead. Amian, belonging to Aonides, g. the Muses, having a well
in Aonia, part of Baeotia. Aorist, g. indefinite. Aornus, the Lake in Italy,
into which Phaeton fell. Aorta, the great Artery. Apamia, a Town in Bythinia.
Apathy, g. want of passions. Apelby, a Town in Westmorland. Apellean, belonging
to Apelles, a famous Painter. Apennage, Appennage, f. a Child's porti^n.
Appennine, a Great hill in Italy. Apepsy, g. bad digestion. Aperient, Apertive,
l. opening. Apertion, Aperture, an opening. Apertly, openly. Aphoeresis, g.
taking away [from the beginning of a word.] Aphelium, g. the point wherein the
Earth [or any Planet] is most distant from the Sun. Aphetical, belonging to the
Planet that is disposer of life in a Nativity. Aphoristical, belonging to
Aphorism, g. a choice short sentence. Aphrodite, g. Venus. Aphtha, an
exulceration in the mouth. Apina and Trica, two trifling Towns of Apulia.
Apian, l. belonging to Bees or Honey. Apis, Osiris, King of Egypt.
Apocalyptical, belonging to Apocalypse, g. Revelation. Apocope, g. cutting off
[from the end of a word,] Apocryphal, belonging to Apocryp^a, g. hidden,
doubtful. Apocynon, a small bone in ^ Frogs left side. Apodictical, g.
demonstrable, easy to be made plain. Apodioxis, g. rejection [of an absurd
argument]. Apogeon, Apogeum, as Apogee, g. the farthest distance of a Planet
from the Earth's Center. Apograph, g. a Copy, an Inventory. Apolactize, g.
kick, despise. Apollinean, belonging to Apollo, the Sun, God of Physic and
Music. Apollyon, g. destroyer, the Devil. Apologetical, or Apological,
belonging to Apology, Apologism, g. defense, excuse. Apologize, g. to make ones
defense. Apologue, g. Fable. Apomel, g. drink of water and honey. Apopheret,
-phoret, g. a present. Apophlegmatism, g. a Medicine to purge plegme.
Apophthegm, g. a short witty sentence. Apoplectical, belonging to Apoplexy, g.
the dead Palsy Aporetique, belonging to Aporia, g. doubting. Aposiop^sis, g.
holding ones peace. Apostasy, g. revolting, falling away. Apostate, he that
revolts, etc. Apostatize, to revolt, etc. Apostata capiendo, l. a writ to seize
a Friar wandering from the House and Orders Aposteme, Apostume, g. Impostume.
Apostolic, Apostolical, belonging to an Apostle, g. Messenger. Apostolians,
Heretics pretending to more than Apostolic gifts. Apostraph, -phe, -phus, g.
the mark of a vowel cut off. Apotheke, g. a shop, warehouse. Apotomy, g.
cutting off [part of a line.] Apozeme, g. a decoction of Herbs and Spices
almost to a Syrrup. Appall, ^. astonish. Apparition, l. wonderful sight.
Apparel, Appareil, f. preparation, also the sum which remains charged upon
the house or College. Apparent, l. clear, plain. Apparitou^, l. who summons
people to appear. Apparlement, f. appearance, likelihood. Appartment, I.
division, part of a great house. Appeach, impeach, accuse. Appellant, l. he
that makes an Appeal, f. removing a cause from an Inferior to a higher Judge.
Appellation, l. the same, also calling. Appellative, l. common to all of that
kind. Appellour, Approve, f. who confessing himself guilty accuses another.
Appendant, l. belonging. to an Appendix, l. addition, that depends on another.
Appensor, l. he that weighs. Appertenances, f. things belonging to another more
principal thing. Appetency, l. earnest desire. Appeteth, o. desires.
Appetible, l. desirable. Appetition, l. as Appetency. Appetite, desire,
stomach. Appian-way, the highway from Rome to Brundusium. Appij*forum, l.
Appius's Market, a Town one days journey from Rome. Apping'd, l. joined, also
painted. Applaud l. clap the hands, rejoice, commend, Applauds, Applause, l.
such expressions of joy or praise. Application, l. applying, address.
Applumbature, l. soldering with lead. Apportionment, dividing of Rent in two
parts. Apposite, l. added, fit. Apposition, l. putting together. Appostile, f.
a small addition to a writing. Apprehension, l. under standing. Apprentice, f.
learner. Appretia^ion, l. high-valuing. Appretiatively, according to the value.
Approbation, l. liking. Approperate, l. hasten. Appropinquate, l. draw nigh.
Appropriate, l. take to ones self. Appropriation, l. taking the profits of a
Benefice and maintaining a Vicar. Approve, l. improve, make the best of.
Approximation, l. bringing near. Appuyed, f. propped, also rested on. Aprique,
l. Sunny. Aprication, basking in the Sun. Apricity, warmth in the Sun Aprize,
o, adventure. Absonus, the City where Medea slew her brother. Aptate, l. to
fit, prepare. Aptitu^e, l. fitness. Ap-thanes, the best of the Scot'sh
Nobility. Aptote, g. without case. Apulia, Puglia in Italy. Apyrexy, g. the
remission of a Fever. Aqua Coelestis, l. Chemical rectified wine. Aqua fortis,
l. strong poison, made of Alum, Vitriol and Saltpeter. Aqua Tetrachymagogon,
purging the four humors of the body. Aquarians, Heretics using only water in
the Communion. Aquarius, l. the watery sign which the Sun enters in January.
Aquatical, Aquatile, l. belonging to the water. Aquation, l. a watering.
Aqueduct, l. a Conduit. Aqueous, l. waterish. Aquiline, l. belonging to Aquila,
l. an Eagle. Aquila Philosophorum, l, ^educing metals to the first matter.
Aquileia, a City in Italy. Aquiliferous, l. the Roman Ensign bearing an Eagle.
Aquisgrane the City Aixcovit in Gulick. Aquitania, Guien, the third part of
France. Aquite, o. to mat^h. Aquiler, o. needle-case. Aquosity, l.
waterishness. Arabant, they that hold by tenure of tillage. Arabella l. fair
Altar. Arabesque, f. flourishing work in paint or Tapestry. Arabian belonging
to Arabia, part of Asia. Arabidi, reformed Franciscans of Arabida, a hill in
Portugal. Arable, l. plowable. Arace, o. deface pluck up. Arain, nota [large]
Spider. Aramites, S^rians, Sons of Aram, h, highness, deceiving, or their
curse. Araneous, l. full of Cobwebs. Aratrate, l. to Plow. Arausia, Orange in
France. Array, f. Order. Arbalist, Arcubalist, l. a large Crosse-bow. Arbela, a
Town of Cilicia, A^bitrement, f. the Judgment of an Arbitratour, l. Umpire,
Judge between party and party. Arblasters, or Arbalist. Arborancy, l. belonging
to Trees or Arbours. Aborator, l. a lopper of Trees. Arborist, l. one skilled in
Trees. Arbor Maris, l. (Sea-Tree) Coral. Arbor vitae, l. (Tree of life) it
smells like bread and cheese. Arbustine, Arbustive, l. shrubby. Arcu^uzier, Sp.
one that serves with an Arcabuz, hand-gun. Arcadian, belonging to Arcadia, a
Country famous for Shepherds. Arcade, f. an Arch. Arcane, l. secret. Archaism,
g. an old way of speaking. Archal, Darbyshire Liverwort. Arche, g. chief.
Archangel, g. Prince of Angels, also a weed like dead Netles. Arch-Dapifer,
Chief Sewer of the Empire, Count Palatine of Rhene. Archduke, Duke of Austria.
Arch-flamines, among the heathens the same as Archbishops, among Christians.
Archiepiscopal, l. belonging thereto. Archelaus, g. Prince of the people.
Arches, a Court of the Archbishop of Canterbury, kept in Bow-Church.
Archetype, g. the Original Copy. Archeus Paracelsi, the vital air in Chemistry.
Archiatre g. chief Physician. Archigrapher, g. chief Secretary. Archiloquy, the
beginning of speech. Archimandrite, the chief of an Hermitage. Archimimick, g.
chief Player. Archidiaconal, belonging to an Archdeacon* g. a Church-Governour
under the Bishop. Archippus, g. Governor of Horses. Architectonick, -- ical,
belonging to an Architect, g. Master Builder. Architecture, g. the Art of
building. Architrave, the Chapter of a pillar, also the chief beam in
building. Archive* the place where old Records are kept. Archontes, g. the
chief Athenian Governors. Archon, one of them, also the first author of the
Archonticks, Heretics denying the Resurrection and affirming the world to be
the work of Princes. Architas, Archytas, made a wooden Dove to fly. Arcitenent,
l. bow-bearing. Arctation, l. streightning. Arctick, Artick, Northern. Arcturus
Boots, [a star by the tail of] Charle's wain. Arcuate, l. make or made like a
Arch. Ardelion, l. busie-body. Ardently, earnestly. Ardenna, (ga. a wood.) a
Forest in Warwick shire, and another in Germany [500 miles long.] Arders,
fallowing or plowings. Ardour, l. great heat. Arduity, l. steepness. Areatour,
l. thresher or cleanser of Area, l. floor. Arefaction, l. a drying. Arelatum,
l. Arles in France. Arenaceous, Arenated, Sandy. Areopagites, Athenian Judges
who sat in the Ar^opagus, -gos, -gy, g. a street in Athens. Areopagetical,
belonging thereto. Arescation, l. a drying or withering. Aret, o. account.
Aretaloger, -gone, g. a talker [only] of virtue. Aretaphila, g. a she-friend of
virtue. Arethusa, Daughter of Nereus a River of Sicily; also an Armenian
fountain in which nothing sinks. Aretine, belonging to Aretium, Arezzi in
Italy. Argent, -try, l. Silver, also white. Argentanginy, l. silver-squincy,
when for money one feigns himself sick and dumb Argentifer, maker of Silver
Argentina, l. wild tansey, also Strasburgh in Germany. Argentum Dei, Gods [ i.
e. earnest] Money. Argile, Arguithil (near the Irish) part of North Scotland.
Argiletas, l. a place near the palace in Rome. Argillous, l. clayie, clammy.
Argives, l, Grecians. Argoil, o. clay. Argonauticks, Books treatin of
Navigation. Argonauts, Jason and the rest that went to Colchos for the golden
fleece, in Argo, the ship in which they sailed. Argos, a Town in Greece.
Argument, l. reason, proof; also the matter of which you Argue, dispute. Argus,
King of Peloponnesus, for his wisdom feigned to have 100 eyes, Argute, -tious,
l. subtle. Argyra, g. an Indian Island full of Silver and Gold. Argyritis,
litharge of Silver. Ariadne, Daughter of Minos. Aridate, l. to make Arid, l.
dry, barren. Aridity, Aritude, dryness. Arided, ar. the swans tail a star.
Arietine, l. belonging to Aries, l. a ram; a Roman battering Engine; also the
first sign of the Zodiac. Arietation, l. butting, battering. Ariminum, Rimini
in Italy. Ariobarzanes, one of Darius's Captains. Ari^lation, l. South-saying.
Arion, a famous Musician of Lesbos. Arist, o. he arose. Aristaeus, King of
Arcadia, he found the use of Bees. Aristarchus, g. best Governor. Aristides,
an Athenian Justice. Aristippus, g. best horseman. Aristocratical, belonging to
Aristocracy, g. Government of a Commonwealth by Nobles. Aristolochia, the herb
Birthwort. Arite* o. arrest, stay. Arithmancy, g. Divination by numbers.
Arithmetical, belonging to Arithmetic, g. the Art of Numbering. Ark, l. Noah's
Ship, also the chest that kept the Law-tables. Arles, Earls, earnest [-penny.]
Armada, Sp. a great Navy. Armadillio* a West-Indian-Beast with skin like Armor.
Armagh, an Arch-Bishops-seat in Ireland. Arma moluta, cutting weapons.
Armature, l. Armor, also skill in Arms. Arm a shot, bind Okum in Canvas to the
spike of a cross-bar-shot. Armenia, part of Asia. Armiferus, l. bearing arms.
Armiger, l. the same, also an Esquire. Armil, l. one of the Coronation
garments, also a bracelet. Armillate, wearing a bracelet. Armillet, a little
Bracelet. Arminians, Heretics following Arminius, a Divinity Professor at
Leyden in Holland. Armipotent, l. powerful in arms. Armomancy, divining by the
shoulders of Beasts. Armoniack, a gum issuing from the plant Fennel-giant
Armoricans, people of Armorick, Britain in France. Armory, where arms are kept.
Armusia, a County of Carmania, full of Vineyards. Arnabo, a kind of
sweet-sented Tree. Arobe, a Portugal measure of Sugar, 15 bushels. Aromatical,
-tick, l. Spicy. Aromatize, to perfume, or Spice. Aromatization, perfuming.
Aron, Wake-Robin, Cuckoe-pit. Arphaxad, Arpachshad, h. the Son of Shem. Arpent
de France, contains 100 perches, square, 18 foot each. Arquebusier, one that
serves with Arquebuse, f. large Musket. Arquebusade, a shot thereof. Arragon,
part of Spain. Arraign, bring to trial. Arran, Cluid part of North Scotland.
Arrass, rich tapestry of Arras, a Town in Art^sia. Array, ranking of Soldiers*
also setting forth a Jury. Arrearage, f. debt due on some old account.
Arrayers* Officers ordering the Soldiers arms. Arrendare, Sp. to let out lands
yearly. Arrentation, license (for yearly rent) to enclose lands. Arreptitious,
l. snatched away; also crept in privily. Arrere, o. apart. Arrest, f. stop,
seizure, also a Court-decree. Arrestandis bonis ne dissipentur, a Writ to
secure goods taken away. Arpetteth, o. laying blame. Arretted, brought before a
Judge. Arrianism, Doctrine of the Arrians, Heretics following Arrius, a Lybian
who denied the Son to be of the same substanee with the Father. Arride, l. to
consent [by smiling. Arrision, smiling upon Arrogate, l. take to much to ones
self. Arrogance, taking too much etc. Arrogant, he that takes, etc. Arrow-head,
a water-herb Arsenal, I. Arcenal, f storehouse of armor and Ammunitton.
Arsenick, Orpiment, Orpine, Rats bane. Arseverse, T. a spell to keep the house
from burning, also as Arse-versie, preposterously, the wrong way. Arsura,
things relating to coynage. Arsmart, the herb water-pepper. Arsons f. the
saddle-bow. Artaxerxes, Artahshash't, h. light, malediction, or fervent to
spoil. Artemisia, Queen of Halicarnassus, also Mug-wort. Artemisian, [month]
May. Arten, o. constrain. Arteries, l. pulser, hollow vessels like to veins,
wherein the thinnest and the hottest blood (with the vital spirits) passes.
Arterial, belonging thereto. Arterious, l. full of Arteries. Arteriatomy,
-otomy, g. a cutting of Arteries. Arthel Arddelw, Br. avouching, vouchee.
Arthritical, Gouty. Arthropia, g. the ligament that joins the bones together.
Arthur, Br. strong man. Articular, belonging to an Article, l. joint or member.
Articulate, l. distinct, joyn^ed; also to joint and make Articles of Agreement.
Artifex, Artificer, l. Arstisan, Artist, f. workman, or Crafts-master.
Artificer, l. craft, device. Artillery, l. War-instruments. Arval [Brothers,]
twelve Roman Priests, Judges of Landmarks. Arvisian [wine,] from Arvis or
Amis^a, in the Isle Si^ or Chios. Arundel, Arunda^e, a Town in Sussex upon the
River Arun. Arundiferous, l. reed-bearing. Arundin^tum, l. Reed-ground.
Acuspicy, l. altar-divination, by beholding the entrails. Asa, h. healer.
Asa^el, h. God has wrought. Asaph, h. gathering. Asara^acca, a vomit-herb.
Asbat^, o. a buying. Asbestes, a people of Lybia. Asbestos, g. a precious-stone
unquenchable when fi^ed. Ascal^nite, Herod, born*at Ascal^n, a Town in Jury.
Ascance, a looking on one side. Ascanius, Son to Aeneas, builder of Alba in
Italy. Ascarides, small worms in the fundament. Ascaunces, o. as though.
Ascendant, l. Horoscope, g. that point of the Ecliptic which rises at ones
birth. Ascenti^e, l. climbing up. Ascetick, g. Monastic, Monkish. Ascertain,
assure. Asclepiad [verse.] a Spondee, Choriambus, and two Dactyls. Ascribe, l.
impute. Ascriptitious, l. added to others [in writing.] Ashchenaz, h. fire as
it were distilling. Ashdown, Assendown, a Town in Essex. Asher, h. happiness.
Ashtaroth, Goddess of the Sydonians. Ashur, h. blessed or beholding. Asiatick,
belonging to Asia, One of the Worlds four parts. Asinine, l. belonging to an
Ass. As^aunce, o. if by chance. As^aunt, o. side-wayes, asquint. (...), newt,
E^t. As^es, o. Ashes. Asly, willingly. Asmatographers, g. Composers of Songs.
Asm^deus, g. the name of an evil spirit [of Lechery.] Asopus, a River of
Baeotia. Asotus, g. a sot, intemperate. Asparagus, l. vulgo Sparagrass. Aspe,
g. a venomous Creature with eyes in the Temples Aspect, l. Sight, Countenance;
also Position of the Stars. Aspectable, l. to be seen. Asper, a Turkish coin
about five farthings. Asperation, l. a making rough. Asperity, l. roughness.
Aspernate, l. despise. Aspersion, l. sprinkling, also slandering* Asphaltick,
Belonging to Asphaltites, the dead sulphry lake where Sodom stood Asphodil, the
flower Kings-spear. Aspike, a little venomous Serpent. Aspirate, -ation, l.
breathing, also the Greek mark for h. Asportation, l. carrying away. Assach,
Assath, Br. purgagation by the oaths of 300 men. Assa-^oetida, Devils-dung, a
strong-sented gum from the scarify'd root of Laserwort. Assaier, a Mint-Officer
for the trial of Silver. Assail, Assault, f set upon. Assart, f. to make glades
in a Wood to lop Trees, grub up bushes; also an offense by rooting up woods in
a Forest. Assassines, a Sect of strict Mahometans, refusing no pain or peril to
stab whom their Master appointed. Assassin^, -nate, I. to murder [for gain,]
also he that so robs and murders. Assation, l. a roasting. Assa^, f. try,
trial. Ass^ctation* l. a following. Assentation, l. a flattering compliance.
Assert, maintain. Assertion, l. affirmation. Assess, f. to tax. Assessor, l.
one joined in Authority to another. Assestrix, a she-assistant, a Midwife.
Assets, f. goods enough for an Executor to discharge Debts or Legacies.
Asseveration, l. an earnest affirming. Assideans, h. Justiciaries, a strict
Sect among the Jews. Assiduous, l. daily. Assiduity, l. diligence. Assign,
Assignee, f. one appointed by another to do any business. Assignment,
Assignation, l. an Appointment, also passing a thing over to another.
Assimilate, l. liken. Assimulate, l. to counterfeit. Assiz^, o. Order. Assised,
o. sure, firm. Assist, l. to help. Assize, f. the sitting of Justices upon
their Commission; also a writ; also the price of any Commodity set down.
Association, l. accompanying. Assonate, l. to sound together or in answer.
Assoyl, o. acquit, also answer. Assoylen, o. declare. Assuefaction, l. an
accustoming. Assuete, l. accustomed. Assuetude, l. custom. Assume, l. take to
ones self. Assumpsit, l. a voluntary promise. Assumption, l. a taking to, also
the minor or second Proposition in a Syllogism. Assumptive, l. taking to
himself, or that is lifted up. Astares* a River in Pontus causing the sheep
that feed near it to give black milk. Asteria, g. Gemma Solis, a stone that
sparkles like a star. Astroit, the same. Asterit^s, a stone having in the midst
the likeness of an half moon. Asterisk, g. a little star. Asterism, g. a
Constellation. Asterius, a King of Creet. Asteriagour, o. Astrolabe. Astert, o.
passed. Asthmatical, belonging to Asthma, g. difficult breathing Astipulation,
l. an agreement. Astite, Astide, No. as soon, anon. Astism, -mus, g. a civil
jest. Astraea, [Goddess of] Justice. Astraeus, Aurora's husband. Astragal, a
ring about the neck of a pillar or Canon. Astragalize, l. to make Astragal^;
also to play at dice or Tables. Astralish, natural gold ore. Astriction, l. a
binding. Astrictive, Astringent, binding. Ast^inge, l. bind fast. Astriferous,
l. star-bearing. Astroarch, g. Queen of Planets, the Moon. Astrobolism, g. a
blasting or Planet-striking. Astri^ilthet, Atra-, Atri- Sa. a forfeiture double
the damage. Astrolabe, g. a flat instrument to take the motions and distances
of Stars. Astrology g. foretelling things to come by the Motions of the Stars.
Astrologi^al, belonging thereto. Astrologer, one skilled therein. Astromela, a
City of Narbon in France. Astronomical, belonging to Astronom^, g. knowledge of
the stars and their courses. Astronomer, one skilled therei^. Asturia, part of
Spain. Astute, l. subtle. Astyages, Cyrus's Grandfather. Asyle, g. Sanctuary,
refuge for Offenders. Asy^bolick, g. Scot free. As^mphony, g. disagreement [in
music.] As^ndet^n, g. putting comma's instead of Conjunctions. Atabalipa, a
King of Peru. Atalanta, the swift Lady won by Hippomane's three golden apples.
Atchievment, f. performance of some great exploit; also a Coat of Arms fully
blazoned. Atche^e^, o. choked. Ateles, an Island famous for good Ointments.
Atenst, o. indeed. Athaliah, h. the hour or time of the Lord. Athamas, Son of
Aeolus, and King of Thebes. Atheistical, belonging to Atheism, g. the Doctrine
of an Atheist, who believes there is no God. Athelney, Athelingy (Isle of
Nobles) in Somersetshire. Athenian, belonging to Athens, g. a City in Greece.
Athletick, -call, g. belonging to wrestling. Athol, part of South- Scotland.
Athos, a high hill between Mac^donia and Thrace. Athroted, o. cloyed. At^antick
[Islands,] Hesperides, the two fortunate Islands on the borders of Ly^ia
Atlantic [Sea*] the west part of the Mediterranean. Atlas, Anchisa, Mont^s
claros, a Mountain of Mauritania Atmosphere, g. the sphere or Region of
vapors, the ^d. Atome, g. a mote in the Sun; the smallest part of any thing.
Atonement, reconcilement, making two to be at One. Atramental, -tous l. Inky.
Atrate, l. made black, in mourning. Atri^k, o. an Usher of a Hall. Atrocity, l.
fierceness. Atrabilary, l. troubled with Melancholy. Atrophy, g. a Consumption
[for want of nourishment.] Atropos, g. (unchangeable) one of the three
destinies, that cuts the thread of man's life. Attachment, f. laying hands on
[Body and Goods.] Attacted, l. touched. Att^inder, f. the convicting any person
of a new crime. Attaint* f. tried, found out. Attainted, convicted. Attamed, o.
set on broch. Attaminate, l. defile. Attaque, f. Assault. Attemperate, l. to
temper, make fit. Attendant, owing service or depending upon. Attenes, o. at
once. Attentate, l. attempt. Attentive, l. harkening diligently. Attenuation,
l. a lessening. Atterly, o. extremely. Attermining, f. a longer time [to pay
debts.] Atterc^b, Cu. a spiders web. Att^r, [corrupt] matter. Att^station, l. a
witnessing. Atthis, Daughter to Cranaus, King of Athens. Atti^ism, l. the
Athenians manner of speaking. Attique, -ick, Athenian. Attiguous, l. near to
Attinge, l. touch [lightly.] Attire, f. dress. Attires, [of a stag,] large
horns. Atone, l. bring into tune consort or agreement. Attorn^to faciendo, a
writ commanding the Sheriff to admit the Attorney. Attoure, o. toward.
Attournment, f. Ones turning Tenant to a new Lord. Attraction, l. a drawing.
Attraits, f. charming qualities [drawing the affections.] Attre^atij, Bark
shire people. Attrectation, l. a handling, feeling. Attribute, l. impute, also
the thing Attributed or given Attribution, Assignment, delivery, applying.
Attrition, l. rubbing, wearing, or dashing against; al^o imperfect contrition
or sorrow for sin. Attrit^, l. worn, fretted, or imperfectly sorry, etc.
Attorney, Procurator, one appointed to act for another. Avage, Avisage, a duty
paid the Lord of Writtel in Essex, for pigs and hogs. Avail, o. value. Availed,
o. assaulted. Avale, o. descend. Avaunce, o. advance. Avauncers, o. the second
branches of the Harts-horns. Avaunt, o. before. Avaunt, f. forward, away.
Avarice, l. Covetousness. Avaricum, l. Bourges, Chasteau-neu^ in France.
Aubades, f. morning lessons under ones window. Aube, o. as Albe. Auctive,
-ifical, l. augmenting. Auctor, l. an Increaser or Author. Aucupation, l.
fowling; also hunting for gain. Audacity, l. boldness. Audible, l. that may be
heard Audience, l. a hearing, a being heard; also as Auditors, l. hearers, also
Officers that examine the accounts of Underofficers. Auditory, l.
hearing-place, also hearers. Audiendo and terminand, a Commission for hearing
and punishing misdemeanors. Au^ita querela, a writ for the appearance of a
Creditor Audry, the foundress of Ely-Church. Avelace, o. (for Annelace, from
the Italian Annela cio, a great ring) the rings or gymews of a bag. Avenaunt,
o. pleasant, agreeable. Avenage, f. Oats paid a Landlord, for some other
duties. Avenor, provider of Oats. Aveni^, Avignon, in France* it has seven
Palaces, Parishes, Monasteries, Colleges, Innes and Gates. Ave Marie, l. Her
salutation by the Angel. Avens, Herb bennet. Aventure, Adventure, f. a mortal
or deadly mischance. Aventinus, one of the seven hills of Rome. Avenue, f.
access, passage to a place. Aver, o. wealth, also bribery. Averr, f. affirm,
avouch. Avera, a dayes-work of a plowman, 8 pence. Average, l. duty of
Carriage [by horse or Cart,] also contribution for the loss of goods cast
overboard; also pasturage. Averia, Cattle. Averdupois, Avoirdupoix, f. (to
contain full weight) 16 ounces to the pound; also goods so weighed. Avery, a
place where Oats or Provender is kept. Averment, f. the Justifying an exception
pleaded in abatement of the Plantiffs act. Avernal, -nial, belonging to
Avernus, a deadly stinking lake in Italy; also Hell. Averpenny, money gathered
for the Kings Averages. Averruncation, l. lopping off superfluous branches;
also appeasing. Averruncus, a Roman God who did Avert or turn away evil.
Aversion, l. turning away; also Antipathy or secret hatred. Aufidena, a City of
Italy. Augeus, King of Elis, had a stable of 3000 Oxen. Augment, l. increase.
Augmentation, [Court,] for the revenues coming by the Monasteries suppressed.
Auger, a boring tool. Augrim, as Algorithm. Augrim-stones, to cast account
with. Augurize, l. to use Augury, l. Divination by Birds. Augures-staff, a wand
which the Augures (in south-saying) held in their hands. August, l. Royal,
Majestical. Augustals, Feasts in honor of Augustus, the 2d. Roman Emperor.
Augustan [Confession,] made at Auspurgh, in Germany. Augustine, Austin, Bishop
of Hippo in Africa. Austin-fryers, of his Order. Augustinians, Sacramentaries,
Heretics following one. Augustine a Bohemian, who who held that Heaven Gates
were not open till the general Resurrection. Aviary, l. a place to keep Birds.
Avice, Hildevig, Sa. Lady defense. Avid, l. Covetous, greedy. Avidity,
covetousness. Avisee, o. look upon; advised. Aviso, Sp. admonition. Auk,
Awkward, untoward. Aulick, l. of the Court. Aulis, a haven in Baeotia. Auln^ge,
f. Ell-measure. Aulnegeor, f. The Officer that looks to the assize of woollens.
Aume, [of Rhenish wine*] fo^rty gallons. Aumener, o. cupboard. Aumer, o. amber.
Aumere, o. welt, skirt, or border. Aumone, f. (Alms) tenure by divine service.
Aunc^try, as Ancestry. Ancient demesne, Demean, or Domain, Kings Lands in
Dooms-da^-book. Aunder, Oneder, che. the afternoon. Auntreth, o. adventureth.
Aunters, peradventure, or if. Avocation, l. a calling away. Auntrous, o.
adventurous. Avocatory, calling away. Avoidan^e, a Benefices becoming void.
Avoided, denied. Avouch, f. maintain justify. Avowable, Justifiable. Avowry,
Advowry, f. the maintaining of an act formerly done, as of distress for rent,
etc. Avouter, an Adulterer. Aurea Chersonesus, an Indian Peninsula. Aurelia,
Orleance in France. Aurenches, heretofore Barons of Folk-stone in K^nt.
Auricular, belonging to Auricle, l. an ear. Auriculum, Calx, a mineral with
Gold in it, also Gold calcined to powder. Auriferous, l. gold-bearing.
Auriflamb, Oriflambe, f. St. Dennis's purple standard born against infidels,
lost in Flanders. Auriga, l Stars on the horns of Taurus. Aurigation, l. the
guiding of any Carriage. Aurigia, Arion in Spain. Aurigraphy, writing with
Gold. Auripigmentum, l. Orpine. Aurist, that is skilled in the ears. Aurney,
Aurigney, Aurica, a Brittish-Isle. Aurora, l. morning. Aurum Philosophorum,
Lead in Chemistry. Aurum potabile, l. drinkable Gold. Aurum Reginae, Queen-gold
Auscultation, l. harkening, obeying. Auses, Afri^an Virgins used to combat in
honor of Minerva. Ausones, an old people of Italy. Auspical, belonging to the
Auspices, l. Soothsayers that observe the flight of Birds. Auspicious, l.
lucky. Austere, l. sour, stern. Austerity, crabbedness. Austral, l. Sou^hern.
Australize, to turn to or from the South. Austrasia, Brabant and Lorrain, one
of the four Kingdoms of France, the other three were Soissons, Orleans, and
Paris. Auta^, o. Altar. Autem, (for Antem or Anthem) a Song. Austria, part of
Germany. Austromancy, g. divination by the South Wind. Austur^us, a Goshawk.
Au^archy, g. contentedness, self-sufficiency, Authentic, g. allowed, of good
authority. Authorize, l. Empower. Autoc^thones, g. Aborigines. Autem, c.
Church; also married. Autocrasy, g. self-subsistence Autogeneal g.
self-begotten. Autograph, -phical, g. of the Authors own writing Autoleon, a
Captain of the Cro^oniates. Autolicus, Mercury's Son who could change all he
stole into what he would. Autology, g. speaking of or to ones self. Automatous,
-tarian, belonging to an Autome, -maton, g. an instrument moving of it self.
Autonoe, Actaeon's Mother. Autonomy, g. living after ones own law. Autoptical,
belonging to Autopsy, g. self-beholding. Autotheism, g. Gods being of himself.
Autremite, o. an [other] attire. Autumnal, belonging to Autumn, l. the
Harvest-quarter. Auturgie, g. self-working. Avulsion, l. a plucking from. Aux,
as Absis Auxiliary, coming to Auxiliate, l. aid, help. Auxilium ad filium
militem faci^n^um* a writ to leavy aid of the Tenants toward the Knighting the
landlords eldest Son or marrying his Eldest Daughter. Av^sions, o. visions.
Awa^d, Judgment, arbitration. ^wait, -ayte, o. waiting; also caution, heed.
Awaits, o. ambushments. Awdley, Aldethelighs, an ancient Family. Awhaped, o.
amazed, astonished. Awhere, o. a desire. Awm, Awame, as Aume. Awn, the beard of
any Corn. Awning, a canvass sail spread above the deck. Awnsel* [weight] quasi
handsale, poising meat only by hand. Awreaked, o. wreaked. Awreaketh, o.
revengeth. Axess, o. as access; ague. Axillar, -ary, l. belonging to the
Armpits. Axinomancy, g. a divination by hatchets. Axiom g. a maxim or general
ground in any Art. Axicle, l. a lath; a pulley-pin. Axis, l. an Axel-tree; the
diameter of the World. Axminster, Axanminster, a Town in Cornwall. Ay, Ea, Eye,
Sa. a watery place. Ay, o. Egg. Aye, o. for ever. Again* o. again. Against, o.
against. Ayenward, o. back again. Ayl, o. always. Azamoglans, those intended
to be enrolled Janissaries. Azariah, h. the Lords help. Azebone, A. head of the
16 mansion. Azemech, A. the Virgins sp^ke, a star. Azemen, [degrees] ascend at
that birth which has some incurable defect. Azimuthal, belonging to the
Azimiuths, or Azimuths, Circles that meet in the Zenith and pass through all
degrees of the Horizon. Azure, lazul, A. skie-colour'd. Az^me, g. without
leaven or mixture. Azymes, g. a feast of seven days (beginning the morrow
after the Passover) wherein no leavened bread might be eaten.
B.
BAal, h. Lord, Jupiter, Ba^lze^u^, Beelzebub, Beel-, h. Lord of flies, or
Devils. Baasha, h. in making or pressing together. Babel, Babylon, Bagadeth,
Bagda, h. confusion [of tongues.] Bab^on, a large kind of Monkey. Bablac, a
Town in Oxfordshire. Babewries, Babeuries, o. strange antic works. Baby^s,
Brother of Marsyas, Bac, f. a ferry. Bach, Beak, Bec, a River. Bacchanalize, to
imitate the Bacchanals, mad feasts of Bacchus. Baccharach, Bachrag, Rhenish
[wines.] from Baccharag, a German City. Ba^chation, l. rioting. Bacchean,
belonging to Bacchus, God of Wine. Bacciferous, l. berry-bearing. Bachyllion, a
song or dance of Bachyllus, a Tragedian. Backberond, Sa. a Thief taken with the
goods about him. Bactriana, part of Scythia. Badbury, a Town in Dorset. Badge,
Arms, Cognizance. Badger, f. a transporter and seller of Provision; also a
Brock or Gray. Badinage, f. frolery, buffoonry Badelynge of Dokys, o. padling
Company of Ducks. Badonicus, Bannesdown-hill in Sommersetshire. Baetica, part
of Spain. Bagate^, f. toy, triffle. Baggeth, o. disdaineth Bagginly, -ingly,
swellingly, proudly. Bajazet, a Turkish Emperor. Bail, f. surety for ones
appearance. Bailly, o. Government. Baily-wick, Jurisdiction of a Baily,
Bailiffe, f. principal deputy to the King or other Lord. B^in, f. a Bath; also
willing, and limber, Sf. Bainards Castle, Earl of Pembrooks house in London.
Baisemains, f. kiss-hands, Complements, humble service Baiton Kaiton, A. the
whales belly, a star. Baize, fine freeze of Ba^* a City of Naples. Balaam,
Bileam, h. the ancient of the People. Balade, f. ballet, poem; also a dance.
Balais of entail, f. rubies [or other jewels] cut. Bales Turks* Turkish ruby.
Balak, h. covering or destroying. Balasse, sa. Gravel (or any weight) in the
bottom of a ship. Balatron, I. babbler. Balaustium, the blossom of the
Pomegranate-tree. Balcone, I. a bay window. Baldwin, ge. bold victour. Baleyne,
f. whale-[bone.] Bale, f. pack [of merchandise.] Baleful, o. Sorrowful. Balk,
sa. a little piece left unplough'd, also a beam. Balkes, foreign pieces of
Timber. Balk-staff, a quarter-staff. Ball, f. a dancing-meeting. Balladin, f
Galliard-dancer. Balliol [Colledge] in Oxford. Ballist, l. a large cross-bow.
Ball-money; given by a new bride to her old Play-fellows. Ballon, f. a large
ball; also the round Globe or top of a pillar. Ballotation, Balloting,
Election, casting lots [by balls.] Ballustrade, jutting out of a window or
Portal. Balm, juice of a Tree in Judaea. Balmerinoch, a Scotch Abbey. Balneary,
l. a bathing place. Balneation, bathing. Balneator, bath-keeper. Balneatory,
belonging to bath. Balneum arenae, infusion of flowers, etc. in a close vessel
(with water) set in hot sand. Balneum Cinerum, the same set in hot ashes.
Balneum Mariae, or Marae, the same put into a bigger vessel of water over the
fire. Balthazar, h. (without treasure) Melchior and Jasper, the three wise men
mentioned, Mat. 2. Baltic, belonging to Baltia, Scandia, Scandinavia, an Isle
in the German Ocean. Balsamon, a Patriarch of Antioch, Anno, 1185. Bambalio, a
faint hearted man. Band, f. a foot Company. Bandie, f. to toss up and down,
also to follow a faction. Banditi, Outlaws, condemned by Bando, I.
proclamation. Banderol, Bannerol, f. a little flag or streamer. Bandle, an
Irish measure of two foot. Bandog, Mastive. Bandon, f. custody; license, also
Sect, or Company. Bandore, I. a Musick-Instrument. Bane, Sa. poison;
destruction. Ban's, Bans, f. proclamations, and particularly of Marriages.
Bangle [eard] like a Spaniel. Bangue, a pleasant drink in the Eastern
Countries. Banker, Exchanger of foreign money. Bankers browded, o. embroidered
cushions. Bankrout, Bankrupt, one that has consumed all. Bannock, La. a cake of
Oatmeal and water only. Bannaventa, -venna, Wedon in Northamptonshire. Banner,
f. flag, ensign. Bannians, crafty Merchants of India. Bannum, Banleuga,
precinct. Bantam, the chief City of Iava Major, in the East Indies Baptismal,
belonging to Baptization, Baptism, g. washing or dipping in water. Baptist, g.
washer, dipper. Baptistery, a vessel or place to wash in, a fon^. Barabbas, Sy.
Fathers Son. Barak, h. lightning. Baratta, rare East India Balsom. Baralipton,
an imperfect Syllogism of two universal and a particular affirmative. Barbara,
a perfect syllogism of three universal affirmatives. Barbarian, belonging to
Barbary, -ria, part of Africa. Barbarism, g. rudeness of speech or behavior.
Barbarous, cruel, inhumane. Barbarity. cruelty. Barbe, a mask or vizard.
Barbed, l. bearded. Barbel, bearded fish. Barbican, f. an Out-work. Barbitist,
g. Lutinist. Bar^e, the chief City of Lybia. Bards, the British Scholars.
Bardes, Barbes, hors-trappings. Bargh, Y. a steep horse-way. Bargaret, -net, o.
a ballet; song or dance. Bar-Iesus, Chapter Son of Jesus. Bar-Ionah, Chapter Son of
Jonah. Barkary, bark- or tan-house Bark-fat, Tanners*tub. Barkman, boatman.
Barm, yest, also a lap. Barm-cloth, o. apron. Barn, Bern, sa. Child. Bearn
teams, broods of Children. Barnabas, -by, Chapter Son of Comfort. Barnacle, a fish
that eats through the planks of Ships, also a Scotch or Soland-goose growing
(they say) on trees, also a brake to put on the noses of unruly horses. Baroco,
a Syllogism of an universal affirmative and two particular negatives.
Barometer, g. an instrument to find the pressure of the air. Baronage, tax laid
upon Baronies, Estates of Barons, f. Lords. Baroscope, g. an instrument showing
all the changes of the air. Bar, a Defendants sufficient answer, also two
lines overthwart an Eschutcheon. Bar-see, 20 d. to the Jailer. Barettor,
Barratour, f. who sets men at variance. Barrataria, -try, Simony. Barcaria,
-ium, a Sheep-coat, also a Sheep-walk. Barricado, Sp. a Defense of barrels
filled with Earth. Barriers, f. an exercise with short swords within bars.
Barresters, -rasters, who (after 7 years study) are admitted to the bar.
Barsalona, Barcellona, Barcino a City of Spain. Barter, Sp. truck or change.
Barth, warm pasture. Bartholomew, Chapter the Son of him that makes the water
ascend. Barton, Barken, a place to keep Po^ltry in. Baruch, h. blessed.
Barulet, the fourth part of a bar. Barzillai, h, hard as Iron. Bas. a Scotch
Island. Bascuence, Sp. the Piscay-tongue. Base, Basis, l. the bottom or
foundation of a thing. Base-Court, not of Record. Base-estate, at the Lords
will. Basels, an old abolished coin. Baselards, o. daggers, wood-knives.
Basiate, l. to kiss. Basha, Bassa, a Turkish Commander. Basil, an herb, also
as Basilical, g. Royal, Magnificent. Basilick vein, the Liver-vein. Basilisk,
g. a Cockatrice, also a large canon; also the Lions heart, a star. Basilisks,
g. stately buildings at Rome. Basinet, ^. a little basin. Baskervile, an
ancient Family. Basse, o. A kiss, or the lower [lip.] Bast, Lime-tree wood
made into ropes and Mats, also to sew, o. Bastardy, the being a Bastard, born
out of wedlock. Bastardize, corrupt, make worse. Bastile, -ilde, -illion, f.
that is to Paris, as the Tower is to London. Bastion, f. Cullion-head, a Fort.
Baston, f. a Cudgel, also an Officer to the Warden of the Fleet. Bastonado, Sp.
a cudgeling. Batable, quasi debatable [ground,] between England and Scotland.
Batauntly, o. boldly. Batavians, people of Batavia, Holland. Batner, c. Ox.
Bath, a City in Sommerset. Bath, o. both. Battail-field, by Shrewsbury.
Battalion, f. the main body of an Army. Battery, fa. beating, assault.
Battology, g. vain repetition of words. Batting, a Hawks fluttring, striving to
fly away. Battle, (size) take provision on the Colledge-book. Battle-bridge,
Stanford-bridge in Yorkshire. Battailed, o. having. Battlements, turrets of
houses built flat. Battus, a perfidious fellow turned to a stone by Mercury
Batune, a note of bastardy in heraldry. Batus, Sa. bo^t. Bavaria, a German
Dukedom Baubels, o. Jewels. Baube^, farthing. Baucis, Philemons wife. Baud, o.
bold. Baude, a brave, a Gentleman, also a Ruffian. Baudkin, a glistering stuff.
Baudon, (for bandon) o. Custody. Baudrick, Bawd, o. furniture* also a
sword-girdle, also an old-fashioned jewel. Baven, Brush-wood [fagots.] Baulk,
o. to cross [a River] Baud^y, o. bravery, boldness. Bawsin, o. big, gross.
Bawsyn, o. a badger. Bay, a stop for water, a road for ships, a brown-red
color, also a stake, o. Bayard, f. bay-coloured [horse.] Bay [window] that
boundeth out round. Baxter, sc. baker. Bazar, an Indian Marketplace. Bayen, o.
to bark. Bdellium, an Arabian-Gum like wax, sweet in smell, but bitter in
taste. Beaconage, money to maintain. Beacons, high lights for warning.
Beadroll, Sa. a list of those that use to be prayed for. Beak, the crooked
upper part of a hawks bill. Beak-head, is fastened with a knee upon the stem of
a ship. Beal, Bell, f. Fair. Beam, whereon the starts of a stags head grow, also
long [feathers of a hawks wing.] Beam, o. Bohemia. Beards, prickles on the ears
of Corn. Bearers, maintainers, abetters. Bearn, o. a wood, also a Child.
Bears-br^ech, brank ursine, a lively-green herb. Bears-foot, the herb
Setterwort. Bear in [with the harbor,] sail into it with a large wind. Bear
off [from the land,] go more room than your course lies. Bear up, sail more
before the wind. Beasel, Bezill Bezeil, the upper part of the collet of a ring,
which contains the stone. Beastail, f. all Cattle. Beat, search for hare, etc.
Beating, Y. with Child, breeding. Beatifie* l. to make happy. Beatifick, -call,
l. that which makes happy. Beatitud^, l. blessedness. Beatrice, -trix, l. she
that makes happy or blessed, Beavis, Bellovesus, proper name Beau hamp, f. a
title conferred on the Family of S^im^urs. Beaumont, f. one of the greatest
Families of the Nation. Beau-pleading, fair pleadng. Beau Sir, o, fair Sir.
Beazar Beazoar, [stone,] bread in the maw of a Beazar, Bazar, an Indian Goat.
Bec, [Phrygian-] bread. Becalmed, not able to sail for want of wind. Bechic,
-call, belonging to a Cough, as Lozenges, etc. Beclap, o. accuse, catch or
arrest. Bed, a plank on which the Canon lies in the carriage. Bid, a Venerable
English Monk near Newcastle, ^lso to offer, also dwelled, o. Beddeth* [the Roe]
lies down. Bed^s-man, Beads-man, Alms-man, who prays for a Benefactor.
Bedrawled, bedrabled, drivel'd. Bederepe, Bidrepe, duty of some Tenants, to
reap their Landlords Corn in Harvest. Bedolven, o. dugg, delved. Bedlam,
Bedlem, Bethlem, h. [house of bread,] for Madmen. B^de^an, the walk o^ a Bedle,
Beadle, Bedel, (D. Crier) waits upon a Magistrate. Beer-sheba, h. Well of the
oath. Beer, birre might, C^e. Bee-mol, f. the Music flat key. Beem, o. tree.
Be [ings,] the first milk after birth. Begone, By-, o. beset [with gold,]
decked. Beglerbeg, [Tu. Lord of Lords] of Greece and Natolia. Beenship, c.
worship, goodness. B^guines, f. an order of old Nuns. Behest, a promise also a
precept. Behight, -^ete, o. promised. Behither, on this side* Ss. Be^iram, a
Turkish feast. Beight, bought, bending, Che. Beknew, o. learnt out, knew.
Bekyth, o. wipeth her beke. Bell, Chald* the Sun, or Lord. Belage, fasten any
[ship-] rope when haled. Belamy, f. fair friend. Belchier, f. good Countenance.
Bel-chose, f. fair thing. Beleag^e, -guer, D. besiege. Belgic, -ian, belonging
to Belgia, l. the Low Countries. Belgrade, a City of Hungary. Belial* h.
wicked, unprofitable, without yoke, also the Devil. Belides, Danaus's 50
Daughters. Belive, qu. by the Eve, anon. Belisarius, a Roman General forced to
beg his bread. Bellacity, l. warlikeness. Bellatrix, the left shoulder of
Orion, a star. Bellatrice, l. a she-warriour. Bellerophon, Son of Glau^us*
killed Chimaera, by the help of Neptunes Pegasus. Belle I saude, I said or spoke
very well. Bellicose, l. warlike. Bellyth, the Roebuck (probably) makes such a
noise. Belligerate, l. make war. Bellipotent, l. strong in arms. Bellitude, l.
beauty. Bell-mettal, a mixture of Tyn and Copper-oar. Bellona, Goddess of war.
Belluine, l. Beast-like. Belly-cheat, c. an apron. Belomancy, g. Divination by
arrows. Belperopis, (q. pyropis,) jewels. Bel-videre, I. (fair to behold) the
Popes palace* so Belvoir [Castle,] in Lincolnshire. Belus, the first or second
King of Assy^ia, also Jupiter. Bement, -eint, o. bemoaned. Bemes, o. trumpets.
Benajah, h. the Lords building. Benacu^, a lake in Lombardy with gold-sands.
Bendlet, f. a little. Bend, a line from the dexter chief to the sinister base
of a Scutcheon; also a muffler, caul or kercher, o. Bend, [the Cable to the
anchor,] fasten it to the ring. Benediction, l. a blessing. Bener, -nar, c.
better. Benet, contracted of Benedict, l. blessed, happy, also a good saying.
Benedictin^s, Benedictine-Monks, in black. Benerth, Plough and Cart-service to
a Landlord. B^nefactor, l. he that does a Benefact, l. benefit, good deed.
Benefice, l. a spiritual living. Benefi^ence, l. bounty. Benegro, make black.
Beneplacity, l. well pleasing. Benemerent, l. awel-deserving Benes, o. bones.
Benevolence, l. good will. Benevolent [Planets] Jupiter and Venus. Bengala, an
East India Kingdom. Bengi, an Indian powder of hemp exciting luxury. Benhadad,
h. Son of noise. Benjamin, ^. Son of days or old age, called by his Mother,
Benoni, h. Son of sorrow. Benjamin, Benzoin, Assa dulcis, a sweet gum from
Java. Bensel, beat, bang. T. Benign, l. favorable. Beningly, o. benignly,
kindly. Benignity, l. kindness. Bent, where rushes grow. Benimmeth, o.
bereaveth, takes away. B^orh, a heap. Benison, f. a blessing. Bercaria, as
Barcaria. Berecynthia, Cybele, the Mother of the Gods. Berenice, Ptolomy's
Daughter. Bergh^master, Sa. an Officer amongst the Derbyshire Miners.
Bergh-mote, a Court held there. Beringarius, a great Scholar. Beris, a high
Armenian hill. Berkhamsted, a Town in Hertfordshire. Bern, chief City of
Switzerland. Bernardines, Cistertian Monks of the order of St. Bernard Sa.
Bears-heart or Bear-ward. Bernard College, St. John Baptist College. Bernet,
a Town in Hertfordshire. Berry, to thre^h, also as Bury, Sa. a Mannor-house.
Berth convenient Sea-room Berthing [the Ship-sides] is also the building or
bringing them up. Bertha, ge. bright. Berthinsec, Birdinsec, a Scotch Law which
only whips men for stealing so much meat as they can carry [in a Sack.] Berton,
a Farm-house. Bertram* proper name, also Pellitory of Spain. Berubium, Vre^ead
in Scotland. Berwica, an appurtenant to some place. Beryl, g. an Indian
greenstone. Bes^ck, o. beseech. Bezant, Besant, Besance, Bisantine, Biz-, Byz-,
an old gold-coyn about a ducket, also (in Heraldry) a round plate of gold, by
some worth 15, by other 3750 pounds, from Byzantium, Constantinople. Besca, a
spade or shovel. Besieged [Planet,] placed between two malevolents. Beset, set
packing, also employed. Besestein, Bisestano, the exchange of Constantinople.
Bese^, o. become. Well Bese^, of good aspect. Bes^et, o. shut up. Besmottered,
o besmutted. Bespreng^d, o. besprinkled. Bestad* o. lost. Beswike, o. betray.
Besyen, o. trouble, grief. Betake, Beteach, Sa. to deliver, to commend. Bet, o.
to pray, also better, also quickly. B^te, o. boot, help, also to make or
compel. Beten, o. kindle, also abate. Beth, h. a house. Bethaven* h. house of
vanity. Bethel, house of God. Bethesda, Alms house, etc. Bethlem^tes, Friars
that wore a star on their backs. Betle, Be^re, Bastard-Pepper an Indian plant.
Betrassed, o. deceived. Betreint, -ent, o. sprinkled. Betty, c. an instrument
to open doors. Beverage, f. mingled drink. Bevy, Company [of Roes, quails,
Fairies, etc.] Bevy-grease, fat of Roes. Bewits, leathers to which the hawks
bells are fastened. Bewared, o. spent* expended. Bewreck, o. revenged. Bewryen,
o. declare, also betray. Bey, o. buy. Beyaped, o. cheated. Beyet, o. begotten.
No Beyete, not a bit, no whit, not at all. Bezaliel, h. in Gods shadow* Bezeil,
as Beasel. Bezoar, as Beazar. Bialacoyl, o. fair welcoming Bibacious, l. given
to Bibacity, immoderate love of drink, t^pling. Bibliographer, g. Book-writer.
Bi^liopolist, Bookseller. Bibliothecary, keeper of a Bibliotheque, g. Library.
Bice, a blew paint, also green. Bic^ering, skirmishing. Bicipi^al, -tous, l.
with two heads. Bicolor, l. of two colors. Bicornous, l. with two horns*
Bicorporal, l. with two bodies. Bid, o. both. Bid a boon, o. desire a request.
Bidding of heads, Sa. calling to prayers. Bid-ale, Bidderale, help-al^ bidding
friends to a Feast to gain their Charitable help. Bidental, l. with two teeth*
also a place where sheep were sacrificed. Bien and loyalment, f. well and
faithfully. Biennial, l. of two years. Bifarious, l. of two meanings. Biformed,
l. of two shapes. Biferous, l. twice-bearing. Bifoyl, l. the herb tway-blade.
Bifront, l. with two foreheads. Bifurcous, l. two-forked. Biga, any carriage.
Bigamist, g. committer of Bigamy, g. the having two wives [at one time.] Bigat,
a Roman penny. Biggening, up-rising [of women.] Biggins, Lancashire buildings.
Big, a pap or teat, E. build, o. Bight, any part of a rope coiled up (see
Beight) also the Neck. Bigot, f. a scrupulous superstitious fellow; also
hypocrite. Bigottery, such practice. Bighes, o. (for Bagues) jewels. Bikenne,
o. acknowledge. Bilander* By-lander, a small kind of ship. Bilanciis
deferendis, a Writ for the weighing of Wool to be transported. Bil-berries,
Whortle-, Dewberries. Bilbilis, a Spanish Town. Bilboa, Bilbo, another, where
the best Blades are made. Bildge, Buldge, the breadth of the floor wherein the
ship rests when she is a ground. Bilged, springs a leak, by striking against a
rock or Anchor. Bilinguis, l. double-tongued, also a Jury made up of English
men and Aliens. Bilious, l. Choleric. Bilk, A. nothing, also to deceive.
Billard, Ss. bastard Capon. Billa vera, l. the indorsement of the Grand Inquest
upon a presentment seeming probable. Billows, great waves. Billet, f. a little
note, also a wedge [of Gold.] Bimatical, l. of two years. Bimensal l. of two
Months. Binarious, -ry, l. belonging to two. Binaria, l. the number of two.
Bineme, o. take away. Binarchy, g. a Government which is under two. Bindeweed,
withwind Bing awast, c. go away. Binne, o. manger, also a place to keep bread
in. Binomical, -ious, l. of two Names. Bint, o. bound. Bipartite, l. divided in
two. Bipatent, l. open two ways. Bipedal, -aneous, -dical, l. of two foot.
Biquintile, (Bq.) an aspect consisting of 141 degrees. Bird, Sf. light [of the
eye.] Birlet, Birret, o. coife or hood. Birlings, sc. small sea-vessel.
Bismare, o. curiosity. Bismutum, Wismuth, counterfein, Tinglass, whiter than
black and blacker than white Lead. Bison, f. Bugle, Buff, Wild Ox. Bisque, a
fault at Tennis, also a compound dish. Bissected, l. cut in two equal parts.
Bissextile, leap-year, every fourth year, when February has 29 days and St.
Matthias, removes from the 24th. to the 25th. day. Bistort, Snakeweed.
Bisumbres, as Amphicij. Bite, c. to cheat, also to steal. Biton and Cleobis,
rewarded with death for their piety to their Mother Argia, in drawing her
Charet to the Temple. Bitrent, o. compass, bind about. Bits, two square pieces
of Timber to belage the Anchor Cable to. Bitta^le, the Compass-box on the
steerage. Bitter, vere out the Cable by little and little. Bitter sweet, Woody
Nightshade with bluish flowers. Bittourn, a kind of Heron having (they say)
three stones Bituminous, belonging to Bitumen, l. a fat Clammy substance used
for m^rter. Bituminated, done therewith. Bituriges, the people of Berry in
France. Biwopen, o. sprinkled with tears. Bizend, Beesend, Bison'd, blinded.
Black-book, treats of all the Exchecquer-Orders. Blake, o. naked Blacklow, a
hill in Warwickshire, on which Pierce Gaveston was beheaded. Black-maile,
contribution for protection against Thieves and Robbers in the North.
Black-more Forest, white-hart-forrest in Dorsetshire. Black-munday, Easter,
Monday 1359. when Hailstones killed both Men and Horses in the Army of our
Edward the 3d. in France. Black-rod, the Usher belonging to the order of the
garter Black-buried, gone to Hell. Blain, a push more painful and red than the
small pox. Blanch, f. white. Blakes, Casings, [Cow-] dung dried for fuel.
Blanching, peeling of Almonds, etc. in hot water. Blandiloquence, l. fair
speaking, also flattery. Blandishment, f. flattring. Blank, 8d. coined by Henry
the 5th. in France. Black-bar, Common-bar, a plea compelling the Plantiff to
assign the place of trespass Blankers, o. white garments. Blank-manger, f. a
kind of delicious white-meat. Blasco, the Isle Languillade, in the mouth of
Rhene. Blase, g. sprouting forth. Blasours, o. Praisers. Blasphemy, g.
reproach. Blatant, barking. Blateration, l. babbling. Blatta Bizantia, a sweet
Indian Sea-fish-shel. Blaze, D. spread abroad, also a fire in memory of the
blazing star ( Jan. 5.) Blazon, f. the description of a Coat of Arms. Blay,
Bleak, a [whitish] fish. Blee, o. Corn, also as B^e, o. sight, aspect.
Bleating-cheat, c. a sheep. Bleach, whiten [in the Sun.] Bleit, Blate, Sc.
shamefast. Blemishes, Hunters marks where the Deer has gone. Blench, a tenure
by payment of a penny, rose, etc. on demand. Blend, mingle together, also blind,
o. Blent, -eint, o. stopped. Blepharon, g. he that has great eyebrows.
Blesiloquent, l. stammering. Blue-mantle, an Office belonging to one of the
Pursivants at Arms. Bleve, -ven, D. tarry, abide. Blight, a blasting. Blinks,
boughs cast in the Deers way. Blissom, to tup [as the Ram does the Ewe.] Blite,
l. a tastless herb. Blithe, Br. yielding milk, profitable; also as Blithsom,
pleasant, jovial. Blive, as Belive, o. readily, presently. Blo, o. blue
[colour.] Blocks, the wooden things in which the ship ropes run. Blois, a City
of France. Blomary, the first forge in an iron-mill. Blonder, o. blunder.
Bloom, blossom, blosme. Blot the Skrip, c. enter into Bond. Blote, to smoke,
also smoked [herrings.] Bloten, Che. fond (as a Nurse.) Bloud-stone, a reddish
stone stopping blood. Bloud-wit, Sa. an amercement for shedding blood. Blow^r,
c. a Queen. Blu^ber, Whale-Oyl [imperfect.] Bluffer, c. an Host or Landlord.
Bluffe, Bluff-headed, when the Ships stern is as it were upright; also to
blindfold. Blunderbuss, a large gun carrying 20 pistol bullets. Blyn, o.
Cease. Blyss, o. joy. Boa, Swine-pox. Boanerges, h. Sons of thunder Boas, a
monstrous Serpent, in who is belly Pliny says a whole infant has been found.
Boatswain* the under-pilot. Boccasine, f. fine buckrum. Bobtail, a kind of
short arrow-head, also a whore. Bocardo, the name of a Prison in Oxford; also a
Syllogism who is first and last Propositions are particular Negatives and the
other an universal Affirmative. Boccone, I. a morsel or bit also poison.
Boc-hord, Sa. where Books or writings are kept. Bockland, held by Book or
Charter. Bode, D. Messenger; also foretell; also to ask news. Bodotria, Bederia,
Edinburgh Frith in Scotland. Bodykin, o. a little Body. Baeotia, Ogygia, part
of Greece. Boer, Boor, D. a Countryman from Bo, (Gothic) a village. Boetherick
that part of Physic which removes diseases. Bohemia, part of Germany. Bois de
Vicennes, a stately Palace near Paris. Boistousness, o. rudeness. Boistous, o.
lame, halting. Book, point [at one,] Che. also belch and be ready to vomit, Li.
Bokeler, o. buckler. Boken, o. strike. Boket, o. Bucket. Bolas, -les, o.
Bullace, -lis, wild plum. Bole Armeniack, or Armo-, a soft crumbling stone
found in Armenia. Bold, o. Fenne. Boling, the Cord that draws the sail to
gather wind. Bollen, o. swelled. Bollingbroke, a Castle in Lincolnshire.
B^lmong, Mong-Corn, Masselin, Bolt, [a Cony.] raise her. Bolting, Sa. a
[house-] exercise inferior to Mooting. Bolts, Iron pins belonging to ships
rigging. Bolt-rope, into which the Sail is made fast. Bolt-sprit, a slope Mast
at the head of a ship. Bolus, as Bole Armoniack also a Physical pellet.
Bombard, l. gun. Bombardical, belonging thereto. Bombasine, stuff made of
Bom^ast, or Cotton, an (...) plant a cubit high. Bombilation, l. humming of
Bees. Bombycinous, l. made of silk. Bona fide, l. Faithfully. Bona Patria,
Scotch Jury. Bona Notabilia, Goods (above 5 l.) in another Dioce^^ than that he
dies in. Bonaught, an Irish tax for the maintenance of Knights* Bonair, f.
courteous Bonairite, Courtesy. Bona r^ba, I. a Whore. Bonasus, a wild horse
with a Bulls head. Bonaventure, a famo^^ Franciscan Friar. Bone-breaker* an
Eagle. Bon Chretien, f. Good Christian, a large French Pear. Bondy, Y.
Simpleton. Bonwell, a Well in Hert^ford-shire, full of little bones* Bongra e,
f. good Grace also a kind of half-bonet t^ keep the Sun from the sore* head.
Bon hommes, f. good me^ an Order of Friars. Boniface, f. Well-doer. Bonifate,
having good luck* Bon jour, f. good morrow* Bonis non amovendis, a (...)
stopping the removal (...) Goods. Bonito, a leaping fish. Bonium,
Bangor-Monastery. Bonne mine, f. good aspect. Bonnet, a short sail to be joined
to another sail. Boodeth, o. Shows. Boolie, o. beloved. Boon, a pole to
spread the clew of a sail further out. Booming, with all sails out. Boon, o. a
request. Boor, Cu. Parlour or Bedchamber. Boot, Bote, Sa. recompense also
help, advantage. Boot of bale, o. ease of sorrows. Booting-Corn, certain
Rent-corn. Boot-haling, No. stealing. Booting, Sc. a punishment by pegging-on
an iron boot. Bostock, with one stone. Bostal Ss. a way up a Hill. Boots, as
Arctophylax. Booz Boaz, h. in strength. Booz, c. drink. Boracho, Sp. a pitched
bottle made of a Pigs skin. Borametsy, a Scythian Lamb-plant, eating the grass
about it and then dying. Borax, Borace, Chrysocolla, a green shining Mineral
[to soder Gold or Silver,] or made of Childrens Urine. Borbonia, a French
Dukedom. Board, c. a shilling. Bordarij, Borduanni, Bores, Husbandmen,
Cottagers. Bordel, I. Brothel-house. Bordagium, the same as Bordland, kept in
the hand of Lords for maintenance of their board. Bordue, a circumference drawn
about the Arms. Boreal, -an; belonging to Boreas, g. North Wind. Borith, an
herb used by Fullers. Born* o. burnish. Borrel, o. head-geer; also rude, plain.
Borrow, o. pledge or surety. Borysthenes, a Scythian River. Bosbage, a place
full of Trees. also the Mast of Trees. Boscaria, Wood-houses, or Ox-houses.
Boscus, Bois, f. Wood. Bosinnus, a rude wind-instrument. Boscob^l, f. Fair
Wood. Bosenham, Boseham, a Town in Sussex. Bosphorus, the name of two Seas over
which Jupiter, (like a Bull) carried Europa. Botachide, a place in Arcadia.
Botachus, Lycurgus's Nephew. Botanical, g. belonging to Herbs. Botanom^ncy, g.
herb-divining. Botargo, a kind of Saussage. Bote, o. bitt. Bothna, Buthna, Sc.
a Park. Botha, a Booth. Botiler, f. Butler. Botin, f. a buskin. Botolph, Sa.
helpful. Bottle, No. house. Bottomry, Bottomary, Bottomage, borrowing Money on
the Ship. Bottom, o. blossom, bud. Boughre^, -relet, a Field-Faulcon. Bovata
terrae, 18 Acres. Boveria, an Ox-stall. Bovicide, l. a Butcher. Bouched him, o.
stopped his mouth. Bouds, Weevils [in Malt] Nf. Bouffe, o. an Elegant
expression of the Noise of of belching. Bougerons, f. buggering. Bovilla, a
Town near Rome. Bovill^n, f. a boiled hotch-potch of several ingredients.
Boulter, seive. Boun, o. ready, bound. Boun and unboun, dress and undress.
Bounsing cheat, c. a botle. Bouchier, Bower, an ancient Family in Essex. Boure,
o. bedchamber. Bourd, f. Jest. Bourgeon, f. bud. Bourges, f. a free Denison.
Bourn, ^. the head of a spring Bourreou, f. Executioner. Bourrough, a Town
incorporate, not a City. Bourrough-English, or Burgh-English, lands coming (by
Custom) to the youngest Son or Brother. Bourser, -sier, Bouser, g. the
purse-bearer or Treasurer. Bout, Che. without [doors, etc.] Boutefeu, f.
Incendiary, makebate. Bow, an instrument to take the height of any thing. Bow,
[of a Ship,] the forepart. Bow-bearer, an under-Officer in a Forest. Bowet,
B^we^s, a young hawk beginning to clamber on the boughs. Bowge [of Court,] a
Princes bounty above the ordinary allowance, also a rope on the outside middle
of the Sail, keeping it close to the wind. Bouche or Budge of Court, id. Bowk,
body, belly, stomach, li. Bowl, a round thing at the head of a Mast to stand
in. Bown, swelled, Nf. Bowr, the anchor commonly carried at the bow. Bowse,
pull [the tackle] all together. Boxa, Boza, a kind of Turky-drink. Boy, Booy,
Buoy, Sp. a swimming thing tied to the anchor to give notice where it is.
Boyar, a title of Nobility in Russia. Brabant, -tia, is parted from Flunders by
the River Schelde. Braccata Gallia, Provence in France. Brace, f. that which
fastens beams in building, and joins words in Printing; a Cable of a Ship, also
a couple [of hares, etc.] Bracer, the thing laced on the Archers arm. Brachial,
l. belonging to the ^rm. Brachygraphy, g. short-writing Brachylogy, g. short
speech. Bradford, (q. Broadford,) in Wilts. Brackets, Braggets, pieces
supporting the Ships Gallery. Brackmans, Bramans, Indian Philosophers feeding
on herbs. Braggadocio, a bragging fellow. Bragget, Welsh drink of honey, etc.
Braid Albin, the Highlands of Scotland. Braied, o. blew [with a trumpet, etc.]
Brake, snafle for horses; handle of the Ships pump; Female fern, also a
flax-dressing-instrument. Brailes, small ropes belonging to the mizzen and
main-top-sail, to put them into a fighting posture. Brainford, Brentford, from
Brent, a River falling into the Thames there. Brancher, as Bowet. Brand-goose,
a water fowl less than a Goose. Brand-iron, Trevet [to set a pot on.] Brandish,
make to shine [with gentle moving.] Brandrith, a rail about a wells mouth; also
as Brand-iron. Brandy, d. burnt [wine,] distilled from wine lees. Brankursin,
bears-foot. Branonium, Wigornia, Worcester Brant, Burgander, Barnacle,
Soland-goose. Brasiator, a Brewer. Brasium, Malt. Brasses, ropes for squaring
and traversing the yards. Brassets, f. armor for the Arms. Brast, o. break.
Brat, o. a ragg, also a course apron, Lin. Brava, an Armerican Isle where the
Sea is thought to be deepest. Bravado, Sp. a daring. Braughwham, La. Cheese,
Eggs, clap-bread and Butter boild together. Braunce, o. branch. Bravy, Brave,
o. a reward [to the Conqueror.] Brawdery, o. engraven work. Brawl, s. a kind
of dance. Brayd, o. break out. Brayed, awoke, arose, took. Brade or breid of,
sc. to be like [in conditions.] Bread, o. appearance. Bread of treet or trite,
boulted or course Bread. Break, Nf. Land plowed the first year after lying
fallow. Breaming, Brooming, washing a Ship burning her filth off [with reeds or
broom.] Breche, o. breeches. Breck, o. a bruise* breach. Breda, a City [of the
Prince of Orange,] in the Low Countries* Bread, Braide, o. breadth; abroad;
also to make broad. Bredgen, o. abridge. Bree, frighten. Breez, fresh gaie of
Wind. Breetch, the aftermost part of a Gun. Breetchings, ropes lashing
Ordinance to the Ship-side. Brehon, an Irish Judge. Breme, o. furiously. Bren,
o. bran. Brennus, a Gaulish Captain who took Rome. Brent, o. burnt. Brest-rope,
keeps the yard close to the Mast. Bretful, o. topful. Bretoyse, [the Law] of
the Britains, or Welsh-men Bret, a wholesome Fish. Brevan, strong German Ale.
Breve, a Writ. Brevet, o. a brief, Popes-bull. Brevibus and rotulis liberandis,
a writ to the old Sheriff to deliver up all to the new. Breviary, a short
Collection, also a mass book. Breviloquence, a brief speaking. Brevity, l.
shortness. Brian, f. shrill voice. Briareus, Aeg^eon, a Giant with an hundred
hands. Bricole* f. brickwall, a side-broke at Tennis. Bricols, battering
engines. Brid, o. bird. Bridgume, o. Bridegroom. Bridg-bote, Brig-bote, Bruck-,
Brug-, Brugh-bote, [exemption from] contribution toward mending of Bridges.
Brichoe, Che. Brittle. Bricken, bridle up the head. Bridgenorth (for Burgmorf)
a Town in Shropshire. Brie, Brieze, horse-fly, gad-bee Brief, as Breve, also
two full times (in Music.) Briewr, as Bruyere. Brigd, f. debate. Brigade, -do,
f. three squadrons of Soldiers, 1512 men. Brigand, f. a robber, a footman
serving with a Brigandine, a Coat of male^ also as Brigantine a swift pinnace.
Brigantes, the Northern people of England. Brigidians, Friars and Nuns of the
Order of Brigidia, Brigit, Bride, a Princess of Swedeland, also an Irish Saint.
Brike, o. narrow, strait. Brillant, f. glittering. Brime, bring, Sf.
Bringer-up, the last man of a file. Brinne, o. burn. Brione, wild-vine.
Briseis, Achilles's Mistress. Brite, [the hops] shatter. Britannia, This Island
of England, Wales and Scotland, from Brith, Br. painted. Bristol, -ow, a City
partly in Sommerset, and partly in Gloucestershire. Britomartis, a Cretan-Lady
Inventress of hunting-nets. Britonner, o. a bragger, boaster. Brize, as Breez.
Broach, the next start above the beam-antler of a stag. Brocado, Sp. cloth mixed
with Gold or Silver Broccarij, sc. Mediators in any business. Brochity,
crookedness [of Teeth.] Brochet, pricket, spitt^r, a red Deer two years old
Broch, Brooch, o. a picked ornament [of Gold,] Brock, Badger. Brocking, o.
throbbing. Brode-half-penny* Board-, Bort-h. Custom for setting up boards in a
market or fair. Broke, o. keep safe. Brokage, Broc-, the hire or trade of a
Broker, Breaker of prices between buyer and seller; also a seller of old broken
wares. Brocker, Blocker, Brogger, sc. the same. Broll, o. part, piece.
Bronch^chele, g. a great round swelling in the throat. Bronchiae, g. branches
of the windpipe dispersed through the lungs. Bronde, o. a fury. Brontes* one
of the Cyclops. Brooklime, a Physical herb. Broom-rape, a plant at the root of
broom, with a root like a Turnip. Brotel, brutel, o. britle, brickle.
Brothel-house, Bawdy House. Brothelry, Whoredom. Brouch, o. a jewel: see Broch.
Brow-antler, the start between the stags head and Beam-antler. Browded, o.
imbroidered. Browk, broke, bruke, o. to use or enjoy. Brownists, rigid
Independents. Browster, sc. Brewer. Browze, feed on shrubs, etc. Brutte, Ss.
the same. Bruges, a City in Flanders. Bruarts, Che. [hat] brims. Bruit, f. a
report. Brunn, o. Fountain. Bruyere, Brujere, f. heath. Brumal, l. Winter-like.
Bruma, l. the shortest day. Brundusium, a Town in Italy. Brush, c. run away.
Brus^, Ten, a tawny-colour (in Heraldry.) Brike, o. straight, narrow. Brymme,
(to go to br.) when a swine desires copulation. Buer, a Gnat. Bubo, c. Pox.
Bubo, a large fiery pimple. Bubulcitate, l. play the Neatherd. Buccinate, l.
sound a trumpet. Buccellation, l. dividing into gobbets. Bucculent, l.
wide-mouthed. Bucentoro, the Venetian Gally wherein they espouse the Sea on
holy Thursdays. Bucephala, a Town built in honor of Bucephalus, g. (bull's
head) Alexanders horse. Buck, Ss. breast, also body. See Bowk. Buckaneers, the
rude rabble in Jamaica. Buckeldians, a kind of Anabaptist-hereticks. Bu^kerels,
an old play among London-boys (forgotten.) Buck-hurst, a Baron-title of the
Sackvils. Buckingham, so called from Bucken, sa. Beeches. Bucks-horn, an herb
with small jagged leaves. Buck-stal, a large Deer-net. Buck-wheat, Beech-corn,
French-wheat, Brank, Crap. Bucolicks, g. pastoral songs. Bud, Sf. a calf of the
first year weaned. Buda, Offen in Hungary. Budaris, Heidelbergh in Germany.
Budg, Lambs-fur, also f. to stir or move, also c. he that slips in to steal
cloaks, etc. Budg-barrel, a little tin powder-barrel. Buffle, wild-ox. Bughar,
c. a dog. Bugle, a wound-herb. Buglosse, g. a Cordial herb. Bulbous, belonging
to Bulbe, l. a round root. Buffo^n, f. Jester. Bulgaria, a Country by Thrace.
Bulimy, bou-, dog-hunger. Bulk-head, a partition of boards in a ship-room. Bulk
and file, c. one jostles you while the other picks your pocket. Bull, a round
hollow jewel; also the Popes mandate. Bullen, hemp stalks pilled. Bull-head, a
kind of Fish. Bullenger, a kind of boat. Bullimong, Es. Oats, pease and vetches
mixed. Bultel, refuse of bulted meal; also the bulting or boulting bag. Bullion,
Money in the mass or billet; also the place where it is tried and changed.
Bully-Rock, Hector, Bravo. Bumbeth, sounds, o. Bummed, o. tasted or desired.
Bundles, Records of Chancery, Bung, c. purse. Bunt, the hollowness allowed in
making sails. Bunt [-lines] to trise up the bunt of the sails. Buquan, part of
South- Scotland. Burbrech, Borg-, Burgh-, sa. [a being quit of] trespasses
against the peace. Burcheta, a kind of gun. Burdegala, Bourdeaux in France.
Burden, f. a deep base; the humming of bees, also a pilgrims staff. Burel, fine
glass. Burford, a Town in Oxfordshire. Burghware (q. Burgi vir) a Burgess, or
Citizen. Burgage, a tenure [for a certain yearly rent] of Burghers, Men of
Cities and Burrowes. Burganet, f. an helmet. Burgeon, grow big about.
Burgh-Grave, a German Count of a Castle, etc. Burglary, f. Fellonious stealing
into a house. Burgundia, -die, in France. Burjon, f. a bud or sprought [of a
vine.] Burled, o. armed, Burlesque, f. in a drolling way. Burlet, f. a Coife.
Burly-brand, o. a great sword, also great fury. Burnet, o. Woollen, also a
hood. Burned, o. for burnished. Burnish, I. polish, also Hearts spreading their
horns. Bur-pump, with a long staff only, and a bur at the end. Burr, the roll
of horn next the Hearts head. Burras-pipe, to keep corroding pouders in.
Bursholder, Burrow-holder, Headborough. Busca, -- cus, under-wood, brush-.
Busk, o. bush; also to shut up. Buscum ducis, He^tog^nbush in Brabant.
Buscurles, Buze-, Seamen. Bush, a Foxes tail. Busiris, a Tyrant slain by
Hercules. Buskin, a kind of boot. Busones, Buzones [Comitatus] Justices.
Bustard, Bistard, a great sluggish bird. But, sc. without. But my lest, o.
Except I list. Butchers broom, a shrub like Myrtle (but prickly.) But-end, the
fore-end of ships. But-heads, the ends of planks. Buthus, a wrestler that ate
an ox every day. Butlerage, impost on wines paid the Kings butler. Buttens,
Burls, the first puttings up of a stags head. Butterburre, pestilent wort.
Butterwort, Yorkshire-Sanicle. Buttington, a Welsh Town. Buttress, a prop
supporting the but-end of a building. Buttock, the ships breadth right-a-stern,
from the tuck upwards. Butyrum Saturni, the sweetest liquor of Lead.
Buxiferous, l. box-bearing. Buxom, Bucsom, (D. boogs^em) pliant, obedient; also
blithe, merry. Buxioning, (for Burjoning) budding. Buzzar, a Marketplace among
the Persians. Buzzard, a large Kite. Bye, o. habitation. Bydding, o. abiding.
Byblus, a Town of Phaenicia. Byg, Bigg, o. build. Byker, o. a fray. By-* Byr-,
Bur-laws, determined by persons elected by common consent of Neighbors. Bym^,
for By me. Byndon, a Town in Dorset. Byraft, bereft, o. Byram, The Turks
Carneval or Shrovetide. Byramlick, a Turkish present like our New-years-gift.
By-spel, sa. Proverb. Byssine, g. made of silk. Bytrent, o. catches about.
Byw^pen, Bywoopen, o. made senseless. Byzantium, Nova Roma, Constantinople in
Thrace. Byzantine, see Besant.
C
CAas, f. Chance. Cab, h. three pints. Caback, a Russian Inn or
Victualling-house. Cabades, King of Persia. Cabal, l. a [jade] horse.
Cabalistick, belonging to Cabal* -la, h. (receiving) Jewish tradition; their
secret science of expounding divine mysteries; also a secret Council. Cabalist,
one skilled therein. Cabaline [fountain,] of the Muses. Cabanne, f. a Tilt-boat.
Cabane, Cabin, a Cottage; also a little room in a ship. Cabern, the same.
Cabbage, that part of the Deers head where the horns are planted. Cablish,
Brush-wood. Cabos'd sp. having the head cut off close to the Shoulder. Cabura,
a fountain of Mesopotamia where Juno used to wash. Caburn, small yarn-line, to
bind Cables with^l. Cacams, Jewish Doctors. Cacafuego, -fogo, sp. shite-fire.
Cacao, an Indian tree, also the fruit, and kernel thereof. Cachectick, g.
having a Cachexy, ill disposition of body. Cachinnation, l. loud Laughter.
Cacique, Casique, an Indian King. Cackling-cheat, c. a Chicken. Cackling-farts,
c. Eggs. Cackrel, a kind of fish. Cacochymy, g. ill juice through bad
digestion. Cacodemon, g. evil spirit. Cacography, g. ill-writing. Cacology, g.
ill language. Cacophony, g. ill sound or pronunciation. Cacosynthet^n, g. a bad
composition of words. Cacozelous, g. ill affected. Cacuminate, l. make sharp at
the top. Cacus, an Italian Shepherd slain by Hercules for stealing his Oxen,
drawing them backward into his Cave. Cadaverous, l. like or full of Carcasses.
Cadbait-fly, Caddis, Cadworm, a bait for trouts, etc. Cadbury, a Town in
Somerset. Cade, l. a Pipe, two hogsheads; of Herrings, 500. of Sprats, 1000.
also as Caddee, a. Lord* Magistrate. Caddow, Nf. a Jack-daw. Cad^-lamb, brought
up by hand. Cadence, -cy, l. a falling; also prose. Caden^ [houses] are the 3d
6th 8th and 12th houses [of a Scheme.] Cadet f. a Younger Brother. Cadge, on
which they bring hawks to sell. Cadier Arthur, King Arthurs Chair, the top of a
Hill in Brecknockshire. Cadis, Cadiz, Cales, Calis-Malis, in Spain. Cadmine,
belonging to Cadmia, lapis Calaminaris, Brass-oar. Cadmus, Son of Agenor,
Brother of Europa, and founder of Thebes, whither he brought the Greek letters
from Phaenicia. Cadrou, Cadzou, a Barony in Scotland. Caducean, belonging to
Caduce, l. Mercury's snaky staff, wherewith he killed or made alive; also the
Roman Heralds staff, a sign of peace. Caduciferous, carrying the same. Caecity,
l. blindness. Caelibat, l. a single life. Caeneus, an invulnerable man,
transformed from Caenis, a Thessalian Virgin ravished by Neptune. Caer, br. a
City. Caercaradoc, a hill in Shropshire, so called from Caratacus, a British
King. Caerdiff, a Town in Glamorganshire. Caerfuse, Caersus^, a Town in
Montgomeryshire. Caermarden, Maridunum, the birthplace of Merlin. Caernarvon,
the birthplace of King Edward 2. built by King Edward. 1. where the Princes of
Wales kept their Chancery, Exchequer and Courts of Justice. Caesar, Keisar,
Czar, Emperor. Caesura, making a short syllable (after a complete foot) long.
Caeyx, as Alcyon, or Halcyon. Cageole, f. to prate much to little purpose, also
to inve^gle one with fair words. Cajole, the same. Cainsham, Canes-, a Town in
Sommerset. Cainsham smoke, a man's weeping when beat by his Wife. Cair, Cairo,
Grand Cairo Cairus, Alcairus, Bab^lon Aegyptia a great City of Egypt.
Caishoberry, a great house by Watf^rd in Hertfordshire. Caitive, I. wretched,
wicked. Caitisned, o. chained. Calaber, a kind of Squirril. Calabria, part of
Italy. Calaen, an East-Indian mineral. Calamary, Cuttle-fish. Calamina, as
Cadmia. Calamint, l. the herb Mountain mint; also a green Frog. Calamist, a
Player upon Calamus, l. a reed. Calamus Aromaticus, a Physical sweet cane.
Calamity. l. misery. Calamize, to pipe. Cala peregrinorum, Tartar. Calangium, a
challenge, or claim. Calasticks, purging Ointments. Calatravo, in Spain.
Calcanthous, belonging to Calcanth, Vitriol. Calcar, l. a spur, also a
calcining furnace. Calcation, l. treading. Calccate, l. to shoe. Calcedon,
-ny, a precious stone, also a (...) in a Ruby, etc. Calcetum, -eata, a causey
or Causway, (Chalky or flinty.) Calc^ya, Casea, Calsetum, and Calceis, Caucies,
the same. Calchas, seeing a Serpent devour 10 young Sparrows, prophesied that
Troy, should be taken the tenth year. Calcine, -nate, -nize* l. reduce metals
to a calx or crumbling substance. Calcitrate, l. kick. Calcule, I. an
accounting, also a Chesman or Counter. Calculosity, l. fullness of stones or
Counters. Calcent, a great Mart Town of India. Caleb, h. dog, or hearty.
Caledonian, belonging to Caledonia, Calyd-, Scotland. Calefactive, l. causing
Calefaction* l. a warming. Calefie, to heat. Calendar, l. Almanac. Calender,
to set a glo^s upon [Clo^h.] Calends, l. the first day of every month. Calent,
l. hot or warm. Calenture, sp. heat; also a burning Fever. Calewise, o. warmly.
Caletum, Calis in France. Caliburn, Prince Arthurs sword. Calico, stuff that
comes from Calicut, a Country in India. Calid, l. hot, also fierce. Calidity,
l. heat. Caliduct, l* a stove. Califactory, l. the warming room [in a
Monastery.] Caligate, l. one wearing stockings. Caligate Soldier, a common
Soldier, also a faint hearted Coward. Caliginous, dim. Caligation, l. dimness.
Caligula, the 4th. Emperor of Rome. Caliph, a Persian King or Emperor.
Calisto, one of Diana's Nymphs, corrupted by Jupiter and turned out of her
train Caliver, Call-, a small Sea-gun. Calked, o. cast out, or (rather) up.
Calk, [the Ship,] beat in Okum, between every plank. Call, c. a Cloak. Call,
o. bravery. Callent, -lid, l. Crafty. Callidity, l. subtilty. Calligraphy, g.
fair writing. Calliope, one of the nine Muses. Callipolis, one of the Aegaean
Islands called Cyclades. Callirrhoe, her 30 suitors having killed her Father
Phocus, (King of Baeotia) were burnt to death. Callosity, hardness or thickness
of skin. Callous* l. hard, brawny. Calot, f. a cap and border, also as Callot,
sa. a wanton woman Callow, downy, unfledged, not feathered. Calour, l. heat.
Calpe, a Spanish hill, one of Hercules pillars. Calsening, o. calcining.
Calsounds, a kind of Turkish linen drawers. Caltropes, Calthrops, Sa. four
square-Iron pricks to cast in the enemies way. Calvinistical, belonging to
Calvinist, one that follows Calvin, a Geneva-Reformer Calvity, l. baldness.
Calumniatour, l. one alleging faults that were never committed. Calumnious,
full of cavils, or false accusations. Calydonian, Scottish. Camail, f. a hood
for wet weather, also a Bishops purple ornament worn over the Rochet. Camerina,
a Lake in Sicily. Cambel, a famous Castle of Argile in Scotland. Cambering, the
deck of a Ship* lies cambering, when it is higher in the middle than at either
end. Camlio, sp. an Exchange. Cambser, a Banker, Cambles, a Lydian King who
devoured his own Wife. Cambren, Br. a crooked stick. [to dress a sheep on,
etc.] Cambrian, belonging to Cambria, Wales. Cambridge, built on the River Came,
reported to be built by Cantaber, a Spaniard 375 years before Christ.
Cameletto, a stuff partly silk and partly Camels hair. Camelford, a Town in
Cornwall. Camelot, a Scotch Town. Cameline, of Chamlet. Camels-hay, a kind of
sweet smelling rush brought out of the Eastern Countries. Cambyses, King of
Persia who added Egypt to his Dominions. Cameracum, Cambray, a City of the
Low Countries. Cambrick, fine Linen Cloth coming from thence. Camelionize, to
play the Cam^lion, a beast like a Lizard, that lives by the air, and often
changes color. Camelopardal, half-camel and half panther. Cameral, l.
belonging to a chamber or vault. Camerade, sp. a Cabin or Chamber-fellow.
Camerated, l. vaulted, arched. Camestres, a syllogism who is first proposition
is an universal affirmative, the other universal negatives. Camisado, sp. a
sudden assault or surprise, also a shirt put over their arms. Camised, o.
Crooked. Cammock, Rest-harrow. Camaenae, l. the Muses. Camois, br. Crooked.
Campaine, -agne, f. plain field, also an armies expedition or taking the field.
Campania, Terra del Lavoro in Italy. Campden-broad, a Town in Glocestershire.
Campernulphs, Champernouns* an ancient family of Cornwall. Campestral, l.
belonging to the Champain, or plain fields. Camphire, l. a drug found on the
Indian shore, by some a gum, by others a mineral. Campions, a kind of Lychnis
or Batchelors buttons. Campsor, as Cambsor. Campus lapideus, a field in France,
where Hercules (with a shower of stones sent from Jupiter) killed 2 Giants.
Campus Martius, Mars's field by Rome, for exercise and popular assemblies.
Campus sceleratus, where the incontinent Vestal Nuns were buried alive.
Camolodunum, Camul-, Colchester or Maldon in Essex. Camulus, Mars. Canaan, h. a
Merchant Canace, Daughter of Aeolus, with child by her own Brother. Canachus, a
fountain near Naupli^, where Juno used to bath, to recover her Virginity.
Canacus, a Spanish hill with a bottomless* well on the top. Canakin, c. the
plague. Canary, belonging to Canariae, the Canary or fortunate Islands in the
Adriatic Sea. Cancel, l. to raze or blot out. Canceline, o. Chamlet. Cancer,
l. a Crab, one of the 12 Zodiack-signs, also a hard and rough swelling.
Candefy, l. whiten. Candia, Creet, Crete, a Mediterranean Isle where Jupiter
was born. Candid, l. white, fair, sincere. Candida Casa, Witherd in Scotland.
Candidate, l. one that stands for any place or Office. Candiope, being ravished
by her brother Theodotion brought forth Hippolagus. Candlemass, Purification of
the Virgin Mary, Feb. 2. Candor, l. whiteness, also sincerity and ingenuity.
Canhooks* hooks at the end of ropes, for hoysing things in or out of a ship.
Cankdorte, o. woeful case. Canken, for Cauken, f. to tread [the hen.] Canibals,
Indians feeding on Man's flesh. Canicular, belonging to Canicula, the little
dog star. Canine, l. dog-like. Canitude, l. hoariness, Cank, c. dumb. Cannae, a
Town in Italy, where Hannibal beat the Romans. Cannel-, or Canel-bone, the neck
or throat-bone. Cannister, a Coopers instrument in wracking of wine. Canonical,
according to Canon, g. a Ruler, also a Rule or [Church-] law, also one that
enjoyes a living in a Cathedral Church. Canonist, a professor of the
Canon Law. Canonium, Chelmerford, Chemford, on the River Chelmer in Essex.
Canonize, to examine by rule, also to register for a Saint. Canopus, a City of
Egypt, also the bright star in Argo. Canorous, l. loud, shrill. Canor, Melody,
sweet singing. Canow, an Indian boat. Cant, Che. [to grow] strong and lusty.
Cantabrians, People of Cantabria, Biscay, Guip^scoa, part of Spain Cantabrize,
to follow the fashions of [ Cantabria, or rather] Cantabrigia, Cambridge.
Cantae, an ancient people of Ross in Scotland. Cantation* l. a singing, also an
enchanting. Cantel, lump, or heap. Canterbury* the old royal Seat of the
K^ntish Kings. Cantharides, g. green venomous Spanish flies. Canticle, l. Song.
Cantilene, l. a song or tale. Canting-coines, short pieces of wood with sharp
edges to lie between Casks. Canting, the Language of Rogues and Beggars.
Cantium, Kent. Cantlow, an ancient family in Cornwall. Canto, I. a division in
an Heroic poem, also as Cantor, a corner, also a division of the Country of
Suitzerland. Cantonize, to divide into Cantons. Cantor, l. a singer or Charmer.
Cantreds, br. the hundreds into which their Countries are divided, or rather
Cantress, br. the same. Cantus, l. the mean or Counter-tenour in Music.
Cantyre, (in Irish, Lands-head) part of South- Scotland. Canvas, to fifth [a
business.] Cana, -number, S^. a duty paid to Bishops [or other Lords.] Canute,
first English Monarch of the Danish blood, because the water would not obey him
sitting by the Seaside, he would never after wear his Crown. Canzonet, I. Song,
Sonnet. Cap, a square piece put over the head of a mast, to receive into it a
topmast or flag-staff. Cap of maintenance, sent from Pope Julius to Henry 8.
and is still born before the King at great solemnities. Capacitate, l. to put
one into a Capacity, Capability, a being Capable, able or fit to do or suffer
any thing. Cap-a-pe, from head to foot. Caparasson, -rison, f. horse-trappings
or furniture. Capcastles, among streets and villages, are the same as
Metropoles among Cities. Cape, Sp. promontory, neck of Land running into the
Sea. Capel, Chapel, also a horse. Caperate, l. frown. Capharnaits, those of
Capharnaum, Caper-, in Palestine, who first doubted of the mystery of the
blessed Sacrament. Capias [ad respondendum,] a writ before judgment requiring
personal appearance. Capias [ad faciendum, pro fine, etc.] Writs of execution.
Capillary, l. hairy. Capillation, l. hairiness, or causing hair to grow.
Capillature, l. a bush of hair; also a frizling of the hair. Cape, a writ
touching plea of land or tenements. Cape magnum or Grand Cape, lies before
appearance. Cape parvum or petit Cape, upon default afterward. Capirotade, a
compound stewed minced meat. Capistrate, l. to m^zzel. Capitation, l.
poll-money. Capite, a holding of lands immediately of the King. Capital, l.
belonging to the head; Chief: also deadly or deserv^ng death. Capitolinus,
belonging to the Capitol, an ancient Citadel of Rome, in digging whose
foundation they found a man's head. Capitulate, l. to make Articles of
agreement. Capnitis, a kind of Cadmi^ Capnomancy, g. divination by observing
the Altar-smoak. Capon-fashion, as Bobtail in the first sense. Capo, one of the
Capi, 3. chief Venetian Officers. Capo, Che. a working horse. Capou^hins,
Capucines, Friars instituted by Mat. Basci of Ancona, without shirt or
breeches; from Capouche, f. the Cowl or hood they used to wear Cappadine, silk
whereof the shag of a rug is made. Cappadocia* part of Asia. Capriccio, I.
-icho, Sp. the first draught or invention of a thing; also a fantastical
humor. Capricious, -chious, whimsical, giddy-brain'd. Capricorn, l. a goat,
one of the Zodiack-signs. Caprification, l. the dressing of wild-vines or
figtrees. Caprifoile, l. woodbine, honey-suckle. Capriole, f. a Caper in
dancing, also the Goat-leap on hors-back. Capsquares, a broad irons covering
the truncions of a great gun. Capstand, -- stern, a wind-beam or draw-beam [in
a ship.] Capsulary, belonging to Capsula, l. a small Chest. Capsulated, locked up
therein. Captation, l. a Catching-at. Caption, a Certificate of a Commission
executed. Captious, l. apt to take exceptions, quarrelsome. Captivate, l. take
prisoner. Captivity* l. bondage. Capture, l. the taking a prey; also an Arrest
or Seizure. Capuched, f. hooded. Capuchin, as Capouchin. Car, o. a pool.
Car-sick, ^. a kennel. Caracol, f. Soldiers easting themselves into a ring.
Caradoc, Br. Dearly beloved. Caranna, a West-Indy Gum good for the toothache.
Caratux, a wise (yet contemptible) Counselor to Saladine the Turk. Caravan,
f. a Convoy of Soldiers, also a kind of wagon. Caravel, Sp. a swift light round
vessel. Carawaies, an herb whose leaves resemble those of Carrets.
Carbantorigum, Caerlaverock, a very strong Town in Scotland. Carbine, Carab-, a
petronel or short gun, also an horsman that serves therewith. Carbonado, I. a
gash in the flesh; also a piece of flesh broild on the Coals. Carbuncle, l. a
precious stone, also a fiery botch or sore. Carcanet, a rich chain to wear
about the neck. Carcedony, a precious stone. Carcedon, Carthage. Carcellage,
prison-fees. Carceral, belonging to a prison. Cardamom^, Grain of paradise, a
spicy seed brought from the Indies. Card, Chart, Sea-map. Cardiaca, g. the
Liver-vein. Cardia^al, g. Cordial, belonging to the heart. Cardiacl^, Cord-, o.
the passion of the heart. Ca^diac line, the heart-line or line of Life [on the
hand.] Cardigan, A^ertivy (the river Tivy's mouth) in Wales. Cardinal, l.
(belonging to a hinge) chief, principal; also the 70 chief Roman Churchmen,
which College chooses one for pope. Cardinal Numbers, One, Two, etc. Cardinals
Flower, a kind of American Throatwort or Bel-flower, very rare. Cardiogmos, g.
heart-burning. Cardiognostick, g. knower of the heart, viz. God. Cardones, an
Indian healing herb. Cardoon, Cha-, f. a salad-plant like Artichoke. Carduus
benedictus, an herb called Blessed thistle. Care-cloth, a fine linen cloth laid
over the new married couple kneeling, till Mass was ended. Carecks, Carectes,
o. Marks. Carecta, -ata, a Cart or Cart-load (in law.) Caretarius, a Carter.
Careening, trimming of the Ship [under water.] Carefax, Carefox, Carfax, Oxford
Marketplace, where 4 ways meet. Carects, o. Marks. Caresbroke, Whitgaraburgh
(Whitgars town) in the Isle of Wight. Caresse, f. a making much of. Caret, l.
(it wants.) Clavis, a mark directing where to insert any thing omitted, (L).
Carfe, o. cut. Cargaison, -ason* f. the Ships freight. Cargo, the same. Caria,
part of Asia the less. Carine, l. the ships keel. Carinthia, a Country joining
to the Alps on the South. Caristie, It. the same as Carity, l. dearth,
scarcity. Cark, a bundle or load: the 30th part of a Sarplar of wool. Carle,
sa. a clown. Carl-cat, No. a bore-cat. Carlisle, a city in Cumberland. Carlin^
thistle, a plant by which Charles the great kept his army from the Plague.
Carlings, Timbers from one Ship-beam to another. Carling-knees, timbers from
the Ship-sides to the hatches. Carlo Sancto, a W^st-Indy root of pleasant smell
and bitter taste. Carmania, part of Great Asia. Carmasal, -musol, a kind of
Turkish ship. Carmelites, Friars begun at Carmelus, a Town in Syria. Carmenta,
Nicostra^a, an Arcadian Prophetess who first gave the Oracle in verse.
Carminate, l. to card [wool.] Carminative, [medicines] breaking wind. Carmouth,
a Town, in Dorset. Carnage, f. eating of flesh; also the flesh (in hunting)
given to the dogs: also slaughter. Carnalist, one given to Carnality, l.
fleshliness. Carnacion, a raw-flesh color. Carnaval, f. Shrovetide.
Carnel-work, bui^ding of ships with timbers and beams before they plank them.
Carnes, o. stones. Carney, a horse-disease furring their mouths. Carnificine,
l. the place of Execution, also the Office. Carnify, l. cut in pieces, also to
torment. Carnivorous, l. flesh-devouring. Carnogan, br. a kind of wooden dish
or piggin. Carnose, the bale ring in a great gun. Carnosity, l. fleshiness.
Carnous, l. fleshy. Carodunum, Cracovia, the chief City of Poland. Carol, a
Christmass-song. Caros, dullness, heaviness of head [from bad concoction.]
Carotick, [Artery,] issues from the Axillar (in two branches) toward the head.
Carove, a kind of fruit; also the root St. John's bread. Carouse, d. (all out)
drink lustily. Carpathus, the Mediterranean Isle Scarpanto. Carpemeals, a
course kind of our northern cloth. Carpobalsamum, g. the fruit of Balsamum.
Carpocrations, Gnostics, Heretics that denied the Creation and Christ's
Divinity. Carp-stone, found in the chap of a Carp, triangular. Carrack, -rick,
a great Ship. Carrat, the 3d. part of an ounce (of Gold or Silver,) and in
jewels the 192d. part. Carre, o. a wood in a boggy place. Careta, as Carecta.
Carriage, that whereon the Ordnance is mounted. Carrict, -ta, part of South
Scotland. Carriere* f. running of horses full speed; also the place of running.
Cartage, as Cartouche. Cartel, f. a Challenge. Cartesian, belonging to Des-
Carts, the modern famed Philosopher opposing Aristotle. Carthage, the chief
City of Africa, built by Dido. Carthamus, Bastard-Saffron. Catharist, g.
Puritan. Carthismandua, a British Queen who casting off her husband Venusius,
married and Crowned his Armor-bearer Vellocatus. Carthusians, Friars
instituted by Bruno of Cullen, 1101. Cartilagineous, belonging to Cartilage, l.
a gristle. Carucata or Hilda terrae, a Carve, or hide of land, as much as may
be plough'd in a year by one plough. Carucage, such a taxation. Carve, kerve,
Che. to grow four (of Cream.) Caruncle, l. a bit of Flesh [growing out any
where.] Cartouch, f. a roll adorning the Cornish of a pillar; also as
Carthrage, a charge of powder and shot made ready in a Paper. Carvage, a being
quit, when land is taxed by Carves. Carvel, a kind of ship. Casan, the chief
City in Parthia. Casani, Indian bread. Casbine, the chief City in Media.
Casemate, I. loop-hole in a wall, [to shoot through.] Cases, changes in the
endings of words. Case-shot, small shot in a case to shoot from Ordnance. Cash,
ready money. Cashire, f. disband. Casings, dried Cows-dung (for fuel,) Caskets,
small strings in fartheling the Sails. Caspian Sea, or lake, between the
Caspian and Hircanian Mountain, it neither ebbs nor flows. Cassandra, a
Prophetess the Daughter of Priam and Hecuba. Cassan, c. Cheese. Cassation, l.
making void. Cassia, Cassia fistula, a sweet Egyptian reed or shrub. Cassia
lignea, a sweet wood like to Cinnamon. Cassidony, o. as calcedony. Cassiope,
-pea, Cepheus's Daughter placed among the stars. Cassivellaunus, -ibellinus,
the British King conquered by Julius Caesar. Cast the Hawk to the perch that
is, put him upon it. Casting, feathers, etc given the Hawk to cleanse her
gorge. Castaldie, l. stewardship. Castalian, belonging to Castalia, a Nymph,
who flying from Apollo, was turned into a Fountain by Parnassus. Castanets,
snappers [for dancing] like Chestnuts. Castellain, l. the Constable of a Castle.
Caster, Chaster, Cester, Chester, o. a walled Town. Castifical, l. making
chaste. Castigate, l. chastise, punish. Castilian, belonging to Castile, part
of Spain. Castlecomb, a Town in Wiltshire. Castlesteed, o. a fortress or
Bulwark. Castleward, the Compass of Land subject to a Castle, also an
imposition on such as dwell there. Castor and Pollux, Sons of Jupiter (in the
shape of a Swan) by Leda. Castoreum, the Cod of a Castor, l. Beaver.
Castrametation, l. encamping. Castrensian, l. of a camp. Castrated, l. gelt.
Casual, accidental, happening by Casualty, chance. Casu consimili, a writ of
entry granted, where the Tenant does alienate. Casu proviso, where a Tenant in
dower does alien. Casuist, one that writes cases of Conscience. Casule, a
Mass-priests vestment, resembling Christ's purple robe of mocquery. Cat, a piece
of Timber, to trise up the Anchor from the hause to the fore-Castle.
Catabaptists, g. Enemies or abusers of Baptism. Catachrestical, -ick, belonging
to Catachresis, g. (abuse) putting an improper word for a proper one.
Cataclysm, g. Flood. Catadoup, -dupa, as Cataract. Catadrome, g. a kind of
Crane for building, also a Tilt-yard or horse-race. Cataglottism, g. a
thrusting out the Tongue [in kissing.] Catagmatical, belonging to Catagmaticks,
g. Medicines for broken bones. Catagraph, g. the first draught [of a Picture.]
Catallis reddendis, a writ of delivery. Catals, as Chattels. Catal^psy, g.
apprehension, also a brain-distemper. Cataline, -eline, as Catiline.
Cataloguize, to put into a Catalogue, g. a roll or list. Catalonia, part of
Spain. Catamidia^e, to put one to open shame and punishment, for some notorious
offense. Catamite, Catem-, g. Ingle, a boy kept for Sodomy. Catapasms, g. sweet
powders. Cataphor, -ra g. a sleepy distemper in the head. Cataphysick, g.
against nature. Cataplasm, a kind of thick pultis of meal and herbs.
Cataphrygians, Heretics baptizing the dead, forbidding second marriage, etc.
Catapuce, the herb spurge. Catapult, l. as Balista. Cataract, Catarr-, gr a
great fall of waters; a Portcullis; also a distemper in the eyesight.
Caractonium, Catarac Catarrick-bridge, by Richmond. Catarh, g. a Rheum or
distillation of humors from the head, Catastasis, g. the third act of a play.
Catastrophe, g. the conclusion [of a play.] Catch-fly, a flower with clammy
stalks. Catchpoll, Chachepollus, Cacep-, a Sergeant, Bailiff, or any that
arrests upon an action. Catch-land, Nf. uncertain to what parish it belongs,
and tithed by the first comer. Catechetical, -chistical, belonging to
instruction. C^atechumen, g. one that is Catechized, instructed [for the
Communion.] Categorematical, belonging to Categorem, g. the predicated, or
latter part of a proposition. Categorical, belonging to Category, g.
Accusation, also as Predicament. Catenate, l. to chain. Caterlogh, Carlogh,
part of Ireland. Cathaness, Cathness, part of South Scotland. Cathaea, part of
India, where they choose the handsomest man for King. Catharine, g. pure.
Catharians, Heretics, rejecting baptism and original sin. Catharists, a sort
of Manichees. Catharpings, small ropes to keep the shrouds tight and the mast
from rolling. Cathartical, g. purgative. Catharticks, g. all purging medicines.
Cathay, Scythia, Sinarum Regio under the great Cham. Cathedral, g. belonging to
a chair; also the chief [church] in a Bishops See. Cathedratick, 2 s. paid by
the Clergy to the Bishop. Cathedrarious, belonging to a chair or seat.
Cathelaunum, Catal-, Chaalons in France. Catherplugs, small ropes forcing the
shrouds, to ease and secure the Mast. Catheter, g. an instrument to cleanse the
yard of gravel. Cathetus, the perpendicular side of a right-angled triangle.
Catholicism, universality, or the Orthodox faith of the whole Church, called
Catholic, g. universal, also Orthodox, and sometimes (corruptly) Roman
Catholic or Papist. Catholic Majesty, the King of Spain. Catholicon, a
general purging Medicine. Catholisation, the being or becoming a Catholic.
Cathore, -rius, the value of nine kine. Catilinisme, the practice of Catiline,
a famous conspiratour against his own Country [ Rome.] Catini, people of
Cathness. Catkins, winter excrescences in Nut- and Birch-trees. Catling, a
knife used in cutting off any joint. Catmint, an herb. If you set it, Cats will
eat it; If you sow it, Cats cannot know it. Catoblepa, a beast that kills, only
with the fight. Cato, the name of several famous men of Rome. Catonian, -ien,
grave, severe* Catopticks, Professors of the Optics or speculative Art.
Catoptographicks, books treating of Glasses. Catoptrick, belonging to
Catoptron, g. a kind of Optic glass. Catoptromancy, divination by vision in a
glass. Catry, a place to keep Cates, or [dainty] victuals. Cats-tail,
reed-mace, who is top resembles it. Catieuchlani, Cassij, certain Britans under
Cassivellaunus. Cavalcade, f. a riding o^ show on hors-back. Cavalier, f.
-lero, Sp. a brave man [on horseback.] Cavalry, f. the horse [men] in an army.
Cavation, l. hollowing [the ground for Cellerage.] Caucasus, part of the
mountain Taurus, parting Ind^^ from Scythia. Cavea, the triangle in the hollow
of the hand. Caveare, -ri, Ickary, a Russian meat made of several (...).
Caveat, l. a Caution o^ warning. Cavechin, -esan, f* a (...) rein [to lead a
horse in.] Cavern, l. a Cave. Cauf, a chest with holes to keep fish alive in
the water. Cavillation, l. a mocking, also wrangling. Cavity, l. hollowness.
Caulk, as Calk. Cavon, part of Ireland. Caupes, Calpes, sc. a gift given the
Master for maintenance and protection. Cauphe, Coffa, a Turkish drink made of
brown berries. Cauponate, l. sell [wine or victuals.] Caurymaury, D.
Mock-garments. Caurus, North-east-wind. Caursines, Lumbards, Italian Bankers
coming hither 1235. and terming themselves the Popes Merchants. Causam nobis
significes, a writ for the Major to show why he delays, etc. Causal, l.
causing. Causality, a being the cause; also as Causation, l. an excusing, or
alleging of a cause. Causidick, pleader of Causes, Trials, actions. Caustic,
g. searing, burning. Cautele, l. a taking heed. Cauterism, g. a searing.
Cautery, g. a searing iron. Cauterize, to fear. Cautione admittenda, a writ
against the Bishop, holding an excommunicate person in prison who promises
obedience [under Caution.] Cautionary, l. given in pawn* also as Cautional,
pertaining to Caution, pledge, instruction, wariness. Cawston, a Town in
Norfolk. Cautor, l. he that foresees or bewareth. Caya, Sa. a Kay, Key, or
Water-lock. Cayer, a quire of [written] paper, or part of a written book.
Cazemate, as Casemate. Cazimi, Ar. in the heart of the Sun, when the planet is
not 17 minutes distant. Cebratane, f. a trunk to shoot-clay pellets. Ceca, a
Monastery of Corduba in Spain. Ceci^y* ^. blindness. Cecrops, an Egyptian King
of Athens, he first civilized them and instituted marriage. Cecutiency, l.
purblindness. Cedar, a tall upright African Tree. Cedrosij, barbarous people
clothed in wild beasts skins. Cefala, an African Isle, three miles in length
and one in breadth, a Portugal Kingdom. Celaenae, the Hill in Asia, where
Marsyas, contended with Apollo. Celarent, a Syllogism who is second Proposition
is an universal affirmative, the other universal Negatives. C^lature, Cael-, l.
carving or engraving. Celebate, as Celibate. Celebration, l. a solemnizing or
making famous. Celebrity, l. famousness. Celerer, o. a Butler. Celeripedean, l.
swift-footed. Celerity, l. swiftness. Celestifie, to make Celestial, l.
heavenly. Celestines, an Order of Friars instituted by Pope Celestine the
fifth, 1215. Cellarist, the Butler in a Religious house. Celostomy, g. a
speaking hollow in the mouth. Celsitude, -ty, l. Highness. Celtique, belonging
to the Celtae, Gauls, inhabiting between the Rivers Gar^nne and Sein.
Celtiberia, Arragon in Spain. Celurca, Montros in Scotland. Cementation, a
joining with Cement, Cim-, l. strong mortar Cemetery, Coem- g. a Churchyard.
Cenatical, -tory, l. belonging to Cene, l. a Supper. Cenchris, a green venomous
biting Serpent. Cenosity, l. filthiness. Cenotaph, g. an empty Tomb in honor
of some great person. Cense, a mustering of an Army, also cessing of the
people. Censer, wherein the Priest burns incense. Cension, l. a punishment
inflicted by the Censor, l. a Roman Officer to cesse Estates, reform manners,
etc. Censorious, -ian, belonging thereto. Censure, to judge, give sentence
Centaurs, half men and half horses (of Thessaly.) Centaury, an herb of Mars.
Centenary, l. belonging to Cent, f. an hundred. Center, -tree, l. the middle of
a circle, also wooden things to turn arches upon. Centiloquy, a
hundred-fold-discourse. Centinodie, l. knot-grass. Centoculated [Argus] having
100 eyes. Centon, l. a patched coat. Central, in the Center. Centrie,
Sanctuary, place of Refuge for Malefactors. Centum-viri, l. (a hundred men)
Roman Judges. Centuplicated, made Centuple, a hundred fold. Century, l. the
number of an hundred [years, etc.] Centuriate, l. divided by hundreds.
Centurion, l. Captain over an hundred men. Centurists, four German
Ecclesiastical Historians, dividing their work into Centuries Cephaleonomancy,
g. Divination by a broiled Asses head. Cephalic, [line, plaster, vein, etc.]
g. belonging to the head. Cephalus, shot his jealous wife in a bush (instead of
a wild Beast) and was turned into a stone. Cephas, Sy. (a stone) Peter. Cepi
Corpus, a Sheriffs Return that he has taken the body of such a man. Ceramite,
a precious stone. Cerast, g. a horned serpent. Ceratine, l. made of wax.
Ceratine, g. horned, subtle [arguments.] Cerberus, a three-headed dog Porter
of Hell. Cercel, a Teal. Cerebrosity, l. a being cockbraind, or brainsick.
Cerebrum Jovis, burnt Tartar (in Chemistry.) C^^onists, Heretics holding two
contrary principles (a good and bad God) in all causes. Ceremonious, -ial,
belonging to or full of Ceremonies, l. Customs and Rites [of the Church,] also
complements. Cereal, pertaining to Ceres, Goddess of Agriculture, daughter of
Saturn and Ops, also Corn. Cerinthians, a sort of Heretics that followed one
Cerinthus, who held, that Christ at his second coming would give all carnal
pleasures. C^rna, an Ethiopick Isle. Ceromancy, divination by wax in water.
Ceromatick, g. anointed. Ceroferarie, Candlestick or Candlem^ker, also he that
has the care of the [wax-] Candles. Cerones, ancient inhabitants of Assin-shire
in Scotland. Cer^te, g a kind of searcloth or plaster. Certaminate, l.
contend. Certes, f. certainly, surely. Certificate, a writing to give notice of
any thing done. Certification of Assize of novel d^sseisin, a writ for the
examining of a matter passed by Assize before the Justices. Certificando de
recognitione stapulae, a writ for the Major to certify to the Chancellor the
staple taken before him, when the party refuses to bring it in. Certiorari, a
writ from the Chancery to an inferior Court, to call up the records of a cause
there depending. Cert^mmy, (ce^tain money) Certum^l^tae, head money or common
fine, paid the Lords of Leets. Cervical [Artery] passes from the Neck-bone to
the brain. Cervine, l. belonging* to a^ Heart, also tauny. Ceruleat^d,
sky-colored. Ceruse, -uss, l. white lead. Cesare, as Celarent. Cesariated, l.
wearing long hair. Cesata, -ada, a City of Spain. Cespitate, l. stumble.
Cessant, l. lingering, doing nothing. Cessation, l. a leaving off Cessavit, a
Writ, when Rent or service (according to tenure) is neglected. Cessure, -ser, a
ceasing, giving over or departing from. Cesse, l. leave off, or be idle; also
to rate or tax. Cessibility, aptness to cease. Cession, l. yielding or giving
place to another. Cessor, l. a loiterer. Cest, l. the Brides wedding-girdle
untied (the first night) by the Bridegroom. C'est sans dire, f. to say no more.
Cestui qui vie, (Cestui a vie de qui) he for who is life any Land or Tenement is
granted. Cestui que use (Cestui a l' use de qui) he to who is use another is
Enfeoffed. Cestui qui trust, he that is entrusted for the benefit of another.
Cesura^e, l. cut, notched. Cetacious, -reous, l. belonging to a Whale. Cete, l.
a Company. Ceterach, A^. Finger-ferne, spleen-herb resembling fern. Ceus, Ceos,
an Isle, where all above sixty years old, were bound to poison themselves. Cha,
a China-leaf, who is infusion makes their ordinary drink. C^abane, o. a Cabin.
Chable, as Cable. Chase, f. a Warren. Chachshirs, Turkish breeches reaching
down to the heels. Chafe, gaul, or fret [a rope.] Chaffers, wares, Merchandise.
Chaffewax, a Chancery Officer preparing the wax for writ^, etc. Chaft, c.
beaten, banged. Chagrin, f. care, Melancholy. Chain-shot, two bullets with a
chain between them. Chalcedon, a City of Asia built by the Megarenses.
Chalcographer, g. an ingraver in Brass. Chalcography, g. the Art of engraving.
Chaldaean, belonging to Chaldaea, part of greater Asia, famous for Astrology
and Magic. Chaldese, to tell fortunes. Chaldron, -der, six and thirty bushels
[of Coals.] Chalice, l, the Communion-cup. Challenge, exception against Jurors,
etc. Chalmer, sc. Chamber. Chalmerlan, Chamberlain. Chaloner, the Name of an
ancient Family. Ch^lens, f. blankets, Coverings. Chalybeat, -beat, l. like
steel, [water] wherein steel has been quenched. Chalybes, people of Asia the
less having great store of steel-Mines. Chamber [of a great gun] so far as the
charge reaches. Chamberdekins, Chaumberdakyns, Irish begging Priests.
Chamberer, Chambermaid. Chamberlain [of a City] the chief keeper of the
public Treasury. Chamfered, [stalks] having impressions like a gutter or
crevice. Chamelaea, spurge Olive, a shrubby surculous plant. Chamelot,
Chamolet, Chamblat, a watered stuff mixed with Camel-hair. Chamfer, an
artificial gutter or crevice in a pillar. Chamfred, o. chapt, wrinkled.
Chamois, [leather] made of the skins of a Chamois, -moy, Wild Goat. Champain,
open Fields. Champernouns, as Campernulphs. Champertors, they that use
Champarty, f. the maintaining of a man in his suit, on condition to have part
of the land or goods when recovered. Champion, f. one that fights (or is ready
to fight) in another behalf. Chananaea, Canaan, the holy land. Chancell^ur [of
either University,] the Chief Governor. Chancellor [of the Diocess] the
Bishops official. Chancellor [of the Duchy of Lancaster.] Judge in that
Court. Chancellor [of the Exchequer] appointed to moderate extremities there.
Lord Chancellor, Chief Judge in the Chancery, Court of Equity and Conscience,
moderating the severity of Common law. Chanfron, an Italian Coin about 20
pence. Chantepleur, f. he that sings and weeps both together. Chanter, a
[Church] singer. Chanticleer, f. the Cock, Chaomancy, divination by the air.
Chaonia, the hilly part of Epirus, from Chaon, Priam's son, slain by chance by
his brother Helenus in hunting. Chaos, g. a confused heap. Chaperon, f. a hood;
also the little Scutcheon on the horses forehead. Chapin, sp. a high
Cork-heel'd shoe. Chapelry, is to a Chapel, as a Parish to a Church. Chaplet,
Garland [for the head.] Chapt, c. dry, thirsty. Chapter, -piter, the top or
head of a pillar; also a Company of Cathedral [or Collegiate] Clergy men who
choose the Bishop. Char, a particular business; also a kind of trout.
Character, g. the print of any thing, or mark in shorthand, or any letter;
also as Characterism, a lively description of a person. Characters in printing
are 1. Pearl, 2. Non-pareil, 3. Breviar, 4. Minion, 5. Long primer. 6. Small
pica, 7. Pica, 8. English Roman, 9. Grea primer, 10. Double pica, 11 Small
Canon, 12. Fat Canon 13. Capitals. And most o^ these have a black English
letter answering them. Characteristick -call, belongin thereto; also
distinguishing, also that letter which immediately precedes the varying
termination of any word. Characterize, to describe, also to take in Characters
or shorthand. Charactery, a writing by Characters. C^aratux, as Caratux.
Chardford, Cerdeford, a Tow^ in Hantshire. Charde, a Town in Somerset. Chare, a
fish proper to Winnandermer in Lancashire. Chare [the Cow,] stop or turn her.
Charge, that which fills the field of an Escutcheon: in a ship, the water she
draws. Charientism, g. gracefulness also a pleasant piece of raille^y softening
a taunting expression. Charing Cross, erected by King Edward 1. in memory of
Queen Eleanor who suck^ the poison out of his wound^ made by a Moors envenomed
sword at the holy war. Charites, g. the Graces, Thalia Aglaia, Euph^osyne.
Charivary, f. a public defaming or traducing of another. Charlatanerie, f. a
Cheating or cogging, from Charlatan, a Mountebank Charles, Sa. all Noble.
Charles-wain, stars near the North pole, l^ke 4 wheels and horses drawing them.
Charlock, wild mustard among corn, with a yellow flower* Charmer, one that
uses Charms, bewitching or unbewitching expressions. Charnel-house, where dead
^ones are laid, Charon, the souls ferry-man over the Stygian-lake. Chart, l.
paper, parchment or written deed. Charter House, Chartreuse, a Monastery of the
Chartreux (Carthusian Friars) Suttons Hospital, founded by Sir Walter Marny of
Henault, who served under Edward 3. in the French wars: also a town in
Somerset. Charter-land, holden by Charter, Letters patents of ^riviledges
granted by the King. Charter-party, an Agreement between a Merchant and the
Master of a ship. Chartis reddendis, a writ* against him that refuses to
deliver Charters of feofment entrusted with him. Chartulary, keeper of a
Register, or reckoning book. Charvil, Chervil, an herb. Charybdis, Gorophar^, a
Gulf in the bay of Sicily. Chasmatical, belonging to a Chasm, -ma, g. a wide
gap or opening of the earth or ^ir. Chasteleyn, o. a Gentleman ^r Woman of a
great house. C^astillein^, as Castellaine. Chasuble, f. a kind of Cope worn a^
Mass. Chats, c. the gallows. Chattels, all kind of goods, except freehold.
Chatteswort^, a stately house ^n Darbyshire. Chaufynges, o. heatings.
Chaumound, an ancient and Noble Family in Cornwall. Chau^-mille, sc. a fault
committed in a sudden tumult. Chavish, Ss. a prating noise. Chauncel, the most
sacred ^eparated part of a church or ^emple. Chaunce-medley, killing of a ^an
by chance. Chauncery, as Chancery, Chaundler, a candlestick. Chaun^ry, f. a
church, chapel or quire endowed with maintenance for singers of Divine
service. Chaworth, a noble family of Alesbury. Cheapgild, a restitution made by
the county or hundred for wrong done by one in plegio. Chec^iface, Chechivache,
f. a starved, hungry cow: see Chi^tyface. Check, when a hawk forsakes her
natural flight to follow other Birds that come in view. Check-roll,
Checquer-roll, containing the names of the Kings [or other great persons]
menia^ ^ervants. Cheeks, thick spliced clamps of wood at the top of a mast.
Cheerte, charity, o. Checkie, (in heraldry) consisting of three panes of
checquer-work. Cheffes, o. chevins or else calves. Chegford, a Town in Devon.
Cheigo, a small Barbados animal getting into ones feet and tormenting them.
Chief, as Capite; also a line in the chief or upper part of the Escutcheon
containing one third of it. Chiefage, Chevage, Chivage, -gium, head-service,
money paid by Villains to their Lords. Chief-pledge, Headborough. Chekelaton,
o. a stuff like Motly. Chelandri, -aundre, o. a goldfinch, or a lark
Chelidonius, a precious stone in a swallows belly. Chelidonie, Celandine.
Chelmerford, Chelmesford, Chensford, a Town in Essex. Chelonophagi, people
feeding only upon Tortoises, covering their houses and building ships with the
shells. Chelsey, g. Shelfsey, in Middlesex. Cheltonham, a Town in
Glocestershire. Chemnis a floting Island. Chent, corruptly for Kent. Chentsers,
quit-rent, or chief Rent. Chepe, o. buy. Cherset, as Churchesset. Cherisaunce,
o. comforts. Chersonesus, Cherro-, g. Peninsula, l. a tract of land almost
environed with the Sea. Cherketh, o. Chirpeth. Cherme, o. a company [of birds.]
Chert, Cheort, Chierte, o. love, also jealousy. Chertes, o. merry people.
Cherubim, h. -bin, chapter the plural number of Cherub, h. fullness of knowledge,
the second of the nine orders of Angels. Chervel, Charwel, a River on the East
side of Oxford, famous for dressing of Leather. Ches^ip, hog [louse,] a little
vermin, turning it self round like a pea. Chese, o. chose. Ch^ss-^owls,
Cheese-bowls. C^esten, -tin, f. Chestnut. Chester, as West-chester.
Chesterfield, a Town in Darbyshire. Chestoul, Poppy. Cherenes, two small pieces
with holes, to which the tack is haled down. Cheve, o. to thrive. Cheveril, f.
a wild goat. Cheverel [leather,] see Chervel. Chevesal, -sail, o. a gorget.
Chevice, o. redeem. Chevin, a fish with a great head. Ch^visaunce, -ssance, f.
Composition between Creditor and Debtour. Chevitiae, -iscae, head-lands.
Chevrons, f. the strong rafters meeting at the housetop, also one of the
Ordinaries of a Escutcheon made in fashion of a triangle. Chevronel, half a
Cheveron (in Blazon.) Chibbol, a little Onion. Chiche, chicket, niggardly, f.
Chicanerie, f. wrangling, impertinent perplexing of a cause. Chichester,
Cissancester, in Sussex, built by Cissa, King of the South- Saxons. Chidleigh,
a Town in Devonshire. Chieve, succeed, befall. Childermas, Innocents day.
Childing [plants,] who is offspring exceeds the number of the ordinary kind.
Childwit, power to take a fine of your bondwoman gotten with child without your
consent, also of the reputed Father of a Bastard. Chiliad, g. a thousand.
Chiliarch, g. a Colonel. Chiliasm, Opinion of the Chiliasts, Millenaries,
holding that Christ shall reign personally upon earth a thousand years.
Chilonick, -ian, belonging to Chilo, one of the seven wise men of Greece, who is
sentences were very brief. Chilperick, a worthless King of France. Chiltern,
sa. the hilly, cold and chalky part of Buckinghamshire. Chily, an American
Kingdom. Chimaera, a hill in Lycia* who is top, middle and bottom, had Lions,
Goats and Serpents; also an idle conceit, or a feigned monster with a Lions
head, Goats belly and Dragons tail. Chimerical, imaginary, fantastical.
Chimbe, the uttermost part of a barrel. Chimin, f. the Kings highway.
Chiminage, toll for passage through the Forest. Chimmar, a Bishops black
sleev-less vestment worn between the Gown and Rochet Chimney-money,
hearth-money, 2 s. per annu^ paiable at Michaelm^^ and Lady day. China, a
Kingdom in Asia containing 600 Cities, 2000 walled Towns, and 4000 unwalled.
Chincery, o. (for Chicherie, f. niggardliness. Chinquita, a Colony of Spaniards
in America. Chione, Daughter to Deucalion, with child by Mercury and Phoebus,
brought them at once Antolycus and Philemon. Chios, an Island in the Aegean Sea
between Lesbos and Samos. Chipnam, a Town in Wilts. Chipping-Norton, a Town in
Oxfordshire. Chipping-Sodbury, a Town in Glocestershire. Chiragrical, having
the Chiragra, g. hand-gout. Chirchsed, as Churches sed. Chirking, o. chattering
noise, Chirograph, g, ones own hand writing. Chirographer, he that gives a bill
of his hand; also he that records the fines acknowledged in the Common pleas
Office. Chirologie, g. a discoursing by signs. Chiromancer, one that
professes. Chiromancy, Palmestry, divination by the hand-lines. Chiromantick,
-call, belonging thereto. Chiron, Sagitarius, half man, half horse, begotten by
Saturn in the shape of a horse. Chironomer, g. a teacher or user of
hand-gestures in dancing, pleading, etc. Chirrichote, a word of derision from
the Spanish to the French pronouncing Chirrie, for Kyrie. Surgery, Surgery,
the Art of curing wounds. Chitty-face, Chiche-face, f. a pitiful, wretched,
sneaking fellow. Chivalrie, f. horsmanship, also a tenure by Knights service.
Chivauchie, -ancy, the same. Chit, the seed chits when it shoots the small root
out of the Earth. Chiven, as Chieve. Chiver, o. to shiver. Chives, the small
parts of roots (as of garlic, etc.) by which they are propagated. Chizzel, Ss.
k. bran. Ch^vasme, as Epicertomesis. Chloris, Flora, the Wife of Zephyrus.
Chlorosis, white Jaundies, or green sickness. Chocolate, an Indian drink made
of Cocao. Choenix, g. a measure somewhat more than a wine quart Choldmonley,
Cholm-, and Cholmley, a Town and Family in Cheshire. Cholog^gon, g. purging of
Choler Chondril, a herb like savoury. Chop-Church, changing of one Church for
another. Choral, one of the quire. Chord, subtense, Hypotenuse, a right line
subtending an arch of a circle. Choriambick, g. a foot of four syllables, the
two middlemost short, the other two long. Chorion, the outermost tunicle that
enwraps the birth. Chorister, g. Quirister, singing man or boy. Chorographer,
g. describer of places. Chorography, the description of a Country, Kingdom,
etc. Chorus, a Company of Singers [in a Quire.] Chose, f* a thing. Chowse, to
cozen or deceive. Chiaux, a Turkish messenger has the very same sound.
Chrismatory, a vessel receiving the liquor from the two Olive branches by
golden pipes in the Temple, also a vessel containing the Chrism, g. ointment
used in Popish baptism, and at Kings Coronations. Chrisme, a white cloth put on
the child after baptism, also a child dying before baptism or with in the
month of wearing the Chrisom-cloth. Chrisom-calf, killed before it is a month
old. Christianism, -ity, the profession of the Christian Religion. Christ, g.
anointed. Christopher, g. Christ-carrier. Chromatick, g. keeping its color,
delightful, also as Acroamatick. Chronical [diseases] not acute but lingering.
Chronical or Achr-rising, is when a star rises at Sun setting. Chronicle, g.
History of the Times. Chronodix, g. a Dial. Chronogram, g. a collection of the
numeral letters out of a sentence. Chronography, g. a writing of Chronicles or
Annals. Chronographer, such a writer. Chronology, g. computation of years and
comparing of Histories. Chronologer, a computer of times. Chronologicks, books
treating of Chronology. Chrysites, a kind of Litharge, from its golden color.
Chrysocol, as Borax, Goldsmiths soder. Chrysolite, an Ethiopian gold-coloured
stone. Chrysopoea, g. the Art of making gold. Chrysopolis, Scutary a promontory
of Asia. Chrysoprafe, an Asian greenish precious stone. Chrysostom, -mus, g.
golden mouth, Bishop of Bizantium. Christalline [heaven], the ninth. Crystal,
a precious stone engendered by cold. Chrystallization, a Chemical purifying of
Salts. Chuck, Ss. chunk, a great chip. Churlich, o. plainly, homely. Churl,
Sa. carle, clown. Church-litten, W. Churchyard* Church-choppers, they that
change away one Church for another. Church-reve, a Churchwarden Church-set,
Churchesset, Churchesed, Church-seed* Wheat formerly paid the Church on St.
Martins day. Chylifactory, causing Chylification, the turning of nourishment
into Chyle, g. a milky substance ready to be turned to blood. Chemistry, the
art of dissolving metals, and extracting quintessence. Chymere, as Tabard.
Cibarious, l. belonging to meat. Ciboire, f. a pix, cup* or box, wherein the
Roman host is kept Cibosity, l. store of food. Cicatrice, l. a scar. Cicely, l.
Grey-eyed. Ciceronian, -ical, belong to Cicero, a famous Roman orator and
Philosopher. Cicer^, l. Italian pease. Cicurate, l. to tame. Cid, Sp. valiant
[Captain.] Caide, Ar. Lord, great man. Cidaris, the Persian attire for the
head. Cierges, o. wax-candles. Cileric, Si-, the drapery or leavage wrought
upon the heads of pillars. Cilicia, Caramania, or Turcomania, in lesser Asia.
Cilicious, belonging to Cilice, l. hair-cloth. Cilinder, as Cylinder. Cimbal,
as Cymbal. Cimbick, g. a niggard. Cimbrians, ancient people of Denmark.
Cimeliark, l. a place for vestments or jewels. Cimice, -isse, l. a wood-louse,
a small red insect. Cimiter, as Scymiter. Cimmerian, belonging to the
Cimmerians, Northern people, also Italians (in deep vales) who seldom or never
see the Sun. Cincantenier* f. a Commander of 50, also an Officer in Paris.
Cincture, l. encompassing with a girdle. Cindalism, dust-point, a boyish play.
Cinefaction, a burning to ashes. Cinesy, l. bring to ashes. Cinerulent, l. full
of ashes. Cingulum Veneris, l. (the girdle of Venus) the semicircle from the
space between the forefinger and middle finger to the space between the
ring-finger and little finger. Ciniph, l. a gnat. Cinque-foil* f. five-leaved
grass. Cinnaber, f. a red mineral stone used for a vermilion color. Cinople,
Sinople, rudle. Cinque Ports, f. (five havens) Hastings, Hith, Dover, Rumney
and Sandwich. Cion, Sion, Scion, f. a young shoot from the root or stock of a
tree. Ciperus, a three square rush who is root is odoriferous. Cipher, any
figure or number, especially the naught (o), also as character. Cippus, l. a
pair of stocks. Cipress, fine curled linen. Circe, a witch who turned Ulysses
companions into Swine. Circester, Cirenc^ster, an ancient City of
Gloucestershire. Circinate, l. make a circle with a pair of compasses.
Circination, a circling or turning round. Ciric seat* Circsed, as Churchsed
Cirk, Cirque, l. a round Roman show place. Circensial, belonging thereto, or
the plays there exhibited. Circuit of action, a longer course of proceeding
(in law) than is needful. Circu^tion, -citure, l. a going about. Circular, l.
round, in a circle. Circulation, l. a fetching of a [round] compass to the same
place again, also extraction of waters by limbeck. Circumaggeration, l. a
heaping round about. Circumambient. l. incircling, flowing all about.
Circumambulation, l. a walking about. Circumbilivagination, circular* motion,
or going round. Circumcelliones, -celians, Heretics who (to get them a name)
laid violent hands upon themselves. Circumcession, a general yielding.
Circumcinct, girt about. Circumcision, l. a cutting off the foreskin.
Circumduction, Circund-, l. a leading about, also deceiving. Circumference, l.
a line drawn round a center. Circumferenter, a Mathematical instrument to find
the hour of the Sun. Circumflex, l. bowed about, an accent showing a long or
contracted syllable, thus (^) or thus (^). Circumflexion, a bending about.
Circumfluent, -uous, flowing about. Circumfodient, digging about.
Circumforaneous, l. pitiful, pedling, loitering [about the market.]
Circumfulgent, shining about. Circumfusion, l. a pouring about. Circumgyration,
l. a wheeling round about. Circumjacent, l. lying about. Circumincession, l. a
going round, the reciprocal Being of the Persons of the Trinity in each other.
Circumligation, Circunli-, l. a binding about. Circumlition, l. a daubing or
plaistering about. Circumlocution, l. many words to express one thing, a going
about the bush. Circumplication, l. a folding about. Circumposition, l. laying
[the mould] about [a bough, which is to be taken off.] Circumrotation, l. a
wheeling about. Circumscribed, enclosed. Circumscription, l. a writing about.
Circumscript, drawn abo^^ with a line, also deceived o^ disanulled.
Circumspection, l. looking about, wariness. Circumstantial, belonging to
Circumstance, l. a quality that accompanies any thing, as time, place, etc.
Circumstantiate, to do or describe a thing with its circumstances.
Circumstantibus, [make up the number of the Jurours] of those that stand about.
Circumstation, a standing round about. Circumvallation, l. an enclosing or
trenching about. Circumvection, Circunv-, l. a carrying about. Circumvest,
cloth or garnish round about. Circumvent, l. deceive, overreach. Circumvolate,
l. fly about. Circumvolve, l. roll about. Circumvolution, l. a rolling about,
or wheeling about. Circumdate, -undate, l. to compass about. Circumsonate,
-unsonate, l. to sound round about. Circundolate, chip, or cut about
Circunspi^uous, to be seen on all sides. Circunvagant, wandering about. Cirrous,
belonging to curled hair. Cisalpine, l. on this side the Alps. Cisbury, a Town
in Sussex, from Cissa, 2d. King of the South- Saxons. Cista gratiae, a
Church-coffer where peoples charity was kept Cistercian, as Bernardine. Cistus,
the holy rose, a bramble. Citation, l. quoting, also summoning to appear.
Citharist, l. a Harper. Citharize, to Harp. Citherides, the Muses. Citrial, o.
a Cittern, Ghittern, or a dulcimer. Citrine, -rean, [colour] of a Pom-citron,
golden. Citrination, perfect digestion, or the color proving the Philosophers
stone. Citrull, a kind of cucumber. Citadel, fort, fortress. Cives, leeks.
Civet, Ar. a sweet unctious excrement of some beast. Civick, [Crown] given to
deserving Roman Citizens. Civilize make civil. Clack [wool,] cut off the Sheeps
mark, to make it lighter. Claick-geese, as Barnacles. Claim, challenge.
Clamorous, full of Clamor, l. noise. Clamps, thick Timbers under the beams of
the first Orlop. Clan, sc. tribe, family. Clancular, -rious, l. private,
secret. Clandestine, l. the same. Clangour, l. a great sound, or cry. Clap, the
nether part of a Hawks beak. Clap-bord, board ready cut to make cask or
vessels. Clap-bread, La. thin hard oat-cakes. Clapperdogeon, c. a beggar born.
Clapers, f. Warren pales or walls. Clara, l. clear. Clare, a Tower in Suffolk.
Clarentieux, -tiaux, -tius, one of the Kings at Arms. Claricord, Cler-, an
instrument somewhat like a cymbal* Clarify l. make clear. Clarigation, l. as
reprisal. Clarion, a kind of shrill Trumpet. Clarissonant, -isonent, l.
shrill-sounding. Clarity, clearness. Clark, a Clergyman, Scholar, Secretary,
etc. Clarmar^^an, sc. the warranting of stolen goods. Class, l. a rank, order
or degree, also a Navy. Classick, -ical, belonging thereto, approved, of good
authority* Claudicate, l. halt. Claudity, lameness. Clavecymbal, Claricy- an
instrument with wire strings, by some an Harpsical or Virginal. Claver,
Trefoyl, an herb. Clavicular, -rious, belonging to Clavis, l. a key. Claves
Insulae, twelve men in the Isle of man to whom all doubtful and weighty cases
are referred. Clavigeraus, bearing or keeping keys. Clause, an Article or
conclusion. Claustral, l. belonging to a Cloister, or close place. Cleam, Li.
glue together. Cleat, a little wooden wedge on the yards, to keep the ropes
from slipping. Cleavers, as Goose-grass. Cledgy, k. stiff. Clemd, Clamd,
starved, also thirsty. Clement, l. mild. Clemency, gentleness. Clementines,
certain decretals collected by Pope Clement. Clenge, o. cleanse, also factious,
disorderly. Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt loved by Julius Caesar. Clep, sc.
certain solemn words used especially in criminal causes. Cleped, Cleeped, sa.
named. Clepen, o. they call. Clepsydry, g. a water hourglass. Clergion, o. a
Clark. Clergial, learned, belonging to the Clergy, the whole company of
Ministers, also allowance of the book to a Prisoner. Clerico admittendo, for
the Bishop to admit a clark to a Benefice. Clerk, as Clark. Clerk of the Axe,
marks timber for the use of the Kings Navy. Clerk of the Check, Orders the
Yeomen of the guard, sets the watch every night, etc. another of this name in
the Navy. Clerk of the Chest, Where is kept the money collected for sick and
wounded Seamen. Clerk Comptroler of the Kings house, Two Court-Officers that
allow or disallow the charges of Pursuivants, etc. Clerk of the Crown [Office,]
Clerk of the Crown of the Kings Bench. Clerk of the Crown in Chancery, Attends
on the Lord Chancellor or Keeper. Clerk of the Errors, in the Common Pleas,
transcribes the tenor of the Records of the cause into the Kings Bench. Clerk
of the Errors, in the Kings Bench, transcribes the Records of such causes into
the Exchequer. Clerk of the Errors, in the Exchequer, prepares the Records
certified thither for Judgment. Clerk of Essoyns, keeps the Essoyn-rolls (in
Common Pleas.) Clerk of the Estreats, Writes out the Estreats to be levied for
the King. Clerk or Warden of the hamper or hanaper, (in the Chancery) receives
all money due to the King for the Seals of Charters, Patents, Commissions and
Writs. Clerk of the Juries or Jurata-Writs, makes out writs in the Court of
Common Pleas. Clerk of the Kings Silver, receives the fines in the Court of
Common Pleas. Clerk of the Market, keeps the standards (examples) of all
measures. Clerk Ma^shal of the Kings House* Attends the Marshal in his Court,
and Records his proceedings. Clerk of the Nichils or Nihiis, (in the Exchequ^r)
M^kes a roll of all such sums as are nihilled by the Sher^ffs, upon their
i^stre^ts of Green wax, etc. C^^rk of the O^tlawrie^* Servant o^ deputy to the
Kings Att^r^y Gene^al. Cle^k ^f the Peace Reads Endictments, etc. at the
Sessions. Clerk of the Pell, or Parchment roll (in the Exchequer) wherein he
enters every Tellers bill. Clerk of the petty Bag, Three Officers in Chancery,
whereof the Master of the Rolls is chief. Clerk of the Pipe, (or great Roll) in
the Exchequer, looks to all Accounts and Debts due to the King. Clerk of the
Pleas, in the Exchequer, in his Office all Court-Officers must sue and be sued.
Clerk of the Privy Seal, Four that attend the Lord Privy Seal. Clerk of the
Signet, Four that attend (by turns) on his Majesty's Principal Secretary. Clerk
of the Yreasury, keeps the Records of the Court [of Common Pleas.] Clerk of the
Warrants, belongs to the Court of Common Pleas. Clermatine [bread] fine, white
Cleromancy, g. Divination by lots or dice. Clever, nea^, smooth, dextrous.
Clevis, o. clifts, Rocks. Clew [of a Sail.] the lower corner. Clewgarnet, a
rope made fast to the clew of the main-sail* and fore-sail. C^ew-line, is the
same to top sails. Cli^^et, the clapper of a door; also a key, o. Cliquets* f.
flat ra^ling bones for boys to play with. Clicketing, when a Fox desires
copulation, he goes a Clicketing. Cli^ntal, belonging to a Client, one that
goes for counsel to a Lawyer. Clientel^, l. a taking of Clients unto
protection. Cl^ff, a Cl^ft o^ side of a hill, a broken rock by the Seas^^^.
Cliff, f. (key) the whole scale of Music is divided into 3 Cliffs, Basse, Mean
and Treble. Climacter, an account or reckoning made by degrees. Climacterical,
Climat-, [year] every 7th. and 9th. year of ones age, to the 63d, which is
accounted the great Climacterical and most dangerous of all. Climate, Clime, g.
such a space of Earth (between two parallel lines) as makes half an hours
difference in the Sun-dials and length of the days. Climax, g. (ladder) a
gradual proceeding from one thing to another. Clinch [of the Cable] that part
which is seized about the ring of the anchor. Clinch the Ports, drive a little
Okam into their seams. Clink, o. key. Clinker, c. a crafty fellow. Clinick, g.
bedridden. Clinopaly, g. bed-wrestling. Clio, one of the 9 Muses, Inventress of
History. Clito, as Clyto* Clitoris, g. the sinewy part of the womb. Clitumnus,
a River in Italy turning the Oxen (that drink it) white. Cloacal, filthy, from
Cloaca, l. a sink or house of Office. Clochier, f. a steeple. Clodius, a
notable Adulterer of Rome. Cloth, a sail clothes the mast, when it is so long
that it touches the hatches. Claelia, a noble Roman Virgin who swam over Tybris
from Porsenna with whom she was left an hostage. Cloffe, Tare, the bag, barrel,
etc. in which the Commodity is. Clomben, o. climbed. Closet, half a bar (in
heraldry.) Clotlefe* o. Clotburre. Clottend o. Clotted. Closh, the forbidden
game at Closh-cayles, Nine-pins. Cl^tho, one of the 3 destinies carrying the
third of man's life. Cloy, c. steal. Cloyed, a piece is cloyed, when any thing
hinders the priming-powder from giving fire to the rest. Cloudsberry, a plant
proper to Pendlehill in Lancashire Clove, 8 pound, the two and thirtieth part
of a weigh of cheese. Clough, Sa. a deep descent between hills. Clowys of
Gelofre flores, o. Clove gillyflowers. Clum, o. a note of silence. Clumperton,
a clown. Clumps, Li. Lazy, unhandy. Clussum'd [hand,] Che. clumsy. Clun-Castle
in Shropshire. Cluniack [monks] Benedictines reformed by Odo Abbot of Cluni in
Burgundy. Clusive, shut up. Cly the jerk, c. to be whipped. Clymbe, o. a noise.
Clyptica, g. Medicines to beautify the skin. Clysterize, to give a Clyster, g.
an instrument to convey a purge through the Fundament to the guts; also the
purge it self. Clytemnestra, lived in Adultery with Aegisthus, and with his
help killed her Husband Agamemnon. Clytia, slighted by Apollo, pined away to an
Heliotrope. Clyto, g. (Excellent,) a title of honor anciently appropriated to
our Kings Sons. Cnidus, Cab^crio, in Caria, where Venus was worshipped.
Cnossus, Gnossus, Ceratus in Crete, where Minos kept his Court. Cnouts delf,
Swerds delf, Steeds dike, made by Canute the Dane between Ramsey and W^itlesey.
Coacervate, l. heap together. Coacervation, a heaping or gathering together.
Coaction, l. the same, also a compelling. Coadjutor, l. fellow-helper.
Coadjuvate, l. to help or assist together. Coadunation, l. an assembling, or
bringing together. Coaetan^ous, l. of the same age. Coaeternal, l. Equal in
Eternity. Coagitate, to move or stir together. Coagmentation, l. a joining
together, also (in chemistry) dissolving things and hardening them again.
Coagulation, l* a curdling; in chemistry the reducing any liquid thing to a
thicker substance. Coalesce, l. to grow together, to close together again.
Coalition, l. a growing together, an increasing. Coamings, see Comings.
Coangustation, a making one thing straight (or narrow) with another.
Coaptation, l. a fitting together. Coarctation, l. a straightning, or pressing
together. Coart, o. Enforce. Coassation, l. a joining together with boards.
Coats, pieces of tarr'd Canvas put about the masts at the deck, to keep the
water out. Coaxation, the croaking of Frogs. Cob, a forced harbor for ships.
Cobby, stout, or brisk. Cob-iron, Es. And iron. Coble-colter, c. a Turkey.
Cobus, a River of Colchis, having golden sands. Cobweb-morning, Nf. a misty
morning. Coccinean, of a crimson or scarlet color. Coccium, Cockley in
Lancashire. Cochineale, Cuchanel, a costly grain made of little worms
proceeding from the fruit of the Holm-Oak, much used in dying Scarlet.
Cock-on-hoop, at the height of mirth and jollity; the Cock (or Spigot) being
laid on the hoop, and the Baril of Ale stunned (as they say in Staffordshire)
that is drunk out without intermission: or else Cock-a-hoop, Coq-a-hupe, f. a
Cock with a cop, crest or comb; also proud, stately, etc. and in this sense I
have seen it joined with Top and top gallant, which sign^fies Lofty, standing
upon high terms. Cockatrice, as Basilisk. Cocket, brisk, malapert. Cocket, the
Custom-house-seal; also their Warrant to the Merchant that his goods are
Customed. Cocket-bread, Wheaten, next to wastel or white bread. Cock-feather,
that which stands upward in the right nocking of a shaft. Cockle, a shel-fish;
also a Cornweed. Cockleary, pertaining to Cockle-stairs, winding stairs.
Cockney, a child that sucks long, wantonly brought up, one born and bred in
London, or (as they say) within the sound of Bow-bell; also an ancient name of
the River Thames, or (as others say) the little brook by Turn-mill street: or
else Cockneigh, as if they could not distinguish the Crowing of a Cock, and the
Neighing of a horse. See Cokeney. Cocles, one born with one eye; also a Roman
who alone withstood all the force of King Porsena, till the bridge was cut down
from under him. Cocti^le, l. easy to be boiled. Coction, l. a seething, also
digestion of meat. Coctive, l. soon boiled, soon ripe. Cocks, square brasses
(with holes) put into wooden sheaves, to keep them from splitting by the
block-pin whereon they turn. Coculus Indiae, Oculus In-, a venomous drug used
in the killing of lice, foxing of fish, Crows, etc. Cocytus. a River of hell.
Cod, a pillow. Code, l. book or volume of the Civil law. Codebec, a kind of
French hat so called, from Codebec, a town upon the Seine in Normandy. Codeta,
Orchards about Tiber, wherein grow shrubs like horse-tails. Codicil, a
supplement to a will. Codiniack, f. Marmalade of Quinces. Codrus, an Athenian
King who (in a disguise) exposed himself to death for his Country; because the
Oracle said the Peloponnesians should overcome if they did not kill him.
Codware, Grain contained in Cods, as pease, etc. Coeliaque artery, a main
branch of the great artery, descending to the midriff and entrails. Caeliacal
vein, a second branch of the Mesenterique running to the blind gut. Coemitarie,
g. Churchyard. Coemptional, belonging to Coemption, l. a Roman Ceremony*
whereby the husband and wife seemed to buy one another. Coenotes, g. Community;
also a figure whereby several clauses end alike. Coequal, l. equal to one
another. Coercible, which may be restrained. Coercive, restraining, compelling.
Coertion, l. a restraining. Coerulean, l. sky-colored. Coessential, l. of the
same essence. Coetaneous* as Coaeta-. Coeternal, as Coaeter-. Coeval, of the
same age or time. Coexistent, having a being at the same time. Coffa, and
Coffee, as Cauphe. Cofferer of the Kings household, he is under the Controller,
overlooks and paies the other Officers, etc. Cog, Cogle, o. a Cockboat.
Coggeshall, a town in Essex. Cogitation, l. a thinking. Cog^tative,
thoughtfull, pensive, Musing. Cognation, l. kindred [by blood.] Cogmen, dealers
in Cogware, Course Northern English cloth. Cognizance, -zance, f. knowledge, a
badge in arms, a Judicial hearing of a thing; also an acknowledging of a fine.
Cognisee, he to whom the fine is acknowledged. Cognisou^, he that acknowledges
a fine. Cognition, l. a knowing or Judging of a thing. Cognitionibus mittendis,
a writ, for him that takes a fine to certify it in the Common Pleas.
Cognominal, having one and the same name or Surname. Cognominate, l. to give a
Surname to any. Cognoscible, l. knowable. Cognoscitive, that knows or may be
known or enquired. Cogs, the outmost knots in a Mill-wheel, also a kind of
boat. Cohabite, l. dwell together. Cohabitation, a dwelling together. Cohere,
l. hang together. Coherence, Cohesion* l. a sticking or hanging together.
Cohibition, -bency, l. a restraining or keeping back. Cohobation, pouring the
distilled liquor on the dregs and distilling it again. Cohort, l. the tenth
part of a Roman Legion, 500 men. Cohortation, exhortation, persuasion. Coilons,
f. the stones. Coincidency, a happening at the same time, a being Coincident,
l. falling out together, or one upon another. Coins, quines, corners of walls,
pieces of wood in mounting Ordinance, also Printers pins to fasten letters into
the frames. Coin the house, lay the corners or foundation with brick or stone.
Coinquinate, l. defile. Coint, o. strange. Coition, l. [carnal] coming
together, also when the Sun and Moon are in the same sign and degree.
Cokermouth, a Town in Cumberland. Coke, (q. Coct.) pit-coal (or Sea-coal)
charred, also Cook, o. Coker, c. a lie. Cokeny, o. Cocket-bread. Cokewold, o.
Cuckold. Cokoar, Cocoar, an Indian Nut-tree that bears both meat, drink and
apparel. Colaphize, l. buffet with the fist. Colation, -ture, l. a straining.
Colatory, l. a strainer. Colbrand, the Danish Giant overcom'n by Guy Earl of
Warwick. Colbrook, a Town upon Cole, a River in Bucks. Colechester, a Town
upon. Colne, a River in Essex. Colchis, a Country in Asia, where Aeoetes
reigned, with whom the Argonauts made war for the golden fleece. Colfox, o.
blackfox. Colcothar, a caustic medicine. Cole, keal, pottage. Colefire, so
much firewood as (when it is burnt) contains a load of Coals. Coliberts, such
as of Villains were made free men. Colisaeus, the Amphitheater of Titus at
Rome. Colic, a grievous pain of the bowels with difficulty of stool and wind.
Collabefaction, l. a destroying, wasting or decaying. Collachrymate, l. weep or
lament with others. Collactaneous, nursed together, sucking at the same time.
Collapsed, l. fallen to decay. Collaqueate, l. to entangle together.
Collaterally, side by side. Collateral kindred, Uncles, Cosins, etc. Colateral
security, over and above the deed it self, as a bond to a Covenant.
Collaterate, l. join side by side. Collar, a great rope about the beakhead, to
which the main-stay is fastened, also another about the main-mast-head.
Collation, l. a little banquet, a comparing, a bestowing [of a Benefice,] also
folding of printed sheets by the letters of direction. Collatitious, done by
conference or contribution of many. Collative, l. Substant. an unanimous
contribution of the people to any public work, Adject. conferred together,
made large, mutual. Collaud, l. to praise with others. Colleague, l. a partner
in Office. Collegate, l. to send together. Collection, l. a gathering or Levy.
Collectitious, -ctaneous. l. gathered out of several things or places.
Collective Noun, though singular, comprehends many particulars, as a Company,
etc. Collect, l. gather together. Collects, things gathered from others works,
also select prayers for certain times Collegiate, one of the san^^* College,
l. society [of students.] Collens earth, a sort of paint. Colignia, a Town in
Brasile, peopled by the French, and taken from them by the Portugese. Colles
Passion, o. the Chollck. Collerage, a French fine upon the collars of
Wine-drawing Horses or men. Coller-dayes, Festivals, on which the Knights of
the Garter wear their collars. Collet, as Beazel, of a ring, also the throat.
Colly, the hawk collies, that is, beaks. Collide, l. to knock or bruise
together. Colligate, l. tie together. Colligence, a knitting, bringing or
gathering together. Collimation, l, an aiming. Collineate, to level at, or hit
the mark. Colliquation, l. a melting. Collision, l. a crushing together.
Collistrigiated, having stood in a Collistrigium, -idium, Pillory. Collitigant,
wrangling together. Collocation, a placing in order, also a letting out to
hire. Collock, Sa. a one-handed pail, or great piggin. Collogue, flatter.
Colonel, as Colonel. Colloquy, l. discourse between two. Colluctation, l. a
struggling together. Collusion, l. fraud, deceitful dealing. Colly^ist, g.
Mony-changer. Collyrie, -ire, g. a medicine for the eyes. Colne, a Town in
Lancashire. Colobe, an old kind of short coat reaching to the knees. Coloferos,
a Religious order of Grecians. Colon, g. half a period (:) also one of the
three great guts. Colony, l. a company sent out of one Country to dwell in
another. Colophonia, the Caput mortuum of Turpentine, useful in salves, the
liquid part being distilled into Oil. Coloquintida, Collo-, a purging wild
gourd. Coloration, l. the brightning of [obscured] gold or Silver. Coloss, a
statue of a vast bigness, as that of the Sun at Rhodes, between whose feet the
ships sailed, also a Town in Phrygia. Colostration, a distemper in Childrens
Stomachs by sucking the beestings or first milk. Colp, o. a blow, also a bit of
any thing. Colpindach, Cowdach, sc. a young cow or heifer. Colquarron, c. a
[mans] neck. Colran, Krien, a County in Ireland. Colubraria, an Iberian Island
full of Snakes. Colubriferous, l. that bears Snakes or Serpents. Coludum,
Coldana, Coldingham, in Scotland, where the Nuns (and Prioress Ebba) cut off
their lips and noses, to shun the lust of the Danes. Columb-Great, A Town in
Cornwall. Columbary, l. Dove-house. Columbine, l. Dove-like. Columity, l.
health, safety, soundness. Column, l. Pillar; also one division of a page at
length. Columnary tribute, was exacted for every pillar in a house. Columnae
Herculis, Hercules's Pillars; by some, two brazen pillars in Cadez; by others,
two western Mountains separated by Hercules, Calpe in Europe and Abyla in
Africa. Columpton, A Town in Devon. Colures, Two Circles which pass through the
Poles, and divide the Globe (like an apple) into four equal parts. Colus, A
whitish beast with a hogs head, that drinks through the nostrils. Colataea, a
kind of bastard Sena, in gardens of rarities. Coma Berenices, a triangle in the
tail of Leo. Comald, -da, an Order of Italian white Friars instituted, Anno
1012. Comarch, -ark, g. a Governor of town or city, an Earl. Comaunce, o.
community. Combat, (in law) the trial of a doubtful cause by two Champions.
Comb, f. a valley between two high Hills. Comb, 4 bushels; also a small piece
of Timber under the beak-head, used in bringing the tack aboard. Combinational,
belonging to Combination, l. a joining together; also a conspiracy.
Combustible, l. apt to take fire, as brush-wood, etc. Combustion, a burning
together, also a tumult. Combustion of a Planet, when he is not 8 Degrees and 3
minutes distant from the Sun. Comeling, Sa. a New-comer, a stranger.
Commessation, l. Revelling, intemperate eating and drinking. Comestible.
eatable. Comestion, l. eating up. Comet, g. a [hairy] Blazing star. Comical,
pertaining to Comedies, Merry Plays: and Comedians, the Actors, or as
Comediographers, Writers of Comedies. Comfry, Bone-set, an herb useful both in
meat and medicine. Comings [of the hatches,] the planks that bear them up above
the deck. Commin^ pugnator, l. he that fights hand to hand. Comitatu Commisso,
a writ authorizing the Sheriff to take the county upon him. Comitatu and Castro
Commisso, the committing of a county (together with a castle) to the Sheriff.
Comity, l. courteous and civil behavior. Comitial, belonging to Comices, l.
Solemn assemblies of the people of Rome. Comitial [disease,] the falling
sickness. Comma g. (Section, cutting,) the smallest of our stops (,).
Commaculate, l. defile. Commasculate, to take heart or hardiness. Commaterial,
l. made of the same substance or matter. Commaundry, -andry, Lands formerly
b^longing to the priory of St. John of Jerusalem. Commeator, l. a Messenger
that goes to and fro. Commemoration, l. remembrance or calling to mind.
Commence, f. begin, also proceed in a suit; also take a degree in the
University. Commencement (at Cambridge) the same as the Act at Oxford, when
they become graduates. Commendaces, prayers for the dead, also Verses or
Orations in their praise. Commendatary, he that has or sues for a Commendam,
He has a Benefice in Com. to who is care it is commended, till it can be
conveniently supplied. Commendatory [letters] recommending one. Commendation,
l. praise. Commendator, a Dutch President or Consul in the Indies. Commensal,
l. Fellow-commoner, companion at Table. Commensuration, l. a measuring one
thing with another. Commensurability, an equal proportion or measure of one
thing with another. Comment, -tarry, f. an exposition of any text. Commentatour,
he that does Comment, write Comments. Commentitious, l. feigned, counterfeit.
Commerce, f. Trade Commessation, as Comess-. Commigration, l. a removing from
one place to another. Commilitone, l. a comrade, fellow-souldier. Commination.
l. a vehement threatening. Comminuible, that may be bruised, or broken in
pieces. Comminution, a breaking to pieces. Commiseration, compassion.
Commissary, he exercises Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in the remoter parts of
the Diocese, also (in war) one that looks to the distribution of Victuals in
the Army and Garrisons. Commissioner he that has a Commission, l. a
delegation, Mandate or Warrant given for the exercising of a jurisdiction.
Commission of Association, is to associate others to the Justices in their
circuits. Commission of Anticipation, was for the collecting a subsidy before
the day. Commission or Writ of rebellion is for the apprehending of such a one
as a rebel, who does not appear upon proclamation. Commissure, l. a putting
together, the joining of the skul on the mould of the head; also of planks,
stones, or any materials. Committe^, he or they to whom the ordering of any
matter is referred. Commixtion, l. a mingling together. Commodious, profitable,
or convenient. Commodity, convenience, also Merchandise. Commoign, f. A
fellow-Monk of the same Convent. Common* Soil or water, whose use is common.
Commoning, Partaking. Common Hunt* The Lord Major of London's Chief huntsman
Esquire by his place. Commonalty, Commin- the common people. Common-Bench, as
Common Pleas, A Court in Westminster erected by Hen. 3. for all civil causes
real and personal. Common fine, Cert-money. Common Law, is sometimes opposed to
Spiritual, Admiralty, etc. Sometime to Customary and all other base courts, but
most usually it is such laws as were before any statute altered them.
Commoration, -rance, l. a tarrying. Commotion, l. a stir or tumult. Commote,
Commoithe, Br. 50 Villages, half a Cantred or a Hundred of a shire, or a
Collection made there. Commune, common; also to discourse. Communication,
Conversation, also as Communicating, imparting to one another. Community,
mutual participation, enjoying in Common. Communion, the same; also the
Sacrament of the Lords supper. Communition* l. a fortifying. Commutation* l a
changing one thing for another. Commutati^e justice, in buying and selling,
borrowing and lending, performing Covenants, etc. Comaedy, as Comedy, a
pleasant personal representation of the common actions of humane life. Compact,
l. agreement. Compaction, -page, l. a joining close together, Contraction.
Compaginate, l. to couple or knit together. Compagnia [de morti,] a Religious
Order in Italy, who are to bury the dead and visit condemned persons. Companion
of the Garter, one of those Knights. Companage, I. all kind of victuals eaten
with bread. Compar, as Isocolon, of equal members or parts. Comparats, l.
things compared together. Comparition, l. an appearing in open view.
Comparative, belonging to Comparation, Comparison, comparing together.
Comparative degree, has the sign More or termination er, as harder or more
hard. Compart, Compartment, f. a square [stone] piece in building; a Garden-bed
or border; a partition or equal division. Compartition, the same; also a
graceful and useful distribution of the whole plot of ground, for all kind of
rooms. Compass, a pair of Compasses wherewith Circles are made, also (at sea) a
round past-board with all the 32 winds described, and (under the North) a
needle pointing Northward. Compass Callipars, (with blunt ends) are used in
disperting a piece of Ordnance. Compassionate, tenderhearted, full of
Compassion, a fellow-feeling, suffering together. Compatible, f. which can
abide, agree or be together. Compatient, l. suffering together. Compatriot, l.
one of the same City or Country. Compeer, l. Consort, fellow, also Gossip, and
(in some places) all the young men invited to the same wedding. Comp^l, l. to
force. Compellation, l. a calling one by their name; also an opprobrious
mentioning. Compendiousness, a being Compendious, l. short or brief.
Compendium, l. abridgment also a gaining by Thrift. Compensable, f. able to
recompense, or make amends. Compensation, l. requi^ing, making up, repaying [a
good or bad turn.] Comperage, f. gossiping, also the affinity or friendship
gotten by being Gossips. Comperendination, l. a deferring or putting off [from
day to day.] Competency, l. a sufficiency, enough. Competize, to stand in
Competition, l. a rivalship, the being Competitour, l. a rival, one that seeks
after the same thing as you do. Competible, that may be sued for with another;
also that may be convenient or agreeable. Compile, f. heap together.
Compinable, o. fit for company. Compitalitious, belonging to Compitals, feasts
celebrated in the Compita, l. Cross-waies. Compital* belonging thereto.
Complaisant, Complacential, -tious, l. of a courteous pleasing behavior.
Complainant, complaining to a Magistrate [for relief.] Complaisance, f. an
obliging carriage, aptness to comply. Complacence, the same, also as
Complacency* a taking delight or being well pleased with. Complemental,
belonging to Complem^nt, l. a filling up; also a choice of the best words to
express our minds by; and (corruptly) too much ceremony in speech and
behavior. Complement [of an Angle,] so much as it wants of 90 degrees.
Completes, Sp. the last or closing prayers of the Evening: See Compline.
Completion, l. a fulfilling* performing. Complex, l. compounded of several
[things, notions, etc.] Complexion, l. the state and constitution of the body*
also (the index thereof) the color; countenance. Complicate, l. wrap or fold
up. Complicated disease, of many distempers meeting together. Accomplices,
Partners [in evil.] Complicity, such partnership. Compline, f. Completory, l.
the last of the Canonical hours, beginning at nine a'clock at night. Complore,
l. bewail or weep together. Comportment, f. carriage or behavior. Composition,
l. a putting together, also a [written] work also a compounding or agreement.
Compositor, he that does Compose, l. put [the printing letters] together.
Compost, f. a composition, also soil or dung for trees, Land, etc. Compotation,
l. a drinking-bout, a merry meeting* Compotist, Computist, l. a computer,
reckoner, calculator* caster of accounts. Comprecation, l. a praying,
Comprehension, l. a taking in or together, also understanding or finding the
depth of a mystery. Comprehensible, that may be Compre^ended, contained and
l^id hold of. Comprehensive, large, taking in, or containing much* Compression,
-su^^, l. a pressing together. Comprint, to print another copy or to print one
upon another. Comprise, comprehend, contain, take in. C^^pro^ation, l. a mutual
approving or allowing. Compromise, f. a mutual promise of Parties at
difference, to refer the business to Arbitratours* also that power (...) the
Arbitratours to decide the matter. Compromisorial, belonging thereto. Compton
in the hole, a Town in Warwikshire. Comptroller, as Controller. Compulsion, l.
a constraining. Compunction, l. pricking, remorse, trouble of mind for a fault
committed. Compurgation, l. a justifying (by oath) the report or oath of
another. Compurgator, l. a cleanser, clearer, purger. Computable, capable of
Computation, l. a reckoning, or casting of accounts. Computo, the same as De
Computo reddendo, a writ compelling a Bailiff, etc. to give up his accounts.
Comrade, or Camerade. Comsed, o. (for commenced) began. Comus, a Heathen God,
the chief patron of revellings and debaucheries. Con, o. ken. Conabel, -byl,
convenient. Concani, Gargani, people of Conaught, Connaught, a Province in
Ireland. Concamerate, l. to arch or make a vaulted roof. Concatinate, l. to
chain together. Concatination, a linking together. Concave, hollow, also
hollowness, the bore of a piece. Concavity, l. hollowness. Concavous, hollow.
Concealers, they that find out Lands privily concealed from the King or state.
Concede, l. yield, grant. Concent, -tion, l. an agreement or harmony [in
music.] Concentrick, having one common center. Concepticle, l. a large
hollowness able to receive [any thing.] Conception, a conceiving with Child,
also a thought, fancy or conceit. Concern, to busy, regard or belong to.
Concern, -nment, business, affair, also moment or weight. Concert, f. as
Concent, also to set [a business] in order. Concertation, l. a striving or
disputing together. Concessi, l. (I have granted) this word (in Law) creates a
Covenant. Concession, l. a grant or yielding. Concidence, a falling or making a
Cadence together. Conciliate, to procure, also to make to agree. Concinnate, l.
apt, fit, proper, also neat. Concinnity, l. handsomeness, aptness, decency.
Conci^nal, belonging to Concion, l. a public speech. Concionator, he that
preaches or makes an Oration to the people. Concise, l. cut short, of few
words. Concision, -sure, l. a cutting dividing, rent or schism. Concitation, l.
a stirring up or provok^ng. Conclamation, l. a great noise or shouting of many.
Conclave, a closet or inner room, also the chamber or Assembly of the Roman
Cardinals. Conclavist, one that meets there, or has the keeping of it.
Conclusion, l. a shutting up, the ending of a business. Conclusive, concluding,
shutting up, ending. Concoction,, a boiling, also digesting of the meat in the
Stomach. Concomitant, l. bearing company or going along with. Concord, l.
agreement, also in (music) an agreeing Note as an eight, fifth, etc.
Concordance, the same, also a Catalogue of all (or the chiefest) Bible-words,
and their places. Concordate, l. to agree. Concorporation, l. a mixing of
bodies together. Concourse, l. a meeting together. Concratitious, l. watled
with rods made like hurdles, etc. Concredited, delivered, lent or trusted
together. Concrete, l. joined or grown together* also an accident or quality
joined with the subject. Concreted, -tive, congealed or grown together.
Concretion, meant, l. a growing or joining together. Concrimination, a joint
accusing. Concubinage; f. fornication, also an exception against her that sues
for dowry alleging that she is not wife but concubine. Concubinal, -nary,
belonging to a Concubine halfwife. Conculcate, l. to trample upon, or tread
under foot. Concumbence, l. a lying together. Concupiscence, l. lust or
vehement desire. Concupisci^le, desiring earnestly or naturally, also
desirable Concupiscible faculty, the sensual power of the soul, seeking only
pleasures. Concurrence, l. a meeting together, an agreeing. Concussion, l. a
shaking together, also a public extortion by threatening. Concussionary, an
Officer extorting gifts and bribes, under pretense of authority. Cond, or Cun
the ship, give directions to him at helm, which way he should steer. Condense,
l. thicken. Condensity, l. thickness. Condensation, l. a making thick.
Condere^m, Chester on the Street, a Town in the Bishopric of Durham. Conders,
Huers, Bale^s Balkers, they stand on hills (by the sea) wi^h boughs in their
hands, to direct the Fishers which way the Herrings pass. Condesc^nd, l. step
or stoop down* Condescension, a compliance, or yielding to Condict, l. an
appointment or composition. Condign [punishment] worthy, deserved. Condiment,
l. sauce seasoning. Condisciple, l. school-fellow, fellow-student. Condise, o.
Conduits. Conditaneous, l. that which may be Condited, l. seasoned, sawced,
preserved. Condite, o. conduct. Condition, nature or disposition, estate or
fortune, also a supposition (if, etc.) Conditional, having a condition or
supposition. Conditor, l. a builder, maker. Conditor, l. a seasoner, temperer.
Condolence, l. a grieving with another. Condone, -nate, l. forgive.
Condonation, l. a pardoning or forgiving. Conducible, l. profitable, also to be
hired. Conductor, he that does Conduct, f. guide or lead. Conduct,, guidance,
also management of business. Conductitious, that may be led, hired, or gathered
together. Condylome, g. excrescent flesh or swelling (like a knuccle) about the
fundament. Cone, l. a Geometrical figure like a pyramid, nine-pin or
sugar loaf. Cone, Colne, sa. an account. A Woman was reckoned to be of
competent years, when she was able to keep Cone and key, the accounts and ^eyes
[of the house.] Confabulation, a discoursing together. Confarreated, married
with Confarreation, l a wedding-ceremony, like the breaking of our Bride-cake.
Conf^ck, c. counterfeit. Confection, l. a finishing or mingling, also the
making of Confits, Comfits, sweetmeats* Confectioner, a maker of sweetmeats.
Confectionary, the same, also the place where they are kept. Confeder, to join
together in a league. Confederate, as Confoederate. Confertion, a stuffing.
Confessionary, f. belonging to [auricular] Confession; also the confession
seat. Confessor, he to whom you confess your self. Conficient, finishing,
procuring, working. Confide, l. to trust, rely upon Confidence, boldness,
assurance. Confident, bold, sure, assured, [sometimes] impudent, also he to
whom trust and secrecy is committed. Configulate, l. play the potter.
Configulation, l. making of earthen ware. Configuration, l. likeness of
figures, the mutual aspects of Plane^s. Confin^s, f. borders of a Country.
Confer, l. compare, also to talk or reason together. Conference, a meeting
together [for discourse.] Confine, to limit, to imprison. Confinement,
imprisonment, or being tied to a certain place. Confirmation, l. a
strengthening or making sure. Confiscation, l. taking away goods (as forfeited)
to the Fi^cus or public treasury. Confitent, penitent, confessor.
Conflagitate, l. to desire a thing importunately. Conflagration, a great
burning. Conflagrant, burning; also earnestly desiring. Conflature, l. the
melting or casting of metal. Confluctuate, l. to flow together, to be uncertain
what to do. Confluence, -flux, l. a flowing or meeting together.
Confluxibility, an aptness to flow or be mingled together. Confaederate, joined
together [by Covenant.] Conforaneous, l. of the same court or Marketplace.
Conformable, agreeable, suitable. Conformist, one that does Conform, suit
himself to [the Church of England.] Confrairie, f. fraternity, society,
brotherhood. Confrication, l. a rubbing. Confreers, -freres, f. Brethen or
fellows of the same house. Confront, f. come face to face, oppose; also
compare. Confusion, l. pouring, mixing, or jumbling together, disorder,
disturbance, also blushing or being out of countenance. Congayne, o. convince.
Congaye, o. send away. Conge, f. leave, also a ceremony (bowing, etc.) in
taking ones leave. Conge d' accorder, f. (leave to agree) desiring the Justice
to give them leave to agree. Conge d' elire, or eslire, f. (leave to choose)
the Kings per^wassion to a Dean and Chapter to choose a Bishop. Cong^able,
lawful, or law^ull^ ^one. Cong^nerous, -nious, l. of the same sort or kindred.
Congeniality, a being Congenial, l. alike in Genius, fancy or disposition.
Congelation, l. a congealing, freezing, or growing like to Ice. Congelative,
having the power to Congeal or dry up. Congeon, o. a Dwarffe. Conger, l. a
large Sea-Eel. Cong^riate, pile up, heap together. Congersbury, a Town in
Somersetshire, from Congar, an Eremite there, affirmed (by Capgrav^) to be the
Emperors Son of Constantinople. Congius, l. a Gallon [and a little more.]
Congiary, l. a Great persons gift to the people. Conglaciate, l. to freeze,
also to be idle. Congleton, a town in Chesh. Conglobation, l. a gathering
round, into a Globe. Conglomeration, l. a rolling or winding up into a bottom
or heap. Conglutinative, that which has strength to Conglutinate, l. glue or
join together. Conglutination, l. a gluing together. Congratulation, l. a
rejoicing with another. Congregational, belonging to Congregation, l. an
Assembly assembling or gathering together. Congregationalists. Independants,
Dissenting Brethren, who gathered particular Congregations in a middle way
between Presbytery and Browni^m. Congress, l. a meeting, encounter. Congruence,
-uity, l. agreeableness, a being Congruous, convenient, fit. Conical, belonging
to a Cone. Conical sections make the Ellipsis, hyperbole and parabola.
Conjectural, belonging to Conjecture, l. guess. Coninesborough, a Castle in
Yorkshire, where Hengist was beheaded. Conif^rous tre^s, bearing Cones or
Clogs, as the fit, pine, etc. Conjugal, belonging to marriage. Conjugates, l.
things of the same rank, order or original. Conjugation, deriving of things
under the same order, particularly of verbs in their moods, tenses, etc.
Conjunction, l. a joining or meeting together, also the particle that joins or
disjoyns words and sentences. Conjunctive, belonging thereto. Conjunctive mood,
Subjunctive. Conjunctiva, a Coat of the eye [sticking fast.] Conjuncture, a
joining together. Conjuration, l. a conspiracy or plot, also a Charm. Conjurer,
he that does Conjure, l. raise or deal with the devil. Conjure, swear together,
also to swear one in the name and power of another. Conizee, as Cognisee.
Conizour, as Cognisour. Connascency, l. a being born or springing together.
Conne, ken, learn [without book.] Connen, o. Can. Connexive, having the power
of, or belonging to Connection, l. a knitting or joining together. Connex (in
Logic) things joined without any dependence or Consecution. Connictation, a
twinkling of the eye. Connivence, l. a winking [at a fault.] Connubial,
belonging to wedlock. Connutritious, nourished or brought up together.
Connuvium, Conwey in Wales. Conquassation, l. a shaking or dashing together.
Conquest, f. Victory; also Lands held by some private Title, not by
Inheritance. Conquestion, l. a Complaining together. Conradus, Ge. able
Counsel. Consanguinity, Kindred by Blood. Consarcination, l. a patching
together. Conscensi^m, l. a Climbing. Conscientious, according to Conscicnce,
the witness of ones own heart. Conscious, l. [knowing ones self] guilty.
Conscission, a cutting. Con^cissure, a gash, cut or rent. C^nscription, l. a
registering. Consecration, l. Hallowing, setting apart for divine service.
Consectaneous, -cutif, -tive, following, or succeeding. Consectary, l. That
which follows upon the demonstration of an argument. Consectatour, He that
follows or pursues. Consecution, A following. Consecution-month, the space
between each Conjunction of the Moon with the Sun. Conseminate, l. Sow diverse
seeds together. Consentient, l. Agreeing. Consequence, l. a following or
conclusion, Also weight and moment. Consequent, Following, or a following
Conclusion. Consequentious, important, necessarily following. Conservation, A
preserving. Conservator, l. Keeper, overseer. Conservatory, [A place for]
preserving or keeping. Conserves, f. Fruits being Conserved, Condited.
Consession, A sitting together. Consideration, An advising or taking heed; also
a condition upon which a thing is done, an allowance. Consignificative, Of the
same signification with another. Consignation, Ones own signing of a Bil.
Consign, Present, deliver, assign over. Consimilarity, Likeness. Consistence, a
being, also settling and growing stiff or hard Consistent, Agreeable, also
standing, not fluid Consistory, l. An Assembly of Churchmen, also the place.
Consition, l. A planting together. Consolatory, Comforting, belonging to
Consolation, l. A Comforting. Consolidation* A strengthening or making sold;
also the uniting a Benefices, also the joining of possession or profit with the
property. Consomniation, A sleeping or dreaming together. Consonant, agreeing
[in sound;] also a letter which is not a vowel. Consort, A Companion* also a
company [of Musicians.] Consound, Cumfry, backwort, knit-back. Conspersion, a
sprinkling. Conspicuous, l. easy to be seen. Conspiratione, a writ against
Conspiratours, guilty o^ Conspiracy, evil and malicious plotting together.
Conspurcation, a defiling. Consputation, a spitting upon. Consputator, he that
spits upon others. Constablerie, o. the office, jurisdiction and dignity of a
Constable, f. (q. Comes stabuli) master of the horse. High Consta^les, are over
hundreds, Petty Constables in Parishes, for conservation of the peace.
Constable of the Tower, Dover-Castle, etc. chief Governor. Constant, l.
standing firm. Constantin^ple, Byzantium the Port, the seat of the Great Turk,
repaired, beautified and named from Constantine the great, the first Christian
Emperor of Rome Constat, l. (it is evident) a certificate given out of the
Court of all that is on record touching such or such a matter. Constellation* a
Company of stars in some figure. Consternation, amazement. Constipation, a
standing close together, a guarding. Constitution, an appointment, also the
state and condition [of any thing.] Constrain, to compel. Constraint, force.
Constriction, the same, also a binding together. Constrictive, binding.
Construction, a placing or joining together, also interpretation or meaning.
Construe, expound, unfold. Constupration, a ravishing of a virgin.
Consubstantiality, a being Consubstantial, of the same substance. Consuet,
-tudinal, usual, accustomed. Consuetude, l. acustom. Consuetudinibus and
servitijs, a writ for rent or service failing. Consular, belonging to the
Consulship, the office of a Consul, chief Governor. Two Consuls were chosen
yearly at Rome, instead of the Kings. Five yearly Consuls (at Paris) determine
all cases of debt not exceeding 4000 livres. Consultation, a taking Counsel;
also a writ returning a cause from the Kings to the Ecclesiastical Court.
Consummate, sum up, make perfect, also as Consummated, perfected,
accomplished. Consummation, l. a fulfilling, perfecting. Consumption, a
wasting. Contabulation, planking* fastening of planks together. Contaction, a
touching together. Contagion, infection. Contagious, l. infectious.
Contamination, a polluting. Conteke, -teck, o. strife, contention,
Contemeration, a violating, deflowring. Contemplation, a deep considering,
meditating. Contemplative, thereto belonging. Contemplatives, Friars of the
Order of St Mary Magdalene. Contemporianism, C^existen^y, a being Contemporal,
-ary, -an^ous, of the same time. Contempti^le, l. base, to be Contemned,
slighted, scorned. Contemptuous, reproachful, scornful, slighting.
Con-tenement, the freehold which lies to a tenement. Contention, l. strife.
Contermination, a bordering upon. Conterpleted, o. controlled. Conterraneous,
of the same Land or Country. Contesseration, entering into league or
friendship. Contest, l. a fellow witness. Contestate, to bear or prove by
witness. Contestation, Calling to witness. Context, -ture, l. (weaving
together) the form or style of a process or discourse, also the adjoining
matter of it. Contignation, raftering, the floor-work. Contiguity, a being
Contiguous, near or touching one another. Continence, -cy, l. a being
Continent, temperate, also the main Land. Contingent, casual, happening.
Contingence, -cy, a falling out by chance. Contingent propositions, may (as it
falls out) be true or false. Continual, without intermission. Continual claim,
(to Land, etc.) made from time to time, within every year and day. Continuance
until next Assizes, Prorogation, putting off till then. Continuando, when the
Plaintiff would recover damages for several trespasses in the same action.
Continuation, -uity, a lengthning or going on with a business. Contorsion, a
wresting, pulling awry. Contrabanded, [goods] forbidden importation*
Contraction, l. Contratation, Sp. making of a Contract, or bargain. Contract,
l. shorten, draw together. Contraction, a drawing together. Contradictory,
contrary by Affirmation and Negation, full of Contradiction, 'gainsaying.
Contrafaction, a counterfeiting. Contra formam collationis, a writ against an
Abbot for making a Feoffement of Land given to the Abbey. Contra formam
Feoffamenti, when a Tenant enfeoffed by the Lords Charter to make certain suit
and service to his Court, is distrained for more than is there contained.
Contramure, Counterscarf, an out-wall built about another wall. Contrariety, a
being Contrary, against one another Contraries, opposites wherein one is
opposed to the other. Contrasto, Sp. Contention. Contragerva, a
West-Indian-plant much used in Counter-poysons. Contratation, Sp. a contract or
bargain. Contravention, a coming or speaking against. Contrectation, [a wanton]
handling. Contribution, money or supplies (given or forced) from many.
Contributione facienda, a writ, when the whole burden lies upon one, though
more be bound thereto. Contristation, l. a grieving or making sad. Contrite,
bruised, also penitent. Contrition, l. a bruising or breaking, also remorse or
trouble of mind. Controller, an Officer who keeps a roll of other Officers
accounts. Controller of the hamper, he takes all things sealed in leather-bags
from the Clark of the hamper. Controller of the Pipe, he writes summons to the
Sheriffs, to levy the debts of the Pipe. Controller of the Pell, keeps a
Controlment of the Pell, of Receipts and goings-out. Controve, o. devise,
contrive. Controver, he that invents false news. Controversy, a dispute.
Controverted [points] argued pro and con. Contrucidate, l. kill. Contumacy, l.
stubbornness. Contumelious, full of Contum^ly reproach. Contumulation, an
intombing or burying together. Contune, o. for continue. Contund, knock down,
beat in pieces, subdue. Contusion, a bruising, beating, pounding to powder.
Convail, o. to recover. Convalesce, l. to wax strong. Convalescency, a
recovering of health. Convalidate, strengthen, confirm. Convene, l. come
together, also to summon one to appear. Convenience, -cy, fitness. Convent,
Covent, Monastery* a Religions House. Conventicle, l. a private assembly.
Conventional, belonging to Convention, an assembly, also a summoning.
Conventione, a writ for the breach of a written Covenant. Conventual, belonging
to a company of religious persons. Conventual Church, belonging to a Convent.
Conversation, a being Conversant, keeping company. Conversion, a change.
Convert, l. turn. Convert, one turned [to the Faith.] Convertite, the same.
Unequal, of a round outside. Convexity, the outside of a Globe. Convict, -ed,
proved guilty. Conviction, proving a man guilty (by witnesses or confession.)
Convictor, l. a boarder. Convivial, belonging to a feast. Convocation-house,
for the Convocation, Assembly of the Clergy. Convoke, l. call together. Convoy,
f. Conduct, guide Conusant, f. knowing, understanding. Convulsion, a violent
pulling together [of Sinews, etc.] Cooliss, Coulise, as Cullis. Coom, the soot
that gathers over the ovens mouth. Cook-room, a ships Kitchen, in a Merchant
man's forecastle, and (generally) in a Frigates hold. Coomb, So. half a quarter
of Corn. Cooperate, l. to work together. Cooptate, l. to Elect or choose
together. Coopertura, a thicket or covert of wood. Coot, a Moor-hen. Copal, a
perfume, of white Rosin from the West Indies. Cope, Cloak, also a vestment
Bishops were wont to wear, also a custom (6d a load) paid out of the lead-mines
in Derbyshire, also the top of an high hill. Cope the Wall, cover it. Cope, Nf.
Sf. Chop or exchange. Coparceners, Parceners, such as have Equal share in the
inheritance of their Ancestors. Copes-mate, a partner in Merchandise. Cophosis,
g. a growing deaf. Copia libelli delib randa, a writ for the Copy of a Libel
from an Ecclesiastical Judge. Coping, the top or roof of a wall. Copyhold, a
tenure by a Copy of the Rolls made by the Lords Steward. Copiosity, a being
Copious, l. plentiful Copise, C^pse, a little wood of underwoods to be cut
down before they be great trees. Copland, Sa. a headland or hadland into which
the rest of the lands in a furlong do shoot. Coporas, Vitriol. Coppen^agen, the
Chief City in Denmark. Copulation, a joining together. Copulative, joining,
coupling. Copy, -py, l. plenty. Coquettery, f. a prating like a Gossip.
Coquinate, to play the Cook. Coquination, a Cooking of meat. Coraage, an
imposition upon certain Measures of corn. Cor Scorpij, the heart of the
Scorpion, a Constellation. Coral, Corral, l. a Sea-plant growing hard as stone
and red, when taken out of the water. Coralline, Sea-moss, Coral-moss, a plant.
Coralwort, Toothwort, an herb near Mayfield in Sussex. Coram non judi^e, in a
cause whereof the Judges have no jurisdiction. Coram nobis, l. before us.
Coranto, a French running dance, also a News-book. Corare, o. overcome.
Corasines, Northern people of Asia, who (by the Consent of the Sultan of
Babylon) subdued all the Elpians in Palestine, and were themselves utterly
rooted out by the Sultan. Corban, Kor-, h. a gift dedicated to God, also the
che^t (in the Temple) receiving it. Corbel, -bet, -bil, a shouldering piece in
timberwork, jutting out like a bragger. Corbets an Ancient Family in
Shropshire, also, o. stones wherein images stand. Corciousness, o. corpulency.
Corck, Or^hal* a kind of blue paint. Cord [of firewood] 4 soot in breadth, 4 in
height, and 8 in length. Cordage, the tackle of a ship, also stuff to make
ropes of. Cordelier, f. a Gray Franciscan Friar. Cordial, l. hearty. Cordon, o.
reward, also the end of the parapet toward the muraille. Corduvan, belonging
to Cordu^a, a City in Spain. Cordwane, o. a dry hide. Cordwainer, Cordinar, f.
a Shoemaker. Coriander, an herb like parsley. Coriged, o. corrected.
Corinaeus, Brutus's Companion who slew the giant Gogmagog. Corinthian,
belonging to Corinth, a City of Achaia. Coritani, the ancient inhabitants of
Northampton, Leicester, Rutland, Lincolnshire, Nottingamshire, and Darbyshire.
Cork, part of Ireland. Cormandel, in the East Indies, where stands Fort St.
George. Cormorant, a Sea-Raven, Cornage, an imposition upon Corn; also a
Northern tenure by blowing of a horn on the approach of an enemy. Cornalin, a
kind of precious stone. Cornavij, ancient inhabiters of Warwickshire*
Worcester, Staffordshire, Shropshire, and Cheshire. Corn-flower, blue-bottle.
Cornea, the horny Coat of the eye. Cornelian, Corncol, a red precious stone.
Cornelian law, made by Cornelius Sylla, Dictatour of Rome, that all that
followed him to the war, should be capable of bearing office before their time.
Cornel, o. Corner; also the forepart of a house. Corneol, Sardis, Onyx, a stone
used much for seals Corneous, horny. Cornet, f. a black taffaty the badg of
Doctors of Physic or Law, also the Ensign of a Troop. Cornice, frize, f. the
Crests or flourishing work at the upper end of a pillar. Cornicle, l. a little
horn. Cornigerous, horn-wearing [ Bacchus.] Cornil tree, horn-tree. Cornimuse,
f. bag-pipe. Cornix, as Cornalix, Cor^eol. Cornu Cervi, the mouth of an
Alembick. Cornucopin, -py, a horn (with plenty of all things) given by Jupiter
to his nurse Amalthea. Cornuted, horned. Cornyale, o. strong. Corody, Corr-, an
allowance to any of the Kings servants from an Abbey, etc. whereof he is
Founder. Corodio habendo, a writ for the exacting thereof. Coroll^try,
advantage above the ordinary measure, also a gift to the people at public
feasts. Coromandel, part of East India. Corona, l. Halo, a clear circle about
the Moon, etc. also a Constellation on the Shoulder of Boots. Coronal arterys,
two little branches of the great artery, to the left ventricle and broad end of
the heart. Coronal vein, a branch of the Spleen-vein, about the heart like a
Crown. Coronal suture, the foremost seam of the skull, from temple to temple.
Coronary, belonging to a Crown. Coronation, l. a Crowning. Coronatore eligend^,
a writ for the Freeholders to choose a Coroner, an Officer who is to enquire
into all untimely deaths, (usually 4, sometimes but 1 in a County.) Sovereign
or Chief Crowner, The Lord Chief Justice of the Kings bench, wherever he be.
Coronet, f. a little Crown. Corporal, belonging to the Body; the least
Commander in a foot company, also the fine linen wherein the Sacrament is put.
Corporation, l. a body politic, formed by the Kings Charter. Corporature, l.
the frame or constitution of the Body. Corporeal, bodily. Corporeity, -eature,
the being a bodily substance. Corporification, a making into a body, a Spirits
reassuming its body and appearing. Corpse, f. a [dead] body. Corps-du-Gard, f.
the body of the Guard. Corpulent, gross, having Corpulency, fullness of Body.
Corpus Christi, l. Christ's body, a College in Oxford. Corpus cum causa, a writ
of Chancery to remove into the Kings bench. Corpuscule, l. a little body. Corr,
two quarts. Corrade, l. scrape together, extort. Corrasive, scraping together
Correction, amendment, chastisement. Correctour of the Staple, a Clark
recording all bargains made there. Correlative, having mutual relation.
Correptory, belonging to Correption, a sudd^n snatching away; also reproof.
Correspond, l. answer, agree. Correspondent, [one] holding. Correspondency,
mutual commerce and familiarity, also the answerableness or proportion of one
thing to another. Corridor, as Cortin, -na. C^rrigible, which may be corrected
or amended. Corrigidor, Sp. the Chief Governor of a Town or City. Corrival, as
Competitour. Corrivality, Corrivalship. Corroboration, a strengthening. Corrode,
gnaw, fret. Corrodible, that may be gnawn or eaten away. Corrosives, Medicines
that are Corrosive, belonging to Corrosion, gnawing, fretting. Corrugation, a
wrinkling, frowning. Corruption, infection, a spoiling, tainting. Corruption of
blood, of the whole issue, honor and Estate (by Felony or Treason.) Corsary,
-saire, f. a Courser, a Rover, a Pirates ship. Corse-present, Mortuary, a beast
or other offering to the Priest from a dead man's Estate. Cors^int, o. f. holy
or blessed heart. Corslet, I. Cuirasse, f. [armour for] back and breast.
Corsure, Courser, o. Broaker. Corstopitum* Corbridge in Northumberland. Cortex
Wint^ranus, a kind of Cinnamon brought first from India, by Captain Winter.
Corticated, covered with a bark. Cortin, f. that space of the Terrasse or
Muraille that is between the Bastions, Corven, o. carved. Corvet, praunce.
Corvetta, I. praunsing. Corvine, l. of a Crow or Raven. Corviser, as
Cordwainer. Coruscant, shining, glittering. Coruscation, l. Lightning, a
flashing of Light. Corybantes, the Priests of Cybele. Cosset [lamb] brought up
without the da^n. Coscinomancy, Coski-, g. divination with a sieve. Cosenage, a
writ for the heir against an intruder. Coshacks, Turkish-womens girdles.
Cosier, o. Sowter, Botcher. Cosignificative, of the same signification.
Cosine, the Complement of the Radius or whole sign to a quadrant or 90
degrees. Cosmeticks, things to clear and purify the skin. Cosmical, of the
world. Cosmical rising [of a star,] is together with the Sun. Cosmographical,
belonging to Cosmography, g. a description of the world. Cosmographer, a
describer, etc. Cosmodelyte, one fearing or serving the world. Cosmology, a
speaking of the world. Cosmarchy, the government of Cosmos, g. the world.
Cosmopolite, -tan, a Citizen of the world. Cosmometry, g. a measuring of the
world by degrees and minutes. Cossacks, Polish Outlaws formed in a Militia,
partly under the Rebel Dorosensko, par^ly under the Crown. Cosset [Lamb, Colt,
etc.] brought up by hand. Cossic^ [num^ers] used in Algebra. Cost, (in blazon)
the fourth part of the bend or half the Sa^^ier. Costay, o. to Coast up and
down. Costive, having the belly bound. Costmary, Alecoast, Maudlin herb.
Cost^el, Cas-, o. a wine-pot. Costus, an Indian drug, (the sweet and the
bitter.) Cot, Cote, re^use or clotted wool, also a Cottage or Sheepfold.
Coteswol^, o. a company of Sheepcoats, and sheep feeding on hills; also hills
in Glocestershire whose Sheep are famous for fine wool. Cottager, -arius, he
who is cottage has not above four acres of Land to it. Cotterel, Cottarel, o. a
poor Cottager. Cottre, De. a trammel to hang the pot on over the fire. Coton,
frize, bombasin. Cotula, l. May-weed. Cottis* as Cost. Cotyledones, g.
Acetabula, l* the mouths of the veins in the womb, through which the monthly
blood is derived. Couch a Hogshead, c. go to sleep. Couchant, f. lying close to
the ground. Coucher, a Factour, also a General Register-book of a Corporation,
etc. Cove, Cuffin, c. a man. Cove, W^. a little harbor for boats. Covenable,
Conv-, f. Convenient, suitable. Covenant, f. bargain, also a writ that lies for
the breach thereof. Coventry, -tree, a City in Warwickshire, from a Covent of
Monks there. Coverchief, o. Kerchief. Covercle, Coverkil, o. a Cover. Covert,
f. a shady place for Deer, etc. Coverture, Covert-barn or -Baron, f. the
Condition of an English wife, who can make no bargain without her husbands
consent. Coughton, the Mansion of the Throgmortons in Warwickshire. Covie, f. a
nest or brood [of Partridges.] Covin, fraud, deceit [by conspiracy.] Coulant,
f. flowing, gliding along. Couldray, f. a hazel grove. Coule, a water-tub, a
friars hood, and (in Archery) to cut the feather of a shaft high or low.
Coulpe, f. a fault. Couller, l. a Plow-share. Counselor, he that give^h
Counsel, f. advice, also as Council, -cil, l. an Assembly of Counselors.
Count, f. Earl, also the Original declaration in a process. Countenance, f.
visage, also credit, estimation, also to favor or favor [shown.] Counter, f.
a counting thing or place; a Shop Chest, also the name of 2 Prisons for debt in
London. Counters, Con-, f. Advocates which speak in Court for one [absent.]
Countercharge, Charge again or against. Counter-check, blame him that blames
you. Counter-componed, Compounded of two colors (or more.) Counterfeit, f.
feign or feigned. Counterfeits and trinkets, Che. Porringers and Saucers.
Countermarch, When file-leaders turn to the hand directed, and pass through the
Company, their followers make good their ground, then turn and follow them.
Countermand, -maund, f. recalling a former command. Countermine, Mine against
mine. Countermure, wall against wall. Counterpane, -pain, one part of a pair of
deeds or Indentures. Counter-plea, -plee, a reply to Ayde-prier, (a petition in
Court for the calling-in of help from another.) Counterpoint, opposition,
composing parts (in Music) by setting point or note against note, also
back-stitch, or quilt-stitch, also the quilt, Carpet, etc. Counterpoise, f. to
weigh one against the other, also the weight, etc. Counterpoison, an antidote,
or a contrary poison. C^unter-balan^e, as Counterpoise. Counterbarred, on both
sides. Counter^ond given to your surety to save him harmless. Counter-rail,
rail against rail. Counter-rolls, of the same contents. Counter-round, Officers
visiting the common round or Sentinels. Counterscarf, -scarp, f. a rampire or
bank [of a moat] opposite to a Fortress, Town-wall, etc. Counter-security,
mutual. Counter-Sophister, who holds the adverse part of Sophistry.
Counter-tail, -tally, one of the tallies or wooden scores, also as
Counter-tenour, against the tenor, a middle part in Music. Countervale, be of
equal value, make amends for. Countess, f. an Earls wife. Counter, f. an
accomptant, a reckoner. Counting House of the Kings Household, the Green Cloth,
where sit the Lord Steward, Treasurer of the Kings-house etc. County, f. shire.
County Court, held monthly by the Sheriff or under Sheriff. Coup, o. a piece
cut off (or out.) Coupant, f. cutting. Coupe, f. cut off. Couped, [trees] cut
from the trunk (in heraldry.) Coupe-gorge, f. a cutthroat Couple-close, the
4th. part of a Cheveron. Courant, f. a news-book. Coure, as Cowre. Courfine, o
fine heart. Courier, a [riding] post, f. Courratier, a horse-courser. Course,
that point of the compass the ship is to sail on. Cou^ser, f. a [race] horse.
Court Baron, which every Lord of a Manor keeps. Court of Requests, a Court of
Equity, l^ke the Chancery. Court of the Legate, obtained of Pope Leo. 10. by
Cardinal W^olsey, to dispense with offenses against the Spiritual Law. Court
Christian, Spiritual Court. Court of Chivalry, the Marshals Court where the
Earl Marshal (one of the Judges) is to see Execution done. Courtesy of
England, Lex Angliae, a man's tenure (during life) of Land which his wife died
possessed of, if he had a Child by her. Courtilage, Curt- a garden or piece of
void ground belonging to a Message. Courtisane, f. a Court Lady, also a
Strumpet. Courtlass, Coutelass, a short sword. Courtmantle, -til, f. a short
Cloak. Courtpy, -pies, o. a kind of short coat. Couth, o. (q. Kennouth) knew
Couthoutlaug^, Couthut- Sa. he that harbors an Outlaw. Cowde, o. gobbet.
Could, f. elbow, cubit. Cowl, E. tub, as Coule. Cowr^, kneel, fall down for
fear, also ruck down (ut mulier ad mingend.) so. Cowncer, the hollow arching
part in the ship-stern. Coy, Coyen, o. nice, dainty, also to quiet [by
flattering.] Coyse, o. jolliness, joys. Crab, a wooden engine with three claws
on the ground for the lanching of Ships, etc. Crab^at, f. comely, also a woman's
gorget, also a Cravate, worn first (they say) by the Croats in Germany.
Cracker, c. the breech. Crackmans, c. hedges. Cra^ovia, Cracow, a City of
Poland. Cra le, a frame on the Ship sides for easy lanching, also a frame
fastened to sy^hes, also the place where the bullet lies in a Crosse-bow.
Craddanly, La, as Crassantly. Crabs-eye, a stone (like an eye) found in a Crab.
Craft, all kind of fishing tools; also small vessels as ketches, etc. Crakel,
o. make a chattering noise. Crakers, Creekers, Kr. choice English soldiers in
France, in the time of Henry the 8th. Crallit, o. engraven. Crambe, g.
Colewort. Cramborne, a Town in Dorcetshire. Cramp, a disease in the hawks wing
(by taking cold.) Crampesh, -eth, gnaws, crasheth. Cramp-rings, c. bolts or
shakles. Cramp-fish, causing the Cramp by touching it. Cranage, money paid for
the use of a Crane, an engine to draw up wares. Cranbroke, a Town in Kent.
Crank, E. lusty, jovial, brisk. Crank-sided, when a ship will bear but small
sail. Crany, g. the skull or brainpan, also as Cranny, a cleft, chink. Cranny
lad, che. jovial, lusty lad Crap, Ss. darnel, also (in other places)
Buck-wheat. Crapulent, l. glutted, having taken a surfeit. Crased, o. cracked.
Crashing-cheats, teeth* c. Crasie, sick, distempered, weak. Crassantly lad,
ch^. a Cowardly lad. Crassulent, full of Crassitude, -ty, thickness,
grosseness. Crasse, l. thick, also heavy or dull. Crastinate, l. put off from
day to day. Cratched, o. scratched (with the Fullers Teasel.) Cratch, Crit^h, a
rack, So. Crater, the bottom of the pitcher in Virgo, also the line to which
Hawks are fastened when reclaimed. Craven, Cravent, -vant, (q. craving mercy) a
horrid word to be pronounced by the vanquished in a trial by battle, a Coward.
Crawly-mawly, Nf. pretty well. Crayer, a kind of small ship. Cray, a disease
hindering the Hawks muting. Creamer, D. he that has a stall in the Fair or
Market. Cream, No. to mantle as drink does. Creance, -aunce, f. trust*
confidence, also a long small line fastened to the Hawks leash when first
lured. Creansour, a Creditor. Creast, as Crest. Crest-tile, roof-tile. Create,
l. make [of nothing.] Creation, l. the making [of the World.] Crebrous, l.
often, usual. Crebrity, frequency, multitude. Credibility, a being Credible, l.
that may be believed. Creditable, bringing Credit, esteem, belief, trust.
Crediton, a Town in Devonshire. Creditor, -tour, l. a lender. Credulity, a
being Credulous, l. apt to believe. Creed, belief. Creek, Sa. a landing place
in a haven. Creem it into his hand, Che. put it in slily and secretly. Creeze,
a broad, sharp waved and envenomed Indian weapon about two foot long.
Crekelade, a Town in Wilts. Cremaster, g. ^he muscle that holds up the Stones.
Cremation, l. a burning. Crenated, l. notched. Crenelle (in heraldry) a line
dented like the battlement of a wall. Creon, he resigned his Kingdom of Thebes
to Oedipus for expounding Sphinxes riddle. Crepitation, l. a crackling noise.
Crepusculous, belonging to Crepuscule, l. twilight. Crescent, l. increasing.
Cressant, f. the figure of a half moon. Cressee, nose-smart. Cresset, o.
lanthorn, beakon. Crest, f. the upper part of an helmet and Escutcheon.
Crestmarine, Rock-samphire Cretians, -ian, belonging to Crete, Creet,
Hecatompolis the Isle Candy in the Mediterranean. Cretism, Creticism, lying,
perfidiousness. Crevequers, an ancient Family in Kent. Creuet, Crus^t, a
Goldsmiths melting-pot. Creusa, wife to Aeneas, lost by him coming out of Troy.
Crible, a sieve. Cribration l. a sifting. Crick, Crock, Cruche, f. an Earthen
pot or pitcher. Criminal, -nous, guilty, an offender, belonging to a Crime,
great fault. Crined, hairy. Crinel, belonging to the hair. Cringles, C^eengles,
little ropes spliced into the bolt-ropes of sails. Crinigerous, having or
wearing hair. Crinisus, a river of Sicily, which (in the form of a Bear)
ravishing Hegesta, begat Acastes King of Sicily. Crinites, the small black
feathers (like hairs) about the sere of a Hawk. Crenosity, hairiness.
Criplings, short spars on the side of a house. St. Crispin, Cre-, the Patron of
the Shooemakers. St. Crispins lance, an Awl. Crispitude, a being Crispid, l.
curled. Crist, a Crest, tuft, plume. Cristal, as Crystal. Cruicism, a playing
the Criti^k, one of a nice judgmen^, apt to censure. Critical, belonging
thereto. Critical days, wherein the disease comes to its Crisis, g. Judgment,
sudden change (for better or worse) viz. the odd days, and fourteenth
(especially.) Crithology, g. a gathering in the first fruits [of Corn.] Cro,
Croy, Sc. which the Judge (if he minister not justice) is to pay the nearest of
kin to a slain man. Crocard, an old forbidden Coin. Crocation, Crocita-, l. the
kawing of Crows, etc. Croc, sc. pot. Crock, e. to black with a pot or soot.
Croce, o. Shepherds staff. Croches, the little tips of the Hearts horns.
Crocolana, Ancaster in Lincolnshire. Crockets, o. locks of hair. Crocodile, an
Egyptian, Amphibious Creature shaped much like an Eft, but (sometimes) twenty
or thirty foot long. Cro^odiles tears, false, treacherous, because (they say)
he weeps when he devours a man. Crocus, g. Saffron, also flowers resembling it;
also a Chemical preparation, as Crocus Martis, a preparation of iron. Crocus
Veneris, of Copper, etc. Crocate, a certain beast imitating man's voice.
Croesus, a very rich King of Lydia, taken by Cyrus and made one of his Counsel.
Croft, a small close adjoining to a house. Crogen, Crogy, Br. hang. Crois, f. a
Cross. Croisada, the Popes Bull granting the sign of the cross to Christians
warring against Infidels. Croiseri, o. those for whom Christ suffered. Croises,
Pilgrims, also Knights of St. John in Jerusalem, created for the defense of
Pilgrims. Crokethorn, a Town in Somersetshire. Crokes, o. hooks. Crome, Corm,
o. an iron crow Crompe, o, a crop. Cromer, a Town in Norfolk. Cronical, as
Chronical. Crones, old Ews, So. Cronie, a contemporary disciple, or intimate
companion. Cronus, Diodorus the Philosopher, from his Master Apolonius Cronus.
Crool, o. mutter* growl. Crop, o. top. Croppin-ken, c. a privy. Crosier, a
Rishops staff. Cross avellane, whose ends shoot forth like a filberds husk.
Cross-fitched, fixed (in the coat of arms) with a sharp end. Cross fourche,
forked. Cross flurry, with a flower-de-luce at each end. Cross milrine, whose
ends are clamp'd and turned again like the milrine which carries the millstone.
Cross voided, when the field is seen through the cross. Cross-wort, whose
leaves and flowers both grow like crosses Cross-bar-shot, a round shot with a
long spike of iron (as it were put through it. Crosselet, f. a little cross,
also as Crucible. Cross-jack, a yard slung under the top of the mizzen-mast.
Cross-staff, an instrument to take the height of any thing. Crostrees, cross
pieces on the head of a mast. Crotaphique artery, a great sinew near the
Temples. Crotaphites, g. the two Temple-muscles. Crotch, the forked part of a
Tree. Crochet, half a minim, also a whimsey; also (in printing) the mark of a
parathesis, []. Crochets, a Foxes chief master teeth. Crotels, Croteying, the
ordure of a hare. Crotyth, -^th, o. dungeth. Cruch, o. cross, whence Crou^h, o.
bless [with a cross] Croupe, f. a butcock. Crow, a southern Constellation, upon
Hydra's tail. Crowfoot, yellow crey, a very biting plant. Crowland, a Town in
Lincolnshire, haunted with spirits till Guthlac (the Hermit) lived there.
Crownet, as Coronet. Crows-bill, an instrument to draw forth bullets, bones,
etc. Crowse* No. brisk. Crows-fect, small ship lines reev'd through the
dead-mens eyes (here and there for ornament. Croydon, a Town in Surrey.
Cruciate, l. afflict, torment. Crucible, a chymick-glass wherein things are
burnt and prepared for powdering. Cruci^ola, l. (cross-worshipper,) an old
Pagan name for a Christian. Cruciferi, Crouched, Crutched, Cruchet or Crossed
Friars, who came into England, 1244. Crucif^rous, cross-bearing. Crucify, l.
nail to a cross. Crucifix, the image of Christ upon the cross. Crucifixion, a
being Crucified. Crude, l. raw undigested. Crudity, rawness [of Stomach.]
Cruental, cruel, bloody. Cru^t, Crewet, Cruse, a vial or narrow-mouthed glass.
Cruise, Creffera, Sc. hogsty. Cruis, o. Prayers. Cruise, Cruse, Cross or
Coast, up and down at Sea [for prize, etc.] Crul, o. smooth, or [rather]
curled. C^uor, l. gore-blood. Crural, l. belonging to the Thighs. C^usk,
Crussel, o. grisle. Crusible, as Crucible. Crustaceous, l. crusted, or covered
with a hard shell. Cruzada, as Croisada. Cruzado, a Portugal piece of Gold
worth 10 s. Cruzet* as Crucible. Cryptick, -call, g. hidden, secret.
Cryptography, [the art of] secret writing. C^yptology, g. secret speaking,
whispering. Crystal, a bright transparent Mineral, like ice or the clearest
glass. Crystalline, belonging thereto. Crystalline humor, the first instrument
of sight, not flat nor round, seated in the center of the eye. Cubbridg-head,
as Bulk-head. Cubbridg-head before* the Bulk-head of the fore-castle.
Cubbridg-head abaft, the Bulk-head of the half-deck. Cubic, belonging to a
Cube, a solid square body of six equal sides, also the product of a square
number multiplied by its root. Cubebs, an Indian fruit like ivy-berries.
Cubical artery, a branch of the Axillar. Cubicular, l. belonging to a
Bedchamber. Cubit, a measure from the elbow to the fingers end. Cubiture, a
lying down. Cuchaneal, as Cochineal. Cucking-stool, Ducking-stool, Cokestool,
or Tumbrel. Cuckopint, Aram. a biting herb. Cucullated, l. having a Monks coule
(or hood) on Cucubite, howl or whoop like an Owl. Cucupha, caps quilted with
things good for the head. Cucurbate, l. a gourd, also a Cupping-glass, applied
to the body (with towe on fire) to raise a blister or draw blood. Cucuye, a
bird in Hispaniola, with eyes under the wings shining in the night. Cudwced,
Cottonweed. Cue, an Item given stage players, what or when to speak. Cuerpo,
sp. a body, also a corporation. In Cuerpo, without a cloak. Cuffin quire, c. a
Justice of Peace. Cui anti Devortium, a writ empowering a divorced woman to
recover her lands from him to whom her husband did (before the divorce)
alienate them. Cui in vita, a writ of entry (for a widow) upon her lands
alienated by her husband. Cuinage, the making up of Tin fit for carriage.
Cuirassier, f. one armed with a Cuirasse, -re^s, -rats, corslet, armor for the
back and breast. Culagium, when a ship is a repairing in the Dock. Cul^leis,
(q. cultores Dei) a sort of Religious people formerly in Scotland and Ireland.
Culerage, f. lechery, also the herb Arse-smart or Water-Pepper. Culinary,
belonging to the kitchen. Cullers, bad Sheep separated from the rest. Culleth,
o. pulls, enforces. Cullion-head, Schonce, Ba^^ion, Block-house. Cullion, a
fleshy stone. Cullis, the strained juice of boild meat. Culleton, a Town in
Devonshire Cullot, f. a cushion to ride post upon* Cully, I. a fool. Culm,
smoke or soot. Culminate, l. to get up to the top, also to appear (as a Planet)
in the Meridian* or Mid-heaven. Culpons, o. heaps, also little bits. Culrach
Col-, sc. a pledge or cautioner left for the repledging of a man from one Court
to another. Culpable, l. guilty, blameable. Cultivation, l. a manuring.
Culture, l. the same. Culver, So. Pigeon. Culv^rtage, faint heartedness, or
turning the tail [to run away.] Culverine, a piece of Ordnance. Culvertaile, a
fastening of boards (or any Timber) by letting one into another. Cumble, f.
full heaped measure* Cumae, an Italian City by the Seaside. Cumatical, blew
[colour.] Cumini sector, l. a niggardly divider of the small seed of Cummin, l.
a plant like (but less than) Fennel. Cumulation, l. a heaping up together.
Cunctation, l. a delaying. Cuneglass^s, a cruel Welsh Tyrant. Cuneus, a Mint.
Cuniculous, full of Cunicles, l. Mines or Cony-burroughs. Cunobelinus, King of
the Trinobantes, when Caesar entered Britain. Cuntey Cunty, a Jury, or trial by
ones Country. Cupidous, -dinous, full of Cupidity, l. lust, Covetousness.
Cup-glass, Cupping-glass, see Cucurbite. Cupulo, -polo, I. a high arch in a
building* a round loover. Cupreous, l. of Copper. Curator, overseer, provider
of necessaries. Cure bulli, Cuir bouillie, f. tanned Leather. C^rfew, f.
covering the fire (in the time of William the Conqueror) at the ringing of the
Curfeu-bell, eight a clock bell. Curia advisare vult, a deliberation in Court
before Judgment. Curia claudenda, against him that refuses to fence or enclose
his ground. Curia Penticiarum, the Sheriffs Court in Chester, under a pentice
or shed of boards. Curia Ottadinorum, supposed the same as Corstopitum.
Curialitas Scotiae, the courtesy of Scotland, equivalent to the Courtesy of
England. Curlew, a bird about the bigness of a Pigeon. Curnock, 4 bushels.
Curranto, f. a running French dance. Curricurre, -to, an East-Indian barge.
Curriedew, Curriedow, o. a curry-favour or flatterer. Current, l. a stream.
Cursiters, Cursitory, the office of 20 Clerks in Chancery who make out Original
writs. Curtezan, as Courtisan. Curt^sie, as Court^sie. Cursorily, in a slight
or running manner. Curteyn, the sword of King Edward the Confessor, carried
before the King at Coronations. Carteis, o courteous. Curtilage, as Courtelage.
Curvature, a bending, crookedness, a roundle. Curvetta, Corv-, I. the prauncing
of a Horse. Curvilineal, who is lines are crooked. Curvity, l. crookedness.
Curules, Roman Senators carried to Court in a Curule Chair, an ivory seat in a
chariot. Curule [wit,] Senatorian. Curvous, l. crooked. Cusco, a great City in
Armenia. Cuspidate, l. sharpen the point. Cuspe, the first beginning or
entrance of any house (in Astronomy.) Custance, o. for Constance or
Constantine. Custode admittendo, a writ for the admitting of a Guardian.
Custode amovendo, a writ for the removing a Guardian. Custody, l. safehold.
Customary, usual, see Custu-. Customary tenants, hold by the custom of the
manor. Custos brevium, keeper of the writs, in the Court of Common pleas.
Custos rotulorum* keeper of the rolls and records of the Sessions. Custos
placitorum coronae; seems to be the same. Custos Spiritualium, Guardian or
keeper of the Spiritualties during the vacancy of the Sea, viz. the Dean and
Chapter. Custrel, f. the servant of a man at arms or of a Lifeguard-man, as in
Henry 8. Customary, belonging to Custom, also the book wherein Customs are
recorded and described. Cuth, o. known, knowing, knowledge. Cuthbert, Sa.
famous knowledge. Cuthwin, skillful Victor. Cuticle, l. the thin skin which
covers the other all over the Body. Cuticular, full of pores or little holes.
Cutter of tallies, an Officer in the Exchequer. Cut, c. speak. Cut the sail,
let it fall. Cuttle fish, he escapes the fisher by obscuring the place about
him with an inky juice. Cutilia, an Italian Lake wherein is a moveable Island.
Cutlu-Muses, the second King of the Turks who took Jerusalem. Cutwater, the
sharpness of the ship before; also a false stem put on a ship that is too
bluffe. Cyamba, a City of Asia, which uses Coral instead of money. Cybel^,
Cib-, -elle, Berecynthia, Dindymene, Ops, Rhea, Vesta, Magna matter, or the
Mother of the Gods. Cyclades, g. Isole d^l Archipelago, I. 50 Islands in the
Aegean Sea. Cycle, g. Circle. Cycle of the moon, the space of 19 years. Cycle
of the Sun, 28 years, wherein their motions return to the same point.
Cyclometry, g. a measuring of Circles. Cyclopaedie, g. the whole Circle of Arts
and Sciences. Cyclopes, Bronte, Sterope, and Pyracmon (or Harp,) Vulcans
servants (with one eye in their forehead) who made thunderbolts for Jupiter.
Cyclopick, -pean, belonging to the foresaid giants, or the old inhabitants of
Sicily. Cycnus, the son of Mars killed by Hercules; also the son of Neptune
(invulnerable) stifled by Achilles kneeling on his neck. Cydonia^um, Marmalate
of Quinces. Cygnus, l. Swan. Cylindrical, pertaining to or like a Cylinder, g.
a Garden-roller, or any thing of that form; also the empty part of a laden
piece. Cymace, g. Carved work resembling waves. Cymbalist, he that plays on a
Cymbal, a Musical instrument of brass plates, resembling a small boat.
Cymraecan, -acean, -aeg, Br. Welsh. Cynanthropy, g. a man's conceiting that he
is a dog. Cynarctomachy, g. a fight betwixt dogs and bears, bear-baiting.
Cynegeticks, g. Treatises of Hunting. Cynegirus, -ris, an Athenian who (after
his hands were cut off) held his Enemies ship fast with his teeth. Cynical, g.
belonging to the Cynick (dogged) crabbed, severe Philosophers. Cynocephalist, a
baboon. Cynosure, g. (dogs tail) Vrsa minor, near the Northpole, directing
sailers. Cynorexie, -ia, g. Dog-hunger. Cynthia, Diana, twin-sister to
Cynthius, Apollo, born near Cynthus, a hill in Delos. Cyon, a young sprout from
an old tree. Cipher, as Cipher, to cast account, a thing of naught, etc.
Cyprian, belonging to Cyprus, an Isle in the Carpathian Sea dedicated to
Cypria, Venus. Cyprine, belonging to a Cypress-tree, once cut it never
reflourisheth. Cyrexaica, Pentapolitana, part of Africa. Cyricsceat, as
Churchesset. Cyrus, King of Persia, he overthrew the Assyrian Monarchy.
Cystick, belonging to Cystis, g. the bag of gall. Cystepatique artery, a branch
of the Caeliaque, to the liver and gall. Cystick vein, a branch of the
Port-vein, to the neck of the gall. Cyzicus* an Island in the Propontis, joined
to the Continent with two bridges. Czar, (q. Caesar) the great Duke or Emperor
of Muscovy.
D.
Daae, People inhabiting part of Scythia Europaea. Dabuze, a weapon (or mace)
carried before the Grand Signior. Dacker, Li. Waver, stagger. Dacia, part of
European Scythia. Dactyle, g. a finger, a date; also a foot of one long
syllable and two short. Dactylogie, discoursing by signs. Daddock (q. dead oak)
the rotten heart or Body of a tree. Daedalean, belonging to Daedalus* a famous
artist, Icarus father, author of the Cretian Labyrinth. Daemoniack, -call,
belonging to* also possessed of a Demon, g. Devil. Daemonologie, a treatise of
angels, spirits or Devils. Daff, o. Dastard, Coward; al^o ^o daunt, No.
Daffock, Dawgos, Dawkin, No. a dirty slut. Daffadil, Narcissus, a flower. Daft,
No. stupid, blockish. Dagged, o. dug, slitted. Dagges, o. Leather-latchets.
Dagge, D. a Dagger. Dagon, an idol having the upper part like a man, the rest
like a fish; also a piece or remnant, o. Dag-swain, a rough or course mantle.
Dakir, as Dicker. D'alanson, Dallison, a Noble family in Lincolnshire, Dalilah,
Del-, h. he drew* or was drawn [out or dry.] Dalmatia, part of Illyricum in
Greece. Dalmatian Cap, a Tulip, brought from Tulippa a Promontory of Dalmatia.
Dalmatick, a kind of vestment (white with purple studs) for Deacons or
Subdeacons; and another used by Archbishops. Dalrendini, Certain Scotch,
conquered by the Irish Renda. Damask prunes, Damasines, plums of Damascus, the
chief City of Syria. Damber, c. a rascal. Damiata, pelusium, a chief haven of
Egypt. Damage, f. hurt; also allowance (in Court) for damage done. Damage
Clear, a Gratuity given Protonotaries and their clerks for drawing special
Writs and pleadings (2 s. per pound.) Damage fefant, when beasts feed and
spoil in other men's grounds without leave. Dammask, fine stuff, first made in
Damascus. Damnation, l. a condemning. Damocrita, a Roman Matron who killed her
Daughters and herself, being forbidden to follow her banished husband Alcippus.
Dan, h. Judgment, also as Don, Monsieur, Sir, o. Danae, Daughter of Acristus
King of Argos. Danai, Grecians, from Danaus, Son of Belus and King of Argus.
Dancers, c. stairs. Dancet, like Indented, only the lines are deeper and wider.
Dandelion (Dent de lion, f.) piss-a-bed, a plant. Dandy-prats, a small coin
made by Henry 7. also little folks. Dandruff, -raff, head-scurfe. Dane-gilt,
-gelt, -geld, -gold, 12 d. paid the Danes for every hide of land. Danewort,
Wallwort or dwarf-elder. Dagwallet (q. Danglewallet) o. excessive. Dania,
Denmark. Daniel, h. Judgment of God. Danistick, belonging to a Danist, he that
takes Danisme, g. Usury. Dank, o. damp, moist. Danmonij, the people of
Devonshir and Cornwall. Dantis^um, Dantzick, -zig, a town in Poland. Dantoned,
o. tamed. Danubius, Ist^r, Danow, the greatest river in Europe. Danwort, as
Danewort. Dapatical, sumptuous. Daphne, flying from Apollo's lust was turned
into a Laurel or Bay Tree. Daphnaelian g. Oil of Bay. Daphmomancy, g.
Divination by Laurels. Dapifer, Sewer, that orders and serves up a Banquet.
Dapper, neat, spruce. Daping, angling near the top of the water. Dapocaginous,
I. low-spirited, narrow-hearted, of little worth. Darapti, a syllogism of the
two first Universal and the last a particular Affirmative. Darby (q. Derwentby)
built on the river Derwent. Darcy, D' Adrecy, an ancient family in
Lincolnshire. Dardanum, Troy, built by Dardanus, Son of Jupiter and Electra,
also a Magician. Dardanian art, Witchcraft. Dare, o. stare upon, also hurt, No.
Darick, a s. a coin of Darius, King of Persia. Darking, a town in Surrey.
Darkmans, c. night, evening. Darling, (q. Dearling) fondling. Darlington, a
Town in the Bishopric of Durham. Darnel, a rushy corn-weed very seedy. Darrein
[presentment,] f. the last. Darreign, Dar^n, o. attempt. Dartos, one of the
skins that enwraps the stones. Dartford, Darf-, Darenf-, a town in Kent, upon
Daren, a River there. Dartmouth, a town in Devon. Darij, a syllogism of the
first universal and the two last particular affirmatives. Dart, jaculus, an
ash-colored serpent darting it self from trees, etc. Datary, a Roman Office,
for the collation of Benefices. Date, the palm tree fruit, also the time of
writing a letter, etc. Dates, o. accounts. Datife, that may be given or
disposed of. Dation, l. a gift. Dathan, h. an Edict of law. Datisi, as Darij
(in another mood.) Datism, a heaping together Synonyma's or words of the the
same signification, from Datis a Nobleman of Greece. Dative, l. belonging to
giving. Dative Case, that which is put acquisitively, to or for ones use,
benefit or damage* Daudery, a town in Lincolnshire. Davitt, a piece of timber
with a notch at one end, whereon they hang the fish-block. Dav^nport, Damport,
a town in Cheshire, also an ancient family. Daventree, Daintry, a town in
Northamptonshire. David, h. beloved. Davids-staff, contains an entire quadrant
between the circle of the arched bases of two united triangles. Daulphin, or
Dolphin [of Viennes] the title of the King of France's eldest son. St. David's
day, March, 1. in Honor of St. David Archbishop of Menevy above 60 years. The
Leek denotes a great victory obtained against the Saxons by the Britains
wearing Leeks by St. David's direction. Daungere, o. a Trap. Dangerous, o. coy
or sparing. Daunsette, as Dancet. Dauntry, an ancient Family in Sussex.
Day-lights-gate, the going down of daylight. Dawe, o. dawn, also thrive, no.
Dawes, o. days. Dawkin, as Daffock. Days in bank, when the writ is to be
returned, or the party to appear. Days-man, Arbitrator. no. Dazed [bread,]
Dough-baked, Li. I 's Dazed, I Am very cold, no. Dea bona, the Goddess Fortuna,
and sometimes the Earth, called also Ops, Fatua, and Fauna, whipped to death with
myrtle by her husband Faunus, for being drunk with wine of Myrtle-berries. Dea
vi^i-placa, a Goddess in who is chapel man and wife were reconciled. Deaction,
l. a finishing or perfecting. Deacon, g. (Minister, Servant) a Church Officer
[looking anciently to the poor, now also] read^ng in the Church. Deadmans-eyes,
Ship blocks full of small ropes. Dead-pledge, Mort-gage, pawning of things for
ever, if the money be not paid at the time agreed on. Deafly, dearn, solitary,
fa^ from neighbors, no. Deadwater, the eddy water at the stern of a Ship.
Deafforetted, discharged from being a Forest, or freed from Forest Laws.
Dealbate, l. whiten. Deambulatory, l. walking up and down, also a walking
place. Deanrie, the Office and place of a Dean, set over [ten] Canons. Deans
rural, who have a Jurisdiction assigned by the Bishop over other Ministers and
Parishes adjoining. Dean-great, a Town in Glocestershire. Deark, as De^ark.
Deau^ation, l. gilding over. Debauch, to corrupt in manners, also as
Debaucherie, Desb^sh^rie, f. riot, disorderly revelling. Debellation, an
overcoming [in war.] Debenham, a Town in Suffolk. De been esse, when a
Defendants deposition is only allowed of, for the present. Debentur, (l. they
are owing) a bill charging the Commonwealth to pay the Soldier creditour his
arrears. Debet and solet, a writ of right, a suit to a mill, common of Pasture,
etc. Debilitation, l. a weakening. Debility, l. weakness. Debito* de debito, a
writ for money due by obligation or bargain. Debonairity, a being Debonair, f.
courteous, sprightly, complaisant. Deborah, h. a word or be. Deboistness, a
being Deboist, debauched. Debosherie, debauchery. Debulliate, l. seethe over.
Decachord, g. an instrument of ten strings, Decacuminate, l. take off the top
of any thing. Decade, g. a number of ten. Decadency, l. a falling down
Decadist, a writer of Decads, as Livy, etc. Decagon, g. a figure of ten angles
or corners. Decalogue, g. the ten Commandments. Decameron, g. Boccaces* book of
Fables in 10 parts. Decant, l. report, sing enchant Decantation, l. a praising,
also the pouring off of liquor settling by inclination. Decapitation, l. a
beheading. Decapolis, g. part of Syria. Decark, g. a Governor of ten. Decede,
l. depart. December* l. the 10th. month from March. Decempedal, of ten foot.
December tales, the Judges granting a supply of ten such Jurors as do appear, or
as are not excepted against. Decemvirate, the office and authority of the
Decemviri, ten Romans chosen to govern instead of the two Consuls. Decenna, see
Deciners. Decennial, l. of ten years. Deception, l. a deceiving. Deceptione, a
writ against him that does any thing deceitfully in the name of another.
Deceptive, l. apt to deceive. Decerp, l. pluck off or away, gather. Decerption,
l. a cropping off. Decertation, l. a striving. Decession, a departing.
Deciduous, hanging or falling down. Decies tantum, ten times as much,
reco^erable from the Juror bribed to give his verdict. Decimal, belonging to
the number of ten. Decimate, l. to tithe or take the Tenth. Decimate, l. a
tithing, also punishing every tenth man. De decimis solvendis, a writ for
recovery of Tithes of them that had farmed the Priors aliens Lands of the King.
Decenna, -ary, the jurisdiction of the Deciners, Decenniers, Deziners, who were
to keep the Peace within ten Friburghs. Decide, l. determine controversies.
Decircinate, l. bring out of compass, unbind. Decision, a determining or ending
of a controversy. Decisive, -sorry. apt to determine. Decius, a Roman Emperor
who persecuted Christians. Deck, floor [of a ship.] Declaim, l. to make a
Declamation, crying out, also an Oration. Declarative, which does Declare, l.
make a Declaration, manifestation, showing forth, also a showing the Plantiffes
grief in writing. Declension, Declination, a declining, bending or bowing
[down,] also the variation of Cases in Nouns, etc. Declinator, an instrument to
take the Declination of Planets, their distance from the Equator. Declivity,
l. steepness. Decoctible, easy to be sodden. Decoction, l. a boiling away.
Decollation, l. a beheading. Decomposite, -pound, l. compounded of more than
two. Deconate, as Decury. Decoped, o. copped, peaked. Decor, l. comeliness.
Decorate, beautify. Decorticate, pill off the rind. Decoration, l. an
adorning. Decortication, a pulling off the bark. Decorum, l. decency,
comeliness, order. Decretist, one that studies the Decrees, Decretals, a volume
of the Canon Law compiled by Gratian a monk. Decrement, l. a decreasing.
Decrements, are paid by Schoars for the use (or wasting) of things at College.
Decrepit, l. weak [with age.] Decressant, l. waining. Decretaliark, an absolute
Commander. Decrustation, a taking away the rind or crust. Deculcate, l.
trample on. Decumbence, l. a lying down. Decumbiture, l. the taking ones bed,
or first lying down in a sickness. Decuple, l. ten fold. Decurion, l. the chief
of a Decuria, a company often. Decursion, a running down. Decussate, l. to make
a Decussation, l. a cutting in the form of an X. Decussion, l. a shaking off.
Decutient, shaking or beating down. Dedalus, as Daedalus. Deed, o. death.
Dedecoration, l. a disgracing. Dedentition, l. a shedding of Teeth. Dedi, (l. I
have given) a warranty to the Feoffee and his Heirs. Dedignation, l. a
disdaigning. Dedimus potestatem, a delegation or commission to a private man
for the speeding some Judicial act. Deeping-market, a Town in Lincolnshire.
Neither Dees nor Daws, No. neither dies nor mends. Dedition, l. a surrendering.
Deed, o. dead. Deeds, writings of contract. Deemsters, Demsters, Judges (in the
Isle of man) deciding all controversies, without process, charges, etc.
Deep-sea-lead, about fourteen pound hung at the Deep-sea-line, to sound in deep
waters. Dees, o. a Canopy. De essendo quietum de Tolonio, privilege from
payment of Toll. Deesis, g. beseeching, earnest entreaty or calling to witness.
De expensis militum, a writ to levy 4 s. per day, a Knight of the Shires
expenses. Defailance, f. a failing. Defaited, o. decayed. Defatigable, easily
wearied. Defatigation, l. a wearying. Defamation, l. a slandering. Defaulking,
f the same as Defalcation, l. an abating or cutting off De facto, actually
done. Default, omission of what we ought to do. Defeasance, Defeis-, f. the
making void an act, obligation, etc. by performing a condition thereto annexed.
Defecated, refined. Defecation, l. a refining or cleansing [from dregs.]
Defection, l. a failing, also revolting or falling away. Defend, f. forbid.
Defendant, f. he that is sued in an action personal, as Tenant in an action
real. Defendemus, a binding the Donour to defend the Donee. Defender of the
Faith, a Title of the Kings of England, given Henry the 8th. by Leo.10. 1521.
Defenestration, a throwing out at window. Defeneration, a taking of money upon
usury. Defensatives, medicines diverting the humor. Deficiency, l. a want or
failing. De fide, l. of Faith, necessary to believed. Define, l. make a
Definition, explication, an unfolding the essence of a thing [by the genus and
difference.] Definite, certain, limited. Definitive, limiting or determining.
Deflagration, a burning. Deflection, -exure, a turning down or away. Defletion,
a bewailing. Defloration* l. the same as Deflowring, ravishing. Defluxion, l. a
flowing down [of humors.] Deft, o. little and pretty. Deforcement, a forcible
withholding lands, etc. Deformatio, as Prosop^paea. Deformity, l. a being
Deformed, ugly, misshapen. Deforsour, -ceor, -ciant, he that dispossesses one
by force, as Desseisour, without force. Defouled, o. shamed. Defray, make free,
also to pay [anothers] charges. Defunct, l. dead. Defy, to challenge.
Degenerous, he that does Degenerate, l. fall from the [better] kind, from
virtue, to vice, etc. Deglutination, l. an unglueing. Deglutition, l. quick
devouring, also the appetite of swallowing. Degow^dy, o. moulting. Degrade, l.
cast down [from Office or Honor.] Degradation, a degrading. Degrandinate, l.
to hail much. Degree, f. a step or stair, a state or condition, also (in
Astronomy) the 30th. part of a Sign. Dehort, l. dissuade. Dehortation, a
dissuading. Deianira, Hercule's wife, who slew her self, because he burnt
himself to avoid the torment caused by the shirt she gave him (to gain his
love) presented her by the Centaure Nessus wounded by Hercules's arrow, for
attempting to ravish her when carried by him over the River Evenus. Deiden, o.
died. Deicide, l. a killer of God. Dejeration, l. a solemn swearing.
Deiformity, the form of God. Deifie, l. make a God of one. Deiphobus, Priam's
Son, who causing Paris to be murdered, married his wife Helena. Deignous, o.
disdainful. Deintie, o. desire or dainty. Deipnosophists, g. wise men
discoursing at supper. D^irie, o. dairy. Deis, o. a seat. Deists,
Anti-Trinitarians. Deity, l. Godhead. Delamere, a Forest in Cheshire.
Delatour, l. an accuser, informer. Delayed [wine] mingled with water. Delegate,
l. appoint another in ones stead, also he that is so appointed. Delenifical,
mitigating, pacifying. Deleted, defaced, destroyed. Deletry, [medicines] deadly
venomous. Deletorious, apt to blot or raze out. Deletion, l. a bloting out.
Delgovitia, supposed to be Wighton in Yorkshire. Delibation, l. tasting, also a
sacrificing. Deliberate, l. with advice, leisure and consideration.
Deliberation, a debating or consulting. Delibrate, l. peel off the bark.
Delict, l. offense. Delignate, destroy wood. Delimate, l. file off. Delineate,
l. draw the first draught of a picture, also to describe. Delinquent, l.
offender. Deliquium, a fainting away, also the dissolving of a hard body (as
salt, etc.) into liquor, in a moist place. Delirous, belonging to or full of
Deliration, -rium, a doting. Deliver, o. active, nimble. Delian-twins, Apollo
and Diana born in Delos, chief of the Aegaean Cyclade-Isles. Delle, o. Dike.
Dell, Doxy, c. a wench. Delph, an abatement in the midst of an Escucheon,
proper to him that revokes his challenge and eats his own words. Delphick,
belonging to Delphos, a Town of Phocis in Greece, famous for Apollo's Oracle
and Temple. Deltoton, g. a Constellation resembling the greek delta Delusion,
l. a deceiving o^ being Deluded, deceived. Deluge, f. flood, inundation* Dely,
o. little. Demagogue, g. leader of the people, head of a party. Demain, -mean,
f. manage. Demandant, in real actions is the same as Plaintiff in personal
ones. Demean, behave, also bemoan, o. Demene, o. dwell. Demeanor, behavior.
Dementation, a making or being besides ones self. Demesne, Demean, f. land
holden originally of ones self* Demerit, an ill deserving. Demas and Gesmas,
(in the Gospel of Nicodemus) the two thieves crucified with Christ. Demetrius,
belonging to Demeter, g. Ceres. Demi- l. half-. Demi-chase, f. half-hunting,
Summer-riding-boots. Demigrate, l. flit, remove. Demin, o. a Judge. Demipho, g.
light of the people. Demise, l. farm or let out. Demission, a casting down or
abasement. Demit, l. lay down, to humble. Democratical, belonging (...)
Democracy, g. a Government whose Magistrates (...) chosen from among and by the
people. Democritick, belonging to Democritus, a Philosophe^ who laughed at all
the world and (for contemplation sake put out his own eyes. Demolition, a
demolishin^ casting down and ruinating. Demonachation, an expelli^^ from, or
forsaking the Monkish order. Demoniack, as Daemonia^ Demonicracy, the
Government of Devils. Demonstrative, belongi^^ to Demonstration, l. a showing
or making plain. Demonologie, a discourse of or with Devils. Demophoon,
succeeding his Father Theseus (in the Government of Athens) forgot Phillis whom
he had married in Thrace, driven thither by storm, whereupon she hanged her
self on an Almond-tree. Demosthenes, a famous Orator, that was banished by
Philip of Macedon and poisoned himself. Demur, -rrer, f. stop at any case of
difficulty. Demi, an half-fellow [at Magdalen College in Oxon.] Denariata
terrae, a farding-deal, or farundel of Land, the 4th. part of an acre. Denary,
the number of 10, also as Deneer, -ier, f. the tenth (now the 12th.) part of a
penny. Denbigh, a Town in Wales. Denwere, o. double. Dene, o. a small valley,
contrary to down. Dendrologie, the or a discourse of Trees. Dene-lage, the law
of the Danes before the Conquest. Denis, Dionysius, a man's name, Denis, Diana,
a woman's name. Deneck, a. the swans tail. Deneck eleced, a. the Lions tail.
Deneck alibedi, a. the bowing of the back, or doubling of the tail of the Goat.
Denigrate, l. make black. Denizon, Dennizen, (q. Danes Son, or Dinesidd, Br.
Citizen) an alien infranchised and made capable of Office or purchasing, but
not of inheriting by descent (as one that is naturalized.) Dennington, a Castle
in Berks, once the residence of Chaucer. Denomination, l. the giving of a name.
Denshire, Devonshire. Denotation, a marking. Dense, l. thick. Densitie, l.
thickness. Dent, indented like the teeth of a saw, also dint, blow, impression,
o. Dental, belonging to the Teeth, also a small shellfish like a dogs tooth.
Dentati, l. such as are born with teeth. Dentelli, Asseri, the teeth above the
Cymatium (in Architecture.) Denticle, l. a little tooth. Dentifrice, l. any
thing to rub the teeth with. Dentiloquent, l. lisping [through the teeth.]
Dentiscalp, l. a tooth-picker. Dentition, l. a breeding teeth. Denudation, l. a
making bare or naked. Denumerate, pay down. Denuntiation, l. a denouncing or
proclaiming. Denwere, o. doubt. Deobturated, l. shut or stopped from. Deodand,
a thing devoted (sold for the poors use) to expiate the mischief it has done,
as a Cart running over and killing a man, etc. De Deoneranda pro rata
portionis, when one is distrained for rent payable by others in proportion with
himself. Deosculation, l. an eager kissing. Deperdeux, (De par dieu) f. from
God. Departer, -ture, waving the first thing pleaded (being replied to) and
producing another. Departers, parters, finers* refiners of Gold or Silver from
the courser sort. Departure in despite of the Court, when a Defendant appears
to an action; but makes default in not appearing afterward. Departed even, o.
equally mixed, or divided. Depauperate, l. make poor. Depeculation, l. a
stealing from the public. Depeloupe, o. (for Deve-) transparent. Depend, l.
hang or rely upon. Dependence, -cy, a relying or staying upon. Depension, l. a
weighing or paying. Dep^ford, West-Greenwich in Kent. Depilatory, that which is
apt to Depilate, take away hair. Depilation, a making bald. Depilous, bald
without wool, fur, or hair. Deploration, l. a bewailing. Deplantation, a taking
up of Plants. Deplume, l. strip off Feathers. Depolition, a polishing.
Deponent, l. laying down, he that does Depose, -site, l. lay down upon oath.]
Deponent verbs, which have laid aside their passive signification.
Depopulatores agrorum, those that are guilty of Depopulation; l. a spoiling,
wasting or unpeopling [of a Country.] Deportation, l. a carrying away.
Deportment, f. carriage, behavior. Depositary* he that keeps a Depositum, l.
a pledge in Feoffee or trust. Deposition, a laying down, an oath, also death.
Depravation, l. a spoiling or making naught. Depraed^tion, l. a preying upon,
robbery. Depredable, that may be robbed or spoild. Deprecation, l. a praying
against [judgments, etc.] Depre^ate, divert by Prayer. Deprehension, l. a
taking unawares. Depression, l. a pressing down Depretiate, beat down the
price. Deprivation, l. a bereaving. Deprome, l. draw forth. Depromption, l. a
bringing out. Depudication, l. a deflouring. Depulsion, l, a driving from.
Depuration, a cleansing [of a wound.] Deputy, one appointed in the stead of
another. Dequace, o. dash, (q. Dequash.) Dequantitate, to lessen the quantity.
Deradiation, l. a casting forth of rays or beams. Derbent, a famous Port in
Persia. Derbices, people of Asia who eat their kindred at 70 year old. Derceto,
half woman, half fish, an Idol Goddess at Askalon. Dercyllidas, a famous
Lacedemonian Commander against the Persians. Dear, o. to hurt, grieve. D^reham
East, a Town in Norf^lk. Dereliction, l. an utter forsaking. Derelinquish, l.
utterly to forsake. Derein, Deraign, prove an action. Dereinment, proof, also
turning aside, departure. D^rham, a Town in Glocestershire. D^rick, Theodorick.
Derision, l. a laughing to scorn. Derivation, a drawing from the Fountain or
Original. Dertmouth, a port-Town in Dev^nshire. Derogatory, apt to Derogate,
disparage, diminish. Derogation, a detracting from the worth of any thing.
Deruncination, l. a weeding out. Dervises, -veeshes, a strict and severe sort
of Relig^o^s T^rks. Desarcinate, unload. D^s^alsas, Spanish bare-leg^d ^ryers.
Descant, the answering of quick notes in one part to a slower measure in the
other, also as Comment. Descent, l. a going down, also a pedigree. Descention,
a going or faling down. Deschevel, as Dischevel. Describe, l. to make a
Description, imperfect definition, showing the nature or property of a thing.
Descry, discover a far off. Desecate, l. cut off. Desection, l. a cutting down
Desecrate, degrade, discharge from holy Orders. D^sart, -sert, l. wilderness.
Des^rt, f. merit. Desertion, l. a forsaking. Deserter, -tor, l. renegado, that
leaves one Religion, Prince or Captain for another D^siccative, apt or able to
dry up. Desiccation, l. a drying up. Desiderate, l. to desire. Desiderative,
desiring [to do what the primitive verb signifies.] Desidery, o. desire, lust.
D^signation, l. design, f. a purposing or contriving. Desidious, l. negligent.
Desipience, l. foolishness, dotage. D^sist, l. leave off. Deslavy o. (q.
deslawy) lawless, leacherous, beastly. Desmonia, Desmond in Ireland.
Desolati^n, l. a laying or a lying waste. Desolate, l. forsaken, left alone. De
son tort Demesne, f. the trepass was done of his own head, without command of
Master, etc. Despection, l. a looking downwards. Desperation, l. a despairing
or giving over. Despicable, l. base, to be slight^d. Despoliation, l. a robbing
or spoiling. Despond, l. to despair. Despondence, -cy, l. a being cast down,
quite disheartened Despondingly, despairingly* Desponsation, l. a betrothing.
Despotical, belonging to (...) Despote, g. Lord, Governor. Despumation, l. a
taking of the scum or froth. Dessert, f. the last course (...) a Feast.
Destination, l. an appointing. Destiny, fate. Destitute, l. forsaken, wanting.
Destitution, l. a forsaking. Destrer, o. a war-horse. Destruction, l. a
destroying. Desuetude, l. a disuse, desisting from any custom. Desultorious,
-ry, l. belonging or given to leaping (...) vaulting; also unconsta^* mutable.
Desumption, l. a Choosing o^ taking out. Detection, l. a discovering or laying
open. Detenebrate, l. dispel or (...) away darkness. Detention, l. a
withholding. Deterioration, a making worse. Determination, a purposing
appointing. Deterred, l. affrighted, ^^^^couraged. Detersion, l. a wiping or
clea^^sing. Detestation, an abhorring Dethrone, l. to depose or (...) from the
Throne. Detinue, f. a writ (...) him that refuses to (...) goods delivered him
to (...) Detonation, a thundri^^ down, also driving away (...) impure
Sulpherous and (...) parts of a body. Detorsion, a wresting a^way. Detraction,
l. a drawing ^^way, also a slandering. Detrectation, a drawing (...) a
refusing. Detrimental, having or bringing Detriment, l. damage. Detrition, l.
a wearing away. Detrite, worn out, bruised, consumed. Detrusion, a thrusting
away. Detruncation, a cutting off [limb or branch.] Deturpation, l. a defiling.
Devastation* a laying waste. Devastaverunt bona Testatoris, a writ against
Executors for paying Legacies and debts without specialties, to the prejudice
of Creditors having specialties. Deucalidonians, the Picts in the West of
Scotland. Deucalion and Pyrrha, all that were saved in the General flood,
restored mankind by throwing stones over their heads. Devection, l. a carrying
away or down. Divest, uncloath, deprive. Devexity, l. the hollowness of a
valley, a bending down. Devils-drop, [the relics of a beacon on] a high hill
at Dover. Devils-bit, a plant who is root seems bitten [by the Devil, out of
envy to mankind, for its rare virtues.] Devenerunt, a writ commanding the
Escheatour to enquire what lands came to the King, by the death of the Kings
tenant. Developed, f. unfolded. Deviation, l. a going astray. Devious, l.
-iant, f. wandering, out of the way. Devirgination, a taking away Virginity.
Devinals, f. wizards, or their predictions. Devise, Div-, bequeath by will,
also to declare or tell* o. Devisee, to whom goods are Devised or bequeathed.
Devise, Motto, conceit, impress in a Coat of arms, etc. Devises, -izes, a Town
in Wilts. Devonshiring, Den-, of land, is improving it by spreading on it the
Ashes of burnt ^urfs. Deumo, an East-Indian Idol. Devoir, f. duty. Devolve, l.
roll down. Devolution, l. a rolling or falling from one to another. Devote, l.
vow, consecrate. Devotion, l. a consecrating, also piety, a being Devout,
Religious. Deuseaville, c. the Country. Deuswins, c. twopence. Deusan, any hard
lasting fruit. Deuterogamy, g. second marriage. Deuteronomy, g. the second law,
a repetition of it. Deuteral, pertaining to a second or weaker [wine, etc.]
Deutroscopy, g. a second aim, intention or thought. Dewclaw, the little nail
behind the foot of a Deer, etc. Dewlap, the skin hanging under the Oxes throat.
Dex, o. for Desk. Dexterity, l. a being Dexterous, handy, active. Dexter
aspect, contrary to the succession of the signs. Dexter point (in heraldry)
begins in the Chief of the right corner. Dexter-Epiploik vein, the 2d branch of
the spleen-vein, passing to the Epiploon and Colon. Dextral, a bracelet for the
right arm. Dey, o. Dairy-woman. Diab^tical, troubled with Diabetes, g. the
running of ones water without any stay. Diabolical, g Devilish. Diacalaminthe,
a powder of mountain Calamint. Diacatholicon, a Composition of universal use.
Diachylon, a softening and concocting plaster of juices or mucilages.
Diacodium, a syrup of poppy-tops and water. Diaconal, belonging to a Deacon.
Diacope, as Diastole Diacydonium, Marmalade of Quinces. Diacyminon, g.
Diacuminum, l. a Composition of Cummin, etc. Diadem, g. a linen wreath for the
head [of Kings;] also a Crown. Diaeresis, g. Division, also the mark thereof on
the head of a vowel (). Diagalanga, a Confection of Galingale, and hot spices,
for the wind-cholick, etc. Diagnostick, discerning, also apparent at present,
also a sign or mark of distinction [in herbs, etc.] Diagonal, g. passing from
corner to corner. Diagram, g. a decree, title of a book, Geometrical figure,
also a proportion of measures in music. Diagraphical, belonging to the art of
painting or graving. Diagrydium, the prepared juice of Scammony-roots.
Dialacca, a confection of the gum Lacca, etc. Dialectick, belonging to Dialect,
Logic, speech; also a particular propriety or Idiom of the same speech. Dial,
belonging to the day. Diallel [lines] running cross and cutting one another.
Dialogism, a man's reasoning with himself. Dialogical, belonging to Dialogue, a
discourse between two. Dialyto, as Asyndeton. Diamargariton, a restorative
pearl-powder. Diamber, a Confection of Amber and hot spices. Diamerdis, a
Confection of Pilgrims salve, also a shitten ^ellow. Diametrical, belonging to
Diameter, a straight line drawn through the center. Diamond, Adamant, g.
untamable (by reason of the hardness.) also the Rhomb or pick at cards.
Diamoschu, a medicinal musk-powder. Diana, the maiden Goddess of woods and
hunting, twin-sister to Apollo, by Jupiter and Latona: the Moon. Diano^tick,
belonging to Dianaea, Consideration, also argumentation. Diapasm, Pomander or
perfume of dry powders. Diapase, -son, g. an Eight, the most perfect concord.
Diapente, a fifth, also a Farriers composition of Myrh, Gentian, Birthwort,
Ivory, and Bay Berries. Diahexapla, the same with an addition of Honey. Diaper,
linen wrought with flourishes and figures. Diaper'd, -pred, [bordure] in
heraldry, where it is fretted all over, and something appearing within the
frets. Diaper. (in painting) overrun the finished work with branches, etc.
Diaphanous, g. that may be seen or shon through. Diaphanity, transparency.
Diaphonicon,, an electuary of dates, etc. Diapnoetica, medicines to ripen a
swelling. Diaprunum, an electuary of Damask-prunes, etc. Diaphonist, he that
makes a Diaphony, a discord or harsh sound. Diaphora, g. difference.
Diaphoretick, piercing through, discussing [humours.] Diaphragmatick, belonging
to the Diaphragm, a fence, a partition; the skin, muscle, midriff or apron
parting the breast and stomach. Diapaedesis, the sweating of blood. Diaporesis,
a doubting, (either real or feigned.) Diarrhoetick, belonging to a Diarrhaea, a
gentle flux of of the belly, without inflammation. Diary, l. a day-book. Dias,
drive away death with Dias and Dragges, i. e. dullness and dregs, or (perhaps)
Diets and Drugs. Diasantalon, a confection of the wood Sanders. Diasatyrion, an
Electuary of Satyrion, etc. Diascordium, an Electuary of S^ordium, etc.
Diasena, -senna, -sonna, an Electuary of Sena, etc. Diastole, Extension,
prolonging a short syllable; also that motion of the pulses which dilates the
heart and arteries, as Systole contracts them. Diasyrmus, g. an extolling of a
person (or thing) by way of derision. Diatessaron, a fourth (in music,) also a
plaster of four ingredients, Diatonick music, plain-song Diatraganth, a
confection of the gum Traganth etc. Diatribe, a place where Orations and
disputations are held. Diatrionpipereon, a medicine of 3 sorts of pepper.
Diatyposis a very exact and lively description of a thing. Diaturbith, an
Electuary of Turbith, etc. Dibble, a forked setting-stick. Dicacity, l.
taunting or mocking. Dicaearchy, g. Government by a Dicaearch, g. a just Prince
or Governor. Dicaeologia, a brief expressing the justice of a cause. Dication,
Dedication, l. a devoting or consecrating. Dichling, a town in Sussex.
Dichotomy, g. a cutting in two, dividing a discourse. Dicker [of Leather] t^n
hides Dictamen, l. a thing written by the instruction of another. Dictate, l.
tell one what he should write, also an English dictated for translation, etc.
Dictitate, l. speak often, plead. Dickins, Devilkins, little devils. Dictature,
l. the same as Dictatorship, the Office of a Dictator, who is word was a law,
chosen upon great and urgent Occasions. Dictionary, l. Lexicon, ga. store house
of words orderly digested and explained. Dictum, Diganway in Caernarvanshire.
Dictum de Kenelworth (Castle in Warwickshire.) a composition between King Henry
3d. and the Barons, etc. for their Estates forfeited in that Rebellion.
Dictynna, Diana. Dido, Queen of Carthage in Africa, she killed herself, because
Aenaeas would not marry her, or (rather) because she would not be forced to
marry Jarbas King of Getulia. Didapper, diver, a bird. Didram, g. a Roman coin
of fifteen pence. Didactick, -ical, g. doctrinal, instructive. Didascalick,
pertaining to a Master or Teacher. Didder, No. quiver [with cold.] Didymus, g.
Thomas, h. a twin. Diem clausit extremum, a writ for the Escheator to enquire
into the Estate and next Heir of a Kings Tenant. Diennial, l. of two years.
Dies datus, a respite given (by the Court) to the Tenant or Defendant.
Dieretick, belonging to Dieresis, as Diaeresis. Diespit^r, Lucetius, Jupiter.
Diet, a German Parliment. Dieta rationabilis, a reasonable days journey.
Dietary, treating of or be-belonging to a Diet Dietical, daily, regular.
Dietetical, belonging to a prescribed Diet. Dieuet mon droit, f. God and my
right. First used (they say) by Hen. 8. Diezeugmenon, Epiz-, g. the reference
of several clauses to one verb. Diffamation, Def-, l. a taking away ones good
name. Diffarreation, l. a Roman ceremony at divorcement. Diffibulate, l.
unbutton. Difficulty, -cacity, l. hardness uneasiness. Difficilitate, make
difficult. Diffidence, l. a doubting mistrusting. Diffident, l. distrustful.
Diffoded, l. dug. Difflation (in Chemistry) when Spirits (through heat) are
blown and coagulated in the adverse Camera, a blowing down or about.
Diffluence, l. a flowing asunder or several ways. Diffusion, l. shedding
abroad, dilating of a substance into more parts. Digamist, -ite, as Bigamist.
Digamma, g. an Aeolick letter, in force and figure like the Latin F. Digestive,
(in Surgery) that which prepares for cleansing. Digestion, l. a disposing,
concocting. Digests, l. Pandectes, g. a Volume of the Civil law. Dight, No.
decked, made ready; also to foul or dirty one, Che. Digit, any single figure in
Arithmetic. Digital, l. of a finger. Digitation, a showing or pointing with
the fingers, also an expressing the form of them. Digladiation, l. a combating
[with swords.] Digne, f. Worthy, neat, gentle, also disdainful. Dignitary, a
Church Officer without cure of Souls, as Dean, etc. Dignity, l. honor,
advancement. Dignities of Planets, their being in their own houses,
exaltations, triplicities and faces. Dignorate, to set a mark on Dignosce, l.
discern, distinguish. Digression, l. a going aside. Dijudication, l. deciding a
difference. Dike-Grave, D. Overseer of the Low Country Dikes and Banks.
Dilaceration, l. a rending or tearing asunder. Dilaniation, l. tearing in
pieces [like a Butcher.] Dilapidation, l. a taking away of stones, also a
wasting. Dilatable, l. capable of Dilatation, l. a widening. Dilatory, -ter, a
Surgeons widening instrument. Dilatory, l. making delays. Dildo,
passa-tempo, I. penis succedaneus. Dilection, affection, love. Dilemma, g. a
forked or horned syllogism, where two propositions are so framed, that neither
can well be denied. Dill, an herb resembling fennel. Dilling, Darling, a Child
born when the parents are old, the youngest. Diloricate, rip a sewed coat.
Dilstone, Divelstone, a town on Divelsburn, a River in Northumberland. Dilucid,
l. clear, manifest. Dilucidation, l. a making clear. Dilute, -ed [wine] mingled
with water. Diluvial, belonging to a flood. Dimber, c. pretty. Dimension, l.
the just measure or proportion, length, breadth, depth. Dimetient, l.
measuring. Dimetae, the ancient inhabitants of Caermarthen, Cardigan and
Pembrokeshire. Dimication, l. a skirmishing. Dimidiation, l. a dividing in the
midst. Dimidietas, the one half. Dimocks, an ancient family in Cheshire.
Diminutive, l. little, diminishing the signification of the primitive,
blemishing or staining a part of the Escucheon, also lessening a pillar all
along by degrees. Dimissory, dismissing, discharging. Dimissory, [letters] of
appeal. Dinah, h. Judgment. Dinarchy, g. a government by two. Dingle, a small
valley between two steep hills. Ding, No. beat, also a blow, also to sling.
Diocese, g. the jurisdiction of a Diocesan, a Bishop. Dioclesian, a Roman
persecuting Emperor, who (after two years) resigned his Crown for a private
life. Diogenes, a Cynic, churlish Philosopher, who dwelt in a kind of tub.
Diomedes, King of Aetolia, one of the chiefest Hero's at the Trojan wars: also
a King of Thrace who fed his horses with man's flesh, till Hercules gave them
him for their meat. Dionymal, g. of two names. Dyonisia, a gemm which being
bruised and drunk, tastes like wine and resists drunkenness. Dionysius (of
Bacchus) Denis. Dioptick art, searching by perspectives the distances of
planets. Dioptrical, belonging to a Dioptra, a Geometrical quadrat. Diphryges,
the dross of brass, sticking (like ashes) to the bottom of the furnace.
Dipthong, g. a double or compound sound, as ei, ai, oy, ou. Diple, a marginal
mark for the correcting of a fault. Diploma, letters patent, a writ or Bull.
Dipondiary, l. of 2 pound weight. Dipsas, a serpent who is biting brings a
deadly thirst. Dipseiline, as Deep-sea-line. Diptote, g. a noun of two cases
only. Dipty^hs, g. tables with the names of famous men recited at the Altar,
the living on one side, dead on the other. Dire, l. cruel, dreadful. Direction,
l. instruction, putting in the right way. Direct, straight. Direct Planet,
moving on in its natural course. Number of direction, the 35 years between the
highest and lowest falling of the moveable Feasts. Directory, apt to direct or
put in the right way, also a book of rules for Divine service, instead of the
Common Prayer Book. Diremption, l. a separation or setting apart. Direption, l.
a taking or snatching away, a robbing or plundering. Dirge, (for Dirige, l.)
Prayers for the dead. Diribitory, the place of mustering and paying Soldiers*
Dirity, l. terribleness. Diruption, l. a bursting in sunder. Dirutor, l. he
that destroys or pulls down. Disability, a being [made] incapable. Disalt, to
disable. Disamis, a Syllogism whose middle proposition is an universal
affirmative, the other two particular. Di^ard, a block-head. Disarmed [Deer]
when the horns are fallen. Dis^^scatio, assarting, turning wood-ground to
arable or pasture. Discalceate, l. unshooe. Discarcatio, an unloading.
Disaster, f. misfortune. Disastrous, unlucky. Disceit, deceit, deception.
Descent, an order or means whereby land is derived to a man from his Ancestors.
Disceptation, l. contentious disputing. Disceptator, a Judge or Arbitrator.
Dis^^rn, perceive, distinguish. Discerption, l. a tearing in pieces.
Discession, l. a departing. Discever, o. spend, consume. Discheveled [hair.] f.
hanging loose, out of order. Discinct, l. ungirded, careless. Disciple, l.
Scholar, learner. Disciplinable, capable of Discipline, l. order, instruction,
correction. Disciplinants, Friars that scourge themselves. Disclaimer, an
express denial or refusal (in law.) Disclaim, f. renounce. Disclose, reveal,
discover. Disclosed [hawks,] newly hatched. Disclusion, a shutting out.
Discolor, l. of diverse colors. Discolor, l. to change into another color.
Discomfiture, f. a routing or vanquishing an enemy. Disconsolate, f.
comfortless. Discontinue, f. leave or break off. Discontinuance, -uity,
interruption or breaking off. Discontinuance of possession, a man's incapacity
of entering on his own alienated lands, except in a legal way. Discontinuance
of Plea or Process, when (the opportunity of prosecution being lost) the suit
must be begun afresh. Discontinued, put without day, finally dismissed the Court
for that time. Discordance, l. disagreement Discords [in Music,] harsh,
disagreeing notes. Discrasy, as Dyscrasy. Discount, set off, count how much
less you have to pay. Discrepance, l. a differing. Discrepant, l. disagreeing.
Discretion, l. a distinguishing, also prudence. Discriminating, distinguishing.
Discrimination, l. a putting of a difference between things. Discubation, the
same as Discumbence, l. a lying (or sitting) down [to meat, etc*] Discure, o.
discover, show. Discurrent, l. wandering about. Discursion, l. a running up and
down. Discursive, l. belonging to discourse. Discuss, l. shake up and down,
handle, search narrowly into-. Discussion, a shaking, handling, searching, etc.
Disembarque, Disimbark, f. to land [goods] out of a ship. Disembogue, Sp, Vomit
up, also to sail out of the straight mouth of a gulf. Disertitude, l.
Eloquence. Disesperan^e, f. despair. Disfranchize, f. take away ones freedom.
Disgrade, as Degrade. Disgregation, a scattering or separating [from the
flock.] Disguise, f. put into another guise or form. Disgust, f. distaste.
Dish-meat, K. spoon-meat. Disherison, a disinheriting, damage. Disheritour,
Disheriter, endammager. Disherit, Disinherit, f. put out of Possession or right
thereto. Disimbellish, f. disfigure. Disjugate, disjoyn. Disjoynt, o. a hard
case, danger. Disjunctive, belonging to Disjunction, l. a separating or
disjoyning. Disjunctum, as Diezeugmenon. Dislocation, a putting out of joint,
out of the right place. Dislodge, f. rowse, raise [a Buck.] Disloyalty, f.
unfaithfulness. Dismal, dreadful. Dismantle, f. take off a cloak, also beat
down the walls of a Town, Fort, etc. Dismay, astonish. Dismember* f. cut off a
member or joint. Dismembering-knife, as Cutling. Dismes, f. tithes. Dismiss, l.
send away. Dismount, f. take down, unhorse. Dismount a piece, take her off the
carriage. Dispand, l. stretch out. Dispansion, l. a spreading abroad.
Disparage, I. disgrace. Disparagement, an undervaluing, also the marrying of an
Heir or heiress under their degree. Disparates, l. opposites wherein one thing
is opposed to many. Disparility, the same as Disparity, l. inequality,
unevenness. Disparition, l. a disappearing. Disparpled, -perpled, -perpelled,
loosly scattered, shooting it self into diverse parts (in heraldry.)
Dispaupered* deprived of the Privilege of forma pauperis. Dispend, f. spend
[money.] Dispensation, l. a distributing or dealing, performing the office of a
Dispenser, -sator, l. Steward. Dispensatory, f. Pharmacopoea, g. directions
(from the College of Physicians) for making all Physical compositions, etc.
Dispertion, l. a scattering. Dispert a piece of Ordnance, find the different
diameters between the mouth and breech. Dispicience, l. looking diligently,
considering. Dispitous, o. angry, full of spite. Display, f. unfold, spread
abroad. Displant, f. pluck up. Displic^nce, l. a displeasing. Displesion, l. a
bursting in two, also the shooting a gun off. Dispoliation, l. a spoiling,
r^fling, robbing. Dispone, o. dispose, set in order. Disport, o. sport.
Disposition, l. a disposing, also the Constitution [of body or mind.]
Dispositor, l. a disposer. Dispossess, f. put out of possession.
Disproportion, inequality. Dispurveyed, f. bare, indigent, unprovided. Dispute,
l. strive, contend (either by words or blows.) Disquammation, l. a scaling [of
fish, etc.] Disquisition, l. a narrow search. Disrationare, o. Traversare, to
traverse. Dissasina, f. Dispossession. Dissection, l. a cutting in two or in
pieces. Desseisin, f. unlawful dispossessing one of Lands or goods. Disseisin
upon Disseisin, when the Disseisour, (or Dispossesser) is Disseised,
(dispossessed) by another. Dissemination, l. a sowing or scattering up and down.
Dissentaneous, l. disagreeing. Dissentery, as Dyssentery. Dissentiment, f.
disagreement [in opinion.] Dissentory, o. a kind of still. Disserve, f. do a
Disservice, f. an ill office, a bad turn; disclaiming ones service. Dissidence,
l. a disagreeing, a falling out. Dissilience, l. a leaping up and down, a
falling asunder. Dissimilar, -ry, l. unlike, compounded of several similar
parts. Dissimilitude, l. unlikeness. Dissimulation, l. a dissembling.
Disheveled, as Desch-, Disch-. Dissipable, capable of Dissipation, l. a
scattering, dispersing. Dissite, l. remote. Dissociation, l. a separating.
Dissology, Dialogue. Dissolve, l. Melt, destroy, undo, put an end to.
Dissolute, loose, debauched, lawless. Dissoluble, capable of Dissolution, l. a
dissolving, also death. Dissonance, l. disagreement [in sound.] Dissuade, l.
persuade against. Disswasion, a persuading against. Dissyllable, g. a word of
two syllables. Distantial, belonging to Distance, l. space, a being Distant,
asunder, far off. Distaunce, o. Discord. Distemper, sickness, also size for
[ancient] painting. Distend, l. stretch out, enlarge. Distention, an enlarging.
Disterminate, l. divide place from place. Distick, g. a couple or pair [of
verses.] Distillation, l. a dropping down, a Distilling, extracting the
moisture of things by heat, and condensing the vapor again by cold.
Distillatio per descensum, when the liquor falls into a vessel below the
distilled matter. Distinction, l. Distinguishing, putting a difference between;
showing the several meanings of a thing. Distorquement, the same as Distorsion,
-tion, l. a wresting, writhing, pulling awry. Distrain, take away goods for the
payment of a debt; also to grieve, vex, o. Distress, a distraining, also great
affliction. Distract, l. draw asunder, perplex, also to cause Distraction,
Madness. Distreine, o. Constrain. Distreineth, o. Effects. Distributive, l.
belonging to Distribution, l. a dividing among many, resolving the whole into
parts, also as Diaeresis. Districation, Disentangling, ridding out of trouble.
Disturn, o. turn away. District, -tus, l. jurisdiction, the compass within
which a man may be compelled to appear, or be distrained. Distrigilation, l. a
currying. Distringas, a writ for the Sheriff to distrain. Distringent, wiping
off, also troubling. Disturbance, -ation, l. a causing of trouble. Disveloped,
as Developed. Disvirgin, Deflour. Disunited, l. severed. Dite, o. (for indite)
a treatise. Dithyramb, f. a jovial song [to Bacchus.] Dition, l. Dominion,
jurisdiction, territory. Dittander, Dittany, Dictamnum, Lepidium, Pipirites,
Pepperwort, a cleansing herb, from Dicte, a Promontory of Creet. Ditto, I. the
same, the said. Dittology, g. a double reading or meaning. Ditty, Song.
Divagation, l. a going astray. Dival, Divine. Divan* -no, the Turkish and
Persian great solemn Council or Court of Justice. Divaporation, exhalation of
vapor by fire. Divarication, l. a being Divaricated, spread as a fork.
Divelled, pulled away, ravished. Diventilate, winnow. Diverberation, l. a
beating. Diversity, l. vary, alter. Diversity, l. a being Diverse, l. different
[in circumstance. Diverse, many, several. Diversiloquent, speaking diversely.
Diverticle, l. a turning, a by-way, also a shifting device. Divertisement, f.
recreation. Dividend, l. the thing to be divided, the dividing, also the
division or share. Dividual, l. apt to be divided. Dividuity, division, aptness
to divide. Divinale, -ail, o. a ridle. Divination, l. foretelling of things to
come. Divine, l. guess; also heavenly, also a professor of Divinity, l. the
mystery of heavenly things, also as Deity. Divinistre, o. a smatterer in
Divinity. Divinize, to [make] Divine. Divisibility, l. a being Divisible,
capable of Division, Dividing or being divided. Divitiate* enrich. Divitiosity,
a being very rich. Divitiacus, King of the Gauls. Divorce, to separate (also
the separation) from the bond of Wedlock. Diuretical, g. provoking urine.
Diurnal, l. belonging to the day, also a day-book or News-book. Diuturnity, l.
lastingness. Divulgation, l. a publishing abroad. Divulsion, l. a pulling
asunder Dizain, f. half a score. Dize, No. put tow on a distaffe. Dizen'd, No.
dressed. D. La sol re, the fifth note in the common Gamut or Scale of Music.
Dobeler, a great dish or platter. Dobuni, ancient inhabitants of Oxford and
Glocestershire. Doced, Douced, a Dulcimer. Docility, Docibility, l. a being
Docile, teachable apt to learn. Docilize, make tractable. Dock, a place where
ships are built or laid up, also the fleshy part of a Boars chine between the
middle and the buttock. Docket, a brief in writing, or a subscription (under
the Letters Patents) by the clerk of the Dockets. Doctiloquent, l. speaking
learnedly. Doctoral, belonging to a Doctor, l. teacher, he that has taken the
highest degree in Divinity, Physic, Civil-law or Music. Doctorate, f.
Doctorship. Document, l. instruction. Dodded, o. having the branches or horns
cut off. Dodder, a weed winding about herbs. Dodecaedrie, -dron, g. a figure of
twelve sides. Dodecagon, g. a figure of 12 Angles. Dodecatemorie, g. one of the
twelve parts of the Zodiac. Dodkin, by some a farthing, by others the 8th.
part thereof. Dodman, So. Hodmand^d, Nf. a shel-snail. Dodona, a City in
Greece, near which Jupiter had an Oracle in a wood whose trees were supposed to
be vocal and to return the answers of the Oracle. Dodo, (Dors, Dors, f.) sleep,
sleep; lullaby. Dodonoeus, a Physician of Mechlin in Germany author of a famous
herbal. Dodrantal, of nine ounces. Dodu, a chuffe, or fat-chaps. Dogana, a
custom-house in the East Indies. Doeg, h. careful. Dog Days, in July and
August, when the Dog Star, rising with the Sun, increases his heat. Dog-draw,
when a man is found drawing after a Deer by the sent of a dog in his hand.
Doge, Duke [of Venice.] Dogger, a kind of ship. Dogget, as Docket. Dogmatical,
imposing his own opinions, also prudent. Dogmatist, introducer of new opinions.
Dogmatize, to impose a Doctrine, also to instruct. Dogs-bane, a dog-killing
herb. Dogs-grass, common in Gardens and ploughed fields. Doke, E. Sf. deep dint
or furrow. Dolation, l. a smoothing, plaining. Dole or Dool, No. (q. dale.) a
long unplowed green in a plowed field. Dole, l. deceit, grief, also a
distributing of Alms. Doleans, f. a lamentation. Dole-fish, which the north-sea
Fishers do by custom receive for their allowance. Dolg-^ote, Dolgbot,
satisfaction for a wound. Dollar, a dutch crown less than ours. Dolgelle, a
Town in Merioneth-shire. Dolling, o. warming. Dolorous, l. painful. Dolphin, a
fish that loves men, the eldest Son of France, also a Constellation of nine
bright stars. Dolt, sot, block-head. Dolven, o. buried. Doly. Dooly, o.
mourning, sad. Dolyman, a Turkish garment Domable, l. tameable. Dome, I, a
Townhouse. Domestic, -call, l. belonging to the house or Family. Domes-man, o.
confessor, or Judge. Domicil, l. a dewlling place. Dominative, belonging to
Domination, l. a ruling or Lording. Dominical, of the Lord. Dominica in ramis
palmarum, Palm Sunday. Dominica in albis, Whitsunday. Dominical Letter, showing
the Lords-daies in an Almanac. Dominicide, l. killer of his Master.
Dominicans, an order of Friars instituted, 1206. by Dominick, a Spaniard, the
author (as they say) of the Inquisition. Domicellus, -la, titles given John of
Gaunts Son and Daughter in their naturalization. Domino, a hood worn by Canons,
also a woman's mourning veil. Domitian, a persecuting Emperor of Rome, who was
wont (when alone) to kill flies. Dompte-vilain, f. tame-knave a good cudgel.
Domition, -ture, l. a taming. Dommera^, c. a madman. Domo reparanda, a writ
against him that lets his house go to decay, and endanger his neighbors. Domus
Conversorum, a house appointed by King Henry the third, for Jews converted to
the Christian Faith, now the rolls. Don, Down, sa. a hill. Donary, l. a gift or
present. Donatists, heretics detracting from the Son and Holy Ghost, and
holding the true Church to be only in Africa, from Donatus, Bishop of Carthage.
Donnat, Donnaught, (q. do naught, or naught) idle, good for nothing, naughty,
Y. Donation, l. bestowing, a gift. Donative, apt to give, also a gift, a
Benefice. Done hours, o. [to observe] Canonical, given or consecrated hours.
Doncaster, a Town in Yorkshire. Dondon, o. a short fat woman. Donegal, as
Tyrconel. Donce, to whom lands are given. Donour, he that gives [lands, etc.]
Doniferous, gift-bearing. Donwich, a Town in Suffolk. Doom, Sa. judgment,
sentence, also sense or signification. Dooms-day-book, made in the time of
Edward the Confessor (or William the Conqueror) wherein all the demeans of
England, (and the possessours) were registered. Don't vient la destenie (or le
destin) f. whence the fate or destiny comes. Dooms-man, sa. a Judge. Dorado,
Sp. gilded over. Dorcas, g. a Deer or Roebuck. Dorchester, the chief Town in
Dorcetshire; and another in Oxfordshire. Dordrectum, Dort in Holland Dorias's
woundwort, an herb with broad leaves, where with he used to cure himself and
his Soldiers. Dorick, one of the five greek Dialects, also a kind of work in
Architecture. Dorick-mood, Dorian-musick, of a slow solemn time, from C sol fa
ut to A la mi re. Doris, wife to Nereus, and Mother of the Sea-nymphs Nereides.
Dormant, f. in a sleeping posture, having a blank to put in a name.
Dormant-tree, the summer or beam lying cross the house. Dormant, (q. demeurant,
f.) unremoved. Dormers, windows in the roof of a house. Dornix, a kind of stuff
for curtains, etc. from Dornick, a City in Flanders. Dorothy, g. the gift of
God. Dorp, Thorp, a village. Doronicum, a Cordial herb resisting poison.
Dorrie, a fish that shines like gold. Dortor, -ture, Dortoire, f. Dormitory, l.
a place where many sleep together, a burying place. Dose, g. so much of a
Medicine as is given or taken at a time. Dosology, g. a discourse concerning
the several Doses. Dosome [beast] Che. content with nothing; also thriving.
Dosel, Dorsel, a Princes Canopy, also the Curtain of a Chair of state. Dosser,
Dorser, a panier. Dotal, belonging to a Dowry. Dote assignanda, a writ for the
Escheator to assign a Dowry to the widow of a Kings tenant, swearing in
Chancery not to marry without the Kings leave. These are the Kings widows. Dote
unde nihil habet, a writ of Dower for a widow, of the land sold by her husband,
whereof he was so seized as the issue of them both might have inherited. Doted,
l. endowed, having a jointure. Dotkin, as Dodkin, or (by some) the 8 part of a
Sol or French penny. Dottrel, a foolish bird (in Lincolnshire) imitating the
Fowlers, till it be caught. Dovan^, f. Custom, the Custom-house at Lions.
Double quarrel, a Complaint to the Archbishop against an inferior Ordinary for
delay of justice. Doubles, Letters patents. Doubleth, when a hair winds up and
down, to deceive the dogs. Doublet, a precious stone, of two pieces joined.
Doublets, a low game at Tables. Doublings, linings of Robes (in Heraldry.)
Dover a Sea-town in Kent. Doves-foot, a kind of Cranesbil, an herb. Dove-tail,
a kind of Joining by laying one piece into another. Doughty, o. stout, valiant.
Douglas-town, in Man Island. Doulcets, Dowsets, the stones of a heart or stag.
Doundrins, Der. afternoons drinkins. Dousabel, f. Dulcibella, l. sweet and
fair. Douset, Doulcet, a Custard. Doutaunces, f. doubtings, suspicions.
Doutremere, (d' outre mere, f.) from beyond sea, seafaring. Dow, o. (q. Da,
l.) Give, also thrive, mend, No. Dowager, applied to widows of Princes, etc.
Doway, an English Seminary in the Neatherlands instituted 1568. by the
procurement of one W. Allen of Oxford. Dowl, o. Deal. Downs, Sa. hilly plains,
also a harbor between Deal and the Goodwin sands. Downeham, a town in Norfolk.
Dow-gate, (q. down-gate, or Dour-gate, Br. Watergate) where the water runs
faster into the Thames than in any other street in London. Dower, Dowry, a
wives portion. Dowsets, as Doulcets or Douset. Dowtremere, as Doutremer. Doxie,
o. a she-beggar, trull. Doxology, g. Gloria Patri etc. repeated (in the
Liturgy) at the end of Psalms, etc. Dozens, Devonshire Kersies. Dozein, as
De^ine. Drabler, a piece added to the bonnet, when there is need Draco's laws,
very severe, from Draco, an Athenian Governor. Drafty, o. Irksom, troublesome.
Dragant, Tragacant* Goats horn, a gum Distilled from an herb so called. Dragges,
o. Dregs or Drugs. Dragges, whatever hangs over the ship in sea, as shirts,
etc. also the boat, and all hind'rances of sailing. Dragons-head, a node or
place in the Ecliptic, which the Moon cuts ascending Northward. Dragons-tail,
the node (opposite to the Dragons-head) which the Moon cuts descending
Southward. Dragons, Serpentary, Vipers Bugloss. Dragonstone, a kind of precious
stone in a Dragons head. Drags, pieces of wood joined to carry wood etc. down a
river. Draiton, Drayton, a town in Shropshire. Draitwitch, a town in
Worcestershire. Drake, a field piece of Ordnance. Sir Francis Drake, in two
years space sailed round the world. Dram, Dram, g. the 8* part of an ounce.
Dramatick poetry, Comedies and Tragedies. Dran, o. bran. Drap de Berry, thick
French cloth of Berry. Drape, No. a farrow-Cow, whose milk is dried up.
Drape-sheep, No. Culled, Bad. Drapery, Cloth-wares, cloth-market, also a
representing of Clothes in painting. Draught, a Drawing. The ship Draws much
water, i. e. goes Deep in water. Draule, o. speak dreamingly. Drawers, c.
stockings. Draw-latches, Roberts-me^, Night-thieves. Dread, o. dread. Dregge,
Draw a little Crapnel on the ground, to find a cable, etc. Dredgers,
Oister-fishers. Dreint, o. drowned, drenched. Dreit-dreit, a double right (of
possession and Dominion.) Drenched, o. over-com'n. Drenie, o. sorrowful.
Drengage, the tenure of a Dreynghe, Drenge, Drench, a tenant in Capite. Dretch,
o. dream, tarry. Dry exchange. Usury. Dribblets, o. little bits. Dree, No.
long, tedious [way] also a hard [bargainer.] q. dry. Driffield, a Town in
Yorkshire. Drift, a driving, a scope or intent, Counsel or Policy. Drift of the
Forest, an exact view of the Cattle. A Drift, a-float, swimming down stream.
Drift-sail, to keep the ships head right upon the Sea (in a storm, etc.) Drill,
a baboon, also a tool to bore holes in Marble, Iron, etc. Drink-lean, Scot-ale,
provided by the Tenants to entertain their Lord or his Steward. Drivebolt, a
long piece to drive out a nail, etc. (in a ship.) The ship drives, when the
anchor will not hold her. Drogeday, Tredah in Ireland. Drof^enn, Sa. a grove.
Drofland, Dryfland, rent paid the Landlord for driving Cattle through the
Manor, to fairs or Markets. Drogoman, Truchman, Tu. an interpreter. Droit, f.
right. Drol, f. a little stage play, also he that uses Drolleric, f. jesting,
joquing. Dromedary, a kind of Camel with two bunches on his back. Dronklew, o.
given to drink. Drovy, o. (Droevigh, d.) troubled. Drozen, No. fond. Dropacist,
one that applies a Dropax, g. a depilatory, or medicine to take away hair.
Dropsy, (for hydropsie,) g. a waterish distemper. Dropping, a hawks muting (in
drops) directly downward. Dropwort, filipendula, an herb. Drouk, Drough, o.
drawn. Dru, Drugo, Drogo, sa. subtle. Drudging, Oyster-fishing. Drugge, d. any
dry simple used in medicine, also drudge, o. Drunk-wort, Tobacco. Druides, old
Gaulish Priests. Drungar, a Grecian Commander [of a squadron.] Drury, o.
modesty, sobriety. Drusilla, Dioclesians wife. Dry, Drien, o. suffer. Dryads,
g. Oak or Wood-Nymphs. Duacum, Doway. Dual, l. belonging to two. Duality, l. a
being two. Duana, as Divano. Duarchy, g. government by two. Dub, No. a pool of
water. Dub, make [a Knight.] Dubiosity, a being Dubious, l. doubtful. Dublin,
the Chief City of Ireland. Dubris, l. Dover. Ducal, belonging to a Duke.
Ducape, a kind of silk. Ducenarious, belonging to two hundred. Duces tecum, a
writ to appear in Chancery, and bring some evidence to be viewed. Duck up the
clew-lines, when a sail hinders the sight in steering, shooting, etc.
Ducks-meat, an herb swimming on the top of standing waters. Ducket, Ducate, a
Roman Gold coin, about 6 s. Ductarious, drawing, or leading. Ductile, (metals)
to be drawn out and beaten into plates. Ductible, capable of Duction, l. a
leading. Du^man, (q. Deadman) a Maulkin or scarecrow. Duel, l. a Combat
between two. Duds, c. Goods* Duilus, a Roman that beat the Carthaginians by
Sea, the first that triumphed after a naval victory. Dulcac^d, sweet and sour.
Dulcarnon, (by some) a proportion found out by Pythagoras, after a years study,
also the Ox which he sacrificed in thankfulness. At Dulcarnon, in a maze, at
my wits end, Chaucer, l. 3. fol. 161. Dulciaries, l. sweetning things. Dull, D.
mad. Dulcifie, l. sweeten. Dulciloquent, sweet-spoken. Dulcimer, a
wire-string'd instrument. Dulcisonant, l. sweet-sounding. Dulcitude, l.
sweetness. Dulcoration, l. a sweetning. Dulocratical, belonging to Dulocracy,
g. a Government where servants domineer. Dulverion, a Town in Somersetshire.
Dumal, belonging to briars. Dumosity, l. fullness of bushes. Dum fuit infra
aetatem, a writ to recover land sold by one under age. Dum non fuit compos
mentis, a writ to recover land alien'd by one not of sound memory. Dun,
importune. Dunbar, a Town in Scotland. Dunch, o. deaf. Dundee, a Town in
Scotland. Dunsets, sa. Mountainers. Duni pacis, as knolls of peace. Dunholm, a
Town in Lincolnshire. Dunmow, a Town in Essex* where the Prior gave a flitch
or gammon of Bacon to all that swore they repented not of marrying within a
year and a day, or never made any nuptial transgression. Dunnington, a Town in
Lincolnshire. Dunington-Castle, a Town in Leicestershire. Dunstable, a Town in
Bedfordshire. Dunster, a Town in Somerset. Dunstan, Sa. most high, or as Aaron.
Duodecennial, of 12 years. Duodecimo, of twelve [leaves in a sheet.] Dup, c.
enter [the house.] Duplicity, l. a being Duple, double, twofold. Duplicate, l.
Double, also a second letter of the same contents with the former. Duplication,
l. a doubling, also an allegation brought to weaken the reply of the pleader.
Dura matter, the outward skin that infolds the brain. Duration, l. continuance,
lasting. Durense, o. (Duracines, f.) some kind of solid and lasting fruit.
Dures, -ress, a plea of exception by one constrained (by imprisonment, etc.) to
seal a bond. Durham, Duresme, Dun^olm, Dunelmum, the Chief City of the
Bishopric of Durham, Durham College, Trinity College in Oxford. Durity, l.
hardness. Durnovaria, Dorchester, Durotriges, Dorcet-shire-Britains. Dursley, a
Town in Glocestershire. Duskie, Dark. Dutchie-Court, where all matters relating
to the D^tchy of Lancaster are Decided. Duumvirate, the Office of the Duumviri,
l. two Magistrates of Equal authority in Rome. Dwale, sleeping or deadly
nightshade. Dwas-light, Sa. Jack with a Lanthorn, Will-a-wisp. Dwindle, shrink
or consume away. Dwyned, o. consumed. Dyers-weed, used for yellow-colour.
Dyke-reeve, Overseer of the Dykes and Draines in Deeping-fens, etc. Dyna, an
East India Coin, about 30 s. Dynamologie, g. a Discourse of power. Dynaste,
-stick, g. [a powerfull] Prince. Dynastie, g. supreme authority. Dypticks, as
Dipticks. Dyrrachium, Durazzo in Macedonia. Dyscrasy, g. a Distemper, an
unequal mixture of the first qualities. Dysentery, g. the bloudy-flux. Dysnomy,
g. evil constitution or ordering of the law. Dysopsy, g. dimness, bad sight.
Dyspathy, g. evil passion or affection. Dyspepsie, g. an ill digestion.
Dyspnaea, g. a difficult breathing. Dysse, a Town in Nf. Dysury, g. a scalding
or stopping of the urine.
E.
EAd, Eadith, Sa. Auda, happiness. Eadelman, Adelman, Sa. Nobleman, Earl.
Eadgar, Sa. happy power. Eadulph, Sa. happy help. Eadwin, Sa. happy victor.
Eaglestone, found in the nest of Eagles. Eaglet, a little Eagle. Ealderman,
Ealdorman, Alderman, as Ead^lman, or Earl. Ealred, Sa. all-counsel. Ealdred,
Sa. all-reverent. Eame, Sa. the Mothers brother; also Gossip, Friend, No. Ean,
bring forth [young.] Ear, ar, Sa. honor. Ear, l. till [the ground.]
Eardorburgh, Sa. Metropolis or Chief City. Earing, that part of the bolt-rope,
which (at the Corners of the sail) is left open like a ring. Earl, Sa. a
Nobleman. Earn, No. to run (like Cheese.) Earning, No. Cheese-rennet. Earnest,
c. a part or share. Ease the ship, slacken the shrouds when too stiff. Ease
the helm, let her fall to the lee-ward. Easel, a Painters frame for his Cloth.
Earthnut, pignut, a root in shape and taste like a nut. Easement, a service
from Neighbor to Neighbor (by Charter or prescription) as passage through his
ground, etc. Easy of dispense, o. of little expense. Easter, No. the back or
stock of the Chimney, Easter, Eoster, Aoster, Oster, a Saxon Goddess, whose
feast they observed in Easter-month, April. Easter, the Christian-Passover, in
remembrance of Christ's [Death and] Resurrection. On this depend all the other
moveable feasts, and the most certain Rule to find it (according to the Church
of Englands use) is this: Shrove-tuesday is always the first tuesday after the
first new moon that happens after January (whether that be in February or
March) and the Sunday following is Quadragesima (or the first Sunday in Lent)
and the sixth Sunday after is Easter Day. Easterling [Mony] 'Sterling, current,
pure, coined by the Easterlings, Inhabiting the Eastern parts of Germany.
Eastmeath, a County in Ireland containing 18 Baronies. Eath, Eth, Eith, o.
Easy. Eath, sc. an Oath. Eaton, above 20 towns in several Counties.
Eaves-dropper, one that Listens under the windows or house-Eaves. Ebere-murder,
Sa. open and inexpiable murder. Ebene, see Ebony. Ebionites, Heretics denying
Christ's Divinity, and all Gospels but St. Matthews, Anno 71. Ebissa, a
Saxon-Captain assisting Hengist against the Britains. Ebony, black, hard wood
of the Eben-tree, an Indian and Ethiopian tree, without leaves or fruit.
Eboracum, Eburacum, Brigantium, York. Ebourn, a town in Sussex. Ebrank, a
British King. Ebrack, o. Hebrew [tongue.] Ebriety, Ebriosity, l. Drunkenness.
Ebrious, l. [making] drunken. Ebulo, as Ybel. Ebullate, l. to bubble or burst
out. Ebullition, -iency, l. a boiling up Eburnean, l. of Ivory. Eccentricity, a
being Eccentrick, l. moving at unequal distance from the Center, out of order.
Ecclesiastick-cal, g. belonging to the Church. Ec^l^siastes* g. The Preacher.
Eccleshall, a Town in Staffordshire. Echen, o. Increase or help. Echidne, a
Scythian Queen, who had three children at a birth by Hercules. Echo, -Echo, a
Nymph dying for the love of Narciss^s, and turned into that voice. Eckle,
Ettle, No. To aim or intend. Eclipse. g. want or defect [of light;] also to
darken or obscure. Eclipse of the Sun, by the interposition of the Moons body.
Eclipse of the Moon, by the interposion of the Earth. Ecliptic [line] running
through the Zodiac, in which the Eclipses happen, when the Moon is in
Conjunction or opposition under it. Ecl^gma, Lo^ock, a confection (thicker than
a Syrup and thinner than an Electuary) to be lickt and softly melted down.
Eclogue, Eglogue, a Pastoral or Shepherds Dialogue. Eclympastery, Son to
Morpheus the God of sleep. Ecphonesis, g. exclamation, crying out. Ecstasie, g.
making a short syllable long, also a trance or sudden rapture of Spirit.
Ecstatick, -eal, belonging thereto. Ecthlipsis, g. a thrusting out [the letter
m (and the vowel before it) when the following word begins with a vowel or h.]
Ectype, g. a draught from another copy. Ed, sa. again. Edacity, l. a greedy
eating or devouring. Edder, a fish resembling a Mackrel. Eddish, sa. no.
Roughings, new latter grass, aftermathes. Eddie, the turning round in a stream.
Eddy-tide* where the water runs back, contrary to the tide. Eddy-wind, that
which recoiles from a sail, etc. Edelfleda, Elfleda, governed the Kingdom
prudently eight years after the death of her husband Ethelred, King of the
Mercians. Eden, h. pleasure, paradise. Edinburgh, -borrow, the chief Town in
Scotland. Edentate, l. make toothless. Edgehill, in Warwick-^^ire, here was
fought the first pitched battle between the King and Parliament. Edgware, a Town
in Middlesex. Edict, l. Proclamation, Ordinance. Edification, l. building, also
instruction. Edifice, l. a house, a building. Edile, Eadile, l. the Surveyor of
the buildings in Rome. Edinton, Eathandune, a Town in Wilt-shire. Edish, Edise,
sa. later-math. Edition, l. setting forth, impression. Edisserator, l. a shewer
or declarer. Edituate, l. to defend or govern the house or Temple. Edmund, Sa.
happy peace. St. Edmunds-bury, Bedericks-gueord, a Town in Suffolk. Edomites,
posterity of Edom, (h. red,) Esau. Education, l. a bringing up. Edward, sa.
happy keeper. Eever, che. corner or quarter. Eel-farees, Eel-vares, the fry or
brood of Eeles. Eem, Che. to have leisure, to spare time. Effable, l. which may
be expressed or utered. Effascinate, l. to bewitch. Effated, l. o. for Of-, or
defaced, Effect, l. end, finishing, that which is caused. Effects, Merchants
concerns. Effection, l. a forming, expressing. Effete, l. having lately brought
forth, also barren. Efferous, l. fierce, cruel, violent. Efficacious, full of
Efficacy, l. virtue, power, force. Efficient, l. making, working. Effiction, l.
an expressing or representing. Effigies, l. shape, representation of any thing.
Effiguration, as Prosopopaea. Efflagitate, l. importune, earnestly to request.
Efflated, l. blown away, yielded or given up. Efflorescence, a budding forth,
or flourishing. Effluen^e* Efflux, Effluvium, l. a flowing forth. Effluent,
-uous, l. running or flowing out. Eff^cate, l. choke, strangle. Effoemination,
a making Effoeminate, l. womanish. Efforts, l. strong assaies, endeavors, or
impressions. Effraction, -ture, l. a breaking open. Effringed, l. broken,
ground to powder. Effractores, Burglars, breakers-open of houses. Effraenation,
l. rashness, unbridledness. Effronterie, as affrontedness. Effund, l. pour out,
consume riotously. Effusion, l. a pouring out, prodigality. Eft, o. again, also
Evet. Efters, o. ways, walls, walks, galleries, entries, hedges. Eft soones,
o. quickly. Egal, f. equal. Egbert, E^b-, sa. ever bright, the first English
Monarch. Egean, as Aegaean. Egestion, l. a voiding or throwing forth.
Egestuosity, l. extreme poverty, a being Egestuous, l. very poor or needy.
Eggement, o. procurement. Eglantine, f. sweet-bryer. Egilopical, Aegi-,
belonging to the Egil^pa, Aegi-, a canker in the corner of the eye, the
lachrymale fistula. Eglogue, as Eclogue. Eglomerate, l. unwind. Egre, o. sore.
Egregious, l. excellent. Egremont, -mond, a Castle and Town in Cumberland.
Egress, -sion, l. a going out. Egrets, o. a kind of ravenous bird. Egremony, as
Aegrimony. Egritude, l. sickness, as aeg- Egroting, as Aegroting. Egurgitate,
l. draw out, empty, disgorge. Egyptians, 'Gypsies, (Cingari, J.) counterfeit
vagabonds. Ehud, h: praising* Ejaculation, l. a casting forth; also a sudden
and short meditation or prayer. Ejaculatory, l. having the power or property of
darting or sprouting forth. Ejection, l. a casting out. Ejectione Custodiae, l.
and Ejectment de guard, f. a writ against him that casts out the heirs Guardian.
Ejectione firmae, a writ for the ^^ssee ejected before the expiration of his
term. Eigh, o. Eyes. Eign, eldest. Eight, Alney, an Isle in Glocestershire,
where Edmund King of English and Canutus King of Danes (in a single combat)
tried their right to the Kingdom. Eighteth mow, o. might grant. Einecia,
Eldership. Eirenarch, g. Justice of peace. Eirenarchie, g. a keeping of the
peace, the Office of Constable, Justice, etc. Eisil, Sa. Vinegar. Eitching, as
Etching. Ejulation, l. a yelling or howling. Ejuration, l. a renouncing. Eke,
also; also to piece, lengthen or enlarge, also to kill, hurt or make to ache.
Ela, the highe^^ note in the Common scale of Music. Elaborate, l. Done with
exactness and great pains. Elaboratory, Labra-, a [chymists] workhouse or
shop. Elacerate, l. rend or tear in pieces. Elamites, the posterity of Elam, h.
young man. Elami, the sixth note in Music. ^lapidation, l. a taking away of
stones. Elapsion, l. a slipping away. Elapsed, l. slipped, gone, past. Elaqueate,
l. disintangle. Elate, Elated, l. lifted up, proud. Elation, l. a lifting up.
Elaterium, g. Concrete juice of wild Cucumbers. Elaxate, l. unloose, widen.
Eld, o. age, Eldership. Elder, D. and No. the udder. Eleack, Philosophers
instituted by Phaedo an Elean, of Elis in Greece. Ele, o. help, assistance.
Elden, No. fuel for fire. Eleanor, Helena. Eleazar, h. the help of God.
El^campane, Enula campana, horse-heal. Elect, l. choose, also as Elect^d,
chosen. Elective, belonging or subject to. Election, l. a choosing, choice.
Election de Clerk, a writ for the Choice of a Clerk assigned to take and make
the bonds called Statute Merchant. Elections, (in Astronomy) fit times elected
for the doing any manner of work. Electorat, the Office, power or territory of
the Electors, Electoral-Princes, who choose the Emperor of Germany.
Electriferous, l. yielding Electrum, Amber, distilling from Poplar-trees.
Electricity, l. power to draw straws etc. like amber. Electrine, belonging to,
or made of Amber. Electuary, a Confection of the choicest Drugs. Eleimosynary,
g. of free gift also an Almoner. Eleemosynate, to give alms. Elegance, -cy, l.
a being Elegant, l. Neat. Elegiac [verse,] pentameter, of five feet (most
commonly subjoined to the Herameter) belonging to an Elegy, g. a kind of
mournful verse, or funeral song. Elegiographer, a writer of Elegies. Elegit, a
writ for part of the land and goods, till the debt or damage given be
satisfied. Elementary, belonging to Elements, l. unmixt bodies, the principles
of all things, fire, air, water, Earth; also the first Principles or Rudiments
of any art, and the single letters of an Alphabet. Elemi, a West India gum.
Elenchical, -ctick, -call, g. belonging to Elench, g. a subtle argument, by way
of reproof. Elenge, o. strange, foreign. Elengelich, o. strangely or
miserably. Elephansy, Elephantiasy, the Leprosy. Elephantine, belonging to an
Elephant. Eles, o. Eeles. Elevation, Exaltation, lifting up; (in Chemistry) the
rising of any matter in manner of fume or vapor. Elevatory, an instrument to
lift up broken pieces of the skull, draw out bullets, etc. Elf, Elve* a fairy.
Elguze, the left shoulder of Orion. Eliah, Elijah, Elias, h. [My] God the Lord
Eliakim, h. God arises. Eli, h. My God, or the Offering, lifting up.
Elibation, as Deli^ation. Elicitation, l. a drawing out, an enticing. Elide, l.
to dash, break, squeeze or strangle. Eligible, l. to be chosen. Elihu, h. he is
my God. Elimation, l. a filing off. Elimination, l. a casting over the
threshold, out of doors. Elingued, l. tongue-tied, dumb. Eliphaz, h. the
endeavor of God. Eliquament, l. fat juice of flesh or fish. Elisa, Dido Queen
of Carthage. Elisha, h. my God saves, or the salvation of God. Elisaeus,
-zeus, as Elisha. Elishaphat, h. my God judges. Elision, l. a dashing or
striking off or out. Elixation, l. a seething. Elixir, -er, A. strength,
quintessence, also the Philosophers stone. Elizabeth, h. the fullness or oath
of God. Elk, a strong swift beast like a stag, also a kind of Ewe for bows.
Ellinge, Ss. solitary, lonely. Ellipsis, g. wanting, leaving out, also a
crooked line in the bias-section of a Cone or Cylinder. Elliptick, Defective.
Ellis, Elias, h. Lord God. Elmer, Ethelmer, Sa. Noble, renowned. Elmet, a
certain Territory about Leeds in Yorkshire. El-mother, Cu. a Stepmother.
Elocution, l. proper speech, handsome utterance. Eloah, Elohim, h. God [the
Judge.] Elogie, l. commendation. Eloinment, f. Elongation, l a removing far
off. Elopement, a woman's leaving her husband, dwelling with an Adulterer, and
losing her Dower, Eloquence, as Elocution, a being Eloquent, l. neat, and
powerful in speech* Eltham, a town in Kent. Elth, o. old. See Eld. Elucidaries,
Expositions of obscure things. Elucidation, l. a making bright, clear, plain.
Elucubration, l. a watching and studying by candlelight. Elves, Fairies,
hobgoblins. Elvish, o. froward. Elutheria, feasts to the Elutherian God,
Jupiter. Ely, a City in the midst of the fens in Cambridgeshire. Elychnious,
without match, weik, or light. Elysian fields, pleasant places whither the
heathens supposed the Souls to pass. Elysium, the same, paradise. Elytroides,
Vaginal tunicle, the inmost of the 3 tunicles covering the testicles.
Emaceration, a soaking, also as Emaciation, l. a making lean. Emacity, l. a
desire of being always buying. Emaculation, l. a taking away of spots.
Emanation, l. a flowing from. Eman^ipation, l. a legal setting of Children free
from the power of their parents. Emanuel, Emm-, h. God with us. Emanuensis (for
Ama-,) One that writes for another, a Secretary. Emargination, l. a cleansing
of sores from the scurfe about the brims. Emasculation, l. a taking away of
Manhood, Effeminating. Embalming, the seasoning a dead body with gums and
spices, to keep it from putrefaction, also wrapping it in Searcloth of wax,
gum, etc. Embarasment, f. a perplexing, intangling, hind'ring. Embargo, Sp. a
stop or arrest laid upon ships. Embassade, f. Embassy, Message. Embattel'd, set
in battle array, also as Crenelle (in Heraldry.) Embelf [circle] o. oblique, or
else Embolick, belonging to leap-year. Ember-weeks, (when the Bishop sprinkled
ashes on the Peoples heads in token of mortality) four Seasons in the year, set
apart for fasting and prayer, immediately preceding the Ordination of
Ministers. Embellish, f. beautify. Embez^l, I. theevishly to consume or make
away. Emblematical, belonging to an Emblem, g. a curious inlaying in wood,
etc. also a device or picture Expressing something moral or divine.
Emblematist, a maker of Emblems. Emblements, the profits of land [which has
been sowed.] Embolism, g. the casting in of the day added to Leap-year.
Embolned, o. swelled. Embossement, Embouchement, f. a putting into the mouth.
Embost, foaming at the mouth, (spoken of a hunted Dear. Embracery, the act or
offense of an Embracer, -eor, he that, (being no lawyer, but for reward) comes
to the bar and speaks for either party, labors with the Jury, etc. the penalty
is 20 l. and imprisonment. Embring-daies, the Wednesday, Friday and Saturday,
before every ordination Sunday. Embrocation, I. by some, a bathing any part in
liquor falling from aloft; by others, a rubbing the part affected or applying
of clothes dipped in oil, etc. Embryous, belonging to an Embryo, -on, g. the
Child in the Mothers Womb not yet shaped, also any thing else before it come to
perfection. Embushment, as Embossement. Embus^hment, f. the falling [of a
river] into the Sea. Embuscade, f. an Ambushment. Embden, a City built upon
Ems, a River in Friezeland. Eme, o. an Aunt. Emendals, (at the foot of an
account in the Temple) bank or stock for the house. Emendation, l. a mending.
Ementition, l. a lying or forging. Emerald, Sp. a precious stone of a green
color. Emergency, a being Emergent, l. rising up above water, appearing on a
sudden, also of great importance. Emeril, a Garnsey-stone, wherewith they cut
and burnish other precious stones. Emetical, -ique, g. purging the body by
vomit. Emersion, l. a rising, appearing or coming out. Emication, l. a shining
out. Emigration, l. a passing out. Emerlin, o. a Marlin, Hawk. Emildon, a Town
in Northumberland, birthplace of the subtle Dr. J. Duns, called Scotus.
Emforth, o. according. Eminence, -cy, a being Eminent, l. excellent, appearing
above others. Emissary, l. one sent abroad [to spy or give intelligence.]
Emission, l. a sending forth. Emit, l. send or cast out. Emme, a woman's name,
either as Amie or Elgiva, help-giver. Emmoised, o. comforted. Emmot, ant,
pismire. Emollid, l. soft. Emollient, l. softning. Emolument, l. mill-toll,
profit. Emotion, l. a moving out, a stirring up, also trouble of mind. Empair,
f. diminish, make worse. Empale, as Impale: Empanel, -nnel, enter the names of
the Jury in a Schedule. Emparlance, f. a petition (in court) for a day of
respite. Empasmus, g. powders to allay imflammations and scarifie the extremity
of the skin. Empeor, o, grow worse. Emp^atical, having or done with an
Emphasis, -sy, g earnestness, an intent expression of ones mind. Emphastica, g.
clammy medicines stopping the pores of the skin. Emphyteutick, g. set out to be
improved, let out to farm. Emphyteuticary, an improver making a thing better
than he received it. Empirick, g. a Physician that cures by receipts taken upon
trust. Empirically, done like an Empirick, by practice without Theory.
Emplaister, l. plaster. Emplasteration, -tration, l. an applying of a
plaster, a dawbing, also a graffing. Emporetical, belonging to an Emporium,
-ry, l. a Mart-Town, or an Exchange. Emprimed, spoken of a Heart at first
forsaking the Herd. Emprize, o. enterprise. Emprostotonos, g. a kind of Cramp.
Emptional, to be bought. Emption, l. a buying. Emptory, as Empory. Empturition,
l. a longing to buy. Empyema, g. corruption between the breast and lungs, after
a Pleurisy. Empyreal, g. fiery. Empyreal Heaven, the highest. Emrods, as
Hemerrhoides. Emucid, l. moldy. Emulation, l. a striving to excel others.
Emulgent, l. milking out. Emulgent vein, pumping vein, one of the two main
branches of the hollow vein passing to the Reins. Emulsion, l. a stroking, any
kind of cream or milky substance, seeds, etc. brayed in water and strained to
the consistence of an Almond milk. Emunctories, l. the kernels by which the
principal parts void their superfluities, also a pair of snuffers. Emuscation,
l. a rubbing the moss off. Enach, sc. a satisfaction for any crime or fault.
Enacted, decreed, ordained. Enaluron, when a bordure (in heraldry) is charged
with any kind of Birds. Enamel, f. to vary with little spots. Enantiosis, g.
contrariety. Enargie, Evidence, clearness. Enblaunched, o. adorned, whited.
Enbolned, o. swelled. Encaustick, g. enameled, varnished, wrought with fire.
Enchase, f. to set in gold. Enchant, f. conjure, bewitch. Enchafed, o. heated.
Encheson, f. occasion, cause or reason why any thing is done. Enchiridion, g. a
hand- or pocketbook. Enclitick, -call, g. enclining, a particle joined to the
end of words and causing the accent to incline that way. Encumbrance, f. an
hindrance. Encomiast, g. a Praiser of virtues. Encomiastick, belonging to
Encomium, -ion, g. a speech in the Praise or Commendation of any. Encontrewayl,
o. prevent. Encrees, o. Increase. Encroachment, a pressing too far upon a
neighbors ground. Encyc^ical, round, belonging to Encyclopaedie, as
Cyclopadie. End for end, when a rope is all run out of the Block, etc.
Endammage, f. to hurt or damnify. Endeynous, o. Disdainful, Endictment,
Enditement, an accusation exhibited or presented to the Court. En Dieu est, f.
it is in Gods hand or power. Endive, a cooling herb. Endorse, -f. write on the
backside. Endorse, the fourth part of a pallet. Endoubted, o. feared.
Endowment, f. the bestowing or assuring of a Dower. Endowment de la plus belle
part, a widows Dower of Lands holden in soccage, as the fairer or better part.
Endowment of a vicaridge, the settling of maintenance on a vicar (by some great
tithes, etc.) when the rest of the Benefice is appropriated. Endromick, -me, g.
a long Irish robe, used before and after running, etc. Endry, o. Endure.
Endymion, a Shepherd in love with the Moon, who stoops every night to kiss him,
being cast into a perpetual sleep on the top of Latmus hill. Endyd in untime,
o. Yeaned before the time. Enecated, l. killed. Eneorema, g. a cloud in
distilled waters, or in urines when the Disease is breaking. Enewed, o. made
new. Encrees (f. Denrees) o. wares, or peny-worths. Enervity, weakness. Enewed,
o. renewed. Eneya, Sa. the principal part of the heritage, passing to the
eldest son. Energetical, belonging to Energy, g. force, efficacy, powerful
working. Enervation, l. a weakening. Enfield-Chase, in Middlesex, belonging to
the Earls of Essex. Enfamined, o. famished. Enfeeteth, o. infecteth.
Enfranchisement, f. incorporating into a society or body politic.
Engastrimuch, g. one that speaks out of his belly. Engel-bert, Ge. bright
Angel. Engine, l. devise, wit, o. Engined, o. racked. Englecerie, Englecherie,
Engleschyre, o. a being an Englishman. Englaymyd* -lemed, o. Nauseated.
Engluting* o. gluing, or glued, stopped. Engonasi, -sin, g. Hercules on his
knee, a Constellation. Engrailed, as ingrailed Engyscope, g. an instrument to
discern the proportion of the smallest things. Enharmonick, -jack, Musick] of
many parts, differing from the other 2 kinds, Chromatick, and Diatonick.
Enhaunsement, f. a raising the price of a thing. Enigma, as Aenigma, Enion, Br.
just, upright. Enitia pars, as Esnecy. Enlased, o. entangled. Enlangored, o.
Languishing. Enneade, Nine. g. Enneagon, g. a figure of 9 angles. Ennealogue,
g. a discousre of 9 points, or parts. Ennoy, Sc. annoy. Enochs pillars,
(supposed) one of brick, the other of stone containing the whole art of
Astronomy. Enoch, Henoch, h. Dedicated to God. Enodation, l. a taking away of
knots. Enormity, l. error, unevenness, a being Enormous, irregular,
unmeasurable, out of rule. Enosch, h. mortal, miserable. Enpited, o. delighted.
Enprice, o. the fashion. Enquest, f. the trial of causes by a Jury. Enquitance,
-aunce, o. Enquiry. Enseame, purge a hawk of her glut and grease. Enseeled, [a
hawk] having a thread drawn through her upper ey-lids, and made fast under her
beak. Ensconse, D. Entrench. Ensiferous, l. sword-bearing. Ensign, f. an
Escutcheon; also a banner, or he that bears it. Ensise, o. quality* stamp. To
Ensile hawks, See Ens^eled. Enstall, set upon a throne, endow with a robe of
honor. Enstalm^nt, a making Knights of the Garter, etc. Entail, f. (cut off)
fee-tail, fee-entailed, limited, tied to certain conditions. Entailed, o.
engraven. Entalenten, o. stir up. Entangle, ensnare, perplex. Entetch^d, o.
defiled. Entelechie, g. an understanding, soul, or power to move or act of it
self. Entendaunce, o. service. Entendment, f. the true sense and meaning.
Entermelled, o. intermingled. Enterfeire, -fere, -frir, f. to hit one against
another, as a Horses heels, etc. Entermined, o. robbed, emptied. Enterlaced, as
Enlased, contrary to unlased. Enterplead, -plede, discuss or try a point
accidentally happening, before the principal can be determined. Entetched,
Enseched, o. qualified. Enthalamize, bring the bride and Bridegroom to bed.
Enthean, -ated, inspired with God. Enthymematical, belonging to an Enthymem, g.
an imperfect Syllogism, part being reta^ned in the mind. Enthysiasmical,
-astick, -call, belonging to Enthysiasm, Enthusiasm, the doctrine or principles
of an Enthysian, Enthusiast, g. one pretending to Divine revelation and
inspiration, fanatic. Entiertie, Int-, the whole. Entierement vostre, f.
entirely yours. Entire Tenan^y, a sole possession in one man. Entire
pertransient, a line crossing the middle of a shield and running diametrically
the longest way of her positio^. Entire pertingents, lines running the longest,
way of the shields position, without touching the center. Entitatively,
according to the Entity, an essence, being or subsistence. Entoire, when a
bordure is charged with all sorts of inanimate things, except leaves Fruits and
Flowers. Entoxicate, l. to poison. Entrails, f. bowels. Entreague, Sp. a making
good again, also a story (after many entangled passages) brought to a calm end.
Entreat, o. to handle. Entrecomune, o. f. converse together. Entremees, -mes,
f. intermingled. Entremesse, entertainment between the messes, or courses.
Entremete, o. to deal or meddle. Entresse, o. entrance. Entreteden, o. to
handle. Entry, a taking possession. Entriked, o. deceived. Entrusion, a violent
entrance. Entrusion de guard, a writ against an Infant within age, entering upon
his lands and holding his Lord out. Entunes, o. tunes. Entwyssel, an ancient
house and Family in Lancashire. Enucl^ate* l. take out the kernel, also unfold,
expound. Envelope, f. infold, wrap up. Environ, f. to compass about. Enumerate,
l. to reckon up, to number. Enunciation, l. an uttering or pronouncing, also
(in Logic) a proposition. Enunciative, simply affirming or denying. Envoy, f.
(Envoi^) a messenger sent [to an Ambassador.] Envoice, as Invoice, Enure, to
take place or effect or be available. Envyron, o. as Environ. Enurny, all
borders of Coats charged with beasts (in heraldry.) Eolian, belonging to
Ae^lus, God of the Winds. Epact, g. the addition of eleven days, to equal the
Lunar year of 354, to the solar of 365 days. Epagoge, g. the comparing of
things that are alike. Epaminondas, a great Captain of the Thebans against the
Lacedaemonians. Epanadiplosis, g. a beginning and ending with the same word in a
sentence. Epanalepsis, g. a repetition of the same word for enforcement sake.
Epaenaphora, g. when the same word begins several sentences. Epanodos, g. a
repitition of things in an order inverted. Epanorthosis, g. a recalling and
correcting something before spoken. Epatrides, g. certain Noblemen amongst the
Athenians. Eparch, g. the chief Governor of a Province. Epenthesis, g. the
putting of a letter or syllable into the middle of a word. Epha, an hebrew
measure of nine gallons. Epheby, g. a stripling. Ephemera febris, a Fever that
lasts but one day. Ephemeron, daily, also as Ephemeridian, belonging to
Ephemerides, g. Journals, also Almanacks. Ephemerist, he that writes Almanacks,
Calculations, etc. Ephesian, belonging to Ephesus, the chief City of Jo^ia in
Asia minor, famous for the Temple of Diana. Ephesian moan, like that of
Heraclitus their weeping Philosopher. Ephi, as Epha. Ephialtes, g. the
nightmare Ephippiated, g. sadled. Ephippiarchy, a body of 16 Troops of horse,
1024. Ephod, a Linen Garment worn by the Jewish Priests. Ephori, g. certain
Magistrates among the Lacedaemonians. Ephr^^mites, the Off spring of Ep^raim,
h. fruitful* Epi^ole, g. as Epanalepsis, only with respect to the matter, as
that is to the style, a repetition of the same word at the beginning of several
sentences. Epick p^etry, written in Heroic verse, not Lyrick. Epicrasis, g. a
slow and moderate evacuation of bad humors. Epicedie, g. -ium, a funeral song.
Epicaene, g. comprehending both sexes under one gender. Epichrists, g.
ointments. Epicure, -ean, belonging to Epicurus, an Athenian Philosopher
holding Pleasure to be the chiefest good. Epicurism, the manner or custom of an
Epicure, or voluptuous person. Epicycle, a lesser orb, whose center is in the
Circumference of a greater, whereby they solve the irregular motions of
Planets, etc. Epidemick, -call, belonging to an Epidemy, g. a disease or
contagion univerally catching. Epidermis, g. the outward skin covering the main
skin of the body. Epididymis, g. one of the tunicles involving the testicles
Epigamy, g. affinity by marriage. Epigastrick, g. belonging to the Epigastrium,
the outward part of the belly, from the stomach to the navel. Epiglot, -^tis,
g. the weasel of the throat, the little tongue closing the Larynx. Epigram, g.
a short and witty sort of poem, playing on the subject. Epigrammatist,
-t^grapher, a maker or writer of Epigrams. Epigraph, g. an inscription.
Epileptick, belonging to, or troubled with an Epilepsy, g. a Convulsion of the
whole body, the falling sickness. Epilogism, a computation or numbering by way
of repetition. Epilogize, to make an Epilogue, g. a conclusion, also a speech
at the end of a play. Epiloimick, g. good against the plague or any infection.
Epim^nides, a Cretian poet. who slept (they say) 75 years in a Cave, as he kept
his Fathers sheep. Epimone, g. a tarrying long upon one subject or matter.
Epiod, g. a song before the burying of the corpse. Epephonema, g. Acclamation, a
sententious clause of a discourse. Epiphany, g. appearance [of the star to the
wisemen,] Manifestation [of Christ to the Gentiles] January 6. Epiphora, g.
force, impression, repeating the same word (with respect chiefly to the matter)
at the end of several sentences. Epiplexis, g. an elegant upbraiding in order
to conviction. Epiploce, g. a gradual rising of one clause of a sentence out of
another, much like to Climax. Episcopal, g. belonging to a Bishop or Overseer.
Episcopate, to play the Bishop, overlook diligently. Episcopicide, the killing
of a Bishop. Epispastick, g. drawing or blistering. Epistolary, belonging to an
Epistle, g. a Letter sent. Epistrophe, g. when diverse sentences end alike.
Epistyle, g. the Chapter of a Pillar, or architrave. Epitaph, g. an
inscription on a tomb or grave. Epitasis, g. the second or busy part of a
Comedy, before things are at full vigor. Epithalamize, to make an Epithalamy,
-mium, g. a nuptial or wedding song. Epithemetical, belonging to an Epitheme,
g. a liquid medici^e applied by Cotton, Scarlet, etc. Epithet, g. an Adjective,
or concrete quality, expressing the nature of the thing to which it is added.
Epitimesis, g. as Epiplexis a rebuking. Epitoge, a loose upper garment.
Epitomater, he that does Epitomize, make an Epitome, -my, g. an abridgment.
Epitritos. g. a foot of four syllables the first short and the other three
long. Epitrochasmus, g. a slight running over several things for brevity sake.
Epitrope, g. permission (serious or ironical.) Epizeuxis, g. an immediate
repetition of the same word. Epoch, -che, -cha, g. as Era. Epode, g. a kind of
Lyrick Poesy, wherein the first verse is longer than the second. Epostracism,
g. Duck and a Drake and a white penny cake (with an oister-shell on the Water.)
Epping-street, a Town in Essex. Epulary, l. belonging to a banquet. Epulosity,
a being Epulous, l. full of banqueting. Epucloticks, g. powders, etc. to dry up
ulcers, etc. Equanimity, l. evenness, quietness of mind. Equation, l. a making
equal even or plain. Equator, as Equator. Equestrian, l. belonging to an
Horseman or Knight. Eques auratus, l. a Knight [with gilt arms, etc.]
Equilateral, as Aequilateral. Equinoctial-line, as Equator. Equiparates, Aeq-,
l. things compared or made equal. Equippage, f. a furnishing, setting forth,
also furniture. Equiparable, comparable. Equiangle, where the angles are equal.
Equipped, f. set forth, furnished, accoutred. Equicrural, even-legged.
Equidial, having the days and nights equal. Equipensate, weigh or esteem
alike. Equipollence, Aeq-, l. a being Equipollent, l. of equal force or value.
Equidistants, Parallels. Equiformity, l. likeness in form. Equiponderous, of
equal weight. Equivalent, Aeq-, l. of equal worth, or signification. Equivocal,
Aeq-, l. having a double meaning. Equivocate, to use Equivocation, double or
doubtful speech. Equorean, l. belonging to the Sea. Equus, the Horse, l. a
Constellation. Er, h. a Watchman. Eradicate, l. pull up by the roots. Erarij,
Aer-, Romans deprived of giving their vote, paid all tribute, and served in the
war at their own charges. Erased, l. scraped out, torn away. Erasmus, g.
amiable. Erastianism, the doctrine of the Erastians, followers of Erastus, a
Swisse Doctor (about 1580) who held that excommunication belonged to the
secular Magistrate, etc. Erato, one of the nine Muses. Erber, o. arbor.
Erchenbald, a Bishop of London, Son to King Offa. Erean, Aer-, l. brazen.
Erebus, an infernal deity, Father of Night, Hell. Erection, l. a raising
upright. Erector, l. a lifter up, one of the Muscles. Eremitical, belonging to
an Eremite, or Hermit, g. Ereption, l. a snatching away. Eretriack, as Eleack,
from Menedemus born at Eretria, a City of Eubaea. Ergotique, belonging to
Ergotism, arguing, quarrelling, sophistry, from Ergo, l. therefore. Eriferous,
l. bearing brass. Erichthonius, King of Athens, Son of the Earth and Vulcan
(striving with Minerva) he invented the Chariot, to hide his Dragons feet.
Eridanus, Padus, the Po, a River in Italy, a Constellation. Erigone, Daughter
of Icarus, who hanged her self for her Fathers death, the Constellation Virgo.
Erimanthian, belonging to Erimanthus, a Mountain in Arcadia. Eriphile, for a
bracelet betrayed her Husband Amphiaraus to the Theban wars, to his
destruction. Erke, o. weary, loathing. Eristical, g. contentious. Eristicks,
books or Treatises of controversy or disputes. Erivate, l. to dry up, or drain
away by a stream. Ermine, a little Beast whose fur is very costly.
Ermin-street, Erminage-street, the Roman highway from St. David's to
Southampton. Ernes, o. a promise in [earnest.] Ern, o. greatly. Ernest, ge.
severe. Earnfull, so. sorrowful, lamentable. Erogation, l. a liberal bestowing.
Eros, g. Love, Cupid. Erosion, l. a gnawing or eating away. Erostratus, to get
him a name set fire to Diana's Temple. Erotesis, -tema, g. asking of a
question. Ersh, Ss. Edish, the stubble after corn is cut. Errant [Justices]
riding the Circuits. Errant [Knights] wandering all over the world, doing
wonders. Err, f. a way. Errata, l. faults [in print, etc.] Erratique, l.
wandering or creeping up and down. Errhines, g. Medicines purging through the
nose. Erroneous, subject to or full of Errors, l. mistakes. Erst, o. earnest.
Erst my shert, o. before my shirt [was made.] Erugate, l. take away wrinkles.
Eruginous, l. rusty, cankered, corrupted, blasted. Erubescency, l. a blushing.
Eructation, l. a belching out. Erudition, l. an instructing. Erumnate, l.
impoverish, make miserable. Eruncation, l. a weeding. Eruption, l. a violent
breaking forth. Erewhile, o. a while ago. Eryngus, Sea-holly. Erysipelatous,
troubled with an Erysipely, g. St. Anthonies fire. Ery, D. to honor or
reverence. Erythraean sea, the Red sea, the Gulf of Arabia or Meccha. Eryx, a
valiant man killed by Hercules at Whirl-bats. Esaias, as Isaiah. Esarhaddon, h.
binding cheerfulness. Esau, h. working or doing. Escal, l. fit for food.
Escambio, a license to make over a bill of Exchange to another beyond sea.
Eschaufeth, o. heateth. Eschange, as Exchange. Eschew, f. avoid or shun.
Escheat, Lands etc. fallen or forfeited to the Lord of the Manor, also a writ
to recover such lands, also the Circuit within which they fall. Escheator, the
Officer appointed to observe the Escheats due to the King. Esc^at, f. a
splinter of wood. Eschequer, as Exchequer. Escotcheon, a shield or buckler, a
Coat of arms. Escrite, f. a writing. Escuage, f. a tenure whereby the tenant is
bound (at his own charges) to follow the Lord to the wars. Esculent, as Escal.
Escurial, a stately Edifice built by Philip 2. King of Spain, in 24 years, it
contains the Kings palace, St. Laurence Church, the Monastery of Jeronomites
and Free-Schools. Eshin, No. a pail or kit. Eskippeson, Eskypesoun, shipping,
passage. Esnecy, f. a prerogative allowed the eldest copartner, of choosing
first. Eson, Aeson, King of Thessaly, had his youth restored by Medea at the
request of his son Jason. Esons bath, the Bath or Medicines which restored his
age. Esopical, fabulous, belonging to Esop, Aesop, author of the Fables.
Espalier, f. a close hedg-row of sundry fruit trees, also a shouldering piece
in architecture. Esples, Expleta, l. the full profit of land. Espervarius,
Sparverius, a Spar-hawk. Espelers, the 3d branch of the harts-horns. Espe^es,
f. kinds. Esperance, f. hope. Espire, o. as expire. Esploit, (for Exploit)
perfection. Espringold, Espringalle, f. a warlike Engine (disused) for the
casting great stones. Esquiline, -nus, l. one of the seven hills on which Rome
was built. Esquiry, f. a querry or Princes stable, also a querry-ship, or the
Office and dignity of an Esquire, f. he that bore the arms of a Knight, [now]
that degree of Gentry next below a Knight. Essay, f. to try, also a trial or
preamble. Essay [of a Deer,] the breast or brisket. Essedary, one that guides
or fights in an Essede, l. a warlike Chariot. Essendi quietum de Tolonio, a
writ for any Townsmen (when toll is exacted) having Charter or prescription to
exempt them. Skeer the Esse, Che. separate the dead ashes from the embers.
Essenes, a kind of Monastic Philosophers among the Jews, kept neither wife nor
servant, referred all to destiny, thought the soul mortal, etc. Essential,
having or belonging to Essence* l. substance, being. Essential debilities, when
planets are in their detriment, fall* or peregrines. Essentifical, causing the
Essence or being. Essoine, an excuse for one summoned to appear. Establishment
of Dowre, assurance thereof to the wife, about the time of marriage. Estandard,
'Standard, the standing measure to regulate all others in the land* also an
Ensign in war. Ester, (f. Estre) o. substance, state or being. Esther, h.
secret. Estiserous, l. bringing or bearing heat. Estimate, Aest-, l. to make
Estimation, account, valuing. Estival, l. of Summer. Estivate, l. to Summer.
Estopel, an impediment or bar of an action, from his own fact who otherwise
might have had his action. Estotiland, the most Northern Region on the Eastside
of America. Estovers, sustenance allowed an accused felon (and his family) out
of his Estate during imprisonment. Estreat, Estreict, f. extractum, l. the copy
of an original writing. Estraie, 'Stray, Extra^^^a, l. a beast (not wild) found
(and not owned) in any Lordship. Estreignes moy de coeur joyeus, f. embrace me
with a merry heart. Estrepement, -pament, Estrapement, f. Spoil made by a
Tenant, to the prejudice of him in reversion. Estuate, as Aestuate. Esurial, l.
fasting, hungry. Esurion, l. a hungry fellow. Esurition, l. a being hungry. Et
je say bien que ce n'est pa^ mon tort, f. And I am sure I have done no wrong.
Etching, graving with aq^ae-fortis eating into the Copper, etc. Etcaetera, etc.
l. and the rest, and so forth. Eternize, g. to make eternal. Etesiae,
Etesian-winds, certain Easterly winds blowing yearly about the dog-dayes. Ethe,
o. Easy, gentle. Etheling, as Adeling. Ethelard, Adelard, Sa. Noble
disposition. Ethelbert, Edlebert, sa, nobly bright. Ethelstaine, -an, sa. Noble
Jewel. Ethelward, sa. Noble keeper Ethelwold, sa. Noble Governor. Ethelwolph,
sa. Noble helper Etherial, as Aetherial. Ethics, g. [books treating of] moral
Philosophy. Ethiopia, as AEthiopia. Ethnarchy, g. Principality. Ethnic, g.
heathenish. Ethnicks, Heathens, Gentiles. Ethologie, g. a discourse concerning
manners. Ethopoeia, g. a representation of [some certain particular mens]
manners. Etiologie, as AEtiology. Etna, as AEtna. Etocetum, a Town in
Warwickshire, the second Roman station from Manchester. Etymological,
belonging to Etymology, g. derivation of words from their Originals.
Etymologize, to interpret by deriving words, etc. Evacuate, l. to empty. Evade,
l. to make an Evasion, an escape, shift. Evagation, l. a wandering abroad.
Evagination, l. a drawing out of the sheath. Evan, Ivon, John. Evander, an
Arcadian, having slain his Father, he fled into Latium, where he made himself
King. Evangeliques, a sort of reformers not much differing from Lutherans.
Evangelism, g., a bringing of glad tidings. Evangelistary, a pulpit, also the
office of an Evangelist, g. one that does Evangelize, write or bring
Evangelium, the Gospel, good news. Evanid, l. soon decaying. Evaporation, l. a
sending forth of vapors. Evate, precious Ethiopian Wood for cups, that will
endure no poison. Eucharistical, belonging to the Eucharist, g. thanksgiving,
also the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Eucrasie, g. a good temperature of
body. Euchamie, g. [a being supplied with] good juice. Eudora, g. a good gift.
Eudoxic, g. excellency of name, good report or estimation. Eve, h. living. Eve
and Treve, sc. Servants whose predecessors have been Servants to any man and
his predecessors. Eveck, -ick, ib^x, l. a kind of Wild Goat. Evection, l. a
lifting up, or a carrying out. Event, l. issue, success. Eventeration, l. a
taking out the belly of a thing. Eventilate, l. sift or winnow [Corn,] strictly
to examine. Evershot, a Town in Dorsetshire. Everych, o. every. Everard, g^.
well reported. Everwicscire, Yorkshire. Eversion, l. an overthrowing.
Evertuate, take away the virtue or strength. Evestigation, l. an earnest
seeking or hunting after. Evesholme, a Town in Worcestershire. Euganian,
belonging to a Country of the Venetians by the inner gulf of the
Adriatick-Sea. Eugeny, g. nobleness of blood. Eviction, l. a convincing or
vanquishing. Evibration, l. a brandishing or darting forth. Evidence, l. a
testimony, or proof. Evince, l. overcome, declare. Evil, a Town in
Somersetshire. Evint^grous, l. bearing age well, without decay. Eviration, l.
an unmanning, a gelding. Evisceration, l. a taking out the bowels. Evitable, l.
capable of Evitation, l. an avoiding, or shunning. Eviternity, l.
everlastingness. Eulogy, -ge, g. a praising. Eum, o. equal. Eulogical, g. well
spoken. Eumenides, the three Furies. Eunuchate, -chize, to geld. Eunuchism, the
state or condition of an Eunuch, g. (whose mind is right) a gelded man.
Eunomians, Heretics holding, that Faith only was acceptable without works, or
that no sin could hurt the faithful. Evocation, l. a calling out. Evolatical,
l. flying abroad. Evolution, l. a rolling or reading over. Eupatory,
liver-wort. Euphemism, g. a speaking well of, putting a favorable
interpretation on a bad word or thing. Euphonie, g. a graceful sound.
Euphorbium, the gum of the Lybian gum-thistle. Euphrosyne, g. burrage, also one
of the 3 Graces. Euridice, being fetched from hell by her husband Orpheus, was
snatched back again, because he looked back on her before she arrived upon
earth. Euripize, to imitate Euripe, -pus, Golpho de Negroponte, which ebbes and
flows seven times a day. Eureclydon, g. the Seamans plague, a furious
North-eastwind. Europaeans, Inhabitants of Europe, one of the Worlds four
parts, separated from Asia by the River Tanais. Eurythmy, g. the exact
proportion of rooms in a building, Eusebius, g. pious, godly. Eustace,
Eustathius, or Eustachius, g. standing firm. Eutaxie, g. good order or
disposing of things. Euterpe, one of the Muses. Euthansie, g. an happy dying.
Euthymy, g. tranquillity, quietness of mind. Eutrapelize, to use or exercise
Eutrapely, g. Courtesy. Eutropius, g. Well-manner'd. Eutychians, followers of
Eutyches (An. 443.) he held that there was but one nature in Christ, that he
was not born of the Virgin Mary, etc. Evulsion, l. a violent pulling up. Ewage,
o. color. Evyn, o. Even. Exaceration, l. a purging or cleansing from chafe.
Exacerbation, l. a making sour, also as Sarcasmus. Exacination, l. a taking
out the stone or kern^l. Exaction, a taking of unlawful fees. Exacuation, l.
the making a thing sharp-pointed. Exactor Regis, the Kings Exactor, Customer or
Exciseman, also the Sheriff. Exaggeration, l. a heaping up* also as
Aggravation. Exagitation, l. a stirring up. Exaltation, l. a lifting up, also
(in Chemistry) a bringing to greater purity. Exalted, lifted up, sublime,
excellent. Example, l. pattern, copy. Examussim, l. exactly. Exanguious, l.
bloudless. Exanimate, l. to deprive of life, also to dismay. Exanthems, g. the
small pox, measles, or any wheales. Exantlate, l. to empty, pump or draw out;
also to overcome by great labor. Exaration, l. a plowing up, also writing,
engraving. Exarchy, -chaie, the office or dignity of an Exarch, g. a Lieutenant
or Vice Emperor. Exarch of Ravenna, Governor of Italy under the
Constantinople Emperors. E^articulation, l. a putting out of joint. Exartuate,
l. disjoynt, carve or quarter. Exasperation, l. a making sharp, a provoking.
Exaturation; l. a satiating. Exauctoration, Exaut-, l. a depriving one of an
office, a disbanding. Exaugurate, l. to unhallow or profane. Ex^uspicate, l.
to have ill luck, or do a thing unfortunately. Excalfaction, l. a heating.
Excambio, an Exchange. Excambiator, an Exchanger of land. Excandescency, l. a
being inflamed [with anger, etc.] Excavation, a making hollow. Excecation, l. a
blinding. Excelsity, l. highness, loftiness. Excentrick, as Eccentrick.
Exception, l. (taking out) a bar or stop to an action. Exceptions,
irregularities, deviations from general Rules. Take Exception at, be displeased
or unsatisfied with. Exceptor, l. a gatherer [of the speakers words.] Excern,
l. to seirce or sift. Excerption, l. picking or choosing. Excess, l. an
exceeding, a going or doing out of measure. Excester, Exonia, Isca Danmoniorum,
the Chief City of Devonshire, upon Ex, the name of the River. Exchangeors, men
licensed to return money beyond sea by bills of Exchange. Exchequer, the Court
whither all the Crown-Revenues are brought. Excision, l. a breaking down,
wasting or destroying. Excise, an imposition on Beer, Ale, Sider and other
liquors. Excitation, l. a stirring up. Exclude, l. to shut out. Exclusory, l.
having power of Exclusion, l. a barring or shutting out. Exclusively, in a
manner. Exclusive of, not taking in [the extremes, etc.] Excogitate, l. to
invent. Excommengement, the same as Excommunication, l. a separating from the
Church or Communion of Saints. Excommunicato capiendo, a writ for the
apprehending and imprisoning him that obstinately stands excommunicated 40
days. Excommunicato deliberando, a writ to deliver the excommunicate out of
prison upon a Certificate of his conformity. Excommunicato recipiendo, for the
retaking an Excommunicate person unlawfully delivered from prison. Excoriate,
l. flea off the skin. Excorticate, l. pull off the rind of bark. Excreable, l.
which one may Excreate, l. Spit out. Excrementous, -titious, belonging to
Excrements, l. dregs, ordure. Excrescence, -cy, l. a growing out, or swelling.
Excretion, l. a voiding or purging of Excrements or bodily superfluities.
Excruciate, l. to torment. Excude, l. to beat or hammer out. Exculcate, to
tread, or kick up or out. Exculpate, l. to clear on^s self of a fault.
Excuriate, l. throw out of the Court. Excursion, l. a roving or running out.
Excusatory, belonging to Excusati^n, l. an excus^^g. Excussion, l. a shaking
(...). Execation, l. a cutting out Execration, l. a cursing* Execrable, l.
accursed, horrible, detestable. Execution, l. the last performance of an act,
inflicting of punishment. Executione facienda* a Writ for the Execution of a
Judgment. Executione facienda in Withernamium, a Writ for the taking his
Cattle who had conveyed another man's Cattle out of the County, so that they
could not be replevyed. Executor, l. he that performs any action, also he that
is left by Will to dispose of the deceased man's estate. Executor de son tort,
who takes upon him the office without appointment. Exeg^tical, belonging to
Exegesis, g. explication. Exemplary, belonging to Exemplar, l. a person or
thing containing an example Exemplify, l. to give, make take out of an example
or copy. Exemplifi^ation^, a writ granted for the exemplification of an
Original. Ex^mption, l. a taking out or a freeing [from duty, etc.]
Exenteration, l. a taking out the guts or bowels. Exequial, belonging to
Exequies, l. funeral rites. Exercitation, l. a frequent exercising, also a
critical Comment. Exergasia, g. an adorning, polishing. Exert, l. to put forth.
Exest^m, l. an eating up or out, consuming. Exflorous, l. having flowers
growing out of it. Ex gravi querela, a writ for him to whom Lands are devised
by Will, and the heir of the devisor enters and detains them. Ex mero motu, (in
the Kings Charters and Letters Patent) of his own will and motion, without the
Petition o^ [false] suggestion of others. Ex officio, an Oath ex officio might
have been administered by any person authorized by Letters Patent, to force the
supposed delinquent to accuse or clear himself; repealed. Exoneratione Sectae,
a writ to disburden the Kings-ward of all suit to the County, etc. Exhalation,
l. a vapor drawn up by the Suns heat, also a blowing or breathing out.
Exharmonia, discords in Music. Exhausted, l. drawn dry, wasted. Exhibit, l. to
show, or present. Exhibition, a showing, also an allowance toward ones
maintenance. Exhilarate, l. to refresh, to make one merry or cheerful.
Exsiccation, l. a drying up. Exigendary, -genter, four Officers in the
Common Pleas who make Exigents, Writs where the Defendant cannot be found, nor
any thing to be distreined Exigent, l. a great straight or necessity. Exiguity,
l. slenderness. Exiguous, l, slender, small. Ex^lition, l. a leaping out.
Exile, l. banishment. Exility, l, as E^iguity. Eximiety, a being. Eximious, l.
excellent, famous. Exinanition, l. an emptying* or making void* a being
Exinanited, l. robbed, pilled, reduced to nothing. Existence, l. a being.
Existimation, l. a thinking or judging. Exit, l. he or she goes out, also a
going out or ending. Exitial, -itious, l. dangerous, destructive, deadly.
Exodus, g. the going out [of the Isralites from Egypt.] Exoine, as Essoyn.
Exol^te, l. stale, out of use. Exolution, l. full payment, also faintness and
looseness all over the b^dy. Exonerate, l. unload. Exoptable, l. desirable.
Exoptate, l. to desire earnestly. Exorable, l. that may be entreated.
Exorbitancy, l. a being Exor^itant, l. out of rule or measure. Exorbitate, l.
to go out of the right way. Exorcism. the practice of an Exorcist, g. he that
does Exorcise, restrain the Devils Power (by prayer or Conjuration.) Exordium,
l. a preamble or beginning [of a discourse.] Exornation, l. an adorning, or
dressing up. Exortive, l. belonging to rising or the East. Exosseous, l. having
no bones. Exoster, l. a petard or engine to blow a gate open. Exoterick
[doctrine] of nice disputes. Exotic, g. strange, forreig^ outlandish. Expand,
declare, display. Expansed, l. displayed. Expansion, l. an opening or spreading
abroad. Ex part, l. partly, also done by one party only. Ex part talis, a
writ for a Bailiff or Receiver who cannot obtain reasonable allowance but is
cast into prison by the Auditors assigned to take his account. Expatiate. l.
walk at large or full liberty. Expectant [fee-] tail, the having Lands given
to a man and the heirs of his body, etc. Epectable, to be expect^d.
Expectation, l. a tarrying or looking for. Expectorate, l. to raise phlegm
from the breast. Expedient, l. fit, convenient An Expedient, a convenient way,
means, or device. Expeditate, l. cut out the balls of the Dogs feet, (for
preservation of the Kings game) Expedite, l. prepare, dispatch finish.
Expedition, l. quick dispatch, also a setting forth upon a journey, war, etc.
Expel, l. drive out. Expenditors, paymasters. Expense, l. cost or charges.
Expensis militum levandis, a writ to levy allowance for the Knights of
Parliament. Experience, l. proof or trial upon sight or observation.
Experiment, l. a putting to trial or into practice. Expetible, l. desirable.
Expiable, capable of Expiation, l. a pacifying, satisfying or making amends for
an offense. Expiration, l. a giving up the Ghost. Expire, l. to come to an end.
Explain, l. unfold, declare. Explanation, a making plain clear or manifest.
Expleiten, o. make show. Explement, the same as Expletion, l. a filling up.
Expletive, l. filling, fulfilling, perfecting. Explication, l. explaining or
unfolding. Explicit, l. unfolded, open. Exploit, f. a notable act.
Exploration, -orement, l. a spying or searching out. Explorator, l. a scout
[Master] Explode, l. to hiss off the stage Explosion, l. an exploding,
slighting, decrying, hissing, off, etc. Ex post facto, l. the doing a thing
after the time when it should have been done. Expolition, l. a polishing.
Eposition, l. an expounding or interpreting. Expostulate, l. reason the case,
complain. Express, pronounce, utter, declare, also a letter or packet of
Letters. Expressed, (in Physic) squeezed out. Expression, l. an expressing,
squeezing, also the thing expressed, etc. also as Ethopoeia. Expro^ation, l. a
reproaching or upbraiding. Expugna^le, capable of Expugnation, l. a taking or
winning by force. Expuition, l. a spitting out. Expulsion, l. a driving out.
Expumication, l. a sleeking or smoothing with pumice-stone. Expunge, l. blot
out. Exquisite, l. exact, in the highest degree. Exsufflation, l. a breathing
out. Ext^n^y, being Extant, l. appearing in sight [above others] also in being.
Extacy, as Ecstasie. Extemporary, -raneous, l. that which is done Ex tempore,
presently, without any praevious study. Extemporality, a promptness without
praemeditation. Extend, l. enlarge, stretch out. Extensible, -sive, capable of
Extension, a stretching out. Extent, whole breadth or compass, also a
commission to seize and value lands, etc. also the act of seizing, etc. upon
this writ. Extendi facias, writ of extent, commanding Lands to be extended or
valued. Extenuate, l. make little, undervalue. Extercorate, l. cleanse, or
carry forth dung. Exterminate, l. throw out or banish. External, -riour, l.
outward. Exterraneous, Extra-, ^, strange, foreign. Extersion, l. a wiping off
or out. Extimate, l. outmost, contrary to intimate. Extimulate, l. to spur on
or provoke. Extinct, l. put out, quenched. Extinction, l. a quenching.
Extinguisher, an instrument to Extinguish, l. put out [a candle, etc]
Extinguishm^nt of Rent, when the Rent and property are both consolidated into
one possession. Extirpate, l. utterly to destroy or root out. Extispitious,
belonging to southsaying by the entrails of Beasts. Extorsion, l. a wresting or
violent taking [of more than is due,] excessive usury. Extort, l. to wrest or
wring out of. Extract, l. to draw out, also as Extraction, l. a drawing out,
also as Estreat, also a pedigree, or descending from such or such a Family.
Extracts, as Estreats. Extrajudicial, done out of Court. Extramission, l. a
sending out or beyond. Extramundane, [spaces] between one world and another.
Extraneous, -terra-, l. of a Foreign or strange Land. Extraparochial, beyond
or out of the Parish. Extravagant, l. wandering beyond the due bounds.
Extravasal, beside or out of the vessel. Extreat, as Estreat. Extricabl^,
capable of Extrication, as Distri-, ridding one self of. Extri^sick, -call, l.
outward, from without. Extroversi^n, a turning [ones thoughts upon] outward
[objects.] Extrude, l. to thrust out. Extrusion, a thrusting out. Ex^uberate,
l, [to cause] to swel or bunch up. Extumescence, l. a swelling or bunching up.
Exuberance, -cy, l. an overflowing or abounding. Exuberate, l. to abound, or be
plentiful. Exuccous, Exsu-, l. juiceless. Exudate, Exsu-, l. to drop or send
forth moisture, to sweat out. Exuge, l. to suck up. Exulate, to be banished or
to live in exile. Exulcerate, l. to blister or turn to an ulcer, also fret or
vex. Exult, l. leap for joy, triumph. Exultation, l. a great rejoicing.
Exundation, l. an overflowing. Exuperable, l. that may be exceeded, got over or
overcom'n. Exuperation, Exsu-, l. an excelling or surpassing. Exustion, l. a
burning or parching. Exuthenismus, g. an extenuation or speaking contemptibly
of any person or thing. Ey, o. an egg, also a watery place. Eye [of a plant,]
where the bud puts forth, also the bud it self. Eye-bite, to bewitch with the
eyes. Ey-bright, Euphrasia, an herb good for eyes, brain and memory. Ey- [of
Pheasants] the whole brood of young ones, the same as Covey in Partridges.
E^ess, a [watery-eyed] hawk brought up under a Kite. Eyet, Eight, a little
Island. Eyleth, o. aileth. Air, the Court of Justices Iterant. Air of the
forest, the Court which was wont to be kept (every three years) by the Justices
of the Forest. Eyth, Eth, o. easy. Eywood, a Town in Surrey. Ezechias,
Hezekiah, or Hizkiah, h. strength of the Lord. Ezechiel, h. seeing or strength
of God. Ezenden, a town in Rutland. Ez^a, h. an helper. Ezzab, a Province of
Africa.
F.
FA^al, h. belonging to a b^an. Fabellator, l. an inventer of little tales.
Fabianus, Bishop of Rome, martyred under Decius. Fabius Maximus, a Roman
General famous for tiring and overthrowing Annibal. Fabrication, l. the making
a Fabric, l. a building; also a workhouse. Fabrick-lands, given for the
building or repairing of a Church, College, etc. Fabulator* -list, an inventer
or teller of Tales. Fabulinus, the God supposed to look to Children when they
begin to speak. Fabulosity, a being Fabulous, full of Fables, l. invented
tales. Fac-totum, (l. do-all) a border, in whose middle any letter may be put
for use, and taken out again. Facade, f. the front or outside of a house.
Facetious, l. wittily-merry. Facile, l. easy. Facility, easiness. Facinorous,
l. belonging to notable exploits. Fack, one circle of any queiled rope.
Facrere, o. dissimulation. Fact, l. an act or deed. Factious, given to Faction,
a withdrawing any number from the main body (of Church or state) governing
themselves by their own Councels, and [openly] opposing the established
Government. Factist, a poet or play-maker. Factitious, l. counterfeited, made
like another. Factor, l. a Merchants Agent beyond sea. Facture, l. the making
or doing of a thing. Faculty, l. power or ability, also a license or
dispensation, also a tr^de, mystery or profession. Faculent, l. bright, clear.
Facundate, l. to make Facundous, full of Facundity, l. Eloquence. Fader, o.
Father. Fadom, Fathom, Six foot. Fage, o. a merry tale. Faint, Feint, or Fained
Action, whereby nothing can be recovered, though the words of the writ be true.
Fain, o, glad. Faint pl^ader, a false and deceitful pleading. Fair-pleading
(beau-pleader) a writ on the statute of Marl-bridg, providing that no fines
shall be taken for not pleading to the purpose. Fairie, Goblin, Phantasm, also,
o. a goodly sight. Fairy-sparks, Shel-fire, K. often seen on clothes in the
night. Faisible, f. possible to be done. Faitours, idle vagabonds. Fakenham, a
town in Norfolk. Falang, f. a jacket or close coat. Fall of a Planet, an
essential debility, opposite to his exaltation. Falarick, l. belonging to a
dart thrown from towers besieged. Falcator, l. a cutter with a bill or hook.
Falcation, l. a mowing. Falchon, a short hooked sword. Falcidius, a Roman
Consul, author of the Falcidian-law, treating of the Citizens right to dispose
of his own goods. Falciferous, l. bearing a hook or bill. Falcon, a great Gun,
next to the minion. Falda, a sheepfold. Faldage, the Lords liberty* of folding
his Tenants sheep. Falding, a kind of course cloth. Faldi^dory, -dorium, -tory,
the Bishops seat within the Chancel. Fald-stool, placed on the Southside of the
Altar at which the Kings of England kneel, at their Coronation. Falern, Fall-,
a disease in hawks known by their white talons. Falernian [wine] growing in
Falernus, a Field of Campania in Italy. Falesia, a hill or Down by the
Seaside. Fallacy, l. Sophism, g. [a proposition framed for] deceit.
Fallaciloquence, deceitful speech. Fallacious, deceitful. Fallax, l. the
same; also deceit. Fall-off, when the ship keeps not near enough to the wind.
Falls, the different lyings of the deck higher or lower. Falls of the tackle,
the small ropes which they hale by. Falouque, f. a kind of Barge or Brigantine.
Falso returno brevium, a writ against the Sheriff, for false returning of
writs. False-keel, another keel put under the first, when the ship is too
floaty. Falstre, an Island in the Baltic Sea. False-stem, another stem put on
the first being too flat. Falsed, o. falsified. Falsification, l. the same as
Falsifying, counterfeiting, working or speaking of Falsity, Falsehood, untruth.
Famagosta, the chief City in the Isle of Cyprus. Fambles, c. hands.
Famble-ch^ais, c. rings or Gloves. Fam-grasp, c. agree with. Famicide, l. a
slanderer, destroyer of ones good name. Famigeration, a divulging, reporting
abroad. Familiar, belonging to a Family, or household, also an hide, Manse,
Carucata or a Plough-land. Familiar, [spirit] with whom there is a league or
contract made. Familist, one of the Family of Love, Heretics following one H.
Nicholas, (1550) whose chief Tenet was, That Christ is already com'n to
judgment. Famulers, o. helpers. Fanatical, belonging to Fanatic, Pha-, l.
frantic, mad; also a dissenter from the Church of England. Fane, a
weathercock, also a Temple. Fannian law, repressing excessive banquets. Fannel,
f. an ancient ornament of Priests left arm in sacrificing. Fantastic, -call,
whimsical. Fantome, as Phantome, also lank or light, No. Fanus, a Heathen Deity
representing the year. Faonatio, Feo-, the fawning of Does. Fapesmo, a
Syllogism whose first Proposition is an universal affirmative, the 2d. an
universal negative, and the last a particular negative. Farantly, No. handsome.
Farandman, sc. pilgrim or stranger. Farce, f. any stuffing in meat, a knavish
jig at the end of an interlude, a fond and dissolute play. Farced, l. Fassed,
o. stuffed. Farcie, -cines, fashions, scurffe lepr^sie, a knotty creeping
ulcer. Farcinate, l. to stuff. Fardingdeal, Farundel of Land, the fourth part
of an Acre. Farding or Farthing of Gold, a Gold-coin worth 20 pence. Fardel of
Land, the 4th. part of a yard-land, or rather (as Noy says) two fardels make a
nook* and four nooks make a yard-land. Fare, sa. [the price of.] a passage,
also for Face. Farrinaceous, -nous, l. made or full of Corn or meal.
Farl^y-leu, something paid (at the death of a Tenant) in stead of a herriot. Of
Farlie or Ferlie, things, for Of Yeorly, early or ancient things. Farnham, a
Town in Surrey. Farriginous, belonging to a Farrago, l. maslin, a mixture of
several grains together. Farreation, l. a Ceremony whereby the Priests
confirmed marriage. Farringdon, a Town in Barkshire. Farrow, to bring forth [as
a Sow.] Farsang, Parasang, a Persian league, three miles. Farth^ling, as
Farling. Farthing of Land, a yardland. Fascicular, made into a Fas^icle, l. a
fardel, bundle. Fasciculate, to tie up into a bundle. Fascination, l. a
bewitching by the eye. Fasciate, to bind with Fascia, l. a swathe. Fasguntide,
Fasting-tide, Ns. Shrove-tide, the beginning of Lent. Fashion-pieces, Timbers
in fashion of a great pair of ^orns, to which all the planks reaching to the
Ships after-end are fastened. Fast, o. wedded. Fast-freits, o. full fraughted.
Fastidious, l, disdainful. Fastigate, -giate, l. to raise or grow up to a sharp
top. Fastness, a strong hold, a place inaccessible, for bogs, bushes, etc.
Fastuisity, l. pride, disdainfulness. Fat, o. eight bushels. Fatality, l.
fatalness, the being Fatal, deadly, belonging to or appointed by Fate, destiny,
necessity. Fathom, six feet in length. Fatidi^al, prophesying, foretelling.
Fatiferous, l. bringing fate. Fatigable, capable of Fatigation, l. a wearying.
Fatigue, f. wearisomness, toil, tediousness. Fatiloquent, l. soothsaying,
prophesying. Fatome, as Fantome. Fatuity, l. sottishness, stupidity. Fatuate,
l. to play the fool. Favaginous, full of or like honey or honey-combs. Faunus,
the Son of Saturn, one of the oldest Italian Kings. Faunes, Field and
Wood-Gods. Faunick, l. wild, rude. Favonian, belonging to Favonius, l. the
West-wind. Faukon heronere, a Falcon taking herons. Faust, l. lucky, happy.
Faustity, good luck, happiness. Faunte^yns, o. little infants. Fautor, l. a
favourer, cherisher or maintainer. Fautress, l. she that favors or
maintains. Faw, fain, glad, o. Fay, f. Faith. Faytours, as Faitours,
deceivers. Faxed, see fixed. Feabes, Feaberries, Sf. Goose-berries. Feal, No.
to hide. Fealty, f. (fidelity) the Tenants oath (at his admittance) of being
true to his Lord. Feasible, Feac-, Feis-, (f. Faisible) easy to be done.
Febricitation, l. a falling sick of an ague or Fever. Febriculous, having or
subject to a Fever. Febris Catarrhalis, a Fever caused by distilling of Rheum
from the head. Feg, no. fair, also to flag or tire. February, the month of
Februation, l. sacrificing and praying for the Souls of the dead. Fecial,
Faecial, l. an herald. Fecible, as Faisible. Feculent, Faec-, full of dregs.
Feculency, filthiness. Fecundity, l. fruitfulness. Fedity, l. foulness.
Federasy, o. confederacy. Fee, Foedum, Lands held by perpetual right. Fee-farm,
Land held of another to himself and his heirs for ever, for a certain Yearly
Rent. Fee-simple, or absolute, to us and our heirs for ever. Fee-taile, or
conditional, To us and the heirs of our Body. Fee of Greece (for Free, Fre,
Fretum) the Archipelago Feers, o. chess-men, fellows. Feast, o. joy (for
Feast.) Feet, (for feat) o. fine. Feffe, o. indue. Fehthe, o. feud, enmity.
Feige, o. to carp at. Feintise, f. a dissembling. Felapton, a Syllogism whose
first proposition is an universal negative, the 2d. an universal affirmative,
and the last a particular Negative. Felaw, o. for fellow. Felicitate, -cifie,
to make Felicitous, full of Felicity, l. happiness. Fellifluous, l. flowing
with gall. Feel, o. Sense, knowledge. Fell, o. for field, a stony hill, sa.
also cruel, raging. Fellon, -oun, o. cruel, also an angry blister at the
fingers end, etc. Felmonger, a dealer in [sheep] skins parting the wool from
the pelts. Felo de se, l. a self-murderer. Felonious, belonging to Felony, any
offense next to petty treason, as murder, Theft, Rape, etc. Feloque, and
Felucca, the same as Falouque. Feltr^d, o. entangled. Feltron, o. strong rock.
Feme Covert, f. a married woman. Feminie, o. the Women's (Amazons) Country.
Fence, c. to spend. Fence-moneth, from June, the 9th. to July, 9 th. when Deer
begin to fawn, and it is unlawful to hunt in the Forest Fencing Cully, c. a
receiver of stolen goods. Fend, no. defend, shift off. Fendly, (q. Fiendly)
ugly. Fends, Fend-bolts, things hung over the ship-side, to keep it from
rubbing against another, etc. Fenestral, l. belonging to a window. Feneratious,
taken or given to Feneration, usury. Fenestere, a promontory of Gallicia.
Fenne, A. the division of a Book. Fenny, k. moldy. Fenugrece, an herb growing
plentifully in Gre^ce. Feodary, Feud-, Feudatory, an Officer belonging to the
Court of wards and liveries, to survey and value the land, etc. Feoffment, the
gift or grant of Lands, etc. in fee-simple by delivery of seis^n, by word or
writing. Foeminine, l. belonging to the Female sex. Foeneration, l. a putting
out to use. Fer, and Ferthest, for Far and Farthest. Feracity, l. fruitfulness.
Feral, l. dangerous, deadly. Feral signs, Leo and the last part of Scorpio.
Ferde, o. Fear. Ferd, o. Went. Fercost, J. a small kind of ship. Ferdella
terrae, ten Acres. Ferdendel, as Fardingdeal. Fere, Phere, o. a companion [on
the way.] Ferdfare, an acquitment of a man to go into the wars. Ferdinando,
either from Fred rand, sa. pure peace* or as Bertrand, sa. fair and pure.
Ferdwit, an acquitment of murder in an Army. Feretory, a place in the Church
where are set the bier, Coffins, etc. Feretrius, a name of Jupiter. Ferial,
belonging to Feriation, l. a keeping holiday. Ferient, l. striking. Ferine, l.
brutish, wild. Ferio, a Syllogism whose first proposition is an universal, the
last a particular Negative, and the second a particular affirmative. Ferison,
the same in the 3d figure, as Ferio in the first. Ferit, I. a blow. Ferity, l.
fierceness, brutishness, salvageness, Ferly, o. Strange. See Farly. Ferling a
farthing, also the fourth part of a Ward. Ferlingata terrae, Ferlingas, Ferdl-,
the fourth part of a yard-land. Ferm, c. a hole. Ferm, Farm, an house [and
land] taken by lease in writing or parol. Fermaces, g. Medicines. Fermanagh,
Erdino, a County in Ireland. Fermisona, the winter season of Deer, as Tempus
pinguedinis is the Summer season. Fermary, o. (q. Infirm-,) an Hospital.
Fermerere, o. an Overseer of Cattle and Husbandry. Fermentarious, belonging to
Ferment, l. leaven. Fermented, -tated, leavened. Fermentation, a puffing up
[with leaven,] the working of beer, etc. and (in Chemistry) the ripening or
resolving of any thing into it self. Fern year, o. February (Fevrier, f.)
Ferocious, l. Fierce, haughty. Ferocity, l. Fierceness. Feronia, a Goddess of
the ^oods. Ferrean, l. of or like iron. Ferret, a little beast sent into the
Coney-burroughs to drive them out. Ferried, carried by Ferry, a passage over
the water. Ferry, a town in Kent, Ferruginous, full of or like Ferrugo, l. the
rust of Ferrum, l. Iron. Ferrumination, a Chemical soldering of metals
together. Ferrure, f. the shooing of horses. Fers, Feers, Feerses, o. Chessmen.
Ferth, o. Fourth. Fert^ing, o. a thin scale. Fertility, l. a being Fertile, l.
fruitful. Fertilize, to make or grow fruitful. Fervent, the same as Fervid,
l. hot, eager. Ferulaceous, like unto or full of Ferula, Fennel-giant, an
African herb, from whose root comes Gum Arabic; also as Ferular, a palmer or
hand-clapper. Fervor, l. a burning heat, vehemence. Fesse, a Considerable
Kingdom of Africa. Fesaunce, o. a Pheasant. Fesse-point, (l. fascia) the girdle
of honor, a line going through the midst of the Escutcheon. Fessitude, l.
weariness. Festination, l. a making haste. Festingmen, Sa. Frank-pledge.
Festino, a Syllogism whose first proposition is an universal, and last a
particular Neg. the midlemost a Partic. Affirmative. Festivous, l. full of
Festivity, l. merriment. Festoon, -ton, f. Encarpo, g. a garland of fruits or
flower-works [in graven or imbossed work.] Festucous, belonging to or having
tender sprigs or branches. Fetid, l. stinking. Fetiferous, l. bringing forth
fruit or young. Fetise, o. handsome. Fetor, l. a stink, ill-smell. Fetously, o.
featly. Fette, o. fetched. Fettle, No. to go about any business. Feu, a very
high Mountain in China. Feud, feed, feid, Ge. a deadly and implacable hatred.
Feudal, belonging to or held in fief or fee. Feud-^oot, Sa. a recompense for
engaging in a feud or faction. Feudist, one that bears a feud or writes of Fee,
etc. Feverfew, Febrifuga, Parthenia, Maetricaria, Motherwort, a cleansing and
opening herb. Feveriere, -rere, o. February. Feversham, a town in Kent where K.
Stephen, his Wife and Son lie buried. Feuterer, a dog-keeper, or leader of a
Lime-hound, etc. Few, No. to change Fewmets, -mishing, the dung of a Deer. F^y,
Sc. Foolish. Fey, or Feigh it, No. to do any thing notably. Fey meadows, ponds,
etc. Cleanse them. F fa ut, the seventh music note, the Cliff-note of the
basse-part. Fiants, f. the dung of a Badger, Fox, and all vermin. Fib, c. to
beat. Fibrous, belonging to Fibers, l. small strings about roots, veins, etc.
Fibulation, l. a buttoning, or joining together. Fictile, l. made of Earth.
Fictitious, l. feigned, invented. Fiction, l. a feigning, also the thing
feigned. ^icus, l. Alanisca* Sycon, Sycosis, Haemorrhoides, the piles in the
fundament. Fid, Okum put into the touchhole and covered with lead to keep the
powder dry, also an iron pin to open the strands in splising of ropes.
Fideicide, a faith-destroyer, breaker of his word or trust. Fideicommissor, l.
he that commits a thing to another trust or dispose. Fidelity, l.
Faithfulness. Fide-jussor, l. a pledge or surety. Fidius, the God of
faithfulness, (for Filius) the Son [of Jupiter.] Fiduciary, l. trusty, also a
Feoffee in trust. Fiduciate, l. to committ a trust, or make condition of trust.
Fiera^ras, f. fierce at arms, a Braggadocia. Fieri facias, a writ for the
Sheriff to levy (within the year and day) the debt or damages recovered. Fife,
an Eastern County of Scotland. Fifteenth* a Parliament-tribut on every City or
Borough in the Realm. Fightwite, Sa. a forfeiture for fighting and breaking the
peace. Fights, Coverts, any places where men may stand unseen and use their
arms (in a ship.) Figment, l. a feigned story. Figulated, l. made of earth
Figurati^n, as Ethopaeit. Figurative, belonging to or spoken by a Figure, a
word or speech not strictly proper or literal; (in Grammar) a distinguishing of
words into simple and compo^nd, (in Logic) a threefold disposition of the
Argument or middle term with the two ex^reams, viz. Sub prae prim^, Bis prae
secunda, Tertia bis su^. Figuretto, a kind of stuff Figured or flowered.
Fi^aceous, l. made of thread or flax, also full of Filaments, l, as Fibers.
Filanders, little worms in hawks, also Nets for wild beasts. Filazers, Fourteen
Officers in the Common pleas, filing original writs that issue from the
Chancery, and making out process thereupon. Filch, c. a staff with a hole for a
hook upon occasion. Fildale, Fi^kale, Fictale, Sothale, an extortion (under
pretense of Compotation) by Bailiffs in their hundreds. File, f. a thread or
wire, a difference in Cout-Armours, also the order of Soldiers in depth usually
six. File-leaders, all in the first rank. Filial, l. belonging to a son.
Filiaster, f. a Son in law. Filiation, Sonship. Filjan-ta^eas, a Cap that the
Turkish Sultanas wear. Filiolus, l. a little son, also a Godson, Nephew, etc.
Fill^mot, (fueille mort) f. [the color of] a dead leaf. Filipendula, Dropwort.
Fillet, a line added under the Chief (in Heraldry.) Fill, o. pleased or thought
convenient. Filly-foal, a Mare-colt. Film, a thin skin. Filipinas, Indian
Islands found and reduced by Philip the 2d King of Spain. Filoz^lla, a kind of
stuff. Filtration, l. a straining or distilling through a felt, woollen-cloth,
etc. hung over the brim of a pot. Fimashing, as Fewmets. Fimble [hemp] So.
Early ripe. Fimbriated, l. edged or bordured with another color (in heraldry.)
Final, l. belonging to, brought to, or having an end. Finan^er, a receiver or
teller in the Exchequer. Finance, -cy, f. Wealth, Revenue, treasure. Finders,
searchers [for goods not customed.] Find the Ships trim, find how she will sail
best. Findible, l. which may be cleft. Fine, a mulct or penalty, also a formal
conveyance of Land, etc. before a Judge, by acknowledging a final agreement.
Fine adnullando levato, etc. a writ to Justices, for disannulling a fine levied
of Lands holden in ancient Demesne, to the prejudice of the Lord. Fine capiendo
pro terris, a writ for one (committed to Prison and his goods in the Kings
hand) to be released for his fine. Fine levando de tenementis, etc. a writ
licensing the Justices of Common Pleas to admit a fine for the sale of Lands
holden in Capite. Fine non capiendo, etc. a writ forbidding Officers of Courts
to take fines for fair pleading. Fine pro redisseisina, etc. a writ for the
release of one laid in prison for a Redisseisin upon a reasonable fine. Fine
force, f. an absolute necessity or constraint. Finesse, f. craft, subtilty.
Finite, l. limited, bounded. Finland, part of Sw^ethland. Finors of Gold, etc.
as Parters and Departers. Fin^ skiles, o. it finds or feigns skills. Firdstole,
as Fridstole. Firebares, o. Beacons. Fire-boot, allowance of competent
firewood to the Tenant. Fire-drake, a fiery Meteor, a great unequal exhalation
inflamed between a hot and a cold cloud. Fire-cross, a Scotch Proclamation (by
fire brands on a spear) for all between 16 and 60. to repair to a place of
Rendezvous. Firkin, a vessel of nine gallons. Firma, sc. the duty which the
Tenant paies to his Landlord. Firmament, l. the starry heaven, finishing its
course in 250 thousand years. Firmity, l. firmness, stableness, constancy.
Firmus, a Roman Emperor of a vast strength. First Fruits, Annates, one years
profits of every benefice. Firth, for Frith. Firthe, Fyrte* Fyrt, o. a bugbear,
a Ghost, or apparition. Fiscal, belonging to a Fisque, l. a treasury or
Exchequer. Fish-garth, a dam or wear for the taking of fish. Fishing, piecing
of masts or yards to strengthen them. Fissility, l. aptness to be cleft.
Fissiped, l. cloven-footed. Fissure, l. a cleft or division. Fiste-nuts,
brought out of hot countries and useful in Physic. Fistulary, belonging to a
Fistula, l. a pipe, also an ulcer eating in and running like a pipe. Fitch, the
[fur of the] polecate. Fitchtel, a town of Mecklenburgh in Germany. Fitched,
sharp at the end. See Cross. Fithwite, as Fightewite, Fitz, (f. Fills) a son.
Five-finger, a fish like a spur^owel, to be destroyed by the Admiralty law,
because destructive to Oysters. Fixation, l. a fixing, making any volatile
spiritual body to endure the fire. Fixed stars, not varying their distance from
one another; and (corruptly) as Faxed stars, Comets, from Fax, o. hair,
Fiz-gig, a dart to strike fishes as they swim. Fiz^n, Foison, Sf. the heart or
natural juice of herbs, etc. Flabellation, an airing with a Flabel, l. a fan.
Flaccid, l. flagging, drooping. Flacket, No. a bottle in fashion of a barrel.
Flag, c. a groat. Flagellantes, l. Heretics going up and down and using.
Flagellation, whipping or scourging [of themselves.] Flagitation, l. earnest
begging. Flagitious, l. heinous, wicked. Flagrancy, l. a being Flagrant, l.
burning, hot, vehement. Flagcolet, f. a small pipe. Flags, Nf. turfs pared off
to burn. Flag-worm, found and bred in sedgy places, hanging to the small
strings of flag-roo^s. Flamins, -ens, the old Roman Priests. Flammability,
aptness to be inflamed. Flammation, a setting on fire. Flammeous, l. like
flame. Flammivomous, l. vomiting flames. Flammiferous, bringing or causing
flame. Flaminian way, a Roman highway full of tombs and monuments. Flanc^, an
Ordinary formed of an Arch-line, from the corner of the Chief, with a swelling
Embossment toward the Nombril of the Escutcheon. Flandria, Flanders, one great
Town of 154. villages within 90 miles. Flan^ards, the nuts or knots in a Deers
flank. Flanque, the side of a company (of Soldiers) from the front to the rear.
Flaring, Flair-, when a ship is a little howsing in near the water, then the
upper work hangs over and is laid out broader aloft. Flash of flames, o. a
sheaf of arrows. Flasque, an Arch-line somewhat distant from the corner of the
Chief and swelling by degrees toward the midst of the Escutcheon, a Carriage
for Ordnance, a box for gunpowder, also a bottle (or pottle) of Florence wine.
Flatility, uncertainty, inconstancy. Flatulent, -uous, l. windy. Flatuosity,
windiness. Flaunes, o. Custards. Flavor, a pleasant relish and smell [in wine,
etc.] Flaw, l. Yellow. Flawmes, Sc. flames. Flay, o. flew. Flea-bane, a whitish
herb (by Ditch sides) driving away fleas. Fleawort, whose seed resembles a flea
in bigness and color. Fleak, No. a gate to set in a gap. Flebring, o. a
slander. Flecked, arched like the firmament. Fleckten, o. abound. Fledwit,
Fletwit, Flightwite, by some, a fine set upon Fugitive^, by others, a
discharging of outlawed fugitives from amerciaments, when they return to the
Kings peace. Fleen, o. to fly. Fleet, a famous prison in London by the side of
Fleta, Fleet, Sa. a River, Flood, or small stream. Flemaslace, Sa. the claiming
a felons goods. Fleme, a lancing or blouding instrument. Flemed, o. daunted.
Fleming, o. Conquest. Flemer, o. an expeller. Phlegmatic, as Phlegmatic.
Flemenesfirinthe, -fyrinthe, -freicthe, Flemeneferd, -frit, -wurde,
Flemnenefremeth, Flemanisflit, Fremenefenda, all instead of Flymenafyrmthe, sa.
the receiving or relieving a fugitive. Flemeswit, a liberty to challenge the
Cattle or amerciaments of your man a fugitive. Flemming, one of Flanders.
Flensborch, a Town of South Iuitland in Denmark. Flesh of Fruits or Roots, the
edible part. Fletif^rous, yielding or causing weeping. Fleure, o. a sweet
smell. Flexanimous, turning the mind, or of a turning mind. Flexibility, l. a
being Flexible, capable of Flexion, l. a bending. Flexiloquent, l. speaking
doubtfully or doubly. Flick, c. to cut. Flicker, c. a glass. Flide-thrift,
shove-groat, shovel-board play. Fliker, o. to flutter. Flint, a Castle in
Flintshire. Fli^ful, sa. contentious. Flitwite, Flitchtw-, Sa. a forfeiture for
Flit, Sa. contention, wrangling, etc. Flite, Flight, o. (...) hide.
Flittermouse, a bat. Flitting, [a staked horse] eating up all the grass within
his reach, removing from place to place. Flizze, No. to fly off. Flizzing, No.
a splinter. Flixweed, Sophia Chirurgorum, an astringent herb. Flo, Flone, o. an
arrow. Floan, loose, not haled home to the blocks. Floccisy, l. to slight, or
lightly esteem. Flockmele, sa. in flocks. Flodden, a hill near Brampton in
Northumberland. Flode, (for flowed) o. abounded. Flog, c. to whip. Floor of a
Ship, so much, of her bottom as rests upon the ground. Flora, Chloris, the
Goddess of Flowers. Florce, f. the blew scum of wood boiling in the dyers Lead.
Floramor, flower of Love, Passevelours, flower gentle. Florein, -rin, a kind of
coin worth about three shillings, another worth eighteen pence. Florentine,
Fluentine, belonging to Florence, the chief City of Tuscany, in Italy.
Florences, a kind of Cloth brought from thence. Florey-blew, a kind of blew for
paint or limning. Floriferous, l. bearing flowers. Florilege, l. a gathering of
flowers. Florist, one skilled in flowers. Florid, l. flourishing. Florulent, l.
gay, the same as ^lo^culous, l. flowery, or blossoming. Flotes, pieces of
Timber joined, to convey burdens down a River. Flotages, things accidentally
floating on the Sea or great Rivers. Flotson, Flotzam, shipwrackt goods
floating on the Sea, which belong to the Lord Admiral, together with Jetson
(things cast over-bord or on shore) and Lagon, Legan, or Ligam (things lying at
the bottom of the Sea) and shares. Flouke of an Anchor, that part which takes
hold of the ground. Flowery de lice, o. beset with Lilies. Floting, o.
whistling, piping. Flower de lysse, Orrece. It flows South, etc. It is high
water when the Sun is in that point at full or new Moon. It Flows tide and half
tide, it will be half flood by the shore, before it begins to flow in the
channel. Fluctiferous, bringing waves. Fluctuate, l. to rise in waves, also to
waver or doubt Fluctisonant, l. sounding with waves. Fluctivagant, tossed or
wandering on the waves. Fluctuous, l. like the waves, unquiet, boisterous.
Fluellin, the herb Speedwell. Fluidity, a being Fluid, Fluent, or flowing or
apt to flow, nimble. Fluish, No. washy, weak, tender. Fluminous, l. full of
Rivers, also as Fluvial, belonging to Rivers. Fluvious, flowing much. Flu^res,
stones (resembling precious stones) coming out of Mines. Flush fore and as^,
when the Deck lies level from stem to stern. Flushing a Town in Zeland. Flux,
-xion, l. a flowing, issue, or looseness of body. Fluxing, making the patient
spit up the disease. Fluxibility, l. an aptness to flow. Fly, that part of the
compass where the winds are described. Fly gross, when hawks fly at great Birds
as Cranes, Geese, etc. Focillate, l. to refresh. Fodder, Foder, Fother, s^.
2000 pound weight of Lea^, also course meat for Cattle, and a Princes
prerogative of being provided by his subjects with Corn for his horses in any
expedition. Fodient, l. digging. Foemina, sulphur (in Chemistry.) Fogage, Fog
or Feg, rank grass not eaten in summer time. Fogo, a burning Island in
America. Fogus, c. Tobacco. Fohines, the first Monarch of the Chinois. Foiles,
f. l. g. leaves. Foiling, the print of a Deers foot in the grass hardly
discernable. Foine, f. to prick or sting. Foines, a fur (black at the top and
the ground whitish) from a small beast of the same name. Foison, f. abundance.
Foiterers, vagabonds. Fold course, as Faldage. Foliaceous, l. leavy. Foist, a
pinnace or small ship. Folgheres, -geres, o. followers. Foliage, branched work.
Foliatanes, a sort of men living only upon leaves, suppressed by the Pope.
Foliate, l. leaved. Folio, of two leaves to a sheet. Folkingham, a Town in
Lincolnshire. Folily, o. foolishly, rashly. Folkland, sa. copyhold land.
Folkmoot, Folkesmote, Folcmote, sa. a general assembly of the people, the
County Court, or else the Sheriffs Turn. Follicle, l. a small bladder, or
purse. Foe-men, o. Enemies. Fomentation, l. a cherishing, an applying warm
clothes (dipped in some liquor) to the body. Fond, Foond, Fund, f. a bottom, or
foundation, also a stock (in money or moneys worth.) Fond, o. contend, labor.
Fondery, f. a stilling house, also the trade of melting metals. Fong, sa. to
take. Fonne, o. [to be] foolish. Fonnes, o. devices. Fons solis, a fountain in
Lybia, (by the Temple of Jupit^r Hammon) boiling hot at midnight. Fontal,
belonging to Fonts, Fountains, springs; also Church-Baptisteries, (which were
primitively Rivers.) Fontanel, f. an issue made in the body. Fontainbleau (for
belle ^au) a retiring place for the Kings of France in the Forest of Becre, one
of the purest Fountains in the world, the Hampton Court of France, (also in
dancing) a Borree so named. Foothote, -hute, (q. hot-foot) o. straightway.
Footing-time, Nf. when the Childbed woman gets up. Footstal, the foot or lower
part of a pillar. Foot-bocks, Foot-books, or Futtocks, the compassing Timbers
which give the breadth and bearing to the Ship. Fop, o. a fool. Forable, l.
that may be peirced or bored. Foppery, foolishness. Forage, fodder for Cattle.
Foraminous, l. full of holes. Foranous, belonging to the Forum, l. a Court or
Marketplace. Forbarre, Forebar, to bar or deprive for ever. Forbode, sa. to
presage, also to prohibit or forbid. Forbish, to burnish. Forcers, an
instrument to draw Teeth. Forcheim, a Town in Francenland, where (they say)
Pontius Pilate was born. Forcipated, l. bending, hooked Foreclose, shut out,
excluded for ever. Fordoe, o. to kill. Fordon, -did, killed. Forecastle, the
fore part of a Ship above Decks. Fore, o. gone. Fore-foot, one ships lying or
sailing cross another ships w^y, or with her fore-foot. Foregoers, Purveyours
going before the King in Progress. Foreign [matter] triable in another Court.
Foreign answer, not triable in that County. Foreign Attachment, of foreiners
go^ds found within any Liberty. Foreign Apposer or Opposer, an Exchequer Officer
opposing the Sheriffs of their green wax, apposing and examining them upon
their Estreats. Foreign plea, a refusal of the Judge as incompetent (the matter
being out of his jurisdiction.) Foreign service, that whereby a mean Lord holds
over of another without the compass of his own Fee; or else that which a Tenant
performs either to his own Lord or to the Lord paramount out of the Fee.
Fore-judging, or Fo^j- a Judgment whereby a man is deprived or put by the thing
in question. Forejudged the Court, banished or expelled from it. Fore-Knight and
Main-Knight, two short thick pieces (carved with a man's head) fast bolted to
the beams upon the 2d. deck. Foreland, Foreness, a promontory jutting out.
Forelock-bolts, bolts with an eye at the end whereinto an iron forelock is
driven, to keep them from starting. Foreloin, when one hound going before the
rest meets chase and goes away with it. Forensal, l. used in pleading,
pertaining to the Common Pleas. Forest, a safe harbor for Deer, or any wild
beasts. Forestagium, a duty paiable to the Forester, the Kings sworn Officer of
the Forest. Forestaller, Regrater, one that buys ware before it come to
Market, to enhaunse the price. Forfare, o. forlorn. Fore-reach upon, to
Outsail. Forfeiture, the [effect of] transgressing a penal law. Forfeiture of
marriage, a writ against one under age and holding by Knights service, who
refused to marry her whom his Lord profer'd, without his disparagement.
Forfraught, o. beset. Forgard, o. lost. Forger of false deeds, [a writ against]
one that make^ and publishes false writings to the prejud^ce of any man's right.
Forkerve, o. cut off. Forlaine, o. Rechased. Forleien, o. to err, or wander.
Forletten, o. abandoned. Forlorn, D. lost. Forlorn-h^pe, a party of Soldiers
put upon the most Desperate service. Forloyn, o. a retreat. Forlyth, o.
spoyleth. Formalize, to form or fashion, also to play the Formalist, one that
uses Formality, a being Formal, punctual, precise, belonging to or giving a
Form, l. outward show or appearance, shape or beauty, also the inward essence
of a thing. Formator, l. a former, maker, also an informer, instructor. Formal,
-m^l, No. to bespeak. Form of a ^are, the seat which she makes herself.
Former, the piece of wood on which they make the Carthrages. Formedon, f. (the
form of the gift) a writ for him who has right to any lands or tenements by
virtue of an Intail. Formica, Herpes, a corroding ulcer. Formicans pulsus, a
thick, and weak pulse. Formidable, l. Dreadful, to be feared. F^rmidolous, l.
the same, also fearing. Formosity, l. beauty, fairness. Formulary, l. a
president of Law-process, etc. Fornagium, Chimney-money, also the Landlords fee
for his tenants baking in his Oven. Forne-fader, o. first father Adam.
Fornication, l. Whoredom between unmarried persons. Foreness, as Foreland.
Forouten, o. without. Forprise, an exception or reservation, in Leases, etc.
Forrey, o. Destroy. Forrioues, o. Forerunners. Forsamkill, o. Forasmuch.
Forses, Catadupae, waterfalls. Forschoke, forsaken, Lands Seized by the Lord
(for want of due service, etc.) and quietly possessed beyond the year and day.
Forslagen, o. slain. Forslegon, -glon, -gen, o. slain. Forsongen, o. weary with
singing. Forspec^n, o. spoken against or in vain. Forspreak, o. an Advocate.
Forster, a Forester. Forstraught, o. Distracted. Forswonk and Forswat, o. over
labored and sweated or Sunburned. Forth, l. Theft. Forthy, -then, No.
therefore. Fortility, a fortified place. Forthink, o. to be grieved in mind.
Fortitude, l. valor, stoutness of mind, courage. Fortlet, a little Fort.
Fortuitous, l. accidental, coming by Fortune or chance. Fortuny, a kind of
Tournement or running a tilt with lances on horseback. Forvise, o. Foreshew.
Forwany, o. wanting. Forwelk^d, o. Dried up. Forwept, o. weary with weeping.
Forw^ned, o. withered. Foryede, o. overwent. Fossatum, a Ditch, or place fenced
therewith. Fosset, Forset, a little long chest or coffer. Fosse-way, the Roman
highway dug from Cornwall to Lincoln, Ditched on both sides, or left imperfect
li^e a Ditch, also several other inferior highways. Fossion, l. a Digging.
Fost^r, Forester. Foster-land, assigned for the finding of food. Fostal* o. the
pricking or footsteps of a hare, also a way from the highway to a great house,
Ss. Fother, Foder, twenty hundred pound weight. Fotheringha^, a Castle in
Northamptonshire. Fotion, l. a cherishing. Fotive, l. nourishing or nourished.
Fougade, f. a kind of firework* a mine. Foul, hindered or entangled with another
ship, rope, etc. Foul water, when a ship raises the sand or oaze in shallow
water. Foundemaunt, f. Foundation. Founder, a melter and caster of metals.
Foulk, Fulk, Ge. Noble, or as Fol^, Sa. People. Founes, o. Devices. Fourche, f.
(a fork) a delaying or putting off an Action. Foutgeld, Foot-, an amerciament
for not expeditating or cutting out the balls of great dogs feet in the Forest*
Founderd, filled (as a ship) with water by an extraordinary leak, etc. Foul
fail o. (q. fail foully,) to err greatly. Fownd, o. framed. Fow, Che. foul.
Fox-gloves, Digitalis, Vi^ga regia, Campanula sylvestri^, a cleansing herb.
Foxes evil, as Alop^cia. Foyeten, (for Forle^en) let pass. Foye, a Town in
Cornwall. Fram, sa. From. Fram-pole-fences, of the Tenants of Writtel Manor in
Essex, toward whose repair they have the Wood growing on the Fence, and as many
Trees (or poles) as they can reach from the top of the ditch with their ax
helve. Fracid, l. rotten-ripe. Fraction, l. a breaking, dissension, part of a
whole number. Fracture, l. the breaking [of a bone.] Fragility, l. a being
Fragile, l. brittle, apt to break. Fragment, l. a piece, or broken part of any
thing. Fragrancy, l. a being Fragran^, l. sweet smelling. Fraine, Sc. to ask.
Freight, sa. the burden of the Ship, also money paid for any thing carried.
Frail of [Malaga] Raisins, about 70 pound. Fraesheur, f. freshness, coolness,
liveliness. Framlingham, a Town in Suffolk. Frampton, a Town in Dorcester.
Franc, f. a livre, 20 pence. Frank, o. free, liberal. Franchise, f. freedom,
exemption, privilege. Franchise Royale, f. a grant of immunity from the King.
Francigena, a native of France, the modern name of Gallia conquered by the
Franci, -cones, Franks, Germans, under the conduct of Pharamond. Francis, a
man's name, and (sometime) as Frances. a woman's name. Franciscans, a strict
order of Friars instituted by St. Francis an Italian, 1198. vowing chastity,
obedience, poverty, etc. Frangible, l. breakable. Frank-almoine, a tenure of
Lands bestowed on such as devote themselves to the service of God. Frank-banck,
Free-bench, the Dower of Copy-hold-Lands which the wife (being espoused a
Virgin) has after her husbands decease. Frank-chase, the Foresters liberty of
Free-chase, whereby all (in such a compass) are prohibited to cut down wood,
without his view. Frank-fee, that which is in the hand of the King or Lord of
the Manor, being ancient Demesne of the Crown. Frank-farm, Land wherein the
nature of Fee is changed (by Feofment) out of Knights service to certain yearly
services. Frank-fold* the Lords benefit of folding his Tenant Sheep for the
manuring of his Land. Frank-law, the benefit of the free and common Law of the
Land. Frank-marriage, a Tenure in Tail-special, whereby a man has Land with a
Woman to him and the Heirs of his body doing fealty only [to the fourth
descent, and thence forward service] to the Donour. Frank-pledge, the ancient
custom of the Decenniers (or freemen in each Decenna) being surety for one
another (at the age of fourteen) to the King. Frankincense, an Arabian gum from
a tree of the same name with leaves and bark like Laurel. Frankendale, a Town
in the Palatinate of the Rhine. Franklin* -colon, a kind of red-legged bird for
Hawking. Francford, -furt, a famous German City. Francling, a Freeholder.
Franconia, Frankenland in the East part of Germany. Franeker, an University of
West-Friesland. Frape, a company or rabble. Fraternize, to agree as Brothers,
also to bring into a Fraternity, l. a Brotherhood. Frase, Nf. to break.
Frantic, Phrentick, g. mad. Fraternal, l. Brotherly. Fratricelli, Fratres de
paupere vita, Heretics following one Hermannus an Italian 1304. They held
promiscuous beddings, Christians not to be Governors, etc. Fratricide, l. the
killing or killer of a Brother. Fratruels, l. Brothers children,
Cousin-Germans. Fraudation, l. a defrauding. Fraudulency, l. deceitfulness, a
being Fra^dulent, crafty, full of Fraud, l. guile, deceit. F. (Fray-maker or
Frighter) a mark burnt on the cheek (for want of ears to cut) for striking with
a weapon in the Church or Churchyard. Fraxinella, a plant (like a little Ash)
against obstructions. Frayes her head, [a Deer] rubs her head against a tree to
renew it. Frayn'd, o. refrained. Frea, as Friga. Frederick, Ge. rich peace,
vulgo Frery, Fery. Fredeborch, a Town of Westphalia. Frediswid, sa. very free.
Free the boat, cast out the water. Freel, f. frail. Freeleg^, No. privilege.
Free-bench, as Frank-bank. Free-booters, Soldiers that make inroads into the
Enemies Country for Cattle, etc. or that serve (for plunder) without pay.
Free-^ord, a small space beyond or without the fence. Free-Chappel, over and
above the Mother Church of a Parish, freely endowed and to which one might
freely resort, or (rather) of the Kings Foundation, or at least exempted by him
from the Jurisdiction and visitation of the Diocesan. Freehold, free tenure,
in Fee-tail, or for term of Life. Free Warren, the power of licencing any to
hunt in such or such places, also the license it self. Freedstol, Fridstol,
Frithstow, sc. (stool of peace) a chair of stone granted by King Athelstan to
John de Beverly Archbishop of York, as a Sanctuary for offenders. Freistat, a
Town of lower Bavaria, another in Austria, etc. Frement, l. gnashing the Teeth.
Fremund, sa. free peace. Frem'd, -ened, o. a stranger. Frenchman, (anciently)
any stranger. Frend-less-man, sa. an Outlaw. Frenigerent, l. guiding the
bridle. Freneth, o. asks. Frenne, (for Foreign) a stranger. Freoburgh,
Fridburgh, as Frank-pledge. Frery, Frederick. Freomortel, Frodm-, an immunity
or freedom granted for murder or manslaughter. Frequency, l. oftenness.
Frequent, l. often. Frequent, l. to haunt or resort unto. Frescades, f. cool
refreshments in Summertime. Fresco, I. fresh, cool. Walk in Fresco, in the
fresh air. Drink in Fresco, to drink cool or fresh Liquor. Paint in Fresco, on
walls newly plaistered, that it may sink in. Fresh, o. refresh. Fresh the
hawse, veer out a little more or lay new plats upon the Cable. Fresh disseisin,
an arbitrary disseisin (not above 15 days old) which a man may seek to defeat
of himself, without the help of King or Judges. Fresh-fine, levied within a
year past. Fresh force, done within forty days. Fresh-gale, immediatel^ after
a calm. Fresh-man, a novice, newly entered [in the University, etc.] Fresh shot,
fresh water (from a great river) for a mile or two in the Sea. Fresh-spel, a
fresh gang to relieve the Rowers in the long boat. Fresh suit, an active and
eager following the offender (from the time of offense) till he be apprehended.
Fret, o. to turn, also fraught. Fret, f. a round verril or ferril (of Iron,
etc.) Frete, Frett^n, o. to devour. Fretrots, a kind of Adamites (wearing a
secret Crown) suppressed Anno 1310. Fretted, diapered, with several lines
crossing one another. Friable, l. capable of Friation, l. a crumbling. Friar,
Friar, (f. Friar, Brother) One that is a Regular or of some Religious Order.
Friburg, a town of Schwaben in Germany. Friars Observant, a sort of
Franciscans, not Conventuals but at large, yet more strictly tying themselves
to the Observation of their Rule. Friends, Quakers so called among themselves.
Fricasse, f. a fried dish. Frication, l. a rubbing. Fridburg, a City of the
higher Bavaria. Fridborge, Frithborg, Friburgh, as Frank-pledge. Fridland, a
town in Germany. Friday, the sixth day, from Friga, a Saxon Goddess in the
shape of an Hermaphrodite Frigate, Sp. a Spial ship. Frigdores, o.
Musick-measures ( q. Frigian and Lorick.) Frigefaction, l. a making cold.
Frigerate, l. to cool. Frigeratory, l. a place to make or keep things cool.
Frigor fical, that which does Frigify, l. to cause Frigidity, Frigor, l. the
being Frigid, l. cold. Frigmareventus, Winchelsea. Frim, No. handsome,
thriving. Frim folks, Li. Strangers. Fripery, f. the trade, shop, or street of
Friperers, the sorriest brokers. Frist, No. to trust for a time. Frisesmorum, a
Syllogism whose first proposition is a particular affirmative, the second an
universal Negative, and the 3d a particular Neg. Frisia, Friezland by Holland.
Frising, a town of lower Bavaria. Frit, salt or ashes fried or baked together
with sand. Frith, Sa. a wood. Frithbrech, Sa. Breach of the peace. Frithburgh,
as Fridburgh. Frithsocne, -soken, Sa. the liberty of having frank-pledge, a
surety. Fritillary* a flower in the fashion of a Fritillus, l. a box out of
which Dice are cast. Fritiniancy, -iency, the chirping of a Swallow, etc.
Frivolous, l. vain, of little worth. Frize, the garnishing at the upper end of
a pillar. Frobly mobly, So. indifferently well. Fro, o. from. Frodesham, a Town
in Cheshire. From-S^lwood, a Town in Some. Frondation, a taking off the leaves
or branches. Frondosity, l. leaviness, a flourishing with green leaves just
under the Archittave. Frond^ferous, bearing leaves. Froise, a Pancake [with
bacon intermixed.] Frontal, l. belonging to the forehead, also as Frontlet, an
ornament or attire of the Front, l. Forehead, also the forepart of any thing.
Frontals, Medicines applied to the forehead. Frontispiece, l. the forefront of
a building, also the Title or first page of a book [done in picture.] Frontier
towns, standing on the Frontiers, the borders of a Country. Frontiniac, a
luscious and rich wine of that town in France. Front-stall, the forepart of a
horses bridle. Front^mes, a Roman name, from their high foreheads. Frote, f. to
rub. Frounce, f. a wrinkle, also as Frounches, o. Bar^illon, f. a distemper in
a hawks tongue. Frower, So. an edg-tool used in cleaving lath. Froy, o. (q. Fro
ye) from you. Fructify, l. bring forth fruit. Frugality, l. thriftiness,
good-husbandry, a being Frugal, l. thrifty, sparing [in expenses, diet, etc]
Fruggin, an Oven-fork. Frugiferent, -rous, l. fruitful. Fruitery, f. a place
to keep fruit in. Frutiges, -ices, l. branched work in sculpture, as
Frueillage, in painting or tapestry. Frum-gyld, Sa. the first payment (or
recompense) made to the Kindred of a slain person. Frunt-stal, Sa. Home-stal,
the chief seat or Mansion House. Frummagen, c. choked. Frum, Sa. Early,
soon-ripe. Frumentarious, belonging to corn or Frumenty, pottage of milk and
Frument, l. wheat. Frump, jeer, flout or taunt. Frussetum, a wood or
wood-ground. Frussura, a breaking down or demolishing. Frustraneous, l. done in
vain. Frustrate, l. to deceive or disappoint. Frustulent, l. full of Frusta, l.
small pieces. Fruitage, Frut-, as Frutiges. Frutication, l. a sprouting or
shooting forth of young branches. Fruticose, l. full of shoots, stalks or
shrubs. Fryth, Frith, sa. a wood, or a pl^in between woods. Frythborgh, freedom
from giving security of the Peace. Fuage, F^cage, Herth-silver (1 s.) imposed
by Edward 3d. (black Prince of Wales) on the Dukedom of Aquitain. Fucator, l.
he that does Fucate, l. paint [the face,] counterfeit. Fugacia, Chasea, a
Chase. Fugacity, l. aptness to fly away. Fudder, No. a load [of lead] eight
pigs or sixteen hundred pound. Fugalia, Roman Feasts in remembrance of the
expulsion of their Kings, also as Hock-tide. Fugation, l. a putting to flight.
Fugue, f. when two or more parts (in music) chase one another in the same
point. Fugitive-goods, forfeited to the King from him that flies for Felony.
Fuir, o. fury. Fuir, f. to fly, run away. Fuir en feit, to fly corporally. Fuir
en ley, not to appear till one be outlawed. Fukes, Che. locks of hair. Fulbert,
sa. full bright. Fulcible, l. capable of Fulciments, l. supporters. Fulgor,
-gidity, -gency, a being Fulgent, -gid, l. bright, glistring. Fulgural,
belonging to Fulguration, l. lightning, also a reducing metals into vapors by
the help of lead (in a copel) and a violent fire. Fulfremed, sa. perfect, fully
framed. Fulk, o. (for Sulk, l. a hollow place, or furrow. Fulli^k, o. fully.
Fulham, sa. a home or habitation for Fowls. Fullians, Monks of the order of
St. Bernard. Fuliginous, l. sooty, or smoaky. Fullers-earth, dug up about
Brickhill in Bedfordshire, dissolved in vinegar it discusses Pimples, represses
inflammations, etc. Fullonical, belonging to a Fuller, or scourer of cloth.
Fulminatory, l. belonging to Fulmination, l. a striking with lightning, also a
threatening. Fulvid, -vous, l. of a yellowish dusky color, lion-tawny. Fumage,
[manuring with] dung. Fumadoes, -thoes, Sp. our Pilchards garbaged, salted,
smoakt and pressed. Fumets, the ordure of a Heart. Fumeyed, -mayed, o. muted.
Fumidity, a being Fumid, l. smoaky. Fumiferous, bringing smoke. Fumigation, l.
a smoking or perfuming with smoke, also cal^ining of bodies by the fume of
sharp Spirits. Fumitory, Enmaria, l. Palomilla, Sp. a hot biting herb.
Funimbulator, -ant, l. a dancer on the Ropes. Function, l. the performance or
exercise of any duty or Office. Fund, land or soil, also as Fond. Funditou^,
-tor, l. a slinger, or darter. Fundamental, belonging to Fundament, l. a
Foundation. Funebrous, -erous, l. mournful, belonging to Funerals.
Funestation, l. poll^tion by touching a dead body. Fungosity, l. spunginess, a
being Fungous, l. full of holes, like a mushroom. Funnel, Tunnel, an instrument
small at one end, to convey liquor into a vessel, also the upper part of a
chimney. Furacity, l. a being Furacious, pilfering, theevish. Furbish, polish,
make bright. Furcation, l. a forking, making like a fork, or hanging on a
gallows. Furca, (Calefurcia) and Fossa, a jurisdiction (in ancient privileges)
of punishing felons, viz. men with hanging and Women with drowning. Furies, l.
Alecto, Megaera and Tysiphone, daughters of Acheron and Night, tormenters of
Murderers and other wicked Souls. Furibund, -bond, l. raging, mad. Furina, a
Roman Goddess, patroness of Thieves. Fured, Cu. went. Furling-lines,
Fartheling-lines, small lines wherewith they Furle or Farthel the sails, ty
them up to the yards. Furlong, the length of ^0 poles, half a quarter of a
mile, and sometimes of an acre. Furlough, a license from a Superior to an
Inferior officer, to be absent a while from his charge in war. Furnivals,
Lords of Fernham in Bucks, whose tenure is, To find the King a right hand glove
on his Coronation-day, and support his right arm while he holds the Scepter.
Furnage, as Fornagium. Furole, f. St. Hermes's fire, a little meteor appearing
in the night upon the shrouds, etc. Furr the ship, clip on another plank upon
her sides after she is built, or else rip off the first planks, put other
timbers upon the first, and then put on the planks again: a great (yet common)
disgrace to English ships. Furst sore, (q. frost sore) a Chilblain.
Furstenburg, a Castle of North Schwa^en in Germany. Furtive, l. given to
stealing, or done by stealth. Furze, whins, a prickly Bush good against the
stone, Spleen, etc. Fuscation, l. a clouding or darkning. Fusibility, a being
Fusible, l. apt or easy to be melted, capable of Fusion, l. a melting or
pouring forth. Fusil, f. a firelock, or a tinder box. Fusil, l. a spindle, also
the resemblance thereof in a coat of arms. Fust, the trunk or body of a pillar.
Fustian, stuff made of cotton, or the down of an Egyptian fruit. Fustic, a kind
of wood which dyers use, from Barbad^es, etc. Fustigation, l. a cudgelling, an
ancient punishment of perjured persons. Fusty, Musty, vinewed. Futility, l. a
blabbing, babbling, lightness, vanity, folly. Futtocks, Foot-hooks, the
compassing timbers scarfed upon the ground timbers and giving breadth to a
ship. Futurition, -ty, a being Future, l. that which will be, or is to come.
Fuzen, Fuzzen, No. Nourishment. Fyle, Sc. Fouled. Fyngted, o. a [sore] finger
tied up, alias a hawk. Fire levin, o. lightning. Fyrte, as Firthe.
G.
GAal, h. Abomination. Gabala, Gibel, Margad, a town of Syria cava. Gab, o. to
prate or lie. Gabbing, lying. Gabardine, an Irish mantle, rough Cassock, or
Livery coat. Gabberies, f. wiles, mockeries. Gabel, f. tribute, custom. Gabion,
f. a defense made of baskets filled with earth. Gable end of a house, the top,
or (by some) the frontispiece. Gabrantovici, Britains inhabiting part of
Yorkshire. Gabriel, h. the strength of God. Gabrosentum, a frontier station of
the Romans, supposed to be where New Castle and Gates-head now stand. Gaddefly,
a brie or brieze. Gad, h. a troop or band. Gadd^, Gaddi, a rare Florentine
painter who excelled in Mosaic work. Gades, two Islands westward beyond the
streights, by some called Hercules's pillars. Gadling, o. stradling. Gaffe, f.
an iron hook to pull great fishes into the ship. Gafold-gyld, Sa. the payment
of tribute, also usury. Gafol-land, Gafulland, liable to tribute, also rented.
Gage or wage deliverance, put in security that the thing shall be delivered.
Gage the ship, try how much water she draws, by a pole and a nail put down by
the rudder. Gage, c. a pot or pipe. Gaging-rod, an instrument to measure any
vessel of liquor. a Gagle of geys, o. a flock of Geese. Gaiety, f. gallantry,
cheerfulness. Gaitere berries, of the Gayter tree, Prickwood. Gainage, the
instruments of tillage, also the land held by the baser sort of Soke-men or
Villains. Gainerie, the same. Gail-dish, Guile-dish, No. the Tun-dish.
Gail-clear, No. a Wort-tub. Gainsborough, a town in Lincolnshire. Gainure,
tillage. Gain [thing] Not. Convenient. Gain [man] active, expert. Gain [miles]
short. Galactopote, g. a drinker of milk. Galactite, g. a milky precious stone.
Galanga, an East India root like ginger. Galanthis, Alcmena's maid turned into
a weasel. Galathea, a Sea-Nymph beloved of Polypheme; who killed Acis whom she
preferred before him. Galatia, Gallo-grecia in Asia the less. Galaxi^, g. the
milky way, made up of little stars. Galbanum, a Syrian gum of the plant
Fennel-giant. Galeat, a kind of White Wind from a Town of that name in France.
Galeges, Galages, Galloches. Gal^oshooes, f. wooden shoen all of a piece; with
us, outward shoes or cases for dirty weather, etc. Gale, o. to chafe, to flout,
also to yawl, Galena, Wallingford. Galenist, -ite, a follower of Galen, -nus, a
famous Physician of Pergamus Galeon, Galleon, f. a great man of war. Gallote,
f. a small Gally, or one that rows in a Gally. Galerion, the herb Crudwort.
Galgacus, a British General against the Romans. Gallians, -iens, f. Galens
works. Galiard, Gaillard, f. merry. Galilaea, -lee, a Region of Syria, North of
Judaea. Galingale, the Aromatic root of the rush Cyprus. Galla moschata, a
Confection of Musk, etc. Galleasse, f. a great double Gally. Gallego, Sp. an
inhabitant of Galatia. Gallia, l. France. Galliard, f. Lusty, Merry, also a
kind of Jovial dance. Galliardise, f. liveliness, etc. Gallie-foist, as Foist.
Gallicism, l. a French Idiome. Galligaskins, -scoines, Breeches or slops first
used by the Gascoines in France. Galli-halpens. a coin forbidden by Hen. 5.
Gallimafry, a minced dish of several sorts of meats. Gallion, as Galeon.
Galliote, as Gal^ote. Galloglasses, -glaghes, Wild- Irish Trooper^. Galloches,
as Galege. Gallon, Sp. the same as Gallion, or Galcon. Galloway, a County both
of Scotland and Ireland. Galls, rough spurious fruit of Mast bearing trees.
Gallulate, l. to begin to have a great voice. Galli, Cybel^s Priests inspired
by drinking of Gallus, a River in Phrygia, whose water made men mad; also a
young man turned into a Cock for suffering Sol to discover the adultery of Mars
and Venus. Galor, o. for Jailer. Galpe, o. to belch. Galnes, Sc. any kind of
satisfaction for slaughter. Gamahez, A. natural figures or images of things.
Gamaliel, h. Gods reward. Gamba, I, a leg. Gambado, a riding leathern leg-case,
hanging in the stirrops place. Gambalock, an Eastern riding gown, buttoned
under the chin. Gam^oles, Gambades, f. leg-gestures, or tumbling tricks.
Gambra, a River in Guiny abounding with River-horses, Torpedos, running-fish,
etc. Gammot, an incision-knife. Gam' Vt, the scale of Music, also the first or
lowest note thereof. Ganching, f. a Turkish execution of men, by letting them
fall from on high upon sharp iron stakes. Gang, No. to go, also a company.
Gangick, belonging to Ganges, a great River (passing through the midst of
India,) in some places 20 miles over, and never less than an hundred foot deep.
Gang-flower, Rogation-flower, flourishing about Rogation time. Gangiatores,
Gaug-, Scotch examiners of weights and measures. Gangrene, g. a beginning of
putrefaction or mortification in a member, an eat^ng Ulcer. Gang-week,
procession or Rogation week. Gantlet, Gauntlet, f. a military glove. Run the
Gantlope, D. Run through the whole Regiment and receive a lash of every
Soldier, from Gant, Gaunt, Ghent, a Town in Flanders. Ganymed, Jupiters
cup bearer, an Ingle. Ganza, an East-Indian metal of gold and brass.
Garamantick, belonging to the Garamantes, Lybians, subjects of Garamas, the son
of Jupiter. Garb, Gerbe, f. a sheaf of Corn. Garb, -bo, I. a graceful
carriage, also a pleasant sharpness in Beer or Wine. Garb feders, o. the
Feathers under a hawks beak. Garbel, -board, the plank next the Ships keel on
the outside. Garble [spices] purify them from dross and dirt. Garbles, the
dust and dross that is severed. Garbling, culling out the good from the bad of
any thing. Gar^oil, f. trouble, tumult, Garbord-strake, the first seam next the
keel. Garcifer, a scotch Mill-boy. Guardian, he that has the Guard, custody or
care of one not able to guide himself and his own affairs. Gard-robe, an herb,
also as wardrobe. Guardian or Warden of the Cinque Ports, a Magistrate who in
those 5 Havens has the same jurisdiction as the Admiral elsewhere. Guardian of
the Peace, as Conservator. Gardein de l'esteinery, Warden of the stanneries.
Guardian of the spiritualties, he that has the jurisdiction of a vacant
Diocese. Gard-manger, f. a place to keep victuals in. Gare, a kind of very
corse wool. Garre, No. to cause or force. Gargarism, a medicinal liquor to
Gargarize or Gargle, wash and cleanse the throat and mouth. Gargarus, the top
of Ida hill. Gargantua, a feigned giant or monster with a Garganta, Sp. a great
throat. Gargilon, the chief part of a Deers Heart. Gariofilli, -phylli,
Caryo-Cloves. Garnade, o. for Granada a Spanish Town. Garner, as Granary.
Garn^t, a Tackle to hoise goods into a ship. Garnement, Garnishment, f. a
warning for one to appear, for the better furnishing the cause and Court.
Garnish, to warn, also a Prisoners fees at his admittance, both to keeper and
Fellow Prisoners. Garnishee, the party in who is hands money is attached.
Garnison, f. preparation, furniture, also as Garrison, a place fortified and
furnished with Soldiers, Ammunition, etc. Garth* a wear for Fish, also a
backside or close. Garth-man, he that keeps or owns an open wear. Garranty, as
Warranty. Garrulity, l. tatling, prattling, a being Garrulous, full of talk,
ever chatting. Garstrange, a Town in Lancashire. Garter, the chief of the 3
Kings at Arms, also half a bend. A la Gascoignade, f. after the Gascoigne,
fashion. Gase-bound, Agasaeus, g. an admirable hunting kind of Dog. Ghastly,
Ghostly, like a spirit. Gasper, -par, one of the 3 Kings of Coll^n, see
Balthazar. Gastness, o, terror. Gaster, So. to scare or fright suddenly.
Gastrom^th, g. one speaking inwardly or as out of his belly. Gastric^, g.
belonging to the Belly. Gastroclite, -lyte, g. he that gets his living by
handicraft. Gastroepiploick vein, Gastrep-, a branch of the Port vein,
spreading it self in the bottom of the ventricle. Gastromancy, g. Divination by
the Belly. Gastrotomy, g. cutting up of the Belly. Gat-tothed, o. Goat or
Gapt-toothed. Gather-bag, the bag that encloses a red fawn in the Hinds belly.
Gate, No. a way or path. Ne Gate ne geyn, o. Neither got nor gained.
Gattlehead, a forgetful person, Cambridge. Gaude, o. a toy or trifle, also to
mock or scoff at, f. Gaudea, o. made gawd^. Gaudy-daies, College or Innes of
Court-festivals. Gaudiloquent, l. speaking with joy. Gavelet, a Kentish
C^ssavit, whereby the Tenant in Gavel-kind (withdrawing his due rents, etc.)
forfeits his Land to the Lord. Gavel, Sa. tribute, also yearly rent.
Gavel-kind, Sa. (Gife call cyn* given to all the kin) an equal division of the
Fathers Lands among the Children, or of a brother (without Issue) among his
Brethren. Gavel-sester, Tol-sester. Oale-gavel, Sa. Sextarius vectigalis
cervisiae, a certain measure of tribute or rent-ale. Gavel^c, Sa. a warlike
sling for stones or darts. Gaul, La. a leaver. Gawn, Che. a Gallon. Gaun^,
Gandavum, a chief City in Flanders, having 20 Islands and 48 Bridges.
Gaulonites a Jewish faction opposing the Roman Tribute. Gawr^n, o. to stare.
Gaugeou^s, as Gaugeators, Gagers, who mark and all^w vessels of Wine, oil,
Honey and Butter, before they be sold. Gawge-peny, the Gaugeors fee. Gayler, o.
for Jayler. Gaza, l. g. and Persian, a treasure. Gazetta, Gazz-, I. a small
Venetian coin (about our penny) the common price of a Gazet, -ette, f. a
News-book. Gazul and Suhit, Two Egyptian weeds (growing in the Sands where the
Nile arrives not) being burnt to ashes and sent to Venice, make the finest
Crystal glasses. Geat, black amber, a sort of precious stone or solid bitumen.
Geaunt, Geant, o. a Jay. Geazon, E. scarce, hard to come by. Gedaliah, h. the
greatness of the Lord. Geffery, Ge. Joyful peace. Gehazi, the servant of
Elisha. Gehenna, h. the valley of Hinnom, where they sacrificed to Moloch, also
hell. Geld, gelt, gild, guild, Sa. Money, or Tribute. Geld ne Geere, o. neither
money nor ware or household-stuff. D^ Geld, o. raise money. Geldable, a 3d part
of Suffolk, the other being St. Edmunds and St. Andreys Liberties. Geldria
Gelderland, a Low-Country-Province. Gelicide, l. a frost. Gelidity, frostiness,
a being Gelid, l. Icy, cold. Gelo, a Sicilian Schoolboy who raised such a
tumult in the School (for his book taken away by a Wolf) that the house fell
and killed them all. Gelones, Scythians who paint themselves to appear more
terrible. Gelover, o. a Gilloflower. Geloum, a lake in Sicily, near two
fountains whereof one makes women fruitful the other barren. Gelous, o.
jealous. Gemefeder, o. the chief tail-feather. Gem, Gemme, a jewel, a bud or
blossom. Gement, l. groaning. Gemersheim, a town in the Palatinate. Gemination,
l. a doubling. Gemels, l. double, twins. Gemini, -nels, l. twins, a sign in the
Zodiac. Geminous or twin-arteries, descending to the joint of the knee.
Gemites, a precious stone with the resemblance of folded hands. Gemmated, l.
bedeckt with precious stones. Gemmerie, a Cabinet or Jewel-house. Gemmiferous,
l. bearing or bringing jewels. Gem^te, the Hundred Court. Gemmosity, an
abounding with jewels, also blossoming. Gemony, a place at Rome, where
malefactors were cast headlong into Tiber. Gemund, a town of North Schwaben in
Germany. Gemow-ring, a kind of double ring, linked with two or more links.
Gend, Gent, Neat. Genda^me, f. a horseman completely armed. Gens-d'armes, f.
Soldiers. Gender, f. difference of sex or kind. Geneal^thud, Sa. approached.
Genealogy, g. a description of one family or pedigree. Geneath, Sa. a Villain,
hind, or Farmer. Geneoglossum, g. the muscle that stretches out the tongue.
Generative, having the faculty or power of Generation, l. an ingendring or
begetting, also an age of men. Generosa, the Title of Gentlewoman as Spinster
of others unmarried. Generos^ty, l. a being Generous, l. noble in mind or
blood, bountiful. Generical, belonging to Genus, or to Genesis, g. birth,
generation, Creation. Genets, a kind of furr from a little beast of that name,
also Spanish horses. Genethliacal, belonging to Genethliaques, Treaters or
Treat^ses of Genethlialogy, l. telling men's fortunes by casting their
nativities. Geneva, an Imperial town by the Lake Leman in Savoy, on the borders
of Switzerland. Gengenbach, a town of Su^via in Germany. Genial, joyful,
festival, belonging to marriage or generation. Geniculation, l. a joynting.
Genital, apt to ing^nder or beget. Genitals, privities. Geniting, a small apple
soon ripe. Genitive, of an ingendring faculty, natural. Genitive Case, the
second, formed of the Nominative, and forming all the rest. Genitor, l. a
Father, begetter, or beginner. Genius, a good or evil spirit attending on
particular men or places, also Nature, fancy or inclination. Gennep, a town in
Cleveland. Genoa, Genes, a City of Liguria in Italy. Gensericus, a Vandal, who
took Carthage and made stables of the Temples. Gent, o. proper, handsome.
Gentian, the herb Filwort. Gentil, a Maggot. Gentile, l. Heathen, pagan.
Gentile, f. Gentleman-like. Gentilesse, f. Gentility, Nobility. Gentilism, l.
Heathenism, the opinion or practice of Heathens. Gentilitial, -ious, l.
belonging to ancestors or kindred. Gentiles (in Gram.) Nouns that signify
belonging to such or such a Country. Gentleman, one that observes his
Gentility, race and propagation of blood, by bearing arms. Gentry Cove or Mort,
c. Gentleman or woman. Genua, Genoua, as Genoa. Genuflexion, l. a kneeling.
Genuine, l. Natural, proper. Genus, l. a kind, stock or lineage, that which
contains many species or smaller kinds. Geode, g. the Earth-stone. Geodesian,
one that uses Geodesie, Geodoesia, g. the art of measuring land. Geographical,
belonging to Geography, g. a descripti- of all the Regions and Countries of the
Earth. Geographer, a Describer of the Earth. Geomanty, g. Divination by Circles
drawn on the Earth, or opening of it. Geometrize, to play the Geometer,
-trician, one skild in Geometry, g. the art of measuring [the earth.]
Geometrical, belonging thereto. Geoponical, g. belonging to tillage, or
manuring ground. George, g. Husbandman. Georgians, Inhabitants of Georgia,
Albania, bordering on Armenia. Georgian-hereticks, followers of David George
(of Delft) who held that both Law and Gospel were unprofitable for Salvation,
That He was Christ, etc. he died 1556. Georgicks, g. Books treating of
husbandry. Geornlick. Sa. Willingly. Gerah, the least silver coin among the
Jews, worth 1 d. ob. Gerard, Gerald, Garret, Sa. all towardliness.
Gerbevillier, a town in Lorrain* Gerent, l. bearing, carrying. Gere, o. Jeer,
jest, frenzy. In no Gere, o. at no rate. Gerfalcon, between a Vulture and a
hawk. Gergon, -ning, o. Chattering, prating. Gergo, ^one, I. speech. Germander,
Chamaedris, Trissago, Quercula major, the herb English-treacle. Germanity, l. a
being nearly related, brotherhood. Germany, High-Dutchland. St. Germain, the
Windsor of France. Germination, l. a budding. Gernsey, Sarnia, an Isle abour 20
miles from Jarsey. Gersa, serpentaria, Cerusse made of Aram-roots. Gersuma, Sa.
Gressume, Sc. a fine or income. Gertrude, Gar-, Sa. all truth. Gervase, (Sa.
all fast, or g. ancient, noble) a Martyr at Millain under Nero. Gerunds, the
Verbal Infinitive terminations - di, -do, and - dum. Geryon, a Spanish King of
three Countries, supposed to have 3 bodies and slain by Hercules. Gery,
Gerifull, o. mutable, also cruel. Gesamund, Sa. Assembled. Geseke, a town in
Westphalia. Gessant, a Lions head born over a Chief. Gesseram, -ran, o. a
brestplate. Gestation, l. a carrying. Gesticulation, l. making signs, using
much gesture, acting of a person, also a kind of dance. Gestion, a doing or
carriage of a business. Gests, great actions or Exploits performed. Getealed,
sa. numbered. Gethild, sa. patience. Getulians, the first inhabitants of Africa.
Geules, a red or vermilion color. Gewgaws, Gug-, trifles for Children to play
with. Gheta, a mineral lately found in Turkey. Gheus, f. beggars, a nickname of
Protestants in Flanders. Ghittar, an instrument somewhat like a Cittern, only
the strings are guts. Ghittern, a small sort of Cittern. Ghybe, Gibe, No. to
scold. Gibbon, No. a Nut-hook. Gibbosity, l. a bunching out in the back, the
Moons being 3 parts light. Gibe, o. to mock. Gibellines, a faction in Italy
opposing the Guelphs. Gibraltar, -there, Gebeltark, -rec, A. (the Mountain of
Tarec son to Abdalla) the streights of the Mediterranean sea, having on the
North Mount Calpe, on the south Abila, with Hercule's pillars. Gibsere, o. f. a
pouch. Gib-staffe, No. a quarter-staff. Giddy, No. Mad [with anger.] Gideon*
Gedeon, h. a breaker or destroyer. Gierful, o. vulturine, rapacious. Gifta, sa.
Marriage. Gifu, Sa. Grace. Gigging, o. sounding. Gigantick, -tine, Giant-like.
Gigantomachy, g. the War of the Giants [with heaven.] Gig, Giglet, -lot, o. a
wanton woman. Gig-mills, for fulling and butling of cloth, prohibited. Gigot,
f. a leg of mutton with the whole hip-bone, also* hasche. G^gger, c. a door.
Gigg, c. the nose. Gigs, swellings on the inside of horses lips, also a
prating, o. Gilbert, Sa. bright as gold, or as Gislebert. Gilbertines, Friars
and Nuns of Sempringham, in Lincolnshire, instituted (1145) by one Gilbert, he
lived to see 700 Friars and 1100 Nuns of his Order. Gild, Sa. Tribute,
Amercement, also a Company or fraternity combined by the Princes leave.
Gildable, as Geldable. Gildale, sa. a club, a compotation where every one paid
his share. Gildhal, Guildhall, the chief Hall of the City of London. Gild halda
Teutonicorum, the Stilyard, hanse or fraternity of Easterling Merchants.
Gild-Merchant, a privilege whereby Merchants might hold pleas of Land within
their own precincts. Giles, Aegidius, l. Aigidion, g. a little kid, or for
Julius, as Gilian, for Juliana. Gill, Ss. a small water, rivulet or beck.
Gillet* Aegidia, the Woman's name. Gillingham, a Forest in Dorsetshire. Gilp,
sa. a brag or boast. Gilt, Jilt, a cheat, a fly defeating ones intent. Gilt, c.
a picklock. Gilt-head, a gold-coloured Fish. Gimlet, a piercer. Gimmal, as
Gemmow-ring. Gimmer-lamb, (q. Gam-) an Ew-lamb. Ginglymos, g. (a hinge) the
joining of bones, so that the same bone receives and is rereceived by another.
Gipe, o. a coat full of plaits. Gingreat, o. to chirp like a bird. Gin^e, Gin,
(for engine) a snare. Gippius, a Roman, Author of the sentence Non omnibus
dormio. Gippon, -ion, f. a jump a kind of short coat or Cassock. Gipsere, (f.
Gibbeciere) a pouch. Gipsous, belonging to Gips, l. lime or plaster. Giraffe,
an Asian beast, under whose belly a man on horseback may ride. Girasol^, the
Sun-stone of a golden splendor toward the sun, otherwise of an eye-like
luster. Girde, o, to strike. Girdle-sted, the waste or girdling place. Girl,
Gerle, a Roe-buck of two years. Girthol, sc. a Sanctuary. Girt, a ship is girt,
when the Cable is so taught that (upon the turning of the tide) she cannot go
over it. Girvij, fen-dwellers, in Lincolnshire, Cambridgeshire, etc. Gisarme,
Guisarme, Bisarme, Sisarme, a kind of halberd or Battle-ax. Gislebert, Gilbert,
sa. bright pledge. Giste, f. a couch or lodging place, Gists of the Kings
progress, a writing with the names of all the places where he means to lie by
the way. Gisting, as Agist. Gite, o, a gown. Git, [eggs] beaten to oil.
Glacial, belonging to Glace, f. Ice. Glaciate, l. freeze or turn to ice.
Gladdon, Gladwin, spatula foetida, Spurgewort. Glade, an open passage in a
Wood. Gladly, (q. leodly sa.) commonly. Gladiatour, l. a Sword-man or fencer.
Gladiature, l. Sword-play, or fighting. Gladuse, Br. for Claudia. Glaive, as
Glave. Glandage, f. mastage, or the season of feeding hogs with Mast.
Glandiferous, l. mast-bearing. Glandulosity, a being Glandulous, l. full of
kernels. Glanoventa, a Town upon Venta, Wanspeck or Wantbeck, a River in
Northumberland. Glare, o. glister. Glastenbury, an Abbey (in Sommersetshire)
founded (they say) by Joseph of Arimathaea, near which (in Wiral-Park) is a
hawthorn that blossoms upon Christmas day. Glatton, No. Welsh ^lannel.
Glaucitate, l. to cry like a Whelp. Glaucoma, g. a fiery redness in the
Cyrstalline humor of the eye. Glaucus, killed by Ajax in the Trojan War, also
a Fisher, who (tasting of a certain herb) leapt into the Sea and became a
Sea-God. Glaver, Glaffer, Che. Flatter. Glave, Glay^e, o. a kind of hooked
Sword or Bill. Glaymous, o. muddy and clammy. Glaze, to varnish. Glaziers, c.
eyes, also Fichers by unripping or creeping into Windows. Glebe-land, belonging
to a Parsonage (beside the tithes*) Gleba, l. a clod of Earth. Glebosity, l.
fullness of clods or turfs. Glede, o. a burning Coal, also a Kite. Gleden, o.
gone. Glee, o. joy, or mirth. Glent, o. glanced. Gleire, o. white. Gleyre of an
eye, o. the white of an Egg. Glimfenders, c. andirons* Glimflashy, c. angry.
Glimmering, a glancing or trembling light. Glimmer, c. fire. Glin, Br. a dale.
Glister, as Clyster. Globosity, a being Globous, -bular, in form of a Glob^, a
thing every way round like a ball. Glob'd, Ch^. fond of, wedded to. Gloucester,
Glevum, the City of Glocestershire. Glocester-hall, built by John Lord Gifford
of Brimesfield, for Students in Oxford. Glombe, o. to frown. Glome, l. a bottom
of third. Glomeration, l. a rolling or gathering into a round lump. Gloomy, o.
dusky, or dark. Withouten Gloss, without deceit. Gloss, o. to flatter.
Glossomatical, belonging to a Glossater, Glossographer, he that makes a Gloss,
l. a short Comment. Glossary, a dictionary or Gloss-book. Glossop^^a, g. the
tongue-stone (from its shape.) Gloten, (for Clothing) covering. Glotend, Che.
surprised, startled. Glowden, o. shined. Glowed, o. stared. Glum, sadly,
sowrely. Glutinosity, a being Glutinous, l. gluy, clammy. Glutination, l. a
gluing. Gly, Li. to look asquint, angerly. Glyconick [verse] of one Spondee and
two Dactyles. Glycerium, a Courtesan of Thespia. Glyster, as Clyster. Glymmer,
c. fire. Glym, jack, c. a link-boy. Glym-stick, c. a Candlestick. Gmund, a Town
in higher Austria. Gnarity, l. knowledge, experience. Gnarr, Gnurr, a hard knot
in Wood, also a churl. Gnast (for Gnash) o. to vex. Gnathonical, playing or
belonging to Gnatho, g. a flattering parasite. Gnathonize, to flatter or play
the smell-feast. Gnat-snapper, Fig-eater, a bird. Gnavity, l. industry. Gnew,
o. gnawed. Gnoff, o. a churl or fool. Gnomological, belonging to the art of
Dialling. Gnomonick, -mical, belonging to a Gnomon, g. a Carpenters square, or
pin of a Dial. Gnostics, Carpo^ratians, Borboritae, Borboriani, filthy
heretics (begun by Carpocras 125) pretending great knowledge, denying a future
judgment, holding two Gods, one good the other bad, etc. Gnurr, as Gnarr. Goa,
the best of all the East-Indian Cities, where the Viceroy of Portugal keeps his
Residence. Goaling, sending to the Goal, or gail. Goan, as Gawn. Goam, No. to
clasp or grasp. Goam, Y. to mind or look at Goaring, cut ^loping (spoken of a
sail. Goats-beard, Tragopogon, g. an herb with long staring leaves, good in
Consumptions. Goats-rue, with leaves like the Vetches but lighter, good against
infection, etc. Gobettyd, a trought gob. o. a trout dressed in bits. Goblins, as
Elves. Gobonated, divided into two colors, as if it were cut into small
gobbets. Go to God, go without day, as Aller sans jour, to be dismissed the
Court. Go-carts, wherein Children learn to go. Gods-good, Nf. K, Sf. barm,
yeast. God-bote, sa. an Ecclesiastical or Church-fine. Godalming, a Town in
Surrey. Godard, sa. godly disposition. Godfrey, (Gods peace) a Christian King
of Jerusalem, who refused to be Crowned with gold, where Christ was Crowned
with thorns. Godiva, Wife to Leofric, Lord of Coventry, who (to gain them a
release from his Impositions) rode naked through the City. Godwin or Goodwins
Sands, (on the Coast of Kent) heretofore the rebel Count Godwins Lands. Godwin,
ge. victorious in God. Goes, a Town in Zeland. Goetie, g. witchcraft. Gofish,
-yshe, o. sottish. Goffe, E. a mow of hay or Corn. Gog, h. the roof of a house,
covered. A-Gog, eagerly bent upon a thing, also pu^t up with pride. A-Gogue, f.
with his belly full, frolic, lively. Gog-magog, a (feigned) British giant (12
cubits high) whom Corinaeus, (Brutus's Companion) threw down Gogmagogs leap, a
steep rock in Cornwall. Golden number, (writ in golden or red letters, or of
golden use in finding the changes of the Moon, etc.) it has yearly one added
till it come to 19, and then returns to one again because in 19 years the Sun
and Moon were thought to finish their mutual Aspects. Gold n-Fleece, gold in
grains (on the Colchian shore) gathered by the help of sheepskins with the
wool on. Golden rod, a cleansing Astringent herb. Gold-foile, leaf-gold.
Golgotha, Sir. a place of dead men's sc^lls. Goliath, -ath, h. a Giant of the
Philistines whom David slew with a sling-stone. Go^ierdies, o.
ravenously-mouthed. Golpe, Sp. a slash. A Golpe, Sp. at a blow. Goman, Gomman,
o. a husband or Master of a Family. The Gome that gloseth so chartes, o. the
man or Officer that closes the Writs or instruments. Gomer, h. (consuming)
FaFather of the Cimbri, also a measure somewhat above our gallon. Gomorrhaean,
one of Gomorrha, a Sedomite. Gomphosis, g. the joining of a bone together.
Gonagra, g. the gout in the knees. Gonde, a town upon the Sihelde in Hanault.
Gondola, -lot, a Venetian wherry-boat. Gonfennon, -fanon, f. a little square
flag at the end of a lance. Gong (q. Gang) o. a privy. Gonorrhaea g. the
running of the reins. Good abearing, Good behavior, an exact carriage of a
Subject toward the King and his liege people. Good Country, a Jury of
Countrymen or good Neighbors. Goodmes, o. Good time or mood. Goodmanchester,
a town in Huntingtonshire, heretofore entertaining Kings with the pomp of 180
ploughs. Goole, (f. goulet) a breach in a bank or Sea-wall, also a Ditch, Li.
Gooly, for Goodly. Goos-hill, a Surgeons instrument of the same use as a
Crow-bill. Goos-grass, Cleavers, cleansing and strengthening the Liver. Goose
intentos, a goose claimed of custom by the husbandmen in Lancashire upon the 16
Sunday after Pentecost when the old Church-prayer ended thus, - ac bonis
operibus jugiter praestet esse Intentos. Goos-wing, a peculiar way of fitting
up the mizzen-sail, so as to give the ship more way in a fair fresh gale.
Gorbelly, -lied, having a very great paunch or belly. Gorce, f. a fish-wear.
Gorchum, a town in Holland. Gor-crow, a Raven. Gord, f. a whirl-pool or deep
hole in the water. Gordiaeus, an Armenian hill wh^re Noah's ark is said to have
rested. Gordius, a Phrygian raised from the plough to the throne he hung up his
harness in the Temple (for a memorial) tied up in a very intricate manner
called the Gordian knot, Cut in two by Alexander (when he could not untie it)
because the Monarchy of the world was promised to him that undid it. Gore, o.
an arbor, also a pleit or fold. Gore, two arch lines from the sinister chief
and bottom of th'Escutcheon, and meeting (in a sharp angle) in the fess-point.
Gorge, in a hawk is the Craw or crap in other fowls. Gorget, o. a throat.
Gorgious, gallant, sumptuous. Gorgons, Medusa, St^enio and Euryale (Phorcys's
Daughters) who had snakes instead of hair, and killed men with their looks.
Gorlois, a Prince of Cornwall, whose wife Uther-Pen-dragon enchanted, and begat
on her King Arthur. Gorroghs, Leathern boats used by the Romans here.
Gormandize, to play the Gormand, Gour-, f. a glutton. Gormoncester, as
Goodmanchester. Gorst, o. bushes. Gortinians, a kind of New- England Quakers,
from Sam-Gorton banished thence about 1646. Gospel, for God-spel, sa. good word
or tidings. Goss-hawk, (q. Gross-hawk, or rather Goos-hawk) a large kind of
hawk. Gossip (q. God-sib, sa, of kin before God) the Godfather or God-mother.
Gossemeer, Gossomer, -mor, Gossa-, Gossymear, Fila Virginis, Our Ladies hair,
white Cobwebby exhalations flying about in sunny weather. Got, a ditch, sluice
or gutter. Goths, Gothi, people of Gothia, Gothe-land, a Country bordering
upon Denmark and Norway, Gothlen, o. to grunt. Gotish, as Gofyshe. Gottorp, a
town of South Juitland in Denmark. Goude, a town in Holland. Goule, o. Usury.
Gouffaucon, o. for Gonfennon. Governail, Gouv-, f. the rudder. Gourd, a plant
somewhat like a Cucumber, also a bottle, o. Goureth, o. stareth. Goutes, Some.
Common sinks or sewers. Goutwort, Herb-Gerrard, Ashweed, Jump-about.
Gouvernante, Gov-, f. a governess or she-governour. Goyster, Ss. to be frolic,
ramp, or laugh aloud. Gracchus Sempronius, a Roman General, who subdued the
Celtiberians. Graces, Aglaia, Euphrosyne and Thalia (daughters of Jupiter and
Venus) goddesses of Elegance, friendship, and handsome conversation. Grach, o.
to behave [with a grace.] Gracility, l. slenderness. Gradatory, the ascent from
the Cloister to the Quire of the Church, also any going up by steps. Gradation,
l. Climax, g. an ascending by degrees. Graduality, the being Gradual, l. by
degrees, also part of the Mass, sung between the Epistle and Gospel, also as
Graile, a book of certain Offices in the Roman Church. Gradual Psalms (of
degrees or steps) the 15 Psalms from 118 to 133, sung on the 15 steps in
Solomon's Temple. Graduate, l. having taken his degree. Gradde, (q. Engraved)
craved. Gradivus, Mars. Graecia, Greece, a large part of Europe, the nurse of
learning, prowess, and of all Arts. Graeae, three Sisters of the Gorgons, they
had all but one eye and one Tooth, which they used by turns. Graffer, Greff^er,
f. a Notary or Scrivener. Graffically, g. exactly curiously. Graie, Gray, a
brock or badger. Graie-Fryer, as Cordelier. Grains of Paradise, Carda^ome.
Graith, o. made ready. Grame, o. anger, sorrow, also mis-hap and punishment.
Gramercy, f. (Grand-merci) great thanks. Gramineal, -eous, l. grassy, or made
of grass, green. Graminous, l. full of or overgrown with grass. Grammatical,
belonging to Grammar, g. the Art of Speaking, Reading and Writing. Grammatist,
-ticaster, a young Grammarian, one skilled in Grammar. Grampus, a fish somewhat
less than a Whale. Grampound, a Town in Cornwall. Granadil, sp. a small
Granado, sp. a Pome-granate, also a hollow bullet filled with wildfire and
shot from a morter-piece, there are also hand-granadoes. Granary, l. a place to
lay Corn in. Granate, l. a precious stone resembling a Pomegranate-stone.
Grand, f. great, also as Grandee, a great or leading man. Grand-dayes, as
Gau^y-days. Grandaevity, l. greatness of age, Antiquity, Eldership. Grand Cape,
see Cape. Grand-distress, of all the Lands or goods a man has within the
County or Bailywick. Grandezza, I. -deza, sp. -d^ur, f. greatness [of state or
Spirit.] Grandiloquence, -quy, l. greatness of speech or style, a being
Grandiloquent, -quous, l. using high words. Grandimontensers, a Religious Order
erected An. 1076. having their Abbey on a Mountain in Aquitane. Grandinous, l.
belonging to, or full of hail. Grand Seignior, the Great Turk. Grandity, l.
greatness. Grand Sergeanty, a holding Lands of the King by service to be done
him in person, as to bear his banner, spear, etc. Grange, f. (a barn) a great
farm with barns, etc. Granicus, a River in Bithynia, where Alexander slew and
took above 600 thousand Persians. Granito, I. a kind of speckled Italian
marble. Grannam, c. Corn. Granson, a French Poet whom Chaucer translates.
Graniferous, l. bearing grains or kernels. Granivorous, l. corn-devouring.
Grantham, a Town in Lincolnshire. Grans, a Town in the Earldom of Mont-belgard.
Granulation, l. a Chemical reducing of metals and minerals into Granula* -ules,
l. small grains. Graphical, g. curiously described or wrought. Graplings,
Grapness, a kind of Anchors with four flooks and no stock, used also in
Grapling, or fastening of Ships together in a Fight. Grassatim, l. a robbing,
spoiling and making havoc. Grateolent, l. smelling gratefully or pleasantly.
Gratiae expectativae, Popish Bulls or Mandates for livings not yet void.
Gratch, o. Apparel. Gratianople, a City of Narbon in France. Gratianus,
Eunarius, a Roman Emperor perfidiously slain by his Captain Andragathius at
Lions in France. Gratification, l. -fying, rewarding; making amends. Gratings,
small ledges a cross over one another (like a Port-cullis) in close Fights etc.
Gratis, l. (for thanks) freely, for nothing, undeservedly. Gratuity, l. a free
reward or gift. Gratton, Ss. an ersh or eddish; Gratton, k. stubble. Grats, a
Town in Stiria. Gratulatory, belonging to or full of Gratulation, l. thanking,
or rejoicing on another behalf. Grave, Greve, D. Earl o^ Governor. Grave, o.
a ditch, also a wood. Grave the ship, burn off the old stuff and lay on new,
with train-oyl, Rosin and Brimstone boild together. Graveling, a Town in
Flanders. Gravesend, a Town in Kent. Graven, o. buried. Gravet, o. a grove.
Graveolence, l. a rank or strong sent, a being Graveolent, smelling rank,
stinking. Graver, a graving-steel, also an instrument to take off scales from
the Teeth. Gravidity, l. a being Gravid, l. great with chi^^ or any young.
Graviloquence, l. a grave speech or speaking gravely. Gravity, heaviness (...)
weight, also graveness or soberness in behavior. Grauntee, to whom is given a
Grant, Grant, a gift (in writing) of such things as cannot fitly be passed by
word only. Grant mercy, o. for Gramercy Grayeth, o. (q. arrayeth) makes trim.
Graythed, o. devised. Greach-breach, as Grith-breach. Grease, the fat of a bore
or hare. Great Men, temporal Lords in Parliament, and sometimes the Commons.
Greaves, f. armor for the Legs. Grecians, men of Greece, also (as opposed to
Hebrews) Heathens. Grecism, l. a greek idiom. Gree, Gre, f. willingness,
agreement, satisfaction, also (in Heraldry) a step or degree Greek Church,
differs in some things from the Roman, viz. in denying the Holy Ghosts
proceeding from the Father and the Son, admitting only painted images,
admitting none but married men into orders, etc. Grede, o. to cry. Green-Cloth,
a Court of Justice, sitting in the Counting House of the Kings Court.
Green-hew, Vert, every green thing growing within a Forest. Green-silver, a
yearly halfpenny paid the Lord of Writtel Manor in Essex for every fore-door
opening toward Greenbury. Green-war, Estreats delivered to the Sheriffs, under
the Exchequer Seal (in Green-wax) to be levied in their several Counties.
Green-wich, a Town in Kent, where Humphrey Duke of Gloucester built the Palace
called Placence. Greece, Greece, o. gray. Grei^ed, o. made. Greith, o. to
remove, or bring. Greathly, No. handsomely, towardly. In Gr^ath, well. Greet
and yowl, Cu. weep and cry. Greese, l. a step or stair. Gregal, l. belonging to
a flock or company. Gregory, g. watchful. Gregorian, [cap of hair] first made
among us by Gregory, a Barber in the Strand. Gregorian, Lilian, Foreign or New
Account, a correction of the Calender (through the advice of Antonius Lilius,
and other Mathematicians) 1584. by Pope Gregory, the XIII. who made the year to
consist of 365 days, 5 hours, 49 minutes and 12 seconds. And that the Vernal
Equinox (which was then March 11) might be reduced to March, 21 (as it was at
the time of the first Nic^n^ Council) he Commanded the 4th. to be the 14th. of
October* Grenhead, o. [q. Greenhead] rashness. Gresham College, the house of
Sir Thomas Gresham, who endowed it with Revenues for the maintenance of
Professors of Divinity, Law, Physic, Astronomy, Geometry and Music. Gremial,
-ious l. belonging to the lap or bosom. Grest-feders, o. Crest-feathers. Great,
o. as Grede, to cry. Greves- o. [q. Groves] Trees, Boughs, Grass. Greve, as
Grave, a Lord, Griffe graffe, f. by hook or by crook, any way. Griffenberg, a
Town in lower Ponurania. Grigg, a young Eel. Grills, a kind of small fish.
Grill, o. cold, [ q. gresse, f. hail.] Grilliade, -lade, f. a dish of broyled
meat. Grimace, f. a sour crabbed look, a wry ill-favored face made. Grimsbie,
a Town in Lincolnshire. Grim^ald, -moald, ge. power over anger. Grinstead, a
Town in Sussex* Grint, o. for grinded, ground* Grinders, c. Teeth. Grise, as
Greese. Gripe, the sharpness of the stem under water. The ship Gripes, when she
is apt to run her nose too much to the wind. Griph, o. a riddle. Grip, Gripe, a
little trench. Grishild, ge. Grey-Lady. Grispe, o. gripe or grasp. Grisly, o.
fearfully, horribly, Grith, o. agreement. Grit, a Grample-fish. Grith breach,
Grich-, sa. breach of the peace. Grith-stole, as Frodmortel. Grobianism, f.
slovenliness, the practice of a Grobian, f. a sloven. Groffe, Gruff, Growff, o.
Grovelling. Groine, o. a froward grunting look. Groening, -ghen, the chief Town
of Groening-land, a Province of the Neatherlands. Grommyts, little rings on the
upper side of the yard, to which the Caskets are fastened Gromatick [Art,] of
casting out the ground for quarters, fortifying a Camp, etc. Gromel, -mil, the
herb Pearl-plant. Gron, Sa. a fenny place. Grondsell, a threshold. Gropers, c.
blind men. Groop, o. a pissing place. Gross boys, f. great wood, Timber.
Grosvenour, Gravenour, [great hunter] a noble Family of Cheshire. Grossome, for
Gersuma. Grot, l. a Cave. Grotesca, I. -sques, f. antic work, odd confused
painting without any sense or meaning, also any rude misshapen thing. Grovelling,
with ones face or belly on the ground. Ground ^he ship, bring her on the
ground, to be trimmed. Ground Pine, an herb creeping on the ground and
resembling the pine tree. Grout, No. wort of the last running, New ale, also
Millet. Groundswel, Senecio, an herb that quickly decays. Ground-timbers,
which are first laid over the keel and make the ships floor. Grouppade, f. a
lofty kind of horse-mannage. I Grow, No. I am troubled. Growbed, o. for
Grubbed. Growm, an engine to stretch woollen cloth. Growth halfpenny, paid (in
some places) for tithe of every fat beast, Ox and other unfruitful cattle.
Growz, No. to be chill [at the beginning of an Ague ^it.] Groyne, f. the snowt
[of a sow.] Abuck Groyneth, makes that noise. Grumosity, l. a curdling of
liquor into a thick mass or clod, a being Grumo^^s, l. Cloddy, full of Clots or
hillocks. Gruarij, the principal Officers of the Forest. Grunting-peek, c.
pork. Grunting c^eat, c. a pig. Gryffen, -fon, g. a fierce creature whose fore
part is like an Eagle, purple colored* and whitish wings, the hinder part like
a Lion, black, by Modern Writers esteemed fabulous. Griffith, Grif-, Br.
strong-faithed. Grymsey, a town in Lincolnshire. Grys, o. a Partridge.
Guacatane, an Indian ^^le-wort. Guadage, as Guidage. Guadelquivir, a River of
Andaluzia in Spain Guadiana, the river Ana, in Portugal, running 14 miles under
ground, so that the bridge may feed 10 thousand Cattle. Guaiacum, a West India
drying wood, good against the French disease. Guaiavas, a kind of Indian
apples. Guastald, he that has the Custody of the Kings Mansion-houses.
Guastaliens, a Religious order of men and women begun 1537 by a Mantuan Lady,
Countess of Guastala. Gubernation, l. a governing. Gu^ernator, l. a Governor
[of a ship.] Gudge^ns* Rudder-irons. Gu^lderland, Gel-, one of the
Neatherlands. Gu^lphs, and Gibellines, two great factions in Italy. Guenliana,
a valiant Lady, (wife to Gryffin Prince of Wales,) slain in a battle with
Maurice of London. Guerring, o. (q. jarring) brawling. Guerdon, f. a reward.
Guest-takers, Gist-, as Agistors. Gugaws, h. Gnugabb, a jews-harp or toy for
Children. Guidage, money for safe conduct through a strange place Guid^n, f. a
horse-banner, also the Corner or bearer of it. Guill, Che. to dazzle [the eyes.]
Guild Hall, as Gild hall. Guilford, Geglford, sa. a town in Surrey, the Mansion
place of the English-Saxon Kings. Guinethia, Guineth, Venodotia, South- Wales.
Guiny, Nigritarum Regio, a Kingdom of Africa. Guise, Manner or fashion. Guld,
Maneleta, a certain Corn-weed. Gules, as Geules. Gul^, Goule, or Yule of
August, St. Peter ad vin^ula, Lammas day, when they say Quirinus's Daughter (by
kissing St. Peter's chain) was cured of a Disease in her Gu^ule, f. a Throat.
Gulick, the Chief town of Gulick-land, a province of Germany. Gulf, Gulf, a
straight see between two lands, or the meeting of two se^s. Gulling, when the
pin of a block eats or wears into the Sheever, or the yard into the Mast.
Gulosity, l. Gluttony. Gultwit* for Gyltwit. Gum Animi, Indian amber. Gum
Arabic, from the Egyptian thorn-tree Acacia. Gummilda, she killed her self,
because her Husband Asmond King of Denmark was slain in battle. Gun, No. a
great flag on of ale. Gunora, a Norman Lady, who held the Hamlet of Lanton by
the service of a barbed Arrow to the King when he hunted in Cornedon Chase.
Gunwale, the piece of Timber that reaches on either side from the* half deck to
the forecastle; also the lower part of any Ordnance-port. Gurgitate, l. to
devour or swallow up. Gurgitive, l. belonging to a gulf or stream. Gurnard, a
fishes name. Gusse^, an abatement, formed of a travers line from the dexter
Chief perpendicularly to the extreme Bases* or Contrary-wise. Gust* Gest, a
Guest or stranger that lodges with us the 2d night. Gust* l. a taste or
relish, also a sudden blast o^ wind. Gustation* l. a tasting, also a little
knowledge or experience. Gusto, I. a right relish, Savor or Taste of any
thing, Gustatory, l. a banqueting house. Gut-tide, Shrovetide. Gutta rosacea, a
praeter-natural redness in the Face. Gu^ta serena, a clear speck [hindring the
eyesight.] Guttulous, belonging to or full of drops. Guttural, l. belonging to
Guttur, l. the Throat. Guttu^al letters, pronounced in the Throat. Gutturous,
Gutt^r-, having a wide throat. Guzes, (in Her.) the ball of the Eye. Guy,
Guido, Guide, f. a leader or director. Guydage, as Guidage. Guye, a rope that
guides gently any thing hoised aboard, also the rope that hales forward the
pendant of the winding tackle. Gwalstow, sa. patibuli locus, the Gallows or
Execution-place. Gwab^-merched, Br. a fine to the Lords of some Mannours upon
the marriage of their Tenants-daughters, also as Lair-wite. Gy, o. a guide.
Gybe, c. any writing or pass. Gyges, a Lydian Shepherd who killed the King
Candaules (his Master) and enjoyed his Crown and Wife (whom he had shown him
naked) by the help of Gyge's ring, taken from a dead Giants finger found in the
belly of a brazen horse in the Earth, who is collet (turned inward) made him
invisible. Gyltwite, a compensation or amends for trespass or fraud.
Gymnastick, g. belonging to a Gymnase, g. a place for exercise (of body and
mind) a School. Gy^nasticks, books treating of Exercise. Gymnasiarch, the head
M^ster of the place where the Champions did exercise, the chief Master of a
School. Gymnosophists, g. Indian Philosophers of a naked and solitary living.
Gyndes, a river cut by Cyrus (in his siege of Babylon) into 46 channels.
Gynecocracy, Gynocraty, g. a Feminine Government. Gypsation, l. a plaistering
with Mortar. Gyration, l. the fetching of a large compass, a wheeling about,
dizziness. Gyre, g. a circuit, compass or cariere, the bound or end of a course
or race, also a trance, dump or fit, o. Gyron, Guyron, f. a geron, half a
square or quarter in an Escutcheon cut off by an oblique or diagonal line.
Gysarme, as Gisarme.
H.
HAam, sa. an Albe, a Priests linen vestment. Habakkuk, h. a wrestler.
Haberdasher, (q. Habt ihr d^s? ge. have you that? or Avoir d' acheter, f.
having to buy? or Kooper-Daeser, D.) a Merchant of toys or small wares. Hab-,
of Hats, a Hat-seller. Hab^re facias se^sinam, a Writ commanding the Sheriff to
give a man seisin of Lands recovered in the Kings Court. Habere facias visum, a
writ for the veiwing of Lands or Tenements. Habeas Corpus, a writ from the
King-Bench, for a Prisoner to remove himself thither, and answer the cause
there. Habeas Corpora, a writ for the bringing in a Jury, or so many of them as
refuse to come upon the venire facias. Habendum, the latter principal part of a
conveyance, limiting and qualifying the estate passing in the premises.
Haberdupois, as Averdupois. Habergion, Haub-, f. a diminutive* Haubert, a
little coat of ma^l, or sleeves and gorget only. Habiliment, f. clothing, also
Armor. Habilitation, a making one able or capable. Hability, l. an aptness or
capacity. Habit, l. clothing, also custom of doing any thing. Habitable, l.
that may be inhabited or dwelt in. Habitacle, -ation, l, a dwelling. Habitual,
l. grown to a Habit or custom. Habituate, l. to accustom. Habitude, l. the
habit, state or disposition of body or mind. Hables, f. a Haven or Port.
Hab-na^, (q. hap n'hap,) at a venture, whether it happen (succeed) or no. Hack,
Li. a hay-loft. Hack, Tu* Truth, and Hact-awlaw, Tu. high truth, a Divine
Attribute. Hace, o. for have, also hoarse. Hach, Hache, Hachis, f. a dish of
sliced steep^d meat. Had^d, h. rejoicing. Hades, g. hell, or the state of the
Dead. Hadarezer, Aderezer, h. beautiful help. Hadleigh, a Town in Suffolk.
Hadbote, sa. satisfaction for the violation of holy Orders, or for violence
offered to persons in holy Orders. Hadock, Hadd-, a small kind of Cod-fish.
Hadrian, a great Roman Emperor. Hadersleve, a Town of South Iuitland.
Hadrianople, g. a City of Ma^edonia in Greece. Haematopodes, g. Birds with feet
red as blood. Haemon, a Theban youth who killed himself over the tomb of
Antigone, put to death by Creon. Haemoplois, -osis, g. spitting of blood from
the vital parts. Haemorrhagy, g. a violent bursting-out of blood.
Haemorrhoides, g. the Piles, a distention of the Fundament veins by too much
melancholy blood. Haemus, a Mountain dividing Thrace and Thessaly. Haerede
deliberando alij, a writ for the Sheriff to command the delivery of the body of
another ward to him who is ward he was, by reason of his Land. Haerede abducto,
a writ for the Lord who having by right the Wardship of his Tenant under age,
has him conveyed away. Haeresy, g. (a sect) a doctrine contrary to the
fundamentals of Religion. Haeretico comburendo, a writ that lay against one who
(being convict of Haeresie and abjuring it) fell into it again. Haesitation, l.
a doubting, a sticking at any thing. Hasne, sa. a Haven or Seaport. Haga, sa.
a house. Haghes, No. haws. Hagar, h. a stranger, or chewing the cud. Hagester,
K. a Mag-pie. Hagard, f. wild, untamed. Hagard Faulcon, which for some time
preyed for her self. Haggai, h. pleasant. Haggase, a kind of pudding made of
hogs flesh. It Haggles, No. it hailes. Haggs, vapors (l^ke flame) about the
hair or horses manes, not so much flaming as reflecting light. Hagiographer, g.
a writer of holy things. Haguenaw, a Town in lower Elsass or Alsatia. Hague,
the best village in Europe, where the States of Holland keep their Court. Haie,
f. (hedge) a net to catch Conies. Hail, sa. health, whole. Hain, a River in
Hainault, one of the Netherlands. Hailes, o. happiness. Haine, f. hatred.
Hair, when a Masculine diurnal Planet appears in the day time. Haimburgh, a
Town (in higher Austria) where there grows some store of Ginger. Haim^ald^tia
Catallorum, (in Scotland) a seeking restitution for goods wrongfully taken
away. Hakeds, large pikes taken in Ramsey Moor. Hake^^n, o. a sleeveless
jacket. Halcyonian, peaceable, belonging to Halcyon, Alcyon, a Kingfisher,
which (in calm weather) builds and breeds on the seashore. Hasle, Ss. a
trammel, Ess. an iron to hang pots on over the fire. Halebrede, a lout or
lubberly Man or Woman. Haledon, Heaven-field in Northumb^rland, where King
Oswald (having erected a cross unto Christ) vanquished the British King
Cedwal, and became a devout Christian. Halesworth, a Town in Suffolk.
Half-bord, c. sixpence. Half-mark, a Noble, 6 and 8 pence. Half-seal, the
sealing of Commis^ions to Delegates, appointed upon any appeal in
Ecclesiastical or marine causes. Halicarnassus, the chief City of Ca^ia* where
the famous tomb of Mausolus was built by his Queen Artemisia. Halidom^* sa.
holy judgment. Halieuticks, g. treatises of the art of fishing. Halifax, (sa.
holy hair) Horton, a Town in Yorkshire, from a Maids head cut off by a Priest
and hung upon a Yew-tree there. Haliography, g. a description of the Sea.
Halituous, l* thin, vaporous, passing easily through the pores. Halinitre, g.
Saltpeter. Halitz, a Town of (...) nigra in Poland. Hall the ship, call to
her, to know whence she is, and whither bound. Haliwerk-folk, sa. Priests and
Religious persons. Hallage, toll to the Lord of a fair or market for
commodities vended in that Common Hall, also for clothes brought for sale to
Blackwell-hall, London. Hallam-shire, was part of Yorkshire. Hallelujah, h.
praise the Lord. Halle, a Town on the Sein in Hainault. Hallucination, l. an
erring or mistaking. Hallandia, part of Scandia. Halm, the stalk (of Corn) from
the ear to the root. Halsier, he that draws the Halser, the rope next to a
Cable. Hol^fang, Healfang, sa. a Pillory. Halo, g. a Circle about the Moon or
other Star. Halse, o. to embrace. Hals, sa. a neck. Halstead, a Town in Essex,
and a village in Kent. Halo^^sus, an Aegaean Isle defended by women when all
the men were slain. Halteth, o. holds. Halt* a stop or stay [in marching.]
Halyardes* the ropes that horse up the yards. Hallyattes, a King of Lydi^
Father to Croesus. Halymote, as Heal-gemote. Ham, h. crafty or heat. Ham, sa. a
house or village. Hamadryades, g. wood-Nymphs. Haman, h. making an up^roar.
Hambles, (for Hables) havens. Hamburgher, one of Hamburgh, the chief City of
Lower-Saxony. Hames, two crooked pieces of Wood encompassing a horse-collar.
Hamkin, a kind of pudding made upon the bones of a shoulder of Mutton.
Hameling, Hambling of Dogs, the same as expeditating. Hameled, o. abated.
Hamlet, hamel, hampsel, a little village sometimes the seat of a freeholder.
Hammocks, hanging ship-beds. Hammon, g, (sandy) a name of Jupiter. Hammone,
Ham, a Town in the Erldom of Mark. Hamor, h. an ass, or dirt. Hampton,
Southamp^on in Hamshire, and above 20 villages elsewhere. Hampton Court, a
Royal Palace on the Thames in Middlesex built by Cardinal Wolsey, finished by
King Henry the 8 th. Hamsoken, sa. the liberty or freedom of ones own house.
Han, o. to have. Hanjar, a rich dagger worn by the Bashaws Wives. Hand-cloth,
sa. a handkerche^. Handful, four inches. Han-speek, a wooden leaver.
Handy-warp, a kind of cloth made at Coksal, Bocking and Braintree in Ess^x.
Hancel^d, o. cut off. Hanaper, Hanper, seems to be the same as originally) the
Latin Fiscus. See Clerk of, etc. Han^eret, part of Burglav^ Diocese in Denmark.
Hankwit, Hangwit, sa. [a being acquitted of] a fine for the the unjust hanging
or escaping of a Prisoner. Hankyn, Hall, Henry, or little Hans. Hannah, h.
gracious, merciful. Hannaw, part of Weteraw in Germany. Hannibal, (Gracious
Lord) a Carthaginian General, who was beaten by the Roman, Scipio; and poisoned
himself. Hand^hoven bread, La. with little leaven, stiff. Hanno, a Carthaginian
rebel who had his eyes put out. Hannonia, Haynault, one of the
Low-Country-Provinces. Hans, D. a Companion or fellow. Hansz, ge. John.
Hans-in-kelder, D. Jack or the fellow in the cellar, also the child in the
mothers Womb. Hanse, (a Gothish word, used also in the Ordonnances of Paris
for) a society of Merchants combined for the good usage and safe passage of
Merchandise from Kingdom to Kingdom. Hanse-towns, (in Germany) about 72 joined
in a league offensive and defensive against all enemies whatsoever, Heyl. Cosm.
the principal seats of the Dutch Merchants. Hansiatick, free of, or belonging
to the Hanse-towns or Merchants. Hansholm, an Island in Denmark. Hansel, (q.
hand-sale) the first money taken in a morning. Hanylowes, o. subtilties,
cunning tricks. Hanselynes, o. short breeches. Hanten, o. to use or accustom.
Hanty [^orse,] No. wanton. Hap, f. to catch or snatch. Haphe^tlet, Happa^l^^, a
course coverlet for a bed. Happa, hap ye, No. think you, Hap, No. to cover or
heap clothes on. Haque, a hand-gun about three quarters of a yard long.
Haquebut, f. the same as Harquebuse. Haracana, Herocane, H^rric-, a violent
whirlwind or tempest overturning all. Harald, Herald, an Officer proclaiming
War or Peace, examining coats of arms, etc. Haran, h. anger. Harangue, f. an
oration or speech. Haraphah, h. a medicine. Harasse, f. to tire or wear out, to
trouble, or disquiet and torment. Haratium, the breed or stock of Swine.
Harbinger, (q. H^rberger, D.) he that goes before and provides lodging.
Harbors, [a Hart] goes to ^est. Herderwick, an University in Gelderland.
Hardiment, o. boldness. Hardly, o. verily, seriously. Hare-lip, cloven like a
Hares. Hare-pipe, a snare made of cane (or Elder) to take Hares. Hariant,
Hauriant, [a fish] represented standing upright (in Heraldry.) Haried, o.
pulled. Hariolation, l. a sooth-saying. Hariot, as Heriot. Harletrise, o. for
Harlotry. Harlem, a City in Holland where (they say) Printing was first
invented, Anno 1440. Harling, a Town in Norfolk. Harlingen, a Town in
West-Friezland. Harlot, (q. Horelet,) a little whore. Arlotta, I. a proud
whore. Arletta, Arlotha, Duke Roberts Concubine Mother to Duke William the
Conqueror. Harman, D. the general of an army. Harmans, c. the stocks.
Harman-beck, c. the Constable. Harmodius, Aristogeiton's fellow conspiratour
against the Athenian Tyrant Hipparchus. Harmonia, the wife of Cadmus, Daughter
of Mars and Venus. Harmonides* a Trojan beloved of Minerva and inspired with
all kind of Manufacture. Harmonious, -ick, -ical, full of Harmony, g. Musical
consent or agreement. Harns, Cu. brains. Hatnet, o. for Hornet. Haro, Harol, as
Hue and Cry. Harold, as Harald. Harowed hell, o. Conquered, spoiled.
Harpalice, a great huntress, who (by force of arms) rescued her father Lycurgus
from the Getans. Harp, the Fauchion wherewith Mercury slew Argus, and Perseus
Medea. Harping irons, barb'd at the end, to strike great fish with. Harpings,
the breadth of a ship at the bow, also the end of the bends fastened into the
stem. Harpocrates, the Egyptian god of silence, with one hand upon his mouth.
Harpyes, 3 filthy, monstrous and ravenous birds (of the lake Stymphalis in
Arcadia) with Women's faces, Vultures claws etc. Aello, Celero, and Ocypete.
Harquebuse, as Arqueb-. Harrow, o. fie! away! alas! Harre, o. harkening,
obedience. A Sea harr, Li. a tempest coming from the sea. Heart, a stag full
five years old. Hart-Royal, having been hunted by the King or Queen. Hart-Royal
proclaimed, when (being chased by the King out of the forest) Proclamation is
made that none shall hurt him or hinder his return. Hart-hall in O^ford, built
(together with Exeter College) by Walter Stapleton Bishop of Exeter.
Hartle-pool, a town in Durham. Hart's-tongue, a long-leaved herb good for the
Liver, Spleen, and passions of the heart. Hartw^rt, a plant good for Hearts or
stags to feed on. Harth-penny, -silver, Chimney-money. Harwi^k, a town in
Essex. Haspa^ or Haspenald-lad, No. a stripling, between man and boy.
Hasel-nut, good only after fish (to hinder the ingendring of phlegm.) Hasford,
a Town in the Bishopric of Mentz. Haske, Li. harsh, also a sign o Fishes
Haske, the sign Pisces. Hale, a town in the lower Elsasz or Alsatia. Hassia, a
Province of Saxony. Hastings, a town in Sussex. Hastilude, l. spear-play, a
running at Tilt or Tournament. Hatering, sa. Clothing. Hatches, the Overtures
or Trap-doors of the deck, to let things down into the hold. Hatch-way, the
place perpendicular over the hatches. In the Hatch-way, On the hatches. Hate,
o. for hea^. Hatfield, a town in Hertfordshire, a Village in Hereford and
Yorkshire. Hatfield-Brodock, a town in Essex. Hatherley, a town in Devon.
Hattle. Ky, Che. wild, -Skittish Cow. Hattock, No. 12 sheaves of corn. Hauberg,
-ert, f. a coat of mail. Hauberge^^, f. a little one. Haubergets, Haberj^cts, a
kind of Cloth mentioned in Magna Charta. Ha^erjannock, No. an Oaten Cake or
loaf. Hauback, o. (q. have or held back] return. Havelo^k, a Danish foundling,
and Scullen in the Kings kitchen, preferred by degrees to the marriage of the
Kings Daughter. Havelburg, a town in Germany. Haven, a port or safe riding for
ships. Have, o. heaved. Haver, Cu. Oats. Haveril, a town in Suffolk. Havering,
a town in Essex, from a ring supposed to be sent from St. John Baptist (by a
pilgrim) to King Edward the Confessor. Haulstead, a town in Essex. Haunce, o.
for Enhaunce. Haunt, the walk of a Deer. Haulm, Helm, So. Stubble. Hauriant, as
Hariant. Hause, Hose, No. the throat. Haus^lynes, Hans-, o. breeches or slops.
Hausible, l. that may be drawn or emptied. Haust, l. a soop or draught in
drinking, also ( No.) a dry cough. Haut-goust, ho-goo, f. a high taste or
relish. Haw (f. hay) a hed^e, also a Disease in the eye, also black, o. also to
have. Haws, K. little pieces of land adjoining to the house^, also by some the
houses themselves. Haward, Hayw-, the keeper of the Town herd [from breaking or
cropping hedges] Hawgh, Howgh, No. a green plat in a valley. Hawis^ as Avice.
Hawkers, deceitful fellows wandering up and down to buy and sell brass, pewter,
etc. which ought to be uttered in open market, also those that sell News-books
about by retail, as the Mercury-women do from the press by wholesale.
Hawk-weed, with thick and dark jagged leaves, good for the eyes and all
inflammations. Hawlkes, o. corners. Hawser, as Halser. Hawses, the holes under
the ships head through which the Cables come. Hawten, o. (f. bautain,)
insolent. Haws, the fruit of the Haw-thorn, Hedge-, or white-thorn. Haylse, o.
to charge or command. Haylsham, a Town in Sussex. Hazarders, players at Hazard,
f. chance, the play at dice, etc. also a place into which if the Tennis-ball be
stricken, it is a loss. Hay, Trekethle, in Brecknockshire. Hay-boot, a
permission to take thorns, etc. to make or repair hedges. Haydegines, o. a
Country dance. Haylayks, Tu. the women-slaves. Hayn, o. hatred. Hazael, h.
seeing God. He, hoo, No. She. Headborow, Burrow-head, Borow-elder, Burs-holder,
Chief-pledge, Third-borow, Tithing-man, chief of the frank-pledge, or Governor
of those within his own pledge, now a Constable. Head-land, a point of Land
lying farther out (at Sea) than the rest, also that which crosses the ends of
the plough'd Lands. Head-lines, the ropes that fasten the sails to the yards.
Head-sailes, those of the foremast and Bolt-sprit, which make the ship fall
off from the Wind, and (in quarter-Winds) are the chief drawing Sails.
Head-sea, that which after a storm [and sometimes before] runs contrary to the
present wind, here long ships go easiest, because they will ride upon two waves at
once. Head-silver, as Common-fine. Head-pence, about 40 pounds collected every
3d. and 4th. year by the Sheriff in Northumberland without any account to the
King, and therefore put down by Henry the sixth. Heaftling, sa. a Captive.
Heafod, sa. a head. H^alfang, as Halsfang. Healed, o. for heared. Healing, Der.
a hylling, or coverlet. Heal, ss. to cover. Healgemote, halymote, sa. a Court
Baron, or the meeting of all the Tenants of one hall or Manor. Heam, the same
in Beasts as the secundine in Women. Hearse, [a husk,] an empty tomb or
Monument for the dead, also the funeral Cloth or litter, wherein the Corpse is
carried. H^arth-money, Chimney-money. Hearts-ease, Pansie, Pances, Jacea, herba
Trinitatis, good for Ruptures and the falling sickness. Heath-poult, a bird
resembling a Pheasant. Heave-offerings, First Fruits paid to the Jewish
Priests. Heave the booth, o. rob the house. Heaver, c. a breast. Hebdomade, g.
the number of seven [years, ages, months, but most commonly] days. Heb^,
Goddess of youth, Daughter of Juno without a Father, Jupiters Cop-bearer till
she fell and was removed. Hebberm^n, Fishers below Lo^d^n-bridge, (commonly at
Ebbing water) for smelts, whitings* etc. Hebbing-wears, laid for Fish at ebbing
water. Hebetude l. a bluntness of point or edge, also dullness of wit. Hebraism,
a dialect or idiom proper to the Hebrew [tongue,] belonging to the Hebrews,
Jews, the posterity of H^ber, h. a Companion, inchanter, etc. in whose Family
(they say) the old language alone remained pure. Helrides, Ebudae, Ebudes,
Habudes, Eboniae, Mevaniae, the Western Islands 44 in number. Hebrus, a River
of Thrace. Hecalius, an Attribute given Jupiter by Theseus, from Hecale, an old
Woman and Theseus's Land-lady, who had devoted herself for his safe return from
the Wars. Hecate, Apollo's sister, Luna, Diana, Proserpina [with three heads)
also a Thracia^ Witch. Hecatomb, g. a sacrifice of an hundred Beasts at once.
Hecatompolis, g. Creete, which had an hundred Cities in it. Hecatompylae,
-pylos, the Egyptian Theb^s, which had an hundred gates. Heck, an engine to
take fish withal in Yorkshire, also a rack to feed at, No. see Hack. Heckled,
o. wrapped. Hecrick, g. (habitual) a fever inflaming the heart and soundest
parts. Hecla, a Mountain in Iseland sending forth a noise like the cries of
tomented persons. Hector, Priam's son, slain by Achilles before Troy. Hecuba,
Priam's wife, who is feigned [after the taking of Troy] to be turned into a
bitch. Heda, a Haven or Port. Hederal [Crown] made of Hedera, l. Ivy.
Hederiferous, l. Ivy bearing. Hederiform vein, passing along the sides of the
womb. Hed^^ick, Cyreniack [Philosopher^.] Heels [to starboard, etc.] the ship
leans to that side. Heep, o. help. Here and Have, o. hoarse and harsh. Here and
Houne, o. hare and hound. Hegesians, Philosophers following. Heges^^s, disciple
to Paraeb^tes. Hegesist^atus, the founder of the City Elea in Asia. Hegira, A.
the flight [of Mahomet from Mecca] the Turkish Epoche, or Computation of time,
beginning July 16. 622. by some 6 7. Hegow, part of Su^via or Schwaben in
Germany. Heidelberg, a town in the Palatinate of Rhine. Hainfare, Hinefare, Sa.
a Servants departing from his Master. Heiminck stead, a town of Holstein in
Germany. Heir* he that succeeds by right of blood in any man's lands or
tenements in fee. Heir, o. their. Heir, o. hair-cloth. Heir-lome, -loom,
Household stuff as Tables, presses, etc. which having belonged to the house for
certain desce^ts, do (by custom, not Common law) accrue to the heir. Heisa,
service. Heisugge, o. an hedg-sparrow. Helaw, -lo, No. bashful. Hel^^cks,
certain solitary rivolets in Richmondshire. Helchesaites Heretics that
followed one Helc^es^us, he held that it was no sin to deny Christ in time of
persecution. Helcys^n, g. the dross or scum of silver or any metal. Helder, No.
rather, before. Held, o. an account or total sum. Helded, for held. Hele, o.
to cover, or hold. Helena, Wife to Menelaus, stolen by Paris, occasioned the
Trojan wars. Helenites, white Friars wearing a yellow cross on their breasts.
Helenopolis, Frankfurt in Germany. Heliacal, g. belonging to the sun. Heliacal
emersion, when a star which was hid by the light of the Sun, appears. Heliades,
Daughters of the sun, and Sisters to Phaeton, who for his death wept themselves
into poplar trees. Heli^s, as Elias. Helical, belonging to Vrsa major or
Charles-wain. Heliconian, belonging to Helicon, a hill in Phocis, sacred to
Apollo and the Heliconiades, the Muses. Helioscopie, g. the furthest point of
the suns course, also a kind of Spurge. Heliotropian, belonging to the
Heliotrope, -py, g. the plant Waterwort or Turn-sole, also a kind of precious
stone. Helispherical, round as the Sun. Helix, g. a spiral-line, rolling in
several circles. Hell^, Daughter to Athamas King of Thebes, falling from the
back of a golden ram into the Pontick sea, occasioned the nameing of it
Hellespont, Brachium Sti. Georgij, the narrow sea by Constantinople dividing
Asia from Europe. Hellebore, Melampodium, Christwort because it flourishes
about Christmas, an herb good against madness. Hellenism, g. as Grecism.
Hellenistical, belonging to H^ll^s, g. Greece. Hellenize, to play the
Hell^nist, g a Grecian, also a Grae^izing Jew, born out of Judaea and using the
Septuagint transl^tion. Helm, Ge. a handle, the piece of wood that guides the
rudder, also as Haulm. Helmeley, a town in Yorkshire. Helmed in stark stowers,
o. defended in sharp assaults. Helstone, a town in Cornwall. Helter-Skelter, q.
Heel-ter-Schetter, D. all to shatter, violently, rashly, confusedly. Heluation*
a gluttonous devouring. Helve, o. the handle. Helvetian, belonging to Helvetia*
l. Swizzerland or Switzerland. Hem, o. Them. Hemerobaptists* g. daily Baptists,
a Sect that baptized themselves every day. Hemerologe, g. a Calendar or
day-book. Hemicade, g. half a hogs-head. Hemicircular, half round.
Haemicranick, belonging or subject to the Hemi^rain, -cranie, g. the Megrim.
Hemicycle, g. a half circl. Hemingham Castle, in Essex. Hemingston, a Town in
Suffolk, held formerly by Baldwin le Petteu^, per saltum, sufflum et pettum,
sive sufflatu^ et bumbulum, (a jump, a puff, and a far^) before the King upon
Christmas day. Hemiplexy, -xia, g. the Palsy on one side only. Hemisphere, g.
the visible half-compass of the Heavens. Hemistick, g. half a verse. Hemorhagy,
g. a large flux of blood. Hemor^hoides, g. Emrods, the piles like teats in the
fundament. Hemorrhoidal vein, the first branch of the Mesenterick, ending at
the Colon and strait gut. Hemlock, a venomous herb. Hemule, a Roe-buck of the
third year. Hempstead, a town in Hertfordshire, and other villages elsewhere.
Henares, a river in Spain. Henbane, a venomous herb. Henchman, (q. Hengst-man
Sa. a horsman or Groom) and Heinsman (q. Hine-man, Sa. a serving-man or
Manservant) a page of honor. Hend, Hende, o. (q. handy or handsome) Feat,
fine, gentle. H^ndecasyllable, Phaleucium, a verse of eleven syllables, as,
Quoquo diffugias pavens Mabili. Hengston-hill, in Cornwall, where King Egbert
defeated the British Danmonii and Danes conspiring against the English.
Hengwit, as Hankwit. Hengest; -gist, (Sa. a stone-horse) he led the first
English men ^ither. Henghen, Sa. a prison or house of Correction. Heniochus, g.
as Auriga. Henoch, h. taught or dedicate. Henley, a town in Oxford shir^,
Warwickshire, and other Villages. Henry, (q. Heymrick) Sa. of a rich home or
house. Hent, o. to catch. Hepatical, -tarian, g. belonging to the liver.
Hepati^ks, treatises or obstructions of the Liver. Hepatick vein, the great
carrying vein. Hephaestian [Montains] in Lycia always burning. Heppen, Heply, T.
neat, handsome. Heptaedrical, belonging to Heptaedron, g. a figure of seven
sides. Heptagonal, belonging to a Heptagon, g. a figure of seven angles.
Heptaphony, the having seven sounds. Heptarchy g. a seaven-sold government, as
of England by 7 Saxon Kings. Heptameron, g. a work of seven days. Haraclea,
St. Giles in France. Heraclitus, the weeping Philosopher of Ephesus. Herald, as
Harald. Heraude, o. to proclaim. Herawdes, o. feats of activity* Herbage, the
natural food for Cattle, also a liberty to feed ones cattle in the Forest or
another man's ground. Herbert, sa. the light or glory of an army, a good
Commander. Herbigage, o. lodging, and Her^orow, o. harbor. Herbalist, Herbist,
-bary, l. one skilled in herbs. Herbal, a treatise of herbs. Herbegeours,
Herberjours, o. Herbergers, Innkeepers. Herbenger, as Harbinger. Herber, o.
arbor. Herbiferous, l. bearing herbs or grass. Her^ Christopher, a kind of
Aconite, with berries like beads. Herb Paris, True love, Oxeberry, the leaves
like a true lovers^knot with a berry in the midst, good against poison,
inflammation, etc. Herb Robert, a kind of Cranes-bill with reddish stalks,
helps the stone, stops blood, etc. Herbipolis, Wirtzberg, in Germany. Herbred,
(q. haer broed) their bread. Herbosity, plenty or fullness of herbs, a being
Herbulent, l. grassy or full of herbs. Herciebant, they harrowed. Hercinia, a
German forest of 60 days journey in length and 9 in breadth. Herculean, -lane,
belonging to Hercules, the son of Jupiter and Alcmena, therefore engaged by
Jun^ in 1^ dangerous enterprises, which he overcame. Hercules pillars, raised
on Mount Calpe and Abila, at the streights mouth. Herculeus morbus, the
Herculean or falling sickness which (they say) he got by eating too many
quails. Herdelenge, the dressing of a Roe, as the undoing of a Bore. Here, sa.
an army [of rebels.] Here de Caesar, for Era etc. an account of time, in Spain
and Arabia, taking date 38 years before Christ and lasted in Spain till the
year 138^. Hereditary, Haer-, l. coming by inheritance. Hereditaments, all
things that descend by way of inheritance, and fall not as Chattels, within the
Compass of an Executor. Heresare, sa. [subsidy towards] warfare. Hereford, the
City of Herefordshire, where Ethelbert King of East England, going to woo the
Daughter of Offa King of the Mercians, was murdered. H^reg^at, as Hariot.
Heregeld, a subsidy for carrying on the war. Heremitage, E^em-, a solitary
dwelling of H^remites Erem-persons devoted to religious solitude. Heresy, as
Haeresie. Heresiarch, Haere-, g. the principal author of any Sect or Heresy.
Hereslita, -slia, sa. a Soldier departing without License. Heretogh, D. a Duke
or Leader of an army. Hericane, as Haracane. Herility, l Master-ship. Heriot,
Hariot, a tribute given to the Lord of a Manor for his better preparation
toward the war, now the best chattel that a Tenant has at his death, due to
the Lord by Custom or service. Herlaxton, a town in Lincolnshire where was
ploughed up a brazen vessel with a golden helmet set with precious stones,
presented to Catharine of Spain wife to King Henry 8. Herman, as Harman.
Hermaphrodite, g. (Mercury-Venus) one of both sexes, man and woman. Hermetical,
belonging to Hermes, g. Mercury. Hermes Trismegistus, a great Egyptian
Philosopher. Hermes fire, as Furole. Hermione, the Daughter of Menelaus.
Hermit as Heremite. Hermitage, as Heremitage. Hermitorium, an Hermitage, or
Chapel belonging thereto. Hermitress, a woman Hermit or Eremite.
Hermodactyles, g. Opprobrium Herbariorum, certain roots like fingers, but of
what plant is uncertain. Hermopole, g. a place where Images are sold.
Hermotimus, a Lydian whose soul was wont to wander far from his body and return
with foreign news, till once his enemies took his body and burnt it the mean
while. Hern, o. Corner. Hernious, l. bursten-bellied. Hern^ues, Li. an heron.
Herodian, belonging to Herod, King of the Jews under the Roman Emperor.
Herodian disease, a being eaten up of lice, as He was. Heroic, -call, noble,
lofty, belonging to or becoming an Hero, g. a Noble or valiant man. Heroic
[verse] Hexameter. Heroine, g. a Noble or Virtuous woman. Heroner, o. a hawk
that flies at a Heron, Ardea, a bird whose dung burns what it touch^s.
Herophila, the Erythraean Sibyl, who being (by Tarquin) denied the price of her
3 books of prophecies, burnt 2, and received the whole price for that which was
le^t. Herostratus, to purchase ^ame, burnt the Temple of Diana. Herpsae, as
Frodmortel. Hersilia, the wife of Romulus, worshipped by the name of Hera, the
Goddess of youth. Herry, Hery, o. to praise. Hertford, Herueford, the chief
town of Hertfordshire. Herthus, a Saxon Goddess, like the Latin Tellus.
Hervorden, a free City of Westphalia. Hesione, Daughter of La^medon King of
Troy, whom Hercules delivered from a great whale. Hesperian Gardens, whose
trees bare golden apples kept by a watchful dragon which Hercules slew. Here
dwelt the Hesperides, the 3 Daughters of Hesperus, the brother of Atlas,
changed (after his death) into the Evening-star. Hesta, -tha, a Capon. Hests,
o. Commands or decrees. H^^eroclitical, belonging to Heteroclites, g. nouns
irregular in their declinings. Heteriark, g. the General of the Allies, also an
Abbot. Heterodoxy, l. a being Heterodox,, g. of another judgment or opinion
than what is generally received. Heterogeneity, the being Heterogene, -neal,
-neous, g. of another or different kind. Heteroscians, g. inhabitants of either
temperate Zone, whose shadows are to one side and contrary to those of the
other temperate Zone. Heth, h. fear or astonished. Hethen, o. mockery.
Hetheneffe, the Heathen world, opposed to Christendom* Hetruria, Tuscany in
Italy. Hette, o. to vow, promise or command. Hete, hight, o. promised. Hetter,
No. Eager, earnest, keen. Heva, -ah, as Eva, Eve. Heveningham, Henn-, a town
and a family in Suffolk. Heven, hafe, o. to rise up. Hew, o. color, also
welfare, also to hover. Hewmond, o. shining. Hewte, a little Copse or Grove.
Hexaedron, g. a figure consisting of six sides. Hexagonal, belonging to
Hexagon, g. a figure having six corners. Hexam and Hexamshire, are now within
the County of Northumberland. Hexameter, g. consisting of six feet, whereof the
last is a spondee, the last but one a Dactyle, the rest indifferent. Hexap^de,
g. a fathom. Hexaptote, g. having 6 cases. Hexastick, g. a Stanza or Staff of
six verses. Hext, o. perhaps for highest, as Next for nighest. Heydelberg, a
City of Germany. Hezekiah, Ezechiah, Hizkia^, h. the strength or apprehension
of the Lord. Hiation, l. a gaping. Hibernian, Irish. Hibernia. Ireland.
Hibride, mongrel, of a mixed generation. Hichel, Hatchel, an instrument to comb
hemp or fla^. Hickling, a town in Norfolk. Hickway, a Woodpicker or Wryneck.
Hictius doctius (q. Hic (...) doctus) a canting word among Juglers, to amuse
the people. Hidage, Hyd-, an extraordinary tax upon every Hide of Land,
familia, a plough-land, or as much as one plough yearly ploughs* about an
hundred acres. Hidous, o. for hideous. Hide-bound, when the skin cleaves to the
sides of Cattle, or the bark is too straight for the body of the Tree. Hide and
Gain, Arable land, see Gainage. Hidel, o. a Sanctuary* protection, or hiding
place. Hidromel, as Hydro-. Hiera picra, a Confection of Aloes Succatrina.
Hierarchy, g. a holy spiritual or Church Government. Hierarchy of Angels,
their supposed order of nine degrees, viz. 1. Seraphims, Cherubims, Thron^s, 2.
Dominations, Principalities and Powers, 3. Virtues, Archangels, and Angels.
Hierarchical, pertaining to a holy Governor, or Government. Hieratick, -call, g.
sacred, consecrated to a holy use. Hieratick paper, dedicated only to Religious
books. Hierd, Hyerd, Herd, sa. a Shepherd. Hieroglyphics, mystical, Egyptian,
sacred Characters or Images (instead of writing) expressing a thing, word or
sentence, as that of Diospolis, a Child, an old Man, a Hawk, an Hippopotamus
and a Crocodile, for, Oh ye that come into the World* and that go out of it!
God hates impudence. Hierograms, g. sacred writings. Hierography, divine
writing, or a description of divine things. Hi^ronymians, Monks of the order of
St. Hierome, Hieronymus, ^erome, one of the chief Fathers of the Latin Church,
he translated the Bible into Latin. Hiero^olymitan* belonging to Hie^os^lyme,
g. Jerusalem, the chief City of Judaea. Hierothius, g. (holy God) a man's n^me.
His test^bus, added (in ancient deeds) after, In cujus r^i testimon^um.
Higham-ferries, a Town in Northamptonshire. Higham, a Town in Suffolk, and
other Counties. Higra, an encounter of contrary waters. Hight, heete, o. named,
called. Hight, Cu. to promise or vow: Ps. 116, 14. Hilarion, a Syrian hermit
famous for many great miracles. Hill, sc. to cover. Hilarity, l. mirth
cheerfulness. Hilarious, Bishop of Poictou in France, persecuted by the Arrians.
Hilary or Hillary term, begins January the 23d. (except it be Sunday) and ends
February the 12th. Hildeth, o. gives. Hildebert, ge. famous Lord. Hillulim, h.
praises, a Jewish wedding-song. Hilkiah, h. the Lords gentleness. Himple, No.
to halt. Hin, h. twelve sextaries or Logins, which contain aabout 6 egg-shels
each. Hindberries, No. Raspberries. Hinkley, a Town in Leicestershire Hine,
hind, a servant at husbandry, also (Cu.) hence. Hinefare, as heinfare.
Hinnible, l. apt or able to neigh. Hinton, the name of several small Towns.
Hippace, f. I. Cheese made of Mares milk. Hipparchus, g. Governor or master of
the Horse, also an At^enian Tyrant slain upon his deflouri^g a Maid. Hippe,
Daughter of Chiron, a great huntress, got with Child and turned into a Mare.
Hippiades, g. Images of Women on horseback. Hippiatrie, g. horse-physick.
Hippiaticks, g. books treating of horses. Hippicon, -cum, eight miles, or
rather four furlongs. Hippocentaurs, as Centaurs. Hippocras, Hipo^, a
compounded and spiced wine from the supposed inventor Hippocrates, a famous
Physician of Coos, who lived 104 years. Hippocrate's bag, made of white Cotton,
pointed at the bottom like a Sugar Loaf. Hippocrene, a Fountain in Baeotia,
sacred to the* Hippocrenides, the Muses. Hippodame, -mia, Daughter to Oenomaus
King of Elis, whom Pelops won at a race with her Father by corrupting his
Chariot-driver. Hippodrome, g. a tilt-yard, or horse-race. Hippo-gryph, g. a
feigned* beast, half horse, half Griffin. Hippolyta, a Queen of the Amazons,
whom Hercules gave Theseus to wife. Hippolytus, their Son, torn in pieces by
his Chariot-horses as he fled, being accused of adultery by his Wives mother
Phaedra whose solicitations he refused. Hippomachy, g. a justing or fighting
on horseback. Hippomenes, and Atalanta (won by his golden apples thrown in her
way) were turned to a Lion and Lioness for lying together in Cybele's Temple.
H^ppo, -on, an African City whereof St. Austin was Bishop. Hippona, the Goddess
of horses and horse-coursers. Hipponax, an Ephesian Poet, whose sharp writings
made his Enemies hang themselves. Hippopheston, g. an herb on the Fullers
thorn, good for the falling sickness. Hippota^es, Aeolus, King of the Winds.
Hipsicrataea, followed her husband Mithridates in all his wars and dangers.
Hirciscunda, the division of an inheritance among heirs. Hircine, l. belonging
to Hircus, l. a Goat, also the left shoulder of Auriga. Hirculation, l. a
disease in Vines making them barren. Hirsute, l. rough, hairy, bristly.
Hirundinous, belonging to a swallow. Hispalis, Sevil on the River Baetis in
Spain. Hispania, l. Spain. Hispanian, a Spaniard or Spanish. Hispaniola, Hayti,
the fairest of all the American Islands. Hispid, l. as Hirsute. Historian, one
read or skild in History, also as Historiographer, one practicing
Historiography, g. a writing of Histories. Historiologie, g. a discourse of
History. Histrionick, -call, belonging to, or fit for an Histrio, l. a
stage player. Hitch, to catch hold of any thing (with rope or hook.) Hitching,
a Town in Hertfordshire. Hithe, Hythe, (as Queen-hy^he, Lamb-hythe, etc.) a
little Port or Haven to imbark or land wares. H^the, a Town in Kent Hlaford,
Laford, sa. a Lord. Hleafdian, Le-, sa. a Lady. Hlafordsocna, sa. the
protection of a Lord. Hlasocna, sa. the benefit of the Law. Hoan, sa. a fine
whetstone. Hoast-men, an ancient guild or fraternity (trading in Sea-coal) at
New Castle. Hot, as Hot. Hob, o. a clown, also ( No.) the back of the Chimney.
Hobgoblins, (q. R^b.) Robin-good-fellows. Hobbie, a hawk less than a
Sparrow-hawk, also a little Irish nag, for the service of Hobilers, Hoblers, a
kind of Irish Knights, light horsemen, also those (with us) whose tenure was by
maintaining a light nag* to certify an invasion or any peril by the Seaside.
Hock and Hocks, o. Mire and dirt. Hoch-berg, a Town in Brisgow, part of
Schwaben in Germany. Hockettour, Hoqueteur, f. a Knight of the post, decayed
man, basket bearer. Hock-tide, Hocks-tide, (q hogh tijd, D. a high time or day)
blaze tide or St. Blazes day, observed for the sudden death of Hardi^nute the
last King of the Danes and their fall with him. Hoc-munday, the Monday
seven-night after Easter-week Hock tuesday money, paid the Landlord for giving
his Tenants and Servants leave to celebrate. Hock-Tuesday, the second tuesday
after Easter-week, whereon the Danes were mastered. Hocus Pocus, a jugler
showing tricks by sleight of hand. Hodge-podge, Hotch-pot, a Gallimaufry or
mixed dish of flesh cut in pieces and herbs boild together, also a putting
together of Lands of several tenures for the better division of them. Hodgee,
P. a holy man or Priest. Hoddy, so. well, pleasant, in good humor. Hodiurnal,
l. belonging to the present day or time. Hodmandod, Nf. a shel-snail. Hod^y, P.
God, a word much used by the Turks. Hog, a young sheep, also (c.) a shilling.
Hogan, Mogan, (Hoghen Moghen* D.) High and Mighty, the Title of the Estates of
the United Provinces. Hogenhine, Third night-awn hine, a guest that lies in the
house the third night, who was then accounted one of the Family, and the Host
was responsible for his mis-behaviour. H^-goo, as Haut-goust. Hogs-head, 63
gallons or the fourth part of a tun. Hog-steer, a wild Boar of 3 years old.
Hoistings, as Hustings. Hoker, o. peevishness* Hokerly, o. aukwardly, hookedly,
crooked, crossly. Hold, as Covert. Hold off, hale away the Cable (as it is
heaved in from the Capstain) to keep it from slipping back. Holland, the chief
of the seven united Provinces, also a third part of Lin^oln-shire, the other
being K^steven and Lindsey. Hollow-ro^^, an herb somewhat like Fumitory. Holly,
o. for whole. Holm, the holly-tree, also a River Island. Hol^caust, g. a whole
burnt offering. Holographical, g. wholly writ with his hand that sent it.
H^lo^ernes, Holoph-, h. (profane, or mad) Nebuchadnezzars General. Holour, o. a
Whore-monger. Holstaines, o. hailstones. Holsatia, (q. Holt Sassia or Saxony)
Holstein, woody Germany, a Dukedom. Holte, a Town in Norfolk, Holly-ho^ks, a
kind of Mallows with beautiful Flowers. Holy-rose, the leaves are like Sage
(but whiter) and the blossoms presently fall. Holy-thistle, Carduus
Bo^edictus, a very wholesome Root. Holy Thursday, Ascension-day, ten days
before Whitsunday. Homage, the Jury of a Court Baron, of such as owe to that
Lord Homage, (f. Hommage,) service, fidelity, sworn by the Tenant (on his
knees) to the Lord, in these words, I become your man from this time forth, for
life, for member, and for worldly honor, etc. Hommageable, subject or belonging
thereto. Homage Ancestrel, done by his Ancestors time out of mind. Homager,
one that does (o^ is bound to do) homage to another, as the Bishop of Man-Isle
is said to be homager to the Earl of Derby. Homagio respectuando, a writ for
the Escheator to deliver land to the Heir (of full age) notwithstanding his
homage not done. Hombre, sp. a man, also a game at cards. Homberg, a Town in
Westphalia. Homerical, after the manner of Homer, (q. Haomer, h. the Eloquent)
the most famous Greek Poet. Homesoken, Hamsoken, -soca, sa. [an immunity or
liberty of] entering violently into an house. Homicide, l. the Commission or
Committer of Murder, Manslaughter or Chance-medley. Homiletical Virtues, which
concern mutual conversation. Homily, g. a speech or Sermon, common discourse or
Communication. Homine eligendo ad custodiendam peciam sigilli pro Mercatoribus
editi, a writ for a Corporation to choose a new man to keep one part of the
seal appointed for statutes-merchant. Homine replegiando, a writ for the
bailing a man out of Prison. Homine capto in Withern amiam, a writ to take him
that has conveyed a bondsman or woman out of the County, so as they cannot be
replevyed according to Law. Hominatio, may be called Dominatio, as many use
Hominium, for Homagium. Homoeomerie, g. a likeness of parts. Homoeology, o.
likeness of speech Homoeon, g. a similitude taken from the parts of a thing.
Homoeoptoton, g. when diverse clauses end with the like cases. Homoe teleuton,
g. when diverse clauses end alike or with the same cadence. Homodox, g. of the
same opinion. Homogeneal, -cous, g. of the same kind. Homography, g. alike
writing or painting. Homologie, g. a confessing or agreeing. Homologation, an
admission, allowance or approbation Homonymie, g. likeness of name, a being
Homonymous, g. having the same name, though the things be of several kinds,
also doubtful, ambiguous. Hondfangenethef, Hontf^n-, a thief taken with
Hond-berend, -habend, a circumstance of manifest theft, when one is taken with
the thing in his hand. Hond-fish, o. dog-fish. Honey combed, [a piece] ill
cast, over-worn and rugged within. Hony-suckle, Wood-bine. Honi soit, qui mal y
pense, f. (let him be berayed who things any harm of it) the Motto of the
Garter. Honitone, a Town in Devon. Honor Courts, held within Honors, the more
noble sort of seigniories, on which the inferior Lordships or Manors do
depend. Honor point, the upper part of an Escutcheon, between the chief and
the Fesse-point. Honorary, l. belonging to, or done in token of honor.
Honorificabilitudinity, l. honorableness. Honorifical, l. bringing or causing
honor. Honorius, Son to Theodosius the first, he divided the Empire between
his two Sons Arcadius (in the East) and Theodosius (in the West.) Hony-moon,
the sweet-month next after marriage. Hood-wink't, c. benighted, belated. Hooks
of the ship, all the forked timbers placed upright on the keel. Hook-norton. a
Town in Oxfordshire. Hoonkeawr, P. (a man of blood) King, a title of the
Grand-Signiors. Hoop, Y. a-peck. Hope, the side of a hill, also ( No.) a low
ground amidst the tops of hills. Hope-Castle, in Flint-shire. Hope-steres,
Pilots. Hophas, a River in Baeotia. Hoplochrism, g. the anointing a sword (or
other arms) with weapon-Salve. Hoplochristical, belonging to the weapon salve.
Hopple, (q. Couple) the horse, tie his legs together. Hoqueton, f. a short
sleeveless coat. Hoppet, No. a little hand-basket. Horary, l. hourly, belonging
to Horae, l. hours, Goddesses, Daughters of Jupiter and Themis. Horace, -atie,
-tius, a man's name. Hord, l. a Cow great with Calf. Horcentrick, f. out of the
Center, quite without the compass, when the Sun is farthest from the Center of
the Earth. Horismos, g. the definition of a thing (to the best advantage.)
Horizontal, belonging to the Horizon, g. the Circle bounding our fight and
dividing the upper hemisphere from the lower, the line in which the Sun always
rises and sets. Hornbeam, a tr^e of very hard firewood. Hornbeam-pollengers,
Trees that have usually been lopped, are above 20 years growth, and therefore
not tythable. Horn-Castle, in Lincolnshire. Hornet, a large kind of wasp
Hornicle, Ss. the same. Horn-geld, a Forrest-tax for horned beasts. Horodix, g.
a Dial. Horological, belonging to an Horologe, g. an hour-teller, Clock, Dial,
Glass or watch. Horologiography, g. a treatise of Clocks or Dials. Horometry,
g. the measure or measuring of hours. Horoscope, g. a marking of hours, or the
thing whereon they are marked, so much of the firmament as arises every hour,
also the Ascendant of ones Nativity, or the Calculation thereof by observing
that Hour. Horridity, l. a being Horrid, l. frightfull, dreadful.
Horripilation, l. a growing rough with hair, also a sudden quaking or standing
up of the hair for fear. Horrisonant, l. making a terrible and roaring noise.
Horror, l. a quaking for fear or cold, astonishment. Horrow, o. nasty, base.
Horse de son fee* f. (out of his fee) an exception to avoid an Action (brought
by the pretended Lord) for Rent or other service. Horse, a rope fastened to the
foremast shrouds, to keep the Sprit-sail sheats clear of the anchor-flooks.
Horse-ballet, a horse-danse. Horsham, a town in Sussex. Horse-heal, Elicampane.
Horse-tail, an herb good for inward Wounds or Ulcers. Hortative, -tatory,
belonging to. Hortation, l. an exhorting. Hortensius, an Eloquent Roman, Father
of Hortensia, she so pleaded her cause before the Triumviri, that they took off
a great tax from the people. Hortensian, l. belonging to a garden. Hortolages,
f. Garden-stuff, things growing in gardens or Orchards. Hort-yards,
Garden-yards. Horwood, a Town in Glocestershire. Hosanna, Os-, h. Save now, O
Lord! I beseech thee save! a solemn acclamation at the feast of Tabernacles.
Hose, as Hause, also to hug or carry in the arms, No. Hospitalers, an Order of
Knights having the care of Hospitals, 'Spitles, houses erected for the relief
of Pilgrims, poor, sick, and impotent people. Hospitality, l. a being
Hospitable, -tious, l. kind to the poor, strangers etc. Hospiticide, l. he that
kills his guests. Host, an army, also the sacramental sacrifice or body of
Christ, also the Landlord entertaing guests, f. Host, No. Cough: see Haust.
Hostage, f. a pledge in war. Hosters, o. they that take in Lodgers. Hostey, o.
to Besiege. Hostilements, o. Necessaries. Hostle, (f. Hostel) a great house,
Hall, Inn, etc. Host'ler, the Horse-Groom, but properly the keeper of an
Hostery, Hostelry, (f. Hostellerie) an Inn. Hosticide, l. a killer of his
enemy. Hostile, l. belonging to or like an enemy. Hostility, l. enmity. Hotagoe
the tongue, Ss. move it nimbly. Hotch-pot, -potch, as Hodg-podge. Hot, hate,
hat, o. called. Hot the knot, o. made fast. Hoten, o. they promise, or
command, also as Ho^t. Hoti and Dioti, g. That [the thing is] and How or Why
[it is so.] Hounds, holes in the Cheeks of the masts, wherein the Ties run that
hoyse the yards. Hounds-tongue, the leaves are like the tongue, and the smell
like the piss of hounds. Hovingham, a Town in Yorkshire. Hover ground, So.
Light ground. Houp, f. a Lapwing. Housage, paid for setting up any stuff in a
house. House, the twelfth part of the Zodiac, also (No.) the Hall. Housleek,
Sengreen, a cooling herb. House-bote, Estovers, an allowance of Timber from the
Lords wood for the repairing or upholding a tenement. Housse, f. the cloth
which the Kings horse^guards wear behind the saddle. Gilb-Houter, Che. an Owl.
Houton, o. hollow. How, Hoo, an high place. Howden, a town in Yorkshire.
Howgates, o. how or which way. Howld, Hold, the room between the Keilson and
the lower deck. House, o. for hooof. Hownds, as Hounds. Howlsom [ship] that
will hull, try and ride well at anchor, without much rolling. Hown, o. for
Gown. Howsel, to administer the sacrament to one on his deathbed. Howse-in the
ship, bring her in narrow to her upperworks, after she is past the breadth of
her bearing. Hozing of dogs, as Expeditating. HS. (for LLS.) the Roman co^n
Sestertius* or two Asses and a half. Hubba, a Danish Captain who once invaded
this Island. Hudegeld, supposed to be mistaken for Hinegeld. Hue and Cry, the
pursuit of a Felon by the Highway, by describing the party and giving notice
from Constable to Constable. Huers, as Conders. Hugh, D. a Cutter or Slasher,
or else (q. hogh) high. Huguenotism, -terie, f. the doctrine or profession of
the Huguenots, Hugonots, a Nickname of the French Calvinists, from Hugo, a
great leader and writer among them, or from Hugon, a gate in Tours near which
they assembled, or from Huc nos venimus, (Hither we come) the beginning of
their Protestation. Huick, Huke, a Spanish and German mantle covering the whole
body. Huissiers, f. Ushers. Hulk, a kind of great and broad ship. Hulfeere,
Hulver, Holly. Hull, Kingston upon Hull, a river in Yorkshire. Hull, the Body
of a ship without the rigging. The ship Hulls, when she is at sea and (in a
calm or storm) takes in all her sails. Hullock, part of a sail loosed (in a
storm) to keep the ships head to the Sea. Hulm, as Holm, Hulstred, o. hidden.
Humane, belonging to man, Courteous, having Humanity, Manhood, or man's nature,
also kindness or Courtesy. Humane Signs, Gemini, Virgo, Libra and Aquarius.
Humber, a great River (or arm of the Sea) in Yorkshire. Humbles, o. for
humbleness. Hemectation, l. a moistening, a softning hard bodies by sprinkling
moisture on them. Humeral, l. belonging to the shoulder. Humerous, l. having
large shoulders. Humiculation, l. a lying on the ground. Humiliates, a
Religious Order instituted 1166. who did Humiliate, or keep themselves low and
humble. Humidate, l. to make Humid, l. wet, moist or liquid. Humiferous, l.
waterish, wetting. Humourist, fantastic, full of humors, or odd fancies.
Humoursom, the same, also obstinate, that will have his own way or humor.
Humorosity, l. moistness, fullness of Humor, l. moisture, juice or sap; also a
man's disposition or fansy. Humors in the Body, Blood, Choler, Phlegm, and
Melancholy. Humfr^y, -phrey, -fred, Sa. house-peace. Humling, o. sounding like
a humble be. Hundred, ten Tithings. Hundreders, a Jury of men dwelling in the
hundred where the Land in controversy lies. Hundredlagh, sa. the
Hundred-Court. Hundred-penny, raised heretofore by the Sheriffs, out of the
hundreds. Hundred-setena, sa. the Inhabitants or constitution of a hundred.
Hungerford, a town in Barkshire. Hungaria, -ry, Pannonia, divided by the Danaw
into two parts, subject partly to the Emperor and partly to the Turk. Hunnes,
Scythians that overran all Gallia and Italy, but at the entreaty of Pope Leo,
retired themselves into Hungary. Huntersdune, Huntington, the Ch^ef Town in
that shire. Hurcly^, o. sits (as a hare.) Hure, No. hair. Hurlebats, as
Whirl-bats or Whorl-bats. Hurleth, o. makes a noise. Hurlers, Great stones in
Cornwall, so tranformed [as the People think] for profaning the Sabbath by
hurling of the Ball. Hurn, Hyrn, sa. a Corner. Hurricane, as Huracane. Hurts,
Heurts, round blew figures in Heraldry. Hurt^l, o. to skirmish. Hurtleth, o.
carries, throws. Hurst, sa. a little wood or plump of trees. Husearl, sa. a
household servant. Huseans, buskins. Husem, Hussum, a town of South Juitland in
Denmark. Husfastne, he that holds house and land. Husky lour, c. a guinny.
Hussars, Husares, Hungarian Hors-men, from Husa, the cry which they make at
their first charge. Husseling people, Communicants, partakers of the Hussel,
sa. the Holy Eucharist. Hussite, a Bohemian Coin in memory of John Husse, the
first Reformer in Bohemia. Hussites, his followers. Hustings, sa. (house of
causes) the principal and highest Court in London, held before the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen; the same was at Winchester, Lincoln, York, etc. Hutton, about 20
small towns. Huy, a town, in the Bishopric of Liege. Hyacinthine* belonging to
Hyacinth, Jacinth, a precious stone of a waterish color, also the purple
flower Crow-toes, made of Hyacinthus, playing at quaits with Apollo was killed
by his quait blown upon his head by Zephyrus whom he had slighted, Hyades,
Atlantides, Suculae, the seven stars Daughters of Atlas, lamenting of Hyas,
their Brother devoured by a Lion. Hyaline, g. of glass. Hybernial, -nian, l. of
Winter. Hybla a Sicilian Mountain, famous for Thyme and Bees. Hyblaean,
belonging thereto. Hybre^s, Governor of Nylasis (a City of Caria) destroyed by
Labienus* because he called himself Emperor of Caria. Hyde-gyld, as Hidage,
also a price or ransom to save ones skin [from beating.] Hydra, a monstrous
Serpent with a great many heads* whereof when Hercules had cut off one, there
came up two in the room. Hydragogues, g. medicines to draw forth water from
hydropical parts. Hydragogy, g. a conveying of water by furrows and trenches.
Hydrargyrous, g. belonging to quicksilver. Hydraulicks, g. musical waterworks.
Hydrogogon, g. a purge against watery humors. Hydrographer, a describer of
Waters, Sea-Charts, etc. Hydrographical, belonging to Hydrography, g. a
description of water, Seas, Creeks, Promontories, etc. Hydromantick, belonging
to an Hydromancer, one that uses Hydroman^y, -tic, g. divination by water, or
raising Spirits in the Water. Hydromel, g. Metheglin, a drink of water and
honey. Hydrophoby, g. a mel^ncholy dread or fearing of waters, caused
(sometimes) by the biting of a mad dog. Hydrophobical, belonging thereto or
troubled with that fear. Hydropick, -call, g. belonging or subject to the
Hydropsy, g. the 'Dropsy. Hydropotist, g. a continual drinker of water.
Hydroscope, g. a modern instrument to discern the watery volatile streams in the
Air. Hyemal. l. winterly. Hyemation, l. a wintering. Hyena, a beast like a Wolf
(with a mane and long hairs) accounted the subtilest of all Beasts, changing
sex often, and counterfeiting man's voice. Hyerds, o. [hired] guides, leaders.
Hygiastick, g. tending to the preservation of health. Hylas, going to fetch
Hercules some water, fell into the River, or (poetically) was pulled in by the
Nymphs in love with him. Hyleg, that Planet or place in the heavens by whose
digression they judge of the life or state of a person. Hylled, o. hid. Hyllus,
Hercules's Son, who built a Temple (at Athens) to Misericordia, the Goddess of
pity. Hylopathy, g. the power or faculty of a Spirit to fill the whole capacity
of a body; to become so firmly and closely united to it, as both to actuate and
be acted upon, to affect and be affected thereby. Hymene^n, belonging to Hymen,
-naeus, Son of Bacchus and Venus, the God (or first instituter) of Marriage,
also a nuptial or wedding Song. Hymn, g. a Psalm or sacred Song. Hymniferous,
bringing or making hymns. Hymnigrapher, a writer of hymns. Hymnist, a singer of
hymns. Hyngham, a Town in Norfolk. Hyothyroides, one of the two muscles lifting
up the Larynx. Hype at one, No. to pull the mouth awry, to do one a mischief.
Hypallage, g. an order of words contrary to their meaning in construction.
Hypanis, a Scythian River, whence daily arise bubbles with small insects,
quickened at morning, flying at noon, and dead at night. Hyperbaton, g. a
transposing of words from the plain Grammatical order. Hy^erbolical, belonging
to, or spoken by way of an Hyperbole, g. an expression beyond the Truth, either
in excess (called Auxesis) or diminution (called Meiosis.) Hyperboreans, very
Northen people. Hypercathartica, g. purges that work too violently.
Hypercritical, belonging to Hypercriticism, the judgment or censure of an
Hypercritick, g. a Master Critic, or over Critical. Hyperdissyllable, [a word]
of more than two syllables. Hyperion, the [Father of the] Sun, the Son of
Coelus and Brother of Saturn, he first found out the motion of the stars.
Hypermeter, g. [a verse] having a syllable above its ordinary measure.
Hypermnestra, one of Danaus 50 Daughters commanded to kill their husbands (the
50 Sons of Aegyptus) she only saved her husband Lyn^eus, who afterward killed
Danaus. Hyperphysical, g. supernatural. Hyphen, g. a note of union, the stroke
between two words or syllables. Hypocaust, g. a stew, stove or hot-house.
Hypocistis, Erythanon, an excrescence of the Plant Cistus, whose juice stops
fluxes. Hypocondriack, -call, belonging to the Hypocondria, g. the sides of the
upper part of the belly (about the short ribs) under which lie the Liver* and
Spleen the seats of Melancholy. Hypocritical, belonging to Hypocrisy, the
practice of an Hypocrite, g. an Actor in a play, also a dissembler or
Counterfeit. Hypogastrick, belonging to the Hypogastrium* g. the groin or lower
part of the belly. Hypoge, g. a cellar or vault under ground. Hypogion, g. a
great swelling inflammation of the eyes. Hypoglottian [medicines] g. lying
under the tongue and melting. Hypogram, g. a subscription, or any writing
subscribed. Hypomone, as Paradox. Hypophora, a branch of the figure Prolepsis.
Hypospadean, -dian, -diaean whose water comes out of the middle of his yard, an
Hermaphrodite. Hypostatical, belonging to Hypostasis, g a personal subsistence.
Hypostatical union, of Christ's humane nature with his Divine person.
Hypothecary, g. belonging to a pledge or gage Hypothenusal line, that side of a
right-angled triangle, as is subtended or opposite to the right angle.
Hypothetical, conditional, belonging to an Hypothesis, g. a supposition upon
which an argument or dispute is grounded. Hypothetical Syllogism, beginning
with the Condition If. Hypot^posis, g. a rhetorical and most lively description
of a person or thing. Hypsicratea, as Hipsi-. Hypsip^ile, Queen of Lemnos
banished thence for saving her Father Thous, when all the men of the Island
were killed by women. Hyrcania, part of Asia, bordering South on Armenia.
Hyrcus, a Countryman of Baeotia, to whom was born Orion of an Oxes dung watered
by Jupiter, Mercury, and Neptune whom he had entertained. Hyrn, as Hurn. Hyrse,
the plant^Millet. Hyspaan, a City of Persia. Hysterical, belonging to the
Hystera, g. the womb, also the afterbirth. Hysterical passions, fits of the
Mothe^. Hysterology, g. a placing that last (in Discourse) which should be
first, and ^ contra. Hysteron-proteron, g. (last-first) a speaking or doing
praeposterously, putting the Cart before the horse. Hyth, as Hit^e. Hyttenia,
Terrapolis, part of Attica, having 4 chief Cities.
I.
JAacob, as Jacob. Jabber, to pratle or chat. Jabesh, h. Confusion. Jabin, h,
Understanding. Jack, Wambasium, a horsemans defensive coat in war. Jack by the
hedge, Alliaria, an Herb with broad leaves, smelling like garlic. Jack with a
Lanthorn, Ignis fatuus. Jackall, the lions provider, following his prey with
open cry gives notice thereby to the Lion who follows him* the beast that is
shown in England under that name resembles a fox in all things save the smell.
Jacca, a City of Arragon in Spain. Jacchus, one of the names of Ba^chus.
Jacent, ly^ng along, sluggish. Jac^nth, as Hya^inth. Jacob, h. (a tripper,
supplanter or beguiler) Israel, James. Jacobins, Dominicans. Jacobites,
Heretics (An. 530.) following one Jacobus Syrus, he held but one will, nature
and operation in Christ, Circumcised both sexes etc. Jacobus, a broad piece of
gold coined by Jacobus, l. James, the first King of Great Britain.
Jacobs-ladder, reaching from earth to heaven, Genesis 28. Jacobs-staff, a certain
Geometrical instrument, a staff with a sword in it, also a pilgrims staff
wherewith they walk to* St. Jago, Sp. Jaques, f. James of Compostella in Spain.
Jactancy, -titation, l. a vain boasting. Jactator, l. a boaster. Jaculab^e,
capable of Jaculation, l. a shooting or darting* Jaculato^y, suddenly cast
forth (like a dart.) Jactivus, Jec-, he that loses by default. Jael, h. a Do.
Jaen, a town in Spain. Jalop, a black West India root purging waterish humors.
Jallamaka, a place (in the Moguls Country) to which they go in pilgrimage.
Jamaica-wood, Granadillo, a fine-grain'd speckled wood, from Jamaica, an
American I^sland taken from the Spaniard* 1655. Jambes, f. (legs) the
side-posts of a door. Jague, c. a ditch. Jam^eaux, -eux, f. armor for the
legs. Jambick verse, whose feet are Jam^ick, the first syllable short and the
other long. Jamblichus, a Syrian Pythagorean Philosopher, the Discipl^ of
Porphyrius. Jamb-stone, the Mantle-tree-stone. James, as Jacob. Jamoglaw, a
Turkish Officer. Jampnum, Furze, Gorse. Jane, o. halfpence of Genoua.
Jangerlesses, o. brablers. Janissaries, Tu. (the new Militia) the principal
foot-soldiers of the Turks Guard. Janewits, a Town in Bohemia. Jannes and
Jambres, the Egyptian Sorcerers withstanding Moses. Jannocks, No. oaten bread.
Jansenism, -ianism, the Doctrine of Corn. Jansenius, Bishop of Ypres, an
opposer of Universal redempion, and an enemy to the Jesuits. Janthe, the
Daughter of Telessa, who (on her wedding day) was transformed to a man.
Janicula, Italy, from Janiculum, a town built by Janus, an ancient King of
Italy, painted with two (and sometimes four) faces. Janus's Temple, built by
Numa, in peace shut, and in war open. Jape, o. jest, play. Japed, o. cheated.
Japan, an Island in Asia. Japetus, Son of Titan and Terra, Father of Prometheus
and Epimetheus. Japygia, Calabria, Magna Grecia, on the borders of Italy.
Jarbas, King of Getulia. Jargon, f. gibrish, pedlers French. Jark, c. a Seal.
Jarnac, a Town in France. Jaroslaw, a Town and Duchy belonging to the eldest
Son of Muscovy. Jarro, sp. an earthen pot or pitcher. Jarre of Oil, twenty
gallons. ^ Jarre, Nf. [the door stands] half open. Jarrock, a kind of Cork.
Ja^sey, a French Island subject to England. Jasion, -ius, Son of Jupiter and
Electra, to him Ceres brought forth Pluto. Jasmin, Jesemin, a tree whose
flowers (with other mixture) make Jesemin-butter. Jason, Son of Eson King of
Thessaly, he fetched the golden fleece from Colchos. Jasper, a green
precious-stone with red veins, also Gasparus, a man's name. Jasponyx, g. a white
Jasper with red strakes. Jatraliptick, g. one that cures by outward application
of ointments, frications, etc. Jathromathematique, a Physician and
Mathematician, or that cures in a Mathematical way* Java, an Island of Asia.
Javan, Jon, founder of the Jonian or Greek Nation. Javarine* f. the Fort Raab
in Hungary. Javelin, f. a dart or lance, between a Pike and Partisan.
Jaundice, a disease properly yellow, yet the worst kind is also black. Jay rout
perdu mon temps and labeur, f. I have quite lost my time and pains. Jay en vous
toute ma fiance, f. I have all my confidence in you. Jazul, a blew precious
stone. Jaycza, the chief Town of Bosnia in Turkey. Iberia, Spain. Ibete, o. set
forth, went. Ibex, Evick, a kind of mountainous Goat. Ibis, a Lybian bird
feeding on Serpents, which (they say) taught Hippocrates the use of glisters.
J. C. Juris-Consultus, a Lawyer. Icarus, Son of O^belus, he was slain by a
Shepherd of Athens whom he had made drunk. Icarian, belonging to Icarus, the
Son of Daedalus, who (flying too high) melted the wings his Father made him,
and fell into the Sea. Ice-bone, Nf. a rump of Beef. Iceni, the ancient
inhabitants of Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge, and Huntingtonshire. Iche, o. I.
Ich Dien, Ge. (I serve) the motto of the Princes-arms (^hree Ostrich feathers)
won by Edward the black Prince from John King of Bohemia. Ichabod, h. where is
glory? Ichneumon, g. an Indian Rat. Ichnography, g. a platform or groundwork
of any building. Ichthyocolla, Isinglass, glue made of the skin of Fishes.
Ichthyologic, g, a discourse or description of Fishes. Ichthyonomancy, g. a
divination by F^shes. Ichthyop^agi, g. Fish-eaters. Icht^yophagy, g.
Fish-eating. I^leped o. called, named. Icond, o. learned. Iconical, -nomical,
belonging to an Icon, g. an Image or picture. Ic^n* Basilike, g. the picture of
the King. Iconism, a true and lively description. Iconoclast, -tes g. a
demolisher or breaker of Images. Iconography, g, the platform or model of a
house, a description by cuts, etc. Icorven, o. cut or carved. Ict^rical,
belonging to or troubled with Icterus, l. the Jaunders, Jaundise, or
overflowing of the gall. Ida, a Trojan Mountain, where Paris, gave judgment
against Juno and Pallas for the Idalian Queen, Venus. Idas, the Son of Neptune,
who (by force) carried away Marpesia the Daughter of Mars, as she was dancing
in a wood. Ideal, belonging to an Idea, g. the form or representation of any
thing in the mind. Ideated, made by or for a pattern in the imagination.
Identification, a causing of Identity, sameness, or being the very same.
Identitate nominis, a writ for him that is imprisoned for another of the same
name. Ides, the eight days next to the nones in every month. Idiograph, g. a
private writing, or of ones own handwriting. Idiom* g. the peculiar phrase of
any language. Idiopathy, g. a peculiar passion, or affection. Idiosyncrasy* g.
the natural property, or peculiar temper of a thing. Idiotism, as Idiom, also
as Idiocie, simplicity, the being an* Idiot, g. a natural fool, of whose estate
the King (by his prerogative) has the disposal. Idiotical, belonging to fools
or private men. De Idiota inqui^endo vel examinando, a writ to examine (by
Jury, etc.) the party suspected of Idiocy. Ido, o. undone. Idolatrous, given to
Idolatry, g. a worshipping of Id^ls, images, false Gods, or the true God by
images. Idolast^r, o. Idolater. Idol^t, a little Idol. Idomeneus, Deucalions
Son, and Minos's Grandchild, driven from his Kingdom for offering to sacrifice
his Son (according to his vow) being the first that met him at his return from
Troy. Idoneity, fitness, a being Idoneous, l. fit, convenient. Idyl, g. a kind
of Eclogue or short Poem. Jear-capstain, holds off the cable from the main
Capitain and serves to heave the Jear [rope], a piece of a hauset (in great
ships) fastend to the main yard and foreyards, to help to hoyse up the yard and
succor the ties. Jeat, as Geat. Jebbe-aekch^see, the Grand Signiors
pocket-mony which he throws to his Buffoons, etc. Jebusites, inhabitants of
Jebus, h. (the fire of the Lord) the old name of Jerusalem. Jeconiah, h.
stability of the Lord. Jeer, as Jear. Je^ret, a Turkish exercise of darting
lances on horseback. Jegen, an Isle in North ^uitland. Jegerndorf, a Town in
Silesia. Jehoahas, h. the Lord seeing. Jehoash, as Joash. Jehojakim, as Joakim.
Jeho^am, as Joram. Jehosap^a^, h. the Judgment of the Lord. Jehovah* h. (which
was, and is, and is to come) Gods proper name of his own imposing, never
pronounced by the Jews on pain of death, only by the High Priest in the holy of
Holies on the day of expiation. Jehu-march, furious, like that of the Captain
Jehu, h. being: Jejunation, l. a fasting. Jejunity, a being Jejun^, l. hungry,
empty, barren. Jemmingen, a Town in Westphalia. Jeman, for Yeoman. Je ne scay
quoy, f. [sick of] I know not what. Jennet^, Barbary-horses. Jenticulation, l.
a breaking ones fast. Jeofaile, (f. Jayfaille, I have failed) an oversight in
pleading or other law proceedings. Jeopard, f. to endanger or run the Jeopardy,
danger or hazard. Jeremiah, h. high of the Lord. Jeroboam, h. fighting against.
Jerusalem-Artichoaks, Batatas, (Potatoes,) of Canada. Jerby, a Town in
Cumberland. Jesses, short straps fastened to the hawks legs and varvels. Jesu,
the Genitive, Dative, Vocative and Ablative case of* Jesus, the same as Jesuah.
Josuah, Jehosuah, a Savior. Jesuati, Apostolici, Monks begun (by John
Columbanus and Francis Vincent) at Siena in Italy An. 1365. Jesuits, (of the
society of Jesus) instituted by St. Ignatius Loyola a Spaniard, and confirmed
by Pope Paul III. An. 1540. Sep. 15. To the common Vows of Poverty, Obedience
and Chastity, he added Mission, to go whithersoever the Pope should send them.
Jesus College, in Oxford, built (for Welshmen) by Hugh Price (...) of the
Laws. Jet, o. a device. Jethro, h. excelling. Jetzeba, Itz-, a Town in
Holstein. Jevouldray, f. I would. Je vous die sans doubt, f. I tell you without
doubt, for certain. Je^son, Jetzon, Jotson, see Flotson. Jews-cars, (q. Judas's
Ears)* an excresence about the root of Elder, on which Judas is supposed to
hang himself. Jewise, o. reward by revenge, also a gibbet, or (as Juise)
Judgment. Jews-stone, a Marchesite. Ifare, o. gone. If^re, o. together. Ifete,
o. an effect. If^tte, o. fetched. Ifretten, o. devoured. Ificched, o. fixed.
Ifounded, o. sunk. Ignaro, I. a foolish ignorant fellow. Ignifluous, l. running
or flowing with fire. Ignifie, l. to set on fire. Ignipotent, l. powerful in
fire. Ignis fatuus, l. (a foolish fire,) Will with a wisp, a flight exhalation
set on fire; it follows one that follows it, because the air does so, also a
foolish fancy. Ignivomous, l. spitting or vomiting fire, as Etna, etc.
Ignitegium, as Curfeu. Ignitible, l. capable of Ignition, a being or making
Ignited, set on fire, made hot or fiery. Ignoble, l. base (in birth, spirit,
etc.) Ignominious, l. full of Ignominy, l. disgrace, reproach, flander, etc.
Ignoramus, l. (we are ignorant) written (by the Grand Inquest) upon bills whose
evidence is weak, and the party (thereupon) delivered, also as Ignaro. Igraven,
o. buried. Igurde, Igourd, o. in a round, or to fly [round.] Ignoscible, l.
pardonable. J. H. S. taken and used (by ignorant Papists, etc.) for Jesus
Hominum Servator, but proved by Antiquaries to be only a contraction of the
greek, (...) Jesus. Ihir^d, Ihiried, o. praised. Iholpe, o. helped. Ihight, as
hight. Jilt, o. to deceive or defeat ones expectation especially in the point
of Amors. Ikend, o. known. Ik, D I^^, ge. I. Ikenild-street, (from Iceni) one
of our four famous Roman Highways from Southampton to Ti^^outh. Ilc^ester,
Ivelcester, a Town in Somersetshire. Ilfarcombe, a Town in Devonshire. Ilia,
Daughter of Numi^or King of the Albanes, a Vestal Nun, but Mother of Romulus
and Remus by Mars. Iliades, Homer's books of the destruction of Ilium, Troy,
from Ilus, a King thereof, the Son of Dardanus. Iliaque, -acal, belonging to
the Isles, Ilia, g. the flanks or three small guts. Iliac passion, wind in the
small guts. Ilike. o. like. Ilimed, o. taken. Ilk, o. each, the same. Ilion^us,
a Companion of Aenaeas into Italy. Illaborate, l* without labor or pains,
plain. Illacerable, l. that cannot be torn in pieces. Illachrymable, without
pity, incapable of Illachrymation, l. weeping. Illaqueate, l. to entangle.
Illatebration, l. a hiding or seeking of corners. Illative, belonging to
Illation, l. an inference or conclusion. Illatration, a barking at.
Illecebrous, l. enticing. Illegitimate, l. unlawful, base-born. Illepid, l.
dull, unpleasant. Illeviable, which may not be levied. Illiberal, l. niggardly.
Illicit, -tous, l. unwarrantable. Illigation, l. an enwrapping or entangling.
Illimitable, that cannot be limited. Illimitate, l. unbounded. Illiquation, l.
a mingling earthly bodies with mettalline. Illiterate, l. unlearned. Ill^gical,
not according to the rules of Logic. Illoqu^s, o. (q. illu^) the place whi^her
the dogs are to run. Illucidate, l. the same as Illuminate, l. to enlighten,
explain. Illuminous, l. without light. Illusion, l. deceit. Illustrate, l. to
make clear, or set forth. Illustrious, l. famous, renowned. Illude, to mock or
deceive. Illusory, l. mocking. Illuti^le, that cannot be purged from filth.
Illyricum, Sclavonia, or We^denland. Ilmister, a Town in Somersetshire. I m^te,
o. I might. Imagery, f. painted or carved work of Images. Imagination, l.
feigning, also the fancy. Imasked, (for masked) ^. wrapped. Imaus, a Mountain
dividing Scythia into two parts. Im^argo, Emb-, Sp. an arrest or stop of Ships
or Merchandise. Imbark, l. to go aboard. Imbecility, l. weakness. Imb^llick,
l. unwarlike, cowardly. Imbellish, s. adorn, beautify. Imberweek, as Ember-,
Imbering-daies, the Wednesday, Friday and Saturday in Ember-week. Imbezle,
-esil, to steal, pil^er or purloyn. Imbi^e, l. to drink-in, receive greedily.
Imbibition, a drinking-in* etc. Imborduring, making the Field and circumference
(in Heraldry) both of one metal, color or fur. Imbes^, f. to hide or shroud
ones self in a wood. Imboss^ment* the manner of Imbossed work, with bosses or
bunches in metal or stone. Imbracery, as Embra-, Imbricate, squared and bent
like unto, also carved with an* Imbrex, l. a gutter-tile. Imbrication, l. a
covering with tile. Imbrocado, Sp. Cloth of Gold or Silver. Imbroyl, f. to put
into a combustion, or set together by the ears. Imbuition, l. a through
moistening, seasoning or staining. Imeint, Imenit, Immenged, o. mingled.
Imitatives, verbs expressing Imitation, l. following or doing like another.
Imitatrix, she that imitateth. Immaculate, l. spotless. Immanity, l. outrageous
cruelty, excess, hugeness. Immansuete, l. untractable, wild. Immanuel, h. God
with us. Immarcesc^nce, l. a not fading or withering, incorruptibleness.
Immarcessible, incorruptible, immortal. Immaturity, untimeliness, unripeness, a
being Immature, l. unripe, unseasonable. Immediate, l. next and presently
following, with nothing between. Immedicable, l. incureable. Immemorable, l.
not worth the remembering, unremarkable. Immensity, l. hugeness, vastness, a
being* Immense, l. exceeding large, unmeasurable. Immersible, which cannot be
drowned, incapable of Immersion, l. a dipping, ducking or plunging-in.
Imminency, a being Imminent, l. hanging over, ready to fall. Imm^^ution, l. a
making less. Immission, l. a sending, putting, graffing or planting*into.
Immobility, l. unmoveableness. Immoderate, l. without measure. Immolate, l. to
offer in sacrifice. Immolation, l. a sacrificing. Immorality, profaneness,
want of morality or common honesty. Immorigerous, l. disobedient. Immortalize,
to give or cause Immortality, l. a being Immortal, which cannot dye. Immunity,
l. freedom, privilege. Immure, l. to enclose with, or between walls.
Immusical, having no music or harmony. Immutability, l. Constancy, a being
Immutable, l. unchangeable. Impacable, Impla-, which cannot be appeased.
Impacted, l. driven in. Impair, as Empair. Impale, I. to spit on a stake, to
crown or adorn, also to fence about with pales, and (in Heraldry) the halfing a
Coat of Arms. Impanation, the turning of another substance into bread.
Imparisyllabical, not having a like number of syllables in every case.
Imparity, -ility, l. unevenness, inequality. Imparlance, as Emparlance.
Imparsonee, in actual possession of a parsonage. Impassibility, a being
Impassible, not moved with passion or affection* Impe, Ympe, Da. a shrub. Imp,
Br. a young shoot or twig. Imp, (f. ente,) a graff, Imps, witches little
familiars. Imp a [hawks feather,] graff a new piece on an old broken stump.
Impeach, f. to hinder, also to accuse one as guilty of the same crime with
himself. Impeachment of waste, a restraint from committing waste upon lands or
Tenements. Impeccability, a being Impeccable, incapable of sinning or
offending. Impedition, l. a hindering. Impediment, l. a hindrance. Impediment,
-ilive, l. hindering. Impel, l. to drive or thrust on. Impend, l. to bestow or
spend. Impendency, a being Impendent, -ding, l. hanging over ones head.
Impendious, over-liberal. Impenetrable, which cannot be pierced* Impenitent,
hard-hearted, not repenting. Impennous, l. without feathers. Imperative, l.
commanding. Imperceptible, which cannot be perceived. Imperfect, [or
Praeterimperfect] tense, has (in English) the sign did before it. Imperial,
belonging to an Imperator, l. a Commander, General or Emperor. Imperil, to
hazard or endanger. Imperious, Domineering, insulting. Imperforable, l. not to
be bored through. Imperforation, a closing up for want of boring or pierceing.
Impersonal [verbs] without the distinction of persons. Impertimence, a thing
not belonging to the matter in hand, a being Impertinent, nothing to the
purpose. Impervestigable, l. impossible to be found or searched out.
Impervious, l. which cannot be gone or passed through. Impetiginosity, a being
Impetiginous, full of, or troubled with an Impetigo, l. an Itching scab.
Impetrable, which one may Impetrate, l. obtain by request. Impe^ren, o. to
entreat. Impetuosity, a being Impetuous, (...), furious, violent. Impiated,
defiled, not purged from sin. Impierment, impairing or prejudicing. Impicate,
l. to cover with pitch. Impiety, wickedness, a being Impious, l. ungodly.
Impignorate, l. to pawn. Impigrity, quickness, a being Impigrous, l. diligent,
ready. Impinge, to throw, dash, or run against a thing, also to drive or fasten
a nail, etc. Impinguate, l. to make fat. Impinguation, a fatning.
Implacability, obstinacy, a being. Implacable, l. not to be appeased or
reconciled. Implantation, l. a planting or fastening into. Implead, to sue one
at law. Implement, l. a filling up. Implements, tools, and other necessaries
belonging to a house or trade. Implication, l. a folding or wrapping within, an
entangling, also a necessary consequence, and as Ploce. Implicitly,
intricately, not in express terms but as included and mixed with another.
Implicit faith, upheld by the judgment and authority of many agreeing
together. Implore, l. to beseech humbly and (as it were) with tears. Implume,
l. bald, without feathers. Impluvious, l. wet with rain. Impolite, l. rough,
unpolished. Imporcation, the making of a balk in ploughing. Imporous, l.
without pores or holes. Importance, [a carrying in it] great weight or
consequence. Importunity, a being Importunate, troublesome [with two often and
unseasonable requests.] Importune, l. to request earnestly and often.
Importuous, without port or haven. Impositive, unnatural, imposed or given to.
Impositour, he that imposes the pages into a Form for the press; also a
School-Monitor. Imposititio^s [names] primitive or radical. Impossibility, a
being Impossible, which cannot be done. Imposition, l. an imposing or laying
on, a strict injunction, also as Impost, f. tribute or tax, properly for
Merchandise imported, as Custom is for wares shipped out of the Land, but they
are confounded. Imposture, the Practice of an Impostour, l. a Cheat.
Imposthume, -tume (for Aposteme, g.) a gathering together of bad humors in any
part of the body. Impotence, -cy, a being Impotent, l. unable, weak, lame.
Impoundage, a putting into a pound. Imprecate, l. to curse, or call down
mischief. Imprecation, a Curse or Cursing. Impreci^ble, unvaluable,
Impregnable, l. not to be won or taken by force. Impregnate, to make fruitful
or cause to swell. Impregnation (in Chemistry) when a dry body has drunk in as
much moisture as it will admit. Imprescriptible, without the compass of
prescription, which by no length of time can be aliened or lost. Imprese, I. a
Devise with a Motto, signifying some particular design or undertaking.
Impress-money, Impressed, or Prest-money, ready money given (as earnest) to
Soldiers obliging them to be ready upon all occasions. Impression, l. a
printing stamp or mark. Impression of Books, usually 1500, but in France 1250
(...) the usual journ^e (or days work.) Imprimery, f. a print or impression,
also a printing house or the art of printing. Imprimings, beginnings, first
essaies. Imprimis, l. first of all. Improbation, l. a disallowing, contrary to
Approbation. Improbability, a being Improbable, l. unlikely, which cannot be
proved. Improbity, l. Dishonesty. Improcerous, low, not tall. Improcreability,
barrenness, an unaptness to procreate. Improlifical, not begetting nor apt to
have issue. Impromiscuous, unmingled, not confused. Improperate, l. to upbraid
one with a fault, to Nickname, also to make haste to go in. Impropriation, as
Appropriations about 3845 Parsonages passing by inheritance. Improvidence, want
of foresight, a being Improvident, careless or forgetful to provide.
Improvement, a making better and more profitable, a thriving or benefitting.
Imprudence, want of discretion, a being Imprudent, l. unwise, indiscreet.
Impudence, a being Impudent, l. shameless. Impugn, l. to fight against,
contradict or resist. Impuissance, f. weakness. Impulse, -sion, l. a motion,
driving or thrusting forward. Impunitively, without punishment, unpunishably.
Impunity, l. freedom from punishment. Impurity, l. uncleanness. Imputation, l.
a laying to ones charge. Imputative, l. reckoned as done by or belonging to
another. Imputrescence, l. a keeping itself from putrefying or rotting.
Imputrescible, l incorruptible. Imrohor (Emeer-Ahor) Bashaw, Tu. Lord of the
stable, chief Master of the Grand Signiors horse, Mules, Camels, and all his
Cattle. In alto and imo, as Alto and ^^sso. Inaccessible, l. not to be com'n
at. Inadvertence, -cy, carelessness, inconsiderateness. Inadulable, that will
not or cannot be flattered. Inachus, the most ancient King of the Argives.
Inaffability, a being Inaffable, discourteous, unpleasant in conversation.
Inaffectation, a carelessness, or freeness from vainglory. Inalimental, without
nourishing. Inambulate, l. to walk, up and down. Inamiable, l. unlovely.
Inamissible, which cannot be lost. Inamorato, I. a lover. Inaniloquent, l.
speaking vainly, or emptily. Inaniloquution, a vain or idle speaking.
Inanimate, l. without life or Soul. Inanity, l. emptiness, vanity. Inappetency,
want of appetite. Inarable, l. not to be ploughed. Inarticulate, confused, not
articulate or distinct. Ina^gentation, l. a covering with silver. Inaspicuous,
invisible, or hard to be seen. Inaudible, not to be heard. Inaugurate, l. to
ask counsel of the Augurs or Soothsayers, also to confer honor, to invest with
an office or place of dignity, also to consecrate. Inaurated, l. gilded over.
Inauspicious, l. unlucky, boding mischief. Inborh and Outborh, Inborow and
Outborow. he that gave passage to (or was surety for) those that traveled
between the two Realms of England and Scotland. Incandescence, l. a growing hot
or angry. Incalescence, l. a growing warm or lusty. Incanescence, l. a growing
gray or hoary-headed. Incantator, l. he that uses Incantation, l. enchanting
or charming. Incapacity, unableness, uncableness, unfitness. Incarcerate, l. to
imprison. Incarnadin, f. a deep rich or bright carnation color.
Incarnate-colour, a flesh-colors, or color of a damask Rose. Incarnation, l. a
making flesh to grow, also an assuming or being made flesh. Incarnative, a
salve or medicine to cause flesh to grow. Incastellated, f. narrow-heeled as a
horse. Incendiary, l. Boute-feu, f. one that sets houses on fire, or sows
dissension among men, Incense, l. to inflame or provoke. Incense, a persume of
the best frankincense. Incension, l. a setting on fire, also Music in Consort.
Incensory, l. a Censor, Censing or perfuming pan. Incentive, l. stirring,
provoking, inflaming; also a provocation, motive, or thing that will quickly
take fire. Incentor, as Incendiary, also a singer of descant, between Succentor
and Accentor. Inception, l. a beginning or undertaking. Inceptour, l. a
beginner, he that is taking or has newly taken his degree. Incessantly,
Continually, without intermission or ceasing. Incer^^ng, l. sifting, examining.
Incession, l. a going or walking. Incestuous, he that commits Incest, l.
(untying the Cestus or virgin-girdle) defiling one that is near of blood or
kindred. Enchantment, a Charm or Conjuration. Inchipin, the lower gut of a Deer.
Inchoative, beginning, apt to Inchoate, l. begin, or take a beginning.
Inchoative verbs, signify to begin to do that which the primitives signify.
Incident, l. cutting off o^ hindering. Incident, l. happening, also an accident
or circumstance, and (in law) a thing necessarily depending on another, as a
Court Baron is so incident to a Manor, that it cannot be separated from it*
Incidentally, indirectly, collaterally or by chance. Incineration, a reducing
to ashes. Incipation, a beginning. Incision, l. a cutting or lancing, also a
short pointing of a sentence. Incisure, l. a cut or gash. Incite, l. to stir up
or provoke. Inclamitation, l. a frequent calling upon. Inclemency, l. rigor,
unkindness. Inclination, l. a bending or leaning toward, a disposition.
Include, to shut or take in. Inclusion, an enclosing or shuting in, also as
Epanadiplesis. Inclusive [of,] containing, comprehending. Inclusively, by
taking in the extremes. Incoact, -ted, l. uncompelled. Incogirable, l. not
thought of, or which cannot be comprehended by thought, also rash. Incogitancy,
l. rashness, unadvisedness, inconsiderateness. Incognito, l. unknown, in
private. Incobible, l. which cannot be restrained. Incolumity, l.
healthfulness, safety. Incomity, l. unsociableness, want of civility in
Conversation. Incommeable, l. unpassable. Incommensurable, l. holding not the
same proportion, or not to be measured with another thing. Incommiscibility, a
being Incommiscible, incapable of being mixed or mingled together. Incommodate,
to hurt or endammage. Incommodious, l. inconvenient, unfit or unprofitable.
Incommunicable, which cannot be made common or imparted to another.
Incommutative, not to be changed or altered. Incompact, l. not well jointed or
joined. Incomparable, l. without compare, not having the like. Incompatibility,
a being Incompatible, l. not agreeing together or enduring one another.
Incompensable, incapable of being recompensed. Incompetency, a being
Incompetent, unfit, unsufficient. Incompossible [proposition] affirming what
another denies. Incomprehensible, l. which cannot be comprehended or conceived.
Incomputrible, which will not rot or decay. Inconcinnity, l. unfitness,
unhandsomness, a being out of order. Incongelable, not to be congeled or
frozen. Incongruity, a being Incongruous, l. disagreeable, unmeet. Inconnexion,
l. a not holding together. Inconsiderable, not worth considering or taking
notice of. Inconsiderate, rash, giddy. Inconsideration, rashness,
unadvisedness. Inconsistency, a being Inconsistent, which cannot consist or
stand together. Inconsolable, l. not to be comforted or appeased. Inconstancy,
unstableness, fickleness. Incontinency, want of moderation in affections and
desires. Incontinent, unchaste, also by and by* Incording, Bursting, the faling
down of the guts into the horses Cod. Incordiate, to persuade or put into ones
heart. Incorporate, l. to mix bodies or substances together. Incorporeal,
Spiritual, without a body. In^orrigibility, a being Incorrigible, headstrong,
past correction. Incorruptible, l. never decaying, free from corruption.
Incrassate, l. to make thick, or gross. Increate, Uncreate, not made.
Incredibility, a being Incredible, l. not to be believed. Incredulity, l. a
want of believing, a being Incredulous, hard or slow of believing. Increment,
l. an increase or waxing bigger, also as Climax. Increpation, l. a chiding.
Incressant [Moon] between the prime and full. Incroche, as Encroach.
Incrustation, l. a rough-casting or pargetting, a making or becoming Cr^sty on
the outside. Incubation, l. a lying down, sitting, brooding, or hatching.
Incubus, l. the Devil (in man's shape) lying with women, as Succubus with men,
also the Nightmare, or raw humors from the stomach troubling the brain and
animal spirits, that the body cannot move. Inculcate, l. to tread or thrust in,
to beat into the memory by frequent repetition. Inculpable, l. unreprovable,
blameless. Incumbent, l. lying or leaning upon, also he that is in present
possession of a benefice. Encumbrance, as Encumbr-. Incurable, l. not to be
cured. Incurr, l. to run upon. Incursion, l. a running upon, a meeting or
hit^ing against one another, also an inroad. Incur^ation, l. a bending or
Crooking. Incussion, l. a violent shaking or dashing against. Indacus, a
servant of the Emperor Leo, who could outrun any horse. Indagable, which may
be searched after. Indagation, l. a diligent searching or hunting out. Inde, f.
Indico, a mineral used in dying blew. Indecent, l. unbecoming, unfitting.
Indecimable, not to be tythed. Indeclinable, l. which cannot be declined or
shunned, also (in Gram.) not varying the termination. Indecorum, l.
unseemliness, unhansom carriage. Ind^fatigable, l. which cannot be wearied or
tired. Indefeisible, which cannot be defeated or made void. Indefensus, one
that is impleaded and refuses to answer. Indefinite, l. not defined,
determined, limited or bounded. Indelible, l. which cannot be razed or blotted
out. Indemnify, to save harmless Indemnity, l. freedom from damage or danger,
pardon. Indenization, the Act or Patent which does Indenize, make a stranger a
free Denizen. Indented, f. resembling the teeth of a ^aw. Indenture, a writing
(indented at the top) containing some mutual Contract, Conveyance or Covenant.
Independency, a being Independent, absolute, not depending on another.
Independents, Congregationalists, appearing in England about the year 1643,
their Churches are not subordinate (as Par^chial to Provincial and they to
National) but Coordinate without superiority. Indeprecable, l. that will not be
persuaded or entreated. Indepr^hensible, l. which cannot be taken. Indesinent,
l. continual, without ceasing. Indeterminate, not precisely determined, but
left indifferent. Index, l. whatsoever shows or directs, the forefinger, hand
of a Clock, table of a book, etc. India, the Indies, a famous, vast and rich
Eastern Country. West Indies, America or The new World. Indian-mouse,
Ichneumon, which creeping into Crocodiles mouths, eats up their Entrails and
kills them. Indicative, showing, declaring, which does Indicate, l. direct,
make manifest. Indicative-mood, wherein the verb plainly affirms, denies or
asks a question. Indication, a showing, also a mark directing to the right
way of prescribing medicines. Indicavit, a writ whereby the Patron may remove
an action of tithes (against his Clerk by another and extending to the 4th.
part of the tithes) from the Court Christian to the Kings Court, whereto it
belongs. Indiciduous, showing, detecting, discovering, also not apt to fall.
Indico. as Inde. Indiction, a tribute or tax, also the space of fifteen years,
which computation began at Rome (instead of the Heathenish Olympiades) at the
dismission of the Nicene Council. Indictive, solemnly declared or uttered,
whereto the people were called by Proclamation. Indictor, he that indicteth
another. Indictee, he that is indicted. Indifference, l. a careless and
unconcerned affection. Indigence, l. penury, want, a being Indigent, poor, or
needy. Indigenous, -nital, natural, born in the same Town or Country.
Indigestible, l. which cannot be digested, or concocted. Indigestion, a crudity
or want of digestion in the Stomach. Indigitate, l. to signify or show by
pointing. Indignation, disdain, wrath. Indignity, l. unworthiness, also an
affront or unworthy dealing. Indiscernable, not to be perceived. Indiscer^ible,
not to be rent or divided. Indiscretion, want of discretion or prudence.
Indiscriminately, without making any separation or difference. Indissolvable,
not to be dissolved. Indissoluble, l. which cannot be untied, loosed or undone.
Indistinct, not distinguished or known a sunder. Indistinctly, without
distinguishing one from another, promiscuously, confusedly. Indictment, as
Enditement. Inditiate, to give a mark or sign. Individuity, -uality, a being
Individual, l. inseparable not to be divided. Individuum, l. an individual,
singular or particular body or thing, as Peter. Individuum vagum, an individual
at large, a singular thing but not determined to be this or that in particular,
as a man. Indivisible, l. which cannot be divided. Indivisum, l. that which two
hold in common without partition. Indocility, -cibility, l. unteachableness,
unaptness to be taught. Indocked, put into a Dock. Indoctrinate, l. to teach or
instruct. Indolency, l. a not feeling (or want of) pain. Indomable, l.
untameable. Indorse, to write on the backside, to lay on the back. Indorsed
fish (in Her.) born with their backs to each other. Indorsement, the Sealed and
delivered, etc. on the back of an Indenture; a Condition on the backside of an
Obligation, etc. Indostan, that part of Indiae which belongs to the Great
Mogul. Indubitate, l. not doubted of, taken for certain. Indubitation, a not
doubting. Indubitably, undoubtedly. Inducement, f. a persuasion, enticing or
drawing on. Indu^iary, belonging to a truce or league. Induciat heir of this
Imperial Crown, King James (then King of Scotland only.) Inductile, which may
be brought into or persuaded. Induction, as Inducement, also a form of argument
enumerating the particulars, also a giving livery and seisin of a Church to the
Incumbent. Indue, l. to put on. Indulcate, -ciate, l. to sweeten. Indulge,
-giate, l. to bear with, to cocker or make much of. Indulgence, pardon, favor,
toleration, gentleness in suffering, also as Indult, a special act of Grace,
pardon or favor (in a written Instrument) from the Pope or other Prince.
Indument, l. a garment or clothing. Indurate, to harden, also hardened,
unrelenting. Indus, a River in the East Indies. Indusiated, l. clothed with an
Indusium, l. a shift, or any under-garment, Industan, an Indoston. Industrious,
full of Industry, l. labor, diligence. Inebriate, l. to make drunk. Ineched,
o. put in (q. eked in.) Ineffable, l. unspeakable, not to be uttered or
expressed. Ineffugible, l. as Inevitable. Inelaborate, not labored or taken
pains for. Inelegant, rude, without elegance. Ineluctible, not to be overcom'n
by wrestling or taking pains. Inept, unapt, foolish, out of season. Ineptitude,
unaptness, also fondness, foolishness, vainness. Inequitable, not to be rid
through. Inequality, unevenness. Inertitude, sloathfulness, dullness, ignorance.
Ines^ation, a baiting, deceiving, inveigling. Inescutcheon, an ordinary of a
three-fold-line, representing the shape of the Escutcheon. In esse, in actual
being. Inestimable, Inaest-, which cannot be valued (to the worth.) Inestuate,
to be very hot or boil much. Inevitable, which cannot be shunned or avoided.
Inexaturated, Inexsat-, not filled or satisfied. Inexaturable, which cannot be
filled or satisfied. Inexhauribility, a being Inexhaurible, -haustible, not to
be drawn dry or emptied. Inexorable, which cannot or will not be persuaded or
entreated. Inexpedient, not expedient or fit. Inexperience, want of experience.
Inexpiable, l. which cannot be purged from guilt, or satisfied for. Inexpleble,
not to be filled. Inexplicable, which cannot be explained or unfolded.
Inexpugnable, invincible, impregnable, which cannot be taken by force.
Inextinguible, which cannot be put out, unquenchable. Inext^^pable, not to be
rooted out. Inextricable, so intricate and difficult, that one cannot wind ones
self out of it. Inexsuperable, Inexup-, which cannot be overcom'n. Infallible,
never failing, never deceived or deceiving. Infame, to defame or slander.
Infamous, scandalous, full of Infamy, slander, reproach or ill report. Infancy,
(properly speechless age but commonly) man's first age (from one to seven
years.) Infandous, (not to be spoken) very wicked, heinous. Infangthef, -theof,
-geneth-, [a liberty of trying] a thief stealing and taken in a man's own
Jurisdiction. Infanta, any Daughter of the King of Spain except the Princesa
(the eldest.) Infant, any Son of the King of Spain except the Principe (the
Eldest.) Infanterie, Sp. the Foot-Souldiery. Infanticide, l. a killing of
Infants. Infatigable, as Indefat-. Infatuate, to besot or make foolish.
Infaust, -tous, unlucky. Infelicity, unhappiness. Infeodation, a granting in
fee. Infeof, Infeoffe, to grant in fee. Inferial, belonging to funerals or
funeral rites. Inference, a conclusion (from premises.) Inferior, lower.
Inferior Planets, below the Sun. Infernal, belonging to hell or the Deep.
Inferrible, which one may Infer, bring-in or conclude (from premises.)
Infertil, barren, unfruitful. Infest, to trouble or molest. Infestive,
unpleasant, without sport, joy or solemnity. Infi^ulate, to button or
buckle-in. Inficial, -atory, belonging to Inficiation, a denial. Infidelity,
unfaithfulness, the being an Infidel, unbeliever, heathen. Infidous, false,
unfaithful, not be trusted. Inf^mous, l. lowest, meanest. Infinitive, Infinite,
Indefinite, without end, number or measure. Infinitive mood, ^ot determined or
limited (by number or person.) Infinity, endlessness, unmeasureableness.
Infirmary, Fermory, a place for the sick in a Monastery, also an Hospital.
Infirmity, a being Infirm, weak, indisposed. Infix, to fasten-in. Inflame, to
set on fire. Inflammation, an inflaming, also a passive burning or swelling
with heat. Inflate, puft-up, swollen. Inflation, f. a puffing-up or windy
swelling. Inflexible, which cannot be bent or bowed, unruly. Inflict, to lay [a
punishment] upon. Influence, a flowing in or upon, a sending forth virtue,
power or operation upon inferior things, also to cause action or motion.
Influx, a flowing in. Infaecundity, unfruitfulness, barrenness. Infoliate, to
be full of (or wrapped in) leaves. Information, a fashioning, instructing or
making known. In forma pauperis, having Council and Clerks assigned without
fees, upon Affidavit made that (your debts being paid) you are not worth five
pounds. Informatus non sum, non sum informatus, an Atturneys formal answer in
Court, when he has no more to say in defense of his Client. Information for
the King, (which,) for a Common-person, is called a Declaration) by one who
prosecutes as well for the King as for himself. Informers, Promoters,
Delatores, who complain in Court, of any that offend against the Laws or penal
Statutes. Informity, Deformity, a being Informous, without shape or fashion,
ill favored. Infragible, Infran-, not easily broken or discouraged.
Infriction, -cation, a rubbing or chafing-in. Infringe, to break in pieces, to
endammage or diminish. Infucate, artificially to color or paint (the face,
etc.) Infus^ate, to make dark or dusky. Infuse, to pour in, to inspire with.
Infusion, a pouring-in; the giving of a Glyster, also the steeping of things in
liquor, that their virtue may pass into it, and also the liquor in which they
have been infused. Ing, Da. a meadow or low ground. Engage, to pawn, to
adventure. Ingannation, I. deceit, cousenage. Ingeminate, l. to double or
repeat often. Ingenerable, l. not to be begotten. Ingeniculation, l. a
kneeling. Ingenio, the Sugar-house or mill in Barbado's. Ingeny, Ingeniosity,
wit, wittiness. Ingenious, l. witty. Ingenuity, good or free nature, a being
Ingenious, good-natured, well-born and bred. Ingenious and Ingenuous, are too
often confounded. Ingest, l. to carry o^ pour in. Ingestion, l. a carrying or
conveying-in. Ingle, as Catamite, also a fire or a blaze, Cu. Inglorious,
without glory, obscure. Ingluvious, l. gluttonous, ravenous. Ingolstad, a Town
in lower Bavaria. Ingot, (q. Lingot, f.) a little [tongue or] wedge of gold,
also the trough wherein it is molten. Ingrailed bordure made of a line bending
inward toward the field. Ingratitude, unthankfulness, a being Ingrate,
ungrateful, unthankful, also unacceptable, unpleasant. Ingratiate, to get into
ones favor. Ingredient, one part of a compound medicine, etc. In gree, f. in
good part. Ingress, -ssion, l. an entering or walking into, also a beginning.
Ingressu, a writ of entry, whereby a man seeks entrance into Lands or
Tenements. De Ingressu sine assensu Capituli, etc. a writ for his Successor
who alienated without consent of the Chapter. Ingria, a Province in Swedeland.
Ingrossator magni Rotuli, Clerk of the Pipe. Ingrosse, belonging to the person
of the Lord. Ingrosser, a forestaller, he that buys bread-corn growing, or dead
victuals to sell again, etc. also a Clerk that writes Records or Instruments in
Parchment-skins. Engrossing of a fine, the Chirographers making the Indentures
and delivering them to him to whom the Cognizance is made. Ingruent,
approaching, unlookt-for. Ingurgitate, Ingulph, to devour or swallow like a
gulf or bottomless pit. Ingustable, which may not or cannot be ^asted. Inhi^,
o. in haste. Inhabitant, a dweller. Inhabited, dwelt-in. Inhabitable, not to be
dwelt in. Inhalation, a breathing in or upon. Inherent, sticking to or abiding
in. Inheritance, a perpetuity of Lands or Tenements to a Man and his Heir.
Inhesion, Inhaes-, a sticking or cleaving to. Inhibition, a forbidding or
stopping, a writ forbidding the Judge to proceed any farther in the cause
before him, and (most commonly) a writ from a higher Court-Christian to an
inferior, upon an appeal; as Prohibition is from the Kings Court to any
Inferior. Inhild, o. to infuse. Inhonestation, a disgracing, shaming, or
making dishonest. Inhospitality, -ability, a being Inhospital, -able, not
affording or unfit for entertainment. Inhumanity, cruelty, a being Inhumane,
barbarous, not like a man. Inhumation, a burying or putting into the ground.
Inhume, to bury. Inidoneus, unfit, improper. Injection, a casting, squirting or
conveying in. Inimical, -citial, like an enemy. Inimitable, which cannot be
imitated. Iniquity, injustice, want of equity. Iniswen, Albion, the white
Island, an ancient name of Britain. Initiate, to enter or begin. Initiative,
which does initiate. Initiated, entered or admitted to any Art or Faculty.
Injucundity, unpleasantness. Injunction, a Command, also a writ or decree of
Chancery, sometimes to give possession to the Plantiff (upon the Defendants not
appearing,) sometimes to stop the rigorous proceedings of another Court.
Injurious, wrongful, against right. Inkling,, (q. tinkling, a little sound, or
else q. Eenckelinghe, D. a running of division) a small and uncertain report.
Inlagh, Inlaughe, under the law, one that is not outlawed. Inlagary, -ation, a
restitution of an Outlaw to the protection of the Law and Liberty of a
Subject. Inlay, to lay in, to lay colored Wood in Wainscot-work, Cup-boards,
etc. See Marquetry. Inland, far in the Land. Inleased, (f. enlas^e) entangled
or ensnared. Inmate, one who (not being able to maintain himself) is admitted
(for money) to dwell jointly with another. Innable, -atable, which cannot be
swimmed in. Innarrable, not to be declared. Innate, natural, imbred.
Innavigable, which cannot be sailed in or upon. Innerest, o. innermost. Innes
of Chancery, Houses for Attorneys and young Students in the Law, viz.
Cliffords, Lions, Clements, Bernards, Staple, Furnivals, Davies (or Thavies)
and New-Inne. Innes of Court, Colleges for Counselors and Students at law,
viz. The Inner Temple (to which belong the three first houses of Chancery)
Grayes-Inne, (to which belong the next two.) Lincolns-Inne, (having the two
next) and the Middle Temple, (with the last.) The Outer-Temple is converted to
Essex-house. Serjeants-Innes, two higher Houses for the Judges, Barons of the
Exchequer and Sergeants at Law. These altogether (says Sir Edward Coke) make
the most famous University (for profession of Law only, or of any one humane
Science) in the world. Innitent, endeavoring, leaning on. Innocents or
Childermas-day, December, the 28th. in memory of the Innocent Children slain by
Herod. Innocuous, harmless or free from hurt. Innomina le, not to be named.
Innotescimus, Vidimus, Letters Patent. Innovate, to make or become new.
Innovator, the author of Innovation, a bringing up of new customs, opinions,
etc. Innoxious, harmless, also safe. Innubilous, without clouds. Innuendo* l.
by meaning or signifying [such a particular person,] as to say that he (
Innuendo, the Plantiff) is so or so. Innutrition, a nourishing. Ino, Daughter
of Cadmus, nurse to Bacchus, and wife to Athamas King of Thebes, who (in his
madness) supposing her to be a Lioness, drove her headlong into the Sea.
Inobservable, not to be observed. Inocciduous [stars,] never setting or going
down. Inoculate, to engraff a bud or kernel. Inodoration, a perfuming. Inome,
-ed, o. taken, obtained. Inominal, unlucky. Inopacous, open, not shadowed.
Inoffensive, giving no offense. Inofficious [will,] which omits or slightly
provides for those that ought chiefly to be considered. Inopinate, unthought
of, unlookt-for. Inopious, poor, needy. Inoptable, not to be wished.
Inordinate, out of order or measure. Inorganity, a being Inorganical, wanting
Organs or instruments of motion or operation. Inprision, an attempt.
Inquietude, restlessness. Inquiline, a native, born where he dwells.
Inquination, a defiling. Inquirendo, an authority (given) to enquire into
something for the Kings advantage. Inquisition, a diligent search, inquiry or
Examination. Spanish Inquisition, Sacred Council of the Inq-. erected by
Ferdinand the Catholic about 1492. to see that all Moors (whose Empire then
determined in Spain) were baptized. Inquisitive, making a diligent search,
prying into. Inquisitors, Searchers, Coroners, Sheriffs, etc. Inrise, o. in
[his] beauty. Inrollment, a Registering of things [in the rolls of Chancery.]
Insanity, a being Insane, l. unsound (in body or mind.) Insanguin'd, dipped in
blood. Insative, not sown or planted, growing of its own accord. Insaturable,
Insatiable, not to be satisfied or filled. Inscient, -ious, ignorant. Inscribe,
to write upon, to make an Inscription, a name or title written or engraven
upon. Inscrutable, unsearchable, not to be found out. Insculption, a carving or
engraving. Insecable, which cannot be cut or divided. Insects, small fleshless
and bloudless vermin, either not divided into joints as other creatures, or as
it were divided between the head and body, as flies, etc. Insectation, a
railing against, a prosecuting or following [with ill language.] Insectile,
cut, or which cannot be cut. Insection, l. a cutting into, also a Declaration,
treatise or long Discourse. Insemination, a sowing into. Insense, Y. to inform
(an elegant word.) Insensate, Mad, foolish, senseless. Insensible, senseless,
also not to be perceived. Insertion, a putting, planting or graffing in.
Insiccation, a drying. Insident, siting or settling upon. Insidiation, a lying
in wait to ensnare. Insidiat res viarum, Way-layers. Insidious, deceitful,
crafty, wily. Insimulation, an accusing. Insimul tenuit, one species of the
writ of partition. Insinuation, a winding ones self in by degrees, also an
intimation or slight touch of a thing. Insipid, unsavory, fool^sh, without
taste or judgment. Insipience, ignorance, foolishness. Insist, to urge or stay
upon. Insition, a graffing or putting into. Insociable* not fit for company.
Insolation, a bleaching or laying in the sun. Insolency, a being Insolent,
proud, arrogant, contrary to common custom. Insoluble, as Indissoluble or
Indissolvable. Insomnious, wanting sleep, also dreaming much. Inspection, a
looking narrowly into, an overseeing. Insperable, not to be hoped for.
Inspersion, a sprinkling upon. Inspeximus, Letters patent. Inspire, l. to
breath into. Inspiration, a breathing into, a being affected with the Spirit
[of God.] Inspruck, the chief town of Tirol in Germany. Inspissate, to make
thick or massy. Instability, unconstancy, sickleness. Instalment, a setlement
or sure placing in, and sometimes as Abatement. Instancy, a being Instant, near
at hand, earnest or urgent, also an indivisible moment of time. Instance, an
example, importunity. Instauration, a renewing or repairing. Instigate, to
prick, provoke or egg on. Instillation, a gentle infusion, a letting or falling
in by drops. Instimulate, to spur-on. Instinct, inward motion or prompting
(usually natural.) Instrumental, serviceable as a means. Institutes,
Ordinances, Instructions [in the Law, etc.] Institution, an Order or
appointment, also the Bishops investing a Parson with Cure and Spiritualty (as
Induction does with the Temporalty) of a living. Insubid, rash, inconsiderate.
Insubria, Gallia Cisalpina, Lombardy or Lumb-, in Italy. Insular, belonging to
an Island. Insulsity, unsavoriness, folly. Insult, to leap upon or triumph
over. Insultation, -lture, a leaping, boasting, etc. Insuper, upon.
Insuperable, which cannot be overcom'n. Insupportable, Intolerable, not to be
born or endured. Insurrection, a rising against. Intabulate, l. to write in
tables. Intabulation, a boarding or planking. Intactible, not to be touched.
Intakers, Thieves (on the borders of Scotland) who received such booties as
their Accomplices (the Out-parters) brought them. Intam^^e, to defile.
Intangi^le, a^ Intactible. Integral, entire, whole. Integration, a restoring or
making whole. Integrity, sincerity, soundness, uprightness. Integument, a
covering, also a thing spoken covertly or darkly. Intellectual, belonging to
the Intellect, the faculty or act of understanding. Intellectualist, one quick
of apprehension or Intelligence, understanding, also notice or information.
Intelligilble, which may be understood. Imtemperance, a being Intemperate,
immoderate in desire, diet, etc. Intempestivity, a being Intempestive,
unseasonable, out of order, also unlucky. Intendment, f. understanding,
meaning. Intenebrate, to darken. Intenerate, to make tender, soft, merciful or
pliant. Inteneration, a softening. Intense, -sive, set, fixed, bent upon a
thing. Intensely, to the utmost, in the highest degree. Intensively, as
Appreciatively. Intent, -tion, a purpose, meaning or design. Intent, -tive, as
Intense, etc. Intentable, which cannot be tempted. Intentation, a threatening.
Intenuate, o. slender or sliced. Inter canem and lupum, l. (between Dog and
Wolf) by twylight. Intercalarity, the burden of a Song, or as Intercalation, a
putting in or between, particularly that Intercalaris dies, the odd day in
February every Leap-year. Interchangeably, by turns. Intercede, to come
between, to play the Intercessour, Mediator, he that makes Intercession,
mediating or praying for another, or helping him to pray. Intercident, falling
between. Intercident (or - tal) day, an extraordinary or critical day, forced
by the malice of the disease. Intercision, a cutting off in the midst.
Interclusion, a stopping the passage between. Interclusive, stopping or
stopped, enclosed, shut-in. Intercolumniation, the distance (or work placed)
between two columns or pillars. Intercommoning, feeding Cattle promiscuously in
two contiguous Commons. Intercostal, l. between the ribs. Intercourse, a
passing or passage between. Intercurrent, running or passing between.
Intercutaneous, between the skin and Flesh. Interdict, to forbid, also as
Interdiction, a forbidding, also a Church-censure prohibiting the
administration of Divine Rites. Interdicted of water and fire, banished,
excommunicated. Interduct, a space left between full sentences (in writing.)
Interemption, a killing. Interequitate, to ride between. Interessed, concerned,
having an Interest, concernment, part or share, right and title; also the use
of money lent. Interfaction, an interrupting one in his discourse.
Interfection, a killing. Interfectour, an interficient or destructive Planet,
placed in the eighth house of a Nativity. Interfeir, as Enterfeir. Interfluent,
-uous, flowing or running between. Interjacency, a being Interjacent, lying
between. Interject, cast or placed between. Interjection, a particle expressing
a sudden passion, as Oh! etc. also as Parenthesis. Interim, [In] the mean
while. Interior, l. inward, on the inside. Interition, a perishing or
decaying. Interlocution, a speaking between. Interlocutory, Order, not final
but for the present, till the cause can he heard. Interlopers, (q.
Interleapers) D. those that intercept the trade of a Company, and are not
legally authorized. Interlucation, a letting in of light by cutting away
Boughs. Interlude, a Comedy or that which is played (or done) between the Acts.
Interlunary, belonging to the Interlunium, the space between the old and new
Moon. Intermean, a mean between two. Intermeation, a passing between.
Intermedian, lying or being between. Intermeteth, o. medleth. Intermicate, l.
to shine between or amongst. Interminant, boundless, uncertain. Intermission, a
putting between, a ceasing or leaving off for a while. Intermissions, spaces
between the wall and pillars* or pillars and pillars. Intermit, to discontinue
or leave-off for a time. Intermitting [pulse,] discontinued for a while by the
fit, an ill symptom. Intermixtion, a mingling between or amongst. Intermural,
between the Walls. Internal, inward. Internecion, l. an utter slaughter or
killing all. Internunciate, to go on a message between party and party.
Interpel, to interrupt or disturb. Interpellation* an interrupting, or being
interrupted in ones business. Interpleder, as Enterpl-. Interplication, a
folding between. Interpolation, a new dressing or polishing of a thing.
Interpose, to put or set between. Interposition, a meddling or putting between.
Interpretation, an expounding or explaining. Interpunction, a distinguishing by
points. Interr, to bury. Interrex, he that rules during the Interreign,
-regency, -regnum, the space between the death or deposition of one King or
Governor, and the Succession or election of another. Interrogation, a
question. Interrogation-point, in Latin thus (?) in Greek thus (;.)
Interrogative, used in asking of questions. Interrogatory, belonging to
questioning* also a question in legal examinations. Interruption, a disturbing
one in the midst of business, also a Parenthesis. Interscident, l. cutting or
hewing in two. Interscript, -tion, an interlining, or writing between the
lines. Intersecants, pertransient lines crossing one another. Intersection, a
cutting in the midst. Interse^tion, a graffing or putting in between.
Intersonant, founding between, or in the mean while. Interspersed, bestrewed,
scattered or sprinkled between. Interspersion, a sprinkling or scattering
between. Interspiration, a breathing between. Interstitial, having an
Interstice, distance or space between. Intertexture, a weaving between.
Interval, any distance or space either of place or time. Intervene, to come
between. Intervenient, coming between. Intervert, to deceive or falsely to
convey away a thing committed to ones charge, also to turn upside down.
Interview, a meeting of great persons, a sight of one another. Intervigilate,
watching now and then or between whiles. Intestable, incapable (by law) to make
a will, or to be taken for a witness. Intestate, [dying] without a will, also
one that has lost his credit. Quasi intestate, whose Executors do refuse.
Intestine, -nal, inward, hidden, belonging to the Intestina, inwards, entrails.
Intestina gracilia, the little guts. Intestina terrae, Earthworms. Intestinum
duodenum, the gut next to the stomach. Intestinum caecum, the fourth or blind
gut. Intestinum jejunum or tenue, the hungry or empty gut. Intestinum quintum
vel crassum, the same as Colon. Intestinum rectum, the strait or Arse-gut.
Inthronize, to place on a throne. Intiertie, as Entiertie. Intimacy, great
familiarity, a being Intimate, inwardly acquainted; also to show or signify
privately. Intimidate, to affright or make fearful. Intinction, a dying or
coloring. Entire, whole or found, as Entire Entitled, having this title.
Intitulation, an intitling or adding a title. Intolerable, not to be born or
endured. Intone, to thunder or speak aloud. Intonation, a thundering or making
a terrible noise. Intoxicate, to poison or make drunk. Intractable, l. not to
be handled or managed. Intrado, En-, Sp. an entrance, also an yearly revenue.
Intraneous, l. inward. Intress, o. lining (perhaps for living.) Intribution,
Contribution, or lot-money paid for lands. Intricacy, a being Intricate,
entangled, perplexed. Intrigue, -que, f. Intricacy, encumbrance, labyrinth,
secret working. Intrins^cal, inward, secret. Introclude, to shut within.
Introduce, to bring in. Introduction, a leading in, a preface or beginning.
Introgression, a going in. Introit, an Entry or Entrance, the first part of the
Mass beginning Introib^ ad altar-. Intromission, a letting in. Introruption, a
breaking in by violence. Introvenient, coming in. Introversion, a turning [ones
thoughts] inward. Intrude, to thrust in rudely and violently. Intrusione, a
writ against an Intruder, he that commits Intrusion, unlawful thrusting
himself into another right. Intuitive, belonging to Intuition, a clear and
distinct beholding of a thing. Intumescence, l. a swelling. Intumulate, to bury
or throw an heap upon. Invaginate, to put into a sheath or scabbard.
Invadiationes, Morgages or pledges. Invalidate, to make Invalid, weak, of no
force or value. Invadible, capable of Invasion, Invading, setting upon another
man's right. Invecked [bordure] inverting its points into it self. Invection, a
carrying in or against. Invective, a railing, reproaching, biting and bitter
speech. Inveigh, to rail against. Inveigle (f. aveugler* to blind, or I.
Vagolare) to allure or draw in. Invelope, as Envelope. Invention a finding out,
a devise. Inventory, -tarry, a repertory or Catalogue of Dead men's goods, to be
valued by four credible men (at least) and exhibited to the Ordinary. Inventre
sa mere* f. In his Mothers belly, the name of a writ. Inversion, Inverting, a
turning the inside out, or upside down. Invest, to cloth, compass or besiege,
also to give one possession of a thing. Investigable, which cannot be searched
or found out. Investigation, a diligent search or enquiry. Investiture, l. a
giving possession, or endowing. Inveterate, grown old, rooted, ^etled. Invid,
spightfull, malicious. Invigilate, to watch carefully. Invigorate, to give
vigor, life, and courage. Invincible, not to be conquered. Inviolable, not to
be violated or broken. Inviron, as Environ. Invious, without way or path.
Invisible, not to be seen. Invitatory, belonging to Invitation, a bidding or
calling to. Invitiate, to spoil or defile. Inumbrate, to shade or cast a shadow
upon. Inunction, an anointing thoroughly. Inundation, an overflowing, a flood.
Invocate, to call upon. Invoice, a particular of the value, custom and Charges
of any goods sent by a Merchant (in another man's ship) and consigned to a
Factor or Correspondent in another Country. Involate, to fly in or upon.
Involve, to wrap or fold in, entangle or overwhelm. Involvent, wrapping, etc.
Involuntary, unwilling. Inurbanity, l. incivility, Clownishness. Inure, Enure,
l. to accustom, also (in Law) to take effect or be available. Inusitate, l. not
accustomed, seldom used, unusual. Inutility, l. unprofitableness.
Invulnerability, a being Invulnerable, l. not to be wounded. Jo, Daughter of
Inachus, turned into a Cow by Jupiter, that she might not be known of Juno, who
drove her into Egypt, where she recovered her former shape and was made a
Goddess. Joab, h. Father-hood. Joachim, Jehoiakim, h. preparation of the Lord.
Joan, the feminine of John. Joannites, Knights of St. John of Jerusalem.
Joannitiques, Red Monks with the figure of a Chalice on their breasts. Joash,
Jehoash, h. the fire of the Lord. Job, c. a guinny. Job, h. sighing, sorrowing.
Jobelin (f. Gobelin) a s^t or fool. Jocalia, Jewels. Jocarius, a buffoon or
jester. Jocasta, Daughter of Cre^^ King of Thebes, after the death of her
husband Laius, she unwittingly married her own son Oedipus. Jockumgage, c. a
chamber pot. Joclet-Yoklet, a little farm, requiring a small Yoke of Oxen to
plow. J^c sity, l. merriness, a being Jocose, Jocund, Jocatory, Jocular,
Joculary, Joculatory, l. merry, jesting. John, h. Gracious. Joilite, o. for
Jollity. Joinder, Join-, the coupling of two in a suit against one another.
Join issue, put the cause to the trial of a Jury. Joint Tenants, that hold
lands or Tenements jointly, by one title or without partition. Jointure, a
settlement upon the wise in respect of marriage. Join-ville, a Town of
Champagne in France. Jolaus, being old, was restored to youth by the Prayers of
his Uncle Hercules, whose chariot he drove. Joly and Jolanus, for Julius and
Julianus. Jollitrin, f. a Youngster, or young Gallant. Jombre, o. ^o join.
Jonah, -as, h. a Dove. Jonathan, h. the gift of God. Jonglerie, f. Juggling.
Joncade, f. a Spoon-meat of Cream, rose water and Sugar. Jonism, -ick,
belonging to Jonia, a Country of Asia the less. Io Paean, a voice or song of
rejoicing [to Apollo.] Jopas, a musical King of Africa, one of Dido's Suitors.
Joram, Jeho-, h. the height of the Lord. Jor and Dan, the two heads of Jordan,
h. the River of Judgment. Joscelin, Justulus, a Diminutive of Jost, Justus, or
Jodocus* Joyce. Joseph, h. Increase. Josias, h. the fire of the Lord. Josuah,
Jesus, h. Savior, a Name common to the Generals of Armies. Iota, g. Jod, h.
the letter I, (being the smallest of them all) a thing of little or no value.
Iotacism, a frequent beginning with the letter I; also a fault in pronouncing
it too broad. All (but Englishmen) pronounce it ee. Jove, (q. Jehove) Jupiter.
Jovial, (like Jupiter) Noble, also pleasant or merry. Jouketh, [the hauk]
sleeps. Journal, f. a diary or day-book, also as much land as a team of Oxen
can plough in one day. Jouissance, f. mirth or jollity. Journ choppers,
regraters of yarn. Journe, f. a day, a days journey or work, a day of battle.
Journy-man, working [properly by the day, but now] by the year. Joyce, Jocosus,
-sa, merry. Joys of Planets, when they are in those houses where they are most
powerful. Jowe, o. for jaw. Joyeux, f. joyful. Joyleyning, o. the same. Ipent,
o. pined or pen't. Iphianassa, Iphinoe and Lysippe, Daughters of Praetus King
of Argos, preferring their beauty to Juno's were by her struck with madness,
imagining themselves to be Cows. Iphicles, -clus, Son of Amphitryo by Alcmena,
who bore him with Hercules (by Jupiter.) Iphicrates, an Athenian Captain, who
banished himself because they would not be guided by him. Iphigenia, Agamemnons
Daughter, which should have been sacrificed to Diana because her Father had
slain a Heart of hers, but the Goddess pityed her and sent an Heart to be offered
in her stead. Iphimedia, ravished by Neptune, brought forth Ephialtes and Otus,
who grew (every month) nine fingers in length, till (helping the Giants
against the Gods) they were slain by Apollo. Iphis, a young man who hanged
himself for the love of Anax^rete, who was also turned into a stone. Iphis, a
Cretan Virgin turned into a man on her wedding day (at the prayers of her
Mother) to avoid the anger of her husband Lygdus, who supposed her to be a man
and had provided her a wife, he having commanded her Mother, if she brought
forth a girl, to destroy it. Ippocrass, as Hippocras. Iprived, o. searched,
pryed into. Ipsissime, l. the very same. Ips, a Town on the River Ips in the
higher Austria. Ipswich, the chief Town of Suffolk, where Cardinal Woolsey (a
Butchers Son) was born. Ipulled, Ipolid, Ipolished, o. smoothed. Iracundious,
teasty, soon angry. Iradde, -rad, o. readd. Irascible, subject to or capable of
anger. Irayled, o. covered. Irayed, o. arrayed. Irching, o. Urchin.
Irchinfield, Archenfield. Where Hereford now does, and the old Ariconium did
stand. Ire ad largum, to go at large, escape, or be set at liberty. Ire, f.
anger, wrath. Ireland, Western Island and Kingdom subject to England. Irene,
the Mother of Constantine the seventh, reigned with him 9 years, he expelled
her and reigned alone 7 years, again she took him by craft, put out his eyes,
cast him into prison (where he died) and reigned alone 4 years. Iris, Juno's
messenger, the rainbow, also an hexagonal precious stone. Irmunsal, Ermisul,
(supposed to be Mercury) worshipped by the ancient Britains. Ironical,
belonging to an Ironie, g. a speaking by contraries or mockingly. Iron-sick,
leaky, by reason of the Irons being rusty and hollow in the planks. Iroquois, a
people of Canada in America. Irradiate, l. to enlighten or shine upon.
Irrational, l. unreasonable. Irrecordable, not to be remembered. Irrecuperable,
Irrecoverable, unre-, not to be recovered, utterly lost. Irredivivous, which
cannot be rev^ved or repaired. Irrefragable, unbreakable, undeniable.
Irregularity, a being Irregular, disorderly, out of rule, also incapable of
taking holy Orders, as being maimed, base-born, criminal, etc. Irreligious,
ungodly, profane. Irremeable, from whence there is no returning. Irremediable,
l. not to be remedied. Irremissible. l. not to be remitted or pardoned.
Irremunerable, l. which cannot be rewarded or recompensed. Irreparable, l.
which cannot be repaired or made up again. Irrepleviable, -isable, not to be
replevied or set at large upon sureties. Irreposcible, l. not to be required
again. Irreprehensible, l. unreprovable, blameless. Irresolute, unresolved,
doubting. Irreverent, rude, without reverence. Irrevocable, l. not to be
revoked or called back. Irrigate, l. to water or moisten. Irriguous, l. that is
or may easily be watered or washed. Irrision, l. a laughing at. Irritate, l. to
provoke or stir up. Irrite, l. void, of no effect or weight. Irroborate, l. to
make strong. Irrogation, l. imposing a tribute* penalty, etc. Irrorate, l. to
bedew, besprinkle or moisten. Ir^uent, l. rushing-in. Irrugation, l. a
wrinkling. Irrump^nt l. breaking in. Irruption, l. a violent breaking-in or
forced entrance. Irus, a beggarly messenger between Penelope and her suitors*
whom Vlyss^s killed with his fist. Isaac, h. laughter. Isaca, Isca, the River
Ex. Isagogical, belonging to Isagogu^, g. an introduction. Iseland, the utmost
Northern Island. Isca Danmoniorum, Excester, Isca Silurum, Caerleon in
Monmouthshire. Iscariot, (q. Ish Carioth) h. one of Carioth a Town in Judaea.
Ischia, an Island near Naples. Ischiatick, g. troubled with the Sciatica or
Hip-gout. Ischnotes, g. a slender, childish or Foeminine pronunciation.
Ischuria, g. a stoppage or difficulty of Urine. Isembourg, a County of
Veteravia. Ishmaclite, Ism-, one descended from, or like to Ishma^l, Ism-, h.
God has heard, or the hearing of God. Ishad, Ished, o. scattered. Ishet, o.
shut. Ishorn, o. (for shorn) docked. Ishove, o. set forth, shown. Isicle, (q.
Icicle, or small ice) hanging at the house-ea^es, etc. Isis, an Egyptian
Goddess made of Io. Isis, the River Ouse in Wiltshire. Islip, Gislipe, a Town
in O^fordshire, where King Edward the Confessor was born. Isonomy, g. equality
of Government under the same Laws. Isonglass, Isin-, as Ichthyocolla. Isosceles,
g. [a triangle] with two equal sides and opposite angles. Isota de Nugarolis, a
virgin of Verona, famous for Philosophy, Philology and Poetry. Ispahan, the
Metropolis of Persia. Isped, o. dispatched. Ispended, o. considered. Isperi, o.
(q. Vespers) Oris^n. Israelites, the Children of Israel, h. (prevailing with
the Lord) Jacob. Issachar, h. Wages. Issue, an effect, Children, profits of
fines or lands, the matter depending in suit. Istalled, o. placed. Isthmian,
belonging to the Isthm, -us, g. Neck of land between two Seas [whereon Corinth
stands.] Istrained, o. (for strained) tied close. Istria, part of Italy joining
to Illyricum, and subject to Venice. Isurium Brigantum, an ancient City in
Yorkshire, out of whose ruins was raised Ealdburg or Aldborow. Iswent, o.
sw^nged, tossed. Italianated, which does Italianize, play the Italian, one of
(or belonging to) Italia, -ly, one of the most famous Countries in Europe,
whose chief City is Rome, where the Pope has his seat. Italiana, a kind of
Merce^^ stuff. Iterate, l. to repeat, do o^ say a thing over again. Ithaca, an
Ionian Isle (where Ulysses was Prince) full of Goats, but no hare can live
there. Ithee, o. to thrive. St. Ithies, a Town in Cornwall. Itinerant, l.
traveling up and down. Itinerary, belonging to a journey, also a Calender of
miles, lodging and other passages on the way. Itinerate, l. to travel or take a
journey. Itwight, o. (q. twitched) drawn. Itylus, slain by his own mother Aedon
instead of Amaneus the Son of A^phion. Itys, slain by his Mother Progne and set
before his Father Tereus (King of Thrace) at a banquet, for deflowring her
sister Philomel; he perceiving the murder, with his naked sword pursued them,
but (in their flight) they were changed, Progne into a Swallow, Philomel into a
Nightingale, and Itys to a Pheasant. Jub (q. Jug.) o. a bottle. Juba, King of
Mauritania, a Constant friend to Pompey and his p^rty. Jubal, h. fading, or a
trumpet. Jubarb, (q. Jovis barba) housleek. Jubeb, Jajubes, Sericum, (A.
Zufalzef) a kind of prune, used much in Physic. Jubilation, l. a shouting for
joy. Jubil^te Lector, having read Divinity fifteen years. Year of Jubilee, -lee,
among the Jews every fiftieth year, when with Jobels (Rams-horns) and trumpets
they signified their rejoicing and remission. Among Christians ordained by Pope
Boniface the Eighth (1300) to be kept every hundredth year, by Clement the
sixth, every fiftieth year, and by Sixtus the fourth (as it now stands) every
25 year, beginning it first Anno 1475. Jucatan, a Peninsula of New Spain.
Jucundity, l. pleasantness. Judah, Jehudah, h. Confession. Judaea, Chananaea,
Canaan, part of Syria, the holy land or land of promise. Judaick, -call, Jewish.
Judaism, the Faith, Custom or Religion of the Jews; also a Mortgage. Judas,
Jude, as Judah. Judas tree (with broad leaves) whereon he is supposed (by some)
to hang himself. Ju^gement Judicium* the second part of Logic disposing
Arguments, as the first part (Invention) finds them out. Judicabl^, which may
be judged. Judication, the giving of judgment. Judicatory, -ture, l. a place of
judgment. Judicial, -ary; belonging to a Judge or Judgment. Jud^cious, full of
judgment, wise. Judicium Dei, trial of Ordel. Judith. h. praising. St. Ives, a
town in Huntington. Ivetot, a town of lower Normandy in France, whose governor
was called King of Ivetot, one of a great Title and small inheritance. Jugal,
l. belonging to a Yoke or Wedlock. Jugament, l. a yoking or coupling. Jugular,
-arie, belonging to the throat. Jugulation, l. a killing or cutting ones
throat. Jugum terrae, half a plough-land. Jugurth, -tha, King of Numidia, taken
by the Romans (after a long war) and brought to Rome, where he died in prison.
Ivingoe, a town in Bucks. Juise, o. Judgment, trial, examination. Jujubes,
-uves, Jubeb-fruit, Italian plums like Olives. Juitland, Jut-, North and South,
parts of D^nmark. Juke, to perch or roost as a hawk. Julep, A. a preparative
(of Syrups etc.) to open the inward parts and prepare for a purgation* from
Julap, P. a kind of Rose Water. I^lian, nus* a Roman Emperor who apostatized
from Christiani^y to Heathenism. Julian, -na, Gilian, a Woman's name. Iuli^n Law
(among the Romans) made Adulte^y death. Iul^an Are^unt, Old* English acc^unt,
where^y the year consists of 365 days and 6 hours, a Correction of the
Calendar made (44 years before the birth of Christ) by Julius Caesar, the first
Roman Emperor, he subdued France, Spain, Britain, and the greatest part of
Germany, reigned 3 years, and was stabbed in the Senate House. Iuliers, an
Imperial town and Dukedom. Iulio, an Italian coin (about 6 d. value) in the
papacy of Pope Julius. Iulus, g. (soft-haired or mossy-bearded) Ascanius, the
son of Aenaeas, also a son of Ascanius. Iullaber, a little hill in Kent, where
(they say) Iullaber (a Giant or Witch) was buried, or where Laberius Durus (a
Captain of Julius Caesar's) was slain. July, Quintilis, the fifth Month from
March, so called in honor of Julius Caesar. Iumbals, certain sweetmeats
Iumentarious, belonging to a Iument, l. a horse or any laboring beast. Iument,
f. a mare. Iuncaria, a soil where rushes grow. Iuncto, (Iunta, Sp.) a Caba^,
Combination of particular persons. Juncture, l. a joint or joining. ^uncture
[of time] the very nick or moment. Juncture [of affairs] the present posture.
Jungible, which may be joined. Junk, any piece of an old Cable. Junonian, -ick,
belonging to Juno, Twin-sister and Wife to Jupiter. Juno's tears, the plant
Vervain. Juniority, a being Junior, l* Younger. Jun^o, Sp. as Juncto, a meeting
of men to sit in Council. Juon, o. John. Ivory, f. Elephants Teeth. Jupart, o.
Jeopardy. Jupiter, Son of Saturn and Ops, he conspired against his Father,
expelled him and divided the Empire between Himself, Neptune and Pluto. Jupiter
Belus, second King of Babylon, Son of Nimrod (or Saturn.) Jupiters distaffe,
Mullein, Candelaria, a kind of Clary. Jura Regalia, as Regalia. Juration, l. a
swearing. Jurate, l. sworn. Jurates, Aldermen, or Sheriffs. Jurden, Jurdan,
Jordan, Jourdon, (q. Gor-den, sa. stercus cubilis) a Chamber Pot. Juridick
-call, l. belonging to the Law, lawful, actionable. Juridical-day, a Court-day.
Jurisdiction, l. authority, also the compass or extent thereof. Juris prudence,
l. knowledge or skill in the Laws, also the style or form of the Law. Jurist, a
Lawyer. Jurn-choppers, as Journ-. Juror, one of the Jury, a Company of men
sworn to deliver a truth upon such evidence as shall be delivered to them.
Grand Jury, twenty four grave and substantial men. Petit Jury, twelve men (at
least.) Juris utrum, a writ for the incumbent whose Predecessor has alienated
his Lands or Tenements. Jury mast, made at Sea, in case of necessity. Ivry, a
Town in Normandy. Jus Coronae, (Crown-Right) part of the Law of England, and
(in many things) differs from the General Law. Jus Curialitatis Angliae, the
Courtesy of England. Jus Patronatus, the right of Patronage or presenting a
Clerk to a Benefice. Jussel, a minced dish of several meats. Jussulent, l. full
of, or stewed in broth. Justes, f. Tournaments or Tiltings on horseback with
spears and lances. Justice, -cer, -eier, f. a Judge or Administrer of Justice.
Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench* he hears and determines all Pleas of the
Crown, Treasons, Felonies, etc. Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, he
hears and determines all causes at the Common Law, that is, all Civil causes
(personal and real) between common persons. Lord Justice of the Forest, Justice
in air of the Forest, one which has Jurisdiction over all the Forest on this
side Trent, and another over all beyond. Justices of Assise, sent (by special
commission) into this or that (but not his own) County, to take Assizes for the
Peoples ease. Justices of Oyer and Terminer, deputed (upon special and
extraordinary occasions) to hear and determine some particular causes. Justices
errants or in Air, were sent with Commissions into the Country to determine
the Pleas of the Crown; for the ease of the Subject, who must else have com'n
to the Courts at Westminster. Justices of Jail-deliver, sent with Commission
to hear and determine all causes belonging to any cast into Gaol. Justice of
the hundred, the Lord or Alderman of the Hundred. Justices of Laborers,
appointed to redress their frowardness, who would either not work or have
unreasonable wages. Justices of Nisi prius, are (now) the same with Justices of
Assizes. Some make this difference, that the first have jurisdiction in causes
personal as well as real, and these (in strict acception) deal only in
Possessory writs. Justices of Trail-^aston, (f. draw-staff,) Inquisitours
appointed by King Edward the first, on occasion of great disorders in the
Realm, during his absence in the Scottish and French wars. Justices of the
Pavilion, authorized by the Bishop of Winchester (at a fair held near that
City) by virtue of a grant from King Edward the fourth. Justices of the P^ace,
appointed (by the Kings Commission) to attend the peace of the County where
they dwell. Justicements, all things belonging to Justice. Justicies, a writ
for the Sheriff to dispatch some special cause above the ordinary reach of his
County Court. Justiciable, subject to authority or Law. Justicium, Lawsteed,
vacation, a stay or ceasing from ministration of Justice. Justifical, executing
or doing Justice. Justification, a justifying, clearing, maintaining, making
good or showing a good reason for. Justificators, Compurgators, which (by oath)
justify the Innocence, report or oath of another. Justinians, Friars and Nuns
instituted 1412 in St. Justines, an Abbey at Padua. Justinianists, Civilians,
Students of the Civil Law, reduced into the Code and Pa^dects by Justinian,
-nus, an Emperor of Rome. Justinopoli-, Ca^o d' Is^ri^, a City of Istria,
built by the Emperor Justine. Jutties of houses, those parts that jut or stand
out beyond the rest. Juturna, the Daughter of Daunus, made by Jupiter (for the
loss of her maidenhead) the immortal Nymph of the River Numicius. Juvenal, a
Roman Satyrist. Juvenility, a being Juvenile, l. youthful, lusty. Juventas,
Hebe Daughter of Juno without a Father, the Goddess of Youth, also young age.
Juverna, Hibernia, Ireland. Iwimpled, o. muffled. Iwis, o. certainly. Ixions
wheel, (a feigned punishment in hell) continually turning about, having
fastened on it Ixion, Son of Phlegyas, thrown to hell for boasting that he had
lien with Juno, in whose stead Jupiter had placed a Cloud, on which he begat
the Centaures. Iwroke, o. wreaked. Iwry, -yen, o. hidden. Iyen, o. eyes. Izhak,
as Isaac.
K.
KAb, as Cab. Kabballa, as Cabala. Kale, Cale, Che. a turn ( vicem.) Kalends,
(as Calends) beginning [of the Month.] Kali, Glass-wort, the herb whose ashes
make Crystal glasses. Kallo, a Town in North- Juitland. Kaminieck, the chief
Town in Podolia. Kamp fight, as Camp-fight. Kantref, as Cantred. Karavan,
Kacabar, as Caravan. Kardiognostick, as Cardiogn-. Karena, (in Chemistry) the
twentieth part of a drop. Karle, Sa. a man or Clown. Karle-cat, Li. a he, or
bore-cat. Karnten, a Province of lower Austria in Germany. Karobe, Ca-,
Karoble, the Fruit of the Carobe-tree, also the herb St. John's bread, also the
24 part of a grain. Karos, Ca-, g. headache, drowsiness. Karrata foeni, a load
of hay. Karyn, o. Lent. Katharine, as Catharine. Kaizen silver, a stone said to
be invincible by fire or water. Kayage, Wharfage, see Key. Kazzardl^ [Cattel,]
No. subject to dye or to Casualties. Keale, Li. a cold. K^als, as Kiles.
Keckle, the Cable or bolt-rope, serve them with a small rope, to keep them from
galling. Kedel, as Kiddle. Kedge, Sf. brisk, lively. Kedger, Kedger-Anchor,
used in bringing a ship up a narrow place. Keel, the lowest Timber or bottom of
a ship, also a vessel to cool new drink in. Keels, Keyls, Cyulae, a kind of
long boats, used by the Saxons. Keelson, the Timber (fastened to the keel)
above the ground-timbers. Keen, Kene, o. sharp. Keep, a place to keep fish in
the water, and meat from flies. Lord Keeper [of the great Seal of England,]
thr^ugh whose hands pass all Charters, Commissions and Grants of the King under
the great Seal, the place and authority (since 5 Elizabeth) is the same as the
Lord Chancellours, and therefore they cannot properly be both together. Keepers
of the Liberties of England, Custodes Libertatis Angliae, etc. the style or
title of all judicial proceedings, from the beheading of the King till Oliver
was declared Protector, called the Rump-time. Lord [Keeper of the] Privy Seal,
through whose hands pass all Charters before they come to the Great Seal, and
some things which do not pass the great Seal at all. Keeper of the Touch,
Master of the Essay in the Kings Mint. Keeper of the Forest, Chief Warden of
the Forest, the principal Governor thereof. Keenk, a little turn or doubling
of a rope hindering the running smooth. Keeve [a Cart,] Che. overthrow it, or
turn out the dung. Keeve, Dev. a brewers fat. Keiked, o. stared. Keisersberg, a
Town in upper Alsatia. Keisers-Lautern, a Town in the Palatinate of Rhine.
Kele, o. to cool, also pottage, No. Kelewurt, pottage-herb, Coleworts. Kellow,
No. Black-lead. Kell, the Caul about the paunch. Kelter, Kilter, So. frame,
order. A Kembo, (I. Aschembo, across, or Ghembo) crooked. Kemeling, o. a
brewers vessel. Kemmet, Shrop. foolish. Kempt, (for kembed) o. trimmed.
Kempten, a City of Schw^bia in Germany. Ken, c. a house. Ken, sa. to see or
know, also view or sight, also to teach, o. Kenchester, a Town in
Herefordshire. Kendal, a Town in Westmorland. Kenhelm, sa. defense of his
kindred. Kenelworth, a Town in Warwickshire. Kennel, a pack [of hounds,] or the
place where they are kept, also a foxes Earth or hole. Kennets, a sort of
course Welsh cloth. Kenodoxy, Ce-, g. vainglory, or a being vainglorious.
Kenotaph, as Cenotaph. Kenspecked, No. Marked or branded. Kepen, No. to keep or
care-for. Keep, o. care, also a fort. Keppen, o. to hood-wink. Kerchief, (f.
Couvrechef.) a linen dress of [old] women's heads. Kerf, o. a great Company.
Kerfe, Ss. the furrow made by the saw. Kerf^e, o. carved. Kerk, Kirk, Sc. a
Church. Kerle, Dev. a loyn [of veal, etc.] Kermes, the grain of the Scarlet
Oak. Kern, Br. a horn. Kern, to corn or salt. Kern, an Irish Rogue, or
light-armed footman; also a plain Country Farmer. Kernets, o. Corners or holes
in battlements. K^rnel, o. to fortify and embattel an house. Kernel-wort, good
against Kernels, hard knots in the neck, etc. Kerry, a County of
Munster-Prouince in Ireland. Kerse, as Cresses. o. Kersey, (D. Kers^rye, and
Karsaye) a kind of stuff or flight Cloth. Kerveth, o. grieveth. Kesar, B.
Keisar, D. Caesar. Kest, o. for Cast. Kesteven, a third part of Lincolnshire.
Keswick, a town in Cumberland. Ketch, a small kind of ship. Kettering, a town
in Northamptonshire. Kever, o. Recover. Key, Kay, (D. Kaeye, f. Quay) a Wharf,
to land or Ship goods or wares at. Key (in Music) as Cliff. Keyles, o. as
Keeles. Keynard, o. a micher, hedg-creeper or Truant. Keyserswerd, a town of
Berg in Germany. Kibrit, as Abric. Kichel, o. a kind of cake. Gods Kichel, a
Cake given to Godchildren at their asking blessing. Kid, No. a small
brush-fagot. Kid, Kith, o. known. Kiderow, Che. a place for a sucking Calf to
lie in. Kidder, Kyddier, a Badger, or Carrier of Victuals to ^el.
Kidderminster, a town in Worcestershire. Kiddle, Kidle, Ke-, an open Wear to
lay Weels in. Kidnapper, c. a stealer or enticer away of Children, etc.
Kildare, a County of Ireland. Kilderkin, (q. Kinderkin, D. a little child) the
eigthth part of a Hogshead. Kiles, Keales, Kettle-pins, (f. Quilles) Nine-pins.
Kilketh, an old servile kind of payment. Kilkenny, a County in Ireland.
Kimbolton, a town in Huntingtonshire. Kime, (sa. Guma) a man. Kim-Kam, as
Cambise. Kimling, Li. a brewing-vessel. Kimmel, Kemlin, No. a poudring tub.
Kinburgh, Sa. strength and defense of kindred. Kinchin, c. a little child.
Kinchin-Cove, c. a little man. Kinds, -dels, o. Young-ones Kinder, a great
company [of Cats.] Kineton, a town in Warwickshire. King of Herau^ds, King at
arms, Pater patratus, the chief of that society. King of Ivetot, see Ivetot.
King of the minstrels, to see that the minstrels did their duty yearly (at
Tutbury in Staffordshire) at our Ladies Assumption. Kings Bench, where the King
was wont to sit in person. Kngs-cleer, a town in Ha^^shire. King's Evil, a
disease or swelling cured by the stroking of the Kings of England ever since
King Edward the Confessor. Kings-silver, due to the King in the Court of
Common Pleas for licenses to levy fines. Kings-bridg, a town in Devonshire.
Kings-spear, a flower good against the poison of asps. Kings Swan-heard, keeper
of his Swans. No fowl can be a stray but a Swan. Kingstone [upon Thames] in
Surrey, where Athelsta^^, Edwin and Et^elred were crowned in the open
Marketplace, also above 20 small towns. Kingsale, Kinsale, an Irish port-town.
Kinrest, o. quiet (or kindly) rest. Kintal, (Sp. Quintal) about an hundred
pound weight. Kirat, a. three grains. Kirk, Sc. a Church. Ki^ked, o. turning
upwards. Kirkby, above 20 small towns. Kirk^y-Morside, in Yorkshire.
Kirkby-Steeven, and K-Landall, in Westmo^land. Ki^kbys-Quest, of all the lands
in Englan^, made by John Kirkby Treasurer to Edward the first 1277. Kirkham in
Lancashire. Kirkton, in Lincolnshire. Kitt, No. a Milking-pail like a churn.
Kit-kaies, the fruit of the ash tree. Kite, Cu. a belly. Kitchiness-bread, La.
thin soft oat-cakes. Klick up. Li. Catch up. Knap, a little hillock, also to
browse. Knap-sack, (...), a bag at a Soldiers back. Knape, D. Cnawa, Sa Knave,
a boy or Servant, also (as they often are) an unlucky or dishonest fellow.
Knares-brough, in Yorkshire. Knap-weed* Iacea nigra, an herb somewhat like
Scabious* Knarri, o. (q. Knurry) stubby, knotty. Knave-line, a rope (from the
Ram-head) to keep the new ties and halliards from turning about one another.
Knedde, o. for knit. Knees, partitions (in plants) like knees or joints; also
crooked timbers that bind the ship-beams and futtocks together. Kneetles (q.
Kno^tles) two rope-yarns twisted together (with a knot at each end) to sease a
rope, block, etc. Knet, o. (q. Ghenett, D.) neatness. Knight, sa. a Servant,
Soldier or Horsman, a title of dignity (now) above an Esquire; also a timber
(carved with some head) wherein are four sheevers, three for the halliards and
one for the top-rope to run in. Knights of Alcantara in Leon, as Knights of the
Pear Tree. Knights of the Annunciada or - ation, a Savoy-Order of fourteen, who
wear a Collar of Gold and the Virgin Mari^s Medal. Knights of St. Andrew or the
Thistle, by Achaius King of Scots, An. 809. Knights of Austria and Corinthia or
St. Ge^rge, instituted 1470 by the Emperor Frederick the 3d first Archduke of
Austria. Knights Batchelour, our simple or plain Knights, the lowest but most
ancient Order. Knights of the Band or red Scarf, instituted by Alphonso the
11th. King of Leon and Castile, An. 1330. Knights Baneret or Bann-, made in the
field by cutting off the point of their Standard and making it a Banner, and
who may display their arms in a Banner in the Kings army. They that are created
under the standard of the King personally present take place of Baronets.
Knights Baronets, erected by King James, and take place of Knights Batchelours,
Ordinary Bannerets, and Knights of the Bath, who bathed themselves (and used
many religious ceremonies) the night before their Creation. Knights of the
Broom-flower erected by St. Lewis, with this Motto, Exaltat humiles. Knights of
Calatrava in Spain, with a red cross on their left breast. Knights of la Calza
(the stockin) a Venetian Order. Knights of the Chamber, made in the kings
Chamber; in time of peace, not in the field. Knights of the Carpet, who kneel
on a Carpet in receiving their Order. Knights of Christian Charity, made by
Henry 3d of France, for the benefit of poor Captains and maimed Soldiers, whom
he provided for. Knights of the Crown Royal, instituted by Charlemaigne in
favor of the Frisons who aided him against the Saxons. Knights of Cyprus or
the sword, by Guy of Luzignan, king of Jerusalem and Cyprus; 1195. Kn^ghts of
the Dane Broge, instituted by the king of Denmark, 1671 in memory of a victory
over the Swedes* when the Danish Colors were seen (as they say) in the
heavens. Knights of the Dog and Cock, instituted by P^ilip the first of France.
Knights of the Dove, by John the first of Castile, 1379. Knights of the Dragon
Erected by Sigismund the Emperor, 1417. Knights of the white Eagle, Erected in
Poland by Ladislaus 5. 1325. Knights of the Elephant, a Danish Order. Knights
de l' Espice, of the Ear of corn or the Ermine (which hung at a Collar of
golden Ears) by Francis the first, 1450. in Bretaigne. Knights of St. Gall or
the Bear, by Frederick 2. Emperor 1213. Knights of the Garter or St. George,
the most Noble Order of England, instituted by King Edward the third, after
many notable Victories. Under the Sovereign of the Order (the King) are five
and twenty Companions. They always wear their George and Star (or rather the
Sun.) Knights of the Gennets, the most ancient Order in France, created by
Charles Martel, (after the discomfiture of the Saracens at Tours) 783. When
many of those Gen^ets (like Spanish or Civi^ Cats) were found in the Camp.
Knights of St. George, an Order in Genoa. Knights of the Golden Fleece, by
Philip Duke of Burgundy at his marrying Isabel the Daughter of Portugal, of
Thirty the King of Spain is chief. Knights of the Golden shield, by Lewis the
second, with this Motto, Allons, (Let us go.) Knights of the Half Moon or
Crescent, by Renier Duke of Anjou at his conquering Sicily (1462) whith this
Motto, Los (praise.) Knights of the Hare, fourteen Gentlemen knighted by king
Edward the third in France, at the shouting of the French which he thought was
the onset of the Battle, but was only occasioned by the starting of a Hare at
the head of their army. Knights of the Holy Ghost, by Henry the third, born and
Crowned King of France on Whit-sunday, this Order (though modern) is most used
now in France. Knights Hospitallers, the same as Knights of St. John of
Jerusalem, Ioannites, erected at Jerusalem, about the year 1104. by Baldwin the
first, suppressed in England (by H^n. the 8th.) for adhering to the Pope. Knights
of St. Iago, (James) a Spanish Order instituted by Pope Alexander 3 d. they
observe St. Austins rules, and their great Master is next to the King in State,
having 150 thousand Crowns yearly Revenue. Knights of the Jar, instituted by
Don Garcia King of Navarre. Knights of Jesus Christ, a Portugal Order. Knights
of St. Lazarus, expelled Jerusalem and entertained by St. Lewis. Knights of the
Lilly or of Navarre, a French Order, by Prince Garcia the 6 th. 1048. Knights
of the Virgin Mary's Looking-glass, by Ferdinand Infant of Castile 1410.
Knights of St. Magdalene, by St. Lewis, to reclaim quarrels and Duels, and to
mind them of Repentance. Knights of Maltha, given them by the Emperor Charles
the 5 th. 1529. paying an yearly Heriot of a Faulcon (which is now paid to the
King of Spain) when the Turk drove them from Rhodes, whither they came from
Jerusalem. Knight Marshal, he takes Cognizance of all transgressions and
Contracts within the Kings House and Verge thereof. Knights of the Virgin Mary
in Mount Carmel, (by Henry the 4th. of France 1607.) an hundred French
Gentlemen. Knights of St. Mark, a Venetian Order. Knights of San Maria de
Mercede, a Spanish Order. Knights of St. Mauri^e and Lazaro, instituted 1119.
and the Duke of Savoy confirmed their great Master by the Pope. Knights of St.
Michael the Archangel, 36 French Knights (instituted by Lewis 1469) whereof the
King is chief. Knights of the Militia Christiana, erected lately in Poland.
Knights of Mont^sia, in the Kingdom of Valentia, by James 2d. King of Arragon,
at the extirpation of the Templars, 1317. Knights of nova Scotia in the
West Indies, erected by King James, they wear an Orange-tawny ribban. Knights
of Orleance or the Porcupin, a French Order, with this devise, Cominus and
Eminus. Knights of the Post, whom you may hire to swear what you please.
Knights of the Pear Tree, or St. Julian, instituted 1179. called afterward
Knights of Alcantara in the Kingdom of Leon. Knights of the Precious blood of
Christ, (1608) by the Duke of Mantua, where some drops are said to be kept.
Knights of Rhodes, Hospitallers driven out of the Holy Land, and holding this
Isle two hundred years, were forced from thence also by Solomon, and seated
themselves in Maltha. Knights of the Round-Table, King Art^urs Knights, a
British Order, the most ancient (they say) of any in the World. Knights of San
Salvador in Arragon, instituted by Alphonso 1118. succeeding the Templars in
Montreal. Knights of St. Sepulcher, instituted by St. Hellen (a British Lady)
after she had found the holy Cross, and con^^r^ed by the Pope. Knights of the
Ship, by St. Lewis in an expedition against the Saracens. Knights of the Shire
or Parliament, two Knights (or Esquires) chosen (upon the Kings writ) by the
Freeholders of every County, to consult in Parliament (on behalf of the Commons
of England) touching the public affairs of the Realm. Knights of the
Seraphims, by Magnus the 4th. King of Sweden, 1324. Knights of the Star, a
French Order with this motto, -- Monstrant Regibus astra viam. Knights of St.
Stephen or Florence created by Cos^^ Duke of Florence, An. 1591. in honor of
Pope Stephen the 9th. Knights of the Swan, the Order of the house of Cleve.
Knights of the Sword and Baudric, a Swedish Order. Knights of Livonia or
Sword-bearers, by Albert a Monk (and some rich Merchants) of Breme, 1203.
Knights of the Temple, Templaries, or Knights Templars, instituted by Pope
Gelasius or (as some say) Baldwin the 2d. about the year, 1119. Their Office
and Vow was to defend the Temple, Sepulcher, and Christian Strangers, but
growing vicious (after two hundred years) were suppressed by Clement the V. and
their Lands bestowed on the Joannites, of whom the Lawyers purchased the Inn
founded by the said Templars in Fleet Street. Knights Teutonick, Mariani* a
mixed Order of Hospitallers and Templars, to whom the Emperor Frederick the 2
d. gave Prussia, on condition to subdue the Infidels, which they did. The
Elector of Brandenburgh was (at last) sole Master of their Order, for at first
they had three. Knights of the Thistle, a French Order (in the house of
Bourbon) constantly bearing this Motto, -- Nemo me impune lacessit, also the
same as Knights of St. Andrew. Poor Knights of Winsor, twenty six (old
Soldiers, etc.) depending on the Order of the Garter. Knights-fee, Inheritance
sufficient to maintain a Knight, by some 800, by others 680 Acres, such as had
20 pound per annum (in fee or for life) might have been (till 17 Car. 1.)
compelled to be made Knights. Knights-fee, is also the rent that a Knight paies
(for his fee) to the Lord of whom he holds. Knight Service, a Tenure (abolished
by 12 Car. 2.) obliging a man to bear arms in defense of his Country.
Knighten-Gyld, a Guild or Company of 19 Knights in London founded by King
Edgar, giving them some void ground (without the walls) called Portsoaken Ward.
Knightle, No. active, skilful. Knipperdolings, Heretics (in Germany) following
one Bern. Knipperdoling, contemporary and Companion with John of Leyden.
Knittlidg, the ballast of a Ship. Knit-back, Bone-s^t, ^on^ound, Cumfrey. Knock
fergus, (the Rock of Fergus.) an Irish Port-town. Knoll, a little hill, also a
Turnep, k. Knolls of peace, Duni pacis, cast up by man's hand, near Sterling in
Scotland. Knopped, o. tied, laced. Gold-knops, Crowfoots. Knots (q. knuts
[birds) a small delicious foul beloved of Canutus the Danish King. Knot-grass,
Polygonum, an herb (with long and ^ar^ow leaves) lying on the ground, good
against the Stone, fluxes and inflammations. Kolding, a Town in North-
Juitland. Koningsberg, a Town of Mentz in Germany, also a Polish University.
Kor^an, as Cor^an. Krain, a Province of lower Austria in Germany. Kunigunda,
Cu-, wife to the Emperor Henry the 2d. to clear her self from the imputation
of unchastity, went barefoot and blindfold on red hot irons. Kydde, o. for
kid. Kyddier, as Kidder. Kye, No. for kine. Kyle, a County in the South of
Scotland. Kylham, a Town in Yorkshire. Kylyw, an exaction (perhaps some kind of
pottage) exacted by Forresters and oother Bailiffs. Kynyl, o. a litter [of
Cats.] Kyneton, a Town in Herefordshire. Kyrk, (g. (...)) a Church. Kyrie
Elceson, g. Lord have mercy [upon us] used both in the Greek and Latin
Liturgies, as (in like manner) Christ Elceson, Christ have mercy [upon us.]
Kyth, Sa. kindred or alliance, whence we say (though corruptly) neither kit nor
kin, also to show, see Kid. Kytte, o. for cut.
L.
LAas Latch, Lace, o. a net, gin or snare. Laban, h. white or shining. Labarum,
g. a banner or ensign, particularly that of Constantine the Emperor, having
the picture of himself and Children, the two first Greek Capitals of Christ's
name wrought in gold and precious stones, in honor of his miraculous
conversion by the apparition of the Cross. Labda, the lame Daughter of Amphion,
despised by the rest of the Bacchidae. Labdacism, as Lamdacism* Labdanum, Lad-,
Laud-, a sweet transparent gum, from the leaves of the shrub Cistus Ledon.
Labefaction, l. a weakening or loosning. Labels, ribbans hanging at Garlands,
Mytres, etc. slipps of Parchment hanging at Indentures, etc. also the three
lines which hang from the file of an Escutcheon, denoting the Elder brother.
Labeones, l. blabber lipp'd persons. Labial, l. pertaining to the lips.
Labienus, one of Caesar's Captains in Gallia, who (in the Civil wars) clave to
Pompey. Lability, l. instability, a being Labile, l. apt to slip or fall.
Laborarijs, a writ against those that cannot live, and yet refuse to serve; or
that refuse to serve in summer, where they served in winter. Laboriferous, l.
enduring or taking pains. Laboriosity, Laboros-, a being Laborious, of great
pains and labor. Labors, [the Ship] rowles and tumbles very much. Labrador,
Sp. a Labourer. Labrous, l. having a brink or brim, or great lips. Labyrinth, a
maze, made with so many windings* and turnings that one cannot easily get out,
also any intricate business. Lacca, a red gum from certain Arabian trees.
Lacedaemonians, people of Lacedaemon, -nia, Sparta, Masithrea, Eb^da, Zacnia,
the chief City of Laconia. Lacerable, l. which one may Lacerate, l. tear in
pieces. Lacert, l. a Lizard, Ewt, Evet, Eft. Lacession, l. a provoking to
anger. Lachanopolist, g. a seller of herbs. Lache, f. Lazy. Laches, -esse, f.
Negligence. Lachesis, one of the 3 Destinies. Lachrymalle, l. to be bewailed.
Lachrymate, l. to weep, also to drop with moisture. Lachrymatory, a
weeping-place, also a Tear-botle sometimes buried with ancient ur^s. Lachrymae
Christi, Wine made near the Mountain Vesuvius. Lack, an East India gum
(gathered by Ants) which makes the best wax. Lacken, o. contemned, lessened.
Lacker, a varnish (whose chief ingredient is gum-lack) used in imitation of
Gilding. Laconick, -call, belonging to Laconia, Zaconia, a Country of
Peloponnesus. Laconize, to use Laconism, the Lacedaemonian (short and pithy)
speech, or hard life. Lactary, l. a Dairy-house or man. Lacte, o. an Offense.
Lacteal, -eous, l. milky. Lactifical, l. breeding milk. Lactucina, a Roman
Goddess over Corn, when the ears began to fill. Lacunation, l. a making of
holes. Ladanum, as Labdanum. Ladas, Alexanders page, who ran so swiftly that
the print of his foot could not be di^cerned in the sand. Lad, o. fed. Ladde,
o. (q. leaded) led. Lade, to load, also a passage of waters. Ladenberg, a town
in the Palatinate of the Rhine. Laden, another. Ladies-bedstraw, an herb in dry
pastures, with small leaves and yellow flowers. Ladies-bower, a plant with
abundance of small branches and leaves, fit to make Arbours for Ladies.
Ladies-mantle, with a neat indented leaf almost like a star. Ladies-smocks, a
kind of water Cresses. Lady traces, a kind of Satyrion or Orchis. Ladogo, a
town (and a large Lake) in Moscovy. Ladon, an Arcadian River, where Syri^x was
turned into a reed. Laft, (for left) o. left off, also enclosed. Lafordswick,
sa. a betraying ones Lord or Master. Laga, sa. Law. Lagan, See Flotson.
Lagemen, Lahmen, sa. Good men of the Jury. Lage, c. water. Lagen, (q. flagon) a
measure of six Sextaries. Laghslite, sa a [mulct for] breach of the law.
Lagophthalmie, g. a sleeping like a hare, with the eyes open. Laguibray, a town
in Normandy. Lahor, a town and Kingdom under the Mogul. Laiazzo, a Town in
Anatolia. Laick, -call, belonging to the Laity, (opposed to Clergy) the people
not in holy Orders. Laid-sterne, sc. (q. Lead-star) the pol-star. Lain^s, (q.
Layings) Courses or ranks of stone or brick in building. Lair^, the place where
a Deer harbors by day. Lairwite, Le^herwite, Leger-geldum, an ancient custom
of punishing Adultery and fornication, by the Lord of some Manors. Lais, a
Sicilian harlot living at Corinth, whose excessive rates made Demosthe^^ say,
He would not buy Repentance so dear. By her instigation Alexander burnt
Persepolis. She was killed by the women of Thessaly in the Temple of Venus.
Lait, o. allure. Laius, J^casta's husband, after whose death she married his
son Oedipus. Lake, No. to play. Lake, a purple-colour paint, see Lacca. Lake,
(D. Laecken) o. fine cloth, Lawn. Lamaunt, (f. l'aimant) ^. ^ lover.
Lambdacism, an insisting too much upon Lambda, g. the Letter L. Lambdoides,
Lamd-, La^d-, the hindmost seam of the skull. Lambeth* -bith, Lomebith, a town
in Surrey. Lambeth-house, a Palace belonging to the Archbishops of Canterbury,
built by the Archbishop Baldwin 1183. where Hardy-C^ute the (...) died
suddenly in the midst of his excessive luxury. Lambert, Sa. Fair lamb, or far
famous. Lambition, l. a licking or light touching of a thing. Lambitive,
licking or lapping. Lamborne, a town in Berkshire. Lamech, h. poor or humbled.
Lamel, l. a little thin plate. Lamers, o. thongs. Lamia, a harlot to whom the
Thebans* built a Temple. Lamiae, l. fairies or female Spirits. Lamination, l. a
beating into a Lamina, l. a thin plate of metal. Lammas-day, (q. Lamb-mass or
Loaf-mass) the first day of August. La Mothe, a town in Lorrain. Lampass,
-preys, a Disease in a horses mouth, cured by burning with a hot Iron.
Lampadios, a constellation in the head of Taurus. Lampetia and Phaethusa, kept
the Sheep of their Father Phoebus in Sicily. Lampoon, a libel in verse.
Lamprey, Suck-stone, a fish with holes on the sides like eyes. Lamsacus, a town
upon the Hellespont. Lanarious, Laneous, belonging to wool. Lancaster, Lon-,
the chief town (upon the River Lone) in Lancashire. Lancelot, (a lance-Knight)
one of king Arthurs knights. Lance-pesado, Lance-, Lan e-presado, (f.
Lance-pessade,) the lowest Officer in a foot-Company, Commander of ten. Lancet,
a Surgeons instrument in letting blood. Lanciano, a City of Naples. Lanch,
to put [a ship] a flote. Lanciferous, l. Lance-bearing. Landa, Lawnd, an open
field without wood. Land^oc, a Deed whereby lands are holden. Landegandman, One
of the inferior tenants of a Manor. Landcheap, a Customary fine to a Town,
etc. at every alienation of Land in the same. Landaffe (a Church on the River
Taff) a City in Wales Land, La. Urine. Land-cape, an end of Land reaching
farther into the sea than other parts of the Continent. Good Land-fall, when we
see the Land, according to the day of our own reckoning. Landgable, a tax or
rent issuing out of land. Landgraviate, the Country which belongs to a
Land-Grave, Lands-, Land-drossard, D. a Count or Earl of a Province, whereof in
Germany there are four. Lands, a County of Gascoigne. Landimers, Measurers of
Land. Land-locked, having the land round about us, and the Sea no where open
upon us. Landrecy, a town in Hainault. Land-loper, D. a Vagabond that runs up
and down the Country. Landman, Land-tenant, the same as T^rre-tenant.
Landmark, whereby the Pilot knows how they bear by the compass. Land-mate,
Heref. He that reaps with another on the same ridge of ground. Land-pirates,
High way men. Landscape, Lantskip, D. Paisage, f. Parergon, g. By-work, All that
in a picture which is not of the Body or Argument, also a description of a fair
prospect. Landsperg, a City of Brandenburgh and of the higher Bavaria.
Landshut, a City of lower Bavaria. Land-to, just so far off at sea, as one may
discern the land. Land-turn, the same from off the land by night, as a Brieze
is off the Sea by day. Lanfrank, an Italian Archbishop of Canterbury, 1060.
Langate, Languet, f. a long and narrow piece of Land etc. Langot, No. Latchet
[of the shoe.] Lang de beuf (f. Langue de baeuf) a kind of yellow-flower'd
bugloss. Langemanni, having So^ and Sac. Langrel, a loose-shot going into the
piece with a shackle and shortened, but flying out at length with half-bullets
at the ends. Langporte, a town in Somerset. Langland, an Island in the Baltic
Sea. Langres, a City of Champagne. Langu^d, tongued, having the tongue ( Gules,
Azure, etc.) Languedoc, part of France* where the Goths continued long, and who
say O* instead of Ouy. Languerth, -goreth, ^. languisheth. Languid, l. weak,
faint. Languifical, l. causing Languor, l. a languishing, decaying drooping.
Laniation, l. a tearing like a Butcher. Laniferous, l. bearing wool or Cotton.
Lanifical, l. making wool or woollen Cloth, pertaining to such work.
Lanionious, l. belonging to a Butcher. Lanipendious, l. weighing wool, spinning
or making yarn. Lanis de crescentia Walliae, etc. a writ for the passing over
of wool without custom being paid in Wales. Lank, o. slender, weak. Lanner,
-ret, (f. Faulcon Lanier) a kind of hawk. Lanniers, small ropes reeved into the
Deadmens eyes of all the shrowds, to loosen them or set them taught. Lanthong,
an Abbey in Monmouthshire, enclosed with such high Hills that the Sun is not to
be seen there but between the hours of twelve and three. Lantgrave, as
Landgrave. Lantskip, as Landscape. Lanuginous, belonging to, or covered with
Lanuge, l. soft thin down. Laocoon* Son of Priam and Priest of Apollo, he
dissuaded the Trojans from receiving the Horse. Laodamia, Daughter of
Bellerophon, she brought forth Sarpedon (King of Lycia) to Jupiter, and was
shot with her own Arrows by Diana. Laodamia, Daughter of Acastus, desiring to
see the Ghost of her Husband Protesilaus (slain by Hector) died in his arms.
Laodiceans, the people of Laodicea, a City in Asia, where was held the
Laodicean Council, under Pope Silvester, Anno 320. Laodochus, Son of Antenor,
in his shape Minerva came to persuade Pandarus to break the league by darting
at Menelaus. Laomedon, Father of Priamus, and King of the Trojans, slain by
Hercules for not performing his promise made for his preserving his Daughter
Hesione from the Sea Monster, to which he was forced to expose her for
defrauding Neptune and Apollo of their wages for building the City-walls. Laon,
a City of Picardy. Lap, c. Pottage. Lapicide, l. a Stone-cutter, or hewer of
Stone. Lapidable, which may be stoned. Lapidacy, a Jeweller. Lapidarious,
-d^ous, stony, like or belonging to stones. Lapidation, l. a stoning to death.
Lapidescence, l. a waxing hard like stone. Lapidescent, waxing hard, etc.
Lapidifical, making or breeding stones. Lapidification, a making stony. Lapis
Calaminaris, as Cadmia. Lapis Contragerva, a stone good against the biting of
Serpents. Lapis Haematites, a boodstone. Lapis Infernalis, a stone made of
the same lie that blacksoap is. Lapis Judaicus, a white stone (found in Judaea)
about the bigness of an acorn. Lapis Lazuli, as Lazule. Lapis Nephriticus, a
stone (good against the stone in the Kidneys) coming from new Spain. Lapis
Opprobrij, the stone of disgrace at Padua, on which whosoever sits
(acknowledging himself Non-solvent) cannot be imprisoned for debt. Lapis
Tutiae, as Tutie. Lapithae, a people of Thessaly, the first inventers of
bridles and Saddles. Lapland, Laponia, part of Swethland. Lappacean, belonging
to a bur. Lappise, when Greyhounds open in their course, or hounds spend their
mouths in the leam or leash. Lapse, l. a slip or fall. Lapsed, let slip. Lapsed
Benefice, to which the Patron neglects the presentation for six months.
Lap-wing, (q. Clap-wing) a bird well known. Laquery, l. the roof of a Chamber
vaulted. Lar, the chief City of Larestan, a Province (bearing the fairest
Dates, Oranges and Pomegranats) in Persia. Lara, -runda, one of the Naiades, on
whom Mercury (instead of carrying her to hell for revealing to Juno the Love of
Jupiter to Juturna) begat two twins called Lares, Pe^ates, the houshold-Gods.
Lar-board, Port, the left side of a Ship. Larceny, f. theft of personal goods
or Chattels in the owners absence. Great Larceny, when the theft exceeds the
value of 12 pence. Petit Larceny, when it exceeds not that value.
Larch-turpentine, a kind of Rosin growing on the Larch-tree, it has leaves
like a Pine and bears the drug Agaricum from Larissa, a City of Thessaly, and
several other places* Larding-money, paid the Marquess of Winchester, for his
Tenants hogs feeding in his woods. Lareow, sa. a Master. Lare, sc. learning.
Large, (in Music) eight Sem'briefs. Large, with a quarter-wind neither by nor
before a wind, but betwixt both. Laredo, a Port-Town of Biscay. Largess, f. a
boon, bounty or liberality. Largifical, l. bestowing bountifully and frankly.
Largiloquent, l. full of words. Largitional, an Officer that oversees the
bestowing of gifts. Larius, Lago di Como, the greatest lake in Italy,
containing (from North to South) sixty miles. Larmiro, a Port of Thessaly.
Laria, a Town of Epirus. Lark-spur, a flower (of several sorts) much regarded
of Florists. Larons, f. thieves. Lar-spel, sa. a lesson or Sermon. Larval,
belonging to a Larva, l. a Ghost or Spirit. Larvated, masqued, for the
representing a Ghost or Goblin. Larunda, the same as La^ Larus, a ravenous
devouring bird. Larynx, g. the head of Arteria Aspera, the instrument by which
we speak. Lasciviate, to give one self to Lasciviousness, a being Lascivious,
l. wanton. Lashlite, the Danish common forfeiture, viz. 12 Ores, (about sixteen
pence each Ore.) Lask, Laritas, l. Diarrhaea, g. the wherry-go nimble or
looseness of the belly. Lasking, V^ering, quarter-winds, Large and Roomer, are
(in a manner) all one. Lassed, o. left. Lassitude, l. weariness. Last, D. a
burden or weight, also (in the Marshes of East Kent) a Court of 24 Jurats. Last
of unpackt Herrings, 18 barrels. Last of Codfish, 12 barrels. Last of Wool, 12
sacks. Last of Leather, 20 Dickers. Last of Osmonds, 4 thousand weight. Last of
Herrings, ten thousand. Last of Pitch, Tar or Ashes, fourteen barrels. Last of
Hides, twelve dozen. Last of Corn or Rapeseed, 10 quarters. Lastage, Lestage,
Lesting, a Custom challenged in Markets and Fairs for ones carrying of things,
or for wares sold by the Last, also the ballast of a Ship. Last heir, the Lord
or King, to whom the Land comes by Escheat, for want of a lawful heir. Lase on,
the bonnet to the course or drabler to the bonnet, etc. Lash, bind any thing up
to the Ship sides or Masts. Lashers, the ropes that bind together the tackle
and breechings of great Ordnance. Latch, o. release, let go. Latchets, small
lines (like loops) sown into the bonnet or drabler (to lase them together.)
Latching, No. catching, infecting. Late, Cu. to seek. Latebrous, full of
Latebrae, l. dens or hiding-holes. Latent, l. lurking, lying hid. Lateral, l.
belonging to the side. Laterality, a being side-wayes. Laterane [Palace,] given
to the Pope by Constantine, and belonging formerly to Lateranus, a Roman
Patrician who hid himself from business, and (being designed Consul) was slain
by Nero's Command. Lateritious, like or made of brick. Lathe, Lethe, Sa. a
great part of a County, 3 or 4 hundreds, etc. Lathe, Li. a barn, also ease or
rest. Lathing, No. entreaty, invitation. Latible, l. a hiding place. Laticlave,
[a purple cloak] with broad nails or studs, a badge of the Senatorian Order.
Latifolious, l. having broad leaves. Latimer, (q. Latiner, f. Latinier,) an
interpreter or Translater [into Latin.] Latinism, -ity, a speaking after the
Latin Idiom. Latinus, an ancient King of Italy, who married his Daughter
Lavinia to Aeneas. Lation, l. a bearing or carrying. Latirostrous, having a
broad or flat bill. Latitancy, -ation, l. a being Latitant, lurking or lying
hid. Latitat, a writ whereby all men in personal actions are called originally
to the King's Bench, upon supposition that he lurks or lies hid. Latitude, l.
breadth, wideness. Latitude of a place, the Arch of the Meridian between the
Equinoctial and the Zenith. Latitude of a Star, the Arch of a great circle
(drawn by the poles of the Ecliptic) between the Ecliptic and the Star.
Latitudinarians, the moderate Divines of the Church of England, abusively so
called. Latomy, g. a stone-quarry. Latonian, belonging to Latona, Daughter of
Caeus, one of the Titans, on whom Jupiter begat the Latonian-lights, Apollo and
Diana, the Sun and Moon. Laton, -oun, o. for Latte^. Lator, l. a bearer or
messenger. Latration, l. a barking. Latred, o. for Loytred. Latrie, g. worship
or service. Latrocination, l. a committing of robbery. Latte, o, for led. Lat
Weather, wet or otherwise unseasonable. No. Lavare, -atory, l. a vessel or
place to wash in. La Val, a Town of Anjou in France. Lavatrine, l. a sink or
washing place in a kitchen. Lau, a Town in the Dukedom of Mecklenburgh.
Laubach, the chi^f Town of Carniole in Germany. Laudable, l. commendable,
praiseworthy. Lauds, praises, also part of the Roman service containing
certain Psalms beginning with Laudate Dominum. Laudanum, as Labdanum.
Laudative, [belonging to] a commendation. Laude^, Lothen, part of
South-Scotland. Lave, l. to wash or Purge. Lavamand^, a Town of Carinthia in
Germany. The Lave, Cu. all the rest. Lavedan, an Iron-grey Gennet bred upon
Lavedan, a Pyrenaean Mountain, breeding the best horses of France. Laven,
(lave-out) o. draw empty. Lavender, Spiknard, a common plant, also a Laundress,
o. Lavenham, a town in Suffolk. Laver, a place or vessel to wash in. Laverd,
L^verd, Laford, o. Lord. Laverna, a Roman Goddess, Patroness of the
Laverniones, Thieves. Laverock, a kind of bird. Lavinia, Aenaeas's wife, who
gave name to Lavinium, a City in Italy. Launc^gays* Offensive weapons
prohibited and disused. Lancelot, Lan-, Launcette (I. Lancetta) a fleam to let
blood, also a man's name. Launcepesado, as Lancepesado. Laund, Lawn (Sp. Landa)
plain untilled ground (in a park.) Launston, a town in Cornwall: Lavolta, I. a
kind of dance, also a course held in sailing. Laureate, -ted, l. crowned with
Laurel, Baies, worn by the ancient Roman Triumphers. Laurel and Bay Tree are
confounded in Latin, but with us known to be two distinct trees. Laureated
letters, sent by the Roman Generals to the Senate (and bound up in Laurel) to
give them notice of their victories. St. Laurence, a Roman Deacon and famous
Martyr, broyled to death for producing the poor (as the Treasure of the Church)
to Valerian the Prefe^^. Laurentalia, Feasts in honor of Acca Laurentia, Wife
to Faustulus, who nursed Romulus and Remus, when exposed by command of Amulius
King of the Latins. Laurer, o. for Laurel. Lauriferous, l. bearing bays or
laurel. Laustein, a town of Mentz in Germany. Lausus, Son of Numitor, slain by
his Uncle Amulius, also the son of Mezentius King of the Hetrurians, slain by
Aeneas. Lausanna, a City of Switzerland. Law, Sc. a hill. Law of Arms, Martial
law which directs how to proclaim and make war, to make and observe leagues,
etc. Law of Maneleta (a Cornweed) ordained by King K^nneth of Scotland, that if
any suffered his land to be overrun with weeds, he should forfeit an Ox. Law
of Marque, Mart or Reprisal, whereby men take the goods of them from whom they
have suffered wrong (and cannot get ordinary Justice) when ever they catch them
within their Marches or limits. Law-Merchant, proper to Merchants, and
differing from the Common Law of England. If one (of any two Joint-Merchants)
die, The Executor shall have the Moiety. Law spiritual, the Ecclesiastical Law
allowed by the Laws of the Realm. Law of the Staple, as Law-Merchant. Law-day,
View of Frank-pledge, or Court Leet, also the County Court. Lawenburg, a town
in Saxony. Lawing of dogs, cutting off three claws of the fore-foot, or as
Expeditating. Mastiffs must be Lawed every three years. Lawingen, a Town in
Schwaben on the Danaw. Lawland, an Island in the Baltic Sea. Lawless-Court,
held on Kinshil at Rochford in Essex, the Wednesday after Michaelmas at
Cockcrowing; They whisper and have no Candle, and write with a coal. He that
ows suit or service and appears not, forfeits double his rent every hour he is
missing. Lawless-man, an Outlaw. Lawn, as Laund. Lax, a certain fish without
bones. Laxation, l. a releasing, easing, or freeing. Laxitomne, a town in the
Isle of man. Laxity, l. looseness, liberty. Lay, f. a song, also as Ley. Lay
branches, bend them down and cover them, that they may take root. Lay a land,
Sail out of its sight, but if another point of land interpose, it is ^hut into
it. Layer, Bed, the Channel of a Sea-Creek, wherein Oysters are thrown to
breed, and not to be taken till a large shilling may be ratled between the
shells. Lay-land, which lies untilled. Layman, following Secular Employments,
not of the Clergy. Laystall, sa. a Dunghill. Laystoff, a town in Suffolk.
Lazar, a poor man full of sores, etc. Lazaretto, I. an hospital or Pesthouse.
At Milan is one 1800 yards in Compass with as many Chambers as are days in the
year. Lazarus, h. Lords help. Lazule, a bluish kind of marble of which they
make the color Azure, and much used in Physic. Lazy, No. Naught, bad. Leach,
o. a Physician. Leaden, Lidden, No. a noise or din. Leafdian, Hle-, sa. a Lady.
League, a Covenant or agreement, also the space of three miles. French League,
about two miles and an half. Spanish League, somewhat more than three miles.
Leah, h. painful. The ship Leaks, is Leak, springs a Leak, makes (or takes in)
water. Leam, Liam, Leash, a line to hold a dog or hawk in. Leander, a Young man
of Abydos, who was wont (in the night) to swim over the Hellespont to Hero (one
of Venus's Nuns) at Sestos, till at length he was drowned. Lean nothing, No.
Conceal nothing. Leap, Lib, Ss. half a bushel. Leap-year, as Bissentile. Lear,
No. to learn. Learches, slain by his Father Athamas King of Thebes, who (in a
raging madness) took him for a Lions whelp. Lease, o. praise (l. laus.) Lease,
f. a demising or letting of lands or any Hereditament to another (for a certain
term of years or l^fe) for a rent therein reserved. Lease parole, made by word
of mouth. Leassee, to whom the lease is made. Leassor, he that lets it. Leash,
as Leam. Leash of hares, hounds, etc. Three. Leasing, Ss. K. Gleaning.
Leasings, -sungs, sa. Lies. Leaven, a piece of dough salted and sowred, to
ferment and relish the whole lump. Leaveret, Lev-, f. a young hare. Leau^y, o.
Loyalty. Lecanomanter, he that uses Lecanomancy, g. Divination by [water in] a
basin. Leccator, a riotous debauched person. Lecca, a City of Naples. Lech, o.
for Like and Leech. Lechnus, an Arcadian spring good against abortions.
Lectern, -orn, (f. Lectrin) a Reading-Desk. Leck-on, No. pour on more [liquor.]
Lectistern, l. the adorning of a bed for a banquet (with the Images of the
Gods, etc.) Lector, -tour, l. a Reader. Lecture, l. a Reading or lesson, also
the place and Office of a Lecturer, a public Reader or Professor, an
Extraordinary Preacher. Leda, being deceived by Jupiter in the form of a Swan,
she brought forth two eggs, whereof one produced P^llux and Helena, the other
Castor and Clytemnestra. Leden, o. to languish, also (for Latin) Language.
Ledors, o. instead of Ledoires, f. reproaches, revilings. Ledges, small Timbers
coming thwart ships (from the wast-trees to the Roof-trees) to bear up the
Nettings. Ledge, o. Leg, Li. to lay. Lee, opposite to the Wind or Weather-gage.
A-lee the helm, put it to Lee-side (not to the Weather-side) of the ship. Look
to the Lee-latch, that the ship go not to lee-ward of her Course. Lay her by
the Lee, with all her sails flat against the Masts, and the wind on her
broadside. Le, Br. a place. Lee, Lew, Ss. Calm, under the Wind. Lee-fang, a
rope reeved into the Creengles of the courses, to hale in the bottom of a sail
Lee-ward tide, when the wind and tide go both one way. Le^c^, the outside or
skirt of a sail from the Earing to the Clew. Leech-lines, fastened to the leech
of the topsails. Lecchyd, o. dressed, seasoned. Leed, Lid, o. March q. Loud
[month.] Hence L^de-pills, o. Cow-hides. Leeds, a Castle in K^nt, also a town
in Yorkshire. Leek, a town in Staffordshire. Leer, the place where a Deer lies
to dry himself from the dew. Leero-way, Lyra-way, a tuning or playing on the
Viol, differing from that of Alphonse. Lees, o. to release. Lees, Dregs [of
wine, etc.] also, for Leesing, o. Lying. Leeten you, Che. Make your self,
pretend to be. Leet, a Law-day. Court Leet, a Kings Court of Record (in whose
manor soever it be kept) it Enquires of all offenses under High Treason,
punishes some and certifies the rest to the Justices of Assise. Lefe, o. (q.
loves, answering the Latin and Greek) is wont, also willing, and as Leve,
Liefe, o. dear, beloved. Leethwake, No. limber, pliable. Legacy, a particular
thing given by a last Will and Testament. Legality, l. lawfulness, keeping the
law, the condition of a Legalis homo, Rectus in Curia, Not outlawed,
Excommunicated or Defamed. Legation, l. an Embassy, the office of a Legate, l.
an Ambassador, or Orator. Legatee, -tarry, -tory, he or she to whom any thing
is bequeathed. Leged, o. (q. legged, laid) resident. Leggen, o. to allay,
assuage. Legging, o. lodging. Legend, l. a writing [about the edge of a piece
of Coin.] Golden Legend, -dary, a Popish book of the lives of Saints, very
fabulous. Legeolium, Castle-ford in Yorkshire. Leger-book, a register
belonging to Notaries or merchants. Legerdemain, f. slight of hand. Legergild,
as Lairwit. Legiaunce, o. Allegiance. Legible, l. which may be readd.
Legiferous, l. making or giving Laws. Legionary, belonging to a Legion, l. a
Brigade or part of a Roman Army, consisting at first of 3000 Foot, and 300
Horse; increased by degrees to 6000 Foot, and 3000 (or, as some say; 730)
Horse, by some it is said to be an Army of 6666. Legislative, belonging to the
making of Laws. Legislatour, l. a Lawgiver. Legist, -ter, l. a Lawyer.
Legitimation, a making Legitimate, l. lawful. Leguminous, l. belonging to
pulse. Legs [of the Martnets,] small ropes (a foot long) put through the
bolt-ropes of the main and fore-sail in the Eeech, and (being splised into
themselves) have a little eye whereinto the Martnets are made. Leicester,
Legeocester, Legecestria, Leogora, the chief Town in Leichestershire. Leid, sc.
a Language. Leiden, Leyden, an University in Holland, erected by William Prince
of Orange, 1575. Leigh, Ley, a pasture, or as Le. Leighton-Buzzard, a Town in
Bedfordshire. Leipsick, a Town in Misnia. Leinster, Lemster, Leighnigh, a
Province in Ireland. Leit, o. Light. Leith, a Town by Edinburgh in Scotland.
Lele, o. (q. lawly) lawful. Leman, (q. lead-man, or rather L' Aimant-te, f.) a
Sweetheart or Lover (He or She) but vulgarly, the Concubine of a Priest or
married man. Leman, -nus, the Lake upon whith Geneva stands. Lemes, o. lights,
flames. Lemnian, belonging to Lemnos, an Aegaean Isle into which sell the
Lemnian God, Vulcan, thrown out of Heaven by Jupiter. Lemnian Earth, Vermillion
or red Earth. Lemburgh, a Town in Podolia. Lemgow, a free City of Westphalia.
Lemster ^re, famous wool of Lemster, -tir, Leonminster, a Town in
Herefordshire. Lemures, l. Hobgoblins. Lends, o. the loins. Lene, o. to lend.
Lenitive, Lenient; softening, asswaging, causing Lenity, -tude, l. softness,
meekness, gentleness. Lenham, a Town in Kent. Lennox, a County in South-
Scotland. Lenonian, l. belonging to a bawd. Lentiginous, full of freckles or
pimples like Lentils, small round and flat pulse growing in hot Countries.
Lent, D. (the Spring) the forty days of abstinence next before Easter,
appointed here first by Ercombert, King of Kent, An. 641. Lentiscine, belonging
to the Lentisk, the Mastick-tree. Lentour, l. stiffness, clamminess. Lentous,
l. pliant, tender, limber, also idle. L' envoy, f. the message, also the
conclusion of a Poem, serving for dedication or short repetition. Leonine,
belonging to Leo, l. a Lion, one of the 12 signs, also the Names of several.
Emperors and Popes. Leocorion, a Monument erected by the Athenians in honor
of Leo, the Son of Orpheus, who sacrificed his three Daughters, to appease the
Gods and divert a great Plague. Leodegar, Leodgard, keeper of the people.
Leodium, Liege, a City in Germany. Leofstan, sa. most beloved, or
precious-stone. Leofwin, sa. win-love. Leoh, sa Light. Leon, a Spanish Province
and City. Leonard, sa. of a Lion-like nature. Leonidas; a famous Captain and
King of the Lacedaemonians. Leopard, Libbard, an Affrican spotted beast begotten
between a Pard and Lioness. Leopold, Leodpold, sa. defender of the people.
Leopolis, Lewenberg, a town in Russia nigra. Leorning-Cnight, sa. a disciple or
Scholar. Lopande, o. leaping. Lep and lace, four pence paid the Lord of Writtel
Manor in Essex, for every cart (except a Noblemans) that passes over
Greenbury (part thereof.) Lepanto, Naupactum, a City of Locris. Lepid^ty, a
being Lepid, l. neat or pleasant. Leporean, -rine, l. belonging to a hare.
Leporarius, a Greyhound. Leprosity, a being Leprous, full of Lepry, -rosy, a
white scars all over the body. Leproso amovendo, a writ for the removing of a
Leper. Leptology, g. a description of minute and sordid things. Lere, o. for
leather, also ( l'air. f.) the air of the face or complexion. Lerida, a Town in
Catalonia. Lernean, belonging to Lerna, g. a water-serpent, also the Lake where
Hercules slew the Serpent Hydra. Lerp^ol, a Town in Lancashire. Without Les, o.
incessantly. Lesbian, belonging to Lesbos, an Aegean Isle, very exact in their
buildings. Lescar, a City of Bearne in France. Lesinage, I. thriftiness, good
husbandry, from Lesina, I. a Cobblers awl. Lesingour, o. a Liar. Lesion, l. a
hurting. Lespegend, sa. Youngmen. Lessee, to whom the Lease is made. Lesser,
-sor, who lets the Lease. Lesses, the dung of a Bear, or any ravenous beast.
Lessel, o. a shady bush or hovel. Lessian diet, very moderate, prescribed by
Lessius, a famous modern Physician. Lest, o. for lust. Lestage, as Lastage.
Lestrigones, a barbarous and Giant-like people of Italy, whose King Antiphates
tore one of Vlysses's Companions in pieces with his Teeth. Letchland, a Town in
Glocestershire. Letany, as Litany. Leth, as Lathe. Let, o. to cease or leave.
Letest fare, o. (let go) make a show. Lethality, l. a being Lethal, l.
deadly, mortal. Letherwite* corruptly for Letherwite, or Lairwite. Lethargick,
sick of, or belonging to the Lethargy, g. the Drousie evil, a cold distemper
causing excessive sleeping, the loss of sense and memory. Lethaean, belonging
to Leth^, g. [a supposed River of Hell causing] forgetfulness. Lethiferous, l.
deadly. Lethy, o. as Lither. Letifical, Laet-, l. making glad. Letter-missive,
an Epistle or letter sent. Letter of Attorney, Authorizing an Attorney, that
is, a man appointed to do a lawful act in our stead. Letters of Marque or
Mart, authorizing one to take by force of Arms those Goods which are due by the
Law of Marque. Letters Patent, Open writings sealed with the broad-seal of
England, enabling a man to do or enjoy what otherwise of himself he could not.
Lettice, Lactu^a, a plant breeding Milk. Lettice, Laetitia, Joy. Lettouwe,
Littaw, Lituania. Lettrure, Literature, book-learning. Levament, -ation, a
lifting up easing or comforting. Levant, f. the East [wind, Country, Sea,
etc.] Levant and Couehant, when Cattle have been so long in another man's
ground, that they have lain down, and are risen again to feed. Levari facias, a
writ directing the Sheriff to levy money upon the Lands and Tenements of him
that has forfeited his Recognisance. Levari facias damna de Disseisitoribus, a
writ directing the Sheriff to levy damages wherein the Disseisor has been
condemned to the Disseised. Levari facias quando Vicecomes returnavit quod non
habuit empiores, a writ commanding the Sheriff to sell the Goods of the Debtor,
which he has already taken and returned, that he could not sell. Levari facias
residuum debiti, a writ for the Sheriff to le^y the remnant of a debt that has
been in part satisfied. Levatory, l. an instrument to elevate the depressed
Cranium. Leucophlegmatick, troubled with a Leucophlegmatie, g. a dropsy caused
by the abounding of white phlegm. Leucothea, Ino, Matuta, Aurora. Leucothoe,
turned into a Frankincense-tree by Apollo, who had gotten her with Child, for
which she was buried alive by her Father Orchamus King of Babylon. Leuctra, a
Town in Boeotia. Lewd, Lewit, sc. ignorant. Leve, o. for leave. Level-Coil, I.
(Leva il Culo) hitch-buttock, when one (having lost the game) sits out, and
gives another his place. Levellers, a factious part of the Parliament-Army
(about the year 1649.) who would have had all things common. Lever; o. better.
Levessel, as Lessel. Leveth, o. bears. Levi, h. joined. Leviathan, h. a
Whale, or (by some) a great water-Serpent, also the Devil. Levy, (f. lever) to
raise, to gather or exact [money, etc.] to cast up [a ditch] to erect [a mill,
etc.] Levigation, Laev-, l. a levelling, smoothing or making plain.
Levisomnous, l. watchful, soon waked. Levissa, Lewis, the largest Isle of all
the Hebrides. Levitical, belonging to the Levites, those of the Tribe of Levi,
whose inheritance the Priesthood was. Leviticus, a book describing the whole
Levitical Order. Leuwarden, a Town in West-Friezland. Levity, l. lightness.
Lewis, -was, the chief Town of Sussex. Lewis, (f. Louis) Lodowick, Ludwig, sa.
the defense of the people. Lewlin, Lewellin, Llew-, Br. Lion-like. Lex
Bretoyse, -oise, Lex Marchiarum, the law of the Britains or Marches of Wales.
Lexicon, g. a vocabulary or Dictionary. Lex talionis, a law returning like for
like. Lex deraisnia, or rather Deraisina, the proof of a thing which one denies
to be done by him, and his Adversary affirms it. Ley, f. (l^y) the law.
Ley-gager, Wager of Law. Leyden, as Leiden, built on one and forty Islands.
Leyes, o. perhaps Libyssa, a City of Bithynia, or else Levissa. Legerwit, as
Lotherwit. Leyton, a Town on the River Ley, about 5 miles from London. Lhan,
Br. a Church. Liam, a leam or leash. Liard, o. nimble. Liart, o. (q. pliart for
pliant) gentle, lithe. Libament, -ation, l. a [liquid] sacrifice. Libanomancy,
g. Divination by Liban^s, g. Frankincense Libb, ^, to geld. Lib^ards-bane,
Doronicam, a kind of herb. Libben, c. a private dwelling house. Libbedge, c. a
bed. Libel, l. (a little book) an original declaration of any action in the
civil Law, also Infamous Libel, an invective or slanderous Writing.
Libellatici, some primitive Christians having bought Libels or Testimonies of
the Roman Magistrate, falsely declaring that they had been assistant at the
Pagan sacrifices. Liberate, a Chancery writ or Warrant to the Treasurer,
Chamberlain and Barons of the Exchequer, to pay out any sum granted under the
broad-Seal, or to the Sheriff to deliver possession of Lands and Goods
extended. Liberation, l. a freeing or delivering. Libera batella, a free boat.
Libera Chasea habenda, a writ granting a free Chase proved to belong to the
Manor. Liber [Pater,] Bacchus. Liber taurus, a free Bull. Libertas, l. a
privilege (by grant or prescription) to enjoy some extraordinary benefit, also
a Roman Goddess whose Temple was on the hill Aventinus. Liberate Probanda, a
writ for such as were challenged for slaves, and offered to prove themselves
free. Libertatibus allocandis, a writ for a Citizen (impleaded contrary to his
liberty) to have his privilege allowed. Libertatibus exigendis in itinere, a
writ for the Justices in Air to admit of an Attorney for the defense of
another man's Liberty before them. Libertinage, -inism, -nity, sensuality,
licentiousness, the state and condition of a Libertine, l. one born or made
free, also a loose and dissolute Epicure. Libertinism (in Divinity) is defined
to be, a false liberty of belief and manners, which will have no other
dependence but on particular fancy and Passion. Libethrae, a Town on the
Mountain Olympus, destroyed ed by a violent flood. Libethra, a Fountain of
Magnesia, sacred to the Libethrides, the Muses. Libidinist, a sensualist, one
that gives himself up to Libidinosity, lasciviousness, a being Libidinous, l.
lustful, incontinent. Libitina, the Goddess or superintendant of Funerals,
Sepulchers and funeral Rites. Libitinarians, l. bearers. Libitude, l. will.
pleasure. Ad Libitum, at will or pleasure. Libourne, a Town of Guienne in
France. Li^ral, belonging to Libra, l. a pound weight, also the balance, one of
the 12 Signs of the Zodiac. Librariaus, belonging to books or to a Library, a
study or place where books are kept. Libration, l. a weighing or balancing.
Librata terrae, contains four Oxgangs, and every Oxgang her teen Acres. Libya,
Africa. Licanthropy, as Lycan-. Licand, o. well-liking. Licaon, a King of
Arcadia turned into a Wolf. License to arise, a liberty or space given by the
Court to a Tenant in a real action (Essoyned de malo lecti) to arise or appear
abroad. Licentia transfretandi, a License (from the King) of passing over-sea.
Licentiate, one that has license or Authority to practice in any Art.
Licentious, loose, disorderly, unruly. Lichas, a boy whom Hercules threw into
the Sea (where he was turned into a Rock) for bringing him the poisoned shirt
from Deianira. Liche, o. for like. Lichfield, Licidfield, (field of Carcases) a
Town in Staffordshire, where many (they say) were martyred in the time of
Dioclesian. Lich sowles, sa. (carcase-birds) Scrich-Owls, Night-Ravens.
Licitation, l. a cheapning or prizing, also a setting out to Sale and
enhauncing the price. Licite, l. lawful. Lictorian, belonging to the Lictors,
l. Sergeants. Liddesdale, part of South- Scotland. Lidford-law, (in Cornwall)
the course whereof is very summary, and is commonly taken for hanging men first
and inditing them afterward. Lief, Leof, sa. rather. Lief-bebber, sa. a Lover.
Lieftenant, Lieut-, f. holding the place or doing the office of another, a
Deputy. Liege, Luykland, a Bishopric (in the Netherlands) called the paradise
of Priests, where there is Coal (they say) kindled with water and quenched with
Oil or Salt. Liege [Lord] Sovereign, owning no Superior. Lieges, Liege people,
the Kings Subjects. Liege-man, he that owes Liegeancy, (I. Liga, a league or
bond) allegiance, fealty, faithful, obedience. Ligeance, the same, also the
Dominion or territory of the Liege-Lord. Lieue, f. a french league. In Lieu, f.
in place or stead. Lientery, g. a flux of the Stomach or belly, presently
voiding things undigested. Liesse, a Town in Pi^ardy. Life-gard, D. Guard du
Corpse, f. the guard of the body. Life-rent, an exhibition received for term (or
sustentation) of life. Lift haufe, o. left hand. Lifts, ropes serving to top
the yard-arms or make them hang higher or lower, etc. Lift, Nf. a style to be
opened like a gate. Lifter, Plyer, c. a crutch. Lig, No. to lie. Ligament, l. a
string or tyband, especially that where with the joints of bones and gristles
are fastened together. Ligature, the same, also as Ligation, a tying or
binding. Light Horse, lightly armed. Light-mans, c. [break of] day. Ligne, f.
(corruptly lime) to couple as Dogs with Bitches. Lignation, l. a providing or
fetching of wood. Lignes, o. likes, yields, or rather pleasure or liking.
Lignean, -eous, full or made of Wood, wooden or Woody. Lignicide, l. a
Wood-cutter. Lignum Asphaltum, a kind of Bituminous Wood, supposed to grow by
the Dead-sea. Lignum Nephriticum, Wood brought from Hispaniola, good for the
Stone in the Kidneys. Lignum Rhodium, Aspalathus, a sweet Wood, of which is
made the Oil of Rhodium. Lignum vitae, the Wood called Aloes, by the Arabians
Calambuco. Ligorne, Livorne, a Port-Town of Tuscany. Ligue, f. a league, or
alliance. Ligula, Uvula, a little piece of flesh in the roof of the mouth.
Liguria, a hilly part of Italy. Ligurion, l. a glutton or devo^rer. Ligurition,
l. a Ravenous or gluttonous devouring* Lily, the ro^e of Juno, a specious
Flower. Lilith, a kind of She-Devil, destructive to Children (as the Jews
imagined.) Lilium Paracelsi, the tincture of Antimony. Lilliers, a Town in
Artoi^ one of the Netherlands. Lillo, a Fortress in Brabant. Lilybaeum, a
Sicilian Promontory, with a Town of the same name. Lima, la Ciudad de los reys,
Sp. the City of the, Kings or Twelf-day (because then the first stone was laid
by Pizarro, 1553) the Metropolis of Peru in America. Limagne, a Province in
France. Limaceous, belonging to a Snail. Limail, o. -aille, f. Filings,
steel-dust, etc. Limation, l. a filing or polishing. Limatura Martis, the
filings of Horn, for the making of Crocus Martis. Limb, part of a quadrant,
etc. also the eclipsed part of the Sun or Moon. Limbeck, an Alembick or Still.
Limbers, Limber-holes, square holes in the bottom of all the ground-timbers to
let the water pass to the well of the pump. Limburgh, a Town and Dukedom in the
Netherlands. Limbus Patrum, a place (on the borders of Hell) where the Holy
Fathers were supposed to reside till the coming of our Savior. Limed, o.
polished. Lime-hound, Limer, bloud-hound, a great Dog to hunt the wild Boar.
Limenarch, g. the Governor of a Port. Limerick, a Town and County in Ireland.
Liminarie, f. set at the entry or beginning of any thing. Limitation, a
stinting or setting of bounds. Limitation of Assize, a certain time set down by
Statute, wherein a man must allege himself or his Ancestor to have been seized
of Lands sued for by a writ of Assise. Limning, a kind of painting in
watercolors. Limosin, a Province in France. Limosity, a being Limous, l.
muddy. Limpidity, -pitude, a being Limpid, l. pure, bright, transparent.
Limpin, a muscle [fish.] Lineage, kindred or stock. Linament, l. linen thread,
also a tent or lint for a wound. Linarium, a flax-plat. Linch, sa. a bank, wall
or Causey, to distinguish bounds. Linch-pins, Lins-, at the end of the
Axle-trees. Lincoln, Lindum, Lindecoit, Lindecollina Civitas, the chief Town in
Lincolnshire. Lincoln College (in Oxford) founded by Richard Fleming Bishop of
Lincoln. Lincolns-Inne, one of the four Innes of Court, the house (heretofore)
of Sir Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln. Lindaw, a City of Schwaben in Germany.
Lindsey, a third part of Lincolnshire. Linde, o. the same as Line-tree, Tilea,
a tall tree with broad leaves and fine Flowers. Lineal, -ar, belonging to a
line. Lineament, a line in painting, also the feature or proportion of any
thing drawn out in l^nes. Ling, Erix, heath. Lingel, a little tongue or thong.
Linghen, a City of Westphalia. Lingot, as Ingot. Linguacity, l. talkativeness a
being long-tongued. Linguist, one skilled in tongues or languages. Linigerous,
l. bearing flax. Liniment, l. a thin Ointment. Linlithquo, Lindum, a town in
Scotland. Linos^y, l. abundance of flax. Linsey-woolsey, cloth mixed of linen
and Woollen. Lintearious, l. belonging to Linen. Lintz, a Town in Colenland,
and another in higher Austria. Lint^l, the headpiece or upper post of a door,
also as Lentil. Lint-stock, a carved stick (about half a yard) with a cock at
on end to hold the Gunners match, and a sharp Pike at the other, to stick it
any where. Linus, the Son of Apollo and Psammas, hiding himself among the
bushes (for some fault) was torn in pieces by the Dogs, also a famous Musician
who taught Orpheus and Hercules, who knocked him (they say) on the head for
laughing at his unhandsom playing. Linx, an ounce, a kind of spotted beast.
Lioncel, f. a little lion. Lionel, l. the same. Lions paw, Leontopodium, an
herb. Lipara, a Mediterranean Island. Lipothymie, g. a swooning or fainting
away by the failing or oppression of the vital Spirits. Lip, a Dukedom of
West^halia. Lippitude, l. waterishness, ^loud-shot or blearedness of the eyes.
Lippen, Sc. to trust to, to rely on. Liquable, l. which may be melted.
Liquation, Liquefaction, l. a melting, dissolving or making often. Liquefie, l.
to melt. Liquescency, a melting or growing soft. Liquidate, to make Liquid, l.
soft, moist or clear. Liquids, the letters, l, m, n, ^, which are soft and melt
(as it were) in pronouncing. Lirip^op, Liripipium, Cleropeplus, a Livery-hood.
Lisard, as Lizard. Liss, o. for less and Release, also for list or border.
Lissed, o. bounded. Lisle, a Town in Flanders. Lisbone, a City in Portugal.
Lisieux, a City of Normandy. Litany, g. an humble supplication or prayer, also
a particular part of the Liturgy, to be used on certain days. A Lit^, No. a
few or little. Lite on, No. rely upon. Liten, No. a garden. Litation, l. a
sacrificing, or atoning by sacrifice. Literal [meaning] plain, common,
according to the words. Literality, the same as Literature, l. learning, skill
in Letters. Lith, o. a limb, also plain or smooth. Lithanthrax, g. a stony
coal, a kind of Gagate. Lithargi^, Litargy, I. the foam that arises in the
trying of Silver or Lead. Lithe the pot, Che. Thicken it. Lither, o. lazy,
sluggish. Lithy, o. humble. Lithiasis, g. the stone engendered in Man's body.
Lithoglyphick, g. a graver or cutter in stones. Lithomancy, g. Divination by
casting pebble-stones, or by the lodestone. Lithentribon, g. a confection that
breaks and drives away ^he stone. Lithontriptick, g. wearing or ^reaking the
stone. Lithontriptica, g. such medicines. Lithotomy, g. a cutting of stones,
also a place where they are cut or dug. Litigation, l. a strife or wrangling, a
suit or pleading. Litigious, l. contentious, quarrelsome. Litispendence, l. the
hanging or depending of a suit till it be decided. Litletons Tenures, a book of
found exquisite learning (says Lord Coke) comprehending much of the marrow of
the Common Law, written by Tho. Littleton (alias Westcote) Justice of the Kings
bench in King Edw. 4. Litmose bule, a kind of blew paint. Lit^ral, -rean, l.
belonging to the shore or Se^-side. Littlebrough, a Town in Nottinghamshire.
Littleport, a town in Cambridgeshire. Litleworth, a Town in Leicestershire.
Litotes, g. a figure, whereby more is signified than is expressed. Littera,
litter or straw. Lituania, Lith-, a Province of Poland. Liturate, l. to blot
out. Liturgick, belonging to Liturgy, g. a public office or service,
particularly the public form of Divine service Liven, o. to believe. Livery, a
Noble or Gentleman's cloth or colors worn by his Servants, with Cogni^ance or
without, also a writ whereby the Heir did obtain possession of his lands at the
Kings hands. Livery of Seisin, a delivery of Possession of Lands, Tenements (or
other corporeal thing) to one that has right (or probability of right) thereto.
Livery-stable, where the Horses of Strangers stand it Livery (for delivery, or
Livr^e, f.) allowance (by week, day, etc.) Liverwort, (Lichen, Hepatica,
Jecoraria, helps all distempers of the Liver. Lividity, l. a being Livid, l.
black and blew, of a leaden color. Livonia, Liefland, a Province in Poland.
Livor, l. a black and blew mark from a blow or humor, also envy spite and
malice. Lixiviated, of, like or washed with Lixive, -via, -ium, l. lee or lie
made of ashes. Lixor, l. a water-bearer. Lizard, a little greenish beast (in
Italy and other hot Countries) like our e^e^, but bigger and without poison, a
lover of men and very medicinal. Lizard-point, the utmost South-west point of
Cornwall. Lizen'd Corn, (q. lessened) Sf. lank or shrunk. Llys, Br. a place.
Loach, as Lobe^. Loads, trenches to drain fenny places. Lobbe, Lobling, a great
Northern Seafish. Lobby, (ge. Lau^e,) a gallery or walking-place, also a
bed-room. Local, belonging to a place. Locality, the being of a thing in a
place. Location, l. a placing, also a letting out to hire. Lock, a place where
Rivers are stopped, also a lake, No. Locarne, a Town in Italy belonging to the
Switzers. Lockers, little cup-boards at the Ship-sides for shot, etc. Lochen* a
Town in Zutphen. Loco-cession, l. an yiedling or giving place. Loco-motion, l.
a moving out of the place. Locri, -ians, people of Locris, a City in Greece.
Loculament, l. a little place apart by it self. Locuplecity, a being Locuplete,
l. Wealthy. Locus partitus, a division between Towns or Counties. Locust, l. a
kind of beetle, a winged insect, and another not winged, edible. Locution, l. a
speaking. Loddon, a Town in Norfolk. Lodemanage, the art or hire of a Lodesman,
a Pilot, guiding the ship with a Lode-stone, (q. Lead-stone, from the color
and use) turning it self to the Lode-star, the north-star, a guide to
Mariners. Lode-ship, a kind of Fishing vessel. Lode-works, certain works in
the Stannaries of Cornwall. Lodges, [a buck] goes to rest. Lo, No. a little
round hill or great heap of stones. Log, an hebrew measure of six egg-shels or
half a pint. Logarithmes, g. numbers, which being fitted to proportional
numbers* always retain equal differences. Logating, an unlawful game disused.
Log-line, Minute-line, with a piece of board at the end and lead to keep it
edg-long in the water, to show (by the fathoms which this runs out in a minute)
how many leagues the ship will run in a watch (14 fathom to a mile.) Logician,
one skilled in Logic, g. the art of Reasoning or disputing. Logism, a due,
judicious and rational understanding a thing. Logist, g. one skilled in the
Logistick Art, the Art of reckoning or casting account. Logists, ten Athenians
who took the accounts of all Magistrates within thirty days after their
determining, looked to the public Revenue, etc. Lond^nb^rgh, a town in South
Juitland, over against De Strandt an Isle in the German Ocean. Logographers, g.
Lawyers Clerks. Logomachy, g. Contention in or about words. Log-wood,
Block-wood, Comp^chio, brought from Compeche and other remote parts and used in
dying of Black Hats. Loire, a principal River of France. Lohoc, Lohoch, Loche,
A Confection to be melted in the mouth. Gualter Lolbard, a German Author of
the Lollards, Heretics abounding here under Edward 3d. and Henry 5th. and (in
general) those that oppose the settled Religion of the Land. Lollardy, Lollery,
their Doctrine. Lombard, Lombar, Lum-, D. a bank for usury or pawns, also as
Lombardeer, an Usurer or Broaker, so called from the Lombards, Longobards,
Inhabiting the hither part of Italy, and much addicted to Usury. Lombes, ^. for
Lambs. Lombarie, belonging to the ^oins. Lome, o. Clay, Mortar. Londenoys, o,
one of London, (Br. Lundayn,) Augusta, Nova Troja, Lindonion, Londinum,
Longidinium, Londinium, Lundinium (from Llwyn a wood, Llong a Ship, or Llawn
full, populous, and Dinas, Br. a City) the Metropolis and Epitome of England.
Londles, (q. Landless) o. a banished man. London*Derry, a town in Ir^land.
Longaevity, l. length of days or long life. Longhbraw, a town in
Leicestershire. Longen, o. for belong. Longanimity, l. Long-suffering,
patience, forbearance. Longinquity, l. length of place or time. Long it hither,
Sf. reach it. Longitude, l. length. Longitude of a place, the distance of it
East, numbered in the Equinoctial by Meridians, from the first general and fixed
Meridian. Longitude of a star, the arch of the Ecliptic, between the beginning
of Aries and the Circle of the stars Latitude. Long-Meg's Daughters, Seventy
seven stones erected round about Long-Meg, a stone fifteen foot high, near
Salkeld in Cumberland. Long-primer, one of the Printers Characters.
Loof-peeces, the Ordnance which lies at the Loof of the Ship, that part aloft
which lies just before the Ches-trees, as far as the bulk-head of the Castle.
Loof-up, Keep your Loof, keep the Ship close to the wind. Spring your Loof,
From going large, Clap close by the wind. Loof-^ook, to succor and secure the
Tack. Loom, Che. an instrument or tool. Loom-Gale, the best fair Gale to sail
in. She Looms* a Great Sail, seems to be a great Ship. Loose-strife,
Willow-herb, which (they say) parts Cattle fighting. Loode, o. led. Loos, Lose,
o. praise. Loot, D. Lead. Hence Lootsman, as Lodesman. Loover, as Louver. Lope,
Li. to leap. Loppe, o. a Spider, or rather (as in Lincolnshire) a flea. Lopum,
a desert in Bactria, where Passengers (they say) are seduced and destroyed by
Evil Spirits. Loquacity, l. talkativeness. Loquabre, part of North- Scotland.
Lorament, l. a bond made of thongs. Loray or Lorry-law, whereby if a Combat be
accepted, and after taken up by consent of the Lord of the Fee (in Orleans)
each party pays 2 s. 6 d. but if performed, the party vanquished pays 112
shillings. Lord ingross, he that is Lord having no Manor, as the King in
respect of his Crown. Lordane, as Lourdane. Lore, sa. learning, skill. Loretto,
a Town in Italy. Loricated, l. armed with a coat of mail. Lorimers, -iners,
Lormiers f. a trade and Company in London that make Bits, Spurs, and all small
Iron-work. Lorion, -ot, f. a Witwal, Yellow-peck or Hickway. Lorn, part of
South- Scotland. Lorne, o. for Forlorn, lost. Lorrel, o. a Devourer. Lorrain, a
German Duchy. L' Orty, a Great and ancient family in Somersetshire. Losel, o.
a lout, or as Lossel, o. a crafty fellow. Loseng, (q. leasing or glozing) a
Nickname of Herbert Bishop of Norwich, and signifies as Losenger, o. a
flatterer. Lothe^de, sa. a pot containing the names of those that were to be
chosen into Office by Lot. Lot, h. wrapped or joined together. Lotharius, a
German Emperor who be took himself to a Monastery. Lothebrook, (q.
Leather-breech) a Dane, whose Daughters were so skild in Needle Work that the
Danes ^^re a Raven of their working, as an invincible Ensign. Lot or Loath, the
thirteenth dish of Lead (in the Darbyshire mines) which belongs to the King.
Loth^rwit, as Leyerwit. Lotion, l. a washing or cleansing, and (in Physic) a
taking away the superfluous quality of a medicament, or the bringing-on a new
one. Loteby, o. Companion or love. Lotis, -tus, the Daughter of Neptune, who
flying from Pri^pus (to save her Chastity) was turned into a Lote-tree.
Lotophagi, Africans feeding much on the Lote-tree, which Vlysses's Companions
(having tasted) could hardly be drawn from. Love-daies, whereon Ar^itrements
were made, and controversies (among Neighbors) determined. Love-apple, a
Spanish root of a Color near Violet. Lovel, De Lupello, an ancient family in
Northamptonshire. Lour, c. Money. Lound, as Laund. Loverd, Lav-, o. a Lord.
Lovingis. sc. (Louanges, f.) praises. Lourdan, Lordane, Lurdan, (not from the
Danes Lording it here idly while others labored, but from the French Lourd,
Lourdant, -din) a Dunce or Block-head. Lourdy, Ss. sluggish. L^urgulary* (f.
Lourderie, i^civility) casting any corrupt thing appoisoning the water, is
L^u-, and Felony. Louvaine, an University of Brabant. Louver, Loover, (f. l'
Ou^^rte) an open place at the top of the house (for air, smoke, etc.) Louvre,
(f. L' Oeuvre, the Work) the Royal Palace at Paris (answering our White-Field)
augmented with a long and stately Gallery by Henry the fourth. Lowbellers, such
as go with a Lowbel, Lough-bel, used in the catching Larks, etc.) with a Lough,
^uff, (Da. Loge) Light or flame, also the vessel wherein the light is put (in
Lowbelling) Low Countries, see Neatherlands. Lower-Counter, the hollow arch
between the lower part of the Ships Gallery and the Transome. Louke, o. an
Overseer of Accounts. Louthe, a town in Lincolnshire. Louting, (q. saluting) o.
honoring. Low-masted or Vnder-masted [ship,] when the Mast is too small or too
short. Low, o. fire, heat; also to praise. St. Loye, o. St. Lovis.
Low-land-men, the offspring of the English Saxons, in the East part of
Scotland. Lowk, No. to weed corn. Lozenge, f. a little square cake of preserved
flovvers, herbs, etc. also (in Heraldry) a quarry of glass, or any thing of
that form. Lua Matter, the ancient goddess of Lustrations or purgings. Lubeck, a
town in lower Saxony. Lublin, a Town in Poland. Lubrefaction, a making slippery
or stirring. Lubricity, l. slipperiness, a being Lubrical, -cious, slippery,
uncertain, wanton. Luca, a town in Tuscany. Luce, Livonia, Leef-land by upper
Germany. Lucernes, a beast (almost as big as a Wolf) of a very rich fur in
Russia. Lucia, -cy, l. Lightsome. Lucible, l. light of it self or apt to shine.
Lucida Lancis, a star in Scorpio. Lucidity, l. a being Lucid, l. shining,
bright. Lucifer, l. the morning star, also Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and
an Arch-Devil. Luciferous, l. bringing light. Luciferians, Heretics that
followed one Lucifer, Bishop of C^laris in Sardinia (Anno 365) who held that
the soul was propagated out of the substance of the flesh, etc. Lucina, Juno,
as Patroness of Childbirth. Lucker, (q. Luckilyer,) o. more likely or rather.
Lucius (bright) a Roman name of men. Lucrative, l. gainful or taken with gain.
Lucration, a gaining or winning. Lucre, l. gain or profit. Lucrece, -retia,
being ravished by Sextus the son of Tarquinius Superbus, caused the banishment
of him (and Kingly Government) from Rome. Lucrous, l. gainful, profitable.
Luctation, l. a striving or wrestling. Luctatius Catulus, a Roman Commander who
with 300 ships beat 600 of the Carthaginians, and put an end to the war.
Luctiferous, l. causing sorrovv. Luctisonant, l. signifying or expressing
sorrovv. Lucubration, l. a studying (or vvorking) by Candlelight. Lucubratory,
belonging thereto. Luculency, l. a being Luculent, clear, bright, famous.
Lucullus, an eloquent Roman, grown very rich by the War with Mithridates,
gave himself up to ease and pleasure, till (growing mad) he was committed to
the care of his Brother Marcus. Ludgate, q. Fludgate (from the ^iver near it)
or Leedgate (the peoples gate) and not of any Fabulous King Lud. Ludible, l.
sportive, apt to play. Ludibrious, l. shameful, reproachful. Ludicral, -crous,
in (or full of) sport, mockery or jesting. Ludification, l. a mocking or
deceiving. Ludlow, a Town in Shropshire, with a fair Castle. Ludovicus Pius, he
succeeded his Father ( Charles the great) in the Empire and the Kingdom of
France. Lues Venerea, the Venerean murrain or French Pox. Luse, sc. love, or
the open hand. Lugdunum, Lions in France. Lugdunum Batavorum, Leyden in
Holland. Lugent, l. mourning. Lugubrous, l. mournful. Luition, l. paying a
ransom, or making satisfaction for any offense. Luke, (h. taken,) a Physician
of Antioch and an Evangelist, hanged (says Nicephorus,) on a green Olive Tree.
Lumbar, as Lombar, also belonging to the Loins. Luminaries, l. lights, also (in
the Western or Latin Church) the Feast of Christ's Nativity. Luminous, l. full
of Light. Luneburgum, Lunenburgh in Germany (built by Julius Caesar) where the
Image of the Moon remained till the days of Charles the great. Lunar,
belonging to Luna, l. the Moon. Lunatic, troubled with a Lunacy, l. [Moon-]
madness. Lunden, a City in Denmark. Lunenbourg, a Saxon Duchy. Lunes, leashes
or long lines to call in Hawks. Lungis, (f. Longis,) a slim slowback, dreaming
lusk or drowsy gangril. Lungwort, an herb good for the distempers of the
Lungs. Lupa, a she-wolf (or Harlot) which nourished Romulus and Remus in the
Lupercal, a place about Rome, where (upon the 15 of February) were celebrated
the Lupercalia, Feasts in honor of Pan (whom they invoked to drive away
Wolves) performed by the Luperci, the Priests of Pan, who ran up and down naked
and (with a Goat-skin) struck or stroakt the Women, to cause fruitfulness and
easy deliverance. Lupines, flat pulse like small beans, bitter and Physical.
Lura, l. the mouth of a Sack or botle, hence Lurcation, l. a greedy or
gluttonous devouring. Lurdan, as Lourdan. Lure, for allure. Hawks Lure, a
device of Leather stuck with Feathers and baited with flesh. Lurries, c. all
manner of clothes. Lurid, l. pale, wan. Lusatia, a German Province. Luscition,
l. a being dim-fighted or purblind. Lushborow, -burg, a base coin
(counterfeiting the English) brought from beyond sea (perhaps from Luxenburg)
and forbidden, in the days of King Edward the 3 d. Lusitania, the Kingdom of
Portugal. Lusion, l. a playing or pastime. Lusk, a slug or sloathful fellow.
Lust of a ship, her inclination to one side more than another. Lustration, a
going about in procession, or purging by Sacrifice (every fifth year.)
Lustrifical, purging or making holy. Luster, f. shinning, also as Lustrum, l.
the space of fifty months. Luted, -eous, l. clayie, muddy. Lutheranism, the
doctrine of the Lutheranes, followers of Martin Luther, who (from an Augustine
Friar) forsook the Church of Rome and wrote against the errors of it, Anno
1515. Lutherans, (though sometimes confounded with, yet really) differ from
Calvinists, in holding predestination from foreseen Faith and good works, etc.
Luton, a Town in Bedfordshire. Lutulent, l. miry, dirty. Lutzelstein, a County
in Lorrain. Luxenburgh, a Duchy in the Low Countries. Luxate, l. to loosen or
put out of joint. Luxuriate, l. to abound, exceed or grow rank. Luxurians,
growing to excess and superfluity, also as Luxurious, l. wanton, given to
Luxury, l. riot, riotousness. Lying under the Sea, when in a storm the Ship is
a-hull, and the helm so fastened a-lee, that the sea breaks upon her bow and
broad side. Lycanthropy, g. a Melancholy frenzy causing a man to think himself
a Wolf, and avoid the company of men. Lycaon, a king of Arcadi^, turned into a
Wolf by Jupiter whom he entertained with Mans-flesh. Lycaonia, Arcadia, and
another Country near Phrygia. Lychan, a Town in Norfolk. Lyceum, a famous
School of Aristotle's near Athens, and another of Cicero's at his manor of
Tusculum. Lycium, g. a decoction of bramble or box-thorn. Lycomedes, King of
the Island Scyrus, among whose Daughters Achilles lived in woman's apparel, to
keep himself from the Trojan Wars. Lycurgus, King of Sparta, having made them
many good Laws, resigned the Crown to his Nephew and killed himself, also a King
of Thrace who rooted up the vines to keep his people sober. Lycus, a King of
Baeotia, who married Antiope, and put her away when gotten with Child by
Jupiter in form of a Satyr, also a King of Lybia, who used to sacrifice his
guests. Lydbury, a town in Herefordshire. Lydia, a woman's name from the Country
Lydia, Maeonia, a Kingdom of Asia the less, so called from Lydus, who succeeded
his Father Atys in that Kingdom. Liar in a ship, is under the Swabber and keeps
clean the beak-head and Chains, is proclaimed at Mainmast on Monday and holds
his place for that week. Lydian Music, doleful. Lydian Spinster, a Spider.
Lydford-law, see Lidford. Lykam, o. (Lichaem, D.) a body. Lykerous, o
Letcherous. Lympha, l. Water. Lymphatick, l. Distracted, by seeing (as it were)
a Nymph in the water. Limbergh, a town in Linclonshire. Lyn R^gis, a town in
Norfolk. Lynchet, a green bulk dividing land. Lycean, -eous, belonging to L^nx,
a spotted beast like a Wolf, quick-sighted, made of Lyncus, King of Scythia, so
changed by Ceres, about to kill his guest Triptolemus. Lyncuris, a bright stone
congealed of the Lynxes Urine. Lynceus, a quick-sighted Argonaut, reported to
see the new moon at her change, to see through stone walls, etc. Lyndus, a City
of Rhodes, famous for sacrifices to Hercules. Lions, a fair and wealthy City of
France. Lypothymy, as Lipothymy. Lyra, [Arion's] harp, a constellation. Lyrick.
belonging to an harp. Lyrist, he that plays ^n, or sings to the Lyre, l. a
harp. Lyrick-poets, (as Pindar and Horace) who make Lyrick-verses, (not
Heroic) composed to the Harp or Lute. Lysander, a Laced^monian who beat the
Athenians. Lysidice, Daughter of Pelops, Mother of Alcmena, and Grandmother of
Hercules. Lysimachus, one of Alex^anders Captains thrown to a Lion which he
killed by pulling out his tongue. Lysius, a name of Bacchus. Lyskerd, a town in
Cornwall.. Lystwythiel, a town in Cornwall.
M.
M. (For Murder or Manslaughter) on the brawn of the Thumb of every one
admitted to his Clergy. Mab* Br. a Son. Mabel* Mabilia, (q* amabilis, l.
lovely, or Ma^elle, f. My fair one) a Woman's name. Mac, Ir. a Son. Mac-beth, a
Scotch Usurper who killed Duncom the King. Macaleb, a Pomander or bastard-coral,
whose sweet and shining black berries serve for bracelets. Macareus, the son of
Aeolus, who got his sister Canace with child, whereupon her Father sent her a
sword with which she killed herself. Maca^, a Portugal Isle on the North of
China. Macaronique, f. a confused huddle of many things together. Macarons, f.
Sweetmeats made of Almonds, Sugar, Rosewater and Musk. Maccaroni I. lumps of
boild paste, served up in butter and strewn with spice and grated cheese.
Maccab^es, Two Apocryphal books containing the History of Judas Maccabaeus, son
of Matathias, from Macabi, the initial letters of Me Camoca Belim Je^ovah, (W^o
among the Gods is like unto thee O Lord?) which (they say) was in his banners
against Antiochus. Mac^donians, people of Macedoni^, Aemathia, Aemonia,
Romelli, a large country in Europe, whereof Philip and Alexander were Kings.
Macegress, those that wittingly-buy and sell stolen flesh* Macellarious, l.
belonging to the Shambles. Macillat^r, l. a Butcher. Macerate, l. to soak in
liquor, also to make lean, mortify, or weaken. Machaon, a famous Physician, who
went (with the Grecians) to the Trojan wars, and was slain. Machevalize, the
same as Macriduclianize, to play the Machiavelian, -villian, he that practices
or studieth Machiavelianism, State-p^licy, the Doctrine of Nicholas. Machiavel,
a famous Historian and Recorder of Florence, whose politics have poisoned
almost all Europe. Machil, Meghil, h. the rich robe of the Ephod, Exodus 28,
34. Machine, g. l. f. an Engine or instrument. Machination, l. a plotting or
contriving. Machlin, a City and Territory (of 9 Villages) in Brabant. Macilent,
l. lean or thin. Mackaroons, as Macarons. Mackenboy, Makimboy, an Irish Spurge,
which purges one much, only by being born about one. Mackerel, Maquerel, f. a
spotted fish well known, also a Pander or Procurer. Mac^lesfield, a town in
Cheshire. Macritude, l. leanness. Macrobij, g. Certain Long-lived Aethiopians.
Macrocosm, g. the Great World, contradistinct to Microcosm. Macrology, g. a
figure using more words than are Necessary. Mactation, l. a killing. Mactator,
l. a killer or murderer. Maculate, l. to stain or spot. Maculatures, waste or
bloting-papers. Mad, E. an Earth-worm. Madagascar, St. Laurence, an African
Isle, (the greatest in the World) a thousand mile in length and about 4 hundred
in breadth. Madder, a plant with a red root, serving to dye Wool. Madefaction,
l. a moistening. Madify, Madidate, l. to wet. Mader, a Town in Zealand. Madera,
an Isle on the West of Ba^bary. Madidity, Madour, l. moisture Madid, l. wet,
washed, also drunken. Madning-money, old Roman Coins found about Dunstable are
so called by the Country people. Mad^c, a British name, from Mad, Er. Good.
Madrid, -il, the Metropolis of Castilia Nova, where the King of Spain keeps his
Court. Madrigal, an Italian air, of one single rank of Verses. Maegbote, Mag-,
sa. a recompense for the murder of ones Kinsman. Maeonides, Homer, the son of
Maeon. Maeonia, Lydia. Maeotis, Marbianco or Mardella Tana, Garpaluc, a Lake in
the North part of Scythia. Maeremium, Timber. Maestricht, a town in Brabant
subject to the French. Magazine, f. a storehouse [of Warlike ammunition, etc.]
Magdalen^, h. magnified or Exalted. Magdalen College in Oxford, built (with a
Hall adjoining) by W. Wainflet Bishop of Winchester. Magdalen College in
Cambridge, convented from an Hostel for Monks by the Duke of Bucks, about the
beginning of K. H. 8. Magdaleon, l. a Langate or long plaster like a rowler.
Magdeburg, Parthenopolis, (Mai^s-town) the Chief City of Saxony, half free,
half subject to the Elector of Brandenburg. Magellanick, belonging to, or
discovered by Ferdinando Magellanus, a Noble Portugal whose ship (the Victoria)
saild round the world in the years 1520 and 1521. though he himself perished in
the Achievement. Magellanica, part of South America. Magellan's clouds, two
small clouds (near the South pole) of the same color as the Via lactea. Magi,
P. (Philosophers) the Wisemen mentioned Math. 2. Magician, one that studies or
practices the Magi^k [Art] Wisdom, Philosophy, also as Diabolical Magic, the
black Art ot dealing with familiar Spirits. Natural Magic, the Science of
Nature, which is lawful, and the ground of all true Physic. Magical,
belonging to Magic. Magintum, Dunstable, in the Emperor Antonines Itinerary.
Magistery, l. Mastership, also the total substance of a thing reduced to its
primitive juice. Magistral, -terial, like or belonging to a Master. Magisterial
p^ll, plaster etc. prepared after the best manner. Magistracy, l. the office
of a Magistrate or Chief Ruler. Magna Assisa Eligenda, a writ for the Sheriff
to summon four lawful Knights, to choose twelve Knights of the Vicinage, to
pass upon the Great Assise between the Plaintiff and Defendant. Magna Charta,
(The Great Charter) the most ancient of our written Laws, Granted by King Henry
3. confirmed by King Edward the first, and other Kings. Magnalia, l. Great
things or works. Magnality, an admired greatness. Magnanimit^, l. a being
Magnanimous, l. Courageous, of a generous, great or stout Spirit. Magnes, a
beautiful youth of Smyrna, beloved of Gyg^^ King of Lydia. Magnetic,
attractive, belonging to the Magnete, l. the loadstone, which draws iron to it.
Magnificat, [My Soul] does magnify, the Song of the Virgin Mary, (Luke 1.46.)
Correct the Magnificat, Attempt to amend the Scripture, or that which is beyond
correction. Magnifical, -cent, Noble, atchieving worthy acts. Magnificence, l.
stateliness, sumptuousness. Magnifici, l. the Governors of the German
Academies. Magnific^'s I. the chief Noblemen of Venice. Magnify, l. to
greaten* extol, or make great account of. Magniloquence, l. a discourse of
great matters, or being Magniloquent, l. speaking loftily, or in a great style.
Magnitude, l. greatness. Mago, the chief of this name increased very much the
wealth and discipline of Carthage. Magog, h. (of Gog or the house top) Genesis
10.2. founder of the Magogi, the Scythians or Tartars. Gog and Magog, (Ezekiel.
38.2.) generally expounded of Antiochus the great, King of Asia and Syria. Gog
and Magog, (Rev. 20.8.) the Enemies of the Church, either secret and open, or
Heretics and Tyrants, or the Ottoman Family, etc. Opinions are various.
Mahamorra, a Portugal fort ^n the Coast of Fez. Magonel, as Mangonel. Mahim,
Maim, (f. Mehaing) the loss [of the use] of any member, which may be useful or
defensive in battle. Mahone, a large Turkish ship Mahound, o. Mahomet or
Muhammed. Mahumetism, Mahumetry, Mahumetanism, the Religion and Law of the
Mahumetans, Maho^-, Turks, followers of Mah^met, Maho-, an Ara^ian born 572.
his Father a Pagan and his Mother a Jew Captain of a rebellious crew, among
whom (by the help of Sergius a Monk) he introduced the Turkish Religion
contained in the Alchoran. Maia, Daughter of Atlas and one of the Pleiades, on
whom Jupiter begat Mercury. Maid-Marrian, (or Morion) a boy dressed in Maids
Apparel, to dance the Marisco. Maidenhair, Ad^antum, Capillus Veneris, a
plant. Maidenhead, or - hood, Virginity. Maidenhead, -hith, South-Ealington,
a town in Berk-shire. Maid, Skate-Damzel, Li. a small kind of raye.
Maiden-rents, a Noble paid by every Tenant (in the Manor of Builth in
Radnorshire) at their Marriage, at first (perhaps) a fine for a license to
marry a Daughter, or as in Marche^a. Maifaie, Masey, (f. Ma foy) by my faith,
Maidstone, Medweageston, a pleasant Town on Medway, a River in Kent
Majestative, the same as Majestical, full of or belonging to Majesty, l. Royal
State or gravity. Maignagium, a Brasiers shop. Maile, (f. an halfpenny) an old
small piece of money. Maim, as Mahim. Main-Knight, that which is placed aft the
Main-sail. Maina, part of Morea. Mainamber, a strange rock in Cornwall.
Main-hamper, a basket wherein they carry grapes to the press. Maienne, a Town
in Main, a French Province. Mainour, Minour, Manor, (f. Manier to handle) the
thing stolen, and wherewith the thief is taken. Mainpernable, bailable which
may be bailed. Mainpernors* they that bail, take into their hands and are
sureties for any one to appear at a certain day. Mainprize, f. the taking a man
into friendly custody* and being security for his appearance. Main-p^rte, a
certain tribute (commonly of loaves) paid in some places instead of Tithes.
Mainsworn, No. forsworn or perjured. Maint, sa. mingled. Maintenance, f.
holding [a child that learns to go] by the hand, also the upholding or
maintaining a cause or person by word or deed, also (q. Menasance) o.
threatening Maintainor, he that seconds a cause depending by money, friends,
etc. Majo, an Irish County. Major, l. Greater, a Regiment-Officer, next the
Lieutenant Colonel. Major General, next the Lieutenant General. Major, Mayor,
the Governor of a City or Corporation-town. Major-proposition of a Syllogism,
the first. Majorque, -r^a, an Isle on the Spanish Coast. Majoration, l. a
making Greater. Maisnilwarings, Manwarings, a great and ancient Family in
Cheshire. Maischleoh, o, Maslin. Maison-Dieu, (for Maison de Dieu, f. Gods
house) an Hospital or Almshouse. Make, Li. a Consort. Make, c. an half penny.
Make, to perform or execute. Make his beard* o. deceive him. M^ke, o. to
hinder. Make-hawk, an old sta^ch flying hawk, to make or teach a young one.
Makeless, No. Matchless. Malabar, a very populous East India kingdom. Malaca,
a Town in India. Malachias, h. the Angel or Messenger of God. Malachite, g. a
precious stone of a dark mallow-green. Malacissation, a kneading or making
soft. Malacy, g. a calm at sea, also the longing of women with child. Malady,
f. disease or sickness. Malaga. -ago, -aca, a Port-town of Andalusia in Spain.
Malanders, a disease in horses, causing them Mal-andare, I. to go ill.
Malapert, -^pert, (f. Malappert, ready for mischief, or Mal-appris, ill-taught)
impudent, saucy. Malchow, a town of Mecklenburg in Germany. Mal disant, f. an
Evil-speaker or back-biter. Maldives, Asian Islands. Maldon. Camalodunum, a
town in Essex. Male, D. a sack or budget. Male b^uch, f. a wicked mouth.
Mal^content, f. [one that is] discontented. Malediction, l. an evil-speaking or
cursing. Malefact^ur, l. an Offender or Evil doer. Malefesance, a
transgressing. Maleficiate, to be Maleficent, doing a Malefice, l. an evil
deed, displeasure or shrewd turn. Malespine, a Marquisate of Tuscany.
Maletalent, o. ill will. Maletent, Malet^t, -olte, (f. -oste) an ancient toll
of forty Shillings for every sack of Wool. Malevolence, l. ill will, a being
Malevolent, unkind, ill-natured, of ill effect or influence Mal-grace, f.
Dis-favour. Malign, to Spite, to bear Malignity, l. Malice or Grudge. Malines,
a town in Brabant. Malison, (f. Maudisson) a curse. Malkin, Maukin, a Scovel
(of old clouts) to cleanse the Oven. Mallard, a Wild Drake. Malleable, which
may be Malleated, l. hammered or beaten out. Malleguetta, a Country on the
Coast of Guiny. Mallevertes, Mali Leporarij, an ancient family in Yorkshire.
Mallows, a plant of a loosening quality. Malmsey, (f. Malvaisie) wine from
Malvisia, Marvisia, a promontory of Chios, or (rather) from M^nembasia (or
Epidaurus) in M^rea, whence comes the best. Malmesbury, Maidulphsburgh, a town
in Wiltshire. Ma^^as, a Town in Cheshire. Malt, o. melted. Maltesian, belonging
to Malta, Melita, a Rocky and Barren Isle some sixty m^les from Sicily,
belonging to the Knights of Rhodes. Malton, a town in Yorkshire. Malveis
Procurors, packers of Juries by Nomination or other procurement. Malversation,
f. ill conversation or Misdemeanour. Malure, o. (f. Malheur) Mischance.
Mamalukes, Mamm-, (A. light-horsemen) an Order of valiant Soldiers in the last
Empire of Egypt. Mamercus, a Bishop of Vienna, who instituted Litanies.
Mamitus, an Assyrian King, a terror to the Egyptians and other Nations.
Mammeated, l. having paps or teats. Mammet, o. a puppet, ( q. little Mam or
Mother.) Mammillary processes, certain bones in the Temples representing the
teats of a Cow. Mammocks, fragments or pieces. Mammonist, a worldling, one that
worships or seeks after Mammon, Sy. [The God of] Riches. Mammon of
unrighteousness, False Riches, This Worlds Goods. Mammooda, an East-India-Coyn,
the value of our Shilling. Mammulucks, as Mamalucks. Man the Ship, store it
with a sufficient number of men, also call them all up aloft. Man the Capstain,
heave at it. Man the top well, take in the Topsails with hands enough. Manation,
l. a flowing or running (of water.) Manage, l. to handle or govern. Manar, an
Asian Isle. Manasses, h. forgotten. Manhote, sa. a pecuniary compensation for
killing of a man. Man, an Isle between Lancashire and Ireland. Manche, f. a
sleeve, or any thing in such a form. Manchester, a Town in Lancashire. Manchet,
(f. Michette) the smallest and finest sort of bread. Manch present, a bribe or
present from the Donours own hands. Mancipation, l. an ancient manner of
selling and delivering possession before witnesses with several circumstances,
also as Emancipation. Manciple, l. a Clerk of the Kitchen, or Caterer, that
buys the provisions for a College or Hospital. Man^a, a square piece of Gold,
commonly valued at 30 pence. Mancuse, -sa, (q. Manu cuse) the value of a mark
in silver. Manca, is sometimes rendered, The fifth part of an ounce. Manca and
Mancusa, are sometimes both translated by Marca. Mandamus, a writ that lay
after the year and day, where (in the mean time) the writ called Diem clausit
extremum had not been sent to the Escheatour, also a Charge for the Sheriff to
take into the kings hands all the lands of a kings widow, who (contrary to her
Oath) had married without his consent. Mandatary, he to whom a command is
given, also he that comes into a Benefice by a Mandamus. Mandate, a Command of
the King (or his Justices) to have any thing done for the dispatch of Justice.
Mandevils, de Magna Villa, an ancient family in Essex. Mandible, l. which may
be eaten. Mandilian, -lion, I. a Soldidiers loose Cassock. Mandingo's,
Inhabitants of Guiny (on the river Gambra) who take Tobacco in large and short
bowls, through a reed of a yard long. Mandonius and Indibi^is, two famous
Spanish Captains who assisted the Romans against the Carthaginians, but
beginning to revolt, they were only discharged. Mandragora, -goras, -drake,
-drage, g. a plant bearing yellow apples, the root cold in the fourth Degree
and used by Surgeons to cast mer into a deep sleep. Mandrakes (Can. 7.13. h.
lovely) pleasant flowers, or something else smelling sweet which the Common
Mandrakes do not. Mandrakes* shown in the perfect shape of men, etc. are
perfect Cheats (of Briony roots, etc.) Manducable, l. eatable, capable of
Manducation, l. a chewing or eating. Mandy-Thursday, as Maundy-. Maneh, h.
Mina, a pound. Maneh of Gold, an hundred shekels or 75 pound sterling. Maneh of
Silver, sixty shekels or 7 pound 10 shillings. Manentes, Tenants, also Manses
or Hides of land. Manfredonia, a City of Naples, on the Gulf of Venice.
Manganese, (in color and weight like the loadstone) the most general
ingredient of glass. Manger, a place to receive the water that comes in at the
Hawses. Mangin, China so called by the Tartars. Mangonel, Mangon, I. an old
warlike engine, to cast great stones or darts. Mangonism, l. the Craft or trade
of Mangonizing, -zation, trimming-up things for sale. Manheim, a fort in the
lower Palatinate. Maniable, f. tractable, to be managed or wielded. Maniack, g.
Mad. Manichees, Heretics following one Manes, a Persian, who affirmed himself
to be Christ and the Paraclete, held a fatal Necessity of sinning, etc.
Manicles, f. Hand-cuffs or Fetters. Manifesto, I. an open or public
Declaration, concerning State Affairs, etc. Maningtree, a Town in Essex.
Manipular, belonging to a Maniple, l. a handful, a band of Soldiers, also a
Fannel or Scarf-like Ornament on the left wrist of Priests at Sacrifice.
Manlius, a Roman name. Man, Manna (q. Man^hu, Chapter what is this?) the dew or
bread of heaven which the Israelites ate in the Desert; also (at this day) a
Physical congealed dew gathered in the morning (from the leaves of Mulberries,
etc.) in Calabri^ and other hot countries, also a sweet extract out of any
matter. Mannaty, Manati, an Amphibious West India beast between a Fish and a
Cow. Mannish, sa. Wicked. Manor, Manor, a Jurisdiction and Royalty
incorporeal, also the Land or Seat. Manor in gross, the right of a Court Baron
(and its perquisites) while another enjoyes the Land. A Manor cannot be without
a Court Baron and two Suitors. Man of War, a valiant Soldier or Warrior, also a
Ship of War. Manpygarnon, a kind of pottage Manqueller, sa. a murderer. Le
Man's, the Chief town of Maine. Mansion, l. an abiding, a dewlling place, also a
Mannor-house, Capital Message, or the Lords chief dwelling house within his
fee. Mansfield, a town in the upper Saxony. Mansfield, a town in
Nottinghamshire. Man slaughter, the unlawful killing of a man without
premeditated malice. It is Felony (because wilful) but admits Clergy for the
first time. Mansura, Mas-, Farmers houses. Mansus, a Farm. Mansuetude, l.
meekness, a being Mansuete, l. gentle, tractable. Mantels, -tles, [the Beer]
Flowers, also [the hawk] stretches her wings along after her Legs. Manticulate,
l. to pick a purse, or do any thing closely. Manti^ore, -corn, I. a ravenous
Indian beast, with three ranks of Teeth, a face like a man, and body like a
Lion. Mantile, Mantle, f. a Cloak or long robe, also the flourish proceeding
from the wreath and helm, and descending on each outside of the Escutcheon.
Mant^, a Theban Prophetess Daughter of Tiresias, and Mother of Ocnus the
Founder of Mantua, a City of Italy on the River Po. Mant-wine, brought from
thence. Manual, -ary, l. filling or belonging to the hand. Manual, a small
volume portable in the hand. Manualist, a handi-craftsman. Manubial, -a^y, l.
belong-to a prey or booty. Manucaptio, a writ for him that offers sufficient
bayl, and cannot be admitted. Manucaption, l. a taking with or by the hand.
Manucaptors, bails or sureties. Manuduction, l. a guiding or leading by the
hand. Manuel, that whereof present profit may be made. Manufacture, l.
handywork. Manumission, l. an enfranchizing or making free. Manumitt* -miss, l.
to make a bondsman free, by turning him round, giving him a cap, and other
Ceremonies. Manure, (Main-oeuvrier, f. to till [the ground.] Manus Coristi,
Sugar boild with Rose Water, (sometime violet or Cinnamon Water.) Manuscript,
l. written with the hand, not printed. Manutenentia, a writ used in case of
[corrupt] Maintenance. Manutention, a holding with or by the hand. Manworth,
sa. the price of a man's head. Manzed shrew, o. wicked scold. Map^e, a wood much
used by Turners. Mar, -rria, part of North-Scotland. Maran-atha, Sy.
Schammatha, h. (the Lord comes) the third and highest degree of
Excommunication. Marathon, a Grecian Town, about 10 miles from Athens.
Maravedis, a small Spanish coin, thirty four of them go to a Ryal or six pence.
Marcab, the pinion of the wing of Pegasus. Marcellus, a great Roman General,
circumvented by Hannibal, and slain, also a Roman Bishop, who instituted the
Order of Cardinals. Marcessible, l. apt to rot or putrify. Marc-grave,
Mart-grave, D. a Count or Earl of the Marches, D. the borders or Frontiers of a
Country. Marc^asite, Marchesite, Marquesite, a fire-stone, a stone partaking of
the nature and color of some metal, not to be separated but into smoke and
ashes. March, a Province of France. Lords Marchers, Noblemen inhabiting (and
securing) the Marches of Wales or Scotland, the bounds between us and them.
Marcheta, Mer-, (by skene, the rai'd or first carnal knowledge of a woman) a
Scotch law by Eugenius 3d. that the Lord should have the first nights lodging
with every woman married within his fee, abrogated by Malcolm. 3 d. for which
they pay a Mark. Marchioness, the Wife of a Marquess. March-pane, Massepain* s.
(q. massa panis,) Sugared paste made into little cakes. Marcidity, -cour l. a
being Marcid, -dious, l. rotten, withered, feeble. Marcionists, -ites,
Heretics following one Marcion, a Stoic Philosopher, who held that Christ was
not the Son of God. Marcus, Mark, a proper name. Marcus Curtius, for his
Countries good rode armed into a gaping of the Earth. Cry the Mare, (in
Herefordshire) the reapers tie together the tops of the last blades, and at a
distance throw their sickles at it, and he that cuts the knot has the prize,
with shouting and good cheer. Maremaid, as Mermaid. Night Mare, as Incubus.
Mareotis, a large Egyptian lake on the South of Alexandria. Mareshal, as
Marshal. Margaret, (Marget, M^g* Peg) g. a Pearl. Margarets, o. Daisies.
Margaritiferous, l. bringing forth or having plenty of Margarites, g. Pearls
found in Oysters and other shelfish. Margelain, o. Marjerom. Margery, (Madg) by
some the same as Margaret, by others as Majorana, Sweet Marjerom. Margery
Prater, c. a hen. Marginal, -neal, belonging to a Margin, -gen^, l. the brink
or brim, also the uttermost part of a page. Mariandunum, part of Asia, where is
the Acherus^an cave by which Hercules (they say) went down to hell.
Mariembourg, a Town in Hainault. Mari^ts, f. Marian-Violets. Marinate fish, fry
them in Sallet oil and then pickle them. Marinated, pertaining to the Sea,
tasting of Salt water, also ( c.) transported into some foreign plantation.
Marine, Maritan, -time, l. belonging to, near or from beyond the Sea. Marjoram,
Majorana, Amaracus, a comforter of the Brain and Nerves. Maritagio amisso, etc.
a writ for a Tenant in frank-marriage to recover Lands whereof he is deforced.
Marital, l. belonging to an Husband or Marriage. Marius, a valiant Roman chosen
Consul seven times. Mark, an Earldom in Germany. Mark of Adam, ^. mark of
manhood. Mark [of Silver,] thirteen shillings and four-pence. Mark [of Gold,]
thirty three shillings and four pence. Scotch Mark, thirteen-pence halfpenny.
Marketzeld, or rather Marketgeld, toll of the Market. The Market hardens, No.
things grow dear. Mark-penny, paid at Maldon for laying pipes or gutters into
the streets. Markab, as Marcab. Marle, Malin, a chalky earth used in soiling of
Land. Marleborough, a Town in Wil^shire (seated on a chalky ground) where a
Parliament made the Statute of Marleborough, for appeasing of tumults.
Marlerium, -etum, a Marlepit. Marlin, Merlin, (f. Esmerillon) a small kind of
Hawk. Marle the Sail, fasten it to the bolt-rope, with Marling, a small tarr'd
line of untwisted hemp, to sease the ends of ropes from ^arsing out, etc.
Marling-speek or spike, a small iron for splising of small ropes and opening
the bolt-rope (to sew in the Sail.) Marlow, a Town in Bucks. Marmaduke, (q.
Mehr-machtig, Ge. more powerful) a man's name. Marmelade, f. l. conserve (of
Quinces, etc.) Marmoration, l. a building with marble. Marmorean, like (or made
of) Marble. Marmoset, a kind of black Monkey with a shaggy neck, (as they are
shown in England.) Marmot* f. a Mountain-rat. Marne, a River of Champagne in
France. Maronea, -ogna, a City of Ciconia, whence Maronean wine, so strong,
that if twenty times so much water be mixed with it, it still retains its
virtue. Marocco, an African Kingdom West of Barbary. Maronites, (a branch of
the Jacobites) Christians of Mount Libanus, whose Patriarch is always called
Peter. Marpissa, Alcyone, the beloved Wife of Idaeus (the comliest man of his
time.) Marpu^g, a Town of Hessen in Germany. Marquis* as Reprisals. Letters of
Marque, See Let-, Marquenterre, part of Picardy. Marquesite, as Marchesite.
Marquisate, the title and jurisdiction of a Marquess, -quiss, (q. Lord Marcher)
a Nobleman between a Duke and Earl. Marquisate of the Empire, part of Brabant,
containing Lovaine, Bruxelles, Nivelle and Antwerp. Marquetry, f. a Jo^ners
checkered in-la^d work with wood of diverse sorts and colors, and sometime
confounded with Mosaique. Marrow, (f. Maraud,) a fellow, knave or beggarly
rascal. Marrows, No. fellows (spoof Gloves, Shoes, etc.) Mars, the Son of Juno
(without the help of Jupiter) War or the God of War, also the Planet next above
the Sun. Marseilles (in Provence) the most ancient City of France.
Marsalquivir, a Spanish Port in the Kingdom of Algiers. Marshal, Ge. (Master
of the Horse) the name of several Officers, whereof the chief is the Earl
Marshal of England, his Office consists (especially) in matters of War and
Arms. Marshal of the Kings House, he hears and determines all Pleas of the
Crown, etc. Marshal of the Exchequer, to whom the Court commits the Custody of
the Kings Debtors, etc. Marshal of the Kings Bench, who has the Custody of the
prison called the King's Bench in Southwark. In every Regiment there is a
Marshal, who Executes all Orders of the Council of War. Marshalsee, the Court
or seat of the Marshal, also the Prison in Southwark so called. Marchfield, a
Town in Glocestershire. Marsyas, a Phrygian Musician, who challenged Apollo, and
(being overcom'n) was flead for his presumption. Mart, a great Fair or Ma^ket.
Martagon, a sort of Lilly. Martane, a River of Lorraine. Martens, sables, a
rich furr of a little beast of that name. Martes ^^rk, o. Mars's mark. Martia*
Cato's wife, whom he gave to his friend Hortensius, after whose death he took
her again. Martial, Warlike, belonging to (or born under the Planet) Mars.
Martial-Law, which depends on the voice of the king or of his Lieutenant, or of
the General or his Officers in wars. Martichore, as Mant-. Martin, -nus (q.
Martius) a man's name. S^. Martin, a Military Saint, Bishop of Tours. Martinet,
Martlet, Apus, a Swift, (the word is diminutive, but the bird is bigger than
the Common Martin.) Martingale, f. a leather passing from the horses chaps to
his fore-girth, to make him reign well, and hinder the casting-up of his head.
Martnets, small lines fastened to the Legs on the leetch of a sail, to bring it
close up to the yard in fartheling. Top the Martnets, hale the martnets of the
top-^ails. Martock, a town in Sommersetshire. Martyria, g. testimony, a
confirming what one speaks, by ones own experience. Martyrologie, g. a
discourse or Book of Martyrs, g. Witnesses sealing the truth of Christianity
with their blood. Martyrdom, their Suffering. Marvel of Peru, an American
Nightshade, with flowers of wonderful variety. Marullus Pomponius, a great
Grammarian and Critic, who reproved Tiberius for speaking improper Latin.
Mary, h. Exalted, or from Marah, h. bitterness. St. Mary Cray, a town in Kent.
Mascarade, f. a Mask or Mummery. Mascon, a City in Burgundy. Mascle, (f. Macle)
a short lozenge (in Blazon) with a square hole in the midst. Masham, a Town in
Yorkshire. Masculine, l. Manly, of the Male-kind. Maskewd, o. fenced,
fortified. Mass, (f. Mess, l. Missa, h, Missah an Oblation) the Popish
Liturgy or Church Service. Mass-daies, Sa. Holy Days. Massa, a Country
between Tuscany and Genoa. Massanello, (for Thomas Anello) a Fisherman of
Naples who headed the tumultuous people against their Governors, arose to
great dignity and (in a moment) slain. Massicot, f. (q. Massa cocta) Oaker made
of Ceruse or white-lead. Massacre, f. (I. Mazzare to kill with a Mazz-, a mace
or club) a General Slaughter. Massilia, Marseilles in France Massilians, as
Messalians. Massinissa, a King of Nu^idia, first an Enemy, afterward a
faithful friend to the Romans. Mass-Munster, a town in Alsatia. Massovia, a
Province of Poland. Massorets, Jews that corrected (in the Margent) the
false-written words of the Scripture-text. Mast, the fruit of the Oak, Beech,
Chestnut, etc. Mainmast, four fifths of a ships breath, multiplied by 3 [feet,]
and (for thickness) one inch to a yard. Foremast, (and Bolt-sprit) four fifths
of the Main mast. Missen-Mast, half the Mainmast. Topmast, half the length of
its own mast. Master of the Armory, having the Care and oversight of his
Majesty's Armor. Master of the Ceremonies, the Kings Interpreter, introduces
Ambassadors, etc. Masters of the Chancery, Assistants to the Lord Chancellor
and Master of the Rolls. Master of the Horse, he that has the rule and charge
of the Kings stable. Master of the Kings Household, Grand Master-, Lord
Steward-, under whom is the Master of the Household, a Principal Officer of
great authority and antiquity. Master of the Jewel house, has charge of all
plate for the King or Queens Table, or in the Tower, Chains, loose Jewels, etc.
Master of the Mint, Warden-, he receives the Silver of the Goldsmiths, etc.
Master of the Kings Musters, or Muster-Master General, sees that the Kings
forces be complete, well armed and trained. Master of the Ordnance, who has
care of all the Kings Ordnance and Artillery, Master of the Posts, was an
Officer of the Kings Court, who appointed all that provided Posthorses, etc.
Master of the Rolls (till ^^ Henry 7. called Clerk of the Rolls) Magister vel
Custos Rotulorum, Clericus parvae bag^, etc. Assistant to the Lord Chancellor
of England, and (in his absence) hears Causes and gives Orders. Master of the
Court of Wards and Liveries, the Chief Officer of that Court, abolished 12 Car.
2. Master of the Wardrope, (an Office near puddle-Wharf) He has the Charge of
all former kings and Queens ancient Robes in the Tower, all hangings, bedding,
etc. for the kings houses, delivers Velvet or Scarlet for Liveries, etc.
Masterie, q. Maistrete (for Maistrise) Mastership, or else for mastereth.
Masterwort, Imperatoria, it provokes sweat, and (being held between the Teeth)
draws rheum very much. Mastication, l. a chewing, Masticatory, a medicine to be
chewed. Masticine, belonging to Mastick, a clear sweet smelling gum of the
Lentisk tree in Chios. Masticot, a fine yellow powder for paint. Masty, q.
Nasty, or fatted with Mast. Mastigophere, g. one deserving stripes, or the
Officer that (with blows) makes way in a crowd. Mastling, (q. Messing, ge.
brass,) o. shining. Mastrake* f. a winter-garment of Wolves and Deer-skins.
Masura terrae, about four O^gangs. Mastuerco, an Indian healing herb. Ma^s,
broad clowts (of synnet and thrums) to save any thing from galling. Matachin,
f. an antic or ^orrice dance. Matagot, a kind of Ape, also a Hypocrite.
Matapan, (in the More^) the most Southern Cape of Europe. Match, when a Wolf
desires copulation, he goes to his Match or Mate. Mate, sa. daunted, also
consumed, dead. Cr^ck-mate, when (at Chess) there is no way left for the King
to escape, and the game is ended. Blind-mate, when he that (...) the King (not
perceiving it) cries only Check. Matelotage, f. the hire of a ship or boat from
Matelo^, f. a seaman or boatman. Mateology, g. a vain overcurious enquiry into
things. Mateotechny, g. a vain art, or the vanity of any science. Materia
prima, the first matter, or subject of all substantial forms. Material, l.
consisting of matter or substance, also weighty or important. Materiation, l.
selling of Timber for building, or preparing it for war. Matter Metallorum,
Quicksilver. Maternal, l. Motherly. Maternity, mother-hood. Mathematical,
belonging to a Mathematician, one skilled in the Mathematics, g. Sciences
taught by Demonstration, viz. Arithmetic, Astronomy, Geometry and Music.
Matthew, h. reward. Mathurins, Friars of the Holy Trinity, who are to employ
the alms they beg, in redeeming Christian slaves from the Turks. Matines, f.
Morning-Prayers at three a Clock. Matire, o. matter. Matricide, l. a killing or
killer of his Mother. Matricious, belonging to the Matrice, -ix, l. that part
of the womb, where the Child is conceived; also a mould for Printers Letters.
Matriculution, l. a being Matriculated, sworn and registered into the society of
our Mother the University. Matrimonial, l. belonging to Matrimony, l. Marriage.
Matron, a grave motherly Woman. Matta, an Indian Idol which they visit yearly,
and to whom they sacrifice a piece of their tongues. Mattathias, Ma^thias, b.
the Gift of the Lord. Matted plants, growing as if they were plat^ed together.
Mattins, as Matines. Matttock, (q. Met haeck, D. with a hook) a kind of
pick-axe. Mattress, s. a quilt or flock-bed. Matura, the Goddess of Corn when
it began to ripen, as Patalena was, when the cups began to open. Maturated, l.
ripened, hastened. Maturation, a ripening. Maturative, belonging to, helping or
causing Maturity, l. ripeness, perfection. Matutine, -nal* l. belonging to
Matuta, the morning. Maud, Matilda, Mathildis, Ge. Lady of M^ids. Maudlin,
Costus hortorum, like Tansey in sight, and Alecoast in virtue. Mauger,
Malgerius, a proper name. Maugre, (f. Mal gre) in spite of ones Teeth. Thou
can (^ennest) me Maugre, o. owe me a spite. Mavis, a thrush, also a
bushel, o. Maumet, o. Mahomet. Maund, f. a hand-basket with two lids, or
hamper, (to carry victuals, etc.) whence Maundy-Thursday, shore or
Sheer-Thursday, next before Easter, when the King (or his Almoner) washes the
feet of certain poor men and gives them Doles. Maunding, c. begging. Mavors, as
Mars. Mauritania* the utmost Region of Africa toward the Gaditan Bay or the
streights of Gibra^ter. Mausolaeum, a famous marble Sepulcher (one of the seven
wonders of the world) 25 cubits high, 411 foot about* supported with 36 curious
pillars, built by Ar^^mesia for her Husband Mausolus, King of Caria. Marentius,
the Son of Maximinus, a Roman Tyrant, persecutour of Christianity. Maxillar,
-ry, l. belonging to the Jaw Bone. Maxim, an axiom, rule, or undeniable
principle in any Art. Maximilian, (composed of Maximus and Aemilianus, Q.
Fabius and Scipio) a German Emperor Son to Frederick 3. Maximinus, a Roman
Emperor Author of the sixth persecution. May, the Month dedicated to Maia,
the Mother of Mercury. May-fly, bred (in May) of a Water-cricket crept out of
the water. May games, Floralia, beginning (probably) from such a Roman custom,
according to Ovid. Exit and in Maias Festum Florale Cal^ndas, Fast. 4. Maynour,
as Mainour. Mayor, Meyr, as Mayor. Maystrye, o. a Masterpiece. May-weed,
resembling Cammomel, but of a stinking savor and odious to Bees. Mazagan, a
Portugal sort on the coast of Morocco. Maze, an astonishment, also as Miz-maze,
a labyrinth or place full of intricate turnings. Mazara, a town in Sicily.
Mazer, -zar, -zeline, a beker or standing-cup to drink in, commonly made of
Maes^r, D. Maple. Mazzards, West. black-cherries. Mazzo, a Town in the
Valteline. Meaco, the chief City in Japan. Mead, Mede, (Br. Medd) as Hydromel.
Mead, a Meadow. Meadow-sweet, Regina prati, with crumpled leaves, stops
bleeding, etc. Meag, Meak, E. a peas-hook. Meagre, f. lean. Meal-Rents, payable
by some Tenants in the Honor of Clun, to make meat for the Lords hounds. Mean,
middle, in the middle, between two extremes. Mean part (in Music,) the Tenor,
between treble and Basse. Meander, Maean-, Madre, Palazzia, a Phrygian River
with many turnings. Meandrous, full of Meande^s, [things full of] intricate
turnings and windings. Mear-stones, placed for bounds between land and land.
Mease, (q. Maison) f. a mansion house, also a measure of 500 Herrings. Measles,
a disease somewhat like the small pox. Measn, as Mesne. Measondue as Maison
Dieu. Measure of length, three barley corns (from end to end) make an inch,
twelve inches a foot, two foot and a half a step, 3 foot a yard* 3 foot and
nine inches an ell, 6 foot a fathom, five yards and a half a Rood, (pole or
perch) forty Roods a Furlong, and (with the breadth of four Rods) an Acre,
eight Furlongs an English mile. Mead, Li. choice or liberty, also a Province
of Ireland. Meaux, a City in France. Mec^^nas, a Noble man of Rome, who
favored Virgil, Horace, and other learned men. Mecha, Meccha, a City of Arabia
faelix, not far from Medina, but of far greater resort and traffic. Mechanic,
-call, g. belonging to an Handy-craft. Mechanic, a Tradesman. Mechanic Arts,
(chiefly seven) Agriculture, Architecture, Clothing, Hunting, Medicine,
Military-Discipline, and Navigation. Mechlin, a City of Brabant. Mechoachan, a
root of great efficacy in the Dropsy. Mechation, l. Whoredom. Mecklenburg, a
German Dukedom. Medal, -lia, (f. Medaille) an ancient flat jewel or coin, (not
current money, but, representing some effigies or other ingenious device. Mede,
sa. a desert or merit. Medea, a forceress feigned to have the power of renewing
youth, etc. Medes, o. to boot. Medembleck, a Town in Holland. Medewife, sa. a
woman of merit. Medfee, sa. a bribe or reward, also the boat or compensation
given in an exchange. Media, a large Country in Asia. Median, l. mean, middle,
indifferent. Median vein, the middle, common or black vein. Mediastine, l. the
thin skins dividing the whole breast (from the throat to the Midriff) into two
hollow bosoms, also a drudge or kitchin-slave. Mediation, l. a dividing in two,
also coming between, the work of a Mediator, l. he that does Mediate,
intercede or entreat for another. Medicable, l, able to heal, or easy to be
healed. Medicament, l. a medicine. Medicaster, l. a Quack or pedling Physician.
Medicated [meats, etc.] mingled with medicinal ingredients. Medication, l. a
curing: Medicinable, curable. Medicine, l. Physic, of five kinds, Nosognomick,
discerning diseases; Boethetick, removing them; Pharmaceutick, curing them by
application of Medicaments; Chirurgick, by incision or cauterising, Diaeteri^k,
by Diet. Medick, l. a Physician. Mediety, l. the middle or half. Medietas
linguae, a mixed inquest of Denizens and Strangers. Medimne, -number, l. 6 Bushels*
Medina, a City of Arabia where Mahomets Tomb stands. Mediocrity, l.
indifferency moderation, a mean. Medio acquietando, a writ to distrain a Lord
for acquitting a mean Lord from a Rent which another claims. Mediolanum,
Millain, the Chief City of Lombardy, so called (they say) from a sow half
covered with Wool, found in digging the foundation. Medisance, f.
evil-speaking, reproach. Meditative, belonging to Meditation, l. a studying or
devising. Mediterranean, l. in the middle of the Earth. Mediterranean Sea, the
Midland Sea, Dividing Europe from Africa, and part of Asia. Meddle, o. mingle.
Medlar, a fruit (if rotten-ripe) grateful to the stomach. Medlefe, -letum,
quarrelling, scuff^ng. Medrinacles, Pouledavies, a Course kind of Canvas.
Medullar, belonging to the marrow. Medusean, belonging to Medusa, Phorcys's
Daughter with golden hair, turned into snakes by Minerva, for lying with
Neptune in her Temple. Meed, o. Merit or reward. Meedless, No. unruly. Meegre
Larbre, o. (q. Maigre (...) arbre) as Lean as a tree. Mien, Mine, f. the
Countenance, or posture of the face. Mere, for Mere Right. Mees, sa. meadows.
Meet, Mete, No. measure. Meet now, No. Just now. Meeter, -tree, Verse or
measure. M^eterly, Meeth-, Meed-, No. handsomely, modestly. Megaclo, Daughter
of Megares, King of Lesbia, who hired the muses to be her maids and (with their
singing) to pacify his frowardness toward her mother. Megacosm, g. Macrocosm,
the great world. Megaera, one of the Furies. Megalensian, or Megalesian Games,
in honor of the great Goddess Cybele. Megalopsychie, g. Magnanimity, greatness
of Soul. Megalysus, A Persian Noble, who (for Darius) overthrew the tyranny of
the Magi. Meganologie, g. a discourse of Greatness. Megarick Philosophers,
instituted by Euclid, born at Megara, a Town near the Istmus, also the daughter
of Creon King of Thebes, slain by her own husband Hercules. Megb^te, as Mag-.
Megrim, Migrame, (Hemicrania) a pain (by fits) in the Temples or forepart of
the head. Meine, o. the same as Meiny, Mesnie, f. a Family. Meiosis, g. a
diminution, making a thing less than it is. Meke, o. meek. Meladine, a king of
Egypt, courteous to the Christians when they were half drowned. Melampode, g.
Hellebore. Melampus, (black-foot, by being laid in the Sun) a Physician that
understood the voices of Birds and Beasts. Melancholic, troubled with
Melancholy* g. black choler, one of the four humors also a pensive distemper
from the abounding thereof. Melantho, Daughter of Proteus, being desirous to
ride on a Dolphin, Neptune (in that shape) deceived her and ravished her.
Melduthus, a banished Messenian, who having helped the Athenians against the
Baeotians, was by them chosen king. Melborn, a Castle in Darbyshire, where the
Duke of Bourbon was prisoner 19 years. Melchior, one of the Magi, or 3 kings of
Colen, also an Heretic, founder of the Melchiorists. Melchites, a Syrian Sect
Subject to the Patriarch of Antioch of the same Tenants with the Grecians (save
that they observe both Saturday and Sunday:) in Religion they follow the
injunctions of the Emperor or Melchi, Sy. king. Melchizedeck, h. King of
Righteousness. Meldfeoh, Sa. the Informers fee. Meleager, son of Oneus king of
Calidonia. Melechsala, the son of Meladine, king of Egypt, he won the peoples
hearts from his Father, who (therefore) lived unbeloved and died unlamented.
Melilote, M^ll-, Corona Regia, (q. Honey-Lote) an herb with round leaves and
slender branches. Meliorate, l. to wax or make better. Meliority, Betterness.
Melissa, M^llona, -nia, the Patroness of bees. Melite, o, power. Melius
inquirendo, a writ for a second (more impartial) enquiry of what lands a man
died seized. Mellasses, Treacle, the dross of Sugar. Mellation, the [time of]
taking the honey out of hives. Mell, o. meddle. Mellean, -eous, of or like
Honey. Mellif^rous, l. bringing or bearing Honey. Mellification, a making
honey. Mellifluent, -uous, flowing with honey, eloquent. Melliloquent,
Sweet-spoken. Melliscent, (hony-sweet) a woman's name. Mellitism, honeyed wine.
Melliturgie, g. Bees-work, making of honey. Mellona, see Mellissa. Melody, g.
harmony, a sweet-song. Melowne, (f. Milan) a kite. Melpomene, one of the Muses,
Author of Tragedies. Melton-Mowbray, a Town in Leicestershire. Membranatick,
belonging to a Memb^ane, l. a thin skin, rind or parchment. Pleuritique
Membrane, through whose doubles pass all the Sinews, Veins and Arteries, which
are between the Ribs. Membrature, l. a setting or ordering of Members or Parts.
Membrin^, a famed Knight errant in Don Quixot, whose helmet was said to be
impenetrable. Memnonian birds, reported to have flown out from the funeral pile
of Memnon, Brother of Laomedon, slain by Achilles in the Trojan war. Memorable,
l. easy or worthy to be remembered. Memorandum, l. [a note or token of]
something to be remembered. Memoires, f. remarkable observations. Memorial, l.
that which puts one in mind, or makes one to be remembered. Memories, obsequies
or Remembrances for the dead. Me^^^ious, l. having a good Memory. Memento mori,
l. remember dying. Of blessed Memory, happy or honored in being thought upon.
Memphians, -ists, Egyptians, inhabitants of Memphis, Alcairo, the chief City of
Egypt. Menage, f. a leading or handing. Menahim, h. a comforter. Menalippus, a
Theban, slain by the friends of Tydeus, to whom he had first given a mortal
wound. Menasseh, Manassah, h. forgotten. Mendaciloquent, l. speaking lies.
Mendicant, l. begging. Mendicants, begging Friars. Mendication, a begging.
Mendicity, beggary. Mendience, f. the same Mendlesham, a Town in Suffolk.
Menelaus, the Son of Atreus, and Husband of Helena the Daughter of Jupiter and
Leda. Menestheus, the Son of Peleus and King of Athens who died at the siege of
Troy. Mean, o. meditate. Menged, o. mingled. Mengrel, o. mongrel. Mengrelians,
Circassians, (next neighbors to the Georgians) of the Greek Religion, save
that they baptize not their Children till eight years old. Menial-servants,
Family servants. Menials, the same Meninges, g. the two thin skins about the
Brain, viz. Dura matter between the skul and the Pia matter, next the Brain.
Meniver, the fur of a small Muscovia-beast. Menker, the Whales jaw, a star.
Mennow, (f. Menu, small) Minimus, a Cockrel, a very little fish. Menachus, the
Son of Creon and the last of Cadmus's race, who slew himself for the safety of
his Country promised by the Oracle on that account. Menologe, the greek
Martyrology, Calendar or Collection of Saints-days in every month. Mensal, l.
belonging to a Table. Menseful, Y. comely, creditable. Mension, -suration, l. a
measuring. Menstrual, l. monthly. Menstruosity, a being Menstruous, -uant, l
abounding with or belonging to monthly Terms or Flowers. Mensurate, l. to
measure. Mensura Regalis, the Kings standard of the Exchequer. Mental, l.
thought or kept in the mind. Menteith, part of South Scotland. Mentition, l. a
lying or telling of lies. Mentz, Maenus, Mogus, a free City on the Rhine in
Germany. Meny, No. a Family. Meotides, Lakes and Marshes between Europe and
Asia. Mephibosheth, h. shame of mouth. Mephistophiles, Dr. Faustus's familiar
spirit. Mephitick, stinking, dampish [savour of the earth.] Mera, a great
huntress ravished by Jupiter in the shape of Diana, who shot her to death and
turned her to a Celestial Dog. Meracity, l. pureness without mixture. Meraud,
(q. Esmeraude) a Woman's name. Mercative, belonging to Mercature, l. the Trade
of Merchandise. Mercedary, l. he that hireth, also as Mercenary, he that is
hihired for reward or wages. Merch, part of South Scotland. Merchenlage, the
law of the Mercian, Inhabitants of Chester, Gloucester, Hereford, Oxford, Salop,
Stafford, Warwick, and Worcester. This was one of the three sorts of laws out
of which the Conqueror framed o^rs, mixed with those of Normandy; the other two
being Danelaege, and West-Saxonlaeg. Mercimoniatus Angliae, the Custom or
Impost of England. Mercurialize, to play the Mercurial, -list, fantastical,
talkative, theevish, Eloquent, one born under Mercury, the Planet next above
the Moon, also Quicksilver, the Son of Jupiter, and Maia, the messenger of the
Gods, also a News-book. Mercurian, eloquent etc. Mercurius Trismegistus, as
Hermes, etc. Mercury-women. See Hawkers. In the grievous Mercy of the King, in
hazard of a great fine or penalty. Merdiferous, l. carrying dung. Mere, a
standing water which cannot be drawn dry, also as Lynchet. Mere, a Town in
Wilts. Meritricious, l. whorish. Mergen, sa. the morning. Me^^ll, o. (for
Werelt, D.) the World. Meridian, an imagined circle (passing through the Poles
and the Zenith) which being touched by the center of the Suns body, makes
Noontide, also as Meridional, belonging to the South or to midday.
Meridiation, l. a sleeping at Noon. Merismus, g. division, a disposing things
in their proper places. Merito^, Oscillum, a childish play of sitting and
swinging in a rope. Meritorious, full of Merit, l. desert, also to deserve.
Merk, o. Dark. Se M^rk. Merkin, (f. la mere, Matrix) pube^ [ementita] mulieris.
Merle, f. a blackbird. Merlin, a British Conjurer. Mermaides, Sirens, (Ligaea,
Leucosia and Parthenope,) Seamaids (with their nether parts fishy) who were
said with their music to entice Seamen and then destroy them. Mern, part of
North- Scotland. Merodach-Baladan, h. bitter Contrition without judgment.
Merod^n, a town in Gulickland. Dia Meroes, the farthest of the Northern
Climates, whose parallel runs through Meroe, a City in an Island of that name
encompassed with Nilus, from Meroe, the Sister of Cambyses founder thereof.
Merope, one of the Pleiades. Merrick, an ancient British name of a man. Merry
banks, Der. a cold posset. Mersion, l. a Ducking, drowning or overwhelming.
Mertlage, for Martyrologie. Merton College (in Oxford) founded by one Walter
of Merton, a town in Surrey. Mer^il, a town of Luxemburgh. Mese, half a
thousand of herrings, also the mean or midle-string of an instrument. Mesel,
Sa. a ^eper. Mesenterick, Meseraick, belonging to the Mesen^ery, g.
(mid-bowels) the Double skin fastening the bowels to the back and one another,
enclosing a number of veins which nourish the guts, conc^ct the juice of meat,
and convey it to the liver to be made blood. Meskite, a synagogue among the
Turks and Moors, from Mezquidun, A. an Oration. Mesnalty, the right of a Mesn,
the Lord of a manor, holding of a superior Lord, also a writ, when the
Tenant is distrained by the superior for service due to the mean Lord.
Mes^agery, -rye, f. [the practice of] Husbandry or Huswifry. Mesopotamia,
Apamia, Adiabene, (Aram Naharaim, h. Syria of the rivers) a large Country of
Asia, between the Rivers Tigris and Euphrates. Mesozeugma, the figure Zeugma
with the verb in the middle. M^ssagery, a diligence in doing a message.
Messalians, Massil-, Heretics holding that the sacraments did neither good nor
harm, etc. Messilanae, the Luxurious Wife of Claudius the Emperor. Messana,
-sina, the chief city of Sicily. Messapia, Mesae-, part of Italy, containing
Apuglia and Calabria. Messarius, a mower or harvester. M^ssenij, the people of*
Messenae, a City of Greece, which held out long against the Spartans, but at
last was reduced to absolute slavery. Messengers of the Exchequer, Four
Pursuivants attending the Lord Treasurer. Messiah -as, h. Christ or Anointed.
Messil^, as Missile, (in the last sense.) Messina, the best port-town in
Sicily. Messor, l. a reaper or mower. Messorious, l* belonging to reaping or
harvest. Mes^^lo, Meslin, Mun^orn, Wheat and Rye mixed. Mestizos, Sp. the breed
of Spaniards by the Americans. Mest, o. for Most. Mestier, f. a trade, also
necessity. Mestifical, l. making heavy or sad. Mesuage, Mess^, a dwelling house
[with Garden and all things belonging to it] Messuagium, (in Scotland) the
Mannor-house. Met, Met, o. Dreamed. Met, No. Four pecks. Metabasis, g. a
Transition or passing from one thing to another. Metachronism, g. an error in
Chronology or reckoning of time. Metacism, l. a fault in pronouncing.
Metaleptick, belonging to Metalepsis, g. a participating, the continuation of a
trope in one word through a Succession of significations. Metal, Mettle, the
breech of a Great Gun. Vnder-M^ttle, with her mouth lower than the breech.
Over-Mettle, with the mouth higher. Metalliferous, l. bringing forth Metals.
Metallic, -ine, l. belonging to Metals. Metamorphize, to transform, or change
the form or shape. Metamorphosis, g. a changing of one shape into another.
Metaphorical, belonging to or spoken by a Metaphor, g. a borrowing of a word to
express something which it does not signify naturally, a similitude
comprehended in one word. Metaphysical, Supernatural, belonging to
Metaphysics, g. a Science which enquires of the form and end (as Physics does
of the efficient and matter) of of things The highest part of it treats of God,
Spirits, etc. Metaplasm, -mus* a necessary change (of words or letters) by
reason of the verse, etc. Metaris, Maltraith, the washes, an arm of the Sea in
Lincolnshire. Metathesis, g. a transposition or change of letters. Mete-gavel,
sa. Tribute or Rent paid in Victuals, changed into money by Hen. 1. Metellus, a
famous Roman General, also a Priest who lost his eyes by venturing to fetch the
Palladium out of Vesta's Temple on fire. Mete, (for Meet,) o. equal, also to
deal, to yield. Metempsychosed, passed by M^tempsychosis, g. a passing of the
soul from one body to another. Meteorologist, one that studies or is skilled in
Meterology, g. the Doctrine of M^teors, g. apparitions on high, or bodies
imperfectly mixed of vapors drawn up into the air, as Comets, Clouds. Wind,
Rain, etc. Metcoroscopie, g. a part of Astrology, handling the difference of
sublimities and distance of Stars. Metewand, a yard or measuring rod. Meth,
Meeth, o. the same as Mead or Metheglin, (Br. Meddiglin) a Welsh drink of wort,
herbs, honey and spice boild together. Methodical, belonging to Method, g. a
ready way or manner, an orderly or artificial disposing of things. Methodist,
one that so disposes things or that treats of method. Methodists, Galenists.
Methridate, as Mit^rida^e. M^thuselah, h. (the weapons of his death) he lived
969 years. Meticulosity, a being Meticulous, l. timorous, fearful. Metient, l.
measuring. Meti^^hus, the Son of Al^ibiades (at war with Darius) being taken
prisoner, was honorably received and enriched. Metius Suffetius, Dictator of
the Albans, torn in pieces by Tullius Hostilius's wild horses, for not
assisting him (according to Covenant) against the Fidenates. Metonymical,
belonging to a Metonymie, g. a putting one name for another, as of the Cause
and Subject for the Effect and Adjunct, or e contra. Metope, the distance or
space (in a pillar) between the Denticles and Triglyphs. Metopomancy, g.
Divination by the face or forehead. Metoposcopy, g. telling men's Natures (and
fortunes) by looking on their faces. Metrenchyta, g. an instrument to inject
liquid medicines into the womb. Metrical, l. belonging to. M^^ter, or verse.
Metropolis, g. the chief or Mother-City of a Province. Metropolitan, belonging
thereto, also an Archbishop, who (usually) has his seat there* Metropolitan
and Primate of England, the Archbishop of York. Metropolitan and Primate of
all England, the Archbishop of Canterbury. Meve, o. for move. Mewet, o. in
secret. Metz* a City of Lorrain. Mexican, belonging to Mexico, a famous City of
Nova Hispania. Meurs, a Town on the Rhine. Meurte, a River in Lorrain.
Mezentius, a King of the Thus^ans, who (with his Son Lausus) assisting Turnus
were slain by Aenaeas. Mezieres, a Town in Champagne. Miagrus, Mya-, Myopes,
Achor, the God of flies. Miasm, g. a defilement. Micajah, h. who is like the
Lord? Michael, h. who is like God? St. Michaels Mount, a Promontory in
Cornwall, fortified by John Earl of Oxford against K. Edw. 4 th. Michal, h. who
is perfect? Miche, to play the truant, or hide ones self out of the way.
Michis, white-loaves, paid sometime as a Rent. Michleta, a kind of Confection.
Mickle, sa. much. Microcosm, g. the little World, Man. Microcosmical, belonging
thereto. Microcosmography, g. a description thereof. Micrography, g. a
description of minute bodies. Micrology, g. a speaking or treating of petty
affairs. Micropsychy, g. smallness of Soul, faintheartedness. Microscope, g. an
instrument to discern the full proportion of the smallest things. Mictus
sanguinis, l. a pissing of [thin, wheyish] blood. Midas* King of Phrygia, who
had his desire of his guest Bacchus, that whatsoever he touched might be turned
into gold, till (being almost famished) he was counseled to wash in Pactolus,
whose sands (thereby) became golden. Midding, sa. No. a mixen or dunghill.
Middleburg, the chief City of Zealand, another in Mentz, etc. Middle-men,
half-files, they that are in the sixth rank of ten, or the fifth of eight (but
improperly. Middleham, a Town in Yorkshire. Midge, No. a gnat. Midian, h.
Judgment or striving. Middleton, a Town in Dorcetshire, and almost 40 more.
Midriasis, g. the dilatation of the apple of the eye. Middlewich, a town in
Cheshire, Midhurst, a Town in Sussex. Midriff, as Diaphragm. Migrame, as
Megrim. Migration, l. a removing or departing. Mikel, for Mickle. Mildernix, a
kind of Canvas for Sail-Clothes, etc. Mile, a thousand paces, or 1760 yards.
Dutch Mile, 4000 paces. German Mile, 5000 paces. Milbrook, a town in Cornwall.
Mildenhall, a Town in Sussex. Miles Milo, a man's name. Mil^sij, the people of
Miletus, Anactoria, Melazzo, the chief City of Ionia Milan, Millain, a City in
Italy. Milford-haven, a large and comodious haven in Pembrokeshire. Militant,
l. f^ighting, combating. Military, belonging to Militia, l. warfare, Soldiery
the implements and furniture for war. Milken, c. a house-breaker. Milky way, as
Vtalactaea. Millea^e, Mil-leat, a trench to convey water to or from a Mill.
Millefoile, ^he herb yarrow. Mill, c. to steal. Millenari^, -ian, as Chiliast.
Millet, Milium, a plant bearing a multitude of small grains. Milliary, l.
mile-mark a stone-pillar (in Rome) with a brass-ball, from whence all the Miles
were reckoned. Such a one London stone is thought to have been. Million, a
thousand thousand. Milo, a Cro^^nian, who (at the Olympic games) carried an
Ox a furlong, killed him with his fist, and are him in one day. Mill-holms,
No. watery places bout the Mill dam. Miloglossum, one of the four muscles of the
tongue. Miltiades, an Athenian who (with 11 thousand Greeks) overthrew 600
thousand Persians, yet (being accused of bribery) was forced to dye in chains.
Milton, a Town in Kent* and about 30 more. Milverton, a Town in Sommersetshire.
Milwyn, La. green-fish. Mimical, a pish, belonging to a Mime, -mick* g. a
Jester, or fool in a play, also a kind of play more wanton than a Comedy.
Mimographer, a writer of such Poems. Minacity, -ature, l. menacing or
threatening. Minchings, o. (Monachae) Nuns. Minchin-Hampton, a town in
Glocestershire. Mindbruch, sa. a hurting of honor or Worship. Mindon, a town
in Westphalia. Mine^ead, a town in Sommersetshire. Mine, f. as Mien.
Mineralist, one skilled in Minerals, metallic substances, dug out of Mines,
whence metals are taken, as quarries, whence stones, and pits, whence clays are
dug. Mineral Courts, to regulate the affairs of lead-mines. Minerva, the
Goddess of Wisdom and all the Arts, born of Jupiters brain without a Mother.
Minerval* l. a reward given for teaching, and (properly) a banquet before a
vacation. Ming, No. mention. Minge, o. for mingle. Min^inator, Y. a maker of
Fr^twork. Miniated, painted, in-laid (with gold, etc. Miniature, a drawing of
pictures in little, usually with Minium, l. red lead. Minim, half a Sembrief.
Miniments, as Muniments. Minims, Minorites, as Bon^ommes. Miniographer, a
painter or writer with Vermillion, or any red color. Minion, Mignon, f. a
Darling or Favorite, also the name of a piece of Ordinance. Minious, l. of a
Red or Vermilion color. Minish, o. for Diminish. Ministry, l. [Church]
service. Ministers, o. for Ministrels or Musicians. Miniver, as Meniver.
Minning-daies (q. Minding-daies) La. Months-mind or Years-mind, Anniversary or
Commemoration days, when some Office was said for the soul of the Deceased.
Minor, l. lesser, younger. Minor [proposition] the Assumption or second part of
a syllogism. Minoration, a making less. Minorative, diminishing. Minority, a
being under age, Nonage. Minorca, -qua, a Mediterranean Isle on the Spanish
Coast. Minors, as Friar Minors. Minos, a King of Creet, supposed (for his
justice) to be made a Judge in hell, his wife Pasiphae having lain with a Bull
(or her man Taurus) brought forth the Minotaur, a Monster (half-man, half-bull)
kept in the Labyrinth made by Daedalus, and devoured yearly seven of the
Noblest Athenian-Youths, till (in the third year) Theseus slew him, and escaped
by the help of Ariadne. Minovery, (q. Main-^^uvre) an Offensive handiwork in
the Forest, as an Engine to catch Deer, etc. Minster, Sa. Monastery. Minstrel,
(f. Menestril) a fiddler or piper. Mint at it, No. aim at it, or have a mind to
it. Mint, the place where the Kings coin is formed, (formerly Caleis, now the
Tower of London.) Minting, (q. minding or coining) Li. ^.* endeavoring.
Minute, the sixtieth part of an hour. Minute, l. very small. Minute-Tythes,
small-tythes belonging to the Vicar. Minution, a making little. Mirabilary, a
book of wonders. Mirach, the girdle of Andromeda. Miraculous, wonderful, above
the force or course of Nature. Miradical, speaking strange things. Mire-Court,
a town in Lorrain. Miriam, h. as Maria. Mirifical, l. wonderfully wrought or
working. Mirmillions, Galli, a sort of Gladiators or Sword-fighters. Mirour,
Mirror, f. a looking-glass. Misagaft, Ss. mistaken. Misanthropy, g. hating of
men. Misanthropist, g. he that hates the Company of men. Misadventure, Misav-,
the killing of a man partly by negligence, partly by chance (as by careless
throwing of a stone, etc.) whereby he forfeiteth his Goods. Misbode, o. Wrong
(by word or deed.) Miscellaneous, l. mixed together without Order. Miscellanies,
Collections of several various matters. Miscreed, No. descryed. At Mi^chefe, o.
Conquered. Miscreant, f. an Infidel. Miscord, o. to differ. Miscognisant,
Ignorant, not knowing. Miscontinuance, as Discon-. Mise, Mize, f. cast or
put-upon, a tax, expense or charges, also Mise, (in a writ of right) is the
same as that which (in all other actions) is called an Issue. Mise (in Wales is
the customary present (of 5000 pounds) to every new Prince, paid thrice in the
reign of King James, viz. to himself, Prince Henry, and Prince Charles. Mise
(in the County Palatine of Chester) 3000 Marks paid to every new Earl.
Misen-sail, between the Poop and Mainsail. Change the Misen, bring the yard to
the other side of the mast. Miseraick, as Meseraick. Miserere, l. (have mercy)
the beginning of the Psalm of mercy, one of the penitential Psalms usually
given as the Benefit of Clergy. Miserere mei, a Disease (from an obstruction of
the small guts) voiding the excrements upward. Misericordia, Mercy, Amercement,
an Arbitrary and moderate punishment. In Misericordia, Amerced or at Mercy.
Misfill, f. (q. Misfell) o. miscarried. M^^seasans, mis-doings, trespasses.
Mish-mash, Ge. a Chaos or confused heaps of things. Mish, Commission, c. a
shirt. Mish-topper, c. a Coat. Mishering, miskering, as Abishersing.
Miskenning, (misunderstanding) erroneous proceeding, also varying ones speech
in Court. Miskin, o. a little bag-pipe. Misnia, a Saxon-province. Misnomer, a
misnaming. Misogamy, g. a hating of marriage. Misogyny, g. hatred of women.
Misogynist, g. a Woman-hater. Misprision, (f. Mespris) contempt, negligence or
O-fight, also a Mistaking. Misprision of Clerks, their neglect in writing or
keeping Records. Misprision of Treason or Felony, Not revealing it, when we
know it committed, the first incurs imprisonment during the Kings pleasure and
loss of goods, the other is only finable by the Justices before whom the party
is attainted. Misqueme, o. to displease. Missate, (q. mis-sate) o. became not,
was misbecoming. Miss, for Mistress. Missal, l. a Mass Book. Misselden,
Meseldine, Missel^^, Mess-, an excrementitious plant (with slimy white berries)
growing upon trees. M^ssen, as Misen, whereof some long ships have two, viz.
the Main-Miss^n* next the mainmast, and the Bonaventure-missen, next the poop.
Missil, l. a dart or any thing shot or thrown, also (in Heraldry) a mixture of
several colors together. Mission, l. a sending, also a Popish Commission to
preach the Roman Faith in other Countries. Missionaries, the Priests that are
so sent, also as Fathers of the Mission (in France) they go by pairs (in
imitation of the Apostles) to assist the Clergy, with obedience to the Bishop.
Missive, l. a sending, also sent, and that which witnesses ones being sent.
Mis-trial, a false or erroneous trial. Mister, o. need, want, also as Mystery,
(f. Mestir,) a craft or trade. Mis-us^r, an abuse of liberty or benefit.
Miswoman, o. a whore. Misy, Copper-(shining like like gold) found in Egypt and
Cyprus. Misthrown, o. cast [thine eye] the wrong way. Mistimed, o. Misspent
the time. Mites, Vermin (smaller than lice) about the heads and Nostrils of
hawks. Mitches, o. Manchets. Mithridate, Meth-, an Antidote against infection,
invented by Mithridates, a King of Pontus who spoke 22 Languages, rebelling and
being overcome by the Romans, he would have poisoned himself, but could not.
Mitigate, l. to pacify or quiet. Mitta, ten bu^hels. Mittens, f. thick winter
gloves [without distinction of fingers.] Mitte, o. Mighty. Mittimus (we send) a
writ by which Records are transmitted from one Court to another, also a
Justices warrant to a Jailor, to receive and keep an Offender. Mittendo
Manus^riptum pedis finis, a Writ for the searching and transmitting the foot of
a fine from the Exchequer to the Common Pleas. Mitral, l. belonging to a Mitre*
was to a Bishop, as a Crown to a King. Mytelene, an ancient City (and now the
whole Isle of Le^bos.) Mixen, S. a Dunghill. Mixolydian, (q. Mixed Lydian)
Music, lamentable, fit for Tragedies. Mixt-tithes, of Cheese, milk, the young
of beasts, etc. Mize, as Mise. Mizzy, No. a quagmire. Miz-maze, as Maze,
Mizmor, Sp. a Dungeon. Mnas, a famous Italian Pirate. Mnason, (q. Mneson,) g.
an Exhorter. Mnemosyne, g. (Memory) the Mother of the Muses by Jupiter.
Mnestheus, as Menestheus. Moabites, the Offspring of Moab, h. Of the Father.
Mobbi, a drink (in Barbados) made of Potato roots Mobility, l. moveableness,
inconstancy. Mockel, Muckle, o. Mickle. Mockadoes, a kind of stuff. Modality,
the manner or qualification of a thing in the abstract. Modbury, a town in
Devonshire. Modder, (D. Modde) and Mawther, (Da. Moer) Nf. a young girl.
Modefy, f. to moderate, or put into the Mode, f. fashion. Modena, the chief
City of Modenois, an Italian Duchy. Moderata Misericordia, a Writ for the
abating an immoderate amerciament. Modo et forma, l. in manner and form.
Moderation, l. temperance, discretion, government. Moderatour, -tor, l. a
Discreet Governor, and Decider of Controversies. Modern, l. New, of late time.
Modiation, a measuring by the bushel. Modher, as Modder. Modicum, l. a small
pittance. Modificable, capable of Modification, the act of Modifying,
qualify^ng, measuring, lim^ting. Modus decimandi, any composition for Ti^hes in
kind. Modul^tion, l. an exact sing^ng or warbling. Modwall, a bird that
destroys bees. Moeble, o. (f. Meuble, Muable) Moveable. Moeris, an Egyptian
King who undertook and finished the Moeris, an admirable lake receiving the
superfluity of Nilus, and supplying them with water in time of drought
Mognions, f. Arms for the shoulders. Mogontus, an ancient British Idol in
Northumberland. M^guntine, belonging to Moguntia, Mentz in Germany, where
printing was invented, An. 1440. Mohatra, Sp. a taking up money upon usury.
Moiety, Moitie, f. the half of any thing. Moile, o. a dish of marrow and grated
bread. Moiles, Mullci, high-soald shoes anciently worn by Kings and great
persons. Moison, o. (f. Moisson, harvest) ripeness [of corn.] Mokes, Ss. the
meishes of a Net. Mokel, sa. Bigness. Molar, l. belonging to a mill. Molar
teeth, Cheek-teeth, Grinders, five on each side both above and beneath.
Molasses, the refuse Sirrup ^n boiling Sugar. Mole, a Peer or Fense against the
Sea. Molebou^e, a great grunting ^^sh. Molech, h. as Moloch. Molendarious,
-dina-, belonging to a mill. Molendinum ad ventum, a windmill. Molendinum
^ladonicum, bladum, de blado, a Cornmill. Molestation, l. a vexing or
troubling. Moliminous, having, using, or requiring much strength. Molinists,
great opposers of the Jansenists, and followers of Molina, a Spanish Jesuit,
maintaining that God did not premove the will in free acts etc. Molli^ion, l.
an attempting or endeavoring. Mollificative, having power-to Mollify, l. to
soften, or cause Mollitude, l. softness, tenderness, effeminateness. Mollock,
Meore, o. dirt or dung. Moloch, Molech. h. (railing, or a King) an Idol having
the brazen body of a man with the head of a Calf. Molter, No. Mill-toll.
Molochi^e, as Malachite. Molucques, Asian Islands. Moly, an herb of great use
(and virtue) among the Gods, whose root was supposed dangerous for mortals to
dig up. Momblishness, o. talk; muttering. Mombelliard, a town in Franche
County. Mome, -mus, a feigned Deity (Son of Nox and Somnus) whose business was
to find fault and carp at all the other Gods. Moment, l. a minute, also weight
or concernment. Momentary, of short continuance. Mompellier, a City of
Languedoc, in France. Mon, o. Might, ( q. Mun or Must.) Mon, Mona, Anglesey.
Mona^hal, Monial, belonging to Monachism, g. the state and condition of a Monk.
Monadical, belonging to Monas, g. unity, the number of one. Mon amy, f. My
friend. Mon-Castel, a town in Flanders. Monarchical, belonging to Monarchy, g.
Government by a Monarch, g. one Man (or Woman) ruling alone. Monasterial,
belonging to Monasteries colleges for Monasticks, g. Monks, or Solitary
Religious people. Mond, f. a golden globe, the Ensign of an Emperor,
challenging a kind of right to the whole world. Moan, o. (q. Mond) a globe.
Monedule, l. a Jack-daw. Moneresse, o. a She-Mourner [at Funerals.] Month,
Four weeks, or Eight and twenty days. Twelve-Moneth, a whole year. Twelve
months, to be reckoned by 28 days to the month. Calendar Month, as expressed
in every yearly Almanac. Month of apparition, 26 days and 12 hours, the Moon
being in combustion with the Sun and disappearing the other 3 days. Month of
Consecution or Progression, from one conjunction to another, 26 days and an
half. Medical or Decretorial Month, 26 days and 2^ hours. Month of
Peragration, 2^ days and 8 hours, the Moons revolution from any part of the
Zodiac to the same again. Moneths-mind, Sa. The 30th. day after any ones
death. Mong-corn, o. Maslin. Monger, a small Sea-vessel for fishing. Monger,
Mangere, Sa. a Merchant. Moniers, Moneyors, the Mint-men or Coyners. Monitory,
l. the place of Monition, l. admonition, warning, the work of a Monitor, l. an
admonishes or Counselor. Monks-hood, Consolida Regalis, a flower. Monmedi, a
town of Luxemburg. Monmouth, a town and County in Wales. Monoceros, -rote, g.
an unicorn. Monocord, g. having but one string. Monocular, -lous, one-eyed.
Monodical, belonging to a Monody, g. a funeral ditty sung by one alone.
Monogamy, g. a marrying but one [wife or husband.] Monogdon, g. an eight, or
one out of eight. Mon^gram, g. a writing or sentence of one line or verse.
Monologie, g. speaking alone or always in the selfsame tone, also a long
discourse to little purpose. Monomachy, g. a single combat, hand to hand.
Monologue, -gian, g. one that loves to hear himself talk Monophagie, g. a
feeding alone, or on one kind of meat. M^nopolize, to play the Monopolist, he
that uses or has the grant of a Monopoly, g. an engrossing of commodities
into ones hand, that none can sell or gain by them but himself. Monops,
Bonasus, a Paeoni^^ beast, which (being pursued) casts forth ordure deadly to
those it lights on. Monoptate, g. [a Noun] of one only case. Monoptick, g.
seeing only with one eye. Monostick, g. a single verse. Monosyllable, [a word]
of one only syllable. Monothelites, g. Heretics ( Anno. 640.) holding but one
will in Christ. Monstrable, l. which may be showed or declared. Monstrance de
droit f. a writ of Chancery to restore one to lands or Tenements, shown to be
his Right. Monstre, o. an essay or (rather) masterpiece. Monstraverunt, a writ
for Tenants in ancient demesne, not to be distreined for toll or other service
contrary to their liberties. Monstrosity, l. a being Monstrous, l. beyond the
ordinary course of nature. Mount belgard, a Town and Earldom in Germany.
Montanus, an heretic who held that the Holy Ghost was not given to the
Apostles, but to him and the Montanists, his followers. Montanous, l. belonging
to or full of Mountains. Montchensy, de moute Canisio, a great surname in Kent
and Suffolk. Montferrat, an Italian Province divided between the Dukes of
Mantoua and Savoy. Mont^fiasco, a r^ch wine from Montefiascone, a City in
Italy. Montfort, a Town in Vtrecht Montera, -to, sp. a Hunters or Horsemans
cap. Montgomery, Mons Gomericus, a City in Wales. M^nticulous, l. f^ll of
Monticles l little hills. Montifichet, de monte fixo, a noted name.
Montivagant, -gous, l. wandering on the Mountains. Monts, Mons, the chief town
of Hainault. Monument, l. a memorial, tomb, statue, etc. Montreali, a City in
Sicily. Montrose, a Marquisate of North Scotland. Monychus, a Centaur that
pulled up Trees by the Roots. Monyma, complained that her Diadem was good
neither in prosperity nor adversity, because it broke when she would have
hanged herself in it, after her husband Mithridates was overthrown. Mony-wort,
Numularia, herb-two pence. Mood, Mode, l. manner, measure, rule, also an humor
or temper of mind. Moods of Verbs, Indicative Imperative, Subjunctive and
Infinitive* Moods in Music, Dorick Lydian, Aeolick, Phrygian and Ionick.
Moon-wort, Lunaria, a small plant of great virtue in curing wounds, bruises,
Cancers, etc. Moon-Curser, c. a link-boy. Moor-hen, as Coot. Moor the ship, lay
out her anchors (at least two) most conveniently for her to ride by. Moor
across or athwart, with one anchor on one side and another on the other side
of the River. Moor a-longst, with one Anchor ahead and the other a-stern.
Moor-Water-shot, quartering, between both the former. Moor a-proviso, with one
Anchor down, and her head moored with a hawser to the shore. Moorland, a
Moorish barren part of Staffordshire. Moot-men, Students (in the Innes of Court
and Chancery) who do Moot, Mote, to plead or handle cases in Law (for an
house-exercise) see Mote. Mooted, (in heraldry) torn up by the roots. Mopsical,
l. mop-ey'd, which cannot see well. Moral, l. belonging to manners or civility,
also Morally, after the manner of men, or as the case now stands. M^rality, an
exercising of the Moral or Cardinal Virtues, Prudence, Justice, Temperance, and
Fortitude. Moralize, to give the Moral sense of a thing, as the Moral of a
Fable, the application of it to men's lives and manners. Moration, l. a
tarrying. Moravia, Marcomannia, part of Bohemia. Moratur (or Demora^ur) in
l^ge, he demurrs or abides upon the Judgment of the Court. Morbidizza, I.
tenderness, softness, effeminacy. Mor^^fical, l. bringing sicking sickness or
diseas^s. Morbu^ent, l. sickly, full of disea^es. Mo^bas Gallicus,
Neopolitanus, Hispanicus, Indicus, the Great or French Pox. Mordacity, -ancy,
l. sharpness, bit^ng, bitterness of speech. Mordecai, h. bitter. Mordicate, l.
to bite Mordicative, l. biting or stinging. Morea, the Peninsula Peloponnes^s
in Greece. Moresk-work, Moresque, f. a rude or antic, painting or carving, a
wild resemblance of all things intermingled. Mores, No. hills. Moreton, a town
in Devonshire. Morgan, Br. Seaman. Morglay, (q. Mort-glaive) a mortal or deadly
sword. Moriam, as Morion. Morigerati^n, a being Morigerous, l. dutif^l,
obedient Mo^im, f a Murrian, a steel-cap or headpiece. Mo^is, Morice, Maurice,
-itius, a Martyr under Maximianus. Mort^co, Sp. a moor, also a Mo^rice (or
moor^sh) d^nce Morking, -kin, a Deer (or other beast) that dies by mischance o^
sickness al^o as Morling, Mortling, wool taken from the skin of a dead Sheep.
Mormal, o. a canker or Gangreen. Mo^ol^g^, g. a foolish speaking. Morosity, l.
a being M^rose, l. froward, peevish, wayward. Morow^d, o. morning. M^rowning,
the same. Morpeth, a town in Northumberland. Morpheus, [the God of] sleep.
Morphew, (q. Mort-feu) a dead fire) a white scurff upon the body. Mors-munster,
as Pfirt. Morsee, part of North Juitland. Mort, c. a Woman. Morta, l. one of
the destinies, See Nona. Mort^l, l. deadly. Mortar, o. a [funeral] lamp. Mort
d' ancester, as Assise of Mort-. Mortgage, f. (dead pledge) a pawn of Lands or
goods for money borrowed, to be the Creditors for ever, if the money be not
repaid at the time. Tenant in Mortgage, holding such Lands or Tenements.
Mortiferous, l. death-bringing. Mortifi^ation, l. the action of Mortifying,
killing [of lust] punishing and subduing [the Flesh.] Mortise, f. the fastening
a piece of Wood (as it were by biting) into another piece. Mortling, as
Mor^ing. M^rtmain, f. (dead hand) an alienation of Lands or Tenements (with the
Kings license of Mortmain) to a Corporation or Fraternity (and their
Successors) as Bishops, Parsons, etc. Mortress, -eis, o. a made dish of hens,
crumbs of bread, Yolks of Eggs and Saffron boild together. Mortuary, l.
corps-present, a gift-left by a man (at his death) to his Parish Church, for
tithes not duly paid in his lifetime, by custom becom'n due ( viz. a noble, if
the goods be worth between 30 and 40 pound, 10 shillings, if above, etc.) and
in some places for the passage of a corpse through another Parish. Mortuum
caput, the gross relics of any thing distilled. Mosaic, -call, belonging to
Moses, h. drawn up [out of the water.] Mosaique, -ical, Musaique, -sive work, a
most curious kind of work inlaid with small pieces of stone, glass, shells,
etc. sometimes in wood, called Tarsia or Marquetry. Mosa, the River Meuse (or
Maes) running through Lorrain and the Low Countries. Mosco, -ow, the chief City
in Moscovy, Mus-, [the principal province of] White Russia. Mosche, -ea,
Mosque, as Meskite, a Turkish Church. Moselle, a river running through Lorrain,
etc. Mosses, La. Moorish and boggy places. Mospach, a town in the Palatinate of
the Rhine. Moss-troopers (like the Irish Yories, and Italian Banditi) that live
(in the North of England) by Robbery and Rapine. Mostick (q. Malstick, Ge.
paint-stick) which the Painters rest upon while they are at work. Mosul,
Nineve. Mote, (sa. gem^te) a Court, Plea or Convention, also a Castle, and as
moot, Mot, f. Motto, I. a word, Emblem, Impress or Device, also a lesson which
Huntsmen wind on their horn. Mote, o. Must. Motable, l. always moving.
Motacism, l. the dashing out of the Letter. Motet, f. a verse or stanza in
Music, a short poem. Mother, a painful rising of the Womb, for which all
sweet smells are bad, and stinking ones good. Motherwort, Cardiaca, a cleansing
astringent herb. Mother-tongues, having no affinity with one another. Motion,
l. a moving. Motive, moving, also a moving cause or argument. Moveable Feasts,
which always keep the day of the week, but ^^ry in the day of the month:
Motred, o. muttered. Mouch, o. to eat up all. Mougnon, f. the but-end of a
thing, the brawny part of the arm, also a brassel or Armor for the arm. South
Moulton, a town in Devonshire. Mound (q. Muniment) a sense or hedge. Mounsoun,
an East India wind, blowing constantly three months one way, and the next three
contrary. Mounster, an Irish Province. Mount a piece, lay her on the Carriages,
also, lay her mouth higher. Mountabour, a town in Westphalia. Mountain of
Piety, a Charitable stock raised and lent (for a small consideration) to the
Poor, to free them from the usury and extorsion of the Jews. Mountaunce, as
Mountenance. Mountebank, Montimbanco, I. Charlatam, f. Quacksalver, D. a
wandering and juggling Physician. Mounts^rrel, a town in Leichestershire.
Mountenance, o. (f. Mo^tance) the price that any thing amounts to, the
quantity. Mourdant, o. the tongue [of a buckle.] Mourning of the Chine, a
disease in Horses, exulcetating the Liver, corrupting the Heart, and killing.
Mous-ear, Pilosella, a binding and cleansing herb. Mous-^ole, a town in
Corn^al. Mow, (f. amas) a pile or stack of Corn or Hay.] Mow, o. I may.
Mowlen, o. moulder away, or molded. Mower, c. a Cow. Mow-heater, c. a d^over.
Moylery, o. pains. Welly Moyder'd, Che. almost distracted. M. S. Manuscript.
Muccilaginous, Mucculent, Mucu-, l. full of snot, filth or phlegm. Mu^idity,
Mucour, hoariness, filthiness, or being Mucid, l. moldy, sinewed. Muckre, o.
to hoard up. Muck, Li. moist. Mucronated, l. sharp-pointed. Mudereeses, Turkish
Readers, instructing Scholars in all Church duties* etc. Muckson up to the
Buckson, Dev. dirty up to the knuckles. Mue, a place where Hawks are kept,
while they. Mu^, f. change [their Feathers.] The Mues, the Kings Stables, where
formerly his Hawks were kept. Muffling-cheat, c. a Napkin. Mufti, (Tu. Oracle
or answerer of doubts) the chief-Priest among the Turks, created by the
Emperor himself. Mugient, l. lowing or bellowing. Mugwet, as Gatherbag.
Mugwort, Artemisia, an herb which (they say) removes weariness. Mulatto, Sp.
one whose Father or Mother only was a black. Mulberg, a town in Misnia.
Mulcible, l. which may be appeased. Mulct, l. a fine or amerciament. Mulcto, I.
a moil or great mule, used to carry sumpters. Mulhausen, a town in Alsatia.
Mulheim, a town of Berg in Germany. Muliebrity, l. womanliness, delicateness.
Mulierosity, unlawful lust after Women. Mulier, l. a woman that has known man,
also a wife. Muliertie, Mulerie, the being or condition of a Mulier, (q.
Melieur, f better) filius mulieratus, the the lawful Issue, preferred before an
Elder Brother born out of Matrimony. Mullar, (f* Mouleur,) the upper stone,
which Painters grind their colors with, upon the grinding stone. Mulled sack,)
Molli^unt) burnt and Sugared. Mullock, N^. dirt or rubbish. Mullet, a barbel,
also (in Heraldry) a starlike spot falling with five ends signifying a third
brother, also a Surgeons small pincerlike instrument. Mulse, l. honeyed
wine. Mulsulmans, Muss-, A. (faithful people) Mahometans so called among
themselves. Multa (or Multra) Episcopi, a fine paid by the Bishops to the King,
for power to make their own wills and have the probate of other men's.
Multatitious, Mulct-, l. gotten by fine or forfeit. Multifarious, l. of diverse
sorts; or divided many ways. Multiferous, l. bearing much. Multifidous l.
having many clefts. Multiformity, a being Multiform, l. having many forms or
shapes. Multiloquent, -quous, l. full of words. Multinominal, l. having many
names. Multiparous, l. bringing forth many [at a birth.] Multiplicity, a being
Multiplicio^s, l. manifold. Multiplicable, capable of Multiplication,
augmenting, making much or many. Multiplication of Gold or Sil^er, forbidden 5.
H* 4. Multipotent, l. able to do much. Multiscious, l. knowing much.
Multisonant, l. sounding much. Multitudinous, having many, or belonging to a
Multitude, (by some) ten persons at le^st, others leave it to the discretion of
the Judge. Multivious, l. having many ways. Multivagant, l. wandering much.
Multivolent, l. of many minds, mutable. Multure, f. the grist, also the Millers
toll. Mum, a kind of Physical Beer made (originally) at Brunswick in Germany,
with husks of walnuts infused. Mummery, f. a personating others in a mask or
antic habit. Mumpers, c. gentile beggars. Mumps, a swelling of the chaps.
Mumial, belonging to Mumy, Mummy, l. Pissa sphaltum, Pici-bitumen, a pitthy
substance, either from bodies embalmed in Arabia, or made of Jews lime and
bitumen. Muncer, the Ringleader of the Munc^rians, a sort of rebellious
Anabaptists in Germany. Mundane, l. worldly. Mundani^y, worldliness. Mundatory,
as Purificatory. Mundbrech, sa. a breach of mounds or fences. Munlick, a hard
stony substance found in the Tin-ore. Mundif^^ative, belonging to
Mundification, l. the act of Mundifying, purifying, cleansing. Mundivagant, l.
wandering about the world. Mun^rate, l. to reward or recompense. Munger, as
Monger. Municipal, -pial, l. enjoying, or belonging to the freedom of a City.
Munick, the chief City of Bavaria. Muniferous, l. gift-bearing. Munificence, l.
liberality, a being Munificent, -call, bountiful. Muniment, l. a fence or Fort.
Muniment-house, a little strong room for the keeping of plate and Muniments,
Min-, Charters, evidences, etc. Munite, l. to fortify, also as Munited, armed,
fenced. Munster, a Province in Ireland, and a City in Westphalia. Munk-scam,
the strongest way of sewing sails, with the edge of one canvas over the edge of
the other. Muns, c. the face. Murage, a toll taken of every laden Cart or
Horse, toward the building or repairing the walls of that City or Town. Mural,
l. belonging to a wall. Mural Crown, given to him that first scaled the walls
of an Enemies City. Murcia, part of Spain. Murcid, l. cowardly, sloathful.
Murder, a wilful killing of a man upon premeditated malice. Murderers, small
canon, carrying Murdering-shot, to clear the Decks, when men enter. Murengers,
yearly Officers in Westchester, who keep the walls in repair. Muret, a Town of
Gascoigne in France. Muricide, l. a Mouse-killer. Muriel, a woman's name.
Muring, the raising of walls. Murk, No. dark. Murklins, No. in the dark.
Murnival, (f. Morni^^ a trick) four [cards of a kind.] Murrain, a kind of
disease or rot among Cattle. Murray, Moravia, part of North Scotland. Murrey,
(M^urus,) a dusky or dun-colour. A Murth of Corn, No. abundance. Musach cassa a
chest in the Temple at Jerusalem, whereinto the Kings were wont to cast their
Offerings. Musaeus, a famous Greek Poet, contemporary with Orpheus. Musahib
Alloh, Tu. (a talker with God) Moses. Musaph, a book of all the Turkish Laws.
Musard, f. a loyte^er. Muscadel, -dine, f. Wine (brought from Candy) having the
flavor of Musk. Muschamp, a name (in Northumberland) formerly of great note.
Muscheto, (Moschetta, I. a little fly) a kind of gnat. Musculous, belonging to,
or full of Muscles, l. fleshy parts of the body, serving for instruments of
motion. Musculous vein, the first branch of the flank-veins, communicating it
self with diverse muscles about the belly and loins. Muscovites, people of
Muscovy, Russia, bordering on Tartary. Muscosity, abundance of Mice, also a
being Muscous, l. mossy. Musen, when a Stag or Male Deer casts his head. Muses,
(Calliope, Clio, Erato, Thalia, Melpomene, Terpsichore, Polyhymnia, Urania)
Daughters of Jupiter and Mnemosyne, Goddesses of Poetry and Music. Muse, -set,
f. the place through which the hare goes to relief. Musive, as Mosaique. Musk,
Pa^, a per^ume growing in a little bag or bladder within an Indian beast like a
Roe or Wild Goat. Musket, the Tassel or Male of a Sparrow-hawk. Muskin, (q.
Mouskin) a Finch, or Titmouse. Musmon, a certain beast resembling partly a
sheep, partly a goat. Musrol, f. an iron ring to put about a horses nose.
Mussack, a drink much used by the Chinese. Mussitation, l. a muttering.
Mussulmans, as Mulsulmans Mus^, l. New-prest wine. Mustachio, -che, f. -chos,
Sp. g. the beard upon the upperlip. Mustaphis, -pheis, Turkish Doctors or
Prophets. Mustelline, l. belonging to a Weasel. Muster of Peacocks, an old (but
Elegant) word for a company of them together. Mustered of Record, enrolled
among the Kings Soldiers. Muster-master General, Master of the Kings Musters.
Mustriche, Mous-, o. (Mustricula) a shoemakers last. Mustulent, l. new, fresh,
sweet as Must. Mutability, a being Mutable, l. changeable, inconstant.
Mutation, l. a change. Mutations, the places where Strangers (as they
journeyed) did change their Posthorses, etc. Mute, l. dumb, or (in Law) not
answering directly, also any Consonant except the Liquids, also ( Sc.) as Mote
or Moot. Mu^es, certain [dumb] executioners among the Turks Mu^eth, [the hawk]
dung^th. Mutilate, l. to maim, curtail, or diminish. Mutiny, f. [to raise] a
sedition, especially among Soldiers. Quintus Mutius Scaevola, burnt his right
hand for killing a Courtier instead of Porsenna (King of the Hetrusci) warring
against Rome. Mutual, l. interchangeable, from one to another. Muzrole, as
Musrol. Muzzle-ring, the greatest cirle about the mouth of a great gun.
Mycterism, g. a wiping ones nose, a closer kind of Sarcasm. Mydias, the reputed
Author of Coats of Ma^l. Mynnyng days, as Minning. Mynt, c. Gold. Myriarch,
g. a Captain of a Myriad, g. ten thousand. Myrmice, a maid who (for contemning
Ceres) was turned into an Ant. Myrmidon, an ancient King of Thessaly, and Son
of Jupiter. Myrmidons, Thessalians that went with Achilles to Troy.
Myrobalanes, Egyptian Nuts or Acorns, of five kinds, viz. B^llerick, Chebule,
Citrine, E^blick and Indian. Myropolist, g. a seller of sweet ointments or
perfumes. Myrrha, Mother of Adonis by her Father Cynaras (King of Cyprus) who
(when he knew it) would have sla^n her, but flying into Arabia she is said to
be turned into a ^ree of that name. Myrrhine, -^hean, belonging to Myrrh, an
Arabian gum (between white and red) of an opening, cleansing and dissolving
nature. Myrsus, King of Lydia, Father of Myrsi^us, Candaules, the last of the
race of the Heraclidae. Myrtilus, the son of Mercury, drowned (instead of being
rewarded) by Pelops, for whom (at a race) he left the Chariot-wheel loose and
brake the neck of his Master Oenomaus. Myrtle, a low, tender and fragrant tree
sacred to Venus, worn garland-wise by those that triumphed after Victories
obtained without slaughter of men. Mysia, part of Asia the less. Mystagogical,
belonging to a Mystagogue, g. he that interprets Mysteries, that has the
keeping of Church-reliques and showing them (...) strangers. Mysteriarch, g. a
Chief prelate or master of sacred mysteries. Mystical, Mysterious, secret,
obscure. Mythologist, he that does Myt^ologize, or practice Mythology, g. an
expounding of Fables.
N.
NAam, sa. a distreining of a man's goods. Naaman, h. Comely. Nab, c. a head.
Nab-girder, c. a bridle. Nab-cheat, c. a hat. Nabal, h. a fool or mad. Nacre,
f. Mother of pearl. And, (q. Ne had) o. had not. Nadab, h. a Prince. Nadir, A.
the point of heaven directly under our feet, and opposite to Zenith. Na^^a,
Funeral songs. Naiades, g. Nymphs (or feigned Goddesses) of Rivers and
Fountains. Nail of beef, Ss. Eight pound. Naiant, (f. Nageant) swiming. Naif,
f. natural, lively. Nail stone, perfect in all its properties, or found so
naturally, as if it had been artificially cut. Nakoners, o. brazen horns. Nale,
o. Alehouse. Nam, o. for Am not. Namation, a distreining, or (in Scotland) an
impounding. Namaz, the Turkish Common prayer. Name, o. took. Namur, one of the
Neatherlands. Nantwich, a town in Cheshire. Naney, the chief City of Lorrain,
surrendered to the French, 1633. Nantes, a City on the Loirz in B^i^any. Nap,
the tufted superficies of Cloth, also a fit of sleep. Nap, c. to cheat at Dice.
Napaeae, g. Nymphs of the Woods and Mountains. Napper of Naps, c. a
sheep-stealer. Napery, f. linnen-clothery, or Table-linnen. Naphthe, -tha,
Median Oil, Babylonish Bitumen, a kind of Marle, which being fired, is more
incensed by water. Napkin, Y. a pocket handkerchief. Naples, a Spanish Kingdom
in Italy, tributary to the Pope. Narbone, a City of Languedoc. Narcissine,
belonging to Narcissus, a beautiful youth, who (slighting Echo, and falling in
love with his own shadow in the water) pined away to a white Daffadill, also a
Bishop of Jerusalem, who (they say) by his prayers turned Water into Oil to
supply the Church lamps. Narcotic, (or Narcotique) medicines, making senseless,
stupifying any member. Nard, Spikenard, an Indian and Syrian plant. Narelles,
o. little Nares, the nostrils or holes in a hawks beak. Narrative, l.
declarative, expressing, also as Narration, a report or relation. Nart, o. Art
not. Na^, o. was not. Narses, an Eunuch, general (after Belisarius) of
Justinians army against the Goths. Nasal vein, between the Nostrils.
Nasicornous insects, with horns on their noses. Nasie, c. drunken. Naskin, c. a
jail or Bridewell. Natal, Natural, also as Natalstious, belonging to Nativity,
a birth or birthday. Natalitious gifts, (among the Grecians) sent by the
Neighbors on the fifth day. Natation, l. a swimming. Nated, l. born, framed of
nature. Nathanael, h. Gods gift. Nativo habendo, a writ for the apprehending
and restoring a Lords Villain, whom he claims for his inheritance. Natural, a
fool born. Naturalist, a natural Philosopher, skilled in the causes of natural
things. Natural Son, base born. Naturalize, f. to admit into the number of
natural subjects. Not wilne, o. not desire. Naval, l. belonging to a Ship, or
to a Navy, a Fleet or company of Ships. Navarre, a Kingdom of Spain. Naucifie,
l. to flight or disesteem. Nave, that part of a wheel in which the Axel-tree
runs, also the largest Temple (or Room) in a Church. Naufrage, l. shipwreck.
Navi^ular, l. pertaining to a small ship. Navigable, l. Sailable, which may be
sailed on. Navigate a ship, carry or direct her at Sea. Navigation, l. [the art
of] Sailing. Navigator, l. a Sailer. Navity, l. diligence. Naulage, f. the
freight or money for passing the Water. Naumachy* g. [the place of] a sea-sight.
Nau^lius, King of Eubaea, to revenge the death of his Son Palamedes (by
Vlysses's means) he drew the Greek Navy (by a false fire) on the Rocks.
Naus^ate, l. to (...) to be ready to vomit, also to make one so. Nauseous,
-ca^ive, loathsome, making one ready to vomit. Nausicae, she met Ulysses
shipwrackt and naked, and brought him to the Palace of her Father Al^inous.
Naustible, a haven for ships. Nautick, -call, l. belonging to Ships or Seamen.
Nautilus, a fish resembling a ship under sail. Naxos, Strongyle, Dia, one of
the Cyclad-Isles, where Ariadne (left by Theseus) married Bacchus. Nazal, f.
the nose-piece of an helmet. Nazarene, one of Nazareth, the place where Christ
and his Parents dwelt, hence Nazarenes, -rites, Christians. Nazarite, h.
(separated) one who for a while (wherein he abstained from wine, shaving, etc.)
dedicated himself to God. Ne admittas, a writ for the Plantiffe in a quare
impedit, least the Bishop should admit the Defendants Clerk during the suit.
Nead, a beast in Samos, whose great bones are kept as miraculous, and whose
voice (they say) shakes the Earth. Ne, o. now. Neaera, the Mother of Lamp^tia
and Phaethusa. N^al-too, a deep bank or shore without Showling. Neopolitan,
belonging to Neapolis, Nap^es, (Parthenope) in Campania in Italy. Neap-tides,
(Sa. Napte, scarcity) the small tides which happen seven days after the Moons
change and full. Dead Neap, at lowest, four days before the full or change.
Be-Neaped, wanting water to carry her off the ground, out of a d^ck or barred
harbor. Near now, Nf. just now. Nearre, Li. Nether. Nea^, (D. Nieten, to but)
an Ox, Cow or Steer. Neat-land, let out to the Yeomanry. Neb, a Tooth.
Nebuch^dnezzar, h. the mourning of the Generation. Nebule, (in Herald.) a
representation of the Clouds. Nebulon, l. a knave or Rascal. Ne^ulous, -osous,
l. misty or cloudy. Necessitate, l. to force (as a thing of necessity*)
Necessitous, indigent, poor. Neck-stamper, c. a pot-boy. Neckabout, Y. any
[womans] Neck-linnen. Necromantick, belonging to a Necromancer, one that
practices the wicked Art of Necromancy, g. Conjuration by raising the dead, or
the Devil in their shape, also the black Art in general. Necromancers, (in a
sort) command, and Witches (says K. James) obey the Devil. Nectarine, a kind
of Peach, also as Nectar^an, belonging to Nectar, g. the drink of the ^^igned
Gods, ^endring the drinkers immortal. Nedely, o. of necessity. Needs cost, Sa.
[by temptation] of necessity. Neders, o. adders. Nefandous, l. heinous, not to
be named. Nefarious, l. very wicked, accursed. Negation, l. a denying.
Negative, belonging thereto, also that manner of expression. Negative pregnant,
including an affirmative, when a man denies not the thing laid to his charge,
but the circumstance. Negatory, belonging to a denial. Negotiation, l. a
merchandising or traffiquing, also any managing of business. Negotious, l. full
of business. Negrepont, an Island in the Archipelago. Negro, I. a Negar or
Blackamore. Nehemiah, h. the Lords rest. Writ of Neif^y, whereby a Lord claimed
his Neif, (f. Naive) a bondwoman or shee-villain. Nieffe, Neive, No. a fist. Ne
injus^e vexes, a writ forbidding the Lord to distrein, the Tenant having
formerly prejudiced himself by doing or paying more than he needed. Nemaean
(lion, games, etc.) belonging to Nemaea, a woody part of Greece, where Hercules
slew a lion of monstrous bigness. Neld, (D. Naelde) a needle. Neme, Staf.
Uncle. Nemene, o. to name. Nemes^s, Adrastia, Ramnusia* the Goddess of revenge.
Nemine contradicente l. no man contradicting it. Nemoral, -rous, l. woody.
Nemorivagant, l. wandering in the woods. Nempne, No^pt, o, named. Nenuphar, A. a
waterlily. Neogamist, g. a new-married man. Neopolitan, as Neapolitan*
Neophyte, g. a new-set plant, also a new disciple or Convert. Neot^rique,
-ical, g. of late time or new. St. Neots, a town in Huntington, and another in
Cornwall, with a Well dedicated to St. Keyne, whereof (they say) whether*
Husband or Wife drink first, they get the Mastery. Nep, Nepeta, Cat-mint. Nepe,
Heref. a navew or Turnip. Nepent^e, g. an herb put into wine to remove sadness,
by some Bugloss. Nephele, g. (a cloud) the Mother of H^lle and Phryx^s by
A^^amas. Nephelian Crook-horn, the sign Aries, or the Ram from whose back Hell
fell. Nephritick, g. troubled with pain in the Reins of the Back. Nepotation,
l. riotousness, luxury. Neptunian, belonging to the Sea, or to Neptune, (Son of
Saturn and Ops) the God of the Sea. Nequient, l. unable. Nere, o. (for near)
until, as far as. Nere, o. (for Ne were) were it not. Neread, a Mermaid (whose
males are Tritons) one of the Nereides, Sea-Nymphs, Daughters of Nereus, a God
of the Sea. Nerfe, o. for Nerve. Nero's, Tyran^s, from Domitius Nero, a R^man
Emperor* who killed his Mother, Wife, Master* St. Paul, etc. Nerthes, o.
Heardsmen. Nervosity, a being Nervous, -v^, l. f^ll of Nerves, l. sinews, by
which the brain gives sense and notion to the body. Nery^, o. ^eins. Nes^ience,
a being Nescient, -ious, l. ignorant. Nescock, N^stcock, a wanton fondling,
that was never from home. See C^ckney. Nesh, Nash, No. tender, weak. Nesse,
Orford haven in Suffolk. Nessus, a Centaur slain by Hercules for attempting to
ravish his wife. Nest, o. Next. Nest of rabbets, a Company. Nestorian,
belonging to Nestor, an Eloquent Grecian who came with 50 ships to the Trojan
Wars; he lived almost 3^0 years. Nestorius, a German Bishop of Constantinople,
his tongue rotted ^n his head, he was the first founder of the Nestorians,
Heretics holding (among other things) that there were two persons (as well as
Natures) in Christ. Netherlands, Low Countries, the Dukedomes of Limbu^gh,
Luxenburgh, Gelderland* Bra^ant the Marquisate of the Holy Empire* the Earldoms
of Flanders, Artois, Hainault, Namur, Zutphen, Holland, Zealand, and the
B^ron^e^ of West-friezland, Vtretcht, O^er-Issel, Machlin, Gr^ening, beside the
Bishoprics of Li^ge and Cambray. N^thinims, Hewers of wood and Drawers of
water for the Temple. N^tting-sails, laid upon the N^ttings, sm^ll ropes seized
together with rope-yarns ((...) form of a net) to shadow the men in a close
fight, etc. Neven, o. named. Nevi^, a town in Caernarvanshire Nevers, the chief
City of Niv^rnois. Neuf chasteau, a town in Lo^rain. Nevosity, a being full of
moles, warts or freckles. Neustria, Westric^, Normandy, part of Gallia Celtica.
Neutrality, being Neutral, Neuter, indifferent, belonging to neither. Newark,
(q. New-work) a pleasant town on the River Trent in Notinghamshire. Newbourg, a
Dukedom in Bavaria. Newberry, a town in Berkshire. New Castle, a town on the
River Tine in Northumberland. New Castle under Line, in Staffordshire. Newent,
a town in Glocestershire. Newing, E. Yeast, barm. New-Colledge, (in Oxford)
built by W. Wickham Bishop of Winchester. New Market, a town in Suffolk and in
Cambridgshire. Newport, a town in Flanders, in the Isle of Wight, Shropshire,
Bucks, etc. Newsta^, a town in the Palatinate of the Rhine. New-years-gifts,
offered by the Roman Knights ( Jan. 1.) in the Capitol to the Emperor, whether
he were there or no. In Italy the greatest present the meanest. Newnham, a town
in Glocestershire. Newton* the name of above a hundred small towns in England.
Nexible, l. which may be knit or tied. Nexili^y, l. pithiness, closeness and
compactness [of s^eech] Ni^^sery, f. simplicity, child^shness. Nias-hawk, taken
out of the nest before she preyed for her self. Nicean, Nicene, belonging to
Nice, -ea* a City of Bithynia, fam^us for the Council of 3^8 Bishops, An. 314.
Ni^ct^* f. idleness, or simplicity. Nices, the same as Niches, I. hollow places
in walls, wherein Images are set. Nicholaitans, Heretics who had their wives
in common, etc. from Nicholas, (q. Conqueror of the People) a Deacon of
Antioch. Nicia, g. victorious, a woman's name. Nicias, an Athenian general,
overthrown by the Syracusians. Nic^^emites, Heretics in Switzerland,
professing their Faith in private like. Nicodem^s, g. Conqueror of the people.
Nicome^t^, Nichor, a City in Bithynia, where Constantine the great died.
Nicopolis, Gallipoly, a City of Epirus, near to which Augustus overcame M.
Anthony and Cleopatra. Nicostrata, Carpen^a, the mother of Evander. Nicotian,
Tobacco, from the Author John Nicot, A^bassadour Leiger for France in
Portugal, where he made that great Nicots Dictionary, French and Latin.
Nictation, l. a winking or twinkling with the eyes. Nidgeries, Nig-, f.
trifles, fooleries. Nidifie, l. to make a Nidifice, l. a birds-nest. Niding,
Nithing, Niderling, Nidering, o. a Coward, or base low-minded man. Niddesdale,
part of South- Scotland. Nidor, l. brightness, also the smell of any thing
burnt or roasted. Nidulation, Nidification, l. the making of a nest. Nient
comprise, an exception to a petition as unjust, because the thing desired is
not contained in the Deed on which it is grounded. Nifle, o. a toy of no value.
Nig^lla, the herb Gith. Nightertale, (q. -deal) o. by night. Nightmare, (D.
Nach^-Maer, Ni^ht-evil) as Incubus. Nigh, No. to touch or come nigh.
Nightshade, Vva Vulpis, Cucu^us, Morella, Dwale or Petty-mor^el. Nig^t-spel, a
prayer against the Nightmare. Nigg, o. for niggard. Nigon, Nigeon, Nigeo^, an
Idiot or fool. Nigrefaction, the action of Nigrefying, making black.
Nigromancy, as Necro-. Nihil dicit, (he says nothing) a failing to answer the
Plaintiffs plea, so that Judgment passes, etc. Nihil capi^^ per breve, the
Judgment given against the Plantiff. Nihilorum Clericus, Clerk of the Nihils,
Nichils, Issues which the Sheriff (being apposed) says are illeviable and
nothing worth. Ni^ilif^e, l. to flight, or account as Nothing. Nil, Pompholy^,
Spodium, the sparkles that fly from metals tried in a furnace. Nil, (q* Ne
will) will not. Nil ultra, l. nothing farther, the inscription of Hercules's
pillars. Nilling* o. unwilling. Nilus, the Father of Rivers, running through
Ethiopia and Egypt (almost three thousand miles) yearly overflowing and fatning
the Land. Nim, Nem, (D. N^mmen. to take) to filch or steal away. Nimbiferous,
l. bringing storms or Tempests. Nimbot, f. a Skip-jack, Dandiprat, or dwarf.
Nimiety, a being Nimious, l. too much, excessive, superfluous. Nimmeguen, a
Town in Gelderland. Nine Nations, the Commonalty of Brussels. Ningid, -guide, l,
Snowy. Ninus, the Son of Jupiter Belus, and King of Assyria, who mightily
enlarged the Empire, and was (at last) secretly made away by his wife
Semiramis. Niobe, Tantalus's Daughter and Amphion's Wife, while she was rai^ing
against Juno (who had persuaded Apollo to kill her children) she was carried by
a whirlwind into Asia and turned into a stone. Niphates, a hill between Armenia
and Assyria, whence Tigris flows. Nippers, small ropes (with a little truck, or
wale-knot, at one end) to hold off the Cable from the Capstain. Niseus, a
Tyrant of Syracuse, who spent that little time the Augurs told him he had to
live, in Luxury and Riot. Nisi prius, a writ for the Sheriff to bring an
Enquest empanel'd to Westminst^r at a certain day, or before the Judges of the
next Assizes. Nisroch, h. flight, a Syrian idol. Nist, (q. Ne wist) knew not.
Nisus, King of Megara, feigned to be turned into a Hawk. Nithing, as Niding.
Nitidity Nitour, a being Nitid, l. bright, clean or neat. Nittle, No. handy,
neat. Nitrous, full or savouring of Nitre, l. a spongy salt-like substance
(ruddy and white) mistaken by some for Saltpeter. Nival, Niveous, l. snowy.
Nivernois, a Province of France. Nixij, feigned Gods assisting Childbed women.
Nix^^, Ingeniculum, Engonasin, Hercules striking at the Serpent. Nizie, c. a
fool. N. L. Non Li^^et, it does not plainly appear, the cause is difficult. No.
(sa. N^^h,) o. near. No, Alexandria in Egypt. Noah, h. ceasing, resting.
Nobilitate, l. to ennoble or promote. Noblesse, f. Nobility (of blood or mind.)
Nocent, l. guilty, also as Nocive, l. hurtful. Noctem de firma, entertainment
for a night. Noctiferous, l. night-bringing. Noct^vagant, l. wandering by night.
Nocturnal, l. nightly, also a night-dial. Nocturne, part of the old
Church Service said i^ the night. The Psalms were divided (by the Fathers) into
seven N^cturnes. Nocument, l. hurt, damage. Nocuous, l. hurtful. Node, l. a
knot or hard swelling. Nodinus, a Roman God overseeing the joints in
Cornstalks. Nodosity, l. a being Nodous, l. knotty, difficult. Noel, f.
Christmas. Noie, o. for annoy. Nold, (q. Ne would) o. would not. Noli me
tangere, (touch me not) an herb whose seed spurts away as soon as touched, also
a piece of fresh (in the Nostrils) growing worse for being touched, also the
French disease. Nolne, as Nold. Nomades, people of Scythia Europaea. Nomarchy,
g. the Office or jurisdiction of a Nomarch, g. a Mayor, or other Governor,
having preeminence in the ministration of Laws. Nombre de Dios, (Sp. Name of
God) a ri^h town in Castell^ del oce. Nombre l, (f. Nombril a navel) the third
and lowest part of an Escutcheon, the other two (upward) being the Honor and
^esse points. Nome, o. took. Nomenclature, the office of a Nomen^lator, l. a
crier in Court, calling all by their names. Nominal, l. belonging to a name.
Nominally, by name. Nominalia, Roman Feast-days* when they gave names to
children (to females on the eighth, to Males on the ninth day.) Nomination, l.
a naming or appointing. Nomographer, g. a writer of Laws. Nomothetical,
belonging to Nomothesie, g. a making or publishing of Laws. Nona, Decima and
morta, the Latin names of the Destinies, Clotho, Lachesis and Atropos.
Non-ability, an exception against any person, why he cannot commence a suit.
Nonacris, an Arcadian mountain, at whose foot is the River Styx. Nonage, a man's
being under fourteen years in some cases (as marriage,) and one and twenty in
others. Non-claim, a man's not claiming within the time limited by Law, as
within a year and a day, etc. Non compos mentis, not in his right wits, viz. 1.
An Idiot by nature. 2. By sickness or other accident. 3. A Lunatic, having
lucid intervals. 4. which (by his own act) deprives himself, as a Drunkard, but
this gives no privilege to him or his Heirs. Nonconformist, one that does not
conform [to the Church of England.] Non distringendo, a writ of d^vers
particulars, according to diverse cases. Non implacitando, etc. a writ
forbidding a Bailiff to distrein a Freeholder without the Kings writ. Non est
culpa^ilis, the defendants general plea to an Action of trespass, utterly
denying the fact. Non est factum, an answer to a Declaration, denying that to
be his deed, upon which he is impleaded. Non Merchandizando, for Justices of
Assize, to enquire whether victuals be sold in gross or by retail, etc. None of
the day, the third quarter, from Noon to half Sunsetting. Nones of a Month,
the ninth day before the Ides; In March, May, July and October, the six days
(and in other months the four days) next after the Calends or first day. Non
liquet, it is not clear, (like our Ignoramus) referring the matter to another
trial. Non obstante, l. notwithstanding. Non molestando, a writ for one
molested contrary to the Kings protection. Non omittas, commanding the Sheriff
himself to execute a Writ delivered to a Bailiff, but neglected. Non-pareil, f.
peerless, without fellow; also one sort of the Printing Characters. Nonplus,
l. (no more) the end of his Latin, [to put to] silence. Non ponendo in assisa,
to free, men (by reason of age, etc.) from serving on assizes and Juries. Non
^rincipia^e, having no beginning. Non procedend^, etc. to stop the trial, till
the Kings pleasure be known. Non-residency, a being Non-resident, unlawfully
absent from his [spiritual] charge. Non residentia pro Cl^ricis Regis, not to
molest a Clerk (in the Kings service) for non-residence. Non sanae memoriae, an
exception against the act of any man, a^ being Non comp^mentis. Non solvendo,
etc. not to take the mulct imposed on the Kings Clerk for non-residence.
Nonsuit, the Plaintiffs renunciation of the suit, when the Jury is ready to
give in their verdict. Non-tenure, an exception to a Count (or declaration) by
saying, he holds not the Lands contained therein. Non sum informatus, as
Informatus non sum. Non-Term, time of the Kings peace, Vacation-time. Nonupla,
a quick time (of 9 Crochets) peculiar to Jigs, etc. Nook, (D. Even Hoeck) a
corner. Nore, o. nourishing. Nortelry, o. nurture. Nory, o. a nurse. Noryce, o.
a foster-child. Norbertius, a Religious Order called also Praemonstratenses.
Nor, no. than. Noricum, Bavaria in Germany. Normal, l. exact, according to rule
or square. Norman, belonging to Normannia, -andy, a Dukedom in France.
Norhallerton, North-, the chief town of Northallerion-shire, part of
Yorkshire, where Ralph ^ishop of Dur^am (in the battle of the Standard)
overthrew David King of Scots. Norrel-ware, corruptly for Lorimers. Norrey,
Norroy, (q. North-Roy) the third of the three Kings at Arms, whose Office lies
on the north-side of Trent, as Clarentius's on the South. Norton, above 50
small towns. Northleake, a Town in Gloucester shire. Northampton, (q.
Northaven^on,) the chief town of Northamptonshire, near which K.H. 6 was taken
prisoner by Rich. Nevil Earl of Warwick. Northwich, a town in Cheshire.
Northgoia, the upper Palatinate. Norwegia, -wey, (q. Northway) part of Denmark.
Norwich, -ck, the chief Town of Norfolk. Nosognomonick, See Medicine. Nost, o.
for know. Nostock, the stinking tawny jelly of a fallen vapor, or (by Dr.
Charlton) the nocturnal pollution of some plethorical and wanton star. Not, (q.
Na wot) know not. Notation, l. the derivation of words. Notted, E. shorn,
polled. Notary, l. a scribe or Scriven^^, taking notes and short draughts of
Contracts, etc. Note, Needs, [necessary] business. Note, o. St. Need. Notes, o.
nuts. Note, a hawks fetching off the oil from her tail, to prune her-self. Note
of a fine, a brief of it (made by the Chirographer) before it be engrossed.
Notification* l. an information or advertisement. Note, no. to push or goar
with the horn. Notion, l. knowledge or understanding, also a conceit or point
del^vered. Noto, a Town in Sicily. Notius, -ios, the Southerly part of Pisces.
Notorius, l. extraordinary or manifest. Nottingham* the chief town of
Nottinghamshire. Nottehead, o. notcht pa^e. Novae tabula, new debt-books, an
easement proposed in favor of debtors at Rome. Novale, Land newly plowed up.
Novatians, Heretics following Novatus, (Anno 215.) he condemned second
marriages received not Apostates though penitent, etc. Novation, l. a making
new. Novator, l. a renewer. Novel, f. new. Novels, 168 volumes of the
Civil-law, added (by Justinian) to the Codex, also little Romances. Novel
assignment, of some circumstance (in a declaration) more particularly than was
in the writ. Novempopulana, Gascoigne in France. Novenary, l. belonging to or
consisting of nine. Novendial, l. of nine days. Novennial, l. of nine years.
Novercal, l. belonging to a Stepmother. Novi^e, a new beginner in any art or
Profession. Novitiate, l. novice-ship. Novity, l. newness. Nouth, Nowth, o.
now. Nowe^, (f. Nouee,) tied in a knot. Nowel, as Noel. Noxious, as Nocent.
Nubia, a Kingdom in Afri^a. Nubiferous, l. cloud-bearing. Nubilous, l. cloudy.
N^b, c. the neck. Nubbing, c. hanging. Nubbing-cheat, c. Gallows. Nubbing-Cove,
c. hangman. Nubbing-ken, c. Sessions House. Nubivagant, l. wandering among the
clouds. Nuceous, l. belong^ng to nuts. Nudation, l. a making Nude, l. bare or
naked. Nude contract, without any consideration given, whence no action can
arise. Nudils, plegets of li^t or cotton, applied to the Womb. Nudity, l.
nakedness, poverty. Nugal, -at^ry, belonging to Nugation, l. trifling. Nugator,
l. a trifler. Nugipolyloquides, a great babbler about trifles. Nuisance,
Nuisance, f. annoyance or damage. Nullifidian, l. a seeker, of no Religion or
honesty. Nullity, l. nothing, the being nothing, or of no effect. Nullo, a
Cipher standing for nothing. Numa Pompilius, the second King of the Romans, who
instituted sacred rights, by appointment (as he said) of the Goddess Aegeria.
Numbles, f. the entrails of a Deer. Numeral, l. belonging to number. Numerical,
l. the same, also particular, individual. Numeration, l. numbering, that part of
Arithmetic which teaches the value of figures in their several places.
Numerist, a kind of Register, Notary, or Auditor, a Roman Officer. Numitor,
King of the Albans, driven out of his Kingdom by his younger brother Amulius.
Nunchion, an afternoons repast. Nunnery, a College of Nunns, (f. Nonnes)
Virgins devoted (from the World) to the service of God. Nun^iatare, a report or
message. Nuncupation, l. a rehearsing or calling by name. Nuncupative, l.
called, declared by word of mouth. Nuncupative will, made by word of mouth
before sufficient witness. Nundiral, -ary, l. belonging to a fair or market.
Nundination, l. a trafficking in Fa^^s or Markets. Nuntio, Nuncio* I. the Popes
[Lieger] Ambassador. Nuper obijt, a writ for a Coheir d^forced by her
copar^^ner, etc. Nuptial, l. belonging to weddings. Nuptial gifts, sent before
the betrothing. Nuptialist, a bride, bridegroom, or one that makes matches.
Nurture, (f. Noutriture) a nourishing or bringing up [in good manners.]
Nuisance, as Nuisance. Nutation, l. a nodding. Nutritive, -ritious, l. belonging
to Nutriment, l. nourishment. Nutrition, l. a nourishing. Nuys, a town in the
Archbishopric of Colen. Nyctalops* g. purblind. Nyctous, the Son of Neptune,
Amalthaea's husband, and Father of Nyctimene, having (by her Nurses help) lain
with her Father, and flying from his wrath, was turned into an Oak. Nigh, (f.
Nid,) a nest. Nymphal, -phous, belonging to a Nymph, g. a Lady or Bride. Nymphs
of the Woods, etc, Virgin-Goddesses. Nymphet, f. a little Nymph. Nysa, a City
(built by Bacchus) in India. Nysus, as Nisus. Nything or Nithing [of his pains,
etc. No. very sparing.
O.
Oo. for one. O. Ni. (Oneratur, nisi habeat sufficientem exonerationem) marked
upon the Sheriffs head, (when he enters into his account for Issues. etc.)
whereby he becomes the Kings debtor. O^^e-gavel, as Gavel-sester. Oaxis, a
Cretian River from Oaxis, the Son of Apollo, who lived there. Oaxus, a City of
Creet, from Oaxus, the Son of Aeacalis Daughter of Minos. Obacerate, l. to stop
ones mouth, that he cannot tell his tale quite out. Obadiah, h. Servant of the
Lord. Obambulate, l. to walk abroad, about or against. Obarmation, l. an arming
against. Obey, o. abide. Obduction, l. a covering about. Obduration, a
hardening, or growing Obdurate, l. hard, obstinate, unrelenting. Obedientia, a
certain ancient Rent, also an Office or the administration of it. Obedientials,
-les, those that have the Execution of any office under their Superiors.
Obeisance, f. dutiful Obedience. Obelise, to raze or blot out. Obelisk, l. one
great square stone, like a Pyramid, also a stroke (in writing) signifying that
something is amiss. Obequitate, l. to ride about. Ober-Sax, part of Saxony.
Oberration, l. a wandering about. Obesity, l. fatness, grosseness. Obeyssinge,
o. as Obeisance. Objectator, l. he that makes an Objection, l. a casting
against, a reproach or laying to ones charge. Obit, l. death, decay,
sunsetting, also a Funeral Song or Office for the dead. Objuration, l. a
binding by oath. Objurgatory, l. belonging to Objurgation, l. a chiding or
rebuking. Oblata, old debts put to the present Sheriffs charge. Oblat, f. a
maimed Soldier maintained in an Abbey, also the place or maintenance it self.
Oblats of St. Jerome, an Italian Congregation of secular Priests, founded by
St. Charles Boromeus. Oblation, l. an Offering [to God, the Church or any pious
use,] also an aid or subsidy-money. Oblatration, l. a barking or exclaiming
against. Oblectation, l. a delight, recreation or pleasure. Oblesion, l. an
hurting. Obligatory, l. binding, also as Obligation, l. a binding, a bond
containing a penalty, with a condition annexed. O^igor, he that enters into
bond. Oblige^, to whom it is made. Oblimation, l. a plaistering or dawbing
over. Obliquation, a causing of Obliquity, a being Oblique, l. crooked, awry.
Oblique cases, all but the Rectus or Nominative. Obliterate, l. to blot out.
Oblivion, forgetfulness. Act of Oblivion, forgetting and forgiving all offenses
past. Oblivious, l. forgetful. Oblocutor, a back-biter. Oblong, l. a
apiece figure whose leng^h exceeds its breadth, the most proper are these,
1. Sesquialtera, 2. Sesquitertia, 3. Sesquiquarta, 4. Diagonial (increased to
the length of the Diagonal of the single square) 5. Superbittens tertias, 6.
Dupla, which is a double square. Obloquy, reproach or slander. Obmurescenc^, a
holding ones peace. Obnection, l. a knitting or tying fast. Obn^xiety, a being
Obnoxious, a subject or liable [to punishment, etc.] Obnubilate, to darken with
(...). Obnunciate, to foreshew some unlucky event. Obnunciation of Assemblies*
dissolving them, upon fore knowledge or conjecture of ill success. O^lata
terrae, by some half a^ ^^re, by others half a perch* Obole, a small coin, with
us to half^penny, also an halfpenny weight, among Apothecaries 12 grains, among
Gold smiths ^4. Obreption, a creeping or ^^ealing upon by craft. O^reptitious,
which has cunningly stolen upon. Obrizum, Obryzum, g. fine gold [of Ophir.]
Obrogate, to interrupt or gainsay. Obrogate a Law, to publish a law contrary to
(and for the abolishing) the former. Obrumpent, breaking. Obscene, l. filthy,
smutty, ^^chaste. Obscenity, ribaldry, baudery. Obscuration, a making Obscure,
l. dark. Obsecrate, earnestly to beseech. Obs^quies, funeral rites, ones last
duty to the deceased. Obsequious, dutiful. Obseration, a locking up.
Observant, dutiful, respectfull. Observants, -tius, a kind o^ Franciscan
Friars, instituted by one Bernard of Siena, 1400. O^session, a besieging o^
compassing about. Obsest, haunted with an evil spirit. Obsibilate, to whistle
or his against. Obsidian-stone, a kind o^ precious stone (in Pliny.)
Obsidional, belonging to a siege. Obsidional Crown, given to him who raised an
extraordinary siege. Obsigillation, a sealing up. Obsolete, l. grown old, out
of use or fashion. Obstacle, an hindrance. O^stetricate, to play the midwife.
Obstetricious, belonging to Midwives or their Office. Obstinacy, a being
Obstinate, stubborn, self-willed. Obstipate, to stop up. Obstreperous, making a
great noise. Obstrigillation, a reproving or resisting. Obstruction. a
stoppage, or hindrance of passage. Obstupify, to abash or a^^onish.
Obtemperation, an obeying. Obtenebrate, to darken. Obtestation, an obtesting,
humble beseeching, or calling God to witness for any thing. Obticence, a
keeping silence. Obtorted, wreathed or wrested. Obtrectation, detraction,
backbiting. Obtrite, worn, bruised or rodden under foot. Obtrition, a bruising
or wearing away against any thing. Obturation, l. a stopping, shutting or
closing up. Obtuse, blunt, heavy, dull. Obtuse angle, when two lines include
more than a square. Obvallation, an encompasing with a trench. O^varication, a
hindering ^nes p^ssage. Obvention, a meeting or coming against. Obventions,
Offerings, also [Spiritual] Revenues. Obv^rt, to turn about or against.
Obviate, to meet, or to resist. Obvious, meeting, Easy to and or understand.
(...), to ^ver-shadow. (...), very crook^^. Obundation, a flowing against.
Obvolate, to fly against. Obvolution, a rolling to and fro, or against.
Occaecation, l. a blinding. Occidental, belonging to the Occident, the setting
of the Sun, the West, also as Occiduous, decaying, declining, going down.
Occipital, belonging to Occiput, l. the Noddle or hinder part of the head.
Occisier, o. a killer. Occision, l. a killing or slaying. Occlusion, a shutting
up. Occular, as Ocular. Occulcation, a trampling upon. Occult, hidden, secret.
Occultation, a hiding. Occupation, an using, also an Employment or Trade, and
(in Law) the putting a man out of his Freehold in time of War. Occupative,
employed or possessed. Occupant, he that first takes possession. Occupa^^^e
field, which (being deserted by its proper owner) is possessed by another.
Occupavit, a writ for one ejected in time of War. Occur^, to be in the way, or
offer it self. Oceanick, -in^, belonging to the Ocean, the main Sea, which
encompasseth the World. Ochlocracy, g. Government by the Multitude or common
rout. Ochus, a great Phaenician Philosoper. Ochus, Artaxerxes, he buried his
Sister and Mother-in Law alive, killed his Uncle, etc. was poisoned (at last)
by his Physician Bag^as. Ockham, Okam, Old ropes untwisted and pulled into
loose flax again. White Ockham, Tow or Flax, to drive into the seames of the
ship. Ocious, l. idle. Octangular, Eight-cornered. Octave, an Eighth. Octaves,
Vtas, the Eighth days next after some Principal feasts. Octavo, having eight
leaves to a sheet. Oct^^nial, of eight years. Octogon, g. a figure of eight
angles. Octo^ed^ical, having eight sides. Octonary, as Octave, also belonging
to Eight. Octostic, as Ogdastic. Ocular, belonging to the eyes. Oculate, full
of eyes or holes, quick-sighted. Oculate Faith, confirmed by, or representing
things (as it were) to the eyesight. Oculist, one skild in the eyes. Oculus
Beli, a white-bodied gem with an eye-like black in the midst. Oculus Christi,
Wild^Clary, an herb very good for the eyes. Oculus Tauri, (the Bulls eye) a
Constellation in Gemini. Ocy, o. (Oh si) I wish. Ocypete, g. one of the
Harpies. Ocyroe, a prophetess who foretold her being turned into a Mare. Oda
Bashaws, Heads of the Companies of Agiam Oglans. Odelet, a short or little Ode,
g. a song or Lyrick poem. Odenchasteau, a town in Lorrain. Oderbury, a Town on
the Oder, a river running through Brandenburgh. Ode^, o. for Other. Odible, the
same as Odious, hateful, detestible. Odio et atia, (or hatia) a writ for the
Undersheriff to enquire whether a man be committed for malice or just
suspicion [of murder.] Odium, l. hatred, bad opinion. Odoacer, having utterly
defeated Augustulus (the last that usurped the title of Roman Emperor)
proclaimed himself King of Italy and Placentia. Odontick, g. belonging to the
teeth. Odor, -our, l. a sent or smell. Odoraminous, the same as Odoriferous,
sweet smelling, or Spice-bearing. Odrysian, belonging to Odrysa, a City in
Thrace. Oeconomical, belonging to Economy, g. the government of an House or
Family. Oeconomist, such a Governor. Ecumenical, g. General, belonging to the
whole habitable World. Oedastine, g. skillful in weights and measures.
Oedema^ous, subject to, or full of Oedeme, -my, g. a ^^egmatick swelling, which
will retain an impression like dough. Oedipus, he unfolded the riddle of
Sphinx, slew his Father Laius King of Thebes, and married his Mother Jocasta.
Oenomaus, King of Eli^ from whom (at a race) Pelops won his Daughter
Hippodamia. Oenopolist, g. a Vintner. Oesophagus, g. the gullet, or mouth of
the Stomach. Offembourg, the chief town of Orthau in Alsatia. Offertory, an
offering, or place where offerings are kept, also a particular part ^f the
mass. Offenbach, a town of Brisgow ^n Schwaben. Official, he whom the
Archdeacon substitutes for the executing of hi^ Jurisdiction. Officialis
princ^palis, the Chancellor, to whom the Bishop commits the charge of his
spiritual Jurisdiction. Officiales Foranei, Commissaries (beside the other.)
Officiarijs non faciendi^, etc. a writ willing a Corporation not to choose such
or such a man Officinator, an Artificer^ a second superintendent over the under
Artisans. Officine, l. a shop or workhouse. Officious, l. dutiful. Offing, the
open Sea* or channel of a River. Offrende, o. an offering. Often sithes, o. many
times. Ofton, a town in Suffolk, from Offa, King of the Mercians. Offuscate, to
shadow, to make dark, dim or dusky. Off-ward, to the off-ward, toward the Sea.
Og, h. a toste, or a mock. Ogdastick, g. a Stanza of eight verses. Ogive, Ogee,
f. a circlet or round band (in Architecture.) Ogles, c. eyes. Ogressees, f.
round black figures (in Heraldry) resembling bullets. Ogyges, an ancient King
of Bae^t^a. Oisterloit, Bistorta, Snakeweed. Oak, a Turkish measure, about our
quart. Okeham, a Town in Rutland. Okehampton, a town in Devonshire. Oker, a
^olour (of several sorts) for painting. Oker de lace, yellow Oker. Okingham, a
town in Barkshire. Okum, as Ockham. Oldenburg, an Earldom in East- Friezland.
Oleaginous, belonging to an Olive Tree. Old, o. old age Old Mr. Gory, c. a
piece of Gold. Old land, Sf. newly plowed up, having lain long untilled.
Oleander, the shrub Rosebay. Oleity, l. oiliness* or [the time of] making oil.
Oleron laws, made by K. Richard the first, when he was at Oleron, an Isle in
the bay of Aquitane. Olfact, to smell much or often. Olfactory, belonging to
smelling. Olib^num, the true Arabian Frankincense. Olicana supposed to be the
same as Ilkely in Yorkshire. Olidous, having a strong smell (good or bad.)
Oligarchy, g. government by a few. Olimpiad, as Olym-. Olitory, belonging to a
Kit^hen-garden or pot herbs. Olivaster, a wild olive, or olive-coloured.
Oliver, peace-bringing. Oliveres, o. olive trees. Oliviferous, olive-bearing.
Olivity, (as Oleity) the time of gathering olives. Ollet, So. Fuel. Olla, Sp:
a pot to boil meat, also the meat it self. Olla podrida, Sp. (f. Bisque) an
Oli^, or hotch-pot of several meats together. Olmeres, (f. Ormiers) o. Elmes.
Olofernes, General of Nebuchadnezzars Army. Olympia, Pisa, a City of Greece,
near unto which were celebrated the Olympic (or Olympian) ^^mes, instituted by
Hercules in honor of Jupiter, and kept every Olympiad, the space of five
years, the Grecian Epo^^a. Olympias, -p^a, g. heavenly, a woman's name, from
Olympus, a high Hill in Thessaly, used (by the Poets) for Heaven. Olynthus, a
Thracian City which King Philip of Macedon won by corrupting the Soldiers.
Olysippo, Lisbon, the chief City of Portugal. Ombrage. f. a shadow. Omega, g.
(great O) the last letter of the greek Alphabet. Omelet, f. a pancake or
froise. Omen, l. a sign portending good or bad luck. Omentum, l. the caul, or
^uet enwrapping the bowels. Omer, h. three pints and a half, the tenth part of
an Ephah ( Ezekiel. 16.36.) Homer, h. forty five gallons, ten Ephahs ( Ezekiel.
4^.11.) Omy, No. mellow [land.] Ominous, l. hausening, portending good or (most
commonly) ill luck. Omission, l. a neglecting or letting pass. Omneity, the
allness or all-being of a thing. Omnifarious, of all sorts, or all manner of
ways. Omniferous, all^bearing. Omnigenous, of every kind. Omnimode, of every
fashion. Omniparent, bringing forth all things. Omnipercipiency, a perceiving
or understanding all things. Omnipotency, a being Omnipotent, Almighty.
Omnipresent, every where present. Omniregency, a ruling power over all.
Omnisci^nt, -io^s, all knowing Omnitenent, containing all. Omnitinerant,
traveling all about. Omnivagant, wandering all about. Omnivalent, able to do
all things. Omnivolent, willing or desiring all. Omnivorous, devouring all,
eating all kind of things. Omologie, g. a confession, also agreeableness or
proportion. Omoplata, the muscles of the Shoulder blade. Omphacy, g. the juice
of unripe grapes. Omphale, a Queen of Lydia, who made Hercules sit and spin,
while she put on his lions-skin. On hie, o. a pace* Onagre, g. a wild ass, also
a sling to shoot great stones. Onde, o. breath* ( f. a wave.) One-berry, as
herb Paris. One-blade, an herb good in wounds of the Nerves. Oneder, Che. the
Afternoon. Onerary l. serving for burden or carriage. Onerando pro rata
portionis, a writ for a joint-tenant distreined for more than the proportion of
his land. Onerate, l. to load or overcharge. Ones o. for once. Onirocriticism,
the skill of interpreting dreams. On knew, o. for one knee. Onocrotal, a
bi^tour, or such like bird. Onology g. vain babbling, or talking like an Ass.
Onomantical, belonging to Onomancy, g. divination by names, also the skill of
repeating many names by memory. Onomatopeious, belonging to Onomatopy, -paeia,
g. the feigning of a name from some kind of sound. Onpress, o. downward. Onques
puis lever, f. can I ever rise or escape? Onslaught, D. the storming [of a
Town, etc] Onycha an Arabian tree, the droppings of whose juice i^ thought by
some to congeal into the Onyx, g. (the nail) a precious stone of the color of
ones nail, by some called a Chalcedony. Oost, East, Some. a kiln. Opacity, a
being Opacous, -aque, l. shady. Opal, g. a precious stone of diverse colors
mixed, yellowish, green and purple. Openhe^m, a town in the Palatinate of the
Rhin^, Openheed, o. bare headed. Opera, l. (labor) an Italian Recitative play
performed by voices, adorned with Music and Perspective Scenes. Operarious,
belonging to Operation, a working, or to an Operator, a workman. Operculated,
close-covered. Operiment, l. a covering. Oper^sity, a being Operose, l. busy
at work, laborious, also curiously wrought. Opertaneous, l. done covertly, in
secret or within doors. Ophthalmy, g. an inflammation of the outermost skin of
the eye. Ophiogenes, g. generated of Serpents. Ophites, g. a kind of marble,
speckled like a Serpent. Ophiuchus, a Constellation in Sagittary. Ophiusa, a
Balearick Island full of Serpents. Ope-land, Sf. loose or open, plowed up every
year. Opiate, l. a Confection of Opium. Opiferous, bringing help. Opifice, l.
workmanship. Opimous, l. fat, wealthy. Opinable, l. capable of Opination,
thinking or supposing. Opinator, a supposer (not a positive affirmer) of
things. Opinative, Opiniative, wedded to his own opinion or humor, full of
Opiniatrety, (f. Opiniastrete) -cy, o. Opiniativeness, obstinacy,
self-willedness. Opiparous, l. sumptuous. Opisthograph, g. [a thing] written on
the back or both sides. Opisthographical, belonging thereto. Opitulate, l. to
help or aid. Opium, l. the juice of black Poppy, causing sleep. Opobalsame,
-mum, g. the gum distilling from the balm-tree. Opoponax, g. the sap of Panax a
hot-Country plant, or (by Dr. Wilkins) the gummy juice of the root of Hercules
all-heal. Oppication, l. a covering with pitch. Oppidan, l. a towns-man.
Oppig^orate, l. to pawn. Oppilation, l. an Obstruction or Stoppage [in the
inward parts.] Oppilative, obstructive, stoping. Oppletion, l. a filling up.
Opponent, l. an Antagonist, or contradicter, opposing the Respondent.
Opportunely, seasonably. Opposite, l. contrary or over against. Opposites,
things opposed or set against one another. Opposition, a resisting or setting
against, and (in Astrology) the being six signs distant. Opprobrious,
reproachful. Oppugn, l. to assault, besiege or violently oppose. Opprist, o.
uprisen. Ops, Daughter of Caelus and Vesta, wife and Sister of Saturn.
Opsimathy, g. a learning late. Opsonation, l. a catering. Opsonator, l. a
caterer, manciple. Optable* l, desirable. Optation, l. a wishing. Optative,
wishing or desiring. Optic^, -call, g. belonging to the sight. Optic sinews,
which bring the virtue of seeing to the eyes. Optimacy, l. Government by the
Nobles. Optimity, l. profitableness, excellency. Option, choice, election.
Opulency, wealth, a being Opulent, l. rich, plentiful. Opuscule, -cle, l. a
small work. Or, o. Li. for err. Ora, as Ore. Or, f. Gold [colour.] Orache,
-age, Atriplex, an insipid pot-herb. Oracle, l. an answer or counsel given by
God, a Prophecy. Oracles of Apollo, Jupiter, etc.) illusions of the Devil (in
imitation of the real ones) which ceased upon the coming of Christ. Oracular,
belonging thereto. Oral, l. belonging to the Mouth, Face or Voice. Orange, a
town on the Rhone in France. Oration, l. prayer, also a speech. Oratory, l.
Eloquence, also a place of Prayer. Oratory of St. Jerome, a place (at Rome)
frequented by, and giving name to the Oratorians, Friars instutited by Philip
Nerius, a Florentine, and confirmed by Pope Pius, IV. 1564. Orator, l. an
Eloquent speaker or pleader. Orbation, l. a depriving, or taking away.
Orbiculated, l. made Orbical, -cular, round, in the form of an Orb, l. a globe
or sphere, a body contained under one round superficies. Orbity, l. a want or
privation [of Parents, Children, etc.] Orbona, a Roman Goddess implored against
Orbity. Orcades, the thirty British Isles of Orkney. Orch* Or^k* a monstrous
fish (the Whales enemy) called a whirl-pool; also a Butt (for Wine or Figs.)
Orchal, a stone (like All^m) used by Dyers to raise a red. Orchamus, King of
Babylon, who Buried his Daughter Leucothoe alive for lying with Apollo.
Orchanet, (A. Alcanet) Anchusa, wild Bugloss. Orc^el (as Orchal) seems (in some
old Statutes) to be a kind of Cork. Orches, a Town in Flanders. Orchestre, g.
the place where the Chorus danceth, or where the Musician sit. Orchis,
Satyrion, Dogs-stones. Orcus, a Thessalian River (flowing out of the Stygian
Lake) so thick that it floats on the River Peneus. Ordael, -- deal, Sa.
Judgment. Fine Ordeal, [a purging ones self from a Crime imputed by] walking
blindfold and barefoot over red-hot Plow-shares. Water Ordeal, [a purgation
by] putting ones Arms up to the Elbows in seething hot water. O^dalian Law,
ordaining the foresaid trial, abrogated in the time of King John. Orde, Sa. the
point. Order in Files, three foot; and the open Order six. Order in Ranks, six
foot; and the open Order twelve. Ordinal, belonging to Orders; also a Book of
Direction for Bishops, or of Orders in a College, etc. Ordinal Numbers, First,
Second, Third, etc. Ordinatione contra servientes, a Writ against Servants that
leave their Masters. Ordinary, (in Civil-Law) any Judge having Power to take
knowledge of causes in his own right (as he is Magistrate) and not by
Deputation. Ordinary, (in Common Law) he that has ordinary Jurisdiction in
causes Ecclesiastical. Ordinaries, Proper Charges belonging to the Art of
Heraldry. Ordination days, the second Sunday in Lent, Trinity Sunday, the
Sunday following, the Wednesday after September 14. and December 13. Ore, the
out-part of any thing, also an old Coin (of 16 pence) mentioned in Doomsday
book. Oreads, g. Nymphs of the mountains. Oreb, h. a Crow, or Pleasant.
Oredelph, Ore lying under ground, also the liberty of claiming the Ore found in
a man's own ground. Oreford, a Town in Suffolk. Orestes, the son of Agamemnon,
and Friend of Pylades, his body (being dug up) was found to be seven cubits
long. Orewell, a Haven in Essex. Orewood, Sea-wrack, a kind of Sea-weed, which
(in Cornwall)* they manure their land with. Orfgild, Sa. a restitution of
cattle, or penalty for taking them away, or (by Lambert) a restitution made by
the Hundred of any wrong done by one in pledge. Orford, a town in Suffolk.
Orfraies, f. a frizled cloth of Gold, worn heretofore both by the Clergy and
Kings themselves. Orgal, the lees of wine dried and used by Dyers to make cloth
drink in their colors. Orgallous, -guil-, o. proud. Organ Ling, for Orkney
Ling where the best is taken. Organical, belonging to an Organ, g. an
instrument. Organick veins, as Iliack. Organist, an Organ-player. Organie,
Origanum, wild Marjerom (growing much on Mountains.) Orgeis, Organ Ling, the
greatest sort of North-Sea fish* Orgeis, Revels instituted by Orpheus, to the
honor of Bacchus (every third year) Orial College (in Oxford) built by King
Edward the second. Orichalcum, a Copper metal like gold, and another
factitious. Orientality, the luster of the East, the being Oriental, belonging
to the Orient, l. the East. Orifice, the mouth, hole or entrance [of a wound,
etc.] Oriflambe, as Auriflambe, the holy purple standard of St. Denis.
Original, l. Natural, also the first draught of a writing, also as Origin, a
beginning, fountain, stock or pedigree. Oriol, l. the little waste room next
the hall, where particular persons dine* Orion, a Great hunter, stung to death
by a Scorpion and both placed among the Constellations. Orisant, o. for
Horizon. Orismada, P. the Fire worshipped by the Persians as a God. Orisons,
(f. Oraisons) prayers. Orle, a threefold line doubled, admitting a transparency
of the field through the innermost space. Orloge, o. a Dial. Orleans, a City on
the Loire in France* Orlop, any Deck of a ship, except the first. Ormeschurch,
a town in Lancashire. Ormus, a Persian City in an Isle abounding with shells
that breed the fairest pearls Ornature, l. an adorning. Orndorn, Cu. afternoons
drinking. Ornithology, g. the speaking (or a discourse) of birds. Ornoman^y, g.
Divination by Birds. Orontes, a river of Caelosyria. Orped, o. gilded.
Orphanism, the state of an Orphan, g. a Fatherless child. Orphean, belonging to
Orpheus, a Thracian Poet, whose harp (they say) drew stones, woods, wild beasts
etc. Orpiment, Orpm-, a soft and yellow kind of Arseni^k or Rat^bane. Orque, l.
a hulk or huge ship, also as Orch. Orrice, Iris, a Flower de lice. Orsey, a
Town and County in Germany. Ortelli, (f. Orteils, toes) the claws of a dogs
foot. Orthodoxy, a being Orthodox, -xal, g. of a right opinion or sound faith.
Orthogonal, g. having right or even corners. Orthographist, he that does
Orthographize, or practice Orthography, g. the manner of true writing, also a
perfect platform of a building. Orthopnaea, g. shortness of breath. Ortive, l.
Easterly, rising. Ortyard, a place (now for fruit trees, but at first) for
Orts, Scraps. Ortygia, Delos, one of the C^clad Islands. Orval, Clary or
Clear-eye. Orythia, Daughter of Erictheus King of Athens, ravished away by
B^reas. Oryen cause, o. Either urgent or Orient, Emergent, Occasional. Oryx,
Orinx, g. a kind of African wild goat. Orzabow, a Town in Podolia. Osanna, as
Hosanna. Osbert, Sa. light of the Family. Osborn, Sa. House-child. Oscian play,
a light Roman sport pleasing the People. Oscillation, as Merito^. Oscines, the
Birds by whose voices the Augurs foretold things to come. Oscitancy, -ation, l.
a yawning or gaping, also idleness. Osculation, l. a kissing or embracing.
Osenbridge, a Town in Bre^^e in Westphalia. Osiris, King of Egypt and Husband
of Io (or Isis) worshipped in the form of an Ox. St. Osith, (formerly Chic) a
Town in Essex, from Osi^h, a Royal Nun, slain by Danish Pirates. Osmonds,
Iron-stone or Oar. Osmund, Sa. House-peace. Osnabrug, a Town in Westphalia.
Oserey, as Ossifrage. Ossendorf, a Town in Westphalia. Osse, Che. (audere) to
offer, intend or dare. Ossicle, l. a little bone. Ossifrage, l. the
bone-breaking Eagle. Ossifragant, bone-breaking. Ossuary, l. a Charnel-house or
place where bones are kept. Ostend, a Port in Flanders. Ostentional, l. a
Soldier attending the Prince at public shows. Ostenreich, Ostrich, Austrasia,
Austria, the extreme Province of East France. Ostent, a wonder or Monster; also
a showing or pointing at. Ostentation, l. vainglory, boasting. Ostentatitious,
l. set out for show, or vainglory. Ostentiferous, l. bringing Monsters or
strange sights. Osterburg, a Town of Brandenburgh. Ostiary, l. a Doorkeeper.
Ostholme, an Isle of North Juitland. Ostiology, g. a Discourse of bones.
Ostomachy, g. a playing [or fighting] with bones. Ostracism, an Athenian
Banishment for ten years (by delivering a shell with the Name) devised by
Clisthenes, who was the first so Condemned. Ostration, g. shelliness.
Ostriferous, l. Oister-bearing. Ostringer, Ostregere, o. an Eastern [Gos-hawk]
Falconer. Oswestrey, (Br. Croix Oswalds) a Town in Shropshire, from Oswold,
-wald (House-ruler or Steward) a devout King of Northumberland, torn in pieces
by Penda the Pagan King of the Mercians. Otaco^sticon, g. an instrument to help
the Hearing. Otalgia, g. a pain in the Ears. Othan, Odinus, Wod^^, Mars. Other,
o. for, Or. Oaths, Otho, Eudo (Ge. Hud, a keeper a man's name. Othryades, the
only surviver of 300 Lacedaemonians (who had slain as many Argives) and writing
on his shield I have overcom'n, killed himself also. O^o^racks, Tu. (fitters
down) old Janissaries no longer fit for war. Otranto* a City of Naples. Ottaque,
-qua, drink (in the Moluccoes and Philippines) coming from a Nut. Ottadini, the
ancient inhabitants of Northumberland. Otter, an amphibious beast of Chase.
Otterendorp, a town of Breme in Westphalia. Otterbourn, a town in
Northumberland. Otus and Ephialtes, the Sons of Neptune, two of the Giants that
warred with Heaven, reported to have grown (in nine years) the length of nine
Acres. Oval, l. round like an Egg, also belonging to Ovation, laying of Eggs,
also a small triumph (for a bloodless victory) the soldi^ers shouting (O, O!)
and a Sheep ( Ovis) being sacrificed. Ouch, a boss, neck-lace, or any ornament
of Gold or Jewels. Oudenard, a town in Flanders. Over-blows, it blows so hard,
they can bear no topsails. Oudwater, a Town in Holland. Overest, o. uppermost.
Overfret, o. overspread. Overhipped, (for-hopped) o. leapt over. All Overly, o.
utterly. Overgrown-Sea, when the waves are at the higest. Over-masted, having
the masts too large or too long. Oversamessa, -senesse, -segenesse, an ancient
penalty or fine upon those that heard of a Murder or Robbery and did not
pursue. Overset, overturn and founder the Ship. Overset the Cable, turn it
over, being quoiled up. Overwheled, o. for Overheled, -veled, or -whelmed.
Overthrown, when (being to be trimmed a ground) she falls over on a side.
Overture, f. an opening, a proposition or conference. Overt, (f. Ouvert,) open,
manifest. Overt, as Loov^r. Over-Wesel, a Town of T^^ers. Over-yssel, one of
the United Provinces. Oviary, l. a flock of Sheep. Ovil, l. a sheepfold.
Oviparous, l. breeding by eggs or spawn. Oulney, a town in Buckinghamshire.
Oun^e* twenty penny weight, also a Lynx. Oundel, a town in Northamptonshire.
Ounding, Own-, o. rising like waves. Owndy and Crisp, o. sliked and curled.
Ourage, (f. Oeuvrage) work. Ouster le main, (f. Oster la main) Amoveas manum, a
writ which was sent to the Escheator to deliver possession out of the Kings
hands to the party that sues. Ouster le mer, (f. Outre-) an excuse (by being
beyond Sea) for not appearing in Court. Ousted, (f. oste^) removed or put out.
Outfangthef, Sa. a Lords privilege of calling a man of his Fee (taken for
Felony in another place) to judgment in his own Court. Outlaw, one deprived of
the benefit of Law and out of the Kings protection. Outlawry, as Utlary.
Outlicker, a timber standing out from the poop, serving (in small ships) for
the haling down of the Missen sheat. Out-pariers* Thieves of Rides-dale, taking
Cattle (or other booty) without that liberty. Outraie, o. depart, run.
Out-riders, Bailiffs errant, sent by Sheriffs to summon persons to their
Courts. Outrance, o. destruction, extremity. Outwail, o. a very sorrowful
thing. Owls, o. hooks ( f. houlette, a sheep-hook.) Owelty (or Ouelty) of
services, an Equality, when the Tenant paravail owes as much to the Mesn, as
the Mesn does to the Lord Paramount. Owhere, o. any where. Owresby, a Town in
Lincolnshire. Owen, Oen, Audo^nus, Eugenius. Ox-eye, a large kind of daisy,
also a kind of woodpecker. Oxenford, a town of Mentz in Germany, also as
Oxford, on the river Ouse. The University began An. 806. having 3 Colleges
built by K. Alfred. Ox-house, No. an Oxstall in Winter nights. Oxgang of Land,
Bovat^ terrae, commonly taken for 15 Acres. Oxter, No. (Axilla) an armpit.
Oxyca^, a poor Persian drink of water and a little Vinegar. Oxygan, g. a
triangle of 3 acute angles. Oxymel, g. a Syrop (against Phlegmatic humors) of
Honey, Vinegar, and Water. Oxymel compositum, with Roots and Seeds boiled in
it. Oxymel Scylliticum, made of Honey, Vinegar, and the Sea-onion. Oxymoron, g.
(Subtily foolish) an Epithet of a contrary signification. Oxyporopolist, g. he
that sells meat in sharp sauce. Oxyrrbodium, g. Oil of Roses and Vinegar mixed.
Oyer and Terminer, (f. Ouir-) a Commission granted to certain persons, to hear
and Determine certain causes. Oyer de record, a petition that the Judges (for
better proof sake) will please to hear or peruse a Record. Oyes, (f. Oiez) Hear
ye! Oyse, a river in France. Oze, Owze, soft muddy ground. Ozene. -na. g. a
stinking sore in the nose. Ozier, a Sallow.
P.
PAagium, money paid for passage through another jurisdiction, Pabular, -lous,
-latory, l. belonging to forage or provender. Pacal, belonging to peace, also
an Indian tree. Pacation, l. an appeasing. Pacator, l. a pacifier. Pace, two
foot (and in some places 3) and a half. Geometrical Pace, (by which miles are
measured) five foot. Pace of Egypt and Samos, six foot. Pace of Asses, a great
company of them together. Pace, o. for appease. Pachynum, a Sicilian
promontory, toward Pel^ponnesus. Paciferous, l. peace-bringing. Pacifique,
-ficatory, belonging to Pacification, l. peacemaking. Pack of wool, a
horse-load, 17 stone and 2 pound. Packers, that barrel up herrings, sworn to do
it duly 15 Ca^. 2. Packing Whites, a kind of Cloth. Pactitious, according to a
Pact, -tion, a bargain or agreement, also a Truce. Pactilus, a Lydian River
with gold-colour'd sand, ever since Midas washed himself in it. Pad, o. a
bundle, also (c.) the highway. Paddock (D. pad^e) a Frog, or a Toad, also a
little park. Padelion, Pes leon^s, great San^cle. Paderborn^, a town in
Westphalia. Padnage, as Pann-. Padua, a Venetian City and University.
Paduentage, f. Common of Pasture. Paddestow, a town in Cornwall. Padus, the
Italian River Po. Paean, g. a Song to Apollo. Paedagogue, g. a Schoolmaster.
Paedobaptism, baptism of Infants. Paeonia, part of Macedonia. Pagaments, a sort
of Prize-cloth. Paganalian, belonging to Paganals, l. wakes or
Countrey-holidayes. Paganical, belonging to the Country, or to a Pagan,
Paynim, Heathen. Paganims, for Painims. Paganism, heathenism, also the custom
of Contrymen. Pageant, a triumphal arch. Paginal, belonging to a Page, l.
the side of a leaf. Pagod, an Indian Idol, also their piece of gold about an
Angel value. Paico, an Indian herb against the stone in the Kidneys. Paigles,
Ox-lips. Paillardise, f. Whoredom. Pain fort and dure, (f. Peine-) a being
pressed to death, for refusing to put themselves on the ordinary trial of God and
the Country. Painemaine, (q. de matin) o. white-bread. Paisage, Landscape or
Countrey-work. Pais, f. a Country. Paladin, f. a Knight of the round table.
Palamedes, Son of Nauplius King of Eubaea, having caused Ulysses (against his
will) to go to the Trojan war, Ulysses (by a false accusation) caused him to be
stoned to death. Palasins, o. [Ladies] of honor. Palastre, o. a combat.
Palapuntz, an Indian drink of Aqua-vitae, Ko^e-water, Citrons and Sugar.
Palatical, belonging to the Palate, l. the roof of the mouth, where (as in the
Tongue) the sense of tasting lies, also to taste or try. Palatine, belonging to
the Palate or to a Princes Palace. Count Palatine or Paladine, a supreme Officer
in a Sovereign Princes Palace. Count or Prince Palatine of the Rhine, the
Palsgrave, one of the Electoral Princes. Palatinate, a County Palatine, a
principal County or Shire, having the Authority (as it were) of a Royal Palace.
County Palatines (in England) Lancaster, Chester, Durham, and Ely, their Power
is abridged by 27 H. 8. County Palatine of Hexham, reduced (by 14 Eliz.) to be
a part of the County of Northumberland. Palatins, Palassins, a precious stone
redder than the Carbuncle or Ruby, being the Palace or Matrix where that is
begotten. Pale, o. a spangle. Pale, two perpendicular lines from the top to the
bottom of the Eschuteon. Paleated, l. mingled with chaff. Palefray, Palfray, f.
a stately horse with trappings. Pale-maille, f. Pell-Mell, a game with a bowl
struck with a Mallet through an iron arch at either end of an alley. Paleous,
l. chaffy. Palermo, the Residence of the Sicilian Viceroy. Pales, the Goddess
of shepherds. Palestine, part of Syria, containing Judaea, Samaria and Galilee.
Paelestrical, belonging to wrestling. Palfrey, as Palefray. Palici, Palisci,
twin-Sons of Jupiter and Thal^ia, the earth swallowed her up (according to the
wish) and let out the Children again (when their time came) into the World.
Palilia, Feasts unto Pales. Palilogia, g. a repetition of the same words.
Palindrom, g. a sentence the same backward as forward, as Ablata, at alba.
Palingenesie, g. regeneration or being born again. Palingman, a merchant
Denizen, born within the English pale. Palinode, -die, g. recantation, another
[kind of] Song. Palinurus, a Promontory of Lucania, where Palinurus, the Pilot
of Aenaeas, sleeping, fell into the Sea. Palizado, Sp. Palissade, f. a defense
of stakes, etc. Pall, l. a long robe, also the black velvet laid over a Corpse,
also a narrow ornament of Lambs wool sent by the Pope to Archbishops, and worn
about their necks at the Altar. Palladion, Sp. -ium, l. an image of Pallas kept
by the Trojans, who supposed that it preserved their City. Pallas, as Minerva,
she is said to furnish Perseus with a shield and l^oking-glass* when he sl^w
M^dusa. Pallat, the Painters thin piece of wood that holds his colors. Palled,
f. pale, dead. Palle-maille* as Pale-. Pallet, one half of the Pale in
Heraldry* Palletoque, Pallecoat, f. a pages Cassock or short cloak with
sleeves. Palliard, c. whose Father is a born beggar. Palliardize, as
Paillardize. Palliate, l. to cover [with a Cloak.] Palliation, a cloaking.
Palliative, belonging thereto. Palliative Cure, a wound ^kin'd over, healed
outwardly but festering underneath. Pallid, l. pale, fearful. Pallification, l.
piling, or strengthening the groundwork with Pile^. Palma la nova, a Fort in
Friuli, with nine bastions and 700 pieces of Canon. Pallor, l. paleness.
Pallizado, as Palizado. Palmar, l. belonging to a Palm, a hands breadth, 4
fingers. Greater Palm, a span, or (by some) a shaftment. Palmata, a handful.
Palm Sunday, the next before Easter, when they met Christ with branches of
Palm Tree, which bears Dates, used as a token of victory, because it shoots
upward (though oppressed with much weight) and the leaves never fall. Palmer, a
Pilgrim visiting holy places (with a staff or boughs of Palm) also a worm with
many feet (eating the Palm Tree) also as Palmatory, a ferular, to strike the
palm of the hand. Palmester, a Diviner by Palmestry, as Chiromancy.
Palmeto-tree, of whose juice (in the Isle Mauritius) they make a pleasant wine.
Palmetto royal, the Cabbidg-tree. Palmiferous, palm-bearing, also victorious.
Palmipedous, whole or flat-footed, like waterfowl. Palos, a Port of Andalusia.
Palpation, l. a stroaking or flattering. Palpable, l. which may be felt.
Palpitation, l. a panting. Paltsgrave, D. Pfaltzgraff, ^e* Count Palatine,
especially the Prince Elector Palatine of the Rhen^. Paludament, l. a
Coat Armor (worn by Chief Captains) also a Heralds coat of Arms. Paludiserous,
l. causing fens or Marshes. Palumbine, belonging to a Ring-dove or Wood-culver.
Pampeluna, the Chief City of Navarre. Pamphili, Great Italia^ boats of 300
oars. Pamp^le^* (D. Pampier, paper) a little sorry book or paper. Pamphylia,
part of Asia the less. Pampination, l. a pruning of vines. Pampinean, belonging
to vine-leaves or branches. Pan, the God of Shepherds. Panada, -do. Sp. meat
made of Crumbs of bread and currants boiled. Panage. as Pannage. Panaretus, g.
containing all virtues. Panathenaic, belonging to- Panathenaea, Athenian
Solemnities kept every year, and (the Greater) every fifth. Pancart, f. a paper
of all the rates of Customs due to the [ French] King. Panches, the Mats made
of Synnet and fastened to the yards, to save them from galling. Panchaian,
-ique, belonging to Panchaia, part of Arabia, where is much Frankincense.
Panchymagogon, g. purging all humors. Pancratical, belonging to a Pancratiast,
one skild in wrestling and all feats of activity. Pancreas, g. the sweetbread.
Pandarism, the work of a Pandar, a Pimp or hebawd. Pandects, g. Book^ treating
of all matters, also as Digests, a Volume of the civil Law. Pandiculati^n. l. a
gaping and stretching of one self. Pandion, King of Athens, and Father of
Progne. Pandor, -der, (D. a taker of pawns) as Pandar. Pandora's box, full of
all miseries, opened by Epimetheus the Spouse of Pandorae, the first woman,
made by Vulcan, and endowed by all the Gods and Goddesses. Pandoxatrix, an
Ale-wise who also brews her self. Pa^durist, he that plays on a Pandure, a
Rebeck, or rather a Bandore. Panegyric, g. a general assembly or Solemnity,
also an Oration in praise of Great Personages. Panegyrist, g. the author
thereof. Panel, -lla, (f. pan, a skin) a roll with the names of Jurors
returned by the Sheriff to pass upon a Trial. Pangonie, g. a precious stone
with very many corners. Panguts, (f. Pancu) a drossel or Gor-belly. Panick,
Painick, a grain like to millet. Panick fear, sudden and distracting, inflicted
(as it were) by the God Pan. Panicle, a little l^af. Panifice, l. a making of
bread. Pankers, for Panters. Pasnage (q. Pastinage) Pannage, Pawnage, f. Mast
for hogs, or the money taken for it. Pannade, f. the prauncing of a lusty
horse. Panel, the pipe next to the Fundament of a hawk. Pannam. c. bread.
Pannicle, l. a little piece of cloth. Fleshy Pannicle, the fourth covering of
the body from head to foot. Pannier, Panier, f. a bin, basket, or dosser for
bread. Panni^r-man (in the Inns of Court) winds the horn to call them to
dinner, provides mustard, etc. Pannonian, belonging to Pannonia, Hungary.
Panomphaean, g. (all-oracular) an Epithet of Jupiter. Panoply, g. complete
harness, a whole suit of Armor. Panoplique, completely armed. Panpharmacon, g.
a medicine for all diseases. Pansie, Jacaea, Hearts-ease. Pansophy, g. wisdom
in all things. Pantagruelist, f. a good companion, imitating. Pantagruele, a
feigned Giant in Raebelais. Pantolone, I. an old amorous covetous Dotard.
Pantalones, -loons, a sort of breeches well known. Pantarb, -arva, Sp. the
stone of the Sun. Panter, c. the heart. Panters, o. toiles for Deer, pitfals.
Pantheology, g. the whole body of Divinity. Pantheon, g. a Roman Temple
dedicated to all the Gods, and since (by Pope Boniface 4) to the Virgin Mary
and all Saints. Pantherine, [spotted] like a Pancher, a female Libard.
Pantomime, -imick, g. an actor of all parts. Pantometry, g. a measuring of all
things. Panurgie, g. skill or meddling in all matters. Papacy, l. the Popedom.
Papal, l. belonging to the Pape, f. (Pappas* g. a Father) the Pope or Bishop of
Rome. Papality, as Papacy, also Popishness. Papaverous, -rean, l. belonging to
Chestoul or poppy. Papelard, f. an Hypocrite. Papelardise, f. hypocrisy.
Paphian, belonging to Paphos, a City in Cyprus dedicated to Venus by Paphus,
the Son of Pigmelion (by a statue of his own making) and King of Cyprus. Papian
(or Poppaean) law (among the Romans) making the people heir to a single man's
estate. Papilionaceous fly, a butterfly. Papplar, c. milk pottage. Papulosity,
l. fullness of pimples or blisters. Papyriferous, bringing forth Papyrus, the
rush whereof paper was made. Papyrius Cursor, a Roman General who overthrew the
Samnites. Papyr^polist, g. a seller of paper. Parabien, Sp. a welcoming or
congratulation. Parabolical, belonging to a Parable* g. a similitude. Parabola,
the same, also one of the crooked lines proceeding from the cutting of a Cone
or Cylinder. Paracelsian, belonging to, or following the method of Paracelsus,
a Physician who used exceeding strong Oy^s and waters extracted from the
natures of things. Parachronize, g. to mis-time [a thing.] Paraclete, g. an
Exhorter, Advocate or Comforter. Paraclyte, g. a man defamed or having an ill
name. Paracmastical, g. [the hot fit of a feaver] declining by little and
little, till it totally cease. Parade, f. a show or appearance [of Soldiers,
etc] Paradiastole, g. a distinction, an enlarging by interpretation.
Paradigora, g. an Example. Paradigmatize, to exemplify. Paradise, g. a Garden
or place of pleasure. Paradozal, -xical, belonging to Paradoxology, a speaking
by Paradoxes, g. things that seem strange, absurd, and contrary to the common
opinion. Paradrome, g. an open Gallery. Paraenetical, g. persuasive. Parage, o.
parentage, also as Parcinerie. Parogogical, belonging to Paragoge, g. an
addition to the end of a word. Parag^n, f. a compeer, to compare, also a
Peerless [Dame, etc.] Paragraph, g. a Pilcrow, where the line breaks off, the
Subdivision of a Section. Paralipomenon, g. left out. Paralipomena, the Books
of the Chronicles, containing many things omitted in the Kings. Paralepsis, the
letting a thing pass (really or in pretense.) Parallactick, belonging to
Parallax, g. the difference between the true and apparent place of a star, by
reason of our beholding it from the Superficies (and not the Center) of the
earth. Parallel, g. Equal, also to compare. Parallelogram, a Square made of
Parallels, lines equally distant and never meeting, five Circles imagined about
the Globe. Paralogize, to make a Paralogism, g. a fallacious syllogism.
Paralytick, belonging to or sick of the Paralysis, g. Palsy, a resolution of
the sinews. Paraments, Robes of state Parament, Parement, the red flesh between
the skin and body of a Deer. Lord Paramount, the highest Lord of a Fee, of whom
the Mesn Lord hol^s. Paramour, f. a Lover. Paranymph, g. a Brideman or maid;
also he that makes a speech in praise of those that are commencing Doctors,
etc. Parapegmata, g. the Tables in which Astrologers write their Art. Parapet,
f. a batlement or Brest-work on a Rampire. Paraphe, f. a mark in the margent,
also an under-signing, or the flourish that is added. Paraphanalia (and in
Civil Law Parapoernalia) the Goods which a Wife brings her husband over and
above her dowry, as Apparel, etc. which (especially in York) are not to be put
in the Husbands Inventory. Paraphrast, g. he that does Paraphrase, or write a*
Paraphrase, -stical exposition, a short Comment. Parasang, a Persian measure of
Thirty Furlongs. Parasel^ne, g. a Mock-moon reflected by a cloud. Parasitical,
belonging to a Parasite, g. a flatterer or smell-feast. Parasitical plants,
that live on the stocks of others, as Misletoe, etc. Parathesis, g. Apposition
or putting to, also the words enclosed within Crotchets. Paratragediate, to
help on a tragedy, make a matter worse than it is. Parature, l. the preparation
or matter whereof a thing is made. Tenant paravail, the lowest or immediate
Tenant, having the avail or profit of the land. Paraunter, P^r-, o.
peradventure. Paray^a, a Portugal town on the River Domingo in Brasil.
Parazone, a wood-knife or dagger. Parboil (q. Part-boil) to boil in part, not
fully. Parbreak, o. to vomit. Par^unkle, a rope seized together and put double
about a Cask, to hoise it by. Parcae, l. the Destinies, Clotho, Lachesis,
Atropos, bearing, spinning and cutting the thread of man's Life. Parcel-maker, an
Exchequer Officer making the parcels of the Escheators Accounts. Parcela seam,
cover it with Canvas, hot Pitch and Tar. Parceners, as Copar^eners. Parcinerie,
their holding of land jointly, without dividing it. Parciloquy, l. a sparing or
niggardly discourse. Parci^y, l. Frugality, Thrif Parco fracto, a writ against
him that breaks a pound, for beasts lawfully impounded. Pard, l, a Libard or
Male panther. Parde, o. (f. par Dieu) by God. Pareasse, -as, a serpent with a
little head (but a mouth wide enough to swallow a pigeon) and making a furrow
with his tail. Parcebasis, g. a digression. Paregmenon, g. a joining together
of words derived from one another. Parelcon* g. the adding one word to the end
of another. Pareil, one kind of printing Character. Parelij, g. Mock-Suns
reflected by a thick cloud on each side of the Sun. Parellelisation, or rather
Paral-, a making of Parellels. Parenchyma, g. the [bloody] substance of the
Liver, Spleen and lights. Parenetick, as Paraen-. Pareneticks, Fatherly (or
Masterly) Admonitions. Paren^, l. obedient. Parental, belonging to Parents or
Ancestors. Parentation, l. a Celebrating [their] Funerals. Parenthesis, g. the
interposing something (^hus) with in a sentence* which nevertheless would be
entire without it. Parenticide, l. a killing or killer of Parents. Parergy,
-gue, f. -gum, -gone, g. something added by the by, beside the main business.
Parfay, (s. par foy) by faith. Parfite, o. perfect. Parget, plaster. Parian,
belonging to Paros, one of the Cyclades, from whence they bring pure white
marble. Pariation, l. evenness [of accounts.] Paricidal, belonging to a
Paricide, l. a killing or killer of Father, Mother, or any of near kin.
Parient, l. traveling with young. Parilian, as Palilian. Parility, as Parity.
Paris, Alexander the Son of Priam, he seduced Helena from Greece, which
occasioned the Trojan War. Paris, the Metropolis of France. Paris-Garden, Bear
Garden, the house of Rob. de Paris in the reign of Rich. 2. who proclaimed it a
receptacle of the Butchers Garbage. Parishens, o. Parishioners. Parisyllable,
l. an Equal syllable. Parisyllabical, having no more syllables in the Genitive
than were in the Nominative. Parity, l. equality. Paritude, -ure, Parture, l. a
breeding or bringing forth. Park, an enclosure for deer or other wild beasts.
Park-bote, a being quit of enclosing a park. Parley, f. a talking [together.
Parliament, (f. Parliament, a conference) an Assembly of the King and 3 Estates
(Lords Spiritual, Temporal, and Commons) of England, for debating matters
touching the Commonwealth, etc. Parliamentum indoctorum, at Coventry (6 Hen.
4.) to which no Lawyer was to come. Parliamentum insanum, at Oxford, 41. Hen.
3. Parma, a City and Dukedom of Italy. Parmaceti, (for Sperma Ceti, the Whales
seed) an excellent ointment. Parmesan, an Inhabitant (or Cheese) of Parma.
Parnassian, belonging to Parnassus, a Grecian Mountain sacred to Apollo and the
Parnassides, the Muses. Parnel, a pretty Woman-lover. Parochial, belonging to
Parishes, about 9284 divisions of the Land by Honorius Archbishop of
Canterbury, 636. Paraemia, g. a proverb. Parole, f. a word or promise.
Paronomous, belonging to Paronomasia, g. a likeness of words. Paros, see
Parian. Paroxysm, g. a fit. Parrels, made of tracks, ribs and ropes (about the
mast) for the sliding of the yard. Parricide, as Paricide. Parrhasius, the
Painter who drew the Curtain which Zeuxis (thinking real) bad him draw.
Parrhesia, g. a freedom of speech. Parsimonious, full of, or belonging to
Parsimony, l. sparing, good husbandry. Parshor St. Cruce, a town in
Worcestershire. Parsly-hedg, Caucalis, an herb. Parsly-pert, Caliulum frangens,
Perce-pierre Anglorum, or Break-stone. Parson imparsonee, Persona impersonata,
a Rector in present possession of a Parochial Church. Partage, f. a parting or
dividing. Parterre, f. Garden-work [on the ground.] Parters of Gold, as ^inors.
Parts Finis, etc. an Exception taken against a fine levied Parthenian, g.
belonging to Virginity. Parthenope, the old name of Naples, also one of the
Sirens. Parthian, belonging to Parthia, Arach, in Asia. Partialize, to use
Partiality, l. a being Partial, inclining to one party more than another.
Partiary, l. one that does Participate, l. give or take part with another.
Partible, which may be parted Participles, Adjectives derived from Verbs (with
some signification of time) as loving, loved etc. Particle, l. a little part, a
small undeclined word. Parti^ Jury, as Medietas linguae. Partile aspect, of two
planets in the same number of Degrees and Minutes. Particularize, to instance
in particulars. Partion, l. a breeding. Partisan, f. a partaker, also a
[Lieutenants] leading-staff. Partitione facienda, a writ against a Coparcener
that refuses to join in Partition, l. a division. Partitor, l. a Divider.
Partlet, an old kind of band, both for men and women, a loose collar, a woman's
ruff, Che. Partners, the Timbers that keep the mast steady in the step.
Partriche, o. a partridge. Parturient, l. about to bring forth [young.]
Parture, for Parcuere, (f. par caeur) by heart. Parvis, o. a porch. Parvity, l.
smalness, Nonage. Pas a pas, f. step by step. Pascal, belonging to Pascage,
-uage, f. Pasturing or grazing. Paschal, belonging to the Pasche, g. the
passover or Easter. Paschal Rents, Synodals. Pascuous, l. serving for Pasture
or feeding. Mad-pash, Che. Mad-brain. Pasiphae, the Wife of Minos. Pasquil,
-in, an old Roman Statue, also a Libel (wont to be fixed thereon) who 's answer
was affixt to Marforeo (another old Statue.) Passade, f. Alms given a
Passenger; also the manage of a Horse backward and forward. Passagio, a Writ
for the Keepers of the Ports to grant passage over Sea. Passant, f. passing,
going. Passardo, a Nepas-artua-rope, to hale down the sheat-blocks of the main
and foresail, when the Ship goes large. Passa^, a Town in Bavaria. Passenger,
Pellerin, a kind of small-trained Hawk. Pass-flower, Pulsatil. Passe-port, f. a
pass or safe conduct. Passibility, a being Passible, l. able to suffer.
Passion, suffering, also an affection of the mind. Passive, suffering, or
having suffered. Pastern, f. the hollow of the heel, Pastilicate, to make or
use Pastils, little rolls of Paste, Pills. Pastinate, to dig [in a Garden.]
Paston, a Town in Norfolk. Pastophories, the most Honorable Egyptian Priests.
Pastoral, -ritious, belonging to a Pastor, l. a Shepherd. Pastoral [Song] of
Herdsmen. Pas^olan^, f. an Hireling foisted in by a Captain on Muster-days.
Patache, a small Indian Ship. Patacoon, a Spanish piece about 4 s. 8 d.
Patagous, Magellanicans, said to be 10 foot high. Pataque, a Neopolitan piece
of an hundred Quadrins. Patart, a Dutch Stiver, whereof five make 6 d.
Patavinity, the property of, or Relation to Padua. Patay, a Town of Beausse in
France. Cross Patee, whose ends are broad and opened. Patefaction, l. an
opening or discovering. Patelena, a Goddess of Corn, when the Cups opened.
Patelin, f. a flatterer. Paten, a wooden shoe with an Iron bottom. Patentee, to
whom the King has granted Patents, as Letters Patent. Patency, a being Patent,
l. open, uncovered. Pater-guardian, the head of a Franciscan College. Paternal,
Fatherly. Paternity, l. ones being a Father. Pathetical, g. affectionate.
Pathologick, belonging to Pathology, g. a part of Physic, treating of the
causes and differences of Diseases. Pathologist, g. a Writer of Diseases and
their Symptoms. Pathopaeia, g. an expression of a Passion. Patible, l.
sufferable. Patibulary, l. belonging to a Gallows. Patibulated, hanged on a
Gibbet. Patin, l. a great Platter, Charger, or Basin; also the flat plate used
by Priests (with the Chalice) at Mass. Patise, a reddish color. Cross Patonce,
who is ends are both broad, and (as it were) three ways hooked. Patration, l. a
doing, perfecting or committing. Patriarchal, belonging to a Patriarchate,
-chy, the Estate, Seat, or Dignity of a Patriarch, -ark, g. a chief Father, the
first Father of a Family or Nation; also a National Primate. Patri^iate, the
Dignity of Patricians, the most Noble Romans, descended of Senators.
Patricide, as Parracide. Patrick, a Patrician. Patrimonial, belonging to a
Patrimony, l. an Inheritance left by the Father. Patrimony of St. Peter, an
Italian Province belonging to the Pope. Patrizate, g. to resemble or imitate
ones Father. Patriot, a Benefactor or Lover of his Country. Patrocinate,
-onize, to defend or plead for. Patronal, belonging to a Patron, l. advocate,
defender; also (in Civil-law) he that has made a Servant free; and (in the
Canon and Common Law) he that has the gift of a Benefice. Patroclus,
Achilles's Friend, slain in Achilles's Armor. Patronymicks, -call. names,
derived from ones Father or Ancestors. Patter and Pray, o. repeat many Pater
nosters. Patulicate, l. to be opened or widened. Pavade, o. a Dagger.
Pauciloquent, l. using Pauciloquy, fewness of words. Paucity, l. fewness.
Paudishaw, Tu. an Emperor. Pavefie, l. to affright. Pavefaction, a terrifying.
Pavese, -vice, I. a large Shield covering the whole Body. Pavia, a Great City
of Milain. Paviage, money toward paving. Pavidity, a being Pavid, l. timorous.
Pavilion, f. a Warlike Tent. Pavin, Pavane, f. a kind of Dance. Paul, h,
wonderful or rest. Paulin, f. little Paul. Paunage, as Pannage. Pavoisade, f. a
Target-defense for Gally-slaves against small shot. Pavanine, l. belonging to a
Peacock or Hen. Pausade, s. a pausing or resting [place.] Pausanias, a famous
Lacedemonian Captain; also a Youth who slew Philip of Macedon; because he had
no redress for being Ravished. Pawl, a short Iron fastened to the Deck to keep
the Capstain from recoiling. V^t-pawl the capstain, let it go back. Pawme, o.
palm [of the hand.] Pax, l. peace, also the Pix or Box (Sp. Paz.) where the
Popish Sacrament is put. Pay the s^ams, lay on hot pitch. Pay the Ship, lay on
the stuff (in Grav^ng.) Paid, when (in a tack) the Sails are flat against the
shrowds and she cannot fall back. Pea^e of God and the Church, vacat^on-time.
Pea^, c. lace. Peal, N^. cool [the pot.] Pean, Erminus, or yellow Ermine (in
Heraldry.) Perch, Perch a Rod, Pole, a measure of 16 foot and a half, in some
places above ^0. Pearl, a Gem bred in shellfish; also the least Printing
Character (except the Diamond.) Pease, o. (q. appease or pause) to stay.
Pease-bolt, E. Pease-straw. Peccadillo, Sp. a small fault. Peccaminous, l. full
of sin. Peccant, l. sinning, offending. Peccator, l. a sinner. Peccavi, l. I
have offended. Peck, -kidg, c. meat. Pecorous, l. full of Cattle. Pectinals, l.
Fish who is bones are straight like combs (as Soals, etc.) Pectination, l. a
combing, also raking of Corn. Pectoral, l. belonging to, good for the Breast
and Lungs; also a Breast Plate or Stomacher. Pecuarious, l. belonging to
Cattle. Peculator, he that commits Peculation, l. robbing the Prince or
Commonwealth. Peculiar, l. particular, private, proper. Court of Peculiars,
dealing in Peculiars, Parishes exempt from other Ordinaries, and peculiarly
belonging to the Sea of Canterbury. R^gal Peculiar. the Kings Chapel, under
the immediate Jurisdiction of the Supreme Ordinary (the King.) Peculiate, l. to
punish a man's purse, take away his goods; also to enrich. Pecuniary, l.
belonging to Pecunia, l. money, and (anciently) Cattle or other substance.
Pedage, l. money given for passage. Pedagogism, the office of a Pedagogue, as
Paedag -- Pedal, l. of a Foot. Pedality, measuring by, or able going on foot.
Pedaneous, l. going on foot. Pedantism, the office of a Pedant, f. an Ordinary
Schoolmaster. Pedanteries, f. Pedantick humors, Ink-horn terms. Pedation, l.
a propping of vines. Pedature, l. the proportion of feet assigned to workmen.
Pedce, a [Commanders] footboy. Pederasty, Paed-, g. a lusting after boys.
Pedestal, f. a footstool, the foot of a pillar. Pedestrial, belonging to a
Footman. Pedicle, l. a little foot, also a stalk of fruit. Pediculous, l. lousy
Peddler, a Scotch or Wandering Merchant. Pedobaptism, as Paedob-. Pedomancy,
Divination by the lines at the soles of the feet. Pedor, l. filthiness [of
prisons.] Pedotribe, g. an instructor of Children to exercise their bodies.
Peek, the room in a ships hold, from the bits to the stem. Heave a Peek, heave
the ships hawse right over the Anchor. Ride a peek, with the main-yard and
fore-yard sloped into a St. Andrews Cross (lest another ship come foul of
them.) Peeper, c. a looking-glass. Peeping, c. sleepy, drowsy. Peel-town, in
Man Isle. Peed, No. blind of one eye. He pees, No. He looks with one eye.
Peevish, No. witty. Peer, o. for appear. Peer, f. a work raised against the
force of the Sea. Peers, (f. Pairs) Equals, Jurymen, also Lords. Peerage, the
condition of Peers of the Realm, also an imposition for maintaining a Sea-peer.
Peery, c. fearful. Peeter, c. a portmantle. Pegasean, like or belonging to
Pegasus, the flying horse of Perseus. Pegnin, the Metropolis of China.
Pejerate, l. to forswear. Pejorate, l. to make or grow worse. Peitrel, Poi-,
ral, f. the brest-leather of a horse. Pekois, o. a pickax. Pelagians,
Heretics, followers of Pelagius. he denied Original sin, held that man of
himself might keep the Commandments, etc. Pelagic^, belonging to the Sea.
Pelasgi, Grecians inhabitants of Pelasgia, part of Pelopon^^sus. Pelf* Pill,
the broken remains of a fowl, after the hawk is relieved. Peli^s, Brother of
Aeson King of Thessaly, slain by his own Daughters. Pelion, a Thessalian
Mountain laid upon Ossa by the Giants in their war with Heaven. Pell, o. a
house. Pelican, a bird said to feed her young ones with her blood. Pellicle,
l. a thin skin or ^inde. Pelliculation, the practice of a Pelliculator, l. a
deceiver with fair words. Pellucid, l. clear, to be seen through. Pel-mel, f.
Confusedly. Pelopaea, the mother of Ae^isthus by her own Father Thestes.
Peloponnesus, Morea (in Greece) on the Adriatic Sea. Pelops* being killed by
his Father Tantalus and set before the gods, Ceres ate his shoulder, but
Jupiter revived him and made him an ivory one. Pelota, f. the ball of the ^oot.
Pelt (in Falconry) the dismembered body of a dead ^owl. Peltiferous, bearing a
P^lt, l. a target of skins like a half moon. Pelt-wool, pulled off the Pelt,
the skin [of a dead sheep.] Pelure, rich fur. Pelusian, belonging to Pelusium,
Damiata, one of the 7 mouths of Nilus. Pembridg, a town in Herefordshire. Pen,
Br. a head. Penarious, l. belonging to victuals. Penates, l. Household gods.
Penbrock, a town in Wales. Penbauk, No. a Beggars can. Pendent, l. hanging.
Pendents, Ear-jewels. Pendants, small streamers, hung out to adorn the ship,
also short ropes fastened to all the yard arms (except the missen) into which
the braces are reeved. Pendiloches, f. the lowest and dangl^ng parts of Jewels.
Pendulosity, l. a being Pendulous, l. hanging, ropy, also doubtful. Pendulum,
a Regulator, exactly proportioning the time in watches, etc. Peneian Vala,
Tempe, on the banks of Peneus, a River in Thessaly. Penelope, the Constant wife
of Ulysses, who to deceive her Suitors (promising her respite till that piece
of work she had in hand was ended) undid by night whatsoever she did by day.
Penetrability, a power to pierce, or a being Penetrable, which may be
Penetrated, pierced through. Penetral, l. the inward open part of a house.
Peni^le, f. painful. Peninsule, Penisle, l. almost an Island. Penistons, a
coars^ woollen cloth. Penitential, penitent, belonging to sorrow or repentance.
Penitentiary, a place (in Rome) where the Priests hear Confessions and enjoin
penance, also as Peniten^ier, the Priest that enjoins it. Pennant, as Pendant.
Pennigerous, l. winged, feathered. Pennipotent, l. strong of wing. Pens feel,
o. many pence. Pennocrucium, Pencridge in Staffordshire. Penny, Catyledon,
Navelwort. Pennyroyal, Organy, puddingrass. Penny-weight, twenty four grains,
whereof one makes 20 Mites, and one Mite 24 droits. Penny, was our ancient
current silver. Penoncels, little Penons (f. Pennons) flags, streamers.
Penreth, a town in Cumberland. Penses, (f. pensee) pansies. Pensiculation,
-ita-, l. a weighing or diligent considering. Pensford, a town in Somerset.
Pension, l. a yearly stipend or payment, also (in Grayes Inn) a Parliament,
Council or Assembly of the members of that Society. Pension-writ, against those
(in Greys Inn) that are in arnear for Pensions, etc. Pensioners, the more noble
sort of Guard to the Kings person. Pensive, f. thoughtfull. Pentagamist, having
had 5 wives. Pentahedrical, g. of 5 sides. Pentaglottical, g. skild in 5
tongues. Pentagonal, g. of 5 corners. Pentameter, g. of 5 feet. Pentaptotes,
Nouns of 5 cases. Pentarch, a Captain of five. Pentasium, a lake deadly to
serpents, wholesome to men. Pentasticks, Stanza's of 5 verses, porches of 5 rows
of Pillars. Pentateuch, g. the 5 Books of Moses. Pentecontarch, g. a Captain of
50. Pentecost, g. the fiftieth day [from Christ's resurrection] Whitsunday.
Pentecostals, Whitson. farthings, pious Oblations at that Feast. Penthesilea,
Queen of the Amazons, slain by Achilles. Pentheus, torn insunder for despising
Bacchus's rites. Penulator, l. a Furrier. Pentir^me, a Galley of 5 oars in a
seat. Penury, l. want. Penurio^s, l. very poor. Pepi^, King of France and
Father to Charles the great. Pepire, o. a Love-potion. Peplography, g. a
description of the People, -lum, l. a hood [for women at their Churching.]
Pepperwort, Lepidium, of a sharp and cleansing nature. Pepti^k, g. conco^^ive.
Pepyns, Pepins, f. Kernels. Peracter, as Circumferentor. Peraction, l. a
finishing. Peragration, l. a wandering about Perambulation, l. a walking about,
or surveying. Perambulatione facienda, a writ for the Sheriff to distinguish
the bounds of Manors. Perangust, l. very narrow. Perarate, l. to plow
thoroughly. Percase, o. by chance. Percepiere, f. Break-stone, an herb in
Somersetshire. Perceptible, l. perceivable.^ Perchemyne, o. Parchment. Perch
stone, found in the head of a Perch. Percolation, l. a straining through.
Percontation, -cunct -l. a diligent enquiring. Pereruciate. l. greatly to
torment. Percussion, l. a striking. Percullis, one of the Pursivants at Arms.
Perdiccas, one of Alexanders Commanders. Perdition, l. loss, destruction.
Perdix, being thrown from a high Tower by his Uncle Daedalus (for inventing the
Saw) he was changed into a Partridge. Perdonatio Vtlagariae, the pardon of an
Outlaw (upon yielding himself.) Perduction, l. a leading through. Perdu. f.
lost. Perdues, Companies chosen for the most desperate Services, forlorn-hopes.
Perduellion, -ism, l. an open Act of Hostility. Perduration, l. a continuing.
Peregrine, l. Outlandish, a kind of Falcon. Peregrination, l. a Traveling;
also a Planets being in a Sign wherein he is altogether a stranger. Peremptory,
l. absolute. Perendination, l. a putting off from day to day. Perennity, l.
long continuance. Perenticide, l. a Cutpurse. Pererration, l. a wandering
about. Perflation, l. a blowing through. Perfidy, l. Treachery. Perforation, l.
a boring through. Perfretation, l. a passing through, or over Sea. Perfriction,
l. a shivering for cold; also as Perfrication, l. a rubbing thoroughly.
Perfunction, a finishing or discharging. Perfunctory, slight. Perfusion, a
pouring upon. Pergamus, a City of Natotolia, where Parchment was invented.
Pergamenous, belonging thereto. Pergraphical, g. very artificial. Periander, a
Corinthian Tyrant, one of the 7 wise men. Pericardian, belonging to the
Pericard, g. the heart-purse. Pericardick vein, a branch of the main ascendant
branches of the hollow vein. Periclitation, -ancy, l. an endangering.
Pericrany, -ion, g. the skin covering the skull. Perjenet, o. (f. Poir je^net)
a young pear tree. Perigee, the place wherein a star is nearest the Center of
the Earth. Peribelium, g. the point wherein the Earth (or any planet) is
nearest the Sun. Perimeter, the outmost line of any solid body; also a verse
that has a syllable too much. Perinde Valere, a dispensation to a Clerk who
(though incapable, yet) is de facto admitted. Perioch, g. the Argument or
Contents of a Discourse. Periodical, belonging to a Period, g. a certain or
full term of time or sense. Perioeci, -oici, g. those that inhabit the same
Climate. Peripateticks, g. followers of Aristotle. Peripherie, g.
Circumference. Periphrastical, spoken by a Periphrase, -sis, g. a
circumlocution. Peripneumonical, sick of a Peripneumony, g. an inflammation of
lungs and shortness of breath. Periscians, g. whose shadows are cast round
about them. Perissology, g. a superfluity of speech. Peristaltic motion, the
quibling motion of the guts, to squeeze out the Excrements. Peristatick, g.
having or belonging to circumstances. Perit, Twenty four blanks, or the
twentieth part of a Droit. Perit^n^um, g. the Cawl. Perjury, l. a being
Perjured, forsworn in a Judicial proceeding. Periwig, as Perwick. Perkin. q.
Peterkin, little Peter. Permagies, little Turkish boats. Per my and per tout,
[seised, as a Joint-tenant] by every parcel and by the whole. Permanent, l.
durable. Permeation, l. a passing through. Permiscible, which may be mingled.
Permissible, which may be permitted Permission, l. leave. Permistion, l. a
mingling together. Permutation, l. an exchanging. Permutatione etc. a writ for
the admission of a Clerk upon Exchange. Pernicious, -ciable, l. dangerous,
destructive. Pernicity, l. swiftness. Pernoctation, l. a tarrying all night.
Pernancy, a taking or receiving. Pernour, (f. Preneur) a taker. Peroration, l.
a concluding. Perpend, l. to examine or weigh. Perpenders, Perpent-stones,
fitted to the thickness of a wall. Perpendicle, l. a plumbline. Perpendicular,
directly down. Perpension, -sation, l. a diligent weighing or considering.
Perpession, l. an enduring. Perpetrate, l. to commit. Perpetuate, l. to cause
Perpetuity, l. everlastingness. Perplexable, full of Perplexity, l.
doubtfulness, trouble. Perplication, l. a folding to and fro. Perquisite, not
left by Ancestors but gained of ones self. Perquisites, l. profits arising by
the by. Perquisition, l. a diligent Enquiring. Perre, o. (q. pierr^e) a
monument. Perry-wright, o. embroidered with precious stones. Perquisitor, l. a
searcher. Perscr^tation, l. a through search. Perreptation, a creeping through.
Perse, f. sky-colored. Perscribe, l. write out to the end. Persant, o.
piercing. Persecution, a following hard after. Perseverance, l. constant
continuance. Persia, a famous Eastern Kingdom. Perside, to sit still Persist,
l. to continue. Personable, enabled to hold plea in Court. Personality, -lty, a
being Personal, belonging to a person. Personal tithes, of profits by Labor,
Merchandise, etc. Personate, l. to represent ones person; also to sound aloud.
Persons ne Praebendaries, etc. a writ for spiritual persons distrained for
taxes. Perspective, l. the Art of helping the sight by Glasses, etc.
Perspicacity, l. quickness of apprehension. Perspicience, l. perfect knowledge.
Perspicil, l. a looking or perspective glass, Perspicuity, a being Perspicuous,
l. clear, plain. Perspirable, capable of Perspiration, l. a breathing through.
Perstringe, l. to wring or touch hard upon. Perterebrate, l. to bore through.
Perth, -thia, part of North Scotland. Pertical, belonging to a perch or pole.
Perticata terrae, the fourth part of an acre. Perticulas, certain Alms or
School-Commons. See Pittance. Pertinacy, -city, a being Pertinacious, l.
obstinate. Pertinens, a Kinsman or Woman. Pertinent, to the purpose.
Pertingency, a reaching to. Pertingent, l. extending or joining to. Ael.
Pertinax, a Roman Emperor, who obstinately refused the Empire for a while. Per
quae servitia, a Writ for a Cognizee of a Manor, etc. to compel the Tenant (at
the time of the Note of the Fine levied) to a^urn to him. Pertur^ation, l. a
troubling. Pervade, to pass into, through and over all. Pervagation, l. a
wandering through* or up and down. Perversity, l a ^eing Perverse, l. froward,
Cross* Pervert, l. to overthwart or overthrow; also turned from good to evil.
Pervestigat^^n, l. ^ finding out by diligent search. Pervicacy, l. a being
Pervicacious, l. obstinate. Pervigilation, l. a watching all night. Peruink, o.
the herb Peruinkl^, or Periwinkle. Pervious, which may be passed through.
Pervise, Parvise, Mooting, an afternoons Exercise. Peruvians, the people of
Peru, a large province in the West Indies. Perwick, -wig, Perruque, f. a cap of
false hair. Pery, o. a Peartree. Peritory, o. for Pellitory. Pesame, Sp. a
condoling. Pesage, f. custom for weighing. Pess^ry, l. a suppository of soft
wool. Pessenae tempus, Shacking-time, Nf. Pessona, Mast. Pessundate, l. to
tread or cast under foot, to destroy. Pesterable wares, troublesome and taking
up much room in a Ship* Pestiferous, l. bringing the Pestilence or Plague.
Petalism. a Syracusian Banishment (for five years) by writing the Names on
Olive-leaves. Petard, -arre, f. a Mortar-like Engine to break open Gates, etc.
Petarrade, f. [a Horses yerking out behind, accompanied with] farting.
Petauristick, belonging to a Petaurist, g. a dancer on the Ropes. Petches, a
Town in Essex. Peterburgh, a Town in Northamptonshire. Peter, g. a stone or
Rock. Peter-corn, given by King Athelstane to the Sea of York. Peter Pence,
Rome-see, Rome-scot, Rome-penning, a penny for every Chimney, given by Inas
King of the West- Saxons, toward the maintenance of a Saxon School.
Petersfield, a Town in Hantshire. Peters-post, a famous Quarry in Yorkshire,
whose stones built St. Peter's Church in York. Petherton, a Town in
Somersetshire. Petit, f. little. Petit Sergeantry, a holding Lands of the King
by some small Service. Petit Treason, when a Servant kills his Master, a Wife
her Husband, or a Clerk his Ordinary. Petitory, belonging to a Petition, a
Request to a Superior. Petous* o. for Piteous. Petra lanae, a stone of wool.
Petrary, as Mangonel. Petreius and Juba, being overthrown by Caesar, consented
to kill one another. Petrification, l. the action of Petrifying, turning into
stone. Petrobusians, Heretics that denied the keeping of Feasts. Petrol, a
kind of Bitumen or Naphtha. Petronel, f. a Horsemans Piece, hanging or aiming
at the breast. Petropolitan, belonging to Petropolis, Rome; also Peterborow in
Northamptonshire. Pettifogger, a silly Atorney, Trouble-town, without Law or
Conscience. Petty Tally, a Competent proportion of Victuals in a Ship.
Petulancy, a being Petulant, l. saucy, wanton. Petworth, a Town in Sussex.
Pexity, l. the nap or roughness of the Web. Pey, o. (f. Paix) Security. Peysen,
o. for appease Pfirt, Mors-Munster in Alsatia. Pfullendorf, a City of Schwaben.
Phaed^a, Daughter of Minos, and Wife of Theseus. Phaemone, the first Priestess
of Apollo at Delphos, and inventress of Heroic verse. Phenomenon, g.
appearances. Phaeton, Guiding the Chariot of the Sun (for a day) set the World
on fire. Phaetontiades, his Sisters. Phagedenick, g. troubled with a Cancer,
eating the flesh. Phalangeary, -eus, belonging to a Phalanx, a Squadron of 8000
Footmen, set in array. Phalangarians, those Soldiers. Phalaris, a Sicilian
Tyrant, who burnt Porillus in the Brazen Bull, which he had made for the
tormenting of others. Phalerated, l. adorned with Trappings. Phaleucian, -e:
sick Verse, of a Spondee, Dactyl, and three Tr^chee^. Phanatick, as Fanatic.
Fantasy, g. Imagination, Fancy. Phantasm, g. a Vision or Apparition. Phao, a
Lesbian Youth made beautiful by an Ointment given him of Venus. Phara^h, ^, (a
making bare) the General Title of the Kings of Eg^pt. Phare, -ros, g. a
Watchtower or Beacon by the Sea. Pharetriferous, l. bearing a Quiver of
Arrows. Pharisaical, belonging to Pharisaism, the Profession of Pharisees,
Jewish Separatists, pretend^ng extraordinary Holiness. Pharma^entick, -call,
-ma^ical, belonging to Pharmacy, -cen^y, g. the Art of Selecting, preparing,
and mixing Medicines. Pharmacopolist, g. an Apothecary. Pharnaces, the Son of
Mithridates, overthrown by Caesar. Pharsalian, belonging to Pharsalus, a Town
of Thessaly, on the Banks of Eripeus. Phasm, g. a terrible Vision. Pheer, o. a
Companion. Pheon, an Arrow-head (in Her.) Phenicia, a Province of Asia. Phial,
as Vial. Philadelphia, g. Brotherly love; a City of Mysia in Asia the less.
Philadelphians, g. lovers of Brothers or Sisters. Philanthropal, full of
Philanthropy, g. love to man. Philargyrous, full of Philargy. y. g. love of
Silver. Philantry, g. self-love. Philibert, Ge. famously bright.
Philippe-ville, a Town in Mainault. Philip, g. a lover of Horses. Philippick,
belonging to Philippopolis, a City of Mecedon. Philippicks, Demosthenes's
Invectives against Philippus, King of Macedon, Alexanders Father; also a Gold
Coin of 3 shillings, and a Silver one of 4. Philips-Norton, a Town in
Somersetshire. Philipsbourgh, a Key of Germany, in the lower Palatinate.
Phillis, g. lovely. Philocte^es, the Companion of Hercules, who left him his
Bow and poisoned Arrows. Philodespot, g. a lover of his Master. Philologer, one
given to Philology, g. the study of speech and Discourse; also as Philomathy,
love of Learning. Philomel, a Nightingale, made of Philomela, flying from
Tere^s who had Ravished her, and cut her Tongue out. Philom^sus, g. a lover of
the Muses. Philonomia, the Mother (by Mars) of the twins Lycastus and
Parrhasius Kings of Arcadia. Philopolite, g. a lover of his City.
Philosophical, belonging to a Philosopher, a studier of Philosophy, g. the
study of wisdom, or knowledge in things Rational, Natural and Moral.
Philostorgy, g. Parents love to Children. Philotimy, g. love of honor.
Philtre, the hollow in the upper lip. Philtre charmed, enchanted with Philtres,
g. love-potions, or medicines. Philyrian Sc^^t, Sagittarius, the Centaur
Chiron, Son of Saturn and Philyra, the Daughter of Oceanus. Phinehas, h. a bold
countenance. Phineus, a King of Thrace slain by Hercules. Phlebotomy, g.
letting blood (by opening a vein.) Phlegeton, g. a flaming river of hell.
Phlegmatic, full of Phlegm, the cold and moist humor of the body. Phlegmone,
g. a swelling with an inflammation of the blood. Phlegraean fields, in Thessaly
where the Gods and Giants fought. Phlegyas, King of the Lapithaeans, set under
a great stone (in Hell) ready to fall on his head, for burning the Temple of
Apollo who had ravished his Daughter Coronis. Phaebe, Diana, the Moon. Phoebus,
Ap^llo, the Sun. Phaenix, an Arabian bird, said to live alone above 5 or 600
years and then to burn her self in a nest of spice, from which ashes springs a
young one. Phorbas, the Son of Priam, slain by Menelaus. Phorcys, King of
Corsica, Father of Medusa. Phosphor, g. the Morning Star. Phraseology, a
Discourse of Phrases, g. proper forms of speech. Phrenetick, frantic, troubled
with a Frenzy, -nz^, g. madness Phrygians, the careless, wanton inhabitants
of the Greater Phrygia, part of Asia. Phrygian Garment, of Needle work.
Phrygian Wisdom, Afterwit. Phthisick, g. a Consumption Cough of the Lungs.
Phylacist, g. a Jailor. Phylacterians, Sorcerers condemned Anno 62. Phylactery,
g. a preservative or Charm. Phylacteries, Scrolls of parchment (with some parts
of the Law) worn by the Jews, to mind them of keeping Gods Commands, Exodus
13.9. Phylarch, g. the Governor of a Tribe or Family. Phillis, hanged her self
for Demophoon, and was turned into an Almond-tree. Physiarch, g. the Governor
of Nature. Physic, g. Medicine Physics, g. Natural Philosophy. Physician, one
skilled in both. Physiognomer, -mist, a professor of Physiognomy, g. a
discovering men's natures by their looks, also contracted to Physnomy, the
feature of the face. Physiologer, a practiser of Physiology, g. a reasoning or
searching of Natural things. Piacle, l. [a Sacrifice to purge] some great
Offense. Piacular, -lous, belonging thereto. Pia Matter, the inmost skin
enclosing the brain. Pian Pian^, I. by little and little, soft and fair.
Piaster, an Italian coin about a Crown. Piation, l. a purging by Sacrifice.
Piazza, I. a broad open place* as a Marketplace, etc. also (corruptly) the
walks about it set with pillars, etc. Pica, l. longing, also a printing
Character. Picards, a kind of Ada^ites, also great boats used on the Severn^.
Picardize, to imitate the Picards, -di^s, people of Picardy, a Province of
Gallia Belgica the Grainary of France. Piccage, money paid at Fairs for
breaking the ground to set up booths. Pickadilly, a famous Ordinary at St.
James's built by one Higgins a Tailor who made Pickadils, (D. Pickedillekins)
the round hems, or several divisions set together about the skirt of a Garment
or collar much in fashion the last age. Pickeer, (I. Picare) to skirmish.
Pickering, a town in Yorkshire. Pickig^i, f. a word used (like Shibboleth) to
distinguish Aliens from the native French as Bread and Cheese did the English
and Flemings in Wat Tylers rebellion. Pickage, as Piccage. Picle, Pitle,
Pightel, (I. Pic^olo, small) a small Close. Pickeron, as Piqueron. Pictor, l. a
Painter. Pictural, -torian, -ical, l. belonging to a picture. Piedmont, part of
Italy under the Duke of Savoy. Pie-powder-Court, Curia pedipulverizati, to
redress all disorders at Fairs. Pigel, o. for pickle. Piger Henricus, a very
slow distilling Instrument. Pight, o. pitched, propped. Pigmens, l. paint.
Pignerate, l. to [take in] pawn. Pigneratitious, pawned, or belonging to
pawning. Pike, o. peep. Pike on the been, c. run for it. Pigritude, l. sloth.
Piladion, a song or dance of Pilades, a notable Comedian. Pilaster, a small
pillar, also the swelling of the Uvula. Pilch, (Pellicon) a woollen or
fur-garment, also a Child's flannel clout. Pilcrow, as Paragraph. Pille of
Foddray, (pilla) a pile or Fort on a Sea-Creek in Lancashire. Pile, a two fold
line (in Heraldry) like a wedge. Pilgrim, (I. Peligrino) a devout traveller to
some holy place, a Palmer is a general and perpetual Pilgrim. Pillaw, a Turkish
dish of Rice and Mutton-fat boiled. Pillow, the timber which the Boltsprit
rests on. Pillours. (f. -eurs) o. robbers, Pilores, o. the same. Pilosity, l.
hairiness. Pilotage, the office of a Pilot, a Steersman. Piment, (q. Pigment)
o. a drink of Wine and Honey. Pimplean, belonging to Pimplea, a Mountain of
Macedon, with a Fountain sacred to the Pimpleiades, the Muses. Pimpompet, f. an
antic dance of three kicking each others bum. Pin-cod, No. a pin-cushion.]
Nick the Pin, drink just to the pin placed about the middle of a wooden cup.
This caused so much debauchery that Priests were forbidden to drink at or to
the pins. Pine, o. a pit, also ( No.) difficult. Pingles, Pingres, f. a
(womanish) play with Ivory balls. Pingle, No. as Picle. Pinguedinous, l. fat.
Pinguedinize, the same as Pinguefie, l. to make fat. Piniscrous, l.
pine-bearing, Pinipinichi, an Indian milky juice purging Choler. Pinnace, a
kind of small Ship. Pinnigerous, l. having fins. Pin, a humor in a hawks
foot. Pinsor, l. a Baker. Pintel, an iron pin that keeps the gun from
recoiling, also the Rudder-pi^^ hanging it to the Stern-post. Pintle-pantle,
Pintledy-pantledy, Li. (Panteler, f. to pant) trembling for fear, or frequent
beating [of the heart.] Pinules, l. the sights of the Alhidada. Pioneers,
-nors, (f. Pionniers) underminers and diggers in an army. Pip, a white scale on
the top of the tongue in poultry. Pipation, l. a crying or weeping. Pipe, the
Great Roll in the Exchequer. Pipe [of wine, etc.] 26 gallons, or half a tun.
Pipperidges, E. Sf. barberries. Piquant, f. pricking. Pique, f. a quarrel.
Piqueron, f. a Dart or Javelin. Piramid, as Pyramid. Pirate, o. perry.
Piratical, belonging to Piracy, the trade of a Pirate, l. a Sea-Robber,
(formerly any Sea-Soldier, or the Overseer of a pira or Haven-peer.) Pirenean,
belonging to Pirene, a fountain made by Pegasus dashing his foot against the
rock. Pisa, a City of Tuscany. Piscaria, -ry, a liberty to fish in another man's
water. Piscary, l. a place for fish. Piscation, l. a fishing. Pisces, the 12th
sign of the Zodiac. Piscicle, l. a little fish. Piscinal, belonging to a
fish pond. Pisculent, l. fishy, or which may be fished. Pissasphalt, g. Pitch
and the Lime Bitumen mixed. Pissupprest, the suppression of a horses Urine.
Pistachoes, small, Physical, Syrian, Pistack-nuts. Pistick, l. pressed,
bruised. Pistillation, l. a pounding in a Mortar. Pistolado, l. a Pistol shot.
Pistorian, -ical, belonging to a baker or baking. Pistrine, l. a mill, prison,
or bake-house. Pit-a-pat, as Pintle-Pantle. Pitching-pence, paid (in ^^irs and
markets) for every bag of Corn, etc. Pithian, as Pythian. Pittance, (f.
pitance, q. pietance) the small portion of victuals given the Monks in
Colleges, a small rep^st. Pittacus, one of the 7 Wise men of Greece.
Pituitous, l. Phlegmatic. Pix, as Pyx. Placability, a being Placable, l. easily
appeased. Placaert, D. a proclamation. Placard, -quard, f. a Bill posted up, a
Table of Laws, Orders, etc. Placard (in our Law) a license to use (otherwise)
unlawful games. Placence, the Palace at Greenwich. Placeta, (in some old
deeds) a place or parcel. Placidity, a being Placid, l. mild, peaceable.
Placit, l. an opinion, also a Decree. Plagiarian Law, against Plagiaries, l.
stealers of Mankind, or of other men's writings. Plagues, (D. Plagghe, a Clout)
o. parts. Plain Table, for the surveying of Land. Plaintiff, he that makes a
Plaint, Complaint, the exhibiting (in writing) any action personal or real.
Plan, l. a large compass or circle. Planetary, a Caster of Nativities, also as
Planetick, belonging to Planets, g. the 7 wandering stars, Saturn, Jupiter,
Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, and the Moon. Planiloquent, l. using Planiloquy,
plain speech. Planim^^ry, g. a measuring of plains or flat things. Planisphere,
l. a plain Sphere, as an Astrolabe. Plank upon plank, a kind of furring, by
laying another plank on the ships-side after she is built. Plantar, belonging
to the sole of the foot. Plantar Arteries, two branches of the thigh-arterie.
Plantation, l. a planting, also a Colony placed in a foreign country. Plant, c.
to lay, place, or hide. Plantigerous, bearing plants. Plasmator, a Potter.
Plasmature, a making of earthen ware. Plastic, belonging to Plastique, g.
Sculpture, the Art of forming things [of Earth.] Plastography, g. a counterfeit
writing. Plat, g. flat. Of Platthan edge, o. [More] of Ease than Grief, of the
flat than the edge of Fortunes sword. Platanine, belonging to a Platane, l. a
Plane-tree. Plateasm, g. a speaking over-broad. Plate, a hoy. Platonist, a
follower of Plato, the Divine Philosopher Chief of the Academicks. Platonic
love, a contemplative Idaea, abstracted from all gross sensuality. Platonic
year, the 36 thousandth, when all things must return (forsooth) to their
present state. Plats, flat ropes to save the Cabel in the hawse from galling.
Plaudite, l. Clap your hands for joy, also a clapping, etc. Plausible,
acceptable, seeming very fair. Plausidical, speaking plausibly and Eloquently.
Plaus^s, l. he that claps his hands, praises or encourages. Play, o. to ply
or Go often. Playing hot, So. boiling hot. Plea, that which either party
alleges for himself in Court. Pleas of the Crown, Suits in the Kings name for
Offenses against his Crown and Dignity. Pleas of the Sword, were to the Earl of
Chester, as Pleas of the Crown to the King. Common Pleas, agitated between
Common persons. Plebeian, vulgar, belonging to the Plebeity, the Commonalty.
Plebicolist, a favourer of the Commons. Plebiscite, a decree of the people.
Pleck, Y. a place. Pledge, f. a surety. I Will Pledge you, I Will look that you
receive no hurt [from the Danes] while you drink, but now it is used in another
sense. Plegijs dequietandis, a writ for the surety against the other, if he pay
not the money duly. Pleget, Spl-, a long plaster of Leather or Linen.
Pleiades, g. 7 Daughters of Atlas, turn^d into the 7 stars. Pleide, o. for
plied. Plenary, l. full. Plenarty, a [Benefices] being full. (Institution is a
good plenarty against a Common person, but not against the King without
Induction.) Plenere, o. fully. Plenilunary, belonging to the Plenilune, l. the
fullmoon. Plenipotentiaries, Ambassadors with full power to treat and conclude
upon all things contained in their Commission. Plenitude, -ty, l. fullness.
Pleonasmick, belonging to a Pleonasm, g. an adding of something superfluous.
Plerophory, g. a fullness or perfection. Plesaunces, o. pleasures. Pleskow, a
Town in Muscovy. Plethorick, -call, troubled with a Plethora, -ry, g. an
abundance of humors, also the headache occasioned thereby. Plevin, as Replevin.
Pleuritick, subject to the Pleuriste, an inflammation of the Pleura, g. (the
side) the inward skin of the ribs. Pliant, -able, f. flexible. Plicature, l. a
folding. Plight, o. plucked. Plymouth, a famous port Town on the mouth of Plim,
a River in Devonshire. Plinth, g. the square bottom of a pillar. Ploce, g. (a
binding together) an emphatical repetition of a word, connoting its quality.
Plonkets, course woollen clothes. Plores (s. pleurez) weep. Plottons, (s.
ploton, a bottom of thread) divisions of Soldiers with 8 in front. Plott, a
Se^-card. Plow-alms, a penny anciently paid the Church for every Plow-land, as
Hide, etc. Plow-Monday, next after Twelfth-day, when our Northern Plow-men beg
Plow-money to drink, and in some places if the Plowman (after that days work)
come with his whip to the kitchin-hatch and cry Cock in the pot, before the
maid says Cock on the Dunghill, he gains a Cock for Shrove-Tuesday. Plumage,
f. feathers, also as Plumassary, a bunch of Feathers. Plumbagin, l. silver
mingled with lead oar; also lead which was put into a Furnace with Gold or
Silver-Oar, to make them melt the sooner. Plumbean, -eous, l. like lead. Plume,
the color of a hawks feathers. Pluming, dressing up the Feathers, or pulling
them off. Plume-striker, a Parasite, brushing the Feathers from your clothes.
Plumi^erous, l. feather-bearing. Plumtuous, o. for plenteous. Plumosity, l.
fullness of Feathers. Plunder, D. to rob or spoil (as Soldiers) first used 1642.
Plural, -litive, containing many. Plurality, l. Moreness, the having more than
one. Pluries, the third Writ issued after the Original Capias and Sicut alias.
Plurifarious, l. of diverse fashions. Plus ne pourroye, ^. I could do no more.
Plutarch, a famous Philosopher of Ch^ronea. Pluto, the God of Hell and Riches,
who (they say) first taught the use of money. Pluto's helmet makes men
invisible. Pluvial, a Priests Vestment or Cope, also as Pluvious, l. rainy.
Ply, So. to boil (as a pot.) Plymouth, as Plimmouth. Plymton Mary's, a town in
Devonshire. Pneumatical, g. belonging to wind or spirits. Pneumaticks, books of
Pneumology, g. a Discourse of Winds or Spirits. Pnigitis, a kind of black
Earth. Po, the largest river of Italy. Pocillator, l. a Cupbearer. Pocklington,
a town in Yorkshire. Pocket of wool, half a Sack. Poco a poco, Sp. by little
and little. Poculent, l. drinkable. Podagrical, gouty-footed. Podarge, a swift
Mare, on which Zephyrus begat Achilles's horses. Podesta, I. a Venetian
Governor of Cities. Podimetry, g. a measuring by the foot. Podolia, a Province
in Poland. Poesy, g. Poetry, a Poets work. Poem, g. a Copy of verses.
Poetaster, a sorry Poet. Poile, o. Apulia in Italy. Poinard, f. a Dagger.
Point, f. the plight one is in, also rich needle work. Point Blank, punctually,
hitting the white or nail on the head. At Point devise, o. exactly. Point of
Land, the sharpness of any head-land at Sea. Points of the Compass, 32
divisions of the wind. Point the Cable, undo the end and lay it over again with
synnet, marling, etc. Pointel, o. a writing pen, or pencil. Poitrel, f. as
Pectoral. Polein, picks set in the forepart of shoes and tied up to the knees
with Silver or Gold chains, forbidden by Edw. 4 th. Poles, o. for Paul's.
Poland, see Polonians. Polarity, a being Polar, -ry, belonging to the Poles, l.
the (North and South) ends of the imagined axel-tree whereon the heavens move;
also heaven. Polaquia, a Province of Poland. Polemark, g. an Athenian Lord
Marshal in the Field. Polemi^al, g. warlike, also controverted. Polemicks,
treatises of war, also disputations. Policies of assurance or ens-*
Assecurationes, Instruments between the Merchant-Adventurer and him that (upon
certain considerations) Ensurers the safe arrival of Ship or goods. Politics,
Treatises of Polity, -cy, g. Government (of Church or sta^e.) Political,
belonging thereto. Politician, a Statesman. Polive, o. a pulley. Politure, l.
polishing, neatness. Deed Poll, a single deed unindented. Pollard, an old coin
forbidden, a Codfish, a Stag (having musen'd or cast his head) a sort of fine
bran, also as Pollenger, a tree that has been usually topt. Poll, o. a head.
Pollicar, l. belonging to a thumb or Inch. Pollicitation, l. a free promising.
Pollinarious, l. belonging to meal or fine flower. Pollinctor, l. an embalmer.
Pollincture, an embalming. Polonians, Polanders, Poles, the people of Poland, a
Kingdom bordering on Turkey. Poltron, f. a rascal or Coward. Polverine,
Rochetta, Levant ashes for the making of glasses. Polychre^ts, g. things of a
various use. Polychreston, g. a medicine of much use. Polycrates, a Tyrant of
Samos, who found his ring (let fall into the Sea the day before) in the belly
of a fish; crucified at last by Orontes the Persian. Polydamas, Son of Antenor
who with ( Aeneas) betrayed Troy to the Greeks. Polygamy, g. a being married to
many at the same time. Polygarchy, g. a Government by many. Polyglot, g. of
many languages. Polygony, the herb Knot-grass, also a being Polygone, g. of
many corners. Polygraphy, g. a writing in diverse manners. Polyhistor, g. he
that knows and describes many things. Polyhymnia, -lymnia, one of the Muses.
Polyloquent, speaking much. Polymathists, g. men skilled in (or treatises of)
many disciplines. Polymorphean, g. having many shapes or forms. Polyphagian, g.
a great eater. Polypharmacal, g. having many medicines. Polypheme, -^^us, a
giant with one eye, which Ulysses put out. Polyphon, g. [an instrument with] a
multiplicity of sounds. Polypragmon, g. one that is Polypragmatick, very
pragmatical. Polyptote, g. having many cases or terminations. Polypus, the fish
Pourcontrel or many-feet, also a Noli me tangere in the Nose. Polysyllable,
-bical, g. having many syllables. Polysyndeton, g. a superfluity of
conjunctions. Pomace, pugs, must, the dross of Cyder-pressings. Pomada, see
Pommad^ Pomander, (q. Pomamber, D.) a ball of perfumes. Pomarious, belonging to
a Pomary, l. an Orchard or apple-loft. Pomatum, l. Cider. Pomegranate, a
shell-fruit (chiefly of Granata in Spain) full of grains or kernels. Pomel, o.
round [as an apple.] Pomelygrise, o. (s. Gris pommil^) dapple-gray.
Pome-paradise, a John-apple. Pomerania, between Sweden and Brandenburgh.
Pomerellia, part of Poland. Pomeridian, Postm-, afternoon. Pomey, a green apple
(in Heraldry) Consecrate to Venus. Pomfret, Pontfract, Kirby (in Yorkshire)
whose bridge brake with the multitudes accompanying William Archbishop of York,
at his return from Rome. Pomiferous, l. bearing Pomes, l. apples, pears, plums,
etc. Pommade, f. Pomatum, -to, a sweet ointment, also as Pomada, a trick in
vaulting. Pomaery, l. the precincts without the town-walls. Pomona, the Goddess
of Orchards. Pompatick, done with Pomp, l. state or solemnity. Pompets, f.
Printers Ink-balls or Ball-stocks. Pompey, a brave Roman General, put to flight
by Caesar (in the Civil wars) at Pharsalia. Pompous, l. stately. Pomum Adami,
Adams ^it, the protuberance of the Throat. Ponderiz^ to ponder or weigh.
Ponderity, -rosity, a being Ponderous, l. heavy, weighty. Pone, a Writ to
remove a cause from an inferior Court to the Common Bench. Pone per vadium, a
writ willing the Sheriff to take surety for ones appearance. Ponendis in
assisis, a writ directing the Sheriff what kind of persons ought to be
empanneld. Ponendum in Halliam, a writ for a Prisoner to be bailed. Ponendum
figillum ad exceptionem, a writ willing the Justices to set their seals to
exceptions brought by Defendants. Pont a Mouson, a town in Lorrain. Pont du
Guard, three bridges (on the river Gardon) one over another. Pontage, a
Contribution (or Toll) toward the maintaining or rebuilding of bridges.
Pontibus reparandis, a writ commanding the repair of a bridge. Pontick,
belonging to Pontus, a part of Asia. Pontick nuts* small-nuts. Pontifical,
-cial, belonging to a Pontif, -fex, l. a Bishop or Prelate. In his
Pontificalibus, Episcopal Ornaments, richest attire. Pool, a town in
Dorcetshire. Pool, o. Poland (plain-land.) Pool-evil, a swelling between the
Ears and Nape of the [horses] neck. Poop, the uppermost part a-stern of the
Ships hull. Poops, No. Gulps (in drinking.) Popelet, -lot^, o. a puppet or
young Wench. Popelin, l a little sinical darling. Popere, o. a bodkin. Popinal,
l. belonging to Popination, a haunting the Popi^a, l. a Victualling-house or
Tavern. Poping^y, a greenish parret, also Symphonia, an herb of that color.
Poplemans, Hobgoblins, from Popleman, (-or Popielus) a Polonian Tyrant.
Poplitick, belonging to the ham. Poplitick vein, the Garter-vein. Poppaean Law
(among the Romans) against a single life. Popped, o. dressed fine. Populace, f.
the same as Populacy, the vulgar or meaner sort of people. Populaeon, g. an
ointment of Poplar. Popularity, a being Popular, l. [beloved] of the common
people. Population, l. a wasting or unpeopling. Populiferous, l. bearing
poplar-trees. Populosity, a being Populous, l. full of people. Porcary, l. a
Swine-sty. Porcelane, the Chalky earth (beaten and steeped in water) of which
they make the China-dishes. Poraile, o. base, beggarly. Porcine, l. hoggish.
Porculation, l. a fatning of hogs. Porcupine, a beast that shoots her bristles
at the dogs. Porosity, a being Porose, -rous, l. full of Pores, l. very little
holes. Porpoise, Phocaena, a duskish fish foretelling storms by approaching the
shore. Porphyretick, belonging to purple, or to Porphyry, a fine streaked
Marble, of which is made the Porphyry-Chair, wherein the Pope is inaugurated.
Porrection, l. a stretching out. Port, put the helm to Larboard or the left
side. Port-vein, the carrying vein seated in the liver. Portable, l. which may
be carried. Portate, l. a bearing or bringing. Portcullis, f. a Gate made to
fall or slip down. Portegue, -tugaise, f. a gold coin worth 3 pound, 10 s.
Portemote, Sa. a Court held in Port-towns. Portend, l. to betoken.
Portentifical, working wonders. Portentous, l. monstrous, betokening some ill
event. Porters of the Verge, Vergers, bearing white wands before the Judges.
Portglaive, f. a Sword Bearer. Portgreve, Sa. the Governor of a Port-town, and
of London before the Two Bailiffs who preceeded the Mayor granted by King John.
Portguid^n, f. the Troops Corne^. Portioners, -narij, the several Ministers
that serve one Parsonage alternately. Portmanteaeu, f. a Cloak-bag. But our
Portmantle is of leather. Portmen. Inhabitants of the Cinque ports, also the 12
Burgesses of Ipswich. Porto, a town that gave name to Portugal, a Kingdom
bounded with Spain and the Western Ocean. Porto bello, St. Philip, a strong
town in America. Portos, Porthose, o. a Breviary or service book. Portpain, f.
a towel carrying bread for the Table at Court. Portsale, the sale of fish so
soon as it arrives in the haven; also a public sale of things to them that bid
most. Portsouth, o. Southwark. Portsmouth, a town in Hantshire. Posade, f. the
lighting down of Birds, also any resting or resting place. Pose, o. for
suppose. Pose, a rheum stopping the nose and hindering the speech. Position, l.
a foundation [upon which an argument is ^^ilt.] Posna, a City of lower Poland.
Possessive, -sorry, l. belonging to Possession, l. property, or ^^tual
enjoyment. Possed, o. tossed, pushed. Possown, an Indian beast receiving her
young ones (on occasion) into a bag under her belly. Possibility, a being
Possible, l. able to be done. Post di^m, the Sheriffs penalty (4d. to the
Custos bre^ium) for returning a writ after the day assigned. Post disseisin, a
writ for him that had recovered Lands, (...): and is disseised again. Post
fine, a duty belonging to the King, for a fine formerly acknowledged. Post
term, 20 d. taken by the Custos brevium of the Court of Common Pleas, for
filing any writ after the ^erm. Post o. Power. Postea, a Record of the
proceedings upon a trial by Nisi prius. Posteriority, a being or coming after.
He that holds of two Lords, holds of the first by priority, of the last by
Posteriority. Posteriors, l. the back-parts. Posthumian, belonging to a
Posthume, l. a Child born after the Fathers death. Posthume (or Posthumous)
works, published after the Authors death. Postick, l. being behind. Postile,
(q. appostile, f. a small addition to a greater discourse) a short exposition
on the Gospel. Postillon, f. a guide or Post-boy; also he that rides one of the
first Coach-horses. Postliminious, belonging to Postliminie, -niage, l. the
return of one thought to be dead, restored to his house by a hole through the
wall. Postmeridian, l. done in the afternoon. Postnate, l. born after. Postome,
o. Impostume. Postpone, -pose, l. to set behind, to flight. Postposure, a
setting behind or esteeming less. Postriduan, l. done the next day after.
Postscript, an addition at the end of a writing. Postvene, l. to come after.
Postventional, coming after. Postulatory, belonging to a Postulate, l. a
request or demand. Postulate, Fundamental principles (in any science) taken for
granted. Pot, a headpiece. Potable, l. fit to drink. Potashes, made of the
best wood ashes (for Soap.) Pottacco, Sp. a small Sea-vessel. Potation, l. a
drinking. Pote, No. to push or put out. Pote the clothes off, No. kick them
off. Potatoes, Indian roots of great virtue. Potent (in Heraldry) the top of a
croutch. Potent, -ntial, powerful. Potentials, things apt to give power or
strength. Potentates, Potest-, men in authority and power. Potosi, a town in
Peru, having the best Silver Mines. Potorious, l. drinky. Potton, a town in
Bedfordshire. Potulent, l. drinkable. Pouches, small bulk-heads in the hold (to
keep up Cor^ etc.) Poud, Ss. a boil or ulcer. Pouldavis, Oulderness,
Medrinacles, course Canvas. Pounce, sp. to jag or cut in and out. Pounces,
Hawks claws. Poundage, a subsidy granted the King (of twelve-pence in the
pound) of all merchandise imported or exported. Pour fair proclamee, etc. a
writ commanding the Mayor etc. to proclaim that none cast filth into ditches or
other places adjoining. Pourcontrel, as Polypus. Pourmenade, f. a walk.
Pourpartie, the division of Parceners Land. Pourpresture, an encroachment, or
any thing done to the Nuisance of the Kings Tenants. Poursuivant, f. a follower,
also a Kings messenger on special occasions. Poursuivants at arms, Blew-mantle,
Rouge-cross, Rouge-dragon and Percullis, attending (and commonly succeeding)
the Heralds. Pourtraicture, the drawing a Pourtract, -ict, f. a draught,
picture or resemblance of any thing. Pourveyance, the work of a Pourveyor, an
Officer providing Corn and victuals [for the Kings house.] Powk, o. for pug.
Power, o. stare, pore. Power of the County, -posse Comitatus, the aid and
attendance of all above the age of 15 (that are capable of bearing Arms) when
any force is used in opposition to the execution of justice. Poynaunte, o.
pricking. Poynings Law, an Act of Parliament in Ireland, 10. H. 7. (Sir Edw.
Poynings being Lieutenant) making all English Statutes (to that time, but none
made since) of force in Ireland. Prae-, is (in English) most commonly written
Pre-. Practick, -call, belonging to Practice, or actual exercise. Pragmatic, Sp.
a Proclamation; also an agreement between a secular Prince and a Bishop.
Pragmatical, g. expert in law business, or (as now it is used) busy about other
men's affairs. Prague, the Metropolis of Bohemia. Prancer, c. a horse.
Prandicle, l. a breakfast or little dinner. Pransorious, l. belonging to
dinner. Prattily, No. softly. Prats, c. Thighs. Pratical, belonging to
Pratique, I. practice, also a license to traffic. Prating-cheat, c. a tongue.
Pratum falcabile, Meadow-grounds. Pravity, l. naughtiness. Preamble, a tedious
preface. Prebendary, an Assistant to the Bishop, he that receives a Prebend, l.
a portion allowed the Members of a Cathedral Church, also the place. Prebendal,
belonging thereto. Prebition, l. a giving or offering. Precaution, l.
fore-warning, fore-^ight or being aware. Precariae, bind-daies (for bidden
days) days works which some Tenants are to give the Lord in harvest.
Precarious, granted by entreaty, only so long as the other pleases.
Precedential, belonging to Precedence, a going before, an excelling. Precedent,
foregoing. Precedent, an Example. Precellence, -cy, Excellency. Precention, the
flourish or Entrance of a Song. Precentor, the Chantor, that begins the tune.
Prece partium, the continuance of a Suit by the consent of both parties.
Preceptive, belonging to precepts. Preceptor, a Schoolmaster. Preceptories,
benefices that were held by the better sort of Templars. Precidaneous, going,
Cut or killed before. Precincts, bounds. Precipice, a downright descent.
Precipitate, to cast down headlong, do a thing rashly, also Red Mercury, a
corroding powder. Preco^ity, a being too early [in ripening.] Precognition,
foreknowledge. Preconious, belonging to commendation, or the Common Crier.
Preconsultors, Preadvisers, a College at Venice. Precontract, a former
bargain. Precursor, a forerunner. Predatory, belonging to Predation, robbing.
Preddy [ship, Ordinance, etc.] ready [for fight.] Predecessors, Ancestors.
Predestination, fore-appointment. Predial, -itory, belonging to Lands, Farms or
Manors. Predial tithes, of things growing from the ground. Prediator, a Lawyer
expert in Actions real or concerning Lands. Predicables, Porphyries 5 terms,
Attributes of all things, Genus, Species, Differentia, Proprium and Accidens.
Predicaments, Ten General places, in which every limited Nature is disposed,
viz. Substance, Quantity, Quality, Relation, Action, Passion, Where, When,
Situation and Habit. Predicate, l. to publish or preach, also that which is
Predicated, spoken or affirmed of the Subject. Prediction, l. a foretelling.
Predominant, bearing rule. Preeminence, right of excellency. Pre^mption, the
first buying. Prees, a town in Shropshire. Pre^xistence, a being before.
Preexistent, being before. Preface, a speech preparatory to the Discourse.
Prefe, o. for proof. Prefecture, the Office or jurisdiction of a Prefect, a
Governor of a City or Province. Preference, advancement. Prefigurate, to
foreshew by signs. Prefinition, a fore-determination. Prefix, to fasten before,
also to appoint [a time.] Prefract, obstinate. Pregnancy, a being Pregnant. big
with child, also full, copious, ripe. Pregression, a going before.
Pregustation, a tasting before. Preignotary, as Pronotary Prejudicate,
fore-judged. Prejudice, rash judgment before trial, also harm. Prejudicial,
hurtful. Prelal, belonging to the Printers press. Prelation, a setting before.
Prelature, the same, also a Prelateship. Prelate, the Governor of a
[Cathedral] Church. Prelections, Lectures. Preliminary, as L^minary. Prelude,
-dium, a pro^m or Entrance, and (in Music) a Voluntary or flourish before a
song or lesson. Prelusion, the same. Premature, too soon ripe. Premeditate,
think beforehand. Premious, rich in gifts. Premise, to speak something by way
of Preface or principle. Premises, things spoken before. Premission, a sending
before. Premium, a reward [at School.] the money* given for ensuring a ship,
etc. Premonstrate, foreshew. Praemunire, (q. praemonere) imprisonment and loss
of goods. Premonition, a fore-warning. Premunition, a fore-arming. Prender, (f.
Prendre) the power of taking a thing before it is offered. Prender de Baron, an
Exception disabling a Woman from pursuing an appeal of Murder against the
killer of her former husband. Prenomination, a forenaming. Prenotion, a
fore-knowing. Prenuncious, foretelling. Prenuntiate, to foreshew. Preoccupate,
prevented, taken aforehand. Preominate, to presage. Preordain, to ordain
before. Preordinate, foreordained. Prepensed, f. forethought. Preponderate, l.
to weigh more or before. Prepose, to set before. Preposition, a part of speech
set before other parts. Preposterous, contrary to order. Preproperous,
overhasty. Prepuce, the foreskin. Prerogative, a peculiar Authority or
Preeminence. Prerogative Court [of Canterbury] wherein are proved the wills of
those who had goods of any considerable value (usually 5 l.) out of the Diocese
wherein they died. In York it is called the Exchequer. Presage, to Guess or
foretell. Presbyterian, belonging to Presbytery, Government of the Church by
Presbyters, g. Priests, Elders. Prescience, l. foreknowledge. Prescind, to cut
before, to divide or break first. Prescribe, to appoint or limit. Prescription,
appointing, limiting, also a long customary course or use of a thing. Presen,
o. to tread on. Presentaneous, present, effectual. Presentation, the Patrons
offering a Clerk to the Bishop to be instituted in a Benefice of his gift.
Presentee, the Clerk presented. Presentment, a mere denunciation of the Jurors
or other Officers (without information) of an offense inquirable in that Court.
Preside, to be over or oversee. Presidial, belonging to a President, an
O^erseer, and sometime as Precedent. Presidary, as Presidial, also belonging to
a Presidy, a Garrison or Succor. Pressure, an oppression or grief. Pressed (f.
ready) a duty paid by the Sheriff upon his account in the Exchequer.
Prest-money, as Impressed-. Pres^^ign, a Town in Radnorshire. Prestation-Money,
paid by Archdeacons yearly to the Bishop. Prestiges, delusions, impostures.
Prestigiation, a juggling. Prestigious, Jugler-like. Preston, a town in
Lancashire, and about forty more. Presto, Sp, quickly. Presumption, arrogance,
also cause of judging so or so. Presuppose, to suppose beforehand. Pretense,
-text, an excuse. Pretensed, pretended. Pretension, a laying claim.
Preterition, a passing by. Pretermission, an omitting. Preternatural, besides
nature. Pretorian, belonging to a Praetor, a General, Chief Justice, Consul or
Mayor. Pretorian guard, Ten thousand, who were to the Emperor, as the
Janissaries to the Turk, and Mamalukes to the Sultan of Egypt. Prevalency, a
being Prevalent, prevailing, powerful. Prevarication, double-dealing.
Prevaricator in Cambridg (as Terrae filius at Oxford) makes an ingenious
Satirical commencement speech. Prevenient, -ventional* coming before. Previd,
o. hardy. Previdence, a foreseeing. Previous, going before. Prevy, o. tame.
Priam, -mus, the Son of Laomedon, King of Troy, in whose time the City was
sacked by the Greeks. Priapism, -mus, Erection without lust, from Priapus, the
lascivious God of Gardens. Prich, No. thin drink. Pricker, a Huntsman on
horseback. Pricket, a brocket, spitter or Male Deer a full year old. Pricking,
a hares footing ^n the dirt. Prick sour, o. a rank rider. Prick-timber,
Enonymus, Spindle-tree. Pridian, l. of the day before. Pride (for Lamprid)
gayel, a Rent paid the Lord of Rodeley in Gloucestershire, for fishing for
Lampreys in Severn. Pridwen, Kings Arthurs shield, with the picture of the
Virgin Mary. Prigging, c. riding. Prigs, o. Thieves. Prig-napper, c. a
horse-stealer. Prig-star, c. a rival in Love. Priket, o. a small wax-Candle.
Primary, f. the dignity of a Prill, o. (q. prickle) to gore. Primate, l, a
Metropolitan. Primage, the Sailers due at the loading and going out of a Ship
from any Haven. Prime, l. first* chief, large, also the first hour of the day,
and one of the Roman Canonical hours (from 6 to nine,) also the Golden Number,
and (in surveying) 19 inches and 5^ parts of an inch. Primer, the Office of the
blessed Virgin, divided into seven parts, 1. Matines and Lands. 2. The Prime.
3d. 6th. None (or ninth hour) 6. Vespers (or Evensong) 7. the Compline. Primero
and Primavista, I. two old games at Cards. Primevous, l. of the first age.
Primices, l. first fruits. Primier Seisin, was a branch of the Kings
Prerogative whereby he had the first possession of all Lands and Tenements
holden of him in chief. Promigerious, l. coming naturally or orginally of it
self. Priming, the first ground color [in painting the Ship. Priming-Iron, to
pierce the Carthrage, through the touchhole. Primitial, belonging to
first fruits. Primitive, l. first, ancient, not derived of others.
Primogeniture, l. the first birth. Primordial, [belonging to] the first
beginning. Primum Mobile, l. the first mover, the tenth Orb. Lord Prince, the
Kings eldest Son, now called. Prince of Wales, since Edward 2d. who was born at
Carnarvan. Principality, Sovereignty. Prindle, as Croft. Princock, No. (q.
praecox or c^ckrel,) a youngster too soon ripe-headed, a pert and forward
fellow. Priors Aliens, French Governors of Religious houses erected here for
Outlandishmen, suppressed by Hen. 5. Priority, l. a being before. Prioress, the
Governess of a Nunnery. Prisage, f. a prising, also the Kings custom or share
of lawful prizes (usually 1/10) Prisage of Wines, as Butlerage. Priscilla,
little Prisca (l. old.) Priscillianists, Heretics ( An. 388.) who followed.
Priscillianus, he held a good and an evil God Creators of all things, denied
the Trinity, etc. Prise, that which is taken of the Kings Subjects by the
Purveyors. Prism, g. any saw-dust, also a solid triangle, hence* Prismatical
glasses, representing variety of colors. Pristine, l. ancient accustomed.
Pristis, l. a long and slender fish, also such a Ship. Privado, Sp. a favorite
or private friend. Privation, l. a depriving or taking away. Privative,
depriving, etc. Privilege, l. a liberty granted besides the Course of Common
Law. Privity, f. private familiarity. Privy, (in Law) a partaker, or he that
has an interest in any action or thing. Privy to, acquainted with. Privy
Artery, passing from the descendent branch of the great Artery, and bestowing
it self among the privities. Privy Seal, used after the Privy signet and before
the Great Seal (and in some smaller things that do not pass the Great Seal at
all.) Prize, that which is taken by conquest, letters of Marque, Robbery, etc.
any kind of booty; as also the Combat or contention for it. Probability* l.
likelihood, Probate of Testaments, proving of Wills (in the spiritual Court)
either in common form by the Executors oath, or (to avoid future debate) by
witnesses also. Probatick pond, g. the Sheeps pool, Bethesda. Probatical,
-ional, belonging to Probation, l. a proving. Probatine piscant, o. the Sheeps
pool. Probationer, a trier, also he that is to be tried or approved before he
be admitted. Probator, a prover or App-, who was to prove his allegation by
battle or the Country, as the Appealed would. Probatory, l. the place or
instrument of proof. Probatum est, l. it is approved. Probe, (f. curette) an
instrument to search the depth of wounds. Probity, l. honesty. Problematical,
belonging to a Problem, g. a hard question. Proboscide, g. the Elephants
trunk. Procacity, l. Malepertness. Procatartick cause, foregoing or causing
another cause. Procedendo, a Writ sending a suit back to the Inferior Court
whence it had been called. Procerity, a being Procere, l. tall. Procers, Irons
hooked at the ends used by Glass-makers. Process, all proceeding at law, and
particularly that by which a Man is called into any Temporal Court. Procession,
a going forward, also a visiting the bounds of the parish in Rogation-week.
Processional, belonging to process or proceeding. Processum continuando, a writ
for the continuing of a process, after the death of the Chief Justice, etc.
Prochein amay, f. he that is next of kin to a Child in his Nonage. Prochronism,
g. a setting down too much in computing of time. Prochyta, a Tyrrhene Isle
arising (they say) from a Mountain of the Isle Inarime thrown into the sea by
an Earthquake. Prociduous, belonging to Procidence, l. a falling down.
Procinct, l. readiness. Pro^livity, a being Proclive, l. eas^y, apt, enclining.
Procon^ul, l. a Deputy Consul. Procrastinate, l. to delay. Procreate, l. to
beget. Pro confesso, for granted, as a bill is taken after a fourth in
sufficient answer. Proctors, soliciting other men's business, gathering their
tithes, etc. Proctors of the Clergy, chosen and appointed to sit in the
Convocation house in time of Parliament. Proctors of the University, two chosen
yearly to see goods Orders kept. Proculcation, l. a trampling under foot.
Procurations, proxies, paid the Bishop or Archdeacon yearly, in respect of
Visitation. Procurator, l. a Proctor, and (at Venice) the second person in
dignity. Procyon, g. the lesser dog star. Prodigality, l. a being Prodigal,
wastfull, riotous. Prodigence, l. unthriftiness. Prodigious, belonging to a
Prodigy, l. a monstrous, wonderful and strange sight. Proditorious, l.
Traitor-like. Prodrome, g. a forerunner. Product, -cate, brought forth out of
another. Production, l. a bringing forth or lengthening. Proecthesis, the
producing a reason to clear or defend himself. Proeme, g. a preface. Prof,
Prove, an Enquest. Profectitions, belonging to Profection l. a going. Profer.
the time appointed for the Accounts of Sheriffs (and other Officers) in the
Exchequer, twice a year. Profession, the entering into any Religious Order.
Professor, l. a public Reader. Proficient, l. profiting, or one that has
profited. Profile, I. the picture of a thing drawn sidewaies. Profligate, to
put to flight, also debauched. Profluence, l. an abundance. Profundure, f.
-dity, l. a being Profound, l. very deep. Profuse, l. lavishing. Profusion, a
pouring out lavishly. Progenitors* Forefathers. Progeny, l. an Offspring.
Progne, Philomela's Sister. Prognosticate, l. to foretell. Prognostics, boding
sign^. Progression, l. a going on. Progressional, belonging thereto*
Prohibition, a forbidding or hindering. Prohibitio de vasto, etc. a writ
forbidding the waste of land in controversy. Prohibitory, -tive, forbidding.
Projection, l. a casting forward, or a contriving. Projectitious, l. exposed,
cast out. Pro indiviso, the possession of Coparceners before partition.
Projecture, l. the jutting out of buildings. Prolation, l. a pronouncing
Prolatation, l. a deferring. Proleptical, belonging to^ Prolepsis, -sie, g. a
conceiving in the mind before hand, a preventing what another thought to
allege. Proletaneous, -arian, -ious, l. having many Children and little to
maintain them, vulgar. Prolification, a making Prolifical, l. fruitful.
Prolixity, l. a being Prolix, liberal, tedious. Prologue, g. the speech before
a play. Proloquutor, l. The Speaker [of either Convocation House.] Prolusion,
l. as Preludium. Prolyte, g. a Licentiate that has studied the Law 4 years.
Promenade, f. as Pourmenade. Promise, f. a promise. Prometheus, Son to
Jape^us, stealing fire from heaven to put life in his Image, was chained to
Caucasus, where a Vulture gnawed his liver. Prominence, a being Prominent, l.
jutting out or over others. Promiscuous, l. mingled. Promissary, to whom a
promise is made. Promissory, l. belonging to a promise. Promontory, l. a hill
butting into the sea. Promoters, -mooters, who (for reward) complain of
Offenders. Promptitude, a being Prompt, l. ready, quick. Promptuary, l. a
buttery. Promulgation, l. a publishing. Prone, l. with face downward.
Pronephew, l. a Nephews son. Pronotary, as Protono-. Prooem, as Proeme.
Propagate, l: to spread abroad, or plant young vines. Pro partibus liberandis,
a writ for the partition of Lands between Coheirs. Propelled, thrust forward.
Propension, -ity, l. a being. Propense, heavy, inclined. Properate, l. to make
have. Property, the highest right a man can have to a thing, also a natural
quality. Properties, the Accoutrements of Actors. Prophecies (in Law) Wizzardly
foretellings. Prophetize, to prophesy, or foretell things to come. Prophecical,
belonging thereto. Prophylactie, g. preservative. Propination, l. a drinking to
one. Propinquity, l. nearness. Propitiate, l. to appease by Sacrifice.
Propitiation, atonement. Propitiatory, belonging thereto, also the Mercy-seat
or place where God was Propitious, favorable. Propontis, the sea from the
streights of Hell^spont to Thracian Bosphorus. Proportion, l. answerableness.
Proposition, l. a sentence or matter propounded. Propounders, seems to be
Monopolists or else Projectors. Propraetor a Deputy Praetor. Proprietary, -tor,
f. the owner, whose the Propriety is. Propudious, l. shameful. Propugnacle, l.
a fortress. Propugnator, l. a stiff maintainer. Propulsation, l. a driving
back. Propulsory, serving thereto. Proreption, l. a creeping on Prorex, l. a
Viceroy. Proritate, l. to stir up. Proroked himself, o. hid himself in a Rock.
Prorogued, l. put off for some time, but not ended. By Prorogation (in open
Court) there is a Session, and then such Bills as had not Royal assent, must
(the next assembly) begin again: But in Adjournment (or Continuance) there is
no Session, and therefore all things continue in their former state. For every
several Session of Parliament is (in Law) a several Parliament. Prosaick, l.
being in or belonging to Prose, not verse. Proscission, l. a cutting up.
Proscription, a making one Proscript, l. an Outlaw, exposed to every man's
sword. Prosecutor, who follows a Cause in another name. Proselyte, g. a
stranger converted to our Religion (formerly to the Jewish.) Proserpine, the
Daughter of Jupiter and Ceres, ravished to hell by Pluto. Prosimetrical, g. part
prose and part verse. Prosodian, one skilled in Prosody, g. the Art of accenting
aright. Prosopopaeia, g. a feigning of a person to speak. Prospect, l. a view
afar off. Prospicuous, l. fair to behold. Prospicience, l. foresight.
Prosteanation, l. a laying flat. Prosthesis, g. an addition to the beginning of
a word. Prostitute, l. to let out the use of her body. Prostrate, l. to lay (or
lying) flat along. Prosyllogism, g. an auxiliary syllogism, to help the main
one. Protatick, belonging to Protasis, g. a proposition; also the first part of
a Comedy. Protection, l. a guarding or being guarded. Protelation, l. a driving
away. Protend, l. to stretch forth. Protervity, l. frowardness. Protesilaus,
going to the Trojan war (contrary to the Oracles advice) was slain by Hector.
Protest a bill of Exchange, declare (on the Exchange) that you are not
satisfied by his Factor, and the Law of Merchants allows you satisfaction out
of his goods, if he have any in the Realm. Protestants, so called at Spires in
Germany (1529) from their Protestation, l. an open declaration of ones mind,
also a form of pleading when one does not directly affirm or deny the thing
alleged. Proteus, a Sea-God who (they say) turned himself into all kind of
shapes. Prothonotary, as Proto-. Protocol, g. the first draught of a Deed, etc.
also the upper title-part of a leaf. Protofole, g. the first leaf.
Proto-^orestarius, was the Chief Justice of Windsor Forest. Protolicia,
supposed to be Prudhow Castle in Northum^erland. Protologie, g. a preface.
Protomartyr, g. the first [Gospel] Martyr, St. Stephen. Protonotary, a chief
Clerk, (three in the Common Pleas and one in the Upper-Bench.) Protoplast, g.
the first formed, Adam. Prototype, g. the first pattern. Prototypographer, g.
the chief Printer. Protozeugma, Zeugma with the verb in the beginning.
Protraction, l. a deferring. Protractor, l. a prolonger; also a surveying
instrument. Protreptick, g. Doctrinal. Protrude, l. to thrust forward.
Protrusion, a thrusting, etc. Protuberant, l. swelling out Protype, g. a
pattern for moulds. Provango, a whale-bone-instrument, to cleanse the Stomach.
Proveditores, l. the Venetian Overseers joined to the general. Provedore, -vid-
the Governor of Zant Isle. Prover, as Approver. Provence, a large French
Province. Prover^ial, belonging to a Proverb, l. an old pithy saying.
Provident, l. wary. Provincial, belonging to a Province, the Archbishops
jurisdiction. United Provinces, Gelderland, Holland, Zealand, Zutphen,
West-friezland, (Vtrecht) Over-Yssel, Groening. Provincial (among Friars) the
chief of their Order in such or such a Province. Provining, f. laying a branch
(of a vine, etc.) to take root. Provision, providing one with a Benefice.
Provisional, for a season, by way of foresight or Proviso, I. a caveat or
condition. Provisor, a pourveyor. Provocation, l. a stirring up or challenging.
Provocative, apt to provoke. Proul, to pil^er by night. Provost Marshal, an
Officer in the Navy, having charge of the Prisoners taken at Sea. Provostal,
belonging to a Provost, (f. prevost) the President of a College and several
other Officers in France. Prow, the forepart of a ship, or any jutting like
it; also (o.) honor, and profit. Prowess, f. courage. Proxy, a Proctors
warrant from his Client, also any deputy. Proxies, as Procurations. Proximity,
l. the greatest nearness. Proyns, o. as Prunes. Pruce, o. Borussla, Preusland,
Spruceland. Prudentiality, [an aptness to breed] prudence. Pruinous, l. frosty.
Prunel, sickle-wort. Prunella's, a restorative fruit, like small figs. Prunes,
[the hawk] picks and annoi^s her self. Prurient, l. itching. Pruriginous, l.
itchy. Prussia, part of Poland. Pru^enicks, Mathematical tables, dedicated to
Albert^^ Marquis of Brandenburgh and Duke of Prussia, 1551. Pry, o. for pray.
Psallocitharist, g. a finger to the harp. Psalm, g. a Divine Song. Psalmist,
the composer of it. Psalmody, g. a singing of Psalms. Psalmography, g. a
writing of Psalms. Psaltery, g. a shalm, (like a harp) with 10 strings.
Psephism, g. a Decree. Pseudodox, g. false glory, or falsely glorious.
Pseudography, g. false writing. Pseudologer, a practiser of Pseudologie, g.
lying. Pseudomancy, g. false divination. Pseudomartyr, g. a false Martyr or
witness. Pseudonymal, g. having a false name. Pseudoprophet, g. a false
Prophet. Psorophthalmy, g. an itching scurf on the eyebrows. Psychomachy, g. a
war of the soul [and body.] Ptisa^e, l. barley-broth. Ptolomaeus, the name of
several Egyptian Kings. Puberty, l. [the signs of] ripe age. Pubescent, growing
to ripe age. Public Faith, on which the Parliament raised money to to carry on
the war. Publican, l. a farmer of public Rents or Revenues. Publication, l. a
making common. Pucelage, l. Virginicy. Puckets, Ss. nests of Caterpillars.
Pucle-Church, a town in Glocestershire. Puddings, ropes nailed to the ends of
the yard-arms, to save the Robbins from galling. Pudhepec, (for Wu-) Sa. a
selling of Wood [in the Park, Forest, etc.] Pudibund, -dons, l. bashful.
Pudi^ity, l. Chastity. Pudor, l. shamefacedness. Pudzeld, as Woodgeld.
Puerility, l. childishness. Puerperous l. Childbearing. Pugil, l. half a
handful. Pugillation, the exercise of Pugils, l. Champions, fist-fighters.
Pugnacity, l. a desire of fighting. Pugnatory, l. belonging to a fighter.
Puisne, f. Younger, born after, puny. Puissancie, f. power. Pulchritude, l.
comeliness. Pulicine, l. belonging to a flea. Pulicosity, l. a being Pulicous,
full of fleas. Pullail, (f. poulaille) wildfowl. Pullation, l. a breeding
Chickens. Pullulate, l. to bud. Pullhely, a town in Carnarvanshire.
Pulmentarious, l. belonging to water gruel. Pulmonarious, l. diseased in the
lungs. Pulmonary, l. Lung-wort. Pulmonical, belonging to ^he lungs. Pulp, l.
the substantial (...) of any thing, also a Guttle-fish. Pulsation, l. a beating
upon. Pulsator, l. a striker. Pultifical, l. serving to make pottage or pap.
Pultrie, o. for poultry. Pulverisation, -izing, l. a reducing to powder.
Pulverulent, -reous, l. Dusty. Pumicate, l. to smooth with a Pumice stone, a
spungy stone, the scum of Etna and other burning hills. Pump-brake, the handle.
Pump dale, in which the water runs to the Scupper-holes. Pumpet-ball, as
Pompet. Punch, a mixture of Brandy, Water, Limons and Sugar. Punchion of wine,
(f. poinson) 80. gallons. Punctilio, I. a little Punct^, I. a point. Punctual,
l. exactly, to a hairs^breadth. Pundonnore (f. point d' honor) a bravado.
Punbrech, Sa. a breaking open the pound. Pungency, l. a pricking. Punick,
Carthaginian. Punick faith, falsehood. Puny, as Puisne. Punition, l. a
punishment. Pupil, l. the apple of the eye, also an Orphan under age and
tuition, also a Disciple of a Colledg-Tutor. Pur^eck, a demy-Island on which
stands Crof Castle in Dorsetshire. Purc^asing, the getting* a rope in by
haling, etc. It is easier (though longer) purchasing upon a block of three
sheevers than two. Pu^fle, (f. pourfile) a border or fringe. Purslew (in
Heraldry) all Furs used in Borders. Purgation, the clearing one self of a
crime. Purgatory, l. the Papists place of cleansing (by fire) between Death and
Heaven. Purgative, purging. Purification, l. a cleansing. Purificatory, the
little linen cloth that wipes the Chalice. Purification of the Virgin Mary,
Candlemas, February, 2. Purim, P. the feast of Lots kept for deliverance from
Haman. Puritans, a Ni^k-name of Calvinists. Purlue, (f. pur lieu) all that
space that is severed by perambulations from the ancient forest. Purlieu-man,
who (being able to spend 40 shillings per annum of free hold) is licensed to
hunt on his own ground within the Purlieu. Purloin, f. to pilfer. Purport, the
true meaning. Purpurean, l. of purple. Pu^presture, as Pour-. Purprisum, an
enclosure. Purrel, a list ordered (33 Eliz.) to be made at the end of Kersies.
Pursivant, as Pour-. Purtrey, o. for Pourtray. Purveyour, as Pour-. Purvieu,
(f. a pa^ent) the body of the Act, beginning with Be it enacted-. Purulent, l.
filthy, mattery. Pusillanimity, l. a being Pusillanimous, faint-hearted.
Pustulous, l. full of Pustules, blisters, pushes, Putage, f. Fornication [on
the woman's part.] Putative, l. supposed. Putatory, belonging to Putation, l.
pruning. Puteal, l. of a well. Putid, l. stinking. Putor, l. a stink. Putre (f.
puterie) Fornication. Putrescence, a rotting. Putrid, l. rotten, corrupt.
Putrefaction, l. rottenness. Puts over, [the Hawk] removes her meat from her
Gorge into her Bowels. Puttocks, small shrowds from the main to the
top-mast-shrowds, for the E^sie going into the top. Putty, a powder of calcined
tin) used by Artificers. Putura, (q. potura) a Custom claimed by some Keepers
and Bailiff, to take Mansmeat, horse-meat and Dogs meat gratis, wihin the
perambulation of the Forest or hundred. Pycar, Pyker, a kind of ship mentioned
31 Edw. 3. Pygmachy, g. a fighting with clubs or hurlbats. Pygmies, Mountainous
Indian dwarfs, said to have perpetual war with the Cranes. Pyladion, as
Piladion. Pynant, o. a starveling. Pyramidal, -dical, like a Pyramid, g. an
Egpptian building like a Spire-Steeple. Pyramidography, g. a treatise
concerning it. Pyrate, as Pirate. Pyre, g. a pile of wood, to burn the cor^s.
Pyrenaean hills, dividing France and Spain. Pyrites, g. the fire-stone.
Pyromancy, g. divination by fire. Pyroti^ks, g. burning medicines. Pyrotechny,
g. a making of fireworks. Pyrrhonian, belonging to Pyrrho, a Greek Sceptick
who thought nothing certain. Pyrrhonism, that Philosophy. Pyrrhus, King of
Epirus, slain (at the taking of Argos) by the fall of a Tile. Pythagorical,
belonging to Pythagoricism, the Tenet of Pythag^ras, Author of the
M^tempsychosis. Pythian games, in the honor of Apollo, who slew Python, a
monstrous serpent, also a prophesying spirit, and one possessed therewith.
Pythoness, a She-Python or Prophetess. Pythonical, belonging to or practicing
Pythonism, the art of prophesying by a Devilish spirit. Pyx, l. the vessel
containing the Roman Host, also an ancient yearly solemn weighing of Gold in
the Star Chamber.
Q.
QVintus, the fifth. Q. quasi, as if it were. Quab, a Water-weasel or Eel-pout.
Quack, D. Frivolous, trifling. Quacking cheat, c. a duck. Quack salver, D. a
Mountebank. Quad, D. Bad. Quadragenarious l. of 40 years. Quadragesimal,
belonging to lent or to Quadragesima [Sunday] the first in Lent (being about 40
days before Easter.) Quadran, f. a Sun-dial. Quadrain, f. a staff of 4 verses.
Quadrangular, like a Quadrangle, l. a 4 square figure. Quadrant, l. a quarter
of a circle or of any measure. Quadrantal, 4 fingers thick, also a figure like
a die. Quadrantata terrae, as Farding-deal. Quadra^, l. a square (to take the
distance or height of a place. Quadrat^, -tick, [made] 4 square. Quadrature, l.
a squaring. Quadricornous, l. with 4 horns. Quadriennial, of 4 years.
Quadrigamist, one four times married. Quadrigarious, belonging to a Coach (or
Coachman) with 4 horses. Quadrigenarious, of forty. Quadrilateral, of 4 sides.
Quadrin, f. Llard, a small coin, about a farthing. Quadringenarious, of four
hundred. Quadripartite, l. divided into 4. Quadrireme, l. a Gally of 4 oars on
a seat, or 4 men to an oar. Quadrisyllable, of 4 syllables. Quadrivial, l.
having 4 ways or turnings. Quadrugata terrae, a Teemland, tilled with 4
horses. Quadrupedal, l. with 4 feet. Quadrupedant, going on 4 feet.
Quadrupedian [Signs] representing four footed beasts Quadruple, l. 4 fold.
Quadruplation, a d^ubling 4 times. Quadruplicate, to fold or repeat a thing 4
times. Quae plura, was a writ to enquire what land there was more than was
found by th'Escheators inquisition. Quakenburg, a Town in Westphalia. Quakers,
friends, a sort of modern Enhtusiasts. Quaint gires, o. strange fits. Quale
jus, a writ for the Escheator to enquire (between Judgment and Execution)
whether the Clerk have right to recover, and there be no Collusion to defraud
the true Lord. Qualify, l. to make fit or quiet. Qualifications, Conditions.
Qualm, o. calmness, also the cry of Ravens. Quamdiu se been gesserii, a formal
clause in the gran^ of Offices; and is no more than the Law implies* if the
Office were granted for life. Quantum meruit, an Action of the Case, grounded
on a promise of paying a man so much as he should deserve. Quandary, (Qu'^n
diray-^e? f. what shall I say to't^?) a study or doubt what to d^. Quap, o. for
quake. Quaplod, a town in Lincolnshire. Quarantain, f. Lent, or any space of 40
days (of prayers, cessation of arms, or tarrying on Ship-bord when you come
from a place infected.) Quaranty, Sp. forty [days.] Quardecue, Quart d' eeu,
f. the fourth part of a [French] Crow^. Quare ejecit infra terminum, a writ for
a Lesse^ cast out before his time is expired. Quare impedit, a writ for one
disturbed in the right of his purchased Advowzon. Quare incumbravit, a writ
against the Bishop conferring a Benefice (within six months) whilst others are
contending for the right of presenting. Quare intrusit, etc. a writ that lay
against a Ward, marrying and entering on his Lands without the consent of his
Lord and Guardian. Quarrels, Querels, l. complaints, all Actions personal and
real. Quare non permittit, a writ for one that has right (for a turn) to
present. Quare non admisit, a writ against the Bishop refusing to admit his
Clerk who has recovered in a plea of Advowzen. Quare obstruxit, a writ for him
who cannot have his right in passing through his Neighbors ground. Quarentena
^a^enda, a writ for a widow to enjoy her Quarentene, -tine, 40 drys continuance
in the chief Mansion House of her deceased husband. Quareria, a stone-quarrey.
Quarrels, ^. arrow-heads. Quarril, f. 1 d. ob. the fourth part of a Spanish
Royal. Quarron, c. a body. Quarry, the fowl that is flown at and slain, also
the Hounds reward after hunting, and the Venison it self. Quart^^e [Ague,]
returning every fourth day. Quartary, the 4th. part of a Sextary, also a
quarter of a pound. Quartation, a separation into 4 parts. Quarter, 8 striked
bushels, also a piece of timber 4 square and 4 inches thick. Quarter Sessions,
a Court held (every quarter) by the Justices of Peace in every County.
Ships-Quarter, from the Steeridge to the Transom or fashion-piece.
Quarter-bullet, quartered in to four parts. Quarter Deck, over the Steeridg, as
far as the Masters Cabin. Quarter pierced, (in Heraldry) a square hole in the
middle of a Cross. Quartering, sailing with Quarter-winds, coming in abaft the
Mainmast shrowds just with the quarter, when all sails may draw together.
Quartile aspect, the distance of 3 (a quarter of 12) Signs. Quarto, with four
leaves in a sheet. Quartz, a kind of flint, with lead and Silver in it. Quash,
to annul or overthrow. Quassation, l. a shaking. Quater Cosins, f. fourth or
last Cosins, good friends. Quaternary, belonging to Quaternion, -ity, the
number of four, by which the Pythagoreans swore, because of the Elements and
name of God which in most languages consists of 4 letters. Quaviver, (q.
aqua-) a Sea-Dragon. Quaver (in Music,) half a Crochet. Queach, o. a quickset.
Quechord, (perhaps shovel board) a game prohibited, 17 Edward 4th. Queen-Gold, a
duty belonging to every Queen-Consort, upon diverse grants of the King. Queens
College (in Oxford) built by Philip the wife of Edward 3 d. who (in honor of
her) built Queenborough, a town in Kent. Quee^, (q. Quade) o. the Devil.
Queest, o. as Culver. Que estate, which estate. Que est le me s^^e, f. which is
the same thing. Queint, o. quenched, also strange. Quem reddiium reddat, a writ
to cause a Tenant to atturn, etc. Quercin^, -culane, l. Oken. Querela coram
Rege et Consilio, a writ calling one to justify a Complaint made before the
King and Council Querimonious, l. complaining. Queintises, o. devises. Queme,
Sa. to please. Querrour, o. a stone-miner. Quercy, a French Province. Quern, D.
a hand-mill. Querpo, as Cuerpo. Querulous, full of complaint. Query, (quaere) a
Question. Quest, Inquest, inquiry into misdemeanors (in the Ward.) Quest-men,
who are chosen and meet about Christmas to that purpose. Questor, l. a Public
Treasurer, also a Judge. Questuary, -rious, exercising a trade to gain thereby.
Questus est Nobis, a writ against him to whom the thing is alienated which
causes the Nuisance. Qui bien aim tard ^ublie, f. he that loves well, forgets
late. Qui est la? f. who is there? Quia improvide, a supersedeas granted where
a writ is erroniously sued out, etc. Quicksilver, a slimy water mixed with pure
white earth. Quiddity, the essence of a thing, also a Quirk or Subtle
question. Quiddanet, a Confection between a Syrup and Marmalade. Quidditative,
essential. Quid juris clamat, a writ for the Grantee of a reversion, when the
particular Tenant will not atturn. Quid pro quo, (...), one for another, a
mutual performance of Contracts. Quiescent, l. resting, not sounding.
Quietancia, as Acquiet-. Quie^us [est,] an acquittance given Accountants in the
Exchequer. Quietus est granted the Sheriff, discharges him of all accounts due
to the King. Quilibet quippe, the proportion every Bencher (of the Inner
Temple) pays at the Terms end for Battles or Exceedings. Quimpercorintin, a
City of lower Britany. Quinary, l. of five. Quincuncial, belonging to Quin^unx,
l. five ounces, also five trees (or more) so set together, that a regular
angularity and through prospect is left on every side. Quincupedal, of 5 foot.
Quindecimuir, one of the 15 Joint-Governours of a Commonwealth. Quingenarious,
of 500. Quinible, (q. whinable) a noble. Quinquagesima Sunday, Shrove-Sunday
(being about 50 days before Easter.) Quinquangle, 5 cornered. Quinque-libral,
of five pound. Quinquennal, -nial, of 5 years. Quinquepartite, divided into 5.
Quinque portus, the Cinque ports. Quinquereme, a ship of 5 oars on a side, also
a Galley of 5 men to an oar. Quinquevir, one of 5 in Joint-authority.
Quinquiplicate, to make it 5 times double. Quinsieme, Quinzime, f. the 15th day
after any feast; also the 15th part of every town in England, an ancient tax,
but not levied now without the Parliament. Quintage, [the laying out] a fifth
part (for younger Brethren) Quintain, f. a wedding-sport (in Shropshire, etc.)
running a-tilt with poles against a Quintin, a thick plank set fast in the
highway, etc. Quintal, as Kintal. Quintessential, belonging to Quintessence,
l. the virtue or purest substance extracted out of any thing. Quint-exact,
Quinto exactus, the last call of a Defendant, when if he appear not, he is
returned Outlawed. Quintile, July, the 5th [Month] from March. Quiniuple, l.
five-fold. Quinzain, f. fifteen days, or a staff of 15 verses. Quire, Queer,
c. base, roguish. Quirinal, belonging to Quirinus, Romulus. Qu^rister, as
Chorister. Quiritation, a complaining or calling for help. Quirites, Romans.
Quistron, o. a beggar. Quite-claim, a quitting of ones Claim or Title.
Quit-Rent, White-Rent, a small Rent of acknowledgment. Quitter, the dross of
tin. Quod Clerici non eligantur, a writ for a Clerk who (by reason of his land)
is like to be made Bailiff, etc. Quod Clerici beneficia^i, a writ exempting a
Clerk of the Chancery from contributing toward the Proctors of the Clergy in
Parliament. Quod et deforceat, a writ against him (or his heir) that took away
land recovered by a Tenant in Tail, Dower, or for Life. Quod, o. for quoth,
says. Quodlibetical, belonging to Quodlibets, Quirks or Quiddities,
School-Questions. Quodlibitaries, that follow their own fancies. Quod
permittat, a writ for his heir that is disseised of his Common of pasture,
against the heir of the Disse^sor. Quod persona nec prebendarij, etc. a writ
for Clerks distrained for their fifteenths. Quo Jure, a writ to compel one to
show by what right he challenges Common of pasture. Quo minus, a writ against
the Grantor making such wast in his woods that the Grantee cannot enjoy his
grant of House-bote and Hay-bote; or for any (that paies the King a fee-farm
Rent) against another for debt or damage. Quorum, Of which [Justices, He is to
be one.] Quotidian, l. daily. Quotient, (Quoties, l. how often?) the number
arising out of any Division. Quotted, Ss. Cloyed, glutted. Qu^ Warranto, a writ
against him that usurps a Franchise of the Kings; or him that intrudes as heir.
Quoyl, a rope laid round, one take over another. Quoyn, a wedg-like-piece of
timber, to put under Ordnance in mounting them. Cantick-Quoyns, short
three-edged ones to put between Cask, etc. Quyke, o. a quick (or living beast.
Quyre of a Boar, the hounds fee, (perhaps from Coeur, f. the heart.) Quysschen,
o. a Cushion.
R.
RAa, o. a Roe. Raab, Javarin, a Hungarian Fortress. Raba^es, [the hawk]
recovers the bearers fist. Rabbeting, a close kind of joining boards (by laying
them over) to keep out wind or dust, also the letting in of the planks to the
Ships keel. Rabbinical, belonging to the Rabbis, -bins, h. the Jewish Masters
or Doctors. Rabbinist, one skilled in their works, also a dunce. Rabdomancy, g.
divination by rods. Rabid, l. raging, mad. Racemation, l. grape-gleaning.
Racemiferous, cluster-bearing. Racha, Raca, h. rascal, a term of reproach.
Rachel, h. a sheep or lamb. Rachetum, -hat-, Thief-bote, the compensation or
redemption of a Thief. Racine, f. a root. Rack, the Duke of Exeter's Daughter,
an Engine to extort Confessions, brought into the Tower by him (being Constable,
16 H. 6.) intending to bring in the whole Civil Law. Rack, Re^k, No. to take
thought or care. Rackel, Rakil, o. hasty. Rack Vintage, a second voyage of our
Merchants into France, for Racked wines, cleansed and drawn from the Lees. Rad
Knights, as Rod K-. Radamant, as Rhada-. Rhadegund, sa. favorable Counsel.
Rade vore, sa. Tapestry. Radgondes, o. a kind of Ulcer. Radiant, l. shining.
Radiation, l. a casting forth bright beams. Radicality, a being Radical,
belonging to the root, nature or life. Radical question, propounded when the
Lord of the Ascendant and of the Hour, are of one nature and triplicity.
Radicate, l. to take root. Radial artery, a branch of the arm-hole artery
bestowing it self on the Radius, the upper and greater bone of the arm, also a
line from the Center to the circumference. Radlings, No. windings of the wall.
Raffinage, f. refinement or quintessence. Raffle, f. a trying to throw most on
three dice, also rifling, o. Raft, a timber float-boat. Rafull of knaves, o. a
Rabble. Raft, o. (q. rest) rent. Rag (or Rake) of Colts, a great company of
them, ( q. Race) Ragery, o. (perhaps) Roguery. Raght, Raught, reached. Ragman,
o. (q. ragement) madness. Rageman, a statute of Justices assigned by Edw. 1. to
hear all complaints of injuries done 5 years before. Ragot, a cunning French
beggar, who wrote all his subtilties and died very rich. Ragounces, sa. a kind
of precious stone. Raguset, a City in Dalmatia. Ragwort, a bitter, cleansing
herb. Railighe, a town in Essex. Railed, Rei-, (q. rolled) o. ran. Raillery, f.
jesting, merriment. Raimund, ge. quiet. Rains, fine linen of Rains, Rennes, a
City of Britanny in France. Rain-deer, a northern Heart with large Antlers.
Raised [in Flesh,] grown fat, spoken of a hawk. Rake, so much of the Ships hull
as over-hangs both ends of the keel. Rakestele, o. the handle of a rake.
Ralphe, Radulph, g* helpful Council. Rally, f. to reunite [dispersed
Companies.] Ramagious, belonging to Ramage, f. boughs. Ramage hawk, wild.
Rame, No. to reach. Ramberge, f. a long swift Ship. Rambooze, -buzze, a drink
of Eggs and Ale (or in summer, Milk and Rose Water) with Wine and Sugar.
Ramkin, a Fort (in the Isle Walcheren in Zeland) called the key of the
Neatherlands. Rament, l. a scraping or remnant. Ram-head, a great block with 3
sheevers, for the main and fore-Halliards. Ramist, a follower of Ramus, a
modern Abridger of many Arts. Ram, a Haven in Zeland. Ramosity, l. fullness of
boughs. Rampant, rearing up his fore-feet. Rampire, -part, f. a fortress-wall
or Bulwark. Rampick, o. [an old tree] beginning to decay at top. Rampions,
Rapunculus, an herb. Ramsey, a famous Abbey in Huntingtonshire, and other small
Towns Ramsey-town, in Man Isle. Ramsons, Allium ursinum, an herb. Ran, sa, an
open rapine. Rancidity, a being Rancid, l. moldy, musty. Rancor, -our, l.
rottenness, also malice or spite. Rank as Roke, o. hoarse as a rook. Randal,
Ranulph, sa. pure help. Ranges, pieces of timber (with wooden pins) to belay
the ropes to. Ranger, Rainger, as Raunger. Ransom, f. to redeem, also [the
price of] Redemption. Ranters, of the Family of Love. Ranula, l. a swelling
under the tongue. Ranular vein, the first branch of the outward throat rein
ascending to the tongue. Rap an Ren, l. and sa. snatch and catch (or else
rend.) Rapacity, l. a being Rapacious, ravenous. Rape, the ravishing a woman,
also (in Sussex) a sixth part of that Country. Rape, o. (q. Rapid,) haste,
quickly. Rape wine, a small wine, of water and the Mother of pressed grapes.
Raphael, h. Physic of God. Rapidity, l. a being Rapid, l. swift, violent.
Rapine, l. an open violent robbery. Rapinous, ravenous. Rapport, f. a report,
relation or resemblance. Rapsod^st, the Author of a Rapsody, g. a confused
collection. Raptu haeredis, a writ for the taking away an heir. Rapture, l. a
taking away by violence, also an Exstasy. Rarefaction, -fying, or causing
Rarity, l. a being Rare, thin, who is quantity is more and substance less. Raze,
a measure of Corn, disused. Rasion, -sure, l. a shaving. Rascal of Boys, o. a
great Company. Raskail, o. trash. Rasp, -patory, a grosser kind of File.
Market-Rasen, a Town in Lincolnshire. Ras algease, a Star in Gemini. Rate, o.
counseled, also the milt, f. Rate tithe, for cattle kept in a parish less than
a year. Rathe, Sa. Ss. Early. Ratify, l. to confirm. Ratiocinative, pertaining
to Ratiocination, l. reasoning. Rationabili part bonorum, a writ for the Widow
(or children) claiming the Thirds. Rationabilibus divisis, for the rectifying
the bounds of 2 Seigneuries. Rationale, a book showing Rationality, a being
Rational, l. reasonable, also the High Priests Breastplate. Rationary,
belonging to account or reckoning. Ratisbone, a City of Bavaria. Ratle, Crista
galli, the herb Coxcomb. Ratles, [the Goat] cries. Ratling-Cove, c. a Coachman.
Ratling-Mumpers, c. beggets at Coaches. Ratlings, the steps of the
ship-shrouds. Ratton, o. a little rat. Ratzenburgh, a Town in Mecklenburg.
Ravage, f. Spoil, havoc. Raucity, l. hoarsness. Ravenglas, a Town in
Cumberland. Ravenna, a City of Italy. Ravisable, o. Ravenous. Ravensperg, a
County in Westphalia. Ravishment, f. an unlawful taking away [of a Woman or
Heir,] also as Rape. Raundon, o. (f. a la randon) at random. Raunge, Range, the
Office of a Raunger, Ranger, who conducts the straying wild beasts to the
Forest. Raunson, o. for Ransom. Ray, f. a beam [of the Sun.] Ray [cloth,] never
colored. Rays, Reies, o. Roundelaies* Songs. Raynous, o. (q. Roigneux)
Scabbed. Re, an Isle near Rochelle. Reach, the distance of two points of land
which bear in a right line to one another. Read, Read, o. Counsel. Reading, the
chief town in Barkshire. Reafforested, made Forest again. Real, Sp. a coin
worth 6d. Realize, to cause Reality, a being real. Realty, opposed to
Personalty. Ream, (Rieme, Ge. a string) twenty quires, also a Realm. Realti, o.
for Royalty. Rear, o. thin. Reasonable aid, was a duty claimed by the Lord, to
marry his Daughter or Knight his eldest son. Reassume, l. to take again.
Reathen, o. soon. Reattachment, a second attachment. Rebate, as Chamf^r, also
to allow (what the interest would* have com'n to) for antepaiment.
Rebaptization, a baptizing again. Rebecca, h. fat and full. Rebeck, a 3
string'd fidle, also ( o.) an old Trot. Rebesk, as Arabesqu^. Rebus, f. a Name
(or other conceit) expressed in picture, (with an equivocal Motto) Rebutter, f. a
repelling the Heir by a Warranty from the Donour. Recalcitrate, l. to kick
backwards. Recant, l. revoke, unsay. Recapitulation, l. a brief repeating the
^eads. Recaption, l. [a writ for one that suffers] a second distress for the
same cause. Recargaison, f. a backfraught. Recede, l. to go back. Recent, l.
fresh, new. Recension, -sement, f. a reckoning. Receptacle, l. a storehouse.
Receptary, f. a note of Receipts. Reception, two Planets being in each others
dignity. Receptitious, l. received. Receptivity, a being Receptive, apt to
receive. Recess, l. a going back or aside, a by-place. Rechabites, sons of
Rechab, Jer. 35. Reche, a Town in Cambridg. Recheat, a Hunters lesson, when
they lose the game, etc. Recidivation, l. a relapse. Recidivous, l. falling
back. Reciprocal, l. mutual. Reciprocation, an interchanging. Recision, l. a
cutting off. Recitation, a rehearsing. Recitative, rehearsed [in Operaes.]
Reck, Ret h, o. care. Reclaim, to tame [a hawk.] Reclamation, l. a crying out
against. Recluse, l. one cloistered up. Recogitate, to ponder upon.
Recognition, a review, considering, or acknowledgement. Recognitors, l. the
Jurymen. Recognitione adnullanda etc. a writ for the disannulling a forced
recognisance. Recognize, to consider again. Recognizee, to whom is made a
Recognizance, a bond of record from the Recognizor, who acknowledges the Debt
in Court, etc. Recognizance, is also the Verdict of the Jury. Recollect, l. to
call to mind. Recollects, a sort of Franciscans. Reconvention, a contrary
Action (in Civil Law) brought by the Defendant. Record, an Act committed to
writing in any of the Kings Courts, and is (when that Term is ended)
uncontrollable. Recordation, a remembering. Recordare (or Recordari) facias, a
writ for the Sheriff to remove a cause from an inferior Court, to the Kings
Bench or Common Pleas. Recorder, whom the Magistrate of any Town (having a
Court of Record) associates to himself for direction in Law. Recordo et
Processu Mi^tendis, calling a Record (and the whole process) from an Inferior
to the Kings Court. Recovery, the obtaining a thing by Trial of Law. Recoupe,
f. to defalk or discount. Recourse, l. refuge, retreat. Recoyl, f. to draw back
[the tail.] Recrean^e, o, against hope. Recreandise, o. Infidelity. Recreant,
f. eating his words. Recreantise, f. Cowardice. Recreation, l. a refresh^ent.
Recrementitious, full of Recrement, l. dross, dregs. Recrimination, l. the
returning a reproach or accusation. Recruit, supply, fill up. Rectangle, l. an
even angle. Rectanguled, having right angles or corners. Rectification, l. a
rectifying or making straight. Rectilineal, of right lines. Recto, a writ of
right, trying both for possession and property, and if the Cause be lost, there
is no remedy. Recto de dote, whereby a woman demands her whole Dower. Recto de
dote unde nihil habet, whereby (having no Dower assured) she demands her
Thirds. Recto de rationabili part, for a Coparcener etc. to recover his share.
Recto de advocatione Ecclesiae, for him that claims the Advowsen to himself and
his Heirs in fee. Recto de custodia terrae et haeredis, for a Guardian in
socage, or appointed by the Ancestors will. Recto quando dominus remisit, when
the Lord (i^ whose Seigneury the Land lies) remits the Cause to the Kings
Court. Recto sur disclaimer, when the Lord avows upon the Tenant, who disclaims
to hold of him. Rectorial, belonging to a Rector, l. a Governor. Rector
Ecclesiae Parochialis, A Parson [with a Vicaridge.] Rectory, a Parsonage (with
all the appurtenancies.) Rectitude, l. uprightness. Rectus in Curia, he that
stands at the Bar, and has nothing brought against him Reculade, f. a
recoyling. Reculver, a Town in Kent. Recuperatory, belonging to Recuperation,
l. a recovering. Recure, o. recover. Recurrent, l. running back Recursion, l. a
running back. Recurvate, l. to bend back Recusants, Romanists, or any that
refuse to come to Church. Red, o. meaning. Red Sea, the Long-Sea, dividing
Africa and Asia. Redacted, l. forced back. Redaman^y, -mation, l. a loving them
that love us. Redargue, to re- (or dis-) prove. Redarguation, a controlling.
Redborn, a Town in Hertfordshire. Reddendum, the reservation of Rent to the
Lessor. Redditive, belonging to Reddition, l. a restoring or yielding; (in Law)
an acknowledgment that the thing belongs not to himself. Reddour, o. (q.
roideur) violence. Read, o. advise, help. Redeless, o. help less. Redford, a
Town in Nottinghamshire. Redemptions, l. Ransomes. Redevable, f. obliged.
Redhibition, a forcing one to take that again which he sold. Rediculus, a
certain God, worshipped for ^righting Hannibal from Rome. Redient, l. returning,
new. Redintegration, l a renewing. Redisseisin, a second disseisin. Redition,
l. a returning. Redituaries, a sort of Francis^ans having Lands, etc. Redolent,
l. sweet smelling. Redon^te, l. to restore. Redoubted, reverenced. Redoubt,
[the jurting out of the corners of] a Fort. Redound, l. to abound. Redour, (q.
redoubleur) o. turning, doubling. Redowbting, o. praising. Red shanks, Irish
Scots. Redstert, a red-taild-bird. Redubbers, Ad-, they that buy stolen cloth
and turn it to some other form or color. Reduction, l. a bringing back.
Redversies, de Riparijs, the family of the Riverses in Cornwall. Redulcerate, l.
to renew a wound. Redundancy, l. a being Redundant, overflowing, having too
much. Reduplicate, l. to double again. Reduplication, as Anadipl^sis.
Reduplicative, which doubles (or may be doubled) often. Reed, o. red. Reem, La.
to cry. Reentery, the resuming a possession we had lately forgone. Reer-County,
as Rier-. Reeve, Reve, Greve, sa. a Governor, the Bailiff of a Franchise or
Manor. Reeve the rope in the block, put it through. Reevo, (Sp. arriva) up.
Reextent, a second extent upon Lands or Tenements. Refection, l. a refreshing.
Refectory, -tuary, a Hall or dining room. R^fel, l. to disprove. Referendaries,
Rapporteurs, Officers under the Masters of Requests (in Germany and France.)
Reflection, l. a bending or beating back. Reflux, l. the flowing back.
Refocillate, l. to cherish. Reformado, Sp. an Officer who (having lost his men)
is either cashiered or put lower. Reforms, [the hawk] prunes her feathers.
Refracted, l. weakened. Refraction, l. a breaking open or a rebounding.
Refreide, o. refrain [for fear.] Refractory, l. stubborn. Refranation, a
Planets becoming retrograde, while he is applying to another. Refret, (f.
refrain) the burden of a song. Refrete, o. full [fraught.] (...) Refrigerate,
l. to cool, refresh. Refroiden, o. to cool. Refrynyd [hawk,] o. neezing and
casting water through her nostrils. Refuge, l. a place of succor. Refulgent,
l. glistering. Refund, l. to melt again, pour or pay back. Refuite, -use, o.
refuge. Refusion, l. a pouring back. Refute, l. to disprove. Regal, l. Royal,
Kinglike. Regal of France, a costly ring offered by a King of France to St.
Thomas of Canterbury, worn afterward by King Henry VIII. Regal Fishes, Whales
and Sturgeons. Regale, f. to feast like a King. Regalia, l. the rights of a
King. Regality, l. Kingship. Regalo, Sp. a Royal dainty. Regardant, f. looking
back or to. Regard, the Office and jurisdiction of the Regarder, the Overseer
of all other Forest-Officers. Regards, f. observations. Regency, rule,
government. Regeneration, l. a being R^generate, -ted, born again. Regenspurg,
a town of lower Bavaria. Regent, l. ruling. Regerminate, l. to spring again.
Regible, l. that may be ruled. Regicide, l. a King-killer. Regifical l. Royal,
stately. Regifugium, l. a feast kept ( Feb. 23.) for the banishment of Tarquin.
Regio assensu, the writ of the Royal Assent to choose a Bishop. Regiment, l.
Government, also the command of a Colonel, abo^t ten Companies. Register, a
Record, or Recorder. Registry, his Office and Books. Reg^utinate, l. to unglue
or glue again. Regnardise, to practice Regnardism, the subtilty of Regnard, f.
a Fox. Regi^s Professor, reader of Divinity, Hebrew, Greek, Law or Physic,
founded by Hen. VIII. in each University. Regrate, o. courtesy, estimation.
Regrator, formerly he that bought by the great and sold by retail, now he that
buys and sells again in the same market or within 4 miles thereof, a Huckster.
Regratulate, to rejoice (or give thanks) again. Regress, ssion, l. a returning.
Regret, f. sorrow, an ill will. Regularity, l. a being Regular, orderly.
Regulars, regular Priests, Monks under some particular rule. M. Attil. Regulus,
a Roman taken prisoner by the Carthaginians, and having liberty upon his
parole, returned accordingly and was put to death. Regurgitate, l. swallow
again. Rehob^am, h. breath of the people. R^jection, l. a casting off. Reif
away, se. snatch away. Reiglement, f. a ruling. Reight, o. reached. Reignous,
o. ruinous. Reimbosce, Sp. return to the wood, lie in ambush again.
Rehab^litation, the Popes bull for reinabling a Clergyman. Rein, o. run.
Rejourn, Readj-, to adjourn again. Reioynder, (in Civil Law Duplication) an
exception or answer to a Replication. Reinforce, f. to strengthen again.
Reister, (D. Ruyter) a horsman. Reit, o. a Sea-weed. Reiterate, l. repeat
again. Reive, as Reif. Rejumble, Li. to rise [in ones Stomach.] Rekelness, o.
rashness. Reken, o. reckon. Reking, a high copped hill in Shropshire. Rela^^s
and Limers, o. standers at advantage with darts to kill Deer. Relapse, l. fall
back. Relatist, a reporter. Relative, l. having relation to another thing.
Relaxate, l. loosen, release. Relay, f. a setting on more hounds when the Deer
and the rest are past by. Release, an instrument whereby Estates, etc. are
extinguished, enlarged, etc. Relief, a certain payment to the Lord at the
entrance of some Tenants. Relegation, a banishment [for a certain time.]
Relent, l. to grow soft or pitiful. Relevant, relieving. Relevate, l. to raise
again. Releeved up, o. raised myself up. Relict, l. a widow, or any thing that
is left. Religate, l. to tie fast. Relinquish, l. to forsake. Reliquary, f. a
place for Relics, l. what is left [of the Clothes or bodies of Sts.
deceased.] Reliquator, l. he that has the arrears of another in his hand.
Reluctance, -ation, l. a striving against. Remble, Li. to remove, also a
reward, and (in Y.) a good color [in the face.] Remainder, an estate limited
in Lands, etc. to be enjoyed after the estate of another expired e. g. a man
may grant land to one for term of his life, the Remainder to another for term
of his life. Remand, f. to command back again. Remancipate, l. to sell or
return a commodity into his hands that first sold it us. Reme, o. take away,
deny. Remansion, l. a remaining. Remersel, a town in Zeland. Remembrancers, of
the Exchequer, three, viz. The Kings Remembrancer, who enters all
Recognizances, etc. The Lord Treasurers Remembrancer, he makes process against
all Sheriffs, etc. Remembrancer of the first Fruits, takes all compositions for
first Fruits and Tenths. Remes, o. for Realms. Remew, o. to refuse. Remigation,
l. a rowing. Remigration, l. a returning. Reminiscence, l. a calling to mind.
Remiss, l. slack, careless. Remissible, pardonable. Remissionary, f. who is
pardoned. Remitter, restoring a man to his best and most ancient Title.
Remonstrance, a showing of reasons; also an Instrument (of silver or gold)
wherein the Sacrament is exposed on the Altar. Remonstrants, Arminians. Remora.
l. a Sea-Lamprey which (they say) stops the course of a ship. Remord, o. To
cause. Remorse, l. the biting or sting of Conscience. Remote, l. far off,
distant, Remuable, o, moveable, ready. Remunerate, l. to recompense. Remus,
Brother to Romulus. Renab^y, -ally* o. ready. Renal, l. belonging to the
Kidneys. Renardism, as Regnar.- Renavigation, a sailing back. Rencontre,
-ounter, f. a sudden adventure or meeting Rendevous, Rendez-vous, f. (Render
your selves at) the place of Muster. Rendlesham, -lis-, a town in Suffolk.
Reneez, f. Apostates. Ren^gado, Sp. he that deserts his colors or Religion.
Renege, l. to refuse. Renged, o. compassed about. Reniant, f. a revolter.
Renimed, running Mead (in Middlesex) where the Barons assembled to claim their
liberties of King J^hn. Renitence, -cy, l. a resistance, or a shining. Renks,
o. for ranks. Ren radder, o. run readily. Rennes, a City in France. Rents
resolute, payable to the Crown out of Abbey-Lands. Renodate, l. to unty.
Renomie, o. renown. Renovate, l. to renew. Renovelances, o. renewings.
Renversed, f. over-turned. Renew, o. to pull or get. Renumerate, l. to pay
back. Renunciate, l. to bring word again. Renvoy, f. a sending back. Reny ^er
lay, o. deny her law. Repairs, the Hares haunts. Repandous, l. bent back.
Reparation, l. a mending. Repara^ione facienda, when one Joint-Tenant is
willing to repair, and the other not. Reparty, f. a subdivision, also a reply.
Repast, f. a meal. Repe, o. to pluck up, also to care. Repastinate, l. to dig
again about vines. Repe and Run, o. for rap and rend. Repeham, a town in
Norfolk. Repatriate, l. to return to ones own Country. Repellance, a repealing
or disanulling. Repensation, l. a recompensing. Repentine, l. sudden.
Repercussion, l. a beating back. Repercussive, belonging thereto, also a
medicine driving the pain from that place. Repertible, to be found.
Repertitious, l. found. Repertory, l. an Inventory. Repignerate, l. to redeem a
pawn. Repleader, to plead again. Reple^e, l. full, filled. Repletion, l. a
filling. Replegiare, to replevy or redeem a distress by putting in legal
sureties. Replegiare de averijs, a writ to release Cattle distrain'd, upon
surety to answer the suit. Replegiari facias, another to the same purpose.
Replevie, -vin, the bringing that writ, and releasing Cattle on that condition,
also the bailing of a man. Replevish, to let go upon bail. Replication, l. an
unfolding, also the Plaintiffs reply to the Defendants answer in Chancery.
Report, a relation or repetition of a case debated. Reporta^or, l. he that
carries back. Repose, l. to lay upon, to rest. Reposition, l. a settling again.
Reposition of the Forest, an Act whereby certain forest-grounds made purlieu,
were (by a second view) laid to the Forest again. Repossede, l. to possess
again. Repository, l. a storehouse. Reprefe, -riefe, o. reproof. Reprehend, l.
to reprove. Reprehension, l. a reproving. Representation, a likeness.
Representative, in the room of another, or he that supplies his place. Repress,
l. to keep down. Reprimende, f a reproof. Reprisal, as Law of Marque. Reprises,
Yearly deductions out of a Manor, as Pensions, etc. Reprieve, a respiting the
Execution of the Law. Reprobate, l. cast out of ^avour. Reptile, -itious, l.
creeping. Repton, a Town in Darbishire. Republique, l. a Commonwealth.
Repudiable, which may be Repudiated, put away, divorced. Repudious, l.
villainous, hateful. Repugnancy, a being Repugnant, l. contrary. Repugne, l. to
resist. Repullulate, l. to burgen and spring again. Repumicate, l. to smooth
with a pumice-stone. Reputation, l. credit. Requests, f. Petitions. Requiem, l.
^est, Mass for the Dead, from Requiem aeternam dona ^is Domine, part thereof.
Rere-County, See Ri^r- Rere-ward, the hindmost part of the Army. Resager, o.
Rats-bane. Resceit, an admission of a third person to plead his right in a
cause commenced between other two; also a bare admittance of plea. Rescind, l.
to cut asunder. Rescissory, -rian, belonging to Rescission, a disanulling or
undo^ng. Rescous, f. a rescue of a distress, or person arrested. Rescussor, the
Rescuer. Rescribendary, a Roman Officer, who taxed Supplications. Rescript, l.
a written answer to a Letter, petition, Writ, etc. Research, f. a continuance
[of Services, etc.] Resentment, Ressentiment, f. a true and sensible
apprehension. Reseration, l. an unlocking. Reservation, l. a keeping back in
store; also as Reservedness, a being Reserved, close, not free in discourse.
Resiance, -idence, a being Resiant, -ident, f. continually dwelling or abiding
in a place. Residentiary, he that resides, or the place of abode. Residue, l.
the rest. Resignation, l. an unsealing; also resigning [a benefice.]
Resilience, -liment, -ition, l. a rebounding or starting back. Resinous,
-naceous, of Rosin. Resipiscence, l. repentance. Resolution, l. untying, full
purpose and intention. Resonant, l. sounding again. Resort, Ress-, f. the
authority or jurisdiction of a Court. Resource, f. as Ressource. Respiration,
l. a taking breath. Respectu computi Vicecomitis habendo, a writ for the
respiting the Sheriffs account. Respectful, giving respect. Respective,
according to several respects or relations. Respite of homage, was a small
sum paid every fifth term for the forbearance of homage till the Prince were
at leisure to take it. Resplendent, l. glistering. Respondent, l. he that
answers the Opponent in disputations or Interrogatories. Respondeat Superior,
Let the Mayor and Commons [of London] answer [for the Sheriffs insufficiency.]
Responsalis, he that appears in Court for another. Response, f. an answer.
Responsible, liable or able to answer or give account. Responsion, surety.
Responsions, certain accounts made to the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem.
Responsory, l. answering. Resport, o. respect or care. Resside, o. rusty.
Ressource, f., a new spring or rising again. Restagnant, l. overflowing.
Restagnation, a bubling up. Restoration, l. a restoring or repairing.
Restible, l. tilled (or bearing) every year. Restipulation, l. an engaging to
answer an Action at Law. Restitutione extracti ab Ecclesia, to restore one to
the Church which he had recovered for Sanctuary. Restitutione temporalium, for
a Bishop to recover his Temporalities and Barony. Restitution, l. a restoring
[one unlawfully disseised.] Restiveness, a being Restive, -ty, (f. rest f)
stubborn, drawing back. Restriction, l. a restraint, or straitening. Restrict
(or discriminal) line, separating the hand from the arm. Resudation, l. a
sweating. Resvery, f. a raving, madness. Resul Alloh, Tu. (the Messenger of
God) Mahomet. Result, f. conclusion, issue, also as Resultancy, rebounding.
Resummons, a second summons. Resumption, l. a taking again [into the Kings
hands, what he had (upon false suggestion) granted.] Resupination, l. a lying
with the face upward. Resurrection, l. a rising again. Resuscitate, l. to raise
again. Retail, f. a cutting (or selling) in small parcels. Retainer, Retei-, a
servant wearing the Livery and attending only upon special Occasions.
Retaliate, l. to do like for like. Retard, l. to stop or hinder. Retchlessness,
o. carelessness. Retenementum, (in old deeds) a withholding. Retent, l. holden
back, also unbent. Retention, l. a retaining. Retentive faculty, duly keeping
the nourishment within the body. Retiary, l. the Net-bearer [in fighting, etc.]
Reticence, l. silence, concealment. Reticle, l. a small net or caul. Retinacle,
l. a stay or hold. Retinue f. a train of attendants. Retort, f. a crooked body,
a Lymbeck of glass, also to twist or turn back. Retour, f. a return. Retract,
l. to revoke or draw back. Retraction, l. a drawing back. Retractation, a
recanting. Retraxit, an exception against one that had withdrawn his Action,
saying (in open Court) He will proceed no further. Retreat, f. a retiring
[place.] Retribution, l. a recompensing. Retriment, l. dross or dregs.
Retrieve, (f. retrouver) to find again, to spring partridges again.
Retroaction, l. a driving back. Retroactive, driving back. Retrocede, l. to go
back. Retrocession, a retreating. Retrocopulation, a coupling backward.
Retroduction, a bringing back. Retrograde, l. to go (or going) back (contrary
to the succession of the Signs.) Retrogradation, a going back. Retrogression,
-oition, the same. Retromingency, a staling backward. Retromingents, Animals
that piss backward. Retrospection, l. a looking back. Return, a Certificate of
what is done in the Execution of writs etc. Returns, Days in Bank, allotted
for the several sorts of proceedings in every term: wherein Crastino, signifies
the morrow after the day annexed; Octabis, 8 days after (inclusive) Quindena,
15 days after; Tres, three weeks after; Mense, that day month; Quinque, that
day 5 weeks. Returno habendo, a writ for the return of Cattle (distrein'd and
replevied) to him that has proved his distress lawful. Returnum Averiorum, for
the return of the Cattle to the Defendant, when the Plaintiff does not declare.
Returnum Irreplegiabile, for the final restitution of Cattle to the owner,
found by the Jury to be unjustly distreined. Reuben, h. Son of vision. Reuda,
an Irish Captain who seated himself in Scotland. Reve, o. (q. bereave) spoil.
Reve, as Reeve. Revelation, l. a discovering. Master of the Revels, who has
the Ordering of the Revels, f. Night-sports of dancing etc. in the Innes of
Court, etc. Revene, l. to return. Revenue, f. yearly rent. Reverberate, l. to
reflect or beat back. Reverberation (in Chemistry) the calcining of bodies by
fire in a Reverbitory, -^eratory, l. a Lymbeck or Furnace. Revere, l. to fear
and honor. Reverential, with reverence and aw. Reverse, f. a back-blow, also
the backside. Reversed, l. turned backward or upside down. Reversion, l. a
returning [of a possession to the former owner or his heirs.] Revery, as
Resvery. Revert, l. to return. Reverticle, l. a place to return unto. Reves, o.
Rents, Tithes. Revestiary, Revestry, the Vestry, where Church-Vestments are
kept. Reveiw, -vise, f. look over again. Bill of Review, exhibited by leave of
the Court when some error appears after the Decree (in Chancery) is signed and
enrolled. Reviviction, l. a coming to life again. Reviving, the same, also a
renewing or bringing to life again. Bill of Revivor, (in Chancery) when one
party dies, to revive and finally determine the former Cause. Reuks, o. for
Rooks. Reunite, l. to join together again. Revocable, l capable of Revocation,
l. a calling back. Revolt, f* to fall away. Revolve, l. to toss up and down.
Revolution, l. a turning round to the first point. Revulsion, l. a pulling up
or away, also a forcing of humors to contrary parts. Rue, o. to take pity.
Rewet, (f. rouette) the lock of a harquebuse. Rewis, o. (f. rues) streets.
Rewish [pigeon] D. earnest in copulation. Rewey [cloth] unevenly wrought, or
full of rews. Reygate, a Town in Surrey. Reyne, o. [clean] water. Rhabdomancy,
g. Divination by a rod or staff. Rhad^mant, -thus, Aeac^s and Minos, the 3
feigned Judges in hell. Rhagides, g. the third skin encompassing the eye.
Rhaetia, higher and lower ( Grisons and Boiarij) bordering on Helvetia.
Rhapsody, as Rapsody. Rhedarious, l. belonging to a Charter, Wagon or Coach.
Rheggio, a City of Naples. Rheimes, a City of Champagne in France. Rhenish,
belonging to the Rhene, Rhine, a German river. Rhenen, a town in Vtrech^ and
Westphalia. Rhesus, a King of Thrace slain in his aid of Troy. Rhetorical,
belonging to a Rhetor, -rician, he that uses or teaches Rhetoric, g. the Art
of speaking Eloquently, or well and wisely. Rhin^^^ld, a town of Schwabe^.
Rhineberg, or Berck, a town of Co^en. Rhinoceros, -rote, g. an Indian beast
with a horn on his nose. Rhode le Duche, a town of Limburgh. R^odomel, g. honey
of Roses. Rhodus, Rhodes, a Mediterranean Island wh^re (they say, the Sun (to
whom it is consecrate) shines every day in the year. Rhomb, Rhumb, g. a spinning
wheel, also a figure of equal sides but unequal angles, as a quarry of glass.
Rhombs, the points of the Mariners compass. Rhomboidal, belonging to a rhomb or
to a Rhomboides, g. a romb whereof 2 sides are longer than the other two, also
a muscle in the shoulder blade. Rhon^hisonant, l. imitating (by way of jeer)
the noise of snorting. Rhosne, a river in France. Rhu^arb, a plant (for its
wholesomeness) called the Friend, Life, Heart, and Treacle of the Liver.
Rhyparographer, g. a writer (or painter) of base trifles. Rhythmical, made in
or belonging to Rhythm, g. xyme, meeter, harmony, proportion. Rial, o. for
Royal. Rialto, a Marble bridge at Venice, where the Merchants meet. Rib, the
division between the feathers in a quill, also the side-timber of a Ship.
Ribadavia, a mild White Wind made at Ribadavia, a town of Gallicia. Riband, (in
Heraldry) the 8th. part of a Bend. Ribaud, f. a baud. Ribaldrie, l. roguery,
whoredom. Ribib, o. for ribaud. Ribible, o. a rebeck or fidle. Riballa, strong
Zant wines. Riche-Cour, a town in Lorrain. Richard, sa. of a strong nature.
Richmond, (q Rich Mount) a town in Surrey, also the Chief Town of
Richmondshire, part of Yorkshire. Riches of Marter^s (or sables,) a great
company of them. Rickmansworth, a town in Hertfordshire and Buckinghamshire.
Riddeled, o. plaited, wrinkled. Riddle-cakes, La. thick sour-cakes. Ricture, l.
a grinning. Rides, [the ship] is holden fast with the anchors. Ride a cross,
with the yards hoised up to the hounds. Ride a good (or great) road (and
stress,] where the Wind and Sea had much power. Riddle, s. an oblong sieve (to
separate the seed from the Corn.) Riders, great timbers bolted on weak places
of the Ship. Ridg-cully, c. a Goldsmith. Ridgil, which has lost but one stone.
Ridiculous, l. to be laughed at. Riding Clerk, one of the six Clerks of the
Chancery. Ridings, the East, West and North divisions of Yorkshire. Riens, f.
nothing. Rier County, a place appointed by the Sheriff (after his Court ended)
for the receipt of the Kings money. Rife, o. for rifle. Rifts, a corruption of
the horses Palate. Rigation, l. a watering. Ridge, Rudg, o. the back. Rigging,
the ropes belonging to the Masts or yards. Rigel, Orions left foot. Rightwise,
Sa. Righteous. Rigidity, l. a being Rigid, l. stiff, surly, severe. Right the
helm, keep it upright. Rigols, o. a claricord [instrument.] Rigorous, l. full
of Rigor, hardness, severity. Rimmon, ^. a Pomegranat. Rimosity, a being
Rimose, -sous, l. full of Chinks. Rimpeled, o. for rumpled. Rine, No. to touch.
Ringelenstein, a town in Westphalia. Riner, Che. a very good cast. Ring-bolts,
for the tackle of the Ordnance. Ring-head, an engine to stretch woollen.
Ring-tail, a Kite with a whitish tail. Ring-walk, a hunters round walk.
Ring-wood, a town in Hantshire. Rio de la hacha, a small West India Province.
Rining, o. for raining, dropping. Rintelin, a town in Westphalia. Riot, the
forcible doing an unlawful act by 3 (or more) assembled therefore. Riparious,
l. belonging to water-banks. Ripariae, the water within the bank. Ripen, a town
in North- Jui^land. Riphaean-hills, Hyperboraean Mountains of Scythia. Ripley,
a town in Yorkshire. Rippon, in Yorkshire. Riple the flax, No. wipe off the
vessels. Ripper, Ss. a pedder, dorser, or badger. Ripiers, that bring fish from
the Seacoast to the Inland. Rise, o. beauty. Rishe, o. for rush. Risible, l.
capable of Rision, l. laughing. Risingham, a town in Northumberland.
Rising-timbers, the hooks placed on the keel. Risings, the thick planks on
which the timbers of the decks do bear at boths ends. Risque, f. danger,
hazard. Ritual, belonging to Rites, l. Customs, Ceremonies. Rituals, books
containing the Rites of the Roman Church. Rivage, f. the waterside. Rivality,
the envy of Rivals, Corrivals, two fetching water from the same river, in love
with the same thing, etc. Riveling, o. turning in and out. Rivulet, l. a small
river. Rixation, l. a wrangling. Rizons, a City of Illyria. Road, a place near
the Land for a Ships riding. Wild Road, with little land on any side. Roader, a
Ship riding at anchor in a road. Roan, a dark horse-colour. Roan, a town in
France. Robert, Ge. famous counsel. Robertines, a religious order erected by
Robert Flower, whose Father Took Flower was twice Mayor of York. Roberdsmen,
Mighty thieves, like Robin-hood. Robigalia, May-feasts in honor of Robigus, a
Roman God preserving Corn from being Robiginous, l. blasted. Robins, the small
lines that make fast the Sails to the yards. Roboration, l. a strengthening.
Roboreau, l. of Oak. Roburnean, l. the same. Robur, a place in Roman Prisons
whence men were thrown head long. Robusteous, l. strong as Oak. Roch, o. as
Rock. Rochelle, a town in France. Rochester, a City in Kent. Roche de March, a
Town in Luxemburgh. Rochet, f. a frock, also a Bishops Vestment. Rochetta, as
Polverine. Rocket, an herb smelling like milk burnt-to. Rod, a Perch, or Pole.
Rodage, f. a toll exacted by some French Lords of Carts passing by their
Lordships. Rode, Rud, o. Complexion. Rod (or Rad) Knights, certain Servitors,
who held their Land by serving their Lords on hors-back. Rodnet, a net for
black-birds or Wood-cocks. Rodomond, f. one that uses Rodomontades, l. the
boastings of Rodomonte, a vapouring Hector in Orlando Furi^so. Rofe, o. did
rend and rive. Rofe-tyle, creast or ridge-tyle. Roe, a kind of Deer. Rogal,
-lion, belonging to Rogus, a great [funeral] fire. Rogation, a desire, prayer.
Rogation-week, Gang-week, Grass-week, the next week but one (of prayers,
processions and abstinence) before Whitsunday. Rogatists, the moderate sort of
Donatists. Roggeth, o. for rocketh. Roger, q. Ruger, D. quiet, or Rodgar,
strong Counsel. Roger, c. a Cloak-bag. Rogitate, l. to ask [often.] Roignous,
o. ruinous. Roile, o. to range. Roin, o. a skar. Roiston, a town in
Hertfordshire. Rider-roll, a Schedule added to a roll or record. Rolls, Domus
Conversorum, the place where the Chancery Rolls are kept. In Rolls, with rolls
of gold on the edges of the Covers. Rollo, a Danish Captain, who seated himself
in Normandy. Roman Indiction, 15 or 3 five years, at the end of which the
Romans exacted their several Tributes, 1. Of Gold. 2. Silver. 3. Brass and
Iron. Romancist, sp. a composer of Romances, feigned histories. Romanize, to
imitate the Romans* people of Rome. Romanists, Papists. Romant, the most
eloquent French, or (in Lorrain and the borders of Germany) that language which
is not German. Romford, a town in Essex. Romney, a Town in Kent. Romer, o.
wider. Romberville, a town in Lorrain. Romboyld, c. with a warrant. Rome-fe^^,
and Romescot, as Peterpence. Rome, the chief City of Italy, built by Romulus,
Grandson of Numitor (King of Albans) by his Daughter Sylvia and Mars, who
being exposed on the bank of Tiber, was nourished (they say) by a Wolf, and (at
last) was hurried away in a Whirlwind. Roncevale, Roscida vallis, a town of
Nevar. Rondacher, he that bears a Rondache,*f. a round target. Rondel, o. as
Roundelay. Ronges (q. Ranges) o. the sides of a ladder. Rondelier, f. an user
or maker of such targets. Rood of Land, a quarter of an Acre. Rood-lost,
between the Church and Chancel, where was placed the Rood, sa. a Crucifix, or
the Image of Christ upon the Cross. Roof-trees, small timbers (from the
half-deck to the forecastle) to bear up the gratings and ledges wherein the
Nettings lie. Roop, No. hoarsness. Rooper, an East India Coin, about 2 s. 9 d.
Rope-yarnes, the yarns of any rope untwisted. Roor, o. uproar. Ropen, o. to
reap. Roral, -rid, -rulent, dewy. Roriferous, l. dew-bringing. Rosere, o. a
Rose-plat. Rosial, o. Red. Rosimunda, (Sa. Rose of peace) she was forced by
Herminges to drink the poison which she offered him, by whom she had procured
the death of her Husband Alboinus (King of the Lombards) because he drank a
health to her in a cup made of her Fathers skull. Rosary, l. a bed or garland
of roses, a rose-water-still, also Fifteens, a pair of beads (of 15
Pater-nosters and 150 Aves) much used by the Arch-confraternity of the Rosary,
instituted by St. Dominick. Roscid, l. dewy. Roses, a port town in Catalonia.
Roseoman, an Irish County. Rose, the flower of Venus, consecrated by Cupid to
Harpocrates the God of silence. Under the Rose, among private Lovers, not to be
divulged. Rosi-Crucians, Chemists, Brothers of the Rosy-Cross. Rosion, l. a
gnawing. Rosse, a Scottish County, also a town in Hereford. Rostration, l. a
putting in the beak or bill. Rosto^, a Town of Mecbleburg. Rot, a file or 6
Soldiers. Rotal, like a wheel. Cropping of the Rotan, c. the Carts tail.
Rotation, l. a wheeling. By Rote, (f. par rotine) roundly, as a wheel runs.
Rotheram, a town in Yorkshire. Rothersoil, the dung of Rother-beasts, No.
horned-. Rotterdam, a town in Holland. Rotulus Wintoniae, Domesday book.
Rotundity, l. roundness. Rou, o. ugly, froward. Rove, the little iron plate to
which the Clinch-nails are clinched; also (o.) did rive. Rouge, f. red.
Rouge-Cross, and Rouge-Dragon, two pursuivants at arms. Rought, o. cared.
Rouncevals, Pease that came from Ronceval, a place at the foot of the
^yreneans. Roundel, a ball (in Heraldry) also as Roundelay, f. a shepherds song
or dance. Roundlet, an uncertain measure from 3 to 20 Gallons. Round-house, the
uppermost room of a ships stern. Round-in (or af^) let rise the Main or
fore-tack, etc. when the wind larges upon them. Roun^, o. to cease. Rounds, the
fragments of Statues. Rout, f. an assembly of 3 (or more) to commit an
unlawful act. Routeth, o. snorteth. Rowland, Rolland, Rodland, Ge.
Land-Counsel, (I. Orlando.) Roll, the round piece wherein the whip-staff goes.
Rowney, o. a Cart-horse. Rounge, o. to gnaw. Rowning, o. silence, whispering in
the ear. Rowpand, o. Calling. Rowse, raise [a heart.] Rowses, [the hawk] shakes
her self: Rowse-in the cable, hale-in so much as lies slack. Rowt, Rawt, No. to
bellow. Rowt, a Company [of Wolves.] Coleur de Roy, f. the King of France's
color, Violet. Royal, f. Kingly. Royal Society, a Fellowship of Noble and
Ingenious men (founded 14 Car. 2.) for the improvement of Natural Knowledge.
Royalist, f. a lover of the King. Royalty, f. the Kings Prerogative. Royston, a
town in Cambridgshire. R. P. Res-publica, the Commonwealth, also as Regiu^
Professor. Rubace, -cel, a yellowish precious-stone. Rubefaction, l. a
rubefying or making red. Rubet, l. a toad-stone. Rubicon, the large Italian
river Runcone. Rubicund, -dous, l. bloud-red. Rubid, l. ruddy. Rubie, l. a red
precious-stone. Rubiginous, rusty. See Rob-. Rubor, l. redness. Rubricate, l.
to make red. Rubric, l. a Title, Rule or Sentence in Red, a Calendar of Saints
and Festivals. Rubrificative, [a strong plaister] making the place look red.
Rucking, o. lurking. Ructation, l. a belching. Rudg-washt Kersey, made of
fle^ce-wooll, washed only on the Sheeps back. Rudge-bone, o. Os sacrum, the
rump-bone. Rudheath (in Cheshire) was a Sanctuary (for a year and a day) to
Offenders. Rudiments, l. Principles or first plain instructions. Rue, Dev. to
sift. Ruel-bone, o. the whirlbone of the knee. Ruff, Pope, a fish like a small
perch. Ruff^n, c. the Devil. Ruffler, c. a notorious Rogue. Ruff-peck, c.
bacon. Ruffians-hall, Smithfield, where trials of skill were played by Ruffianly
people. Rugby, a Town in Warwickshire. Rugen, an Island of Pomerania. Rugosity,
l. a being Rugose, -sous, full of wrinkles. Ruinous, l. falling to decay. Rum,
Kill-devil, a Barbado's drink stronger than brandy. Rum, c. gallant. Rum
boozing welts, c. bunches of grapes. Rumboyl c. the Watch. Rum-Cully, c. a rich
fool. Rum dropper, c. a Vintner. Rum-gutlers, c. Canary. Rum-hopper, c. a
drawer. Rum-padders, c. brave highway men. Rum-vile, c. London. Rumb, as
Rhomb. Rumbeg, Tu. Lord of Rome, the Pope. Rumia, the Goddess of sucking.
Rumidg (or Rummage) the hold, clear it of lumber, for the stowing of goods.
Rumiforate, -ige-, l. to report abroad. Ruminate, l. to chew the Cud, also to
ponder. Ruminus, [Jupiter] bestowing teats or breasts. Rumsey, two towns in
Hantshire. Rumsebab, P. the King of Rome, the Pope. Runcinus, a load-horse, or
Cart-horse. Runcina, the Goddess of Runcation, l. weeding. Run, that part of
the ships hull under water, which comes lanker by degrees from the floor-timber
to the stern-post. Rune, Somerset, a watercourse. Runge, No. a flasket.
Rung-heads, the ends of the Rungs, the ground-timbers which give the floor of
the ship. Runlet, as Roundlet. Runn^l, No. Pollard-wood. Runner, a rope used in
the hoising of heavy things. Over-^ale the Runner, pull down that end with a
hook in it, to hitch into the slings etc, Rupelmond, a Town in Flanders.
Ruption, l. a breaking. Ruptor, l. a breaker. Ruptory, f. a Corrosive, or that
which has power to break. Rupture-wort, an herb good for a Rupture, l. a
burstness. Rural, l. of the Country. Rural Deanery, the Jurisdiction of a Rural
Dean, an Officer under the Archdeacon, for dispatch of business. Ruremond, a
town in Gelderland. Rurigene, l. born in the Country. Rus^a apum, a hive of
bees. Rush-grown, as Bob-tail (in Archery.) Rushin-Castle, in Man Isle. Russia
[alba] Muscovy. Russia nigra, a Province in Poland. Rustication, l. a dwelling
in the Country. Rusticity, l. a being Rustic, -call, clownish. Rut, Copulation
of Deer, also the dashing of the sea against any thing. He Rutes it, Che. cries
fiercely. Ruth, h. watered or filled. Rutilant, l, glistering like gold.
Rutilate, l. to shine or make bright. Ruttier, (f. Routier) a direction to find
out Courses (by Sea or Land,) also an old beaten Soldier (that knows all the
places.) Ry, o. a swelling about the hawks head. Ryal, o. for Royal. Rye, a
Sea-town in Sussex. Ryparographer, as R^ypa-. Ry^elere, o. a hawk that only
rifles the feathers of a Fowl. Ryntye, Che. By your leave, stand handsomely.
S.
Sabbath, h. Hosts, Armies. Sabatons, o. Soldiers boots. Sabbath, h. [Day of]
Rest. Sabatarians, Observers of the Jewish Sabbath. Sabbatical [year] the
Seventh, when the Jews rested from Tillage, etc. Sabbatism, a keeping of the
Sabbath. Sabellians, Heretics that followed one Sabellius, he held but One
Person in the Godhead, under 3 names, etc. Sable, f. black (in Heral.) also a
rich fur of a little Tartarian beast. Sabrina, the Severn River. Sabulous, l.
Sandy, Gravelly. Saburrate, l. to balast a ship. Saccharine, l. of Sugar. Sac,
Sacha, (Sa. Cause) the Royalty which the Lord of a Manor claims, of holding
plea in Causes of debate among his Tenants. Saca^urth, -^ere, he that is
robbed. Saccus cum brochia, was a Tenure by finding a Sack and a broach for the
use of the Kings army. Sacerborgh, Sicker-, a sufficient pledge or Cautioner.
Sacerdotal, l. Priestly. Sachem, a Prince or Ruler among the West- Indians.
Sacksfettes, o. Either feat or fat (full) sacks. Sackless, No. Innocent.
Sackbut, Sp. a drawing trumpet. Sack of wool, 26 stone of 14 pound, in Scotland
24 stone of 16 pound. Sacrafield Rents, paid by some Tenants of Chuton Manor in
Sommerset. Sacramental, l. belonging to a Sacrament or Oath. Sa^rament^ries,
Calvinists in the Doctrine of the Sacrament. Sacrary, l. a S^xtry or Vestry.
Sacre, l. to hallow or dedicate. Sacr^d Artery, descending to the marrow of Os
sacrum, Sacred vein, a branch of the ^^ank vein running thither. Sacred
Majesty, the Kings inviolable person. Sacriferous, bearing holy things.
Sacrificial, belonging to Sacrifices, holy offerings. Sacrilegious, l.
committing Sacrilege, l. the robbing of God, a Church, etc. Sacrisly, l. a
vest^y. Sacrist, -stan, a Sexton or Vestry-keeper. Sadducism, the doctrine of
the Sadduces a Jewish Sect, who received only the Pentateuch, believed no
Spirit, etc. Safe Conduct, a security gien by the Prince (under the broad Seal)
to a stranger, for his quiet coming in and passing out of the Realm.
Safe-pledge, a surety for a man's appearance. Sagacity, l. a being Sagacious,
quick of apprehension. Sagam^re, an Indian King. Sagapenum, the gum of the
plant Ferula or Fenel-giant. Sagibaro, Sachbaro, sa. a Justice. Sagitate, l. to
cram. Sagittal l. of an arrow, also the straight seam upon the head. Sagittary,
-ri^s, the Archer (or Centaure) in the Zodiac. Sagittiferous, l.
shaft-bearing. Sagittipotent, a cunning Archer. Saguntine, belonging to
Saguntus, a City of Valencia in Spain. Say, (Sp. Saietta) a kind of stuff.
Sailen, o. for Assail. Sailors, Seamen, also ( o.) dauncers. Sain alse, o. for
seen also. Saint Anthonies fire, a hot Choleric blood rising to a tetter. St.
Andrews, a City in Scotland. St. Denis, the Patron of France. St. Di^, a town
in Lorrain. St. Domingo, the chief town of Hispaniola. St. Helene, the
Sea-I^ne, an Isle (in the way to the Indies) where they take in much water. St.
Hippolyte, a town in Lorrain. St. Hubert, a City in Luxemburgh. St. Laurence,
as Madagascar. St. Malo, a Port of Britany. Mont St. Michel, a town on a Rock
in the Sea between Britany and Normandy. St. Miel, a town in Lorrain. St.
Nicholas, a town in Musscovy and Lorrain. St. Omer, a town in Artois. St.
Patrick, the Patron of Ireland. St. Quentin, a town in Picardy. Saint-foin, f.
holy-grass, Medic-fodder, Spanish Trefoyl, Snail (or horned) Clover-grass.
Saint John to borow, o. with good speed (he undertaking for you.) Saint Pia^re,
a Palsy and cramp together. Saintwary, o. Sanctuary. Saker, (f. Sacre) a kind
of ^awk, and piece of Ordnance. Salacia, the Goddess of water. Salacious, l.
full of Salacity, lust, wantonness. Salad, as Salet. Salamanca, an University
of Leon. Salamander, l. a beast (like a lizard) that will live (for a while) in
the flames. Salarian, l. of Salt. Salarian verse, sung by the Priests of Mars.
Salariated, having a Salary, l. a stipend or wages, (as needful as Salt.)
Salarium, Salt-Custom. Salebrity, l. a being Salebrous, rugged, uneven.
Salenae, Salndy (or Sandy) in Bedfordshire. Salet, -lade, f. a headpiece.
Salew, o. for salute, honor. Saliant, l. (in Heraldry) leaping. Saligots, f.
Water-nuts or water-Caltrops. Salgemma, a clear Hungarian Salt like Cristal.
Salij, the 12 Priests of Mars. Solena, a Salt-pit, vate or house. Saline of the
Levant, hard Salt extracted from sea-froth. Salinous, l. of Salt or Salt Pits.
Salique Land, France, or the Land about Sala, a River in Misnia. Salique Law,
that no Woman shall reign or Inherit Land. De terra salica nulla portio
haereditatis mulieri veniat, etc. Salisbury, Sarum, the chief City of
Wiltshire, whose Cathedral has Gates, Windows and Pillars answering the
Months, Days and hours In a Year. Salivarious, like spittle. Salivation, a
fluxing by spittle. Sallow, the Goats willow. Sally, Sp. to issue out [upon the
besiegers.] Salmacian, -idan, belonging to Salmacis, a Fountain in Caria where
the Nymph Salmacis and Hermaphroditus became one, and is said to effeminate all
that drink or ^ath in it. Salmagundi, I. a dish of cold Turkey and other things.
Salmon-pipe, an engine to catch them in. Salmon sewse, the issue or young fry.
Salmoneus, King of Elis, struck to hell with a thunderbolt, as he was
thundering with his Chariot over a bridge of brass. Solomon, c. the Mass.
Solomon, Sol-, h. peaceable. Salom, o. white ( D. Salig^, happy) contrary to
the present use. Salsamentarious, l. belonging to Salt things. Salsipotent, l.
ruling the Sea. Salsure, l. a salting. Saltatory, l. belonging to. Saltation,
l. a leaping. Saltatorium, a Deer-leap. Saltimbanco, I. a Montebank. Saltuary,
l. a forester. Salture, l. a leaping. Saltleot, a town in Lincolnshire.
Salvage-money, allowed (by the Civil Law) to the Ship that saves another from
enemies. Salva guardia, the Kings protection to a stranger fearing violence for
seeking his right at Law. Salvatel vein, runs through the wrist into the hand
to the division of the third and little fingers. Salubrity, wholsomness, also
healthfulness. Salve, l. God save you. Salvediction, a saluting. Salver, a
broad plate (with a foot) used in giving Beer, etc. to save the Carpet or
Clothes. Salus, a gold Crown coined by Hen. 5th. in France. Salutary, l.
wholesome. Salutatory, l. where people stand to salute a Prince. Salutiferous,
l. bringing health, Salvation, or safety. Salutigerous, l. bringing
commendations from one. Salzbourg, a City in Bavaria. Samaritans, people of
Samaria, part of Syria. Sambenito, San (or Santo*) Benito, sp. a Sackcloth in
which Penitents are reconciled to the Church. Sambre, a river of Hainault.
Sambuke, l. a dulcimer, also an engine of war. Samekle, sc. as much. Samian,
belonging to Samos, an Isle where were good earthen pots and whetstones. Samet,
Sammet, D. Satin or Velvet. Samoners, o. for summoners. Samogitia, a Province
of Poland. Samonds, de sancto Amando, an ancient family in Wilts. Samothr^cia,
Dardania, an Aegaean Isle. Samplar, (Exemplar) a pattern [of needle-work] or
rather (for Sarpliar) the Canvas on which the Scholars work. Sampson, h. there
the second time. Samuel, h. heard (or placed) of God. Sanahle, l. curable.
Sanative, l. healing. Sanballat, h. a bramble hid in secret. Sance-bell,
Sanctus bell, wont to be rung when the Priest said, Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus,
^ominus, Deus Sabbath. Sanc^ia, Sancta, a woman's name. Sanctification, l. a
making holy. Sanctiloqueut, speaking holily. Sanctimony, -ity, l. holiness.
Sanction, l. a decree. Sanctuary, l. a holy place, a refuge for Offenders.
Sanctum Sanctorum, the most holy part of the Temple. Sand, o. sending. Sandal,
h. an old-fashioned open shoe; also as Sanders, Saunders, a precious physical
Indian wood, of 3 sorts, Red, white and yellow. Sandapile, l. a bier.
Sandarack, l. Red Arsenick or Orpine (for paint.) Sand-bag, on which the Graver
turns his plate. Sandwich, a port-town in Kent. Sandever, Suin-, f. (the fat of
glass) a very white salt easily dissolving. Sandon-Castle, in Wight-Isl^.
Sandwich, a Town in Kent. Sand-gavel, a payment for liberty to dig sand.
Sanglant, f. bloody. Sanglier, f. a wild boar. Sanguin, -nary, -neous, -nolent,
l. bloody. Sanguis draconis, the red gum of the Dragon-tree. Sanhedrim, -in, h.
the supreme Court or Council of the Jews, viz* the High Priest and 70 Elders.
Sanjacks, Sansiacks, Turkish Governors of Cities, Next (in Dignity) to
Bashaws. Sanicle, l. a healing herb. Sanity, l. health, soundness. Sankfin,
Sang-fin, f. the final end of a lineage. Santalum, Sanders. Santon, a Town in
Cleveland. Santo, -on, Sp. a great Saint. Saphen (or Saphaeno) vein, the Mother
vein, the first branch of the thigh vein. Saphick (or Sapphique) verse, of a
Trochet, Spondee, Dactyl, and two Trochees, invented by Sapho, Sappho, a
Poetress of Mitylene. Sapphire, an Indian azure stone. Sap-green, the Juice of
the Rhamnus (or Christ's thorn) berry (for dying and paint.) Sapidity, -por, l.
a being Sapid, l. Savory. Sapientipotent, mighty in Sapience, l. wisdom. Sar, a
river in Lorrain. Saraband, I. a kind of quick air in Music. Sarah, b. Lady or
Mistress. Sarbrucken, a town of Triers. Sarcasm, g. a biting taunt.
Sarcastical, belonging thereto. Sarcel, a hawks pinnion. Sarcenet, a kind of
thin Taffata. Sarcinate, l. to load with packs. Sarcinarious, belonging to
packs. Sarcling-time, f. weeding-. Sarcocolla, g. a healing Persian gum.
Sarcoma, g. a bunch of flesh growing on the nose. Sarcophage, g. Eat-flesh, a
stone wherein bodies enclosed do quickly consume, also any tomb. Sarcotick, g.
breeding new or superstuous flesh. Sarculate, l. to weed. Sardanapalus, a very
luxurious King (the last) of Assyria, who (in the rebellion) burnt himself and
all his wealth. Sardeleben, a town in Brandenburg. Sardinia, a Spanish Isle in
the Mediterranean. Sardel, -dine, l. a pilcher. Sardonyx, Sardonian (or
Sardine) stone, a Corneol, found in Sardinia, a Ligustick (or Libyan) Island.
Sardon, a venomous herb (like smallage) causing a Sardonick laughter,
immoderate and deadly. Sare, o. for sore. Sarentine, a town in Mechlenburgh.
Sarlinish, o. a kind of Sarcenet. Sarmati^, a large Country, part in Europe,
part in Asia. Sarmentitious, l. of twigs. Sarpedon, King of Lycia, killed at Troy
by Patroclus. Sarplesis, -eris, o. packs. Sarpliar, (f. Sarpillere) a piece of
Canvas etc. to wrap wa^es in. Sarplar (or Pocket) of wool, (in Scotland,
Serpliathe) half a Sack or 80 stone. Cow. Sarve the rope, lay on synnet, yarn,
canvas, etc. Sarse, a hair-sieve. Sarsaparilla, Prickly-bind-weed. Sartor, l. a
Botcher. Sarum, Salisbury. Sased, o. stuffed. Sassafras, Agne-tree of Florida,
the bark is sweet in smell and very Physical. Sasse, a Floud-gate, Lock,
Turn-pike, Sluice. Sassinate, as Assassinate. Satanical, belonging to Satan,
Satan, h. an Adversary, the Devil. Sat me sore, o. touched me greatly.
Satellite, l. a Sergeant or Yeoman of the guard. Satiate, l. to satisfy or
^loy. Satiety, l. fullness. Sation, l. sowing, planting. Satisdation, l. a
putting in of Surety. Satisfaction, l. amends, content. Satorious, of sowing or
sowed. Satournade, o. yellow, or rather leaden and livid. Satrap, g. the
Governor of a [ Persian] Province. Saturate, to cause Saturity, l. fullness,
plenty. Saturnals, -lian feasts, celebrated (about the middle of December) in
honor of Saturn, an old heathen Deity, Son of Cael^ and Vesta, deposed by his
Son Jupiter, also the dullest of the Planets, also (in Chemistry) Lead, and (in
Heraldry) Sable. Saturnia, the line of Saturn, (from the palm toward the middle
finger.) Saturnian, -ine, barren, Dull, Melancholy, Unlucky. Satyr, an hairy
Mo^ster, like a horned man with Goats feet; also an invective poem, Satirical,
belonging thereto. Satyrist, such a writer. Satyriasis, as Priapismus.
Satyrion, g. Rag-wort, Standle-wort. Saverden, a town in Lorrain. Sauciate, l.
to wound. Bolonia Saucidge, made of chopped Beef, Bacon, Pepper, ginger and salt
in an Ox gut. Save, o. (I. Savio) Sage, Wise. Saver default, to excuse a
default. Savine, a shrub like Tamarisk. Saul, b. desired. Sault, o. for
Assault. Saults, f. jumps. Saultoir, (in Heraldry) St. Andrews Cross. Saunce
dout, (f. Sans doubt) o. without doubt. Savoy, a Duchy between France and
Switzerland. Saunders, as Sanders. Saunkefin, as Sankfin,. Sautry, o. for
Psaltery. Sawsfleme, o. red-faced. Saws, Saughs, o. sayings. Saur-pool, No. a
stinking puddle. Sax. Saxony, part of Germany, the Country of the Saxons,
(wearing Seaxes or crooked swords) who (next to the Romans) conquered Britain.
Saxifical, l. turning (o^ turned) to stone. Saxifrage, an herb that breaks the
stone in the Kidneys. Saxifragant, l. breaking (or broken against) stones.
Saxmondham, a town in Suffolk. Say of it, Sf. taste of it. Scabious, l Scabby,
also an herb. Scabrous, l. rough, uneven. Scaevity, l. a being left handed, or
unlucky. Scaevola, as Mutius Scae-. Scalado, Sp. the scaling of a town. Scalar,
-ry, belonging to a Scale, l. a ladder. Scale of miles, a measure of them
proportionable to the Draught. Scale of music, the Gammut. Scale, a place in
Zant, where (after 14 days) one stands and publicly cites offenders. Scalae
Gemoniae, as Gemony. Scaldis, the river Scheldt in the low Countries. Scallop,
Shallop, Sp. a Ship-boat. Scalp, the skin covering the skull. Scalper, -ping
iron, a Surgeons scraping Instrument. Scammony, purging bind-weed.
Scandalize, g. to slander, also to give one occasion (by example) to sin or be
offended. Scandalous, l. giving offense. Scandalum Magnatum, [a writ to recover
damage upon] a wrong done to any high Personage, by false reports etc.
Scanderbeg, (Tu. Lord Alexander) George Castriot Prince of Epirus, who is said
to have slain 3000 Turks with his own hands. Scandia, -inavia, Scanzia,
Basilia, Baltia, a large Peninsula, containing part of Denmark, and the
greatest part of Sweden. Scandular, l. of Shingles or wooden tiles. Scania,
Schonen, part of Scandia. Scansion, l. the scanning or proving of a verse.
Scantilone, o. (for Scantling) a measure. Scapular, l. belonging to the
shoulder, also as Scapulary, the upper narrow cloth worn by Friars, down to
their feet on both sides. Scar, o. a steep rock. Scarabee, l. a beetle.
Scaramouche, an Italian Zani (or Player) who lately acted in London.
Scarborough, a town in Yorkshire. Scarceheed, o. for Scarcity. Scarkalla, some
old prohibited fishing tool. Scarfing, letting the end of one timber into the
end of another, wood and wood, or very close and even. Scarification, -fying, a
cutting or lancing. Scariole, broad-leaved Endive. Scarpe, the slopeness of a
wall, also (in Heraldry) a Commanders Scarf. Scarre, No. a naked rock. Scathe,
D. to hurt. S^athless, o. indemnified. Scatinian law, against preposterous
venery. Scaturiginous, l. Overflowing. Scavage, Schevage, Schewage, Scheauwing,
Sceawing, Scewinga, Sa. a toll exacted of Merchant Strangers for Wares showed
or offered to sale; forbidden by 19 Henry 7. Scavengers, (D. Schaven to shave)
two yearly Officers in every Parish about London, who hire Rakers and Carts to
cleanse the streets. Scedasus, a Baeotian who killed himself for his daughters
being ravished and drowned in his absence. Scelestique, l. wicked. Sceleton, g.
an anatomy, or frame of dry bones. Scellum, Sche-, D. a rogue. Scenical,
belonging to a Scene, l. the changing of persons on a Stage, also the forepart
thereof. Scenker, Skinker, Sa. he that fills the cup. Scenography, g. the
presenting a work with its shadows, according to perspective. Skeptical,
belonging to Skepticism, the Opinion of Scepticks, g. Philosophers
contemplating things and leaving them in suspense, professing they knew
nothing. Scep^riferous, l. Scepter-bearing. Scevity, as Scoevity. Sc^vola, as
Scaevola. Schamlat, a town in Westphalia. Schammatha, b. as Maranatha, an
Excommunication to death. Scharp, a river in Flanders. Schediasm, g. an
ex-tempore work. Schedule, l. a little scroll. Scheld, a River in Flanders.
Schelink, a town in Westfrizeland. Scheme, g. a figure or outward fashion.
Schene, 5 miles, and in some places 7 and an half. Schenk, a Fort in
Gelderland. Schiff, a Ship-boat. Schirius, a hard swelling without pain.
Schismatical, belonging to a Schismatic, one guilty of Schism, g. a separation
or division [in the Church.] Schlesie, Silesia. Schelstad, a town in upper
Alsace. Scholastica, a woman's name. Scholastic, g. Scholar-like. Scholay, o.
[School] exhibition. Scholiast, a writer of a Scholy, -lion, g. a short and
critical exposition. Schoonhoven, a town in Holland. Schwerin, the chief town
of Mechlenbourg. Sciagraph, g. a platform or description of a building.
Sciamachy, g. a counterfeit fighting, or with shadows. Sciater, l. an
instrument to design a situation. Sciatherical, belonging to a sun-dial.
Sciatick vein, seated above the outward ankle, usually opened for the Sciatica,
l. the hip-gout. Science, l. skill, knowledge. Liberal Sciences, Grammar,
Logic, Rhetoric, Music, Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy. Scientifical, l.
filling or filled with skill. Scilcester, a town in Northumberland. Sciled, o.
(q. S^iled) closed. Scimitar, as Scymitar. Scintillation, l. a sparkling.
Sciolous, belonging to a Sciolist, l. a smatterer. Sciomantie, g. divining by
shadows. Scion, a graff, or young shoot. Scipper, Sch-, Sk-, D. the Master of a
Ship, also (with us) any Seaman. Scipio, a name of sundry famous Romans. Scire
facias, a writ calling one to show why Judgment (passed at least a year before)
should not be executed. Sciron, a Pirate of Megara. Scirpean, l. of bulrushes.
Scirrhaus, belonging to Scirrhus, as Schirrus. Scissile, -sible, l. to be cut.
Scissure, l. a cleft or division. Scitament, l. a pleasant dish or discourse.
Site, l. a decree or statute. Scitturn, Hamp. a shrewd-turn. Sclavonia,
Widishmark, westward on the Adriatic. Scluse, a town in Flanders. Scolion, as
Scho-. Scoll, o. a shole of fish. Scolopendra, g. a venomous worm with many
feet, also a fish that frees himself of the hook by casting out his bowels.
Scom, g. a scoff or jeer. Sconce, (in Oxford) to set a mulct upon ones Sconce,
a head, a block-house or fortress. Scopelism, g. rockiness. Scopticks, g.
Jeers, flouts. Scopulous, l. full of rocks. Scorbutic, -call, of or subject to
the Scorbute, l. the Scurvy. Scordium, Water-German der. Scorning, o. (f.
Escorner to unhorn) changing. Scorpion, a seven-footed Serp^nt with a sting in
his tail, also an engine to shoot arrows. Scorpion-grass, resisting the poison
of vipers. Scortator, l. a whoremonger. Scot and Lot, a customary contribution
laid on all subjects, according to their ability. Scot-Ale, Ale-shot. a
drinking at the Foresters for fear of his displeasure. Scotists, followers of
Scotus, John Duns, or subtle Doctor opposer of the Thomists. Scotomatical,
troubled with a Scotomy, g. a Vertigo or dizziness in the head. Scottering, a
wad of pease burnt and parcht by the boys in Herefordshire, at the end of
harvest. Scottish-waith, Sc. the Picts wall. Scovel, I. a Malkin. Scoundrel, I.
a base fellow. Scour, c. to wear. Scout, c. a watch. Scout, D. a discoverer.
Scowen, an Isle in Zeland. Scrat, a kind of Hermaphrodite. Screable, l. which
may be spat out. Screation, l. a spitting. Screkingham, a town in Lincolnshire.
Scribes, l. Writers, and (among the Jews) expounders of the Law. Scriesten, a
town in the Palatinate. Scribender, a Scribe. Scrip, c. [a piece of] paper.
Scriptorian, l. belonging to writing. Scrivenish, o. (q. Scrivnerish)
subtilely. Scrofulous, Scroph-, belonging to the Scrofula, l. the King's Evil.
Scrudland, Sa. Land allotted for buying Apparel. Scruff, sorry fuel gathered by
poor folk by the Thames side. Scrupular, belonging to a Scruple, l. seven
grains and a half. Scrupulosity, a being Scrupulous, full of Scruples, l.
doubtings. Scrutable, capable of Scrutation, l. searching. Scrutiny, a search,
a perusal of suffrages or Votes. Scry [of fowl.] a great flock. Scull of
Frerys, c. a Company of Friars or Brethren. Sculk of Foxes, a great many.
Sculpter, l. a Carver. Sculpture, a graving. Scumber, a Foxes dung. Scuppers,
the holes through which the water runs off the Deck. Scurrility, a being
Scurrile, -lous, l. basely abusive, ^aucily scoffing. Scut, a hares tail.
Scutage, a subsidy granted H. 3. for his voyage to the Holy Land. Scutagio
habendo, a writ against him that held by Knights-service. Scute, o. 3 Shill. 4
Pence. Scutcheon, as Escutcheon; also a bud for inoculation. Scutiferous, l.
Shield-bearing. Scutiform, like a Scutcheon or Shield. Scuttle, a square hole
to go down through the Deck. Scutum armorum, a Coat of arms. Scyld, Sa. debt or
default. Scylla, the Rock over against Charybdis, between Sicily and Italy.
Scylas, -llis, a skillful diver who regained much shipwrackt wealth. Scymitar,
I. a crooked Persian sword. Scyre-gemot, Sa. was a Court held (twice a year) by
the Bishop and Sheriffs, giving in Charge both the Ecclesiastical and Temporal
laws. Scytale, l. a field-mouse, also a staff which the Lacedaemonians wrote
secret letters on. Scythick. -ian, belonging to Scythia, a large Northern
Country. God him Se, o. look upon him, or bless him. Sea-lamprey, as Remora.
Sea-lungs, Sea-froth. Seal, a Sea-calf. Seam, as Seem, Sean-fish, taken with a
Sean, Li. a great long net. Sea-rover, a Pirate. Seasing, binding ropes fast
with rope-yarn. The boats Seasing, the rope that fastens it to the ships side.
Seasnaple, a kind of shelfish. Seater, a Saxon idol. Seax, a crooked Saxon
sword. Sebacean, l. of tallow. Sebastian, g. honorable. St. Sebastians, a town
in Brasil built by the Portingals. Sebasto-crator, the third man in the
Constantinople-Empire, the second being Despot* Sebesten, Myzaria, an Assyrian
plum. Secament, l. a chip, etc. Secandunum, Secking^on in Warwickshire. Secant,
a line from the Center through one extreme of an Arch, meeting the tangent
raised from the Diameter at the other. Secation, l. a cutting. Secern, l. to
sever (by sifting. Secession, l. a departing. Seclude, l. to shut out or apart.
Seclusion, a shutting out. Seclusory, l. a place where a thing is shut up
apart. Second, the sixtieth part of a minute. Second deliverance, a writ for a
second replevying of Cattle upon security, etc. Secondary, next to the Chief
Officer. Secondine, the Heam (in Beasts) or afterbirth (in Women.) Secta ad
Curiam, a writ against him that refuses to perform his Suit. Secta facienda,
etc. a writ to compel the heir that has the elders part of the Coheirs, to
perform service for all the Coparceners. Secta Molendini or ad Molendinum,
against him that forsakes the mill he used to frequent; or against a tenant
holding by making suit to the Lords mill. Secta ad justitiam faciendam, a
service to which a man is bound by his fee. Secta unica, etc. for the heir
distrained to more suits than one. Sectis non faciendis, for a woman, who (for
her dower) owes no Su^e of Court. Sectary, l. the follower of a Sect, a party
[divided from the Church.] Section, l. a division [of a Chapter.] Sective, l.
[to be] cut. Sector, two right lines with an angle at the Center, and the
Circumference assumed by them, also an Instrument with all variety of angles
etc. Secular, belonging to an age or the World. Secular plays, (to Apollo and
Diana) once in 100 years. Secular Priests, conversing in the World, not tied to
a Monastic life. Secunda superoneratione pasturae, a writ against him who
(after an admeasurement made) surcharges the Common again. Secundary, as
Secondary. Secundate, l. to cause to prosper. Secundine, as Secondine.
Securiferous, l. ax-bearing. Securitatem inveniendi, etc. a writ to stop one
from going out of the Kingdom without license. Securitate pacis, against him
that threatens another with death or danger. Sedation, l. a rendering one
Sedate, l. quiet, appeased. Se defendendo, a Plea for killing one in his own
defense, yet must he procure his pardon from the Lord Chancellor, and forfeits
his goods to the King. Sedentary, l. sitting much. Sediment, l. settling, dregs.
Seditiary, one that is Seditious, given to Sedition, l. faction, mutiny. Sedan,
a town and province by Champagne and Luxemburg. Seduce, l. to lead aside.
Seduction, a mis-leading. Sedulity, l. diligence. Sedulous, l. diligent.
Seed-leap or lib, E. a basket for seed-corn on the arm. See, o. a Seat.
Seeling, a sudain heeling, forced by the motion of the Sea or Wind. Seel, Seal,
E. time, season. Seem (or Seam) of glass, 120 pound. Seer, Sere, o. dry.
Segador, Sp. a harvestman. Sege of herons or bittours, a great company. Segge,
D. Say. Segges, Sa. Soldiers. Segmentation, a cutting into Segments, l. pieces,
parcels. Segnity, l. slothfulness. Segregate, l. to separate [from the flock.]
Sejant, Seisant, Seant, f. sitting upright (in Heraldry.) Sejan-horse, of a
wonderful bigness and composure, first backed by Sejanus, a great favorite of
Tiberius, whose pride brought him to a miserable end. Siegnorage, the Kings
challenging an allowance for Gold and Silver brought in the Mass to be coined.
Seignory, the Jurisdiction of a Seignor, -nior, -neur, f. a Lord. Seimo^^* de
Sancto Mauro, an Ancient and Noble Family. Seinde, a for singed [Bacon.] Seint,
o. (f. C^inte) a gir^^* Selsina babenda, etc. to deliver lands to the Lord
(convict of Felony) after the King has had the Year, day and Waste. Seisin, f.
possession. Primier Seisin, the first, etc. Seizing, taking hold of. Sejugate,
l. to separate. Sejunction, a putting asunder. Seek, o. for Sick. Seker, o. in
like manner, truly. Selah, ^. a note of resting or of observation. Selbie, a
town in Yorkshire. Selde, o. for Seldom. Selda, Sa. a seat, window, shop, etc.
Selt-graving, in steel or copper, a^ flat-stich is in wood. Seland, the
greatest Island in the Baltic Sea. Selenite, g. a stone with a white spot
increasing and decreasing with the moon, also a Moon-Dweller. Selenography, g.
a description of the Moon. Seleucus, one of Alexanders Captains, King of Syria.
Self-heal, a wound-herb. Sell, No. Self. Sellander, a Scab in the bend of a
horses hinder ham. Selkougth, Sa. Seldom known. Selle, a River in Lorrain.
Selimus, the Turk that added Egypt and Arabia to his Empire. Selion, Seillon,
f. a Ridge of land between two furrows; also a Land (of uncertain quantity.)
Sellary, l. a place of benches. Selt, Che. a Chance. Selvage, the margin of
linen cloth. Selve momet, o. the same moment. Sely, o. for silly, also (D.
Salig) happy. Seltz, a Town in lower Alsace. Sem, Shem, h. a Name. Seem, E. a
horse-load, 8 bushels. Semblable, f. alike. Semblance, f. likeness, a seeming.
Semblaunt, o. a look. Sembrief, a full time (in Music.) Semde, o. for Seemed.
Semele, the Mother of Bacchus. Semelihede, o. Comeliness. Sementation, l. a
seeding. Sementine, belonging to sowing or seed-time. Sementing, o. (for
Cementing) dawbing. Semicastration, l. half-gelding. Semicircular, l. like half
a Circle. Semicolon, half a Colon (;) Semicope, o. a short cloak. Semicupe,
-pium, a half-bath up to the navel. Semidiameter, half a Diameter, from the
Circumference to the Center. Semidole, a pipe, half a Tun. Semiferous, half
wild. Semihore, half an hour. Semimarine, half marine. Seminality, a being
Seminal, l. belonging to seed. Seminary, l. a seed-plot or Nursery [of plants,
learning etc. Seminate, l. to sow or breed. Semination, a sowing etc.
Seminifical, l. producing seed. Semipedal, l. of half a foot. Semipelagians,
holding Grace necessary to the perseverance, but not the beginning of good
works. Semiquadrat, an aspect of 45 degrees. Semiquaver, half a quaver.
Semiquintil, an aspect of 36 degrees. Semiramis, Wife to Ninus whom she
made-away and succeeded in the Kingdom of Assyria. Semitar, as Scymitar.
Semitate, l. to make paths. Semivowels, l. the liquids. Semiustulated,
half-burnt. Sempiternal, l. everlasting. Sempt, o. for seemed. Semuncial, of
half an ounce. Sena, a purging plant of Syria and Arabia. Senacherib, h.
bramble of destruction. Senary, l. belonging to 6. a verse of 6 feet, the sixth
days work. Senatorian, belonging to a Senator, an Alderman, or one of the
Senate, l. the supreme Council. Sendal, f. fine linen, also a kind of Cyprus
Silk. Seneca, Tutor to Nero, who caused him to bleed to death. Sends much, [the
Ship] falls deep (a-stern or ahead) into the trough of the Sea. Senescal,
-shall, f. a steward. Senesce, l. to be Senescent, growing old. Sencucia,
Widow-hood. Senfy, Not. likelihood. Sengle, f. a girth. Sengreen, housleek.
Senhusen, a town of Brandenburgh. Senie* as Sena. Seniority, a being Senior, l.
elder. Sensation, a perceiving by sense. Sensiferous, l. sense-bringing.
Sensine, Cu. since then. Sensory, l. an Organ of the Senses, Hearing, Seeing,
Smelling, Tasting, Feeling. Sensible, l. apt to perceive or be perceived.
Sensitive, having sense. Sensuality, l. a pleasing or indulging of the Senses.
Sentement, as Sentiment, a thought. Senten, o. for sent. Sententiosity, a being
Sententious, l. full of Sentences, wise sayings. Sentiment, f. a feeling
apprehension. Sentinel, f. a sentry standing to watch. Senvie, (f. Seneve) the
mustard plant. Separation, a setting apart, dividing. Separatist, one that
withdraws himself from the Church. Separatory, an instrument to pick out
splinters of bones. Sepiment, l. a sense or hedge. Seplasiary, -iator, l. a
maker or user of sweet ointments. Seposition, l. a setting apart. Sept, l. an
enclosure. Septs, the multitudes of the same name in Ireland. Septangle, l. a
figure which is Septangular, of seven corners. Septemfluous, of 7 streams.
Septempedal, l. of 7 foot. Septemvirate, l. the authority of Septemviri, 7
coequal Officers. Septenary, a seven, also as Septenarious, belonging to
seven. Septennial, of seven years. Septentrional, Northern. Septical, l. making
rotten or ripe (as matter in a sore.) Septifarious, of seven fashions.
Septifluous, as Septemfl. Septimane, l. a week, also falling out on the seventh
[day, week, etc. Septimarians, weekly Officers in Monasteries. Septimestre, of
seven months. Septuagenary, of 70. Septuagesimal, the same, also belonging to
Septuagesima [Sunday,] the next but one before Shrove-Sunday. Septuagint, l.
the Greek translation of the Bible (at the request of Ptolomy King of Egypt) by
the Septuagints, the seventy (or 72) interpreters, Jewish Elders* Septuary, a
week, or any thing composed of seven. Septuncial, of 7 ounces. Sepulchral, l.
of the grave. Sepulchred, buried. Sepulture, l. a burying. Sequacious, l.
easily following. Sequedrie, as Surquedrie. Sequatur sub suo periculo, a
summons, when one appears not at an alias and a pluries. Sequela curiae, suit
of Court. Sequel, l. a consequence, a retinue. Sequence, l. a following of
things in order. Sequences, verses answering one another Sequentially, in
Order. Sequestrator, he that does Sequester, -trate, to separate a thing in
Controversy from the possession of both parties, also to seize on the rents of
Delinquents estates. Sequestration, is also the Ordinaries disposing the goods
of one deceased, whose estate no man will meddle with, also the gathering the
fruits of a void benefice for the use of the next incumbent. Sequestro habendo,
a writ for the dissolving the Bishops sequestration of the fruits of a
Benefice, etc. Seraglio, the Turks Palace. Serain, f. the evening fresh air,
also the damp vapor then falling. Seraph* a Turkish gold coin about a Crown.
Seraphick, -call, like the Seraphim, h. (shining or flaming) the highest order
of Angels. Seraphis, -pis, an Egyptian Idol. Sercil feathers, a hawks pinions.
Sere, the yellow between the hawks beak and eyes. Sere, sc. for sore. Sered
pokettes, o. locked up. Serenade, f. evening music under his Mistresses window.
Serene, l. without clouds. Serenity, l. clearness. Sergeant at Law or of the
Co^f, Sergeant Cauntor, the highest degree in the Profession of the Common Law.
Sergeanty, service due to the King by his Tenants tenure. Grand Serjeanty, to
be performed in person. Petit Serjeanty, yielding some small thing toward his
wars, as a Sword, etc. Sergeant, a Griffin (in Heraldry. Sericated, l. clad in
Silk. Series, l. an Order or succession. Sermacinate, l. to discourse.
Serosity, the wheyish part of blood. Serous, l. wheyish, waterish. Serotine,
-nous, l. late in the Evening. Serpentary, Vipers-grass. Serpentine, belonging
to Serpents, l. all creeping things. Serpentine verses, beginning and ending
with the same word. Serpentine, as Basilisco. Serpet, o. a kind of basket.
Serred, f. joined close. Sertotius, a Roman, general of the Lusitanians against
the Romans, slain at supper. Diana was said to attend him in the form of a
Heart. Servable, that may be kept. Servage, o. slavery. Servet, as Sherbet.
Serville, l. slavish. Serviotis, sc. (f. Serviettes) Napkins. Servitor, f. a
Servant, a poor Scholar waiting on another. Servitors of bills, now the
Tipstaffs of the Kings Bench. Servitude, l. slavery. Serys, o. the skin of the
hawks feet ( f. S^rres, pounces) Seseli, s. Hart-wort. Ses^stris, a King of
Egypt. Sesquialteral, containing one and a half. Sesquiquarta, when a fourth
part is added. Sesquitertian, having a 3d part more than another. Session, l. a
sitting. Sessions, the quarterly sitting of Justices in Court. Sesterce, -cie,
H. S. (for IIS. or LLS.) a fourth part of the Roman Denarius, two As's and a
half, almost twopence. Sestine, f. a staff of 6 verses. Set [a land, Ship,
etc.] observe by the compass upon what point they bear. Set-bolts, Irons
forcing the works and planks of the Ship together. Sethim, Setim, Sittim,
Shittim, a tree of Judaea, whose timber never rots. Setle the Deck, lay it
lower. Setigerous, l. bristle-bearing. Settle, a town in Yorkshire. Setron, o.
(q Citron) bright of hue. Settles, o. grafts. Setsoil, Tormentile. Setwall,
Valerian. Severance, the singling of those that join in one writ. Sevenock, a
town in Kent. Seven-shale, a town in Northumberland. Severians, Heretics
following Severus, he condemned marriage, Flesh, Wine, etc. Severn, a famous
River by Shrewsbury, Worcester, Gloucester and Bristol. Sevidical, speaking
cruelly. Sevil, as Sivil. Sevocation, l. a calling aside. Sew, Sewen, o. for
sown. Sewed [ship,] when (the water being gone) she lies dry. Goes Sew, Ss.
[the Cow] goes dry. Sewer, he that ushers up and places the meat of a great
Personage; also a passage for water into a River (corruptly called the [common]
shore. Sewel, a thing set to keep out Deer. Sewing, o. placed, following.
Sewis, (f. Suivre) to follow. Sexagesima [Sunday,] next before Shrove-Sunday
and the sixth before Passion-Sunday. Sexenniat, of 6 years. Sextant, a very
small coin, or the sixth part of any thing divided into twelve. Sextantary,
belonging thereto. Sextary, a pint (or pound) and a half, Sexte, part of the
Canon Law added to the decretals. Sexten, as Sacristan. Sextery, as Sacrary.
Sextile, l. an Aspect of 60 Degrees, also as Sextilian [Moneth] August.
Sextule, a deam and a scruple. Sextuple, l. containing six. Sev. o. seen, saw.
Sfachia, a town in Candia. Shack, Nf. a general common for Hogs, from the end
of harvest till seed-time. To go at Shack, to go at large. Shack-bolt, a
shackle or fetter. Shad, o. parted. Shadrach, h. a little tender dug. Shackles,
oblong ship-rings for the shutting of the Ports, etc. Shaft, an arrow, and (in
Darbyshire) a digging like a Well. Shafman, No. the same as Shaft-met, -ent,
sa. the measure of the fist, with the thumb set up, half a foot. Shaftsbury, a
town in Dorset-shire. Shallop, Sc-, Ch-, f. a small sea-vessel, also a
shel-fish. Shamgar, h. desolation of the stranger. Shamois, as Chamois.
Shamsheer, a Persian sword more crooked than a Scymiter. Shan, Li.
shamefacedness. Shank, the longest part [of the Anchor. Shank-painter, a short
chain (by the Ships side) on which rests all the weight of the anchors
after-part. Shap, o. fate, destiny. Shapely, o. likely. Shapournet, a
resemblance, (in Heraldry) of the Chaperon or French-hood. Sharnebude, o. a
Beetle. Sharping-corn, given at Christmas (by some Farmers) to their Smith, for
sharping plough-irons, etc. Shash, the whole piece of linen (Telbent) whereof
the Turbant (or rather Sharuck) is made, or which is tied about the middle.
Shavaldries, o. feats of Chivalry. Shaw, o. shadow, tuft of trees, a wood round
a close, Ss. Shaw, P. a King. Shaw-zawdeh, P. the Grand Seignors Son. Shawl,
Ss. a winnowing shovel. Shead, La. to distinguish. Shearing, when the ship goes
in and out, and is not steered steddily, also ( No.) reaping. Sheer-hooks, most
unuseful irons set into the yard-arms (to cut the enemies shrowds, etc.)
Sheat-anchor, the biggest. Sheats, ropes bent to the clew of all Sails, also
the planks (under water) which come along the run of the ship and are closed to
the stern-post. Sheath a Ship, case it (under water) with thin boards over hair
and tar, to keep out the Southern Worms. No Shed, No. No difference between
things. Shed, Che. to strike off a piece. Shede, o. to de] part. Sheen, Shene,
o. shining. Sheep-shanks, two masts (or yards) set up and seized across one
another near the top. Sheers, two poles so set up. Sheevers, which run round in
the pullies and blocks. Sheffield, a town in Yorkshire. Shefford, a town in
Bedfordshire. Shekle. as Sicle. Sheldaple, a Chaffinch. Sheld, Sf. flecked,
party-colored. Shem, as Sem. Shemmering, o. glimmering. Shend, o. to blame, or
spoil. Shent, o. a barrow-pig. Shepen, o. simple, fearful. Shepens, o.
Sheep-coats. Shepster, o. Shepherd. Shepton-mallet, a town in Somersetshire.
Sherbet, a pleasant drink (of Limons, Sugar, Amber, etc. or Violets, Honey,
juice of Raisins, etc.) of great request among the Turks and Persians.
Sher^orn, a town in Yorkshire, Dorcet-shire, and other places. Shermans-craft,
the shearing of Cloth (at Norwich.) Sherry, (Sp. Xeres) a Seatown of Corduba in
Spain. Shetland, a Northern Isle. Shete, o. sat, or shoot. Shetten; o. shut in.
Shibboleth, h. an ear of Corn. Shield, sa. to defend. Shift, o. to bestow.
Shildes, o. French Crowns. Shilling, sa. was but five pence. Shilo, -oh, h.
sent. Shimper, Ss. to shine. Shingle, a lath. Shingled, o. for singled, or made
of Shingles. Shingles, a heat arising in the body, if it get round, it kills*
Ship Money, an imposition (1635.) for the providing Ships for the Kings
service* etc. declared unlawful by Stat. 17. Car. 1. Shippen, No. a Cow-house.
Shipt^n, a town in Shropshire, Worcestershire, and about a dozen more. Shire,
sa, a division or County. Shirif, -ref, Shire-reve, sa. the chief yearly
Officer (under the King) of a Shire. Shirifalty, the time of ones being
Sheriff. Shire-Clerk, the undersheriff or his deputy. Shirtband, Y. a band.
Shoad, the Tin-stones in Cornwall. Shoars, props. Shode, o. a bush of hair.
Shoder, o. for shoulder. Shope me, o. shoved or thrust my self. Shoplift, c,
one that pretends to cheapen, and steals wares. Shore, o. a cleft or cranny.
Shorefhode, o. for Sherifdom. Shoreham, (old and new) in Sussex. Shorling, a
fell after the Fleece is shorn off, also a shorn Sheep. Shot of Cable; two
cables spliced together. Shoud, a Turkish Justice. Shoulderd head, an arrow
head (with a shoulder) betvveen blunt and sharp. Shoulder^pight, when the
pitch or point of the horses shoulder is displaced. Showl, shallovv at Sea.
Good Showling, growing shallovv by degrees. Shraping, o. scraping. Shrew, a
kind of Fieldmouse very mischievous to Cattle. Shrewsbury, Shroes-, Salep, the
chief town of Shropshire. Shrift, -ivi^g, sa. auricular confession. Shright,
o. a shriking or crying out. Shrine, (Scrinium, a chest) that which contains
the body of a Saint. Shrowds, the ropes that come from either fi^e of all the
Masts. Shrove-tide, Confession-time. Shrove-tuesday, the first tuesday after
the first new mood that happens after January. Shuck, so. a husk. Shullen, o.
for Shall. Shun, Ss. to shove. Shymar, a short vest, formerly a Bishops long
robe. Sialoquent, l. spitting in his speech. Sib, sa. kindred. No sole Sib'd,
No. Nothing akin. No more Sib'd than sieve and riddle, that grew both in a wood
together, Che. Sibberidg, -red, Sf. banes of Matrimony. Sibilation, l. a
hissing. Sibils, as Sybils. Siccaneous, l. dry, without springs. Siccifical, l.
cars^ng Siccity, l. drieness. Sich, Sike, No. a little watercourse, dry in
summer. Sicilian, belonging to Sicily, an Isle by Italy. Sickerly, No. surely.
Sicle, Shekel, h. half an ounce, half a Crown. Siclike, o. such like. Sicut
alias, a second writ when the first was not executed. Side-laies, when dogs are
let slip at a deer as he passes. Sidemen, Assistants to the Churchwardens.
Side, No. long, also proud. Si douset et la margarete, (Si doucette est la
marguerite, f.) so sweet is the daisy. Siderated, l. planet-struck. Sideral,
-real, -an, Starlike^ Siderite, g. an Iron-like stone, or the loadstone drawing
iron. Sidon, a City of Phaenicia, plentiful in fish. Sidy, Ss. surly, moody.
Sie, o. to fall, also as Sigallion, as Harpocrates. Sigele, Sa. a Neck-lace.
Sigh, Seigh, o. for Saw. Sigillar, l. belonging to a so^l. Sigillative, apt to
seal or be sealed. Sigillum Hermetis, an extraordinary way of luting glasses.
Sigismund, Sa. victorious peace. Sigles, g. Ciphers, initial letters put for
the whole words. Signacle, l. a sign or seal. Signatory, l. sealing. Signature,
l. a mark. Signaturist, a marker. Signet, one of the Kings seals wherewith his
private letters are sealed. Signiferous, l. Ensign-bearing. Significavit, a
writ for the imprisoning him that stands obstinately excommunicate 40 days;
also in other Cases. Sike mister men, o. such like men. Sikerd, o. allied.
Silentiary, l. he that sees good rule and silence kept. Sile down. No. Sink
down. Sile, So. filth. Sile, o. for Exile. Silery, as Cilery. Siliceous, l.
flinty. Siligineous, l. of fine flower. Sillinder, Cylinder, the bore of a
piece. Sillogism, as Syll-. Sillographer, g. a writer of scoffs. Siliquous, l.
of the husk. Silk-thrower or throwster, a trade that winds, twists and spins
(or throws) silk. Silvestrous, as Syl-. Silures, people of South- Wales.
Silurist, one of South- Wales. Silver-spoon-head, a kind of arrow-head. Simeon,
Shi-, as Simon. Similar, -ry, l. like, of the same substance. Similitude, l.
likeness. Simmer^n, a town in the lower Palatinate. Simon, h. hearing,
obedient. Simoniacal, belonging to Simony, buying or selling of spiritual
things, from Simon Magus, a Samaritan Sorcerer, who would have bought the power
of giving the Holy Ghost. Simoniacks, followers of Simon (in that or any
Heresy.) Simon Islip, the first Erector of a printing press in England 1471.
Simonides, a Lyrick poet of Thessaly. Simous, l. flat-nosed. Simpler, -list, he
that studies Simples, plants and drugs. Simpson, E. Sf. Groundsel. Simulacre,
l. an Image. Simulation, l. a counterfeiting. Simultaneous, l. bearing a
private grudge. Sin, o. for Since. Sinai, Horeb, a Mountain of Arabia.
Sinapism, l. a medicine of mustard (to raise blisters, etc.) Sincerity, l. a
being Sincere, l. pure (as honey without wax.) Sindic, as Syndic. Sindon, g.
very fine linen. Sine, a perpendicular from one extreme of an Arch to the
other. Sine assensu Capituli, a writ aginst him that alienates Lands without
consent of his Chapter or Covent. Sine die, without day, dismissed the Court.
Sing-cantor, as Succentor. Singerles, f. apish tricks. Single, the tail of a
Deer. Singularity, a being Singular, l. without fellow. Sinisterity, a being
Sinister, l. left-sided, unlucky. Sinister base point, under the sinister
point, in the lower part of an Escutcheon. Sinnet, Rope-yarns plated together
and beaten smooth (to sarve ropes, etc.) Si non omnes, a permission for some
Commissioners (when all cannot meet) to finish a business. Sinon, a crafty
Grecian who (by Virgil) betrayed Troy. Sinopical, belonging to Sinoper, -ple,
Cinnabar, Ruddle. Sinus, a gulf or large bay. Sion, as Scion. Siphak, A. the
Inner rim of the belly, joined to the Cawl. Si-quis (If any one etc.) a bill
set up for something lost. Sir, (f. Sieur or Seigneur) prefixed to the
Christen-Names of Knights, and Surnames of Bachelors of Art. Sire, spoken (now)
only to the king of France. Si recognoscat, a writ against the Debtor having
acknowledged the debt before the Sheriff. Siren, as Mermaid. Sirenical,
belonging thereto. Sirenize, to allure like them. Sirickzed, a town in Zeland.
Siringe, g. a Surgeons Squirt. Sirius, the Dog Star. Sirocco, I. a noxious
South-East wind. Sisamnes, a Judge whom Cambyses flayed for bribery. Sisley, as
Cicely. Sysiphus, a Robber slain by Theseus, in hell he is said to roll a stone
up hill, which returns and makes his labou^ endless. Sitarch, g. a Pourveyor.
Site, Situation, l. the seat or standing of a place. Sithcundman, sa. the
Gentleman who was to lead the men of his parish. Sithness, o. seeing that.
Sitient, l. thirsting. Sitomagus, Thetford in Norfolk. Sittim, as Sethim.
Sittenborn, a Town in Kent. Sivil, Sevil, the Chief City of Andaluzia in Spain.
Sixain, f. a sixth, also as Sestine. Size, a farthing [bread, etc.] noted with
an S. in the buttery-book at Cambridge, where To Size, is the same as to battle
at Oxford, and Siz^r, as Servitor, or Batteler. Sizygy, as Syz-. Sizzing, Ss.
Yeast, barm. Skaddle, Scathy, Ss. Ravenous, Mischievous. Skarfing, as Scarfing
Skarmoch, o. Skirmish. Skathe, No. loss, harm. One does the Skath, another has
the scorn. Skegg, that little inconvenient part of the keel, which is cut
slaunting and left a little without the stern-post. Skeer the Esse, Che.
separate the dead ashes from the Embers. Skeeling, Ss. an Isle or bay of a
barn. Skeleton, as Scel-. Skellum, as Scel-. Skere, o. a fray. Skew, c. a dish.
Skeyn, an Irish dagger. Skid the wheel, K. keep it steady (with an iron hook)
upon a descent. Skiff, Sc^ph, Sch-, a shipboat. Skink, strong Scotch pottage of
knuckles and sinews of beef Skinker, as Scen-. Skinret, a dainty strengthening
root like a Parship. Skleir, o. a scarf. Sklendre, o. slender. Skleren, o. to
cover. Skorchlith, o. Scorcheth. Look Skrow, Ss. sowrly. Skry, sc. to Cry.
Skupper, as Scupper. Skypton, a town in Yorkshire. Slape-ale, Li. plain ale
(not medicated.) Skappel, Ss. a piece or part. Slay, (D. Slagen, to strike) a
Weavers instrument with ^eeth like a Comb. Slaton, No. cast on, or dash
against. Slatch, the middle part of a rope hanging slack without the Ship; also
a small interval of fair weather. Slat, c. a sheet. Sleasie Holland, Vulgarly
all slight Holland, but properly that which comes from Slesia, Schlesie,
Silesia, part of Germany. Sleak out the tongue, Ch^. put it out in derision.
Sleck, No. small pit-coal; also to slack or quench. Sleech, No. take up
[water.] Sleepers, the timbers fore and aft the bottom (on either side the
Keelson) which describe the narrowing of the ships floor. Sleford, a town in
Lincolnshire. Slego, an Irish County. Sleswick, a Duchy of South Juit^and.
Slete, N^. to now or set on [a dog.] Slew sire, Sc. struck fire. Slewth of
beerys, o. Sloth of bears. Sliding of co^age, o. Easily daunted. Slidder, o.
slippery* falling. Slight a Fort, demolish it. Slim, L^. crafty, naughty.
Sliming, a hawks muting long-waies entirely without dropping. Sling, to f^sten
Cask etc. in a pair of slings. Slive, Li. to creep. Sliverly, Li. crafty.
Sliver, o. a piece or parcel. Slo, o. for slay. Slocksher, Slocker, D. he that
enticeth away men's servants. Slot, the print of a Stag^foot. Slot the door, Li.
shut it. Slough, a damp, also a ditch, and (in Hunting) the place where a Bore
^^es. Sloth of Bears, a great Company of them. Slug, a Ship that Sails ill and
heavily. Slouthlich, o. slovenly. Smacking-Cove, c. Coachman. Smalt, a kind of
blue paint, or enamel. Smaragdine, like a Smaragd, l. an Emerald. Smarile away,
No. waste away. Smittle, No. to infect. Smear of Caryours, o. a Company. Smec,
a contraction of Smectymnnus, the initial letters of five Co-authors of one
Book, viz. Stephen Marshal, Edm. Calamy, Tho. Young, Mat. Newcomen, and W.
Spurstow. Smegmatick, g. like a wash-ball. Smelling-cheat, c. a garden or
nosegay. Smelting, the melting of metal in the Oar. Smeth, Smothery, an
ointment to take away hair. Smilax, a virgin who (for Crocus's love) pined into
a Kidney-bean. Smired, Sa. anointed. Smiter, c. an arm. Smiting-line, fastened
to the Missen yard-a^m. Smite the Missex, pull that rope, to break the
fartheling rope-yarn, and let the sail come down. Smoke-silver-penny, paid many
Ministers, either in lieu of Tithe-wood, or the old Rome-scote. Smopple, No.
[short and fat] Py-crust. Smoterlich, o. snout-fair. Smuglers, Stealers of
Custom. Smuity, obscene. Smylting, Sa. a mixture of Gold and Silver, a
Soldering. Smyrna, a City of Ionia. Snag, Ss. a snail. Snake-weed, Adders wort.
Snap-dragon, a Hob-goblin; also a plant. Snap-haunse, a fire-lock.
Snatch-block, a great block with a sheever, and a notch through one cheek, by
which they reeve any rope into it. Snathe, a Town in Yorkshire. Snee, Sny, No.
to abound or swarm. Snees-wort, an herb causing to sneeze. Snete, the fat of
Deer. Snettersham, A Town in Norfolk. Snever-spawt, No. a slender stripling.
Snock the door, No. latch it. Snitch, Snitchel, c. a fillip. Snilches; c. sees
or eyes you. Snite, No. wipe [your nose. Snithe-wind, Li. a cutting wind.
Snudg, c. one that ^ides himself in a house to do mischief. Snurl, Sf. a pose
or cold in the head. Snytyth, o. [the hawk] snites or wipes her beak. Soa^, to
fly up aloft. So^riquet, f. a nickname or byword. S^c, Soke, Soken, sa. a
power to Minister Justice, also that Jurisdiction. Hence Soca, a Lordship
endowed with liberty of keeping a Court of Socagers, Sockmen, Tenants whose
tenure is Socage, Soccage, (f. Soc. a plough-share) a tenure by some
husbandry-service to the Lord of the fee. Sociality, Society, l. fellowship,
Company. Socinianism, the doctrine of the Socinians, followers of Laelius the
Uncle and his Nephew Faustus Socinus, Sozzo of Sienna (1555.) he denied Christ's
eternal Divinity, etc. Socna, sa. a privilege or liberty. Sockets, holes for
the pintels of the rudder, murderers, etc. Socome* a Custom of grinding at the
Lords mill. Bond-Socome, to which they are bound. Love-Socome, when done
freely. Socord, l. Idle or Idleness. Socratick, belonging to Socrates, a famous
Athenian Philosopher, called (by the oracle) the wisest man. Sodalicious,
belonging to Sodality, l. a fellowship. Sodor, a town in Siera, (one of the
Hebrides) where are interred 60 Kings. Sodomitical, belonging to a Sodomite,
he that commits Sodomy, buggery, the sin of Sodom, h. their secret or lime.
Soest, a Town of Mark in Germany. Sofees, Turkish Pharis^es. Soget, o. (I.
Soggetto) subject. Soil (or Sile) the milk, No. strain it. Soigne, Soin, f.
care. Sojour, f, tarrying, dwelling. Soken, o. trade, dealing. Sokemans, as
Socagers. Sol, l. the Sun, or gold. Solace, l. comfort. Solar, l. of the Sun,
also a^ upper room. Solary, the same, also ^ Sundial, a pension for livin^
retired from business, or for building upon the Commonwealths soil. Sold^, as
Selda, a shop or shed. Soldado, sp. S^ldat, f. a Soldier. Sultan, Sold-, as
Sultan. Soldin, a town of Brandenburg. Soldures, Gauls that vowed friendship
and to share in the good and bad fortunes of any. Soleated, l. shod [with iron.
Solecism, as Solaecism. Solein, o. only. Solegrave, -rove, o. February.
Solemnity, [yearly] pomp. Solemnize, to celebrate. Solennial, Solemn, done
publicly every year. Solent, the sea between the Isle of Wight and Hampshire.
Sole tenant, holding in his own right, without his wife (or any other) joined.
Solevation, Sp. a lifting up. Solfe, o. to sing Sol, Fa. Solicitation, stirring
in a business. Solicitor, one employed to take care of suits depending.
Solicitous, full of Solicitude, l. care. Solidata, as Fardingdeal, also a
soldiers pay. Solidation, l. a making whole. Solids, regular bodies or figures,
viz. a Circle, Cube, Pyramid, Cylinder, and Dodecaedron. Solifidian, holding
faith only necessary to salvation. Solifuge, l. a venomous creature found in
the silver Mines of Sardinia. Soliloquy, l. talk alone Solinus terrae, two
plowlands and almost an half. Soliped, l. whose foot is whole. Solisequious,
following the sun. Solistime, l. divination by the dancing of bread thrown to
chickens. S^litaneous, -ary, without company. Solitude, l. loneliness.
Solivagant, l. wandering alone. Soller, as Solar, a Chamber. Solaecismical,
belonging to Solaecism, g. a speaking contrary to grammar. Solomon, h.
peaceable. Solon, one of the seven wise men of Greece. Solstitial, belonging to
Solstice, Sun-stead, when the Sun is highest and lowest (about the middle of
June and December.) Soltwedel, a town of Brandenburg. Soluble, l. which one may
Solve, l. loosen, unty. Solute, -tive, loosed or loosening. Solution, a
dissolving or undoing. Solutione feodi Militis Parl. a writ for a Knight of the
Shires allowance. Sol. feo. Burgen. Parl. for a Burgess. Som^wilne, o. some
one. Summer, as Summer. Sommerton, a town in Somersetshire. Somnicul^^s, l.
sleepy; also as Somniferous, bringing sleep. Somnolency, a being Somnolent, l.
drowsy. Somnus, l. [the God of] Sleep. Sond, o. Will, Commandment, also sand
and messenger. Sondbache, a town in Cheshire. Sonesse, o. a noise. Songal,
-gle* Heref. a handful of gleaned corn. Sonti^els* o. Sunny (shining) tresses
of hair. Sonnenberg, Sunn-, a town of Brandenburg Son^ro^^, l. loud, shrill.
Sontage, a tax of 40 shilling upon every Knights fee, al^o coarse cloth for
bagging, etc. Sontick, l. hurtful. Sontick disease, continual, hindering ones
business. Sontina, a Town of Colen. A-Soon, No. at even. Soot, Sote, o. sweet.
Sophia, g. wisdom. Sophism, g. a deceitful sentence. Sophist, -ter, a crafty
Caviller. Sophistical, deceitful. Sophisticate, l. to falsify. Sophistry,
circumvention by false arguments. Sophronia, g. prudent, temperate. Sophy, the
King of Persia. Sopited, l. laid to sleep. Sopition, -porat-, a laying or being
laid to sleep. Soporiferous, l. causing sleep. Sorb, l. a service-berry.
Sorbition, l. a supping. Sorbonists, Divines of the Sorbonne, a College in
Paris founded (1264) by Robert de Sorbonne, an Almoner and Preacher of St.
Lewis 9. Sorcery, -elery, -llage, f. Witchcraft. Sord, o. sorrel-coloured.
Sorde (or Sat) of Mallards, o. a great company. Sorde^, -dine, f. the little
pipe in the mouth of a trumpet. Sordidate to make Sordid, l. foul, base. Sore a
cale, o. very cold. Sore, a male fallow deer 4 year old. Sorel, one of 3 years
old. Sore-age, the first year of a hawk. Sore-hawk, till she has mewed.
Sorites, g. an argument of diverse propositions heaped, wherein the Predicate of
the former is the subject of the latter, and the last predicate attributed to
the first subject. Sorit^cal, belonging thereto. Sorlinges, many small Islands
on the West of England. Sororiation, a becoming Sororiant, l. whose breasts
begin to show. Sororicide, l. a Sister-killer. Sorority, Sister-hood.
Sortilegy, l. lottery, divination by lots. Sortition, l. a casting lots.
Sortitor, l. a caster, etc. Sospital, l. safe, wholesome. Sospitation, l. a
keeping safe. Sotel, o. for Subtle. Sote, o. sweet. Sothale, as Scotale or
Filctale. Sothfast, sa. Faithful. Soukle, o. wretched. Soulack, a Turkish
Officer. Soudan, o. for Souldan. Soul-Mass-Cakes, still given (in some places)
to the poor on All Souls day. Sold, o. inspired [with a new soul. Soul-scot,
money paid the Priest at the opening of the grave. Sound, any great in-draught
of the Sea (between two head-lands) where there is no passage through;
particularly a famous Eastern Sea. Sounding-lead, about 7 l. weight, and 12
inches long. Sounding-line, about 20 fadom, market at 3 with a black leather,
at 5 with a white rag, at 7 red, at 10 and 15 with leather. A deep-sea-line is
sometimes 200 fadom. Source, f. a spring. Sourd, f. deaf; also as Sounder, a
Company [of Swine or wild boars. Sourdet, as Sordet. Sourd, o. to arise,
proceed. Sous, Sol, f. a penny. Sous-ciaviere artery, the ascendent branch of
the great artery. South-Hampton, the chief town of Hantshire. South-Vicont, the
Undersheriff. Southam, a town in Warwickshire. Southcast, a town in Hantshire.
Southold, a Town in Suffolk. Southwark, a town in Surrey. Southwell, a town in
Nottingham. Southsaws, o. true speeches. Sow and plite, o. Seal and fold.
Sower, (for sore) a deer. o. Sowgh, o. to sound. Sowl, Sool, No. any thing
eaten with bread. Sowl him by the ears, Li. worry him (as a dog does the Sow.)
Sown, o. for Swoon and Sound. Sown, (f. Souvenu) remembered. Estreats that Sown,
such as the Sheriff can gather. Sowned, o. ordained (published with sound of
Trumpet.) Sowter, o. (Suitor) a Shoemaker. Sozzo, I. Socinus. Anti-Sozzo, a
Treatise against Socinianism. Spa, as Spaw. Spackt, No. apt to learn. Spade, l.
one gelded (man or beast.) Spadiards, Laborers [with spades] in the Cornish
tinmines. Spadiceous, l. of a bright bay. Spagyrical, belonging to a Spagyrick,
l. an Alchymist. Spahy, (P. Spawhee) a Turkish hors-man completely armed.
Spaid, a red male deer 3 year old. Spaidairs, White-friers, with a red swords
on their habits. Spalding, a town in Lincolnshire. Spannishing, o. full
breadth. Spancel, No. a rope to ty a Cows hin-legs. Spane, No. wean [the Child.
Spar, Speir, Spur, No. to enquire or cry at the market. Spar the door an emis
be come, Nf. shut it lest he come in. Spars, Gem-like stones found in
lead-mines. Sparsion, l. a sprinkling. Sparadrap, a linen rag dipped in melted
plaster. Sparsedly, scatteringly. Spartans, the people of Sparta, Lacedaemon,
a famous City of Peloponnesus. Sparth, o. a double ax or spear. Spasmatical,
belonging to a Spasm, g. the Cramp. Spat, the spawn of Oisters. Spat, -tter,
-tule, l. a splatter or slice to spread plasters. Spatiate, l. to walk abroad.
Spaw, Spa, a town in Liege, famous for medicinal Waters. Spawhawn, Spaan,
Spahan, Jespaa, Hisphan, Dura, Hecatompylos, the Chief City of Persia, called
(by them) Half the World. Spayad, o. as Spaid. Lord Speaker, of the house of
Peers. Mr. Speaker, of the house of Commons. Speal, Spell, No. a Splinter.
Spearmen, as Pensioners. Speces, o. parts or pieces. Specialty, a bond, bill,
or such like Instrument. Specifical, belonging to or constituting a Species, l.
the different kind or form of a thing* Sp^cify, to show or signify in
particular. Specification, a signifying, etc. Specimen, l. a proof or trial.
Specious, l. fair in show. Spectable, l. to be looked on. Spectacle, l. a
public show. Spectative, speculative, contemplative. Spectatour, l. a
beholder. Spectre, l. an apparition. Specular, belonging to or helping the
sight. Speculate, l. to watch on high. Speculatory, belonging to Speculation,
l. espial, watching, observing. Speculum oris, an instrument to skrew open the
mouth. Speeks, long nails. Speek the missen, put the yard right up and down by
the mast. Speedwell, the herb Fluellin. Speer, Che. the Chimney-post. Spell,
sa. a world, also a charm* Give him a Spel, row or pump in his turn or stead.
Spell the missen, let go the sheat and speek it up. Spelt, Zea, a kind of wheat
in Italy, France and Flanders. Spelter, Zink, a modern metal. Spend a Mast,
etc. lose them by foul weather. Spenen, o. for spending. Spending their mouth,
is the same in hounds, as Opening in Greyhounds, questing in Spaniels, and
barking in other Dogs. Spene, K. a Cows pappe. Sper, o. open, manifest. Sperid,
o. asked. Sperable, l. to be hoped. Sperage, Asparagus. Sperkel, o. wandering.
Spermatical, belonging to Sperm, g. natural seed or spawn. Sperma Ceti, as
Parma Ceti. Spermatize, to cast forth Sperm, Spermatique artery, goes from the
body of the Aorta to the Testicles, and there joins the vein governing those
parts. Spermatick vein, the third branch of the trunk descendant of the hollow
vein. Sperstick, g. done in haste. Sphacelism, g. an nicerating in the Brain.
Spherable, which may bemade Spherical, round, like a Spear, g, a globe or
circle. Sphericity, such a roundness. Spheromachy, g. playing at ball or at
bowls. Sphincter, g. the muscle of the Fundament. Sphi^^, a kind of Baboon; (in
Poets) a Monster near Thebes, destroying all that could not unfold her ridles,
but Oedipus doing it, she brake her own neck. Spicate, l. eared as corn. Spice,
Y. Raisins, Figs, etc. Spice, o. a kind. Spiciferous, bearing corn-ears.
Spicilegy, l. a gleaning of Corn. Spiculator, l. a spearman of a guard.
Sea-spider, a Carvel, casting out many strings for small Fish. Spignel, mew,
Baldmony, Bearwort. Spigurnels, was the Scalers of the Kings writs. Spikenard,
an Indian odoriferous plant. Spillisly, a town in Lincolnshire. Spinal,
belonging to a Spine, l. a thorn or sting, also the backbone. Spindle, the
smallest part of the Capstern between the a Decks. Spingard, an old kind of
Chamber-gun. Spinge, o. to sprinkle. Spiniferous, l. thorny. Spinosity, l.
thorniness. Spinster, the title of all unmarried women, from the Viscounts
Daughter downward. Spintrian, l. belonging to new inventions of lust. Spiracle,
l. a breathing hole. Spiral, rolling in several circles one about another.
Spirarch, g. a Captain. Spiration, l. a breathing. Spirlinga, a small Sicilian
town that conspired not in their Vespers. Spiritualities [of a Bishop.] the
profits he receives as Bishop, and not as Baron of Parliament.
Spiritualization, (in Chemistry) a changing the whole body into spirit.
Spiritual Electors, the Bishops of Colen, Mentz and Triers. Spiss, l. thick,
gross, firm. Spissity, -tude, l. thickness. Spitter, as Brocket. Spittle, (I.
Spedale) an hospital. Splattyd, o. dressed, disht. Splay, o. for display.
Splayting, the parting of a horses shoulder from the breast, (occasioned by
some slip, etc.) Spleen-wort, Ceterach, Milt^wast. Spleget, as Pleget.
Splendent, -did, l. bright, brave. Splendour, l. brightness, etc. Splenetick,
troubled in the Spleen, the milt under the left short-ribs, purging the Liver
of superfluous Melancholy blood. Splenitique artery, the greatest branch of the
Coeliaque ending in the Spleen. Splenetick vein, a main branch of the
port-vein, ending (in four parts) in the Spleen. Splice the ropes, make fast
their ends into one another. Spodium, sooty dregs of dross in the melting of
Brass. Spoliation, l. a spoiling or robbing, also a writ for one incumbent
against another (of the same Church and Patron.) Spondalion, g. a heathen hymn
sung at the burning of the incense. Spondee, g. two long syllables. Spondyles,
g. the chin^bones. Spongious, l. like to Sponge, Sponge, l. a kind of
plant-animal growing only under the Sea-rocks of Samos. Sponsal, -litious, l.
belonging to a Spouse or to marriage. Sponsion, l. a [mutual] promise. Spontal,
-ane, -eous, l. free, voluntary, without constraint. Spontaneity,
voluntariness. Spoon the ship, put her right before the wind and Sea (without
any Sail.) Sporades, scattered Carpathian Isles. Sport, l. a hand-basket or
panier. Sport, o. deportment. Spouse, f. a Bridegroom or Bride. Spousage,
betrothing. Spousail, o. the same. Spout, (at Sea) a little river running out
of the clouds. S. P. Q. R. Senatus Populusque Romanus, the Senate and people of
Rome. S: P. Q. L. - Londinensis, of London. Spraints, Otters dung. Spray, o. a
bough or sprig. Sprent, o. springled, leapt. Spraint, o. sprinkled. Spretion,
l. a despising. Spretor, l. a scorner. Sprights, short arrows with wooden heads
(shot out of muskets) which would pierce a ships sides. Spring a mast, to have
it cracked. Springolds, o. for springals. Springal, D. a stripling. Sprutellit,
o. spotted. Spring-tides, three days after the full and change of the moon.
Spullers of yarn, Triers if it be well spun and fit for the loom. Spume, l.
foam, froth, scum. Spumid, l. frothy. Spumiserous, froth-bearing Sponge, as
Sponge, also a staff (with a piece of Lamb-skin) to scour a gun. Spunk, un
excrescence on the sides of trees, also half-rotten [ash] wood. Spun-yarn,
rope-yarn scraped thin to make caburn, etc. Spurcidical, l. speaking smuttily.
Spurious, l. base-born, counterfeit. Spurkets, the holes or spaces between the
futtocks (or the rungs) by the ships-sides. Spurrey, Spergula, an herb.
Sputative, l. spitting much. Squadron, f. a square body of Soldiers. Squaimus,
o. for squeamish. Squames, o. Scales. Squalid, l. filthy, nasty. Squamigerous,
l. scale-bearing. Squat, Ss. bruise by falling. Squeeker, c. a bar-boy. Squill,
l. the Sea-Onion. Squinant, th, g. the sweet rush, Camels meat, an Arabian
plant. Squincy, -nancy, l. a swelling in the Throat. Squireth, o. waits upon.
Squobled, when (between setting and imposing) some lines (in a form) fall out
of Order. S. S. Sacrosanctus, (or Sancti) holy; Spiritus Sanctus, the Holy
Ghost, or Sacra Scriptura, the holy Scripture. Stability, l. firmness.
Stable-stand, a finding one (with his bow bent) ready to shoot at Deer, or his
dog ready to slip, etc. Stabulate, l. to keep or be kept up as Cattle in a
stall. Stacker, Li. stagger. Stack of wood, (in Essex) 14 foot in length, 3 in
height and breadth. Stacte, the gum of the Myrh-tree. Stad, (q. bested) o.
encumbred. Stade, l. a furlong. Stade, Stood, a town of Breme in Westphalis.
Staffonger, a Port-town of Norway. Staffier, (l. Staff^a, a stirrup) a lacquey.
Stafford, the chief town of Staffordshire. Stael, a town in Gelderland. Stag,
a red male Deer five years old. Staggard, one four years old. Come a-stages or
a-backstages, with the sails driven back against the shrowds, as the ship must
before she can tack. Stagirite, Aristotle, born at Stagira, a town in
Macedonia. Stagnarium, for Stunn-, a tin-mine. Stagnes, l. ponds. Stainard
colors (in Heraldry) tawny and murrey. Staindrop, a town of Durham. Stallage,
(sc. stallange) Siliquaticum. Stall-money in Fairs, etc. Stall-whimper, c. a
bastard. Stalling-ken, c. a brokers, or any house that receives stolen goods.
Stalboat, a kind of Fishers boat. Stalkers, a kind of nets. Stallion, l. a
horse kept for Mares. Stamineous, l. of hemp or flax. Stamps, c. legs.
Stampers, c. shoes or carriers. Stam-flesh, c. to cant. Stamwood, Ss. the root
of trees stub'd up. Stanbol, Tu. Constantinople. Stanch [hound,] old,
experienced. Standard, Est-, s. the chief ensign of an army, also the standing
measure, to whith all others are framed. Standel, a young store-oak, whereof 12
must be lest standing at the felling an acre of wood. Stanes, a town in
Middlesex. Stanford, a town in Northamptonshire, also another in Lincoln
(where an Academy was (only) begun, in the reign of Edw. 3d.) and several other
small towns. Stang, No. a Cowl-staff, also to make one ride thereon. Stannar,
the mother of metals, a secret fume whereof they are made. Stank, o. weary,
faint. Stannaries, l. the Cornish Tin-wo^ks. Stanza, I. a staff [of verses.
Staple, f. a public Mart, whither English Merchants (by common order) were to
carry their wares for Wholesale. Staple Inn, (by Helbourn bars) an Inn of
Chancery, formerly for Staple-merchants. Star-board, sa. the right side of a
ship. Starfe, o. died. Star Chamber, a Court at Westminster put down by 17 C^r.
1. Stark, No. stiff, weary. Star of Bethlehem, Ornithogalum, a kind of herb.
Stargard, a town in lower Pomeren. Starrulet, a little star. Start, No. a tail
or handle. Start, put up [a hare. Starwort, Bubonium, Aster Atticus, a cooling
and drying herb. Startling, o. for sparkling. Stasiarch, g. the chief rebel.
Stater, g. in Silver 2 s. 6 d. in Gold, 17 s. 6d. Stavesaker, an herb whose
seed is used to kill lice and the itch. Staticks, g. the science of weights and
measures. Station, l. a standing-place, a bay or road for Ships. Station-staff,
a surveying-pole Stationary, settled in any place. Stationers Company, takes in
Booksellers, -Binders, and Stationers (properly so called) sell Paper, Ink,
Wax, etc. Stative, l. standing, pitched. Statuary, l. a stone-cutter.
Statuminate, l. to underprop. Statute, l. Act of Parliament. Statute-Merchant,
and Statute-Staple, Bonds made and acknowledged in manner directed by the
Statutes. Statutes, Statute (or petit) Sessions, kept yearly for the disposing
of Servants. Statuto Stapulae, a writ for the body and goods of him that
forfeits the Statute-Staple. Statutum Mercatorium, against him that forfeits
Statute-Merchant. Statutum de Laborarijs, against Laborers that refuse to
work. Staw'd, No. (for stowed) set. Steccado, sp. the lists railed in for a
combat, also a pale or fence before trenches. Stechfelt, (for Steffens felt) a
town in lower Alsatia. Stechados, a beautiful and opening herb. Stead, o. a
place. Stedship, o. firmness. Steel, the body of an arrow. Steel yard, as
Stil-yard. Steer, to govern a ship with the helm. Steerage, -idge, the place
where the steers-manstands. Stee, No. a ladder. Stem, No. to bespeak a thing.
Stein, Steven, the same. Steindel, a town in Brandenburg. Steke or steick the
dure, No. shut the door. Steganography, g. a discourse of covering buildings.
Stellar, l. starry. Stellation, l. adorning with stars, also blasting. Stele
So. a stalk or handle. Stelletto, Stiletto, I. a dagger. Stelliserous, l.
star-bearing. Stellion, l. a spotted lizzard, that casts his skin (a Sovereign
remedy for the falling sickness) and enviously devours it every half year.
Stellionate, l. deceit in Merchandise. Stelt, a town of Berg in Germany. Stem,
a stalk, stock or lineage, also the great timber coming up compassing from the
keel before the forecastle. Stem for Stem, right with their heads one against
another. Give her the Stem, the same as Go Stemming aboard her, run right upon
her with the stem. Stennery, as Stannary. Stenais, a town in Lorr^^n. Stenning,
a town in Sussex. Stenten, o. to stay (stint.) Stenography, g. short-writing.
Stentorian, like unto Stentor, a Grecian whose voice was louder than 50 men's
together. Stephen, g. a Crown. Step, the timber wherein a mast is placed.
Stepmother, Mother-in-law Sterbrech, Streb- sa. an obstruction of a way, or a
turning it out of the way. Stercorean. -orarious, l. belonging to dung.
Stercoration, l. a dunging. Stered, o. dealt withal. Stereless, o. without a
stern. Sterelich, o. earnestly. Stercometry, g. the measuring of solid bodies.
Sterile, l. barren. Sterility, l. barrenness. Sterling, as Easterling, also
part of South- Scotland. Sterling-mon^y, numini Esterlingi, brought to
perfection by the Easterlings under Rich. 1. Stern, the aftermost part of a
ship, also the tail of a Greyhound or Wolf. Sternberg, a town of Mechlenburg.
Sternfast, a rope fastened to the stern, to keep it firm. Stern, o. to lay
down (sternere.) Sternon, g. the breast bone. Sternutatory, a powder to cause
Sternutation, l. sneezing. Sterquilinous, -nious, belonging to a dunghill.
Sterve ^. to die. Stesimbrotus, a Theban Captain, put to death (by his Father
Epaminondas) for fighting the enemy without orders. Stetin, the chief town of
Pomerania. Steves, [the bolt-sprit or beak head] stands too upright. Steving of
Cotton, Stowing it. Steven, o. a Sound. Stews, Hot (or Whore) houses; also
little fishponds, So. Sthenobaea, receiving a repulse from Bellerophon, accused
him falsely to her Husband. Stibes, -ez, Thebes in Greece. Stibium, Antimony,
from the Darby-shire mines, etc. Stich-wort, an herb good against stiches and
pains in the side. Stiff-gale, a strong wind. Stife queen, No. lusty. Stigian,
as Stygian. Stighed, o. ascended. Stigmatick, -call, one that is Stigmatized, g*
branded with a hot iron. Stigonomancy, g. divination by writing on the bark of
trees. Stillatory, l. a still, or distilling. Stilletto, as Stelletto.
Stillicide, l. Eaves-dropping. Stillicidous, -latitious, dropping. Stillyard,
Steelyard, Guilda Teutonicorum, where the Hanse and Almain Merchants used to
reside. Stimulate, l. to prick or provoke. Stipation, l. a guarding about.
Stipendial, l. belonging to wages. Stipendary, l. taking wages, or paying
tribute. Stipendin^^. l. having often served for wages (in war.) Stipone, a
sweet compound summer-drink. Stipticity, a being Stiptick, -call, g. of a
binding nature. Stipulate, l. to make a Stipulation, l. a solemn and formal
Covenant or promise. Stiria, Stiermark, part of Austria. Stiricide, l. the
dropping of icicles. Stirious, l. belonging to icicles. Stirps, l. a stalk,
stock or kindred. Stithe, No. strong, stiff. Stithy, No. an anvil. Stoage, for
Stowage. Stoaked [pump or ship] when the water cannot come to the well.
Stoccado, Sp. a thrust or stab. Stockbridg, a town in Hantshire. Stockholm, the
chief town in Swedeland. Stock-drawers, c. stockings. Stocks, posts framed to
build a ship or boat upon. Stocked, o. cast [into prison. Stood of maarys, o. a
company of Mares. Stoical, belonging to Stoicism, the doctrine of the Stoics,
g. Porch-Disciples of Zeno at Athens, who held a fatal necessity, freedom (in a
wise man) from all passions etc. Stoikesomaticks, g. the makers of certain
Chaldean figures or Images. Stoke, above 50 small towns. Stoly [house] Sf.
dirty, cluttered. Stole, l. a long robe, also the Ornament about the Priests
neck and cross his breast, denoting the yoke of Christ and the cord that bound
him; a tippet. Stolidity, l. a being Stolid, l. foolish, fond, lewd.
Stomachick, that cannot keep the meat in his stomach. Stomachick vien, ends (in
2 branches) in the hollow of the ventricle. Stomachosity, l. a being
Stomachous, angry, disdainful. Stomatick, g. with a sore mouth. Stone, a town
in Staffordshire, and about a dozen more. Stone of wool, ought to be 14 li.
Stone of beef, 8 pound, in Heref. 12. Stone-falcon, building in rocks.
Stone-fly, a May-fly. Stone-^enge, a wonderful pile of stones on
Salisbury-plain. Stont, o. for stood. Stony-stratford, a town in Bucks. Stook
of corn, 12 sheaves. Stooming of wine, with bags of herbs (and other infusions)
to make Rochelle etc. pass for Bachrag. Stooping, the hawks bending down to
strike a fowl. Stopford* a town in Cheshire. Stoppers, pieces of rope to stop
the Cables from going out too fast. Storax, a fragrant Syrian gum. Stork, D. a
bird famous for piety to his parent, feeding him when old and impotent.
Storks-bill, as Crows-bill. Stormaria, part of Holstein. Storming, assaulting a
place. Stot, No. a young horse or bullock. Stotal, for Scotale. Stovene, as
Zuche. Stover, E. fodder. Stowk, No. as stook, also a pail-handle. Stow your
whids, c. speak warily. Stowage, the place or money paid for Stowing, laying
goods in a Ships hold or warehouse. Stownds, o. sorrows, dumps. Stound, Sf. a
little while, also (No.) a wooden small-beer-vessel. Stound-meal, o. of small
continuance. Stowrs, o. shocks, brunts. Stowr, No. a hedge-stake or ladder
round. Strahism, l. a looking asquint. Straelsonde, a Port-town in Pomerania.
Strage, l. a great slaughter, selling of trees, etc. Struck, o. to pass.
Struck, the iron about the fellies of a wheel, also the seam between two
ship-planks. Straits, Streits, course narrow cloth or kersey. Stranded, run
upon the Strand, sa. the bank or shore. Strand, Ss. a twist of a line.
Straineth, [the hawk] snatcheth. Strangury, -ullion, g. a making water by drops
and great p^in. Strappado, I. an engine to punish soldiers by drawing them up
and letting them drop. Strasbourg, a town in Alsace, with a tower of 630 steps
up. Stratagemical, full of Stratagems, g. subtle [warlike] inventions.
Stratford upon Avon, in Warwickshire. Stratification, a strewing corroding
powder on metals Stratiotick, g. warlike. Straton, a town in Cornwall.
Stratocracy, g. government by an army. Stratuminate, l. to pay. Stream-anchor
and cable, used in Rivers and fair weather. Straught, o. for stretched.
Straight, Straight, a narrow sea-passage between two lands. Street-gavel, two
shillings paid yearly by the Tenants to the Lord of Cholington in Sussex, for
going out and returning into it. Streme-works, following the veins of Tin by
trenching, as Lode-work is by digging shafts in higher places. Stre, W^. straw.
Strene, Streen, o. kindred. Strenuity, l. a being Strenuous, valiant, hardy.
Strepe, o for strip. Streperous, l. hoarse, jarring. Strepitate, l. to make a
noise. Stretch forward, deliver it along into the men's hands to hale by.
Strictive, l. gathered, cropped. Stricture, a gathering, also a spark from a
red hot iron. Strident, -dulous, making a Stridor, l. a crashing noise. Strig,
Ss. the stalk of Fruit. Strigilate, l. to curry [a horse. Strigment, l. filth
rubbed off. Strike, No. a bushel. Strike sail, pull them down Strikle, -er,
stritchel, that which strikes off the over-measure. Strip, Strop, destruction
or mutilation. Stripe, o. kindred. Strocal, a long iron instrument (like a
fire-shovel) in glasse-making. Strom, No. an instrument to keep the Malt in the
fat. Stromatick g. belonging to strewings. Stromaticks, books of several
scattered subjects. Strond, as Strand. Strophes, g. subtilties in arguing.
Stroud, a town in Gloucestershire. Strushings, No. Orts. Structure, l.
building. Strumatick, troubled with Strume, -ma, l. a wen or swelling in the
neck, etc. Strunt, No. a tail or rump. Stuckling, Ss. an apple-pasty. Stude (or
Stood) of Mares, a great company, a stock of breeding Mares. Studious, l.
careful. Study of Oxford, etc. University. Stull, E. a luncheon [of Bread, etc.
Stultiloquy, l. foolish talk. Stum, the flower of fermenting wine put up in
vessels with iron hoops. Stunt, Li. stubborn, angry Stupefaction, l.
astonishing. Stupendous, h. wonderful. Stupid, l. dismayed, senseless.
Stupidity, dullness. Stupor, l. amazement. Stuprution, l. a deflowring.
Stuprous, l. adulterous. Sturbridge, a town in Worcestershire. Sturmister, a
town in Dorcet-shire. Sturk, no. a Bullock or Heifer. Sturrup, a piece patcht
to the keel with an iron like a stirrup. Sturt, o. to straggle. Stusnet, Ss. a
posnet, skillet. Stut; Summers. a gnat. Stygian, hellish, belonging to Styx, g.
a poisonous fountain of Arcadia, feigned to be a River in Hell by which the
Gods swore, and he that swore falsely was banished from Heaven and Nectar for
1000 years. Stylo novo, after the new Gregorian Account. Stylo veteri, after
the old Julian account. Styptick, as Stiptick. Suada, the Roman Goddess of
Eloquence. Suasory, l. persuading, exhorting. Suaviation, l. an amorous
kissing. Suaviloquent, l. sweet-spoken. Suaviloquy, sweet speech. Suavity, l.
sweetness. Sub-, l. under, somewhat. Subaction, a bringing under. Su^agitation,
a driving to and fro, a soliciting, etc. Subalbid, whitish. Subalpine, under
the Alps. Sabaltern, taking turns also under another. Subalter and Sept, o. for
Gibralter and Septa (now Ceuta.) Subaquaneous, under-water Subaudition, hearing
a little Sub^ineritious, under ashes. Sub^lavian, under lock and key.
Subclavicular vein, a main ascendant branch of the hollow vein. Subcutaneous,
under the skin. Subdial, being Sub di^, in the open air. Subdititious, in
another room. Subdolous, deceitful. Subduct, to draw back or away. Subduction,
a bringing under, a reckoning or an allowance. Subgette, o. for subject.
Sub^a^^ation, an outcry, portsale, selling confiscate goods under a spear.
Subhumerate, to undergo a burden. Subject, to put under. Su^j^ct, one under
another, the matter treated of, the substance to which qualities adhere.
Subingression, a subtle entering. Subitaneous, -ary, sudden. Subjugate, to
subdue or bring Sub-jugum, under the yoke, or spears set like a gallows.
Subjunction, a joining under. Subjunctive, under-se^ting. Subjunctive mood,
which depends on another verb or a conjunction. Sublapsarians, hold that God
(in his reprobating of men) did consider them as fallen (but without respect to
their final impenitence.) Sublation, a taking away. Sublevate, to lift-up, or
help. Subligate, to bind underneath. Sublimation, a carrying aloft, also (in
Chemistry) the sticking of dry exhalations to the sides of the Alembick.
Sublimatum, white Mercury, a corrosive powder. Sublimatory, an instrument (or
vessel) of sublimation. Sublime, lofty. Sublimity, height. Sublition, an under
daubing, grasing or laying the ground color under the perfect. Sublunary,
under the Moon. Submarine, under-sea. Submersion, plunging, drowning.
Submission, a yielding. Subordination, a being Subordinate, set under another.
Suborn, to prepare or procure [false witness, etc.] Subpedaneous, Supp-, set
under foot, as a footstool. Sub-poena, (under the penalty [of 100 pounds,
etc.) a writ to call a man into the Chancery; also as a witness, into any
Court. Subreptitious, as Surrept-. Subriguous, moist underneath. Subrision, a
smiling. Subrogation, as Surro-. Subsannate, to mock or leer. Subscription, an
underwriting. Subsecive, cut off [from other business] done at times.
Subsequent, immediately following. Subservient, helping, in order to.
Subsidence, a sinking down. Subsidiary, auxiliary. Subsidy, aid, also a tribute
Assessed by Parliament. Subsistence, abiding, continuance. Subsortition, a
choosing by lot after others have chosen. Substantial, real. Substantive, a word
that signifies the substance or being of a thing. Substitute, to put in the
room of another, also a Deputy. Substitutive, appointed in another place, also
conditional. Substraction, a taking a lesser number from the greater.
Substruction, an underpinning, groundselling, or laying the foundation of
a-house. Subsult, to leap under or about. Subsultation, such a leaping.
Subsultory, leaping under. Subtegulaneous, under the house-eaves or roof.
Subtense, chord, a right line from one extreme of an arch to the other, like
the string of a bent bow. Subterduction, a private leading away or stealing.
Subterfluous, flowing under. Subterfuge, an evasion or cunning shift.
Subterranity, the being Subterrany, -neous, underground. Subtiliation, the
turning a body into liquor or fine powder. Subtilties, quirks, cunning sayings.
Subtract, as Substract. Subventaneous, under the wind. Subversion, an
overthrowing. Subvert, to overthrow. Suburbian, belonging to Suburbs, the
out-part of a Town or City. Suburbicarian, within the Jurisdiction of the City
[ Rome. Subvulturian, like a vulture, living by rapine. Suc, f. Juice.
Su^cedaneous, l. succeeding another. Succedaneous medicament, instead of one
that cannot be got. Succedent houses, 2d, 5th, 9th, 11th. Succentor, l. a [bass
or under] singing-man. Succenturiate, l. to fill up the [Soldiers] vacant
places. Succernate, l. to sift meal. Succiduous, l. ready to fall. Succinct, l.
girt up, also brief. Succineou^, belonging to Succinum, l. amber. Succisive, as
Subsecive. Succollation, l. a beating on the shoulders. Succubus, a she-devil
said to ly^ with men. Succulency, a being Succulent, l. juicy, plump.
Succumbents, l. excommunicate penitents kneeling behind the Quire or Pulpit.
Succussion, sation, a violent shaking, trotting or jolting. Suction, l. a
sucking. Sudation, l. a sweating. Sudatory, belonging thereto; also a
hot-house. Sudbury, a Town in Suffolk. Sudorifick, causing sweat. Sud^^ous,
swe^ty. Suecia, Swedeland, a Kingdom North of Germany. Sue^^, ^. wipeth ( f.
Essu^^^) Suffarcinate, l. to stuff up. Suffarraneous, Subf-, l. under another
servant; also carrying meal to sell. Suffection, Substituting. Suffition, l. a
perfuming (on hot coals.) Sufflamen, l. a trigger, to Sufflaminate, to scatch
or scotch a wheel. Sufflation, l. a puffing up. Suffocate, l. to strangle or
choke. Suff^ssion, l. an undermining. Suffragan, l. a Bishops Vicegerent.
Suffragation, a giving ones Suffrage, l. a vote or voice in electing.
Suffraginous, l. having the scratches or spaven. Suffraunt o. a sufferer.
Suffricate, l. to rub off or under. Suffumigation, l. a conveying smoke up
[into the body. Suffusion, l. a spreading or pouring upon; also a pin or web in
the eye. Suggestion, l. a prompting. Sugillation, l. a beating (or being) black
and blew, also a slander. Suhit, See Gazul. Suicide, l. Self-murder. Suist, a
selfish man. Suit of the Kings peace, the pursuing a man for breach of the
Kings peace. Sulcation, a making furrows. Sulphurous, like or full of Sulphur,
l. brimstone. Sul, W^. a plough. Sul-paddle, a plough-staff Sultan, Sultan, (P.
an Earl) a King or Sovereign, particularly the Turk; also as Sultanin, a
Turkish gold coin, near 8 shillings. Sultana, the Emp^ress. Sulzbach, a town in
Bavaria. Sumach, -a^k, -aqu^, a rank black-berry'd plant used by Diers. Sumage,
a toll for carriage on hors-back. Summary, a brief Epitome. Summed, [a hawk]
having her feathers complete. Summer, the main beam (in building.) Summit, -ty,
l. the top or height. Summist, -muli^t, an abridge^. Summons in terra petita,
made upon the land which the party sues for. Summons ad-Warrantizandum, the
process whereby the Vouchee is called. Sumner, a Summoner. Sumpter-horse,
carrying necessaries for a journey. Sumptify, l. to be at great expenses.
Sumptuary laws, against excess in apparel, etc. Sumptuous, l. costly, stately.
Sunamite, Shu-, h. sleeping. Sund, Sond, Sa. a straight. Sundew, Lustwort,
Moorgrass, Redrot. Sungow, the South part of Alsatia. Super-, l. Over, upon.
Superable, to be overcom'n. Superabound, to abound very much. Super^ffussion, a
pouring upon. Superannate, -nuate, to outlive, or grow out of date.
Superbiloquence, proud speech. Superbiloqu^nt, l. speaking proudly.
Superbiti^ns-tertias, (q. super^bis tertias) an oblong whose length is
increased by 2 thirds. Superchery, f. superfluity; also an injury or sudden
asault. Supercilious, l. proud, haughty. Supereminence, l. an excellency above
others. Supererogatory, belonging to Supererogation, laying out more than one
has received, doing more than our duty. Superfetation, a conceiving with young
upon young. Superficiary, he that paies quit-rent for a house built on another
ground; also as Superficial, belonging to a Superficies, l. Surface, outside.
Superficialize, to do a thing Superficially, slightly, Overly. Superfluity,
-tance, excess. Superfluous, more than needs. Superjection, a casting upon.
Superinduce, to bring or draw one thing over another. Super-institution, one
upon another. Superintendent, an Overseer. Superintendents, were Scotch
Presbyterian Bishops. Superiority, a being Superior, above others. Superior
Planets, above the Sun. Superlative, highest of all. Superlative degree, ending
in - est, or having most prefixed. Supermeate, to pass over. Supernal, from
above. Supernatation, a swimming upon. Supernumerary, above the ordinary (or
full) number. Supernatural, above nature Super^neratione Pasturae, against him
that over-burdens the common. Super Praerogativa Regis, against the Kings
widow, for marrying without his License. Supersaliency, a leaping upon.
Superscription, a writing over or on the outside. Supersede, to omit, or
cease. Supersedeas, a writ to stop the doing what otherwise ought to be done.
Supersession, a surceasing or leaving off. Superstitious, full of Superstition,
too much scrupulousness, giving too much to ceremonies. Super Statuto Edw. 3.
against him that keeps another man's Servants departed against Law. Super
statuto de York, against him that uses Victualling during the time he is Mayor.
Super statuto facto pour Senescal, against the Kings Steward or Marshal, for
holding plea in his Court of Freeholds or for trespass not made within the
Household. Super Statuto de Articulis Cleri, against distreining in the Kings
highway or in the Glebeland. Supervacuous, -caneous, needless. Supervene, to
come upon. Supervisor, a Surveyor. Supervive, as Survive; also to recover from
peril of death. Supinity, a being Supine, l. with the face upward, careless.
Supines, the Accusative and Ablative cases of Verbal Nouns. Suppedaneous, as
Subpe-. Sppeditate, l. to supply [with foot forces. Suppellecti^arious,
Supell-, l. belonging to household stuff. Suppilation, l. a pilfering. Supplant,
l. to trip up, to beguile; also to prop up a plant, etc. Supplement, l. a
supply. Suppliant, f. humble; also a Petitioner. Supplicate, l. to beseech.
Supplice, l. punishment, also prayer and Sacrifice. Supplien, o. to make
Supplication. Supplosion, l. a stamping noise Supposititious, as Subdititious.
Suppository, any solid thing put up into the body to make it soluble (usually
boild honey [and egg.] Supposted, l. underset or suborned. Suppress, o. to
keep down. Supprise, l. to overcome. Suppuration, l. a mattaring, the ripening
of a bile, etc. Supputation, l. pruning or reckoning. Supramundane, l. above
the world. Supralapsarians, holding that God, in his reprobating of men, did
consider them before their fall. Supremacy, l. a being Supreme, highest in
power. Supremity, l. the state of men after death, the last and highest action
of a thing Sural, belonging to the calf of the leg. Surannation, f. a growing
out of date, above a year old Surate, an Indian Port-town of Cambaia.
Surbating, f. a galling or over-heating the soles of the feet. Surcease, f. to
give over. Surcharge, f. Charge upon charge. Surcharge the Forest, to put in
more beasts than he has right to Common. Surcingle, f. an upper girth or
girdle. Surcle, a young graff or twig. Surcoat, f. an upper garment, a Coat of
Arms over Armor. Surcrew, Surcroit, f. vantage, overgrowing. Surculate, l. to
prune or cut off young shoots. Surculous, l. full of sprigs. Surdity* l. a
being Surd, deaf, also dumb. Sureby, a port in Yorkshire, Surface, as
Superficies. Surges, [the cable] slips back at the capstain. Surge, a wave.
Surkney, Suckney, f. a frock. Surmount, f. to excel. Surpass, f. the same.
Surplice, Surpilch, the Ministers white vestment. Surplusage, f. superfluity,
adding more than needs. Surprisal, f. a sudden assault. Surquedry, o. pride,
presumption. Surrebutter, a second Rebutter. Surrejoynder, f. the Plaintiffs
opposition to the Defendants rejoinder (in civil Law, Triplication. Surrender,
a Tenants yielding up his lands etc. to him that has the next remainder or
reversion. Surreptitious, l. done by stealth. Surrey, o. Syria. Surrogation,
the substituting a Surrogate, a [Bishops] deputy. Surround, compass about.
Sursanure, a sore kin'd over. Sursengle, f. a long upper-girth. Sursise,
penalties (in Dover-Castle) laid on those that do not duly pay their duties for
Castleward. Survive, f. to outlive. Survivor, the longer-liver of two
joynt-tenants. Suryal [horns] more than royal, o. Susan, nna, h. a lilly or
rose. Susception, l. an undertaking. Susceptible, l. apt to take impression.
Susceptor, l. an undertaker, a Godfather. Suscitation, l. a raising or stirring
up. Suskins, a coin prohibited 3 Hen. 5. Suspend, l. to hang up, deser, stay,
keep in doubt. Suspension, a hanging up, doubting, also a temporal stop of a
man's right. Suspensories, f. cords hanging down for a sick man (in bed) to ease
or remove himself by. Suspiral, f. a breathing-hole; also a spring passing
underground to a conduit. Suspiration, l. a fighing. Suster, o. for sister.
Sustentation, a maintaining. Susurration, l. a whispering. Sute-silver, paid to
excuse the Freeholders of Clan Manor in Shropshire, from appearing at Court
Barons. Sutherland, part of North- Scotland. Sutler, Suitler, (D. Sceteler, a
Scullion or Huckster) one that follows an army, to sell meat, drink, etc.
Sutorious, belonging to a Suitor, l. a Shoemaker. Sutton, about 60 small Towns.
Sutton (...), in Warwickshire. Suture, l. a seam, or any thing like it. Suzan,
P. a needle. Swa. sa. so. Swabber, a small Officer who cleans the ship, etc.
Swaben, or Schwaben [land] Suevia, a German Province. Swad, no. a pea-shell,
also a shallow-pate. Swag, c. a shop. Swaffham, a town in Norfolk Swain, sa. a
Countrey-^umkin, also a Bocland-man or Freeholder. Swainmote, Swanimote, sa. a
Court of Forrest-Free-holders kept thrice a year. Swale, o. swelled. Swale* no.
windy, bleak, also to singe, burn or blaze away. Swallow-tail, a strong forked
fastening together two pieces of timber. Swan, a Constellation. Swapt-down, o.
squatted down. Swarth, Cu. the Ghost of a dying man. Swarthy* D. blackish,
tawny Swart-Ruyter, D. a horseman with black arms. Bartholous Swartz, the
German Friar that invented Gunpowder. Swash-buckler, a bragging Hector.
Swathe, No. Calm. Swea^ish, No. modest. Sweal, Ss. to singe. Sweb, No. to
swoon. Sweden, Swethland, a Northern Kingdom. Swe^ps, [the hawk] wipes her
beak. Swegh, o. force, noise. Sw^lwen, o. to swallow. Swepe, Swipe* an
instrument (with cross beams) to draw water, also as Swepage, the crop of hay
got in a Meadow. Swear, sa. a column or neck. Sweren, a town of Mecklenburg.
Sweven, o. a dream. Swift, a martlet, with feet to short that he cannot rise
from the ground. Swift the masts, ease and strengthen them with* Swifters,
ropes belonging to the main and foremast, to keep them stiff and succor the
shrowds. Swill, No. a three-footed keeler to wash in. Swilk, sa. such. Swilker
ore, to dash over. Swilpough, a dilling. Swinbull, Swine-crue, No. a hog-sty.
Swink, sa. labor. Swinker, a labourer. Swipper, o. nimble. Swithin, (Sa. very
high) a pious Bishop of Winchester, Anno 860. Swith, Switch, o. quickly.
Switzerland, a warlike nation (by the Alps) divided into 13 Cantons or
Republics. Sw^le-hot, o. sultry-hot. Swoling (or Suling) of land, Caru^ata
terra, as much as one plough can till in a year. Swoll, a town in Over Yssel.
Sword-sleiper, sa. a Sword-cutler in the North of England. Swerle, Ss. to
snarle. Swe^e, o. sweet. Swough, o. a sound, or a swooning. Syb and Some, sa.
Peace and safety. Sybarnical, like the Sybarites a very effeminate and
luxurious people of Sybaris, a town of Calabria in Italy. Sybil, g. divine
doctrine or Counsel. Sybilline, belonging to the Sybils, 10 heathen women who
(they say) prophesied of Christ. Sybillianists, a heathen Nickname for
Christians. Sycomanty, g. divination by a Fig or a Sycamore, a fair tree of
Egypt, Rhodes, etc. between a Fig and Mulberry, whose Fruit (like a wild
seedless fig) grows on the very body of the tree. Sycophantize, to play the
Sycophant, g. a Parasite, properly an Athenian informer of Figs (and other
goods) exported. Syderation, l. Tree-plague, a blasting, also the benumming of
a limb. Syderosous, l. full of stars, also planet-struck. Sye, o. as Sile-down.
Sylla, a famous Roman general and Dictator, who (at last) retired to Puteoli.
Syllabical, belonging to or consisting of a Syllable, g. a complete sound.
Syllabize, to make syllables or syllabus. Syllabary, a book treating of
Syllables, also as Syllabus, l. the Index of a book. Syllepsis, one verb plural
with two Nominatives singular, etc. Syllogistical, belonging to a Syllogism, g.
a Conclusion drawn from two premises, viz. the proposition or Major, and the
Assumption or Minor. Syllogize, to argue by Syllogisms. Sylva Caedua,
Coppice-wood. Sylvanectum, Semis, in Pycardy. Sylvanus, the God of woods.
Sylvan, a wild-man. Sylvatical, -vestri^^, -ious, l. woody. Sylvigerous, l.
bearing wood. Symbolical, belonging to a Symbol, g. a sign o^ badge, a secret
note or se^^^nce, a shot (in paying) also the Creed. Symbolize, to concur in
opinion or humor, to join purses, to signify by signs, etc. Symbolography, g.
a descripon of Symboles, al^^ of instruments or Presidents. Symmachy, g.
confederacy in War. Symmetrist, -ian, one skilled in Symmetry, g. a due
proportion of parts. Symmist, g. a Privy-Counsellor, or Colleague in a [sacred]
profession. Sympathetical, belonging to Sympathy, g. natural agreement in
affection or passion. Sympathize, to have a mutual affection or fellow-feeling.
Symphoniacal, belonging to Symphony, g. harmony, consent. Symphonist, g. a
Songster. Symploce, g. a giving the same beginning and ending to several
clauses. Symposiaques, Treatises of Feasts. Symposiast, g. Master of the Feast.
Symptomatical, belonging to a Symptom, g. a sign, accident or effect of a
disease. Synaeresis, g. a contracting [two syllables into one. Synagogical,
belonging to a Synagogue, g. an assembly, Jewish Church. Syna^aepha, g. the
cutting off a final vowel before an initial one. Synaxis, g. the holy
Communion. Syncategorematical, g. which has no predicamental or
self-signification, but (being added to another) makes it differ from what it
was (as all, none, etc.) Syncentrick, g. having the same center. Synchondrosis,
g. a joining together by a gristle. Synchronism, g. a being Synchronical, g.
contemporary, done at the same time. Synchoresis, g. a concession, granting or
yielding. Synchrism, g. a thin spreading ointment. Syncopate, -pize, to
contract, cut away, or to swoon. Syncopation, when the striking of time falls
in the midst of a note, notes driven till the time falls even again. Syncope,
g. the taking a letter or syllable from the middle, also a sudden decay of the
spirits. Syneretism, g. the joining of two enemies against a third person.
Syncrisis, g. comparison. Syndic, g. a censor or Controller. Syndiques of
Geneva, the 4 chief of their 200 Common-Council-men. Syndicable, subject to
censure. Syndicat, a Syndicks office. Syndrome, g. a concourse or running
together. Synecdochical, belonging to Synecdoche, g. the putting a part for the
whole, or e contra. Synedrium, -ion, g. a Council. Synerize, to contract by the
figure. Syneresis, as Synaer-. Synguler, o. a Boar (above four years old)
leaving his sounder. Syngraph, g. a bond or bill. Synodale, a tribute paid the
Bishop or Archdeacon (by the inferior Clergy) at Easter Visitation. Synodal,
-dical, belonging to a Synod, g. a Convocation or Ecclesiastical Assembly.
Synoicciosis, g. a reconciling, attributing contraries to the same thing.
Synonymize, to make use of Synmyma's, words that are Synonymal, -mous, g. of
the same signification. Synoper, l. red-lead. Synople, f. (in Heraldry) green.
Synopsis, -sy, g. a short view. Syntagm, g. a Treatise, Ordinance, or placing
things together. Syntax, g. the same; also the joining of words into sentences.
Syntectical, g. weak, often swouning. Synteresy, g. the pure part of
Conscience, accusing or excusing. Syntheme, g. a watchword, also a riddle, and
as Diploma. Synthetical, belonging to Synthesis, g. an agreement in sense, not
in word. Syntomy, g. conciseness, brevity. Syracuse, a City in Sicily. Siren,
as Siren. Syria, part of Asia. Syrinx, a Nymph (flying from Pan) turned into a
reed, which he made his pipes of. Syrtes, [African] Quicksands. Sysor, o. one
of the Assise or Jury. Systatique, g. placing together. System, g. the compass
of a song, the body of any Art or Science. Systole, g. a Contraction. Syzygy,
g. a Conjunction [of the Sun and Moon.
T.
T. The brand of one convict (of any Felony save murder) and having the benefit
of Clergy. Taas, o. (f. Tas) a heap. Tab, Mo. the latchet [of a shoe. Tobacco,
Tob-, brought from an Indian Isle (of the same name) by Sir Francis Drake,
1585. Tabard, as Taberd. Tabs, St. Ebbes, Ebbechester, a town of Durham.
Tabefaction, l. a corrupting. Tabefy, to melt or consume. Tabellarious,
belonging to a Tabellary, an Auditor or letter carrier. Tabellion, l. a public
Notary. Taberd, -ard, a sleevless coat, also a Heralds Coat of arms in service.
Tabern, No. a Cellar. Tabernacle, l. a booth or Tent, also a little vessel in
which the Popish Sacrament is put on the altar. Feast of Tabernacles, kept in
remembrance of their living in Tents when they came out of Egypt. Tabernarious,
l. belonging to Taverns or shops. Tabid, l. wasting away. Tabifical, l. causing
a Consumption. Tabitha, h. a Roe-buck. Table of Apelles, representing the
excellency of sobriety (on one side) and the deformity of intemperance) (on the
other.) Twelve Tables (of Brass) Roman laws brought (by the Decemviri) from
Athens. Tabling of fines, making a Table with the Contents of every Pine (past
in any one term) for every Counry where the Kings writ runs. Tabouret, f. a
pin-case, also a Child's low stool. Privilege of the Tabouret, f. for some great
Ladies to fit in the Queens presence. Tabular, -rious, l. belonging to Tables
or Writings. Tabulary, l. a place where public writings are kept. Tabulate, l.
to floor or board. Taces, armor for the thighs (tackt with straps to the
Corslet.) Tacamachacca, a sweet gum used for the Teeth and head. Taches, o.
pranks. Tachos, a king of Egypt, whose jeering at Agesilaus's shortness, broke
their league and lost him his Kingdom. Tachygraphy, g. Swift-writing. Tacoy o.
to pluck-to. Tacit, l. silent. Taciturnity, l. silence. Tacks, great ropes
(seized into the clew of the sail, reeved into the Chestree and comn in at the
ship-side) to carry forward the clew and keep the sail close by a wind. Tack
the ship, bring her head about, to ly quite the other way. Tackle, small ropes
(running in 3 parts) to heave in goods, etc. Tacticks, g. military books or
Officers. Taction, l. a touching. Taddy, an Indian drink issuing from a tree.
Tagge, Ss. a sheep of the first year. Tagliacotius, a Surgeon of Bononi^a
who made a new nose (of another man's flesh) for one of Brussels. Tagliacotian,
belonging thereto. Tagus, the gold-sanded river Taio, between Castile and
Portugal. Tail, (f. cut or divided) a fee (opposite to fee-simple) not in a
man's free power to dispose of. Tail general, limited to a man and his Issue by
any Wife. Tail special, limited to a man and his Wife, and the Heirs of their
particular bodies. Tail, is also the same as Talley, a cleft piece of wood to
notch an account upon. Tails of Kentish men, a feigned punishment for their
cutting off the tail of St. Tho. of Canterbury's horse. Tailagiers, o.
gatherers of Tailage, Tall-, a tax. Tainct, a small red spider Infesting Cattle
in Summer. Taint, conviction, or one convict of Felony, etc. Takel, o. an arrow
or feather. Talaries, l. Mercuries winged shoes. Talassion, as Thalassion.
Talcum, Talk, a Sussex Mineral transparent as Crystal (but not so fine as the
Venetian) of which they make a curious white wash. Talent of Silver, (among the
Jews) about 375 pounds. Of Gold, 4500 pounds. Tales, (l. such) a book (in the
King's Bench office) of such Jurymen as were of the Tales [de circumstantibus]
a supply of Jurymen for them that appear not, or are challenged by either
party. Taleshile, as Talwood. Taley, Tally, see Tail. Talion, lex talionis, a
punishment like the offense. Talismanical, belonging to Talismans, A.
Artificial magical images or figures made under certain constellations. Tally
aft the sheats, hale them aft. Talmudical, belonging to the Talmud, Thalmud (^.
discipline) a Collection of the Jewish Ceremonies, and superstitious
traditions. Talmudist, a student therein. Talpicide, l. a killing or killer of
Moles. Talus, slain by his Uncle Dedalus envying his ingenious inventions of
the Saw, Potters wheel, etc. Talwood, Talshide, Firewood cut into billets of a
certain length. Tamadua, the Ant-bear in Brasile, feeding on ants. Tamarinds,
an Indian, Physical, opening and cooling Fruit. Tamarisk, a shrub of two sorts
whereof the less boild in Wine (and a little Vinegar) greatly helps the Spleen
Tambour, f. a Drum. Tamburine, an old kind of instrument difused. Tamerlane, a
Scythian who led Bajazeth the Turk about in an iron cage. Tamesis, the Thames
compounded of Them and Isis. Tampoon, Tamkin, the wooden stopple of a Canon.
Tampoy, a pleasant Molucca-drink (of a kind of Gilli-flowers. Tamworth, a town
part in Warwick and part in Staffordshire. Tanacles, I. torturing pincers.
Tanais, a river between Europe and Asia. Tanet, Tha-, a Kentish Isle. Tangent,
a right line perpendicular to the Diameter, drawn by one extreme of an Arch and
terminated by the secant, drawn from the center through the other extreme of
the said arch. Tangibility, a being Tangible, l. touchable. Tang^er, an English
town of the Kingdom of Fesse in Barbary. Tanistry, an Irish custom, whereby the
most powerful and worthy did inherit the principality. Tank, a small pool.
Tanquam, (l. as) a Fellows fellow (in the University.) Tant me fait mal
departir de ma dame, f. so much it grieves me to part with my Mistress. Tant
que je puis, as much as I can. Tantalized, in the Condition of Tantalus,
feigned to stand up to the chin in water with pleasant Apples at his mouth, yet
unable to compass either. Tantamount, I. equivalent, of the same price. Taps or
Beats, [the har^ or coney] makes a noise. Taper-bored, [a piece] wider at the
mouth than breech. Tapinage, s. a secret lurking. Tapis, -ssant, lurking.
squatting. Tapite, o. Tapistry. Taprobane, Sumatra, an Indian Island 1000 Miles
long and above 600 broad. Tarantarize, to sound Tarantara, Taratan-, the sound
of Trumpets (to battle.) Tarantula, a most venomous spider, or a fly whose
sting (they say) is only cured by Music, from Tarantum, a City of Naples where
they abound. Tardy, l. slow, also guilty. Tardigrade, l. slow-paced.
Tardiloquent, l. of slow speech. Tardity, l. slowness. Tare and Tret,
[allowance for] the weight of box, bag, etc. and waste in emptying, etc. Tares,
[wild] vetches. Targe, o. for Target. Tar^, No. a lake. Tarky, Sf. dark.
Tarnish, to lose the gloss or splendor. Tarpawlinz, -paulin, a tar'd canvass
laid on the deck, to keep the rain out. Tarpeia, a maid that betrayed the
Capitol to the Sabines for their bracelets, who (adding their shields too)
pressed her to death. Tarquinius superbus, last King of Rome* Father of
Tarquinius Sextus, ravishing Lucretia, caused the extirpation of Kingly
Government. Tarracon, a City of Arragon. Tarragon, a Sallet-herb. Terrass, as
Terrasse. Tarsbish, h. the Ocean or main Sea. Tarsus, a City of Cilicia.
Tartar, Argal, hard lees sticking on the sides of wine-vessels. Tartarean,
-rine, belonging to Tartarus, l. hell. Tartaria, a large part of Asia. Tasck,
Br. a tribute. Tasels, Cloth-workers burs. Tasse, f. a heap. Tassay, ^. for to
assay. Tassel, Tiersel, (f. Tiercelet) the male Hawk, less (by a third) than
the female. Tasses, as Taces. Taste, No. smell. Tatch, Tetch, o^ craft. Titus
Tatius, a Sabine Captain, (after long wars) made a sharer in the Roman
Government. Tattershall, a town in Lincolnshire. Tatterways, o. for tatter
rags. Tave, Li. to rage. Taudery, for St. Audrey (Ethelred.) Taudery-lace,
bought at Audry fair in Cambridgshire. Tavistoke, Teav-, a town in Devonshire.
Taunt-mast, too high for the Ship. Taunton, Thonton, a town on the River Thon^
in Sommersetshire. Taught the rope, set it stiff. Taurean, -rine, l. of a Bull.
Tauricorneus, l. horned like a Bull. Tauriferous, l. nourishing or bearing
Bulls. Taurinum, the City Turin in Piedmont. Taurus, the largest hill in Asia,
also the Zodiac bull. Tautological, belonging to Tautology, g. a repeating the
same thing [in other words. Tawn* No. to swoon. Taxario bladorunt, an
imposition on corn. Taxers, two yearly Officers (at Cambridge) who gage all
weights and measures (they formerly rated houses.) Taximagulus, a King of Kent,
who opposed Julius Caesar. Tay, a River dividing Scotland into North and South.
Taygetus, a steep hill near Sparta. Tea, an Indian drink made with the leaf of
a shrub, etc. Team; Theme, Tem, Theme, a Royalty granted the Lord of a Manor
to have and judge Bondmen, etc. Team, Teem, No. pour out. T^amfull, No.
brim-full. Tech, o. for touch. Technical, g. artificial. Technology, g. a
treating of arts or workmanship. Tectonick, g. of building. Tectoria^, l. of
covering or pargetting. Tedder, D. [a rope] to tie a beast that he may graze no
farther. Tediferous, l. torch-bearing. Te^n. No. angry. Good or fow Tecn, Che.
good or soul taking. Tegment, l. a covering. T^^fidale, part of South Scotland.
(...), a Hawks pu^s^v^ness, ^eing quickly wea^y. Teirs^, as Tiers^ Tell no
store, o. account as nothing. Telary spiders, as weave webs. Telephus, exposed
in the woods and brought up by a Heart, becoming King of Mysia, was wounded and
cured by Achilles dart. Telescope, g. a large prospective glass. Teliferous, l.
dart-bearing. Telisman, as Talisman. Tellers, (in the Exchequer) four Officers,
receiving all money, etc. Tellus, l. [the Goddess of] the Earth. Teme, o. for
(Theme) argument. Temen, o. to bind or lay. Tem^rarious, l. rash. Temerity, l.
fool-hardiness. Tempe, g. pleasant Fields at the foot of Haemus in Thessaly.
Temperamental, belonging to Temperament, l. a due proportion [of the four
humors. Temperance, l. Moderation [in diet and desires. Temperature, l. as
Temperament. Tempestivity, l. seasonableness. Templars-Inn, (in Fleetstreet)
built by the Templaries, as Knights of the Temple. Temporal vein, he
Temple-vein opened for the Megrim, etc. Temporal augment, an increasing the
quantity of a vowel. Temporalties, (-alities) of Bishops, their Revenues, as
Barons of Parliament. Temporal. -raneous, -ary, -reous, l. belonging to (or
continuing for) a time. Temporize, to observe or comply with the times.
Temporizer, a time-server. Temse, No. a fine small sieve. Tem^l^ncy, l.
drunkenness. Temulent, -tine, l. drunken. Temse-bread, sifted. Tenacies, l.
apple-stalks. Tenable, holdable. Tenacity, l. a being Tenacious, l. holding or
sticking fast, stiff-necked. Tenancies, Tenements. Tind, l. to bend, stretch
out, show forth. Very Tenant, immediate. Tendency, an extending, a making
toward. Tender, to offer. Tenderlings, the soft tops of Deers horns in blood.
Tendons, l. instruments of motion at the top of muscles, knitting them to the
bones. Tendrals, -rons, f. the same, also little sprigs (of Vines, etc.) Tene,
o. sorrow. Tenebres, f. (darkness) the Roman service (on Wednesday, Thursday
and Friday before Easter) representing Christ's apprehension in the Garden, when
at the end of every Psalm they put out a Candle, till all the 15 are out, and
he left friendless and under the power of darkness. Tenebrion, l. a
Night-walker. Tenebrosity, a being Tenebrous, l. dark, obscure. Tenedos, an
Egean Isle whither the Greeks retired for a while. Tenementis legatis, a writ
for a Corporation to hear controversies touching Tenements devised by Will.
Tenentibus in assisa non onerandis, a writ for him to whom a desseisor has
alienated land (whereof he desseised another) that he be not molested for
damages awarded, etc. Tenerity, l. tenderness. Tenesmus, Tenas-, g. a continual
(but vain) desire of going ^o stool. Ten, (in Heraldry) an Orange or tawny
color. Tenon, that part of the timber that is put into the mortoise-hole.
Tenor, l. an order, fashion, state, content or substance, also that part (in
Music) next the Bass. Tenore indicta menti mittendo, a writ calling the record
of an indictment (and process) into the Chancery. Tenses, the different endings
of Verbs to signify difference of time, viz. (in Latin) the Present,
Preterimperfect, Preterperfect, Preterpluperfect and Future. Tensile, l. to be
bent or stretched out. Tensity, l. stiffness or tightness. Tent, Mast^ck and
Turpentine which Jewellers put under Table Diamonds, when they set them in
work. Tent-wine, Vino-tinto, Sp. all Wines (in Spain) except white. Tent, Che.
to look to. Tentation, l. a trying. Tentative, l. a posing or poser of those
that are to commence. Tenths, the Kings yearly portion of Ecclesiastical
livings. Tentor, a stretcher (used by Clothiers) prohibited. Tentorean, l.
belonging to a Tent or Pavilion [in War. Tentife, o. (q. attentive) careful.
Tenuate, l. to cause Tenuity, l. a being Tenuious, -ous, thin, lean, slender,
weak. Tenure, the manner whereby lands are held. Tepefaction, -fying, l. a
warming. Tephramantie, g. Divination by ashes thrown in the Air. Tepedity, a
being Tepid, l. lukewarm. Teraphim, h. Images for] private use. Teratology, g.
a discourse of wonders. Tercel, as Tassel. Tercel-gentle, a Male Faulcon.
Tercera, a Western Isle. Terrebellum, l. a kind of Crows-bill. Terebinthine,
belonging to Terebinth, l. Turpentine. Terebrate, l. to bore, or thirl.
Terebration, l. a boring, etc. Tergeminous, l. threefold, or three born at a
time. Tergiductor, l. a bringer up. Tergimen^, l. that which is put into the
scales to make weight. Tergiversation, l. a turning the back, a nonsuit. Term,
l. a bound or limit, also the time when places of Judgment are open for all
Lawsuits. Hillary-Term, begins Jan. 23 (except it be Sunday) and ends Feb. 12.
Easter-Term, begins the Wednesday fortnight after Easter day, and ends the
Monday after Ascension day. Tri^y-Term, begins the Friday after Trinity-Sunday,
and ends the Wednesday fortnight after. Michaelmas-Term, begins Oct. 23.
(except it be Sunday) and ends Nov. 28. Tarmagant, thrice (or very) great.
Termantine, l. Turpentine. Terminals, feasts ( Feb. 22.) in honor of Terminus,
the Roman God of bounds deciding controversies of Husbandmen. Termonland,
Glebeland. Termor, he that holds for term of years or Life. Terminate, l. to
limit. Termination, a bounding or ending. Ternary, -rious, belonging to
Ternion, l. the number three. Terns, No. large ponds. Terra e^^iendenda, a writ
for the Escheator to find the true yearly value of Land, etc. Terra
excultabilis, land that may be tilled. Terra frusca or frisca, fresh land, not
lately plowed. Terra gilliflorata, held by paying a Gilly-flower. Terra Lemnia,
red astringent Earth of Lemnos. Terra lucrabilis, that may be gained from the
Sea (or a waste) to particular use. Terra sigillata, Earth (sent from Lemnos)
sealed against wounds, Fluxes, Poisons, etc. Terra vestita, (in old Charters)
sown with corn. Terrae-filius, l. the bondrol at the Oxford Act, See
Praevaricator. Terraqueous, l. of Earth and water mixed. Terrar, -rer, a survey
of all the acres (and their bounds) in an estate. There is a Terrar in the
Exchequer of all Glebelands in England. Terrasse, Tar-, f. a bank of Earth,
also an open walk or gallery. Terrestrifie, to cause Terrestriety, a being
Terrene, -restrial, l. Earthly. Terre-Tenant, f. he that has the actual
possession of the Land. Terrecrepant, l. rebuking terribly. Terrier, a
Catalogue of all the Lords Tenants, etc. Terring, a town in Ss. Terris, bonis
et Catalis, etc for a Clerk to recover his Lands, etc. having cleared himself.
Terris et Catallis, etc. to restore to the debtor distreined above the debt.
Terrisonant, l. sounding terribly. Territory, l. the land within the bounds of
any place. Terrulent l. full of Earth. Terry, an Indian liquor drawn from the
Palm Tree. Terse, l. neat, polite. Tertian, the third part of a tun, 84
gallons. Tertian, -ary, l. belonging to the third. Tertianague, returning every
other day (tak^ng in the extremes.) Tertiate, l. to till ground (or do any
thing) a third time. Tertiation, a dividing into three. Tervin, a town in
Cheshire. Tesserarious, belonging to a Tessera, l. a die, or any such square, a
token, watchword, etc. Test, a broad instrument (made of maribone-ashes)
hoop'd with iron, on which they refine gold and silver. Testaceous, l. of tile
or brick. Testaceous Animals, having shells. Testamentarious, belonging to a
Testament, l. ones last will having an Executor expressed. Testat^m, a writ
(after Capias) when a man is not found in the County where the action is laid.
Testation, l. a witnessing Testator, l. He- and Testatrix, l. She that makes a
will. Tester, sixpence, See Teston. Testers, o. sculls, sallets, headpieces.
Testicular, belonging to Testicles, l. the Stones. Testiff, o. (q. Testy)
wild-brained. Testification, as Testation. Teston, f. an old silver coin
formerly worth 12 pence, sinking by degrees to gilt brass and six pence.
Testudinous, belonging to or like a Testudo, l. a Tortoise shell, or
Target-fence in war. Tetanical, having a crick in the neck. Tetbury, a town in
Glocestershire. Tethys, a Goddess of the Sea. Tetch, o. a fashion, also a
stain. Tetches, o. forwardness. Tetrachord, g. an instrument of 4 strings, a
fourth in the Gamut. Tetrade, f. a mess of 4. Tetraeterie, g. four years.
Tetraedron, g. a figure of four sides. Tetraglotical, g. of four Tongues.
Tetragonal, belonging to a Tetragon, g. a quadrangle. Tetragrammaton, g. the
Name of 4 letters (almost in every language) viz. Jehovah. Tetralogy, g. a
discourse in four parts. Tetrameter, g. a verse of 4 feet. Tetraptote, g. a
noun of 4 cases. Tetrarch, g. a Governor of the 4th part. Tetrarchy, g. a
Government by four. Tetrastick g. 4 verses. Tetrasillabical, g. of four
syllables. Tetricity -ritude, l. sourness of countenance. Tetrick, l. sour,
crabbed. Tetronymal, g. of 4 names. Teverton, a town in Devonshire. Teutonick,
belonging to the Teutones, Almains, Germans (in the largest sense.) Tewksbury,
a town in Glocestershire, famous for woollen cloth and Mustard. Tewel, o. a
Chimney, Texel, a Bay and Port in Holland. Textele, o. (q. textuel, f.) well
verst in the text. Textile, l. woven, embroidered. Textorian, belonging to
Texture, l. a weaving. Teynted, o. for tainted, dipped. Theborites, the followers
of John Zista, a Bohemian rebel (1426) from Thabor, a hill so called by him,
which he took from a Nobleman. Thack-ti^^, plain or side-tile. Thac^, o. for
Thwack. Thalassiarch, g. an Admiral. Thalassical, g. Sea-g^^en or bluish.
Thalassion, l. a Neptial song among the old Roman^. Thales, one of the 7 wise
men of Greece. Thalestris, an Amazon-Queen, who went 30 days journey to meet
Alexander. Thalia* one of the Muses. Thalmud, as Talmud. Them, a town in
Oxfordshire. Thane, Sa. a Nobleman, Freeman, etc. but properly an Officer of
the King. Thankebeld, o. thank-worthy. Their, o. needs. Thascry, o. Outcry,
Tharcakes, La. as Bannocks. Tharm, Li. Guts prepared for ^uddings. Thavies Inn
(in H^lborn) one of the Innes of Chancery, formerly the house of John Thavie an
Armourer. Tharted, a town in Essex. The, Thee, o. thrive. Theatral, -rical,
belonging to a Theater, -tree g. a stage. Theatral Law, punishing those that
presumed to sit in the Knights seats. Theatins, Thietins, a Religious Order
instituted by John Peter-Caraff, who (before he was Pope Paul 3.) was Bishop of
Theate, Thiette, a City of Naples. Theave, E. an Ew of the first year. Thebae,
Thebes, Stibes in Egypt, another in Baeotia. Thebes, Ns. Goos-berries. Te^ch,
Theich, o. plain, smooth. Thedome, o. thriving. Theifthe, o. Theevish. Thekk,
o. such. Theft bote, the receiving goods from a thief, to favor and maintain
him; the punishment is ransom and imprisonment. Thelemite, g. a Libertine.
Thelonium, a writ to free Citizens from toll, according to their Charter or
Prescription. Theme, g. an argument to discourse on. Themis, a Goddess of
Justice. Themistocl^s, a banished Athe^ian, who (being entertained by Xerxes
and made General against his Countrymen) poisoned himself. Thence, o. to get
or find. Then, o. for thence. Theos, g. God. Theobald, Tibald, Sa. Bold among
the People, or soon virtuous. Theocracy, g. Gods Government. Theoderic, Deric,
Terrey, Sa. Rich in people. Theodolite, a Surveying instrument. Theodom, Sa.
Servitude. Theodore, Tydder, g. Gods gift. Theodosia, the feminine of
Theodosius, g. as Theodore. Theogony, g. the generation of the Gods.
Theologaster, a pitiful Theologue, -ger, g. a Divine. Theological, g. belonging
to Theology, g. Divinity. Theologig^, to play the Divine. Theomachy, g. a
fighting against God or the gods. Theomagical, g. belonging to Divine Wisdom.
Theomancy, g. Divination by abusing the names of God Theominy, the wrath of
God. Themville, a ^own of Luxemburgh. Theophilus, g. lover of God. Theor^^, l.
a large Lute. Theorematick, belonging to a* Theoreme, g. a Principle in any
Art; but chiefly respecting contemplation, as Problem does practice.
Theoremist, a Pro^essor of Theorems, or undoubted truths. Theoretick, belonging
to Theory, g. the speculative part of any Science without practice.
Theosophical, g. Divinely wise* Therapeutick, g. healing. Theraphim, as
Teraphim, humane images. Theriacal, g. of treacle, of a viper or other wild
beast. Thermefy, to heat [with over-eating hot things. Thermid, o. therewith.
Thermometer g. a Weather-glass. Thermopolist, g. a seller of hot things.
Thermopol^^, a long ridge of Mountains in Greece. Thesaurer, g. a Treasurer.
Thesaurize, to heap or hoard up treasure. Theseus, by Ariadnes help flew the
Cretian Minotaur. Thesiphon, as Tesiphone. Thesis, g. a general argument or
position. Thessalonica, Salonique, in Macedonia. Thessalia, -- ly, part of
Greece, between Baeotia and Macedon. Thesick, belonging to Thet^, (the first
letter of (...) Death) a note of Condemnation. Thetford, a town in Norfolk.
Thetis, [a Nymph of] the Sea. Theu, o. though. Therys, o. Doves. Thew'd, No.
towardly. Thewes, o. qualities. Thight, o. well compacted. Thight ship,
staunch, making but little water. Thilk, o. such, or this. Thiller, the horse
that bears up the. Thills, the sore-part of a Wagon or Cart. Thingus, as Thane.
Thirdborow, as Headborow. Thirdings, the third part of Corn on the ground, etc.
Third-night-awn-hynd, a guest lying the third night in an Inn was accounted a
domestic, and the Host answerable for his offenses. Forman night uncuth, Two
night gueste, Third night awn hynde. Thirl, Li. to bore. Thivel, Thible, No. a
stirring-stick. Tho, o. then and those. Thokes, broken bellied fish: Thole, l.
the Scutchin or knot in the midst of a timber vault, a pinnacle, Tabernacle, and
the place (in Temples) where gifts, are hung up; also to stay, brook or endure,
Der. Thomas, h. a twin. Thomists, followers of Thomas Aquinas, a School-Divine
called (by Papists) Angelical Doctor. Thomyris, Queen of Scythia, who threw the
head of Cyrus into a tub of blood, say^^g -- Satia te sanguine, Cyre! Thon^,
Thong, No. damp. Thong Castle, Castor, in Lincolnshire. Thor, Jupiter, a Saxon
Idol giving name to Thursday. Thore, o. before. Thoracbique, g. belonging to
the breast. Thornbury, a town in Glocestershire. Thorton, about 30 small towns.
Thorow-toll, paid formerly at Bough in Yorkshire. Thorp, sa. a Village, the
name of above 50. Thorruck, o. a heap. Thoughts, the rowers seats in a boat.
Toulouse, a City in Lan guedoc. Thourgy, as Turgy. Thowls, the pins which the
Oars bear against. Thrages, o. busy matters. Thracia, part of Europe East of
Macedon. Thrapston, a town in Northamptonshire. Thraskites, followers of John
Thrask, a broacher of Judaical opinions in England, 1618. Thrasonical, like
unto Thraso, g. a great boaster. Thrasybulus, an Athenian exile, who freed them
from the 30 Tyrants. Thrave, two stooks or 24 sheaves, also a bevy of quails,
and (in Li.) to urge. Threke, o. thrust. Thremot, (q. terrae mot) o. the blast
of a horn. Threne, g. a lamentation [song. Thenetick, g. mournful. Threnody, g.
the singing of a funeral song. Threpe, sa. to affirm confidently, also to call,
rebuke and impose, or heap, No. Threst, o. to oppress. In a Threw, (q. throw^)
o. quickly. Thrie, o. for thrive. Thrilled, Thirled, sa. killed. Thridborow, as
Third. Thrippa, Che. to beat. Thrimsa, three shillings, or rather the 3d. part
of a shilling. Thring, o. to thrust. Thrithing, a Court of three or four
hundreds. Throb, sa. to pant or heat. Thrones, the third rank in the Celestial
Hierarchy. Thropple, Y. to strangle, also the windpipe. Thrope, o. for Thorp.
Throsshers, o. quails. Throw, No. to turn as Turners, also anger, haste, o.
Thrutch, Che. thrust. Thrusk, a town in Yorkshire. Thucydides, an eloquent
Greek Historian. Thule, a Northern Isle. Thummim, ^. perfections. Thuriferous,
l. bearing frankincense. Thursday, Thorsday, Da. Dondersdagh, D. See Thor-.
Thwart-ships, across the ship. Thwite, No. to whittle. Thy, s^. therefore.
Thiatica, a City of Lydia. Thyland, part of North Juitland. Thymelical, of
Players. Thymick vein, the first branch of the Subclavicular, going to the
kernel under the Canel-bone. Thymomancy, g. a presaging from ones own hopes or
fears. Thymous, l. full of thyme. Thyrse, g. a stalk, also Bacchus's Javelin
wrapped with Ivy. Tiara, l. a Turbant. Tib of the buttery, c. a goose. Tiber, a
River by Rome, as the Thames by London. Tibial, l. belonging to pipes.
Tibicinate, l. to pipe. Tiching, Der. drying turves in the Sun. Tickrum, c. a
license. Ticktack, f. trictrac, or touch and take, a game at Tables. Tid, o.
happened. Tiddeswell, a town in Darbyshire. Tide, D. time. Tide-gate, where the
tide runs strongest. Lee-ward Tide, running with the wind. Wind-ward Tide,
against Wind. Tides-men, Officers attending ships till the Custom be paid.
Tiel, a town in Gelderland. Tierce, Tiers, f. the third part of a pipe, 42
Gallons. Tiercel, Tercel, as Tassel. Tiercet, f. a staff of 3 verses. Ties, the
ropes by which the yards hang. Tifters, Tyffelers, o. for Triflers. Tigh.
Teage, sa. a Close. Tigillum, l. a crucible. Tigrine, l. like a Tiger. Tiliden,
o. they tilled. Tillemont, a town in Bra^^nt Tiller, in a boat, is the same as
Helm in a Ship, Tilt, a tent or canopy. Tilts, as Tournaments. Timariots,
Turks who hold the parts of conquered Lands by a kind of knights service.
Timber of skins, forty. Timbers of Ermine, the rews of Ermine in the Robes.
Timbesteres, o. Timbrel-players. Timbres, f. little bells. Timbrel, (D.
Trommel) ^ Taber. Timorous, fearful. Timidity, l. fearfullness. Timocracy, g.
government by the richest. Timo^^, a sour Athenian hating all company.
Timotheus, -thy, g. an honourer of God. Timpany, as Tympany. Tincel, (f.
Estincelle, a spark) a glistering stuff (of silk and copper, etc.) Tincture, l.
a stain, color, touch, or taste. Tineman, Tienman, an old Forest
Night-Officer. Tine the door, No. shut it* Tine (tin) the candle, So. light it.
Tingible, l. that may be stained or died. Tinkeled, o. for Twinkled. Tinniment,
l. a tinkling. Tinsel, as Tincel. Tint-win^, as Tent-. Tintamar, f. a clashing
or ingling noise. Tintinnation, l. a ringing. Tiny, small, slender. Tip the
cole to Adam Tiler, s. give the [stoln] money to your [running] Comrade.
Tip-staff, one of the Warden of the Fleets men. Tipocosmy, Typ-, g. a Type or
figure of the World. Tiren, o. tear. Tire of Ordnance, a set fore and aft.
Cable-Tire, the row in the middle of a coyld cable. Tiresias, a blind Theban
Prophet. Tirconnel, an Irish County. Tiromancy, Tyr-, g. Divination by cheese.
Tirol, Ty-, part of Austria. Tissue, f. woven, plaited. Cloth of Tissue, silk
and silver or gold. Titanick, belonging to Titan, (Poet.) the Sun. Tite, o.
befalls. Tithing-man, the Chief of a Tithing, a Society of ten families bound
for one another good behavior. Tithonus, ravished by Aurora into Aethiopia,
and turned at last into a Grasshopper. Tithymal, Milkthistle, Sealettice or
Wolfs-milk. Titillation, l. a tickling. Titter, Tidder, Tider, No. soon,
quickly. Titulation, l. a stumbling. Titular, l. having only a title. Tmesis,
g. a separating the parts of a compound word. Tmolus, a Lydian Mountain, whence
the river Pactolus flows. Tobacco, as Tobacco. Tobiah, -as, h. the Lord is
good. Tod of wool, Two stone, 28 pound. Todder, o. for the other. Toftman, the
owner of a Toft, a place where a messaage has stood. Tofet, as Tov^t. Toforn,
o. before. Togedi^, o. for together. Toils, hunte^s nets. Tol, l. to take away.
Toll, liberty to buy and sell within the precincts of a Manor; also Custom for
passage, buying, etc. Tolbuyth, broth, a Custom-house; also the chief prison at
Edinburgh. Toletum, Toledo, the chief City of New-Castile who is, wall has 150
Towers. Tole, o. a clout or toy. Tolen, a town in Zealand. Tolerable, which one
may Tolerate, l. endure. Toleration, an indulgence. Told no tale, o. never
reckoned upon it, slighted it. Tolsey, Toldsey, the Exchange at Bristol.
Tolestale, the Town Hall of Dublin. Tolt, a writ removing a cause from a Court
Baron to the County Court. Tolutation, l. an ambling. Tolu^iloquence, smooth
speaking. Toman, a Persian coin of 3 l. 6 s. Tomblesterers, -listeres, o.
tumblers, dancers. Tome, g. a division or volume. Tomboy, sa. a girl that
tumbles about like a boy. Tomentitious, l. of flocks. Tomin, f the weight of a
Spanish Real also (among Jewellers) 3 Carrats. Tomine, o. for to mind or mean.
Tomkin, as Tamkin. Tonical, belonging to a Tone, l. tune, note, accent. Tons,
o. to^s, claws. Tongue, a town in Shropshire. Tongres, a town of Li^ge. Tonne,
as Tun. Tonitruate, l. to thunder. Tonnag^, a Custom for goods brought or
carried in Tuns or such like vessels. Tonnage and Poundage, began 45 Edw. 3.
Tonnellers, those Seamen that fill the casks with water. Tonsils, l. kernels at
the root of the tongue, subject to inflammations, etc. Tonsorious, belonging to
a Tonsor, l. a Barber. Tonsure, l. a clipping. Tourcan, No. to wonder or muse.
Too-too, No. very well or good. Toom, Tume, No. empty. Toothing, the working-in
of bricks in a party-wall. Toparch, g. one having Topar^ie, -g. the Government
of a place. Top-armors, clothes tied (for show) about the tops of the Masts, to
hide men in sight, etc. Topaze, a precious stone, one gold-coloured, another
^affron. Tophet, h. a place near Jerusalem, where they burnt their Children to
Molo^h. Topiary, l. of Arbors. Topos, g. a place. Topical, belonging to
Topics, g. common places of invention for arguments. Topography, g. the
description of particular places. Topping-cheat, c. the gallows. Topping-Cove,
c. the hangman. Top-rope, wherewith they strike the main and fore topmast.
Topsy-turvy, forth' up-side the other way. Tor, sa. a tower or high rock.
Torcencious, o* using extortion. Torcular-vein, a branch of the throat-vein
ascending to (and moistning) the brain. Torce, (in Heraldry) a wreath.
Torch-royal, the start in a staggs head, next above the Royal. Torcularious, of
a winepress. Tories, Irish Outlaws. Tormentick, setfoil. Torminous, troubled
with Tormins, l. gripings in the guts. Tornado, Sp. a sudden violent storm at
Sea. Tornatil, l. turned or made with a wheel. Tornus, a town of Burgundy.
Torosity, l. brawniness. Torpedo, l. cramp-fish, be^ummingones hands (though
^oucht with a pole.) Torpidity, a being Torpid, l. benumbed, astonished. Torp^r,
l. a drowzy dullness. Torquated, l. wearing a collar or chain. Ti. Man.
Torqudius, beheaded his Son for fighting against his command, though
victorious. Torrefaction, -fying, rosting, scorching, parching. Torrent, l. a
violent landfloud. Torrets, o. rings. Torrentine, belonging thereto.
Torrington, a town in Devonshire. Torrid, l. scorching-hot. Torsion, l. a
wringing. Tortfeasor, a trespasser. Tort, f. injury, extortion. Torteauxes, f.
wastels, round colored figures like cakes (in Heraldry.) Tortile, l. bent,
writhen. Tortiloquy, l. crooked discourse. Tortive, l. squeezed, wrung out.
Tortuosity, l. a being Tortuous, winding in and out. Torvid, l. cruel, stern.
Torvity, sourness, grimness. Toscuny, as Tuscany. Totage, f. the same as
Totality, l. the total or whole sum or substance. Toties quoties, l. as often
as. Totilas, a King of the Goths, who overcame the Romans. To^nes, a town in
Devonshire. Toteth, o. looks. Totoiar, o. (q. ta^tler) prating Totted, marked
in the Exchequer (with the word Tot) as a good debt to the King. Totteray, was
4 pence for every bushel and half of Corn sold at Maldon in Essex. Totti^, o.
wavering. Totty, o. dizzy. Tovet, Tofet, K. two pecks. Touked, o. ducked.
Tought, o. for ^ough or ^aught. Tour, f. a tower or turn. Tournet, o. for
turret. Tour-frizette, f. curls for women's foreheads. Tournement, f. a turning,
also justing or tilting. Tournois, belonging to Tournay, a town in Fl^^der^
Livre Tournois, etc. the tenth part of a pound sterling. Tout, f. whole. Tout
tempt pressed and encore est. f. (always ready and is so now) a plea of defense
for one sued for any debt on duty. Touting-ken, ^. tavern-bars Tout, ^. to look
out or upon. Towage, the towing or dragging any thing at the stern. Towgher,
Cu. a dowry. Towel, (q. tewel) a tail. Towcester, a town in Northamptonshire.
Towton, a town in Yorkshire, where (1461) 30 thousand were slain in a battle
between York and Lancaster* Toxie, l. venomous. Toylet, f. a bag for
night-cloathes, also a cloth richly wrought. Trabal, l. belonging to a beam.
Trac^s, -ssorie, f. a restless needless hurrying up and down. Track, c. to go.
Traces, the footsteps of wild beasts. Trachlen, (-chian) artery. the pipe of
the Lungs. Tract, l. a line (or discourse) at length, also the footing of a
Boar, and (in the Mass) the Versicle* between the Epistle and the Gospel.
Tractable, l. easy to be handled. Tractate, l. a treatise. Tractitious, l.
handling. Tradition, l. a delivery [of doctrines. Traditive, delivered by word
of mouth. Traduce, l. to flander. Traduction, l. a defaming, also a
translating. Trafine, the Chirurgions best Trapan. Tragacanth, g. (Goats-^horn]
a gum from a shrub of the same name. Tragecomedy, between a Tragedy and Comedy.
Tragedian, a Tragic Actor, also as Tragediographer, g. a writer of Tragedies,
lofty Plays, treating of Great and Bloody exploits. Tragelath, g. a
stone-buck, Deer-goat, or Goat-hart, got between a Buck-goat and Hind.
Tragematopolist, g. a Confectioner. Tragic, -call, belonging to Tragedies;
cruel. Trajection, l. a passing over. Trajectitious, carried oversea. Trail, o.
an arbor. Trail-baston, see Justices of; etc. Traitorous position, of taking
arms by the Kings authority against his person or those commissioned by him.
Tralatitious, l. borrowed, vulgar. Tralucency, a shining through. Tramontane,
Northern, beyond the Alps (from Italy.) Trammel, E. a Chimney-iron whereon to
hang pots, etc. Trancelirs, o. husbandmen. Tranquillize, to cause Tranquillity,
l. quietness. Transaction, l. a dispatching of business. Transalpine, l. beyond
the Alps. Transcendent, surpassing [the predicaments. Transcolate, to strain
through. Transcript, that which is Transcribed, written from the Original.
Transcripto recognitionis, etc. a writ for the certifying a recognisance into
Chancery. Transcripto pedis finis, etc. a writ for the certifying (into
Chancery) the foot of a fine levied before Justices in Air, etc.
Transcurrence, a running over. Transduction, l. a leading over. Transection,
-exion, a turning from one sex to another. Transfeminate, to pass from Woman to
man. Transfer, to carry over. Transfiguration, a changing from one form to
another. Transfix, to run one through Transfretation, passing oversea.
Transfume, to smoke through. Transfusion, a pouring from one thing to another.
Transgression, a passing the bounds. Transgressione, a writ or Action of
Trespass. Transire, a Custom-house Warrant or Let-pass. Transjection, a casting
over. Transition, l. a passing from one thing to another. Transitory, soon
passing, and (in Law) opposed to Local. Translation, a changing from one thing,
place or language to another. Translucid, through bright. Trans^^^rine,
beyond sea. Transmeable, which one may Transmeate, pass through or beyond.
Transm^w, o. to change. Transmigration, a flitting or passing from one place
(or body) to another. Transmission, -mitting conveying from one to another.
Transmotion, a removing the cause of a thing from ones self. Transmute, to
change from one form to another. Transmutation, such a change. Transnomination,
a changing name. Transome, a brow-post or over-thwart beam; the timber athwart
the ships stern. Transpare, to appear through. Transparency, a being
Transparent, to be seen through. Transpass, to pass beyond. Transpeciate, to
change kind or form. Transpierce, to pierce through. Transpiration, a breathing
forth (through the skin.) Transplant, to plant in another place. Transport, to
carry oversea. Transport, a rapture of mind. Transpose, to change the order.
Transposition, a mis-placing. Transprose, to turn out of verse into prose.
Transubstantiation, a change of one Substance into another, as of the bread
into the body of Christ (according to the Papists.) Transv^sation, a pouring
from vessel to vessel. Transude, to sweat through. Transvection, a carrying
over. Transverse, a-thwart. Transversion, a turning o^ going across. Transult,
to leap over. Transumption, a taking from one another. Transvolation, a flying
over Transylvania, Silemburghen, part of Daci^. Trapan, as Trepan. Trantery,
money arising by amercements of Ale-sellers, etc. Trapezium, g. a figure of ^
unequal sides and oblique angles. Trarames, the unseen actions of Spirits and
Ghosts. Thrashed, o. deceived. Trasonings, the doublings of a Roe-buck before
the Hounds. Traskites, as Thraskites. Travado's, Portug. whirlwinds at Sea.
Trave, f. a trevise or little room to shoe unruly horses in. Trate, o. an old
trot. Traverse, f. to cross or deny, also the Ships way. Traverses, turnings
and windings, troubles. Traverse-board, with all the points of the compass on
it, and holes for the Steersman to skore how many glasses they go upon them.
Travested, -iz, f. dressed in another man's clothes. Traulismus, g. a stammering.
Traumatick, g. belonging to wounds. Trasoun, o. for Treasure. High Treason, an
offense against the security of the King or Commonwealth. Petit Treason, when
a servant, wife or Priest* kill their Master, Husband or Ordinary. Treasure
trove, Tresor trouve, f. Treasure found, which not being owned, belongs (by the
Civil-Law to the finder, but by the Common Law) to the King. Treat, f. taken
out, withdrawn. Treated, f. handled or entertained. Treatise, o. attractive.
Treble* three fold, also the highest part in Music. Trebuchet, Tribuch,
Terbiche^um, a Tumbrel, Cokestole, Cuckingstole or G^gingstole. Trecentene, l.
of three hundred. Treachour, o. treacherous. Trectes, o. straightway.
Tree-n^lls, oak-pins to fasten the ship-planks. Treen-ware, No. Earthen. Bread
of Treet, made of fine Wheat. Trefoil, three-leav'd grass, of several sorts.
Tregoney, a town in Cornwall. Tregetor, o. a Jugler. Tregit, o. deceit.
Trellis, Treillisse, f. a lattice. Trellized, cross-barred. Tremendous, l. to
be feared, Tremor, l. a trembling. Tremulous, quaking. Tren, f. a
Sea-instrument to strike fish withal. Trenchant. f. cutting. Trench the
ballast, divide it. Trene, (for treves, s.) a truce. Trental, f. a thirty
[masses for the dead. Trepan, Trappan, (^. Trappare) to catch in a trap, also
as Trepandiron, an instrument used about broken sculls. Trepeget, o. a
battering-ram. Trepidate, l. to quake for fear. Trepidation, a trembling.
Trespass, any transgression of the Law, except felony or treason.
Tressel-trees, lying (alongst-Ships) cross the cross-trees. Trespassants, f.
Passengers. Tressis-agaso, l. a pitiful halfpenny groom. Tresses, locks of
hair. Trestle, a 3 footed stool. Tres-wins, c. threepence. Triacle, an
antidote against poison. Tre^es, o. is streightened. Trial, g. a trey or
three. True, o. for truce. Treves, the same as Triers, a City in Germany.
Triangle, a figure which is Triangular, l. of 3 corners. Triarchy, g. a
governme^^ by three Triarch, g. a Master of a ship with three tops or three
rows of Oars. Triarians, the stout Roman Soldiers in the rear. Tribe, a kindred
or company dwelling together in the same Ward or Liberty. Tribes, the posterity
of Jacobs twelve Sons. Triblesees, a town in upper Pomerania. Tribunal, l. a
Judgment^ seat. Tribunitial, belonging to a Tribune, a chief Roman Officer.
Tribune of the [Common] People, to defend their rights against the Nobles.
Tribune of the Soldiers, to see them well armed and ordered. Tributary, l.
paying Tribute, l. money exacted out of men's Estates. Trica, the hair of
Berenic^ (a Constellation.) Trice, o. to convey. Tricenarious, l. of thirty.
Trichlich, o. richly, or neatly (with fine tricks.) Tricennial, l. of 30 years.
Tricliniarch, g. the usher of the dining room. Tricliniary, l. belonging to a
Triclinium, l. a dining room. Tricornous, l. with 3 horns. Tricoterie, f.
cheating [in law suites. Tricotomy, g. a dividing into three. Tridentiferous,
l. bearing a Trident, l. a 3 forked mace. Tridentine, belonging to Trent, a
City in the North of Italy. Triduan, l. of three days. Triennial, l. of 3
years. Triental, l. an half pint. Trierarch, g. the Master of a Ship.
Trieterick, g. of every third year. Trifallow, Her. to plow land the 3d time
(for the same crop. Trifarious, l. of three manner of ways. Triferous, l.
bearing thrice a year. Trifistulary, l. of three pipes. Trifole, -lie, l. three
leaved grass. Triform, l. of three forms. Trifurcous, l. three forked.
Trigamist, g. having three wives. Trigeminous, l. threefold [twins. Triglyphs,
g. borders graven like three furrows. Trigonal, like a Trigon, g. a triangle,
also as Triplicity. Trigonometry, g. a measuring of Triangles. Trihing, as
Trithing. Trill, -lo, I. a quavering grace in singing. Trill, o. to turn or
drill. Trilogy, g. a discourse in 3 parts. Trim of a ship, that way which she
goes best. Trimenstruous, l. of three Months. Trimodial, l. of 3 bushels.
Trinacrian, belonging to Trinacria, Sicily. Trine, c. Tyburn, or to hang.
Trine, l. belonging to 3 Trine aspect, the distance of 4 signs (a 3d part of
the Zodiac.) Tring, a town in Hertfordshire. Trinitarians, as Mathurins; also
New Arrians, denying the Trinity, and blaspheming it with the name of Infernal
Cerberus. Trinity, l. the number of three. Trinity-house (at Deptford) belongs
to a Company of Seamen, who (by the Kings Charter) take care of things
belonging to Navigation. Trink, an old kind of fish-engine. Trinobantes, the
Britains of Midlesex (in Caesar.) Trinoctial, l. of 3 nights. Trinodal, l. of 3
knots. Trinominal, l. of 3 names. Trinquet, f. the top-gallant sail, also any
gay trifle. Triobolar, l. of three halfpence. Triours, chosen by the Court to
try if the Challenge against a Jurour be just. Trip, o. a small piece. Trip of
sheep Nf. a few. Trip of goats, a great Company. Tripartite, l. divided into
three. Tripedal, -aneous, l. of 3 foot. Triperie, f. a tripe-market.
Triplication, a making Triple, l. threefold. Triplicity, 3 of the signs. Fiery
Triplicity, Aries, Leo, Sagittarius. Aerie, Tri-, Gemini, Libra, Aquarius. Watery
Tri-, Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces. Earthly Tri-, Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn.
Tripodical, like a Tripode, g. a three footed stool. Tripoly, the plant Turbith
or blew Cammomel, also a stone with whose powder they polish jewels, also a
town in Barbary. Tripontium, Torcester in Northamptonshire. Triptote, g. a noun
of three cases. Tripudiary divination, by the rebounding of crumbs thrown to
chickens. Tripudiate, l. to dance. Tripudiation, a tripping on the toe.
Triquet, -trous, l. Triangular. Trireme, l. a gally of three Oars on a side, or
three men to an Oar. Trise-up, hale by a dead-rope not running in a block.
Trisagion, g. Holy, Holy, Holy. Hermes (or Mercurius) Trismegistus, an Egyptian
Philosopher, Priest and King. Trist, o. a mark. Trista, -it is, -tris, a Man's
immunity from attendance on the Lord of a Forest in his hunting. Tristifical,
l. which does Tristitiate, or make Tristful, sad, sorrowful. Trisulk, l.
three-furrowed. Trisyllabical, g. of three syllables. Trite, l. threadbare.
Tritheites, g. Heretics holding three distinct God-heads. Trithing, the third
part of a shire, also the Court now called Court Leet (between a Court Baron
and a County Court.) Triticean, l. of wheat. Triton, a Sea-god ( Neptunes
Trumpeter) also a Weathercock. Triturable, capable of Trituration, l. a
threshing. Trivial, l. common, belonging to the highway. Triumphal, -ant,
belonging to a Triumph, l. a solemn show, at the return of a General from Noted
Victories Triumvirate, the office of the Triumviri, three in Equal authority.
Troce, o. a wreath or withy. Troch^e, a foot of the first syllable long and the
other short. Trochings, the many small branches on the top of the Deers head:
Trochisk* g. a little wheel, also a Cake of medicinal things. Trod, o. a path.
Troglodites, Wild Africans. Trompe, f. a trumpe^. Tromperie, f. deceit. Tro^a,
a weigh-beam. Tronage, custom for weighing wool. Tronator, a London-Officer
weighing wool. Tronum, celestial dew. Tropical, belonging to a Trope, g. the
turning a word from its proper signification. (Figure respects the sentence.)
Trophy, g. any thing set up in token of victory. Tropicks, two Circles imagined
for the bounds of the Suns course. Tropological, belonging to Tropology, g. a
discourse of or by Tropes and Figures Trosque, as Trochisk. Trover, f. an
action against him that refuses (upon demand) to deliver the goods he found.
Trough, the space between two waves. In the Trough of the Sea, under the Sea,
with her broadside to the Sea. Trou-madam, f. Troll-madam, or Pigeon-holes.
Trousonyd, o. [an ^el] dressed. Troth, o. for Truth. Troy-weight, 12 ounces to
the pound, by which they weigh Bread, Gold, Silver, Pearls, precious stones and
Medicines. Truand, f. a vagabond, or common beggar. Trubridge, a town in Wilts.
Trucheman, f. an Interpreter. Trucidation, l. a murdering. Trucks, the entire
wheels of carriages, also the wooden balls belonging to the Parrels. Truculent,
l. cruel, bloody. Truets, True-, Sf. pattens. True-love, herb Paris. True day,
the day of parley at the True place, a place of conference, in Northumberland.
Trug, o. three trugs make two bushels. Trug-Corn, paid the Vicar of Lemster,
for officiating at some Chapels of ease. Trug, Ss. a tray for Milk, etc.
Trull, I. a vile harlot, also to trundle, Ss. Trull^ssation, l. a plaistering.
Truncation, l. a cutting short. Trunk, l. the body of a tree or man (without
head, arms and legs.) Trundlers, c. Peace. Trundle-shot, cast upon the middle of
an Iron sharp at both ends. Truphat, the occult virtue of Minerals preferring
every metal. Trunnions, the two knobs on the sides of Ordnance. Trusses, ropes
fastened to the parrel of the yards (to bind them to the Mast or hale them
down.) Truro, a town in Cornwall. Trutinate, l. to weigh, examine. etc. Try, to
have no more sail forth but the main-sail. Tryppe of get, o. for trip of
Goats. Tuant, f. killing. Tubal, h. worldly. Tubal-Cain, h. worldly possession.
Tube, l. a long pipe [through which runs the chine-marrow. Tubercula, Montes,
the risings at the roots of the fingers. Tuberous, l. full of bunches.
Tubicinate, l. to trumpet. Tubulation, l. a making hollow like pipes. Tuck, the
gathering-up of the Ships quarter under water. Tuddinton, a town in
Bedfordshire. Tudiculate, to work with hammers. Tufa, o. a banner. Tuel, the
fundament of a beast. Tuelleries, f. (where tiles were made) a stately Fabric
near the Louvre. Tuition, l. a protecting. Tul, o. to allure, also a tile.
Tulipant, an Indian head-shash. Tullianum, a Roman dangeon. Tullus Hostilius, a
warlike Roman King, struck dead with a thunderbolt. Tully, Mar. Tullius Cicero,
the Roman Orator. Tumbler, c. a Cart. Tumbrel, a Cucking-stool, also a
dung-cart. Tumefaction, -fying, a making Tumid, l. swollen. puffed up. Tumor, l. a
swelling, pride. Tumulate, l. to entomb. Tumultuary, l. done in haste.
Tumultuous, l. full of trouble. Tunals, trees of Nova Hispania, in whose leaves
are bred the costly worms called Cocheneile. Tun, a measure of 252 gallons, a
weight of 20 hundred. Tun of Timber, 40 solid feet. Tunbridge, a town in Kent.
Tun-greve, Villae praepositus, a Reeve or Bailiff. Tunick, -cat, l. a
[sleeveless] Coat, also as Tunicle, l. a little coat or skin. Tunis, a City in
Barbary. Turban, an innumerable company of stars, also a presage from all four
Elements. Turbant, a Turkish hat. Turbary, a right of digging turves on
another ground. Turbervils, de turbida villa, an ancient Family of
Dorcetshire. Turbination, l. the making a thing like a top. Turbinous, l.
belonging to a storm or whirlwind. Turbith, the herb Tripoly. Turbith mineral,
a red powder used in the French disease. Turbulent, l. troublesome. Turcheim, a
town in uppa Alsace. Turgesc^^ce ^. a being Turgent, gid, puffed up. Turgy,
Theurgie, g. white Magic, a pretended conference with good angels. Turin, the
chief town of Piedmont. Turingin, part of Saxony. Turmerie, a yellow root for
the yellow Jaundice. Turn, the Sheriffs Court, kept twice a year. Turneament^
Tournement, Justing, Tilting, a Martial Exercise on Hors-back. Turney, the
same. Turno Vicecomitum, a writ calling men (out of their own hundred) to the
Sheriffs Turn. Turnsole, the Heliotrope. Turpentine, a clear moist Rosin from
the Larch and other trees. Turpefie, l. to make unclean. Turpitude, l.
filthyness. Turquise, a blew precious stone. Turwin, a town in Artois.
Turtle-dove, a small kind of mournful Pigeon, living always single after the
Mates Death. Turriferous, l. bearing Towers. Tuscan-work, a plain* massy, rural
sort of Pillar. Tuscia, -any, a Dukedom in Italy. Tusky'd, o. [a Barbel.]
dressed. Tusin, a Baltic Island. Tut, an Imperial Ensign (of a Globe with a
golden cross. on st.) Tutelar, ry, belonging to Tutele, l. wardship,
protection. Tutelina, a goddess protecting Corn. Tutia, a Vestal Virgin, who to
clear her self) carried water in a sieve. Tutie, a white Physical substance,
bred of the sparkles of brazen furnaces. Tut-mouthed, whose chin and nether jaw
stand out too far. Tutor, l. a Guardian or instructor. Tutsan, (q. tout sain)
Parkleaves, a good wound-herb. Tuysco, the particular Idol of the Duytsch or
old Germans, giving name both to them and our Tuesday. Tuway, o. for two.
Twait, Wood-ground turned to arable. Twa-nights-geste, answerable himself for
what harm he does. Twelfth-day, Epiphany-Feast. Twelfe-men, the Jury or
Enquest, but a grand Enquest consists of 16 at the least. Twibel, D. an
instrument to make mortoise-holes. Twilight, Cock-shoot time, between day and
night. Twettle, o. for to whitle. Twin, o. to divide in two. Twist, o. a bough.
Twight, o. twitched, pulled. Twinters, Bedf. Cattle two winters old. Twitter,
No. to tremble. Twy, or Thry, o. twice or thrice. Twyf^ld, o. twofold. Twist,
o. thrust, pinched. Twytten, o. (q. whitled) carved. Tyheriade, a draught of a
place, from that name of Bartholus, a Lawyers book, first graced with such
figures. Tybur, Tivoli, near Rome. Tydder, as Theodore. Tye-top, No. a garland.
Tygendis of Pies, a Flock of them. Tymariots, as Tima-. Timber of skins, as
Tim-. Tympane, g. a drum, also the Parchment instrument on which a sheet is
printed. Tympanism, a Jewish beating to death. Tympanize, to play the
Tympanist, a drummer, also ^ne that is Tympanitical, troubled with or curing
the Tympany, a hard Swelling of the belly with wind, etc. Tynt, o. shut up.
Typical, belonging to a Type, g. an example, figure or shadow of a thing.
Typocosmy, g. a figure of the World. Typographer, g. a Printer. Typographical,
belonging to Typography, Printing. Tyrannicide, the killing a Tyrant, g. a
cruel Governor. Tyrconel, an Irish County. Tyrian, belonging to Tire, a City
of Phoenicia, Tyrianthine, of purple. Tyro, l. a fresh water Soldier. Tyrociny,
l. an apprenticeship. Tyrol, as Tirol. Tyromancy, g. Cheese-divination. Tyrone,
l. a Novice. Tyrrhene, of Tuscany. Tyryd, o. [an egge] dressed or poacht.
Tysiphone, one of the Furies. Tyte, Sc. for quite.
V.
V-, (in the West) generally used instead of F-. Vacancy, a being Vacant, l.
void, empty, at leisure. Vacation, l. as Vacancy, also the time between Term
and Term. Vacary, Vachary, La. a Cow-house or pasture. Vachoris, an Egyptian
King, who retired to a private austerity. Vacillation, l. a tottering. Vacive,
l. void, empty. Vacuity, l. emptiness. Vacuna* Goddess of rest. Vacuum, l. an
empty place. Vadelet, -lect, Valect, -et, f. (a Servant) a Benchers Clerk of
the Inner Temple, corruptly called Varlet. Vadimony, l. Suretiship or day of
appearance. Vafrous, l. crafty, subtle. Vagabond, l. an idle wanderer.
Vagation, l. a wandering. Pure Vageour, o. poor beggar. Vagination, l. a
sheathing. Vaginipennous, l. having their wings in sheaths or cases.
Vail-b^nnet, strike sail, put off the hat, etc. Vaire, a fur composed of
Argent, Gules, O^ and Sable. Vaivode, as Vayvode. Valadelid, the old Seat of
the Spanish Kings. Valasca, an Amazonian Queen of Bohemia. Val d'ombre, Val
ombreux, a shady vale in the Appenine, where John Gualbert a Florentine began a
Religious Order (1040.) Valdo, Author of the Waldenses in Piedmont. Vale, l.
Farewell. Valect, as Vadelet or Valet. Valence, -tia, a town in Spaid, France,
and Milan. Valeneiennes, -chia, a town in Hainault. Valencourt, a town of
Namur. Valentine, a Roman Bishop whole feast is kept Feb. 14. about which time
birds choose their Ma^es. Valentines, Saints chosen for special Patrons for that
year, or (among us) men and women chosen for special loving friends.
Valentinians, heretics following Valentinianus, who held that Christ received
not flesh of the Virgin Mary. Valerian, a Plant good against the Plague, etc.
Valerian law, whereby one might kill him that usurped Magistracy without the
peoples consent. Valet, f. a mean servant^ anciently any young Gentleman under
18. Valet de Cambre, f. a groom of the Chamber. Valetudinary, l. sickly, also
an Hospital. Validation, a causing Validity, l. a being. Valid, strong, firm.
Valkenburgh, a town of Limburgh and other places. Valor of Marriage, was a writ
for the Lord to recover the value of a Marriage profer'd to the Infant and
refused. Valtorts, de valle torta, a Noble family in Cornwall. Valtoline, a
Province of Switzerland. Valves, l. folding-doors. Vambrace, Vanb. f. a
gauntlet. Vamp, -py, pay, o. a sock. Van, Vanguard, (f. Avaunt-) the forepart
of an Army. Vancurriers, f. forerunners. Vandalia, Burglave, a Diocese in
North Juitland. Vandelbiria, supposed to be Wandlesbury in Cambridgeshire.
Vang, Some. to take or undertake. Vang to him, answer for him. Vaniloquence, l.
vain-babling. At the Vant, at the Font. Vantarius, the Kings forefoot-man.
Vantchemise, f. a fore-shirt. Vapid, l. stinking. Vaporation, a casting forth.
Vapors, l. fumes, steams, easily resolved into water. Vaporiferous, raising
vapors. Vapulation, l. a being beaten. Variable, subject to Variance, -ation,
l. alteration. Vari^gation, an adorning with diverse colors. Varlets, was used
(20 Richard 2) for yeomans servants. Varry, Ver^y, f. argent and azure mixed.
Varuels, f. small silver rings at the hawks legs, with the owners name.
Vasiferous, l. vessel-bearing. Vassalage, f. the duty or condition of a Vassal,
a slave, also a tenant in fee. Vassow, a town in Podolia. Vastation, l. a
destroying. Vastity, l. hugeness. Vasto, a writ against a Tenant making waste.
Vatican, a hill in Rome, where was built (by Sixtus 4) the Vatican, or
Palatine, a famous Library. Vaticinate, l. to prophesy. Vaticinian, belonging
to Vaticiny, l. a foretelling. Vatinian, belonging to Vatinius, a Roman whom
all men hated. Vavasorie, lands held by a Vavasour, Valv-, one in dignity next
a Baron. Vaucoleur, and Vaudem^nt, a town in Lorrain. Vaudeville, Virelay, a
Country ballad, or common proverb. Vaumur, f. a bulwark. Vaunt courers, as
Vanourriers. Vauntlay, setting hounds in a readiness where the chase will pass.
Vaward, as Vanguard. Vayvode, a Governor in Transylvania, Walachia, etc.
V-batch, as Yu-batch. Vberate, l. to make Vberous, having Vebr^y, plenty,
fertility. Vbication, a thing being in a place. Vbiquitarians, holding that
Christ's body is every where. Vbiquitary, belonging to Vbiquity, a being in all
places at a time. Veal-money, Veal-noble-money, paid the Marquess of Winchester
yearly by some Tenants. Vechones, o. hedg-hogs. Vecke, o. an old woman.
Vecordy, l. dotage, stupidity. Vectarious, of a Carriage. Vectible, carriable.
Vectigal, l. paying trite. Vection, l. a carrying. Vectitation, a carrying
often. Vectorian, apt to carry. Veer more cable, let it run out. The Wind Veers
and bulls, goes in and out suddenly. Veering, with the sheat veered out.
Vegetal, -able, l. living and growing as Vegetables, Plants. Vegetation, a
refreshing. Vegetive, l. lively, strong. Vehemence, -cy, earnestness.
Vehicular, belonging to Vehicles, l. any carriages. Vejours, as Viewers. Veil,
l. to cover, also that which covers. Veliferous, l. bearing Sail. Velifical,
displaied (as with Sails.) Velification, a hoising or making Sail. Velitation,
l. a skirmishing. Velites, l. light, armed Soldiers. Velivolent, l. flying
[with full Sail. Velleity, a wishing and woulding. Vellicate, l. to pull,
detract. Vellication, a twitching, etc. Velling, W^. plowing up turf to burn.
Velocity, l. swiftness. Velvet-flower, as Floramor. Velume, fine Parchment of
Calves-skin. Venalitious, belonging to Venality, l. a being Venal, to be sold
or bribed. Vena Porta, as Port-vein. Venarie, the sport of hunting. Venatick,
-torious, belonging to Venation, l. hunting, or to Venator, a hunts-man.
Vendible, which one may Vend, l. put off, sell. Vendicate, l. claim, challenge.
Venditation, l. a vain boasting Vendition, l. a selling. Venditioni expon^^, a
Writ for the Undersheriff to sell goods formerly taken for the satisfying a
Judgment. Venedocia, North Wales. Venefick, -call, -cial, -cious, l. belonging
to Venefice, l. poisoning or Witchcraft. Venenous, -niferous, poisonous.
Venerate, l. to show Veneration, reverence. Venereal, -reous, given to Venery,
l. carnal lust, also hunting. ^. Venereal disease, French. Venice, a famous
City of Italy, built (421.) upon 60 Islands. Venie, a touch in the body with a
weapon. Venew, as Venue. Venged, o. for avenged. Venial, -able, l. pardonable
Venial sins, (among Papists) whose guilt the bare confession does expiate.
Venire facias, a writ for the Sheriff to cause 12 men of the same County to say
the Truth upon an issue taken. Venous, l. full of veins. Venous Artery, a
principal one (the other being Porta and Trachea) carrying blood from the
hearts left ventricle to the Lungs. Venloe, a town in Gelderland. Venire facias
tot Matronas, the same as Ventre inspiciendo, for the search of one that says
she is with child and withholds land from the next heir at Law. Vent, l. a
wind, a report, a breathing-hole. Venta Belgarum, Winchester. Venta Icenorum,
Caster. Venta Silurum, Caerwent in Monmouthshire. Vensilia, Wansyssel, -stie,
part of North Juitland. Ventelet. f. a small gale. Ventiduct, l. a conveyance
of wind. Ventilate, l. to fan or winnow. Ventosing, o. cupping. Ventosity, l.
windiness. Ventoy, f. a fan. Ventricle, l. the Stomach, also any round
concavity in the body. Bloody Ventricle, the right side of the heart containing
the natural blood. Spiritual Ventricle, the left side containing the Arterial
blood. Ventriloquist, one that uses Ventriloquy, l. a speaking (as it were)
out of the belly. Ventripotent, l. big-bellied. Venue, Venew, Visne, the place
next to that were the thing in trial is supposed to be done. Venundate, l. to
buy and sell. Venus. [the Goddess of] lust, also the morning star (for 9
months) and Even-star (for 9 more,) Venus Escuage, Knights service to Ladies.
Venus Navel-wort, Kidney-wort, Wall-peny-wort. Venustate, l. to beautify.
Vepricosous, l. full of brambles. Ver, l. the Spring. Veracity, l. a speaking
truth. Verament, o. truly. Very, o. (q. vray) very. Verbality, a being Verbal,
l. belonging to words or Verbs, the principal words, without which (expressed or
understood) no sentence can be, they signify Being, as I Am, I read or Am
reading, etc. Verbatim, l. word for word. Verberable, worthy or capable of
Verberation, l, a beating Verbigerate, l. to noise abroad. Verbosity, a being
Verbose, l. full of words. Verdant, f. green, fresh. Verde, -dea, white
Florenti^^ wine. Verderor, Viridarius, a Judicial Officer of the Forest, who
receives attachments of all trespasses, etc. Verd-grease, Vert-greece, Verdig-,
the green rust of brass or copper hanged over strong vinegar. Verdict,
Vere-dictum, the answer of the Jury upon any Cause. Verditure, one sort of
green paint, the other being green Bice, Vert-Greece, and Sap-green. Verdoy, a
bordure charged with leaves, fruits, etc. Verdure, -deur, f. greenness. Verdun,
a City in Lorrain. Verecund, -dous, l. bashful. Verge, f. a wand, a Sergeants
Mace, also the compass of the Kings Court (12 miles) bounding the jurisdiction
of the Lord Steward of the Kings household. Verger f. he that bears ^ Verge,
before a Magistrate. Vergere, o. an Orchard. Vergobert, a Magistrate (with
power of Life and Death) among the Hedui (in France.) Veridical, l. telling
truth. Verify, l. to prove. Verilaies, as Vire-. Veriloquent, l. the same.
Veriloquy, l. a speaking truth, or the true Etymology* and meaning of a word.
Verisimility, l. likelihood. Veritrate, o. for Very Trot. Vermiculated, l
worm-eaten; also wrought with diverse colors. Vermail, -mell, o. the same as
Vermilion, f. a ruddy color (of Brimstone and Quicksilver.) Vermination, l. a
breeding of worms. Vermiparous, l. bringing forth worms. Vernaccia, a kind of
Malmsey drunk much at Rome. Vernacle, the Cloth of St. Veronica, wherewith
Christ (...) his face, and (if you will) believn the Papists) left his his
picture on it. Vernaculous, l. of ones own country. Vernage, o. sweet wine.
Vernal l. of the spring. Vernant, l. green, springing. Vernility, l. slavish
behavior, flattery. Verona, a Venetian City in Italy. Verre f. glass. Verrey,
as Varry. Verrucous, l. full of warts. Versable, -atile, capable of Versation,
l. turning winding. Versicle, l. a little verse. Versify, l. to make verses.
Version, l. a translation. Versutiloquent, l. speaking craftily. Vert, (f.
Green) any Greens (in the Forest) apt to cover Deer Vert-greece, as
Verdigreece. Vertebrae, Chine-bones. Verterae, Burgh under Stanmore in
Westmoreland. Vertible, which one may turn. Verticality, a being Vertical, l.
right over ones head, also wavering. Verticillate, l. knit together as a joint,
also apt to turn. Verticity, the top of a thing, or aptness to turn.
Vertigious, -ginous, troubled with the Vertigo, l. a dizziness in the head.
Vertumnals, Feasts unto Vertumnus, a God of all shapes, governing men's minds.
Vertuoso, as Virt-. Vervain, Holy herb, Pigeons grass, Juno's tears.
Vervecean, -cine, of a weather. Vervels, as Varv-. Vervise, as Plonkets.
Verulam, a City of Hertfordshire, whose ruins still appear. Very Lord and
Tenant, Immediate. Vesanous, l. mad, outrageous. Vesculent, l. Eatable.
Vesicatory, l. a cupping-glass, or plaster to raise Vesicles, l. little
bladders, blisters. Vesperal, l. Western. Vespars, -rals, Evening prayers.
Sicilian, Vespers, a General Massacre of the French by those Islanders (1582.)
Vesperies, [the Sorbonists] evening exercises. (...), l. of the Evening. (...),
l. a Night-bearer of Corpses in Plague-time, etc. Vesses, Set-cloaths, commonly
made in Suffolk. Vest, a long-skirted doublet. Vestry-men, a select number of
Parishioners, who yearly choose Officers. Vestal Virgins, consecrated (for 30
years) to the service of Vesta, a Roman Goddess, in whose Temple if the fire
went out, it was to be renewed by the Sun beams. Vestiary, a Vestry or
Wardrobe. Vestible, l. a porch. Vestigate, l. to seek by the Vestiges, l.
footsteps. Vestitor, l. a Tailor. Vestment, l. (f. Chasuble) the Mass-priests
uppergarment, also as Vesture, any clothing, also [admittance to] a
possession, and the profits of it. Vetation, l. a forbidding. Veteran, l. [one]
old in Office. Veteratorian, experienced, crafty. Veteravia, as Weteraw.
Veterinarian, belonging to or dealing in Horses. Veterine, l. belonging to
burdens or carriages. Vetitum Namium, a distress which the Lord forbids his
Bailiff to deliver to the Sheriff who would replevy it. Vetust, l. old,
ancient. Vexillary, l. [belonging to] an Ensign. Vexillation,, l. a Company
under one standard. Vffa, the first King of the East Angles. Vfkins, His
Successors. Vffers, Vtfers, certain great Ships. Vgsumness, o. terribleness.
Via combusta, (the burntway) the last 15 degrees of Libra, and first of Scopio.
Via lactea, the milky-way. Via solis, a line from the ring-finger toward the
hollow of the hand. Viage, o. for Voyage. Vial, a pot or glass with a wide
mouth, all plate serving for wine or water. Viands, f. Victuals [of Flesh.
Viary, l. of the way. Viatick, l. of a journey. Viaticum, l. provision for a
journey. Viatorian, l. belonging to Viator, l. a traveller, also one
contra-distinguish'd to Comprehensor (who has attained the sight of God.)
Vibration, l. a brandishing. Vibrissation, l. a quavering [in singing. Vicario
deliberando, etc. a writ for a Clerk imprisoned (on forfeiture of a
recognisance) without the Kings writ. Vicarious, l. belonging to a Vicar, one
in another stead. Vice-versa, on the contrary way. Vicenals, solemn games and
vo^^es for 20. years. Vicenarious, -esime, -mal, l. belonging to the twentieth.
Vice-Chamberlain, next to the Lord-Chamberlain. Vicegerent, a Deputy. Viceroy,
f. a Deputy-King. Vicinage, as Voisinage. Vicinal, belonging to Vicinity, l.
Neighborhood. Vicis and venellis mundandis, a writ against a Mayor, etc. for
not cleansing the streets. Vicissity, -tude, l. a changing by turns. Vicount,
Visc-, a Sheriff, also a Nobleman next an Earl. Writs Vicountiel, triable in
the Sheriffs Court. Vicountiels, Ferms which the Sheriff rents of the King.
Victimate, to offer a Victime, l. a sacrifice. Victor, l. a Conqueror. Vidame,
Vice-dominus, an honor in France, (the first of their Seigneurs Mediocres) and
was at first the same to a Bishop (in his temporal jurisdiction) as a Vicount
to an Earl. Videlicet, viz. to wit, that is. Viduation, l. a depriving or
causing. Viduity, l. widow-hood. Vie, a town in Lorrain. Viemalim, a small
American bird feeding on dew and the juice of flowers, and therefore sleeps all
the winter. Viended, o. having plenty of mea^. Vienna, Wien, the seat of the
German Empire. Vies, Devises, a Castle in Wi^ts. Vietor, l. a Cooper. View, the
print of a Fallow-Deer foot. Veiwers, sent by the Court to veiw any place or
person. View of frank-pledge, the Sheriffs or Bailiffs looking to the Kings
peace, and seeing that every man be in some pledge. Vigesimal, l. of the
twentieth. Vigil, l. a watching, also the Eve of solemn feasts. Vigilance, a
being Vigilant, l. watchful. Vigintivirate, the Office of the Vigintiviri, 20
men in coequal authority. Vigone, f. [a Spanish Sheep Whose wool makes] a
Demicaster. Vigorous, l. full of Vigor, l. strength, courage. Vi laica
removendo, a writ to remove a forcible possession of a benefice by Laymen.
Vilify, l. the same as Vilipend, l. to disesteem. Vility, l. baseness,
cheapness. Vill, a Manor, Parish, or part thereof. Villication, l. the rule of
husbandry, under the Master of a Manor. Villain, f. a bond servant. Villanis
Regis subtractis, etc. was a writ for the bringing back the Kings Bondmen taken
out of his Manors. Villainous Judgment, casting the reproach of Villainy on a
man, as for Conspiracy, Perjury, etc. Villein Fleeces, bad ones, shorn from
scabbed Sheep. Villenage, a tenure by doing servile work for the Lord. Vilna,
the chief town and University of Lithuania in Poland. Viminal, -neous, l. of
Osiers. Vina Chia, Wines of Chios or Scio, the best Greek wines. Vinari
envermailed, o. a Vineyard made red. Vinarious, belonging to Wines. Vinatorian,
of a Vine-dresser. Vincent, l. Victorious. Vincible, l. to be overcomn.
Vincture, l. a binding. Vindemial, -atory, belonging to Vintage or
Vine-harveis. Vindemiate, to gather Grapes, or other ripe Fruits. Vindication,
l. a revenging, also a clearing or delivering. Vindicative, -ctive,
revengefull. Vindonum, Silecester in Hantshire. Vineatick, l. of Vines.
Vinerous, No. hard to please. Vinipote, l a wine-bibber. Vinitorian, belonging
to vines or vine-yards. Vinnet, a bordure with which Printers garnish their
leaves Vinolen^, l. full of wine. Vinosity, a fulness of wine. Vintage,
Grape-gathering. Violate, l. corrupt, defile or transgress. Viol, an
instrument of six strings. Violin, f. (a small Viol) with four. Base Violin,
with four, as the treble. Violl, a hawser (at the Jeer-capstain) fastened with
nippers to the cable (at the Main capstain) for more help in weighing anchor.
Viperine, belonging to a Viper, a yellowish hot-Countrey-serpent, with a short
tail, grating as he goes. Vipseys, certain springs near Flamborough in
Yorkshire. Viragin, -go, l. a manly Woman. Virason, a Cool Sea-gale about
Hispaniola, etc. Vire, f. a quarrel or Crossbow arrow. Virelay, f. a Roundelay.
Virgate of land, a yard-land. Virge, the rays obliquely striking through a
cloud. Virger, as Verger. Virginal, l. virgin-like. Virginals, a Maidenly
Instrument, wi^h keys as the Organ and Harpsicon. Virginia, part of America.
Virgo, l. the Zodiack-maid. Virgula divinatoria, a hazel rod, whereby they
pretend to discover mines. Virgult, l. a company of young shoots together.
Viriatus, a Portingal Robber, who at last became a great Commander. Viridario
eligendo, for the choice of a Verderor. Viridate, l. to cause Viridity,
greenness, strength Virility, l. Manhood. Virip^tent, [a maid] marriageable.
Virtuoso, I. an accomplished, virtuous and ingenious person. Virulency, l. a
being Virulent, l. very venomous. Viscated, l. dressed (or caught) with
bird-lime. Visceral, l. of the bowels. Visceration, l. a dole of raw flesh; or
the garbage given the hounds. Viscidity, -cosity, a being Viscid, -cous, l.
clammy. Visel, a town of Cleves. Visibility, l. a being Visible, apt to be
seen. Vizier, a prime Officer and Statesman in Turkey. Vision, l. a sight.
Bishops Visitation, every 3 years. Archdeacons Vis-, every year. Visitation of
manners, the Regarders Office. Visne, as Venew. Visor, l. a spy. Visu
franciplegii, to exempt him from the view of frank-pledge who is not resident
in the Hundred. Visual, belonging to the sight. Vital, belonging to life.
Vitality, l. liveliness, the spirit of life. Vitation, l. an avoiding
Vitelline, l. like the yolk. Vitemberga, Wittemberg in Germany. Vitiate, l. to
corrupt, debauch. Vitiferous, l. Vine-bearing. Vitilitigate, l. to raise
quarrels. Vitiosity, l. a being Vicious, full of vice. Vi^^ean, -rine, -ical,
l. of glass. Vitrificable, capable of Vitrification, l. a change into glass.
Vitriolous, belonging to Vitriol, l. Copperas, between a stone and metal.
Vituline, l. of a Calf. Vituperable, worthy of Vituperation, l. a blaming. St.
Vitus's dance, a kind of madness, from a malignant humor of kin to the
Tarantula. Viva pecunia, 'live cattle. Viva voce, by word of mouth Vivacity,
liveliness, vigor. Vivary, l. a place to keep living birds, beasts or fish.
Vivency, a living. Vivian, (a man's name) lively. Vivifical, -cent, l. which
does Vivify, quicken, or make Vivid, l. lively, strong. Vivification, an
enlivening. Viviparous, l. bringing forth young ones alive. Vixen, Fixen, a
little Fox or Vexer. Vizier, as Vizier. Vkrain, part of Poland. Vlcerate, to
break out into an Ulcer, l. a running sore, full of putrid virulent matter.
Vlcerous, full of Ulcers. Vle, Yule, Yeule, Yool, (Sa. Gehul) Christmas.
Vliginous, l. wet, plashy. Vlme, a City of North- Schwaben. Vlophone, g.
venomous glue of Misl^to, also Vervilag^, the black or Camelion thistle.
Vlster, an Irish Province Vltimity, a being Vltime, -mate, l. last, utmost.
Vltima basia, the last kisses (or touches) of the pencil. Vltion, l. a
revenging. Vltra marine, l. from beyond sea. Vltra mundane, l. beyond the
[v^sible] world. Vltroneous, l. with a free will. Vlverton, a town in
Lancashire. Vlulate, l. to howl. Ulysses, a subtle Greek, Prince of Ithaca, who
did great service at the Trojan wars. Vmbel, l. o bone-grace. Vmbelliferous,
bearing. Vmbels, the round se^dy heads of Fennel, etc. Vmber, a sad yellow
paint, also a kind of mungrel-sheep and a tender mouthed fish. Vmbilical, l. of
the Navel. Vmbilical arteries, two from the Navel to the sides of the Bladder,
the first-begotten in Infants. Vmbilical vein, which nourishes the Infant and
(after birth) closes it self, se^ling the Liver to the Navel. Vmbilicality, a
being (like the Navel) in the midst. Vmbrage, f. a shadow, also suspicion.
Vmbragious, -atical, -i will, -lous, l. shady, obscure, private. Vmbratiles,
rotten bodies made visible again by the magical virtue of the stars. Vmbray'd,
o. upbraided. Vmbrello, l. a skreen or fan. Vmbriferous, l. casting a shadow.
Vmbrosous, l. very shady. Vmple, o. fine lawn, (q. Wimple.) Vmstrid, No.
astride, astridlands. Vmquhill, -i will, o. heretofore. Un-, is Negative or
Privative, as Unnecessible, not to be com'n at, Undeceive, to remove ones
mistake, etc. Unanimity, l a being Unanime, -mous, of one mind. Unberd, (q.
unbarred) o. laid open. Unbethink, On-, s^. to bethink. Unbroyden, o.
unbraided. Uncome, o. a Fellon. Uncore-prist, the Defendants plea (sued for a
debt) that he tendered it and is yet ready to pay. Uncoupted, o. for uncoupled.
Uncuth, sa. unknown, also a Guest of one night, for whose offense the Landlord
was not answerable. Unction, l. anointing. Vnctorian, belonging thereto.
Unctuosity, a being Unctuous, l. oily, fat. Uncus, l. a hook or anchor.
Undation, l. a flowing of waves. Undee, (in Heraldry,) like waves. Undenae,
earthly Spirits. Under-sitter, an Inmate. Undertakers, were Deputies to the
Kings Purveyors. Undercroft, a vault underground. Undersong, o. undertake.
Undergrow, o. little of stature. Undermeles, o. afternoons. Undern, -noon, o.
afternoon. Underneme, o. (take down) Excommunicate. Underspore, o. put under.
Undisonant, roaring like waves. Undulate, -ted, made like waves. Undulation, a
moving up and down like waves. Uneth, Um-, o. scarce, with difficulty.
Unganand, o. ungainly, foolish. Ungreable, o. for unagreeable. Unguent, l.
ointment. Unguentum armarium, weapon salve. Unbele, o. sickness. Unick, -ique,
f. the only. Unicornous, l. of one horn. Unify, l. to make one. Unidel, o. in
vain. Uniformity, a being Uniform, l. of one fashion. Union, as Unity, also the
combining or consolidating two Churches into one. Union-pearls, the best sort,
growing always in couples. Uniparous, l. bearing one at a time. Unison, f. the
agreement of 2 notes in one. Unition, l. a causing Unity, l. oneness, concord.
Unity of Possession, a joint possession of 2 rights by several titles, as
having a Lease of Land, and then also buying the Fee-simple of it.
Universality, l. a being Universal, general, all. University (in Civil Law,) a
Corporation or body politic. Universities, the Scholastic Societies in Oxford
and Cambridge. University College, the most ancient in Oxford, founded by King
Alfred. Univocal, l. of one voice or word, signifying but one thing. Univocally
spoken, applied to more in the same signification. Vnkennel, force [the Fox]
from his hole. Vnlage, Sa. a wicked or unjust law. Unlawful Assembly, of 3 (or
more) with force to commit some unlawful act; and (for the exercise of
religion) 5 above those of the family. Vnleash, let go the dogs. Vnna, a Town
of Mark in Germany. Vnpli^e, o. to explain. Vnques prist, a plea by professing
ones self always ready to do what is required. Un sans Changer, f. one without
changing, always the same. Vnseliness, o. unhappiness. Vnsperd, (q. unspard) o.
unlockt. Vnsumm'd, [hawks feathers] not at their full length. Unsw^te, o. not
sweet. Untachyd, o. [a bittour] dressed. Unthewed, o. unmannerly. Unweather, Sa.
a storm, tempest. Unwemmed, o. unspotted. Unwist, o. unknown. Unwit, o. folly.
Unwrie, o. uncover. Unyolden, o. not yielded. Vocabulary, l. a small
Dictionary, or book of words. Vocality, a being Vocal, l. belonging to voice.
Vocation, l. a Calling. Vocative, belonging to calling. Vociferation, l. a
crying out. Voculation, the right accenting of a word. Vogue, f. Sway,
authority, clear passage [of a ship at Sea. Voidance, Vacatio, the want of an
Incumbent on a Benefice. Voider, an Arch-line moderately bowing from the corner
of the Chief to the Nombril of the Escutcheon. Voiders, broad dishes (or
baskets) to take away the remains at Table. Voiding, (in Heraldry) taking away
some part of the inward substance, so that the field is seen through the
Charge. Voitland, part of Saxony. Voisinage, f. Neighborhood. Volage, f.
unconstant. Volant, f. flying. Volary, a flying-place. Volatility, a being
Volatical, -il, -lous, flying, not fixed; apt to evaporate. Nolens Volens*
whether one will or no. Volgivagant, Vul-, l. like or among the Common people.
Volitate, l. to flit up and down. Volition, a willing. V^ll^x, Sf. fallow.
Volocity, l. a flying. Voloy, a river in Lorrain. Volta, Lav-, I. a course or
turn [in riding, dancing, etc. Volubility, l. a being Voluble, l. easily
rolled, round, nimble in speech. Volumus, (we will) the first word of a Clause
in the Kings Writs of Protection and Patents. Voluminous, of a large Volume,
the bulk or size of a book. Voluntary, l. free, without force. Volunde, o. the
will. Voluntative, proceeding from the will. Voluper, o. a Kerche^, (q.
invelopper.) Voluptable l. pleasurable, causing delight. Voluptuous, l. devoted
to pleasure. Volutation, l. a rolling. Volutina, the Goddess Overseer of the
cups wherein the corn is enclosed. Vomanus, a river in Italy. Vomes, (q. fomes)
o. foming. Vomition, l. a vomiting. Vomitory, belonging thereto. Voor, Ss. a
furrow. Voracity, l. greedy devouring. Voraginous* like a Vorago, l. a
Whirl-pool or Gulf. Voration, l. a devouring. Votary, l. be that binds himself
by a vow. Vote, l. a voice or s^ffrage. Votive, l. vowed or desired. Vouch ye
save, o. for Vouchsafe. Voucher, f. a calling one into Court to Warrant or make
good a thing, also to avouch, avow, affirm boldly. V^ucher, Vocans, he that
voucheth. Vouchee, Warrantus, that is vouched. Vound-stones, (q. found or
foundation) o. freestone. Vowels, the single sounding letters, a, e, i, (or
y,) o, u. Voyles, f. vails [for Nuns. Vpland, high-ground, not Moorish.
Vp-setting-time, Y. when the Childbed woman gets up. Vphap, o. (q. heap up)
overcover. Vpplight, o. taken up. Vprist, o. for up-rising Vpswale, o. swelled
up. Vppingham, a town in Rutland. Vpton, (upon Severn) in Worcestershire, and
about 50 more small towns. Vpsal, a City and University in Sweden. Vraic,
Wrack, a Sea-weed used for fuel in Jersey and Gernsey. Urania, the Heavenly
Muse, Vranoscopy, g. a view of the Heavens. Vrbane, -nical, l. of a City.
Vrbanity, l. Civility, Courtesy. Vrbicarian, l. of the City [ Rome. Ure, o. (f.
heur) chance. Vrent, l. burning, parching. Vreter, g. the urine-pipe from the
reins to the bladder. Urgent, l. pressing. Vriah, h. fire of the Lord. Vriel,
h. the fire of God. Vricornium, the village Wreckcester, (once a famous City)
in Shropshire. ^rim and Thummim, h. (lights and perfections) the bright
precious stones in the Highpriests breast plate, Lev. 8. Vrinary, the
urine-pipe, from the bladder. Vrinator, l. a Diver. Vrith, So. Etherings or
hazle-windings of hedges. Vrn, l. a pitcher [for the ashes of a burnt corpse;]
also 2 gallons and a half. Vrescopy, g. a casting ones water. Vrsa major, the
Greater Bear, and Vrsa minor, the Lesser Bear, Northern Constellations. Vrsine,
bear-like. Vrsula, l. a little she-bear. Vrus, Vre-ox, a huge wild bull.
Vrynes, o. Nets to catch Havvks. Vsance, f. use, usage. At Vsance, at the
months end. Double Vsance, two months Vser de action, the pursuing an Action in
the proper County. Vshers (in the Exchequer) 4 that attend the Chief Officers.
Vsedom, an Isle of Pomeren Vsquebagh, Iscobah, Irish Aqua-vitae. Vstion, l. a
burning. Vstulate, l. to burn or scar. Vstulation, a curling with hot irons.
Vsucaption, l. prescription or long possession. Vsufructuary, l. [one] reaping
the profit of that whose propriety is another. Usury, l. [the taking] Interest
or Use-money. Usurpation, l. a taking against right. Vtas, the eighth day after
any Term or Feast. Vtensils, f. household stuff, things necessary for use (in
house or shop.) Vterine, l. of the womb. Vtible, that may be used. Vtility, l.
profitableness. Vtinam, l. I (or a) wish. Vtfangthef. Sa. a Lords Privilege of
punishing a Thief taken within his Fee, though he dwell (and commit the theft)
out of it. Vtlagato capiendo, etc. a writ for the taking an Vtlagh, Sa. an
Outlaw. Vtlary, -awry, the making one an Outlaw, for contemptuous refusing to
appear, when lawfully sought and called into Law. Vtopian, belonging to Vtopia,
g. a feigned well-governed Country described by Sir Thomas More. Vtrecht, a
City (near Holland) whence you may go to 30 walled towns to dinner and to 50 to
bed. Utter, Outward. Utter Barristers, that plead without the Bar. Vttrance, o.
extremity. V^toxcetor, a town in Staffordshire. Wal, Weal, l. of a grape.
Wea tunica, a coat of the eye, like a grape-skin. Wid, l. wet, moist.
Vviserous, l. bearing grapes. Vulcan, Jupiters Smith, [the God of] fire.
Vulgarity, l. a being Vulgar, l. common, vile. Vulgarization, a making common.
Vulgate, l. published abroad. Vulg^, l. commonly. Vulned, (in Heraldry) the
same as Vulnerated, l. wounded. Vulnerary, [a curer] of wounds. Vulnifical, l.
wounding. Vulpinariness, craftine^s. Vulpinate, l. to play the fox. Vulpine, l.
of or like a fox. Vulsion, l. a pulling. Vultuosous, l. of a grave (or heavy)
countenance. Vulturine, of or like a Vulture, l. a ravenous bird. Vyrel, o. (f.
virole) a ferril at the end of a staff. Uvula, l. the palate. Vvula-spo^^* to
blow up pepper and salt to the Uvula hanging loose. Vxbridge, a town in
Middlesex. Vxellodunum, Cadenac in France. Vxorious, l. of (or doting upon) a
wise. Vxitas, the same as Vzita, an African City. Vzziah, as Azariah.
Vzziclites, the Offspring of Vzziel, h. Gods He-goat.
W.
WAar, o. as Waier. Waden^orch, a town in Westphalia. Wafts, signs hung up for
a boat to come aboard, or that the ship is in distress. Waftors, Frigots that
convoy Merchantmen. Waga, Vaga, a weigh 256 pound. Wage, Gage, f. to put in
security, to follow or prosecute. Wage^ of Law, an offer to Wage his Law, make
oath (by himself and Compurgators) that he ows not the debt charged by surmize.
Wagerland, part of Holstein. Waif, Weif, derelictum, what a thief had stolen and
(being pursued or overcharged) leaves behind him. Wailed wine, o. choice wine.
Wain, (D. wan) want, decrease. Wainnable, tillable. Wair of Timber, 2 yards
long and one foot broad. Waist, as Waste. Waive, to forsake. Waived (in women,)
is the same as Outlawed (in Men) for contemptuous refusing to appear. Waiviaria
mulieris, is as much as utlagatio viri. Wake, the smooth water which a ship
makes a-stern her, and shows what way she goes. Get her Wale, (in chasing) get
as far into the wind as she, and so go right after her. Wakeman, the chief
Magistrate of Rippon in Yorkshire. Wake-Robin, Arum, Cuckow-pit, Starch-wort.
Wakes, were wont to be kept the Sunday after that Saints day to whom the
Church was dedicated. Walburg, sa. Gracious. Walcheren, an Isle of Zeland.
Waldeck, a Saxon County. Wald, as Weald. Waldenses, a Sect follovving. Waldo,
of Lions in France, he denied the real presence, condemned the eating of Flesh,
etc. Walwin, ge. a Conqueror. Wallis, o. waves. Wale, as Bend in Navigation.)
Wale-reared, not ship-shapen, but built right up (after she comes to her
bearing.) Walkers, Foresters. Walker, D. a Fuller. Walk-mill, No. a
Fulling-mill. Wallingford, a town in Berks. Wall-Pepper, Stonecrop. Wallen
hoven, a town in Over-Yssel. Walsal, a town in Staffordshire. Walsham, a town
in Norfolk. Walsingham, (old and great) in Norfolk. Walt, No. to overthrow,
totter, or lean one way. Walt, not having ballast enough. Walter, ge. a Pilgrim
or a Wood-man, also to welter, o. Waltham- Abbey, in Essex. Waltsome, o.
loathsome. Wandsdike, (q. Wo^ensdike) a wonderful long ditch in Wiltshire.
Want, No. a mole, or mould-warp. Wontage, a town in Barkshire. Wankle, No.
limber, fickle. Wang, sa. a Field, also a jaw. Wang-teeth, o. Cheek-teeth or
Grinder. Wanger, o. a male or bouget Wan^ope, o. despair. Wantrist, o.
mis^r^st. Wantey* a sursingle for Carriers horses.) Wanwerd, o. [hard] fortune.
Waped, o. as Awhaped. Wape^ta^e, a hundred (from delivering their weapons to
the Lord, in token of subjection.) Wapse, etc. Ss. for wasp, etc. Warbling of
the wings, a Hawks crossing them together over her back. Warble, to quaver [in
singing. War and War, No. worse and worse. Warch, Wark, No. to ^ke, to work.
Ward, the jurisdiction of an Alderman, also part of a Forest, also the heir of
a Tenant holding by Knights service, during his nonage. Warden, a Guardian or
Keeper. Ward^ors, (q. Garde-Corps) Guard of the body. Wardmore Court, kept in
every ward of London. Wardrobe, where Kings and Great Persons Garments are
kept. Wards and Liveries, a Court erected by King Hen. 8. taken away by 12 Car.
2. Wardst^ff, carrying a load of straw with 6 horses, two men in Harness, etc.
to Aibridge, (by which service Lambourn Manor in Essex is held.) Wardwit,
-wit, Warwit, a being quit of paying for watch and ward. Ware, a town in
Hertfordshire. Warectum, terra Warecta, land that has lain long untilled.
Waren, a place priviledg'd by the King, to keep Beasts and F^wl of Waren, i. e.
H^res* Co^eys, Partridges and Pheasants. Ware your money, No. bestow it well.
Warham, a town in Dorcetshire. Warisht, No. well stored, having conquered a
disease (or difficulty) and secure for the future. Wariangles, birds full of
noise and ravening. Warison, o. reward. Warish, o. to save or deliver. Warnoth,
a forfeit of double rent by the Tenants of Dover-Castle, if they fail at the
day. Warned, o. denied. Warnstore, o. to fortify [with arms. Warp, the third
at length, into which the wool is woven. Warp, aw- sa. to cast. Warpe, a hawser
(or any rope) used in the Warping a Ship, haling he^ in or out of a harbor
(for want of wind.) Warrans, o. [wary] designs. Warrantus, he that makes a
Warranty, a Covenant by Deed, to secure a bargain against all men. Warrantia
Chartae, a writ for one enfeoffed with clause of Waranty and impleaded in a
writ of entry, etc. Warrantia diei, a writ to excuse ones appearance, being
employed by the King. Warrant of Attorney, whereby a man appoints another to do
something in his name, warranting his action. Warrington, a town in Lancashire,
on the edge of Cheshire. Warsaw, -s^via, a town in Poland. VVarscot, a Saxon
contribution toward the war. Warth, No. a Foord. Warwick, the chief town of
Warwickshire. Wary, La. to curse also to la^ an egg. Wary, Waren, o. to
weary, afflict, consume. Wash of Oisters, 10 strikes. Washeringhen, a town in
Gelderland. Wash the Ship, by making her heel over to a side when they cannot
come aground to careen.) Wash off the Shore, close by the shore. Wassail, (sa.
Was-heal) be in health. Wassail-bowl, of Spiced Ale, on Nevv-years Eve. Waste,
spoil of houses, woods, etc. to the prejudice of the heir, etc. also as
Waste-ground, lying as Waste and Common. Waste, that part of the Ship between
the Mainmast and Fore-castle. Waste-boards, set up between the gun-wale and
wast-trees, or the sides of a boat (to keep the sea out.) VVaste-clothes, all
that are round about the Cake-work of the Ships hull, the ^ights of a Ship.
VVastel-bread, o. fine cimnel. Watch, a town in Somersetshire. VVatch, (at
Sea) 4 hours, also half the Ships company. VVater-born, just a-flote.
Waterford, an Irish Porttown. VVatergage, a Sea-wall or bank, also a gaging
instrument. VVatergang, a trench (or trough) for a stream of water.
VVater-line, the depth that the Ship should swim in, when laden. VVater-shot,
mooring (not across nor with the tide, ^ut) quartering (between both.)
VVater-lock, a fenced watering-place. VVater-way, a small ledge of timber close
by the sides of the Ships deck. VVatford, a town in Hertfordshire. VVatweil, a
town in upper Alsatia. VVatlington, a town in Oxon. VVatling street, VVerlam-,
one of the Roman Highwaies (whereof Vitalian had the oversight) from Dover to
Anglesey in Wales, also the milky-way. VVattles, (to fold Sheep) So. made of
split wood in fashion of gates. VVave-offerings, certain loaves for yearly
first Fruits, Lev. 23. VVavey, (in Heraldry) the resemblance of a swelling
wave. VVaving, making a sign for a Ship (or boat) to come toward (or go from)
them. VVaws, o. for waves. VVax-shot, -scot, was paid thrice a year toward
Church Candles. Way, o. to guide. Way of a Ship, (forward or aftward-on) the
Ships rake and run. VVay-bred, No. Plantain. VVay-b^^, Wea-, We-, Y. a
little bit, a little more. VVayled, o. grown old. VVaymenting, o. lamenting.
VVaymouth, a town in Dorcetshire. VVainfleet, a town in Lincolnshire. VVayned,
o. put back. VVde, o. for wood. VVeald of Kent, (sa. wald) the woody part
thereof. VVeanel* a young beast newly weaned. VVeapon-salve, applied to the
weapon that made the wound. VVear, No. cool [the pot. VVeat his Head, No. look
it. VVeather, to go to wind-ward of a place. VVeather-bow, etc. next the
weather. VVeather-Coils, [the Ship being a-hull] lays her head the other way,
without loosing any sail (only by bearing up the helm.) VVeather-man, an Archer
that diligently observes the weather. VVeather the Hawk, set her abroad to take
the air. VVea-worth you, No. woe betide you. VVebley, a town in Herefordshire.
VVebb^, o. a Weaver. Wed, sa. a pawn or pledge. VVede, Weed, sa. a Garment.
VVeel, La. a whirlpool. VVeen, o. to think. VVeet, VVite, No. nimble, swift.
Weigh, 256 pound. VVeild, to rule or sway [a Scepter etc. VVeir, VVaar,
Northum. Seawrack. VVelked, o. withered. VVelken, -kin, sa. the sky.
VVellaneer, No. alas! VVellingborough, a town in Northamptonshire.
VVellington, a town in Shropshire. Wells, a City in Somersetshire. VVeleful,
o. wealthy. Well, o. to Spring. VVelmeth, o. rises. VVelt, o. (q. weilded,)
ruled. Welsh, VValsh, VVallish, Gallish. VVem, E. a small blemish [in cloth.
VVend, No. to go. VVenlock, (little and great) in Shropshire. VVeold, Would,
sa. a Forest. VVere-wolf, sa. a Man-wolf, or German Sorcerer (by an enchanted
girdle, etc) turned wolf and worrying humane Creatures. Were, VVair, so. a
pond. Were, o. a maze or doubt, also to defend. VVerb, a town of Brandenburgh.
VVerden, a town in Mark in Germany. VVerkington, a town in Cumberland. VVerne,
o. to deny or put off. VVeroance, a West-Indian Lord. VVerre, Were, VVergeld,
-gild, sa. a mulct for killing of a man. The VVeregild of an Archbishop (or
Earl) was 15 thousand thrimsas. VVeregelt-thef, a thief that might be redeemed.
VVerre, o. grief. VVerry, o. to destroy. VVerryed, o. banished. VVerth, o. for
worth. VVesel, a town in Cleveland. VVestbury, a town in Wilsthire. Weston, a
town in Sommersetshire, and above 50 more. VVestloe, a town in Cornwall.
VVestphalen, part of Westphalia, a large German Province, stored with Chestnuts
and good bacon. VVestern, o. to draw toward west. VVestreth, o. sets at the
west. VVesty, No. dizzy, giddy. VVest-friezland, one of the Neatherlands,
feeding the best horses and Cattle in Europe. VVest-Saxonlage, the law of the
West Saxons. Westminster, (the Monastery westward of London) was the ancient
seat of our Kings. VVete, Wit, VViss, o. to know. VVeteraw, a German
Province. VVethirby, a town in Yorkshire. VVhapple-way, so. a horse (but not a
cart) way. VVharfinger, the keeper of a VVharfe, a broad place (near the
shore) to lay vvares upon. VVharfage, the fee for landing things there.
VVharre, Che. Crabs, as sour as vvharre. VVheadle, (Br. a story) a subtle
dravving of one in, also he that does so. VVheam, VVheem, Che. so close that no
vvind can enter it, also convenient. VVheamow, No. Nimble. VVheden, we. a
simple fellovv. VVheen-cat, No. a she-cat. VVheen (or Queen) fugol, sa. a Hen
Fovvl. VVheint lad, Che. (q. Queint) a fine lad (ironically.) VVhelps, like
brackets set to the body of the Capstain. Where, o. a maze. VVhicket for
VVhacket, Quittee for Quattee, K. Quid pro quo. Which, o. on ark or chest.
VVhids, c. words. VVhilk, o. which. VVhilom, o. heretofore. VVhines, [the
Otter] cries. VVhins, Furs, Fursbushes. Whip, -staff, with which the
steers-man turns the helm. VVhirkened, No. choked. VVhirlbat, as VVhorl-.
VVhirlbone, upon the knee. VVhisket, No. a basket or shallovv ped. Whit, c.
Nevv-gate. White, Che. to requite, also to blame. Lean the White off your
sell, No. remove the blame from your self. White Hall, York-Place, taken from
Cardinal Wolsey by King Hen. 8. VVhite-hart Forest, Blackmore. VVhite-hart
Silver, imposed on Tho. de la Linde (by King Hen. 3) for kiling a beautiful
white heart, and is still paid. VVhite-spurs, a sort of Esquires. VVhitby, a
town in Yorkshire. VVhit-Church, a town in Hant. Shropshire, and several
others. VVhitmister, a town in Glocestershire. White straites, a course kind
of Devonshire cloth. VVhitle, to make white [by cutting. Whittle, we. a
doubled blanket worn over Women's Shoulders. Whitlow-grass, Nailwort, good
against Whitlows, or Fellons. Whitsontide, the time about Whitsunday, (Sa.
Wied* sacred) when the Holy Ghost descended on the Apostles in the form of
fiery tongues, and when there was wont to be a General Baptism in white.
Whoave, Che. to cover or whelm over. Whole-case boots, large hunting or riding
boots. Who whiskin, Che. a Whole drinking black pot. Wholsomship, as Howlsom.
Whoodings, the planks fastened along the Ships side into the stem. Whookt,
Che. shook [every joint. Whorlbats, straps (with leaden plummets) used in Roman
exercises. VVhorts, the same as VVhortle-berries, Bilberries. VViborch, a City
in North Juitland. VViche, a town in Vtrecht. VVick, o. stinking, counterfeit.
VVicket, c. a casement. Wickham, a town in Bucks. VVicklivists, -vians,
followers of VVicklif, Curate of Lutterworth in Leicestershire, (1380.)
VVickware, a town in Glocestershire. VVidows-bench, Ss. a share of their
husbands Estate which they enjoy beside their joi^^ure. VViegh, VVaagh, No. a
leaver or wedge. VVicres, o. Witches, Destinies. VVigan, a town in Lancashire.
VVight, an Isle on the South of England. VVight, o. swift. VVighton, a town in
Yorkshire. VVigornia, Worcester. VVigreve, Sa. a Woodward. VVild-fire, invented
by the Grecians, (about 717.) VVildeshusen, a town in Westphalia.
VVild-water-cresses. Ladies smock. Cuckow-flower. VVilfred, Sa. Much peace. St.
Wilfrids ne^dle, a hole (in a vault under Rippon Church) through which Chaste
Woman might pass, others not. Wilk, VVhilk, No. a periwinkle or Sea-Snail. Last
Will, a Testament. But a Testament properly has an Executor expressed. Will of
the wisp, Ignis fatuus. VVillern, N^. Wilf^ll, peevish. William, (Ge.
VVilhelm) Much defense, or (Guildhelm) having a gilt hel^net* VVillow-weed,
-herb, loose-strife. VVilton-house, the Seat of the Earls of Pembroke, near
Wilton, a town in Wilsthire. VVily, full of wile or craft. VVimple, a plaited
linen about the necks of Nuns; also a flag or streamer. VVimborn-minster, in
Dorcetshire. VVimund, Sa. sacred peace. Win, o. to complain. VVincaunton, a
town in Sommersetshire. VVinch, a pulling (or screwing) Engine. VVinchcomb, a
town in Glocestershire. VVinchelsey, a town in Sussex. Winchester, a town in
Hantshire, another in Northumberland. VVind-berry, No. bill-berry. VVind the
ship, bring her head about (with the boat or oars at the stern-poets.) How
win^s the ship? On what point of the compass lies her head? VVinder, o. to trim
[the hair. VVinding-tackle, for the ^oysing-in of goods. VVindlass, the beam
which (with hand-speeks) winds-in the Cables. VVind-row, Hay (or grass) raked
in rews, to be cockt. Windsor, VVindleshore, a town in Barkshire, another in
Cornwall. VVind-taught, [too much ragging, etc.] holding wind stiffly aloft.
Wine Ape, o. Ap^anum, Mascadel. VViners, o. Vine-branches. VVinfrid, Sa.
Win-pe^c^* a man's name. VVinifred, -nef-, a British Virgin-Saint, revived by
Bruno the Priest, after Cradacus had cut off her head, in a place where sprang
up St. VVinfreds well, in Flintshire. VVinly, No. quietly. VVinslow, a town in
Bucks. VVinter-beyning, from Nov. 11. to Aril 23. No commoning (that while) in
Dean-forest. VVinter-rigg, to fallow land in winter. VVisard, VViz-, (Sa.
VVitega, a prophet) a cunningman. VVise-acre, (D. VVaer-seg^er) Tom Tell-troth,
a fool. Wise Men of Greece, ^ viz. S^^en, Chilo, C^eobulus, Thales, Bias,
Pittacus, and Periander. VVishbich, a town in Cambridgshire. VVishippers, o.
Astrologers. VVish, o. to wash. VVisket, as VVhisket. VVisly, o. even. VVismar,
a Hans town in M^klenbourg. VViss, o. to advise, to save or secure. Wist, Sa.
known. VVitcher, c. silver. VVitcher-bubber, c. a silver-bowl. VVitcher-cully,
c. a silversmith. VVitcher-tilter, c. a silver-hilted-sword. VVitfree, a
privilege from VVite, Sa. a penalty or fine; also to blame, No. VViterden,
-re^^, VVinterd-, a West Saxon tax imposed by the public Council of the
Kingdom. VVithernam, Sa. the driving away a distress, so that the Sheriff (upon
the Replevi^) cannot deliver it to the party distreined. Withers, the extreme
part of a horses neck, near the saddle bow. Withsey, o. to deny. Withsit, o. to
withstand. Witney, a town in Oxon. Wittal, -ol, Sa. one that knows himself a
Cuckold Wittemberg, the seat of the Saxon Electors. Witten Witterly, o. to know
certainly. Wivescomb, a town in Sommetsetshire. Wiver, as Wyver. Wlate, Sa. to
hate or loath. Woad, (l Guado) an herb (like plantain) used in dying blew.
VVoadmell, a hairy course stuff, made of Island wool. VVoborn, a town in
Bedfordshire, another in Bucks. VVoddeth, o. grovvs mad. VVoden, Sa. (fire or
furious) an Idol giving name to Wednesday. VVodensburgh, a village in
Wilsthire. VVogh, La. a wall. VVolds, Sa. plain vvoodless hills. VVolgast, a
town in Pomerania. VVollin, an Island of Pomerania. Wolves teeth, 2 (in a
horses upper javv) that hinder his chevving. VVolverhampton, a town in
Stafford. VVon, o. store, plenty. VVone, o. a dwelling place. VVonde, o. to
turn back. Wonders of the world, 7. viz. 1. The Pyramids. 2. Mausolaeum. 3.
The Temple of Ephesus. 4. Walls of Babylon. 5. Colossus of Rhodes. 6. Statue of
Jupiter Olympicus. 7. The Egyptian Pharus. VVong, Sa. a field. VVonne, D. to
dwell; also (q. Wont) a fashion or custom, and a remedy, o. VVood, VVod, Sa.
mad. VVoodbinde, Honey-suckle. VVoodcock-soil, So. of a woodcock color, not
good. VVoodgeld, cutting wood in the forest, also [a freedom from paying] money
for the same. VVoodmote Court, the Forest Court of Attachments. VVood-plea
Court, held (twice a year) in the Forest of Clun in Salop. VVoodshaw, o.
wood-side or shadow. Woodstock, a town in Oxon. Woodstock lower, a Labyrinth
built by King Hen. 2. for Rosamund Clifford (utterly defaced.) VVood-wants, No.
holes in a post or piece of Timber. VVoodward, a Forest-Officer (walking with a
forest-bill) presenting all offenses, etc. VVoodwose, a wild-man or Satyr.
VVood and VVeod, letting 2 ship-timbers close into one another. VVoof, the
thread weaved cross the warp. VVool-drivers, they buy wool of sheep-masters, and
carry it on horsback to Markets. VVolfeshead, as VVulves-. VVooldbridge, a town
in Suffolk. VVoolpit, another. VVool-staple, the Town where wool was sold.
VVool-winders, that wind or bundle up the fleeces, (sworn to do it truly
between the owner and buyer.) VVopen, o. for wept. VVoor, the same as Wore, K*
Sea-Wrack. Worcester, the City of that shire. Worch-bracco, Che. (Workbrittle)
intent upon ones work. Workesworth, a town in Darbyshire. Wormatia, the City
Worms, in Germany. Worm, an iron at a staffs end to draw shot out of a piece.
Worm the cable, strengthen it by laying a small rope along it between the
strands Worried, No choakt. Worsop, a town in Nottingham. Worstead, a town in
Norfolk. Wort, as Wart. Worth, o. to be. Worth up, o. to ascend. Wost, o.
know. Wotton, above 30 small towns. Wotton-basset, in Wilts. Wotten
underedge, in Glocestershire. Would the mast, etc. bind it with a rope to keep
on the fish (or somewhat to strengthen it.) Wouldings of the bolt-sprit, the
ropes that lash it fast down from rising off the pillow. Wowe, o. a field or
wood. Sea-Wrack, a Sea-weed. Wrake and Wrecke* o. wrath and revenge.
Wranglands, misgrown trees that will never prove timber. Wrathed, o. moved to
anger. Wrawxes* (q. Wrothness or roughness) o. frowardness. Wray, Wrey, o. to
bewray, discover. Wreath, a Boars tail, also a Torce (between the Mantle and
the Crest.) Wreck, (f. Varech) the perishing of a ship and every person in it.
What part of it is cast ashore belongs to the King, but if man, dog, or cat
escape, the goods are the owners still (if claimed within a year and day.)
Wreedt, D. Wroth. Wreke, D. to revenge. Wrenches, o. traps, cheats. Wreken,
-kyn, as Reking. Wreme, o. to compass about. Wright, Wyrhta, Sa. a workman.
Writ, (breve, actio, formula) the Kings precept whereby any thing is commanded
to be done touching a Sure or Action. Original Writs, sent out of the high
Court of Chancery to begin the suit. Judicial Writs, from the Court where the
Cause depends; after the Suit is begun. Wro, o. Wrath, grief. Wroken, o.
revenged. Wrote, o. sorrowful. Wrotham, a town in Kent. Wry, W^yne, Wrene, o. to
cover. Wryen, o. to change, also as Wrygh, o. covered. Wryeth, o. gets,
works. Wrytheth, o. casts out. Wulfer, Sa. helper. Wulfrun^, a devout
Woman who enriched Wulfrunes Hampton, Wolver-hampton in Staffordshire.
Wulvesheved, -head, Sa. the condition of an Outlaw, whose head was accounted
as a VVolfs. Wun, No. as Won. Wurtsberg, Wir-, Herbipolis, a City in Germany,
whose hills abounded with Wurts, Worts, sa. Herbs. VVyke, a farm or little
village. VVyte, as VVite. VVyoh-house, the house in which the salt is boiled.
VVyver, (q. Viper,) o. a kind of Serpent. Wye, a town in Kent. VVymondham, a
town in Norfolk. VVynsing, o. a sweet singer. VVyntred. o. wrinkled. Wise. o.
a Proverb. VVyshe, o. [he] washed* VVyten, o. to keep [from falling, etc.
VVyttes, o. the Senses.
X.
XAintogne, Sain-, a Province of France. Xangti, (among the Chinois) the
supreme Govern of Heaven and Earth. Xanthi, a People of Asia. Xantippe, the
froward wife of Socrates, who said he kept her to exercise his patience.
Xantho, one of the Sea-Nymphs. Xanthus, Scamander, a River by Troy. Xativa, a
town of Valentia in Spain. Xenocrates, a severe Chalcedonian Philosopher.
Xenodochy, g. an Inn or Hospital. Xenophon, a famous Athenian Philosopher and
general. Xensi, a principal Province of China. Xeres [de la frontera,] a town
of Andaluzia in Spain. Xeriff, the title of some Barbarian Princes. Xeroph^gy,
g. the eating of dry Meats. Xerophthalmy, g. a dry red itching of the eyes.
Xerxes, Son of Darius and King of Persia* whose Army of sevent^^^ hundred
thousand men was beat by forty thousand Greeks. Xi^inous, l. of Cotton.
Xylval^es, as Lignum Aloes. Xylobalsamum, g. the sweet wood that produces
Balm. Xylopolist, g. a VVoodmonger.
Y.
Y A. D. yea, Y. Yacht, a Dutch pleasure-boat. Yall, o. to go ( s. Aller.)
Yape, o. to jest. Yard, three foot, settled (says Sir Richard Baker) by Hen.
1. according to the length of his own arm. Yard, the timber (cross the mast) at
which the sail hangs. Main-yard, five 6 parts of the keels length, etc. Top the
Yards, make them hang even. Yard-land, Verge of land, an uncertain quantity
from 15 to 40 acres. Yare, No. Covetous. Yare, Sf. nimble, smart. Yare, o.
ready. Yark, No. prepare. Yarmouth, a Port of Norfolk, also another in W^ght.
Yarn, o. to study. Yarrow, o. faint-hearted, also an herb that stops bleeding.
Y^rum, a town in Yorkshire. Yate, Yatt, a Country-Gate. Yave, Yafe, o. gave,
regarded. Yaws* [the Ship] goes in and out with her head. Y^e, o. for been.
Ybet, o. made [better. Yblent, o. blinded. Ybourded, o. jested. Ycast, (for
Y^east) o. left. Ychaped with silver, o. having a silver handle. Ycleaped, sc.
called. Yclenched, o. covered, crossbar'd. Yclothed, o. for clothed. Ycorven,
o. cut. Ycrased, o. broken. Ydo, o. stayed or (for Ydon) done. Ydraw, o. for
draw. Year, Day, and Waste, the King has the profits of their Lands and
Tenements that are attainted of Petit-Treason and Felony for a Year and a Day,
and also may (except the Lord of the Fee agree with him for it) destroy the
houses, root up woods, etc. Lunar Year, twelve revolutions of the Moon, three
hundred fifty four days. Solar Year, three hundred sixty five days and six
hours. Yearn, to bark as Beagles at their prey. Yearn, o. shrill. Yedding, o.
brawling and ^adding. Yede, as Yewed. Yield, o. to reward. Yeender, E^nder,
Der. the forenoon. Yeander, No. yonder. Yeepsen- Yaspen, E. as much as can be
taken up in both hands together. Yef, o. for If. Yefts, o. for Gifts.
Yeld-hall, o. for Guild Hall. Yelding, o. for yielding. Yellow-goulds* o.
Marigolds. Yeme, (q. Hyeme) Winter. Yeman, Yeoman, (q. Young man, or Geman, sa.
a married man or common, or else Guma, sa. a painful man) Ingenuus, the next in
order to a Gentleman. Yoman, an Officer in the Kings house between the Sergeant
and the Gr^om. Yongmen, for Yomen in 33 Hen. 8. Yene, o. nigh, or as in Before
Yene, o. over against. Yerd, o. rod, plague, Government. Yern, o. (for ^arn) to
deserve or desire, also earnestly. Yepely, o. cunningly, vvisely. Yests, (q.
hests,) o. precepts. Yetten, o. to get, lay up. Yeve, o. for Give. Yeven,
Yeoven, o. for Given, Dated. Yewd, No. Went. Yewing, o. going. Yex, to
Hick-cough or Hick-up. Yfrounsed, o. frovvning. Yft^r this, o. even as. Yhed*
o. on high. Yhold, o. held, accounted. Ykleped, o. named. Isle, (q. idle) o.
vain, empty. Ynde, (q. Indian) o. black. Ynow, o. enough. Yod, as Yewd. Yoke, a
double rope (from the helm to the ship-sides) to help the steering (when their
hands are too vveak.) Yolden, o. yielded. Yoman, See Yeman. Yonker, D. a
Gentleman. Yonkers, the young foremast-men who take in topsails, etc. Of Yore,
o. heretofore. Yorely, o. ancient. York, the City of that shire. Youghall, an
Irish Port. Youketh, [the havvk] sleeps. Yoxley, a town in Huntingtonshire.
Yp^ked, o. set forth [vvith peaks. Ypocras, o. Hippocrates. Ypres, Ypres, a
town in Flanders. Yqueint, o. quenched. Yreken, o. raked. Yren. o. displeasure
(l. (...).) Ysam, o. seen. Yslawe, o slain. Ysselstein, a town in Holland.
Ystoppe, o. stepped. Ystorve, -en, o. dead. Ytake, o. taken. Ytwight, o.
tvvitched. Yvernagium, the vvinter seed-time. Yuba, an Indian herb of which
they make bread. Yu-batch, No. a Christmas batch. Yu-block, No. the same as
Yule-block, a Christmas block. Yu-games, No. the same as Yule-games, See Vl^.
Yule-dag, Da. Christmas day. Yule of August, Lammas. Yvoire, o. Ivory. Ywoxe,
o. vvaxen, grown. Ywrien, o. covered. Ywroke, o. for VVreaked, revenged.
Z.
Z-, (in the West.) for S-. Zaara, the Desert, Lybia. Zabern, or Elsasz-Zavern*
a town in lovver Alsace. Zabulon, Ze^-, h. a dvveliing-place. Zachary, -riah,
h. mindful of the Lord. Zacynthus, Zante, a Venetian Island, West of Greece.
Zacutus Lysitanus, a famous Jevv Physician in Amsterdam. Zald, Sc. (q. Yald)
yielded. Zaleucus, a Locrian Lavv-giver who put out one of his own eyes and
one of his Sons, to fulfill his own law against adultery. Zamolsis, a
Thracian Philosopher. Zane, I. [a silly] John. Zan^, I. a Tumbler who procures
laughter by his mimick gestures, etc. Zanni, I.. such Jack-puddings. La Zeccha,
the Mint at Venice. Zara, a Venetian City in Dalmatia. Zecchine, I. a gold coin
about 7 shillings 6 pence. Zecchine, Tu. vorth 9 shillings. Zede, Sc. went [to
vvrack. Zedekiah, Zid-, h. the Justice of the Lord. Zed^^ry, an Indian hot and
dry plant. Zeland, one of the united provinces, also a Danish Island. Zelot, g.
one that is jealous or zealous (fervent.) Zelotypi-, g. Jealousy. Nova Zembla,
a nevv-discovered Northern Isle. Zenith, A. the point directly over our heads.
Zeno, a Greek Philosopher Author of the Stoics. Zenobia, Zebennia, Queen of
Palmyrene in Syria, she Usurpt the Government of the world, but was overcom'n
and led in triumph (by Aurelian) in golden chains Zephyre, -rus, g. Favonius,
the West-vvind. Zereth, an hebrew measure of 9 inches. Zero, f. the Cipher or
Naught. Zerubbabel, Zombabel, h. repugnant to confusion. Zest, f. the peel of
an Orange, etc. squeezed into a glass of wine (to relish it.) Zethus, a
Musician, twin-brother to Amphion. Zeugma, (g. a joining) making the verb (or
Adjective) by supplement to answer diverse supposites. Zeuxis, a famous Greek
Painter. Zimri, h. a Song. Zink, as Spelter. Zodiac g. an imagined circle
containing the yearly course of the Sun through the 1^ Signs, viz. Aries,
Taurus* Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus,
Aquarius, Pisces. Zoilists, men that imitate Zoilus, Homeromastix, a critical
carping Poet of Amphipolis who wrote against Homer. Zome, a River in Brabant.
Zonarious, belonging to a Zone, g. a girdle, or purse, also a fifth part of the
heavens. Torrid Zone, between the two Tropicks of Cancer and Capricorn.
Temperate Zones, between the Tropicks and the Polar Circles. Frigid Zones,
between the Polar Circles and the very Poles. Zonigrism, an instrument (with a
long narrow neck) to convey bitter potions into the stomach. Zonnets,
fantastical bodies of the Gnomes or Pigmy-Spirits. Zoographical, belong^ng to a
Zoographer, an author of Zoography, g. a description (or painting) of beasts.
Zoop^ites, g, plant-animals, partaking the Nature both of plants and
living-creatures, as spunges, etc. Zopyrus, he cut off his ears, etc. and fled
to Babylon (pretending Darius had done it) and (being made their general)
betrayed it. Zoroaster, the first King of Bactria, and Author of Persian
Magic, who laughed (they say) so soon as he was born. Zorobabel, as Zeru^b-.
Zubal, the Philippine Island where Magellan died. Zu^he, Stovene, a withered or
dry stock of wood. Zulp, a town by Colen. Zundel, ^inder. Zutphen, one of the
United Provinces. Zwallock, a town in Cornwall. Zweibrucken* Deux ponis, a
Dukedom in the lower Palatinate. Zygostatical, belonging to a pound of 16
ounces (or to a Zygostate, g. the Clark of a Market. Zythepsary, g., a
brew house. Zz, a mark (in old Physicians) for Mirth.
FINIS.

