PURPURA ANGLICANA, BEING A DISCOVERY OF A SHELLFISH. Found on the Shores of
the Severn, in which there is a Vein containing a Juice, giving the delicate
and durable Tincture of the Ancient, Rich, Tyrian PVRPLE; of which it is an
undoubted Species: The Knowledge of which, has been lost for many Ages. With
Experimental OBSERVATIONS upon it, and Figures of the Shells. First printed at
Oxford, in the Year 1686. In a large Philosophical Transaction, No. 178. Now
reprinted alone, at the Desire, and for the convenience of many, who are not
disposed to buy the BOOK.

By W. C. the AUTHOR.

LONDON, Printed by Joseph Streater. MDCLXXXIX.

PURPURA ANGLICANA
THere being many Natural things, which I have formerly, and of late, happily
found in the South and West Parts of England, not as I can find published by
any Author; besides many more which have been discovered by the industrious
Exquisitions of diverse ingenious and curious Searchers of Nature; (as also
others which were before thought to be Exotiques;) I have reason to believe,
that there are very many more (for encouragement of such Inquirers) yet
undiscovered in this our Native Country. Among others, that of the Purple-Fish,
which I found the last Winter, on the Sea Coasts of Somersetshire, and the
shores of South Wales opposite to it; which also I doubt not but may be found
on the other Coasts of England, especially the South and Western parts, (in
which I am almost assured I have formerly seen them, though then unknown to me,)
where there are Rocks and great Pebbles, and where the Tides run not too
strong. Which Discovery I do not pretend to be so made by me, as having no hint
of it before: For in October, 1684, there were two Ladies at Mynehead, where I
then was, who seeing what Collections I had made of Natural things in those
Parts, told me, there was a certain Person living by the Seaside, in some Port
or Creek in Ireland, who made considerable gain, by marking with a delicate
durable Crimson Color, fine Linen of Ladies, Gent. etc. sent from many parts
of that Island, with their Names, or otherwise as they pleased; which, they
told me, (as they were informed,) was made by some liquid substance taken out
of a Shellfish; upon which I showed them all the Shells I had found on that
Coast; one of them thought it to be taken out of a Limpot; the other out of
that Shell here figured and described; but neither of them could inform me out
of what part it was taken in either. After their departure from that Port, I
made Experiments on all the Shell-fishes, in which I might probably think to
find it; and brake them while the Fishes were alive in them, and with a short
pointed Pencil of Horse hair (no other instrument being so convenient) I tried
every part of each, which I imagined might yield the Color; but upon washing
the Linen which I had marked, in scalding water, with soap, there appeared
nothing of any color on them; upon which I was ready to give over any farther
search; but at length trying that part, in which I least thought the Tincture
lay, it immediately turned to a light green; which being presently dried and
washed, as before, there appeared that delicate color they told me of, as
aforesaid.

The whole process, upon my often repeated Experiments, was as follows.

These Shells, being harder then most of other kinds, are to be broken with a
smart stroke of a hammer, on a plate of Iron, or firm piece of Timber, with
their mouth downwards, so as not to crush the Body of the Fish within: The
broken pieces being picked off, there will appear a white Vein, lying
transversly in a little furrow or cleft, next to the head of the Fish, which
must be dug out with the stiff point of the Horse hair pencil, being made
short and tapering; which must be so formed, by reason of the viscous
clamminess of that white Liquor in the Vein, that so by its stiffness, it may
drive in the Matter into the fine Linen, or white Silk; which, although I (...)
not yet tried it, will (I think) be better then on Linen, and make the color
appear more bright and vivid by its reflection, since which I have (...) it on
white Sarsnet, and find it so.

The Letter, Figures, or what else shall be made on the Linen or Silk (as much
forced in, as it can be by the pencil) will presently appear of a pleasant
light green color; and if placed in the Sun, will change into the following
colors, i. e. if in Winter, about noon, if in the Summer, an hour or two after
Sun rising, and so much before setting, for in the heat of the day, in Summer,
the colors will come on so fast, that the succession of each, will scarce be
distinguished; next to the first light green, it will appear of a deep green;
and in few minutes change into a full and very fair Sea green; after which in a
few minutes more, it will alter into a Watchet blew; from that, in a little
time more, it will be of a Purplish red: after which, lying about an hour or
two, (supposing the Sun still shining) it will be of a very deep Purple red,
beyond which the Sun can do no more.

Note, that these changes are made faster or slower, according to the degrees
of the Suns heat.

But then the last and most beautiful color, (after washing in scalding water
and soap) will (the Matter being again put out into the Sun or wind to dry) be
much a differing color from all those mentioned, i. e. of a fair bright
Crimson, or near to the Princes Color; which afterward, notwithstanding there
is no use of any Stiptic to bind the color, will continue the same, if well
ordered; as I have found in handkercheifs, that have been washed more than 40
times; only it will be somewhat allayed from what it was after the first
washing. I made large Letters on so many clothes, as there are distinct
colors, to put them into a Book, which kept them from the Air; I have several
months after, showed the various colors distinct, as aforesaid; yet by often
opening the Book, and so exposing them to the Air, all the colors, excepting
the two last (I mean before washing either) will fade; but all the colors,
being washed, will be one and the same. While the Cloth so writ upon, lies in
the Sun, it will yield a very strong fetid smell; (which diverse who have smelt
it could not endure) as if Garlic and Assa-faetida were mixed together; which I
proved but few days before I wrote this, though it had been at least twelve
months, kept in a Book; which before it was laid in the Sun, had very little of
that smell. I have farther observed, that the cloth dried and washed soon after
it is wrote on, will appear fresher and brighter, then after being kept in a
Book; as I found by some I newly caused to be washed, after they had been 14
months so kept.

The Shells are of diverse colors, but the most part of them white; some are
red, when newly taken off the Rocks; some yellow; others of both those colors;
some a blackish brown; many a Sandy color; and some few striped with white and
brown parallel lines: I have herewith sent you most of the colors, with one of
the largest I have found, and one of the least, with several of the middle
sized. vid. the Figures, (...)

The first linen Clothes marked with Letters and Names, I sent to Dr. Plot in
Nov. 1684, being then one of the Secretaries to the Royal Society in London, to
whom he communicating my Letter containing my first Observations, and also
showing the Linen so marked (at the same time) advised me that it was so
acceptable to them, that they were pleased to order him to return me their
thanks; and that they had appointed some Gent. to wait on His late Majesty with
them; who (with diverse Persons of Honor to whom they were shown) was much
pleased with the sight, and relation of the discovery, as new to him. After
which I was desired to send up some Shells with the Fishes alive in them; which
could not be done any other way, then by sending them in some Ship bound for
London, in an open Earthen Pan; renewing the Seawater every day: after which
manner I have kept them near a fortnight, and longer I might, had I not made
use of them; for it seems to be a kind of Amphibious Animal, alternately living
in both Elements every Tide. Being out of their native place, and in want of
such Vicissitudes, they take this course to find the Air; when any of them are
put into a Vessel of Seawater, (for in fresh they soon expire) after they have
lain some time on the bottom of the Vessel, they creep up to the superficies of
the water, and by extending a kind of Lipp, with their Operculum's cling to the
side of the Vessel or Pan, (which is most convenient for their ascent,) with
about half that part above the water, sometimes creeping down under it, and
returning again to their station, between Wind and Water. This I designed to
accomplish, and was contriving this way to gratify their desires; to the end
His Majesty the great Patron and Founder of their Society, might have the
pleasing diversion of seeing the Experiment made in His Royal Presence; but a
stop was put to this design by a Calamity, too great and public to be
mentioned.

There are other imperfect observations, which I have made of this our
Purple-Fish; which I may in some time give you a better account of, viz. 1. At
what Age of the Moon, and time of the Tides ( i. e. Spring or Neap) their Veins
are fullest, and give the best Tincture. For I have found a difference, they
being sometimes fuller and whiter, and the juice more viscid; at other times
more flaccid and watery.

2. Whether they are in greater perfection in Summer or Winter; having not, as
I expected, received any of them this last Summer, to make that Experiment, by
reason of our Western Troubles in the Duke of Monmouth's Invasion. Such as are
inclined to these Inquiries, and have more liberty from business then I have,
may make farther improvements of it, in the preparations of it by Urine, Salt,
etc. mentioned by Pliny and other Authors. And although the Shells are small, yet
their abundance on some of our Shoars, may yield matter enough, (with the more
pains) to die a quantity of fine Wool, or Silk, so as to render the discovery
some way useful, and to answer the vulgar objection of cui bono, made by such
persons, who own no good but what relates to the Body. I am of opinion there
may be found on our marine Coasts, some bigger Shells, which may have a
coloring juice, though not the same with this, for that I know few Natural
things both of Animals and Vegitables, but what have diverse Species of the same
kind, sometimes in the same place. This may be a sufficient intimation to all
Ingenious persons living near the Sea, to employ some time to find this out.

My purpose was, with this discourse to have drawn and sent you Figures of
these Shells, with the Fish pulled out and extended beyond the Vein, together
with their Operculums; to which end I sent lately for some of them, but they
being not yet come (to satisfy the desires of some Gent. of the Society) I have
sent it now, (in that particular) not so perfect as I could wish. As for the
qualities of this Fish, I can yet say but little, only I was assured, by some
who had boiled, dressed, and eaten of them, that they are wholesome food; as good
at least, and taste as well as Lympots or Winkles, only the flesh something
harder.

For what Use Nature has designed this Vein of coloring juice unto the
Animal, will be difficult to find out; perhaps it may be the spermatick and
prolifick Matter, by which they propagate their kind; which I am inclinable to
think, from its consistence, virulent and faetid savor. A Microscope (which I
had not then by me) might have given some light in this Matter, and confirmed
it, if those Animalcula are to be found in it, which are in the Masculine Sperm
of Fish, and other living Creatures (as some affirm from the many late
Experiments they have made.) Or else it may be a Humor in this Animal, which by
its Vital Energie, as the spring of life and motion, supplies the want of
heart, liver, blood, etc. as in other exanguinious Animals. Those who seek
after them may find, as I have done, some of those Purple Shells, in which are
the Cancelli, or rather Astaci, (unto which they are more like,) and so may
mistake; for those little Craw-fishes, I have found in most of our
English-Shells, excepting the bivalved, and Patella's; of which in many parts,
especially in the West Indies, there are many sorts, and some very large; which
our Countrymen there call Soldiers; for that they say, they enter by force,
kill, and take possession of those Houses they have not built; and when they
grow too big, forsake them and enter into larger: Whether that be true I know
not: This I have found, when I have broken some of the Shells in which those
Vagrants are, so as not to bruise their Bodies, and then put them naked into
the water, I have beheld them with nimble springing Motion, to run to and fro,
till they find a Stone to hide themselves under; which not finding, they bury
themselves in loose sand: and this observation gave me full satisfaction, that
they were not (at least all the kinds) connate and coalescent with their
Shells, as other testaceous Animals of the Sea and Land are; but this being
besides my purpose, I return to the Purpura.

There is no doubt, but that it is a Species of that kind; of which there are
many sorts, differing in bigness, structure, color of the Shell, according to
the nature of the Sea-Grounds, depth or shallowness of water, Rocks, Gravel,
Mud, as also the Latitude where they are found; and so differing also in the
varieties of colors of the tinging juice in their Veins, as black, livid,
violaceous, deep Seagreen, light and deep red, Amethystine, etc. As the
Histories of this Animal do mention. But the best of all were found in the
Tyrian Seas, near that Island, on which the renowned City of Tire was built,
now an inconsiderable Town called Sur; this was celebrated, and prised above
all the rest, for that it excelled them all in its illustrious color, called
in former Ages by diverse Names, as Ostrum Sarranum, Pelagium, Venenum Tyrium,
Purpurissum, Flores Tyriani, etc. Almost all Authors agree, that it lies in a
certain Vein in the Fish, and some of them mention it to be white and viscous,
as this of ours is. It were to little purpose to give the History at large of
all the Purpurae; and when and how first discovered to Phoenix the Son of
Agenor, the second King of the Phoenicians, by means of a Shepherds Dog
devouring one of the Fishes, and coloring his lips with that excellent dye: By
which its Antiquity appears. In succeeding Ages it received improvements, to
the time of Pliny, in whose days (being in the Reign of the Vespasians) it
seems to have arrived at its highest perfection; of which he has made more
particular Observations than I can find in other Authors; for which he had
great opportunity, living in the Imperial City of the World, where the Artists
in Preparations of that Tinging Succus, for dying the Robes and other Vestments
of the Emperors, Senators etc. strove to excel each other in new fashioned
Purples for their own gain, and (...) to gratify the luxuriant excess of the
Great Ones of those times, by preparing and mixing the color (found in the
several sorts of Shells, as aforesaid.) This color sold then at great Prises;
that which was fine double dyed Purple of Tire, called Dibapha, yielded 1000
Roman Denarii the pound, which is computed to be more than Thirty Pounds
Sterling: and this of ours being so excellent a color, without other
preparation or addition of any thing to it, may now, or at least hereafter (by
farther improvement) vye with the Tyrian Purple. Iohnston out of Aristotle,
mentions a Species of these Fishes, under the Name of Littorales quae parvae
and flore sunt rubro; this agrees with ours, which may be named Purpura
littoralis (sive Teniensis) parva turbinata.

Since the importunity of some Friends hastened this Discourse sooner than I
intended (and so prevented those farther Experiments, which I might have made
this next Summer) persuming on your favorable acceptance, and excusing the
imperfections of it, which could not be so well digested (in the Method of it)
as it might have been, were I not engaged in a public Employment, which
requires my daily Attendance; I have therefore now presented you with it as it
is: And if I find it grateful to you, and to such others, as shall happen to
read it, I shall be encouraged to impart many other things, which I este^m no
less considerable than this; to the end that the stupendous Works of Nature,
or rather of the God of Nature (in which are clearly seen his infinite Wisdom,
Power, and Goodness) may by us, as his Instruments, be celebrated for his
Glory: In whose Service I am one of the least of your (...).

WILLIAM COLE.

A TABLE of Troy-weight.
32 Grains of Wheat make 24 Artificial Grains. gr.
24 Grains make 1 Penny Weight. p. w.
20 Penny Weight make 1 Ounce. oun.
12 Ounces make 1 Pound. lb.

A TABLE of Aver du pois Weight.
4 Quarters make 1 Dram. 16 Drams make 1 Ounce. 16 Ounces make 1 Pound. 28
Pounds make 1 Quarter of a hundred of 112 pounds. 20 Hundred make 1 Tun.
A TABLE of Liquid Measure.
1 Pound of Wheat Troy weight make 1 Pint. 2 Pints make 1 Quart. 2 Quarts make
1 Pottle. 2 Pottles make 1 Gallon. 8 Gallons make 1 Firkin of Ale, Soap,
Herrings. 9 Gallons make 1 Firkin of Beer. 10 Gallons and a half make 1 Firkin
of Salmon or Eels. 2 Firkins make 1 Kilderkin. 2 Kilderkins make 1 Barrel. 42
Gallons make 1 Tierce of Wine. 63 Gallons make 1 Hogshead. 2 Hogsheads make 1
Pipe or But. 2 Pipes make 1 Tun of Wine.
A TABLE of Dry Measure.
2 Pints make 1 Quart. 2 Quarts make 1 Pottle. 2 Pottles make 1 Gallon. 2
Gallons make 1 Peck. 4 Pecks make 1 Bushel Land-measure. 5 Pecks make 1 Bushel
Water-measure. 8 Bushels make 1 Quarter. 4 Quarters make 1 Chalder. 5 Quarters
make 1 Way.
A TABLE of Long Measure.
3 Barley Corns in length make 1 Inch. 12 Inches make 1 Foot. 3 Foot make 1
Yard. 3 Foot nine Inches make 1 Ell. 6 Foot make 1 Fathom. 5 Y^rds and a half
make 1 Pole, or Perch. 40 Poles make 1 Furlong. 8 Furlongs make 1 English Mile.
A TABLE of Time.
60 Minutes make 1 Hour. 24 Hours make 1 Day Natural. 7 Days make 1 Week. 4
Weeks make 1 Month of twenty eight days. 13 Months 1 day and 6 hours make 1
Year very near.

