THE Old Apostolical Way OF PREACHING, OR, Peter's last Legacy to all his true
Successors in the Ministry and Faith of the Gospel.

BEING An awakening Word from a Dying-Preacher to his Dying-Hearers. IN A
SERMON Preached on the Death of Mr. EDWARD WEST, Late Minister of the Gospel in
London.

BY THOMAS COLE, Preacher of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cockeril, at the Atlas in Cornhil, 1676.

THE OLD Apostolic Way of Preaching.
2 Pet. 1.12, 13, 14, 15. Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always
in remembrance of these things, though you know them, and be established in the
present Truth. Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to
stir you up, by putting you in remembrance: Knowing that shortly I must put off
this my Tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed me. Moreover, I
will endeavor that you may be able after my Decease, to have these things
always in remembrance.
I Do not so much intend a Funeral Elegy for the Dead, as a plain Practical
Sermon for the Living. Eccles. 9.5.
The Dead know not any thing, neither are they any more concerned in the things
that are done under the Sun. Yet we may draw Arguments from their Graves, to
quicken us to our Duty. It Is evident that this great Apostle had Death in his
eye, when he wrote these words; whether those to whom he wrote were under the
like consideration of their own Mortality, is uncertain. Peter being so
solicitous here to put them in remembrance, seems tacitly to charge them, with
a careless, negligent, forgetful frame of Spirit; and those who do not bear in
their minds the great Truths of the Gospel, that show the Consequents of Death,
and so make it weighty and considerable in our Thoughts, can never seriously
prepare for it. He tells them he is but a Sojourner amongst them, in a Tent and
Tabernacle, intimating that they themselves dwelt under as thin a Roof, that
might suddenly let in Death upon them, which he foresaw was not far off from
himself; this stirred him up to a more diligent and vigorous performance of his
Duty. He is very desirous to finish and perfect his Work before the Night comes
upon him, that he might not Run in vain, nor Labor in vain, but thoroughly fix
those Truths upon the Hearts and Consciences of his People, which he had
Preached to them, that they might Remember them when he was Dead and gone. The
Text is, An awakening Word from a Dying Preacher, to his Dying Hearers. I know
I am engaged in a Funeral Sermon, but it is upon the Death of a Minister, and
to a Congregation, who by this sad Providence, are called to the Choice of a
new Preacher: And therefore, if in the former part of my Discourse, I say
something of the Nature of Preaching of the old Apostolic Way, which God did
so wonderfully own in the Primitive Times, and unto which we must certainly
return, before we can expect the like Success in our Ministry. I hope if I do
insist a little upon this, you will not judge it wide of the Occasion, or
altogether unseasonable: -- But if any do, let them know that the Circumstance
of the season, must give place and yield a little to the Substance of the Text,
which by and by will suit that also. Therefore I must crave a little time to
show you the general Scope and Design of the Apostle in these words, afterward
I shall more particularly speak to the 15th verse, which will bring me nearer
to the present Occasion. -- And because many particulars in a Sermon do usually
run out into new matter, carrying the Speaker sometimes both beyond the Text
and his own Intentions: to avoid this I shall cast my whole Discourse into this
Method, and couch all I have to say under these two General Heads, which I will
insist upon.

1. The Old Apostolic way of Preaching that was so much upon the Heart of
Peter just before his Death.

2. His last Legacy to all his true Successors in the Ministry and Faith of the
Gospel.

The shortness of Time both to prepare and deliver what I have now to say, must
excuse that want of Method and Exactness that sudden Things are usually
defective in. I begin with the first, (viz.)

The old Apostolic way of preaching, in laying down the plain Fundamental
Truths of the Gospel, proving them by Scripture, and frequently minding the
People of them by way of Remembrance: this was Christ's Method, Luke 24.27, 44,
45. It Is the Method of the Holy Ghost to bring things to our Remembrance; and
for this very end was the Holy Spirit promised to the Church, John 14.26. But
the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name,
he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you. 'Twas John's Method, 1 John 2.21. I have not
written unto you, because you know not the Truth: I but because you know it,
and that no lie is of the Truth. I must tell you what you know already, that is
the way to know more: 'twas Paul's Method, Phil. 3.1. To write the same things
to you, to me indeed is not grievous, but for you it is safe. 'Twas that he
advises Timothy to, 1 Timothy 4.6, 7. If thou put the Brethren in Remembrance of
these things, thou shall be a good Minister of Jesus Christ, nourished up in
the words of Faith, and of good Doctrine, whereunto thou have attained. But
refuse profane and old Wives Fables, and exercise thy self rather unto
Godliness. 2 Timothy 2.14, 15, 16. Of these things put them in Remembrance,
charging them before the Lord, that they strive not about words to no profit,
but to the subverting of the Hearers. Study to show thy self approved unto God,
a Workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth.
But shun profane and vain Bablings, for they will increase unto more
ungodliness. 'Twas the desire of those Gentiles, which Paul and Barnabas
complied with, with very great Success, Acts 13.42. to hear the same words
preached to them the next Sabbath. 'Twas Peter's design in his Epistles, 2 Pet.
3.1, 2. This second Epistle, Beloved, I now write unto you, in both which I
stir up your pure Minds by way of Remembrance; That ye may be mindful of the
words which were spoken before by the Holy Prophets, and of the Commandment of
us the Apostles of the Lord and Savior. As appears, also in the words of the
Text. The first Sermon that was preached after the coming down of the Holy
Ghost upon the Apostles was by Peter, Act. 2. And three thousand Souls were
converted by it, to show the mighty Efficacy of the Spirit of God, and the
power of a plain Gospel-Sermon; for it was no other, but a plain Narration of
those Things that concern the Power and Coming of Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 1.16.
For we have not followed cunningly devised Fables, when we made known unto you
the Power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his
Majesty. The Effect of this Sermon made deep Impression upon Peter, he was
greatly affected with it, he never forgot it to his dying-day; and being now
going out of the World, he would fain preach over that Sermon again, putting
them in Remembrance again and again, he mentions it thrice over, Verse. 12, 13,
15, q. d. Remember, Remember, Remember the things that I have told you
concerning the Power and Coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and for
all humane Inventions, and cunningly devised Fables, and Stories of I know not
what, that Men may tell you in the Pulpit, to set out themselves and their own
Parts and Learning, away with them. If ever you be Converted it must be from
that Testimony the Spirit gives in your Hearts to those Fundamental Truths of
the Gospel concerning Jesus Christ, and hence does certainly arise the
Conversion of all the Sinners that are ever brought home to Christ. You may
think that the Doctrine of the miserable state of Man by Nature, of the only
way of Redemption by Christ, the Doctrine of Faith, Repentance, and Selfdenyal,
are all of them but common things, which you have heard over again and again,
and are cloyed with the very sound of them; I say these and such like Truths
are the only converting Truths, and we must hold Men to them, till God does
work by them upon their Hearts: they are indeed easy Words, but they are hard
things to receive and practice. When God brings our Souls under the Power of
these Truths, Psalm. 199.129.
how wonderful are they then? how full of matter? those who are Converted do
admire those Truths most which before they looked upon as common and ordinary;
but now they think they can never hear too much of the way of believing in
Christ, and laying hold upon him as their Righteousness and life: these Truths
do find them work enough now, though before they were unconcerned in them, and
these are the things which we must insist upon. You see the old Apostolic way
of Preaching was in all plainness and simplicity to propound Gospel Truths in
the name of God to the People, and to Commend them to their belief upon the
bear Credit of Divine Testimony, till Faith came by Hearing; they knew the Word
had all its weight from that stamp of Divine Authority that is upon it, and
from the Efficacy of the Spirit accompanying it to the Hearts of Believers:
these things they often inculcated, and kept in their Remembrance, telling them
what was to be done upon the belief of such Principles, and this was the
Application they made, and here is scope enough for Exhortation to the People:
but now adays too too many do lay aside their best Argument, which is to
ground the Truth of the written Word upon Divine Testimony, and the whole
efficacy of the Word Preached upon the promises of a Divine Concurrence, which
God has made to this Ordinance; here lies the Strength and Virtue of this
Ordinance, it would signify nothing without this; Go (says Christ) teach all
Nations; Lo I am with you always even unto the end of the World. Mat. 28.19, 20.
We that are Ministers should take this promise up into our Pulpits every time
we preach, and leave the whole matter with God, who works as he pleases by our
Ministry; but instead of this, Men take up these Weapons of our
Spiritual-Warfare, 2 Cor. 10.4.
[ Which are mighty only through God] into the Hand of Carnal Reason, and think
to set a further Edge upon them that way. What has Man to do to give his
reasons of Gospel-Mysteries, since there is no other way of knowing them, but
by believing, comparing Scripture with Scripture, till we are satisfied that
Things are so set down in the Bible, as they are reported to us out of the
Pulpit? Act. 17.11.

Naked Truth is far more venerable in its own Simplicity than in that
Artificial Dress which the Self-admirers of this Age, to please themselves and
to delude and amuse others, have put upon the Back of abused Truth, that
labors greatly, even almost under a total Eclipse, by the Interposition of
such gross terrene matter between the Heavenly Light of the Gospel and this
sinful World, upon whom this Sun is risen, and would shine out in more
Brightness, were these Clouds and Mists, the empty Vapors of a human Brain,
more thoroughly scattered. The further we go in our own reasonings about
Spiritual Things, the less we discern them; it is not in our own Light, but in
his that we see Light; yet how do many please themselves with a mere humane
Knowledge of Divine Things? disputing all things, rather than believing any
thing, heaping up Distinctions and Terms of Art, and all by way of Explication;
as if the Subtilties of Logic and Metaphysics were of the essence of saving
Faith, and that a proficiency even to the Highest Form in the Schools of humane
Literature, were as absolutely necessary to make a Christian, as a Divine,
though something else is required to both. Thus they would engross all Religion
to the Gown, leaving nothing to those of a lower capacity but a blind implicit
Faith; as if Gospel-Principles were unintelligible to all but Scholars, when
God who causes the foolish Things of this World to confound the wise, has
declared to the Contrary.

Logic alone may speak Natural Reason, but seldom good Divinity: Therefore
after all Disputes about the Polemical part of Divinity, give me the sincere
unlearned Man's Religion, who has no more in his Head, than he has in his
Heart; whose Reason does not outrun his Faith and Experience; he lives in what
he believes, and knows more of the Nature of Faith by one Act of Faith, than
others do by reading of an hundred Books, and Discourses of Men about it: A
downright plain-hearted Christian who has but one Notion of things, (I mean
of any one Truth) but that is a right one, he keeps to it without any variation
in his Conceptions about it, and walks evenly and uprightly with God all his
days according to his Light: What a great place in Heaven will such a one have,
who is faithful over a little, and is what he is by the Grace of God? Whereas
others of larger Heads, abounding too much in their own sense, keep not their
Hearts so close to the plain Fundamentals of the Gospel, their Reason out-runs
their Faith, and insensibly winds them off from the power of the Gospel, into
many Labyrinths of Error, or at least into empty airy Speculations: Thus losing
themselves in their own thoughts, they become vain in their Imaginations; and
framing some curious Notions in their Heads, they presently grow fond of them,
and must find some place in Religion for them. They go back to their Faith, to
justify their Reason in its late rare Inventions, and if that cannot be,
rather than fail, they will offer Violence to their first received Principles,
and shape the very Fundamentals of the Gospel to a subserviency to their own
Notions, that they may have somewhat to ground their new devised Superstruction
upon.

I am persuaded many Unorthodox Antivangelical Opinions have had their Rise
from hence: Some Men are run down by their own Reason, and see it not, their
proud Rebellious Thoughts not being yet brought into Captivity to the Obedience
of Christ.

I might enlarge upon this, and show you that most of the Errors that are Crept
into the Church, were bred in the Schools, and have been the cursed Offspring
of unsanctified Natural Abilities: It Is time then to return to the Simplicity
of the Gospel, and to begin the Bible again, that we may take in the sincere
Milk of the Word, without any Humane mixtures, drawing pure Streams from the
Fountain of Truth; and keeping up a constant Remembrance, especially of the
prime grand Truths of the Gospel, from whence we must derive our Life,
Strength, and Comfort, in an evil Day of Terror and Darkness, we must return
then to plain Gospel-Principles: It Is not School-Subtilties and Nice-Reasonings
that will relieve us, but downright Faith. -- Christians could never Die in
peace, if they had not next their Hearts some plain comfortable Word to rely
upon; as that Christ Died for Sinners, to Reconcile us to God by his Blood,
that through Faith in Him we might be Justified and Sanctified.

You Will say, We have all this in our Catechisms, we learned it when we were
Children: Well* we must go back to our Catechisms again; here lies all our
Salvation, therefore Meditate upon these things and Remember them: Do not think
you can be too often minded of them, they are Truths you must live upon all
your days, and be continually feeding upon. It Is not doubtful Disputations, but
clear undeniable Gospel-Maximes, that a trembling Soul flies to and argues
from. --

Therefore I say again, That Preaching does not consist so much in variety of
Notion, as in a plain Proposal and powerful Application of those things that
are Revealed in Scripture. Gospel Truths do not work upon us by the Strength of
Man's Reason, but by a secret Divine Virtue going along with them, they become
the Power of God unto Salvation. Ministers are to Publish the Contents of the
Bible, and so to open the Scriptures, that their Hearers may attain to a true
Historical Knowledge of what is there written; which Saving-Faith does always
presuppose, and include. This is that Preaching by which God does Insensibly
and Secretly turn the Hearts of his Elect: As many as were ordained to Eternal
Life, believed, Acts 13.48.

It Is not said as many as were Learned Men, skilled in Arts and Sciences, of
good Natural Parts, and quick Apprehensions: -- But as many as were Ordained,
etc. Though never so Unlearned, of never such mean and ordinary Capacities; yet
such by the Power of the Gospel plainly preached, are made wise unto Salvation,
God working Faith in them; which implies the Knowledge of all things necessary
to Salvation. The Spirit of God supplies all the Defects in Nature, and brings
a new Nature along with it, sufficiently furnished for all the Works and
Actions that are proper and peculiar to the New Creature; and all Men are in an
equal natural Capacity for this Change, I mean passively capable of it.

When God takes this Clay into his Hands, he can form what Vessels of Honor he
pleases out of it; none can foresee the Way, Manner, and Method of the Word and
Spirit of God in working Faith in us: Some sit long under the Word and are not
stirred, yet it is good to keep our Hearts under the Historical Light and
Knowledge of the Gospel, hearing in a daily Expectation of the coming of Faith,
subjecting our selves to God's Ordinance, waiting for the Effects of it, often
revolving and considering in our Minds what we have heard: To Remember, is to
look back upon former things, to Chew the Cud, going over in our Thoughts again
and again what we have been Taught; but some have such Itchin Ears, they are
all for Novelties, something that they knew not and have not heard before, some
fine-spun Notion that may buz a while in the Head, though it never reach the
Heart; it is but as the tinkling of a Cymbal, a mere transient Apparition that
vanishes away with its own sound; yet these are the Rarities that many look
after, they can relish nothing else: when they are put in remembrance of former
things, they are so far from being pleased that they nausiate the thoughts of
hearing over again what they knew before, they put up their Pen and Ink, shut
their Books, and stop their Ears, are quite taken off from any due Attention,
they carry as if they had long since done with all plain downright
Gospel Truths, they have nothing to say to them now: Ay but they may have
something to say to you that they never told you yet; God may let them down
further into your souls, and cause them to make deeper impressions upon your
Hearts than ever heretofore.

2. I now come to speak of the 15th verse: I shall still prosecute the same
Point, but in a nearer Relation to the present Occasion than has been yet done.

I call this Peter's last Legacy to all his true Successors in the Ministry and
Faith of the Gospel. I don't see any mention here, or any where else in
Scripture, of that large Patrimony which the Sea of Rome lays claim to by an
Hereditary Right from Peter: If you read over his Inventory here, you will find no
Triple-Crown or Miter, no Cross-Keys, no Roquet, Camad and Cloth, no Slippers
and Pantofles, or any such Pontifical Habiliments which are now reckoned among
the Regalia of their Spiritual Monarchy: But what does Peter bequeath us? for
the words have vim Testimenti (Calv.) they are in the nature of a Testament or
last Will, in which he commends to us after his decease, the frequent
Consideration and Remembrance of those plain solid Fundamental Truths contained
in the Scriptures; by which is made known unto us the Power and Coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ; Peter himself being an Eyewitness of his Majesty when he
was with him upon the holy Mount. But his pretended Successor at Rome, thinking
there is not variety enough in Religion, as it is drawn up and stated by Christ;
therefore the better to entertain the Fancies of Men in an outward sensitive
way of Worship, has made a supplemental addition of his own, teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men, obtruding upon us cunningly devised Fables,
quite contrary to the express Mind of Peter, ver. 16. What this Apostle gives
us in charge is plainly this:

Observe. That it it the Duty of all Congregations, all Hearers, who outlive
their Ministers, to keep in Remembrance those precious Truths which they
formerly heard from them. Let me press this upon you of this Congregation, the
Text looks directly upon you, and therefore fail not to come up to the Duty
that is here required: And now after the Decease of your Minister, keep those
Truths fresh in your Memories, and warm upon your Hearts, which he Delivered to
you in his Lifetime.

Let me urge this upon you from these following Considerations.

1. You lie under a very great Obligation to God and Conscience, to live up to
what you have heard; the Word heard, neglected, and forgotten, has a dreadful
Influence upon us many times; Prove. 1.24. to the end of that Chapter; so Romans
10.18, 21. Have they not heard? Yes verily; which was a great Aggravation of
their Disobedience. If it should be so with any of you, Let me tell you, there
is a Witness now gone to Heaven against you, to testify at the last Day before
God, Angels, and Men, what Truths he Preached unto you, and earnestly pressed
upon you. God takes notice what Means, what Ministers, what Messengers have
been sent to every Congregation; How early, how often, how many, All my
Servants the Prophets, Jer. 7.25, 26, 27, 28. rising up early, and sending
them, q. d. I did nothing else for a long time, from Morning to Evening, but
send unto this People: What could I have done more that I have not done? let
them speak; let any judge between me and my Vineyard; I appeal to Heaven and
Earth; I Will refer my self to the whole World; therefore God styles them the
Generation of his Wrath, rejected and forsaken of the Lord, Ver. 29. It Is a
dangerous thing to have Sermons by you, that are not to be found in your Hearts
and Lives; it signifies little to have them in your Books: How inexcusable will
they be, who go to Hell with Directions to Heaven in their Hands, and will not
vouchsafe to Read them? May not God say, I told you which was the Way, you took
it from the Mouth of your Minister, and noted it down, I have it under your
hands to show?

2. The oftener you draw any Gospel Truth through your Hearts, by calling it
into your Remembrance, the deeper impression it makes; it seeds in the Heart,
and leaves a fresh fructifying Virtue behind it upon the Soul: you will find
something new in every old Truth you take up into your Thoughts, if not in
Notion, yet in Power, which is the best of all; fresh mixtures of Faith make
the same words exceeding profitable to us every day; Faith is never cloyed with
the Word, but finds it sweeter and sweeter still; Faith comes at one time to a
Promise, that it might know the way the better the next time; Faith has never
done with the Word in this World, but has more and more business, every day
with the same Promise, with the same Word; It Is hid in the Heart, Psalm. 119.11.
It dwells there; it is never out, a constant In-mate.

3. The Word is eternal; all Flesh is Grass; the Fathers, where are they? and
Prophets, do they live for ever? Zach. 1.5. The Prophets may die, but their
Prophesies live. The Word of our God shall stand for ever, Isa. 40.8. It Is
still in force, it is of eternal concernment.

4. It Is the greatest Honor you can do to the name and memory of your worthy
deceased Minister, to keep his Sermons alive upon your Hearts; (...) you keep
life in them, and they will keep life in you* as the Word quickneth Faith, so
Faith quickens the Word, joining the Spirit and the Letter together: God has
taken him away, you have all of him, and from him, that ever you are like to
have in this World; make much of those precious Remains; he is now silent in
the Grave, never to be seen, or heard more in the Land of the living, till he
stand in his Lot at the end of days; but if you keep in mind the Instructions
he formerly gave you, though he be dead, he yet speaks, and you may yet hear
him: The Sermons you so remember, and think upon, you are as it were
continually hearing, they are well pleasing to God, very profitable to your own
Souls, and the greatest Argument imaginable of your high esteem of, and sincere
love to that Faithful Shepherd of this Flock, whom God has now smitten and
taken from you: This is more than to build Sepulchers, and adorn the Tombs of
the Prophets; you will erect for him an everlasting Monument in your Hearts, by
holding forth the Seal of his effectual Ministry among you. When you can say
the Word of God that came by the Mouth of such a one, now in his Grave, was to
me a Saving Word, a Sanctifying Word, a Healing, Strengthening Word? What
Spices, what Perfume's so Sweet an Embalming as this? Me thinks I smell these
Spiritual Odours already, and I hope the Sent will be stronger and stronger
every day.

Let me add a Word of Advice to you of this Congregation: God has made a great
Change among you, and a Change there must be, and you will find it more and
more every day; it is one end that God aim's at in such dispensations, to vary
his Course toward you, even in the means of Grace; he does all things wisely,
he has variety of Work, and variety of Workmen; the Word reaches from top to
bottom in the Soul, and works here and there as God appoints it, who knows best
where our weakness lies; what though he lay down a sharper, and take up a
blunter Tool, be not discouraged, the nature of the Work may require this
sometimes; as God has Top-Stones to lay, so he has Foundations to examine, he
has variety of Instruments, diversely qualified, for such and such special
Services in the Church; he knows when to set on, and when to take off his
Workmen; he changes Hands, sometimes by Death, and sometimes by a providential
Removal. I am not against a fixed Ministry, yet I think a more interchangeable
Course in our Ministry sometimes, would tend much to the increase of Love and
Union among Professors, and to the mutual Edification of all; we should have a
taste of the Spirits of Men, and of the variety of Gifts, that may not be
exactly the same in any Two in the World. Some are Suns of Thunder, some of
Consolation; you may and ought to covet the best Gifts in your choice now; But
still know your Faith consists not in the Wisdom of Man, but in the Power of
God; therefore leave it by an Act of Faith to the great Shepherd of the Sheep,
to provide for you, to direct you in all your endeavors that way, and submit
after all to the Lords Disposition of this Lot, wherever it shall fall; though
you do, as I told you but now you would, find a difference between former and
future means, yet suffer the Lord, which does all the work, to make Choice of
the Workman, and then whether Paul, Apollo, or Cephas, all things are yours,
and shall be blessed to you, while you live in such a dependence upon the God of
all Grace.

You may expect I should say something of your worthy Minister, and my most
beloved Brother, and Fellow Laborer in the Gospel, who very lately stepped out
of this Pulpit into the Grave; this is not a day nor a place to speak of Man,
no not of the best of Men, further then we may gather Arguments from any
eminency in Gifts and Grace in them, to stir up our selves and others to our
duty, and upon this Account only I shall say something that may add some
further Weight and Strength to the Obligation that lies upon you, to keep those
Truths always in Remembrance that have been delivered to you by so skilful a
hand. I shall not suffer his name to slip into Oblivion without some memorable
remark upon it; I confess, what I have to say might better come from another
Mouth than mine, considering my Relation to him in his younger years: But I am
not ashamed to own, that I had some hand in Planting Fruit that was ripe before
me, and is now gathered; though this forward Increase, is, under God, to be
ascribed rather to the goodness and fertility of the Soil, than to the skill of
the Husbandman: he was one for Endowments of Mind, both as a Man, and a
Christian, far beyond his Years; he Died young, but Lived long: He was a Man
betimes, and which is more, an early Christian. He came into the Vineyard the
first hour of the Day, did his days-work by Noon, and God has given him the
Preference over us all, in taking him to Heaven before us. Therefore I say
again, see that now after his Decease you have those things always in
Remembrance which you have been taught by so able a Misnister of the New
Testament, that it may never be said, you Buried your Preacher and his Sermons
too in the same Grave.

I Had thoughts of taking more liberty in the Press than was fit for the
Pulpit, in giving the World a further Character of this Worthy person deceased;
but Considering that what I might say in his just Praise and Commendation, is
no news to them that knew him, and may seem altogether incredible to those who
knew him not, I shall spare my pains, leaving his Friends to their own Knowledge
of him* and Strangers to what enquiries they please to make concerning him,
being confident they will meet with that good report of him from the Mouths of
many, that will go beyond the testimony of my single Pen, and greatly endear
his name to Posterity,

FINIS.

