Mr. Coleman's TWO LETTERS TO Monsieur l' Chaise. THE French KING'S Confessor,
with Monsieur l' Chaise's Answer to Mr. Coleman: Which the House of Commons
desired might be Printed.

Together With the D. of Y's LETTER to the said Monsieur l' Chaise; Which
shows, what Mr. Coleman wrote to him, was by his special Command and
Appointment.

Mat. 10. 26. Luke 8. 17. Fear them not therefore; For there is nothing covered
that shall not be revealed, and hid that shall not be known and come abroad.
Psalm. 7. 14, 16. Behold he travelleth with iniquity, and has conceived
mischief, and brought forth alye; His mischief shall return upon his own head,
and his violent dealing upon his own pate, Job 5. 12. He disappointeth the
devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their Enterprise.

Printed in the Year, 1678.

THE FIRST LETTER OF Mr, Coleman's To the French Kings Confessor, MONSIEUR
LE-CHEER.
Since Father Sir German has been so kind to me as to recommend me to your
Reverence so advantagiously or to encourage you to accept my Correspondence; I
will own to him that he has done me a Favor, without consulting me, greater
than I could have been capable of, if he had advised with me, because I should
not then have had the confidence to have permitted him to ask it in my behalf;
And I am so sencible of the honor you are pleased to do me, that though I
cannot deserve it, yet at least to show the sense I have of it; I will deal as
freely and openly with you at this first time, as if I had the honor of your
Acquaintance all my life, and shall make no Apollogy for so doing, but only
tell you, I know your Character perfectly well, tho I am not so happy as to
know your Person; and that I have an opportunity of putting this Letter into
the hands of Father Sir Germans Nephew (for whose integrity and prudence he
has undertaken) without any sort of hazard.

In order then Sir, to the plainness which I promise, I will tell you what has
plainly passed between your Reverend Predecessor Father Ferriers and my self,
about three years ago, when the King, my Master, sent a Troop of his
Horse-Guards into the Most Christian Majestys Service, under the Command of my
Lord Duras: He sent with it an Officer called Sir William Frogmorton, with whom
I had a particular intimacy, and he had then very newly embraced the Catholic
Religion, and to him did I constantly write, and by him address my self to
Father Ferriers.

The first thing of great importance, which I presumed to offer to him (not to
trouble you with lesser matters of what passed here; and immediately after the
fatal Renunciation of the Kings Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, to which
we owe all our late mischiefs and hazards) was in July, August, and September,
1673. when I constantly inculcated the great danger the Catholic Religion, and
his most Christian Majesty's Interest would be in, at our next Session of
Parliament, which was then to be in October following; at which, I plainly
foresaw, that the King, my Master, would be forced to something in prejudice,
of his Alliance with France, which I saw so evidently and particularly that we
should make Peace with Holland, that I weighed all the Arguments I could (which
to me were Demonstrations) to convince your Court of that Mischief, and pressed
what I could to persuade his Christian Majesty to use his utmost force to
prevent that Sitting of our Parliament, and proposed Expedients how to do it.
But I was answered so often and so positively, that his Christian Majesty was
so well assured by his Ambassador here our Ambassador there, the Lord
Arlington, and even the King himself, that he had no such apprehensions at all,
but was fully satisfied of the contrary, and looked upon what I offered as a
very zealous mistake, that I was forced to give over arguing, tho not believing
as they did, but confidently appealed to time and success to prove, who took
their measures rightest. When it happened, that which I foresaw came to pass,
the good Father was a little surprised to see all the Great Men's mistake, and a
Little one in the Right, and was pleased by Sir William Frogmorton to desire
the Continuance of my Correspondence, which I was mighty willing to comply
with, knowing the interest of our King, and in a more particular manner, of my
more immediate Master the Duke, and his Most Christian Majesty to be so
inseperably united, that it was impossible to divide them without destroying
them all.

Upon this I showed, That our Parliament, in the Circumstances it was managed,
by the temerous Counsels of our Ministers, who then Governed, could never be
useful either to England, France, or the Catholic Religion, but that we should
as certainly be forced from our Neutrality at their next Meeting as we had been
from our active Alliance with France the last; that a Peace, in the
Circumstances we were in, was much more to be desired than the continuance of
the War, that the Desolution of our Parliament would certainly procure a Peace,
for that the Confederates did more depend upon the Power they had in our
Parliament, than upon any thing else in the World, and were more encouraged
from thence to continue the War, so that if that were Dissolved, their Measures
would be all broken, and they consequently, in a manner necessitated to a Peace.

The good Father minding this discourse some what more than the Court of France
thought fit to do my former, urged it so home to the King, that his Majesty was
pleased to give him Order to signify to his Royal Highness, my Master, that
his Majesty was fully satisfied of his Royal Highnesses good intention toward
him, and that he esteemed both their Interests but one and the same; that my
Lord Arlington and the Parliament, were both to be looked upon as very unuseful
to their Interest; and that if his Royal Highness would endeavor to Dissolve
this Parliament, his Majesty would assist him with his Power and Purse to have
such a new one as would be for their purpose. This, and a great many more
expressions of kindness and confidence Father Ferier was pleased to communicate
to Sir William Frogmorton, and commanded him to send them to his Royal
Highness, and withal to beg his Royal Highness to propose to his Most Christian
Majesty what he thought necessary for his own Concern, and the advantage of
Religion, and his Majesty would certainly do all he could to advance both or
either of them.

This Sir William Frogmorton sent to me by an Express, who left Paris, June 2,
1674. Stilo Novo.

I no sooner had it, but I communicated it to his Royal Highness, to which his
Royal Highness commanded me to Answer, as I did on the 29th. of the same Month.

That his Royal Highness was very sensible of his Most Christian Majesty's
Friendship; and that he would labor to cultivate it with all the good Offices
he was capable of doing for his Majesty: That he was fully convinced that their
Interests were one: That my Lord Arlington and the Parliament, were not only
unuseful, but very dangerous both to England and France, that therefore it was
necessary that they should do all they could to Dissolve it. And that his Royal
Highnesses opinion was, That if his Most Christian Majesty would write his
thoughts freely to the King of England upon this Subject, and make the same
offer to his Majesty of his Purse to dissolve this, which he made to his Royal
Highness to call another, he did believe it very possible for him to succeed,
with the assistance we should be able to give him here; And that if this
Parliament were dissolved there would be no great difficulty of getting a new
one, which would be more useful: The Constitution of our Parliament being such;
that a new one can never hurt the Crown, nor an old one do it good.

His Royal Highness being pleased to own those Propositions, which were but
only general, I thought it more reasonable to be more particular, and to come
close to the Point.

That if we happened to agree, we might go the faster about the Work and come to
some issue before the time were too much spent.

I said this for my Maixme, The Dissolution of our Parliament would certainly
procure a Peace. Which Proposition was granted by every body I conversed
withal, even by Monsieur Ravigny himself, with whom I took liberty of
discourting so far, but durst not say any thing of the Intelligence I had with
Father Ferriers.

Next, That a Sum of Money certain, would certainly procure a Dissolution.
This some doubted, but I am sure I never did, for I knew perfectly well, that
the King had frequent Disputes with himself at that time, whether he should
Dissolve or Continue them, and he several times declared, That the Arguments
were so strong on both sides, that he could not tell to which to incline; but
was carried at last to their Continuance by this one Argument; If I try them
once more, they may possibly give me money, If they do, I have gained my Point,
If they do not, I can dissolve them then, and be where I am now; so that I
have a possibility at least of getting money for their continuance, against
nothing on the other side. But if we could have turned this Argument and said
Sir, Their Dissolution will certainly procure you money, when you have only a
bare probability of getting any by their continuance; and have shown how far
that bare probability was from being a foundation to build any reasonable hope
upon, which I am sure his Christian Majesty was sensible enough of: And how
much 300000 l. Sterling certain (which was the sum we proposed) was better than
a bare Probability (without any reason to hope that that would ever come to
pass) of having half so much more (which was the most he designed to ask) upon
some vile dishonorable terms and a thousand other hazards, which we had great
reason to be afraid of. If, I say, we had had power to have so argued, I am
most confidently assured we could have compassed it. For Logic in our Court
built upon Money has more powerful Charms than any other sort of Reason.

But to secure his most Christian Majesty from any hazard as to this point, I
proposed that his Majesty should offer that sum upon that condition, and if the
condition were not performed, the money should never be due, if it were, and
that a Peace would certainly follow thereupon, (which no body doubted) his
Majesty would gain his end, and save all the vast expenses of the next
Campaign, by which he could not hope to better his condition, or to put himself
into more advantageous circumstances of Treating than he was then in, but might
probably be in a much worse considering the mighty oppositions he was like to
meet with and the uncertain Chances of War.

But admitting that his Majesty could maintain himself by his great strength
and conduct in as good a condition to Treat the next year, as he was then in,
which was as much as could then reasonably be hoped for, he should have saved
by this Proposal as much as all the men he must needs loose, and all the
charges he should be at in a year, could be valued to amount to more than
300000 l. Sterling, and so much more, in case his condition should decay, or it
should be worse than it was when this was made: and the condition of his Royal
Highness and the Catholic Religion here, which depends very much upon the
success of his most Christian Majesty, delivered from a great many Frights and
real Hazards.

Father Ferriers, seemed to be very sensible of the benefit which all Parties
would gain by this Proposal, but yet it was unfortunately delayed by the
unhappy and tedious sickness which kept him so long from the King in Franche
Conte, and made him so unable to wait upon his Majesty after he had returned to
Paris, but so soon as he could compass it, he was pleased to acquaint his
Majesty with it, and did write to the Duke himself, and did me the honor to
write to me also, on the 15th. of September 1674. and sent his Letters by Sir
William Frogmorton, who came express upon that Errand.

In those Letters he gave his Royal Highness fresh assurances of his most
Christian Majesty's Friendship and of his Zeal and readiness to comply with
every thing his Royal Highness had or should think fit to propose in favor of
Religion, or the business of the Money, and that he had commanded Monsieut
Ravigny, as to the latter, to treat and deal with his Royal Highness, and to
receive and observe his Orders and Directions; but desired that he might not at
all be concerned as to the former, but that his Royal Highness would cause what
Propositions he thinks fit to be made about Religion, to be offered either to
Father Ferrier, or to Monsieur Pompone.

These Letters came to us about the middle of our September, and his Royal
Highness expected daily when Monsieur Ravigny should speak to him about the
subject of that Letter, but he took no notice at all of any thing, till
September 19, the Evening before the King and the Duke went to Nevvmarket, for
a fortnight, and then only said, That he had command from his Majesty to give
his Royal Highness the most firm assurance imaginable of his Friendship, or
something to that purpose, making his royal Highness a general Complement, but
made no mention of any particular Orders relating to the subject of Father
Ferriers Letter.

The Duke wondering at this proceeding, and being obliged to stay good part of
October at Nevv-market, and soon after his coming back hearing of the death of
Father Ferrier, he gave over all further prosecuting of the former Project.

But I believe I saw Monsure Ravigny's policy all along, who was willing to
save his Masters money, upon an assurance we would do all we could, to stave
off the Parliament for our own sakes, that we would struggle as hard without
money as with it, and we having by this time upon our own Interests prevailed
to get the Parliament Prorogued till the 13th. of April, he thought that the
Prorogation being to a day so high in the Spring, would put the Confederates so
much beyond their measures, as that it might procure a Peace, and be as useful
to France as a Desolution.

Upon these Reasons, which I suppose he went upon. I had several discourses
with him, and did open my self so far to him as to say that I could wish his
Master would give us leave to offer 300000 l. to our Master for the desolution
of the Parliament, and show him that a Peace would most certainly follow a
dessolution, which he agreed with me in, and that we desired not the Money from
his Master to excite our Wills, or to make us more industrious to use our
utmost power to procure a Dissolution, but to strengthen our Power and Credit
with the King, and to render us more capable to succeed with his Majesty, as
most certainly we should have done had we been fortified with such an Argument.

To this purpose I promised Monsieur Pompone, frequently, by Sir William
Frogmorton, who returned from hence again into France, on the 16th. of
November, the day our Parliament should have set, but was Prorogueth, Monsieur,
Pompone, as I was informed by Sir William, did seem to approve the thing, but
yet had two Objections against it.

1. That the Sum we proposed was great, and could very ill be spared by his
Majesty in the Circumstances he was in.

To which we answered; That if by his expending that sum he could procure a
Dissolution of our Parliament, and thereby a Peace, which every body agreed
would necessarily follow, his most Christian Majesty would save five or ten
times a greater sum, and so be a good husband by his expense; and if we did not
procure a Dissolution, he should not be at that expense at all, for that we
desired him only to promise upon that condition, which we were contented to be
obliged to perform first.

2. The second Objection was, That the Duke did not move it, nor appear in it
himself.

To which we answered, That he did not indeed to Monsieur Pompone, because he
had found so ill an effect of the Negotiation with Father Ferrier, when it came
into Monsieur Ravignys hands, but he had concernd himself in it to Father
Ferrier.

Yet I continued to prosecute and press the Dissolution of the Parliament,
detesting all Prorogations, as only so much loss of time, and a means of
strengthening all those who depended upon it in opposition to the Crown. The
Interest of France, and the Catholic Religion, in the opinion they had taken,
that our King durst not part with his Parliament, apprehending another would be
much worse.

2. That he could not live without a Parliament, therefore they must suddenly
meet, and the longer he kept them off, the greater the necessities would grow,
and consequently their power to compel him to do what they listed would
increase accordingly; and therefore if they could but maintain themselves a
while, their day would certainly come in a short time, in which they should be
able to work their Wills.

Such discourses as these kept the Confederates and our Malcontents in heart,
and made them weather on the War in spite of all our Prorogations, and
therefore I pressed, as I have said, a Dissolution until February last, when
our Circumstances were so totally changed, that we were forced to change our
Councils too, and be as much for the Parliaments Sitting, as we were before
against it. Our Change was this.

Before that time the Lord Arlington was the only Minister in credit, who
thought himself out of all danger of a Parliament, he having been accused
before them and justified and therefore was zealous for their sitting, and to
increase his Reputation with them, and to become a perfect Favorite, he set
himself all he could to prosecute the Catholic Religion, and to oppose the
French.

To show his Zeal against the first, he revived some old dormant Orders, for
prohibiting the Roman Gatholicks to appear before the King, and put them in
Execution at his first coming into the Office of Lord Chamberlain. And to make
sure work against the second, as he thought, prevailed with the King, to give
him and the Earl of Ossery, who married two Sisters of Mine Here Odyke's, leave
to go over into Holland with the said Here, to make a Visit, as they
pretended, to their Relations, but indeed and in truth, to propose the Lady
Mary, Eldest Daughter to his Royal Highness, as a Match for the Prince of
Orange, not only without the consent, but against the good liking of his Royal
Highness; insomuch as the Lord Arlingtons Creatures were forced to excuse him
with a distinction, that the said Lady was not to be looked upon as the Dukes
Daughter, but as the Kings, and a Child of the State, and so the Dukes Consent
not to be much considered in the disposal of her, but the Interest only of
State; by this he intended to render himself the Darling of the Parliament and
Protestants, who would look on themselves as secured in their Religigion by
such an alliance, and designed further, by that means to draw us into close
Conjunction with Holand, and Enemies of Erance.

The Lord Arlington set forward upon this Errand, November the 10th. 1674, and
returned not till January 6, following. During his absence, the Lord Treasurer,
Lord Keeper, and Duke of Lauderdale were the only Ministers in any considerable
credit with the King, and who all pretended to be entirely united to the Duke,
declared loudly and with great violence against the said Lord, and his actions
in Holland, and did hope in his absence, to have totally supplanted him, and
routed him out of the Kings favor; and after that they thought they might
easily enough have dealt with the Parliament, but none of them had Courage
enough to speak against the Parliament, till they could get rid of him, for
fear they should not succeed, but that the Parliament should sit in spite of
them, and come to hear that they had used their endeavors against it, which
would have been so unpardonable a crime with our omnipotent Parliament, that no
power would have been able to have saved them from punishment.

But they finding, at his return, when they could not prevail against him by
such means and arts as they had then tried, resolved upon new Councils, which
were to outrun him in his own course, which accordingly they undertook, and
became as fierce Apostles, and as zealous for Protestant Religion, and against
Popery, as ever my Lord Arlington was before them; and in pursuance thereof,
persuaded the King to issue out those severe Orders and Proclamations against
Catholics, which came out in February last, by which they did as much as in
them lay to extirpate all Catholics, and Catholic Religion out of the Kingdom.

Which Counsels were in my opinion so detestable, being levelled (as they must
needs be) so directly against the Duke by People that he had advanced, and who
had professed so much duty and service to him, that we were put upon new
thoughts how to save his Royal Highness from the deceits and snares of them
upon whom formerly we depended, we saw well enough that their design was to
make themselves as grateful as they could to the Parliament (if they must sit)
they thinking nothing to be acceptable to them as the persecuting of Popery;
but yet they were so obnoxious to the Parliaments displeasure in general, that
they would have been very glad of any expedient to keep it off, though they
durst not engage against it openly themselves, but thought this device of
theirs might serve to that purpose, hoping that the Duke would be so alarmed at
their proceedings and by his being left by every body, that he would be much
more afraid of the Parliament than ever, and use his utmost power to prevent
its sitting, which they doubted not but he would endeavor and they were ready
enough to work underhand with him for their own sakes, not his, in order
thereunto, but durst not appear openly; And to encourage the Duke the more to
dissolve the Parliament, their Creatures used to say up and down, That these
vigorous proceedings against the Catholics was in favor of the Duke, and to
make the Dissolution of the Parliament more easy, which they knevv he
coveted, by obviating one great Objection which was commonly made against it,
which was, That if the Parliament should be Dissolved, it would be said it
was done in favor of Popery, which Clamor they prevented by the severity
which they had shevvn against it before hand.

As soon as we saw these tricks put upon us, we plainly saw what men we had to
deal with, and what we had to trust to if we were wholly at their mercy, but
yet durst not seem so dissatisfied as we really were, but rather magnified the
contrivance as advice of great cunning and skill.

All this we did purely to hold them in a belief, that we would endeavor to
dissolve the Parliament, that they might rely upon his Royal Highness, for that
which we knew they longed for, and were afraid they might do some other way, if
they discover that we were resolved we would not.

At length when we saw the Sessions secured, we declared we were for the
Parliaments meeting, as indeed we were from the moment we saw our selves used
by all the Kings Ministers at such a Rate: That we had reason to believe they
would sacrifice France, Religion, and his Royal Highness too, to their own
interests, if occasion served, and that they were led to believe that that was
the only way they had to save themselves at that time; for we saw no expedient
for to stop them in their Carreirs of Persecution, and those other destructive
Counsels, but the Parliament, which had set it self a long time, to dislike
every thing the Ministers had done and had appeared violently against Popery,
whilst the Court seemed to favor it; and therefore we were confident that the
Ministers having turned their faces, the Parliament would do so too, and still
be against them, and be as little for Persecution then, as they had been for
Popery before.

This I undertook to manage for the Duke, and for the King of Frances
Interest, and assured Monsieur Ravigny (which I am sure he will testify if
occasion served) That that Sessions should do neither of them any hurt, for
that I was sure I had power enough to prevent mischief, tho I durst not answer
for any good they should, do, because I had but very few assistants to carry on
the work, and wanted those helps which others had of making Friends.

The Dutch and Spaniard spared no pains nor expense of monys to anituate as
many as they could against France.

Our Lord Keeper, Lord Treasurer, and all the Bishops, and such as call
themselves Old Cavaleers, who were all then as one man, were not less
industrious against Popery, and had the Purse at their Girdle too, which is an
excellent Instrument to gain Friends with, and all united against the Duke, as
Patron both of France and of the Catholic Religion.

To deal with all this force we had no money, but what came from a few private
hands, and those so mean ones too, that I dare presume to say, that I spent
more my particular self out of my own Fortune, and upon my single Credit, than
the whole body of the Catholics in England besides, which was so
inconsiderable in comparison of what our Adversaries could command, and we
verily believe did bestow in making their party, that it is not worth
mentioning.

Yet, notwithstanding all this, we saw that by the help of the Nou-Conformists,
as Presbyterians, Independents, and other Sects who were as much afraid of
Persecution as our selves, and of the Enemies of the Ministers, particularly
the Treasurer, who by that time had suplanted the Earl of Arlington, and was
grown sole mannager of affairs himself, we should be able to prevent what they
designed against us, and so render the Sessions ineffectual to their ends,
though we might not be able to compass our own; which were to make some brisk
step in favor of his Royal Highness, to show the King that his Majestys
affairs in Parliament were not obstructed by reason of any aversion they had to
his Royal Highnesses person, or apprehension they had of him or his Religion,
but from Faction and Ambition in some, and from a real Dissatisfaction in
others. That we have not had such fruits and effects of those great sums of
money, which have formerly been given as they expected.

If we could have made then but one such step, the King would certainly have
restored his Royal Highness to all his Commissions, upon which he would have
been much greater than ever yet he was in his whole life, or could probably
ever have been by any other course in the World, than what he had taken, of
becoming Catholic, etc.

And we were so very near gaining this Point, that I did humbly beg his Royal
Highness to give me leave to put the Parliament upon making an Address to the
King, That his Majesty would be pleased to put the Fleet into the hands of his
Royal Highness, as the only person likely to give a good account of so
important a Charge as that was to the Kingdom; and showed his Royal Highness
such reasons to persuade him that we could carry it, that he agreed with me in
it, that he believed we could; yet others telling him how great a damage it
would be to him if he should miss in such an undertaking (which for my part I
could not then see, nor do I yet) he was prevailed upon not to venture, though
he was persuaded he could carry it.

I did communicate this design of mine to Monsieur Ravigny; who agreed with me,
that it would be the greatest advantage to his Master imaginable to have the
Dukes power and credit so advanced, as this would certainly do it, if we could
compass it: I showed him all the difficulties we were like to meet with, and
what helps we should have. But that we should want one very material one,
money, to carry on the work as we ought: And therefore, I do confess, I did
shamefully beg his Masters help, and would willingly have been content to have
been in everlasting disgrace with all the World, if I had not with the
assistance of 20000 l. sterling from him (which perhaps is not the tenth part
of what was spent on the other side) made it evident to the Duke, that he could
not have missed it.

Monsieur Ravigny used to tell me, that if he could be sure of succeeding in
that design, his Master would give a very much larger sum; but that he was not
in a condition to throw away money upon uncertainties.

I answered, That nothing of this nature can be so infallibly sure, as not to
be subject to some possibility of falling, but that I durst venture to
undertake to make it evident, that there was as great an assurance of
succeeding in it, as any Husbandman can have of a Crop in Harvest, who sowes
his Ground in its season; and yet it would be accounted a very imprndent piece
of wariness in any body to scruple the venturing so much Seed in its proper
time, because it is possible it may be totally lost, and no benefit of it in
harvest. He that minds the Winds and the Raines at that rate, shall neither Sow
nor Reap.

I take our Case to be much the same now as it was the last Session, if we
advance the Dukes Interest one step forwards, we shall put him out of the reach
of all Chances for ever; for he makes such a Figure already, that cautious men
do not care to act against him, or always without him, because they do not see
he is much overpowered by his Enemies. Yet he is not at such a pitch as to be
quite out of danger, or free from opposition, but if he could gain any
considerable new addition of power all would come over to him as the only
Center of our Government, and no body could contend with him further. Then
would Catholics be at ease, and his Most Christian Majesty's Interest secured
with us in England, beyond all apprehensions whatsoever.

In order to this, we have two great Designs to attempt this next Sessions.

First, That which we were about before, viz. To put the Parliament upon making
their humble request to the King that the Fleet may be put into his Royal
Highnesses care.

And, Secondly, To get an Act for General Liberty of Conscience.

If we carry these two, or either of them, we shall in effect do what we list
afterward. And truly we think we do not undertake these great Points very
unreasonably, for that we have good Cards for our Game; Not but that we expect
great opposition; and we have reason to beg all the assistance we can possibly
get; and therefore if his Most Christian Majesty would stand by us a little in
this Conjunction, and help us with such a sum as 20000 l sterling, which is no
great matter to venture upon such an undertaking as this, I would be content to
be sacrificed to the utmost malice of mine Enemies, if I did not succeed.

I have proposed this several times to Monsieur Ravigny, who seems always of
my opinion, and has often told me That he has writ to France on this Subject,
and has desired me to do the like; but I know not whether he will be as zealous
in this point as a Catholic would be, because our prevailing in these things
will give the greatest blow to the Protestant Religion here, that ever it
received since its Birth, which perhaps he would not be very glad to see,
especially when he believes that there is another way of doing his Majesty's
business well enough without it, which is by a Dissolution of the Parliament,
which I know he mightily depends upon, and concludes, that if that comes to be
dissolved, it will be as much as he need care for, proceeding, perhaps upon the
same manner of discourse which we did this time twelve month. But with
submission to his better judgment, I do think that our case is extremely much
altered from what it was then in relation to a Dissolution, for then the body
of our governing Ministers (all but the Earl of Arlington) were entirely united
to the Duke, and would have governed his way had they been free from all fears
and control, as they had been if the Parliament had been removed, but they
have since that time engaged in quite different Councils, and imbarqued
themselves and Interests upon other bottoms, having declared themselves against
Popery; and to dissolve the Parliament simply, and without any other step made,
will be to leave them to Govern what way they list, which we have reason to
suspect will be to the prejudice of France, and Catholics, because their late
Declarations and Actions have demonstrated to us, that they take that for the
most popular way for themselves, and the likeliest to keep them in absolute
power, whereas should the Duke get above them, after the trick they have showed
him, they are not sure he will totally forget the usuage he has had at their
hands. Therefore it imports us now to advance our Interest a little farther, by
some such project as I have named, before we Dissolve the Parliament, or else
perhaps we shall but change Masters, a Parliament for Ministers, and continue
still in the same slavery and bondage as before, but one such step as I have
proposed well made, we may safely see them Dissolved, and not fear the
Ministers, but shall be established and stand firm without any opposition. For
every body then will come over to us, and worship the rising Sun.

I have here given you the History of three years as short as I could, though I
am afraid it will seem very long and troublesome to your Reverence amongst the
multitude of affairs you are engaged in. I have also shown you the present
state of our Case, which may by Gods Providence and good Conduct be made of
such advantage to Gods Church that for my part I can scarce believe my self
awake, or the thing real, when I think of a Prince in such an Age as we live
in, converted to such a degree of Zeal and Piety, as not to regard any thing in
the World in comparison of God Almightys glory, the Salvation of his own Soul,
and the Conversion of our poor Kingdom, which has a long time been oppressed and
miserably harrassed by Heresy and Schism.

I doubt not but your Reverence will consider our Case, take it to heart, and
afford us what help you can, both with the King of Heaven, by your holy
Prayers, and with his most Christian Majesty, by that great credit which you
most justly have with him. And if ever his Majesty's Affairs or your own can
ever want the service of so inconsiderable a Creature as my self, you shall
never find any body readier to obey your Commands, or faithfuller in the
execution of them, in the best of his power, than

Your most humble, and most obedient Servant.
September 29. 1675.
THE ANSWER FROM MONSIEUR L' CHAISE to Mr. COLEMAN from PARIS, 23d. of October,
1675.
Sir,
THE Letter which you gave your self the trouble to writ to me, came to my
hands but the last night. I received it with great satisfaction, and I assure
you that its length did not make it seem tedious; I shall be glad on my part,
to assist in seconding your good Intentions, I will consider of the means to
effect it, and when I am better informed than I am as yet I will give you an
account, to that end I may hold Intelligence with you, as you did with my
Predecessor. Sir, I desire you to believe that I will never fail as to good
will, for the service of your Master, whom I honor as much as he deserves,
and that it is with great truth that I am,

Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, D. L. C.

THE SECOND LETTER OF Mr. Coleman's To the French Kings Confessor, MONSIEUR L'
CHAISE.
I Sent your Reverence a tedious Letter on our 29th. of September, to inform
you of the progress of our Affairs for these two or three last years. I have
now again the opportunity of a very sure hand to conveigh this by, I have sent
you a Cipher, because our Parliament now drawing on, I may possibly have
occasion to send, you something which You may be vvilling enough to know, and
may be necessary for us that you should, when I may want the convenience of a
Messenger. When any thing occurs of more concern than other, which may not be
fit to be trusted to a Cipher alone, I will, to make such a thing more secure,
write in Lemon, between the Lines of a Letter which shall have nothing in it
visible, but what I care not who sees, but dried by a warm fire shall discover
what is written, so that if the Letter comes to your hands, and upon drying it
any thing appears more than did before, you may be sure no body has seen it by
the way.

I will not trouble you with that way of writing but upon special occasions,
and then I will give you a hint to direct you to look for it, by concluding my
visible Letter with something of Fire or Burning, by which mark you may please
to know that there is something underneath, and how my Letter is to be used to
find it out.

We have here a mighty work upon our hands, no less than The Conversion of
three Kingdoms, and by that perhaps the subduing a pestilent Heresy, which has
domineered over part of this Northern World a long time. There was never such
hopes of Success since the Death of our Q. MARY, as now in our days, when God
has given us a PRINCE who is become (may I say by Miracle) Zealous of being the
Author and Instrument of so glorious a Work: But the opposition we are sure to
meet with, is also like to be great: So that it imports us to get all the Aid
and Assistance, For the Harvest is great and the Laborers are fevv.

That which we rely upon most, next to God Almighties Providence, and the
Fervor of my Master the Duke, is the mighty mind of his Christian Majesty,
whose generous Soul inclines him to great undertakings, which being managed by
your Reverences examplary Piety and Prudence, will certainly make him look upon
this, as most suitable to himself, and best becoming his power and thoughts; so
that I hope you will pardon me, if I be troublesome too upon this occasion, from
whom we expect the greatest help we can hope for.

I confess I think his Christian Majesty's temporal interest is so much
attracted to that of his R. H. which can never be considerable but upon the
advancement of the Catholic Religion, that his Ministers cannot give him
better Advice even in a politic sense abstracted from the Considerations of
the next world, then that of our dear Lord, To seek first the Kingdom of
Heaven, and the Rightcousness thereof, that all other things may be added.

Yet I know his most Christian Majesty has more powerful motives suggested to
him by his own Devotion, and your Reverences Zeal for Gods Glory, to engage
himself to afford us the best help he can in our present Circumstances: but we
are a little unhappy in this, That we cannot press his Majesty's present
Minister here, upon these latter Arguments, which are most strong, but only
upon the first, Monsieur Ravigny's sense and ours differing very much upon
these, though we agree perfectly upon the rest; And indeed though he be a very
able man, as to his Majesty's service, in things where Religion is not
concerned, yet I do believe it were much more happy, considering the Post he is
in, that his temper were of such a sort that we might deall clearly with him
throughout and not be forced to stop short in a discourse of consequence, and
leave the most material part out, because we know it will shake his
particular opinion, and so perhaps meet with dislike, and opposition though
never so necessary to the main concern.

I am afraid we shall find too much reason for this Complaint this next
Sessions of Parliament, for had we one here for his Christian Majesty who had
taken the whole business to heart, and who would have represented the state of
our case truly as it is, to his Master, I do not doubt but his Christian
Majstey would have engaged himself farther in the affair then at present I fear
he has done, and by his approbation have given such counsels (as have been
offered his R. H. by those fevv Catholics who have access to him and are
bent to serve him, and advance the Catholic Religion, with all their might)
more credit with his R. H. Then I fear they have found; And have assisted him
also with his purse as far as 100000. Crowns or some such sum (which to him
is very inconsiderable but would have been to them of greater use then can be
imagined) toward gaining others to help him, or at least not to oppose him,
if we had been so happy as to have had his most Christian Majesty with us to
this degree, I would have ansvvered with my life for such success this
Sessions, as would have put the interest of the Catholic. Religion in his R.
H. And his most Christian Majesty out of all danger for the time to come.

But vvanting those hopes of recommending those necessary, counsels which
have been given his Royal Highness in such a manner as to make him think them
worthy of his accepting, and fit to govern himself by, and of those
advantages, which a little money well managed would certainly have gained
us, I am afraid we shall not be much better at the end of this Session then
we are now: I pray God we do not loose ground. By my next, which shall be
ere long, I shall be able to tell your Reverence more perticularly what we
are like to expect: In the mean time I most humbly beg your holy prayers for
all our undertakings, and that you will please to honor me so far as to
esteem me, which I am, entirely and without any reserve

Sir, Most Reverend Father, Your Reverences most humble and most obedient
Servant.

A Copy of his R. H. his Letter to L' Chaise, about the time Mr. Coleman
vvrote his long Letter, 1675.
THE 2d. of June, last past, his Most Christian Majesty; offered me most
generously his Friendship, and the use of his Purse to assistance against the
designs of my Enemies and his, and protested unto me, That his Interest and
mine were so clearly linckt together, that those that opposed the one, should
be looked upon as Enemies to the other; and told me moreover his opinion of my
Lord Arlington, and the Parliament; which is, That he is of opinion that
neither the one nor the other is in his Interest or mine; and thereupon he
desired me to make such Propositions as I should think fit in this Conjuncture.

All was transacted by the means of Father Ferrier; who made use of Sir William
Frogmorton, who is an honest man and of truth, who was then at Paris, and has
held correspondence with Coleman, one of my Family, in whom I have great
confidence.

I was much satisfied to see his most Christian Majesty altogether of my
opinion, so I made him Answer the 29th. of June, by the same means he had made
use of to write to me, that is, by Coleman, who adrest himself to Father
Ferrier (by the forementioned Knight) and entirely agreed to his most Christian
Majesty, as well to what had respect to the Union of our Interests, as the
unusefulness of my Lord Arlington and the Parliament, in order to the service
of the King my Brother, and his most Christian Majesty, and that it was
necessary, to make use of our joint and utmost credits to prevent the success
of those evil designs resolved on by the Lord Arlington and the Parliament,
against his most Christian Majesty and my self; which of my side I promise
really to perform; of which, since that time, I have given reasonable good
proof.

Moreover I made some Proposals, which I thought necessary to bring to pass,
what we were obliged to undertake, assuring him that nothing could so firmly
establish our Interest with the King my Brother, as that very same offer of the
help of his Purse, by which means, I had much reason to hope I should be
enabled to persuade to the Dissolving of the Parliament, and to make void the
designs of my Lord Arlington, who works incessantly to advance the Interest of
the Prince of Orange and the Hollanders, and to lessen that of the King your
Master, notwithstanding all the Protestations he has made to this hour, to
render him service.

But as that which was proposed was at a stand by reason of the sickness of
Father Ferrier, so our Affairs succeeded not according to our Designs, only
Father Ferrier vvrote to me, the 15th. of the last Month, That he had
communicated those Propositions to his most Christian Majesty, and that they
had been very well liked of, but as they contained things that had regard to
the Catholic Religion and to the offer and use of his Purse, he gave me to
understand he did not desire I should treat with Monsieur Ravigny upon the
first, but as to the last, and had the same time acquainted me, that Monsieur
Ravigny, had order to grant me, whatsoever the conjuncture of our Affairs did
require; and have expected the effects of it to this very hour, but nothing
being done in it, and seeing on the other hand that my Lord Arlington and
several others endeavored by a thousand deceits to break the good Intelligence
which is between the King my Brother, his most Christian Majesty and my Self,
to the end they might deceive us all three, I have thought fit to advertise you
of all that is past, and desire of you your assistance and Friendship to
prevent the Roguerys of those who have no other design than to betray the
Concerns of France and England also, and who by their pretended service, are
the (...) they succeed not.

As to any thing more I refer you to Sir William Frogmorton, and Coleman, who I
have commanded to give an account of the whole state of our Affair, and of the
true condi^^^^of England, with many others, and principally my Lord Arlingtons
endeavors to represent to you quite otherwise than it is.

The two first I mentioned to you are firm to my Interest, so that you may
treat with them without any apprehension.

FINIS.
Errata. Page 1. line 6. for LE-CHEER, read L'CHAISE, and so wherever you
meet with that Name. l. (...) Sir German, r. Saint German; and so
throughout (...)


