AN ANSWER To a PAPER importing a PETITION OF THE Archbishop of CANTERBURY, AND
Six other BISHOPS, TO His Majesty, Touching their not Distributing and
Publishing THE LATE DECLARATION FOR Liberty of Conscience.

Vide, utrum Tunica filii tui sit, an non? Quam cum cognovisset pater, ait,
Tunica filii mei est, fera pessima comedit eum.
Genesis xxxvii. Ver. 32, 33. With Allowance.

London, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel; And are to be sold at his Printing House on the
Ditch-side in Blackfriars. 1688.

AN ANSWER TO A Paper importing a Petition of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Six other Bishops, to His Majesty, etc.
NOT to amuse my Reader with any Reasons or Excuse for this Undertaking, let
this suffice for both; That several Copies of this Paper, instead of
distributing His Majesty's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience having been
privately dispersed through most Counties of England, I thought it every man's
Duty, and (among the rest) mine, to undeceive them who have not the same
Brains, but more Honesty and Loyalty, than those that sent it, and bestow some
Ink upon the Tetter, that it spread no further. In order to which, and that
every man may at once see the Whole before him, and thereby come to the truer
Conclusion, I shall take my Rise from the Occasion of this Paper, and thence
proceed to the Matter of it. Now the Occasion was thus.

His Majesty finding it had been the frequent endeavors of the four last Reigns
to reduce this Kingdom to an exact Conformity in Religion, and how little the
Success had answered the Design, but rather destroyed Trade, depopulated the
Country, and discouraged Strangers; and being resolved to establish His
Government on such a Foundation as might make His Subjects happy, and unite
them to Him by Inclination as well as Duty, on the 4th of April, 1687. issued
His most Gracious Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, thereby declaring,
That He will Protect and Maintain His Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy, and all
other His Subjects of the Church of England, in the free Exercise of their
Religion, and full Enjoyment of their Possessions and Properties, as now
Established by Law, without any Molestation, etc. -- That all Execution of
Penal Laws for matters Ecclesiastical, as Nonconformity, etc. shall be, and are
thereby suspended. -- That all His Subjects have leave to Meet and Worship God
in their own way, without disturbance. -- And forasmuch as the benefit of the
Service of His Subjects is by the Law of Nature inseparably annexed to, and
inherent in His Royal Person, and that no one for the future may be under any
Discouragement or Disability, by reason of some Oaths or Tests usually
administered; That no such Oaths or Tests shall be hereafter required of them;
And that He would dispense with them, etc.

And because several Endeavors had been made, to abuse the easiness of the
People, as if He might be persuaded out of what He had so solemnly declared,
His Majesty, as well to stop the mouth of Gainsayers, as to show his Intentions
were not changed since the said 4th of April, by a second Declaration of the
27th of April last past, enforces and confirms the said former Declaration,
conjures His loving Subjects to lay aside all private Animosities and
groundless Jealousies, and to choose such Members of Parliament as may do their
part to finish what he has begun, for the Advantage of the Monarchy over which
God has placed Him, as being resolved to call a Parliament that shall meet in
November next at furthest.

This Declaration was forthwith printed, and by Order of Council required to be
distributed, published, and read in the respective Churches through the Kingdom:
And in that it was not enjoined to be read in any the Congregations thereby
permitted, what greater Evidence can there be of His Majesty's real Intentions
to the Church of England, when, however He suffered others, He owned not yet
any Established National Church but the Church of England? Upon this the
ensuing Paper was on the 18th of May following (between the hours of Nine and
Ten at night) presented to His Majesty by the Six Bishops the Subscribers.

To the King's most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of William Archbishop of Canterbury, and of diverse of the
Suffragan Bishops of the Province, now present with him, in behalf of
themselves, and others of their absent Brethren, and of the Clergy of their
respective Dioceses.
Humbly shows,
THat their great Averseness they find in themselves to the Distribution and
Publication in all their Churches of your Majesty's late Declaration for
Liberty of Conscience, proceeds neither from any want of Duty and Obedience
to your Majesty, our Holy Mother the Church of England being both in her
Principles, and constant Practices, unquestionably Loyal, and having to her
great Honor been more than once publicly acknowledged to be so by your
Majesty; nor yet from any want of due tenderness to Dissenters: In relation to
whom, they are willing to come to such a Temper, as shall be thought fit, when
that Matter shall be Considered and Settled in Parliament and Convocation. But
among many other Considerations, from this especially, because the Declaration
is founded upon such a Dispensing Power, as has been often declared Illegal, in
Parliament, and particularly in the Years 1662, 1672, and in the beginning of
your Majesty's Reign, and is a Matter of so great Moment and Consequence to the
whole Nation, both in Church and State, that your Petitioners cannot in
Prudence, Honor, and Conscience, so far make themselves Parties to it, as the
Distribution of it all over the Nation, and Reading it, even in God's House,
and in the time of his Divine Service must amount to, in common and reasonable
Construction.

your Petitioners therefore most humbly and earnestly beseech your Majesty,
that you will be Graciously pleased not to insist upon the Distribution and
Reading your Majesty's Declaration. Canterbury.
St. Asaph.
Bath and Wells.
Chichester.
Peterborough.
Ely.
Bristol.


And here also for Methods sake, and before I come to the Matter of it, I hold
it requisite that I speak somewhat to the Persons the Subscribers, and the Time
of their Presenting it.

As to the First, the Holy Scripture styles Bishops, The Angels of their
Churches; And by the Common Law of England the Archibishop of Canterbury is
Primus Par Angl. 4 Inst. 5. Idem 362.
The Bishops, Lords Ecclesiastical Secular, -- and Sit in Parliament Jure
Episcopatus, which they hold per Baroniam. -- The Statute 25 E. 3. c. 24.
(pro Clero) calls them Peers of the Realm. -- That of Queen Elizabeth, One of
the greatest States of the 8 Eliz. c. 1.
Realm. -- They have Jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical Causes, and are not bound
to obey any Mandate but 1. Inst. 134.
the King's: And by reason of all this, presumed to have a more than ordinary
Influence upon the People. Our Savior calls his Disciples, The Salt, and Light
of the World. And why? But that they should season others with their Doctrine,
and guide them by their Example, into the way of Peace. His Name is, The Prince
of Peace: His Sermon on the Mount was, The Gospel of Peace: The Blessings in
it, are to The Poor in Spirit, The Meek, The Merciful, The Peacemakers, etc.
His Life was one continued Practice of it; And his last Legacy to his
Disciples, was Peace. He gave to Caesar the things that were Caesar's; and that
Tribute, which yet was the product of an Absolute Power, he not only paid it
without disputing the Authority, but commanded it to others: And though the
Imperial Power after his Death was of the same Absoluteness, yet St. Paul says
not, the Senate had declared it Illegal, but calls it The Ordinance of God, and
enjoins Subjection to it. What the Apostles in their time were, the same ever,
and now challenge the Governors of all Churches; next, and under Kings, they
are in the stead of God to the People; and where they make a false Step, what
wonder if the unthinking People forget the Precept, and take after the Example?
They see nothing but (sub imagine lusca) by twilight, and conceive according to
the color of those Rods are cast before them; They hear a noise, but know not
whence it comes, or whether it goes, and run away the Cry, without so much as
laying a Nose to the Ground for it. What made the People set up Adoniah against
David's disposition of the Crown to Solomon? Abiathar the High Priest was in
the Head of them. What made the Nobles break the Yoke? The Prophets had
Prophesi'd falsely, the Priests applauded it with their Hands, and a foolish
People loved to have it so. Or what made the Jews who had so often acknowledged
our Savior, turn head against him, and crucify him? The Chief Priests, the
Scribes and Elders had possessed the People, that the Romans would come, and
take away their City. Thus we see what Influence Great Men have upon the
heedless Multitude; and therefore how wary ought they to be, how they give them
the least Example of Disobedience; for it is seldom seen, but where the one
Disputes, the other Cavils; and where their Leaders make but a Shrug at the
Government, the People think it high time to be Mending it: Our own Histories
are as one Example of it; or if they run narrow, Tacitus may be believed of
his, Erant in Officio, qui mallent mandata. Imperantium interpretari, quam
exequi. There were (says he) some in Power, that were more for Commenting,
than Executing the Emperor's Directions. Nor are Disputes or Excuses of less
danger; for it is a kind of shaking off the Yoke, and an Essay of Disobedience;
especially Lord Bacon's Essay of Subjection.
if in those Disputings, they which are for the Direction speak fearfully and
tenderly, and those that are against it, audaciously. And if by such means a
Fire break out in the State, 'twill want no Fuel, when it is kindled from the
Altar.

And for the Time of their Presenting it, I shall consider it as it may respect
the present Circumstances of the Kingdom, or that half scantling of time they
gave his Majesty to consider of their Excuses.

As to the former, the glut of Reformers in Edward the Sixth's time was great,
and the Qualifications so indifferent, that the Church of England has ever
since labored under it, and the same Elements that compounded her, half
destroyed her: For as the Laws, not the Doctrine, brought them first together,
they no sooner found themselves straightened in the One, than they made it up
with the Other, and Themselves somewhat in the Broils, that were otherwise
nothing in the Peace of the State. These Humors, during Her, and King James's
Reign, lay fermenting in the Body, but in his Son's broke out into a
Pestilence. The Crown sell, the Church followed it, and the most diligent
Enquirer might have sought England in her self, yet missed her; till at last it
pleased Him, whose only it is to still the raging of the Sea, to say to the
Madness of the People, Huc usque, nee ultra. His late Majesty King Charles the
Second was Restored; and so little averse were the Catholic Lords to the Church
of England, that their Votes, which otherwise might have kept them out, brought
them once more into the House of Peers: nor were they scarce warm in their
Seats, before the Act of Uniformity was passed, and driven with that Violence,
that it had like to have overturned all again. The Dissenters were not fit for
Employ, they had Money in their Purses, and the World was wide enough: The
Catholic Lords were less to be trusted, they cumber'd the Ground, and 'twas but
fit they were down: There remained nothing but to cast out the Heir, and then
the Inheritance would be the easier divided. And here also it pleased God to
appear in the Mount: He plucked him out of the deep Waters, and set him on the
Throne of his Ancestors: And as he came to the Crown through the greatest of
Difficulties, he has been preserved in it by no less a Providence. He stifled
two Serpents in the Cradle of his Empire, and in a three-years Government
conquered all Example, in His own. And now, when our troubled Waters had begun
to settle again, what need of whistling up the Winds for another Storm? When
the Wounds of the Kingdom were almost closed, what Charity was it to unbind
them too soon, or under pretense of easing the Patient, to set them bleeding
afresh? In a word, when the Brands of our late Rebellions lay smothered in
their almost forgotten Embers, what prudence was it to rake them into another
Flame? I see little of the Dove in it, and am loath to say, too much of the
Serpent.

And for that half scantling of time they gave his Majesty to consider of their
Excuses, it seems here also, that the Spirit of Direction (like Baal in the
Kings) was some way or other out of the way. The Declaration was no new thing,
it had been published the 4th of April 1687, and his Majesty had received the
general Acknowledgments of the Kingdom for it; which argued their Satisfaction
in it. The Corn was in the Ground, and now, if ever, was the time to sow Tares;
and therefore, to prevent their choking it, His Majesty the 27th of April
1688, (which was one full year, and three weeks after) enforces his first
Declaration, and commands it to be read in all Churches within Ten miles of
London, on the 20th and 27th of May, and in all other the Churches through the
Country, on the 3d and 10th of June following; time enough (one would think) to
have considered the Matter, so as to have given the King some time to have
advised. Whereas on the contrary, they make no scruple of it, till the 18th of
May, about 10 at Night, and then (the 19th being a Day appointed for Hunting)
they present the Paper before mentioned, as well knowing, that if his Majesty
had an Inclination of Countermanding his Declaration, he was so straightened in
time, that he could not do it, for it was to be read the Day after. And what
can be rationally interpreted from it, but that they had been all that while
numbering the People, to see whither the Party were strong enough? And I am the
rather inclined to it, for that since the time of the first Declaration, the
Doctrine of Non-Resistance has not been so much in Vogue, as it was formerly; it
would keep cold for another time, and to have pressed it now, who knows but the
People might have believed it? In short, Nathan, Zadoc, etc. had some pretense
for opposing Adoniah; Me thy Servant, and Zadoc the Priest, he has not called.
So Core, Dathan, and Abiram, were Ecclesiastical Princes, and thought they
might have as much right to Govern as Moses: But when the Church of England
(founded on the Law of England) acknowledges the King Supreme in all Causes;
Themselves, Glan. l. 7. c. 1. Tract. l. 5. 427.
infra aetatem, and in custodia Domini Regis; when the King by his Declaration
has secured them in their Religion, Possessons and Properties, and by virtue of
his Royal Prerogative (and for the Quiet of the Nation) only indulged it to
others, (yet making no doubt of the Parliaments concurrence in it) is it just
that Their Eye be evil, because the King's is good? or must the Kingdom of
Heaven be confined to a Party? I never heard that Disobedience was any
Qualification for it; and therefore, if they will not enter themselves, why do
they shut it against others, that would enter?

But perhaps the Petition (if yet there can be any reason for the breach of a
Duty) may give us the reason of it. The Title says, In behalf of themselves,
and others of their absent Brethren, and of the Clergy of their respective
Dioceses. Which makes good what I before hinted, that instead of Distributing
and Publishing His Majesty's Declaration to be read in their respective
Dioceses, as in bounden Duty to their Supreme Ordinary the King, they ought to
have done; and the Clergy, in respect of their Canonical Obedience to them,
must have obeyed under the pain of Suspension, and in case of Contumacy of
Deprivation: they had been feeling the Pulse of their Clergy, and finding
little return from them, but speak, Lord, for thy Servant hears, they
concluded the Flock would follow the Shepherd; and consequently, if the Party
were not strong enough, the Multitude of the Offenders might make it
dispunishable; whereas it has been seen, that a Ferry-boat's taking in too many
Passengers, to increase the Fare, has been often the occasion of sinking all
together. And if the Loyalty of the Church of England receive any blemish by
it, what can she say, but that she was wounded in the House of her Friends? For
by the same Reason that a Metropolitan refuses the Injunctions of his Supreme
Ordinary the King, by the same Reason may a Diocesan refuse his Metropolitan,
and every inferior Clergy man his Diocesan; and when the Chain is once broken,
you may dispose the Links as you please.

But the Petition says, It was neither from any want of Duty and Obedience to
His Majesty. No? Then why was it not complied with? Show me thy Faith by thy
Works, says St. James; nor will it be possible to clear that Son of
Disobedience, that said I go, but went not. A Bishop (as before) is not bound
to obey any Mandate but the King's; which Exception proves the Rule, and that
he is inexcusably obliged to obey the King's: For all Bishops are subject to
the Imperial Power, who is to be obeyed against the will of the Bishop.
Mauritius the Emperor (says Bishop Ductor dub. fol. 606.
Tailor) commanded St. Gregory to hand an unlawful Edict to the Churches; the
Bishop advised the Prince, that what he went about was a sin, did what he could
to have hindered it, and yet obeyed. It was the Case of Saul and Samuel: The
King desires Samuel to join with him in the Service of the Lord; He, with the
liberty of a Prophet, refused at first, but afterward joined with him:
Whereupon the said Bishop in the same place further says, That even the
Unlawful Edicts of a Lawful Prince may be published by the Clergy: How much
more then those that are Lawful? And that this Declaration is such, I shall
show presently, when I come to speak to their word Illegal. In short, the
Archbishop of Canterbury is Heylin's Life of A. B. Laud. 209.
Ordinary of the Court, and a Bishop's private Opinion may be warrant enough
for him to speak when he is required, but not to reprove a Prince upon pretense
Id. Ductor Dub. 608.
of Duty.

Our Holy Mother the Church of England being both in her Principles and
constant Practices unquestionably Loyal. Nor have they hitherto appeared other;
and, if not Religion, moral Gratitude must have obliged them to it. All the
Bishoprics of England (but Sodor 4 Inst. 285.
in Man, which was instituted by Pope Gregory the Fourth) are of the Foundation
of the Kings of England, 1 Inst. 94, and 97.
and those in Wales of the Prince of Wales: Nor is it less than reason, that
they look up to the hand that fed them; Or to whom more justly ought they have
paid the Tribute of Obedience, than to Him that took them from the Flock, and
sat them among Princes? In a word the late War was Bellum Episcopale; and if
King Charles the First would have confirmed the Sale of Church Lands, he had
saved Himself: And why then do they reproach the King His Son with their
Loyalty, when they instance the contrary in so small a trial of that Obedience;
especially when, were the matter doubtful, the Presumption were for Obedience,
and even unjust Commands may be justly obeyed? For as we fear the thing is
unjust, so have we reason to fear the evil of Disobedience, for we are sure
that is evil; and therefore we are to change the Speculative Doubt into a Id.
Duct. Dub. f. 136, and 531.
Practical Resolution, and of two Doubts take the surest part, and that is to
obey; because, in such Cases, Reumfacit Superiorem, iniquitas Imperandi;
innocentem Subditum, ordo serviendi: The Evil (if there be any) is imputed to
him that Commands, not him that Obeys, who is not his Prince's Judge, but
Servant; and they that are under Authority are to Obey, not Dispute; nor shall
any thing done by virtue thereof be said to be contra pacem. David commanded 9
Coke 68. 10 Coke 70.
Joab to put Vriah in the Head of the Battle, to the end that he might fall by
the Enemy: Joab obeys; Vriah is killed; and yet not Joab, who might have
prevented it, but David, who commanded it, is charged with the Murder. In a
word, to pretend Loyalty for a common Principle, and yet make Disputing and
Disobedience the Practice of it; what is it, but a drawing near with the Mouth,
when the Heart is farthest from it? The Voice (perhaps) may be the Voice of
Jacob, but the Hands are the Hands of Esau.

And having to her great Honor been more than once publicly acknowledged to be
so by your Majesty. And does his Majesty less than acknowledge it in this
Declaration? He has in the Word of a King secured to them their Religion,
Possessions and Properties; And why? but to assure them, He repented not the
Character. And it was their Interest, if not Duty, to keep it up; nay, the
Honor of their Church depended on it, inasmuch as Men value things, according
to the present Good or Evil they do in the World; and what Advantage can that
Religion give us to another Life, when it shall be found mischievous, or
destructive to this? They have (I said) the Word of a King for their Security;
but if they force him in his own defense, to secure against it, whom can they
blame but themselves, who first made the Challenge? Abiathar's Service to
David, was acknowledged by Solomon, but when he once began to boggle, he
forgave, but removed him. And our Bishop Bonner, though he got his Bishopric by
thwarting the Pope, yet he lost it again by opposing the King. In a word, The
Holy Spirit in the Apocalypse, acknowledges the good works of the Seven Churches
of Asia, but bids some of them remember, whence they had fallen, and repent,
and do the first works, or he would remove their Candlestick.

Nor yet from any want of due tenderness to Dissenters. No? Why then have those
Penal Laws been executed with so much rigor against them? Or why are they so
averse from having them eased at present? What brought them into this Kingdom,
I have touched before, and what turned them out again, and our Trade with them,
is demonstrable enough in the late Protestants of France. I will not say but
they might have been kept out at first; but being settled, and embodied into a
People, it may seem ill Policy to remove any Greater Number to gratify a
Lesser. It is not the Nobility, or the Gentry, that are the Traders; nor is it
the Gown that enriches more than particular persons: but the Trade of the
Merchant, and the Industry of the Middle sort, that enriches a Nation, and
without which Vena porta, let a Kingdom have never so good Limbs, it will have
but empty Veins. It was Trade gave England its first Credit abroad, and the
Manufacture at home found matter to it; the One drein'd other Kingdoms to water
our own, and the Other brought a Balance to it, in making the Export come up
to the Import, and both together secured the Dominion of the Sea, and made the
Wealth of either Indie a kind of Accessory to it; and all this carried on by
the Middle-sort of People. Take our Seaports, and the Seaman is but here and
there a true Church-of- England man: The Merchant that employs him not much
better at Heart: The Artisan through the Kingdom has more than a Spice of the
Disease; and the Body of the People not least infected with it. However, let
them be quiet within themselves, and they dispute no Authority; but when they
are uneasy, and mewed up at home, what wonder if they change it for a freer
Air? What makes us complain of the want of Trade? That our Neighbors have
gotten into our Manufacture? That our Ships are not so well Manned as formerly?
And the Rents of Lands fallen? The Reason is obvious: Our selves have cut off
our own Hands. The Merchant sits down with what he has, or turns Builder; The
Workman carries his Art with him; The Seaman will have his Opinion, as well
as his Pay; And the Lump of the People their Consciences, or Goodnight
Landlord! Whereas, since his Majesty's late Indulgence, Trade is visibly
increased, Building stops of it self, the Kingdom begins to People again, and
the numerous Addresses on this occasion, speak so general a Satisfaction, that
if such be the Dawn, what may there not be expected from its full Day? And is
there no Equity, that the Catholic also come in for a share, though the word
Dissenter seems not (in proper Speech) to comprehend him; for neither the Law
of England, or themselves, ever knew him by that Name? However, that some
tenderness might be due to them, may be gathered from the English Litany. The
Church of England knows, the King professes the Faith of Rome; And therefore
when they beseech God, That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the
true worshipping of thee, in righteousness and holiness of Life, they Servant
James our most gracious King and Governor, what do they mean by it? if after
the way which some of them call Idolatry, so worships he the God of his
Fathers, and they beseech God to keep and strengthen him in the true worshipping
of him, they imply that Worship to be a true Worship; and if they do not
believe it, and yet use the words, how will they avoid a Sin? for whatever is
not of Faith, is Sin. In a word, The King has made a General Indulgence to all
his Subjects, The Catholics fall under no particular Exception, in it; And
therefore, the Law of Reason, as well as the Law of the Land, gives them the
benefit of it.

In relation to whom, they are willing to come to such a Temper, as shall be
thought fit, when that Matter shall be Considered and Settled in Parliament and
Convocation. What the Temper hitherto has been, is but too sensible already,
and what it is like to be for the future, may be guessed by what is past. The
King (who by the Law of England is Supremus in Ecclesiasticis) has Thought fit,
Considered, and Settled the Matter; and were a Parliament now Sitting, the King
is sole 22 E. 3. 3.
Judge, all the rest but Advisers. The Royal Prerogative is a part of that Law
of the Land, and by that Stan. Pl. Cor. 162.
Authority, the King has Settled it; and therefore it becomes no Man to be wiser
than the Law. Nor is 1 Inst. 97.
the Advice of Ignatius to his Clergy foreign to it, Epist. 12.
Nolite Principes irritare ut acerbentur, ne ansam detis iis qui illam contra
vos quaerunt. Provoke not Princes (says he) to become bitter, lest ye hand an
Occasion to those that seek one against ye. But supposing it a matter only
cognisable in Parliament, why could not they have held till then, and in the
mean time obeyed? especially, when the King had by the same Declaration,
declared his Resolution of calling a Parliament in November next at farthest;
and our Law says, 4 Inst. 11.
Extra Parliamentum nulla petitio est grata, licet necessaria. No Petition, how
necessary soever, is grateful out of Parliament. Or how then could the
Convocation be concerned in it? for (besides that the Matter is merely
Political, and singly respects the Quiet of the Kingdom) if the King, who is
Supreme Ordinary of all England, may by the ancient Laws of this Realm, and
without Parliament, make Ordinances and Constitutions for the Government of the
Clergy, and deprive them for Non-obedience thereunto, as has been more than
once resolved, He may; Crook Jac. 37. Moore 755.
what have the Convocation to be consulted in it? Especially when they have so
often, in Henry the Third, Edward the Second, and Edward the Third's 4 Inst.
322.
time, been commanded by the King's Writ, That as they love their Baronies,
(which they hold of the King) That they intermeddle with nothing that concerned
the King's Laws of the Land, his Crown and Dignity, his Person, or his State,
or the State of his Council or Kingdom: (Scituri pro certo quod si fecerint,
Rex inde se capiet ad Baronias suas) willing them to know for certain, That if
they did, the King would seize their Baronies. And by the Statute of Henry 25
H. 8. c. 19.
the Eighth it is provided, That no Canons or Constitutions should be made, or
put in Execution by their Authority, which were contrariant, or repugnant to
the King's Prerogative, the Laws, Customs, or Statutes of the Realm. In a word,
the King has commanded, they have disobeyed, and by their ill Example perverted
others, and are yet very uncondescending (for so the People word it)
themselves. And what would Henry the Eighth have done in such a Case; made use
of his last Argument, or thrown up the Game for a few cross Cards?

But among many other Considerations, from this especially, because the
Declaration is founded upon such a Dispensing Power, as has been often declared
Illegal in Parliament: And what were those Considerations? If a Man should put
an ill Construction upon them, it may be said, their Lordships never intended
it; and if they intended not to amuse the People, why did they not speak plain
English, and specify those Considerations? inasmuch as all Petitions ought to
contain Certainty, and Particularity, so as a direct Answer may be given to
them; which could not be here: For whatever the King's Answer might have been,
somewhat more also might have been hooked in from the words; And Alexander
would have given it a short Answer, (Aut Ligna inferte, aut Thus.) Either made
it a Chimney or an Altar. But it seems it moved in sundry places, though the best
Scripture for this pretended Illegality, be a Declaration in Parliament: Their
Lordships instance nothing beyond their own time; but I conceive it not
impossible to bring them those of elder times, that have been so far from
doubting the King's Dispensing Power, that they held it unquestionable.

The Stat. 1. H. 4. cap. 6. says, The King is contented to be concluded by the
Wise Men of his Realm, touching the Estate of Him and his Realm; saving always
the King's Liberty, i. e. His Prerogative of varying from that Law, as he
should see cause.

In the Parliament-Roll, 1 H. 5. N. 22. the Statutes Serj. Rolle's Abridg. 2
part. Ti'. Prerog. 180.
against Provisors are confirmed; and that the King shall not give any
Protection or Grant against the Execution of them: Saving to the King his
Prerogative.

And what was meant by that, may appear by a prior Roll of the same year, N.
15. where the Commons' pray, That the Statutes for the putting Aliens Id. Tit.
Prerog.
out of the Kingdom may be held and executed: The King consents, saving his
Prerogative, and that he dispense with such as he shall please. Upon which the
Commons answer, That their intention was no other, and by the help of God never
shall be.

Queen Elizabeth had dispensed with the ancient Form and Manner of Investing
and Consecrating of Bishops, and the Parliament of the 8th of her Reign, cap.
1. declares it Lawful, as being done by her Inherent Prerogative. And when by
the same Prerogative or Privilege, and Royal Authority, (for so it is worded)
she dispensed with the Universities, etc. so Popish a thing as Latin Prayers,
and which their Lordships the Bishops still use in Convocations, though it be
directly contrary to the Statute 1 Eliz. c. 1. for using the Common Prayer in
the Vulgar Tongue only: what is meant by it, but that the Queen might lawfully
dispense with that Statute? for if otherwise, there is no Ecclesiastical Person
in the Kingdom, but would have found the Temporal Censures too heavy for him,
when it had been too late to have asked a Parliamentary Consideration, whether
Legal or not.

And in particular in the years 1662 and 1672, and in the beginning of Your
Majesty's Reign. As to the first of which, matter of Fact stands thus: King
Charles the Second, by his Declaration from Breda, had declared Liberty for
tender Consciences, and that no man should be disquieted for difference in
Opinion in matters of Religion, which did not disturb the Peace of the Kingdom.
And in his Declaration of the 26th of December following stood firm to it, but
that no such Bill had been yet offered him. While it thus lay, an Act of
Indemnity, and one other of Uniformity, were passed: The first regenerated
Themselves; and the second, with the old Ingredient, The Growth of Popery, was
a probable way to exclude Others. The 25th and 26th of February the Commons
come to some Resolves against That, and Dissenters; which, with the Reasons of
them (wherein yet they declare not the Declaration Illegal) they present His
Majesty on the 28th in the Banqueting House. The King complies; and it was too
soon after a Rebellion to have done otherwise: However, if they had declared it
Illegal, it was but the single Opinion of the Commons, wherein the Lords made
no concurrence: And therefore to say, This Dispensing Power was in the
Parliament of 1662 declared Illegal, when (in common and reasonable
Construction) a Declaration in Parliament is intended of both Houses of
Parliament; why may it not be as well urged, That those other Votes and
Resolves of the Commons, touching the Bill of Exclusion, were a Legal
Declaration in Parliament, when yet the Lords swept their House of it?

Then, for that other of 1672, the King in the Interval of Parliament was
engaged in a War with the Dutch; and, to secure Peace at home while he had War
abroad, had put forth a Declaration for Indulgence to Dissenters: The
Parliament meet, grant a Supply of Twelve hundred thirty eight thousand seven
hundred and fifty thousand Pounds; and, without charging the Declaration with
Illegality, pray His Majesty to recall it. The Argument prevailed, and the King
did it: Which shows, that it was in the King's Option not to have done it, or
done it.

And lastly, for that other in the beginning of His Majesty's Reign. That also
(without declaring it Illegal) was but some Heats of the Commons. There were at
that time two open Rebellions; the King (who is sole Judge of the danger of the
Kingdom, and how to avoid it) had granted Commissions to certain persons not
qualified according to the Statute 25 Car. 2. The Commons offer to bring in a
Bill for the Indempnifying those persons: The King knew his own Authority, and
ended the Dispute. And if any man doubts the Legality of the King's dispensing
with that Statute, a subsequent Judgment Trin. 2. Jac. 2. in B. R.
(in the Case of Sir Edward Hayles) has determined the Point; And that the
Power of dispensing with Penal Laws, upon Necessity, or urgent Occasions, of
which the King is sole Judge, is an inseparable Prerogative in the King, not
given Him in Trust, or derived from the People, but the ancient Right of the
Crown, innate in the King, and unalterable by them. And that this has been the
ancient Judgment of the Judges from time to time, I shall meet with the
occasion of showing it in the next Paragraph.

And is a matter of so great Moment and Consequence to the whole Nation, both
in Church and State. And so indubitably is it, that nothing can be more: For
the best of Laws being but good Intentions, if a Prince should be tied up to
such unalterable Decrees, as in no case whatever he might vary from them, it
might so happen, that what at one time was intended for the Good of Church and
State, may at another prove the Destruction of both, if not as timely
prevented. The present Case is a pregnant Instance of it: One would have
thought, that the frequent Endeavors of the four last Reigns, for the reducing
this Kingdom to an exact Conformity in Religion, might have answered the Design;
but (if His Majesty in his Declaration had not told us His thoughts of it) our
own Experience might have taught us, the Effects thereof have in a manner
brought the Kingdom to nothing: And what should the King have done in this
Case; sat still, and expected a Miracle, or interposed his Royal Authority for
the saving it? The Question answers it self: And if the Power of Dispensing
with Penal Laws, were not inseparably and unalterably in Him; how could he have
done it? What elder Parliaments have declared in it, I have already shown; and
that the Judges successively have gone with it, is, or may be, obvious to every
man.

Such was the Resolution of all the Justices in the Exchequer-Chamber, 2 R. 3.
12. And that the King might grant License, against a Penal Statute. And what is
that, but a dispensing with it? In like manner, by all the Justices in the same
place, 2 H. 7. 6. That the King may grant a Non obstante to a Penal Statute,
though the Statute say, such Non obstante shall be merely void; and such was the
Case there. -- The 13 H. 7. 8. to the same purpose. -- Allowed for good Law.
Plowd. Com. 502. -- Confirmed by Sir Edward Coke, 7 Coke 36. -- and 12 Coke 18,
19. And lastly, by a Judgment in His now Majesty's Reign, of which before. And
if so necessary a part of the Government, so solemnly determined by Parliaments
and Judges, is fit to be slighted, or not obeyed, which amounts to the same, I
leave it to every man.

That Your Petitioners cannot in Prudence, Honor, and Conscience, so far make
themselves Parties to it, as the distribution of it all over the Nation, and
reading it even in God's House, and in the time of His Divine Service, must
amount to in common and reasonable Construction. And on the other hand I
conceive, that both in Prudence, Honor, and Conscience, they were highly
obliged to it: For what is Prudence, but the active Faculty of the Mind,
directing Actions morally good to their immediate Ends? That this Declaration
is morally good appears by the purport of it; and that is, His Majesty's desire
of Establishing His Government on such a Foundation, as may make His Subjects
happy, and unite them to Him by Inclination as well as Duty. And what greater
Prudence could there have been, than by their Lordships distributing that
Declaration as enjoined to them, and by their Pastoral Authority requiring it
to be read in all Churches, etc. to have directed it to its immediate Ends,
which were the Establishing the Government, and making the Subjects happy? Or,
if Wisdom must come in for a share, the Offices of That are Election and
Ordination; the choice of right means for, and ordering them aright to their
End. The right means of quieting the Nation was before them; and I think it no
question, whether their Lordships not distributing it, has ordered it aright to
the end. The King had enjoined it to be published, and Wisdom in this Case
(like Scripture) is not of private Interpretation, but lies in Him that has the
Power of commanding, not in him whom Conscience binds to obey. In a word, if
Obedience in Subjects is the Prince's Strength, and their own Security, what
Prudence or Wisdom could it be, by weakening the Power of Commanding, to lessen
their own Security?

Then for Honor and Conscience, though in this place, they seem to mean the same
thing, and may be both resolved into Nil conscire sibi, -- yet I Will take them
severally. And how stands it with the Honor of the Church of England, both in
Principles, and constant Practices, unquestionably Loyal, and to her great
Honor, more than once so acknowledged by His Majesty, to start aside in this
Day of her trial? Both the last Armagh's, Usher, and Bramhal; Bishop Sanderson,
Bishop Morley, etc. have all along by their Doctrine, and Practices, beat down
that other, of Resisting Princes, in that the Church of England held no such
Custom: nor have the most eminent of her Clergy, Dr. Sherlock, Dr. Scott, and
others, until this last uncomplying, Compliance, taken any other Measures. And
ought not their Practice now, to have made good their Principles? Or that
Advice of the present Bishop of Ely to the Church of England, to have been
considered, and followed? Let her be thankful (says he) to God, His Coronation
Sermon, page 27.
for the Blessings she has, and unto the King, under whom they will be
continued to her; And take heed of overturning, or undermining the Fabric,
because she cannot have the Room that she would choose in it. And what greater
Assay to it can there be, than Disobedience? inasmuch as he that thinks his
Prince ought not to be obeyed, will from one thing to another, come at last to
think him not fit to be King. Nor must the Anniversary of the now Bishop of
Chester, be past in silence. Though the King (says he) should not please, or
humor us; though he rend off the Mantle from our Bodies, His Sermon on that
occasion, p. 13, 14.
(as Saul did from Samuel) nay though he should Sentence us to death (of which,
blessed be God and the King, there is no danger) yet if we are living Members
of the Church of England, we must neither open our Mouths, or lift our Hands
against him, but honor him before the Elders, and People of Israel. And having
instanced in the Examples of The Prophets, our Savior, his Disciples, and
Christian Bishops under Heathen Persecutors, and demanded, whether ever the
Sanhedrim questioned their Kings? Nor must we (says he) ask our Prince, why he
Governs us otherwise, than we please to be Governed our selves: We must neither
call him to account for his Religion, nor question his Policy, in Civil
Matters; for he is made our King by God's Law, of which the Law of the Land is
only Declarative. In a word, this and the like has been the Doctrine of the
Church of England, and when on that ground, his Majesty has more than once
acknowledged her Loyalty, who in Honor more obliged to make it good, than those
that serve at her Altar? unless (perhaps) they coin a Distinction to Salve it,
And that the Church may be of one Opinion, and the Churchmen of another.

And then in Conscience, their Obligation was higher; for besides what I said
before, that the People are apter to follow Example than Precept, every Man
(and even their Lordships with the rest) is Party, and privy, to an Act of
Parliament, and bound in Conscience, to the observance of it: Nor is there
either Bishop, or Clergyman in the Church of England, who has not subscribed
to the lawfulness of this Declaration's being read in the Church, during the
time of Divine Service. As thus: Every Clergyman at the time of his
Institution, subscribes (in a a Book kept for that purpose) That the King's
Majesty Ecclesiastical Canons 16^^. Art. 36.
under God, is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm: And that the Book of
Common Prayer contains nothing in it, contrary to the Word of God. Now, the
Book of Common Prayer, as it is now used in and through the Church of England, is
Enacted by Authority of Parliament, to be read in such Order and Form, as is
mentioned in the said Book: And the Rubric, i. e. the Order and Form, how
those Prayers shall be read, is to all intents and purposes, as much Enacted as
the Book its self; And in that Rubric, next after the Nicene Creed (in the
Communion Service) follow these words: Then shall the Curate declare unto the
People what Holy Days, or Fasting-days are in the Week following to be
observed, etc. And nothing shall be proclaimed or published in the Church,
during the time of Divine Service, but by the Minister; Nor by him anything,
but what is prescribed by the Rules of this Book, Or enjoined by the King, or
by the Ordinary of the Place. Now when all Clergymen have subscribed, That the
Book of Common Prayer, contains nothing in it, contrary to the Word of God;
and that the King has enjoined, That his Declaration be read in all Churches,
during the time of Divine Service; these Subscriptions of theirs (besides the
Authority of King and Parliament) conclude themselves, from offering any thing
against the Lawfulness of reading it, as it had been enjoined to them, and the
Rubric, required of them. And being so, what Excuse can there be, why they did
not read it?

Or suppose that Clause, Or enjoined by the King, had not been in the Rubric,
(as it was first inserted in this Act of Uniformity, and every Man that was of
the Convocation of 1661, knows by whom:) were none of the King's Declarations
ever read in Churches (and that, during the time of Divine Service) before that
time? I think there were, and (amongst many others) that of the Declaration for
Sports, for one. Or that the Ordinary of the Place had enjoined the contrary,
ought not the King, the Supreme Ordinary, and as their Subscriptions farther
acknowledge, The Supreme Governor of this Realm under God, to have been first
obeyed? I think he ought; for the Authority of the Greater, Supersedes the
Lesser; nor is there any Power in his Dominions, but what is derived from him.
And whatever Station the King has given them in the Church, it is not to be
presumed, he thereby locked out himself. Nor must a Remark of the said Bishop
of Chester, in his Sermon before mentioned, be forgotten here: The Jews (says
he) say, That the Keys of the Page 15.
Temple were not hung at the High Priest's Girdle, but laid every night under
Solomon' s Pillow, as belonging to his Charge. The Moral of it holds true; for
when a Prince shall have little Authority in the Church, it is not to be
expected he should have much better in the State.

And Lastly, for their Lordships so far making themselves Parties to it, as the
Distribution and Reading of it, etc. must amount to, in common and reasonable
Construction. A Clergy-man's merely Reading the Common Prayer in his Church, is
no giving his Assent to it, unless after his so Reading it, he shall publicly,
and openly, before the Congregation there assembled, declare his unfeigned
Assent, and Consent, to all and every thing contained, and prescribed in and by
the said Book, Entitled, The Book of Common Prayer, etc. Vid. Act of
Uniformity before every Common Prayer Book. Par. 3, 4.
which necessarily implies, that neither the Distributing, nor Reading it, etc.
can in common and reasonable Construction amount, to the making the Publisher,
or Reader of it, a Party to it.

The Apostle says, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's
sake. And upon this, the Bishop of Hereford grounds his Judgment, for the
Reading this Declaration. The King (says he) His late Discourse on this
occasion.
expressly commanding it to be read in all Churches, without requiring him that
reads it, to declare either his Consent, Assent, Allowing, or Liking it; I
would gladly know how this is contrary to the Word of God? Show it me. Or, if,
as it is said, this Dispensing Power be contrary to the Laws of the Land, as is
declared in the Parliament 1662, and 1672, is it contrary to the Law of God?
Show it me. (page 5, 6.) Or that to read any thing in the House of God, is
declaring my Consent to it? (page 8.) No certainly; (page 9.) for in the
reading this Declaration there is no Doctrine taught, only matter of Fact
declared, and perchance, to try my Obedience. (page 10.) And done out of pure
Obedience to my King, upon God's Command, and to so good an End, as the
preserving Truth and Peace among us. Which if we lose on this Occasion, they
will have much to answer for who are the Authors of it. (page 13.) Besides
whom, there are several other Bishops of the Church of England, who have obeyed
his Majesty's Commands in it, albeit they may not have so publicly declared
it. And having said so much to the Matter of the Paper, I think I may well pass
the Prayer of it, That his Majesty will be Graciously pleased not to insist
upon the Distribution, and Reading that Declaration.

And therefore upon the whole, If this Declaration had not been thought fit to
have been distributed, as enjoined, less ought the said Paper to have been
dispersed privately, and by such previous disposition, stoll'n the Form of the
Design into the Matter it was to work on: And considering the Evils we had
passed, and that the Kingdom wanted a Lenitive, not a Corrosive, least of all
ought The People on the wall to have been har'd with new Jealousies: The People
(I say) who need more a Balance than a Fly, somewhat to moderate, not multiply
their Motion.

In short, Trust is the Sinew of Society, which is the right Object of true
Policy; and Distrust, a disbanding of it. The King, as he has more than once
acknowledged the Church of England' s Loyalty, has as often declared, that He
will Protect, and Maintain, His Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy, and all other
His Subjects of the Church of England, in the free Exercise of their Religion,
as by Law Established: And in the quiet, and full Enjoyment of all their
Possessions, without any Molestation or Disturbance whatsoever. The King has
said it, and shall he not perform it? He has pledged his Royal Word, and shall
we doubt the Truth of it? It is not with God, that he should lie; nor with his
Vicegerent, that he should be changed. And therefore, let us (as his Majesty by
this his Declaration Conjures us) lay aside all private Animosities, and
groundless Jealousies: Let us Fear God, and Honor the King, and not discover
the falsness of our own Hearts, by distrusting our Prince's.

In a word, Let every Man in his Station, contribute (his Mite) to the Peace,
and Greatness of his Country: Let him show his Love to God, in his Obedience to
his Prince: And let no Man, by setting up Conscience against Duty, run the
hazard of dashing the First Table against the Second.

FINIS.

