A Physico Medical ESSAY, CONCERNING ALKALY and ACID, SO FAR As they have
relation to the Cause or Cure of DISTEMPERS; WHEREIN Is endeavored to be
proved, that Acids are not (as is generally, and erroneously supposed) the
Cause of all or most Distempers; but that Alkalies are.

TOGETHER With an Account of some Distempers, and the Medicines, with their
Preparations, proper to be used in the Cure of them: AS ALSO A Short
Digression, concerning Specific Remedies.

By JOHN COLBATCH Physician.

LONDON, Printed for Dan. Brown at the Black Swan without Temple Bar, MDCXCVI.

To the Right Honorable Sir HENRY BELLASIS, Lieutenant General OF His
Majesty's Forces.
Honored Sir,
DEdications are at this time grown so much in Fashion, that a Book which
appears in the World without one, is scarce looked upon by any body; people
thinking that the Author, who omits a thing so generally practiced, is
altogether destitute of a Friend who is capable of protecting and countenancing
him; and for that very reason only, let the merit of the Book be never so
great, few people will give themselves the trouble of Reading any more than the
Title Page alone. To prevent which, and at the same time to manifest my
Gratitude for the manifold Favors you have been pleased Generously to heap
upon me, I have presumed to prefix your Name to the following Essay. I cannot
flatter my self so far as to think there is any thing in it worthy to entertain
a Person of Your Parts: But since it comes from one who is filled with a sense
of Gratitude, I have some reason to hope, that it may meet with a kind
Acceptance; I very well knowing, that small things have sometimes a Value set
upon them, especially when they are made the Offerings of Respect, Esteem, and
Gratitude. It would be too great an Honor to me, to tell the World with what
readiness you have appeared to Serve me at those times when I have stood most
in need of your Assistance: For which I cannot better express my Gratitude,
than by a silence full of Admiration: For let me say never so much, I should
still fall short of my Duty. This Piece is properly Yours, it being under Your
Umbrage that I have been enabled to Write it. And if, out of Your wonted
Generosity, You shall be pleased to cast a favorable Aspect upon it, it will
afford the greatest satisfaction to him, who is,

Great Sir, Your most Obliged, and most Obedient Servant, JO. COLBATCH.

TO THE READER.
IT may be much wondered at, that I should in the least presume to meddle with
this Subject, that has already been handled by so many very Great men. But
when it shall be well considered, in ^ow much different a manner I have ^eated
upon it, from what has ^een hitherto done, I question not ^ut by the
generality of Mankind, ^ shall be very easily excused. And though there may be
many imperfections met with: Yet when the design of the thing (it being to
undeceive people in a Matter, upon which depends the Health and Welfare of all)
shall be well looked into; I doubt not, but by the heartily ingenious, my
Undertaking will be well approved off: Though I expect to meet with a great
number of Carpers, especially amongst those, who by long custom, and for want
of due consideration, have embraced a contrary opinion to that of mine.

It is scarce possible for a man to converse with a Person that is ill, let the
Distemper be what it will, especially those, who have any smattering in
Physic, which most people now a days have, but they presently tell you, that
their blood is so very acid, that unless that acidity can be corrected, it is
impossible for them to be well: And accordingly they presently fly to the use
of Alkalious Medicines, as Powder of Pearl, Corral, Crabs eyes, or something
of the same nature, and if they send for a Physician, which few people do, till
they have first used a vast Farrago of Alkalious Medicines; and if the
Physician chances to take the same method, that they themselves had before
done, they presently cry out, we have already taken such vast quantities of the
beforementioned Medicines, that unless you can think of some more generous and
efficacious Alkalies, the Acids complained off, are not to be mortified: Which
has put men to great shifts either to find out new, or to disguise the old
ones: yet after all, the Patients expectation has been frustrated, their
Distempers not being to be cured, by Medicines of that Nature, but on the
contrary either to be exasperated, or so confirmed, that they will scarce ever
admit of a cure at all, especially if the Distemper be a Chronick one.

I must confess, that I my self have formerly been a stickler for Alkalies,
(being carried away by the common vogue of Mankind) and seeing the
insufficiency of common Alkalies, have put my self to great expense, besides a
vast deal of trouble, to Volatilize Salt of Tartar, etc. till at last I was
fully satisfied, by daily observation, that Alkalies, though never so exalted,
would do me very little, if any service at all in the cure of most Distempers.

There are some particular preparations of Steel and Antimony, some of which I
have given an account off, the which giving as Alkalies, and as they are
generally believed to be, did me very great service. But since I have well
examined them, instead of Alkalies, I find them to be most noble Acids, and the
Distempers cured by them, did not (as I formerly supposed) proceed, from any
abundance of acid Particles in the Blood or Juices. But on the contrary from
Alkalious ones, as I suppose, most Distempers do, and as I have endeavored to
make appear by many Observations.

I expect a great many will cry out as some have already done, that this Man
was bred an Apothecary, and shall he pretend to be a reformer in Physic and
Surgery.

To which I answer, that their Charge I own, confessing my self to have been an
Apothecary, and was bred up under a man (though otherwise a very honest and
just Person) that was not the greatest Master in his business. I taking notice
of my Masters imperfections, applied my self, for four years of the time I
lived with him, to diligent Study, in order to become Master of those things, I
was sensible my Master could not teach me, And after I had well considered, and
in some measure, become a Master in Pharmarcy, which is the Foundation, upon
which the Practice of Physic is built: I was at last induced to look into the
Body of Physic it self, and though I don't pretend to absolute mastership, yet
I shall endeavor, and think my self oblidged in Duty, both to God and Man, to
improve my small Talent to the best advantage I can, let Carpers say what they
will.

The greatest part of my time, I lived in Worcester, and although I kept an
Apothecaries-Shop, yet my Dependence was wholly upon my own Practice, the
success I had in which, is sufficiently known in that Country. And for a
Character, I desire no other or better, then the generality of those People
will give me, of whom I know not one, that can or will speak amiss of me, for
any thing, but my coming away from them, and leaving such flourishing, thriving
business, that scarce any man of my Age ever had before me. For which many of
them have blamed me. But the reasons of my leaving that place, are best known
to my self.

And since I have been speaking concerning my own being bred an Apothecary, I
shall enlarge a little upon that subject, giving a short account of the
necessary qualifications of one of that Profession, and then shall leave every
body to judge, whether a man so qualified has not made a large step, toward
being a good Physician.

First, An Apothecary must be very well acquainted with the Vegitable Kingdom,
not only to know the faces of Plants, but their Natures and manner of Operation
upon Humane Bodies, otherwise, how can he tell how to handle them, so as to
make his Compositions as they ought to be. And indeed every Physician supposes
the Apothecary so qualified when he Prescribes to his Shop; for in his Bill, he
seldom directs the method of making his Medicines, but only orders such and
such Medicines, knowing or at last supposing them (for every Physician ought to
be well satisfied in the Abilities of an Apothecary, before he prescribes to
him) to be before hand skilfully prepared. For let a Physician Prescribe like
an Angel, if the Apothecary through his ignorance in his business, be destitute
of good and well prepared Medicines, both Physician and Patient are frustrated
in their expectations, the which I am afraid to frequently happens.

Secondly, He must well understand the Nature and Operation of Minerals and
Metals, which is not to be learnt in the Dispensitary, nor any other way to be
attained, but by much reading and hard labor in the fire.

Thirdly, He must understand the Nature of Animal Bodies also, amongst which is
comprehended that of Man, there being scarce a part of whole Body, but what is
sometime or other to be used as Medicine: But before it is used, the
Apothecaries skill is for the most part required for its preparation, in order
to which, he ought first of all, very well to understand its Nature.

All the forementioned qualifications, and a great many more, are multitudes of
Apothecaries in England endowed with: And to the Honor of the Apothecaries of
London, be it spoken, I have generally found the meanest Shops in that Eminent
City, better fraited with good Medicines, then any of the most Eminent in all
Holland, or the rest of the Low Countries.

I might add a great deal more on the behalf of that noble Profession, which
although, I my self have left it off, yet still have a high value and esteem
for it, and think an honest and skillful Apothecary, is as serviceable in the
Commonwealth, and deserves as much encouragement, and is as highly to be
valued, as any man whatsoever.

The Famous Ettmuler, was not ashamed to own, that he served eight years to an
Apothecary. Yet for all that, he afterward became one of the eminentest
Physicians of Europe. And for ought I know, the loss of him at the Age he died,
from whom so much might rationally have been expected, deserves as much to be
lamented, especially by Physicians, as the loss of any one private man.

I have not given a full account of those Distempers I have treated on, but
given some short hints concerning them, so far as was necessary to clear my way
as I went.

I have in the following Essay, made reflections upon the Practice of some
particular men only, my design not being in the least, to reflect upon that
Noble Society, or Body of Men, or any Member of them, I mean the College of
Physicians, whom I own to be the Glory of our Nation, and of the whole World,
and for whom I have the greatest reverence and respect imaginable.

I don't pretend to be the sole Auther, or first broacher of this Doctrine of
Acids, in the cure of Distempers, it having long since been the opinion, of
some of the most happy Practitioners in the World, and is at this time
embraced, by several of the greatest men, that perhaps our age affords.

I wrote this Essay at a place, (during the first three Weeks of the Siege of
the Castle of Namur, in which time, we had not many wounded men, brought to our
Field-Hospital) where I had not the oppertunity of consulting Books, nor had I
the benefit of coming at my one Papers, wherein I had from time to time set
down my Observations upon this Subject: For want of which I have only made use
of those that occurred to my memory, which is a very treacherous one, and so
they are not so numerous nor exact as I designed them: But however for some
reasons I am willing to venture them abroad as they are, they not being in the
least designed to entertain the Learned, but to undeceive the Multitude.

I don't pretend to be so great a man, nor to deserve so well of Mankind as
Helmont, Paracelsus, etc. have done, yet they treading out of the common Paths,
and acting upon different Principles, from the rest of Mankind: They did not
want those, who maligned and hated them, and used all the opprobrious Language
in the World against them. Therefore why should I, who don't in the least
pretend to have arrived to those great Perfections, that they had attained to,
take it amiss to be abused and evil spoken of.

Authority has in great measure, blinded some men's understandings, and sealed
up their eyes. There being still a sort of men, that pay too submissive a
deference to ancient Opinions, though never so contrary to reason, that they will
not open their eyes to see or understand the truth. There are still men who
write against most known Truths, as against the gravity and Elastick force of
the Air, and other things of the same Nature. This Doctrine of Acids, and that
I formerly wrote concerning the Cure of Wounds, are likewise of the number of
those that are unfortunate, merely for want of being born old and with a
venerable Beard.

When a Book (says the Famous Malbranch) is first to appear in the World, one
knows not whom to consult to know its destiny. The Stars preside not over its
Nativity: Their influences have no operation on it; and the most confident
Astrologers dare not foretell, the diverse risques of fortune it must run. Truth
not being of this World, Caelestial Bodies have no power over her; and whereas
she is of a most spiritual Nature, the several positions or combinations of
Matter, can contribute nothing, either to her establishment or ruin. Besides
the judgments of men are so different in respect of the same things, that we
can never more hazardously and imprudently play the Prophet, then in presaging
the happy or unfortunate success of a Book. So that every man who ventures to
be an Author, at the same time throws himself, at the Readers mercy, to make
him, or esteem him, what he pleases. But of all Authors, those who encounter
with prejudices, ought most infallibly to reckon upon their condemnation. Their
Works sit too uneasy upon most men's minds, and if they escape the passions of
their enemies (which I have not done) they are obliged to the Almighty force of
Truth for their protection.

However time will do every man Justice, and Truth, which at first appeared a
Chymerical and ridiculous Phantasm, by degrees, grows sensible and manifest.
Men open their eyes and contemplate her, they discover her charms and fall in
love with her.

The Books that encounter with prejudices, leading to Truths through unbeaten
Paths, require much longer time than others, to obtain the reputation their
Authors expect them. And I find it but too true in my self, that all those
Writers who combat with prejudices, are much mistaken if they think by that
means, to recommend themselves to the favor and esteem of others. Possibly
some few, will speak honorably of them when they are dead. But whilst they
live, they must expect to be neglected (I speak experimentally) by most people,
and to be despised, reviled, and persecuted, even by those, who go for the
wisest and most moderate sort of men.

There is nothing but Truth contained in my Novum Lumen Chyrurgicum, and I did
think that I should have been put into a condition this Summer, to have made it
evidently appear. But instead of that, I have been abused and delivered up into
the hands of my enemies, to do with me as they pleased.

My Novum Lumen is built upon a pair of Medicines, the which as yet I think not
fit to make public, but here lies my misfortune, common to all those, who make
new Discoveries. A great many believe the Truth of what I have said, and that
my Medicines are capable of performing what I have promised for them. But
amongst the number of those, who are so ingenuous as to believe matter of fact,
a great many say, this man was not the Author, others that they have the same
Medicines, and some that they imparted them to me. As for these Gentlemen, I
can very easily excuse them, I very well knowing that it is the Nature of most
Men, not to allow any Person the honor of his own Discoveries, they thinking
that thereby, their own Glory is eclipsed. But there are another sort of Men,
whose Interest, will not give them leave to embrace the Truth, and for the same
reason they do what in them lies, to keep others from so doing. And the
greatest part of Mankind not being judges in my cause, any further then their
eyes direct them, and it being altogether impossible, that there should be any
great number of Spectators, by which means I am evil spoken off by many, upon
no other grounds, then because an interested party have told them, that I have
pretended to what I cannot perform.

I expect the mouths of my enemies will be opened very wide against me, but I
have already born so much, that I can with a great deal of contentedness bear
with the greatest indignities that can be offered me: My great satisfaction
being, that I have peace in my own breast, having proposed nothing but what
tended to the good of Mankind: And very well knowing, that if my Medicines are
faithfully and skilfully used, they are capable of performing much more then I
have promised for them; but the best Medicines unskilfully used, or with a
design that they should not succeed by prejudiced Persons, may be brought into
disgrace.

The following Essay I humbly offer to the candid Readers serious
consideration, nothing doubting but that it will meet with a favorable
reception from some few. And I must needs say, that I more value the good
Opinion and good Word of one heartily ingenuous, then all that can be said
against me, by ten thousand clamarous ill-natured Persons. I have endeavored
to act and behave my self so, as to deserve no man's ill Word; but if I am
abused and my Undertakings misrepresented without any just cause, I shall never
break my heart about it, I very well knowing that the justice and integrity of
my Undertakings, will one time or other be made appear.

From my House in St. Anns Court, in Dean-Street, near Soho-Square, October the
12th. 1695.
A Physico Medical ESSAY, etc.
CHAP. I.
Of the Small Pox.

THE first thing I shall begin with, is the disuse of Alkalies in the
Smallpox, that fatal Distemper to three Kingdoms, and even all Europe: In
that, by the means of it, God was pleased to deprive (...) of a Princess, whose
worth was such, that a value sufficient can never be set upon it, and whose
loss sufficiently be lamented.

It is a common pract^ce, both of Nurses and the generality of Practitioners,
as soon as they perceive the least Symptoms of this Distemper, to give either
Gascons, Countess of Kents, Lapis de Goa, or some other Testaceous Powder,
which are known Alkalies. The one Party as they pretend to drive the Malignity
from the Heart; the other to correct the Acidity which they conjecture (for
beyond conjecture they cannot go) to be in the blood.

In the subsequent Discourse, I shall endeavor to show, upon what false
suppositions both Parties go.

For the first sort, it will not be worth while to spend much time about them,
by reason every one will readily grant, that they generally act upon wrong and
mistaken Notions. For, for any Malignity to be lodged in the Heart, more than
any other part, is altogether impossible, by reason that the Blood moves ten
times at least faster through the Heart than any other part, the Lungs
excepted: For the Cavities being large, no Stagnation is to be feared, and so
by consequence no danger. If there be any danger of the Malignities settling any
where, it must be in those parts where the Vessels are very small, and the
Blood moves but slowly, which must be near the extreme Parts.

For the second sort, who give the same Medicines, but with quite different
Intentions; I shall endeavor to prove, that their suppositions are altogether
as false and groundless as the sormer. They give their Alkalious Medicines, to
correct the Acidity they suppose to be in the Blood, and which is, as they
pretend, the occasion of all the ill Symptoms that attend People in the
Smallpox: Now I could never hear of any one, that by Analyzing the Blood of
Persons in the Smallpox, that could ever find the least footsteps of Acidity
in it; though on the contrary it does appear, after many trials, that the Blood
of such Persons, does more abound with Alkalious Particles, then that of sound
People: So by consequence, the giving of Alkalies in this case must be at least
superfluous, if not highly pernicious, and as I have frequently observed, and
shall instance in some particulars.

The cause of the Smallpox, common with most other Fevors and acute
Distempers, I suppose to be, from a quantity of such Particles, being some way
or other admitted into the Blood, which being of a quite different Texture from
that of the Blood, and so not capable of being mixed with it, causes a hurry and
disorder there, which is what I Nov. Lum. Chyr.
elsewhere observe, to be the occasion of both continued and Symptomatick
Fevers. Now it is well known, that a Fever always precedes the Eruption of the
Pustles in the Smallpox: And when the Pustles are well come out, that is, when
the Heterogeneous or Particles of a different Texture from those of the Blood,
are thrown out to the Surface of the Body, then the Fever ceases.

Now to assist Nature in throwing those Heterogeneous Particles out of the
Blood, to the extreme Parts, which they pretend to be mightily hindered, by a
great quantity of Acids in the Blood, they give repeated, and large quanties of
Testatious, Alkalious Powders, and other Diaphoreticks: Which indeed seldom
fail of answering their Intentions, in throwing out large quantities of
Pustles, even more than Nature is able to supply or bring to maturity; and if
she does chance to cope with them, is the only occasion of spoiling so many
angelick Faces, as we every day observe. But the spoiling of Faces is not all,
for besides the throwing out of so great a quantity of Pustles, by breaking off
the Globules of the Blood, when it is brought to the Cataneous Glands, instead
of those Glands separating the Excrementitious Serum, which in a State of
Health, is all or most part of it, to be carried off by sweat or insensible
transpiration, but at this time to supply the Pustles till they are brought to
maturity. I say by breaking off the Globules of the Blood, when it is in its
confused State, Serum and all together; the Excrementitious Serum only,
according to the Rules of Nature, ought to be separated, those Glands being so
many strainers, adapted to receive into them the Serum only, and not the least
drop of Blood, when it is in its natural State, and its Globules unbroken. I
can liken the separation of the Serum from the Blood, by the mediation of the
cutaneous Glands, to nothing better, then to a mixture of oil and water, made
by continued agitation, when that compound mixture seems to be one entire white
liquor, though with good eyes or a good glass, the oil may be seen floating in
the Water in small Globules, as the Blood does in the Serum, as I elsewhere
Nov. Lum. Chyr.
observe: Yet this mixture of Oil and Water, let it be done never so exactly,
if it be poured into a funnil, lined with brown Paper, wet before hand, the
Pores will be so disposed, as to let all the Water run through, though not the
least Particle of the Oil; yet if there be some Alkalious Salts, boiled with
this mixture of Oil and Water, the Globules of the Oil will be so broken, as to
pass readily with the Water, through the forementioned brown Paper, which
before it would not in the least do. In like manner the Globules of the Blood
being broken, by the means of Alkalious Medicines, together with too great a
quantity of Alkalious Particles, being before admitted into it, is by that
means made capable of being received into the Cutaneous Glands, which is the
only occasion of those purple spots upon the surface of the skin, not only in
the Smallpox, but other Fevers, which spots seldom or never fail of being the
certain Prognosticators of future Death.

But this is not all, for by the foresaid breaking of the Globules of the
Blood, by Alkalious Medicines, these small broken Globules, getting into the
small Meanders of the Brain, hinder the Motion of the Animal Spirits, through
the Nerves, and so cause Deliriums, and all those fatal disorders of the Brain,
that are but too frequently seen.

Likewise the Blood not being capable of being contained in its proper
Channels, is the occasion of violent Bleeding at the Nose, bloody Urine, etc.
which are none of the best Symptoms, but what too frequently happen by the
aforesaid means.

Besides breaking of the Globules of the Blood, and causing the ill Symptoms
beforementioned, with many others, I don't think fit here to enumerate: By
their Diaphoretick quality, there is so vast a waste made of the Serum of the
blood, that there is not a sufficient quantity left, to supply and bring to
maturity, those many Pustles, (even more than Nature designed) that those
Medicines alone had thrown out: So that about the ninth, eleventh, or
thirteenth day, for want of a sufficient quantity of Serum to supply them, the
Pustles fall, and the Acrid corrosive matter, being absorbed into the Blood,
causes secondary Fevers, which oftentimes prove of very dangerous consequence.
I might expatiate a great deal more, but I design brevity.

It may be said, you have gone far enough in condemning the ordinary Practice,
as to the use of Alkalies and Diaphoreticks, not having substituted a better
and safer Method and Medicines in their room: but not too fast, that follows in
its proper place.

The Smallpox, is a Distemper, that requires the giving of as few Medicines,
as in any Distemper whatsoever, unless in some extraordinary cases: But yet I
think it the most unreasonable thing in the World, that People (as is the
common practice in this case) should be left to the sole management of old
Women and Nurses; which thing alone, I verily believe, has been the destruction
of more people, than the Sword it self. And although but very few Medicines, as
I said before, are generally necessary, yet the eye of a careful, skilful
Physician, and that from the beginning, is as convenient as in any Distemper
whatsoever, that he seeing Natures operations, may also see the fit time, when
to give the Medicines requisite. I confess I have heard some people complain,
that such a Physician has had so many Fees, and never wrote one Bill for them;
for such people, let me tell them, that they complain without cause, for in
many cases, especially in this, the Physician deserves his Fees better for not
writing at all, then for so doing.

I own my self to be a professed Chemist, and in many things, though not all, a
Disciple of Helmont, and know nothing in this World, so delightful to me, as
Chemical Operations: Yet in this case, nor indeed in scarce any acute
Distemper, do I judge Chemical Medicines to be absolutely necessary, though
many of them may do well, and are sometimes to be used: But I don't know any
reason we have to fly to elaborate Preparations, when Nature has provided
Medicines ready to our hands. Acids are the things skilfully and timely given,
which I have seen, not only by my own, but by other Great men's Practice, to be
the only safe, effectual, and seldom or never erring Medicines in this
Distemper, so that they are rightly timed, and given with discretion; and why
should we fly to Acids Chymically prepared, when as I said before, Nature has
provided to our hands, Oranges, Lemmons, Cittrons, Limes, and a great many
more, not necessary here to mention, which for the most part answer our
Intentions, so that they are skilfully given, by an experienced hand. And as, I
hope, I have given sufficient reasons to dissuade the use of Alkalies and
Diaphoreticks, from the many direful effects that daily attend their use, so I
hope to give as cogent ones to enforce the use of Acids, from the laudable,
good effects, I have seen from them; for in five hundred (at least) Patients,
that I have had of all Qualities to do with, in this Distemper, in Worcester
and London, where I have been called in at the beginning of the Distemper, I do
not know that I have had one that has died or been disfigured; nay, some that
have been brought into very ill circumstances, by the precedent use of
Testacious, Alkalious Powders and Diaphoreticks, I have retrieved from the jaws
of impending death, by the use of fit and proper Acids.

It may be wondered at by some, that I make a difference between Testacious
Powders and Diaphoreticks, when the Testatious Powders, especially the compound
ones, as Gascons Powder, Countess of Kents, Lapis de Goa, etc. are accounted
Diaphoreticks, and indeed are so: But the reason why I do it, is, because for
the most part besides the said Alkalious Powders, other more forcible
Diaphoreticks are also given.

I having in short given some hints concerning the cause of the Smallpox, I
need not again repeat them, so I shall immediately proceed to the method I take
in the cure of it, which being according to Natures dictates, is short and
easy: For Nature in performing her Operations, makes short and easy cuts, it
being in the cure of Diseases, as in finding out and giving an account of the
Phenomenon of Nature by Phylosophical Disquisitions; they that go upon the
fewest Principles, generally discover most of her secrets, and are capable of
giving the best and most rational account of them: Whereas they that are
clogged with multiplicity of Principles, and wandering in tedious, long, and
uncouth Paths, thinking thereby to get admission into Natures Cabinet, after
they have spent much time, and taken a great deal of pains, at last fit down as
wise as when they began, and not one jot the wiser.

First of all, when I come to a Patient who has the Symptoms of the Smallpox
upon them, which are so well known, even to Nurses, that I need not spend any
time about them. In the first place, if there be any manifest signs of the
Stomachs being oppressed and clogged with viscous Matter, as generally it is, I
first of all give a gentle, easy vomit, suitable to the age and constitution
of the Patients, and after that has done operating some Syrupus E Meconio, or
any other pro-Opiat in due proportion. Afterward, to allay the hurry and
disorder in the Blood, occasioned by the intromission of Hetrogeneous
Particles, which Nature is endeavoring to throw out: And to confirm the
Texture of the Blood, so as to enable it to rid it self of its enemy, I give
large quantities of any of the following Julips.

Take of fresh juice of civil Oranges six Ounces, Barley Water one quart, double
refined Sugar as much as is sufficient to make it grateful, or to those Palats
or Stomachs (which are very few) to whom juice of Oranges is ungrateful.

Take of juice of Lemmons, or Lime juice that is not musty, four Ounces, Barley
Water one quart, Cinnamon Water half an Ounce, Syrup of Rasberries as much as
is sufficient to make it grateful: Or,

Take of Barley, Cinnamon Water one quart, juice of Lemmons four Ounces, Syrup
of Wood Sorrel three Ounces, mix and make a Julip.

O any of these Julips, I give my Patients to drink as often and as freely as
they please: Drinking likewise small Beer with juice of Oranges in it, in as
large quantities as they please. But during the whole course of the Distemper,
all sorts of flesh ought to be avoided.

To poor people, instead of the aforesaid Julips, and to save charges, I order
them large quantities of small Beer, acidulated with Oil of Vitriol, or instead
of that Vinegar or Verjuice Posset drink, to be drank frequently, and in large
quantities.

But if in the beginning or at any other time, I find the Brain very much
disturbed, and the Patient delirious, I for the most part find it absolutely
necessary to let Blood, and that in a good quantity; and then to fly to the
use of more powerful Acids, giving the following Julips in large quantities,
which presently calms the violent Motion and Agitation of the Blood and Spirit,
and sets ^ll to rights in a small ^ime.

Take of Barley, Cinamon-wa^^r one quart, Syrup of Ras^^erries three Ounces,
Volatile Spirit of Vitriol one Dram and half, or mix and make a Julip.

Take of Barley, Cinnamonwater one quart, Syrup of Rasberries three Ounces, Gas
Sulphuris as much as is sufficient to make it sharp: Or,

Take of Barley Water one quart, Epidemick Water two Ounces, Syrup of Wood
Sorrel three Ounces, sweet Spirit of Niter or Vitriol two Scruples: Or,

Take of red Rose Leaves six Drams, put them into an earthen or glass Vessel,
pour upon them one quart of boiling Water, let them stand covered for some
time, then pour on them two Scruples of Oil of Vitriol, or Oil of Sulphur pe^
Campanam, when cold, strain out, and add as much double refined Sugar as is
sufficient to make it grateful.

If at any time, I find my Patients Spirits languid and low, I then give three
or four spoonfuls of the following Cordial at due intervals.

Take of Aqua Mirabilis, Epidemick Water, of each three Ounces, Spirit of
Citrons half an Ounce, Balm Water eight Ounces, Syrup of Gilliflowers one Ounce
and half, mix and make a Julip.

By this method, I have brought my Patients through the Distemper, without so
much (almost) as the least uneasiness, or even confining themselves to their
Beds, and without the least fear of a secondary Fever, which is that, which
frequently proves of most fatal consequence.

After the Pustles are quite gone, I then take care to purge them well for five
or six times, with gentle and easy Purges, after each Purge, giving an
Hypnottick: After that I have done Purging, for some time I give corroborating,
strengthening Medicines, to confirm the Texture of the blood and Juices, and
bring them to their natural State, by which means I prevent ill accidents, that
sometimes succeed the Smallpox.

I have not given a full History of this Distemper, that being contrary to my
design, but endeavored to deter people from the use of those Methods and
Medicines that have proved fatal to so many, and to advance a better and safer
Method and Medicines in their room: Yet I would not have people, wholly to rely
upon the Method I have here set down, but always have a Physician by, to
obviate any unusual Symptoms, that may chance to appear contrary to what
generally do, and where life lies at stake, people cannot be too cautious. But
if the good old Woman and Nurses, in spite of all that can be said, will be
still tampering, I must needs say this, that if my Method were exactly followed
by every body from the beginning, without any variation, I verily believe that
there would not one in ten die, that have formerly done by the use of Alkalies
and Diaphoreticks.

As I have before endeavored to explode the use of Alkalies, and to give my
reasons for so doing, so I shall now endeavor to give some reasons for the
Method I take, with the great use of Acids in this case.

As I have before observed, I judge the cause of the Small Pox, to be from an
intromission of Heterogeneous, or Particles of a different Nature and Texture
from the blood into it; by the means of which Particles, the blood is put into
a very great hurry and disorder, in order to throw off its enemy, and that the
place that Nature designs the discharge of these Particles by, to be the
cutaneous Glands. Now the inconveniences, that I observed to attend the use of
Alkalies, were the throwing out of more Pustles than Nature designed, the
destroying of the Globules of the blood, and a waste of too great a quantity of
Serum. I had before forgotten to mention one dismal effect of Alkalies and
Diaphoreticks, and that is by destroying or breaking the Globules of the Blood,
instead of regular Pustles being thrown out to the Surface of the Skin, the
divided broken Globules are together with the morbifick matter thrown out, as
in the case of -- and so causes an Erispelas or St. Anthonies Fire, which
seldom or never fails of proving fatal.

Now I almost defy any one to say that he ever observed such Symptoms as
these, if Acids were from the beginning used. For Acids are of that Nature,
that they confirm the Texture of the Blood, which is that red substance,
wherein is contained the Byolyenium Nov. Lum. Chyr.
or Lamp of Life; by so doing, Nature is capable of throwing out the extraneous
Particles, in a way suitable to it, and without the inconveniences that attend
the other method: For the Texture of the Blood being confirmed, and moving
regularly and Naturally in its proper Channels, the morbifick Particles are
only thrown out, and such a quantity of Serum left, as is sufficient to supply
the Pustles and bring them to maturity without any danger of their flatuing,
and the acrid Matter; being again absorbed into the Blood, and causing
secondary Fevers: Besides the Globules of the Blood being kept together
unbroken, there is not any danger of their being extravasated, and causing
those fatal purple Spots. Nor of being thrown out together with morbifick
Matter, and so causing an Erisipelas or St. Anthonies Fire; neither are
Hemoragies at the the Nose, bloody Water, etc. in the least to be feared, nor
by being admitted into the small Meanders of the Brain to cause Deliriums, and
those other Symptoms that attend it.

I might expatiate upon continued Fevers and some other acute Distempers: But
that would be to be guilty of Tautology: For I assign but one general cause of
them, though I own that the extraneous Particles, causing them, may be somewhat
different, and according to the different size of the extraneous Particles, the
parts affected may be different; as in the Smallpox, the size of the Particles
are such, as to fit them to be thrown out by the cutaneous Glands to the
surface of the Skin; in other Fevers they are thrown out, sometimes one way,
sometimes another, according to their size. For instance, sometimes they are
thrown out by critical sweating, sometimes by Urine, sometimes by the Glands of
the Mouth in spitting, and so on, according to the different disposition of the
Particles causing the Distemper, being fitted to be discharged through the
Pores of different Parts: And which ever way we find Nature inclined to do her
work, we must assist her in it, but not spur her on unless she be too sluggish,
but must not, upon any account whatsoever, hinder or thwart her in her
Operations.

In most continued Fevers, I have found Alkalies equally pernicious, as in the
Smallpox; and Acids equally advantageous, the which I shall instance in one or
two particulars.

After I came out of Flanders last year, being ninety four, having discoursed
with a certain Physician about a Fever that had that Summer raged in London,
and of which many died; he told me, that when he found his Patients under such
and such circumstances, that he as much gave them up for dead, as if a Dagger
were run through their Hearts. I asked him what those Symptoms were, that
rendered his Patients circumstances to be so very dangerous? He replied, That
when he found them delirious, and had Spasmes and Convulsions of the Nerves. I
enquired of him, what Medicines he gave? He told me, a Composition of Gascons
Powder, Virginian Snake Root, etc. which was what he solely relied on, and
which is the same or of the same Nature, with what is generally given in those
cases. I asked him whether he had never found his Medicine serviceable to him?
He ingeniously confessed, that when his Patients were under the aforesaid
circumstances, it never did him any service at all. I again asked him why he
did not vary his Method? His reply was, It was a most noble Alkaly and
Alexipharmick, and what was generally used, and therefore he did not think fit
to vary from an Established Method.

A few days after, I was called into a Gentlewoman, exactly under the same
Circumstances before related, she being delirious to the highest degree, had
violent Spasmes and Convulsions of the Nerves, and all other Symptoms of a
Malignant Fever. Of her Life I did not despair, and by the plentiful use of
proper Acids, all Symptoms soon vanished, and in a weeks time, she was fit to
go abroad.

Besides this, I could instance a hundred cases of the same nature, but I
design brevity.

I must own, that other Distempers may be complicated with the Smallpox, and
other continued Fevers and acute Distempers, or from a different constitution
of the Air, etc. unusual Symptoms may appear, in which cases a general method
must not be relied on, but recourse must be also had to proper Specificks.

CHAP. II.
Of the Scurvy.

I Am now come to treat upon the disuse of Alkalies in the Scurvy, that
reigning Distemper, which few people are altogether free from, and is by most
men accounted incurable, or at least, it for the most part proves so.

But here I expect the cry of all Mankind against me; What! say there is no
Acidity in the Blood in the Scurvy? What! is it but an Acidity in the Blood
that is the occasion of the breaking out of Scabs, Pimples, Blotches, etc. upon
the Skin? What! but a sharpness and Acidity in the Blood, occasions those
wandering Pains, and a thousand other Symptoms, that people laboring under that
Distemper complain of?

My Friends, have a little patience, and I will presently make it appear to
you, that those Symptoms are not occasioned by Acids, but from Acrid,
Lixivious, Alkalious Particles, which I doubt not to evince by plain matter of
fact.

First of all, by a Chemical Analysis, it does appear, that the Blood of
Scorbutic Persons, has by much a greater quantity of Volatile, Alkalious
Particles, then that of sound Persons, besides which some quantity, more or
less, of a Lixivious fixed Alkaly, which, for as much as ever I could find, the
Blood of sound Persons is altogether destitute of.

And by the way give me leave to add this. It is my opinion, that if Physicians
would give themselves the trouble of Chymically Analyzing the Blood of Persons
in all Distempers, and making nice Observations of the different substances to
be obtained from it: By that means the cause of Distempers would be certainly
known, and by consequence the cure of them much more certain, then now it is.
But that I may return to my business.

Another considerable Argument, besides that beforementioned, to prove that the
Scurvy has its rise from Alkalious substances in the blood, and not from
Acids, is this which follows.

I have been frequently told, by some Seamen and Surgeons, that have been long
Voyages at Sea, especially toward China and the Indies, that of a hundred Men
that have been in a Ship, not two of them but have been almost eaten up with
the Scurvy, their Skin squallid and full of blotches, their Gums eaten away,
and their Teeth ready to drop out, Pains and Aches all over their bodies, etc.
and yet upon their landing at Cadiz or thereabouts, where are plenty of Oranges
and Lemmons, upon eating large quantities of them, in one Fortnights time, at
farthest, scarce one has failed of being perfectly cured. This is not a bare
relation of one or two Persons only, but what is generally agreed-upon and
allowed by all people.

Although these moderate Acids plentifully used, may have such effects in that
hot Country, yet I have not observed that in our cold Climate, they have
always, always I say, the same effect, because in slight cases, they generally
do very well; yet in more stubborn ones we are forced to have recourse to more
powerful penetrating ones.

As for Alkalies, I don't believe that ever any one was cured by them of this
Distemper, although I have known some People that have taken a vast farrago of
Testacious Powders, etc. without any good effect at all, which afterward has
been done in a small time, with a small quantity of proper Acids.

Before I conclud, I shall insert a Preparation of Antimony, the which I have
found of extraordinary use, in the most inveterate Scurvies.

Take of white Flowers of Antimony eight ounces, Volatile Spirit of Tartar two
pound, put them into a large Bolt-head, and digest in a gentle heat in Balneo,
for fourteen days, then take out the Bolt-head and let it cool by degres, when
cold, decant the clear Tincture from the Feces: Then put the decanted Liquor or
Tincture into a long Cucurbite, fit a head to it exactly, and with a gentle
fire, destill off the one half, the remaining part keep for use, in a Bottle
well stopped with a glass stopper. That which comes over by Distillation, may
be kept for the same use.

To make the Volatile Spirit of Tartar.

Take of very fine and clean Rhenish Wine, Tartar twenty pound, put it into an
Iron-pot, fit to the said Pot, a Moors-head made either of Iron or Copper, the
which fix to a large Worm fixed in a Tub of Water; fit a very large Recipient
to the end of the Worm. Lute all the joints except that of the Receiver, with
very good Lute, and when the Lute is very well dried, make a very gentle fire
under your Pot at first, which increase by degrees, and continue as long as any
thing will come over; then let the fire go out, undo your joints and take out
the Caput Mortuum; which Calcine to Greyness, in a large Crucible; then put
three pound of the calcined Caput Mortuum into a long Cucurbite, then pour upon
it, all the Spirit that came over, being before hand freed from the fetid Oil
that came over with it, by running through a Funnel, lined either with wet
brown Paper, or Cotton: Put on your Head, which lute very well with a wet
Bladder, then put to a Receiver, which lute also very well, and with a moderate
fire, draw off one half of the Spirit. Pour out that which remains in the
Cucurbite as useless, and put in two pound more of the Calcined Caput Mortuum,
upon which pour the Spirit before drawn off, and with a gentle fire draw off
one half, whick keep for the aforesaid use. It being a noble, volatile Spirit
of Tartar, and is as noble a Menstruum as most I have met with, not only for
this use, but several others.

Of the aforesaid Tincture, I use to give about four, six, eight or ten drops,
according to the age and strength of my Patients, Morning and Evening, in about
half a pint of strong Infusion or Decoction of Juniper Berries, without any
precedent Purgation; this Medicine performing that office, where there is
occasion; it answering every thing that is generally said of a true Panacca;
sometimes working by Vomit, sometimes by Stool, and sometimes by Urine, but
mostly by a gentle Diaphoresis or Sweating: And I have once known it to cause a
Salivation, without any of the ill Symptoms that usually attend it, when raised
by Mercurial Medicines. Whoever has a mind to see more of this Tincture, may
read Glauber Op. Mineral. Par. Prim. from whom I had it, though I have
something varied from him. I have found it of great use, not only in the
Scurvy, but many other Chronical Distempers, as Rheumatisms, Sciaticas,
Dropsies, etc. and by some few Observations that I have made, I believe it may
do great things even in the Gout it self.

Before I conclude, I shall mention one Objection more against my opinion, made
to me by several, and that is, that a more than ordinary saltness, is to be
perceived in the Blood of Scorbutic Persons, and this saltness they take to be
an Acidity: But if they would but enquire a little narrowly into the matter,
instead of finding it to be an Acid saltness, on the contrary they will find it
to be, a Lixivious, Alkalious one.

CHAP. III.
Of the Gout.

I Shall here make only some few Observations concerning the Gout, it being
cousin German, to that of the Scurvy. Though I must confess the Gout to be a
Distemper I have not had much to do with, but by that little I have seen of it,
I am fully convinced, that it is not from Acids, as is generally said, that,
that troublesome Distemper is occasioned.

I have observed considerable large Nodes, in which are sometimes contained a
hard chalky substance, and of which I have seen large quantities extracted,
which by many experiments I have found to be as much an Alkaly, as either Crabs
Eyes, Corral, Pearls, etc. the which I suppose no man will deny.

Now it being granted, that the matter contained in the aforesaid Nodes, to be
an Alkaly, how is it possible for this Distemper, to proceed from Acids, when
in those very parts where the Distemper most violently rages, there should be
produced such large quantities of an Alkalious substance. For if the Distemper
proceeds from Acids, as it is generally agreed upon, the Patient need not clog
his Stomach with Alkalies as is generally practiced, there being a Remedy
already placed in the part affected: And I verily believe, that the only reason
why this Distemper has been accounted amongst the Opprobria Medicorum, has been
from the mistaken Notions, they have had concerning it.

But if men will still persist to assert, that this Distemper proceeds from
Acids, and at the same time own the chalky substance beforementioned, which is
only the Morbifick Matter indurated, to be an Alkaly, they must tacitly
believe the Doctrine of Transmutation, though openly they are ashamed to own
it, and will laugh at, and ridicule those that do.

But this is not all, for suppose the Acid Matter causing this Distemper to be
transmuted into a chalky, alkalious substance, the Distemper must never more
pretend to come in or near the part, where this substance is lodged, it being
placed as a Centry to guard it off: Nay, the Blood at times, must all, or at
least, great part of it, pass through the Part or Parts, where this chalky
substance is lodged, by which means a man would think, it should be
sufficiently guarded from any more growing Acid; and so by consequence, when
the chalky Nodes are once settled, people have not the least reason for the
future, to be in fear of the return of their Distemper: The contrary of which a
great many honest Gentlemen to their sorrows experience. So that a man would
think, that these very Nodes alone, were sufficient, if there were no other
reasons to be given for it, to satisfy any man, who is master of his reason,
that Acids are not, and that Alkalies are, the cause of this Distemper. And if
the Blood abound with too great a quantity of Alkalious Particles, the giving
of Alkalies must be preposterous, is being to add Fuel to the Flame, which
instead of quenching or extinguishing, makes it so much the greater.

It may not be amiss to take notice, that few people are troubled with the
Gout, but those who drink large quantities of Wine or some other generous
Liquors, abounding with vinous Spirits; so that the Blood and other Juices,
being impregnated with the said vinous Spirits, these Spirits meeting with the
volatile, alkalious Salt, of which, even the Blood of sound People, is never
destitute: By the means of which Salt, the vinous Spirit is coagulated, and
turned into that substance (or somewhat like it) which Helmont calls his Offa
Alba, which coagulated substance, not being capable of moving with the Blood
and Juices through the small Vessels, causes obstructions and violent pains,
and in time, by the addition of other gross, terrestrious Particles, into the
beforementioned chalky substance.

By the foresaid coagulation of vinous Spirits with the volatile Alkaly of the
Blood, may a very good reason be given, for the Generation of the Stone in the
Bladder and Kidneys: And Mr. Boil tells us (being what Helmont had before
done) that having obtained some Stones of a certain Lythotomist, he put them
into a Retort, and exposed them to a strong fire, and found that the better
half consisted of volatile, alkalious Salt, like unto that obtainable from
Humane Blood, and a considerable quantity of heavy Oil, so that it is plain,
that the Generation of the Stone, is not from Acids, but Alkalies.

From which may be inferred, that it is not, from the Acidity of Rhenish Wine,
that makes the drinking of it pernicious to Gouty People, but from its
abounding with spirituous Particles, more than most other Wines.

CHAP. IV.
Of Rheumatisms.

THIS is another of the Distempers generally said to proceed from Acids in the
Blood; but very falsely, as I hope fully to make appear; I having had to do with
multitudes under this Distemper, and that (thanks to God) with very good
success.

I. shall not trouble my self to investigate the original causes of this
Distemper, which are various, that being foreign to my design; but shall
immediately proceed to the business I have undertaken.

First of all; Having by the fire analyzed the Blood of Rheumatick Persons, I
have found it to abound more with Alkanious Particles, than that of sound
Persons; but not the least grain of any Acid substance in it; from which alone
it may readily enough be inferred, That it proceeds not from Acids, but, on the
contrary, from Alkalies.

But it may be Objected, From whence proceeds that syziness and viscosity of
the Serum, which is generally observed in the Blood of Rheumatick Persons, if
not from Acids? For we know that Milk, which is a sort of Serum of the Blood,
let it be in never so fluid a state, by the addition of any Acid, though never
so gentle, a great part of it will be immediately congulated and turned into
Curds.

To which I Answer, That the foresaid Objection is altogether invalid; the
viscousness that is observed in the Serum of the Blood, being quite different
from that of the Curds in Milk: Though there are those substances contained in
Milk, that are fit to make both Blood and Serum; but Milk is a much more
compound liquor than the Serum of the Blood; so the comparison being made
between subjects so vastly different, it is of no validity at all.

But suppose the comparison between the two Liquors good; What agreement is
there between Curds, and a substance like unto Gelly? None at all that I know
of:

But if instead of curdled Milk, they had made the comparison between the
inviscated Serum and Hartshorn Gelly, they had been in the right on it; for
indeed I know not any two subjects more fit to be compared together. But then
this comparison will not in the least prove the inviscation of the Serum to
proceed from Acids, but on the contrary from Alkalious Particles; for every
body that knows what Hartshorn is, know that the reason of its making a Gelly,
is from its abounding with volatile alkalious Salts. And for the same reason it
is, that Calves Feet, Izing-glass, Ivory, etc. make Gellies.

By what I have said, I hope, I have freed Acids from occasioning the
viscousness of the Serum of the Blood in Rheumatisms; which viscosity if it can
be once taken off, every one knows that the Distemper immediately vanishes. But
this is not to be done by Alkalies, that ever I could see, although I have
given them in large quantities. But it is expeditiously to be done by proper
Acids, such as the beforementioned Tincture of Antimony, etc. and Calibiats.

But here I expect that People will think that I have caught my self in a trap,
when I bring in Calibiats amongst the number of Acids, when they are generally
owned by all Mankind to be Alkalies; to confirm the truth of which, they tell
you it is plainly manifest, that filings of Iron will make as great an
Effervescency with all sorts of Acids, as any of the Alkalies I have mentioned;
therefore it is plain I must be much in the wrong, in reckoning Calibiats
amongst the number of Acids.

From this difficulty I shall endeavor to extricate my self, and likewise to
prove, That Iron or Steel, until it be converted into a Vitriol (and every body
will allow Vitriol to be an Acid) cannot act upon the Blood or Serum to cause
any alteration in it, nor so much as any way enter into the Veins or Arteries.

It is the Custom of Skilful Practitioners, before they give Steel Medicines,
to enquire of their Patients, Whether they are sensible of any Acidity in their
Stomachs; in which part I do allow Acids oftentimes to abound, and that
exorbitantly. If they are sensible of any Acidity there, it is then found
necessary to give Iron or Steel, without any Preparation at all, by reason that
by the means of the Acids in the Stomach, it is turned into a Vitriol, and so
made capable of being carried into the Blood, whereas in such cases, if it has
been before satiated by a precedent Preparation, it has little or no effect at
all. On the other hand, if there be no sensible Acidity in the Stomach, Iron or
Steel being given Unprepared, are carried off by Stool, without the least
alteration, or any part of it being admitted into the Blood.

All or most of the Preparations of Steel that I know of, that are good for any
thing, are performed by the means of Acids, which tend to the dividing of their
parts, and turning them into a Vitriol. Now according to the difference of the
Acids used, the result is a different sort of Vitriol, which has different
operations: But on the contrary, Alkalies do so lock up the Body of Iron, as to
make it unfit to be taken as Medicine, by reason of its extraordinary hardness
and firmness of Texture.

The Preparations of Steel I generally use are, that which goes by the name of
Dr. Willis's Preparation of Steel, and is now almost every where to be had;
which although it be grown common, is, for all that, no despicable Medicine; and
that which follows. Take of filings of Steel, or rather Iron, very clean and
free from dust, one pound and half, Sal Ammoniac two pound; make the Sal
Ammoniac into very fine Powder, then mix them well together in an iron or stone
Mortar, then put the mixture into a moist Cellar, and let it stand a week. Then
put it into a very large Crucible, which cover with (...) piece of Tile,
afterward put the Crucible into a Charcoal Fire, which increase by degrees,
till the Crucible be almost red hot; after it has continued in this state about
an hour, take away the Fire, and let your calcined matter cool by degrees; when
cold, take it out of the Crucible, and make into fine Powder in a glass or
stone Mortar, then put it into a Bottle with a wide mouth, which stop with a
glass Stopple, and keep in a warm place.



These two Preparations properly given, and with convenient Vehicles, I have
known of very great use in Rheumatisms. And the last, when all other Medicines
have proved ineffectual, has never once failed me in the most inveterate
Obstructions of the Menses in Women.

Besides the forementioned Preparations of Steel, I have frequently found
Cinnaber of Antimony, or even common Cinnaber, mixed with a due proportion of
Gum Guaiaci, and given in large quantities, to be of great use, not only in
confirmed Rheumatisms, but even in Sciatica's of long standing, by the means of
which alone I have known many cured.

I did formerly believe Cinnaber of Antimony, and common Cinnaber to be
Alkalies; but since I have more nicely inquired into it, I find that by a
peculiar management, a large quantity of an acid sulphurious Spirit may be
obtained from it.

Before I conclude upon this Head, it will not, I suppose, be amiss, to observe
one thing more about the Preparation of Steel beforementioned, and that is,
that whilst it is kept dry, and in a Powder, it is one of the greatest
Deoppilatives or openers of Obstructions imaginable: But let it be put into a
Cellar, and run per deliquium, which it will do in a few days, fifty or sixty
drops of the said Oil per deliquium, given twice a day in a strong Decoction of
Oak Bark, I have of late found never to fail me in stopping a seminal Flux,
which all People will allow has hitherto been found as difficult a thing to do
as any whatsoever. Some People having told me, that they supposed the
Stipticity to proceed from the Decoction of Oak Bark only, I have purposely
tried it alone, and although I own Oak Bark to be a Noble Stiptic, and to do
Wonders, the Decoction being taken in at the mouth, and by way of Clyster, in
common, simple Diarrhea's, and even sometimes in bloody Fluxes; yet in the case
beforementioned it would do nothing at all; but adding some drops of the Oil
of Mars to the Decoction, it had soon the desired effect.

CHAP. V.
Of Consumptions.

I Have little to say upon this Subject, but that I have seen great numbers of
People under this Circumstance, to whom have been given large quantities of
Alkalies, and all sorts of Balsamics, and those things called Pectorals,
without the least advantage in the world; tho I have seen others who have had
the manifest signs of a confirmed Phtisis or Consumption, who by the plentiful
use of proper Acids, have been reduced from a state of dying, to that of
perfect health.

My Reasons in short, according to my best Observations, for the use of Acids,
and the disuse of Alkalies, are as follow.

The Globules of the Blood by reason of so great a quantity of Acrid,
Alkalious, Lixivious Particles, being mixed with it, being broken and
confusedly mixed with the Serum are, together with the Serum, admitted into the
small Glandules of the Lungs, and not being capable of being discharged, cause
Inflammations there, and by consequence Hectic Fevers, which always precede and
accompany a Pthisis or Consumption. Now by the use of Alkalies and Balsamicks,
these extravasated Globules are so far from being thrown out, and the depraved
state of the Blood from being altered, that instead of it, the state of the
Blood is made much worse by Alkalies; and by Balsamicks the Pustles occasioned
from the extravasated Globules being admitted into the small Glandules, are
brought to Suppuration, the necessary consequence of which is an Ulceration,
and when so tender a part as the Lungs are, is once Ulcerated, he must show
himself an Artist indeed that can heal such Ulcers.

Now proper Acids being given in due time, confirm the Texture of the Blood,
and reduce the Serum to a state of fluidity, by which means the Fever and
Inflammation of the Lungs are taken off, and the extravasated Globules of Blood,
by means of a thin Serum, assisted by its quick motion in that part, when in a
fluid state, are by degrees carried off, and so the Pustles disappear.

But it may be Objected, How comes it to pass, that the broken Globules of
Blood, you so often mention, come to be admitted along with the Serum into the
Glands of several parts, and that they cannot by the same reason be carried off
to the parts designed, along with the Serum or Lympha, as it is styled, when it
once comes into the Lymphatick Vessels?

To which I Answer, That when they are first admitted into the Glands, I mean
the broken Globules, coming just out of the extremities of the Arteries, and
being then very hot, the sides of them are lax, and so in some measure capable
of being compressed or squeezed together; but being once admitted into the
Glands, the motion of the Serum from them, through the Lymphatick Vessels,
being very slow, they soon grow cool, and so more firm; and by reason of the
different figure of these broken Globules from the Pores, by which the Serum is
to pass from the Glands to the Lymphatick Vessels, they are not suffered to
pass through with the Serum, as in the forementioned instance of the mixture of
Oil and Water, so that the Globules being extravasated and without motion,
corrupt; from which corruption proceeds all the ill symptons I have mentioned
to accrue from the broken Globules of the Blood being admitted into the Glands.

But to return to the business of Acids; to confirm the truth of what I have
said, besides my own Observations, I remember Riverius, that famous
Practitioner, somewhere says, That he has several times cured a confirmed
Pthisis or Consumption, by giving only of large quantities of Conserve of Red
Roses, well Acidulated with Oil of Sulphur per Campanam.

And now I am speaking of Oil of Sulphur per Campanam, give me leave to add an
account that Helmont gives of it in his Arbor Vitae; which although it has not
any immediate relation to the Point in hand, yet may be pertinent enough to
show the good effects of Acids, in keeping the Blood in a good Texture, and by
that means prolonging Life, and preserving us from Diseases. Moses, who perhaps
understood the Mysteries of Nature as well as any man, and who was guided by an
unerring, infallible Spirit, says, that in the Blood is contained the Life. Now
the Texture of the Blood being confirmed, and its Globules whole, must go a
great way toward the prolongation of Life: But on the contrary, the Texture of
the Blood being spoiled, and its Globules broken, (which they are by Alkalies)
must in great measure shorten Life, and occasion Diseases.

In the Year 1600. says Helmont, a certain Military Man, being burdened with a
great number of small Children, made his Complaint to me that he was 58 years
of age, and that if he should chance to die, his Children must go begging from
door to door. He asked of me something, whereby his Life might be preserved. I
being then a Young Man, and commiserating his Condition, I considered with my
self, that a lighted Match of Brimstone would preserve Wine from Corruption;
therefore I concluded with my self, that the Acid Oil of Sulphur did
necessarily so contain this Flame of Sulphur, and all the Smell of it, that it
self was nothing else, meaning the Acid Spirit or Oil, but the Fume of Sulphur
it self, imbibed by its Mercurial Salt. Last of all, I was confirmed that the
Blood was the Wine of our Lives, and that being preserved, if it did not
occasion long Life, it would at least in some measure be prolonged, by our
being guarded from Diseases, and free from Pains. Wherefore I gave him a Pot
full of the Distilled Liquor or Oil of Sulphur, and likewise taught him the
manner of Distilling the said Oil from kindled Brimstone. I furthermore bid
him, that every Meal, in the first draught of Beer he drank, that he should
take two drops of the said Liquor, and by no means exceed it; I being satisfied
that two drops did contain a large quantity of the Fume of Sulphur. The Man
followed my advice, and at this time walks about the Streets of Bruxels, being
Sixteen hundred forty one: And which is more than all, for the whole Forty
years he never labored under any Distemper, although once by a Fall upon the
Ice, he broke his Leg near the Knee, yet all the time he was under Cure, he was
free from a Fever. He continued slender and lean, and although in want of all
Necessaries, lived to be thus Old. The Name of this Old Man is John Mass, who
served in the Bedchamber of the Bishop of Ypre, when Count Egmont and Horn
were beheaded, and was at that time Twenty five years of age.

The Truth of this Relation need not in the least be doubted, the Man being
alive and well when it was wrote. By which Instance it is plain, that Acids are
not the Cause of Diseases, but Preservatives against them; and whatever is a
Preservative from Distempers, by the same parity of reason must be of use to
repel them, when we labor under them.

A signal Instance of which, I remember I have somewhere read of a Person who
purposely suffered himself to be bitten by a Viper, in order to try the good
Effects of Monsieur Charras's Volatile Alkalious Salt of the same Animal, in
preventing and taking off the Symptoms that attend the Biting of the said
Creature. The Volatile Salt and other Antidotes were in large quantities given,
but all in vain; for instead of allaying, the Symptoms so increased, that
nothing less was to be feared, than the loss of the poor Man's Life. To the
best of my remembrance, nay, I think I may be positive, that it was in the
Wrist where he was bitten; but for all the Volatile Salts, and other Antidotes,
in a very little time his Arm was swelled so big, and so high, that Amputation
could do him no service; nay, all the Bystanders, which were many, gave him up
for dead. At last a certain Person advised the giving of him large quantities
of only so simple an Acid as Juice of Lemmons; which immediately abated the
Symptoms, and retrieved him from all manner of Danger.

We live in an inquisitive Age, wherein People have more sense than to take
things upon trust: The obtaining of the Blood, both of well and distempered
Persons, is no difficult matter; and I desire no greater justice to be done me,
than that People would themselves Experiment the truth of what I have said: And
if after trial it be found that the Blood of persons in any of the
beforementioned cases, has any thing of Acid in it, I will own my self in the
wrong. But shall never take the least notice of such scurrilous Answers as I
have been used to, nothing of that nature being in the least valid with me,
that is not confirmed by well-attested Experiments.

The CONCLUSION.
IT is, I suppose, allowed by every body, that Sea Salt is an Acid, and for
that very reason only it is, that we who eat such large quantities of Flesh are
not able to live without it. For all sorts of Flesh abounding with large
quantities of volatile Alkalious Salts, if the said Alkalious Salts were in
some measure locked up and mortified by the means of Sea Salt, or which is all
one, that which is the product of our English Brine-pits, they having their
saltness from the same origin, which is Currents of Water passing through
great Rocks of Salt; which late discoveries have made appear to be both in
England and many other parts of the World: As for instance, one in Cheshire,
whose Vein is Twenty Yards thick, and may be traced for a great many Miles
together; which very Rock alone is sufficient to Impregnate almost an Ocean of
Waters.

There is some reason to believe, That the People before the Flood did not eat
Flesh, but lived altogether upon Vegetables, as Fruits, Herbs, and Roots;
which, I suppose, was one great reason of their Longevity. And it may be
observed that in Herefordshire, and other Countries abounding with Fruit, the
People are longer Lived than in those Countries that want them. Now had the
Antedeluvian People eaten Flesh as we do now, I cannot imagine what they would
have done for Salt; for supposing Dr. Burnet's Hypothesis true, (the which I
think there is not the least reason to doubt of, his Arguments to prove it
being to me Unanswerable) I suppose their Rivers must have been altogether void
of saltness; and how they could come at salt any other way, considering the
state of their Earth, I cannot imagine: And for them to have eaten Meat without
Salt, must necessarily have greatly prejudiced their healths, and shortened
their lives. For we have seen in the late Irish Wars what destruction and
desolation was made in our Army by eating Meat without Salt, of which at one
time there was a scarcity, whole Regiments having been swept away together with
Fevers and Fluxes. But the Antedeluvian People living upon Vegetables, they had
no need of Salt, there being a sufficient quantity of Acidity in them to
confirm the Texture of their Blood, and preserve them from Diseases.

Since I have been mentioning Sea Salt, I shall make bold to trouble you with a
relation of a strange and accidental Cure wrought upon a Person in a
Tympanitis, given over as Incurable by the most eminent Physicians of England,
by barely immerging her two or three times over Head in Sea Water.

The Person was Daughter to an Eminent Citizen of Worcester, she had labored
under a Tympanitis Three or Four years; her Father applied himself to most of
the Eminent Physicians for advice, but all that they could do signified
nothing. Her Father who is a Corpulent man, has several times told me, that her
Abdomen was swelled so big, that his Cloak would not lap round her, and she was
then not above Ten years of Age. It happened one Morning that her Mother, Two
Brothers, her self, and a Maidservant, were Bitten by a little Dog they had in
the House, which was grown Mad. Advice was presently given by Dr. Johnson, an
Eminent Physician then living in Worcester, That they should all go to the
Salt-Waters to be dipped; observe by the way, the efficacy of Salt-Waters in
preventing the dreadful symptoms that attend those People Bitten by Mad Dogs:
The Mother, her Two Sons, and Maidservant, were prepared to go, but she did
not design to take her Daughter with her, supposing her not capable of living
till she came to the Journeys end. The poor distressed Child seeing them all
going away without her, called to her Father, telling him, He took care of
every body else, but valued not what became of her; upon which her Father being
moved with compassion, was resolved she should go, let the event be what it
would. Accordingly she was carried down, and when it came to her turn to be
dipped, it was as much as two men could do to immerge her over Head: After they
were all dipped, they were carried to an adjacent House and put to Bed; she had
not been in Bed many Hours, but she called for a Pot, and pissed several
Quarts, even more at that one time, than she had done of some Months before;
and when they returned to Worcester, which was within few days, she run out of
the Boat herself to her Father without any help, when she had not been able so
much as to stand of a year or two before. To be short, without any other help,
she was perfectly cured of her Tympanitis, and is now a Tall, Slender, Healthy
Woman, as any I know.

I have mentioned this thing because I find it not any where taken notice off,
and may be of service to others. Nay, I am told that a certain obscure Person
in Herefordshire, has Cured several by the same method, to his own great
Advantage, and withal says, that it never once failed him.

I must beg the Lady's pardon for writing this Relation without first asking
her leave; but since I have no other end in it but to serve Mankind, I doubt
not but I shall be easily excused.

Helmont positively says, and as I my self have found it true, That Spirit of
Sea Salt, which is an exalted Acid, is a certain Remedy in the Strangury; which
is a Distemper generally said to proceed from Acids; which if it does, instead
of being Cured it must be highly Exasperated by Spirit of Salt, the contrary of
which I have frequently Experimented. Helmont somewhere else says of it, Est
namque Acidissimus, nec sibi par habet remedium extinguendis ardoribus Urine,
etiam present in Vessica Calculo.

I remember that not long since an Eminent Physician told me, That bare Juice
of Lemmons would sooner take off the Heat of Urine, in People that are, as we
commonly call it, Clapped, than Emulsions, or any of the things commonly used;
which since I have found true; and have also found that the Urine of such
Persons abounds more with Volatile Alkalious Salt, than that of sound People:
Upon which I have been induced to try, whether the Acid Spirit of Guaiacum,
which that Wood affords in large quantities, would not be more prevalent in the
Cure of confirmed Poxes, than the bare Infusion or Decoction of the said Wood;
the which in conjunction with Cinnaber of Antimony, or common Cinnaber, and Gum
Guaiaci, or else with the before mentioned Tincture of Antimony, has seldom
failed me in Curing the most confirmed Poxes without Salivation.

I am very apt to believe, that if the rectified Acid Spirits, obtainable from
most, if not all Woods, were made use of, they would be found to be great
Specificks in most Distempers, especially Chronical ones.

And since I have mentioned Specificks, I do own that it may be rationally
enough Objected, That my Doctrine of Acids does mightily thwart with that of
Specificks; since there are many Specificks that are neither Alkalies nor
Acids, yet seldom fail of Curing Distempers, as rationally to be supposed to
proceed from Alkalious Particles abounding, as any whatsoever.

To which I Answer, That I have only brought my Doctrine of Acids upon the
Stage, as a general one, in opposition to the general and pernicious Doctrine
of Alkalies. For should I deny the Doctrine of Specificks, I must deny matter
of fact, which is what I shall never do, till I am totally deprived of my
Reason.

There is a little Herb called Paronichia cum foliis Rutaceis, or Whitlow
Grass, with leaves like Rue; the which the Honorable Mr. Boil recommends as a
Specific in the King's Evil: Which Herb I have immerged both in moderately
Acid and Alkalious Liquors, yet could not perceive any Luctus or Effervescency;
yet I have known it do wonders in the forementioned Distemper, and that without
having the least sensible Operation: I shall instance in one particular.

A poor Woman in Worcester having one only Child of about Ten years of Age, who
by Weaving of Bone-lace maintained both her Mother and her self: The Mother of
the Child came one day to me making a great complaint that she was undone? I
asked her the cause of her complaint; she told me, her Child who kept her in
her old Age from Begging, had for Two Years had Scrophulous Tumors in and about
her Privities, and that about Three Months before, one of the said Tumors began
to Ulcerate, and that now the Ulcers were crept into her Body, which made her
uneapable of Sitting. I went immediately with the poor Woman to see her
Daughter, and found what she said was true, the poor Girl being the most
miserable spectacle I ever saw. I remembering what Mr. Boil had said concerning
Paronychia; and being sufficiently satisfied that there was not the least
reason of doubting the truth of any thing he had said, when he related it as
matter of Fact upon his own Knowledge; I was resolved to try it upon this Girl;
I first of all Purged her Three or Four times with Calamelanos, Rezin of
Jallap, and Cremor Tartar; I afterward gave her Two large Handfuls of the said
Herb dried, ordering her to put it into Two Gallons of small Beer after it had
done working, and let it stand Six Days, and then to drink it for her constant
Drink: She continued to take it for about Two Months, in which time, without
applying any thing to the Ulcers, save Clean Cloths, both Ulcers and Tumors
vanished, and she continued well till I left Worcester, which was two years
after the Cure was performed, and is so still for ought I can hear, I having
several times enquired after her.

Another Instance of the Operation of Specificks, without their being either
Alkalies or Acids, is that frequently experimented Decoction of Mercury, after
having been Boiled for a considerable time in Water, has been found not to have
lost the least Grain of its former Weight, or imparting either Taste or Color
to the Water; yet this Water in which the Mercury has been Decocted, has not
failed of killing and bringing away Worms, when other Celebrated Medicines have
failed.

Likewise Crocus Mettalorum, and some other Preparations of Antimony, being
barely infused in Wine, without losing the least Grain of their Weight, or
imparting either Smell, Taste, or Color, to the Wine in which they are
infused, yet never fail of giving the Wine a violently Emettick Quality. I my
self have at several times poured above Twenty Quarts of Canary upon one and
the same Ounce of Crocus Mettalorum Powdered, and found that the last Quart,
was as violently Emettick as the first; although after nice trial I could not find
that the Powder was diminished one Grain in its Weight, or had, as is
before-observed, caused the least sensible Alteration in the Wine.

The Cortex, that Noble Specific in all Intermitting Fevers, I don't apprehend
to perform its office as it is either an Alkaly or Acid; though being mixed
with Acids, it performs its work much better than without them.

It is a general complaint against that Noble Medicine, and is the only
occasion of deterring some People from the use of it, That being given in never
so large quantities, especially in Quartans, it only puts off the Fit for a
time, but does not totally eradicate the Distemper, it returning after a
certain period. To obviate which inconvenience; I have been advised to give it
after the following manner, which seldom or never fails of preventing the
return of the Distemper.

Two Hours before the Fit, I give a gentle Emettick; after that has done
Working, an Opiate; when the Fit is over, I give the quantity of a large Nutmeg
of the following Electuary with the Decoction, and repeat it every Four Hours,
for Five or Six Days, ordering my Patients to eat something of easy Digestion,
within an Hour after each Dose: After the expiration of Five or Six Days, I
give it only first in the Morning, and at Five in the Afternoon for a Week,
Eating something after each Dose. Take of Picked Peruvian Bark One Ounce, make
it into a very fine Powder, and with good Syrup of Lemons, as much as is
sufficient, make an Electuary.



Immediately after each Dose of which, I give about a Quarter of a Pint of the
following Decoction: Take of Picked Peruvian Bark Half an Ounce, Gentian Roots
Two Drams, Centaury Two Pugils, Spring Water Two Quarts; Boil to the
Consumption of One Half, when Cold strain out and keep for use.



By this Method, I have known Three or Four Ounces of the Cortex perfectly Cure
Quartans without any Relapse, after People have taken a Pound or more after the
common Method, which has only put by the Fits for a time.

The Reasons, as I apprehend, why this method of giving the Cortex should be
more prevalent than that commonly taken, are, the Particles of the Cortex being
very firm, the Medicine being taken, and the Patient Fasting Three or Four
Hours after it, it slides out of the Stomach into the small Guts, and so on;
the small Guts being empty, there is not pressure enough to squeeze but a very
small quantity of it into the Lacteal Vessels; so that the greatest quantity of
it is carried away as Excrement: But the Patient eating something of easy
Digestion, within so small a time as an Hour after it, that eaten, is turned
into Chyle before tho Particles of the Cortex can be carried off, and the Chyle
being of a Viscous Nature, retains the small Particles, and carries them along
with it into the Blood; so that the Blood is more impregnated by one Dose this
way given, than with Twenty Doses without presently eating after it.

As a confirmation of the truth of what I have said concerning the firmness of
the Texture of the Particles of the Cortex; if you boil it never so well, the
clear Decoction will not Gure a Quotidian or Tertian Ague; whereas the Cortex
after it has been well Boiled, being reduced to Powder, and given after the
foresaid manner, will cure a Quartan.

It would be a great Blessing to the Commonwealth of Physic, if there were a
faithful Record kept of all the Cures wrought by Simple Medicines, by which
means Physicians might arrive to a certainty of Curing more Distempers than
that of Agues; which thing I never expect to see, so long as tedious
nonsensical Compositions are depended on.

I don't remember that any of the Ancient or Modern Botannick Writers, have
mentioned the Leaves of Assarabacca to have any other quality besides that of a
violent Purger by Vomit and Stool: But Mr. Pit, a late Eminent and Learned
Apothecary of Worcester, my singular good Friend, told me, that he found it to
be one of the most noble Purgers of the Head, that he ever met with, having a
different Operation from any other Medicine that he ever met with; that the
Snuffing up of Three, Four, or Five Grains of the Powder of the dried Leaves at
Night going to Bed, would on the Morrow, without diflurbing rest that Night,
but rather causing it, occasion the discharge of a vast quantity of Serous
Matter from the Glands of the Nose; nay would sometimes last for Two or Three
Days, without being in the least a Sternutatory.

By the repeated use of this Powder alone, I have known the most violent,
confirmed Head Aches imaginable taken off, after they have eluded the efficacy
of the most Noble Celebrated Cephalicks: But this ought to be taken notice of,
That whoever takes this Medicine must confine themselves to their Houses, and
keep as warm as if they had taken the most violent Purge.

I have been told by a certain Gentleman, who uses a great quantity of the
Powder of this Herb amongst his poor Neighbors after the aforesaid manner,
that he was once induced to use it in a Deafness of long standing; he gave the
Patient Four or Five Grains to Snuff up into each Nostril every Fourth or Fifth
Night, and ordered that Three Grains should every Night with a Quill be blown
into each Ear; and in a Fortnight's time the Party recovered his Hearing as
well as ever in his Life.

I could expatiate a great deal more concerning simple Specific Remedies. But
what I have already said is enough to satisfy the World, that I allow the
Doctrine of Specificks; nay I think it ought to be lamented that it is not more
Cultivated.

I have been told by some Intelligent Persons, who have much conversed with the
Natives of West India, that the Doctrine of Specificks is mightily Cultivated
by those Barbarous People, by which means they have arrived to a certainty in
Curing most Distempers, and that to see People of One hundred and twenty and a
Hundred and thirty Years of Age, is as common a sight, as in England to see
People of Sixty. Now what a shame is it for us, who live in a Learned and
Inquisitive Age, to be outdone by those Barbarous and Illiterate People; nay,
for ought I know, the greatest part of our Skill we had from them, or a People
altogether as Ignorant.

The Physicians of Europe are not arrived to so great a certainty in any one
thing, as in the Cure of Agues; And who may we thank for that but the Poor
Indians, who imparted to us the use of their famous Bark?

From whom had Hypocrates, that Father of Physicians, his Skill, but by
Collecting the common Observations; the which only it was that made him so very
famous throughout the World. But the state of Nature being in a great measure
altered in that long track of time since he lived, and the difference of our
Climate from that wherein he lived, makes that his Observations don't
altogether hold good with us. So that if we will arrive to any certainty in our
Art, we must make nice Observations of our own.

Helmont in his Treatise of Fevers says, Quis que Artificum facit, quod
promittit, Statuarius nempe Statuam, Calciarius Calcios indubie parat, solus
autem Medicus nil audet ex art spondere sua, quia Nititur Fundamentis
incertis, per accidens duntaxat, subinde, atque dolose proficuus. Which in
English is, That there is a certainty in all Professions, but that of a
Physician; and it is altogether our own faults, for want of due Observation,
that we act upon such uncertainties as we do.

But to return to the business of Acids; What great benefit does Mankind, in
general, receive from Mineral Spring-Waters? All of which are allowed to be
Acids; and according to the difference of the Acid contained in them, they have
different Operations. Some of them, as Acton, Epsome, Dullidge, Northall, etc.
abounding with Aluminous, as well as Vitriolick Particles, work by Stool.
Others, as Tunbridge, Astrop, Ilmington, etc. Abounding with Vitriolick
Particles only, are Alteratives, and are generally carried off by Urine. The
Bath-Waters, abounding with Nitro-Sulphureous Particles, have a different
Operation from any of the former, but are generally carried off by Urine, tho
sometimes by sweat.

There is scarce a Person laboring under any Chronical Distemper, or ill habit
of body, (whose Fortune or Business will permit them) but at the proper season
are sent to one of the forementioned Places; and I verily believe, to our no
great Credit, that more People are freed from Chronical Distempers by the use
of Mineral Waters, than by all other Prescriptions: Though I am very well
satisfied, that Mineral Waters, not being properly taken, do frequently a great
deal of mischief.

Besides the service done to Mankind by drinking of Mineral Waters, what
advantage does accrue to many People laboring under some sort of Nervous
Distempers, etc. by merely Bathing themselves in the Nitro-Sulphureous Hot
Baths.

There is also a new way of Sweating, by the means of the Volatile Acid Steams
arising from the evaporating Brine, in the making of Salt at our English
Salt Pits, lately invented by Mr. Henry Hodges of Droyt-Wych in Worcestershire,
by the means of which, several very great things have been done, even in cases
where the Bath, Common Hummums and Bagnio's, have proved altogether
ineffectual. I am sorry that I am at a place where I cannot procure a number of
Experiments to insert in this place, which might be of service to Mankind: But
to supply the place of them, I shall add something done in a little
Bathing-House I erected of my own, wherein I imitated, if not outdid, the way
of Sweating at Droyt-Wych; but my many Avocations hindered me from the
prosecuting of it.

I procured a quantity of the Virgin Salt, from the Salt-Rock in Cheshire, and
as I had occasion, I dissolved a convenient quantity of it in Spring Water,
making a Brine as strong as that obtainable from the Brine-Pits; with this
Brine I filled a large Iron Pot, which had Pipes of Wood went from it to a
little Room over head, made convenient for People to Sweat in: Under my Pot I
made a fire, which both warmed the Room and made the Brine to boil, and from
the boiling Brine arose such quantities of Steams as filled my Room, which,
when it was warmed and full of steams, was fit for use: I had, beside the large
Pipes which supplied the whole Room, several others of different lengths, by
the means of which I more forcibly conveyed the Steams to any particular part.
By this way of Sweating, I have known a Gentlewoman Cured, as wa^ also one at
Droyt-Wych, of an Inveterate Leprosy, which had eluded the Efficacy of all
other Medicines and Baths. It rarely failed taking off the most violent Old
Aches and Pains. In all Relaxations of the Nerves and Tendons, I have never met
with any thing comparable to it. To be short, I found it as good as the Bath in
most things, and in many out-did it; and I believe Mr. Hodges, computing the
time he has used the way of Sweating at his Brine-Pits, and the number of
People he has had, can produce a greater Catalogue, and more considerable Cures
wrought, than has been at the Bath.

I hope by the means of Experimental Philosophy, so happily begun and
encouraged by that Admirable and never-sufficiently to be valued Mr. Boil, to
see the Art of Physic arrive to as great Certainty and Perfection, as other
Arts and Sciences are arrived to. For, as I before observed, by Chymically
Analyzing the Blood and Juices, both in their Natural and Morbid state, we may
arrive to some certainty in the Knowledge of the Cause of Distempers; which I
am afraid we have hitherto been greatly ignorant of; and when once the Causes
of Distempers are thoroughly known, the Cure of them will be no difficult matter.

I shall conclude in the Words of that Industrious Philosopher by the Fire,
Helmont, in his Treatise De Lichiasi: In nostris furnis legimus, non esse in
Natura certius Sciendi genus ad cognoscendum per causas radicales and
constitutivas rerum; quamdum Scitur quid, quantumque in re quaque sit
contentum. Ita quidem ut cognitio and connexio causarum, non constent clarius,
quam cum res ipsas ita recluseris, ut coram prodeant ac velut tecum loquantur.
Siquidem entia realia, duntaxat stantia, in suis primor dialibus, and
succedentibus seminum Principius, adeoque in vera entitate Substantiali dant
notitiam and proferunt causam cognoscendi Naturam Corporum, Mediorum and
extremitatum. Quippe sunt causa generationis, existentiae and permutationis,
secundum ipsorum radicem, quoniam (test Raimundo) utcunque Logicus habeat
profundum ingenium Argumentabile, aut Natural, de rebus extrinsecis: tamen
nunquam per aliquam rationem quae venit ad sensum, poterit direct cognoscere,
nec judicari, cum quali natura, aut virtute, per fortitudinem intrinsecus,
habeat Multiplicatio grani, crescere super terram, nisi pro similitudinario, ab
observatione desumpto. Nec sciet unquam, quomodo semen in terra pullulet,
crescat, and coligat fructum: Nisi cum doctrina experimentali prius intraverit
in nostram Philosophiam Naturalem, and non Sophisticam, sermocinalem illam,
quae nascitur Logicis, per diversas praesumptiones Phantasticas: qui cum
prognosticationibus sequelarum, contra vim Naturae, faciunt multos pertinaciter
errare, in Sophisticatione mentis. Quia per nostram Mechanicam Scientiam,
intellectus est rectificatus, vi experientiae, respectu Oculi, and verae
notitiae mentalis. Imo experientiae nostrae, stant supra probationes
Phantasticas Conclusionum; ideoque nec eas tolerant: Sed omnes alias Scientias
ostendunt Vivaciter intrare in intellectum. Unde deinceps intelligimus per
Naturam, intus illud, quod est, and quale est. Quia per talem Scientiam,
Intellectus stut denudatus Superfluitatibus and erroribus, qui ipsum ordinario
removent a veritate, propter praesumptiones and praejudicata, credita in
conclusionibus. Hinc enim nostri se direxerunt ad intrandum per quamlibet
scientiam, (in omnem experientiam) per artem, juxta Naturae cursum, in suis
univocis principiis. Spagyria enim sola, est speculum very intellectus:
Monstratque tangere, and videre veritates, earum, in claro lumine. Nec fert
argumenta logicalia; quia nimis remota, and longuinca, de claro lumine. Ideoque
habet tabula smaragdina: Per hoc genus demonstrandi, fugiet a te omnis
obscuritas, and acquiritur tibi omnis fortitudinis, fortitudo fortis, vincens
omnia subtilia, and solida penetrans, propterea vocor Hermes Trismegistus,
habens tres, (id est omnes) Parts Philosophiae, atque totius mundi Telesmon;
Haec ille inter orare ergo, and pulsare, supponitur Medium in Naturalibus,
quaerendi per ignem.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
I Design (God Willing) in a short time to Publish a Complete History of Human
Blood, both in its Natural and Morbid State.

BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Daniel Brown, at the Black-Swan and Bible
without Temple Bar.
NOVVM Lumen Chirurgicum: Or, A New Light of Surgery. Wherein is Discovered
a much more Safe and Speedy way of Curing Wounds, than has heretofore been
usually Practiced. Illustrated with several Experiments made this Year in
Flanders. Novum Lumen Chirurgicum Vindicatum: Or, The New Light of Chyrurgery
Vindicated from the many unjust Aspersions of some unknown Calumniators. With
the Addition of some few Experiments made this Winter in England.
Both by Jo. Colbatch, Physician.


