A DISCOURSE OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION, In Sundry Points: Preached at the Merchants
Lecture in Broadstreet. By THOMAS COLE Minister of the Gospel in London.

LONDON: Printed by R. R. for Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the
Poultrey, over against the Stocks-Market. MDCXCII.

THE Preface to the Reader.
I Dictate nothing to thee, I only offer my thoughts about some Points; if you
find them agreeable to the line and measure of the Word of God, receive them;
if not, you cannot do either your self, or me, a greater kindness then to
reject them. To take all for truth that we read in humane Authors, has filled
the world with Error; therefore search the Scriptures, whether things are so or
no; and impartially pronounce that judgment which the Word gives of them,
whether for, or against them. I pretend to no new discoveries, neither do I
affect to be wise above what is Written; an improvement of known truths, is all
I aim at: Here is no new unscriptural Light hung up, I only snuff the Candle
that is already burning; seeking to free the Truth from some Obscurities, that
hinder a right perception of it.

I am persuaded, the chief, if not the only cause of difference among real
Christians, lies not so much in different thoughts, as different expressions;
they mean right, but are understood wrong: We are not so Angelical yet, as to
have an intuitive knowledge, that looks Truth directly in the face, and judges
of it, as it is. But we range about in a discoursive way* inferring one thing
from another; the least error in the Premises, affects the Conclusion, and
leaves a blemish upon it, that renders it suspected by all wise men. If our
more refined thoughts and speculations in some abstracted notions of truth that
we please our selves with, lose something of their beauty and luster when put
into Words, we must allow for the grossness of the medium thorough which they
pass, all things being handed to the Intellect by our senses; we must phansy
something, before we know any thing. Common sense that rises from particulars,
may present very unintelligible species to the understanding, and occasion much
confusion there, by those false images of things, upon which right notions of
truth cannot well be built. To avoid these Uncertainties, Ambiguities, and
indistinct Conceptions, that our own words are apt to lead us into; our surest
way is to ground our judgment upon the Infallible Word of God, not receeding
from the literal Interpretation of Scripture, so far as it agrees with the
Analogy of Faith, and the general scope of the Bible in other places. We must
not suppose a Figure, where there is none; nor Allegorize plain Texts into a
foreign sense, not intended by the Holy Ghost. In all our Expositions of such
plain Scriptures, we should justify the Letter of the Text, and not force a
sense of our own upon it, which the words will not bear; this is the real cause
of those unscriptural Expressions, that some men cloth their false Conceptions
with: They cannot speak as the Scripture speaks, which argues thoughts within,
very disagreeable to the Word of God; all their Labor and Study, is, to
distinguish the Scripture out of its own sense into theirs, that they may have
some show of Divine Authority to maintain their brainsick Notions, which this
giddy Age abounds too much with.

The use of Reason in Divine Mysteries, lies in Three things: 1. In observing
what is plainly laid down in Scripture; that it is so and so Written. 2. In
understanding the true sense and signification of Scripture-terms. 3. In
discerning the natural consequences of plain truths, how one thing follows by a
rational deduction from another. But as some men would have it, we must first
look into the nature of the most incomprehensible Mysteries of the Gospel, and
draw up a Rationale of the Bible, that reason may judge what is fit to be
believed, before we give any credit to the Word of God; which is to make our
selves the first judges of Gospel Truths, and in effect to slight all Divine
Testimony.

If I keep not always the common road, but now and then step out of it, all I
have to say is this, I count not my self obliged to go thorough thick and thin
for Company, especially when I see a nearer and a cleaner way: There is some
latitude, even in the narrow way to Heaven; we may take a compass and go wide
of each other, yet have our faces fixed upon the same point, and meet at the
same place at night. Where there is the greetest agreement among Saints in any
point of Doctrine, yet we may find some difference in their conceptions of the
same thing; we are not yet come to that Unity of knowledge, which will make us
entirely one in our perfect state: In the mean time, let us not except against
that diversity of gifts and operations, that flow from the same Spirit: One may
follow another, though his pace be slower, though he tread not directly in his
steps, who goes before; nay, short steps often repeated, may rid more ground
than long deliberate paces; one shows how far he can stride, the other how fast
he can go; and a nimble Feet, is better than a long, lazy Leg, that out-strides
those, whom it cannot out-go.

I shall give thee only this brief Account of the ensuing discourse: I suppose
thou have read the Title Page; if thou think thy self concerned in so
weighty a Subject, read on; if not, I fear thy hope is only in this life. Paul
will tell thee what a miserable man thou art, 1 Cor 15. None in the world more
wretched than thy self. So I leave thee, to give thy self a reason, if thou
can, why thou slightest the Hope of Glory, and art so unconcerned in the next
state of things, when this world shall be no more.

The Knowledge of God in Christ, requires frequent and fervent Prayer, serious
Meditation, and diligent searching the Scriptures, which testify of Christ:
God never made himself visible to man, but in the person of Christ Incarnate,
who is the express Image of the Father, best able to make the truest
representation of God to man, being himself both God and man.

What is occasionally spoken of some other Points, viz. Of the Law; of the New
Covenant; of the Instrumentality of Faith in Justification; of Repentance and
New Obedience, as required in all who are Justified, though not unto the
Justification of any, I refer to thy serious consideration: My design is not to
satisfy the captious reason of the Disputers of this world, but to speak to
the experience of humble Christians: If I do that, I shall have witnesses
enough to the truth of what I say. Though some may not understand, in a
Christian, Faith is the best understanding: Were there more of this among our
men of Reason, Gospel-Mysteries would not seem such unintelligible Notions as
they do to many, who think there is no ground of certainty, but Logical
Evidence: The Divine Authority of the Scripture stands for little with such
men, who resolve to believe themselves, leaning in all things to their own
understandings: And under that Spiritual slumber I must leave them, till it
pleases God to awaken them.

As for those who make previous Conditions performed by themselves, the ground
of their Faith in Christ for Pardon, not daring to trust in Christ for
Salvation, 'till they have first prepared themselves by such doings of their
own, as may give them a right and title to it, and encourage them to trust in
Christ for that Salvation; whereas I conceive the bare offer and tender of
Grace made to sinners in the Gospel, is sufficient to give them a right and
title to it, who thankfully accept the offer, though they come without Money,
have no Righteousness of their own to make way for them, coming as they are in
their nakedness and Poverty, casting themselves upon Christ for all, looking
for acceptance only in the Beloved. Besides, to require such preparatory works
before believing, I mean, before we close in with Christ by an act of
justifying-Faith, is to put natural men upon supernatural acts, which they have
no strength to perform; and does suppose, that in their natural state, they may
be brought to true holiness; may reform their lives, and attain to some degree
of Sanctification, before their hearts are changed, and purified by Faith:
There must be a change of state, before there can be a change of life; in a
real turning to God, by a sincere obedience: In Preaching the Gospel, we exhort
and press our Hearers to holiness; not as if we thought to bring them to it,
while in their natural state, but because there is a converting Power in the
Gospel to make them new Creatures, that must be first done, before any
acceptable obedience can be performed: It Is Faith that unites us to Christ, and
being so united, all principles and habits of holiness are infused, which the
Spirit of Christ dwelling in us, draws into act upon all occasions. Some carry
it, as if all holy dispositions and inclinations were acquired by our own
endeavors: But as original Corruption was propagated by our descent from the
first Adam, so the first seeds and principles of true holiness, are propagated
by our descent from the second Adam in our new birth: Let us not think to
become holy any other way than by Faith in Christ, in whom we are sanctified,
and by whose Spirit, the Saints are stirred up and quickened to all those duties
that tend to the perfecting of holiness in them. Christ is the root that bears
us, our fruit is found in him, all our springs are in him; without me (says
Christ) you can do nothing; we shall be sorry doers of Righteousness, if we set
about it in our own strength; therefore I conclude, we must begin our Religion
with Faith in Christ, and Pray that we may be led by his Spicit, in all ways of
holiness to our lives end. I see no ground in all the new Testament, to press
and exhort Sinners to humiliation, repentance, and reformation of life, from
any other motive, than that of Gospel Grace, which must be received and taken
in, in some degree of Saving-faith, before we can heartily set about the
foresaid duties; and this is all I contend for: This reception of* or faith in
Christ, must go before all things that are afterward to be received from
Christ: That which leads many into a mistake in this matter, it their putting
too great a difference between saving Evangelical Conviction of sin, and true
saving-Faith; as if such a Conviction of our lost undone state by nature, were
but a preparative to saving-Faith; whereas it is an essential part of
justifying-Faith to convince us of sin, from which we are justified by Christ;
they are always concomitant, and cannot be separated in any act of saving-Faith
we put forth upon Christ: What is Faith, but a Conviction of sin, and
righteousness, showing us our sins, that we may seek after righteousness in
Christ? As for legal Conviction and repentance, that is but a common work. As
God pleases to awaken natural Conscience, by setting home the threats and
terrors of the Law; this may, or may not be previous to Conversion; and is
wrought in whom, and in what degree God pleases: Some lie in a spiritual
slumber all their days, without any legal touch upon their Consciences, are
fast asleep, 'till they awake in Hell; which is full of legal Convictions:
Sometimes God reserves the whole of Conviction for saving-Faith; he lets in a
sense of sin, and of the remedy at once; and this Faith may first show it self
in some, more in an humbling Conviction of sin, than in the comfortable
application of Christ's righteousness, that may come afterward, when Faith has
done its humbling work, under which, there is a secret looking unto Christ, tho
not with that comfortable sense of our interest in him, as we are made
afterward to understand.

What I urge is this: We must begin our Religion with Faith in Christ, which
never fails to produce repentance and new obedience; but how to attain to any
degree of either, before we are in Christ, is to me unconceiveable: They who so
much contend for these Preparatives, do run upon Rocks, and will be forced to
deny such fundamental Points of the Protestant Religion, which I am persuaded
they will be ashamed to disown, when closely put to it; many things are
required of those who are in Covenant, that are not required as Conditions of
our first entering into Covenant: We must not think to bring any Grace to the
Covenant, but must fetch all Grace from the Covenant, even Faith it self; a
power to believe, being the first thing promised in the Covenant; and by our
passive reception of this first Grace, a spiritual Principle of life is let
into the Soul, from whence flow all holy and spiritual actions, Qua facultates
Animae in calescunt and vivificantur, and potentes fiunt in ordine Spirituali.
Tho. Parker, These. 43.
as the fruits and effects of that habitual Faith, infused at first by God.
This reception of Christ by Faith, is our life, 1 John 5. 12. John 6. 53. by
which the faculties of our Souls are warmed and quickened, and enabled unto all
acts of spiritual life, being now thoroughly furnished unto every good word and
work.

Were Pride and Prejudice laid aside, and did every one study his own
Justification, and mind that more; some would find those very Arguments which
they take up against their Antagonists, whilst they are acting the part of
Opponents, contending more for Victory, than Truth, to make against the inward
Judgment of their own Consciences, when once it comes to be their own case. I
am persuaded many plead for those opinions and notions, upon which they would
be loath to venture their own Souls in a dying hour; I value more the Judgment
of a dying Saint about Justification, than all the wrangling Disputes of
Learned men, who are under a great temptation sometimes of showing their parts,
in speaking Learnedly against the truth; and whilst they seek to bafflle
others, they baffle themselves into a belief of those errors; which for
Disputation sake, they at first so stiffly maintained, being not able to answer
their studied Objections; they are judiciously punished for making so bold an
attempt against the truth; God giving them up to strong delusion, to believe
lies.

I conclude, That every Sinner whose heart God inclines by the Preaching of the
Gospel, to rely upon Christ for Salvation, has right so to do; and from this
first Faith in Christ habitually disposing the Soul to all holiness, do arise
actual repentance, and new obedience, as the fruits and effects of that Faith,
evidencing the truth of it, to the great comfort of all sincere Believers.

Thy faithful Monitor, And hearty Well-wisher of thy Soul's Eternal good. T. C.

The Contents of this Book.
1. CHrist in us the Hope of Glory, Col. 1. 27. Page. 1. 2. What it is to know
God in Christ, Joh. 8. 54, 55. 113. 3. Christ the only Savior of his People
from Sin, Luke 1. 77. 183. 4. Christ the Great Redeemer of Body and Soul, 1
Cor. 6. 20. 251. 5. Christ the only Mediator of the New Covenant, Heb. 12. 24.
283. 6. Christ the Foundation of our Adoption, Gal. 4. 5. 333. 7. The Necessity
of preaching Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 23. 373.
ERRATA.
PAge 5 l. 1. for in glory, r. is glory. p. 12. l. 20. for (...). p. 19. l. 5.
for Believers, r. believers. p. 59. l. 16. for longing, r. longings. p. 74.
last line, blot out other. p. 117. l. 6. for put Death, r. put to Death. p.
126. l. 20. for at last, r. at least. p. 189. l. 27. for then his, r. then this
p. 286. l. 16. for commed, r. commend.

CHRIST THE Hope of GLORY.
COL. I. 27. That God would make known what is the Riches of the Glory of this
Mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you the Hope of Glory.
IN handling these Words, I shall observe this Method, (1.) Speak to the
Coherence. (2.) Explain the Terms of the Text. (3.) Draw both parts of the Text
together into one Doctrinal Observation.

The Coherence lies thus: Colosse was a City in Phrygia in the lesser Asia,
where by the Ministry of Epaphras, a Church was gathered, and soon after
troubled by certain Seducers, pressing upon them the Observation of Mosaical
Ceremonies, and many Human Traditions. Epaphras goes to Rome to acquaint Paul
with the present state of this Church, verse 8. whereupon he, as the great
Apostle of the Gentiles, upon whom the Care of all the Churches lay, writes
this Epistle to the Collossians; taking notice of their Conversion to the
Faith, and giving Thanks to God upon that account, v. 3. Praying for them, That
they might be filled with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding, that they might walk worthy of the Lord unto all
pleasing, and be strengthened with all might, unto all patience and
long-suffering, with joyfulness, verse 9, 10, 11. Then he takes occasion to set
forth the Excellency of Christ preached unto the Gentiles, laying open the
Benefits of our Redeemer, verse. 12, 13, 14. And then he gives an admirable
Character of the Divine Person of the Redeemer, from the 15 th verse to the 23
d. exhorting them thereupon to persevere, v. 23. by diverse Arguments drawn from
the Necessity of Perseverance; from the Multitude of those who had embraced the
Gospel; from his own Ministry; from the Afflictions they suffered for the
Gospel, v. 24. and from that Obligation that lay upon him to preach the Gospel
to the Gentiles, v. 25. extolling the Dignity of the Gospel as a Mystery hid
from Ages, but now made manifest to the Saints, v. 26. And in the beginning of
this 27 th verse, he sets forth the Riches of this Mystery; He shows in the
Words of the Text, how all this is contained in Christ, of whom they were now
possessed; they had him in their very hearts, dwelling there, which is, Christ
in you the Hope of Glory. So much for the Coherence.

I now come to open the Terms of the Text; To show you what is meant by Christ;
and what by the Hope of Glory. And because there is more of Mystery in the
first part of the Text, Christ in us; than in the second part, the Hope of
Glory; not but that there is great Mystery in this too, as will appear by and
by: But I say, there is more of Mystery in the first part, because we have some
Natural Notions of Hope and Glory, that may help to lead us up into the
Spiritual Sense of the Apostle here. But we can have no natural Notion of
Christ being in us; this is above all the Apprehensions of Reason, and must be
taken in by pure Faith, from the Word of God revealing it: Therefore I will
dispatch the second part of the Text first; and show, What we are to understand
by the Hope of Glory. First, What by Hope, Secondly, What by Glory.

All Hope presupposes Desire, tho every Desire does not amount to Hope; It must
be desire continued. Hope implies that; Desire maintained and kept up in the
Soul. We may have a sudden liking, a pleasing, transient fancy to such or such
a thing from the first glance of the eye upon it; this is not properly Hope.
The Moralists tell us it is durabilis Affectus, a durable, permanent, fixed,
habitual Desire, when the Mind is set upon such a thing, dwells upon it, must
have it, is continually reaching out after it from an eager Propensity toward
it, so as it cannot be satisfied without it: This is continued Desire, strong
Desire; Valde vult; the Will is bent upon it, cannot be taken off from looking,
waiting, and longing after it. And this is the Nature of that Hope in the Text.

Secondly, What are we to understand by Glory, which begets all this waiting
and longing Desire? Now, Brethren! I must rise upon you a little: We have a
great Subject before us. I will give you first the plainest Exposition of it,
and then go as far higher as I can.

By Glory we commonly understand the Happiness of Saints in Heaven; the
Perfection of Grace in Glory. It is the highest Degree of that Good, that man
is capable of to Eternity. It is the Consummation of Divine Election: The
actual accomplishment of all that Good that God intended man from Eternity.

Having given you this plain Account of Glory, let us now look a little further
into it, and consider it as flowing from God the Fountain of it. Let us, as
well as our weak eyes will bear, look upon this Excelling, Overcoming Object,
Heavenly Glory.

It is called Romans 5. 2. The Glory of God, because God is the Author of it: He
is the Fountain and first Subject of it; and therefore he is styled, Acts 7. 2.
The God of Glory; and the Father of Glory, Ephesians. 1. 17. Compare Matthew. 5. 16.
with Romans 8. 30. and you will find that we are said to glorify God; and God
also is said to glorify us; but with this difference; We glorify God by
declaring those Divine Excellencies that were in God before; God glorifies us,
by putting an Excellency upon us which we had not before. We glorify God here
on Earth, God glorifies us in Heaven; as our Savior says, John 17. 4, 5. I
have glorified thee on earth; now, O Father, glorify thou me with the glory
which I had with thee before the world was. What was that? I wish I were able
to tell you: It may be some of you may think I say too much; and others too
little. I desire, as God will help me, to say something of it, that may lead
your Thoughts into a further Consideration of this matter: Therefore I shall
endeavor to open that difficult Scripture, Glorify thou me with that glory
which I had with thee before the World was, John 17. 5.

I conceive thus; That Christ's Human Nature upon his Ascension to Heaven, was,
according to its finite capacity, lifted up by virtue of the Hypostatical
Union, into the Essential Glory of the Godhead; which did not so shine forth in
the Man Christ here on Earth, as it does now in Heaven: It was under an Eclipse
then in his state of Humiliation; but now this Glory is fully communicated to
the Human Nature of Christ, and through Christ unto us, John 17. 22. compared
with Joh. 14. 20. I am in my father, and ye in me, and I in you, says he: I
say, the Glory of the Godhead is communicated to the Human Nature of Christ,
and through Christ unto us who are united to him: And by virtue of this Union,
the other Two Persons of the Trinity, the Father and the Holy Ghost, are said
to dwell in us, and to be in us: The Father dwells in us, and we in him, 1 John
4. 12, 13, 16. If we dwell in Love, we dwell in God, and God dwells in us; that
is, we have deep Apprehensions of the Love of God. And the Spirit dwells in us,
Romans 8. 11. comp. with 1 Cor. 3. 16. I speak this, to show how near we are
brought to God in Glory, to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And thus you see
how Saints are glorified in Christ; blessed with all Spiritual Blessings in
Heavenly Places in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 3. And how Christ is glorified in them, John
17. 10. Christ takes the Saints into his own Glory, which is their
Glorification, perfective of their Happiness. And this Manifestation of the
Glory of Christ in and upon the Saints, is said to be a glorifying of Christ,
John 17. 10. The Original Glory of Christ shining out upon us, is our
Glorification; which does consist in the Beatifical Vision, in beholding the
Glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ; we see him face to face, 1 Cor. 13.
12. Mat. 18. 10. We see him as he is; which transforms us into his likeness, 1 John 3. 2. We then appear with him in glory, Col. 3. 4. Joh. 7. 24.

What can we conceive of this Glory? What is this Glory?

The Scripture sets it forth by Allusions to things that are natural; and so
shall I.

Glory, then, is a Splendour or Luster arising up, and resulting from the Beauty
and Excellency of a thing above other things. So God outshines all Creatures,
being transcendingly Good. So that Glory, in its perfection, as it is in God
the Fountain of it, it is a continual Effulgency and Brightness flowing from
God the Perfection of Beauty. He dwells in inaccessible Light. This is called
sometimes, The brightness of his glory, Heb. 1. 3. always sending forth
resplendent Beams and Rays of Light, which do reach us in Heaven, and do
reflect a Glory upon us.

Thus the Glory of God is set forth in Scripture by things that are most
glorious in our sight: And I must tell you, That Faith sees something in God,
that is beyond all these Metaphors of Light and Brightness; I say, beyond all
these Notions of Light and Brightness, a more excelling Glory; in comparison of
which, all created Glory is no Glory. But the Beatifical Vision is abo^e all
the Visions of this Glory, that Faith now gives us, because it fills and
satisfies the whole Capacity of our Souls: We are then possessed of all, and
desire no more. The Schoolmen tell us, Heaven is Appetitus quietivum, does
satisfy and quiet the Desires of a man. So says the Scripture, Psalm. 17. 15.
When I awake, I shall be satisfied with thy likeness; speaking of the
Resurrection. If the Love of the world is in you, the love of the father is not
in you, 1 John 2. 15. If we are still flying out in our affections after
worldly things, it is a sign our minds are not quieted and satisfied with God
alone. School-Divines say further, That in Hell there is fear, but Heaven is
above all Hope: And they give this reason for it, Because in Hell there is
Successio Poenarum, a Succession of Punishment, which causes Fear; but, say
they, in Heaven, Glory is absque Successione, without Succession; i. e. It Is
all present before 'em. I suppose they mean this, That the Saints above, have a
kind of actual Comprehension of their Eternal Beatitude, in which there is
nothing past, or to come, but all as present before them. They don't Hope, but
certainly know that their Blessedness does continue for ever: That is, I say,
the Saints above, after the Resurrection, cannot be more happy to all Eternity,
than they are the first moment of their Glorification. And this I mean by an
actual Comprehension of our Eternal Beatitude: All is as present to Glorified
Saints.

Brethren! If these things seem difficult to you, and do pass your knowledge,
are above your comprehension, it is your happiness it is so, that there is more
Glory reserved for you, than you can conceive. Eye has not seen, ear has not
heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, the things that God has
prepared for them that love him. Besides, pray consider; we that are Ministers,
do prophecy but in part; we see but through a glass darkly; no wonder then if
these things seem abstruse and enigmatical. The more spiritually-minded you are
about these deep things of God, seriously considering the Sufferings of Christ,
and the Glory that shall follow, as 1 Pet. 1. 11. the more plain and evident
will this Glory be unto you. You will know more of it than the Tongue of Men or
Angels can express. There are certain Elevations of an enlightened mind, that do
sometimes raise our Apprehensions of Divine Mysteries above and beyond our
ordinary thoughts of them. The Spirit takes us up into the Mount of Glory, and
shows us the things of Christ more demonstatively than any Minister in the
World is able to do. When we are heaving at some heavy body, we lift here, and
we lift there, and it may be upon some sudden strain, we move it a little,
though ordinarily we cannot stir it: So there are some certain strains of
Faith, that give us that discerning of Spiritual Things, that we never had
before, lifting up our heads within the Vail.

Let us then wait upon God for such further manifestations of his Spirit, and
pray, That he would shine in our hearts the Light of the Knowledge of his Glory.

What shall I say more? Now we live upon Creatures, and have but a remote View
of God in them and through them; and this is our Grace. But when we come to
Heaven, God will be all in all: We shall stand in no need of Creature Comforts
to Eternity, but shall derive all our support, satisfaction, and joy,
immediately from God himself. His Spirit will be instead of Meat, Drink, and
Clothes to our bodies, and will to Eternity fill up the Capacity of our Souls
with Ravishing Joys and Delights: And this is our Glory.

The sum of all is, That Christ received into the heart by Faith, as our Jesus,
our Redeemer and Savior, does beget in the Soul thus relying upon him, an
earnest Expectation, and lively Hope of all that Good that may consummate and
perfect man's Happiness to Eternity. And this in the Text is called Glory,
Christ in us the Hope of Glory. So much for that part of the Text.

I come now to the First Part of the Text. What are we to understand by Christ
in us? And this is Mystery upon Mystery: It is evident, that in Scripture
Christ is said to be in us, and we in him; he to abide in us, and we to abide
in him. I shall now only give you a more general Exposition of these Words; in
the general sense of the Text.

I say, Christ is said to be in us, and we in him; To abide in us, and we in
him, John 15. 4. And all this must be spiritually understood; all this is by
Believing; by Faith we receive him, and by continued Acts of Faith we do keep
him dwelling in our hearts, Ephesians. 3. 17. We abide in Christ, and Christ in us;
we are in him, and he in us, when we do persevere in the Faith; when we have in
our hearts an inward belief and persuasion of all the Gospel says, concerning
Christ as our Redeemer and Savior: He is in the thoughts and imaginations of
our hearts continually; and we do act toward him according to what we believe
of him; this is believing indeed. And here comes in hope, as most suitable to
the apprehensions of our Faith concerning Christ as our Jesus: Christ in you,
(...); some render the Greek thus, Christ among you, outwardly Preached to you,
is the hope of Glory. This is Doctrinally true; but this is not enough to beget
Hope: Many hear, and don't believe; they have much of Christ without them, but
nothing of Christ within them. Hope arises from something within impressed upon
the mind; the Soul does not stir till then, does not put forth any act of Hope
till Faith comes; That sets all the wheels in motion, draws our affections
after him; such is the power of Faith, that we cannot but love and desire what
we believe to be so good and desirable. Hope naturally springs out of Faith;
and in this Hope you have the comfort of your Faith; you see the benefits of
Faith, rejoicing in what you believe. Gospel truths are very advantageous to a
believer, when he sees the advantage that accrues to him by them; and therefore
is filled with joy unspeakable, and full of Glory, by believing. We should be
little concerned in our Faith, were it not for the Hope it begets. It is life
Eternal to know Christ; in the light of that knowledge you perceive how you
live in him, and by him: As Faith carries up our Souls to Heaven, so it brings
down all the good things of Heaven to our Souls. Faith is a very enriching
Grace; rich in Faith, says the Apostle; when the Soul takes notice of this, it
cannot but Hope: What Faith has obtained of God through Christ, Hope goes out
after, longs for, and patiently waits for things unseen: Faith has ensured
them, and therefore Hope will expect them. So that Christ outwardly Preached,
is the Hope of Glory; that is, Doctrinally so: It is Doctrinally true, but it
is not experimentally true to you and me, that Christ is our Hope of Glory,
till we do believe in him: Christ must be ours, before this Hope in the Text
can be ours: Christ is not ours, till we receive him by Faith from an inward
Revelation of him, Gal. 1. 16. Till then, he is a Christ without us, not in us.
With the heart man believes; It is an inward act of the mind to believe in
Christ. The Soul does converse with Christ about its own Salvation; our
Thoughts are much taken up in considering him; applying to our selves the
benefits of his Death. If Christ be thus in you, you cannot but have Hope.

I am upon the general Exposition, and shall show you more at large, how Christ
is in us by believing.

I say Faith lets Christ into the Understanding, Will, and Affections.

Naturally when the Understanding acts upon any Object, it draws the species
and image of that Object into its self: Hence they say, Intellectus
intelligendo fit omnia; the Understanding is every thing it understands; That
is, it takes in the Idea, Shape Image of that thing which it knows, under all
its distinguishing Properties; else there would be confusion in the
Understanding; we should not know one thing from another, which is not to know
at all.

So Faith brings in Christ into the Soul under a peculiar Character, as the
fairest of Ten thousand; proposes him as the greatest truth to the
Understanding; as the greatest good to the Will, and frames conceptions of him
accordingly; thus is Christ formed in us. Faith does not take in Christ
notionally only, to lie by, as other notions do in which we are little
concerned; but it takes him in in reference to our selves, as a new Mould into
which the Soul is to be cast, as a Spirit and Principle of new life: He comes
to rule and reign, and to reduce man to a conformity to himself. And here lies
the difference between historical and saving Knowledge; one is purely
Speculative, the other is Experimentally Practical; that is, there is always
something done upon it, in and by the Soul, 2 Cor. 3. 18. We do behold as in a
glass the glory of God, and are changed. Pray observe that Text: There is a
Beholding, and there is a Transformation upon that beholding, a being changed
into the same Glory. We do not know Christ savingly, if every thing we know of
him does not help to change us more and more into his Image; I say, we do not
know Christ savingly till then. You must judge of your saving knowledge of
Gospel Truths, by the lively impressions they make upon your hearts. Are you
brought to act, do, think, that which you never did before? Do you find Christ
has had a quickening influence upon your Hearts? is indeed become your life? He
savingly knows Jesus Christ, who does act toward him according to what he
believes of him. Let men talk of this or that concerning Christ, and pretend to
understand all Mysteries, to have all knowledge; yet unless they can show the
work of the Gospel written in their hearts, as the Apostle speaks of the work
of the Law, Romans 2. 15. I say, unless they can show the work of the Gospel
written in their hearts, I am sure they are nothing. For it is impossible to
receive Christ by the saving knowledge of Faith, and not to have his Image
impressed upon all the faculties of the Soul by that Faith which first brought
it in. The very conceptions of Faith concerning Christ, are the very thoughts
of a man's own heart; so he is, so he thinks, so he acts, even as he believes.
Gospel truths cannot enter into our rational Nature at any other door, than
that of Faith: When Faith comes, there needs nothing else to turn that Soul
unto God. Every man is an his Faith is. Faith contains the true inward sense of
the Soul about Jesus Christ: And God is the Author and Finisher of this Faith,
and understood to be so by all true Believers. Pray let us close up all with
this; for I am only now laboring as well as I can to show you in general, how
Faith lets Christ into the Soul. The main thing in Conversion, is Faith; and
the main thing in Faith, is the Power of God in working it. These two things
are principally taken notice of by all Believers. They observe them in others,
much more in themselves, Acts 11. 17, 18. compared with Acts 14. 23. What
notice did they take there of the Faith God had wrought in those? They
perceived they had received the same Faith with themselves; that God had
granted unto the Gentiles, Repentance unto life. Faith is the main thing in
Conversion: Christ is the same in himself, both before and after Conversion: So
are all Gospel Truths the same in themselves; only then we did not believe
them, and now we do. It is Faith makes all the difference; and the principal
thing in Faith, is the power of God in working it. How does Paul admire the
goodness of God to him, that he should obtain Mercy, and believe in Jesus!
Lord, says he, What will thou have me to do? He never called him Lord before:
The High Priest was his Lord and Master before, from whom he received his
orders what to do against the Saints. Now he is Sick of that employment; he
lays down his Commission at the feet of Christ, and desires he would give him
instructions what to do: None should be his Lord; None should now command him
but Christ; Lord, what will thou have me to do? The beginning of Faith and
Conversion, lies in looking unto Christ for Power to believe. And our first
Faith usually breaks out in an Outcry to God to help our unbebelief. All true
Converts are sensible of this, they in Acts 7. 47. How did they Praise God for
their Conversion? They ascribe it all to him. I say, our first Faith in the
Lord Jesus, comes in with a sense of God's Power in working it; and Faith is
known to be the gift of God, by those who have it. They who begin their Faith
in the strength of their own Reason, thinking to take in such considerations of
God and Christ, and to draw such arguments from Scripture, as can induce them
to believe, will find themselves mistaken. I am persuaded the doubts and fears
of many Believers have their rise from hence; That they did not begin their
Faith in such an humble dependence upon God for strength to believe; they did
not, I say, do this as they should. And it appears that that is the cause of
their fears, because nothing but such a dependence upon Christ for Grace does
cure them. When once they have learned the right way of believing and trusting
in Christ, they enter into rest, there is an end of all their fears.

There are Promises in Scripture made unto Faith; and there are Promises made
of Faith. These, so far as we may be concerned in them, seem to be made to
Believers quite void of Faith: Though to Unbelievers remaining in unbelief,
nothing is promised; yet all things are promised to Unbelievers, going out by
Faith unto Jesus Christ: Or, if you will, I had rather express it thus; These
promises of our first faith, of the first Grace, of giving the Spirit, and the
like, they are made to Christ in the behalf of Unbelievers, such who were from
Eternity ordained unto Life; so many of them whose Names were written in the
Lamb's Book of Life. The Covenant of Grace made between God and us, does
respect the Covenant of Redemption between the Father and the Son. This first
Faith is wrought in us in such a manner, that we are sensible of the Divine
Power and Efficacy of God's Grace in working it. Though God does lead out our
Souls into rational considerations of Himself and his Son; yet we find that
these considerations do flow into our Minds from an inward Revelation made of
Christ. We do know, that such thoughts of God and Christ, could never have come
into our minds, if the Holy Ghost had not suggested them. In his Light we see
Light; and our coming to Christ, is always by the Father's drawing.

CHAP. II.
More Particularly, How Christ is in us by Faith: How Faith brings Christ into
the Soul: Or, how Christ conveys himself into our hearts through Faith: And
also, How we may discern this in our selves.
THis is the Point, and a Point of greatest concernment it is unto us all: And
therefore, I beseech you follow me with your strictest Attention.

First, That Christ may be in us, it is necessary that he should be first
outwardly proposed unto us. There is an outward Light of the letter proposing
Christ to us; and there is an inward Light of the Spirit revealing Christ in
us. It is one thing to speak Notionally, from the outward Light of the Letter;
another thing to speak Experimentally, from an inward Light of the thing it
self in our own Souls. Besides the outward Light of the Word, there is in every
true Believer an inward Light, flowing through the Word from the Object, or
thing spoken of. The Spirit reveals Christ the Object, and so making us Light
in the Lord, in his Light we see Light. As we cannot see the Sun but by its own
Light, so neither can we see Christ but in his own Light. By Faith we go unto
Christ, by Faith we go into Christ, and we sit down in his Light, entertaining
our selves with Spiritual Contemplations of his Glory. I say, that Christ
presents himself to us in a Gospel Promise, as our God and Savior: He offers
himself to us as such; and by offering himself, or under that proposal, he does
act as a Gracious God toward us. Here lies the Converting point, the effectual
working of the Word; when together with the outward proposal, Christ lets forth
some Virtue from himself, to draw in the Heart unto him. When God owns us for
his Children, who were not his Children before, yet his Adoption makes us
Children; that is the time of our effectual Calling: When under the outward
Preaching of the Gospel, Christ does so powerfully impress his own first act of
Love upon us, in dying for us, that we cannot but be sensible of it. His Love
is shed abroad in our hearts, we are overcome by it; we cannot but call him
Father, who by calling us Children, has made us so; letting in at the same
time the Spirit of the Son into our hearts. God's owning us for his Children,
is a sufficient proof that he is our Father, we cannot but call him so ever
after Zec. 13. 9.

Thus Christ makes himself inwardly known to us, by giving us Faith in himself;
for there is no other way of knowing Christ, but by believing. Sense and Reason
cannot bring Christ into the Soul, but Faith can, giving that account of him
from the Word, that is fully satisfactory. How Glorious is Christ in the Eye of
Faith! How is a believing Soul taken with him as the Fairest of Ten thousand!
And this is the first step, according to the Method of the Holy Ghost, that God
takes in bringing Christ into the Soul.

Secondly, Christ is let into the Soul by an appropriating act of Faith, by
which we do take him into our hearts as our Jesus: Every Believer says for
himself, the Lord Jesus, my Righteousness, and my Life, and my Salvation, my
God, and my Lord! The Soul knows this by that sense that Faith gives of that
act by which we do receive him; I say, by that sense that Faith gives of that
appropriating act by which we do receive Christ as our Jesus. Those who
understand themselves in an act of believing, know it to be so. Saving Faith,
so far as it reaches, is all evidence; it carries conviction along with it of
those Truths which we believe. Heb. 11. 1. I told you the last time, How Faith
does Spiritually draw in the object upon which it acts, into every believing
Soul. Faith is in us, Christ is in our Faith, as the object of it, always in
the view and eye of Faith. Faith has nothing else to act upon for
Justification, but Christ held forth in the Word: Now Faith takes Christ out of
the Word into the Heart. And this I would a little open to you; for here lies
the Mystery of your Faith; this is the critical Act of Faith.

I say thus; Faith takes in the Promise, and in and with the Promise, Christ
himself, who is wrapped up in it. Faith takes in the Promise; and in and with the
Promise, the Mercy it self that is Promised. Our Title to, and Interest in the
Lord Jesus Christ, it does arise out of this Act of Faith. By this Act of
Faith, all is completed both on God's part and our part, that may confirm our
Title to Christ. God has past his word in the Promise, Faith lays hold upon
that Promise, receives Christ from the hand of the Father as his Gift, has it
from God's own Mouth that Christ is ours; and Faith does so interpret the
Promise of God to the Soul, by a particular application of it unto us by Name;
which gives us that security of mind about our real Interest in Christ, that we
do no longer doubt of it. We are under a sense of the greatness of the Gift, of
the free Grace of the Donor, of our Propriety and Interest in so great a Gift;
and all this by our actual receiving the Promise, and in and with the Promise,
Christ himself promised. Faith draws both into the heart together, Christ and
the Promise; and Faith keeps them together; it is impossible to have and to
hold one without the other. A Promise of Christ, is Christ to a Believer; Faith
takes hold of Christ in and by the Promise. Faith carries in the Promise, as
well as Christ, into the Soul: To prevent all after challenges, The Devil is
ready to question our Interest in Christ; How came you by Christ? By Peace? And
Pardon? What have you to show that Christ is yours? Then the Soul holds up a
Promise. Here is the offer that God has made of Christ to me, says a
Believer; and what should hinder my acceptance of it? I have accepted it, and I
will keep my hold on this Promise; It is the Word of God to me, who cannot lie;
and what have you, Satan, to say against this? Thus by resisting the Devil, we
make him fly from us. And this Armor of Light does so dazzle the Eyes of the
Prince of darkness, that he is not able to stand before it.

Many complain that Christ is not theirs, but they do not consider, that it is
long of themselves, because they don't receive him: To as many as received him,
to them he gives power to become the Childreu of Cod. You will never be able to
apprehend your self to be a Child of God, till you receive Christ; do that, and
you will quickly find the Spirit witnessing with your spirit, that you are a
true Child of God.

Thirdly, We always have in this appropriating act of Faith, by which we take
Christ into our Souls, a respect and reference to Christ without us, to him as
actually Incarnate, according to the Word, and personally Glorified now in
Heaven, yet Spiritually present in us. I speak this against a late Generation
of Men, who speak so much of the Light within them, and would seem to
understand the same that we do by Christ in us; though it is evident they put a
mere natural Principle for Christ; it is not the Person of Christ as God-Man
who dyed at Jerusalem, and is now Glorified in Heaven, and in our Nature in
Heaven; it is not this Christ whom they rely upon, but a Principle of Light in
themselves, which they call Christ; a mere imaginary Christ. If our Faith does
not terminate upon the Person of Christ without us, and fix distinctly upon
him, observing what was done in, by, and upon his Person, as Dying for us;
Rising, Ascending up to Heaven, continually making Intercession there for us: I
say, if our Faith does not begin with the Person of Christ, and end in the
Person of Christ, we may be mistaken in all our seeming Spiritual apprehensions
of Christ. The Spirit of Christ is the Spirit of a real Person, of the second
Person in the Trinity, who is very God and very Man. To talk of the Spirit of
Christ, without any relation and reference to the Divine Person of Christ, is
mere Enthusiasm, and overthrows the foundation of Christian Religion. When the
Scriptures speak of Christ as dwelling in us, it still refers to the Person of
Christ, to what was really done, and acted by, and upon that Person. Romans 8.
11. His Spirit dwells in you, i. e. the Spirit of him that Rose from the Dead,
and is now Alive in Heaven. When we speak of Christ being in us, we do not mean
his Corporal, Personal Presence, but his Spiritual Presence. If any man has
not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, so says the Apostle, Romans 8. 9,
10. Though his Person be taken away from us, Acts 1. 11. and is contained in
Heaven till his second Coming; Yet the Life, Power and Spirit of Christ does
dwell in us now; and this is the Spiritual Presence of Christ in the hearts of
Believers now; this is a good proof of Christ being in us of a truth, in power
and spirit, 2 Cor. 13. 3, 4, 5.

Fourthly, Christ appears to be in Believers by the inward Communion they have
with him, by the daily moving of their hearts toward him; the Soul gathering
up it self more and more into Christ, often revolving what Christ has done for
them. Truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.
We have frequent serious Thoughts of Christ: That which is in you, is in your
Thoughts, must be in your Thoughts, you are full of him. Some can think of
nothing but the world, and the things of the world; and it is a sign Christ is
not in them: That Is the Fourth.

Fifthly; By the suitable actings of the Soul toward Christ in the most proper
and seasonable Exercise of those Graces that such or such a Manifestation of
Christ unto us, may call for.

A Soul in communion with Christ, is very observant of him, very attentive to
him, eyes him strictly; As the eye of the servant looks unto the hand of his
master, and the eye of the maiden to the hand of her mistress, so do our eyes
wait upon thee, O God; Psalm. 123. 9. You would take it ill, and count it a
great neglect in a servant, if while you are speaking to him, he should look
another way, not minding what you say: And so does Christ: If you will not keep
him company when he comes to visit you; if you will not sit with him, and
converse with him, and perform your part of Communion with him, readily
answering to his Call, making suitable Returns to all the Motions of his Holy
Spirit, you offend the Holy Ghost, and give him just occasion to leave you to
your worldly, sullen frame of Spirit. See what the Spouse in the Canticles lost
by such a carriage, chap. 5. 2. She was in a sleepy frame when Christ came to
visit her, not at all disposed to entertain him: He calls, and knocks at the
door, uses many loving compellations to allure her to open to him: Open to me,
my love, my dove, my sister, my undefiled. What kind, soft words are here!
Christ would fain have had Admittance; tells her how long he had waited, that
he was now benighted, and suffered the injury of the weather, was wringing wet:
Nothing would do; she is loath to rise; I have put off my coat, how shall I put
it on; I have washed my feet, and how shall I defile them? What! set her naked
feet upon the bare ground! not she; tho but a step or two to the door. After
she had paused a while, she bethought her self, and arose; I rose up to open to
my beloved, and my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone: And well he
might after such ill usage. If Christ be in you, be sure you use him well, lest
he withdraw from you. They who know what it is to have Christ within them,
unless it be under some such Temptations as the Spouse was assaulted with, they
will do all they can to keep him dwelling in their hearts: They study to please
him; their Carriage toward him is suitable to the Apprehensions their Fath
has of him. There are many things in Christ, that fall under the consideration
of a Believer, some at one time, and some at another; some upon one occasion,
and some upon another, as the matter they come to Christ about, may require;
and as he is pleased to let out himself more or less to us: This must be
attended to: We must answer the Call of Christ, by stirring up that Grace by
which we may best experience the sense of what Christ is to us, does for us,
requires of us, at such or such a season, under such or such circumstances, in
reference to this or that particular discovery Christ makes of himself unto us.
Sometimes our duty lies in acting this Grace, sometimes in acting that Grace;
whether it be Faith, Love, Fear, Joy, etc. Tho we cannot act one Grace aright,
but we must in some degree act every Grace; for all Graces run into that one,
which bears the name for the time, as most suited to the present occasion we
have for the Exercise of our Grace. Hence the Saints sometimes speak of one
Grace, and sometimes of another Grace. Sometimes it is Faith, sometimes it is
Love, Zeal, Joy. I protest by our rejoicing in Christ Jesus. Sometimes it is
this, sometimes it is that Grace, that their Souls are most taken up with.
There is that in Christ that will draw out every Grace in its season; and we
should at all times be in the actual exercise of some Grace: If you ask, Which?
I say, That which best suits the present occasion that is given for the
exercise of your Grace. We should labor to pitch our Thoughts upon that in
Christ, that does most directly relate to our present case; and many are the
cases of our Souls; God has ordered it so, that we might have recourse to all
his Attributes, sometimes to one, sometimes to another: God has suited our
dependence upon him to his several Attributes, and to the several Properties of
his Name, and of his Son's Name. He expects our Faith in him should be always
grounded upon that in Christ, which we see makes most for our present Relief:
Whether we want Wisdom, Righteousness, Strength, Patience, Pardon, Comfort, we
must eye that in Christ that is the next immediate Encouragement to our Faith
for that thing.

In the next place I shall show you the necessity of Christ being in us; and
that upon a double ground.

First; Because otherwise there can be no Vital Union between Christ and us; no
real Communion with him, no saving Application of him to our Souls; no
Communication of Life and Grace to us. A Branch cannot bear fruit, unless it
abide in the Vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me, John 15. 4. He says
further, Every branch that brings not forth fruit, v. 2. (A dreadful Text; it
should make Professors tremble at the reading of it); every branch in me that
brings not fruit. No wonder to hear of fruitless Professors out of Christ; but
to hear how fruitless many are who are in Christ, that is outwardly by
Profession! We may seem to be in Christ, when Christ is not really in us. The
unfruitfulness of many Professors, gives sad Demonstration of this Truth. When
Christ is really in us, we must needs be in him; there is a mutual in-being in
each other, John 17. 21. That they may be all one, as thou Father art in me,
and I in thee, that they may be one in us. This is meant, not of a Personal,
but of a Mystical Union, a Spiritual Union, Christ letting in the Virtue, the
Power of his Resurrection upon us, Tit. 2. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 18.
so purging our hearts from corruption, and redeeming us from our vain
conversation.

Secondly; Christ must be in us, because Christ has much to do within us. He
has a kingdom to set up, Luke 17. 21. Many strong holds of Satan to pull down;
the strong man to cast out; many lusts and corruptions to mortify; many Graces
to raise up and strengthen: He sanctifies us throughout, not only in Body, but
in Mind and Spirit; and therefore he must deal inwardly with us: He takes away
an heart of stone, and gives an heart of flesh; and this is inward work: The
Spirit of Christ strives with our Spirits about this; deals with the hearts of
men to turn them unto himself. Many Checks, many Calls, many Pangs, many
Throws, before Christ be formed in us, Gal. 2. 19. He is a Jew, who is one
inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the
letter, Romans 2. 29. This inward man is renewed and strengthened day by day, by
Christ living in us, Gal. 2. 20. comp. with 2 Cor. 4. 16. Tho Christ has done
much without us, in dying for us, yet if he did not come into us by his Spirit,
we should be little the better for all he has done without us. Christ is a
Savior out of us by his Merit, and in us by the Virtue and Efficacy of his
Spirit. He makes a powerful entrance at our first Conversion; he creates new
Principles, by which he works further and further upon the heart, till he has
reduced it to perfect conformity to himself.

Now here may come in a Query; Possibly some may say, Could not Christ have
done all within us? What need he do any thing without us? Might he not come and
live in us, without dying for us? Might he not enter in the Soul, and sanctify
us, though he had not first suffered outwardly for us?

I answer, No;

1. Because the Justice of God had been then unsatisfied: God the Father, God
the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, were all unsatisfied: They could have nothing
to do with fallen Man in a way of Mercy, till Satisfaction was made to Divine
Justice.

2. Supposing such a Sanctification, man must be damned notwithstanding, for
his former sins. Now no man will be at the pains to wash and cleanse a Vessel
that must presently be broken in pieces, and thrown away. What Christ did in
Person in our Nature without us, that he does Spiritually in our Hearts. As he
suffered on the Cross for us, truly so he suffers much in us, and by us, meets
with much opposition from in-dwelling Corruption: The Fight of Faith is great
and long, even to our lives end; our Warfare is not accomplished till then. Tho
Christ has satisfied the Law and Justice of God in dying for us, yet the same
power must be put forth to make us believe this, as in raising up Christ from
the dead. Christ meets with a Legal Conscience in every man, that will not
readily admit of the Grace of God, till it be overpowered by the Spirit of
Christ, and sprinkled with his Blood. It is a mighty work of Divine Power, to
bring over a trembling, convinced sinner, to trust in Christ for the Pardon of
all his Sins. There are many carnal Reasonings against this, many thoughts and
imaginations that do with a great deal of confidence exalt themselves against
the Mystery of God's Grace in Christ. Now all these Thoughts must be brought
into Captivity to the Obedience of Christ: And this is a mighty work of Divine
Power, like levelling of Mountains, and breaking Rocks asunder, giving hearts
of Flesh, that may take in Impressions of God's Love to us in Christ, and
thankfully accept of Eternal Life, as the Free Gift of God. When it pleases God
to open the wonderful Mysteries of his Grace to us, by shining into our hearts,
he does at last fully convince us of that which we could never believe before
Were there more of this inward Religion among us; more of the Power and
Efficacy of the Gospel experienced in the hearts of Professors, the savor of
it would be much stronger in our lives. Christ within makes every thing in the
Soul bow down before him.

Let us not then keep at a distance from Christ, but gather up nearer and
nearer to him by Faith, till we are united and joined to the Lord in one
Spirit, and then the Power of Christ will rest upon us, 2 Cor. 12. 11. We shall
be strengthened with might in our inward man, Ephesians. 3. 16, 17. It must needs be
so, if Christ be in us. How strong is the Devil in the hearts of Wicked Men?
How does he rage and rule in the children of disobedience? Ephesians. 2. 2. Let Satan
enter into Judas, what bold Attempts does he make upon his Master? How ready to
betray him? Thus when the Devil is in men, how mad are they? How does he hurry
them on to all manner of Wickedness; till Christ, who is stronger than this
strong man, enters in and binds him, casting him forth, Matt. 12. 25.
Unconverted men act like so many madmen; the Devil is in them; Satan reigns in
them; and it will never be otherwise, till Christ comes into them: The Power of
Satan's Kingdom is founded in the Darkness of our Minds; and when one beam of
Saving Gospel Light shines in upon us, we are turned from the Power of Satan
unto God, the whole Soul is subjected to him; every rebellious Thought is
captivated to the Obedience of Christ. Till we feel Christ thus living in us,
we know not where we are, nor what our state is. If Christ be not in you, I am
sure you are not in Christ; and what the sad consequence of that is, you may
see Ephesians. 2. 12. At that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the
commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise; without
God in the world, having no Hope: But Christ in us is our Hope of Glory.

CHAP. III.
I Shall now draw both Parts of the Text into one Doctrinal Observation, which
is plainly this, That Christ in us is our Hope of Glory; or Christ dwelling in
our hearts by Faith now, is the only sure ground and foundation of our Hope of
Glory hereafter. And therefore (1 Timothy 1. 1.) Christ is called our Hope. Why he
is so called; and how our Hope is grounded upon him, I am now to show;

(1.) From the Nature of Faith, by which we receive Christ. And

(2.) From the Object of Faith, Christ received, or, Christ in us.

I shall show you, How Faith, by receiving Christ into the Soul, begets Hope:
And also, How Christ received, does feed, nourish, and maintain this Hope, keep
it up.

I begin with the

First, To consider the Nature of Faith, as it is a Cause of Hope. When the
Apostle says, Christ in us is the Hope of Glory; he means Christ received by
us, or Christ believed on: For nothing but Faith can raise up Hope; no, not
from Christ himself. Faith is before all other Graces, is the Mother of them
all. Hope, Love, Fear, Joy, Zeal, and the like, are but the several Motions of
the Heart toward Christ, as he is represented to us by Faith. Faith raises and
sanctifies our Affections; lets them out upon Christ, so leading out our Souls
toward him, by all those holy Passions that may be any way expressive of the
high Veneration we have for him. Our Affections do express the sense of our
Souls, whether we like or dislike; how we stand affected toward any thing
proposed to us.

My business is, To show how Faith begets Hope; how naturally Hope rises out of
Faith, and is founded upon it. And I shall argue from the Nature of Faith, as
it stands in relation to Hope; so it is spoken of, Heb. 11. 1. Faith is the
substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen. It is the
Substance, (...), Quasi fulcrum rerum sperendarum. It is Calvin's Notation upon
the word, (...), Institut. lib. 3. c. 2. Sect. 41. Faith is that which
under-props Hope, and therefore rendered the substance of things hoped for; a
substando, denoting not only the subsistence of the things hoped for, in the
Understanding of a Believer, but also the help that Faith gives our Minds to
conceive of things to come, as if they were now before our eyes, and in our
hands. Faith is Hypostasis, that which under-props our Hope, that which Hope
stands upon. Faith bears up Hope; Hope stands upon the shoulders of Faith, and
looks over into Eternity, upon things to come, which are lifted up as it were
by Faith, out of their Futurity, and rendered as present to us in their very
substance; that is, The Objects of a lively Hope do affect the Mind of a
Believer, as much as present Objects do our Senses. Hence Faith is also called
(...), the Index, Ostension, Probation, or Conviction of things hoped for; that
is, it is the evidence of things not appearing; the sight or intellectual
Vision of things not seen; it is the Perspicuity or plain Appearance of things
obscure; it is the presence of things absent; the demonstration of things
occult and hidden; and all this, because Faith does secure to us what is hoped
for from the Promise of God: Evidence is a rational, intellectual thing, the
demonstration of something to our Understandings: But the Substance of a Thing
is the Thing it self, it is as if it were so, to a Lively Hope thus raised and
influenced by Faith. Faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the
evidence of things not seen. Besides, Faith sees that in Christ that answers
all Objections against our Hope. His Power and Ability to save, is
unquestionable to every true Believer; whether he will save such vile sinners
as we are, many doubts may come in at this door; but it is of the Essence of
Saving Faith to believe the Power and Ability of Christ to save to the
uttermost; there can be no Faith till then, neither weak nor strong. Where
there is nothing to rely upon, there can be no reliance. That which we rely
upon must be sure and certain in it self. Hence Christ is compared to a Rock,
to a Foundation, to a Cornerstone that bears up the Weight of the whole
Building. He is one mighty to save, and must be looked upon as such, before a
poor trembling Sinner will venture to trust in him. I grant, they who don't
question his Power, may doubt of his Will; as that Leper, Matthew. 18. 2. If thou will, thou can make me whole. Yet when things come to extremity between God
and a Sinner, Faith in the Power and Ability in Christ to save us, will carry
it against all surmizes of any unwillingness in him to save us: When we are put
to it indeed, Faith will make the venture; the Consideration whether he will or
will not save thee, is out of doors then; you will cast your selves upon him at
all adventure; if I perish, I perish; tho thou killest me, I will trust in
thee: To whom should we go? with thee only are the words of eternal life. There
is no other name under heaven, salvation is in no other, Acts 4. 12. There is
many a soul goes o Christ for Salvation, who at the same time may fear, and
think, and it may be, say, That Christ will not save them, will not own them,
nor look upon them; but having none else to fly unto* to him they must, and to
him they will go at last, if they belong to God; Lord save us, we perish, say
they. They come to Christ under fears of perishing, as appears by their
Outcries; and yet not without some hope of Deliverance, as appears by their
Coming. I am persuaded many a dear Child of God goes out of the world, under
such a trembling Act of Faith; and blessed are they that do so; for certainly
that is dying in the Lord. It may not be so comfortable, yet it is a safe
state. And this may be not only the concluding Act of Faith in a dying hour,
but Faith may and does so act in weak Christians at other seasons; it brings
them to the feet of Christ full of Fears and Doubts, and there they lie, and
there they will lie, till help comes from the Lord. They are long a coming to
Christ, but come they will, first or last; It shows they have some hope, more
it may be than they themselves take notice of: They express it rather by their
Actions than by their Words: They act like those who have hope, tho they speak
like those who have none; Master, save us, we perish! I must allow something
for these doubts and fears of our Acceptance with God upon the account of our
own unworthiness, as consistent with the Nature of Saving Faith in the main:
Yet whatever show of Humility they have, they are but a proud piece of
Unbelief: And I will further say, That these distrustful Thoughts of Christ's
Willingness to save us, are most directly opposite to the Hope in the Text, and
do arise, I am persuaded, from a secret Distrust of his All Sufficiency and
Power; tho we may not discern this in our selves. That act of Unbelief that is
uppermost, and most palpable, goes for all the Unbelief that is in our heart,
when it is quite otherwise, if they were searched to the bottom. Unbelief has
many Strings and Fibers; it is a complicated thing, all evil is in it, even
Atheism it self; let us carry it how we will, it is a denial of God. See how
the Psalmist, Psalm. 77. 7, 8, 9. under a fit of Unbelief, does not so much
question himself, as God's Faithfulness and Truth; Is his Mercy clean gone?
does his promise fail for evermore? has God forgotten to be gracious? He had
forgot himself, and he thought that God had forgot himself: But as I told you
before, Faith in the Power of Christ, will carry it at last against all our
fears: At what time I am afraid, I will trust in thee. As there is something in
Fear that makes us draw back from God, so there is something in it that puts us
forward. The greater the extremity is, the more apt we are to venture. As a man
pursued by an Enemy, and running for his life, tho he may boggle at some
difficult pass, he tries, and tries again; draws back his foot, thinks he feels
the ground sink under him; but the Enemy being now at his heels, he must
through, or Perish; and so he ventures without any more ado, and glad he is to
find firm ground under his feet; he did not think so, till he was upon it. And
so it is with a weak Believer; Faith does not presently drop all its fears when
it is coming to Christ. Act reliance upon Christ, and you will find support,
which was the thing you doubted of; by taking hold of Christ, you will stay
your selves, and feel your selves upheld. A Soul when actually come to Christ,
is rid of many fears it was under all the while it was coming, and lives under
a more comfortable Hope ever after.

Thus you see how Faith begets Hope, how naturally it arises out of Faith.

In the Next place, I shall show you, how Christ received; or, Christ in us,
does cherish, maintain, and keep up this Hope in Believers: Christ in us, the
hope of Glory, says the Text.

Brethren! Glory is a great thing, and the Hope of Glory is a great Hope: And
great hopes must have a great foundation to support them. There must be that in
the ground of my Hope, that will, at least, make it probable to me, that the
thing I Hope for, is attainable that way, else it is not a rational ground of
Hope. Now I will make it evident to you, That a Believer is the most rational
man in the world in all the actings of his Faith and Hope. He goes upon sure
ground, he has the clearest Evidence, the fullest Conviction, the most
demonstrable Proof on his side, that can be, which heightens his Hope
exceedingly. Do you make good the foundation, that Christ is in you of a truth;
and I will make good the Hope built upon it; and prove it to be sufficiently
grounded, provided you are grounded, and settled, and stablished in the Faith.
Col. 1. 23. comp. with Col. 2. 7. I am sure you will not be moved away from the
Hope of the Gospel.

I shall show you, that Christ is the only foundation of a Christians Hope of
Glory: I prove it many ways.

First, Christ removes all that may obstruct our Hope of Glory.

Secondly, He has done all that may raise and strengthen our Hope of Glory:
All that conduces to it, that any ways tends to invest us in it, and make it
ours.

Thirdly, Christ has given us a famous instance of the full actual
accomplishment of his whole Undertaking for us in himself.

Fourthly, He has given us some present earnest of all this in our selves.

Fifthly and Lastly. Lest Death should dash all our Hopes, he has assured us
of a Glorious Resurrection.

If I make out all this to you, there will be no scruple left in the Case, you
must needs be convinced, That Christ in you is your hope of Glory. I begin with
the First, Christ has removed all that may obstruct our Hope of Glory.

1. He has overcome the Devil, that grand Adversary to our Souls. The strong
man is bound, Matthew. 12. 29. Captivity is led captive, Ephesians. 2. 4, 8. Satan
falls like lightning from heaven, Luke 10. 18. He that had the power of death
is destroyed, Heb. 2. 14. The prince of this world is cast out. Joh. 12. 37.
Principalities and powers are spoiled, triumphed over, Col. 2. 15. And thus the
head of the old serpent is bruised, Genesis 3. 15. We are turned from the power of
Satan unto God, Acts 26. 18. And for this very purpose, the Son of God was
manifest, that he might destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8.

You see how full, how particular, the Scripture is in setting forth the
Victory that Christ gained over the Devil: And all, that he might secure unto
us this Hope of Glory. The devil was once in Hope to bring us all into the same
place of Torment with himself; but Christ has appeared, and has destroyed,
and overcome that great destroyer of Souls.

2. Christ has freed us from the Curse of the Law, and the Wrath of God. Gal.
3. 13. comp. with 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. He has redeemed us from the curse, being
made a curse for us; and has delivered us from the wrath to come. He was
wounded for our transgressions: He was made under the law, Gal. 4. 4. He
fulfilled all righteousness, required in the law. Matthew. 3. 15. And

3. Christ has taken away all Sin, that causes shame, and is therefore
directly opposed to this Glory in the Text. Sin is a reproach to a man, it
fills him with shame and confusion of Face, is a blot upon him, leaves a note
of infamy upon him: Now Jesus Christ he bore our Sins in his own body on the
tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. That we being dead to sin, might live to righteousness.
While we live in Sin, and live unto Sin; we live to the dishonor of God, to
the reproach of our Profession, and of all the pretended Hopes that we were
under of our Eternal Salvation. He was made sin for us, who knew no sin, that
we might be made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. He gave himself
for us, to redeem us from all iniquity, Tit. 2. 14.

Thus you see how Christ has removed all that may obstruct our Hope of Glory.

Secondly; He has done all that may raise and strengthen our Hope of Glory:
All that conduces to it, that any way tends to invest us in it, and make it
ours.

1. He satisfies the Justice of God in order to the free Remission of our Sins.
We are justified freely by his Grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus,
Romans 3. 24, 25, 26.

2. Christ does not only justify us, procure Pardon of our Sins; but he also
reconciles us to the Holiness of God, by his sanctifying Spirit. Before, we
were Enemies to God in our minds by wicked works; but being justified, God does
immediately begin to sanctify, to reconcile us to himself, to the Power,
Purity, and Strictness of Gospel-Holiness; he transforms us more and more into
his own Image from Glory to Glory; (all this tends to Glory you see) by the
Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 8.

God's Holiness inclines him to hate Sin, and his Justice to punish it: And
till these Two Attributes of God be for us, there is no Hope of Glory. Christ
by taking our Nature, put himself into a capacity of suffering for us. He took
not on him the Nature of Angels; this is some ground of Hope to Man; and having
drawn his heart to believe in him, rely upon him, it is a sure sign he intends
good unto him. Christ being become Man, he does through our own nature, convey
himself to us in the most intimate, familiar manner that can be. His Spirit
enters into us, passes through all the Faculties of our Souls, leaving a
Spiritual Inclination in them all toward God, which by degrees prevails over
all the sinful inclinations of our corrupt natures, making us at last perfectly
conformable to the Son of God; and this is our Sanctification. Christ in us
demonstrates the Love of God to us, sheds it abroad in our hearts by his
Spirit. We hope for little from those who have no kindness for us, no love to
us: But the love of God most eminently appears to us in Christ; Ephesians. 2. 4.
God having given us his Son, how shall he not with him give us all things?
There is ground enough for Hope. Faith having Christ, raises our Hope for every
thing else: If Christ be ours, all is ours.

Thirdly; Christ has given us a famous Instance in himself, of the full actual
accomplishment of his whole Undertaking for us; which I find insisted upon in
Scripture, as an Encouragement to Believers. Says the Apostle, Heb. 2. 9.
There are many Promises and Prophesies not yet come to pass, many things we do
not see fulfilled: But do we see nothing fulfilled? Ay, says he, we see Jesus
entered into Glory, that is enough for us, so 1 Pet. 1. 21. says he, God has
raised up Christ from the dead, and given him Glory; to what end, pray? That
your Faith and Hope might be in God. Believers by virtue of their Union to
Christ, their Head and Representative, they are in Heaven already, made to sit
together in Heavenly places in Christ, Ephesians. 2. 6.

All is already fulfilled in Christ that you hope for. You hope for full pardon
of Sin, full sense of Comfort, full sense of your Justification; you hope for
thorough Mortification of your Sin, perfect Sanctification; you hope for full
deliverance from all afflictions, for a Resurrection from the Grave; you hope
to ascend up to Heaven, to be Glorified there: All this is past upon Christ
already; he has finished Transgression, as to what concerns the business of
our sins, Christ has finished it; he has finished Transgression, and brought
in Everlasting Righteousness: It is not a thing to be done, but already
actually done; he has finished Transgression. Sin when finished brings forth
death, says James, this is the perfection of Sin, in the utmost extent of its
fatal Energy and Efficacy; when it is finished it brings forth Death. But
Christ's finishing Sin, was to prevent Death, the dispatching it out of the
World. He by finishing Sin, utterly abolished Death, and Sin too, by the
infinite Merit of his precious Blood. Christ's finishing Transgression, was the
blotting it out, the undoing and reversing of all that Evil that Sin had
brought upon us, that it might not be able to bring down a Curse upon us any
more.

The consideration of this famous instance, is a wonderful support to our
Faith. Let me tell you this, that a bare word of Promise concerning things to
be done for us, by God, without this famous instance of their being done and
actually accomplished in the Man Christ Jesus, would not have been such a
confirmation of our Faith, tho in it self it ought to be; yet through our
weakness and infirmity, it would not have been such a convincing confirmation,
as now it is in conjunction with this undeniable instance. It strengthens the
very Word of God, and helps us with more confidence to settle upon it. There is
nothing we hope for, but the Man Christ Jesus is already possessed of; he is
Risen, he is Ascended, he is sat down at the right Hand of God upon his
Throne, he is Glorified in our Nature; and what is done to man, may be done
again.

So that Christ is the most rational ground of a Christians Hope that can be.

Fourthly, Christ has not only given us a famous instance in himself, of the
coming to pass of all that is promised to us; but in the Fourth place, he gives
us present earnest of all this in our selves. We have the first fruits, the
earnest of the spirit in our hearts, 2 Cor. 1. 22. We are sealed by the holy
spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14.
They who are so sealed, do walk in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, Acts 9. 31.
as well they may under so great an Assurance of Glory hereafter. Some Rays of
this Glory do shine in upon the hearts of Believers here: A spirit of glory
rests upon them now, 1 Pet. 4. 14.

Now from these Beginnings we may hope for all that is to follow. Our Light is
come, and the Glory of the Lord is risen upon us in some measure already, and
is continually rising higher and higher toward a Noonday Light, which is our
perfect day. Thus we are transformed now from Glory to Glory. Believers find it
so in themselves: And therefore experience should beget Hope, Romans 5. 4. And
then,

Lastly: Lest Death should dash all our Hopes, Christ has assured us of a
Glorious Resurrection: If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of
all men most miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 19. Christ has taken off this Objection,
that we might not be in bondage through fear of death, Heb. 2. 16. It is
evident he has power to raise the dead, as he has raised himself from the
Grave. They deny matter of Fact, who deny the Resurrection. 1 Cor. 15. 13. If
there be no resurrection, then Christ is not risen; but that is matter of fact,
he is risen; we know it: Christ is the first fruits of them that sleep in the
Grave: The first begotten of the dead, Rev. 1. 5. The first who rose from the
dead, Acts 26. 23. He is the firstborn from the dead, Col. 1. 18. And he will
change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like to his glorious body, Phil.
3. 21.

See what ground there is for your Hope of Glory, from the Resurrection of
Christ. That which is sown in dishonor, shall be raised in glory, 1 Cor. 15.
43. This still maintains your Hope of Glory. Therefore my beloved brethren,
says Paul, be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
for as much as you know your labor is not in vain in the Lord, v. 58. Were
there no Resurrection, all the pains we take in Religion, would be labor in
vain; but we know our labor is not in vain.

Thus you see how Christ in us, is our Hope of Glory; because Christ without
us, is now personally in Heaven: And if since his Ascension and Glorification,
he is pleased to descend down into us by his Spirit, and dwell in us, this is a
sure sign he intends to bring us to the same place of Glory with himself.
Christ was to bring many sons to glory, Heb. 2. 7. And he sends his Spirit as
an earnest to assure us of this. The Spirit never quite leaves that soul, into
whom he once comes. He abides with us for ever, John 14. 16. He comes to take
possession for Christ; he enters in in his name, he sets his mark upon the
Soul; casts out the Devil, seals up the Soul for Christ; Thou art mine, says
the Spirit of Christ: The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirits, that
we are the children of God, Romans 8. 16. Saints are sensible of this, and do
give themselves unto the Lord: As Christ gives himself unto the Saints, so they
give themselves unto the Lord. My beloved is mine, and I am his; they do
mutually own each other. And this is the happy day of our Espousals; we are
married unto the Lord, and he is become an husband to us, and ever after we
dwell comfortably together in Love.

Brethren: If we set our minds to know these things, the Spirit will show us
out of the Word, what Christ is now doing for us in Heaven; That he is gone to
prepare a place for us, John 14. 2. To make intercession for us, Romans 8. 34. He
is entered in for us as a forerunner, Heb. 6. 20. that we may follow after. He
will come again, and receive us to himself, John 14. 3. We shall partake of his
glory, Joh. 17. 22. We shall sit down with him on his Throne, Rev. 3. 21. These
are good grounds of Hope; we should seriously weigh and consider these things,
we should ponder them well in our hearts. Some apply themselves with great
earnestness to outward Duties of Religion: Others, they study the Controversial
part, and rest in an Orthodox Judgment, in the bare knowledge of the Truth: And
may be neither the one nor the other do attend to the acting of their Faith
upon Christ, which only brings down Religion to our selves, engages our Hearts
and Consciences in it: And I am sure till then, let our Profession and
Knowledge be what it will, we are not real Christians in the sight of God;
Christ is not in us of a truth.

I see many Professors wrapped up close in their several Forms, crying, Lo here,
and Lo there; each one contending for his own Opinion, pleasing themselves with
their different ways and methods of outward Devotion: Here they rest, and are
no further concerned in Religion, than to join to such or such a Party, going
under such or such a Name. We may see many Professorts of all sorts and forms,
walking softly to Hell, talking of Christ all the way they go. This is Truth;
This is Gospel; This is the Protestant Religion; This and that is a good
Sermon: And yet it is visible, that the most important Truths of the Gospel
have not that weight with them as they should: They do not carry on the grand
design of their Profession: They don't live and walk as if they really believed
what they so solemnly profess. This is the Charge I have against the Professors
of this Age; I am afraid of them; I am afraid of you, I am afraid of my self.
Let every one examine himself. If you know these things, happy are ye if you do
them. Let us either resolve to live up to our Christian Principles, or lay
aside that Name to live, by which we deceive both our selves and others. Let us
lay aside all Hope of Salvation by Christ; or study Christ more who is the only
sure Ground and Foundation of our Hope of Glory.

CHAP. IV.
THAT I may take occasion to look a little further into the Text, I shall put
this Query from the running of the Words as they lie before us, Christ in us,
our Hope of Glory. The Query is this:

If Christ be in us, can we hope for any thing more? If Christ be ours, all is
ours; How then can Christ in us, beget Hope of any thing further? Is there any
thing more than Christ? Can Christ be nearer to us, than to be within us? Is
any thing beyond Christ? Any thing more desirable than Christ? One would think
that Christ in us, should complete our Fruition, and not lead out our Souls to
a Hope and Expectation of something else. This is the Query.

I answer; We must distinguish between the Spiritual and Personal Presence of
Christ: Christ is present with us in Spirit here; but he will be personally
present with us in Glory hereafter. It is a great deal more; or, as the Apostle
speaks, far better for us to be with Christ; that is, with his Glorified
Person, than for Christ to be in us now by his Spirit. This is in order to
that; to fit us for himself, and to make us meet for the inheritance of the
saints in light. All is ours, if Christ be ours: All ours; How? Not in hand,
not in full possession; but only in Hope, in the account and reckoning of
Faith; all is made over and secured to us; our Title is firm and good to the
whole Inheritance, and all that God has promised; but still the Inheritance is
reserved, 1 Pet. 1. 4. We are not yet entered into it, are not yet invested with
all that belongs to us. God has begun a good work here, which he will not
finish till the Resurrection.

Our Grace lies in the Spiritual Presence of Christ in us here; our Glory lies
in the Personal Presence of Christ with us in Heaven hereafter. We must speak
of these things as men, and you must bear with our infirmity, and with the
weakness of our expression. I beseech you consider what I am now saying: The
Glorified Person of Christ will not bear that which the Spirit of Christ bears
now in the Saints. The Spirit comes to sanctify us, comes where Sin is, and
casts it out. Tho the Spirit never mingles with our Sins, yet the Spirit will
hold Communion with those in whom Sin dwells, which the Glorified Person of
Christ will not. No unclean thing shall enter Heaven: We must not think to come
so near to the Person of Christ, till we are perfectly sanctified. We must be
without spot, or blemish, or wrinkle, or any such thing, before we can have
immediate Fellowship with the Father and the Son in Glory.

The Presence of the Spirit now, tho it be an inward, intimate Presence, yet it
is but a mediate Presence through the Word, through Gospel Ordinances: But the
mutual Presence of God and the Saints with each other in Heaven, is an
immediate Presence, face to face. We had need have no spot upon our face then,
but be thoroughly washed and cleansed, that no filth may be found in our skirts.
Christ has espoused us now by his Spirit to himself here under all our
Infirmities: And he sends his Spirit to put a Beauty and a Comeliness upon us,
to adorn the Bride, to clothe her with beautiful garments against the day of
his coming, that she may be fit to stand in the Presence of the Bridegroom, as
the king's daughter, all glorious within, and without too; then, being
perfectly sanctified both in Body, Mind, and Spirit. The Spirit of Christ gives
us access now into the Grace of God; but nothing but the glorified Person of
Christ can gives us access into the Glory of God; Come ye blessed: All are
admitted into Heaven by the glorified Person of Jesus Christ. The Spirit of
Christ acting now through the Word, in the Absence of the Person of Christ,
prepares us for his coming, keeps us waiting for that blessed day: Rev. 22. 17.
The spirit and the bride say, Come. The spirit says so in the Word, says so
in the hearts of the Saints, that is, makes them to say so: The whole Church,
and every particular Member says the same thing for himself, Amen, so come
Lord Jesus, come quickly. If Believers were asked one by one, Whether they
desire the Coming of their Lord, they would all agree with John, and say, Amen,
so come Lord Jesus; they care not how soon, Come quickly. They are all of a
mind in that thing. The earnest longings of every gracious Soul after Christ,
are from the Spirit of Christ breathing in Believers, kindling and keeping up
strong desires in them after Christ: They retain these desires in their Spirits
after death. The Souls under the Altar cry out, How long, Lord, holy and true,
etc. Rev. 6. 9, 10. We are still to conceive of the Spirit, as the Spirit of
Christ. It is Christ in us shedding abroad his Love in our hearts, uniting them
to himself: He will see we shall not forget him; therefore he dwells in us by
his Spirit, to keep up love in our hearts to his Person. And is not this a good
ground of hope, That Christ and Saints shall have a joyful meeting ere long,
who do thus continually remember each other: The heart of Christ is toward
them, and their hearts are toward him. They are joined together in one spirit
now. The Glory of the Saints lies in beholding the Glorified Person of Christ,
because in him they see the Human Nature so highly dignified and exalted in the
Divine Person of Christ. They see the express Image of God in Christ shining
out in the brightness of Glory: They see the Image of Christ in themselves,
shining out in the Perfection of Grace. When he shall appear, they shall be
like him, which is their Glory.

Thus Christ dwelling in us now by his Spirit, raises our Souls to the Hope of
this Glory in the Text.

The Application contains a Threefold Exhortation:

(1.) That you would be persuaded to examine and prove your Hopes, Whether they
be well grounded, yea or no.

(2.) If you find them otherwise, not sufficiently grounded upon Christ, that
you would be persuaded to throw away those vain Hopes, to lay them aside. And

(3.) That you would earnestly labor every one of you, to come under the Power
of this true Christian Hope in the Text; and then you will know where you are.

I begin with the

First: Let us examine and prove our Hope to be well-grounded upon Christ
within us. 2 Cor. 13. 5. Know ye not your own selves, how that Christ is in you
of a truth, except ye be Reprobates; that is, such (who dying in that state)
God will reject at the last day. We should do all we can to secure our Hopes,
lest our Crown be taken from us. Hope rises out of Faith; yet we must not so
take it upon trust, as not to be able to give a Reason of it, 1 Pet 3. 15. Hope
without Faith, is Presumption, Hope without Faith, is without a Reason, a
foolish Hope. Till we are justified by Faith, we can have no Hope, but we lie
under all the damning Circumstances of our sins, exposed to the Wrath and
Vengeance of God. To be without Christ, implies all misery: Then we have no
hope, Ephesians. 2. 12. He that has the Son, has life; and he that has not the Son
of God, has not life, nor shall ever see life, 1 John 5. 12.

We should not rest till we know this, because it may be known. The Spirit is
given us to this very end, 1 John 3 24. To show us that we are in Christ, and
Christ in us, John 14. 20, 21. Such a manifestation of Christ to us, is a great
Argument of his love to us, ver. 21. The Spirit does testify of Christ, John
15. 26. Besides, it is a Glory to Christ, to make him our Hope of Glory. We
render him great in the eyes of men, when we look upon him as one who makes us
great. The generality of men know nothing of Christ, but what the Faith and
Hope of Christians speak him to be. They understand the Language of your Hope,
who have none themselves. How mean thoughts soever they have of Christ, yet
they cannot but look upon him as one greatly admired by others, whose
expectations from him are so high. Ambition is natural to men; all would have
Glory, tho few take the right way to obtain it. The present satisfaction men
take in sins, may be great, yet their Hopes of any future good from them, are
very small: When they give themselves time to think, they are usually surprised
with some fear of the ill consequence of their sins; they are under some secret
bodings of some evil that will follow: Let them ask their Consciences if it be
not so. Therefore that you may have more solid grounds of Future Blessedness,
search for Christ within you; rest not till you feel the quicking Influences of
his Divine Power and Spirit in your selves; till you feel Christ living in you.
It is one thing to walk as men, another thing to walk as Christians, in the
Spirit of Christ. Did we pray more to the Father to reveal his Son in us, form
Christ in us, make us Partakers of the Divine Nature; waiting for the coming
down of the Spirit upon us; we should be endued with Power from on High, we
should know what it is to do all things in the strength of Christ, to have all
our Works wrought in God: What it is to act supernaturally, which every
Christian should aim at, experimentally to know what it is to act
supernaturally: They who do so, will know that they do so; They cannot be well
ignorant of that which is so new, so much another thing from all that is
Natural. They are lifted up above themselves, they are carried away by the
Spirit of God, and they may know that they are in that Spirit; every such
appearance of God in the Soul, is a manifestation of the Spirit; not only to
others, but more especially to our selves. The Spirit bears Witness, that the
Spirit is truth; The Spirit witnesses with, and to our Spirits.

When the Spirit comes as a witness, he stands forth distinct from our Spirit,
that the joint Testimony of the Spirit of God with ours, may be discerned from
the single Testimony of our own Spirit, which could not be, if the Holy Ghost
when giving in his Witness, laying down his proposition, did not stand forth by
himself, in distinction from the spirit of a man, that the truth may be
confirmed out of the mouth of two Witnesses, at least in the Conscience of a
Believer.

Some of the Heathen of old had their Ecstasies and Raptures, were sensible they
were acted by a spirit higher than their own, and thought themselves Divinely
Inspired, when they were under the greatest Infatuation of Satan imaginable.
But it does not hence follow, that those who are truly inspired by God, may not
know it: Were Christ in us of a truth, we should find our selves strong in the
power of his Might. He that is in us, is greater than he that is in the World;
could we take hold of this great one, and go forth in his Name, Spirit, and
Strength, we should do great things; I can do all things, says Paul, through
Christ that strengthens me; what do we then in the strength of Christ, which
we know we could not do of our selves? I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in
me. We should labor after some experience of this in our own selves, not to
rest satisfied till we can experimentally say it of our selves: Without this
experience, we live but at a low rate, do no more than others, and sometimes
not so much neither; whereas we should hold forth Christ, and walk in his
Spirit, having our conversation more in Heaven, resisting the Devil, overcoming
the World, denying our selves, as those who are strengthened by Christ in our
inward man so to do.

While I am putting you upon this search to feel for Christ within you, as the
Ground of your Hope; I shall lay down Two Cautions:

1. This Mystical Union between Christ and Believers, this Spiritual In-being
of Christ in our hearts, is a great Mystery. We cannot fully comprehend it in
this world. Some experience we now have of such a thing in our selves; but a
perfect, distinct knowledge of these deep Mysteries, is reserved for Heaven.
Then we shall have a clearer Revelation of the Mystery of the Trinity: At that
day, says Christ, you shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I
in you, John 14. 20. At that day, but not before: In that day you shall know it
perfectly; now you know something, you see something, tho but darkly; and we
must be content.

2. Never take that to be from the Spirit of Christ in you, that leads you from
the Scripture, and would make you wise above what is written. Some have run
into strong delusions this way, fancying every thing they do or say, to be by
Divine Inspiration. What tho some are deceived in thinking they have the Spirit
of Christ, when they have him not? It does not therefore follow, that those who
have the Spirit indeed and in truth, may not know that they have him. One man's
Error in this case, cannot overthrow another man's Experience. He that has not
the Spirit, may think he has him; but he that has the Spirit indeed, may know
he has the Spirit. Because some men mistake the Truth, it does not follow
therefore, it cannot be known by any. When you seek for Christ in your selves,
and for further Teachings of his Spirit, you should always pray over some Word;
have your eye upon some Scripture which you beg a right understanding of; for
no inward Revelation is now to be expected; but only of things already revealed
in the Word, which the Spirit opens to us; that is, Christ in us does this. But
in Heaven we have an Intuitive Knowledge of the things themselves in God, who
is the First Spring, the First Cause, the Fountain of all supernatural Truths
contained in the Bible. In Heaven we shall know the Truth only as it is in
Jesus; now we know it as it is in our Bibles; we know it by the Word, as a Sign
and Symbol of the Will of God, from whence we abstract all our knowledge of
Divine things in a discoursive way. But Intuitive Knowledge in Heaven is
another thing; there needs no written Word, no other Bible in Heaven, but
Christ the Essential Word of God, who will show us all in himself, all
Gospel Truths do center in him; which shows, that for us to be with Christ in
Glory, is more than for Christ to be in us by his Spirit here.

Secondly; Let us lay aside all vain Hopes, that confound and make us ashamed,
Job 6. 20. The Vanity of Hope lies not so much in the Object of Hope, as in our
Hope it self: The Object may be real, to wit, Life and Eternal Glory: They are
gay things, desirable things, and they are real things too: But we must see
that our Hope be well-grounded: If the Grounds be weak, such as by no just
Consequence of Reason will bear what we infer from them, then our Hope is vain;
we must give a reason of the hope that is in us; and such a reason as may
answer all Objections against our Hope. The Object of Hope is Bonum arduum
futurum, sed possibile: If there be not a possibility of obtaining what we hope
for, upon the ground we go upon, our Hope is vain, and will certainly make us
ashamed, the issue not answering our expectation, Job 11. 20. comp. with Prove.
10. 28.

There are Two Things which men ground their vain Hope of Salvation, of Heaven
and Glory upon; in both which they overlook Christ, and pass him by.

1. Their own Righteousness, so far as they can pretend to any, they make the
most of it, grow proud of it, look to be considered by God for it; as if he was
beholden to them for their good Lives, and inoffensive Carriage; that they run
not into the same excess of Riot with others. But alas! what a sandy foundation
is this to build our Hope of Heaven upon!

Be not offended at what I am saying, but weigh it well in the Balance of the
Sanctuary; consider it strictly by Gospel Light: I say this; We may as soon be
saved in our Sins, as by our own Righteousness. It is as contrary to the Gospel
to trust in our own Righteousness, as to the Law, not to do it. Our Sins are
not more opposite to the Holiness of the Law, than trusting in our own
Righteousness is to the Free Grace of the Gospel. Not by works of righteousness
which we have done, but according to his mercy he saves us, Tit. 3. 5. It is
true, a Holy Life becomes a Christian; we cannot be Christians without it; but
it does not make a Christian: Nothing but Faith in Christ does make a
Christian, from whence all true Holiness found in Believers, does spring. I
have sometimes told you, That Preaching of Holiness, pressing Holiness with
little or no mention of Christ, will never bring men to Christ; but Preaching
up Christ will bring men to Holiness; that is the right spring and root of all
true Godliness. It does as much belong to Christ to Sanctify us, as to
Justify us. We must go out of our selves for Sanctification, as well as
Justification. Who shall bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one: None
but God. No unjustified person can be sanctified.

He whose sins are imputed to him, must needs be under the power of them: Sin
will live under its own Guilt: If that be removed, sin dies presently. If it
cannot kill us, it ceases to reign over us. The strength of sin is the law.
When the Law cannot by any Act of Justice belonging to it, curse us for our
sin, sin in us grows weaker as to its own Acts hereafter; because we are no
longer under the Law, but under Grace, which teaches us to deny-ungodliness. A
man will never be brought off from his own course, by all the teachings of the
Terrors of the Law, till the Grace of God begins to tutor him, to instruct him.
The Law was not intended to be our Teacher, but our Judge: It was given to man
in his Perfect State, who knew the whole compass of his Duty, had the Law
written in his heart. The breach of the Law left him under the Curse, where he
does, and will lie, till free Grace relieve him, and brings him under the
Blessing of the Gospel. The Law shows fallen man his Transgression, but cannot
show him any Righteousness in himself, because there is nothing exactly
answering the Law found in man fallen. Malum est ex quolibet defectu; The whole
Action is sinful, because imperfect.

The Righteousness of the Law, in a strict Legal sense, (for I must be forced
to distinguish; I know many in this Age will not understand me; but they that
have ears to hear, let them hear: I say, The Righteousness of the Law in a
strict Legal sense) admits of no degrees; it must be perfect or none: It is
true, a gradual tendency toward the exact Righteousness of the Law, is
commendable in any; but because it is not a fulfilling of the Law, the Law will
not reward it, but punish that man as a Sinner; not because he goes so far in
his Obedience, but because he goes no further. A man may do many things, but if
he does not always do every thing that is right in the Law, the Law will curse
that man, and his former Righteousness shall not be remembered.

2. The second false Ground of hope, is the Gracious and Merciful Nature of
God. How is this cried up! his Philanthropia, God's Love to his creature man!
And this they think will make God unnatural to himself, and cause him to lay
aside his Justice, that he may show kindness to them who have acted so contrary
to him. And therefore they hope God will have as little regard to his own
Justice and Holiness, as they have had.

All I shall say is this; That those who reject the only way of Salvation by
Christ, in whom the Justice and Mercy of God are reconciled, will find it a
hard matter to plead the Mercy of God for themselves in a direct Opposition to
his Justice: Whether they can dye in Peace under these Thoughts, let them see
to that. Men may talk what they will of their Good Works, and of their inherent
Holiness; but sure I am, Nothing but the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us,
will remove that Guilt that cleaves to us in every thing that we do; and you
will never be Justified till that be done. What is all your Duties,
Performances, all Holy Works, What is all this to the Pardon of thy Sin, Man?
God never absolves the sinner, never looks upon him as Righteous, till he be
found in Christ, not having on his own Righteousness.

CHAP. V.
Thirdly; Let us labor to come under the Power of this Christian Hope.
WHether I shall Prophecy good to you, or evil, from this Text, I know not, it
is according to the frame the Word finds you in, which I am now to deliver to
you. If in this life only you have hope in Christ, you are of all men and women
the most miserable. But I hope better things of you, of every one of you, tho I
thus speak; knowing that you all have immortal Souls, that cannot always live
upon the Bodies portion; I am jealous over you with a Godly Jealousy, and
would provoke you to give a reason of the hope that is in you; not so much to
satisfy me, as to satisfy your selves: Give such a Reason as may satisfy
your own Consciences: And this is all I aim at.

All of us must be either under Hope, or under fear, or in a dead, stupid,
senseless frame: I will suppose you are all under some hope of Eternal Glory;
for rruly I see little else appear in the Faces of Professors. They all hope to
be Saved and go to Heaven; I am not willing to weaken your Hopes, nor disturb
you in them, unless I see cause: And truly I wish, that this Hope do not prove
a presumptuous Confidence in some, arising from carnal security. But be it what
it will, let us look into the matter, it may be while I am speaking of the
Power of Hope, some of you may be made sensible of the weakness of your Hope.

Hope has powerful influences upon the Mind of a man, makes strong
impressions, and gives a sense of it self unto those that have it: we cannot but
take notice of our own Hopes: Many pretend to this Hope, say they have it, who
have it not: They are willing to deceive themselves, to flatter their own
Souls, to think better of their State than it is; but can give no reason that
will hold, why they think so: And yet they will not be persuaded otherwise;
they take it ill to be suspected by those who see further into their State than
they do; till a through conviction of Sin and Wrath come upon them, they will
never be otherwise minded. But then all their Hopes vanish, their Light goes
out in utter Darkness, their Spiders Web breaks and becomes vain when they lay
any stress upon it; their Hope is as the giving up of the Ghost, which makes
them ashamed, fills them with Confusion of Face. Whereas a true lively
Christian Hope, will carry us through Death it self, Prove. 14. 32. This Hope in
the Text is not an empty name, but a real thing, a real Grace, and has real
effects that may be felt, and will be felt by those who are under the Power of
it. You know what it is to be in fear, how discomposed and cast down, how
perplexed and troubled, how pale and wan. By the contrary frame, you may know
what it is to be under the Power of Hope, which is so reviving, and begets such
strong consolation, Heb. 6. 18. It is a blessed hope, Tit. 2. 13. It will
comfort us in a Dungeon, there we may sing as prisoners of hope, Zech. 9. 12.
It is an helmet to receive all Blows, securing the head from hurt, Ephesians. 6.
17. It is an anchor to keep the Soul steady in a tempestuous season, Heb. 6.
19. Great is the patience of Hope, 1 These. 1. 3. It bespeaks a troubled Soul,
as Psalm. 42. Why art thou cast down, O my soul, why art thou disquieted within
me: Hope thou in God. There is little comfort for a Christian in this world, if
the hope of eternal life be cut off, 1 Cor. 15. 19.

First, The usual Effects of this Hope, when it is in any other Power, are
these:

1. Hope of Glory, and an earnest expectation of the coming of Christ, are
joined together, and indeed they are almost the same: Waiting for his Coming;
looking for and hastening to the Coming of the Day of the Lord: Christ was
called the hope of Israel, Acts 28. 20. Because our Fathers looked for his
first Coming; and so he is now called the Hope of Glory, because the Saints do
so earnestly look for his second Coming. 1 Cor. 17. 2 Pet. 3. 12.

2. This Hope and Prayer go together. The Schools tell us, that Petitio is
Interpretativa spei; we cannot better express our Hopes, than by wishing,
Praying, and earnest breathing after what we Hope for. Would you know, whether
you shall enter into Glory, and be Eternally Saved? If you have the Spirit of
Prayer, you will certainly be Saved: But mistake not the gift of Prayer (which
may be nothing but words) for the grace of Prayer, that lies in the inward
earnestness of the heart, sometimes in Groans that are unutterable: If you can
pray inwardly in the frame of your Hearts, with Fervency and Affection in the
Name of Christ, this is Praying in the Holy Ghost; let your words be never so
few, and your expressions never so broken and imperfect, if the desire of your
Souls be after Christ, it is laid down as an infallible Mark of your title to
Heaven. Gal. 4. 6, 7. Because you are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of
his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Wherefore we are no more
servants but Sons; and if sons, then heirs of God through Christ. The Spirit of
Prayer is a convincing Evidence to those that have it, or else the Spirit of
God would miss of his end, if he did not assure us by that assuring act which
is put forth for that very purpose: Therefore be much in Prayer. If you are not
in that measure of lively Hope as you would, be much in Prayer for Hope. Saints
cannot but Pray much under Hope. Hope invites to Prayer, and disposes to it, if
it be but to tell God what we Hope for, which we cannot do but under some
present renewed Acts of Hope, which possibly we may not perceive in our selves.
Yet however, Pray under all your despondencies for Hope, that God would raise
it, and kindle it in you. Though you pray but faintly, weakly, through fear and
diffidence, yet pray on: God usually comes in with strengthening Grace in the
time of Prayer: He says to the fearful Soul, Fear not; there is a sudden
reviving, a shedding abroad of the Love of God in our hearts by the Holy Ghost.
We may be under dismal apprehensions of of the Wrath of God in the beginning of
Prayer, and yet conclude with rejoying and triumphing in his Grace toward us.
There are many instances of this in the Psalms. Faith, if it be right, knows
not how to conclude a Prayer, till it has taken some hold of Christ for
relief; we cannot say Amen, till then, we cannot come to the conclusion till
then; and then the Soul rises up in a comfortable frame under some Hope of
Mercy.

Thus Hope is raised, nourished, and increased in us by earnest fervent Prayer.

3. Hope of Glory and Mortification of Sin go together. He that has this hope,
says the Apostle, purifies himself as God is pure, 1 John 1. 3. Every Sin in
any measure Mortified, brings on a further degree of Glory upon us, and leaves
a deeper impression of the Image of God upon the Soul; you resemble him more,
which brings you nearer to your Heavenly State, when you shall be exactly like
him.

4. Hope of Glory, and Cheerfulness under all outward Afflictions, go together.
2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18. We faint not, because of that far more exceeding and
eternal weight of Glory. You should always hold fast the rejoicing of your hope
firm unto the end, Heb. 3. 6. Gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and
hope unto the End; for the Grace that is to be brought unto you at the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 13. We are often assaulted by
Temptations, outward Afflictions, and inward Desertions are ready to sink our
hope: We say sometimes as the Church did, Lament. 3. 18. My strength and my
hope is perished from the Lord. Our hopes seems to be plucked up even by the
roots, as a tree that is removed, Job. 19. 10. yet revives again, and springs
up as God turns his face toward us, filling us with joy and peace in
believing; then we abound in hope tbrough the power of the Holy Ghost. Romans 15.
13.

Directions how to get under the Power of this Cristian Hope; for a Power it
has, and it is nothing to us, till we come under that Power.

1. Labor to understand your Hopes; What it is you look for from Christ, how
great the inheritance is. A Minor under Age, who is born to a great Estate, is
little affected with it, till he comes to know what he is Heir to; what Houses,
Manors and Lordships belong to him, then he counts himself rich indeed: The
Apostle prays for this, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. That the God of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of Glory, may give to you the Spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the knowledge of him: The eyes of your understanding being
enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the
riches of the Glory of his inheritance in the Saints. Did you know what a rich,
Glorious Inheritance is reserved for you, this would mightily raise, quicken,
strengthen your Hope: You would count your Hope something then, and rejoice
more in it.

That is the First Direction; Labor to understand your Hopes: Read over the
Inventory of God's Gifts bequeathed to you in the Covenant of Grace, till you
can say, This is mine, and that is mine, and all is mine through Christ.

2. Call over former experiences. What God has already done for you.
Experience begets Hope, as in Jacob, Genesis 32. 10, 11, 12. With my staff did I
come over this Jordan, and now I am become two Bands; Lord, I am not worthy of
the least of thy mercies, deliver me from the hand of my Brother Esau: Thou
that have done such great things for me, go on and deliver me. Be not afraid of
present danger, but remember what the Lord has done for you; suppress all
discouraging thoughts that may arise in thee. Deuteronomy. 7. 17, 18, 19. If thou
shall say in thine heart, these Nations are more than I, how shall I dispossess
them? Thou shall not be afraid of them, but shall well remember what the Lord
thy God did to Pharaoh, and unto all Egypt Thou shall not be afrighted at them,
for the Lord thy God is among you, and he will put out these Nations by little
and little, v. 21, 22 We complain, things go on but slowly, there is little
done; God chooses to do things by little and little; consider what has been
done, and don't make it less than it is; it may seem little in comparison of
what shall be, yet in it self, as it is, it is very great. And therefore let us
argue as David did, 1 Samuel 17 37. Psalm. 3. 7, 8. Psalm. 9. 10, 11. Psalm 143 5, 6,
7, 8. so Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. 7, 9, 12. so Paul, 2 Cor. 1. 10. God that
has delivered, and does deliver, and we trust will yet deliver. The
remembrance of what God has done, and does do, will strengthen our Hope in him
for the future.

3. Converse much with the Scriptures, especially with the Promises, that
through Patience and comfort of the Scriptures you may have hope, Rom 15. 4.
How did David raise his Hope from the Word of God, Psalm. 119. in many places, v
42, 72. and elsewhere in that Psalm? When a man gives his word to us again and
again, we believe him, and reckon our selves sure of what we ask, having so
many repeated promises that it shall be done. The Word of God is a living Word
in this respect, because as often as we mingle it with Faith, it represents God
speaking afresh to us in particular: Faith hearing this again and again, is
more confirmed. Faith at first came by hearing, and the oftener it hears God
speaking in his Word, the more it is strengthened in a lively Hope of all that
God has promised.

4. Look upon it as your Duty to Hope in God. He has commanded us, because he
knows we are apt to doubt and question his Promises. It is not presumption, but
Duty to Hope in God, relying upon his free Grace, and not upon our own deserts;
which never begets a true humble Christian Hope, but a proud, arrogant
Confidence in a man's self: Whereas the fiducial Confidence of Hope is always
derived from Faith, Ephesians. 3. 12.

5 thly. and Lastly. Look unto the God of Hope. Live in a constant dependence
upon his Spirit to work it in you. It is through the Power of the Holy Ghost we
abound in hope, Romans 15. 13. That we are brought under the Power of a Christian
Hope, which arises from such hidden causes, such deep grounds, not known to
flesh and blood, that none but God can demonstrate the reasonableness and
certainty of our Hope. He knows how to beget us again to a lively Hope by the
Resurrection of Christ from the Dead, which is more than a Promise: It is the
actual accomplishing of that in another, that makes it credible to us, that God
can raise the Dead, and that as he has raised up Christ, so he will also raise
up us at the last Day.

To the former directions add these Two things following.

If you would ground your Hope aright upon Christ within you, so as to come
under the Power of it. Then

1. Consider well, whether Christ be indeed in you; whether you have felt the
quickening influences of his Spirit in your own Souls. Christ is your life, Col.
3. 4. comp with John 11. 25. Consider then whether he be indeed your Life; use
all your Spiritual senses about this; it is no easy matter to understand this
Mystery. There are many who lead a Natural, Rational, Moral Life under a
Christian Profession, and may be estranged from the Life of God all their Days.
You see how Paul distinguishes in the case, lest he should mistake himself, or
be mistaken by others. Gal. 2. 20. I live, says he, yet not I, but Christ
lives in me. And so may a Saint now say, I understand Gospel Mysteries, yet
not I as a man, by the Light of my own Reason, but as a Man in Christ, in the
Light of Faith; by which I know, not only that such things are revealed in the
Word, but also, that they shall be accomplished unto all those who rely upon
Christ: Neither can I give any other reason for their accomplishment, but so it
is Written, and thus says the Lord. This is to speak like a Christian, when we
resolve all into Christ, becoming fools in our selves, that we may be wise in
him. The Life I now live in the Flesh, says he, I live by the Faith of the Son
of God; take away that Faith, and all my Hope as a Christian vanishes away.

You had need have a true Spiritual Light rightly discerning of Spiritual
things, to know that Christ is in you, as your Life; It cannot be known but by
Faith. Though Faith be very rational in all its arguings from Gospel
Principles, yet Faith it self is not properly an act of Reason, but rather an
act above Reason; it carries the Understanding above its Reason, to act my
Understanding so, as to assent to that which I have no Natural Reason for: This
is the knowledge of Faith; a strange way of knowing, which the world counts
Foolishness.

Supernatural truths don't rise up into our Minds, as the product and
consequent of our Reason; this is humane knowledge according to our Logic. But
all supernatural truths are let down through the Word by the Spirit of God into
our Understandings; they are too deep, too mysterious and profound to be
conveyed to our Understandings by the ordinary course of Reason: And therefore
God opens another door, and lets them into the Soul by Faith. Thus he writes
his Law in our Hearts, puts his Truth into our inward parts; Where is the
Scribe? Where is the Wise? Where is the Disputer of this World? How does God
confound the Wisdom of the Wise, from whom he hides these things, which he
reveals to Babes and Sucklings: Poor humble Souls, they have the knowledge of
the Heavenly Mysteries, and the World knows not how they came by it. Whence
has this man this wisdom, and this knowledge, having never learned? say they
of Christ, Matthew. 13. 54. comp. with John 7. 15. They wondered that any, not
brought up in their Schools, should be more knowing than themselves. It is an
astonishment to the World, to consider what knowledge poor humble Saints have
of things, which they do in no wise understand.

2. Have a care of too gross conceptions of Christ within you. You must
understand the Text Spiritually: As Reason brings Natural things into your
Minds, and gives you an Intellectual Vision of them; So Faith brings Heavenly
things into your Minds, and gives you a Spiritual Vision of them. Christ is
first known to us by Faith: There is no knowing him but by Believing in him; no
coming to him, no seeing of him, but as the Soul moves toward him in the Light
of Faith. God shines in our hearts, says the Scripture, the Light of the
knowledge of his Glory in the face of Jesus Christ; and this Light of knowledge
is Faith. When we Believe, we know Christ, we See him, we Come to him, we Rely
upon him, Rejoice in him, we Love and Obey him; all the actings of the Soul
toward Christ, they are from Faith, representing him to us out of the Word.
And when we believe the Report of the Gospel concerning him, we are persuaded,
and must be persuaded of the Truth of that which by a present Act of Faith we
do Believe: There goes no more to your knowledge, persuasion, and satisfaction,
than real Believing. Faith in its own Nature, is all Evidence; though Flesh and
Blood do contradict this Evidence, seek to cast clouds over it, yet those
doubts that arise, they come not from Faith, but Unbelief that accompanies it
more or less in every act we perform.

The more Faith, the more Hope; the more Unbelief, the less Hope. Hope will be
in a proportion to the degree of our Faith: The Spirit works Faith in us, and
then shows us Christ in the Light of it. Christ is let into the Soul by Faith,
there he is, and there he dwells, transforming us into his own Image by our
Faith in him. As Faith works by Love, so the Spirit works by Faith; I mean by
our Faith in him. The Spirit knows how to improve our Faith in Christ, to draw
arguments from thence, to bring us to any thing which the Gospel calls for.

I am persuaded I speak to many who have Christ within them, who would not quit
their Interest in him for Ten thousand Worlds; if so, you must fetch the reason
of this from your Hope in Christ: What! Not part with Christ upon any terms,
and yet Hope for nothing from him; not part with Christ upon any terms, and yet
get nothing by him! He does not offer himself to you upon these terms, but that
ye may be enriched by him in all things. You dishonor Christ, and forget your
Faith, when you don't Hope for great things from him. I Beseech you, Sirs!
Bethink your selves a little of your standing in Christ; what hold you have
taken of Eternal life in him; and don't after all say, I have no Hope. Neither
would I have you content your selves in bare saying you have Hope: But stir it
up, act it, show it, rejoice in it daily. Hope to the end, that others may see,
how happy you count your selves in Jesus Christ; tell every one you meet, That
Christ in you, is your hope of Glory. We often Preach and Hear of Faith and
Hope, but we practice those Graces at leisure. Sermons of Faith and Hope, don't
beget these Graces in us, nor draw them out into act: Pray consider of this;
were our hearts changed under the Preaching of the Word, into a frame suitable
to it, this would be a token for good unto us, that the Lord is indeed among
us. If Sermons of Hope did end in lively actings of Hope, we should all go home
Rejoicing, Blessing and Praising of God for his abundant Mercy toward us.
Great Hopes cannot easily be forgotten; we naturally run into our Hopes; we are
fond of them, they present themselves to our Thoughts continually, have easy
access to us, they take up our Minds daily, making pleasing representations to
us of the Good that is coming toward us: I would leave you under the
Contemplation of these things. Did we converse more with our Hopes of Heaven
and Glory, this would keep sorrow from our hearts, and cause us always to
rejoice in the Lord. Here is a present Cordial for the Poorest, the most
Afflicted and Disconsolate Soul. How uncomfortable soever your present
circumstances may be, if you would get up into this Hope, what happy Men and
Women would you be! you would count your selves happy, and be filled with joy
unspeakable, and full of Glory. None of your wants would pinch you, you would
be lifted up above the afflicting sense and smart of any outward Cross that may
now lie heavy upon you: All your Afflictions would be light, if compared to
this Eternal weight of Glory, which weighs down all troubles, and does
wonderfully alleviate and moderate all your Griefs. You may be AS sorrowful in
the Judgment of others, and yet always rejoicing in your own Spirits from the
Power of Hope.

It may be some will say, How can this be? Were we never so high in these
Hopes, yet we should grow weary and restless under them, because all is put off
to the Resurrection, till the Coming of Christ; and who can tell when that will
be? Hope deferred makes the heart sick; we may faint under our desires before
they come to pass, Prove. 13. 10.

I Answer; In worldly hope it is so; worldly hope is not so strengthened, is not
so established, has not that overcoming Power and Virtue in it, as this
Christian Hope has; for these Two Reasons:

1. Because of the firm Assurance we have of the certain Accomplishment of our
Hopes; which cannot be said of any outward, humane, worldly hope. As
Christians, we know our hope will not make us ashamed, Romans 5. 5. comp. with
Romans 8. 38, 39. A Christian knows his Hope is founded upon immutable Promises,
and this does strangely animate the Power of a Christian Hope.

2. We cannot flag in our Christian Hope, because of the present satisfaction
it gives us: Wordly Hope is but a lank thing, promises fair, but has little
present influence upon the minds of men to give them any real satisfaction; but
a Christian Hope does give present satisfaction: There is always something in
hand, some pledges, some earnest of all that is to follow; and this is
sufficient for our present occasions, to serve the turn till we have finished
our Pilgrimage here below. They that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their
strength; they shall mount up as with eagles wings; they shall run and not be
weary; they shall walk and not faint, Isa. 40. 31. There is a strange Strength
and Virtue in a Christian Hope. The Hope of a Christian is a feeding Hope, a
Soul-satisfying Hope; there is no languishing under it, it feeds upon the
present overflowings of the Promise. Tho the thing it self is not yet brought
forth out of the Promises, yet the Actings of Faith and Hope do cause a strange
present overflowing from the Promise, that drops into the heart like Oil to
refresh it: I say, the Promises are continually dropping in fresh Comforts,
giving us fresh Tastes of the Love and Goodness of God. Now under this
satisfaction, our expectation is raised; and this again heightens our present
satisfaction; we have enough now, are full, are rich, have all our hearts can
now hold; and yet we do see more a coming, with a further Capacity, Skill, and
Wisdom to improve it. I shall see him, but not now, Numb. 24. 17.

The Soul cannot bear more of God in this world, than what comes in by Faith
and Hope; and tho we are satisfied in our present state, yet we wait for a
change. The Husbandman is satisfied to see the Seed sown, coming up in the
green tender blade; but the joy of Harvest is another thing, Nothing but the
full Fruition of all that good you are capable of to Eternity, can swallow up
our Faith and Hope, which will be continually reaching out after those things
which are before, till we have attained them. In Heaven there will be no need
of Hope; but prize it while you live upon the earth, at a distance from your
Heavenly Country.

If you would know, Whether indeed you are under the Power of Christian Hope,
then try the Strength of it in your selves, What it does in you; How it
supports and comforts you.

1. Under all delays of Providence in fulfilling the Promises, can you wait the
Lord's leisure, and not make haste, but patiently wait for what you yet see
not? this is a sign of Hope in Power, Romans 8. 25.

2. Does your Hope support you, not only under delays, but when God seems to
act contrary to his Promises, to let out his Anger against you? It is no easy
matter for us to turn toward God by Faith and Hope, when God turns away in
Anger from us, hiding his face. It was well said of the Prophet, I will wait
for the Lord, that hides his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for
him.

3. When things seem desperate as to all second causes in the judgment of man,
can you then count upon the Truth and Certainty of the Promise? And

4. When you are actually surprised with Fears, what does Hope do then? Does it
check your fears? Does it raise you above them? Psalm. 56. 3. What time I am
afraid, I will trust in thee. In the 4 th. verse it is read thus, What time I
am afraid, I will not fear: A brave Resolution: I will not fear what man, what
flesh can do unto me: What is man? What is flesh to the great God of Heaven and
Earth? What time I am afraid, I will not fear. If God be for me, it matters not
who is against me.

When you can thus reason your selves out of all your carnal fears, it is a
sign you are under the Power of Christian Hope. When Grace does master that
sinful Passion that is contrary to it, that is Grace in Power, reigning Grace;
it keeps Sin under, it shall not have dominion over us.

CHAP. VI.
How Hope rises from Christ in us higher and higher, till we abound in Hope,
and come more fully under the Power of it.
FIrst, viz. By a frequent serious Consideration of Christ in his Divine Person
and Offices; what his end was in coming into the World, in taking our Nature
upon him, and in dying for us in that Nature. We should ponder these things in
our minds, and be intent upon them. We are exhorted to this in order to hope,
Heb. 3. 1. and 6. verses comp. Therefore, holy brethren, partakers of the
heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our Profession, Jesus
Christ: To what end? That you may hold fast your confidence, and the rejoicing
of your hope, firm unto the end, v. 6.

There are Two Effects of this serious and frequent Consideration of Christ.
(1.) We shall know him better; what he is in himself. (2.) We shall better
understand our own Interest in him, what he is to us; which will mightily raise
our Hope.

1. We shall know what he is in himself; I say we shall know this better, the
more frequently and seriously we consider of him. This was that which raised
Paul's Hope, 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded he is
able to keep that which I have committed to him. They that know thy name, says
the Psalmist, Psalm. 9. 10. will trust in thee. By reflecting often upon Christ
in us, and conversing much with him, we see further and further into the
Mystery of the Gospel; Christ opens himself more to us, shines in more clearly
upon us; gives us a fuller discerning of the deep things of God, which lie at
the bottom of the Covenant; we must dig deep to find them out. When we set our
selves to it in good earnest, praying the Father to reveal his Son in us,
Christ will further manifest himself unto us, Joh. 14. 21. That is not spoken
of the first saving discovery of Christ in Conversion, but of a further
Revelation of Christ to a Soul after Conversion. He that keeps my commandments,
and loves me, to him will I further manifest my self. So v. 23. If a man love
me, and keep my words, we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. It
is not meant of his first coming to a Soul in Conversion, but of an after-Visit
that God will give every Converted Soul who waits for him. His Spirit shall
teach us all things, and bring all things to our remembrance. The Spirit seldom
makes any Repetition of a Sermon in our Consciences, but it is with further
light, clearing up matters to us, that which we did not so well understand
before. When we act our Faith afresh upon any Gospel Truth which we have
formerly heard and believed, we grow more expert in the knowledge of that
Truth; we discern that by an after-Act of Faith, which we could not discern by
all former Actings of our Faith: And thus it pleases God to supply what is
wanting in our Faith, and raise it up by degrees to an higher pitch, making us
to grow and increase in our knowledge of Christ, which makes Hope to grow and
increase in us: We abound more and more in Hope, the more we know of Christ.

2. Secondly, We shall better understand our own Interest in him, get a greater
Assurance of that which strengthens our Hope exceedingly. Whilst we are under
doubts about our Interest in Christ, questioning our state, our Hope is small,
it runs very low: Our fears being greater than our Hopes, we are much dejected;
there is not that holy boasting and glorying in God, as heretofore; the Soul is
now under a Cloud, sits in darkness, sees little or no light. And it is a great
Work of the Spirit of God, as a Comforter, to revive our Hopes. Faith may hold
out in some Spiritual Reasonings and Arguings from a bare Promise, when Hope
may fail as to any present comfortable Influence upon the Soul. Faith may keep
some hold of the Promise, when Hope is ready to let go the things promised, or
at least, to put them afar off from us. Tho it is not impossible, yet, says a
drooping Soul, it seems to me very improbable, that such an one as I should be
saved. Here is Hope at a very low ebb, laboring under those Difficulties and
seeming Improbabilities that shake us exceedingly: But God orders the matter
so, that a weak Hope puts us upon laboring after a stronger Faith. When you
find yonr Hopes sinking, then look to your Faith, for the fault lies there;
raise that, and Hope will quickly recover it self. By often proving and
examining our selves about our Interest in Christ, we come to know it more
perfectly, to be assured of it. Want of Assurance does come from the want of
Light in the Understanding; hence that Phrase, Col. 2. 2. The full assurance of
understanding. When we have entire satisfaction in our Judgment and
Understandings, that things are so and so, we know that Christ is in us of a
truth. We had need make good proof of this, for all depends upon it: It is a
Truth Saints are apt to question, when a good Work is begun in them, which they
and others take to be Conversion, and which indeed is so, yet the Devil labors
to persuade them otherwise; puts in many Exceptions: Tho he knows he cannot
overthrow their state, yet such is his Malice, he would rob them of the comfort
of it, and hide it from them if he can. He seeks to blind the minds of men, to
keep out the Light of the Gospel from shining in upon us; and when it does
shine in, he raises all the Mists and Fogs he can to obscure it; he would fain
turn day into night, and draw a Cloud over that Day Star that is risen in our
hearts; and therefore we had need have recourse to Christ within us. We should
often have recourse to Christ within us, look well upon him, and consider him;
comparing Christ in our hearts, with Christ in the Word; for we may take a
false Christ into our hearts, an Idol instead of the true Christ; as the
Galatians, chap. 1. 6. They had another Gospel quite different from what Paul
preached to them: There was no such Christ, no such Gospel as they fancied to
themselves: They had a wrong notion of things; thought they must join something
to Christ, did not stick to say, Unless they were circumcised, they could not
be saved; Christ himself could not save them without Circumcision. We should
examine our selves about this, Whether our sole dependence be upon Christ, or
whether we join any thing with him in Justification, piecing up a Righteousness
partly from Christ, and partly from our selves. I am not against Works of
Holiness and Gospel-Obedience; but if we do not warily and wisely distinguish
between Faith as Justifying, and Faith as it orders and governs the Life
according to the Rule of Gospel-Obedience, we shall run into endless Disputes,
and never understand one another. Therefore, I say, let us consider whether or
no we rely upon Christ and his Righteousness for our Justification in the sight
of God. We should examine the Principle by which we are carried out to holiness
of life afterward. We may know this by searching our hearts, and putting close
Questions to our selves, Whether our whole Trust and Confidence be reposed in
him alone? Whether we desire to be found in him, not having on our own
righteousness? If we are clear in this, and can say from the bottom of our
hearts, None but Christ, None but Christ, is the stay and prop of our Souls; we
have nothing else to trust in, or rely upon; then all our Hope of Eternal Life
must needs flow from him, and be grounded upon him only. Here we fix, and are
immovable from the Hope of the Gospel all our days.

Secondly, By imploring the help of the Spirit to show us those things of
Christ which we read and hear from the Word. Without this, all our Reasonings
and Considerations of Gospel Mysteries will come to little; we shall not have
one right thought of him; We are not sufficient of our selves, as of our
selves, to think a good thought, 2 Cor. 3. 5. As of our selves, i. e. not by
our own Wit, Parts, and Learning; He speaks this chiefly of Ministers. And if
They stand in need of help from God to guide their Thoughts and Meditations of
Christ, certainly private Christians do. The Spirit shall teach you all things,
Joh. 14. 26. He will guide you into all truth, John 16. 13. He shall receive of
mine, and show it unto you, v. 15. And therefore when you set your selves to
think of any Gospel Truth, be sure you look up to God to enlighten you, and to
give you good Understanding of that Truth as it is in Jesus; or else all your
Reading, Hearing, Studying, Discourse, and Thinking, will come to nothing.

The Help of the Spirit lies in Two Things: (1.) In Teaching. (2.) In
Testifying.

1. In Teaching. The Teaching of the Spirit, and the Testimony of the Spirit,
are Two Things: We are Taught, that we may Believe; but we are sealed after we
believe, Ephesians. 1. 13. For the Spirit bears witness, not only to the Truth of
the Word, but to the Truth of a Work of Grace in our hearts; and that must be
wrought, before the Spirit can witness to it; and therefore Sealing comes after
Anointing, and is distinguished from it, 2 Cor. 1. 21, 22. He that anoints us
is God, who also has sealed us, and given us the earnest of the Spirit in our
hearts. Who also has sealed us; he speaks of it as a distinct thing, as a
further work of God upon the Soul; first Anointing, then also Sealing, giving
us the Earnest: There seems to be some difference between these Two Phrases,
Sealing, and giving Earnest; who also has Sealed us, and given us the Earnest
of his Spirit in our hearts. Sealing implies bare Assurance; but the Earnest so
assures us, as to put part of the Inheritance into our hand: An Earnest is
something in hand; but Sealing is a demonstrative Evidence of the Truth and
Certainty of a Thing to the Understanding only; it is all Intellectual.

I shall first show you, How we are led to the Knowledge of Christ in us, by
the Teaching of the Spirit; and then show, How we are confirmed in that
Knowledge, by the Testimony of the Spirit; and both in order to the raising and
strengthening our Hope.

1. The Spirit shows us Christ within, formed in our hearts; then teaches us to
argue from Christ within us. Consider that Scripture, Romans 8. from 10. to 17.
and see what work Paul makes of it; how he argues from Christ within; If Christ
be in you, the body is dead because of sin; but the Spirit is life, because of
righteousness. If the Spirit be in you, then you are assured of the
resurrection of the body. If the Spirit of Christ be in you, then you are led
by the Spirit, then you know that you are the children of God; and if children,
then heirs, joint-heirs with Christ, that we may be glorified together. So you
see he argues up to a lively Hope of Glory; as if he had said, All this does
naturally follow from Christ being in you: He that has the Son, has life, 1 John 5. 12. Believers may have Christ, and may have life in him and by him, and
yet not know that they have it. These things have I written to you, (v. 13.)
that believe in the Name of the Son of God, that you may know that ye have
eternal life. John wrote this Epistle purposely to satisfy weak Believers,
that whatsoever they thought of themselves, they had Eternal Life, and he would
have them know as much. Put then the Trial of your state upon this very point,
Whether you have Christ, and in him Eternal Life: Do you make good the former,
and we who are Ministers of the Gospel, may, by the Blessing of God undertake
to prove the latter, to your great Comfort and Satisfaction. These things have
I written to you that believe, that you may know you have eternal life. Then
Believers themselves stand in need of such Writings, and Sermons as may help to
open the Mysteries of Christ to them; and to this end is a Gospel Ministry
appointed to make manifest a savor of his knowledge in every place, 2 Cor. 2.
14, 15. We are a sweet savor of Christ unto God, in them that perish under our
ministry, says he. We must seek to please God in our Preaching, and not men,
whatever the issue be. Men have no savor, don't savor such Sermons and
Gospel-Discourses that do lead them into the Mysteries of the Gospel; they are
for a more Rational way of Preaching; they love Moral Preaching; but this
Mystical, Mysterious Preaching of Christ, and Faith in him, and Union to him,
this they count foolishness; they don't savor it; but, says he, we are a
sweet savor of Christ to God, even in them that perish.

2. The Spirit does not only teach us to know Christ in us, but confirms us in
that knowledge, by an after-Testimony, bearing witness with our spirits, that
so it is. This fixes and settles our minds in a firm persuasion of the Truth.
Had we no other witness but our own Spirits, we should vary and fluctuate in
our minds about these great Points of the Gospel; we should be of one mind to
day, and of another to morrow. Reason is not always consistent with it self;
varies in its apprehensions of things, argues pro and con, according to the
different appearance of things, the different Impressions that contrary
Reasonings make upon our unstable minds; I say, all these things make Reason
very uncertain. Fancy and Imagination are very uncertain and variable, and do
strongly influence men's understandings: It is hard to know whether Sense or
Reason do lead us; but the Testimony of the Spirit of God is a more uniform
Testimony, does never vary from it self, always passes the same Judgment about
the same point: It is not yea and nay; it does not say and unsay, but stands to
the first judgment; it is purposely given to testify of Christ, and of the
infallible consequents of our Faith in him; which must needs beget Hope. The
oftener we appeal to this witness, and hear the Testimony of the Spirit in our
hearts concerning Christ, the more are we confirmed in our Faith and Hope. They
who are full of the Holy Ghost, they are full of Faith and Hope. When we have
found out Christ within us, we should appeal to the Spirit of God, Whether it
be not so indeed? Whether Christ be not in us of a Truth? None knows the Son,
but the Father; and it is by his Spirit he reveals him in us. Ask the Spirit
then, Whether this be the Christ of God, which your Faith has taken hold of,
and brought into your Soul, to Live, Rule, and Reign there. Did we live in more
Communion with the Holy Ghost, we could not be so much estranged from the Life
of Christ, we should not be so unacquainted with Christ. No man can say, That
Jesus is the Lord, but by the Spirit. Say what you will of Christ, you
understand not what you say, till the Spirit reveal him in you. There is no
thinking, talking, no meditating on Christ in our own Light and Strength, if
the Holy Ghost does not help us. Believers have a sense of this, that God has
taught them, and shined into their hearts; it is in his Light they see Light,
and have a true Spiritual Discerning of the Mystery of God in Christ. You know
in the first days of the Gospel, the Spirit bore witness unto the Divine Person
of Christ, That he came from God, and was God; for the world could believe
neither, John 15. 26, 27. comp. with Acts 5. 32. It was the great business of
the Spirit, I say, to testify to the world, That Christ was sent of God, and
that he was very God. This the Holy Ghost did by many signs, and wonderful
effects of the Divine Power of Christ, wrought through Faith in his Name. And
so ever since, the same Spirit breathing in the Consciences of Believers, does
testify of Christ in them, with that Evidence and Power, that they cannot
withstand, they are convinced and satisfied, That Salvation is only by him; and
that relying upon him, their Souls are secured to all Eternity. This begets
Peace in their (before affrightned) Consciences.

If you ask, how does the Holy Ghost bring over the Mind of a man, to be so
fully persuaded of the truth of that which Flesh and Blood cannot reveal unto
him?

I Answer; The Holy Ghost does this as a Spirit of Power, Luke 24. 49. Christ
is said to Teach us as one having Authority: There is Power and Authority, as
well as Teaching, Reasoning and Objective light. I say, the Spirit acts as a
Spirit of Power, impressing a sense of God's Love so upon our Hearts, that we
cannot but count upon it, rejoice in it, feeling it shed abroad into our
Hearts. The Testimony of the Spirit, is a convincing, undeniable Evidence, able
to persuade of the truth of that he bears witness to, against all surmises of
Flesh and Blood. Were not the Spirit of Christ, a Spirit of Power, it would be
impossible he should ever establish such a a Doctrine, so contrary to all the
sentiments of Nature, and to all rational Inferences men can make from any
principles of Reason. The Spirit comes as a Spirit of Power, will have the
Heart open, will bring over Man to assent, though it be to what his
Understanding cannot reach; and this the Spirit of God does, by particular
Application of the Blood of Christ to us by Name; so revealing Christ in us,
that we cannot but feel the Virtue of his Blood in our Conscience, cannot but
know him, and own him as our Jesus. In all Hope there is a peculiar Application
of Promises to our selves; He that believes, has eternal Life, John 3. 36. Is
not only persuaded there is such a thing, but that he has it already begun in
him, and shall be further let into it ere long; We shall be like him, 1 John 3.
2. We shall be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life, Tit. 3. 7. For
the hope which is laid up for you, Col. 1. 5. There is a particular Application
to our selves, of those things we Hope for. It is impossible for a man to Hope,
and be no way concerned in his Hope; it is impossible to leave himself quite
out of his Hope.

If Christ in you, be your hope of Glory; Then look upon him as the only sure
bottom and foundation of all your Hopes, you will prize him the more: We
naturally love and esteem that which gives us hope of any goood coming toward
us. The Reason why Christ is so little regarded, so lightly set by, is because
men are afraid they shall be losers by him: Go and sell all, and follow me;
this is an hard saying to such as understand not the gain of Godliness, the
excellency of Christ, that he is able to do more for them, than all the World
can. Paul was so persuaded, Romans 8. 37. Nothing could separate him from the
Love of God in Christ Jesus; Neither life nor death, nor all evils that it was
possible for men and devils to bring upon him: In all these things, says he,
we are more than conquerors. As if he had said, we are so far from being
losers, that we are great gainers, come off with advantage. Thanks be to God,
who has given us the victory, 1 Cor. 15. 57. Thanks be to God who also causes
us to triumph in Christ, 2 Cor. 2. 14. Thus he overcomes the world, who
believes Jesus is the Son of God, 1 John 5. 4, 5. Quenches all the fiery darts
of the wicked one, Ephesians. 6. 16. Overcomes by the blood of the Lamb, Rev. 12. 11.

But after all this, If any should Object and say, We cannot rejoice in this
Hope of Glory by Christ; we cannot bring our hearts under the Power of this
Hope, as you have been persuading us to do.

I Answer; You cannot, but God can; God by his Spirit of Power, can do this in
you, and upon you. We have a cloud of Witnesses to this, in all those Saints in
former Ages, who have gone Triumphing to Heaven in a Joyful Hope and
Expectation of Eternal Glory; and you will find it so in your selves, when the
Spirit of God comes upon you, as a Spirit of Power. Let me tell you, The
impressions of the Spirit, are strange things, till you come under them; then
you feel the powerful effects of them in your own Souls; will see that done
which you thought could never have been done; find that made easy to you, which
you thought was impossible. And thus it will be when you are begotten again to
a lively Hope. Many Professors have a dead Hope of Eternal Life and Glory,
which make no impression upon them; but a lively Hope, has lively Effects that
will be felt.

It may be you will further Object, and say, It is true, there are some who
have this Hope, and this Joy; But may not all this be a Delusion upon false
Grounds?

All I shall say in Answer, is this: I wish you would make the same Objections
against your Worldly Hopes, as you do against this Christian Hope; I am sure
you have more cause. How prone are men to Object against the Hope of the
Gospel? And how willing are men to be flattering themselves with all Worldly
Hopes! they follow them, are mightily pleased with them, they all run well, and
are well founded. But this Hope of Glory by Jesus Christ, that is an ignote
thing, they know not what to make of it. Look to it, Those who are willing to
nourish vain Hopes now, will have Hope little enough ere long; they will be
Punished with Everlasting Despair in Hell. But alas! with what confidence and
security do Men Hope in the Creature! but with what trepidation and
doubtfulness do some Trembling Souls Hope in Christ! Methinks their Reason
might instruct their Faith, to argue otherwise from Gospel Principles, the
consequence of which, Sanctified Reason may discern, and ought to attend unto:
You find a Thousand Instances in every Age of such whose Worldly Hopes have
disappointed them, and made them ashamed: But never since the World began,
could there be one Instance produced of any Believer, whose Hope in Christ has
made him ashamed: It is strange that we should rejoice so much under that Hope,
which seldom or never answers our expectation; and be so much cast down and
dispirited under those Hopes of Glory that never fail: I wish you would but ask
your selves the Reason of this: It is a sign we are rather Carnal than
Spiritual, and savor more the things of this Earth, than the things of Heaven.
It is a shame to think how little Influence this Hope of Glory has upon us. We
usually count our selves the better for our Hopes; but it seems the Hope of
Glory adds little to us; we lay it by, as that which speaks of something to
come, a great while hence, in another world, we know not when; we cannot get
our minds to attend to it, and look for the accomplishment of it. And thus we
bereave our selves of much good, by suffering our Hope to languish, as it will
do, if we don't take comfort in it, and daily solace our selves with the
thoughts of it. To think of our Hopes, is enough to revive us at any time,
especially when we count them sure and certain.

I know not whence it is, but you may observe many Christians to be more in the
Exercise of Faith and Love, than of Hope. We reverence the Word, and dare not
disbelieve that, when we are under little or no Hope of what is promised to us
in the Word. A little Fear drowns our Hope: We believe the Truth of the
Promises, but in modesty suspend the application of them to our selves; as if
it were a piece of Humility to Believe much, and Hope but little. God is good,
and gracious, and faithful, says the drooping Soul; here is Faith: But I am
unworthy, I am less than the least of all his mercies, unfit to receive any
thing at his hand: Thus by sinking our Hope, we do insensibly weaken our Faith;
for a weak Faith does always follow a languid Hope; the Promises will grow out
of credit with us, when in an affected Despondency we humor our selves too
much, in refusing our own Mercies. It would make our hearts ache, if God should
take us at our word, and say, Because you will not have this or that Mercy, you
shall not have it; because you will not have life by applying this and that
Promise to your selves, I reverse it, call it in, declare, you shall never have
that Mercy; I say, it would make our hearts ache, if God should take us at our
word, when in a froward, sullen fit of Despondency. It is a slight to his rich
Grace, to be so shy of it, to take but little, when much is offered. Express
then the greatness of your Faith, by the greatness of your Hope. As God has
abounded, yea, superabounded in his Grace toward you, so do you abound more
and more in your Hope in him. Faith is but a Notion, a mere empty Speculation,
when the good things of the Promise are not brought down to our selves, by a
lively Hope; that we may taste and see how gracious the Lord is: We never suck
the sweet of a Promise till then. Therefore judge of your Faith by your Hope,
and judge of your Hope by your Faith; Whether it be well grounded upon the
Word; if it be, it can never rise too high; otherwise Hope is an aspiring
Passion, and usually flies too high, when it is not fixed upon a right Object;
the Soul is overset by it. How are some men intoxicated and drunk with their
vain hopes? There is no fear of any such excess in true Christian Hope. No man
was ever questioned by God for having too much Grace; we may all complain of
too little: More Grace, is the constant Desire of every holy Soul; as there is
a Propensity in God to give it; To him that has, more shall be given: God
loves to accumulate his Favors, to load us with his Benefits; he gives
liberally, that he may draw out our Hope to follow him for more and more still.
Let us then abound in Hope, holding fast our Confidence firm unto the End.

What it is to KNOW GOD in CHRIST.
JOHN VIII. 54, 55. Of whom ye say, That he is your God; yet ye have not known
him; but I know him.
CHAP. I.
EVery one of you in this Assembly, may be ready to say, That the God of
Abraham is your God; but what if I prove to the faces of some Professors, that
they have not yet known the Lord? I am from these words to show, who among you
do, and who among you do not yet savingly know the Lord. This Enquiry will be
as Comfortable to some, as it may be Terrible to others; the Lord make it an
Awakening Word to us all. There is no dallying in this matter; it is Life
Eternal to know God, and Eternal Death not to know him.

Ye say he is your God, yet ye have not known him. A likely matter indeed, That
God should be your God, and you not know him! I am sure you know him not,
because you know not me: I know him, but you do not: I know him, and none else
do, but such as I reveal him to: Since you refuse to learn of me, I do
pronounce you a company of ignorant, formal Professors, quite beside the Truth
and Power of Religion, aliens and strangers from the commonwealth of Israel,
without God in the world; worshipping you know not whom, doing your devotions
to an unknown God.

The Knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ, are often put together in
Scripture, because we cannot know one, if we do not know both, 2 Pet. ^. 2.
Joh. 14. 6, 7, 9. No man comes unto the Father, but by me: If ye had known me,
ye should have known my Father also: He that has seen me, has seen the
Father. And through the knowledge of both, there is a multiplication of grace
and peace to us, 2 Pet. 1. 2.

Some seek to know every thing but Christ; Paul desires to know nothing but
Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 2. The Lord grant that may be the unfeigned desire of every
Soul here present.

The Coherence.
Because the sense of the Text depends very much upon what goes before in this
and the 7 th Chapter; therefore I shall give you a brief Analysis of both these
Chapters, down to the very Words of the Text.

In these two Chapters there are hot Disputes and Contests between Christ and
the Jews, about the Divinity of his Person, and the Truth of his Doctrine;
Christ maintains both.

In the beginning of the 7 th Chapter, Christ and his Brethren have a
consultation about his going up to Jerusalem to the Feast of Tabernacles, which
was at hand, verse 2. The Point they deliberate upon was this, viz. Whether he
should go up at the beginning of the Feast; his Brethren who did not yet
believe in him, verse 5. were for it, tho upon very slight grounds, verse. 3, 4.
Christ is against it, refuses to go then, verse 8. I go not yet unto this
feast, but go ye; I will go when I see my time; my time is not yet full come,
verse. 8. Christ knew the proper seasons and moments for every part of his Work;
so he sends 'em away, but himself abode still in Galilee, verse. 9. Upon this,
there were great Enquiries after Christ, where he was, and why he was not
there? This occasioned a murmuring among the people concerning him, verse 12.
About the middle of the Feast Jesus appears among 'em, Teaching in the Temple
to the admiration of all that heard him, verse. 14, 15. The Points of Doctrine
that he there handles, with his Answers to all their Cavils and Objections, I
shall for brevity sake omit; you may read 'em in that Chapter, from the 16 th.
to the 37 th verse; so ends his Sermon at the midst of the Feast.

Verse 37. He begins another Sermon at the end of the Feast, for the Feast
lasted Eight days; and in the last day, that great day of the Feast, wherein
there used to be the greatest Assemblies, Lev. 23. 36 On the eighth day shall
be a holy Convocation, a solemn Assembly: And upon this day, that the people
might have something to meditate on by the way, and to carry home with 'em,
Christ pr^aches an excellent Sermon about Spiritual Water verse. 37 38, etc.
which had different effects upon his ^earers; some believed, and some believed
not; as it was then, so it is now.

The Feast being over, Christ continues Preaching in the same place; you have
him early in the morning, teaching the people in the Temple, Chap* 8. 2. But
the Scribes and Pbarisees purposely to interrupt his Preaching, put an
ensnaring question to him, about a woman taken in the very Act of Adultery,
what his Judgment was concerning her, Whether she should be put Death,
according to Law in that case, Levit. 20. 10. How he managed himself in
acquitting the Woman, to the Shame and Conviction of all his Opposers, I refer
to your own reading, from the 1 st. verse of this 8 th. Chapter, to the 12 th.
verse. Having dispatched that business, he falls to Preaching again, of many
weighty and very useful Points, suited to the present condition of his Auditors.

First, He preaches himself to be the true light of the world, verse. 12. which
occasioned a long Dispute between him and the Pharisees, about the validity of
that Testimony which he gave of himself; Christ vindicates both himself and his
Doctrine, and proves both to be from Heaven: It Is observable, how in the close
of one Point, Christ gives occasion for another, which he knew their Objections
would lead him into ( verse 32, 33.) about Spiritual Freedom, declaring what
that is; and that the Jews had not yet attained to it, because they were the
servants of sin, verse. 34. in bondage to their own Corruptions and Lusts; this
he urges close upon 'em, notwithstanding their vainglorious boasting of their
descent from Abraham. Now because my Text comes in upon this Discourse, I shall
give you some account of it. The Jews to prove themselves to be Freemen, and
never in bondage, allege that they were Abraham's seed, verse. 33. They said,
Abraham was their father, v. 39. and God was their father, ver. 41. Christ
denies both, and says the Devil was their Father, which he proves by their
contempt of him and his Doctrine, as more at large appears in this Chapter. The
Sum of all is this; viz. They vainly pretend to an Interest in God, who
dishonor the Son of God; it is my Father that honors me; Of whom ye say he
is your God, yet ye have not known him.

First, I shall make good the Words of our Savior against the Jews, and prove,
That they knew not God, because they knew not Christ the Son of God.

God cannot be savingly known, but as he has revealed himself in Christ. God
has revealed himself to the Jews in his word, not only as the Creator of
Heaven and Earth, and as that God who brought them out of Egypt, (so they knew
him); but that he intended to send his Son into the world, the Seed of the
Woman to redeem Man. Zech. 9. 11. Isa. 45. 17. Had the Jews believed this, they
would never have treated Christ so scornfully, saying, Where is thy Father? v.
19. Such a spiritual Redeemer they looked not for, they thought the Messiah
should be some Temporal Prince, who should come of some Noble Family, with
great attendance, armed with Power and Strength to deliver them from the Roman
Yoke; to restore the people to their Liberties, to enlarge his Dominion over
other Nations, keeping up the Mosaical Polity every where; they never dreamed
that the Son of God was to come in man's Nature to dye for Sinners, to bring in
a new Everlasting Righteousness and Life; though all this was foretold in the
Old Testament, yet they did not so understand it. All outward deliverances
promised to the Jews, were through Christ. So to unbelieving Ahaz, Isa. 7. 14.
All Mercies promised to the Jews, hung upon the Kingdom of David, which pointed
to Christ. Isa. 55. 3, 4. Jer. 23. 3, 4, 5, 6. Ezekiel. 34. 22, 23. and Ezekiel 37.
25, etc. All the hope of Israel in all Ages, was reposed in Christ only: Zech.
9. 9. etc. Amos 9. 11. etc.

The Gospel being first to be Preached to the Jews, Christ ceased not to Preach
to them; notwithstanding all their scorn and contempt of Him and his Doctrine,
expressed by their Contumelious words, and wicked attempts to take away his
Life. They took up stones and cast at him, v. 59.

It Is evident that the greatest part of the Jews did not know God, though the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 76. 1, 2. In ^udah is God known, his name is great in
Israel; in Salem also is his Tabernacle, and his dewlling place in Sion. Yet
Christ here reproves them for their ignorance of God, even in ^erusalem.
According to that of the Prophet Isa. 1. 3. The ^x knows his owner, and the
^ss his masters crib: but Israel does not know, my people ^oth not consider: o,
My people is sottish, they have not known me, they are sottish ch^ldren, they
have no understanding, Jer. 4. 22. No wonder the Gentile world knew not God;
but that his own people the Jews should not know him, this is strange! They
knew there was a God, and did worship him according to the Law, but not
according to the Gospel; therefore though they said they knew him, yet not
doing the Duty of those who rightly know God, they are said not to know him.
But,

Secondly, to bring down the point nearer to our selves.

1. Obs. Many do pretend to an Interest in the God of Abraham, as their God and
Father, who yet know him not.

As there were many carnal Israelites of old, who had a form of knowledge in the
Law, Romans 2. 20. So there are many formal Christians now, who have a form of
knowledge according to the Letter of the Gospel, and yet do not truly know God
in Christ Jesus. Many call God their God and Father, whom he will never own for
his true Children. God owns none for his Children, who do not own Christ for
his Son, carrying it toward him accordingly: Our relation to God as Children,
springs from our relation to Christ the Son of God; our union to Christ by
Faith, proves our adoption; but whilst we are without Christ, we are looked
upon as aliens and strangers, as without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12.

I shall include all that I have further to say from this Text, in this general
observation, viz.

2. O^s. A right saving Knowledge of God, is only in and through Christ: We
cannot know God unto Salvation any other way.

From the Analysis of these two Chapters, and the coherence of the Text with
the Context it plainly appears by these words of our Savior to the Jews, That
none do truly know God the Father, who do not acknowledge Christ to be the Son
of God.

All the saving Knowledge we have of God, is from the Knowledge Christ has of
God, who lying in the bosom of the Father, has declared him to us, John 1. 18.
John 14. 9.

We ought not to speak any thing of God, but what he has said of himself in his
word: Theology is the Doctrine of God concerning himself, concerning his works
and his will.

Christ, as man, was ignorant of some things, and knew no more than the Father
revealed to him. Mark 13. 32. so Joh. 7. 16, 17. My doctrine, says he, is not
mine, but his that sent me; it is of God, I speak not of my self, or from my
self, but as I hear. John 5. 30. So he received the Revelation from the Father,
Rev. 1. 1.

As our Knowledge of God flows from the Knowledge Christ has of God; So our
Knowledge of Christ is from himself. John. 14. 21. As he does by his Spirit
reveal himself to us, so he does reveal the Father to us in himself. Mat. 11.
27. John 6. 46. No man has seen God at any time, no not Moses himself has
seen the Father, but had all from Christ, who gave the Law upon the Mount, Acts
7. 38.

Whatever Notices there may be in the minds of men, of a Deity, yet they know
not God aright without faith in Christ.

Saving Knowledge, is that by which we understand the right way of a sinners
salvation by Christ; or it is the Knowledge that shows us what we must do to be
saved. A convinced sinner is at a great loss about his Salvation, till God open
to him the Mystery of his free Grace in Christ, giving him thereby the
Knowledge of Salvation, Luke 17. 7.

God's love is toward the Elect, before they know him, but it is not in them
till they know him; then they understand how they are beloved of God; his love
is shed abroad in their Hearts, Romans 5. 5. It Is in them: John 17. 26. And I in
them; Not only for them, but in them; before we knew God or Christ, Christ had
suffered for us, interceded for us; but before Faith, he is not said to be in
us: i. e. Not to live in us by his Spirit, that we may live to God, Gal. 2. 20.

This Saving Knowledge of God, which I am now speaking of, is not the Knowledge
of his Essence, but of his Grace, Love, and Good Will toward us in Christ, and
this the only begotten Son declares to us, John 1. 18. (...). This word (...),
is plenior and perfectior rerum explitio.

CHAP. II.
THat I may more distinctly open to you the nature of this saving knowledge of
God in Christ, I shall show 1. What may be known of God out of Christ. 2. All
that may be known of God out of Christ, is better known in and by Christ. 3.
What may be known of God in and by Christ, that cannot be known any other way.
4. What it is to know God in Christ. 5. What a true saving knowledge of God
implies.


1. What may be known of God out of Christ, viz. The invisible things of God,
even his eternal Power and Godhead, Romans 1. 19, 20. This Natural Philosophical
knowledge of God, though it be not sufficient to Save us, yet it is sufficient
to Damn us; to render us inexcusable, and consequently to justify our
Damnation. It may convince us of Sin, but does not enable us to shun it, or to
do Good; to addict our selves to it in a constant way, this is a special work
of the Holy Spirit. Natural Concience knows something of God, but nothing of
Christ, till our Ears are opened. Psalm. 40. 6. Aures perfodit, dug or bored
our Ears; There is an obstruction, a stoppage in all our Natural faculties,
that Spiritual objects cannot enter, till we are Spiritually enlightened, till
God moves our Hearts to assent to this Divine Revelation of God in Christ, so
giving us knowledge, which is an effect of Divine Power, 2 Pet. 1. 2, 3. Ephesians 1.
19* 2 These. ^. 11. Which overthrows the Pelagian Doctrine, asserting it to be
in man's power to believe, contrary to 2 Cor. 4. 7. and 2 Cor. 2. 5. in the
Power of God, i. e. In the irresistible efficacy of his Grace: Though all
Natural men do resist Grace at first, yet Grace overcomes them at last; takes
away all final prevailing resistance, turning the heart of stone into a heart
of flesh, Ezekiel. 36. 26. Besides to be able to resist the Grace of God, is no
Argument of man's Power, but of his Weakness, Malice, and Pride.

The Gentiles knew God by the Creation, but not by the Scriptures, forbidding
inward Lust and Concupiscence, which natural light does not, Rom 7. 7. They
judged thoughts to be free; for this reason the Gentiles are said, not to know
God, 1 These. 4. 5.

2. All that may be known of God out of Christ, is better known in and by
Christ: By Reason we know that the World was made, but by Faith we know it more
certainly, Heb. 11. 3. The light of Nature gathers up something from the Works
of God, but Faith gathers up more from the Word of God; the Word speaks more
distinctly than the Works of God do; these hold forth something of God in the
general Notion of a Deity, but leave us in the dark where to find out this God:
They speak out God to our Reason, by some remote consequences, leading us up to
a first cause, and in a discursive way convincing us of the Being of a God; but
few men have such Logical heads, as to keep themselves under the power of these
reasonings; they are apt ever and anon, to sink at last into practical Atheism:
He is a Practical Atheist, who does not order his life according to those
inward speculations he has of God. The Word holds forth God more powerfully,
and directly to our Faith, showing us that God in Christ, which it speaks of:
Since in the Wisdom of God, i. e. by the Fabric of Heaven and Earth, setting
forth the Wisdom of God, the World cannot by all its Wit and Wisdom,
comfortably know God unto Salvation, therefore he calls us to Faith in Christ,
1 Cor. 1. 21.

3. What may be known of God in and by Christ, that cannot be known any other
way, viz.

His Pardoning Grace, which as Sinners, we are most of all concerned to know;
all other Attributes of God make against us, without the knowledge of this,
which makes all to be for us. The way of a Sinners Salvation, is no where
revealed, but in Christ; the last word the Law speaks, is Death, in the day
thou eatest, thou shall dye, and so leaves us under that Sentence, till the day
of Execution.

The Devils knew God, without a Redeemer, and therefore tremble, Jam. 1. 19.
The Gentiles knew God, but not in Christ, Romans 1. 20. The Jews knew God as the
Creator of the World, as their Deliverer out of Egypt, as the founder of their
Commonwealth, but not as the Father of Christ, the true Messiah: All this
knowledge of God out of Christ, does represent him to us only as our Judge;
which leads a Sinner to utter Despair, overwhelms him with a sense of God's
Wrath. It Is only in Christ that we look upon God as a Savior, freely pardoning
all our Sins: This Pardoning Grace flows down to us only through Christ, In
whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, Col.
1. 14. Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Jesus Christ: whom God has set forth to be ap^opitiation through Faith in his
blood, to deelare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past,
through the forbearance of God, Romans 3. 24, 25. This is a faithful saying, and
worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. Who has saved us, and called ws with a holy calling:
Not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which
was given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began; But is now made manifest,
by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished death, and
has brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10.
From all these Texts it plainly appears, that God never had a thought from all
Eternity of Pardoning Sinners, but only in and through Christ; and what
applications we have made, and do make every day unto God in the Name of Christ
for the Pardon of Sin, does highly concern every one of us seriously to
consider. This hidden Mystery of Gods Pardoning Grace, unknown to the World
before, Mat. 13 35. is revealed to us in and by Christ, being intimate with the
Father, even in his bosom, Joh. 1. 18. And what he has seen and heard, that he
testifies, John 3. 32. Let us receive his Testimony, and set to our seal that
God is true, and will never pardon any who believe not in Jesus The end of his
Coming into the World in our Nature, was to manifest the Name of God to his
Elect, Joh. 17. 6. to tell us all things relating to our salvation, Joh. 4. 25.
Therefore let us hear him, Mat. 17. 5. by Christ Angels have a clearer
knowledge of God, Ephesians. 3. 1. He is seen of Angels as the Redeemer of the World,
and he only gives us understanding of those truths that lead unto Eternal Life,
1 John 5. 20. He is the way, the truth, and the life; no man comes unto the
Father but by him, Joh. 14. 6.

4. What it is to know God in Christ: Of this only in general, to make way to
the last Head, which I shall more enlarge upon.

He that knows Christ to be God, knows God in Christ; this needs no proof. But
what is it know Christ to be God?

Answer. To own him to be the Eternal Son of God. When do we own him as such?
Ans. when we acknowledge him to be indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world,
Joh. 4. 42. Trusting in him for the Pardon of Sin. Jer. 31. 34. They shall all
know me, from the least to the greatest, says the Lord: for I will forgive
their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. Till we know God, to be
a God of Forgiveness, casting our selves by Faith upon Christ, for the pardon
of our Sins, we do not savingly know the Lord.

To know, in the sense of the Text, includes in it, Faith, Love, and
Approbation; Faith in the Truth, Love to the Truth, and a hearty Approbation of
the Truth which we profess to know; testifying all this, by our ready
subjection and obedience to it. As to know, is to love and approve, Psalm. 1. 6.
So not to know, is to disallow, to disown, to disapprove, to hate that which I
do; I allow not (...). Romans 7. 15. I know not; and therefore know not, because
I allow not, I hate it: So the Lord said to the foolish Virgins, Mat. 25. 12. I
know you not, i. e. I do refuse, reject, and condemn you. So Joh. 17 25. The
World is said not to know the Father, because they rejected that Revelation
which he made of himself in Christ The Galatians in their Pagan state, are said
not to know God, Gal 4. 8. some knowledge of God they had by the creatures, but
none in Christ, and therefore are said not to know God.

This saving-knowledge of God in Christ is altogether Spiritual, and lies in
the sp^cial light of Faith, discerning the Godhead of Christ; and therefore
inclining us to trust in the Merits of his Precious Blood, for the Pardon of
all our Sins. It Is a very gross corrupt Interpretation of that Text, 2 Cor. 5
16. that the Lutheran Divines give, Tho we have known Christ after the flesh,
yet now henceforth know we him no more. i. e. say they, in favor of their
Ubiquity, Tho we have known him as a Body circumscribed and limited to a
certain place while on earth, yet since his Ascension, we know him so no more;
but suppose a Corporeal Ubiquity by virtue of his Divine Glorified Person;
which is in effect to deny the Truth of his Human Nature, by ascribing that to
it, which is altogether inconsistent with it.

The Apostle's meaning is plainly this, Henceforth know we no man after the
flesh, i. e. I and all true Believers since our Conversion, bear no affection,
no carnal worldly respect to any man living. Tho once we knew Christ after the
flesh, i. e. as the world knew him by his outward appearance only, slighting
and condemning that in him, in his state of Humiliation, which the world so
much despised. Then we looked upon him as a mere Man, as an Impostor worthy of
death; therefore we blasphemed him, and persecuted all his Followers: This was
the sense of the flesh: But now we look upon him in the Light of the Spirit, as
the Son of God, who died to save us from our sins.

They counted Paul's Ministry inferior to that of the other Apostles, because
he had not conversed with Christ on earth. What tho, says Paul, I have not
known him after the flesh, as you have, who boast much of this, That you knew
his Parents, his Brethren and Sisters, where he was born and bred, etc.? Yet I
spiritually know him by Faith, as the Redeemer of the world, tho I have not
known him after the flesh, as you have; neither do I desire henceforth so to
know him; i. e. to account of him according to any mere human Endowments, or
outward worldly Circumstances; but I judge of him according to his Divine,
Supernatural Excellencies, and so I admire and magnify him.

When Paul says, We know Christ no more after the flesh, flesh here is not
taken for the substance of the flesh, but for the quality, or natural Passions
of his Human body, being liable to all those natural, yet sin-less Infirmities
of Human Flesh: He was hungry, athirst, weary, a man of sorrows, and acquainted
with griefs: It Is not said, we know no more the flesh of Christ, but we know no
more Christ after the flesh; i. e. according to that mean, outward appearance
he made in the world, in his state of Humiliation: Our thoughts run higher now,
to Christ glorified in Heaven, in our Nature. These words, Not to know Christ
any more after the flesh, must not be taken in Servetus's sense, as if the
Human Nature of Christ were now quite swallowed up by the Divine; as if Christ
had now put off his Human Body, and was turned into a Spirit. This overthrows
the whole Foundation of Christian Religion.

Tho the Papists many of 'em seem to be against the Lutheran Ubiquity, yet it is
evident, That neither the Doctrine of Consubstantiation, nor
Transubstantiation, can possibly stand without a Corporal Ubiquity; and
therefore both must fall to the ground, as having no foundation in Scripture.

The Apostle's meaning is, That we don't know Christ now, according to the
sense of the flesh, but by a Divine Spiritual Knowledge, as New Creatures.
Verse. 17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature.

CHAP. III.
What a true saving Knowledge of God implies. Being the Fifth and last Head.
WHat that Saving Knowledge of God in Christ, that every new Creature has,
does imply, I shall more particularly show; some things first premised; viz.

1. True Religion flows from, and is grounded upon a right Knowledge of the
True God.

2. A Religion without a God, is a very strange unaccountable thing, no reason
can be given for it.

3. A man without a God, is a very lonely solitary Creature, he would not know
what to do with himself under extraordinary difficulties and distresses, if he
had not a God to go unto, and to rely upon.

4. Man by Nature is a devout Creature, he will have a God, and a Religion; he
has a Conscience, and therefore he must have a God, and a Religion of some
sort or other.

5. Man by Nature is prone to Idolatry, grossly mistaken in the choice of his
God.

6. Many of the more civilized sober Professors, even of Christianity, are apt
to rest in general Notions of a Deity; when they don't know God himself, they
don't know him who is God.

My Text leads me to speak of The Knowledge of God in Christ; if what I shall
say be not so plain and easy as you would have it: Pray remember that I am
speaking of that great mystery of godliness, God manifest in the flesh; which
no tongue, neither of men or angels, is able fully to set forth and to express:
Yet I hope (through the guidance of the Spirit of God) what I shall deliver
upon this high Subject, will fall in with the Conceptions of your Faith, and
with the Spiritual Apprehensions of an Enlightened Mind. Now I proceed:

A True Saving Knowledge of God, implies these Three Things: 1. A Knowledge of
God in the Person of Christ Incarnate. That God manifest in the Flesh of
Christ, is the only True God. 3. That this only True God manifest in the Flesh,
is our God.


CHAP. IV.
Of the Knowledge of God, in the Person of Christ.
WHat this Personal Knowledge of God in Christ is, I shall explain. We conceive
God to be a distinct Being from all created Beings; above all, beyond all, and
before all; the only Jehovah, the Great Essentiator, who is an Eternal Being
himself, and gives Being to all other things; this God we cannot see with our
bodily eyes, but with the eyes of a mind spiritually enlightened we may; i. e.
we may see him by an eye of Faith, conceiving him to be all that which he has
revealed himself to be in Christ. Till we see God in the Person of Christ the
Mediator, we have no certain Object for our Faith to fix upon; our natural
Notions of God will never carry us to any Person who is God; the Scriptures
only lead us to Christ, as the Son of God: The Person of the Father and of the
Holy Ghost, are invisible; but the Second Person has made himself visible, by
taking our Nature upon him, and is the only True Visible Image of the Invisible
God: He is God-Man; which signifies not Two Personalities, but Two Natures
united in One Divine Person: The Person of Christ Incarnate is Divine, tho many
in the days of his flesh here, saw his Person, who did not own his Divinity;
they saw him who was God, but did not own him to be God; it is Saving Knowledge
only, that gives us a true sight of God in Christ; we never see him till then:
God in Christ, is God indeed; all other representations of God, do change his
Glory into a lie; they are all idols and vanities: The Heathens became vain in
their imaginations, multiplying gods to themselves; but never agreed who was
the only true God. Christ said to the Jews, verse. 19. Ye neither know me, nor
my Father; if ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also; because the
Will of the Father concerning the Salvation of Sinners, is revealed by Christ.

To believe the Being of a God, That there is a God, and to believe in God, are
two things: The light of Nature leads to the former, but not to the latter;
because we must have a particular, distinct Knowledge of God, i. e. of him in
particular, who is God, the only True, Living, Eternal God; we must know his
Name, his Attributes, his Power, Wisdom, Infinite Love and Mercy: We must be
able to prove all this from Divine Revelation, before we can have sufficient
ground for our Faith and Hope in him; to believe we know not why, in we know
not whom, is not Faith, but fond Credulity; this way we render Faith a very
irrational thing; a mere fancy: We cannot prove the Attributes of God, but by
the Almighty Acts and Works of God; we believe him to be God, for his Works
sake, which the Word gives us so full an account of. It Is strange to see what a
slight Knowledge of God men do rest in, reposing so great a trust as they
pretend to do, in one whom they know not whether he be able to answer that
trust; they worship they know not whom; they trust they know not whom: Tho they
own God, whoever he be, to be Almighty, Infinite in Wisdom, Love, etc. yet they
choose a God for themselves, who is none of all this, and so deceive themselves.
General Notions of Infinite Power, Wisdom, etc. unless we see where to place
them, and to whom they do belong, are but empty speculations, no sufficient
ground for our Faith. Christ has outdone all that ever were called gods; and
therefore he only deserves that Name, who has in himself revealed the true God
to us; all the Idols of the world are vanities.

The Son of God has made himself visible, by taking our flesh upon him, and
through that veil we look in upon the whole Trinity, and know all that is
called God in Christ Jesus: He that has seen me, has seen the Father, John
14. 9. has seen the Infinite Power of that Holy Spirit put forth by me.

No mere Creature holds forth two Natures; but the Person of Christ does, and
therefore is the only Image of the Invisible God, holding forth all that is
contained in the Infinite Essence of the Divine Nature, truly representing God
in all his Essential Properties, as God and his Father. Christ is properly the
Image of the Father, not of the Godhead, for that is really in him, he is very
God: The thing it self cannot be said to be the Image of it self; Christ and
the Father are one in the Essence of the Godhead. I and my father are one,
John 10. 30. But Christ is not the same Person with him whose Image he is: When
Christ is said to be the Image of God, God is taken personally for the Father,
not essentially for the Divine Nature: I am not now speaking of the
Characteristical Differences of the Three Persons, but of the Unity of Essence
in which they all agree: These three are one: If you would know what manner of
God, the Father is, you must look upon Christ his Image, and conceive of him
according to that manifestation of himself in the Flesh of Christ, who has in
that very flesh expressed and acted over all the Divine Attributes of God, in
the Miracles he wrought upon earth, letting out a Divine Power through our
humane Nature, acting as God in our flesh: Something of God's Glory appears in
the Works of Creation, but the Brightness of his Glory shines out only in the
Face of Christ; as men are known by their faces, so God is known by Christ: God
having in an ineffable manner communicated his Essence to Christ, he is
therefore (...), the express image of his person: As he holds forth the Glory
of God to us, he is called (...), the brightness of his glory.

This is that Divine Person, upon whom the eye of our Faith must be fixed; I
say the eye of our Faith, because many who looked upon Christ with their bodily
eyes when he was upon Earth, saw the man Christ, but saw not God in that man;
Nay, they Crucified him as a Blasphemer, for saying he was God.

Obj. How can we now see God in the Person of Christ since his Ascension? Who
shall Ascend into Heaven after him?

Answ. You may as well, (nay, upon some accounts bette^), discern God now in
the Person of Christ since his Ascension, as they could who were present with
him upon Earth; for they could not discern his Godhead, but by Faith, and so
may we now. But you will further

Object. We cannot see his Person.

Answ. Not with our bodily Eyes, neither would that help us to discern his
Godhead, if we could so see him with our bodily eyes, unless the Father did
inwardly reveal him, and this he does now to his Saints, as well as then; then
he did convincingly reveal the Godhead of Christ, in the Person of Christ
livingupon Earth, now he does reveal the same Godhead of Christ, in the same
Person of Christ, though not as living upon Earth, but as represented to us in
the word, and living now in Heaven.

We must consider Christ, as held forth in the word, it is enough that he was
once upon Earth, and that we have such a perfect Character of him; such a full
authentic description of the Person of Christ Incarnate, and of his coming
again, left upon record in the Scriptures, the word is nigh thee, act your
faith upon that, and you will quickly have a spiritual discerning of God in
Christ. You cannot believe all that the Scripture says of Christ, but you must
believe him to be God, the very Son of God, by eternal Generation from the
Father; and if you believe this, you cannot but believe the eternal Procession
of the Spirit from them both. How can you conceive a living eternal Father, and
a living eternal Son, without a living eternal Spirit? The account the
Scriptures give of the Son of God incarnate, is ground enough for our Faith to
fix upon; set but your Faith a-work upon Christ, and you will quickly have a
spiritual sight of God in him; Faith will observe that in Christ, that speaks
out his Godhead; 'twill spy out such Rays and Beams of Divine Majesty, shining
out in his Person, that will create in us a holy Reverence toward him, and
cause us to fall down and worship him.

Though Christ be Personally Ascended, yet he is Spiritually present with us,
and in us; faith knows how in the light of the word, to follow him up to
Heaven, to sit down in Heavenly places by him, and to keep up a constant
Communion with him.

As Christ was in Heaven as God, when he was upon Earth as Man, John 3. 13. So,
tho now he is contained in Heaven as Man, yet he fills both Earth and Heaven as
God: Tho his finite Humane Nature cannot co-extend it self to an Ubiquity, to
reach as far as the Divine, yet the Two Natures in Christ are always
hypostatically united; and tho the Divine Nature do act in, with and through
the Humane, yet it does in many things act above, and beyond it, even under
this hypostatical Union, by which God intended to advance Humane Nature, but
without any Contraction or Diminution of the Divine.

If you ask, What is that Object which we should set before us in every Act of
Worship, Public or Private? I Answer; The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, one
God, and Three Persons; Through Christ, by one Spirit, we have access unto the
Father, Ephesians. 2. 18. According to that Economy we worship one God all along,
applying our selves in a distinct manner to each Person, according to the Word,
that the whole of our Worship may center in one God. We shall become vain in
our imaginations, if we worship God any otherwise. Our own Notions of
Omnipotency, etc. let them rise never so high, are but mere empty Speculations,
till we know the subject to whom they belong: If they are true, they are true
of something; Attributes ascribed to nothing, are nothing in themselves; but
when we see in whom they are vested, they command a Reverence in us toward so
great an Object; they that know thy name, will trust in thee; the name leads us
to the thing, to God himself, as an Infinite, Eternal Being, clothed with all
those Attributes that render him worthy of all Honor, Praise, and Glory from
us.

The Heathens for want of a right Object to fix their natural Notions of a
Deity upon, set up such Similitudes and Images of God, as did no way represent
him, but rendered him like unto corruptible things: God forbid us to make any
Image or Likeness of him, and set up his Son, as his only True, Living Image,
that we might conceive of him according to that Image, and no otherwise.

The Sum of all is this:

The New Testament declares Christ to be the Son of God, equal with the Father,
the express image of his person: Flesh and blood cannot reveal this to us, i.
e. cannot persuade us to believe it; but when it pleases the Father to reveal
his Son in us, then we see the Eternal Father in his Son; in knowing one, we
know both, because both are one and the same God: We see the Eternal Spirit in
Christ also, who is called the Spirit of Christ, residing in him without
measure: It Is by the Son that we know both the Father and the Spirit, as One
God, and Three Persons; One, and yet Three; Three, and yet One. God has said
it, therefore let us admire and believe: The greatest things that are, cause no
admiration till we believe them, and then we sit down astonished. That Three
Personalities belong to One Infinite Essence, must needs be true, because God
in effect says it, who knows himself best: I am that I am, says God, i. e. I am
all that is revealed, and I am that I am besides. Secret things belong to God,
not to know what is not revealed, is not culpable ignorance, but a holy
Nescience that will become us.

It Is fit that God should so reveal himself to us, that he may appear
incomprehensible by us; had he revealed himself as comprehensible by us, we
should have had no reason to believe him to be God; for he must have been a
finite God, and therefore none at all: 'Twas fit therefore that God should show
himself to man in his transceedent Excellencies, as incomprehensible by man; so
that his very incomprehensibleness, which may occasion some doubt and
hessitation in us, yet if rightly considered, it may be brought in as a strong
argument, to prove the truth and certainty of his Divinity. Men are now for
Comprehending, not Believing; but all men are not Philosophers. Besides; the
Philosophical Reasons you bring for the Being of a God, may prove there is a
God, and that you know there is a God; but they do not prove, that you know who
that God is. Let me tell you, the wisest among you cannot comprehend God, you
cannot know him to Perfection; but the weakest among you may be made to
Believe, what you cannot Comprehend. If there be any Atheists, or Scepticks
here, who either deny, or doubt of the Being of a God, let them be persuaded
for once to make trial of Christ, to cast themselves upon the Infinite,
Almighty, Incomprehensible God. held forth by Christ in the Gospel. We stand in
need of that which none can do for us, but an Infinite God; let us not then be
startled, when we hear of such a God, but get under the shadow of the Almighty
as fast as we can; then we shall count our selves safe to Eternity.

We may as soon comprehend the Trinity of Persons, as the Infinite Essence of
God; both are alike incomprehensible.

Three finite Persons have each of them an Essence, numerically different from
each other; but the Three Persons in the Trinity have but one and the same
numerical Essence of the Godhead among them all; else there would not be One
only God, but as many Gods as Persons. From what has been said, it appears,
that God in Christ is the true God, God indeed: Which is the first thing
employed in a saving-knowledge of God: The second is this, viz.

CHAP. V.
God in Christ the ONLY True God.
2. WHat it is to know him as the only true God. They know not God aright, who
do not know that there is, and can be but One only God, none like him; this
takes us off from all Idolatry, and directs our Worship to the true object of
all Divine Worship; This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, Joh. 17. 3. The Lord our God, is one Lord,
Deuteronomy. 6. 4. I even I am he, and there is no God with me. i. e. none besides me,
none equal to me, Deuteronomy. 32. 39. Who is God, save the Lord? Who is a rock save
our God, Psalm. 18. 31. We are strictly commanded to have no other gods before
him, Exodus 20. 3. Because there is none other God but one: To us there is but
one God the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him, 1 Cor. 8. 4, 6. There is one
God, and one Mediator, 1 Timothy 2. 5. To Worship many gods, as the Heathens did,
is to Blaspheme them all, to ascribe Impotency, and Insufficiency to them; one
hand is too weak, where many are required; there can be but one infinite
Supreme God: What we ascribe to other gods, we detract from the true God; we
are commanded to Love God with all our hearts, soul and strength, Luke 10. 27.
If all be due unto one God, What remains for any other? We never truly rely
upon God, when we put confidence in any thing else, He only is my rock, and my
salvation; my soul wait thou upon God, Psalm. 62. 25. Whom have I in heaven but
thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee, Psalm. 77. 25.

God is one, there is none like him, therefore to be worshipped with a peculiar
singular Worship, appropriated to him only; which for the height and
spirituality of it, belongs to him, and to none else; he will not give his
Glory to another: There is a Glory belonging to God that is truly Divine, that
is too much, and too great to be ascribed unto any Creature. When we come
before the Lord, if our hearts are not enlarged, and extended to a further
Degree of Zeal and Fervency, deriving some elevation more than ordinary, from
the greatness and excellency of the object that inflames our Devotions, makes
us to be otherwise affected toward God, than we find our selves to be toward
other things; we are not under a true sense of the Greatness and Majesty of
God, neither do we know him, as we ought to know him; they who know God in
Christ, do love him more, fear him more, rejoice in him more, than we do in
other things; they are carried out in an extraordinary manner toward him, from
the high apprehensions they have of his glorious Majesty. What made the Angels
and Elders Rev. 5. 12. ad finem. raise their Note so high in that Doxology, but
because they thought him worthy of the highest Honor, more worthy than all
Creatures in Heaven or Earth. So Rev. 4. 8. ad finem. There is that in God,
that calls for the highest Adoration and Worship.

Thou art worthy. i. e. It is most decent, fit, and convenient to pay this just
Reveretce to the great God: It Is highly rational; the worth and excellency of
the Object calls for it; it is injustice toward God, to rob him of his Glory,
by not rendering to him the Praises due unto his Name. How was Paul affected
with the consideration of God in Christ Jesus, 1. Tim. 1. 17.

We shall be apt to come in a slight common Spirit to the worship of God, till
we apprehend it to be a special peculiar Service of a higher Nature, requiring
more intenseness of Spirit, more zeal and ardency of Affection, then we exert
and put forth upon any other occasion; because we have to do with God who is
above all. If your Hearts are not now fixed upon God, wholly taken up with
serious thoughts of God, Trembling at his Word: You do not behave your selves
wisely in the House of God. This one only true God, is known by this
distinguishing Character, as the Father of Jesus Christ: to be convinced of the
truth of a Deity, and of the Mystery of Christ's Incarnation holding forth this
God unto us, are the Two points upon which all our Religion hangs, every
Gospel Truth, has relation to both these depending upon 'em, and naturally
flowing from them.

Since we all profess our selves to be Worshippers of God, it highly concerns
us to know that true God, and that this God is but one, even he who has
appeared in Christ Jesus.

To Worship God out of Christ, is to Woiship as the Heathens do; in plain
English, it is to Worship the Devil. 1 Cor. 10. 20. The things which the
Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God; I would not you
should have fellowship with devils. I am afraid there is a great deal of
Heathenish Worship among us; the Devil carries away all that Worship, that is
not directed to God in Christ. There is no other medium of Worship but Christ;
it is not the intention of Worshipping the True God in or by an Image, that will
justify Image Worship, from being downright Idolatry. We may be mistaken in
Worshipping one God, if that prove a False one: Nay, if we intend the True God,
yet as represented by that which by nature is no God, Gal. 4. 8. it is a false
object of Worship.

All Creatures but the Devil do pay a Worship to something which they call God;
he only is a constant Blasphemer; though he be no Atheist, yet he is no
Worshipper of God, but a Malicious Blasphemer of him; he pretends to no manner
of Worship; he intends no such thing toward God; though he promotes Idolatry
in others, yet does what in him lies to eclipse his Glory altogether, and to
set up himself for the God of this world. The Devil would be a God to this end,
that Wickedness may be accounted Godliness, receiving its denomination from
Satan, usurping the name and title of God. But from such a God, and such
Godliness, good Lord deliver us.

Therefore that we may have clear distinct apprehensions of the only True God,
let us keep the eye of our Faith fixed upon Christ, in all the acts of Worship
we perform unto God; believing him, and him only to be the True Living God, who
has Manifested himself to us in the Flesh of Christ.

CHAP. VI.
To know this only True God, to be OUR God.
1. WHAT it is for God to be our God.

God as Creator and Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, might have dealt with
his creature Man, in a way of Absolute Prerogative, commanding duty without
promising any Reward, being Debtor to none; he might without showing any cause,
why, have given to, or taken from man, what he pleased; all was his own,
whether he gave, or took away, he did with his own as he pleased. Thus he might
have disposed of Man, from time to time, according to the secret good pleasure
of his Will; not made known to us, but by the unavoidable events of it upon us.
This had been a Government, not so suitable to our rational Natures, to which
God was resolved to accommodate himself, in all his dealings with us;
therefore, having made Man a knowing Creature, he reveals his Will to him,
tells him what he expects from him, and binds himself by Covenant to continue
man in Life, as long as he continues in his Obedience, which his perfect State
inclined him to. Thus God set Life and Death before him, left him to his
choice; what he did, he must do knowingly and willingly; if he injure himself,
the whole blame must lie upon himself; he could not rebel against God, but he
must rebel against his own Reason, and wilfully act against his own Light; I
say, wilfully: For there was nothing in his perfect Nature, that could incline
him to the Sin he committed; his will chose it without any direction from the
understanding; for it was absoltuely impossible, that the perfect understanding
of man in Innocence, should be guilty of such a mistake, and dictate such a
wickedness; no, the Devil dictated it, and the mutable will of man was deceived
by the Tempter, and fell under a Curse, from that time forward; the law could
do nothing but Curse fallen man, who had now lost his legal Interest in the
Love and Favor of God. There is nothing due to a Sinner by Law, but Death, the
wages of sin is death; by nature we are Children of wrath, fallen under the
heavy displeasure of God, and must Perish Eternally, unless some means be found
out to reconcile us to God again; some dayes-man to umpire the business between
God and us, and to take up the quarrel. Christ undertook this, to make our
peace with God, to bring us nigh by his blood, shed for the remission of our
sins, that God being pacified toward us, might become our God and loving
Father; ceasing from his anger, receiving us into a state of Grace and Favor
with himself.

God lost none of his Power over us, when we fell; it is so far from that, that
we fell into the hands of the living God; sin fitted us for destruction, Romans
9. 22. Laid our Necks, as it were upon the block, exposed us to the stroke of
Divine Vengeance. In respect of power, God is God over all still; but in
respect of Grace, he ceases to be God; i. e. a gracious God, to those who are
shut out of his love, having forfeited all their Interest in it.

When God comes to a sinner, and says (as to Abraham, Genesis 17. 7.) I am thy
God; it is as much as if he should say, what I am in my self, I Will be on thy
behalf, I Will be all in all to thee; I Will confer all blessings temporal and
spiritual upon thee; I Will communicate all good to thee, Grace and Protection; I
ll be with thee, wherever thou go, to bless thee.

Alas! What if God be Almighty and Alsufficient in himself, unless he will help
me, and do good to me, what am I the better; therefore says God, whatever I am,
have, or can do, shall be for thy good; my Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Mercy,
shall be applied to thee and thine, for Blessing and Salvation, Psalm. 144. 15.

I will be thy God: In words, a short promise; but in sense, the most ample
promise in the whole Bible; God here is taken relatively, as he stands related
to his people, and his people to him; he is the God of such a people, and they
are the people of such a God. Hos. 2. 23. God dwells among them, Exodus 29. 45,
46. As a God nigh at hand to help them, ready upon all occasions to do them
good; he does not only dwell, but walk among us, he goes into every room of the
House; takes care of every thing, keeps all in good order, Levit. 26. 12. 2
Cor. 6. 16. Zech. 2. 10, 11, 12. This dwelling denotes, not only the general
presence of his Power, but the special presence of his Grace. So he was with
Joseph, Genesis 39. 2. And when he withdraws his favor and assistance, he is
said, not to be among us, Numb. 14. 42. Then they are smitten by their Enemies,
but when God appears, then their Enemies fly before them, Psalm 79. 9, 10.

For God to be our God and our Father, secures us to eternity; whatever
Chastisements we pass through, all will issue well, 2 Samuel 7. 14. 15. if God be
our God and Father. For God to be our God, is equivalent to other expressions
of Scripture of the like import, viz. to be for us, Romans 8. 31. To be on our
side, Psalm. 124. 1, 2. To be round about us, as the Mountains about Jerusalem,
Psalm. 125. 2. To be with us, in us, always nigh at hand to help us. God is
ours, when all that he has is ours, for our use and benefit.

2. How comes God to be our God.

This comes originally from himself, because he truly bestows himself upon us
in the new Covenant; by virtue of which he becomes ours, and we become his,
Genesis 17. 7. God and the Saints have a propriety in each other. Heb. 8. 10. I
will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people. God gives himself to
us, and then we resign up our selves to him, Isa. 44. 5. We must prove God to
be ours, by some grant or deed of gift which God has made of himself to us in
his word, before we can lay claim to him: As God became the God of Abraham by
Covenant and Promise, so he becomes our God; he makes a Covenant with us in
Christ, to be our God; that for his sake he will freely pardon our sins, and
receive us into a state of Grace and Favor again; thus God offers himself in
the Covenant to be our God: But an outward tender of grace, if not closed in
with, and accepted, is but a bare offer, not a gift, till we receive it; when
God intends to give grace, he secretly joins with the outward call, speaks
himself to the heart, and inclines us to receive it; herein lies the difference
between an outward and an inward effectual Call. An effectual Call, is that
which has its effect upon the Soul, makes us answer to the call, and obey it;
we are called to come to Christ, and when we actually come, then is the Call
effectual, and not before; when God offered himself to Abraham, it was with a
purpose not to be refused, and therefore he inclined the heart of Abraham to
believe.

You may live long under an outward Call, and not be effectually called, i. e.
not called with such a Call, as God gives his Elect at their Conversion, many
are called, but few chosen, i. e. few called with such a Call as God gives his
Elect. We cannot be sure of our Election, till we are thus effectually called:
To be frequent Hearers of the word, calling us to Christ, and yet find no
inclinations in our hearts to come to him, is a sign that God has not yet
spoken to us himself; Ministers have, but God has not yet by his Spirit set
home his word upon our hearts: The inclinations of the Soul toward Christ,
that arise from an effectually Call are very strong, they put the Soul upon
coming to Christ, urge us to it every day; there is something writ upon the
heart, whch he that runs may read, Conscience is reading over that inward
Writing every day to the Soul, calls for a speedy answer; why is not this done
that God requires, that God has left upon record in thy heart? Why so backward,
why so slow of heart to believe? Arise, arise, away to Christ as fast as you
can, run for your life to the City of refuge that God has appointed. They who
know what an inward Call is, cannot resist it; an awakened Conscience is, in
have, will have the business dispatched out of hand, nothing can stop that man
who is effectually called. O that every one here present were under such a Call
this day God is able to give it, and I am sure none of you are able to resist
it.

Christ is offered to us in the New Covenant, as our Peacemaker, and Mediator,
therefore called, the covenant of the people, Isa. 42. 6. the sure foundation
of it, Isa. 26. 16. The Covenant made with Abraham, is said to be confirmed of
God in Christ before his Incarnation, Gal. 3. 17. This Covenant was made
between the Father and the Son from Eternity, Isa. 42. 6. Tit. 1. 2. 2 Timothy 1.
9.

The first outward declaration or revelation of it was in time, Genesis 3. 15.

The actual application of this Grace to our selves, is, when we first Believe:
We enter into Covenant by Faith, we set our seal to the truth of the Promise,
and receive that right, that Christ Believed on, gives to Eternal life. Faith
it self gives no right to Salvation unto us, but what it first receives from
Christ; we have nothing to do with the promise, till we are in Christ by Faith,
Ephesians. 2. 12. Romans 8. 32. Faith discerns the Grace and Love of God to us in
Christ, and accepts of the offer of life upon Gospel terms, which the Soul
could never be brought to, till Faith came. Who has believed the report, and to
whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed, i. e. to beget Faith which wins
over a Sinner to Christ: We should be much in the first direct acts of Faith,
coming to Christ, casting our selves on Christ, relying on Christ; these direct
acts of Faith, often repeated, will sooner clear up our Interest in Christ,
than our judging by marks, signs, effects and fruits, which can give no clearer
Evidence of their truth, than Faith does of its truth in a real closing with
Christ, in an absolute Promise; this is the first act of Saving Grace,
antecedent to all qualifications in us, or conditions performed by us; this
alters our State: They understand not the Gospel, who keep off from Christ, for
want of such and such qualifications; which Christ expects not we should bring
to him, but derive from him; an humble sense of our vileness and unworthiness,
is qualification enough for a Sinner to come to Christ, and cast himself upon
him. When God has once said he will be our God, he is ever after minding us of
that, speaking it over again and again upon all occasions, Isa. 43. 1, 2, 3.
etc. Isa. 41. 10. Heb. 8. 11, 12. I will, and they shall; God undertakes both
parts of the Covenant. The Covenant in the first initial Grace of it, must be
first executed on God's part toward us, before it can be executed on our part
toward God; God begins with us, does his part first, and that enables us to do
our part, i. e. we cannot give up our selves to him to be his people, till he
has writ his Laws in our Hearts, and put his Spirit within us, thereby
declaring himself to be our God, and strongly inclining us to give up our
selves to him as his People. God first enters into Covenant with us, brings us
under the bond of it, and then governs us ever after by the Grace of that
Covenant freely conferred upon us: There may be conditions in the Covenant,
that speak out the order of it, what is first, and what follows upon it,
according to the method of the All-wise God in bringing hom-Sinners to Christ:
But I do not conceive there are any conditions previously required in us, in
order to our first entering into Covenant. God takes whom he will into Covenant,
and leaves out whom he will; it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs,
but of God that shows Mercy; it is a Covenant of Free Grace, consisting of
absolute Promises, what God will do; our doing comes afterward, as a fruit and
effect of God's work in us: That which is done by us in the virtue and power of
that which is first done in us by God, must be ascribed to him, and not to our
selves; Turn thou me, and I shall be turned; God gives the first turn, before
we can perceive any such thing as Conversion in our selves; God lays in the
principle, and then draws us in the Power of it after himself: The Terms of the
Covenant may be outwardly propounded to many, who never enter into Covenant
with God, nor God with them; the Covenant is never executed in them, and
toward them, though it be often preached to them. How often would I have
gathered you, and you would not? Mat. 23. 37. When the word of God's grace
comes to us, we either receive it, or put it from us; and 'twill be no joy of
heart to us in a dying Hour, to think how often we have refused our own Mercies
offered to us, which nothing but our final unbelief can hinder us of; you who
do not now believe, know assuredly that you will never believe, 'till God turn
your hearts; and he then begins to turn them, when he puts you upon seeking
earnestly to him for it, as that which none can do besides: I wish this sign of
Conversion were more apparent in us all; how diligently should we wait upon God
for converting Grace in the use of means? the reason why many receive so little
benefit from the word, is because they expect so little from it; they do not
come with raised expectations of a powerful Revelation of the Arm of God upon
their hearts; you that do, have, I doubt not, seen, and felt the mighty works
of God upon your Souls. Faith begins at the promises, is raised from thence,
and ever after waits for the performance of them; it shall be done according to
your Faith.

Some think they must bring Faith to the Covenant, as a preparatory
Qualification for all the Grace that is there promised; whereas we must come to
the Covenant for our first Faith, and fetch it thence; the Spirit by the
outward proposal of the Covenant kindles Faith in us, by which we cast our
selves upon the free Grace of God in Christ: We have nothing to believe till
then. Do this, and then look for the Law written in your hearts; for the Spirit
of God, and all the fruits of the Spirit in your repentance; Love, Obedience,
and holy walking with God; all Graces flow from the Covenant of Grace. Pray
that God will give you a heart to assent to, and close with Christ upon the
terms of the Covenant, and then see if all be not made good to you. God will do
much for the Glory of his Grace, but he will do nothing to nourish your Pride
and Conceitedness of your selves, and your own righteousness; seek all from
Grace, and you have all; but if you go about to establish your own
righteousness, you will never attain unto righteousness, if you seek it not by
Faith, Romans 9. 32.

3. How come we to discern God to be our God in Christ; or what is there in
Christ, that makes out this unto us?

1. Christ, as Man, does own God to be his God, and the God of all who are in
him. My Father, and your Father, my God and your God, John 20. 17. God is not
only the God of Christ Personal, but of Christ Mystical, his Head both ways, 1
Cor. 11. 3. When we are one in Christ, then the God of Christ is our God; we
cannot since the fall, have an Interest in God, but through a Mediator; he is
the great Peace maker; it is Christ makes God to be ours, who otherwise would be
against us, not for us; God is in Christ, reconciling the World unto himself:
As Christ owns God to be his God, so God the Father owns Christ incarnate as
his wellbelovedSon; and the same love he bears to him, he bears to all his
Members, John 17. 23, 26.

We can have no immediate Knowledge of God in his own Divine Essence; So he is
perfectly known only to himself; all that concerns us to know of him, he has
revealed in Christ: Without a personal knowledge of God in Christ, we cannot
act our Faith upon him, nor have any real Communion with him; Notions are not
Persons or Subsistencies, but Mental Conceptions; neither can we apply our
selves to those Speculations, if we know not the Person to whom they belong;
all Divine Attributes relate to their proper Subject; nay more, all Divine
Attributes are of the essence of God, they are God himself; neither do our
thoughts of Omnipotency, Allsufficiency, etc. signify any thing to our relief,
unless we know him who is all this; we cannot know Omnipotency to be God
himself, unless we see it acted, and expressed by him who is God; it is a hard
matter to prove the reality of that which was never acted; and it is impossible
to know that such Attributes have been exerted, unless we know by whom. None of
the idol gods were ever able to act over any one of the essential Attributes of
God; by the help of the Devil they pretended something that way, but it was a
mere pretense, easily disproved by any considering man, strictly examining,
either their Predictions of future Events, or their feigned Miracles, which
were all mere Delusions, false and groundless.

Christ out-did them all, he did the works of God indeed, and for his work-sake
ought to be believed to be God indeed.

2. In Christ we see God's Wrath appeased, his Justice satisfied for all our
Offenses, all causes of Enmity between God and us are taken away by Christ,
Ephesians. 2. 13, 14. The body of sin destroyed, Romans 6. 6. We Crucified to the
World, Gal. 6. 14. The Image of God restored, his Law writ in our hearts.

3. The Spirit of Christ dwelling in us, tells us so, teaches us to cry Abba
Father. As no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor.
12. 3. So none can say, that God is their God, but by the Holy Ghost: By the
Spirit of Christ, which is the Spirit of God, Romans 8. 9. When God himself tells
you by his own Spirit, that he is your God, he makes you to understand what he
says, and to see how happy you are, in having God for your God: Till we come to
some sense of this, we lose the comfort of our Religion, it has little
Influence upon us; whence does the power of godliness arise, but from the power
of God, who is the Author of true Religion, and puts that power into it, that
belongs to true godliness; take away the relation that is between Godliness and
God, and you quite destroy the power of godliness: Religion is a weak thing, if
it be not maintained and supported by the authority and power of God himself.

4. We see that of God in Jesus Christ, that makes us fall down and Worship him
as our God, crying out with Thomas, John 20. 28. My Lord, and my God. When we
look upon Christ with an eye of Faith, we do with open face behold, as in a
glass the glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. God causes his glory to pass before
us, lets out some beams of his Divine Majesty, that we may know him to be the
Lord; such Manifestations of God to the Soul through Christ have, I hope,
fallen under your own experience many a time, and that you are not now without
such a sight of God in Christ, as does create in you a holy Reverence toward
him, a holy trembling at his word; if you receive it as the word of God, of
your God, it must have this effect upon you; any thing from our God, that bears
his Name, comes with authority, commands a due respect from us.

Since we are redeemed with the precious Blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 19.
Justified by his Blood, saved from Wrath through him, reconciled to God by the
death of his Son, Romans 5. 9, 10. We may conclude from all that has passed
between God and Christ, concerning our Salvation, that God is our God: Christ
has made him so.

When we know who is our God, what he will be unto us, and do for us, we may
enter into rest for ever, rejoicing in his Salvation.

Two things prove God to be ours.

1. His giving himself to us in a Promise.

2. Our receiving him in that Promise by Faith, which holds him fast, will not
let him go; neither will God wrest himself out of the hand of our Faith, for
that would be to recede from his own Promise, to deny himself; no he will
approve himself to be every way ours; taking a universal Care of us, and
providing eternally for us, causing his fullness to flow in upon our Souls more
and more every day. Jer. 17. 8. For he shall be as a tree planted by the
waters, that spreads her roots by the river, and shall not see when heat
comes; but her leaf shall be green, nor shall cease from yiedling fruit.

CHAP. VII.
Some further Evidences of God's being OUR God.
1. LOOK into your own hearts for this; see what impressions of his Love and
Fear you can find there, what measure of the Spirit of his Son breathing in
you; examine, prove your own selves, that you may know whether Christ be in you
of a truth; he who has God for his God, his heart is much set upon Christ, who
has brought this about, and by a Spirit of Adoption made it known to us, that
God is our Father; the Spirit does not tell us this only by an external
Declaration of it in the word; but by an internal operation, or breathing in
our hearts as the Spirit of the Son, inclining us to go to God, as Children of
our Heavenly Father. We know God to be our Father by a Divine Instinct; the
spirit of the Son leads us naturally to our Heavenly Father; the Spirit of the
Son knows no other Father but God, and God acts as a Father toward all, in
whom he sees the Spirit of his Son; when we are joined to the Lord in one
Spirit, we stand in the same relation to God the Father, as Christ our elder
Brother does; then it is, I and the children which thou have given me, Heb. 2.
13. All Children of the same Father; I the first born, and these my Brethren:
Being partakers of the Divine Nature, that Nature tells us who is our Heavenly
Father; we need not say with Philip, show us the Father; we shall see the
Father in the Son, and move toward him in the Spirit of the Son, feeling in
our selves such childlike affections toward God, as will make us call him
Father. We must be clear in the actings of our Faith upon Christ, before we can
apprehend God to be our Father; still remembering, that it is the Father of
Christ, who is our Father.

2. By that inward satisfaction and rest we find in our selves under this new
Covenant Relation to God, he that believes, does enter into rest, Heb. 4. 3.
Soul, take thine ease; a Child of God may truly say so; upon our believing in
Christ, there is a secret shedding abroad of that love of God in the Soul; when
we turn to God, God turns about to us, looks pleasingly upon us; we taste and
see that God is gracious, this is the sinners welcome into a state of Grace, he
sees it much better with him than before.

3. By the confidence we put in him for help and comfort in all our times of
need. The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want, Psalm 23. 1. We see that in
God, that answers all our fears; do we want strength? the Lord is our strength;
would a rock or fortress stand us in any stead? God is both; would a Buckler, a
high Tower? the Lord is all this to a Believer, and Faith understands as much,
Psalm. 18. 1, 2. And therefore is confident in God, knows that every Promise
will be established. God will act like a God toward us, like a God to Israel,
as 1 Chronicles. 17 24, 25. We may safely trust in him, Dan. 3. 17. Our God is the
God of Salvation, Psalm. 68. 20. Isa. 41. 10. We should apply to him for help
upon all occasions, Isa. 8. 19. And let others have a care of meddling with the
people of God to their hurt. Jer. 2. 3. All that devour him, shall offend, evil
shall come upon them, says the Lord. They are sensible how God stands engaged
to them, and they to God; God promises to do great things for them, and they
promise to walk in his ways, and to keep his statutes, Deuteronomy. 26. 16. ad finem.
Not to do this, is to deny God, Josh. 24. 27. You say he is your God, don't
unsay it again by your wilful Disobedience. When God owns any for his people,
he makes them to own him for their God; he works answerable Dispositions in
their hearts toward himself; as he avouches them to be his people, so they
avouch him to be their God, Hos. 2. 23. I will say, i. e. I will make them my
people, Dei dicere, est efficere; our saying, is to believe and obey; when we
disobey God, we disown him; we set up something else for our God, we say unto
God, Depart from us, Job. 21. 14, 15.

4. By his appearing for us, against all our sworn Enemies, as he did for
Israel of old, bringing them out of Egypt with a Mighty hand; when things come
to extremities between God and his People, he will then save them, because he
is their God, Psalm 3. 7. For his own name sake, Isa. 43. 25. David knew the
strength of the Argument, Psalm. 119. 94. Though God may severely Chastise his
people, yet he will not take away his Loving kindness utterly from them; he
will not make an utter end of them, God cannot do this, Hos. 11. 8.

5. By our zealous appearing for God upon all occasions. The way of the Lord is
strength to the upright, Prove. 10. 29. The people that do know their God, shall
be strong, and do exploits, Dan. 11. 32.

6. The Apostle, Phil. 3. 3. when he would prove himself, and the Philippians,
to be the peculiar people of God, to belong to him indeed; he gives Three Signs
of it, viz. Worship God in the spirit, rejoice in Christ Jesus, have no
confidence in the flesh.

They who say God is their God, from a true saving Knowledge of God in Christ;
they believe there is no other God, that he is the only true God. Who is God,
save the Lord? who is a rock, save our God? Psalm. 18. 31. Above all gods, 2 Chronicles. 2. 5. And him only will they serve, Mat. 4. 10. He is their guide unto
death, Psalm. 48. 14. They forsake all false gods, and return unto him with
their whole heart, Jer. 24. 7. He is the only object of their Faith, Fear, and
Worship; they separate themselves from all Idol Worship, 2 Cor. 6. 16.

Lastly, That you may the better know whether God be your God, let me mind you
of Three things, which God has expressly promised to do for us, as he is our
God.

1. To deliver us from all outward Misery, Rev. 21. 3, 4, 7. God himself shall
be with them, and be their God. And God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes; and there shall be neither death, nor crying, neither shall there be any
more pain: for the former things are passed away. He that overcomes shall
inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my son.

2. To raise our Dead Bodies to an immortal Condition, Mat. 22. 31, 32.

3. To prepare Heaven for us. Heb. 11. 16. God is not ashamed to be called
their God, for he has prepared for them a City.

CHAP. VIII.
The APPLICATION.
IF God manifest in the Flesh, be your God, as you say he is, then consider how
you carry it toward God; whether you have glorified him as God. Our carriage
toward God, should be answerable to the apprehensions of our Faith concerning
him: If I be a Father, where is my honor? if a master, where is my fear? Mal.
1. 6. We should give unto God the things that are God's; to withhold from him
what is due unto his Name, is to rob him of his Glory; some who profess they
know God, in works denybim, Tit. 1. 16. declaring to all the World, that the
fear of God is not before their eyes. I am pleading the Cause of God this day,
and would lead you all into a due respect toward that God, whom you call your
God; What your God, and not Governed by him, not Rely upon him; not Consult
with him, How can this be? Either you mistake the Notion of a God, or else you
will fully act against your own light; The wicked contemn God, Psalm. 10. 13.
and say, Who is Lord over us. I hope there are none in this Assembly so
Atheistically inclined; if any such be here, their own Consciences will confute
them ere long.

I shall apply my self to you, who own God in Christ for your God; and I this
day appeal to God in every one of your Consciences, Whether you have and do
carry it toward him, according to what you profess to know of him? Who among
us is not guilty in this matter? O! that the sense of our former neglects, may
quicken us up to a more diligent observance of his Holy will, and to pay that
just reverence that is due unto his Name. Pray consider what use do you make of
your God, your own God, Psalm. 67. 6. We should make use of our own things, we
should never boast of a Propriety in that, which is not useful and beneficial
to us; then tell me, What do thou expect from thy God? And what think you
does your God expect from you? When Paul was brought to the knowledge of God in
Christ, the first Word he said after his Conversion, was, Lord, what will thou
have me to do? I am devoted to thy service while I live: so Thomas, My God, and
my Lord; we never own God for our God, till we are savingly enlightened, then we
turn about toward him, then we fall down and Worship him, and have an awful
sense of God abiding in us ever after; then we follow him crying, Abba, Father;
then my God and my Father in every Prayer we make: You may know a Child of God
by his daily Crying, Abba, Father; the reason why many restrain Prayer, don't
call upon God from one end of the Week to the other, is, because they do'nt own
him to be their God: It Is impossible to own him, and not to pray to him
continually upon all occasions; he is a strange Christian who stands in no need
of God every day; and if so, Why don't you go to him upon your knees every day
and beg his help? Not to do this, is to live without God in the World.

I appeal to your Consciences concerning your God; you know, he is a jealous
God, he cannot endure to behold iniquity; he is a consuming fire to unbelieving
impenitent Sinners; he will prove so to them at last, and since your God is
such a God, How dare you put forth your hand to the least Iniquity? What
trembling should seize upon you, when you sin against such a God? I beseech you
go home and think seriously of your God: Either you have a God, or you have
none; if you acknowledge none, then profess your selves to be Atheists, and let
us never see your faces more in the Assemblies of God's People; if you own a
God for your God, subject your selves to him, and be willing to be ruled by him.

We cannot look God in the face, and say our Father, if we know him not to be
ours.

God offers himself to many who reject him, Israel would none of me, Psalm. 81.
10, 11, 12.

Let us have a care of this, lest God make us to know to our sorrow, what it is
to be forsaken by him. Christ for a time was under desertion, and he knew how
to carry himself under it, better than we do. My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me. Christ did, and so may we plead our Interest in God as our God,
and yet be forsaken by him for a time; my God, my God, says a deserted Soul;
had thou never been mine, the hiding of thy face had not been so terrible;
but to lose the sight of my God, with whom I enjoyed such sweet communion
heretofore; this goes to my heart, as a Sword passing through it. Few under
desertion are able to say as Christ did, my God, my God; we are apt to think he
has cast us off, and that we hear him say, lo ruhamah, I will no more have
Mercy; lo ammi, Ye are not my people, and I will not be your God, Hos. 1. 6, 9.
We think every Handwriting of any bitter thing against us, is a Bill of
Divorce, and that God will be our God no more; when he frowns upon us, we start
back farther than he would have us.

If we don't fear him, whom we call our God, we have no God who is properly
ours, whom we own as such in our Consciences. No, no! Such are without God;
their Belly is their God, their Riches, Power, Parts, Places, are their God;
they think they can do any thing for themselves in this World; never seriously
thinking of the immortality of their Souls, of a future State; if they may
enjoy the pleasures of Sin that are but for a season, they don't consider how
short that season is, nor what comes after; they would Eat, and Drink, and be
Merry, though to morrow they may dye; and what care they? the things of another
World are Mysteries to them, they will not trouble their heads about them: This is
the true real State of Thousands and Ten thousands in the World. Could we see
into their Hearts, we should find it just so, and no otherwise; let their
outward profession be what it will, their inward thoughts are as you have
heard, let them deny it if they can; I am sure, if they will tell themselves
what they think, they must acknowledge all this to be so, and no otherwise.

If God be not your God, then he is none of yours, i. e. he is against you;
you will shortly feel the weight of his Almighty hand pressing you sore, and
giving you an irrecoverable stroke; it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the Living God. If God be for us, Who can be against us? But if God be
against us, Who can be for us, to secure us from his Vengeance? None can
deliver out of his hand; if God be not your God, you are under the power of the
Devil, he is your God, Act. 26. 18. Col. 1. 13.

I don't ask what your Opinions are, some difference may be among us there; but
I ask, Who is your God? I hope we are all agreed in this; To us there is but
one God, and one Lord Jesus Christ: If so, if God in Christ be indeed your God,
then his word must be the rule of all your actions both Civil and Religious:
how careful should you be to keep his Word, to do according to the revealed
will of your own God? you cannot answer the contrary to your Consciences. It Is a
reasonable motion to put you upon worshipping your own God. Deuteronomy. 10. 20, 21.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God; him shall thou serve, and to him shall thou
cleave, and swear by his name. He is thy praise, and he is thy God, that has
done for thee great things. I have not chosen your God for you, you your selves
have chosen him, as Josh. 24. 22, 23, 24. Ye are witnesses against your selves;
that ye have chosen the Lord to serve him, etc. vide. You say, he is your God,
then I say you ought to Fear and Obey him: For all people will walk every one
in the name of his God; and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God, for
ever and ever, Micah 4. 5. All your Godliness lies in the respect you show to
your God.

If you shall still ask, How shall we know that God is our God?

Ans. God comes himself and tells us so; not only in his Word, but by some
particular Manifestation of himself to our Souls, according to the Word, John
14. 21. God does act over the grace of such a promise, gives us undeniable
experience of it in our own Souls, that he has made good such a promise to us:
Here is more than a bare promise; here is the Spirit of promise sealing the
truth of it to our souls: The Holy Ghost is called the Spirit of Promise, not
only because he himself is the great Promise of the Father, but because he is
the best Interpreter of all the promises; gives us light into them all,
searches the deep things of God, that we might know the things that are freely
given to us of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11, 12. We take that that lies uppermost in a
promise; but we don't dig deep enough to discover the hid treasures that are
there; in the light of the Spirit we may look down to the bottom of a promise,
and see all that is contained in it, gathering up the unsearchable riches of
Christ. The Spirit makes us to understand our interest in God, bearing witness
to our Adoption, and shedding abroad the Love of God in our Hearts; so that we
are full of a sense of God's love: In the midst of my thoughts within me, thy
comforts delight my soul, Psalm. 94. 19. q. d. When I could think of nothing to
revive my drooping Soul, thy comforts did it presently. Let us wait for this
particular manifestation of God to us, till he know us by name, as Joh. 10. 3.
Exodus 33. 12. I know thee by name, and thou have found grace in my sight. What
an accent did Christ put upon the word Mary, when he spoke to her! She knew his
Voice presently, and turned her self, saying, Rabboni, Master, Joh. 20. 16. He
first calls her Woman, v. 15. as if he knew not whom she was; and it is plain
she knew not who he was, though many words passed between them; but when he
called her by her Name Mary, he secretly told her his Name Jesus: She did not
own him for her Lord and Master till then.

Though all Believers have not always a full sense and assurance that God is
their God; yet they always cleave to him as their God; they look toward him,
long for clearer evidences of his Love, desire nothing more than that God would
be their God: Sometimes Grace spends all its strength in desires after more
Grace, so that what we have is hardly discernable by us; we pray for more
grace, as if we had none at all, though the manner of our praying argues the
contrary: Where there is but little Water in the Bucket, we sometimes pour it
all into the Pump to fetch up more; as he that has, receives more; so he that
has, desires more, and that makes him forget what he has, Phil. 3. 13. Our
longing after clearer views of God in Christ may seem to obscure, at least to
take us off from the consideration of the present sight we have of him.

The Majesty of God out of Christ, is too high for Mortal men to approach unto;
therefore consider your Immanuel, God manifest in the Flesh: Pray for a Spirit
of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him, Ephesians. 1. 17. It Is granted to
some, but not to others, Mat. 1^. 27. Mat. 13. 11. it is a signal effect of the
Covenant of Grace, Heb. 8. 11. made to know that God is our God; to know, or
rather to be known of him, Gal. 4. 9. There is a mutual understanding between
God and the Saints, of the interest they have one in another. I am the good
shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine, Joh. 10. 14.

CHRIST The ONLY Savior of his People from Sin.
LUKE I. 77. To give knowledge of salvation unto his people, by the remission
of their sins, through the tender mercy of our God, etc.
CHAP. I.
Some things impli'd in the Text, viz.
ALL men by nature are in a lost undone Estate. 1. Obs.


No man knows how to recover himself out of this lost undone estate, 2. Obs.
i. e. no man by nature knows this great Mystery, without the light of the
Scriptures revealing it to us, and laying before us the only way of Salvation
by Jesus Christ, declaring all the counsel of God in this matter, Act. 20. 27.
His Wise contrivance for the Salvation of man by Christ, called the Mysterious
hidden Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 2. 7. kept secret since the World began, but now
is made manifest by the Scriptures, Romans 16. 25, 26. That no man knows this but
by a Scripture Light, appears by these Texts, Act. 2. 37. Men and brethren,
what shall we do? They knew not what to do. Sirs, what must I do to be saved,
Acts 16. 30. and 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard; neither
have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them
that love him: but God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit. When we were
yet without strength, and could do nothing to help our selves, in due time
Christ died for the ungodly, Romans 5. 6.

This outward revelation in the letter of the Scripture, 3. Obs.
of God's intended Grace toward Sinners, is little regarded by the generality
of men; they cast the Word of God behind their backs, and count the Doctrine of
the Cross foolishness.

There are Two Causes of this.

1. They are not convinced of their lost Estate, Rev. 3. 17. The whole need not
a physician, Mat. 9. 12.

2. When they are convinced, I mean when they are under the highest degree of
Conviction that a natural man is capable of, yet they cannot reach the mystery
of the Gospel; it is foolishness to them; nay, the more they are Convinced of
the sinfulness of sin, the further they see into the horrid nature of it, the
more improbable, nay, impossible, does it seem to them, that ever their sins
should be pardoned: It Is an easier matter to convince them of sin, than it is
under that Conviction, to persuade them to believe in Christ for the pardon of
sin; there is something in Nature that helps forward the Conviction of sin,
natural Conscience joins with the Law to accuse for sin; but there is nothing
in Nature that does any way promote our belief of the Gospel; the first is a
common work of the Spirit; this latter, a special saving work. Therefore,

4. Obs. Besides the written word, which God has put into every man's hand, who
lives under the outward light of the Gospel, God ordained, and appointed
Ministers to go up and down as his Ambassadors, to beseech and entreat sinners
to be reconciled unto God, and put them in mind of what is written in the Word;
to exhort them to read it, to hear it, to consider seriously of it; God sends
his Ministers to discourse them, to expostulate the case with them; so
unwilling is God that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance, and live.

If any object, Why may not the written word suffice, without the Ministry, to
bring men to the knowledge of Salvation?

I answer. All cannot read, therefore they must be spoken to, and instructed by
Preaching. Besides,

It Is not for us to prescribe unto God, what means he should use to fit us for
Heaven; he has appointed this Ordinance of Preaching. It preased God by the
foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1. 21. Therefore
let it not displease us. Besides, should God speak to us immediately in his own
voice, we should not be able to bear it, as they Deuteronomy. 5. 25, 26, 27. Therefore
he speaks in our voice and language to us, that he may more secretly and
silently convey himself to our hearts, by the ministry of man, speaking in his
Name, and uttering his words; which are capable of more of the Spirit of God,
than our hearts can well bear; the Word of God, and the Spirit of God, do
perfectly agree, but it is not so between the Spirit of God, and our hearts;
the Spirit enters not without opposition; therefore to avoid all clamor
abroad, and noise in the streets, God chooses this more soft, easy way, by
putting his power into the word preached by man, so making it effectual to what
degree he pleases. Thus God gets within us ere we are aware, his word spoken by
man, comes home to our hearts with power, in the evidence and demonstration of
the Spirit, showing us the way of Salvation.

Having thus led you to the Text, by these things that are impli'd in it, and
must be first supposed, in order to a right understanding of the words read to
you, which I shall now speak more directly to.

1. As relating to John's Ministry in particular.

The words of the Text, are part of that Prophecy which Zacharias uttered, when
he was filled with the Holy Ghost, verse. 67. Concerning Christ, and concerning
John; he begins with Christ, great things he speaks of him, lays open the whole
mystery of the Gospel, and of the Churches Salvation by Christ.

Then in the same breath continuing his Discourse, he makes a sudden
Transition, and directs his Speech to the Infant John then present, as I
suppose.

And thou child shall be called; and here is a description of his Person, and
thou child. And of his Office, shall be called a Prophet of the highest.

John was to teach them the way of Salvation, to tell them the Kingdom of
Heaven was at hand, and to call them to Faith and Repentance, in order to the
remission of sin.

The time of John's Ministry was a middle state, between the Law and Gospel,
between Moses and Christ; he is preferred before all the Prophets, Mat. 11. 11.
And yet as to clearness of light, inferior to the Apostles and Gospel Ministers
in the renewed state of the Church; though he knew more than all that were
before him, yet he saw less than they who came after him; This John is the
voice of one crying in the wilderness, exhorting the people to believe on him
that should come after him, Acts 19. 4. Christ, as Man was six Months younger
than John, came a little after into the world, and a little after him into the
Ministry; it was meet it should be so; John being his forerunner, a Messenger
sent before to prepare the way. Mark begins his Gospel from the Ministry of
John, because then the Judaical worship began to cease, The Law and the
Prophets were until John, Luke 16. 16. i. e. All the Prophets and the Law
prophesied until John, Mat. 11. 13. They spoke of the Messiah to come; John
shows he is already come in the flesh, points to him, Behold the lamb of God,
which takes away the sin of the world, John 1. 29. Therefore John's Ministry
is called the beginning in the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Mark 1. 1. This
Gospel-Administration we are now under, began in John the Baptist, who brought
that New Testament Ordinance of Baptism into the Church.

Thus much of that, which peculiarly relates to John. I am now come to that
which relates.

2. To a Gospel Ministry in general, and shall show you from this Text, what it
is, what you are to expect from it, what you should aim at in your attendance
upon it; which is briefly this, viz. The knowledge of Salvation for the
remission of sin; this is that which we are sent to teach, and which you come
hither to learn; if you propose to your selves any other end than his, you are
not like to thrive under Ordinances.

In the Description of John Baptist's Office, we may see the nature, use, and
end of a Gospel Ministry, all must be called to that Office who are employed in
it; they must prepare the way, and seek to lead their Hearers to Christ,
Preaching remission of sin through faith in him, showing how all flows from the
tender Mercy of God, setting forth Christ as the true light of them who sit in
darkness, etc.

Before Christ's time, the Patriarchs, Priests, Levites, and Prophets, carried
on this Ministry: After Christ's Incarnation, John the Baptist was the first
Gospel-Minister; after him, the Apostles and Evangelists, by an extraordinary
Call; then Pastors, and Teachers, as the ordinary Ministers of the Gospel, who
continue still in the Church, and whose duty still it is to seek the Salvation
of their Hearers, and Hearers should come to learn the way of Salvation by
Christ.

To give knowledge of Salvation, etc. Not that Preachers can infuse knowledge
into their Hearers, none but God can do this, as Dan. 1. 17. There the words
have a greater Emphasis than here, when applied to men, who only prepare the
way by Instruction, afford some outward help to bring us to the knowledge of
Salvation; they do aditum patefacere, they prepare the way, make it plain, lay
it open, setting before you the credenda what you are to believe, and do; they
tell you, what way and method, what manner and means, God has made choice of,
to bring about Salvation; for they give us notice of all this, speaking in a
plain familiar manner, that men may know what is contained in the Bible, what
the main drift and scope of the Gospel is, which we cannot be ignorant of, when
it is told us in such plain and intelligible terms, which if we do not stop our
ears, will inform us, whether we will or no, of the History of the Bible; we
cannot but conceive something of the matter; they are willingly ignorant, who
being so taught, yet slight all they hear, and will not regard it; where there has
been such an outward manifestation of the Truth, we may say as 2 Cor. 4. 2, 3.
If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost. Ministers should do what
in them lies, to help the understanding of their Hearers; bringing down things
to their Capacities, giving the sense, and causing the people to understand the
reading, Neh. 8. 8. This is the way for a Minister to save himself, and them
that hear him, 1 Timothy 4. 16. Many common Hearers cannot understand what they
read and hear, unless some man guide them, as the Eunuch said of himself, Act.
8. 30, 31. When we have in handling the word, commended our selves to every
man's Conscience in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4. 2. we must leave the success of
our Ministry to him; whether the word be a savor of life or death to him. Paul
may Plant, and Apollo may Water, but it is God who gives all the increase. You
see how Ministers give the Knowledge of Salvation, by Publishing the Gospel, i.
e. by Preaching Christ, Romans 16. 25. They say to the People, what the Angel did
to the Shepherds, Luke 2. 10, 11. Behold, I bring you good tidings of great
joy, which shall be to all people, For unto you is born a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord. A great multtitude of the Heavenly Host, join with the Angel
in praising God for his good will toward men, v. 14. This is the Ministers
work now, to declare these glad Tidings, this faithful saying, so worthy of all
acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.
15. Christ commanded his Apostles to go into all the world, and preach the
gospel to every creature, Mark 16. 15. To tell them plainly, there is no other
name under Heaven by which we can be saved, but the name of Christ. One would
think this were enough to set all the world upon enquiring after Christ. But
who has believed our report, and to whom has the arm of the Lord been
revealed: Men will not receive this Testimony that God has given of his Son.
We who are Ministers, cannot finish our course with joy, and the ministry which
we have received of the Lord Jesus, if we do not testify of the gospel of the
grace of God, Act. 20. 24. And as for me, I would say with Samuel, 1 Samuel 12.
23. God forbid that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray for you,
and to show you the good and the right way. He that has ears to hear, let him
hear.

Having showed, what this knowledge or notice is, which Ministers give to the
People of the way of Salvation by Christ; I shall now speak something of the
notice the People take of this, how they resent it, how they receive it, what
impression it makes upon the generality of Professors. They assent to it, seem
to be convinced of it, and do profess to believe it; but in such a cold
careless manner, that they are not at all concerned in the matter; Putting the
greatest cheat upon themselves that can be; it is below the reason of a man in
all it is other actings, to counterfeit knowledge in things so nearly relating
to himself, and of so dreadful a consequence if neglected, and not strictly
attended to; to profess to believe in Christ for Salvation, and yet never come
to him for that Salvation, never deal with him about it, is such a gross piece
of Hypocrisy and self-deceit; that one would wonder men should be guilty of:
Such a formal profession comes not from any true conviction, or real belief of
what they profess; but from custom, education, and a desire to be like other
men; they walk in the shadow of other men's Religion, who have none of their
own; they take up the name of Believers, and say they have Faith, when they
know, or may know they have none; such a feigned Faith undoes Thousands.

Since they say they have Faith, and profess it, how does it appear they have
it not?

Appear! Ans.
As plain as the Sun at Noon! If a man say he is convinced there is but one
remedy in the whole World that can cure that disease he is sick of, and yet
refuse it when it is offered to him; I am sure if he be in his right Wits, he
lies in saying he is so convinced; what! convinced that his House is on fire,
and yet not call out for help, and seek to quench it; or that this is a Cup of
Poison in his hand, and yet drink it off! This is to take away the force and
power of reason over man, to make him unconcerned in, and for himself, even
when he is under the greatest sense of imminent danger, that such a through
conviction must needs bring him to; nothing brings things nearer to a man's
reason, then conviction does; it is an Act of the understanding, by which he
owns and acknowledges that for truth, which he never assented to before; it is
not a mere Speculation only, but proceeds from the Judgment of a practical
understanding, about a matter that merely concerns himself; telling him, that
something must be done in the case. Those in the Acts, when convinced, cry out,
Men and brethren, what shall we do? they knew something was to be done, they
bestir themselves under their convictions. What shall we say of those who sit
still under a profession of Faith, and do nothing? Let them say what they will,
they are not convinced, they do not indeed believe, though they read and hear
the Scriptures, and own their Divine Authority; what then, if the Spirit come
not along with the word, there is that cursed Principle of unbelief in their
hearts, that will be too hard for the Word and the Minister to; they will put
the Word from them, and if the Minister come up close to them, and say, Thou
art the man, they will fly in his face too, because he does not Prophesy good
to them.

CHAP. II.
The Preacher's Power of binding and loosing.
I Have one thing more about a Gospel Ministry, which I would mind you of, and
bring into practice; I see a necessity of it, to awaken Professors in this
declining Age, where Religion seems to have lost its Primitive Glory, and that
powerful Influence that formerly it had upon the minds of men, who stood more
in awe of their Religion, than we do now; gave another-gates account of it to
their own Conscience, than I fear many nowadays can do.

I conceive it belongs to the Office of a Gospel Minister, not only to declare
the way of Salvation by Christ, and show how remission of sin is to be had; but
also to bind or loose their Hearers, as they do either come up to the Word, or
reject it; and this done Authoritatively in the Name of Christ, according to
Scripture-rule, is a real discharge, or a real Condemnation of that person who
falls under such a Sentence.

I don't speak of binding and loosing, as it is an Act of Church Discipline, in
casting Offenders out of the Church, and receiving them into it again upon
their Repentance; for so it is in use among us, and in that sense only we
generally take it.

But I conceive there is a binding and loosing mentioned in Scripture, distinct
from all Church Censures in a way of Discipline, and is always to follow the
Preaching of the Doctrine of the Gospel, loosing those from their sins, who do
believe it, and binding their sins upon them who believe it not; and this I
take to be an essential part of a Gospel Ministry. Where Ministers do perceive
in any of their Hearers, a visible contempt of the grace that is offered in the
Gospel, they ought to be is readiness to avenge all such Disobedience, 2 Cor.
10. 6. by binding their sins upon them, pronouncing such persons to abide under
the wrath of God, 'till they do by Faith embrace a Promise of Pardon. Those two
places, viz. Mat. 16. 19. Joh. 20. 23. relate to the Doctrine of the Gospel,
showing what follows upon it, and also do confirm the Authority of it, for the
comfort of those who believe it, and for the terror of those who reject it.
That place, Mat. 18. 18. relates to the Discipline of the Church, in all
public Censures passed upon impenitent Offenders: So that he who acknowledges
his Fault, and repents of it, being admonished by the Church, is absolved, not
only by man, but by God, and taken into the Communion of the Church again. The
Church of Rome admits of binding and loosing in the latter sense, but they
engross it all to themselves, and apply it wholly to their Sacrament of Penance.

The Council of Trent Anathematizes those who allow the power of binding and
loosing in any sense to the ordinary Preachers of the Gospel; but Calvin is
expressly against them; Non separanda est, says he, haec potestas remittendi
Peccata, a docendi officio, i. e. The power of binding and loosing must not be
separated from the office of an ordinary Gospel Minister. There be other
Scriptures to confirm this, as 2 Cor. 5. 19. Luke 4. 18. The sum of the Gospel
is, to preach deliverance to captives. So Luke 24. 47. and Luke 10. 5, 6, 9,
10, 11, 12. vide.

I am not for Popish Absolutions, but I think it the Duty of Ministers to tell
their People whom God will save, and whom he will not; whose sins are, and
whose are not remitted to them; and to do this Authoritatively, by a particular
Application, that may reach the persons themselves whom they most suspect, ay,
and privately to tell them by name, that they are the persons they meant,
warning them to consider their danger, lest sudden Destruction from the Lord do
come upon them.

It Is evident that general Preaching does little good without this; men shift
it off, and distinguish themselves out of the power of Religion, think their
Profession secures them from all that is threatened in the word, and denounced
against the Profane and Ungodly; Doctrines and Exhortations will not do, without
this particular Application of the blessing to whom it belongs, and of the
curse of God to them over whose Heads it certainly hangs; we must do our Duty
herein; there be some weak ones, who cannot speak peace to themselves, we must
speak it to them in the Name of the Lord; there be others who will not speak
Terror to themselves, but go on in their wickedness, and bless themselves; I
say it is out Duty to curse them in the Name of the Lord, and plainly tell
them, that they who do such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of God, Gal.
5. 21. 1 Cor. 6. 9. Ephesians. 5. 5.

There are too too many now-a days who count hearing the word a very
indifferent thing. They can come to it, and they can forbear; it is all one to
them which they do, they are not much concerned either way; when they come,
they think hearing the word, if it does them no good, 'twill do them no harm.
But there is a great mistake here, let me tell you; there is a blessing or a
curse at the end of every Sermon you hear, and one or 'tother will certainly
light upon you; Scoffers may puff at the Judgments of God, and say, that
Ministers take too much upon them, in passing such a peremptory Sentence on
them; what care they what men say; ay, but know who ever thou art, so
Sermon-proof in your own opinion, that the Minister shall never take hold of
thee; I say, thou art by those very words, those binding words pronounced
against thee in the Name of the Lord by a Minister of the Gospel, as surely
Condemned already, as if thou were already in Hell; the wrath of God will
certainly come upon you, unless you repent, and so I leave you, think of it at
leisure.

If we do not our Duty, who have these Keys committed to us, we shall be
questioned at the last day for not shutting this man or that woman out of the
Kingdom of Heaven, whom we saw walking so disorderly under so visible a neglect
of their own Salvation.

Obj. This way of Preaching may grieve the Saints.

Ans. What! to hear that impenitent unbelieving Sinners remaining so, shall
never enter into Heaven; if this grieve them, they must be grieved, we cannot
help it; better they grieved, than others eternally Damned for want of such an
awakening word. Am I your enemy because I tell you the truth; if so, I desire
never to be friends with you upon other terms.

Brethren! What we do of this kind, errante clave, affects no man's Conscience:
But if you find that you are the persons to whom God intends Comfort, you ought
to receive it; if the persons to whom the Curse belongs, you ought to apply it
to your selves, and to tremble under it; for what is bound on Earth, is bound
in Heaven: The Curse will certainly come upon you, if you repent not; you may
reverse the Sentence we pass, by a speedy turning to God before you dye; else
'twill be confirmed against you at the last Day, to your eternal Destruction,
by an irreversible Sentence. You will frequently find, it may be not presently,
that as you are bound or loosed by the Preachers of the Gospel, so suitable
impressions of God's Love, or Anger, are made upon your Souls, even in this
World. God does this to keep up the Authority of his Ministers, that they may
effectually comfort Believers, and as effectually terrify Unbelievers;
therefore if we are bold against some, 2 Cor. 10. 2. and do use sharpness
according to the power which the Lord Jesus has given us for your edification,
2 Cor. 13. 10. For that we aim at in all these denunciations of God's wrath
against the impenitent, 1 Cor. 5. 5. I say, if we come with a Rod, and seem not
so kind and gentle to you, as you would have us, 1 Cor. 4. 21. If at any time
we are found unto you such as ye would not, it is because we do not find you
such as we would, 2 Cor. 12. 20.

The Sum of All.
This Phrase of giving the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, is Metaphorical, from
one who has the Supreme Power in a House, or City; so Eliakim as Chief
Governor of the King's Household, had the keys of the house laid upon his
shoulder, Isa. 22. 22. Prefiguring the Kingdom of Christ, who gives the Keys,
i. e. the Power of binding and loosing here on Earth, to his Ministers.

Q. How can the power of Remitting Sin, which belongs to God only, Mark. 2. 7.
be ascribed to men?

A. Christ in Commanding the Apostles, and in them all Ministers, to remit Sin;
does not transfer upon them that which is his own peculiar Prerogative, i. e.
he does not resign to them his Power of forgiving Sin, but only Commands them
in his Name to testify to their hearers, that the Sins of all those who
Believe in Jesus, are Pardoned, and to pronounce them Pardoned by God: So that
Ministers are not the Authors of Forgiveness, but only God's witnesses,
testifying his Grace toward Repenting Believing Sinners. Nothing makes more
for our comfort, than to know that our Sins are Pardoned; and to this end God
has appointed his Ministers in his Name to tell Believers so; and to declare
unto all, that they who Believe shall be Saved, and have all their Sins
remitted to them for Christ's sake.

Thus I have showed you what is implied in this Text: And till men are wrought
up by the Preaching of the Gospel, to a real conviction of these Truths, viz.

1. That all men are Sinners by Nature, and under Condemnation by Law. 2. That
there is no Salvation to be expected or hoped for, without a full and free
Remission of all their Sins. 3. That this Remission of Sin can never be
obtained, till full satisfaction be first given to the Law and Justice of God,
for all our Offenses and Trespasses against him. 4. That none but Christ is
able to make this satisfaction for Sin. 5. That in order hereunto, i. e. for
the effecting and completing this satisfaction, the Son of God took our flesh
upon him, and Dyed in that Flesh for us; shed his Blood for the Remission of
our Sins. 6. That all who come unto this Jesus, casting themselves by Faith
upon him, shall certainly find Mercy, shall have all their sins Pardoned, and
shall be Eternally Saved.
Till we can prevail with our hearers to own and acknowledge these Generals,
it is impossible they should Believe in the Lord Jesus, to the saving of their
Souls. That Faith that is saving, does necessarily presuppose and include in it
a real assent unto, and full conviction of all the forementionned Truths.

Possibly some will say, We know all this already; have heard these things over
and over; it may be so, but pray hear them over once more, and consider them
well in the light of this Text, that tells you plainly there is no other way of
Salvation. Sometimes it pleases God by one Text set home by the Spirit upon our
hearts, to lead us into a more serious consideration of many other Truths
relating to it, which we formerly gathered out of the letter of the Word,
without any application of the matter contained in them to our selves. We who
are Ministers, must insist upon these things; we have nothing else to say to
Sinners, till they are convinced of these truths; this is the first opening of
the Gospel; we cannot proceed one step farther, till some credit be given to
these first Principles of the Christian Religion. I hope you who are here
present, and do frequent this Assembly, do attend upon the Ministry of the
Word, under a real conviction of these truths: Therefore give me leave to put
One question to you, to every one of you, to your Consciences I put it, viz.
Whether you have answered this Conviction, by your personal Coming to Christ,
and actual casting your selves upon him for the Pardon of all your Sins? If
this be not yet done, I am sure you cannot Answer it to God, nor your own
Consciences. Pray consult your convictions, and show your selves men: To say no
more.

Two things I shall speak to from this Text, viz.

1. What Remission of Sin is. 2. How Salvation consists in the Remission of
Sin.
CHAP. III.
I. What Remission of Sin is.
I Intend to speak distinctly to these Two Heads; yet not so distinctly
neither, but I may now and then run them both together in my Discourse, which
cannot well be avoided in truths of so near an affinity to each other, as these
are.

I begin with the first, viz. Remission of Sin: What are we to understand by
that?

Remission of Sin, implies our justification: It can signify nothing less in
Mark 1. 4. and Mat. 26. 28. They who labor most to find a difference, are very
much put to it, to make it out: They say, that imputation of Righteousness, is
distinct from Remission of Sin; but the Scripture seems to make them the same,
Romans 4. 5, 6, 7. I think they are so inseparably joined together, that no man,
who has obtained the Pardon of all his Sins, ever was, or can be at a loss for
a Righteousness to complete his Justification, and entitle him to the reward of
Eternal Life promised in the Law. I conceive the Pardon of all our Sins, is a
Righteousness we may boldly appear before God in; because it lays before God
that full satisfaction that Christ made for Sin, by his active and passive
Obedience, which is not only satisfactory for Sin, but also meritorious of
Eternal Life; so that all the ends of Justification are accomplished in the
Remission of Sin: What precise conceptions we may have of Remission of Sin, and
imputation of Righteousness, as differing in the notion, will not argue any
real difference in the things themselves. We must have a care we do not
separate what God has so intimately joined together. This has occasioned all
those unhappy Controversies about Justification, as I shall show anon. They who
want a sufficient Justifying Righteousness, after the full Remission of all
their Sins, do not rightly resolve Remission of Sin into the proper procuring
causes of it, viz. the satisfaction that Christ made for Sin by what he did and
suffered for us, from his Birth to his Death; so it became him to fulfill all
Righteousness, that he might be the end of the Law for Righteousness to them
who Believe: So that Christ himself is our Righteousness, the Lord Jehovah our
Righteousness; the Law is as well satisfied with what Christ has Done and
Suffered for us, as if we our selves and perfectly kept the Law, or Died by it
for our Sins.

It Is dangerous separating Christ and his Righteousness; as if we were to
derive a justifying-Righteousness from Christ distinct from the Person of
Christ: This notion has insensibly led men to seek a Righteousness in
themselves, not wrought out for them, but wrought in them by Christ; this
indeed is the right way of Sanctification, but not of our Justification. The
Scripture directs us to seek our Justification in the Person of Christ only, by
Receiving him, Believing in him; to them is Remission of Sin Promised, and
everlasting life, John 1. 12. John 3. 15, 16. John 6. 40, 47. Romans 4. 5. Romans
3. 26. Acts 10. 43. Acts 26. 18.

Some do too nicely distinguish between freedom from Punishment, and a right to
eternal Life; as if one could be obtained without the other, which is
impossible: Certainly not to Die, is to Live; not to Die eternally, is to Live
eternally; the expulsion of Darkness, is the bringing in of Light: He who is
counted worthy to escape the Punishment threatened by Law, is worthy to receive
the Reward promised by Law; I see not what should hinder it, since no fault of
Omission or Commission can be charged upon him whose Sins are Pardoned.

If after the full Remission of all our Sins, we were to receive eternal Life
from the Law, then some Righteousness distinct from Pardon, a Righteousness
wrought by our selves after Pardon, would be antecedently necessary to our
justification unto life: But that is not so, for every Pardoned Sinner receives
eternal Life from the hand of Free Grace, as the Gift of God, freely given,
without any consideration of any works of Righteousness done by us. Gal. 2. 6.
Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith
of Jesus Christ; even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be
justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law, for by the
works of the law shall no flesh be justified. If there had been law which could
have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the law, Gal. 3. 21.
But since the Law does not give Life, therefore that Righteousness that lets us
into eternal Life, is not of the Law, but that of Faith, Phil. 3. 9.

The Law admits of no Pardon, allows of none, is not at all concerned about
that matter, but seeks its own satisfaction in a way of strict justice; the Law
is all for Justice; Mercy comes in by another Covenant: 'Twas never in the
nature and constitution of the Law, to give life to a Sinner; the Law cannot do
that, Romans 8. 3. It can give life to a Righteous man, but not to a Sinner; The
Law will prosecute him to death; 'twould act contrary to it self, to its own
eternal Sanction, and declared judgment, if it should do otherwise; and
therefore the Law as a Covenant of Life and Death, is fully determined in the
Death of Christ toward all Believers, who are no longer under the Law, but
under Grace.

Yet I say, the rigor of the Law in it self, is not relaxed by the Pardon of
Sin, only it does not exert its condemning power upon the persons of Believers,
because Christ has already Suffered for their Sins; but still the Law remains,
and ever will remain a Sin-condemning, and Sin-avenging Law, it has as much
power as ever to stay the Sinner, but it can slay him but once; and the stroke
of the Law is so heavy in that case, that it need not smite him a second time.
Christ indeed being God, as well as Man, recovered from that deadly blow the
Law gave him for our Sins, and so saved himself and us. Here is no relaxation
of the Law, but a full execution of it, full satisfaction given to it; the
whole debt is paid to the utmost farthing by Christ our surety. Now all the
Life, Glory and Happiness that follows upon this, comes in by Grace: Christ
having Redeemed us from the Curse of the Law and the Law being fully satisfied,
cannot be against any thing that Christ shall do for his Redeemed ones; he may
freely bestow what he will upon them, having brought them under a Covenant of
Grace; he may, and he will pursue that Covenant to the utmost, toward them for
their good, till he has made them as happy, as infinite Love and Grace can make
them: Sin being taken away, and expiated by the Death of Christ, Believers do
pass over of course into his Life; they Rise with him; he who has called us
into a Communion with him in his Death, will not deny us Communion with him in
his Life and Resurrection; otherwise the benefits accruing to us by his Death
in a freedom from Punishment, would never have made us happy, had we been quite
shut out from his Life; 'twas for that end he Died for us, that we might Live
for ever in him, by him, and with him: The Law, and the works of the Law,
contribute nothing to this Life; and for our Evangelical Holiness, that is but
the fruit and effect of this eternal Life derived from Christ, already begun in
us, and exerting it self gradually according to the measure of our imperfect
Sanctification here: All our Evangelical works, are but so many expressions of
that new Life which we are raised up unto in this World, by the Power of
Christ's Resurrection, which has a quickening influence upon our Souls, raising
us up to newness of Life: There was some distance, though but a little at
first, between the Death and Resurrection of Christ, only Three Days; during
that time they could not draw comfort from his Death, till he Rose again: But
since the time of his actual Resurrection, the Death and Resurrection of Christ
stand closer together in our thoughts, and have a joint Spiritual influence
upon our Hearts; we presently pass in the actings of our Faith from one to the
other; from the effects of his Death, in the Pardon and Mortification, of Sin,
to the effects of his Resurrection, in our Spiritual Vivification and quickening
up to new Obedience; thus the Death of Christ lets us into his Life; being
planted together in the likeness of his Death, we shall be also in the likeness
of his Resurrection, Romans 6. 5. We deal with the Blood of Christ for our
justification from Sin; and with the Spirit of Christ risen from the Dead for
our Sanctification: Did we clearly discern how our Sanctification flows from
the Resurrection of Christ, as a consequent of that forgiveness of Sin
purchased by his Blood, Ephesians. 1. 7. we should not so confound Justification and
Sanctification, as some do. So much as we ascribe to our works in
justification, so much we take off from the Blood of Christ, to which the whole
of our Justification is ascribed: It Is a Righteousness without works, by which
we are Justified; therefore it can never pass thorough our hands; no part of it
is wrought by us; it is all imputed to us for Pardon of Sin, that we may live
and not die; and this is Justification unto life. Justification has different
names in Scripture, from the different respects it bears to us: as we are
obnoxious to Punishment, it is called Remission; as it relates to a state of
Sin, which is a state of servitude and bondage, it is called Redemption; as we
are Enemies to God, it is called Reconciliation.

Remission of Sin is absolutely necessary in order to Salvation; I will show
you the necessity of pardon, and of Preaching this Comfortable Doctrine to all.

Having given you a general account of that comfortable Gospel Doctrine,
concerning the full and free remission of all our sins, through Faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ; and showed you from Scripture, how the remission of sin
implies our Justification; I opened to you that common distinction by which
Divines do well express the whole nature of Justification, as consisting in the
Remission of Sin, and imputation of Righteousness; and showed you how these Two
are inseparably linked together wherever the former is, viz. Remission of all
Sin, there is also the latter, viz. Imputation of Righteousness. I shall now
proceed to the further opening of the nature of Remission of Sin, in these
following Particulars:

1. Remission of Sin does not change the nature of Sin; that that which is Sin
should be counted no Sin, that Evil should be called Good, Isa. 5. 20. Sin is
as really Sin after Pardon, as before; only Pardon frees us from the guilt of
Sin, takes away meritum poenae, the deserved Punishment: This it takes away,
not from the Sin, but from the Sinner only; still the wages of sin is death, i.
e. Sin deserves Death even after it is Pardoned, but this Death is not inflicted
upon him to whom Sin is Pardoned; and this absolving from Guilt, is properly
the Justification of a Sinner as such in himself, but now looked upon by God,
as Righteous in Christ, by virtue of his Pardon. To make this yet more clear,
take it thus:

Any act contrary to Law, is properly (...), Transgression, or Sin; and Sin in
respect of its guilt binding us over to Punishment, is called a Debt.

The fact or action it self, cannot be Remitted, because that which is done, is
done, and cannot be said not to be done; yet the guilt of that evil act may be
Remitted, and is Remitted, when the Punishment which we have deserved is
Remitted; and this is properly pardon of Sin; Sin is not imputed: To impute is
an act of Reason and Judgment, (...), rationem ineo, ratiocinando deduco, it is
a mental act, a rational inference, or conclusion from such premises. So when
applied to God, it is an act of Divine Reason and Wisdom; to impute Sin is to
deal with men according to the just demerit of sin, to give it its due reward,
its wages according to reason and justice; it is an act of the Divine
understanding: God does think with himself, what Sin deserves, and does resolve
upon the Punishment of it, as a thing most just and reasonable.

So not to impute Sin, or to forgive Sin, is not to enter into Judgment with
the Sinner, Psalm. 143. 2. according to the strict terms of the Law of Works:
For when God so enters into Judgment with us, the reason of the Law, and
Justice of God, must needs carry it against the Sinner; and yet not to impute
Sin, is an act of Judgment too, an act of Divine Reason and Understanding in
God: But in this act of Judgment, whereby God does not impute Sin, God judges
of sin according to the terms of the New Covenant, having in his Eye, and under
his Consideration, the full satisfaction that Christ has made for Sin; upon
this account he judges it most reasonable not to impute Sin to those for whom
Christ has died. Civilians do admit of a supposed imaginary solution, when
really nothing is paid; this among men is to forgive the Debt, acceptum far:
Whence comes the term, Acceptilatio, the Creditor counting the Money as
Received, which he forgives the Debtor. But in God's forgiveness, there is a
great deal more than this, here is real payment made, full satisfaction given
by Christ our Surety; and the Grace of Pardon lies in the free application of
all this unto us; this is God's Grace toward us; yet the Pardon of the Sins of
Believers, is but justice toward Christ; it is Grace toward us, that God
should accept of satisfaction from the hand of another; but upon full
satisfaction given, it is an act of Justice to remit the Debt.

2. Pardoning Grace takes away that that makes a man unrighteous in the sight
of God, it takes away sin; how that is, I have in part showed already, and
shall more fully demonstrate. It Is evident, that Gods counts them righteous
whose sins are pardoned, and that he has nothing in his eye then, but the full
satisfaction Christ made for sin; which is the Foundation of Pardon, and also
meritorious of eternal Life; it was not only bare satisfaction that Christ
made, for that is but Justice, paying what is due, not a Penny over or under;
but in Christ's satisfaction, there is a redundancy of Merit, procuring Grace
and Glory for us; the Merit of Christ procures the favor of God for us, and a
right to all the blessings promised in the Gospel, and his Spirit effectually
applies all this to us, and works all this in us.

3. Remission of sin, as it is held forth and offered in the Gospel,
presupposes nothing in man, as the cause and condition of it, moving God to
pardon him, but only denotes God's gracious Indulgence toward him, not
reckoning his sin to him, upon his believing in Christ; see how pardoning Grace
finds us, Col. 2. 13. And you being dead in your sins, and the uncircumcision
of your flesh, has he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all
trespasses. So Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12. God does not eye any Qualifications in us,
but promises to do all himself; I will, and they shall, etc.

It Is objected, That Faith is the beginning of Sanctification, and if Faith be
required unto Justification, then some part at least of our Sanctification is
required unto justification.

Answ. No part at all; for though Faith be a supernatural Principle infused by
God in order to our Sanctification, as well as our Justification; yet it first
Justifies before it Sanctifies; I speak of Faith now, not in its first
Principle, but in its first actings; I say, it first acts upon Christ by
receiving him, before it begins actually to sanctify us; there is a great
difference between the Instrumentality of Faith in receiving Christ for our
Justification, and the efficacy of Faith applying Christ received for our
Sanctification; to speak properly, it is not God's working Faith, but Faith
working in us, and upon us, that Sanctifies; God always gives Christ in and
with our first Faith for Justification and Pardon, this must be first finished
and completed, before Faith will or can begin to sanctify us, because Faith
fetches all its sanctifying Virtue from Christ received; but our first act of
receiving Christ, is that that justifies: Sanctification always follows upon
it, and is gradually carried on by a justifying Faith to our lives end: in is
not pardoned because it is mortified; but because it is pardoned, therefore
it is mortified.

Remission of sin presupposes no real change in the man himself, as moving God
thereunto: Neither does remission of sin alter the nature of sin, but only the
state of the Sinner; his sin is not imputed to him: To forgive sin is, not to
remember it, Jer. 31. 34. There it is; but God will not look toward it, his
thoughts are so taken up with the blood of Christ, and the Interest that
Believers have in that blood, that he willingly forgets their sins, he will not
deal with them after their sins, nor reward them according to their iniquities,
Psalm 103. 10. And that they may be sure of this, he casts their sins into the
depths of the sea, Mich. 7. 19. As far as the east is from the west, so far
has he removed our transgression from us, Psalm. 103. 12. Not only from
himself, but from us, he sees no iniquity in Jacob. If pardoning Grace does not
presuppose, but make a real change in a man for the better, yet forasmuch as we
are imperfectly Sanctified, the Pardon of sin, and the being and presence of
sin may and do consist together in every true Believer here below, provided
they do not allow themselves in the practice of it.

4. Remission of sin is an act of Mercy, not Justice, yet not contrary to
Justice; because the sins that are pardoned to us, are punished in Christ; it is
from God's Justice that he will not pardon sin without satisfaction; it is from
his Mercy that he will accept of satisfaction from the hand of another.

This answers that plausible Objection that is commonly made against our
Salvation by Grace, viz. Wicked men are condemned for their evil works,
therefore Saints are justified for their good works. Answ. This does not
follow, because one is an act of Justice, and the other of Mercy. Romans 6. 23.
The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Death is wages due by Law; eternal Life is a free gift through
Jesus Christ.

5. Remission of sin, as it is an act of Mercy, so it is act of Power too; God
has Power to forgive sin; none but the Creditor can forgive the Debtor; God is
the greater Creditor, and we are all his Debtors; against thee only have I
sinned; therefore God only has Power to forgive sin; but yet it is not an act
of mere absolute Power neither, but an act of Divine Jurisdiction, that carries
in it a due respect unto the Law, which God as the righteous Judge, and most
wise Governor of the world will not violate. Therefore Remission of Sin, under
this provision that God has made in Christ for the satisfaction of his Law and
Justice, is called Justification, Romans 4. 5, 6. God is Just as well as Merciful
in Pardoning Sin, Rom 3. 25, 26. So that Pardon flows from the Love of God,
acting toward us for Christ's sake, i. e. upon the account of his Merit and
Satisfaction, which respect the Justice of God: The truth is, the satisfaction
of Christ is the foundation of Pardon; this satisfaction lies in the expiatory
Sacrifice offered by Christ upon the Cross; hence expiation or atonement, is
joined with pardon in Scripture. Numb. 15. 25. Levit. 4. 20. The priest was to
make an atonement, that the sin should be forgiven; An expiatory Sacrifice led
the way to forgiveness under the Law, and so it does now under the Gospel;
without shedding of Blood, there is no remission of sin: If you have not the
Blood of Christ is your eye, when you go to God for Pardon, never think to
speed.

CHAP. IV.
The APPLICATION.
I Shall shut up all with a word of Exhortation, urging every one of you to a
frequent, deep, serious consideration of this grand fundamental truth,
concerning the only way of Salvation by the remission of sin through Faith in
Christ Jesus. I know the time will shortly come, when all our Notions, and
Disputes must be resolved into our believing or not believing in Christ for
Pardon of sin; therefore be persuaded to begin your Religion in pure Faith
trusting in Christ only for the remission of all your sins, through the merit
of his Blood; begin here, lay this as the Foundation of all your Religion, make
this sure, and then you will more clearly see upon what account you stand
righteous before God; if you join any thing with Christ here, and miss your way
in the first setting out, you will go wider and wider from the Gospel every stop
you take, and be forced to wrest the Scriptures all along, to make good your
first grand mistake; therefore I say, beg of God to bring your hearts to a true
reliance upon the Free Grace and Mercy of God in Christ Jesus for the pardon of
all your sins. Take this as a clue in your hands to guide you into such an
understanding of all other truths, as is consonant to this; put no other sense
upon any Scripture that is not consistent with, and agreeable to this great
fundamental Principle, keeping close to the just analogy of Faith, in all your
tenants and opinions: I know there are other things to be considered besides
Remission of Sin; but be sure you begin here, don't suppose that some previous
qualifications in your selves are required to incline God to pardon your sins,
for this will carry you unavoidably into a self-righteousness, and then Christ
will profit you nothing. We are not pardoned because we repent and lead holy
lives, but we repent and lead holy lives, because we are fully Pardoned for
Christ's sake: Shut all self-righteousness out of your justification, and take
all that is Christ's into it, both his active and passive Obedience; though I
had rather join them together as the Scriptures do, and say, That by the
obedience of one man, many are made righteous, i. e. by the Obedience of Christ
in Suffering and doing all that the Law required: And in the Application of
this Grace to us, it is clear to me, that upon the Remission of all our Sins,
Righteousness is imputed to us; and this is that which the Apostle calls
Righteousness without works, Romans 4. 6, 7, 8. The Righteousness of works, so
far as it can be attained in this life, is but an effect of the Righteousness
of Faith. You know not the right way of Salvation, till you know how to obtain
the Pardon of all your Sins; then you will see how Christ is become your
Righteousness. Let us not be too curious in placing one part of our
Justification upon his Passive, and another part upon his Active Obedience. Let
us be sure to place all upon Christ, and then we are right; the Spirit does not
reveal the whole Mystery of Christ at once to Believers; there is a great deal
of Christ to be learned by those who are Justified and Pardoned, even after
they are in a state of Grace. Let us believe Christ to be our Righteousness,
and leave it to him to make out the way and manner of his being so: Our terms
and distinctions applied to the fundamental Points of Religion, have occasioned
many mistakes about them.

Let us therefore attend more strictly to the simplicity of our own Faith, and
not call in our Reason to prompt our Faith, but rather submit our Reason to the
instructions of Faith. I would have all Christians study their own Faith more,
and dwell more in the light of it; then they will be more familiarly acquainted
with it, and better understand themselves in every act of Faith they put forth.
Let us give our Faith time to act, to open it self further to us, and our
selves time to take in the full sense of our Faith: Generally our acts of Faith
are too short, sudden, and transient. We make a formal profession of Faith, and
say, We believe in Christ for the Pardon of Sin, but don't so well weigh and
consider what we say, or what we bel^eve; we turn off presently to something
else, as if we had done with our Faith, when the Mystery of it is not half
apprehended by us: We should attend to it, ponder it well in our minds, look
round it; this is the way to keep up a presence of mind in us about what we
Believe. One act of Faith attended to, will fill us with such thoughts and
apprehensions of the Love of Christ, that will furnish us with matter of
discourse for many days: But I don't find Professors so much concerned in their
own Faith; so much affected with it as they should; they pass it over as a
plain ordinary piece of Religion, and having once declared they believe in
Christ for the Pardon of Sin, they have no more to do with him: Whereas the
Mystery of Faith should be studied all our lives long, we should pray as Paul
did, Ephesians ^. ^7, etc. vide. That we may know what is the hope of his calling,
and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints. Faith has
more in it than most People are aware of: it is not so easy a matter to know,
comprehend, and remember what is contained in an act of Saving-Faith; we should
discourse more with our own Faith, look into all particulars, search to the
bottom, by gathering up more and more of the unsearcheable riches of Christ. He
that would judge of a curious piece of Workmanship, brings it to the light,
views it round in every part, till he has gathered up all the excellencies of
it into his mind, then he can speak knowingly, in the praise and commendation
of such a thing, having made observations before of all that was admirable in
it. So you should sit down and consider the consequence of an act of Faith upon
Christ for Justification and Pardon; what depends upon it, what you gain by it,
what you expect from it, all is yours if Christ be yours; therefore be
persuaded to enter into your Chambers and Closets; sit down with a Bible in
your hands, stir up your Faith, consider the state of a Believer, and then
gather up what makes for your comfort out of the Word of God. O how would your
Faces shine! you would be filled with joy unspeakable, and full of Glory, by
Believing; there is not that Joy among Believers, because they don't think
enough of what they Believe. Do* you Believe in Christ for the Remission of
Sin? Then there is a great deal in Christ, a great deal in Sin, a great deal in
the actings of thy own Soul under this Faith, to be considered of: The
knowledge, experience, and evidence of Faith, are things that should be
particularly examined and seriously thought of: There is a full business in
Faith, enough to employ a gracious Soul all his days; Faith fills the mind with
deep apprehensions of our own great concernments in Christ Jesus. Were we wise
indeed unto Salvation, we should think of nothing oftener, than of what we
believe; there may be Faith, and there may be Truth in the heart, and yet these
Two may not be sufficiently mingled together; therefore we should often apply
our Faith to the Word, that what it does not see at one time, it may see at
another; what it does not reach by one act, it may take in by the next. The
oftener Faith looks into the Word, the more distinctly does it gather up the
full sense of the Word; it dwells in us in more Wisdom and Spiritual
Understanding: Did we take this course we should quickly find the benefit of
it, out of our Bellies would flow Rivers of living water; we should be more
skilful in the word of Righteousness, more expert Believers, ready to give a
reason of the hope that is in us; Believers have much to say in defense of
Christ, the Gospel, and their own Profession; and the more they study the
point, the more ready are they to give an answer to them, who ask them any
questions about their Religion; they keep the word fresh in their Memories, by
reflecting often upon it, conversing much with it. Whilst I am exhorting you to
a more frequent Consideration of the fundamentals of Christianity, don't
mistake me, as if I were putting you upon reading many Books, upon studying
Controversies, and knotty Disputes; no, no, study your own hearts and the Bible
more; keep under the power of those truths that are plainly revealed: We lose
much of the joy of Faith, by diverting our Minds to things of an inferior
Nature; I observe among all sorts of Professors, there is more stir about
uninstituted things, more zeal for their own unscriptural Traditions and
Customs, than for the grand fundamentals of Faith and Holiness; there is
utterly a fault among us in this matter. If you would keep up the joy of your
Salvation, you must consult often with your Faith about the prime fundamentals
of Religion, and muse often upon them; examine your Faith about them; consider
what a privilege it is to have all your sins blotted out, and laid upon Christ,
who shed his Blood for the remission of them; you must think, and think again
upon this, till you find your hearts overcome with the sense of God's
Free Grace toward you in Christ. You cannot conceive beforehand, what further
Light will break forth, what further Discoveries God will make of the Mystery
of his Grace; one thought rises strangely out of another in holy Mediation;
things come into our minds, that all our hearing and reading could not furnish
us with; when we are in our thoughts pursuing spiritual truths through all the
consequences of them, there is that let into our minds, which before we were
not in a fit posture to receive or understand, but when Faith has set all
before us which we have attained unto, and drawn, as it were, a Scheme of the
whole Gospel in our minds, the Spirit knows how to carry on his work further in
such a Soul.

Having already given you a general, and also a more particular account of the
nature of remission of sin; I shall now proceed to the 2 d. Head propounded,
which is this, viz. To show you

2 How Salvation consists in the remission of all our sins. And to make way to
this, I shall speak something of the necessity of remission of sin, in order to
Salvation; which can never be attained without it.

The necessity of Forgiveness, and of Preaching this comfortable Doctrine to
all.

1. Because all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God, Romans 3. 23.
and are therefore liable to Condemnation.

2. No man is able to make satisfaction for his sins; if we could, we should
not need a Pardon.

3. There is no escaping Divine Vengeance, no flying from Justice; and it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of a living God; if this be so, then
either sin must be Pardoned, or we must perish under it; therefore, blessed is
that man whose Iniquities are forgiven.

Further to evidence the necessity of Pardon, consider this, viz. That all our
Sanctification, all our inherent holiness, all our good works, will stand us in
no stead without a Pardon, because of the imperfection and sin that cleaves to
them; this makes Pardon so necessary; to remit sin, is not to condemn us for
sin; he that bel^eveth on him, is not condemned, John 3. 18. Not to condemn, is
to justify; to justify, is not to impute sin, but to impute righteousness
without works; either the sin that cleaves to all our good works must be
imputed to us, or else a righteousness must be found out for us without works,
that does not touch upon any of our works, but is imputed to us, not done by
us; man fell by his own sin, but he rises by another righteousness, which
covers all his sins.

CHAP. V.
How Salvation consists in the Remission of Sin.
THE knowledge of Salvation that the Law gave, was by a legal Righteousness in
keeping the whole Law; That which the Gospel gives, is by the remission of sin.

How Salvation consists in this, viz. remission of sin.

Because it takes away that which hinders our Salvation, viz. The guilt of sin,
and the wrath of God.

The expiatory Sacrifices under the Law, were called Sin Offerings, because the
sin of the people; i. e. their guilt was transferred to the Sacrifice, and laid
upon that; it was to bear the iniquity of the Congregation, to make atonement
for them before the Lord, Levit 10. 17. i. e. The sin was imputed to the
Sacrifice; the wrath of God, and the Punishment due by Law for sin, was
inflicted upon the Sacrifice; in this sense Christ is said to be made sin for
us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Because he suffered in our stead, his own self bare our sins
in his own body on the tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. He bare our sins, alluding to the
Sacrifices that were lifted upon the Alter; this is to offer up sacrifice, Heb.
7. 27. (...), from (...), sursum tollo. So Christ lifted up, or took up the
heavy burden of all our sins upon his own back. God looked upon Christ, lying
under the imputation of our sins, as the object of his wrath, and vengeance,
that he might ever after look upon us, under the imputation of his
righteousness, as the objects of his love and delight; to bear iniquity, is to
suffer the punishment due for it, Levit. 5. 1. To bear iniquity, and to be cut
off for it, is all one, Levit. 20. 17. He shall bear his judgment, Gal. 5. 10.
The blood of the sacrifice was to make atonement for the soul of man, Levit.
17. 11. I am showing you how remission of sin, takes away guilt by a
non-imputation of it to us; God forgives, as men forgive. Mat. 6. 12, 14.
Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our Debtors. So Mat. 18. 21. 35. Among men,
Debts are remitted, when nothing is required of the Debtor; the Creditor counts
the Money as received, which he remits to the Debtor; so it is in our
Justification, God deals with Believers, as with those for whose sins he has
received satisfaction, though not from their hands, yet from Christ's; so their
sins are Pardoned and taken away. The same word, 1 Samuel 15. 25. That we render
Pardon, signifies to take away, (...), and nunc toll peccatum meum; from (...)
abstulit, condonavit, pardon; so takes away sin, that God will not visit it
upon us, he will not require it; which Joseph's brethren feared their brother
would; Joseph will peradventure hate us, and will certainly requite us all the
evil which we did unto him. Reddendo reddet, in requiting, he will requite; i.
e. he will fully requite this evil, he will make it revert upon our own heads;
so the word (...) signifies from (...) redire fecit: Both these significations
are to be carried into the Construction of these Texts, viz. That remission
takes away sin; and the taking away of sin is the remission of sin, by which a
sinner is freed from the guilt of sin, from the curse of the Law, and from the
wrath of God; hence it appears, that Salvation lies chiefly in remission of
sin. Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Blessed is he whose transgressions is forgiven, blessed is
he whose sin is covered, blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not
iniquity. Neither does the consideration of any good works done by man, come in
as a motive for God to pardon our sins, because to pardon sin, is to impute
Righteousness without works: i. e. God looks upon pardoned sinners as
righteous, through Faith in Christ, though their works be not answerable to the
Law of Righteousness laid down in the Covenant of works. Christ comes in, in
the room and place of our Good Works, and Free Grace confers that upon us for
Christ's sake, which our own Good Works were to procure for us under the Law:
For by grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of your selves; it is
the gift of God; not of works, lest any man should boast, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. Thus
Christ is the end of the law, for righteousness, to every one that believes,
Romans 10. 4. The end of the Law, under the Mosaical Dispensation, whether Moral
or Ceremonial, was to lead a sinner to Christ for Righteousness; this
Righteousness lies in the full satisfaction that Christ made to the Law, for
the sin of man; we must bring to the Law, either a perfect Righteousness of our
own, or a full satisfaction for all our sins, which is equivalent to man's
perfect Righteousness, and not only equivalent, but much beyond it; for our own
perfect Righteousness, had we continued in it, would have kept us in a happy
Paradisical state here on earth. I know Divines speak of our Translation
afterward into Heaven; but of that the Scripture is silent; it is evident, that
had we kept the Law, we had not died; but upon the satisfaction Christ has made
to the Law, we obtain Eternal Life, have a more abundant entrance into the
Kingdom of Heaven; and this satisfaction accepted for us, is in the infinite
merit of it, our Righteousness: Thus the Law obtains its end, in that full
satisfaction that Christ gave it for the sin of man, and can demand no more of
any believing sinner for his Justification; it becomes the Law to bring things
to a righteous Conclusion between the Justice of God and a sinner. The Law
cannot do unjustly, but is righteous in condemning the Unbeliever, and
righteous in passing by the Believing sinner. If any ask, How comes a Believing
sinner to escape the Vengeance of the Law, to get out of the hands of a
sin-revenging Law? Answ. Because the Law has obtained its end in Christ, and
done full execution upon him for the sin of man, to its own satisfaction; and
this secures a man from the curse of the Law, as much as his own perfect
righteousness would have done.

The Papists deny the imputation of Christ's Righteousness, and derive
Remission of Sin from inherent Righteousness; whereas inherent Righteousness
never frees us from all Sin in this World; he is a liar who says he has no
Sin: But imputed Righteousness is opposed to all Sin in us, and covers it all.
We are holy, and unblameable, and unreproveable in the sight of God, Col. 1. 22.

New Obedience, and the practice of Holiness, is the consequent of Pardon;
which must not be taken for a permission, or license to Sin. Pardoning-Grace
lays a strict injunction upon us to Sin no more, as Christ did upon the man
whom he healed at the Pool of Bethesda, Behold, thou art made whole; sin no
more lest a worse thing come upon thee, John 5. 14. Christ Died primarily for
our Justification from all Sins committed by us; and also for our
Sanctification to prevent the Commission of further sin, To that end he
purchased for us his holy spirit, that we might live to God, 2 Cor. 5. 15. That
being dead to sin we should live to righteousness, 1 Pet. 2. 24. The blood of
Christ purges the conscience from dead works to serve the living God, Heb. 9.
14. There are two special parts of the covenant of grace, Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12.
viz. Remission of sin, and a change of Heart and Nature, they always go
together; to fancy a change of State, without a change of Nature, is but a
fancy.

Though Justification be a continued act, yet that it may be continued to us in
a comfortable sense of it, Believers must sue out their Pardon for every new
sin, and by renewed acts of Faith, apply the Blood of Christ in particular for
the Pardon of this or that sin. In Justification, all sin is Pardoned, past,
present, and future, that no place may be left for Condemnation, John 5. 24.
Sins to come are virtually Remitted to a Believer, i. e. we are by Faith put
into a state of Pardon, Faith knows whither to go for Pardon upon all
occasions: Tho the Commission of new sins does not cast a Believer out of a
state of Grace, does not null and make void his former Justification in the
sight of God, yet he may lose the comfortable sense of it in his own
Conscience, and lie under (though not judiciary Punishments) yet under such
castigatory Chastisements from an Angry Father, that may be a great bitterness
of Soul unto him, till by a renewed act of Faith he does apply himself to
Christ for Pardon, and make his peace with God. Faith it self cannot speak peace
to an impenitent Believer, who as to this or that sin may be called impenitent,
though as to his state he be a Believer. Till Faith do bring down the Blood of
Christ by a particular application of it to the Conscience of a man for the
Pardon of this or that particular sin, he may and will be very uneasy under it;
and the longer Repentance is deferred, the more angry reflections will
Conscience make against that man; he may be brought to question his own state
by deferring his Repentance so long: Care must be taken to set upon this work
of Repentance out of hand, and when we go about it, we must still keep Christ
in our eye, and not sorrow as without hope; that sorrow for sin, that in the
beginning may be Godly sorrow, may by the cunning of the Devil rise so high, as
to become ungodly sorrow, sinking the Soul into despair: Many do begin in the
Spirit, and end in the Flesh; therefore care must be taken to keep our selves
in a due temper of mind, that we be not overwhelmed with sorrow; that sorrow
for sin that hinders us from coming to Christ is sinful, and not to be allowed
in a Christian. So that Repentance is required not as a previous condition of
our Justification, but as that without which no man can, or will ever come to
Christ for Justification; Faith first works Repentance under a secret hope of
Pardon, and then applies Christ not for the sake of Repentance, but because by
Repentance a man becomes willing to receive Christ; it is a vain thing to
pretend to Faith in Christ for Pardon, unless we see the Fruits of Faith in our
selves, in the exercise of all other Graces, and in those good works of
Holiness that always accompany Saving-Faith. Faith never speaks but in some
act, it never gives a comfortable sense of it self, but in some present act,
now it is impossible truly to act Faith without an universal consent of the Soul
to this act; it diffuses its influence all over the Soul, touches the Soul in
every part, strikes upon every string, puts the whole Soul in tune; every thing
in a man does answer and correspond to such an act of Faith; you may see your
Faith in your Hope, Love, fear, Zeal, Repentance, etc. All Graces rise or fall
as Faith does, it is like the spring of a Watch, it sets all the Wheels in
motion. We may have a clearer discerning of Faith by a reflex act, whence all
assurance springs, then we can by a direct act, though you cannot see your
selves closing in with Christ for Pardon; whilst you only intend that thing,
and would fain prove Faith by it self and by its own justfying act; yet if you
look through your Love, your Repentance, through all the fruits of Faith in
your Lives, you will more clearly discern it in its Saving, Justifying Act,
that you do really and sincerely take Christ as your only Righteousness, and to
show that you do so, you produce those things as proofs of your sincerity,
which this Faith has put you upon, and which you could never bring your selves
to, till Faith came drawing the whole Soul after Christ, and strongly inclining
you to a holy life; this is God's way of teaching his Children, by putting
Principles of Faith and Holiness into their Hearts, powerfully inclining them
to live to God; this is set forth by God's teaching the Ants to provide their
Meat in the Summer, Prove. 6. 8. i. e. God inclines them naturally to do this;
so does God Spiritually incline his Children by his Spirit dwelling in them, to
act as Christians ought to do.

The sum of all is this: The Justifying-Righteousness of a Believing sinner
before God, lies in the Remission of sin, and God's Gracious acceptance of
sinful man, upon the sole account of the Obedience of Christ our Mediator,
apprehended by Faith and imputed to him for Righteousness; thus the
Righteousness of God without the Law is manifest.

In humane Judicatories, Forgiveness implies a mere non-imputation of the fault
only, but no imputation of Righteousness; because in our Courts, a man is Tried
for some particular Offense, and if he be found Guilty, and through the Favor
of the Prince obtain his Pardon, that Pardon looks no further than that time;
for the aftercourse of his life he is accountable to the Law, and must be
Judged by it; he stands upon his good Behavior, and must be a doer of
Righteousness to avoid the Condemnation of the Law; if not, he must answer for
his misdoing, and be judged according to Law. But it is not so in Divinity, for
when we obtain the Pardon of sin by Faith, that Pardon is general and universal
to a man's life's end; it is not only a Pardon of this or that sin to such a
time, but a Pardon of all sins for ever; such a Pardon does necessarily imply
in it an imputation of Righteousness, because no sin can ever be imputed to
him; his Pardon is valid in all times to come; though the Law be still a rule
of Obedience, yet he is no longer under the Law as a Covenant of life, but
under Grace; and for all his miscarriages under the New Covenant, he must apply
himself to the Grace of that Covenant for Mercy and Pardon, but he shall never
be judged by the Law more; the satisfaction of Christ is instead of all legal
Righteousness to him, and to that he stands, the Law having accepted of it,
delivers him up to Christ untouched by the hand of Vengeance, to be governed
ever after by the Law of Grace, which establishes the holiness of the Law;
though it shuts it out of our Justification, yet not out of our lives, but
strictly enjoins it.

CHAP. VI.
The APPLICATION.
SINCE God has given us the knowledge of Salvation by the Remission of sin,
let us act according to that knowledge, and begin our Religion with Remission
of sin; I mean, let us first study that point well; when we are over that, are
got into the Mystery of that great Gospel Truth, we shall more clearly see upon
what account it is we are dealt with, looked upon, and accepted as Righteous in
Christ unto Eternal Life.

Faith ought to have both the active and passive Obedience of Christ in its
eye; but I would not too nicely distinguish between them, abstracting the
active from the Passive; ascribing the Remission of sin to one, and our title
to life to the other; because I find some who do so, apt to drop the
Righteousness of Christ; that will not serve the turn; they must have a
Righteousness of their own, an Evangelical righteousness, to strengthen their
title to Life; thus while they set up a Law of Grace requiring such and such
things to be done by us in order to our Justification, they turn Grace into
Works, set up a New Covenant of Works, differing from the first only in this,
that whereas the first Covenant in Innocence justified upon the account of
perfect Obedience, this upon the account of our imperfect Obedience.

We know but in part, there will be some difference among us in our Notions and
Conceptions of these things, and more in our Words and Expressions; the same
thoughts in one and another seldom come forth in the same words. I have offered
you what I take to be most agreeable to the Mind of God; Do you search the
Scriptures, and judge: I do conceive that the New Covenant of Grace requires as
complete and perfect a Righteousness, nay, a higher Righteousness for the
Justification of a Sinner, than the Law of Innocence did for the Justification
of a sinless man: That was but the Righteousness of man; this must be the
Righteousness of God reckoned or imputed to us, not his essential
Righteousness, but that which is wrought out for us by him who is God, and
which God approves of; and being thus justified, God does graciously accept of
our sincere imperfect Obedience, together with our persons. Let us not puzzle
our selves about a second Justification; get the Pardon of all your sins sealed
to you in the Blood of Christ, and fear no after-charge at the last day; that
will answer all: I see no room for a Second Justification. Can it be imagined
that defects of our Grace here in this imperfect state, should be brought in as
proofs against the truth of Grace in our perfect state hereafter: If Grace in
its perfection cannot sufficiently evidence its Truth, I see not but there may
be matter of doubt among the Saints in heaven it self, whether they be real
Saints or no. It Is the weakness and imperfection of things, that casts them
under a suspicion; but when they shine out in their full beauty and glory,
there is no room for any objection; Does any man question whether the Sun be
risen at Noonday? If perfect Day, will not pass for Day, then there is no
difference between Day and Night; Light and Darkness must be all one.

It Is not a right way to a settled peace of Conscience that some take, who
instead of an humble application to free Grace for the Pardon of sin, do apply
themselves to their own goods works; considering how holy they have been, how
holy they are, how holy they intend to be; and all this in order to their
Justification at last; it is a hard matter to keep men humble under such
thoughts, they will be glorying in the flesh, and think themselves something
when they are nothing: To look for Justification by our own Holiness, will
prove an ineffectual motive unto Holiness; either they are discouraged from the
visible imperfection of their Holiness, or else they grow remiss in it,
thinking that any thing will serve to justify them; since perfect
Righteousness is not required; such as they have must serve the turn, rather
then fail of eternal life; any thing will do under the umbrage of (it may be)
but a pretended sincerity; a good meaning must answer for a bad life; and on
they go in their wonted evil course; all is but imperfection and weakness; and
the Covenant of Grace not requiring perfection, will bear with that, and pass
it by.

I confess there is Grace enough in the Gospel to Pardon all, your sins; but
whether the best of you have good works enough to justify your Persons, you
had best see to that.

I dare appeal to all your Consciences in point of experience, whether you do
not find your selves growing more holy, and conscientiously strict in your
walking with God, under an humble dependence upon the Free Grace of God in
Christ Jesus for the Pardon of all your sins, than ever you did under your
greatest endeavors to save your selves by your own works: The Grace of God
teaches to deny all ungodliness, and nothing will effectually do it but that.

The great question among us this day about Justification, is, Whether our Good
Works, and Evangelical Righteousness, have not some place in our Justification,
as con-causes, or social causes, having some partial influence at least that
way? I would propound two Expedients for Peace.

1. Since the main point of difference is about the use of our Good Works at
the day of Judgment, when we shall be sententially justified, or pronounced
just by God, I would have the decision of this left to that day; for I fear we
are not likely to agree sooner: Then 'twill appear, that evidences of Faith are
no cause of the Justification of our persons in the sight of God. That will be
resolved into pure Faith, resting upon Christ for Righteousness and life.

2. Since we cannot agree in the nature, use, and proper ends of Evangelical
Righteousness, let us more strictly intend the thing it self, and labor every
one of us to be more Evangelically holy and righteous in our lives and
conversations. Did we live more by Faith in Christ Jesus, we should quickly see
how all good works rise out of that Faith by which all true Believers are
already justified.

All that An inomianism that the Orthodox Preachers of Free Grace are falsely
charged with, lies here; Because they maintain, (and I hope ever will maintain)
that the first thing a convinced sinner is to eye, in his turning to God, is
the Free Grace and Mercy of God in Christ for the Pardon of Sin. Evangelical
Conviction leads him to a reliance upon Christ, in some degree of Saving Faith,
for the pardon of all his Sins; and this Faith begets in him a secret hope of
Pardon, and is the spring of all after Sanctification; viz. of Mortification of
Sin, of Repentance, of all new Obedience. Let this be remembered as the main
thing we contend about, that we begin our Religion at the Grace of God, and not
think to ground our Faith in Christ, upon any legal preparations, or works of
our own.

We ought not to hold a convinced sinner one moment under Legal Terrors,
without making an offer of Grace in Christ to him. I see not what should hinder
a sinner under the height of Legal Conviction, from hanging himself, as Judas
did: I am sure a thorough Legal Conviction of Sin, will sink any man into utter
despair, if Faith in Christ come not in immediately to his relief: Indeed those
who are but half convinced by the Law, and know not the strict Spiritual sense
of it, may betake themselves to their works and duties, and think to save
themselves that way; but this is so vain a thought, I will not spend time to
confute it; you who have lived so long under the Light of the Gospel, can
answer that your selves.

Besides: Pure Legal Convictions, have a greater tendency to Despair, than to
Faith; they naturally work despair; but it is the work of God, a supernatural
work of his Spirit, that any under such Convictions are made to believe in
Christ. The Conviction becomes Evangelical in all who believe, and it is Faith
makes it so: Evangelical Conviction includes Legal: Faith indeed pointing to
Christ, abates something of the Terror of the Law, and by a clearer
Gospel Light expounds the law into its true sense and meaning, which no natural
man can gather from the bare Letter of the Law; and thus Faith by the Law, lets
us further into the knowledge of sin, than the Law alone, without the Gospel,
could ever do. And this is that Faith we preach, as the beginning of all true
Conversion, and the only spring of all true Holiness: We cannot begin to lead a
holy life, till we first look unto Christ by Faith for the pardon of sin.

CHRIST THE Great Redeemer of Body and Soul.
1 COR. VI. 20. For ye are bought with a price; therefore glorify God in your
body, and in your spirit, which are God's.
CHAP. I.
FOR ye are bought with a price, etc. i. e. with the Price of the Blood of
Christ, who has redeemed us to himself, and purchased an everlasting Right in,
and Dominion over our bodies and souls; therefore glorify God in your body,
and in your spirit, which are God's. Or thus:

Obs. The absolute Dominion that God has over us, and the special right that he
has in us, and to us, not only as our Creator, but as our Redeemer, lays a
strong Obligation upon us to glorify God in our body, and in our Spirit, which
are his.

It Is fit that man should have the use of his own things, what he has bought
and paid for; we stand much upon our Property, would not have that invaded,
meum and tuum must be preserved inviolable to every one: Pray see you don't
invade God's property, which you cannot do without manifest injustice to God,
and wrong to your selves; we are depending Creatures, because we are Creatures;
our being, well-being, our safety, comfort, and sufficiency lies in another,
and not in our selves. A Creature separated and cut off from all Divine
influences, must needs wither away and sink into nothing; God has bought you,
have a care of selling your selves away from him, into other hands, of
alienating your selves from God, as if you could shift well enough without him;
have a care of living to your selves, of bringing forth fruit to your selves,
Hos. 10. 1. All that you are and have, is God's, and all that you do, should be
for God. It Is a rule in Civil Law, quodcunque per servum adquiritur, id Domino
adquiri: Whatever a Servant gets, he gets to, and for his Master; and that a
Servant running away from his Master, does furtum sui facere, he steals away
himself, he takes away that which is none of his own; a Servant was reckoned
among the Goods, Utensils, and Possessions of his Master; he had nothing at his
own disposal, all was his Masters, and for his use: So are all Believers,
vessels of honor, sanctified, and meet for the master's use, prepared unto
every good work, 2 Timothy 2. 21. Whose they are, and whom they serve, Acts 27.
23. Did we better consider whose we are, we should quickly see whom we ought to
serve: They live without God indeed, who cast him off, will not be governed by
him, but resolve to live as they list, to speak and act as they please; our
lips are our own, Psalm. 12. 4. Our hands, our strength, our estates are our
own, who is Lord over us? I shall from this Text show you whose you are, to
whom you belong, who is your Lord and Master, to whom you are accountable for
every thing done in the Body; even to him who has bought you, and has the
first right to every thing that is your; his servants must serve him, Rev. 22.
3.

That I may the better clear up the interest and right that God has in you,
and the Service and Duty you owe to him as your Lord and Master, I shall cast
all I have to say from this Text, under these following heads, viz.

1. Who are they, who are said to be bought.

2. Who was the Buyer.

3. What was the price paid by Christ for our Redemption.

4. Who set the price of our Redemption so high.

5. To whom was the price paid.

6. For whom, and to what end was it paid.

7. How by the Law of Redemption, the Redeemed pass over Body and Soul into the
possession of the Redeemer.

First, Who are they who are said to be bought.

Ye are bought, i. e. The believing Corinthians, and all other Believers, whose
hearts God has drawn to close in with Christ, by a true saving Faith, as their
only Redeemer and Savior. Till Faith be wrought in us, we can have no sure
evidence that we are among God's Redeemed ones; it is Faith only that tells us
this from the word of God, ye are bought; this implies that we were sold under
sin, reduced to a miserable state of Bondage by our Apostasy from God, which
none could deliver us from, but Jesus Christ our mighty Redeemer and Savior.

Secondly, Who was the Buyer.

Christ our Redeemer, who was God and Man. The right of Redemption among the
Jews lay in the next Kinsman, who was to purchase the Widow's land, and to
marry her person, Deuteronomy. 25. 5. comp. with Ruth 4. 3, 4. That Christ might claim
kindred with us, in order to a Marriage afterward to be completed, he took
part of our flesh, Heb. 2. 14. A body have thou prepared me, Heb. 10. 5. I am
willing to take it up, lo, I come to dye in that Body for all the Elect; that
having overcome death, I may be Married to them, and become their Head and
Husband; had an Angel offered himself, supposing him otherwise qualified, he
could not have been our Redeemer, because he must be akin to us, bone of our
bone, and flesh of our flesh, who undertakes that Office; therefore I say,
Christ took up that Body prepared of the Father, died in it, rose in it,
ascended into Heaven in it, is now glorified in it, to show what he intended to
bring fallen Man unto, as many as should believe in him.

Thirdly, What was the price paid by Christ for our Redemption.

Viz. His own Blood, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Pretium pretiorum, the greatest price
that ever was paid for any thing that ever was bought; all the Gold and Silver
in the World heaped together, is not to be compared to the value of the Blood
of Christ; by this you see the great love of Christ to the Souls of Men, who in
themselves were hopeless and helpless; could do nothing toward the Redemption
of their own Souls, but Christ being God and Man, pours out his Soul as man,
and takes it up again as God, when he had done his work, that we might have a
sure ground for our Faith and Hope to rest upon; not doubting but as Christ
raised himself from the dead, so he will also raise us at the last day, who dye
in him; that we may live by him, with him, and upon him for ever; who is the
Resurrection and the life, as his death is imputed to us, and spiritually acted
over upon us, in the mortification of sin; so is his life actually communicated
in some degree to all Believers here, by the same spirit that dwells in him,
and in them; and this eternal spirit of life in Christ will never cease,
working higher and higher in the mystical Body of Christ, diffusing it self
more abundantly through all the Members, till Mortallity be quite swallowed up
of life; this will be more manifest, when Christ, who is our life shall appear.
You see that God went not out of himself for a Mediator, but appointed the
Second person of the Trinity to that Office, that the whole transaction between
God and Man, might go through his hands, who is both God and Man.

Fourthly, Who set he price of our Redemption so high?

1. God the Father, who also found out this Ransom; he knew the whole world
could not raise it; it must come out of the Treasury of Heaven; God himself was
at the charge of our Redemption, and whatever it cost him, was resolved to
effect it; and therefore he spared not his own Son, but parts with the greatest
Jewel in the Crown of Heaven, to buy off sinful man from that Thraldom and
Bondage he was involved in, and could never have extricated himself out of.

2. The Law sets the price by consequence, not that the Law provides a
Mediator; the Law seeks its own satisfaction, in saving, and damning men; it
promises Salvation upon our perfect Obedience, and all who come short of that,
it threatens with eternal Damnation; Cursed is every one, etc. In the day thou
eatest, thou shall die. Nothing does establish this Law, and give it its full
course toward Believers, but faith in Christ Jesus, who was made a curse, and
died according to Law for our sins; and being risen again, he brings those whom
he freed from the curse of the Law, under the blessing of the Gospel, giving
eternal Life as a free-gift to all who thankfully receive it from his hand by
faith, owning him as the Author and Donor of it.

3. The nature of the Offense, as committed against an infinite God, requires a
price equivalent to it, of infinite value; none but God could satisfy God; the
wrath of God is assuaged by the blood of God; and that he might bleed, he
became Man; the Second Person of the Trinity, as incarnate, died for man,
tasted death for us in our nature, which he still kept hypostatically untied to
his own Divine Person; for Christ by dying, did not lay down humane Nature, but
humane Life only, which he took up again, and now lives for ever as a quickening
Spirit; communicating eternal Life to Believers, through his humane nature, now
glorified in Heaven: Therefore Christ is said to be our life, Col. 3. 4. And
this life is in his son, 1 John 5.11. Hid with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3. The
life which we derive from mere humane nature, will quickly fail; but the life
which we derive by faith form the Divine Person of the Son of God, is
everlasting, John 3. 16. As the father has life in himself, so has he given
to the son to have life in himself, John 5. 26. i. e. He is life essentially,
the essence of the Deity is communicated by the Father to Christ incarnate, and
so he becomes the Fountain of life to us; therefore let all those who hope to
inherit eternal life, join themselves by faith to Christ the only Fountain of
life: How little of this hidden life does appear in the effects of it among
Professors! We live more by sense than faith; very solicitous about natural
life, but how few do carry it as those who have eternal life abiding in them? 1
John 3. 15. Living in the flesh by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20. Who
fell a Sacrifice for our sins, but rose again, and now lives for ever; And
gives eternal life to as many as the father has given him, John 17. 2. He has
undertaken to the Father to draw all the Elect into a participation of that
eternal life, which he as man possess now in Heaven; and because he lives, we
shall live for ever in him.

The Second person in the Trinity died as a man in our human nature, to
satisfy the Law; and to evidence the reality of his death, he lay buried three
days in the Grave, he was alive as God, when dead as Man; what a profound
Mystery is this, that the Deity of Christ should suffer his human Body to fall
under the power of death for three days; this shows the strength of sin, the
strength of the law, and the strength of the wrath of God: that so great a man
as Christ was, could not stand under, and live; die he must by the sanction of
the law, being found in the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8. 3. bearing our
sins in his own Body on the Tree; but the dignity of his person was such, and
the extremity of his sufferings so great, that his three days death, was
equivalent to eternal death, he did that in three days, which a damned sinner
in Hell cannot effect to eternity; for that which is doing to eternity, can
never be actually done and completed, i. e. Christ gave full satisfaction to
the Law in three days, and therefore could not longer be detained in the Grave;
there was no Law nor Reason for it, having paid the utmost farthing of our
whole Debt, the Prison-doors were opened, and Christ let out: That which keeps
the Damned in Hell for ever, is, because they can never fully satisfy the law
of God by all their sufferings, therefore they must suffer on still to
eternity; but Christ by one offering, has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. Christ could have chose whether he would have died or
no, but for this end he came into the World, and did voluntarily yield up
himself to the Death of the Cross; but rising the Third Day he lives for ever,
and has brought eternal life into human Nature, to be communicated to all his
Members; who cannot forfeit that life which they derive from the second Adam,
as we all did that which we derived from the first Adam. In Adam all die, and
in Christ all are made alive, 1 Cor. 15. 22.

CHAP. II.
To whom was this PRICE paid?
FIfthly. To whom was this Price paid? viz. Into the hands of God the Father,
to appease his wrath under which we were, Joh. 3. 36. God's justice requires
this, it is (...), the judgment of God, that sinners are worthy of death, Romans
1. 32. To this end Christ is our propitiation, Romans 3. 25. Reconciling God to
us, that we may be received into his favor again; hence God declares in the
new Covenant, I will be merciful to their unrighteousness; and their sins, and
their iniquities will I remember no more, Heb. 8. 12. Sing, O ye heavens, etc.
Isa. 44. 23. vide. That satisfaction that Christ gave to the Justice of God,
lay in his bearing the Punishment of our sins, which is the wrath of God in all
the dreadful effects of it. 2 Cor. 5. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 24. He was made a curse for
us, Gal. 3. 13. Died for us, Mat. 20. 28. Isa. 53. 5. Was cut off for our sins,
Dan. 9. 26. Death was required to make satisfaction for sin; In the day thou
eatest, etc. The Wages of sin is death, Romans 6. 23. There is no escaping this
death for us, but by dealing with the Justice of God in some way, that may
satisfy Justice and save the sinner; this Christ undertook, and by his own
Death effected for us. He gave himself for our sins, Gal. 1. 4. His Blood was
the Price of our Redemption. Price here is not taken (as vulgarly) for Money,
but whatever may satisfy him in whose hands the captive is; that is the Price
of Redemption: God does not seek to make a gain of us; that which he stand
upon, is the vindication of the honor of his Law and Justice, the maintaining
his Truth and Faithfulness. To declare his righteousness, that he might be
just, and the justifier of him which believes ion Jesus, Romans 3. 26.

Christ did not pay the Price of our Redemption to the Devil, but to God the
Father, who had power to condemn us, and as a Judge to detain us in prison,
till his Justice was satisfied; therefore Christ deals with the Lawgiver,
takes the penalty upon himself. Whilst the condemning power of the Law is in
force against us, the Devil has a right in us, and to us, as God's Executioner
by virtue of that Law which casts us into his hands; but when the Law is
satisfied, and the Curse taken off, the Devil's claim ceases; where there is no
condemnation, there can be no punishment inflicted: Just punishment is
according to Law; but where no sentence of judgment can be passed, there can be
no execution of the minatory part of the Law upon that man; Currat lex, and
fiat justitia; but where the due course of Law is stopped, and by some means
prevented, there can be no trial, and consequently no judgment pass upon that
man unto condemnation: The Devil detains us Captives, not in his own right, but
in God's, whose Prisoners we are.

Our Redemption by Christ, is a spiritual Redemption, both of our Bodies and
Souls; as we are said to be sold under sin by our own default, so we are said
to be Redeemed or freed from sin, by Christ's giving satisfaction for our
offenses; the Price was paid to God, Christ offered up himself to God, Heb. 9.
14. Who as a Righteous Judge has power to cast Body and Soul into Hell: 'Twas
his Divine Majesty that we offended, 'twas his wrath we lay under, Romans 1. 18.
John 3. 36. We don't ask pardon of the Devil, but of God; it is to his judgment
that we are bound over, Gal. 3. 22. Romans 3. 9. Romans 11. 32. 'Twas God that cast
the Devils into Hell, 2 Pet. 2. 4. So he delivers Impenitent sinners up to the
Devil as his Executioner, as that Lord delivered the unjust servant to the
tormentors, Mat. 18. 34. And the Judge to the officer, Mat. 5. 25. The power of
the Devil over us, mentioned Col. 1. 13. 2 Timothy 2. 26. is but a secondary power
derived from God the Judge, as Christ said of his Murderers, You could have no
power over me, if it were not given from above, John 19. 11. It Is God who has
power over all plagues, Rev. 16. 9. Even over death it self, Heb. 5. 7. He has
the keys of hell and death, Rev. 1. 18. When we are redeemed from the curse of
the law, and from the wrath of God, 1 These. 1. 10. we are Redeemed from all the
adjuncts and effects of these, as a vain conversation, from the power of Sin,
Satan, and Death: Our Captivity lies in our alienation and distance from God;
and when we are brought nigh by the Blood of Christ, and reconciled to God, the
ransom being paid by Christ, we are delivered from the wrath of God, and all
the consequents of it. As in Civil Corporal Redemptions, the Price is paid, not
to the Jailer, to the Hangman, to the Tormentors, but to the Supreme Judge, in
whose power the Prisoner is; if he be discharged by the Judge, he is freed of
course from his Chains, from the Dungeon, and the noisome stench of it.

Thus you see how we are bought with a Price; not one Penny or Farthing of this
comes out of our own Purses, Isa 45. 13. Isa. 53. 3. No good thought, no good
word, no good work of our own, no not any act of our own Faith does belong to
this sum, as part of the Price. We buy, but without money, Isa. 55. 1. what is
so bought, is freely given: The hope of eternal Glory, is proposed in the
Gospel as a motive to, and reward of our good works; but still it is Faith in
Christ alone, that lets us into this hope, begets it in us, and being justified
by Faith, perfectly justified in this life, our good works, though imperfect in
themselves, are rewarded of mere grace; yet the imperfection of them makes them
incapable of a reward from Justice; and if that imperfection were not covered
and pardoned, Grace it self would turn away from them, and disregard them; but
being justified from the guilt of all our sins, God remembers them no more, he
will not see iniquity in Jacob; there it is, but God having pardoned it, he
passes it by, and overlooks it, so as not to charge it upon us to our
condemnation. God considers the Holiness of his children, as if it were by it
self, shining out under the covering of all their infirmities, through their
Faith and Sincerity: It Is not the degree, but the truth of their Holiness, that
God takes most notice of; he is pleased to see the fruits of his own Spirit in
Believers; he looks through their good works, upon their Faith from whence they
spring, and so accepts both of their persons and their works for his Son's
sake. Though Faith be an appointed means instrumentally necessary to apply and
put on Christ, by whom alone we are justified in the sight of God; we shall
never be the less justified for deriving all from Christ alone; converting our
own inherent holiness to those proper uses the Gospel has assigned it unto,
viz. the glory of God in this World, a testimony of our obedience and
thankfulness to him, an example to others, provoking them to good works, and a
meet fruit of true, saving, justifying Faith; these are motives strong enough
to good works, without advancing them into the room and place of Christ,
robbing him of the Glory of our full and free Redemption.

What the Socinians object against this, purposely to overthrow the
satisfaction of Christ, denying any Price to be really paid to the Father for
our Redemption, I shall speak to next time, and clear the Text from their
Cavils.

The Socinians, that they may overthrow the necessity of Satisfaction for Sin,
deny the Divinity of Christ, and that he paid any Price to the Father, for our
Redemption: They say the word Redemption is but a Metaphor, signifying only
simple deliverance or freedom from Bondage, without any Satisfaction given to
any; they make Mercy and Justice no essential Properties in God, but only mere
voluntary effects of his Free Will, because God, say they, may pardon sin
without satisfaction, by an Arbitrary Act of his Absolute Power: For this they
quote many Scriptures, speaking of God's redeeming his people out of the house
of bondage, from the hand of Pharaoh, Deuteronomy. 7. 8. Deuteronomy. 15. 15. Neh. 1. 10.
Jer. 15. 21.

Answ. It Is granted, that the Hebrew word used in all those formentioned
places, is (...) which signifies redimere absque pretio, and it is applied to
civil, bodily, temporal Redemptions; but when the Holy Ghost speaks of our
Spiritual Redemption by Christ, either in the thing it self, or in the Type: He
uses another word (...) redimere pretio: So Exodus 15. 13. (...) redimisti, That
this word (...) signifies to redeem by price, appears plainly, Lev. 25. 49, 50,
51. in buying the Field of Naomi, Ruth 4. 6. and the field of Hanameel, for
money, seventeen shekels of silver, I weighed him the money, Jer. 32. 7, 8, 9,
10. The same word is applied to Christ, Genesis 48. 16. The angel which redeemed
me from all evil, bless the lads. The Angel in the precedent verse is called
God. And he blessed Joseph and said, God, before whom my fathers, Abraham and
Isaac did walk, the God which fed me all my life long unto this day; the angel
which redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads. Hence Christ is called our
(...), Isa. 43. 14. Thus says the Lord your redeemer, the holy One of Israel.
Thus says the Lord, the King of Israel, and his redeemer, the Lord of hosts,
Isa. 44. 6. (...), Redemptor ejus. This word (...), signifies a near kinsman,
as well as a Redeemer, Ruth 4. 4. Blessed be the Lord, which has not left thee
this day without a kinsman, (...), a Redeemer, (...), Redemptor propinquus,
Ruth 3. 12. a near kinsman: Christ was both, Heb. 2. 14. ad finem, vide.

So in the New Testamen, the word used for Redemption, or to redeem, is, (...),
from (...), forum, to buy, as in a market, with ready money, as in the Text,
(...), Ye are bought with a price. So Rev. 5. 9. Thou wast slain, and have
redeemed us to God by thy blood. And Rev. 14. 3, 4. The Hundred forty four
thousand, were (...), redeemed, or bought from the earth, and from among men.
Hence (...), Gal. 3. 13. Christ has Redeemed us from the Curse of the Law,
emercatus, as Merchants who give a valuable consideration for the Commodities
they buy; so Christ, emendo, exemit, has redeemed us by buying us off: The same
word you have, Gal. 4. 5. God sent forth his Son to redeem them that were under
the Law, by laying down a sufficient price. Hence Christ is said to give his
life a ransom for many, Mat. 20. 28. He gave himself a ransom for all, 1 Timothy
2. 6. The words used in those places are, (...), from (...), solvo, to loose
one from his bands, as Paul was, Acts 22. 30. (...), he loosed him from his
bands. It signifies also to loose from sin, by the Free Pardon of it; (...);
Whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in Heaven, Mat. 16. 19.
The same word is applied to Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. (...): Ye are not
redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with the precious
blood of Christ; or with the honorable, invaluable Blood of Christ; (...).

As Servants under the Law were redeemed by Price or Compensation, Lev. 25. 52.
so are we under the Gospel; we are Servi emptitii, bought Servants.

By all this it appears, That our Redemption by Christ is not a bare simple
deliverance and freedom from Misery, by a mere act of Power only, but a real
Price was paid. It pleased God to redeem man in a way of Justice, as most
agreeable to his holy Nature, who as a Righteous God punishes sinners, Psalm.
11. 5, 6, 7. Rev. 16. 15, 16. Romans 3. 26. Natural Conscience is convinced of
the equity of this, that a sinner is worthy of death, Romans 1. 32. Justice
cannot be taken off from inflicting this Punishment, but by Satisfaction given
by Christ: If sin could have been forgiven without it, Christ would never have
undergone such Sufferings as he did. A Believer may plead both Mercy and
Justice for the Pardon of Sin: Art thou afraid Grace will not reach thee? then
know, that Justice it self will discharge thee: Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of God's elect? who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, Romans
8. 33, 34.

CHAP. III.
SIxthly, For whom, and to what end was this Price paid?

For all the Elect, that not one of them might be lost, John 6. 39. 'Twas the
love of God that procured this Ransom; God so loved the world, etc. John 3. 16.
Romans 3. 24, 25. We are brought nigh to God by the blood of Christ, Ephesians. 2. 13.
Justice being satisfied, nothing can now obstruct the free course of his mercy
toward us; Christ knew he was able to rescue us out of the power of Sin and
Satan, undertook this when he laid down the ransom; but the actual
accomplishment of this in us, is a work of time; many for whom Christ shed his
Blood, are not presently freed from Sin and Satan; they both have power over
them, till Christ by his Word and Spirit has subdued them, and set his Elect
at perfect liberty; some degrees of this liberty they attain in this World, but
not their full and perfect liberty till the Resurrection; then the strong man
shall be quite cast out, by one stronger than himself; then will those
Scriptures, ( Heb. 2. 14. Col. 2. 14, 15.) be fulfilled in us. Our Redemption
by Christ, is the greatest expression of God's love to us, that ever was, Romans
5. 8. Romans 8. 32. Joh. 15. 13.

Seventhly, By the law of Redemption, the Redeemed pass over Body and Soul into
the possession of the Redeemer, they become his, Isa. 43. 1. vide. His peculiar
people, the lot of his Inheritance, Deuteronomy 4. 20. Deuteronomy. 32. 9. God calls them so,
from their Redemption out of Egypt, which was a Type of our Redemption by
Christ: therefore Believers are called in the New Testament, (...) a peculiar
people, or a purchased people, 1 Pet. 2. 9. To buy, is to acquire, or procure
unto ones self a special right in any thing so bought; thus the Church is
purchased by the Blood of Christ (...), Act. 20. 28. Possession follows
Purchase, the Purchased Possession, Ephesians. 1. 14. (...) is to do something about
us; God does clasp us round as it were, and incircle us; he draws us to
himself; separating us from the rest of Mankind; These are mine, says Christ; I
am the sole Proprietor; I have purchased an everlasting right in them, and
dominion over them; they are my own, I am their Lord and King, they are at my
disposal, 1 Cor. 7 23. I am their father and redeemer, Isa. 63. 16. A
dwelling house in a walled city, if it were not redeemed within a whole year
after 'twas sold, it was established for ever to him that bought it, Levit. 25.
30. But the Saints are Christ's own for ever; as soon as he has bought them, he
will never sell them, never part with them.

What right did God recover in and to us, by Redeeming us?

1. God has an original right to, and dominion over all Creatures, by the Law
of Creation: Has not the Potter power over the clay, of the same lump, to make
what vessels he pleases unto honor or dishonor? Romans 9. 21.

2. God as a Creator and Judge, has a right to man fallen, to dispose of him
according to justice, to execute his vengeance upon him, To make his power
known upon vessels of wrath fitted to destruction, Romans 9. 22. But

3. God's Justice would not permit, that man should be received into favor,
and freed from that misery he had brought upon himself, 'till a sufficient
Price was paid for his ransom; nothing but the Blood of Christ could quench
that flaming Sword of God's just Anger, that kept man, when cast out of
Paradise, from the Tree of Life. So that the right that God recovered, was for
the good of man, a right to show Mercy to the worst of Penitent sinners,
without any reflection upon his Justice, That he might be just, and the
justifier of him that believes in Jesus, Romans 3. 26. That a Holy God should
justify a sinful man, is the greatest Mystery that ever the World heard of;
but God, who works wonders, has in his infinite Wisdom, Job 28. 23. glorified
his Justice and Mercy both in our Salvation by Christ. God had a special right
by Election in all his chosen Ones; but foreseeing the fall of his Elect, he
provides for their Redemption in case of Transgression; Election was unto
Eternal Life; but sin intervening between Election and Salvation, threatens
Eternal Death, puts such a rub in the way, which must be removed, or else the
Elect themselves could not be Saved; therefore that Election might stand and
obtain its end, Romans 11. 7. God provides for our Redemption, lays help upon
one that is Mighty; we were chosen in him, in whom we have redemption, Ephesians. 1.
4, 7. God had an Eye to Christ in our Election, it is that makes it sure: What
wonderful difficulties does Election meet with! enough, if it were possible, to
hinder the Salvation even of the Elect, Mat. 24. 24. But Christ has secured
them, John 10. ^8. I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. The end of our Redemption, was,
not to rescue us quite out of the hand of God, to take us out of his power, for
that cannot be; but to let us into his Love, to reconcile us to him, to bring
us to a nearer conjunction with him than ever, John 17. 21. That which moved
God to Redeem us, was his Love and Pity, Isa. 63. 9.

CHAP. IV.
Seventhly. How by tbe Law of Redemption, the Redeemed pass over Body and Soul
into the possession of the Redeemer.
LAstly. The relation that Christ has to, and the interest and propriety that
he has in all Believers as their Redeemer, obliges them in Reason, Justice,
Equity and Conscience, to Dedicate and Devote themselves, all that they are,
and have, to his Service, to Glorify God in their Body and Spirit, which are
God's.

All the Persons of the Trinity have a special Interest in the Persons of all
true Believers.

1. God the Father. Their Body and Spirit are God's, says the Text, they are
Redeemed unto God, Rev. 5 9. 2. God the Son, as they are Members of Christ, 1
Cor. 6. 15. 3. God the Holy Ghost, as they are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1
Cor. 6. 19. 1 Cor. 3. 6. Ephesians. 2. 21. 2 Cor. 6. 16. The Spiritual House of God,
1 Pet. 2. 5. If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy, 1 Cor.
3. 17. for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are.
Redemption, fixing such a right and propriety in the Redeemer, over the
Redeemed, must necessarily imply obedience and subjection on our part; Ye are
not your own. How shall we live any longer in sin? Romans 6. 2. Being made free
from sin, we should become servants of righteousness, v. 18. Believers are not
sui juris, to live as they list. Romans 14. 7, 8, 9. 1 Pet. 4. 2. For me to live
is Christ, Phil. 1. 21. My business is to serve him, not to comply with the
lusts of men. 1 Cor. 7. 23.

What to Glorify God in our body? viz.

When in all our outward actions we govern our selves by the law of Christ,
following the rule of his word, and the guidance of his Spirit: The Body is for
the Lord, who is our Head to govern our bodies in all their motions; Christ is
the Saviviour of the body, and will raise it up to eternal life, Romans 6. 5. and
make it conformable to his glorious body: Our Bodies are the Members of Christ;
and as such, they ought to subject themselves to the command of the Soul under
Christ, mortifying the deeds of the Body through the Spirit, Romans 8. 13. The
whole man is the temple of the Lord, 1 Cor. 3. 16. Our Bodies are, as it were,
the Porch of this temple, therefore we should not touch any unclean thing, 2
Cor. 6. 16, 17. lest we grieve the Spirit of God who dwells in us. The
Sanctification and Holiness of the Body, is opposed to any outward pollution of
it, by which we do defile and dishonor the Body, 1 These. 4. 3, 4, 5. If Christ
has such an undoubted right to your Bodies as they are his members, and temples
of the Holy Ghost; then be sure you keep them holy and undefiled. I need not
exhort you to flee Fornication, you are all convinced of the evil of that; but
the outward Attire, I will not say of whom, ( Prove. 7. 10.) lest I put some to
the blush, does not become serious Worshippers of the true God; a more grave,
sober, modest Apparel, would convincingly testify to others, the due respect
and reverence you have for the holy Spirit dwelling in you; your Bodies are the
temples of the Holy Ghost; do not then profane these temples by antic exotic
dresses, the sure emblems of a vain mind; such plumes and wethercocks as some
wear upon their heads, become not the Pinnacle of these Temples of the
Holy Ghost: Therefore if there be any fellowship of the Spirit, cloathe your
selves as women professing Godliness; and that I may apply this to both Sexes,
1 Cor. 11. 14. I must tell you, it argues a very Effeminate age, to see so many
men's head thatched with Women's hair; what may be brought by some, as an
argument in point of health for the cutting of their own Hair, will never
justify what is put on by most in the room of it.

When you have trickt up your selves, according to the Mode and Fashion of the
world, before you go forth to be seen of others, put this question to your
selves, Is this to Glorify God in my body? or will it not rather open the
mouths of many to blaspheme that profession of Godliness that I have taken up?
Answer it to your Consciences if you can: He that does not keep his body in a
due subjection to the Spirit of Grace, will never keep his heart long in a
right frame.

What to Glorify God in our Spirit?

To serve God only with our bodies, is Hypocrisy, it must be with Body and
Spirit, else our service is not reasonable service, Romans 12. 1. If our minds
are not pure in the sight of God, and our outward profession answerable
thereunto in the sight of men; Paul sets forth this inward service Romans 1. 9.
God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit in the gospel of his Son, and
with a pure conscience. 2 Timothy 1. 3. void of offense toward God. Acts 24. 16.
In simplicity and godly sincerity, 2 Cor. 1. 12. When with our minds we serve
the law of God, Romans 7. 25. God is a Spirit, and will be Worshipped in spirit
and truth: You have reason to enure your selves to this Spiritual worship,
because ere long you will be all Spirit, when you have laid down these earthly
tabernacles. I mean, it is the will of God, that the Souls of men should after
death, live a while out of the body in a separate state, till the Resurrection,
conversing with an innumerable company of Angels and Spirits of just men made
perfect. Though Believers now are Spiritually joined to the general Assembly of
the Firstborn, and in the apprehensions of their Faith do rejoice in that
relation they stand in to the Church-triumphant; yet after death they will have
actual communion with those blessed Spirits above; though we cannot so clearly
apprehend what this happy Paradisical state is after death; yet those who are
spiritually minded, conceive so much of it by Faith, as makes them long to be
dissolved and to be with Christ; they grow weary of all earthly converses,
waiting till their change comes, that they may enter into rest from all their
Labors, and from that hard travel of Soul, which they cannot be freed from
till their warfare be fully accomplished; then they put off their Armor as
more than Conquerors, and sit down in an everlasting Peace, with palms in their
hands, and crowns upon their heads, triumphing in the Grace of Christ to all
Eternity.

Could we look through the dark Entry of the Grace into Eternity, lifting up
our heads within the Vail, we should see a Glorious Light that would dazzle our
eyes; we should have a stronger taste of the powers of the world to come. The
wiser sort of Heathens were not without some thoughts of a future happy estate;
they did praesentire in posterum: They had some bodings in their minds, of some
great good or evil that should befall them after death. What a shame is it for
Christians to be so little affected with the future eternal state of their
Immortal Souls?

Believers, while they are in this world, are joined to the Lord in one Spirit;
i. e. in one spiritual body, or in the same spiritual nature with Christ, Heb.
2. 11. We live the life of Christ; the Head and the Members being acted by the
same Spirit. Christians have not every one a diverse spirit, as every man has
a diverse Soul, numerically distinct from the Soul of another man; but as all
Members of the Body have the same Soul, though each of them diverse operations,
Romans 12. 4. so we have all of us one and the same Spirit, though the operations
of it be diverse, 1 Cor. 12. 4, 13. Therefore if there be any fellowship of the
Spirit, let us glorify God in our bodies, and in our spirits, which are God's.

CHRIST The ONLY MEDIATOR OF THE NEW COVENANT.
HEB. XII. 24. And to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant.
BEfore I speak to the Words of the Text, I shall premise Two Things.

1. Compare the Covenant of Grace with the Covenant of Works, showing in what
they agree, and in what they differ.

2. Compare the New Covenant with the Mount- Sinai-Covenant.

CHAP. I.
Christ the ONLY Mediator, etc.
FIRST, I shall Compare the Covenant of Works, with the Covenant of Grace, in
sundry particulars.

1. The Covenant of Grace frees a Sinner from two things, which by the Covenant
of Works are in force against him.

1. From the Curse.

2. From perfect Obedience as a Condition of life to be performed by man
himself. My meaning is, That the Covenant of Grace does not take away the
Condition of perfect obedience, but only the Performance of it by us: It is
enough that Christ has performed it for us, by whose Obedience we are made
Righteous.

2. The Covenant of Grace is so far a friend to the Covenant of Works, or
rather to the Good Works commanded by that Covenant, that it takes in all the
moral Duties of that Covenant; they are as much our Duty now under the Gospel,
as they were under the Law; and our coming short in any of them, is as much our
sin now as then; we ought as much to strive against it; nay, which is more than
could be expected under the Law, we are called to repent of it: The Law neither
gave Grace to repent, neither did it admit of any Repentance: You see how
little countenance the Covenant of Grace, rightly understood, gives to
Licentiousness, how much it promotes Holiness, even the perfection of Holiness:
For when all the Grace of that Covenant is given forth, it will issue in
Perfection; then the Saints will be perfect. The reason why under the Gospel,
imperfect Obedience is accepted, is not because the Imperfections of it are
approved, but because they are pardoned and covered.

3. The Covenant of Works shows what man must do to be justified; The Covenant
of Grace, what a justified man ought to do, how he should carry himself ever
after toward God.

Holiness of life, by the Covenant of Works, went before Justification, as the
procuring meritorious cause of it; but according to the Covenant of Grace, it
is the consequent or effect of Justification.

4. The Covenant of Grace, in the application of it to us, begins in the pardon
of sin: No Grace reaches us, till pardoning Grace begins with us; we are under
a curse till then, concluded or shut up under wrath; but pardoning Mercy opens
the door for all manner of Mercies to enter in, turns the whole stream and
course of God's Grace toward us. Blessed is the man whose transgression is
forgiven, etc. Psalm 32. 1. This leads the way to all other blessings.

5. In the Covenant of Grace, God declares what he will be to us, and do for
us, and also what he will enable us to be to him, and to do for his Glory; his
free Grace undertakes both Parts of the Covenant.

6. The Covenant of Grace, presupposes full satisfaction made by Christ for all
our sins against the Covenant of Works, else God would not be just in
justifying a Believer, Romans 3. 25, 26.

7. The Covenant of Grace finds nothing in man to commed him to God, but what
it brings along with it: To suppose any preparatory qualifications, conditions,
causes or motives, to make way for us into the favor of God, does quite
overthrow the nature of free Grace, and take off greatly from the glory of it.

1. None can have an interest in the Covenant of Grace, or be said in a Gospel
sense, to be in Covenant, in whom the essential parts of the Covenant are not
already in some measure fulfilled, viz. To have the Law written in their heart,
to have a right Spirit put into us, to own God for our God, to delight in his
Law in the inward man; these are so far from being conditions of the Covenant,
giving us an interest in it, that they are rather the Covenant it self
fulfilled in us, which is an undeniable proof of our being in Covenant.

9. The New Covenant does not so much imply an outward Law or Rule of
government set before us, as an inward Law, or rather, a spirit and principle
of Love and Obedience, inclining us to a willing performance of all those
Duties that either Law or Gospel call for. The Covenant of Grace brings forth a
new creature created in Christ Jesus unto good works, that he should walk in
them; you put a force upon the new creature, if you turn him out of his walk.

By the Covenant of Grace, our Justification hangs not upon doing, but upon
believing.

That which much perplexes the point of Justification, is, the separating of
Faith and Justification too far asunder, which has many ill consequences in it.

1. If you suppose Faith as a quality preexisting in the Soul before
Justification, and standing a while alone by it self, in order to our
Justification, this lets in previous qualifications in us as necessary to
Justification: And if Faith, as a quality in us, have any causal influence into
our justification; so must Repentance and all good Works, which are linked to
it. This lets us into a justification by Works of our own doing, and by
qualities inherent in our selves, which is downright Popery.

2. If we place our personal Justification before Faith; this runs us up to an
actual Justification of our persons from eternity, which is of as ill
consequence as the former.

Therefore the safest way is to put them both togethet. What God has joined,
let no man put asunder. He that believes, is justified; and he that is
justified, Believes; there can be no justification without Faith, nor no true
Faith without justification. God's act in justifying, does symphonize and
correspond to our act in Believing: There cannot be actual giving, without
actual receiving; one is naturally necessary to the other. I know Faith and
Justification are different notions, and may in our way of speaking and
expression, be put one before the other; but the things themselves are always
together; God justifies us, by working Faith in us.

The Covenant of Grace requires nothing to be done by us, as an antecedent
moral condition, or procuring cause of our Justification; it supposes Faith in
all who actually partake of the Grace of this Covenant. Nay, the Covenant of
Grace, I mean, the outward proposal of the terms of the New Covenant, is an
outward means appointed by God for the working or begetting of Faith in us.
Faith comes by hearing, i. e. by hearing the Doctrine of our Redemption by
Christ; and this Faith so wrought by hearing the Word, disposes the Soul ever
after to Repentance, and new obedience, which are the inseparable effects of
Faith in all who are justified: He who does not show his Faith by his Works, is
no sound Believer.

Though it be commonly said by many, That Repentance is in order to
justification; the sense cannot be, that Repentance is instrumentally necessary
to justification, as Faith is: Do but keep up the different relation that Faith
has to justification, from all other Graces and good Works, and we shall
quickly understand one another; and not confound Faith and Works together in
our justification.

We may differ in our expressions; but that should make no real difference, if
the same thing be meant and intended.

This account of Faith (or to this effect, for I will tie none to my words)
does answer all the ends of true Religion, it exalts Christ, ascribes our free
Justification and Pardon to him, and his Righteousness only; it secures our own
Souls, it suppresses and discountenances all Vice, all licentious loose living;
it establishes the Law as a Rule of life; it promotes all practical Holiness by
the most forcible motives that can be.

We can never keep up Religion in the power of it, if we do not keep up the
plain notion of it, in the sense that is commonly received by all sober sincere
Christians. Arguings pro and con may have their use among the Learned; but
still let us be sure to sail by the Pole Star, to keep that in our Eye, as a
fixed point that governs all our motions. My meaning is this, let us ultimately
resolve Religion in the main fundamentals of it, into such naked simple truths,
as may fall under the capacity of all plain meaning Christians; that they may
know what we Believe, and what we Profess: That we all aim at the same thing in
our Preaching; and that the same Spirit may still appear in all the diversity
of gifts that is among us.

The reason why the Apostle, Gal. 3. 17. calls the Mount- Sinai-Covenant a Law,
is because the Mount- Sinai-Covenant is a mixed Covenant, made up partly of the
Law, and partly of the Gospel; and the Apostle in that place, opposes the
Legalities of the Sinai-Covenant, to the promise made to Abraham: There was no
reason why he should oppose the Gospel part of the Sinai-Covennat, to the
Covenant with Abraham, for they were both the same, they were coincident, there
was no opposition between them; therefore he calls the Mount- Sinai-Covenant a
Law, in opposition to the Covenant of pure Grace made with Abraham.

The Covenant of Works made with Adam, as to any benefit from it, ceased at the
entrance of sin, which laid all mankind under a curse: This curse cannot be
taken away but by a New Covenant; you see how sin disordered the whole world,
put all things out of frame. God's Government of the world, as to the outward
administration of it, must be altered, or else the whole world must be
destroyed; there must be a new Constitution, a new Covenant: What havoc did
sin make in one day! that put God upon a second Creation, making all things
new, casting all into a new mould, to prevent the utter destruction of all
mankind, that otherwise must have ensued.

This Covenant of Grace may be considered Four ways.

1. In the promise of the seed of the Woman made to Adam, at least in his
hearing; couched in the threatening denounced against the Serpent, Genesis 3. 15.
2. In the Promise made to Abraham, Genesis 17. 7. 3. In the Mount- Sinai-Covenant
with all Israel, Exodus 19. 8. this Covenant had the nature of a Testament,
therefore confirmed by Death; hence beasts slain in Sacrifice, Heb. 9. 16, 18.
4. In the New Covenant with Jews and Gentiles now under the Gospel.
CHAP. II.
SEcondly. See Mr. Petto ^n this Subject.
The comparison of the New Covenant made with Jews and Gentiles, now under the
Gospel; with the Mount- Sinai-Covenant made with the Jews only under the Law.

When Abraham's Posterity grew numerous, even into a Nation, then commenced the
Mount- Sinai-Covenant, containing the moral, judicial, and ceremonial Laws,
given not with an intent to disannul the Promise made Four hundred and thirty
Years before, Gal. 3. 17. which it must have done, had the Law been then given
to bring Israel under a Covenant of Works. The Church of Israel continued under
this Sinai-Covenant, till this better, this second, this New Covenant was
introduced, Heb. 8. 6, 7, 8.

This Mount- Sinai-Covenant, is in Scripture called, the First, or the Old
Covenant, in comparison of the New, established by Christ in the Gospel.

In this Sinai-Covenant, there was a revival, or a repitition of the Law of
Works, and a Typical pointing to the time of the promise, when Christ himself
should appear; hence the Law is said to be our Schoolmaster to bring us to
Christ.

The Sinai-Covenant had all the institutions of Worship annexed to it, Heb. 9.
1, 2, 3. but this whole System of Levitical Worship in all its Rites and
Ceremonies, was to be disanull'd, that a more Spiritual and Evangelical
Church State might be established by a standing irrevocable Law, (...) Sancitum
est, Heb. 8. 6.

The Sinai-Covenant was suited to the times of the Old Testament; 'twas that
dispensation which God thought fit to place the Church under at that season,
till the fullness of times should come, for a clearer discovery of God's free
Grace in Christ, who was born under the Sinai Covenant, made under the Law, to
redeem us from the curse of it, Gal 3. 13. Gal 4. 4, 5.

The Covenant of Works put a double bar to man's Salvation since the Fall. 1
st. The Curse lay upon man for sin, which must be removed, or death was
unavoidable. 2 d. Perfect Righteousness was to be performed, without which life
was not attainable by that Covenant; neither of these done then under the
Sinai-Covenant. Therefore Christ by virtue of the New Covenant-sanction,
authorizing him as Mediator to undertake both, he dies to free us from the
Curse of the Law, and by his active Righteousness, or Obedience, made us
Righteous, as Romans 5. 18, 19. It is as plain as words can express it, that it
is not by our own Evangelical obedience, by works of Righteousness that we do,
but by the Obedience of that one Man Christ, that we are made Righteous unto
Justification of life. So that Gospel Grace, in the right notion of it, does
not consist in abating the rigor of the Law; or that for Christ's sake, our
sincere imperfect obedience shall be accepted unto Justification, instead of
that which is perfect: But it lies here, viz. in exempting us from a personal
performance of perfect Righteousness required by Law unto our Justification,
and admitting Christ to answer the Law for us in our stead, who accordingly
fulfilled all Righteousness for us, is become the end of the Law for
Righteousness, to every one that believes, Romans 10. 4. This is that
Righteousness without works imputed to us, Romans 4. 6. or the righteousness of
God by Faith, Phil. 3. 9. Romans 1. 17. the Obedience or righteousness of that
one man Christ (as before) opposed to our own Righteousness, Phil. 3. 9. Romans
10. 3.

Let us not carry it, as if there were no way to Preach up Holiness and
Sanctification, but by Preaching down Justification by Faith alone in Christ
Jesus: Were some persons as zealous for the Doctrine of Freegrace, as they who
assert it, are for good Works and strict Holiness of life, there would not be
that offense given by setting up a new way of Justification by our own
Evangelical Obedience: All who oppose this new scheme, are presently branded
with Antinomian^sm; a beadroll of abominable errors are reckoned up, and
obliquely charged upon them. But the strength of this way of Arguing I
understand not.

Thus Christ as Mediator of the New Testament, satisfied for the Transgressions
of the Old Covenant, That they which are called, might receive the promise of
eternal inheritance, Heb. 9. 15, 16. Dan. 9. 24. He brought in everlasting
Righteousness, and by one offering has perfected for ever them that are
Sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. So Redeeming us from the Law, the Sinai Law, for of
that the Apostle there speaks, Gal. 3. 10, 17. Let us have a care of living in
the Spirit of the Old Covenant, going about to establish our own Righteousness;
Since by virtue of the New Covenant, God has accepted Christ in our stead to
be o^^ ^econd Adam, every way to answer the demands of the Law, or Covenant of
Works, which was revived at Mount- Sinai, and added because of Transgression,
that Christ by coming under the Law might make satisfaction for that
Transgression.

There was a necessity of a New Covenant, that the fulfilling of the Old by
Jesus Christ might be imputed to us; there must be a Law for that, before it
could be, that the benefit of Christ's Sufferings and active Obedience might
redound unto us. The New Covenant (as comprehending that of Redemption) obliged
Christ to satisfy for our breach of the Old: But though Believers are Redeemed
from the curse of the Law, yet they are still under the Law to Christ their
Mediator, who satisfied for their breaking of it, 1 Cor. 9. 21. they are indeed
dead to the law by the body of Christ, Romans 7. 4. i. e. Not under the
condemning power of the Law, because Christ bore the curse of it on his own
Body; yet still obedience to the Law is strictly required of all Believers,
though not in order to their Justification, but for other ends; all doing for
life is now over, that is no Antinomian Doctrine. Gospel motives to Holiness
from the Love of God in Christ Jesus, are far more forcible than those drawn
from the terror of the Law. The New Covenant is a mild gentle Covenant, full of
Grace; therefore called the Covenant of Grace, consisting not of precepts and
threatenings, but of absolute Promises. I will, and they shall, Heb. 8. 10, 11,
12.

The Covenant of Grace, is one and the same for substance all along ever since
the fall; there have been several discoveries of it.

1. In the promise to Adam in more general terms. 2. In that to Abraham,
limiting the seed to his family.
And when the Posterity of Abraham multiplied into a Nation, the Covenant was
put into a National form, and was made with Israel, as with a people, and only
with the people of Israel.

But when Christ came, the last edition of the Covenant was more comprehensive
both of Jew and Gentile, reckoning all Believers to be the spiritual Seed of
Abraham; and was more expressive of spiritual Blessiugs than before. This is
called a New Covenant, another Covenant, because it was so different from the
outward form, and Systeme of the Sinai Covenant; and of this New and better
Covenant, Christ is the Mediator; We are come unto Mount-Sion, to Jesus the
Mediator of the new Covenant.

The Apostle persuades to more exact holiness of life.

1. From the greatness of Gospel Grace.

2. From the sweet alluring nature of it; it must needs draw our hearts toward
it, make us fall in love with it, thankfully receiving it with Reverence and
Fear, lest we should not walk worthy of it unto all well-pleasing: Grace
pleases a Believer so well, that he cannot but study to please God in all
things ever after; the Law of Grace constrains him.

Obs. The clearer Gospel Light we live under, the more holy we should be in our
lives and conversations; not continuing in sin, because Grace abounds. Since we
are delivered from the terror and bondage of the Law, let us not desire to be
under it; Gal. 4. 21. We are not under the Law, but under Grace; or which is
all one, are not come unto Mount Sinai, but unto Mount Sion; God was very
terrible upon Mount Sinai, but very amiable and gentle upon Mount Sion; sitting
upon a Throne of Grace, ready to show Mercy to all who come unto him, Heb. 7.
25. he will in no wise cast off any. So that Believers now are in a far better
case than they were under the Old Testament; they enjoy now far greater
Privileges, and among the rest, we have a more powerful Mediator than Moses
was, even Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant.

CHAP. III.
Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant.
IN opening these Words, I shall speak to these following Heads; viz.

1. What a Mediator is. 2. The difference between Moses and Christ. 3. The
necessity of a Mediator between God and fallen man. 4. How Christ was fitted
and qualified for the Office of a Mediator. 5. What are those special Mediatory
Acts that Christ puts forth. 6. Answer some Popish Objections, and open some
Scriptures very much perverted by them. 7. Show what use we should make of
Christ our Mediator.
First, What a Mediator is: viz. One who interposes himself as a middle person
between two or more who are at variance, that he may reconcile them, and join
them together in a New Covenant.

A Mediator is one coming between two parties at variance, to take up the
quarrel, and reconcile them.

Medium refertur ad duo extrema, the middle refers to two extremes; so a
Mediator is not of one, Gal. 3. 20. There must be two at variance; God is one,
there must be some other at variance with God, else no need of a Mediator,
whilst God and man were one, i. e. united in love and affection; for then they
are said to be one, Joh. 17 21. 1 Cor. 6. 17. of the same nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
But there being a difference between God and man Christ is not the Mediator of
one, i. e. of God only, but of God and man, God and sinful man; for God and a
just man are not at variance. The first Covenant in Innocence was made between
persons perfectly united and agreed; the second Covenant between persons
mortally offended; therefore this needed a Mediator; extrema unjuntur in medio.
So here, 2 Cor. 5 18, 19. A Mediator stands in the middle to unite both
extremes. So Christ is the Prince of Peace, Isa. 9 6. The Parties disagreeing
are God and Man; the cause of the difference is sin, Isa. 59. 2. which cannot
be expiated but by the blood of Christ; and because God would not contend for
ever, Isa. 57. ^6. he sent his Son to dye for our sins, and so to make Peace,
Romans 5. 10. A Mediator is one who takes hold of both disagreeing Parties, one
with his right, the other with his left hand, so bringing them together in
Love, as Job 9. 33. Isa. 41. 10. God and Man agreeing in one Mediator, do walk
together, Amos 3. 3.

The Person of the Mediator, as Mediator, is inferior to the Father, by a
voluntary exinanition of himself in the form of a servant; but he is above us,
1. As God, by his Divine Nature. 2. As Man, by the Purity of his Humane Nature.
3. By virtue of his Office, and high Prerogatives belonging to it. Mediator and
Savior are all one; for Mediation is in order to Salvation, one the means, the
other the end; He is our Savior, because he is our Mediator, Heb. 7. 25.

The knowledge of a Mediator is not from the Creatures, but from the Scriptures;
it is a point of revealed Religion, to know who is our Mediator, even the Son of
God.

Secondly, The difference between Moses and Christ, as to their Mediation.

1. Christ as Mediator of the new Covenant, effectually wins and draws to it,
all those to whom the benefit of this Covenant belongs; he undertakes for the
full accomplishment of the Covenant on both sides. So did not Moses, He was
mediator of the old covenant, Gal. 3. 19. Exodus 20. 19. Deuteronomy. 5. 4, 5.

2. The Mediator of the New Testament must die, because he is the Testator, as
well as Mediator. Heb. 9. 15, 16, 17. vide. The Priests under the Law did offer
Sacrifice, but did not offer up themselves as Christ did. Moses was only a
Ministerial Mediator; he was not the Author of the Covenant, but only a Witness
to the delivery and publication of it in God's Name by his Hand. But Christ
himself is the Author of the New Covenant, and he stands engaged to make good
the terms of it, to take up the difference between God and us, Ephesians. 2. 14. He
is our peace. Man's reconciliation with God was drawn into a Covenant,
therefore Christ is called the Mediator of the New Covenant; he is both our
Mediator and our Ransom; he that is our (...) is also our (...), 1 John 2. 1, 2.

3. The Priest and Sacrifices of old were tipes of Christ, the great Mediator
of the New Testament; the only high Priest, who is both Priest and Sacrifice.

4. Under the Law, many Sacrifices, and they often repeated. Heb. 10. 11. But
in the Gospel but one Sacrifice, and but once offered. Heb. 9. 28. Heb. 10. 12,
14, 18.

5. Christ does not only intercede with the Father for us, Joh. 16. 23. but
promises to do it himself, John 14. 14. He does not only intercede for us as an
Advocate, but himself hears our Prayers, and grants our Petitions, so could not
Moses; he is an extraordinary Mediator, not only procuring remission from the
Party offended, but actually remitting the offense himself.

6. The new Covenant comprehends both Jew and Gentile, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. Ephesians. 1.
10. So did not the old.

7. There was only Typical forgiveness in the old Covenant, as pertaining to
the conscience, Heb. 9. 9, 10, 13, 14. Heb. 10. 1, 2, 3. But real forgiveness
in the new, Heb. 10. 16, 17. A real purging the Conscience, Heb. 9 14.

8. Moses was not Surety of the new Covenant unto God on the part of the
people, but only an Internuncius, or middle agent between them, declaring the
mind of God unto the people.

9. The Sinai Covenant had relation to the Covenant of Grace, and therefore the
Ceremonial Law was annexed to it. Circumcision was a Seal, not of the Covenant
of works, as the Jews misconceived, but of the second Covenant of Righteousness
by Faith, Romans 4. 11. Confirmed before of God in Christ, Gal. 3. 17. The Law
was given 430 Years after the promise made to Abraham, threatening the sinner,
not with an intent that the Curse should be executed, or the handwriting
against us fulfilled, but rather blotted out, Col. 2. 14. Is the law then
against the promises? Gal. 3. 21. It Is certain the Law as threatening, is
against the Promises, against us, and contrary to us, as Col. 2. 14. But not so
against the Promises, as to vacate and abolish them, but is rather subservient
to them, stirring up the sinner to fly to the Promise for a Pardon. When the
people, just after the giving of the Law, had grievously sinned in making the
Calf, and God threatened to consume them, Exodus 32. 9, 10. Moses does not plead
the Mount Sinai Covenant, but the Covenant made with Abraham, verse. 13. So
Deuteronomy. 9. 27. 2 Kings 13. 23.

The condition of the Sinai-Covenant being performed by Christ, the New
Covenant becomes absolute to us; nothing more can be demanded of us in a way of
satisfaction for sin, Heb. 10. 14. Christ as our Advocate pleads this, and that
we ought to be discharged from the Curse of the Law. All doing for life is over
in the New Covenant, our Surety has done that, and therefore is become the
Mediator of a better Covenant, Heb. 8. 6. Having made way for our receiving the
Promise, Heb. 9. 15. This full satisfaction is the main thing we are to believe
in order to our Salvation; this is the sense of every act of Justifying-Faith,
to which Salvation is annexed; we must mean this in believing, or we mean
nothing, neither do we understand those Scriptures, Mark. 6. 16. Joh. 3. 16,
36. The Obedience of Christ comes instead of our doing for life, he is the Lord
our righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. Christ being made of God our Righteousness for
Justification, it is the will of God that he should by his Spirit sanctify us,
and make us inherently holy: Our Mediator does not only take away the guilt of
sin, which legal Sacrifices could not do, they only purified the Flesh, Heb. 9.
13. but not the Conscience; the Blood of Christ only does this, v. 14. So the
Spirit of Christ by Faith purifies the Heart, sanctifies the whole person, 1
These. 5. 23. since we are come to the Mediator of the New Covenant, let us see
we don't abuse the free Grace of God, Heb. 12. 25. In the New Covenant great
Grace is revealed to Believers, and great wrath against all Unbelievers, Mat.
3. 7, 10, 12. Isa. 61. 2. vide.

3. The necessity of a Mediator between God and Fallen man; If one man sin
against another, the judge shall judge him: but if a man sin against the Lord,
who shall entreat for him? 1 Samuel 2. 25.

This necessity appears

1. From God's just anger against us.

2. From our inability to appease his wrath; I put them both together.

Adam was the Son of God by Creation, Luke 1. ult. but soon alienated himself
and all his Posterity from God his Father and Creator; neither could we ever
become the Children of God again, but by Christ, John 1. 12. Heb. 2. 10, etc.

Angels, though they need no Redeemer, yet they need a Mediator; a Head, in and
through whom they have access to God, and communion with him; much more does
fallen man need a Mediator, by whom he may come unto the Father, Joh. 14. 6.
It Is impossible to see God any otherwise than through Christ, John 1. 18. if
any man sin, as every man does, let him not despair, for we have an Advocate
with the Father, 1 John 2. 1, 2. in whom God is well pleased, Mat. 3. 17. We
cannot have immediate access to God himself, but through a Mediator we may.

3. By those terrors of Conscience which we are under, when our hearts smite us
for any sin, accusing us, Romans 2. 15. telling us that God knows all this evil
and much more by us, 1 John 3. 20. Then whither shall I go from thy spirit?
whither shall I flee from thy presence, Psalm 139. 7. How terrible is God out
of Christ to a convinced sinner.

4. The dreadful Punishments that are inflicted upon sinners, upon the fallen
Angels, upon the old word; many particular instances in former and latter
times, do render it a very fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God, Heb. 10. 31. When a guilty sinner has none to speak for him, what
trembling must needs seize upon him, lest God tear him in pieces, and there be
none to deliver him? Psalm. 50. 22.

5. By the Sacrifices of the Old Testament, and also of the Heathens, which
were designed to pacify God, some means was to be used; all the Sacrifices of
old appointed by God himself, could never expiate sin, nor pacify God, but as
they pointed to the great Sacrifice in the New Testament. Christ is the great
Reconciler, Col. 1. 20. We come to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, to
be freed from the curse of the Old, and invested in the privileges of the New.

The Covenant of Works made at the Creation with Adam in Innocence, being
broken, and the legal Administration of the Mount- Sinai-Covenant being faulty
and unprofitable, Heb. 8. 7, 13. Our Fathers not continuing in it, God regarded
them not, Heb. 8. 9. And being thus alienated and enemies in their minds, by
wicked Works; God thus provoked, gave up man a child of wrath, to be a slave to
sin, Satan, and Death, Romans 1. 28. Heb. 2. 14, 15. Yet God so loved the world,
John. 3. 16. Whilst we were yet without strength, Romans 5. 6. when we were
sinners, v. 8. and enemies, v. 10. Then did God reconcile us to himself, by the
death of his Son; entering into a New Covenant with us, by appointing Christ to
be the Mediator, 1 Timothy 2. 5. and Surety of a better Covenant, Heb. 7. 22. Heb.
8. 6. so reconciling us to himself, 2 Cor. 5. 18. God the Father provided this
Mediator, John 3. 16. Romans 3. 25. Isa. 49. 1. 1 Cor. 1. 30. You may see the
greatness of the sin, and of the Punishment too, in the greatness of the
Mediator; God himself in the person of his Son, became our Mediator and
Redeemer.

6. The Law was ordained in the hand of a Mediator, to show, that it is not in
the power of any man since the Fall to satisfy the Law, Gal. 3. 19. By the
hand of a Mediator we must understand, not only Moses, but the virtue and power
of the great Mediator Christ, of whom Moses was a Type.

Thus you see the necessity of a Mediator. Fallen man himself could not deal
with God because of sin; Angels could not, being not of Humane nature; and
since there is but one God, then either the Majesty of Heaven must descend down
to us immediately, which could not be; or else this one God must become our
Mediator, our Immanuel; his Godhead, and our humane Nature being joined
together in the Divine Person of the Son.

The low estate of man, made of the dust of the Earth, laying aside all
consideration of sin, made it impossible for man to be brought so near to God
as Christ has brought him: It Is something difficult to apprehend how Adam in
Innocence held Communion with God, how he could pray without a Mediator. But
after he fell, for those few hours, before the Promise of Christ came to him;
no doubt he was full of horror: The Text says, he was afraid, and hid himself
from the presence of the Lord, Genesis 3. 8, 9, 10. But Christ interposes, took
our nature upon him, to convey his to us, to make that ours by Grace, which was
his by Nature, so uniting us to God again.

CHAP. IV.
4. How Christ was fitted and qualified for the Office of a Mediator.
HE had the Nature of both parties in him as our Immanuel, Isa. 7. 14. He had a
right in both, as God manifest in the Flesh; he stood in the middle between
both parties, and may be called the Third, Isa. 19. 24. because Israel was
joined in league and amity with Egypt and Assyria, they all had an interest in
one another, all were Blessed of God, v. 25. So God and man considered as
united in a Third Person, who is God-man, they both have an interest in him,
and he is them, (...), Mediator is one who stands in the middle between Two,
partaking of both the extremes: In this sense Christ is a middle Person,
medius, not only by Office, but by Nature, as God-man, Divinity and Humanity
being substantially united in his Person; he must be God, that he may be able
to satisfy; he must be man that he may be in a capacity to die: So that medius
may refer to the Person, Mediator to the Office; the Office depends upon the
Person; such an Office requires such a Person, who was God-man. Christ is a
Mediator, according to both his Natures as God-man, as his Divine Person is
Incarnate; in Christ's Mediation both natures are employed, and do act
distinctly: His Deity did what was Divine, his Humanity what was Humane; and
what was done according to either Nature, is ascribed to his Person: The Person
of the Mediator has something common to both the dissenting parties, viz. The
same essence of the Godhead, though not the same Personality with the Father
and the Holy Ghost; and the same humane Nature with us, not numerical, but
specifical. In the Incarnation of Christ, humane Nature is not individuated to
a formal subsistency in this particular Man by the Divine Essence, but by the
Personality of the Son; and therefore the Son is said to be Incarnate; because
the Person of the Son gives humane Nature a subsistency in himself. The Person
of Christ joins Two Natures not disagreeing; for the sinless Humanity of
Christ, was never contrary to his Divinity, though inferior to it. Christ thus
Incarnate, lays out himself to reconcile God and man, which his Two Natures do
fit him for, disposing and giving an aptitude to the Office of a Mediator; for
Christ is Mediator oeconomically and by Office; Christ's assuming humane
Nature, was part of his Humiliation, and did fit him for his Mediatory Office,
Phil. 2. 7, 8. Though as has been said, there was no enmity between God and
Christ's sinless humane Nature, yet as it is in us, it is defiled and contrary to
God, therefore Christ mediates for us with the Father.

Though Christ Offered up himself a Sacrifice for us in humane Nature, yet the
whole Divine Person may be said to be offered up in that Nature, John 10. 17,
18. Christ speaks there as Mediator; the power that he had of laying down, and
taking up his life, was the power of the Divine Person, not of his humane
Nature. Some of the Schoolmen have this apt similitude, viz. As a man draws a
Sword out of a Scabbard, holding the Sword in one hand, and the Scabbard in the
other; so the Divine Person of Christ separated his Soul from the Body, as a
Sword from the Scabard, and yet kept both parts united to himself, Toletus.
Christ took our Flesh, in which he was mortal, and freed even our flesh from
that mortality, when he raised it from the dead. Aug. de Civ. D. l. 9. c. 15.
mortalitatem habuit transeuntem; and so raising us, ex mortuis facit
immortales: Who could swallow up death, but he who was life it self?

It makes much for the relief of fearful Consciences, that our Mediator is
God-man; we should tremble at the mention of God only, but when we hear he is
Man as well as God; then we come willingly to a man like our selves; God has
hid and veiled his Majesty under our flesh, that the brightness of his Glory
might not overcome us. When God appeared of old to the Patriarchs, it was in
some visible shape, which he took up for that time, and laid down again; but
now he has really taken the substance and truth of humane Nature into a fixed
union to the Person of his Son; never to be dissolved. Heb. 1. 1.

Christus Incarnandus, was Mediator under the Old Testament, as Exodus 23. 20,
21. This could not be a created Angel, because he had power to forgive sin,
therefore it was Christ to come; apud Deum facta and facienda, things actually
done, and to be done hereafter; things present, and to come, are all one, Jesus
Christ the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. Who was verily
foreordained, 1 Pet. 1. 20. Faith in Christ to come, saved our forefathers,
Christ was an effectual Mediator then, in esse cognito, not in esse reali; this
gives present efficacy to a moral Cause; hence Abraham had the benefit of
Christ's Mediation, therefore he rejoiced, John 8. 56, 58. The Israelites are
said to tempt Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 9. Therefore he was with the Church then, so
verse 4. called a rock; David calls Christ, Lord, Psalm. 110. 1. Which shows
that Christ had power over him, to save him, to redeem him; so that you see
Christ, tho not actually Incarnate, procured Remission of sin for the Saints
then, who acted Faith on Christ to come; they saw him a far off, Numb. 24. 17.
Promises do signify something before they are fulfilled; the Merits of
Christ's Blood being known to God, before it was actually shed, had its virtue
and influence from the beginning.

According to the Divine Economy, Christ mediates with the Father only; he is
never in Scripture brought in, praying to the Son or the Spirit; Christ as
God-man is Mediator to himself, as he is essentially God; and Christ as
Mediator, is inferior to himself. As he is essentially God, so he is the Party
offended; but as Mediator God-man, so he is the party that makes
reconciliation: A Mediator is not of one, i. e. He consists of two distinct
Natures; Angels, and Saints are mere Creatures, and never will be more, and
therefore will make but sorry Mediators; the Man Christ is the highest Creature
Image of God, because he is God as well as Man. The Hypostatical union of the
two natures in Christ, is the Foundation of our spiritual and mystical union to
God; God and his Creature Man, meet in Christ the Mediator.

We must not understand our union to Christ so grossly, as if we were Deified; I
abhor that blasphemous Famelistical Notion of our being Christed and Godded;
no, the new Creature in its nearest union, and highest communion with God, is
but a Creature, and never will be more; nothing that is infinite, eternal, and
uncreated, can in its immensity enter into us, but we may enter into it; hence
the Saints are said to enter into life, Mat. 18. 8. Mat. 19. 17. As a Barrel
cast into the Sea, is in the fullness of the Sea, tho the fullness of the Sea be
not in the Barrel, it is filled according to its Capacity, and can hold no more:
So is the life of Christ derived to us by gradual Communications in a way of
influence from Christ the Fountain of life; we live, because he lives who has
life in himself, and is a quickening Spirit in us; certainly great things are
intended by, and implied in our union to Christ; I remember a late eminent
Divine, now in Glory, expresses it thus: That provided we keep below the
Hypostatical union of the two natures in Christ; we cannot ascend too high in
our thoughts and conceptions of the mystical union between Christ and his
Members; all that is below the hypostatical union, may be allowed to this: So
that I would not have any interpret our union to Christ, and communion with
him, into so low a sense, as not to apprehend how Believers by virtue of their
union to Christ, stand in a nearer relation to God than the Angels do, whose
Nature Christ took not; I say, Believers are under a more special, immediate
influence of the eternal Spirit; their life is hid with Christ in God, and will
be better understood by us in Heaven, than it is here on Earth; though we
should be studying it more and more: I am sorry to see the most spiritual
expressions of the Gospel, sealed up as it were by a common short exposition of
them, that goes with most for the full sense of the Text; it contains, it may
be, truth, but not all the truth; or at least does not fully express all the
truth; it is looked upon as very unsafe to put a further and higher construction
upon the words, than others has done before; though they will bear it: I think
while we keep within the Analogy of Faith, not wounding any vital part, or
fundamental Principle of Religion, nor wresting the Scriptures to a forced
sense, we may admit any farther light that shines through the word unto us,
waiting upon God to lead us by his Spirit further and further into the
knowledge of the truth, as it is in Jesus, that our light may shine out into the
perfect day.

Christ being thus qualified for his Office, is

1. Called the Messenger or Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 1. Because he does
declare and interpret the terms of the Covenant between God and Man, as Moses
did, Exodus 20. 19. Deuteronomy. 5. 5, 27. In this he was a type of Christ, Deuteronomy. 18.
15, 18, 19. Therefore Christ as Mediator is referred to in the Old Testament,
Isa. 7. 14. Isa. 8. 8.

2. The Angel absolutely, Exodus 23. 20.

3. The Angel of his Face or Presence Isa. 63. 9.

4. (...), 1 John 2. 1. An advocate, The Holy Ghost, has the same name (...)
John. 14. 16. 26. Because as Christ makes intercession for us above, his Spirit
makes intercession in us here, Romans 8. 26.

God is in Christ reconciling the World unto himself; if ever we meet with God
in peace, it must be in and through this great Mediator Jesus Christ.

5. What are those special Mediotory acts that Christ puts forth?

CHAP. V.
Of Christ's Mediatory Acts.
WHAT are those special Mediatory Acts that Christ puts forth?

Some proper to his Prophetical, some to his Priestly, and some to his Kingly
Office.

To his Prophetical Office.
1. To know, and rightly to state the case between God and Man. 2. To propose
and declare the terms of the Agreement between God and Man, contained in the
New Covenant.
To his Priestly Office.
1. To make satisfaction, in order to our Redemption. 2. To make intercession
for us by Arguments drawn from that satisfaction.
To his Kingly Office.
1. To Protect and Govern his Church, defending it against all the sworn
Enemies of it. 2. To give Rules, Laws, and Ordinances to his Church, for the
avoiding of all Will Worship.
But I shall not tie my self to this Method. But speak of Christ's Mediatory
Acts.

First, As Mediating with God for us.

Secondly, As Mediating with us on God's behalf.

1. As Mediating with God for us, 1. By giving satisfaction to his Father's
Justice. He undertook this as our Surety, Heb. 7. 22. Heb. 10. 7. And actually
performed this Undertaking, 1 Timothy 2. 6. Mat. 20. 28. John 10. 15. To give
satisfaction, is tantum facere, quantum satis est. Christ as a Priest offering
himself up to death for us, was one of the chiefest acts of his Mediation, that
he might take away the guilt of sin; bur this was not all, for as our Mediator,
he puts forth a further act, viz.

2. By promising to sanctify us, to free us from the filth of sin, Ephesians. 5. 25,
26, 27. He shows there that Christ upon giving himself for the Church, laid
himself under Engagements to sanctify and cleanse it; here the law of the
spirit of life in Christ, makes us free from the law of sin and death, Romans 8.
2. Thus Christ by himself purges our sins, Heb. 1. 3.

3. By making Intercession for us.

1. On Earth. John 17. 9. 20. I pray for them, and for all that shall believe
on me through their word.

2. In Heaven. Heb. 9. 24. Romans 8. 34. 1 John 2. 1. Heb. 7. 25. He ever lives
to make Intercession for us; it is continual Intercession; should it cease but
for a Moment, we should be in great danger; therefore Christ is continually
representing in Heaven, what he has done, and suffered for us in the flesh.

2. As Mediating with us on God's behalf. Christ as Mediator, came about the
Father's business, Luke 2. 49. And deals with us Prodigals, about our returning
to our Heavenly Father.

1. By declaring the Father's Will to us, John 1. 18. John 6. 38, 39, 40. John
17. 8, 14.

2. By applying his Merits in the efficacy of them unto us. The son quickneth
whom he will, John 5. 21. If when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by
the deatb of his Son; much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his
life, Romans 5. 10. There is a mighty Power in the Death and Resurrection of
Christ, Phil. 3. 10. Romans 6. 3, 4, 5. When we are planted in the likeness of
both, we shall then as Branches abiding in the true Vine, bring forth much
fruit, John 15. 5.

The efficacy of Christ's Mediation, and the effectual Application of the
Merits of his Blood to us, in our Justification, appears,

1. In our Regeneration, Tit. 3. 5, 6.

2. By preserving us from final Apostasy, John 10. 28. John 17. 12.

3. By raising us up unto glory at the last day, John 6. 39, 40. John 17. 22.

In order to all this, God chose us in Christ our Mediator from Eternity, Ephesians.
1. 4. The office of a Mediator lies in Trans, acting all things with God, that
concerns the people, (...), Heb. 2. 17. That he may save his people from their
sins, Mat. 1. 21.

Christ is Mediator of Redemption to man, 1 Timothy 2. 5. Heb. 2. 16. Of
Conservation, and Confirmation unto Angels, who need such a Mediator, Job 4.
10. Angels were mutable Creatures, till Confirmed by Christ, for which they
are, no doubt, very thankful unto God. We ought to be thankful, not only for
deliverance out of evils already come upon us, but also for being kept from
many evils that might have befallen us, as Psalm 86. 12, 13 Psalm. 144. 9, 10,
11. Upon this account Christ is to be worshipped not only by men, but by
Angels, Heb. 1 6. And Angels being sensible of so great a benefit by Christ
their Head, they do willingly Minister to his Members, Mat. 18. 10. Heb. 1. 14.
They rejoice at the Conversion of sinners, Luke 15. 10. They gain more
knowledge in Gospel Mysteries by the Church, Ephesians. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 12. They
have all Prophetic Revelations from Christ, Rev. 19. 10. The testimony of
Jesus, is the spirit of prophesy. All such Gospel discoveries, are called the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, Rev. 1. 1. The word of God, and the testimony of
Jesus, v. 2. Who is the faithful witness, v. 5. Men and Angels bare record to
the truth of this; John did, Rev. 1. 2. That Heavenly Host of Angels did it,
Luke 2. 13. 14. Angels are a part of the Church, which is preserved by Christ,
Heb. 12. 22. They are called the Sons of God, Job 1. 6 Job 2. 1. Elect, and
therefore in Christ, 1 Timothy 5. 21. Therefore that the Angels stand, and that
fallen man is raised up again, both are from Christ, our great Mediator and
Intercessor, whose Prayers are always heard for the Church, Zech. 1. 12, 13,
etc. Because Christ has the same will with the Father, John 10. 30. Because
Christ is well beloved, his Person is Accepted, and we in him, Ephesians. 1. 6. and
his Prayers are offered on the Altar of his Godhead, Heb. 9. 14.

6. Answer Some Popish Objections, and open some Scriptures very much perverted
by them.

1. Obj. Christ is Mediator in respect of his Humane Nature, only as man, from
1 Timothy 2. 5. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, tbe Man
Christ Jesus.

Answ. Man here is taken in the concrete, for the whole Person of the Mediator,
not in the abstract, for his Humane Nature only; in saying the man Christ, we
don't exclude his Divinity; quia in homine Deus est, Ambros. The Man Christ,
and Christ as a man, differ very much; the First signifies God-man, the Second
only Man: Therefore we say against the Lutherans, That though Christ, who is
man, be every where, yet Christ as man is not every where; these Two
Propositions are not equipollent; The First is true, the Second is false; it is
the Error of the Vbiquitarians. If Christ were only God, or only Man, then not
medius inter Deum and hominem, and consequently no Mediator. Therefore how can
Saints, who are only men, become fit Mediators? When we say the Man Christ, the
Species is explained and limited by the individuum to such a man, who is the
Christ of God, God and Man.

2. Obj. Since Christ our Mediator is Ascended and Glorified, and is to resign
up his Mediatory Kingdom, it is necessary that others be preferred to that
Office, v. 9. the Virgin Mary, the Apostles, Martyrs, and Confessors, etc.

Answ. 1. Christ has not yet resigned up his Mediatory Kingdom. 2. The Apostle
1 John 2. 1, 2. confutes this, and says, We now have an advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. So Psalm. 110. 4. Thou art a priest for
ever, always making intercession for us, Romans 8. 34. Heb. 9. 24.

I grant indeed, according to 1 Cor. 15. 24. that Christ will resign up his
Mediatory Kingdom to the Father; when Sin, Death, and all the Enemies of the
Church are overcome, there will be no need of such a Mediator then, as Christ
now is, riding on conquering and to conquer, Rev. 6. 2. So long as there are
any to be conquered, Christ is in a Warlike posture on Horseback; but when all
are subdued, then he possesses the Kingdom in peace with his Father, Reigns
with him as God to Eternity, Triumphing in the final overthrow of all his
Enemies: Though he then cease from those Mediatory acts, which the present
necessities of his suffering Church and People call for; yet he continues a
Mediator still; he did not finish that Office in the Garden, or upon the Cross,
that he should be no more a Mediator.

When it is said Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to the Father, this is not
to be so taken, as if the Father did not now Reign, or that the Son should not
Reign afterward: But because while the Prince of Darkness reigns, and the far
greater part of the World goes after him, God seems not to reign while they
will not own him for their King: But when Christ shall have conquered all his
Enemies, and brought all the Elect into a due subjection to God, then he shall
deliver up the Kingdom in a quiet settled state to the Father, so as the Son
shall Reign with him for ever; for of his kingdom there is no end, Luke 1. 33.
The subjection spoken of here, is not any thing unworthy of Christ, but makes
rather for his glory, to have his humanity more visibly subject to the Divine
Nature. For as long as Christ holds his Mediatory Kingdom, having all Judgment
committed to himself; doing all himself, though by Commission from his Father;
yet while he is exerting this Regal Authority by virtue of his Mediatory
Office, it does not so well appear, how as Man he is subject to the Father, as
it will do when God shall be all in all: Yet still the Efficacy of Christ's
Offices is eternal, though the present Execution of them may in diverse respects
then cease.

Obj. 3. The Papists hold, That though there be but one Mediator of Redemption,
yet there may be many Mediators of Intercession.

Answ. If many Mediators, in any sense, had been necessary to save man, this
had reflected upon the Grace of God; since the sin of one man was enough to
damn all mankind. By one man's disobedience many were made sinners, Rom 5. 19.
Wy should not the Obedience of one, especially such a Man as Christ, make many
Righteous? Therefore it is said, 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. One Mediator gave himself a
ransom for all. There is one Lord, Ephesians. 4. 5.

Obj. 4. From Psalm. 132. 10. The Papists infer from thence, That God does not
hear us for Christ's sake only, but for David's sake too.

Answ. When it is said for David's sake, it is not meant for the Merit,
Intercession or Mediation of David, as we understand when we say for Christ's
sake: But here it is for the sake of the Covenant made with David and his seed,
from whom should spring the Messiah; this Covenant is mentioned, Psalm. 89. 3,
4, 24. Hence the Saints expostulate with God in the same Psalm, v. 49, 50. So
these words in Psalm 132. 10. are explained in the next, v. 11.

CHAP. VI.
The APPLICATION.
7. WHAT use we should make of Christ our Mediator.

Are we come to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant? Then let us never think
to obtain any New Covenant-mercy without the Mediation of Christ; it is great
presumption to come alone, and in our own names to the Throne of Grace; all the
force and efficacy of our Prayers, depends upon the Intercession of Christ, who
is our Advocate with the Father, our great High Priest, always appearing in
Heaven for us; he undertakes that our Prayers shall be heard, Mat. 21. 22.
Whatsoever ye ask in prayer believing, ye shall receive. Mark 11. 24. Joh. 14.
6. No coming unto the Father but by me; and whatsoever ye shall ask in my name,
that will I do. If ye shall ask any thing in my name I will do it, V. 13, 14.
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you, John 16.
23. What encouragement does Christ give us to pray in his Name, to make use of
him for our Mediator in all things, wherein we have to do with God! He presents
his People, and their services, to God for acceptance: What can a man do for
himself? How can he deal with God, without a Mediator? I have sinned (says Job
7. 20.) What shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? A Sinner knows not
what to do without a Mediator.

We can have no Communion with God, but by a Mediator; no Mediator but Christ;
our fellowship is with the Father and with the Son, i. e. with the Father by
the Son, and no otherwise: It Is not enough to own one God, unless we own one
Mediator, the man Christ, 1 Timothy 2. 5. I am the door, no entering but by me,
John 10. 9. No other name under heaven, whereby we must be saved, Acts 4. 12.
Christ is the Ladder reaching from Earth to Heaven, Genesis 28. 12. No climbing up
to Heaven any other way; they are Thieves and Robbers who attempt it; we can
have no access to God, but through Christ, John 10. 1, 7, 8, 9. All our
Spiritual Sacrifices are acceptable to God through Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5. All
Blessings come upon us through Christ, Tit. 3. 6. and in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 3. Let
us come in that Name for the Remission of Sins, Acts 10. 43. By him let us
offer the Sacrifice of Praise to God continually, Heb. 13. 15. Let us be sure
to eye Christ in all the actings of our Faith upon God, 1 Pet. 1. 21. By him
believing in God: And in all our accesses unto God, that we may come boldly by
the Faith of him, Ephesians. 3. 12. Since our High Priest has such fellow-feeling of
all our infirmities, sympathysing with us; therefore let us come boldly unto
the throne of grace, Heb. 4. 15, 16.

To Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant. The New Covenant implies, That God
will deal with men upon new terms, upon other Terms than he did before under
the first Covenant; this is a better Covenant, established upon better
Promises, more encouraging, more relieving to a poor Sinner. The Mediator of
the New Covenant, lives for ever to make intercession for us, Heb. 7. 25. From
this the Apostle argues, That they shall be Saved to the uttermost, or
evermore, as in the Margin, (...), in eternum, or perfect servare, or
vivificare, (...), to quicken or make alive: Christ as Mediator will do every
thing that tends to the perfecting of eternal life; Christ is a very powerful
Advocate, heard in all the requests he makes to the Father, John 11. 41, 42. If
so, then the perseverance of the Saints is built upon a sure bottom, because
Christ has prayed for them, John 17. 24. That they may be kept, v. 15. That
their Faith fail not, Luke 22. 32.

Christ's Mediation, as useful and necessary as it is, extends not it self
beyond his Church and Chosen, Rom 8. 33, 34. Acts 20. 28. Ephesians. 5. 25. John 10.
14. He plainly declares this, John. 17. 9, 20. His Mediation reaches no further
than the Covenant; every Mediator is the Mediator of a Covenant; all men are
not taken into the Covenant of Grace, though Christ prayed for his Enemies here
on Earth, Luke 23. 34. That was because he knew some of his Elect were to be
found among his Murderers; this Prayer of Christ took effect, for some of them
were afterward converted, Acts 2. 23, 37. You see how effectual the Mediation
of Christ is; therefore if we intend to speed at the Throne of Grace, let us be
sure to direct all our Prayers to God by Faith in the Name of Christ Jesus, the
Mediator of the New Covenant.

As we are directed to come to God by Christ, and through Christ; so we must be
sure to come to God in Christ, to God in a Mediator, as well as by him. Christ,
though he be another Person, yet he is not another God from the Father; and the
Holy Ghost, he is alius, but not aliud, not differing in the essence of the
Deity from the Father; we shall become vain in our imaginations, if we set our
selves to conceive of God out of Christ; we are apt to pass through the
Mediator to the Father, as to a God distinct from the Mediator: Some Christians
have been very much at a loss in the actings of their Faith upon God through
Christ, because they have not looked unto God in Christ so much as they should:
Christ calls us to the knowledge of himself, that we might know the Father in
him, John 14. 7. If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also. He
that has seen me, has seen the father, v. 9. I am in the father, and the
father in me,, v. 10. God in Christ is the only true object of all Divine
Worship. In him the Godhead dwells bodily, Col. 2. 9. We can have no Communion
with the Godhead, but through the Flesh of Christ; as he is God Incarnate, our
Emanuel, and Mediator; Faith first takes hold of the Flesh of Christ, and
through that veil draws nigh to God who is a Spirit, Heb, 10. 19, 20. John 6.
56. The main end of Christ in dying for us, was to bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.
18. And that he may effect this, he shows us God in himself. They who have not
seen God in Christ, they know not what God is, they have never yet seen him who
is invisible: This is the Excellency of the Christian Religion, That it brings
us to the knowledge of that very Person who is God, which cannot be said of any
other Religion whatever.

CHRIST THE Foundation of our Adoption.
GAL. IV. 5. That we might receive the Adoption of sons.
CHAP. I.
Of Adoption in general.
THE Apostle here shows the difference between the Jewish and the Gentile
Church; That was as an Heir in his Minority, This as an Heir come to full age.
All Old Testament Saints were God's Heirs; But living under a darker
Dispensation of Gospel Grace, before the coming of Christ in the flesh, in that
respect they were under age, and in bondage under the Elements of the World;
but when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman,
made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law, v. 4, 5. i. e. To
free them from the servile Discipline of the Law; pouring our a more ample
measure of his Spirit upon Believers now; That we might receive the Adoption of
Sons. Old Testament Sains were Children as well as we; they are so called,
Deuteronomy. 14. 1. Jer. 31. 20. Isa. 63. 16. Doubtless thou art our Father; they had
God for their Portion, Lam. 3. 24. were Heirs, as well as we, Gal. 4. 1. But
their time and ours was not the same; they lived in the beginning of Gospel
time, when Grace first broke out; the Glass was then first set a running, and
is now run to a fullness, v. 4. i. e. to the time appointed of the father, v. 2.
For the fuller manifestation of Gospel Grace; Adoption is not to be restrained
altogether to the times of the New Testament; the Saints of Old had their share
of it, sucked some comfort from those more obscure Promises of Gospel Grace;
they were acted by some love, as well as fear; truly, Saints now are not
altogether without their fears under this abundance of Grace that is revealed
to them; so that their Adoption and ours, differ not in substance, but in the
manner of Revelation; it is clearer to us, than it was to them.

Adoption in Scripture is taken more largely, as including those who are Sons
of God by Name only, as all common Professors, who are but externally in
Covenant, such are called the Sons of God, and of the Kingdom, Genesis 6. 2. Mat.
8. 12. But such Children may prove Bastards, not true sons of God. So God
chooses the Nation of the Jews to be his peculiar People, this is called
Adoption, Romans 9. 4. Exodus 4. 22. Jer. 31. 1. This was a type, or resemblance
of our spiritual Adoption in Christ; and in this strict sense I now take it, as
it is applicable only to those who are the Children of God from special Saving
Grace, who have the Nature, Affection, and Disposition of Children.

Christ is the Son of God by eternal Generation, Angels by Creation, Believers
by a voluntary Adoption; and of this I am now to speak.

First, What this Adoption is.

1. As to the thing it self. Adoption is a high expression of God^s love to us;
a clear evidence of that great intimacy and nearness that is between God and
Believers, who are admitted into fellowship with the Father, and with his Son
Jesus Christ. How our Adoption rises from the Sonship of Christ, by virtue of
our Union to, and Communion with him, I shall show in its proper place. For the
present, take this general description of it, viz. It Is a gracious act of God,
giving all Believers power to become the Children of God, John 1. 12. looking
upon them ever after as such; taking them into his Family, and under his
eternal Care, Ephesians. 2. 19. Ephesians 3. 15. (...), quasi filii constituti,
constituted, ordained, and appointed by God to be his Children, to be in the
state and condition of Children unto him.

Power to become, i. e. jus, or right to Adoption; the word (...), signifies a
lawful Liberty, or License given by God, 1 Cor. 8. 9. So here, Believers do not
usurp a Name or Title that does not belong to them; God has called them his
Children, and made them his Children; therefore they may lawfully and
rightfully be called by that Name: The word also implies a special Prerogative,
Dignity, and Honor conferred upon them, which is primarily intended in this
place.

As Justification, so Adoption makes only a relative change of state in the
Judgment of God; reckoning, or reputing us to be his Children, whom he will
love and own as such.

2. As to its order and place in Divinity, how comes it in, and where, after
what? It Is an Article of Faith; I am now enquiring, What joint in the whole
body of Divinity is the proper Seat of this Article; that we may know what
immediately goes before it, and what immediately follows after it: We have not
a right Method or Scheme of Divinity in our Heads, till we see the coherence,
dependence, and reference that one Gospel Truth has with, upon, and to
another, that stands next it.

There is some variation here among Divines, tho no material difference; some
referring it to Predestination, some to Vocation, some to Justification, some
to Sanctification, and some to Glorification; indeed it has some reference to
all those, as will appear by and by.

I conceive Adoption comes orderly to be considered after Justification, as an
Appendix, or consequent of it; it presupposes Faith, John 1. 12. And therefore
is no part of Justification, but a Spiritual privilege flowing from it.

Believers have a double right to Heaven, one from Redemption, the other from
Filiation; this is an accumulative right, ex abundanti, given purposely to
confirm them in their hope of Glory, Romans 8. 17. Adoption tends to
Glorification, and gives a right to it; I mean, it is not the Meritorious
cause, but only causa dispositiva, it does naturally tend, both to
Sanctification, and Glorification. God draws Arguments from one act of his
Grace toward us, to proceed further and further in a way of Grace with us;
having made us his Children, it pleases him to give us a Kingdom.

Secondly, How it is brought about, as to the cause, manner, and time of it.

1. The cause of it.
1. The free Grace of God the Father, not any Merit of ours, John 3. 1. Ephesians. 1.
5. Therefore we should be thankful to him for it, Col. 1. 12. To the father who
has made us meet, etc. He has wrought us for the self-same thing, 2 Cor. 5.
5. Who has not only conferred a right of inheriting Glory, but also has
suited and qualified our hearts and nature by his Grace, to enjoy this glory,
and delight in it.

2. As God the Father is the prime Author of Adoption, so Christ is the
exemplar; the Spirit impressing upon us the similitude of that exemplar, we
become the Children of God. I shall open this a little, and show you what
influence Christ has into our Adoption: God gives the Elect to Christ as his
Children, as the Heirs of God, and joint-Heirs with Christ; they lostt-heir
Inheritance in the first Adam, and recovered it in the second Adam; they now
stand in the same relation to God, (in their measure) as Christ does; I, and
the children thou have given me, Heb. 2. 13. The Son of God must become the Son
of Man, that we might be made the Sons of God in him, Gal. 4 4, 5. Here comes
in our Adoption by virtue of our relation to Christ our elder Brother, as one
with him, Gal. 3. 28. All God's Adopted Children are found in his natural Son,
mystically united to him, deriving from him that filial relation which they
have to God: Al God's Chidren are of one mould, of one shape and fashion, all
conformable to the image of his Son; this is the Mark by which they are known
and distinguished from others. The great enquiry that God makes, is, What of
Christ there is in us? what of Christ there is held forth by us? God owns none
for his Children, but such as resemble Christ; Christ is the express Image of
the Father, and Christians are the express Image of Christ. The reason why God
the Father is so well pleased with the man Christ, is, because he sees his own
Image in him; he sees himself, his own essence in Christ, not so in the Saints;
the Image of the Father in Christ, and the Image of Christ in the Saints, do
agree in many things, yet they differ in some; the Image of Christ in the
Saints, is not the essence of God, for that is incommunicable to any mere
Creature; but it is a lively resemblance of all the communicable attributes of
God in some degree and measure drawn from the very face of Christ, upon the
faces, hearts, and lives of all Christians; yet still, Christ is the original,
by eternal Generation; the Saints are but so many Copies drawn in time from
that Original, and they are drawn to the life, not only in a way of outward
resemblance, but by a real inward participation of the Life and Spirit of
Christ, according to their finite capacity. As the humane Nature does subsist
in the Divine Person of Christ; so our humane Persons, so far as we are new
Creatures, do Subsist in Christ, in whom we spiritually live, move, and have
our Being, as New Creatures; the Divine Graces of Christ do subsist in the
Saints, by the Spirit of Christ dwelling in them; i. e. They act the same
Graces finitely, which Christ acts infinitely; they receive of his fullness, but
cannot contain all his fullness, they have not a capacity for that; they enter
into his fullness, but all his fullness cannot enter into them.

3. Our Adoption is brought about, not only by the Father and the Son, but also
by the Spirit; bearing Witness with our spirit to the truth of the Image of
Christ drawn upon the Soul, inferring from thence our Adoption. The same Image
bears the same name, implies (in a measure) the same nature and Spirit to be in
us, that is in Christ, puts us into the same relation to God, that the Man
Christ stands in; the names of things would never occur to our memories, if the
likeness of the object we look upon, did not teach us what to call it;
convenient rebus Nomina etc.

The Spirit witnesses by inward impressins, tho no voice be heard; and these
impressions are always according to the word; the Spirit does not speak from
himself, suggesting any thing to us not contained in the word; but of this more
hereafter. I am now showing how Adoption is carried on by the Spirit, therefore
called the Spirit of Adoption, because given only to the Adopted; and because
he bears witness to them of the good Will of God, wherewith the Father has
accepted them in the beloved, that he might be a Father to them: Tho the Spirit
works all other saving Graces in us, yet because Adoption is the prime, and
chief work of the Spirit, therefore he is called the Spirit of Adoption.

2. The manner of it.
This is clearly set down, Gal. 3. 25. ad finem. It Is Faith makes us the
Children of God, by joining us to Christ; our union to, and communion with
Christ, the natural Son of God, is the Foundation of our Adoption, Gal. 3. 29.
Christ by coming into the World in our Nature, made way for our Adoption, of
which Baptism is the symbol or sign; we are Baptized into Christ, we put on
Christ, are incorporated into him by Faith; are all one in him, Gal. 3. 27, 28.
If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the
promise, Gal. 3. 29. All Abraham's believing Posterity are blessed in Isaac, i.
e. in Christ, Gal. 3. 16. They are Children, and remain in the House of God, i.
e. in the Church for ever, John 8. 35.

3. The time of it.
1. From Eternity, in the purpose of God. This is virtual Adoption, Ephesians. 1. 5.
Hence the Elect, not yet called, are said to be the Children of God, John 11.
52. compare with John 10. 16. God intended Adoption in Predestination, and in
the fullness of time, sent Christ to effect it, Gal. 4. 4, 5. And his Spirit to
evidence it, Gal. 4. 6. We were Adopted in the purpose of God, before we were
born; this is virtual Adoption.

2. At our effectual vocation, then actual Adoption begins; we receive the
first fruits of it here; it follows Faith, at least, as to our sense of it,
Ephesians 1. 13.

3. At our Glorification, then will our Adoption be completed and perfected in
our Bodies and Souls; we shall actually enjoy all the Privileges of it; then
there will be a clearer manifestation of the Sons of God; the glorious Liberty
of the Children of God, will more fully appear, then now it does, Romans 8. 19,
21. Hence the Consummation of our Redemption, at the last day, is called
Adoption, Romans 8. 23. 24. But I now speak only of the present fruits of
Adoption, which the Saints enjoy in this life.

CHAP. II.
Thirdly, How it differs from humane Adoption.
1. DIVINE Adoption presupposes a Title to the Heavenly Inneritance by
Justification, John 1. 12. Humane Adoption gives all the Title that a Man,
otherwise a Stranger to the Blood, has to the Inheritance of him who adopts
him.

2. Humane Adoption conveys only outward goods to a person, does not change his
nature, but the Father communicates to us the Spirit, and likeness of his
natural Son, Romans 8. 29.

3. Humane Adoption is for want of a natural Son, it is an act of law, imitating
nature, for the comfort of those who have no Children: But Divine Adoption is
from the abounding love of God to us, making us joint heirs with his
well-beloved Son. Though God had a Son from eternity, yet he had none of humane
race, none of our kind, all being fallen in Adam.

4. Our spiritual Sonship runs thus; If children, then heirs; it is not so among
men, all Sons are not Heirs, but only the eldest; but we shall every one
possess the whole Inheritance: Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the
kingdom, etc. Mat. 25. 34.

5. Adoption among men, implies a succession into the inheritance after the
death of the Adopter: Haereditas est successio in universum jus defuncti,
Civil. A Testament is of force after men are dead, Heb. 9. 17. The Heir,
whether Natural or Adopted, has nothing to do with the Estate till then. But
our Heavenly Father never dies, our Elder brother never dies; and yet we enter
into possession, have a present Copartnership with the Father and the Son;
Truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John
1. 3. Nay, we actually enjoy the whole inheritance with the Father and the Son;
indeed they are our inheritance, the only portion of our Souls: Had God left us
never so much to be enjoyed by it self, apart from God, 'twould be as nothing
to us; Heaven would not be Heaven, if God were not there; therefore we are said
to be glorified together, Romans 8. 17. Christ will be always among his Brethren,
John 17. 24. Their Glory lies in beholding his; the Father and the Son will
have all things to be in common between them and the Saints, and that to all
Eternity: Here is a Glorious Adoption indeed; the world never knew the like.
What manner of love is this, that we we should be called the children of God.
Tho our Heavenly Father never die, nor our Elder Brother never die, yet we must
die before we can have full possession of the whole inheritance; so did the Man
Christ, and so must we, If we suffer with him, we shall reign with him, 2 Timothy
2. 12.

CHAP. III.
Fourthly, The signs of Adoption.
1. A Loving peaceable disposition. Blessed are the peacemakers, for they
shall be called the children of God, Mat. 5. 9. Who is the God of peace, and
has commanded us with great earnestness, if it be possible, and as much as
lies in us, to live peaceably with all men, Romans 12. 18. So far as may be
without wrong to the truth and our own Consciences, we must so follow Peace as
not to quit Holiness, Heb. 12. 14. A zealous contending for the Truth, is very
consistent with the peaceable Temper of a true Christian, We may have salt in
our selves, and yet have peace one with another, Mark 9. 50. Adoption is an
uniting principle; the Saints should live together in Love, as the Children of
one Father, as joined in the same interest: Behold, how good and how pleasant
is it for brethren to dwell together in unity, Psalm. 133. 1. What Abraham said
unto Lot, Genesis 13. 8. we should say to each other, Let there be no strife, I
pray thee, between me and thee, for we be brethren. I wish there were more of
this sign of Adoption among the Children of God this day: We have reason all of
us to pray for more of that Wisdom that is from above, Which is first pure,
then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, James 3. 17.

2. A spiritual and holy Conversation, Abraham's children do the works of
Abraham: Joh. 8. 39. Walk in the steps of his faith, Romans 4. 12. Who is the
father of us all, V. 16. The Children of God should not debase themselves to
the sordid practices of the men of the World; they should shine out as lights
in the midst of a crooked Generation, making straight paths for their feet,
walking evenly and uprightly, as those who are led by the Spirit of God, and
thereby do approve themselves to be the Children of God, Romans 8. 14

3. A reverential Fear of God in all our ways, 1 Pet. 1. 17. Mal. 1. 6. joined
with filial Obedience, 1 Pet. 1. 14. which they are led to, not from a
mercenary hope of reward, but from an innate Principle of Love to God as their
Heavenly Father; they cannot but take after that will of God, of which they
were begotten.

4. A restless breathing and panting after God when he hides his face from us
in any displeasure: A child of God cannot bear the least distance between God
and his soul, Psa. 42. 1, 2. There is nothing that a gracious Soul more
desires, than the presence of God, Psalm. 84 10. Psalm. 65. 4. He is carried out
by a Divine instinct after God, his joy is full when he is in communion with
God, and he is presently troubled when his face is hid. The more God sheds
abroad his Love in our hearts, the more are our hearts captivated to him, made
more willing in the day of his power to serve him; The Love of God is a
conquering Love, a heart-subduing Love, it has a mighty constraining power over
us, drawing the will after it. The Law presses duty, but gives us no strength
to perform it, it pricks us forward, as with the point of a Sword, but does not
bear us up in doing it: The Law commands Holiness, but under the Gospel,
Holiness commands us; the Principles of it being inlaid in our renewed Natures,
We consent unto the law, that it is good; we delight in it after the inward
man, Romans 7. 16. 22. It Is written in our hearts, we are a Law to our selves,
and therefore not without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ, 1 Cor. 9.
21. The Grace of the Gospel suits our wills to the will of God, the free Spirit
of Christ inclines us to new Obedience; God knows how to commend his Love to
us, how to ingratiate himself with us, till he has so taken our hearts, that we
begin to be sick of love toward him, Cant. 5. 9. Full of vehement desires and
longings after him. David's heart was ready to break under this most holy
frame, Psalm 119. 20.

Till we are Adopted children, we are (as to our state) under the Law.

To be under the Law, is to be without a Spirit of Grace; to be a debtor to the
Law, when we have nothing to pay; to be under the curse and servitude of the
Law, acting out of Fear, not Love: We cannot Love God or Godliness, till we
Believe God loves us in Christ; this molifies and changes the heart; we are
holy by choice now, are a Law to our selves; ergo, the Doctrine of Free Grace
is no licentious Doctrine, as some would make us believe. It Is not wrangling
about Faith and Works, but living by Faith, that gives us an experimental
knowledge of the truth and power of the Doctrine of Free Grace; which makes us
own God as our God. We must break the First Commandment, before we can break
any of the other Nine. In a dying hour, Bellarmine's Tutissimum est, will be
good Doctrine. When we bring things to an issue between God and our own Souls
about Justification, we shall conclude as Paul does, Romans 3. 28. Then Blessed
is the man to whom the Lord imputes righteousness without works, Romans 4. 6.

CHAP. IV.
Fifthly, the Privileges of Adoption.
ADoption carries all the outward privileges of the Covenant along with it,
Romans 2. 4. But because this relates to Adoption at large, I shall confine my
self to those special privileges of Adoption, that belong to the true Children
of God only, viz.

1. A filial confidence and boldness at the Throne of Grace; In whom we have
boldness and access with confidence, by the faith of him, Ephesians. 3. 12. Heb. 4.
16. Adoption heightens our trust and confidence in God; Christ as a Son,
trusted in God, and so do all Christians, Heb. 2. 13.

2. Conformity to Christ; Christ is formed in them all, Gal. 4. 19. As Christ
is, so are they, each one resembles the children of a King, Judge. 8. 18. They
will be exactly like Christ at the Resurrection, Psalm. 17. 15. They were from
Eternity predestined unto (...) Romans 8, 29.

3. If (...), then Heirs, Romans 8. 17. Gal. 4. 7. We have not only a right, but
a present participation of the inheritance in some degree here; we have
something in hand, and more in hope; the earnest Penny, the first fruits we now
have, the rest is reserved for us in Heaven, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. 1 Pet. 3. 4. God
makes us joint heirs with Christ, to share with him, because the Heavenly
inheritance is not diminished by being communicated to many: Every one has all.

The Sons of God are Heirs, 1. Of Glory, 1 Pet. 1. 4. 5. 2. Of this World, 1
Cor. 3. 22. 3. Of the Promise, Heb. 6. 17. Heb. 11. 9.

4. Adoption translates us out of a Miserable estate, into a Happy estate; from
being Children of the Devil, of Wrath, of Perdition, of Darkness, to become the
Children of God, partakers of the Divine Nature, Brethren of Christ, Children
of Light, Children of Abraham; being Aliens and strangers before, standing at a
great distance from God, We are now brought nigh by the blood of Christ, Ephesians.
2. 12, 13. Are become children of the house, to abide there for ever; God is in
Covenant with us, and we in him. I will receive you, and be a father to you, 2
Cor. 6. 17, 18. A great promise indeed, it secures us for ever; like that which
God made to David concerning his Son Solomon, 2 Samuel 7. 14, 15. I will be his
father, and he shall be my Son, my mercy shall not depart away from him.

Adoption casts us upon God, puts us under his Fatherly care for ever, Mat. 6.
25, 26, 32, 33. So Mordecai brought up Hester; when he took her for his own
Daughter, Esther 2. 7. This title of being the Children of God is very
honorable; how do the Saints glory in it! 1 John 3. 1. it makes us great
indeed, as was said of Christ, Luke 1. 32. He shall be great, and shall be
called the son of the most High. How do men value themselves upon the account
of their Birth, as descending from an Ancient Honorable Family? He that is
born of God, is better born, more Nobly descended than they, and may vie
Genealogies with the best of them: By Faith Moses refused to be called the Son
of Pharaoh's Daughter, choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the people of
God; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the Treasures in
Egypt, Heb. 11. 23, 24, 25.

I shall choose rather to insist upon those privileges of Adoption that flow
from that Christian Liberty, which always accompany it; If the son shall make
you free, ye shall be free indeed, John 8. 36.

have no respect to their own Works in Justification; because they know they
are justified without them; they eye only the Mercy of God in Christ for their
Justification. When the question is about Justification (and it is a question
much agitated among us nowadays) it is not how we are made Righteous in our
selves, but how we being Sinners in our selves, may be accounted Righteous and
Just before God; we must consult with the Gospel about this, not the Law; how
God becomes propitious to Sinners; it is Christ, not the Law, gives us the
reason of this: And when Conscience is satisfied in this point, That we shall
not be Judged by the Law, the Saints do willingly yield Obedience to the Law,
according to the measure of Grace they have received; they know now, that for
Christ's sake, their sincere, though imperfect Obedience will be accepted. We
can never serve God cheerfully till then; we cannot believe that God counts
himself truly Worshipped by our imperfect Obedience, till we believe he will
accept of it through Christ: For the Law rejects all imperfect Works, it is
Faith in Christ only procures their acceptance; For we are not under the Law,
but under grace, i. e. We are not only freed from the Curse of the Law: But

Gal. 3. 23, 24. Before faith came, we were kept under the law, shut up unto
the faith, which should afterward be revealed. Wherefore the law was our
schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith. So
Romans 8. 15.

And as we are freed from the curse of the Law, and also from the intolerable
yoke, and servile paedagogy of the Law. So

i. e. Conscience is not bound to one, or to the other, but free to either:
It Is necessary to know this, to satisfy scrupulous Consciences, that may be
under the power of a superstitious Opinion, as if the use of this or that were
unlawful.

It Is a dangerous thing to speak too freely of Christian Liberty, because many
under that pretense, allow themselves in very unwarrantable courses, running
into excess, laying aside all Moderation, Order and Government of themselves in
the use of outward things: Therefore you must note, That Christian Liberty is
altogether Spiritual, 2 Cor. 3. 17. Not to be used for an occasion to the
Flesh, Gal. 5. 13. So that Luxury in Diet, Pride in Apparel, etc. can never be
justified by the doctrine of Christian Liberty, which is principally intended
to pacify fearful Consciences in these Three Things.

1. Whether our sins be all pardoned. 2. Whether our imperfect Obedience
pleases God. 3. Whether God allows the free use of all indifferent things.
These are the puzzling points that are apt to disturb our Consciences, till we
rightly understand the nature of Christian Liberty; which does not countenance
that excess, that too many of the Richer sort run into, vying who shall be
finest in their Apparel, most sumptuous in their Entertainments; these things
are not forbidden, say they: It Is true, the things themselves are not
forbidden, but the immoderate use of them is forbidden. Therefore let your
moderation be seen in all things; and know that your Christian Liberty lies as
well in abstaining from indifferent things, when inexpedient, as in using them.
Christian Liberty relates to Conscience, both thy own and thy Brothers: So use
your Estates, that you may glorify God and edify your Brother, and we shall
not question your Liberty; it is not for nothing that so many woes are
pronounced against the Rich, Luke 6. 24, 25, 26. Read that place, and also Amos
6. to v. 7. I don't quote these places, that you should throw away your Riches,
and lay aside all Mirth; no, do but throw out the sin that is in all these, and
I have nothing to say against the lawful use of the things themselves, but see
you don't abuse them.

CHAP. V.
The APPLICATION.
LET us labor to live in the comfortable sense of our Adoption, as the only
way to walk worthy of it, Mal. 1. 6. It Is a shame to do otherwise, Deuteronomy. 32. 6.

The best way to keep up a sense of our Adoption, and of all the high
privileges belonging to it: Is

1. To attend to the witness of the Spirit within us: Our Adoption is a great
mystery, the grounds and reasons of it lie very deep, quite out of the reach of
a mere Humane understanding, that cannot discern the deep things of God; we
shall certainly be at a loss in our own thoughts, how to clear up our Adoption,
if the Spirit do not help us, and make it out plainly to our Spirit from the
word; and when that is done, we sit down astonished at the greatness of God's
Love; when the Spirit has satisfied us, that it is so, we can give no reason
why it should be so; but must resolve all into the Love of God in Christ, that
passes our knowledge; Behold what manner of love is this, 1 John 3. 1. That we
should not only be called, but really be the Children of God: We must observe
what inward evidence and demonstration the Spirit gives of our particular
Adoption by name, that is properly the work of the Spirit in witnessing to us,
the Spirit applies in particular the promises of Life and Pardon; they are
generally propounded by Ministers, but there comes a word behind; from the
Spirit, Isa. 30. 21. privily assuring a man of his Adoption. You may know it is
not a delusion of your own Spirit, nor of Satan. Not of your own Spirit,
because this testimony to the truth of our interest in Christ, is usually given
in when we have no sensible apprehension or feeling of the Love of God to us,
as Mat. 27. 46. The Spirit comes in to comfort us when we are most cast down,
and overwhelmed in our own spirits, and so not in a condition to speak comfort
to our selves. Not from Satan, who at such a season seeks to drive you to utter
despair, but the Spirit strengthens our Faith at such a time, sets it against
all discouragement; it is not said, he that feels, but He that believes has
everlasting life, John 3. 36. And there is a feeling that belongs to Faith,
that none but the Spirit of God can give us the sense of; hence it is that the
Saints know more certainly that they are the children of God, than the men of
the World do, that they are the Children of those whom they call their Fathers
in the Flesh.

The witness of the Spirit is a secret information of the Love of God, and his
Fatherly affection to us; a still voice from Heaven that God is thy God, which
the heart rests in, and is fully satisfied; it is more than if an Angel should
come from Heaven and tell thee, Thou art greatly beloved, as Dan. 9. 23. The
earnest of the Spirit in our hearts is more than all this, 2 Cor. 1. 22. We may
without this testimony of the Spirit, know that there is such a thing as
Adoption spoken of in Scripture; but that we in particular are Adopted, none
can assure us of this but the Spirit by a particular application of this Grace
to our selves: The Spirit of God in us, speaks particularly to us, to our case,
to our state, to our Souls. I hope he is so speaking to you now, so speaking in
you at this time, showing you what interest you have in Christ, and what
follows upon it, reasoning you into a belief of the thing in reference to your
selves. When the Spirit comes in as a witness, 'twill be believed the Spirit
comes on purpose to answer all our doubts and objections, to make the matter
plain and evident to us; else the Spirit could not be so effectual a Comforter,
if he did not bring convincing light along with him into our dark Souls: You
may put by all that we can say to you, and remain unsatisfied, after all the
arguments that Ministers may use to convince you of your Adoption; you may hang
down your heads every one of you, and say, notwithstanding all this, I fear I
am not a Child of God: But when the Spirit himself comes into that Soul, there
is no resisting the wisdom of the Holy Ghost; Ministers have not wisdom enough
to quiet a troubled Conscience. We may set outward light before a dark Soul,
and yet that Soul be as dark as ever for want of inward light; we may speak the
truth as it is in Jesus, but we cannot give you a discerning of that truth; we
may hold the object before you, but cannot give you eyes to see it; but the
Spirit does both, gives us a capacity to learn and take in what he teaches us.
I grant an enlightened mind may reason it self into some present sense of his
Adoption, but seeing so many things contrary to the Divine Nature in himself,
he doubts again, and questions his Adoption, and will be ever and anon at a
loss, wavering in this matter, 'till the testimony of the Spirit confirm him,
which is distinct from all his own spiritual reasonings, from all the right
inferences that his Faith draws from the word: I mean, the testimony of the
Spirit has a greater cogency and force with him, than all the apprehensions of
his Faith can have; though Faith and the Spirit both go upon the same grounds,
and quote the same Scriptures, yet the testimony of the Spirit is stronger,
than the bare apprehensions of our Faith, and makes deeper impression upon the
mind of Believers, than their Faith can; which impressions are more easily
retained and remembered, than all the just consequences of our Faith; we have
not always that presence of mind, cannot so soon recollect our selves, as to be
always under the light of that demonstration, that Faith well studied and
acted, can, and does sometimes make of our Adoption, and then the Spirit comes
in, and helps us under our present Temptations, gives such an unquestionable
Testimony of the truth of that which we were in some suspense about, that we
can doubt no more, but are settled and established in our belief of it; so that
when the Soul is clouded, when Faith is not so ready and prompt as formerly to
make clear and evident proof of our Adoption, cannot set before us so plainly
the reasons and grounds of it; the Spirit's Testimony puts the matter out of
doubt, and makes us not only to know, but to feel that we are the true Children
of God; by that Childlike disposition toward God and our Heavenly Father,
which we find in our selves.

If you observe how the Children of God come out of their doubts about their
Adoption, you will find it to be this way; the same Scriptures and spiritual
reasons, that Faith alone cannot set home at one time, do suddenly enter and
prevail at another time; we see that in them now that convinces us, which we
could not see before; and this is from the testimony of the Spirit, witnessing
with our Spirit; our Spirit was alone before, laboring to persuade and
convince, but could not; then in comes the Spirit, and gives such a
corroborating Testimony with our Spirit; that in the mouth of these two
Witnesses the truth is confirmed, and cleared up to our full satisfaction:
Worldly men boast of their being the Children of God, tho they do the works of
the Devil; this is from their own Spirit, not from God's.

As we are to attend to the witness of the Spirit, so we should

2. Apply our selves often to God as our Father; say, Our father, which art in
heaven; from the instinct of the Divine Nature in us, we cannot be beaten out
of it, but that God is our Father; Doubtless thou art our father, tho Abraham
be ignorant of us, Isa. 63. 16. We don't doubt of that, we will lie at thy
feet, and commit our selves to thy care, not questioning thy love to us. A
woman may forget her sucking child, and not have compassion on the son of her
womb, yet thou will not forget us, Isa. 49. 15, 16. Therefore cry Abba, Father;
he is not the God of the Jews only, but of the Gentiles also; the believing
Gentiles, may in their several Languages, cry Father with as much confidence,
as the Jews cried Abba; if you, from your hearts own God as your Father, he
will answer to that name, and call you his Children, make the Trial when you
will in uprightness of heart, you will find his Fatherly Bowels will earn
toward you; he has styled himself your Heavenly Father, and your naming that
word in Faith, will have a secret influence upon your Souls, and let in a sense
of his Fatherly love to you, and make you pray like his Children; the more you
do express a willingness to have God for your Father, counting your selves
happy in that relation, the more willing is God to own you for his Children;
here is a poor Soul, says God, who counts himself utterly undone, if I do not
become a Father to him; he has cast himself down at my Feet, I cannot contain
my self any longer, from owning him as my dear Child; I must tell him so, Son,
Daughter, be of good cheer, I am thy Father, and will be a Father to thee for
ever; all that I have is thine. This is the highest degree of comfort we are
capable of in this World, to live under a clear manifestation of the love of
God to us in Christ Jesus.

Obj. I can sometimes call God Father, and do think my self to be his Child;
yet I am afraid he will not own me, because I have been a rebellious Child; I have
sinned greatly against him, and am afraid to come into his presence.

Ans. So it was with the Prodigal, Luke 15. 21. But his Father, instead of
taking notice of his former Miscarriages, sets himself to give him all the
demonstrations of his love immaginable, in the highest expressions of his
kindness to him, v. 22, 23, 24. And so does God carry it toward a returning
Sinner.

But if after all, doubts still remain, you are still under a secret
Trepidation in your own mind, that you shall not be accepted of the Father,
that he will not own you for his Child. Then,

3. Consider your alliance to Christ; apply to him as your elder Brother; A
brother is born for the day of adversity, Prove. 17. 17. Never was there such a
Brother as Christ, he is not ashamed to call us Brethren, Heb. 2. 11. Tho he be
so infinitely above us, being the only Natural Son of God, his firstborn yet
Believers, by the Grace of Adoption, are called his firstborn too, Heb. 12.
23. Being mystically joined to Christ, the natural Son of God; Adam in his
innocence, was never so joined in that nearness to God; the privilege of the
firstborn under the Law belongs to Believers now, who are therefore made
Priests unto God. The Foundation of our Adoption lies in our Alliance to Christ
our elder Brother, who is able to bring us into, and to fix us in that relation
to God. Because

1. He has a great interest with the Father as his well-beloved Son; you may
think your selves not beloved, but you cannot think so of Christ, who is the
express Image of the Father; if Christ be so like the Father, and the Saints so
like Christ, then stand before God in the Image of Christ, and you will find
every cast of God's Eye upon his Son Christ, will reach your hearts; Christ in
you, draws the eye and the heart of God toward you; for all the acts of love
and complacency that God puts forth toward the Person of the Son, do extend
themselves to all the operations of the Spirit of the Son in the hearts of
Believers; let me tell you, God cannot disown you, but he must disown Christ,
in whom you are, and who is in you; let God look either upon Christ, or upon
Believers, he still sees them both together, one in another, John 17. 21, 22,
23. Then keep close to Christ, go to the Father in his name; to his Father, and
your Father; if not to your Father, yet go as to his Father; when Faith cannot
act one way, yet it may do the same thing another way; when it cannot enter in
at one door, it may enter in at the other door of the same House; what cannot be
proved by one medium, may be proved by another; the Devil can never so block up
all ways of access to God, but Faith will break through somewhere; 'twill
either find a way, or make a way.

2. Because he is a merciful and faithful High Priest, Heb. 2. 5. Every way
fitted for the Office of a Mediator, touched with the feeling of our
Infirmities; in all points tempted as we are, Heb. 4. 15. A body have thou
prepared me, Heb. 10. 5. i. e. Framed to such a temper, that Christ through our
nature, might best express God's love to man; Christ acted over the life of God
in man's nature, therefore it was necessary, that the humane Nature of Christ
should be adapted and suited to the Divine Nature; which was done three ways,
viz.

First,

By the perfection of it, being free from all contagion of sin, by a miraculous
conception; the Holy Ghost over-shadowing the Virgin Mary, and separating
humane Nature in the first conception of Christ, from original sin that
descends down upon it, in all who come into the World by natural Generation.

Secondly,

By the Hypostatical union of the humane Nature to the Divine, in the second
Person of the Trinity, which eternally secures our humane Nature in Christ,
from all possibility of the least defection, puts it quite out of the power of
the Devil any way to corrupt or vitiate it, by all his subtle contrivances and
temptations by which he did vainly attempt such a thing; perfect Nature in the
first Adam (I don't say could not, but) did not preserve it self. Adam did not
fall for want of light and knowledge; no, he could never have fallen unless he
would; 'twas from the mutability of his Will that he fell, but the humane
Nature of Christ, the second Adam, being under the Government of a Divine
immutable Will, can never fall; hence it is, that our standing in Christ, is
secured to eternity.

Thirdly,

By the pouring out of the Spirit without measure upon him; that so strengthened
all his humane Faculties, that 'twas impossible the Devil should ever impose
upon him; such an overflowing fullness of the Spirit, leaves no room for any
carnal impression to be made upon him; his humane Nature received such a Divine
tincture from the essence of the Godhead, so powerfully influencing his
Manhood, that the Devil found nothing in him to work upon; he met with God in
every thought, in every word, in every Action of Christ, in every motion and
affection of his heart; and finding one so much greater than himself,
continually aiding and strengthening the Man Christ, he despairs of Victory, and
leaves him.

The Devil was not mistaken in the Nature of the Man Christ, which was really
humane; but he was mistaken in the Person of Christ, which was solely Divine;
such a Person, in such a Nature, he never thought to meet with; that which
posed the Devil, was the Person of Christ; he might know him to be God, and yet
apply himself to him as Man, that he is sure he was; he could not conceive how
humane Nature could subsist, but in a humane Person, and as such a Person, he
set upon him; but found it hard to kick against the pricks; such a mighty Man
he never grapled with before; he was so shamefully foiled in this encounter,
that he never durst look Christ in the face afterward; he came behind him
often like a Coward in disguise, and by his wicked Instruments annoyed him all
he could, but durst not send him a second Challenge, to fight it out with him
once more hand to hand; no, he had enough of that already; now he foams and
rages at a distance, throws his fiery darts here and there, strikes at the
Image of Christ in the Saints, where ever he sees it, but dares not come up to
his Person face to face; the great thing that the Devil dreads, in the second
coming of Christ; he knows that is the time of his torment.

Therefore having such a high priest, who is set on the right hand of the
throne of the majesty in the heavens, Heb. 8. 1. who is not ashamed to call us
Brethren, let us not be ashamed to call God Father. Christ will bear us out in
it; the Children of God as such are not known to the World, 1 John 3. 1. Have
hard usage from the World, 2 Cor. 48. 9, 10. Yet God knows them, is kind to
them, and tender of them, Isa. 54. 11. Behold now we are the sons of God, 1
John 3. 2. Now under all our infirmities and afflictions, God is with us in the
fire, and in the water; he has a great love to, and very high esteem of all his
Children; since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, and
I have loved thee, Isa. 43. 2, 3, 4. He will by no means take away his loving
kindness utterly from them, Psalm. 89 32, 33. Deuteronomy. 8. 5. We are apt to think
otherwise. Isa. 49. 14. Zion said, the Lord has forsaken me, my Lord has
forgotten me. We shall be apt to entertain hard thoughts of God upon all
occasions, if we live not under the daily sense of our Adoption; in which we
see the Fatherly love of God flowing down so strongly toward us, through
Christ; that we cannot but greatly rejoice in it.

THE NECESSITY OF Preaching CHRIST.
I COR. I. 23, 24. But we preach Christ crucified, etc.
THE design of the Apostle here, is to vindicate the Doctrine of our Salvation
by Christ, from all those Aspersions that were cast upon it both by the Jews
and Gentiles; the Gospel then was as much cried down by some, as it was cried
up by others. The Apostle tells you who were for it, and who were against it;
he divides all men into two ranks, viz. The Called, and Uncalled; the
Converted, and Unconverted; he tells you, that they who were effectually Called
and Converted, were for the Gospel, but the Uncalled and Unconverted, were
against it; and as it was then, so it is now. Hence note,

Obs. That all unregenerate Persons, whether Jews or Gentiles, will have a
fling at the Gospel; it is contrary to them, and they are as contrary to it;
they cannot reach the Mystery of it, and therefore do slight and contemn it; but
all who are effectually called, and savingly enlightened, do highly prize it;
they see much of the Power and Wisdom of God, in that excellent contrivance of
Man's Salvation by Christ; they desire to know nothing but Christ, and him
Crucified. Let us have a care we do not darken the evidence of our Conversion,
by a Spirit of opposition to the Gospel, in the main fundamental points of it.

I shall do little else in this Exercise, but open the terms of the text,
observing some things by the way. But we preach Christ crucified, etc. He shows
the matter and manner of his Preaching in this Chapter, what he Preached, and
how.

1. The matter of his Preaching, or what he Preached, viz. The Gospel, v. 17.
The Cross, v. 18. Or Christ Crucified, v. 23.

2. The manner of his Preaching, v. 17. Not with Wisdom of words. So 1 Cor. 2.
4. vide.

Unto the Jews a stumbling block; they were offended at Christ's low, mean,
humble state in the flesh; they did not look for any great matter from such a
one; Can any good thing come out of Nazareth* When the Apostles Preached the
Mystery of Christ's Incarnation, how he was Born of a Virgin, what Miracles he
did, how he was Crucified, how he rose from the Dead, ascended up to Heaven,
and should come again to judge the World, the Jews were offended, did not
believe these things to be true, Romans 9. 33. Luke 2. 34. They saw nothing but
weakness in the Doctrine of the Gospel, therefore the Jews require a Sign, v.
32. Signs and Wonders were to evidence the power of those who wrought them.
Moses confirmed his Doctrine by many Signs and Wonders; so must you, say the
Jews to Christ and his Apostles, if you would have us to follow you. The Jews
were used to Signs and Wonders from the beginning, as appears in the Old
Testament; so they were instructed in the Wilderness, Deuteronomy. 32. 10. and
convinced of the power of God, Psalm. 77. 14. ad finem. This made them so
desirous of Signs under the New Testament: Hence that Complaint, Psalm. 74. 9.
We see not our Signs, we would fain see Signs, as Mat. 12. 38. Master, we would
see a Sign from thee. So Mat. 16. 1. Luke 11. 16. Joh. 2. 18. Zacharias erred
in this, Luke 1. 18. The Jews are sharply reproved by Christ for this, Mat. 16.
4. The Signs and Miracles by which the Gospel was already confirmed, should
have satisfied them; the Jews did not require a Sign, as Abraham, Gideon, and
Hezekiah did, for the strengthening of their Faith; but out of Curiosity, and
contempt of Christ and the Gospel, resolving never to be satisfied, they must
have Sign after Sign, they thought it absurd to trust in a Crucified Christ, to
expect life from death; that he who did not save himself, should be able to
save them: Unbelief, you see wants not its seeming reasons to fortify it self
against the Gospel. Besides, they saw that such a Profession of Faith in
Christ, exposed them to Sufferings, which made them the more against it, Gal.
5. 11.

And unto the Greeks foolishness. By Greeks here we understand all Gentiles,
who received all their Wisdom and Learning from the Greeks; or Jews and
Gentiles are contradistinguished thus: One had the Written Law, the other had
not, Romans 2. 12, 13, 14.

The Greeks would have the Mysteries of the Gospel made out by Reason, else
they reject them as foolishness; they count that foolishness, which transcends
their Wisdom; they thought the Gospel an idle Fancy, a very simple absurd
Doctrine; they required Philosophical reasons, which as men, they might
comprehend; proving Christ in a Logical way to be, what the Scripture says he
is. Moses magna dicit, sed nihil probat, say Galen, Pliny, and Julian. They
wanted Logical Demonstrations of Scripture Mysteries, from the true natural
Causes of them, which cannot be; for then they would not be Mysteries, if Flesh
and Blood could understand them, Mat. 16. 17.

Thus you see both Jew and Gentile, all sorts of men unregenerate, have
something to say against the Gospel, they set themselves studiously to object
against it: All Unbelievers stand it out with God; hence (...) is rendered both
Disobedient, and Unbelieving, as Acts 26. 19. Acts 14. 2. (...). and Ephesians. 2. 2.
(...).

But unto them that are called, etc. v. 24. i. e. Effectually called to
believe; it is by our actual believing, that we answer to an effectual Call, by
which we are called to the Obedience of Faith; and when we believe, we obey
God's Call, Romans 1. 5, 6. Such are called according to his purpose, Romans 8. 28.
You see the different opinion the Converted and Unconverted have of Christ;
highly to prize Christ is a sign of true Conversion; and to under-value him, to
speak slightly of him, or his Doctrine, is a sign of the contrary; Paul here
opposes the Judgment of those who are Called, whether Jews or Greeks, to the
Judgment of the Uncalled concerning Christ: Would you know what Christ is,
consult with Believers; they know him; he is precious to them; never regard
what the blind World says of him, but hear what the Saints say, what Believers
say who know him best. I confess it is a shame, and a reproach not to be
excused, that Christians do not magnify Christ more. I remember I have read of
one, who professed he knew not which was the greater wonder, that Believers
love Christ no more, or that Unbelievers do hate him so much; no doubt the
former is far the greater wonder, that they who know him so well, should love
him no better, than that they who know him not at all, should hate him so much;
their blindness and ignorance runs them into that gross mistake; but what can
cold lukewarm Believers plead, who have so much light, and yet so little love!

Both Jews and Greeks, i. e. All sorts of Believers, of what Country,
Condition, or outward state soever, they all agree in this, viz. That Christ is
the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God; it is common to all Saints, and proper
to them only as Saints and Believers, to have a high opinion of Christ.

Christ the power of God. God showed his power in Creating the World by Christ
as God, John 1. 3. and by Redeeming it by Christ as God-man.

Christ in his Divine Nature is the God of Power, a mighty one, Isa. 9. 6. A
rock, Isa. 32. 2. A Lion, for his strength, Rev. 5. 5. So Angels are called
Principalities and Powers, for their strength, Col. 1. 16. As they are called
Intelligences for their Wisdom, which is very great, a Sam. 14. 17. To discern
good and bad. They are continually prying into the Doctrine of the Gospel 1
Pet. 1. 12. Exodus 37. 9. They look to the Mercy-seat, a Type of Christ.

We are now showing how Christ the Mediator is the power of God, by whom great
things have been done.

1. God by Christ satisfies his Justice, and yet saves the Sinner, he
reconciles Justice and Mercy together, Psalm. 85. 10, 11. They both act to the
height toward a Sinner: The Salvation of a Sinner is the greatest instance of
Justice and Mercy as ever was; what is purchased, is also freely given; he is
our righteousness, giving us right to eternal Life, as well as our ransom,
saving us from eternal Death, Jer. 23. 6. 1 Cor. 1. 30. He is made unto us
Righteousness as well as Redemption, 2 Cor. 5. 21.

2. Christ bore the wrath of God, without sinking or fainting under it, Isa.
53. 4.

3. Christ has overcome the devil, death, and the world, Heb 2. 14. Hos. 13.
14. John 16. 33. He is stronger than the strong man, Luke 11. 21. 22.

4. Christ preserves his Church against all the most potent Enemies thereof,
Mat. 16. 18.

5. Christ maintains a little Grace in his Children, amidst many strong
corruptions and lusts; Grace is but a little grain, and yet it lives and
thrives, it is an abiding seed, 1 John 3. 5. under continual influences from
Christ.

In the next place, I shall speak of power and wisdom; not as they relate to
the Person of Christ, but to his Doctrine, or to Christ Preached; we Preach
Christ Crucified: The Doctrine of Christ Crucified is a powerful Doctrine, able
to save those who believe it, Romans 1. 16. 1 Cor. 1. 18. Heb. 4. 12. This
Doctrine is called the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, 1 Cor. 2. 7. it is the
revelation of a Mystery, Romans 16. 25. There are many Mysteries in this
Doctrine, The manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3. 10. This way of saving sinners
by Christ Crucified, is called The wisdom of God; because he does thereby
manifest his deep and unsearchable wisdom; they who are spiritually
enlightened, do count it so, they desire to know nothing else, 1 Cor. 2. 2. The
Gospel contains the Glorious method of a Sinner's Salvation by Christ, who is
therefore called the Wisdom of God, Prove. 8. 12. In whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2. 3. The Doctrine of the Gospel
appears to be a powerful Doctrine, because it is so effectually a means for the
Conversion of sinners, who are so much against Conversion; certainly there is
Wisdom and Power in it, else it could never bring such a strange thing as that
to pass.

Obj. The learned men of the world* see not any Wisdom in the Gospel; the
Greeks seek after Wisdom, but cannot find it there, and therefore they count it
foolishness. They seek after Wisdom; And why not? Must we not speak reason in
the Pulpit?

Answ. We speak wisdom among them that are perfect, 1 Cor. 2. 6. i. e. That
have a true solid judgment of Spiritual things. But if you mean by reason, that
which falls under our understanding, and is comprehensible by us as men; I say,
we speak Mysteries above reason, which we propound only to your Faith; the
Doctrine of the Gospel is worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy 1. 15. Let not man
oppose his wit to the Wisdom of God. We speak Wisdom, but not the Wisdom of
this world, but the Wisdom of God, in a Mystery, hidden Wisdom: When our frail
reason can do nothing in discerning this wisdom, the Spirit comes and
demonstrates the Truth to us with power, by an invincible internal persuasion,
1 Cor. 2. 5. Men may think by their Wit, Learning and prompt Parts, to run down
the Doctrine of the Gospel: But let them remember, that Christ is the Power and
Wisdom of God. They who do not rely only upon Christ Crucisied for
Justification unto life, do despise the Gospel, and count it foolishness; they
are ashamed of the Gospel, Romans 1. 16. Paul was not; let us follow his Example,
and labor to promote it, praying daily for the propagation of the Doctrine of
the Gospel, That the way of God may be known upon earth, and his saving health
among all nations, Psalm 67. 2. Because the foolishness of God is wiser then
men, etc. V. 25. The Power and Wisdom of God, by anironical concession, are
here called, weakness and foolishness, i. e. admit this according to the
opinion of the unconverted Jews and Gentiles; Let them say what they will; what
they call foolishness is wiser then men, i. e. then the wisdom of men; and what
they call weakness, is stronger than men, i. e. then the strength of men. Any
thing that belongs to God, is to be preferred before that which is but Humane;
the least things of God, do infinitely exceed the greatest of men's: When we
consider that the Name of God is upon such a thing, it should create a
reverence in us toward it; whatever is in God, is God. The way that God has
made choice of, and the means he has pitched upon, must needs be the best; for
all things are great or little, weak or strong, as God makes them to be, by
putting more or less of his fullness into them.

Obj. They who count the Gospel foolishness, are the wise men of the world,
therefore sure they are in the right.

Answ. Not many wife are called, and when they are called, they see the folly
of their carnal wisdom, by which they judged amiss of Christ before.

The APPLICATION.
LET us now consider seriously, how we stand affected toward Christ and the
Gospel; whether we do receive the truth in the love of it, viz. Whether we do
indeed believe in the Lord Jesus, and are persuaded that nothing is required as
a Meritorious procuring cause of our Justification in the sight of God; but
Christ and his Righteousness received and applied by Faith: And that all our
Evangelical righteousness, so much contended for, is only to prove the truth
and sincerity of our Faith, from whence it springs; (though I think there will
not be any formal proving of such matters then): Yet if this be all, I would
not contend about it, but leave others to their own methods, schemes and
expressions, heartily wishing all may understand them, as clearly and
Orthodoxly as they profess to understand themselves. Though I must tell you,
those words will prove the most wholesome, and grow most in use among serious
Professors, which they best understand, and which do most easily and plainly
convey the Spiritual sense of the Gospel into their minds. If any should say
our own Evangelical Righteousness, has some causal influence into our
Justification (though I count it a very Unorthodox expression) yet I would in
Charity think, that the reason why they say so, is out of a zeal to promote
practical Holiness, by the strongest motive imaginable: And if they who say
Holiness of life is only an effect of Justification; making it as indispensably
necessary, in all who are justified, as the former. Is not Holiness secured and
promoted this way, as well as the other way, and without any suspicion of
derogating from Christ? Pray then, Why should we contend so much for the former
way, laying stumbling blocks before others, who cannot get over them, when all
our ends are better answered the other way? Let none say we are Solifidians who
hold this: We know very well, that good works are required in the New Covenant,
as well as Faith: but all that is required in the New Covenant, is not required
unto Justification. Besides, Justifying-Faith does many things by its
influence, which must not be put into the justifying act of Faith, for then we
shall confound Justification and Sanctification, and make them as the Papists
do, all one.

As the Apostle has stated the point of Justification, we are not only to
consider how we are justified in God's sight, but in the first place to
consider how God himself is Just in his Justifying-act, Romans 3. 26. If God be
just in that act, and can Pardon sin without any impeachment of his Justice,
then sure there is sufficient ground and reason for it; God can do no unjust
thing; and if God in justifying Believers be just, i. e. if there be merit
enough in the Blood of Christ to bear him out in this act, then certainly we
may safely rely upon this precious Blood for our Justification: That which
Justifies God in his act of Justifying a Believing sinner, must needs be a
sufficient cause of our Justification; else it could not justify God in his
Justifying act, there would be no equitable reason for it, besides, to say that
the Blood of Christ is the only procuring Meritorious cause of our
Justification, i. e. of the acceptance of out Persons and Performances: This is
truth, but not all the truth belonging to Justification. For my next Query is,
What is it that gives us an interest in the Blood of Christ, in the
satisfaction he has made for sin? Here nothing must come in as instrumentally
necessary to our receiving and applying Christ* but Faith only; Repentance and
new Obedience are the effects of the Faith; either they are the effects of
Faith, or of Unbelief* None will say the latter, then they must necessarily
flow from the real interest that Faith gives us in Christ; if not, I don't see
how we can attain to them. At this rate, they must be done in our own strength,
not in Christ's, for being conditions, as some say, of our interest in Christ,
they must be performed, before we can have an interest in him.

It is an excellent Note of Calvin, in his Commentaries upon Romans 8. 30. Whom
he did predestinate, them he called: and whom he called, them he justified,
etc. Scimus enim, ubi de salute agitur, libenter homines a seipsis incipere,
fingereque sibi praeparationes quibus Dei gratiam antevertant, i. e. It Is
natural for men in the business of Salvation, to begin at themselves, fancying
some preparatory Works, by which they may prevent the Grace of God, and do
something for themselves in their own strength, that may fit and qualify them
for an interest in Christ. In this rotten Principle, do many begin their
Religion, which corrupts their minds ever after, from the simplicity that is in
Christ, and puts them upon seeking Justification; Not by Faith, but as it were
by the works of the law, Romans 9. 32. Supposing something in themselves to be
the first cause of their acceptance with God. I wish all who call themselves
Calvinists, would read that place, and seriously consider the sense of that
Holy man in this main point of our Religion. Some through mistake, have counted
Luther an Antinomian, but none call Calvin so. It Is good to be zealous in
promoting practical Holiness and Gospel-Obedience; but let us be sure it be
Gospel-Obedience, flowing from a principle of Faith in Christ Jesus: For to
Preach up Holiness, from any other Principle then that of Faith in our Lord
Jesus Christ, is not to Preach like Ministers of the New Testament.

Faith only is required in Justification, rather than to it, I so phrase it,
because they are simultaneus; Repentance and New Obedience do follow Faith; let
them be kept in their due place, and be allowed no causal concurrence unto our
Justification, and we shall avoid all confusion; else there will be a
fundamental difference between us; while some hold that Faith only gives us an
interest in Christ, others, that Repentance and New Obedience do equally with
Faith, give us an interest in Christ.

Some carry it, as if the end of Christ's coming into the world, was only to
set up a New Covenant of Works upon milder and easier terms of sincere
imperfect Obedience, which all men are to be exhorted to, and urged to the
performance of, upon a supposed general sufficient Grace, purchased by Christ,
enabling all men (who do not wilfully refuse) to come up to the terms of this
New Covenant. This Opinion has many ill consequences in it, viz. Of a General
Redemption taking away Original sin, restoring man to a freedom of will in
doing good; setting him upon his own legs again to stand or fall, as he comes
up to, or falls short of the terms of this New conditional Covenant: So that
all is resolved into man's own power and will, all being now put into an equal
capacity of Salvation by Christ; and having said this, they have done with
Christ, have all in their own hands, may set up for themselves, and love to be
put upon duty as persons sufficiently furnished for it already: But
notwithstanding this specious new scheme of rational Divinity (as some call
it), I must in faithfulness to God, to my own Conscience, and the Souls of them
that hear me, tell you plainly, That they who trust in a general Redemption,
will fall short of their particular Salvation, upon the Principles that those
Universalists go upon.

We are all by nature dead in trespasses and sins, reprobate to every good Word
and Work, and shall so remain, till we do by a particular personal act of our
own Faith, come to Christ for life, that we may be quickened by his Spirit, and
made alive unto Righteousness. We must have life before we can live, or put
forth any vital operations; we must be first quickened by Christ, the great
quickening Spirit, before we can live to God, or do any thing that is
Spiritually good. It Is Faith that unites us to Christ, which is the gift of God
to some; for all men have not Faith; and till this Faith comes by hearing the
Gospel, we are dead in sin. Christ came not only as a Lawgiver, to prescribe
rules of living to dead sinners, but to create in us a principle of life, to
give us strength to perform what he requires of us, as new Creatures created in
Christ Jesus unto good Works: All our own endeavors after Holiness, while we
are out of Christ, will prove ineffectual; we must be first engrafted into the
true Olive Tree, deriving all our fruitfulness from the root that bears us,
else we shall quickly wither away and come to nothing. No acceptable service
ever was, or can be done by man, till Faith brings us to Christ, without whom
we can do nothing; when Faith comes, life comes, strength comes, a Spiritual
ability to do the will of God in some measure. And as this Faith increases by
the daily exercise of it, so we increase in Spiritual strength, perfecting
Holiness more and more in the fear of God. Let no man think to be made perfect
in the flesh, Christ came not to reform corrupt Nature, but to destroy it, and
utterly to extirpate it; the old man will never learn to lead a new life; die
he must, and be Crucified; he must be put off, that we may put on the New man,
which after God, is created in Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24.
This is the only way to true Holiness here, and to Eternal Happiness hereafter:
To as many as the Lord our God shall effectually call to this Faith, to them,
and to them only, does the promise of Salvation by Christ belong; It Is the
command of Christ, that all should Believe on him; they that do, and they only
shall be saved by him, with all manner of Salvation, not only from Hell, but
from the power of sin, that they may live no longer therein; Paul knew no other
way of Salvation according to his Gospel; they that do, must invent another
Gospel to support their New Divinity.

I see no ground in Scripture for those preparatory Works that some urge, as
antecedently necessary to our first Faith in Christ, because Faith brings all
along with it, viz. Conviction of Sin, Humiliation, Repentance, etc. Faith
never comes to Christ, but it shows us a reason why, and that reason is drawn
from our lost undone Condition by Nature, which true Faith is never without
some knowledge and sense of, and therefore sends us to Christ for help: By
Nature, all men are equally indisposed to Faith, counting the Gospel,
foolishness; when their time of their Coversion comes, whether prepared, or
unprepared, whatever their present practice or frame is, whether legally
Convinced, or Unconvinced, sitting in gross darkness and unbelief; the Power of
God by the Preaching of the Gospel, works a convincing, saving Faith in all
those, who are ordained unto life: God calls one, and not another, of his mere
good Pleasure, being not moved thereunto, by any thing in us, that may render
one man more capable of Conversion, than another; sometimes they who (in an eye
of reason) seem furthest off from the Kingdom of God, and are most unlikely to
be Converted; them does God call by his Grace, even Publicans and Harlots.
Before the stricter sort of formal Professors, who notwithstanding their
Preparations, and seeming fitness for Conversion, are left behind in their
Natural State; when others who sought not after God, are found of him, and
brought into a state of Grace; God does this, to show that the Battle is not to
the strong, nor the Race to the swift, not of him that runeth, but of God that
shows mercy to whom he will, Romans 9. 15, 16. Many may outrun others in their
acquired Qualifications, and yet not so run, as to obtain the prize, 1 Cor. 9.
24. We are like to make but a sorry Market of it, unless we come without Money;
many have been too rich, too well qualified in their own opinion for Christ;
but none were ever too poor and wretched for Christ, whose hearts were stirred
up by the Preaching of the Word, to come unto him, and cast themselves upon
him: There is nothing required by way of Preparation, as antecedently necessary
to our first Faith in Christ, but hearing the Word; let the Hearer be who he
will, never so unprepared, if he belong to God, the Word will one time or
other, make it is own way to the heart of that man, and work Faith in him; there
is no resisting the Wisdom of the Holy Ghost.

The Doctrine of Faith, and the Doctrine of Good Works, are both very sound
Christian Doctrines; agreeing very well in their proper place and order: As no
man can enter into a state of Grace by good Works, so no man can conclude
himself to be in a state of Grace, without Good works; it is one thing to prove
that I am already in a state of Grace, another thing to show how a Sinner may
now enter into a state of Grace, and what is first to be done, in order
thereunto. It Is not said, he that works, but he that believes, shall be
saved; and it is the work of God, that we believe; and none but God can bring
over the heart of a Sinner to trust in Christ; and under such a Faith, it is
impossible not to lead a holy life.

We had need be clear and distinct in our Conceptions of these things, since
our Salvation depends upon our right understanding this Point. I say, we had
need consider, what we mean, and how we express our selves, lest instead of
trusting in Christ, we trust in our selves, and drop the Gospel, whilst we seem
to maintain it.

If any scoff at this Doctrine, and count it foolishness; I will only say, that
the foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the weakness of God, is stronger
than men.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed and Sold by THOMAS COCKERIL, at the Three Legs ever-against the
Stocks-Market.
HIstorical Collections. The Third Part; in Two Volumes. Never Printed before
Containing the Principal Matters which happened from the Meeting of the
Parliament, November the 3 d. 1640. To the End of the Year 1644. Wherein is a
particular account of the Rise and Progress of the Civil War to that Period:
Impartially Related. Setting forth only Matter of Fact in Order of Time,
without Observation or Reflection. With Alphabetical Tables. By John Rushworth,
late of Lincoln's Inn, Esquire Fitted for the Press in his Lifetime.

The Works of the late Learned Divine, Stephen Charnock, B. D. In 2 Vol. Fol.

A Demonstration of the First Principles of the Protestant Applications of the
Apocalipse. Together with the Consent of the Ancients, concerning the Fourth
Beast in the 7 th of Daniel, and the Beast in the Revelations; By Drue
Cressener, D D.

The Morning Exercises at Cripplegate, of several Cases of Conscience,
practically resolved by sundry Ministers, in 4 to.

A Supplement to the Morning Exercise at Cripplegate, or several more Cases of
Conscience, practically resolved by sundry Ministers, in 4 to.

Speculum Theologia in Christo: or a view of some Divine, Truths, which are
either practically exemplified in Jesus Christ, set forth in the Gospel, or may
be reasonably deduced from thence; by Edward Polhil of Burwash in Sussex,
Esquire, in 4 to.

(...): A Succinct and Seasonable Discourse of the Occasions, Causes, Nature,
Rise, Growth and Remedies of Mental Errors: Written some Months since; and now
made public, both for the healing and prevention of the Sins and Calamities
which have broken in this way upon the Churches of Christ, to the great scandal
of Religion, hardening of the Wicked, and obstruction of Reformation. Whereunto
are subjoyned by way of Appendix.

I. Vindiciarum Vindex: Being a Succinct, but full Answer to Mr. Philip Cary's
Weak Impertinent Exceptions to my Vindiciae Legis and Faderis.

II. A Synopsis of Ancient and Modern Antinomian-Errors, with Scriptural
Arguments and Reasons against them.

III. A Sermon composed for the preventing and healing of Rents and Divisions
of the Church; by John Flavel, Preacher of the Gospel at Dartmouth in Devon:
With an Epistle of several Divines, relating to Dr. Crisp's Works.

A Discourse concerning Liturgys, by the late Learned Divine, Mr. David
Clarkson.

Precious Faith considered in its nature, working and growth; by Edward Polhil,
Esquire etc. in 4 to.

Geography Rectified: or a description of the World, in all its Kingdoms,
Provinces, Cities, Towns, Seas, Rivers, Bays, Capes, Forts; their Ancient and
Present Names, Inhabitants, Situations, Histories, Customs, Governments, etc.
And also their Commodities, Coyns, Weights and Measures, compared with those of
London. Illustrated with above sixty new Maps. The whole work performed
according to the accurate Discoveries of Modern Authors. The Third Edition
Enlarged, in 4 to.

The right use of an Estate, briefly directed and urged in a Sermon lately
Preached to a Person of Quality, upon his coming to Age; by Tho. Dorrington, 4
to.

Christus in Cord: Or the Mystical Union between Christ and Believers
considered, in its Resemblances, Bonds, Seals, Privileges and Marks, by Edward
Polhil, Esquire in Octavo.

De Causa Dei: Or a Vindication of the Common Doctrine of the Protestant
Divines, concerning Predetermination, ( i. e.) the Interest of God, as the
first Cause, in all actions as such, of all Rational Creatures) from the
invidious consequences with which it is burdened; by Mr. John How, in a late
Letter of Postcript of God's Prescience, in Octavo.

A Dialogue between a Romish Priest, and an English Protestant; wherein the
Principal Points and Arguments of both Religions are truly proposed, and fully
examined; by Matthew Pool, Author of Synopsis Criticorum, in Twelves.

God, a Christians Choice, completed by particular Covenanting with God;
wherein the Lawfulness and Expediency is cleared, by Samuel Whiney in 12 s.

Mr. West's Legacy, being a Discourse of the Perfest Man, in 12 s.

The Sin and Folly of Drunkenness considered 1. What it is: 2. What is vicious
and sinful in Drinking (whether Men will call it Drunkenness, or no). 3. What
may be said against it; by Edward Buckler of Bradford in Somersetshire, the
Author of God all in all, 12 s.

Familiaria Colloquia Opera Christophori Helvici, D etc. Professoris Gieffensis
olim, ex Erasmo Roterodamo, Ludovico Vive, etc. Schottenio Hasso selecta.
Editio Decima tertia ad pristina exemplaria denuo recognita, in 12 s.

The School of Manners, or Rules for Childrens Behavior; by the Author of the
English Exercise for Schoolboys, etc.

Gradus ad Parnassum, sive novus Synonymorum, Epithetorum, and Phrasium
Poeticarum Thesaurus, Elegantias, flavissas Poeticas, Parnassum Poeticum,
Thesaurum Virgilii, Smetium, Januam Musarum, Aliosque id genus libros ad poesin
necessarios Complectens.

A Discourse of Secret Prayer; first Preached, and now Published, at the
request of those that heard it, By Samuel Slater, Minister of the Gospel in 12
s.

The Spiritual Remembrancer: or a brief Discourse of those who attend upon
Preaching the Gospel, by Samuel Wells, in 8 vo.

Poesecos Graecae Medulla; in qua continenter Insigniores Poetarum Graecorum
gnomae, versus Proverbiales, and Epigrammata quaedam selecta, and in memoriae
subsidium Alphabetice disposita; cum versione Latina in usum Scholarum; per
Johannem Langston, in 8vo.

Poems in two Parts: First, An Interoculatory Discourse concerning the
Creation, Fall, and Recovery of Man. Secondly, A Dialogue between Faith and a
Doubting Soul, by Samuel Slater, in 8 vo.

A Renunciation of several Popish Doctrines, because contrary to the Doctrine
of Faith of the Church of England, by R. R. B. D. in 8 vo.

A Practical Grammar: Or the easiest and shortest way to initiate young
Children in the Latin Tongue, by the help whereof, a Child of seven years old
may learn more of the Grounds of that Language in three Months, than is
ordinarily learnt in a years space by those of a greater age in a common
Grammar School. Published for the use of those that love not to be tedious. To
which are added Tables of Mr. Walker's Particles; by the assistance whereof,
young Scholars may be the better enabled to peruse that excellent and most
useful Treatise, by J. Philomath. Master of a Free School, in 8 vo.

A Treatise of Divine Providence: First, In General. Secondly, In Particular,
as relating to the Church of God in the World, by that Eminent Minister of
Christ, Mr. Stephen Charnock, B. D. sometimes Fellow of New-College in Oxon, in
8 vo.

The Evidence of things not seen: Or diverse Spiritual and Philosophical
Discourses concerning the state of Holy men after Death, by that Eminently
Learned Divine, Moses Amiraldus, translated out of the French Tongue, by a
Minister of the Church of England, in 8 vo.

Mr. John Flavel's Remains: Being two Sermons composed by that Reverend and
Learned Divine. The former Preached at Dartmouth in Devon, on the day of the
happy Coronation of Their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary. The latter
intended to be Preached at Taunton in Somerset, at the Meeting of the United
Ministers of several Counties; to be held there September 2d. 1691. By John
Flavel, late Preacher of the Gospel at Dartmouth in Devon. With a brief account
of the Life and Death of the Reverend Author.

A Discourse of the Reasonableness of Personal Reformation, and the necessity
of Conversion, etc. By John Flavel.

A Discourse of Regeneration, Faith and Repentance. Preached at the Merchants
Lecture in Broad-street, by Thomas Cole, Minister of the Gospel, London.

FINIS.

