LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE Asserted and Vindicated.

By a Learned Country-Gentleman.

Humbly offered to the Consideration of the LORDS and COMMONS in this present
PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St.
Paul's-Church-Yard. 1689.

THE PREFACE.
Courteous Reader,
MY Purpose in the following Treatise is not to satisfy all the Questions which
may be put, as, What if any one should preach in the Pulpit ( in terminis) that
Jesus is not the Christ, or against the Resurrection of the Dead, or any other
Article of our Faith, which all who call themselves Christians do acknowledge?
or affront the Minister at the Communion, and pull the Cloth and Vtensils off
the Table? such things by the place and manner of doing them, may be reduced to
moral Impiety, and punished as Crimes against natural Light. But my Business is
to assert a just Liberty in such controversial things of Religion, as they who
have forsaken the Church of Rome do differ in, and have, as they suppose, some
able and learned, sober and Godly Men of their Persuasion, supposing that in
the mean time they behave themselves peaceably, and live without any Civil
Injury: for my own part I am so sar from thinking that any of these Sects ought
to be punished, that I believe they might communicate each with other,
notwithstanding any Opinion in Religion which they hold, (if that be all) had
they but Charity enough to bear with, and forbear one the other: for he who
believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, 1 John 5. 1. and is built
upon the Rock, Matthew. 16. 16, 18. Although I will not deny but I should prefer
a purer Church before a less pure, and perhaps one that is not of my own
Persuasion before one that is, for other causes; but I cannot communicate with
any Church, which will require me to subscribe to, or by my Practice and
Gesture, to justify any the least thing which I judge to be unlawful, or else I
shall not communicate; for Example, The Baptism of Infants is not so material a
thing either way, as that Men should break Communion upon it; for there is for
it neither Precept nor Precedent: On the other side it is not forbidden, but if
he who thinks it unlawful to baptize his Infant, shall not communicate except
he does, he cannot lawfully communicate; and the Schism is on their part, who
will force it as a necessary Condition of Communion, for they cause Divisions,
Romans 16. 17. I think there are in our Church others who deserve Toleration less
than any Dissenters whom I know, as notorious Prophaners of the Lords Day,
Haunters of Alehouses at unseasonable times of the Night, or when according to
their Consciences, they should be at Church: and other debauched Persons whom
we hear daily in the Streets cursing and swearing, bidding God to damn
themselves and others. Now that they are grossly mistaken, who tolerate such
Persons as these that offend against their own Consciences, and yet severely
punish Dissenters in matters of mere Religion, will be sufficiently proved in
the following Discourse.

G. C.

Of Liberty of Conscience.
QVI been distinguit, been docet; it will therefore be requisite to premise a
word or two for distinction's sake.

And First, We need not trouble our selves to define Conscience logically, but
taking that word grossly, and as it is vulgarly understood, we mean by
Conscience any Man's Persuasion of what he is to believe and practice, which
may be of two sorts;

1. Either first, of such things as may be known by the common Light of Nature:
Or,

2. Such things as are known only by Divine Revelation. And these are of two
sorts:

1 st. Such as concern the revealed Will of God under the Old Testament, which
is called the Law: Or,

2 dly. The Revealed Will of God under the New Testament, which is called the
Gospel. And,

Secondly, By Liberty we mean an Immunity from Punishment, and that is either,

1. Divine, viz. the just Judgments of God.

2. Humane, and those are twofolde;

(1.) Civil and Temporal Punishments, by loss of Life, Limb, or Estate, etc.

(2.) Ecclesiastical, by the Admonitions and spiritual Censures of the Church.
These things being premised, the Truth concerning Liberty of Conscience will be
cleared by the proof of the following Propositions.

I. First then, if the Conscience be erroneous by any great Fault against the
common Light of Nature, we cannot assert any Freedom to it: For God will punish
it, and the King will punish it, and so should the Church too by her spiritual
Censures: and the greater the Error is as to the clearness of the Light,
against which it is committed, or as to the Mischief and Malignity of it, the
more punishable it is; for else we should introduce a Liberty for professed
Atheism, Blasphemy, Murder, Adultery, Theft, etc. for Catilines and
Ravilliacks, etc. for Punishments in such cases may be proper and more likely
to amend the Delinquent, and save the Community from such Mischiefs as such
Errors tend to bring upon it. Yet do not good Magistrates write all their Laws
in Blood, but decree Capital Punishments only against Capital Offenders, and
especially for such Offenses as are against the second Table, which Magistrates
are better able to judge of, and strike at the Root and Being of Civil
Societies, as Murder, Paricide, etc. I mentioned gross Errors in the
Proposition, for as Aquinas says in his Sums, All Faults against natural
Light belong not to the Cognizance of the Civil Magistrate, who is a public
Person, but are to be corrected by Oeconomicks and Ethics; so for the most
part the Faults of Children are to be corrected by their Parents.

Besides, some gross Errors may be excepted as they may be circumstantiated or
overruled by Education and Religion, therefore the Christians did not
persecute the Heathens as the Heathens persecuted them, although the Idolatries
of the Heathens were contrary to common Light, nor do the Protestants persecute
the Papists as the Papists persecute the Protestants, though some of the Errors
of the Papists, as Transubstantiation, are grossly against the common Light of
Reason and Sense it self; but more tolerable as Errors merely, than paying
Peter Pence to the Pope is in Civil Government.

II. Prop. Such Jews as lived in the Times of the Old Testament were not to
have the Liberty of their Consciences as to humane Punishments, though a great
part of that Law consisted only of the revealed Will of God; for God's Will was
likewise revealed that they should be punished. Now these Ordinances unto which
the Jews were bound, were mostly concerning the outward Man, and very clearly
revealed: Besides, the Jews had their Vrim and Thummim, their Priests and
Prophets, whom God according to his Promise, Deuteronomy. 18. 18. raised up from time
to time for their Direction, whom the People were bound to hear under penalty
of Excision; neither were the Strangers that dwelt in the Land, and were but
Proselytes of the Gate, to be tolerated in Blasphemy, Lev. 24. 16. in Idolatry,
Deuteronomy. 17. 4, 5. in Sabbath-breaking, Exodus 31. 15. so Numb. 15. 35. it was
revealed that he who gathered Sticks upon the Sabbath Day should be put to
death; though for other things God did not bind the Gentiles to the like
Obedience to the Law with the natural Jews: Neither did the Jews require it of
them, nor do they now; from whence it appears that is a great Paralogism to
argue from what was done by Kings and Princes under the Old Testament, to the
like under the New, as if a Man should now argue from Elijah's slaying Baal's
Prophets, 1. Kings 18. 20. or from that in Zech. 13. 3. Thou shall not live,
for thou speak Lies in the Name of the Lord, as some have argued from Asa's
Covenant to put Men to Death, 2 Chronicles. 15. 13. what a hideous deal of Mischief
might an ignorant Zealot be persuaded to do from ill managing the Old
Testament; as I have heard some in the Pulpit to argue from thence for the
observation of the Lord's Day, as would prove the Saturday Sabbath, and not
lawful now under the Gospel to kindle a Fire upon Saturday.

But some will say, that the Equity of that Law obliges still, giving to Kings
and Princes power to reform the House of God.

I answer, Be it so; but what that Equity is must not be taken as every Man
shall imagine of his own Head, but from the Law of Nature, and from the
positive Law of Christ: Placeus says that those Kings were all typical; and it
is probable that in the spiritual sense, not Kings, but prevalent Parties in
the Christian Church are to be understood, so Hierom ad Paulinum, Haereticorum
bella adversus Ecclesiam declarantur. A Magistrate may do much for the
propagation of the Christian Religion against such Errors as are merely against
the Gospel, by protection of the Orthodox, by his Munificence, Encouragement,
Direction, Example, and against moral Errors and Impieties by due coercion; for
where these are carefully looked to, no fear but the Gospel will thrive well:
but that the Magistrate is to punish Errors and Heresies merely concerning the
Faith of Christ, where there is not sufficient mixture of moral Impiety, proved
by sufficient Witnesses, that this I say is any part of the moral Equity of
that Law, I deny, affirmanti incumbit probatio.

III. My third Conclusion is this, Errors and Heresies against the Faith of
Christ, only and merely as such, are not to be punished with civil Punishments
by the Christian Magistrate. I shall prove this Proposition by these Arguments
following.

I. First I reason ab Authoritate divina negative, which no Logician can
reasonably deny in this case. I reason therefore thus, Our Savior Christ has
neither by himself, nor by his Apostles, commanded any such thing; therefore no
such thing ought to be done. To meddle with the Estates, Liberties, Limbs or
Lives of Men is no indifferent thing, but a matter of great consequence, and
therefore our Savior Christ, who was the great Lawgiver of the Christian
Church, and was faithful to him that appointed him, who spared not to threaten
and denounce the Judgments of God, and knew very well that the Christians would
one day gain the Imperial Crown; I say, he would not only have commanded all
Christian Kings and Princes in a thing so important, (as Mahomet bids his
Disciples to fight for the Faith, with promise of great Reward) but have given
them plain and particular Rules to guide them, that they should not draw the
Ruin and Blood of Men upon them where it is so dangerous to mistake and exceed.
Our Savior foresaw the grand and general Apostasy of the Christians from the
Purity of the Faith, and was therefore very unlikely to put such Knives into
the hands of Apostates, or Men imperfectly reformed: We see what Work they have
made for their abominable Heresies, thinking to do God Service in burning Men
alive; which is enough to satisfy any Man of a true Christian Spirit of the
Antichristianism of the Opinion which I oppose, since all Errors are not
equal, neither ought the Punishment: What Rule has our Savior left, or can
any Man imagine by which to proportion the Punishments which are of many sorts
and degrees; indeed the Pope, as if he would supply what Christ left defective,
makes his own Definitions and Decrees, the Rule whereby to judge of Heresy; and
his own arbitrary Will, the Standard of its Punishment; being in that directly
Antichrist, i. e. contrary to Christ.

Now if Christ has not commanded, they are surely too officious that will
offer violence to any Man for his sake, and may expect their Reward from him
that set them on work, non amo nimium diligentes.

But to prosecute this Argument further, it is clear that there is nothing to
be alleged from the Current of the Gospel, so that the Adversary is
constrained to glean up a Scrap or two; I think there was hardly ever any thing
alleged from our Savior's own Words, except some few have trifled from those
Words, Luke 14. 23. Compel them to come in; which are part of a Parable, and
according to the scope of it to be understood of importunate preaching; for
surely the Apostles were not Masters of the Temporal Sword* the word is in the
Greek (...), which is best understood of urgent Invitation, and most proper to
bring such as are there spoken of to his Supper. Paul uses the same word of
Persuasion and Example, Gal. 2. 14. Why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as
do the Jews? So likewise little is to be alleged from the Apostle's words, but
from some general Expressions, and by consequence, as thus, it may be objected,
That though the Apostles could not punish so, as being no Magistrates, yet
Peter denounced God's Judgments against Ananias and Sapphira, Acts 5.

1. I answer, first, That is without the state of the Question; for that was in
a criminal Cause, of Lying, Dissembling, Purloining, Sacriledg, Vow-breaking;
and I will not deny but Heretics may be punished for the like Faults, when
they can be proved against them, as they use to be against other Men: Ananias
and Sapphira might be Orthodox enough as to any point of Doctrine.

2. What Peter did by extraordinary Inspiration and miraculous Infliction upon
some particular Persons, is no Rule for uninspired Men to go by in ordinary
cases Magistrates being sometimes young Men and Women, and of small Learning in
the Scriptures, and which is worse, often wicked Men and Heretics themselves
by ill Education, Interest and Practice.

This may answer to that which was said of them who were delivered over to
Satan, and that Paul says of the Judaizers, I would they were cut off that
trouble you, Gal. 5. 1, 2. viz. as Dr. Duport expounded at St. Mary's in
Cambridg, that God would cut them off, which yet may be meant of
Excommunication, as in ver. 10. And the Apostle who was no Magistrate, and ver.
11. suffered Perfecution, was very unlikely to persuade the Galatian
Magistrates to persecute. It Is also certain that those Judaizers were Men full
of moral Impiety, and Persecutors of others.

The same Answer may serve for them who were blamed, Rev. 2. 20. for suffering
Jezabel the false Prophetess to seduce; but to what? viz. to Fornication and
Idolatry. Moreover, what Toleration is here blamed, is easily proved by this,
that the Christians were then no Magistrates, but were by sound Doctrine to
have stopped the Mouths, and convinced Gainsayers by the Sword of the Spirit,
which is the Word of God; and if the seven Churches be prophetical, as has of
late been very well proved, we know who they were that had the temporal Sword,
and how well they managed it in the Thyatirian Interval; they were certainly
damnable Heretics, and such as deserved to be punished for their innumerable
Crimes, if they had had their due.

As an Appendix to this Argument, let it be considered, that the Apostles and
Primitive Christians being accounted Heretics by the generality of Men, were
very unlikely to have put such a Sword into the hands of their Enemies, as to
teach them that Heretics were to be punished by the Civil Magistrate.

And our Savior Christ laying the Foundation of his Church in his own Blood,
and the Blood of his Apostles and Disciples, was very unlikely to prescribe a
way for the shedding the Blood of his Enemies by a judicial Trial in humane
Courts, for that wherein their Consciences were thoroughly satisfied as true and
good, and therefore must needs think themselves honest and innocent, and the
Christians unjust and inhumane, notwithstanding all their preaching up of
Meekness, and the Example of the most meek and merciful Jesus, who endured such
Contradiction of Sinners against himself; what had that been but to disgrace
the Glory of Christian Martyrdom, as when our Savior bids Peter to put up
his Sword, Matthew. 26. 52. he gives this reason, For they that take the Sword,
shall perish by the Sword; intimating nothing of real worth and excellency in
the Sufferings of Christians by the Sword, if themselves should take the Sword
as a matter but of quid pro quo. He wanted not more effectual Soldiers to have
made use of against his Persecutors, viz. whole Legions of Angels.

II. I argue from Divine Authority affirmatively, Our Savior does condemn
Persecution in mere Causes of Religion in that Parable of the Tares, Matthew. 13.
and so Chrysostom, Austin, and others both ancient and modern have expounded
the place. The Reapers are to be Angels, not Men; those Words, Let them grow
together, cannot forbid Excommunication, and therefore, Let them grow together,
must forbid temporal Excision; and if that should be taken only to signify
eventually, that there would be Tares to the End of the World, yet there is a
good Argument in the Caution, ver. 29. Lest while ye gather the Tares, ye root
up the Wheat also; for though Men may think that they can distinguish clearly
enough betwixt. Tares and Wheat in some cases of Heresy, yet as wise Men as
they have found themselves deceived, Acts 26. 9. And let Men give way to
judicial Proceedings in this kind, and the Ignorance and Rashness of Men will
pluck up ten Orthodox Professors for one Heretic, I am sure they have hither
to plucked up many more* Now in Civil Causes there is not the like danger,
wherein the Criminals own Consciences accuse them for the most part, and they
cannot deny the justness of the Law, but deny their own particular Fact; which
made St. Cyprian say to Demetrian, Proconsul of Africa, Torqueri enim debui si
negarem -- nunc autem cum sponte confitear, etc. quid tormenta admoves
confitenti?

2. Consider also how our Savior rebuked his Disciples when they called for
Fire from Heaven upon the Samaritans who received him not when his Face was as
though he would go to Jerusalme, Luke 9. 55. Ye know not what manner of Spirit
ye are of; i. e. how unsuitable these killing Spirits or Dispositions of yours
are to the Times of the Gospel, or that the Times of the Gospel require you to
be of other Dispositions; see Dr. Hammond in loc. It is manifest that our
Savior opposes not fault to fault, as if the Samaritans fault was less
deserving Punishment; nor does it appear that he opposes the private Passions
of his Disciples, as Desire of Revenge, or the like, to the public Spirit of
Elias, but he opposes the Severity of legal Times to the eminent and
extraordinary Grace of the Times of the Gospel, as appears by the words
following, ver. 56. For the Son of Man is not come to destroy Men's Lives, but
to save them; as if he had said, Ye must not be so prodigal of Men's Lives, now
the Savior of the World is come to lay down his own Life for the ransom of
other Men's.

3. Some also argue from those words of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10. 4. For the
Weapons of our Warfare are not carnal; where tho the word carnal does signify
weak, as the word Flesh is often used (...)gnify Weakness, yet the words do
imply that the Christians Weapons are spiritual and of another sort distinct
from those which worldly Soldiers use.

III. My next Argument is drawn a Regula Fidei, from the Rule of Faith, viz.
the Scriptures; it is not proper to say that the Scripture is Judex
Controversiarum, the Judge of Controversies, but it is Norma Fidei, the Rule of
Faith; this I take here for granted. Now this Rule is too hard to be understood
to be introduced into humane Courts for civil coaction by temporal Punishments;
for unto the right determination of many Questions in Religion the Scriptures
must be well translated, various Copies must be consulted, Figures of Speech
must be known, and the Idiom or Properiety of Language with many obsolete
Customs, the Analogy of Religion, the Context and Coherence of Words, comparing
Scripture with Scripture, are to be minded, besides many Prejudices from
diversity of Interpretations, Authority, Education and Company, etc. must be
considered; all which make it so easy for a Man to be mistaken, as to exempt
his Error from the cognizance and animad version of humane Courts by civil
coercion; they who are the great Persecutors, when they please, and it serves
their turns, can make large declamations of the Obscurity of Scripture, even to
little better than Blasphemy and Atheism, saying it is but a Leaden Rule, a
Nose of Wax, and yet see not what a horrible folly and detestable Impiety it is
to quote Scripture to an fro, whether a Man shall be burnt? as many poor,
honest, innocent Men, yea even Women, were in Queen Mary's Days, after the
Doctors had disputed of Hoc est corpus meum: and whether Hoc was an individuum
vagum or no? If these things had been only ridiculous, they might have been
born, but tending to so much Mischief and Murder, they were intolerable.

Here it is like some will say, That although some things are dark and hard to
be understood, yet other things are plain and easy, namely Fundamentals.

I answer, Many things may be evident enough to make Men obnoxious to God's
Judgment, which is always according to Truth, and yet not make Men liable to
Men's Judgment, who sometimes are very apt to swim with the Stream of the Times,
and call every little thing Heresy, and who cannot as yet agree what is
fundamental, and how many Fundamentals there be. Some say that in the Christian
Religion there is only this one, viz. That Jesus is the Christ, and such other
things are only necessary, without which this Article cannot be retained; but
what they are is hard to say.

Neither can we tell how far God will forbear Men's Mistakes about things which
in themselves are damning: so was Circumcision, if retained as necessary, even
to the Jews; for Paul says, Gal. 5. 2, 3. If ye be circumcised, etc. for I
testify again to every one that is circumcised, that he is a Debtor to the
whole Law; yet was this Error tolerated a great while, and some judicious Men
think that Paul never intended this Sentence to be so comprehensive, as to
anathematize universally all, even weak Jews, who might mistake out of
Tenderness and Infirmity. Add to this, That many understanding and charitable
Men have thought and do think, that negative unbelief even of that capital
Article, does not certainly exclude all the Heathens from Salvation, tho ('it is
true) they are therefore out of the way, viz. the Roadway, the authorized way
of Salvation, to say nothing that ( Acts 19.) there were some called Disciples,
who did not know whether there was any holy Spirit or no; which take it in what
sense you will, was requisite to Christian Baptism; and we do see as much
difficulty, and there has been as much Controversy in Articles thought
fundamental, as in others remoter from the Foundation; and it is certain by 2
Pet. 3. 16. that some Scriptures are hard to be understood, which yet are of
that moment, that Men's Salvation are concerned in the right understanding of
them.

IV. My fourth Argument shall be taken a natura Fidei, from the Nature of
Faith, and the things which are revealed, which are spiritual and supernatural;
Faith is in an eminent manner the Gift of God; and the natural Man receives
not spiritual things, for they are spiritually discerned, and so far
transcending Men's ordinary Reason, that they cannot be the matter of humane
Courts: for example, take the great Article of the Resurrection of Christ: Our
Savior's own Apostles, who had conversed with him, and seen all his Miracles,
and although he had told them before of his Resurrection, yet were very slow to
believe them who had seen him after he was risen; and Thomas would not believe
except he might see, therefore these things cannot be the matter of the
Magistrates Courts: for who will say that a Man is to be punished for denying
that which is so very hard to be believed by by a mere animal Man, and much
less ought a Man to be punished for believing it may be, but part of a great
spiritual Truth; I instance in this Article, because it being one of the
principal Articles of our Religion, my Argument holds a fortiori, in matters of
lesser Consequence, the Truth and Virtue whereof for the most part depend upon
this Article and the belief thereof; which it self depended in great part upon
the Testimony of faithful Men, and still must be supposed harder in that
respect for them who never saw nor spoke with the Apostles themselves, who did
so testify, therefore our Savior says, Blessed are they who have not seen,
and have believed.

Thus Baptism and the Lord's Supper can signify nothing except the Resurrection
of Christ be supposed true and certain, and if a Man be supposed to deny the
Resurrection of Christ, he may be supposed to deny the use of Baptism and the
Lord's Supper, as wholly signifying nothing; and of no use or benefit to him;
and much less are Men to inflict temporal Punishment upon him, if he misbelieve
only as to some circumstances of them: Shall misbelief of Christ's Presence in
the Lord's Supper be punished, and unbelief of Christ's Presence in Heaven not
punishable? As one said wittily, that the Italians would burn a Man for not
believing Christ's real and Bodily Presence in the Sacrament, whenas themselves
did not believe him to be in Heaven. It is much which Evagrius says, lib. 1.
c. 15. That Synesius was desired by the Christians to accept of the Priestly
Function, although he did not admit the Article of the Resurrection, nor would
be brought to believe the same out of charitable hopes for the future, that he
would discern the Truth after a while. Much more are Men to be suffered to
enjoy their Lives and Liberties, how indisposed soever they may seem to believe
out of charitable hopes; when as they may be very skilful to till the Ground,
or exercise some mechanical Trade, and so be very useful to the Commonwealth,
and fit to live in it. Education indeed tends much to make the Truth easy to be
believed; but it will do as much for an Error, and so far as a Man believes
merely for that cause, his Faith must needs be of little avail, however I will
not deny but that with other circumstances, as divulging before such Persons,
in such time, in such place, with such Impudence and Effrontery, may turn a
Man's Fault into a Crime, and make it reducible to an Error against natural
Light; possibly a Man may be justly punished for preaching the Truth, as
suppose to rail against Transubstantiation in a Sermon before the King of
Spain, or call Mahomet a damnable Impostor to the Grand Signiour's face.

Though the Jews are not within the design of this Treatise, yet I think this
Argument proves that they are to have their Liberty if they live peaceably,
without impudently affronting the Christians.

As an additional Supplement to this Argument, let me add these two things.

1. First, That Faith is the Substance of Things hoped for, the Evidence of
Things not seen; and God would have our Faith to contain in it these
difficulties, without which it would lose its real worth and value, the Object
whereof would not be as now it is, a Touchstone and Trial of true Grace and
Godliness before God who searches the Heart and Reins, and whose Judgment is
according to Truth, and to whom it is therefore fit the Judgment of Matters of
Faith should be remitted.

2. The other is, That no Man has been thought fit to be punished, for not
performing the supernatural and perfect Precepts of Christ in the most perfect
way of Charity, in giving and forgiving, which yet is more necessary to
Salvation than Faith is; and therefore why should any Man be punished for not
believing, or believing amiss, concerning the supernatural Doctrines of Christ.
As for that which some say of forcing the external not internal Acts of Faith,
I shall speak to that afterward.

V. My fifth Argument is drawn ab axiomate; viz. from that received Axiom,
Dominium non fundatur in Gratia, that Dominion is not founded in Grace; which I
know to be chie^ly understood of Sovereignty: But there is a gradual Parity of
the Reason upon which that Axiom is founded, which may be reciprocally applied
to Subjects: for Pagans though they cannon be lawful Dispensers of the
Mysteries of Christ, nor Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven, yet they may be lawful
Kings, and lawful Subjects, lawful Husbands, lawful Masters, and lawful
Possessors of their Lives, Liberties and Estates. Christian Religion does not
allow Servants to deny Obedience to their Masters according to the Flesh,
except they may be made free; nor Masters to turn away their Servants contrary
to their Covenants; nor ought Christian Magistrates to deny Protection to whom
it is due, though they be not Christians, and perhaps was due before either of
them was Christian. What might a good moral Heathen say, if your Christianity
stirs you up either to tyrannize or to rebel sor causes of mere Religion:
Malo Venusinam quam te Cornelia Matter;
-- Si cum magnis Virtutibus affers,
Grande Supercilium. --


Indeed Errors in Religion may have such intolerable Injury mixed with them, as
may excuse if not free both the one and the other, but I speak of merely
Religious Errors.

It is true wicked Men want the Blessing of God to them upon what they possess;
they have not a sanctified use of things, but they have a lawful Title, and
it is as much Theft to steal from them as the best Godly Men in the World. And
therefore Heresy can be no sufficient ground to dispossess any Man of what he
has, for that can only denominate a Man not Godly or Gracious, or to be no
excellent Person; but Men are not to be punished by the Civil Sword, because
they are not excellent Persons. It is generally thought that Sovereign
Authority, be it as absolute as it will, is founded at least in implicit pact
or trust, which was necessary in all Nations before Christianity came into the
World, and when it did, it was not in the Christian Power to betrust that, nor
is it likely that the Community would trust their temporal Rights with the
contingent Opinions of their Governors, and therefore that bloody persecuting
Opinion must needs it self be an Heresy with moral Impiety mixed with it, and
intolerable, as being at Inlet to Thievery and Tyranny on the one Hand, and
Rebellion on the other.

And we see by Experience that the principal Hyperaspists and Defenders of the
bloody Tenent, I mean the Papists, do not stick to rebel against, to depose and
murder Heretical Princes merely for Religion, as they are encouraged to do by
the Decrees of their Popes and Councils, by which whether Kings or Subjects
they are bound the one to persecute, the other to rebel in case of Heresy,
though no Civil Injury be offered, whatsoever Oaths they may have taken.

Here it may be objected, that what Persecutors do now is according to Law.

I answer, no humane Authority can justly make such Acts of Sequestration or
Confiscation, or impose Fines, much less such unreasonable Fines, as they are
wont to do for things merely Religious; what is that else but to establish
Iniquity by a Law? then they say they do not force Men to embrace the Faith,
but punish Relapsers. I answer, that Men are forced into Opinions by Law and
Fear of Punishment, or are surprised by Education and Custom before they are
able or fit to judge, or are deceived by the plausible reasons of abler Men,
without hearing what other Men could say to the contrary. And then if any Man
was to be free from Punishment before he turned, he ought to be as free to
return, except some sufficient cause in Nature or Reason could be shown to
dissolve his Right in the one case more than in the other; to relapse indeed
for any by, or worldly ends, is a great Sin in the sight of God, and fit for
him to judge of, whose Judgment is according to Truth. There are a great many
things both in Doctrine and Discipline for which some are very zealous, but the
greatest part do so little understand or apply their minds to understand, that
they may turn and return ten times over, for what they know, and yet the
Zealots will engage them to be of their sides; as for the great Persecutors
their talk of Relapse is but a Pretense, for they persecute all of all sorts.

Again it may be objected, that now the Ministers Ecclesiastical Preferments
may be endangered by Heretical Doctrine, which Preferments are settled by Law.

I answer, that that Settlement cannot be good so far as it abridgeth any Man,
or deprives him of that Right which is vested in him by the Law of Nature,
which is for the Parishioner to have his Freedom in matters of Religion, as
well as the Rector of the Parish, who turns a just Reward into Oppression and
Bribery, when he uses it to another Man's Wrong, what ever Declamations or
Defamations such Men may make for their own ends. I answer further, that the
Ministers spiritual Title is founded in Grace, viz. for a certain spiritual
use, which when the Office proves needless or vain, the Title falls of it self,
because the Foundation is sunk away from it. Now though in the present
Objection we suppose the Office well founded and terminated in a good use, yet
in those Offices which are not essential to Civil Government, in order to the
temporal Weal of the Public, but founded in Grace for spiritual ends, the
Usefulness whereof is best judged by such as are spiritual, the Right is
likewise best judged by them also, and to be reputed but as doubtful and
disputable as to others, and consequently it cannot be an Offense so great, and
of the same Nature to deny that Right, to oppose it or undermine it as it is to
oppose Civil Natural Right, which is all the World over unquestionable,
especially when that Religious Right is but remotely endangered, and not
actually opposed by Sedition or other Endeavors without the Command of the
Sovereign Authority, paying all Dues in the mean time according to Law. If a
Petition was preferred to the Parliament that our Prelates who in this Latitude
of Diocese are indeed Archbishops, might be made without any new Ordination,
by Patent or Commission only; and before they enter upon their Offices, be
bound to declare that they do not hold their Jurisdiction in that Latitude to
be jure divino, viz. as distinct from Presbyters or such parochial Bishops as
watch over the Souls of the People; and that the Means of the Church might be
brought into a common stock, and more equally distributed, as they in their
Wisdom shall think fit: the Petitioner in the mean time paying their Duties
till such Determination of the Sovereign Authority. I see not how they could be
justly blamed for such a Petition.

VI. My sixth Argument shall be drawn ab absurdo, from the absurd Consequences
which follow that detestable Opinion of forcing Men's Consciences, to say
nothing that the National Churches are yet very imperfectly reformed, and
therefore very unlikely to manage the Sword well, some of them punishing one
thing and some another, and some of them in the same Church in diverse times
punishing diversely, as several parties accidentally get into Authority.

The Sword will cut only the Honest and Conscientious who dare not dissemble;
the rest for the most part will temporize and run home again, when they see
their Opportunity, and revenge themselves upon them who were so rough with
them, and shamed them so much; and this temporizing and turning, merely for
lucres sake and to save themselves, makes Religion very ridiculous, and weakens
the Repute and Authority of the Professors, as but Atheists and Men of no real
Religion; as truly the Atheists have the Advantage of all Men in this Regard,
for to be sure their Consciences are not so scrupulous, but they can subscribe
to every thing, they can dissemble and comply for their own ends with all Times
and Parties, yea and under the Disguise of Religion help to make all true
Religion odious, by persecuting Men as Heretics and Schismatics, not because
they have no Religion, but because they have (as they think) too much, and are
religious in good earnest, and then these Men applaud themselves, and think
they have got a great Argument for their Atheism, when they see other Men make
Religion but a Dance after the Pipe of the Times.

Then to force Men to the Service of God makes often but Hyprocites, whose
presence there should be voluntary, or else it is neither acceptable to God,
who requires the Heart; nor to good Men, who must needs desire the greatest
Unanimity and Freedom of Consent that may be, in their joint Addresses to the
Throne of Grace, which in worldly things is otherwise; for if a Man does not
pay his Debts with a good Will, it matters not, so the Creditor be paid, he is
satisfied.

Again, except the Persecutions be more severe than good Natures can endure to
execute, and the Sectaries but few, they either make Sects or make the
Sectaries obstinate, who otherwise might come to the public Assemblies, were
they not exasperated by the Violence of them, who would bring them thither and
their Rigioties, when they come there. Now how should they worship God
together, who are Persecutors one of another, who bite and devour each other,
and for that Reason can hardly think one another to be Christians, as indeed a
Persecutor will have much ado to defend himself to be a true Christian, as
great a Zealot as he may take himself to be for the Christian Religion.
Likewise Persecution gives way to the Rabble to deride and insult over Men much
better than themselves, and to other Men to get some part of a base Livelihood
by informing, or to vent their private Malice and Revenge upon old Grudges, and
the Heats and Inflammations of Disputation, that so they may have their Wills
over them whom they could not overcome in Controversy also to the Cruelty of
covetous Men, who are too timorous of losing their own Preferments, or lurch
a(...) other Men's.

Then it often makes Magistrates but the Ministers Executioners, and that in
things which they neither understand, nor have reason to understand from their
Age, Sex, manner of Education, meanness of Parts, Passion, Employment, etc. and
which they who study all their Lives (and as far as we know without prejudice)
cannot agree about, and in things which Magistrates have no reason to trust
other Men, as they may in Physic, and Civil Causes. In what a horrid manner
was Q. Mary abused by the Priests? And I have read in the Life of King Edward
the 6 th, that when Archbishop Cranmer urged him to sign the Warrant for the
burning Joan Butcher an Arian, the King vehemently refused, but at last yielded
through much importunity, saying it was Cranmer's doing, and he should answer
for it, which the Historian says brought him under Censure, he being afterward
burnt himself for an Heretic. If they make themselves suspicious who choose to
sell their Wares in a dark Shop, what do they do who sell them by the Light of
such Fires? The Lord Falkland and Dr. Hammond excuse the Protestants from much
of this barbarous Cruelty, confessing a little to be too much. To this Head I
may reduce an Argument ab incommodo; as that it makes the Magistrates to make
themselves parties in the Factions of their Subjects, and many times run
needless Hazards from the ill humors of their People; and makes the several
Parties to bandie against one another, and against the Government; which will
make work enough for the wisest Man in the World, to know how to govern such
unruly People, who are always striving to get the Civil Sword into their Hands,
not for common Defense, but to oppress their Antagonists, often quarrelling
about Questions, in themselves perhaps not very material to Religion, which
have been long disputed, and may be disputed sine fine, as the Controversies
about Free Will, Election and Reprobation have been. Nor is it for the
Magistrates Interest, that Men who might live usefully in the Commonwealth
should be kept in Jails for disciplinary notions in Religion, which are
uncertain, or manifestly false, supposing Men to be Churches, or pure Churches,
which are not so: like making Shoes for all Men by one Last, and the same
Prayers to serve for Men of contrary Tempers, and in contrary Circumstances, as
we have lately experienced.

It destroys trading, when Men cannot go freely about their business, and lay
out their Stocks with security; nor dare Neighbors freely lend Moneys to
others, for fear they should be beggared by Religious Fines.

Lastly, It could not reasonably be expected that Reformation from such a huge
mass of Errors and Confusion should be perfected simul and semel; but though
all Reformers cannot agree in their Judgments about some weighty things in
Doctrine and Discipline, yet except they make account all to be destroyed by
the common Enemy, it is most certainly the Interest of all who have departed
from the Roman Pontific, to join all together as one Man, (so far should they
be from persecuting one the other) and say, I am as thou art, my Horses as thy
Horses, etc. Which I say, not to propagate the true Faith by Force, but by such
honest and lawful means as God has wonderfully put into their Hands, to defend
themselves against their bloody and implacable Adversaries, who have lately
appeared in their Colors, and gone about to destroy all the Northern Heretics
with a Vengeance, as it is phrased by a late learned Author of a Treatise
concerning Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws, who has displayed the Cruelty of
their Decrees and Canons, and clearly proved that there is no trusting to their
Words, Promises or Oaths.

VII. My Seventh and last Argument shall be taken ab Authoritate Ecclesiae
affirmative, from the Authority of Christians both ancient and modern; the
Ancient Christians generally denied the Persecution of Heretics, for at least
well nigh the first 400 years: for which there are well-known Testimonies cited
out of Tertullian, Lactantius, etc. that Faith is to be persuaded, not forced.
St. Austin is very express contra Cresconium Gra(...)maticum, l. 3. c. 50.
Nullis bonis in Catholica hoc placet, (...) usque ad mortem in quenquam licet
haereticum saeviatur; It pleases no good Men in the Catholic Church, that
Heretics should be put to Death. This Testimony shows not his private
Opinion, but the Judgment of the Univers^l Church; which no Man knew better
than he, and strongly proves that the Papists are neither the Catholic Church,
nor good Men, for he says, Nullis bonis hoc placet, and in Catholica; but it
is no wonder for Apostates to alledg the whole Primitive Church as for them,
when it is all against them. This place is quoted by Bishop Jewel, Apol. c. 32.
Div. 1. p. 431. who cites also Chrysostom Homil. 19. in Matthew. Number Ovis
persequitur Lupum Christianus haereticum? etc. Does the Sheep persecute the
Wolf? No, but the Wolf does persecute the Sheep: Does the Christian persecute
the Heretic? No, but the Heretic does persecute the Christian. And again,
Whomsoever you see rej^icing in the Blood of Persecution, he is the Wolf, and
wishes that God would kill the Heretic with spiritual Darts, and the twoedged
Sword of the Spirit.

Eusebius relates in Vita Constantini, that Constantine decreed, that they
which erred should have equal fruition of Peace and Quiet with the Faithful;
and that we may know Constantine was in earnest, he puts it into his Prayer, l.
2. c. 55. It is true he banished Arius, but he banished likewise Athanasius,
and neither of them for their Opinions, (which he accounted trifling: and Bp.
Jewel says, in Apol. c. 3. Div. 2. p. 524. was thought to incline in his own
Opinion, rather to Arius) but for other Causes and Immoralities, and
unchristian Contentions, not to be reconciled by the Emperors Tears, Letters,
and the Mediation of his Legate Hosius Bishop of Corduba. This is certain, that
Athanasians, Arians, and Novatians, were all suffered in the same Cities, to
have Churches and Bishops of their own, whose Successions are delivered in
Ecclesiastical History, till Pope Celestine banished the Novatians out of Rome,
deprived them of their Churches, and constrained Rusticula their Bishop to
raise private Conventicles, anno 425. Socrates Schol. l. 7. c. 11. For now he
and Cyril of Alexandria were grown ^reat, having gone beyond the Bounds of
Priesthood, and gotten the temporal Sword.

He that would see more of Antiquity may consult Mr. Daille of the right use of
the Fathers, and read the Comments of the Fathers upon the Parable of the
Tares, etc. -- Ye know not what Spirit ye are of. I shall add some modern
Testimonies of our own Countrymen.

The Apology of the Church of England, set out by Authority, p. 431. mihi. As
for us we run not to the Fire, as these Men's Guise is, but we run to the
Scriptures; neither do we reason with the Sword, but with the Word of God.
Indeed the Writ de Haeretico comburendo, is now out of Doors, and I hope his
Fellow de Excommunicato capiendo, will follow him ere long: See Dr. Hammond in
his Defense of my Lord Falkland, who writes very fully to this Purpose, but
especially see his last Words about Paedobaptism in his six Queries.

His Words are -- And God forbid we that desire to reduce Dissenters -- should
ever think of damning, killing, or persecuting any that dissent in this or any
other particular. -- And I think it but Duty to pray against that treacherous
Prosperity, which should be able to infuse any greater Degree of Unkindness or
Roughness into the Minds of Men, whether Sons or Fathers of the Church, than
what I here avow to be strict Duty in every Christian. Dr. Taylour, since
Bishop of Down and Conner, wrote a whole Book de Liberate Prophetandi; the
like has been done by several Conformists in their Pleas for Nonconformists.
Mr. Hudson who rode with King Charles the first in Disguise, in his Treatise of
Monarchy, etc. dedicated to the King, asserts Liberty of Conscience boldly, and
perhaps too boldly; but that it was Mr. Hudson, who carried his Life in his
Hand, and at last lost it in the King's Cause.

See what Dr. More in his Appendix to his Antidote against Idolatry, says --
p. 55. of Nadab and Abihu's offering strange Fire before the Lord, Lev. 10. 1.
where he compares it with Luke 9. 54. John 16. 2. and says -- Whether
Protestants or Papists that kill one the other for conscientious Difference in
Religion, as thinking (...) to make an Oblation of Divine Worship to God
thereby, do turn the living God of the Christians (who is Love it self) into
the foulest Idols of the Heathens, who used to be worshipped with the bloody
sacrificing of Men.

This holds good in Proportion against Religious Robbery, by Fines, or
Confiscation of Goods. Mr. Day on Isa. 1. 21. says, that to take away Men's
Livelihood is there called Murder.

Lastly, To name no more, Dr. Burnet has written very learnedly and solidly in
Defense of Liberty of Conscience, in his Preface to the History of the
persecuting Emperors.

Now from what has been said, appears the Vanity of those Men who are content
to give a private Liberty, but no^ to) assemble; which signifies little to many
Men, who think themselves bound to do so from Heb. 10. 25. and not to live like
Atheists.

Others will give Men Liberty, if they will hold their Tongues, and distinguish
betwixt the outward Exercise or Profession of Faith, and the internal Acts of
Faith, which they say are not to be forced; thank them for nothing, did the
primitive Church only tolerate the Thoughts of Heretics; and who can think any
sober Man should dispute of Men's private Thoughts, which as such no Man can
know, or if they be declared and punished, yet cannot a Man certainly say that
they are forced, viz. that his Thoughts are altered, for that may be
dissembled, but all Men have hitherto supposed that Men's Consciences are
capable of being forced, that is punished, taking the inward and outward Acts
together as they ought in this Question: some I see would give such a Liberty
as Antichrist never denied.

Now it may be fit to answer the principal Arguments, which are produced by the
Adversaries:

1. From Romans 13. where Magistrates are said to be a Terror to Evildoers, etc.

I answer, that Text only authorizeth the Magistrate to punish civil Injuries
and moral Evils. He may punish Treason, Rebellion, Murder, etc. Such Heresies
are Works of the Flesh, and against the Light of Nature, such as the Apostle
mentions, Gal. 5. 20. and what they are may be known by their Companions there
enumerated; that the Apostle does not speak of Errors in the Faith, is plain,
because the Magistrates were then Heathens, and he seems to speak of the
present Powers, when he says ( The Powers that be, etc.) though it is true he
speaks of them rather according to what they ought to be, than according to
what they were, as may appear by those Words, He is the Minister of God to thee
for good, which some in alleging this Scripture do little consider; Does the
Apostle make Caligul^, and Nero, and Commodus, with the whole Tribe of Usurpers
Judges of the Faith of Christians? and therefore Paul could appeal to Caesar
only, whether there was any Immorality or Crime in him deserving Death, as the
Jews caluminated.

2. It is objected, that the King is bound to serve God, not only as a Man, but
as a King.

I answer, It is true, and that may be done without Violation of Conscience in
matters of Faith: He may punish Immoralities, Impieties, and such as sin
against their Profession and Conscience; He may serve God by Protection of his
Church, by his Treasure, Munificence, praising and encouraging good Christians,
without bribing Men by extravagant Rewards, and Wages, which bear no Proportion
to the Work, by good Persuasions and Advice, by his Wisdom in calling Councils,
and presiding in them; and by defending even honest and well-meaning Heretics
from such cruel Men, as put honest Men into Bear-Skins, and then set the Dogs
on them, and care not what censure they pass upon Dissenters: so lavish are
they in calling every little thing Heresy, Blasphemous and Damnable; of which
Chrysostom complains as too rife in his time, in his Comment on Matthew; but
these Men learnt that Language of Antichrist the old Anathematizer.

Some urge the Power of the Kings of Israel, in 2. Chron. 15. 13. That
whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel, should be put to Death. But
this is already answered in Propos. 2 d.

3. Some say, if Liberty of Conscience be granted, there will be Confusion.

I answer, This is a Selfish Objection, for I dare say the Objector would not
use it, if he stood in need of Liberty himself. Unity and Uniformity are good
things, but we must come honestly by them.

I am for Unity, but as Bp. Latimer said, Unity in Verity, and not in Popery.
There is Unity enough amonst Mahumetans in Spain and Muscovie, and yet in
Reality there is the greatest Babylonical Confusion, (that is) mixture of Truth
and Error, which is the Mother of the greatest Dissension; for whenever the
Force shall be taken off, (as is fit) there must of necessity be the greatest
Differences; when Men shall use their own Judgments from proper Arguments, and
not as now one Judge for them all, right or wrong at Adventures: then it will
appear that he who pretends himself most infallible, and other Men to be
Heretics, is most deceived and the greatest D^ceiver and Heretic of all, as
it is usual with them to be; who most of all cry out upon other Men as Heretics
and S^hismaticks, to be indeed such themselves; and if Heretics were to be
punished, they deserve most of all to be punished.

4. Some say, If Liberty of Conscience be granted, that then there can be no
National Church.

I answer, Was there then no National Church for the first three hundred Years
before the Emperor received the Faith?

It is true, there can be none with Coercion to it, nor should there be any
such.

What National Church can there be where the major part of the Nation are
Infidels or Papists? What Parochial Church, where the major part of the Parish
are such?

What National Churches can there be, where the Sovereign Authorities are
Infidel or Popish? must they appoint the Bishops? They are (sure) like to be
good ones!

Constantine would set up no such National Church, but suffered Arians,
Novatians, and others to have their Churches and Bishops. And Mr. Heylin says
there were Bishops in Poland, but no Man forced by the Civil Sword, and Bishops
could uphold, when the Emperors were against them: but now we think as good no
Bishop, if all that live within such a part of the Country be not forced to be
subject to him, as being in his Diocese.

That Church may be said to be National, when the most are of it, and
especially when the Sovereign Authority does countenance it, does establish and
encourage it by favorable Laws and Privileges.

The best way to make a National Church, was by such healing Principles as
these.

For Magistrates to command as little as may be, and People to obey as much as
they can; besides the Test against Popery, to require as little to be subscibed
to as is possible, and that in the words of the Scripture.

To let the Parishes where the Fault is committed to examine and censure gross
and notoriously scandalous Offenders; and order the needful Rites and
Ceremonies of their own Church, without chargeable Traveling, tedious Suits,
crafty Pleadings, Quirks of Law, and Pettefoggeries, Fees and Charges,
Extortion and Barretry in foreign Courts, who indeed have nothing to do in
such matters not easily to impose a Pastor upon a Parish without their Consent;
The Ancients thought it fit the Crime should be judged where it was committed.
nor a President Bishop upon his Clergy without their Consent.

And he with the chief of them to ordain Ministers, and see that they who
receive the Magistrates Maintenance, do the Work accordingly. I am so far from
being against Bishops, that where there is one, I would there were many more.

5. Others say, Why do they then deny the Papists Liberty?

(1.) Because the Papists are gross Idolaters against Natural Light.

(2.) Because the Papists will give no Liberty. And if they do promise it and
swear it, by virtue of the Decrees of Popes and Councils, they must not perform
it longer than the Pope pleases, if they will be true to their Religion.

(3.) Because the Papists introduce a Foreign Power, viz. the Pope with his
Locusts, to burden the Land, and emunge the People, and cheat them of their
Money; and therefore no more tolerable than Regraters or Forestallers, etc.

(4.) Because the Papists, where they get full Power, are unmeasurably cruel.
Bishop Bramhall against Militeir says, that they have equalled, if not
exceeded, the Heathens in Cruelty, and now of late they have outdone
themselves, witness their Dragooning in France and Savoy, and the like in other
places. Otherwise,

The Papists are not to be punished as Heretics: Queen Elizabeth and our Kings
do expressly deny, that they punished them merely for their Religion: Indeed our
Laws were very cruel against them, but never executed in any very high degree;
and as to any great Violence or Severity, I wish they were so moderated as to
be fit to be executed, and with consideration of all mollifying Circumstances,
and not one Man to suffer for the Offense of another.

IV. My fourth and last Conclusion is this, An erroneous and heretical
Conscience is not free in things merely Religious, from the Judgments of God,
nor from the Censures of the Church by Admonition and Excommunication, in
Causes purely Ecclesiastical, where there is any gross scandal or danger by the
Leaven of Infection; for these two were the chief Causes of Excommunication in
the Primitive Church, and that chiefly in case of moral Impieties, which now
are or should be carefully looked to by the Christian Magistrate; and therefore
we have now so much the less need of Excommunication, our Neighbors who may be
offended, being also Christians as well as we; as likewise neither have we so
great need of Deacons and Deconesses, now our Sick and Poor are provided for by
the Christian Magistrates; however it is still of very good use, if it be
managed by the Church where the Crime is committed, and who are best able to
judge, and not by Foreigners, nor buoying Men up to Obstinacy for every little
thing, for Fees and Groat-matters. Now though Excommunication be concerned only
in gross things, yet the Conscience is bound to Obedience, not only to the
Ordinances of Christ, but even to the laudable Rites and Orders of that
particular Church, where a Man lives or converseth, or to the Churches as
associated for Order and Concord-sake, without Infringement on the Rights of
particular Congregations or Churches, or to the Customs of the Church, which
are useful, at least not -- hurtful, as is undeniably proved from St. Paul's
Discourse of Women's vailing their Faces, 1 Cor. 11. and by his Discourse of
speaking with Tongues, 1 Cor. 14. and truly if a Man does not profess himself
unsatisfied as to the Lawfulness of such Customs or Ceremonies, which are
pretended to be but for the Decency of the Administration of the Service of
God, I for my part take it to be a Peevishness and Crossness not to observe
them; and to be over-scrupulous, is but to be superstitious, on the one hand,
as some under Pretense of Obedience to Authority in indifferent things, have
been too rigorous, offending as grossly against Romans 14. as the Papists by Latin
Prayers do against 1 Cor. 14. these following Rules I think would do well to be
observed concerning indifferent things.

1. That we entertain them but as alterable things, in which Authority may use
their Liberty to change or abolish them, as the Peace and Edification of the
Churches shall require, without fear of offending the Papists in making use of
our Liberty, which tends rather to do them and some carnal Protestants good;
for they are in manifest Slavery to their Customs; or however may do our own
People good, viz. that they may never come to be enslaved so bad as Papists
are. Vide Theses Arminii.

2. They be not oppressive by their Multitude, as Augustine complained of them
in his time.

3. That they be not dubious, nor subject to breed Scruples in Men's Minds, and
Factions amongst them.

4. Not savouring of Superstition; thus the Primitive Church was troubled with
Judaizers and Gentilizers, according to the several Schools out of which the
Christians came.

5. Not wholly needless, but such as have some convenience. For indifferent may
be considered two ways:

(1.) Absolutely, as opposite to convenient; as to say it is indifferent, that
is, it has nothing good nor bad in it at all, such things scarce fall under
deliberation; and surely no prudent Governors will command any such things in
Religion, though in Civil Things possibly they may, as Captains, merely to try
their Soldiers Obedience.

(2.) Comparatively, it is indifferent, that is, it is not unlawful by any Law
of God commanding or forbidding it; and it may be another thing might serve the
turn as well, yet there is some convenience in it without doubt; Governors may
command in such things; and all People which are concerned and satisfied of
their Lawfulness, are bound to obey, or else all Government would be vain; yet
are such Commands even of Magistrates as far as they are concerned (except
there interpose some Circumstances which may superadd a civil or moral
consideration) but directive and paternal, as were those of the Christian
Bishops and Councils under the Pagan Emperors: the Civil Magistrate by
becoming a Christian ipso facto, acquires a Right as the Head of all Political
Authority, in the National Churches, concerning matters of Prudence and
Concord, being Parens Patriae, and Pater-Familias; and may in that regard be
called the Bishop of his Kingdoms, as Constantine was called the Universal
Bishop of the Empire; and as we commonly say, that every Master of a Family is
a Bishop in his own House. But in such cases there is no necessity to think
that such kind of Magistrates Commands must always be backed with Civil
Punishments, or else Authority is despised: for God himself, as many Authors do
say from 1 Cor. 7. 38. does counsel us to do better, when he is yet pleased if
we do well, and does not punish us for the breach of all things which he
commands us.

6. They should be such as agree with the Analogy of the Christian Religion,
with the plainness and simplicity of it, etc. not such as are fitter for
Theatrical Shows and Pomp, to feed the carnal Eyes and Ears of the People, more
than for the decent administration of the Service of a crucified Savior.

7. We must have a care not to content our selves with a mere formal and
customary way of serving God in a road of outward and bodily Observations, so
to flamm off our Consciences, rather than to study real Godliness,
Mortification, true Faith, Love and Charity toward God and Man, above which if
any Man advances Rites and Ceremonies, let him boast what he will of his
Obedience, he turns lawful things into Pharisaism: Washing of Hands was no
unlawful thing of it self.

8. I conceive that they are not to be made Conditions of Communion, so as Men
may by their Contumacy be buoyed up to Excommunication; for that is to declare
a Man to be no Christian, but as an Heathen, which is too censorious to, say of
one, who for ought you know may be really unsatisfied of the lawfulness of
things propounded, (which are indeed indifferent) or else he would willingly
observe them; indeed if they be very perspicuously indifferent, it is a shrewd
suspicion of a factious Mind; but Proof, and not Suspicion, must be the ground
of Punishment.

Thus have I pro modulo, through God's Goodness, satisfied such Questions as do
appertain to Liberty of Conscience.

FINIS.

