A PHYSICO-MEDICAL ESSAY Concerning the late frequency of APOPLEXIES.

Together with a general Method of their Prevention, and Cure. In a Letter to a
Physician.

By WILLIAM COLE, M.D.

OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER. 1689.

Imprimatur. GILB. IRONSIDE Vice-Can. OXON.

Feb. 20. 1689.

To my much esteemed Friend Samuel Kimberley, Dr. in Physic.
Dear Sir.
THough I must look on your request, to have my thoughts of the cause of the
greater frequency of Apoplexies these late years, than formerly, as only an
instance of your modesty, in giving a deference to the judgment of others,
when, I doubt not, your own notions, if you please to draw them forth, can
better satisfy both your self, and all men else, then any I can produce; yet
that I may not be wanting to the friendship I have so long in reality professed
for you, I shall for once venture to present them to you, however unaccurate;
which, being addressed to a friend, may expect to be heartily interpreted,
although they bring not the satisfaction you expect.

It Is true; I have heard the (...) questioned; it being alleged that this
distemper might, amongst the vulgar, be ranked under some other class, in
regard it is not to be presumed they should know to assign the right names to
diseases; till the fate of a Great Prince, our late most gracious Sovereign,
commonly reported to have dyed of it, might give a general notion of the name,
as well as imprint apprehensions of the danger. And indeed it may be suggested,
that such an accident, happening to so great a person, may make stronger
impressions on men's minds, than when it falls on those who make a lesser
figure, and thence make them take notice of what they would not otherwise have
heeded. Besides that the report must, on that account, be the more diffusive;
and so being conveyed amongst many of all tempers, must meet with some of
very apprehensive ones, whose fears will easily be propagated to others; it
being natural to all men to reflect upon what they think carries danger,
(especially when it is strongly and frequently inculcated) in order to prevent
it, if not to have their spirits depressed by it, from whence perhaps such may
be more disposed to receive the Idea's (to speak in the language of Helmont) of
such a disease.

But if we duly consider it, we may find, that it has been both known by Name,
and dreaded by those of all Ages. For besides that all practical Authors (from
whom the vulgar must be presumed to have first received it) treat of it ex
professo by that Name, the very surprise must necessarily excite a notion of it
in all, it being so very different in its symptoms and fatality from all other
distempers. So that the many accounts continually brought of great persons, as
well as those of a lower rank, that have been snatched away by it, are not to
be looked upon as only the true notion of it retrived, which was before
mistaken, but a real increase of it now; and may too much justify the
melancholy apprehensions of the Gentlemen you spoke off, who desire an
information concerning it.

To endeavor then to give a satisfactory answer to your question, 'twil be
requisite I consider, though briefly, the particular Seat, Nature, and
immediate Causes of the distemper, as also the Disposition of the Part, where
it is seated, to be affected. And though this disquisition have been so often
and learnedly made by many Authors, yet most of them differing from others in
some particulars, it may hope your more favorable interpretation, if I do the
like from any of them who may perhaps be your favorites, when by their example
I show why I do it: since as the notions of all cannot be reconciled, so no man
is obliged to think precisely with any other, be his reputation ever so great.

I propose not to my self to deliver all their opinions (which your own
reading supplys you with better than I can) much less solemnly to refute them.
But I must necessarily touch on some particulars in a few of them, in order to
make out my own thoughts.

To the First, It Is agreed by the generality of Physicians that the Brain is
the seat of the Apoplexy; only Helmont places it in the Praecordia (as most
explicitly, De Lithiasi, Cap. 9.. 52, and 70.) whose offense against the
Schools, and contempt of Anatomy (though otherwise he must be owned to be a
man of great parts and learning) might possibly prompt him, in opposition to
the Ancients and their followers, to take up with some opinion, that presented
it self with any color, that might contradict theirs, rather than agree with
them even in the most obvious and convictive ones, though ever so clearly
demonstrable too upon dissection. For indeed, besides Anatomical autopsy, which
is too clear to be contradicted, all the Symptoms argue it to be seated in the
Brain. For even in the most sudden seysure, when the persons affected have not
time allowed them to declare their perceptions, it is evident that the stroke is
impressed on the animal faculty in general, by the immediate cessation of its
functions, the vital (so called) continuing, for the most part, entire for some
time; which must argue the cause to reside about the original of it, the Brain,
since from thence only that faileur can so generally be effected. But when it
begins with less violence, so that there is any interval betwixt its invasion,
and the total defection of the animal functions, they generally complain of,
either a vertigo, or a great oppression and pain in the head; upon which
presently follow stupidness, somnolency, dazzling of the eyes, a relaxation of
all parts of the body, and the like: all which are so evidently deducible from
the consideration of the nerves affected at their original, that twere time
lost farther to prove it.

But since it is not satisfactory enough to assert in general, that the Brain
(which is an accurately organized part, in which there is a great variety of
cells and vessels, and a considerable difformity of parts one from another) is
the seat of this distemper, without determining whether the whole, or any
particular region, or part, of it be especially affected, Authors have employed
themselves in this search.

The most celebrated opinion, and which most have followed till this Age, was
that of Galen, who assigned the Ventricles for the particular Seat, and
supposed a viscous matter got into them to be the cause of it. This opinion,
though it might give some account of the interception of the animal spirits,
which (according to the ancient doctrine are to actuate the body by being
distributed along the nerves, on the account of the compression these must so
undergo near their original, which distribution failing, all animal motion, in
the parts influenced by the nerves which labor under this compression, must
cease; yet (with all deference to the memory of the great Author, as well as to
the abbettors of it) I conceive, may rather be presumed to suggest a reason of
a Palsy, than Apoplexy, and can hardly be made out to be the cause of so
sudden a seizure; since such a congestion must be slow, and so the effect
generally must come gradually: whereas from a perfect state of health the
Apoplexy on a sudden (as the name imports) ordinarily seizes. Besides though
the passages of the spinal marrow, and nerves thence arising be thus closed
(rather than obstructed; an obstruction being generally, I conceive, in the
common acception of the word, understood to be from some matter within their
tracts, and not properly from it externally compressing them) whereby the
spirits cannot readily descend into them; yet their motion in the Brain may
possibly for some time be free enough; and consequently the Souls exercise may
be then entire for a while, if not indeed exalted from the confinement those
have to the Brain in that case: and it is observed many times that, in a
Hydrocephalus, Intellection, and other animal faculties fail only gradually,
though the Ventricles have been found upon dissection to have been much filled;
which they must have been long time a doing. Withal, what is once got into the
Ventricles has no farther communication with the animal spirits, being
disterminated from the Brain by the interposition of the membranes. But Galen
seems not very consistent to himself in this notion, as making the Brain it
self ( De loc. affectis lib. 3. cap. 10.) to be the seat of it, without there
mentioning the Ventricles, whereas before ( cap. 7. as well as in other places)
he only seated it in these, exclusively to the substance of the Brain.

But that Hypothesis is now antiquated, and the substance of the Brain,
generally owned to be the seat of it, Anatomical observations having, as I
said, made it apparent it must be seated there. And tho several Authors have
diversely explicated it, yet there are two opinions particularly which are now
adays most celebrated, and perhaps deserve to be so, both on their own
account, as being each of them very specious, though somewhat different from
each other, as also of their Authors, the famous Wepfer and Willis. These
indeed seem to agree in their notion of the particular seat of it, viz. both
of them assigning the Medullar substance of the Brain and Cerebellum for it.
But they differ here in that the former considers the whole compage of them
both under that name, in contradistinction only to the Ventricles; the now
received distinction into Cortical and Medullar (more properly so called)
having not been then thought on; and therefore he seems to suppose any part of
the substance may be the seat: whereas the latter supposes it to be in the
corpus callosum, or true Medullar part according to that distinction; but
withal he asserts that the morbifick matter is transmitted to it through the
Ambitus or Cortical; the Arteries (which are the conduits for conveighing it,
whatsoever it be, either immediately, or mediately) passing all through it. But
they differ in their explication of the mode of production. For Wepfer supposes
that the Brain is either denied a sufficient afflux of blood, of which he
assigns several causes; or if it have that, yet that the distribution of the
spirits into the nerves is hindered either by an obstruction of them at their
originals, or their compression. But Willis doubts whether the former of these,
the want of a supply of blood, can have place here, since it is known there are
every where about the Brain (as well as in other parts of the body) mutual
Inosculations of the arteries, on the account of which it is not to be supposed
that all the branches of the Carotides and Vertebral can on a sudden be
obstructed, but that if some happen to be so, yet all parts of the Brain must
receive the blood quickly enough from those which are free, by means of these
Anastomoses, and so the nerves may be readily enough supplied; or if these
arteries chance to be totally obstructed, he thinks the consequent distemper
will not be properly an Apoplexy, but a Lipothymy, or Hysterical affect. From
which consideration he deduces, that what makes an Apoplexy must be something in
the Brain it self, that causes either a solution of continuity in it, or
insinuates it self into the Meditullium Cerebri, or original of the nerves, and
there either obstructs the passage of the spirits into them, or else on the
account of some narcotick, or other disagreeable quality, dissipates or
depresses them. Both these notions may with much greater advantage be had from
the learned Authors, than a short abstract; for which too, under this head, I
should apologize, this relating to the Cause, but that withal it conduces to
determine the Seat.

But though Dr. Willis have so speciously urged against that tenent, of the
non-admission of blood to the Brain, to produce an Apoplexy, yet I suppose that
(with all deference to his great judgment) his opinion, that the proper
Medullar part of it is the only, or at least most frequent, seat of it, is
somewhat too contracted, not to say precarious; and that on the other side,
though an Apoplexy may perhaps sometimes begin in the corpus callosum, yet
rather and much more frequently, in the Cortical than there, or amongst the
nerves at their original. For though it is probable the Meditullium cerebri is
the place where the soul principally acts, and from whence she dispences her
influence to the rest of the body, and therefore she cannot be said to be
disturbed in her actings, and so a distemper be introduced, till that part be
disaffected; yet I conceive that part is properly to be reckoned the Seat of a
distemper, where the Cause that influentially occasions the defection of
natures due actings, first fixes it self: otherwise I see no reason but that
Wepfers denegation of spirits, which Willis oppugnes, might be sufficient both
to make, and denominate, an Apoplexy. And indeed that the Cortical is most apt
to receive the morbisick matter, seems obvious from hence, that in it the
arteries are most numerous, and it most lax and yielding; so that when from any
occasion the blood is apt to get out of, or, at least distend, its vessels, or
indeed but to exude out of them, it is probable this may be done more easily
here, than in the corpus callosum. It Is true, it must be granted that the
arteries are disseminated through all parts of it, even to the inmost;
otherwise they could neither receive due heat nor nourishment (if at least
nourishment come immediately from the blood to any parts but the roots of the
Nerval tree, numerously dispersed through the cortex) which vessels though
penetrating ever so deep, if they chance either to open, be broken, or become
relaxed, whereby they may let go some of the substances they carry (after the
manner by and by to be alleged) it is obvious must soon supply the matter of a
considerable inundation (if I may so call it) of the blood, or those substances
of it which are apt to secede, upon these parts of the Brain to which they
reach, from the impetuous protrusion from the heart: and the vessels being here
tenderest (as all vessels not only are at their extremities, but especially
when they runn deepest, and proportionally farthest, because then they are
smallest) it is no wonder that a congestion should soon be made where this is.
But yet if we consider their comparatively small number to those in the
Cortical, and how they must be better fenced and supported by their being
distributed through a more compact substance as the corpus callosum is, there
seems less danger of either a congestion, or extravasation, in this region; the
strength of the tone of any part mainly conducing to the ready transmission of
the perluent liquor. And that this happens most usually in the cortical region,
three, of the four instances alleged by Wepfer, seem to evince; in which I
conceive it is easy to gather that they were the extime parts of the Brain that
were most disaffected, and therefore there seems reason to suppose must be
primarily so. But from hence.

Secondly, The Nature of the distemper may be deduced. And it seems to me
probable, that it consists indeed in the defect of that matter, which should be
supplied to the nerves for the exercise of the animal functions, but occasioned
from the vitiated organization of the parts and vessels of the Brain, from
whence a due secretion (which I have heretofore [ Tr. de secretione animali]
endeavored to make probable to be here performed by a simple colature in the
Cortical glandules) of the nervous liquor out of the blood cannot be made, but
that, either from the forementioned distention of the sanguiferous vessels, the
secretory ducts cannot readily admit the matter to be separated; the confusion
of the mass, emergent upon such a congestion, prohibiting a regular secession;
or else the grosser substance of the blood, not moved as 'twas wont, being
brought to the beginnings of the nerves, must needs obstruct them, and so cause
an immediate cessation of motion in all parts below, as well as, by disturbing
the regular motion of the spirits in the Brain, hinder the exertion, not only
of the Intellectual, but also sensitive faculties.

For though Intellection (and possibly Sense) belong only to the Soul as such,
which is a substance distinct in it self from the Body; yet the exercises of
it, so long as the soul continues united to the body, cannot be had but by its
mediation: our bodies being very fitly resembled to Hydraulick Engines, whose
structure disposes them to exhibit a great number of various phenomenon, when
filled with a due liquor, and set on work by a mover distinct from them
(whether within or without it is not material) which, as they, whilst in order,
very regularly perform all the motions their fabric directs to, so if they
happen to be either accidentally broken or disordered in any part, or else the
liquor they carry comes to be so gross as to obstruct them, or corrosive, or
otherwise vitiated, as to make its way through them, must either undergo a
total loss of their motion, or at least a very great disorder in the several
performances that the organical design requires. Agreeably to which, the Blood
appears to be the principal liquor for the motion of this curious engine of our
body, as being universally and uncessantly carried through all parts of it.
(Not to make a comparison betwixt this and the Nervous juice; which though it
may be designed for more noble, and perhaps much more extensive proximate uses,
than the gross mass of the blood, yet must be owned, on the account of its
small quantity, and slow motion, to be not fit for this design, otherwise than
to spiritualize, and give an instinct to that and the Heart that impels it,
add that it is made out of the blood.) Now if through the fault of its pipes,
the arteries and veins, it make its way out of them, it must of necessity
extremely disaffect the parts in which this happens, especially when they are
designed for the nobler sort of uses. Indeed Life, as well from arguments of
Reason, as the Divine Oracles (which though they teach many things above, yet
none against, Reason; and I conceive ought to be construed literally when the
analogy of reason and nature countenances it, though many things in them are
owned to be spoken according to men's common apprehensions; holy scripture being
designed not to teach, Philo -- but Theosophy) seems to consist originally, and
therefore principally, in the motion of the Blood, its first indicia being from
the punctum saliens; for which therefore so exquisite pipes are made to
distribute it to all parts of the body, and return it back again to its first
source for reiterated motions, and those so adapted to the secretory parts, for
the separating of substances from it for several uses; that as all vital
actions must needs be placidly performed whilst they are thus duly disposed, so
if any of them happen to be broken or opened (at least in any considerable
measure) whereby this vital stream gets forth of its boundaries, that due and
regular motion thence ceasing, Life must too. But this must most effectually
come to pass, if this disturbance of the motion of the blood chance to be in
the Brain, where the Soul sits (by the consent of almost all) inthroned, and
from whence she gives laws to all the Body: so that if this her Royal seat
happen to be overwhelmed with such a deluge, and her intercourse with the rest
of the body, which her Empire over it requires, intercepted, it is no wonder she
leaves her province and mansion, thus become so unfit for her residence. But I
must beg your pardon for these allegorical excursions, which yet the luxuriancy
of the subject readily affords.

This fault in the due Organization of the Brain consists, either in an
Obstruction of the passages, or a Solution of the continuity; either of which
may easily occasion any of the symptoms. For the former; it is impossible but
that (since there is a necessity of a due proportion between the cavity of the
vessels and the liquors, as well here, as in innumerable instances every where
to be met with, to the performing of regular motions) if any obstruction
happen, the Liquors must either move more sparingly than is requisite, or be
congested there, or else the course of them must be diverted into other
channels, and so natures designation (to be discerned by the known effects)
must be altered: from any of which occasions, as there must happen a defect of
spirits to actuate the Brain and nerves, and that proportionally to the
greatness of the obstruction; so if this happen suddenly, and be total, it is
evident that there must follow both a total and sudden abolition of the animal
functions. In the latter, the Blood, flowing out of its vessels, must, in so
tender a part as the Brain, quickly overflow a great part of it, being urged on
by the impulse from the heart; and then it is obvious that all the regular
motions and secretions there, necessary to animality, must immediately be
interrupted; the passages designed for carrying select substances being thus
both enlarged and filled with heterogeneous and gross ones, which make up the
much greatest part of the Blood. So that hence,

Thirdly, What is called the Containing cause is easy to be collected, viz.
some matter either discharged out of the sanguiferous vessels upon the
substance of the Brain; or else, filling and distending them, and thence
compressing the sides of the passages in it. This may either be, 1 st, the
Blood in its whole substance, whether good, or impure; since in either
constitution it may, if either congested in too great quantity, or too
impetuously moved, get out of its vessels, or else so distend them, as to
produce the mentioned effect. Or, 2 dly, some Viscouse matter, proceeding from
the Serum become less spirituous, whose particles therefore are disposed to lay
hold one of another, and so to grow clammy, and consequently unapt to pass
along the usual tracts, but apt to stick in the laxer interstices between the
arteries and veins in the habit of the Brain; to which more, being continually
brought by the continual motion of the Blood, may by a likeness of substance,
still associate it self, till it come to a congestion great enough to cause
such an obstruction, as may at last hinder the circulation, or at least the
separation of such substances from the Blood, as must actuate the Brain and
nerves. From such a cause too Inflammations, which are some of the acutest, as
well as the most frequent sort of distempers that assail us, often arise; and
it is generally to be observed that in pleurisies, anginas, etc. the Blood is
exceeding viscous; which quality in it disposing it to obstruct, must
therefore, when that happens, cause a congestion all about, the Blood
incessantly arietating against that place, and thence soon an inflammation. Or,
3 dly, a greater collection than usual of the fluid Serum in the Blood, though
not disposed to viscosity, but instead thereof grown too sharp, which thence
may be very apt to make its way through the passages in the habit of the Brain,
whose natural Make might keep out a less thin Serum, such as belongs to the
Blood duly constituted but cannot this, in regard its particles are perhaps
become less than the diameter of the pores of the vessels it is naturally
carried into; or else these pores may come to be so dilated by means of the
continual lancinations, that the resistance of their sides may soon come to be
overpowered. Or, 4 thly, polypous concretions, (those infelicia aegri cordis
germina, as Wepfer calls them) which have their construction from the fibrous
parts of the Blood, whose Make being oblong and ramous, numbers of them may
happen to associate in the heart too strictly, and being, when once thus
associated, unapt to be dissolved, must make carneous concretions there; where
being radicated, they may grow to a considerable bulk and length, and diffuse
themselves all along the arteries to a great length: the manner of whose
production the accurate Malpighius (de polypo cordis) has very curiously
described. These Wepfer supposes may make an Apoplexy on a double account, viz.
either entire, or broken. The former way, by being propagated from the heart up
to the entrance of the Carotides and vertebral arteries into the skull, which
vessels, being extensive before, let the Blood pass by these polypi up to the
Brain before they reach those perforations of the skull; but when once they do
that, the arteries being confined by the bones, through which they pass, must
be totally stopped by them; and so the Blood being prohibited from coming to
the Brain, an Apoplexy must according to him, follow. Which supposition indeed,
if it could be demonstrated, would prove the greatest instance of his
assertion, that Apoplexy may proceed from a denegation of Blood to the Brain.
But, besides that it is hard to conceive all these four arteries should be
stopped at once by this cause (which if they be not, the Blood coming by any
one will be diffused by means of the Anastomoses all over the Brain, for the
continuance at least of the animal actions, though perhaps in somewhat a lower
degree) it seems moreover probable, that this should rather be ranked under the
class of Cardiacal Syncope's, whose symptoms are very like those of an
Apoplexy: and so many and large polypi, as must effect this, would in
likelihood kill, by hindering the Circulation through the heart, before they
could grow to the length and bigness requisite to cause this obstruction. But
the other way by which he supposes an obstruction from them may come, is the
breaking of them off being grown fracid; which happening, the course of the
Blood must carry them on into those narrower passages; whereby it might be
presumed there would follow such a sudden obstruction as must produce an
irremediable Apoplexy, did not his instance of James Knoll evince the contrary;
who, though the arteries in his Brain were full of them, yet had never any
touch of an Apoplexy: unless we should suppose those were not true polypi,
which, as I said, are generally of a carneous nature, and radicated in the
heart, but only associations of viscous substances in the degenerated Blood,
formed in those places where he found them. But indeed it seems probable, that
if any of these broken polypi get into the narrow passages of the arteries in
the Brain, they may cause such a stop of the Blood there, that it not finding
its usual way open, may, by the impetuosity of its motion, make it self a new
one into the substance of the Brain.

So that from any of these causes the Blood in its circulation passing (as I
have said) irregularly through the Brain, may, if this part happen to be more
than usually susceptible of an impression from it, either deflect into the
lateral yielding recesses in its habit, or by reason of a partial obstruction
of the vessels, distend them; since being impelled in the usual quantity, but
deficiently transmitted, there must quickly follow such a congestion, that
either a stagnation of it in the vessels must happen; or an exudation of some
parts of it through the widened passages; or else, if the impulse prove to be
more violent, a laceration of them; from whence comes an Extravasation, which
will be continually increased from the continual impulse upon parts thus become
unfit to resist the motion.

But of these causes of Apoplexies, especially those which prove most fatal,
the Effusion of Blood, mentioned, seems to be the most usual (though as I see
not but the distemper may, as I said, proceed from only a Congestion, so
possibly this may be that from which most recover that do at all, however by
continuance it may prove as dangerous, as being the beginning of that by
effusion, and a stop of the Blood even in the vessels for any considerable time
necessarily kills) both from what appears upon dissection; not only Wepfers,
before mentioned, but others, observations evincing it, and I my self happened
to observe the same in the dissection of a very worthy Lady, the Lady
Pakington, the relation whereof was published in the Philosophical
Transactions, Number. 173. A. D. 1675. as also in regard it seems difficult to
make out how, from a slow congestion, if viscous matter be the cause, or from
an exudation of Serum, the diffusion whereof, though somewhat more speedy than
in the supposition of viscosity, is yet comparatively slow to the sodainness of
the invasion, much more from so very slow a congestion as must produce a fleshy
substance as the polypus is (unless on the occasion of its dislodging, even now
mentioned) all the Animal functions from a perfect exercise of them, as is most
usually observable, should so instantaneously be destroyed. Whereas the
effusion of the Blood out of its vessels may rationally yield an account of
this defection with as great swiftness as can be imagined; the Blood as I said
before, once got out of its channels being propelled, by means of the impulse
from the heart, so as to diffuse it self immediately over the whole substance
of the Brain, so far as the investing membrane will permit. And though only
one Lobe of it chance to be disaffected, yet the commerce being broken off
betwixt the spirits in this and the rest (it seeming probable, though, from the
disproportion of our organs to discern those extremely small passages, not
autoptically demonstrable, that there is a constant one by some small Meatus
through the whole Brain) the action of the whole must cease; since it is
observable that, for preforming regularly the actions which are the province of
any organ, all the parts of that organ must be duly constituted; and therefore
much more ought this to be observed in the Brain, whose action is so much more
considerable and nice than any of the rest, as influencing the whole Body, as
well as its texture is more curious, and substance more tender.

The Fourth thing proposed to be considered was, the Disposition of the part,
where the distemper is seated, to be affected; which having endeavored to make
out to be the Brain, we are to reflect that much of the invasion of the
distemper (as was before insinuated) is owing to the vitiated organization of
it, and not all to the perluent liquors. For if it be firm in its tone, and
otherwise rightly constituted, there is reason to suppose it may, caeteris
paribus, much resist morbifick impressions; whereas if it have been before
weakened, it is obvious 'twill easily yield to them. We see in Fevers that the
Blood runs rapidly enough through it; and in an Anasarca, and cachectical
habits, the Serum makes up much the greatest part of the Blood, which might
therefore be presumed apt to overflow that tender part; so also it is
observable, that the Blood many times appears extremely viscous, as in
Pleurisies, Rheumatismes, etc. Yet in none of these cases ordinarily are the
persons inclined to Apoplexies: so that though the irregularities of the
liquors may sometimes occasion them without this predisposition often he Brain,
yet when it appears they invade more frequently than otherwise they use to do,
there seems considerable reason, to suppose, that it deflects some way or other
in its Organization from what is natural to it. This defect, I deny not may
perhaps sometimes consist in too great a Closeness of its texture, whereby a
partial obstruction of its vessels may be made by degrees, from the adhesion of
some viscouse matter deposited by little and little by the circulating Blood
about the capillary arteries, and so the Blood behind comes indeed only to be
retarded here whilst no disturbance happens to it, but takes its course to some
other region of the Body; but if it once come to be more than ordinarily
exagitated, it may become so determined in its motion, as at last to flow
impetuously hither too, but not being able to get through its usual channels
must produce the effects, before suggested, of an irruption into the substance
of the Brain: but yet ordinarily, I conceive, it depends upon too great Laxity
of it; whereby, when any forcible impulse happens, it may too readily yield to
it, and so be suddenly overwhelmed. This laxity may be considered to consist,
not only in a greater inteneration of its substance than usual, and thence its
easiness to yield to the force of the impelled Blood, to which in its due
constitution it bears a proportion; but likewise in the greater openness of its
pores than is natural, though the fibers that constitute it have their due
degree of firmness, whereby it becomes capable of receiving other, and more
bulky particles than usual, as is consequential upon that texture so depraved:
which may possibly (as in too serous and acrimonious a dyscrasy of the Blood)
proceed from the abrasion of some of the looser particles that constitute the
habit of the part, by the perluent juice supplied by such Blood, and I suppose
might be the case of the Lady before mentioned, who being endued with an
extraordinary acumen, a great evidence of an exquisite constitution of the
Brain, yet abounded with exceedingly sharp substances in her Blood or other
liquors, as many, of her symptoms declared. Which pores likewise may acquire
other figures than are proper for them; these concurring particularly to
determine almost any of the Secretions, whether simple or mixed, that happen in
our Bodies. So that when the Brain happens to have its Organization thus
vitiated, and the other causes concur, an Apoplexy may in probability easily
enough be produced.

So that, to recapitulate, I conceive the part effected may either be the whole
Brain, or any considerable part of it, and either the Cortical, or Medullar,
but especially (or at least first) the Cortical, from whence the disaffected
matter is transmitted to the parts of it which lie deeper, where the animal
spirits principally exert themselves; the Nature of the distemper to consist,
in the sudden abolition of the due excrasie, and distribution of them thence;
the immediate cause, most usually (when unavoidably fatal) an effusion of Blood
out of its vessels upon the substance of the Brain, though I conceive a bare
distention, of the arteries there may occasion it, as also may perhaps a
congestion of viscous or serous matter when it comes to a considerable degree,
and becomes freshly excited; or else Polypous concretions, or (if we can
suppose it) any other obstructing matter deposited in it, may at last produce
it; and the predisposition of the Brain to it, to consist, usually, in the more
than ordinary laxity, or openness of it.

These things premised I consider (to advance a little farther toward the
solution of the Problem) that whatsoever, either 1 st. causes a congestion of
Blood, or 2 dly otherwise so indisposes it, that it cannot readily and duly
circulate through its usual vessels in the Brain, or else 3 dly disaffects the
Brain, whether by weakening its tone, or altering the figures of its passages,
or straitning them too much, may occasion Apoplexies: and the greater urgency
or violence, of such antecedent causes may introduce a greater frequency of
them than ordinary.

As to the first; Besides common observation, it is obvious to any man's reason,
that those who indulge themselves in full meals, but especially in copious
drinking, and use not due exercise, may fall into them, especially if their
natural constitution incline them to breed Blood plentifully; since so it must
be heaped up in too great a proportion for the vessels, and thence may easily
be supposed to make its way out of them, upon, even light occasions into the
most yielding parts. Besides, persons given to these excesses do frequently,
either voluntarily, or by the necessity of the irrigation made on the Brain,
allow themselves likewise great liberty of sleeping, and so relax the Brain;
whereupon the Blood flowing more plentifully in the usual posture of it, viz.
lying along, may be presumed without great difficulty to get out of its
vessels, distended on this occasion, into it. And it seems rather to be wondered
at that no more fall into them, than that some do from this cause; since there
are so obvious reasons of their production from the number of those who thus
indulge themselves. But this seems no adequate reason of their greater
frequency now than formerly, since these excesses have been of a much longer
date, than to give occasion hence to justify the temperance of former ages
comparatively to ours. Therefore,

Secondly; as to the causes of those dyserafies of the Blood, from whence the
immediate continent cause of Apoplexies flows, we must seek them from without
us, since our Blood has its supplies so: and its motions, whether circular or
intestine, are excited or retarded by abundance of outward, and the most of
them inevitable (our shallow knowledge and foresight in choosing what is proper
for us, and avoiding what is prejudicial, and the unmanagable bent of our
inclinations to what gratifies us, especially considered) occasions. From which
external causes likewise.

Thirdly, the disposition of the Brain to fall into these distempers must
proceed; these being as well disposed to act on the solid, as fluid, substances
of our Bodies, as they find them fit to receive their impressions.

The external occasions therefore of our disorders are generally deduced from
some or other of the six Non-naturals, so called, viz. Air, Meats and Drinks,
Motion and Rest, Sleep and Waking, substances excreted or retained; and the
passions of the mind: any of which, if inordinate, may produce such diseases as
the Body, upon some peculiar predisposition, is subject to.

It Is besides my subject to dilate on them particularly, especially as they
contribute to produce the gross of diseases; neither do I think the five
latter so very applicable to my present theme, as to detain me. But the first
seeming the most usual and efficacious, as to the production of all, or the
greatest part of other distempers, since it is so generally influential and
unavoidable, so of this, I am obliged to take some notice of it. For we may in
a great measure correct irregularities in the rest; but not so in this, without
which we cannot live many moments; neither is it in our power to correct its
disorders, if any thing considerable, since it diffuses it self every where;
and must therefore, if vitiated, be the cause of general distempers, and more
especially seems to have a very prevailing energy to introduce that under
consideration.

Its disorders are generally reduced to two heads, viz. either excesses in (one
at least of) the First qualities, Heat, Cold, Moisture, or Dryness; or else
Malignity in it, unaccountable for from them (whatever it satisfactorily be
from any other vulgar notions) which may be of very different kinds, and so
produce distempers, different as to their symptoms, yet of that general
denomination. These have been so copiously and learnedly treated of by many
great Authors, that 'twere very impertinent in it self, as well as unfit for
the brevity of a letter, to expatiate on them: but particularly the Doctrine of
Malignity seems too abstruse to be discoursed of in few words; only (if it be
not a solecism to pretend to judge of things of which we can assign so little
reason) it seems best adjusted to give an account of diseases that generally
invade, and where indeed surprising symptoms, whose reasons cannot be assigned
from known hypotheses, happen, as in some Epidemical fevers, the Plague etc.
For it seems agreeable to reason, that it must be somewhat more than what is
deducible from the first qualities, as well as very active, that must so affect
multitudes of people of different constitutions, and of whom many have no
evident predisposition to sickness, with so extraordinary indispositions, and
that at times when the Air is free from excesses in any of the first qualities,
(or indeed any of the rest of the sensible ones:) and it is acknowledged by all,
how differently soever they explicate the matter, that these epidemical miasmes
are so.

But to give an account of the production of the present distemper, we have no
need to have recourse to this abstruser cause. For, first, this can hardly be
reckoned among Epidemical distempers, however more frequent than formerly;
since at all but few, comparatively to those who are with other distempers, are
assaulted with this, and those not in one region, but here and there in far
distant places, at all times of the Year, and at all seasons, whether of
excessive Heat, Cold, Moisture, or Dryness; (though, as I shall by and by
observe, it took its rise from one of them.) Secondly, 'twas never observed,
nor thought, contagious, as most Epidemical diseases that depend upon
Malignity, are; those subtle steams that occasion them being, as very
diffusive, so also determinately fermentative to the production of like
substances in the Bodies they enter into; which when emitted, and then received
by others which have a predisposition (as most have; a small one being
sufficient in so heterogeneous Bodies as ours are, and where the substances
that compose them are so lax, and in such an agitation) to be by them acted on,
must affect them in the same manner. Thirdly, there seems nothing in the
symptoms but what is constantly observable in almost all assaulted with it, and
agreeable to the general history of it; whereas those called epidemical have
generally something anomalous in the symptoms, when ever they so invade, from
what has been observed in those of the same denomination at other times. And
fourthly it seems accountable enough for, from the consideration of those more
obvious qualities of the Air. So that I conceive it is rather to be reckoned
among the Sporadical diseases, so called by Physicians; and to proceed from
some, or one of these (modifications of the Air, which we call) first
qualities. But from which of them, it is requisite we enquire.

To consider first the Passive qualities of the Air, Dryness and Moisture; it
may perhaps seem probable that they may, in order to produce this, as well as
some other distempers, indispose the Brain; the former by hardening the tone of
the sanguiferous vessels in general, and consequently contracting their tubes,
and so causing an acceleration of the motion of the Blood through them (which
must, if propelled with the same force at its original, run more swiftly
through vessels when thus straightened, than whilst having their usual
dilatation:) whereby it may be presumed, that when cast forth of the arteries
into the interstices between them and the veins at their extremities, it may
make its way into the more yielding substances it is any where to pass through:
and the Brain being confessedly more so, than any other part of the Body, is
therefore most likely to be affected on such occasion: the latter (which is
countenanced by the great Hippocrates, Sect. 3. Aph. 16.) by intenerating the
Brain so much beyond its usual constitution, that it may thence become more
than naturally susceptible of the always briskly circulating Blood. Next; as to
the most efficacious of the Active ones, Heat; it may perhaps be urged that the
Blood, though otherwise well enough constituted, being much heated and rarifyed
by that excess of the Ambient, might be inclined to make its way out of the
vessels, in the Brain especially, on the account of its forementioned
tenderness.

But, besides that experience warrants none of these suppositions, perhaps it
can hardly be made out, 1 st, That so great a dryness, as must effect this, can
be introduced into our Bodies, which are continually irrigated, not only by the
circulating Blood, but other secondary liquors; 2 dly, That a great excess of
moisture in the Air should produce Apoplexies, unless those more rare ones (as
I suppose they are) from the Serum, and that generally after other distempers
which have weakened the crasis of the Blood, as well as the tone of the Brain;
since such a dyscrasy impressed on the Blood seems to make it more torpid by
clogging the spirits in it, and so less apt to inundations, and besides relaxes
the vessels, as well as the substance, of the Brain, and so favors its ready
passage along them; and, 3 dly, That the excess of outward heat should cause
this eruption; since by it the solid parts may be as well presumed to be
invigorated to resist, as the Blood excited to attempt it; besides that the
transpiration, that is occasioned by this heat, may sufficiently compensate for
the accelerated motion of the Blood, its quantity (which may in that case be
principally dangerous) being thence diminished.

It remains then to attribute this frequency of Apoplexies to the Coldness of
the Air, as the most adequate occasion; which when it happens to be intensly
so, may, I conceive, be made out to give a probable reason of it.

That Cold is a great enemy to the Brain, is both the general sense, and
confirmed by the authority of Hippocrates, Sect. 5. Aph. 18. and all Physicians
since: and therefore we may possibly infer that the great Architect fenced
this part with so strong a wall, scarce more to protect it from other injuries
than this, to which 'twould otherwise be exposed. But how Cold affects it so
injuriously may require a little explication.

In order to it, give me leave, Sr, to consider (without pretending to discuss
it so minutely, as men of more Philosophical heads, and better accomplished in
such speculations, might) the nature of Cold, as being requisite to be known in
some measure to the understanding its relative effects. Which attempt indeed
might appear very presumptuous, after that the exquisite Mr. Boil has not
thought fit to determine in the matter, but that you may perhaps find that the
short deductions I make, however unartificially, are either taken from, or, I
conceive, reducible to what he has delivered; and so far from being positively
asserted, that they are only submitted to the censure of your, and others,
better judgments. To which purpose three or four general considerations seem
not unfit, so far as belongs to our present disquisition, to be taken notice
of, to give an account of its manner of affecting us.

In the first place then it may be considered, that though neither Cold nor
Heat nor any of the rest of the sensible qualities have any real Being, but
only in relation to our perception; insomuch that were there no sensitive
Beings there could be no such things; yet they must be founded on something that
does really exist, as all accidents besides are. So that though they cannot be
reckoned amongst the general affections of matter, as motion (though they
depend upon it) or its contrary, Rest, Bulk, Figure, etc. are, which would
still be where matter is, though there were no sensitive Beings, yet are
consequent upon it, but determined by these and associated to somewhat that has
perception.

Secondly, That it is evident our sensories are affected by Cold, that is, have
some impression made on them. Now nothing can affect but by approaching to that
which it does so affect, and to approach requiring motion it must follow that
motion must go to constitute the nature of Cold. Which though it may seem not
so evident, since Cold is reckoned contrary to Heat; and this consisting
obviously in motion it may be urged, that should in Rest: Yet it may be
returned, that though it be necessarily to be inferred, there is motion where
there is Heat, yet not always that there is Heat where motion: so that it is not
motion simply, but considered with some adjunct, viz. motion in such or such a
degree, and with relation to sensitive Beings that constitutes Heat; and
consequently that it is not to be inferred that Cold consists in absolute Rest,
because contrary to Heat, but in a different degree of motion (though other
mechanical affections must concur to determine it) which recedes on one hand
from a middle degree of it in our sensory, as that which makes Heat does on the
other. Which too may be evinced from hence, that each of them having a great
latitude of degrees must be founded in what admits of degrees, which motion
does, but Rest not.

Thirdly, that motion here being not to be considered abstractedly, but
together with the subjects of it, and as occasioned by, and produced in some
Bodies; we may take notice, that as it is evident the Bodies without us, which
excite our sensation, are moved, so our organs, which are designed to receive
the impressions of these extraneous objects, and transmit them to the Soul, can
hardly be presumed to do it (any more indeed than prove a fit mansion for her)
without having their particles (whether consistent or fluid; for both are
necessary to their construction) in motion: and not only so, but endued with a
determinate degree of it. This degree ought not to be violent: for so the
constituting particles neither could be brought into such a frame as we find
they are, nor persist in it; but they (especially the most subtle, which are
the Souls immediate instruments in the organ) would soon undergo new textures,
or be dissipated. As on the other hand it must not be very languid, since in
that case they being in great numbers, and some touching still in their motion
upon others which have a different determination, would soon be entangled in
one another, or otherwise stopped. But it must be such a middle one, as may
keep up a due crasis in both the fluid and consistent substances that make up
the organ, for the performing the functions appointed.

Fourthly, that these motions (considered as I said in their subject) thus
regulated, being congenial to us, seem not properly objects of our perception
(at least are not taken notice of) since it is by means of them that the Soul
receives those impressions that cause a perception of others, but rather
instruments of transmission of those others from without, which recede from
these degrees, or are otherwise circumstantiated: though indeed even these, when,
becoming either too quick or too slow, they deffect from their due proportion,
may, by affecting the Soul differently from what they use to do, so excite her,
as that she may take notice of them too, as well as those of exterior objects
which thus solicit them.

Fifthly, that therefore these mean motions, being what belong to the organs
duly constituted, are the standard from whence we are to take our measures of
all others, so that when any objects from without come against, and so affect,
our sensories with a greater degree of motion, than what naturally belongs to
them, we form one kind of notion of them; when with a lesser degree, a very
different one, and give them likewise denominations according to that degree of
motion with which they act upon our sensory.

From the consideration of these particulars, we may, I conceive, deduce, that
the nature of Cold consists in a check (though not a total stop) of that degree
of motion, which belongs naturally to the parts of, and fluid substances in,
those of our sensories which concern the sense of Touching, duly constituted;
as, on the contrary, Heat (without some reflection on which, Cold can hardly be
understood) in an acceleration of such their motions. Which differences being,
by means of these organs transmitted to the Soul, and so affecting her, she,
forming a comparison between them, denominates one Heat, and the other Cold.

But though motion must have the first consideration in producing this effect
upon us, yet it is farther to be noted, that the Bulk, and Figures, both of the
Bodies that cause this check, and those upon which it is impressed, must concur
to it: it being evident, that not only some are themselves more fit and easy to
be moved than others, according as they are bigger or less, of this or that
figure, but also to accelerate, or retard, the motions of others that impinge
against them.

As to acceleration, wherein Heat consists, minute Bodies, of almost any
figures that are irregular, if they are not apt to cohere, may occasion that
though some more than others; especially those that are most angular: since
with their angles striking against those among which they move, they must be
presumed to exert a proportionally greater force, than blunt or glabrous ones
can, which on that score are easy to be distorted. But as to retardation which
makes the nature of Cold (that we may restrain our discourse to that) it may be
occasioned on several accounts. For, first, either the affecting Bodies may, by
a correspondency of their sides, so apply themselves to those to which they
come, that, transferring their surplusage of motion to them, they may adhere to
them, and with them constitute bigger masses, and acquire other figures than
before they had: Or, Secondly, by altering the due contexture of the vessels
(which is necessary to regular motions) they may thence occasion a stop of the
substances, which used to be carried in them; and so, though they are otherwise
disposed to accelerate motion on the account of their figures, as I said
before, yet thus accidentally they come to retard it: Or, Thirdly, if they
happen to be of such a figure and texture as to be flexible, and thereby to
wrap themselves about those they occurr to, they may, by thus inviscating them,
hinder their motion: Or, Fourthly, (and which may possibly, in the present
case, be the most effectual means of occasioning this check) they may so
interpose themselves between the moved particles in the organ, as to intercept
their former motions; whereby also they fill the spaces necessary for
continuing those motions. This seems most agreeably to be done by Conical ones,
which by their angle are fitted to enter, but being blunt and bigger at the
other extremity, must, when they come into porosities, which are a little
straiter than that necessarily fix there; and both the more abate the motion of
the forementioned agitated matter, and also be more firmly impacted in the
parts unto which they thus arrive, by their contraction, upon the score of the
lancination occasioned by the sharp angle of these particles first entering: the
solid parts, that are sensile, being all the Body over contractile, as being, I
suppose, nothing else, but either propagations of nerves or the roots of them.
And when it happens that many such conical substances come to act at once upon
the organs, the effect must be the more considerable.

But perhaps, Sr, you may think these speculations too nice and general; and
indeed impertinent to the present consideration, since they are not our senses
that are in Apoplexies primarily affected; those persons that are violently
seyzed loosing, immediately upon the stroke, the use of them; but only
influentially from the Brain, which it self is thought to be void of sense
actually (which supposition yet may perhaps be liable to some exceptions)
though the source of it to all the Body beside: And therefore when they invade
more gradually, and those that are affected are conscious of great pain in the
head, it may be supposed that the morbifick matter affects the membranes of the
Brain, as well as the substance, and so causes that symptom. So that if the
predisposition to the disease be from Cold affecting a part of our Body not
sensible, you may ask to what purpose all this notion of our perception is
introduced? However give me leave to say, that since Cold would not properly be
Cold, as I have urged, without perception; which though it produce all the
effects, it does on Bodies not endued with sense, on a purely mechanical
account, viz. from schematismes of matter in motion, determined by the fitness
of some to act on others, according as they appel to one another; yet as it
relates to us, who are endued with sense, and to whom it belongs to define
things cannot be well understood without reflection on that; it seems not
altogether alien to our purpose to state it in that latitude, since without
such a reflection we cannot have a notion of it; and therefore not explicate
its positive nature, and what produces it. And indeed whether these
speculations are altogether superfluous, may be judged from taking, first, some
short view of the nature of the Air, so far as concerns its aptitude to act on
Bodies conversant in it, particularly ours, it being the Medium to conveigh the
influence of exterior (when not immediately contiguous) objects, or at least
necessarily concurring to make considerable impressions on us who, it is known,
cannot live many minutes without it, especially in relation to it when
deflecting toward Cold: and secondly, its manner of affecting injuriously our
Bodies, particularly the Brain, upon the account of the forementioned
mechanical affections.

And first, as to the Nature of the Air; Though, generally speaking, we call
so all that vast congeries of corpuscles wherein we breath, which is made up of
all sorts of particles from the earth and water, and steames raised from
complex bodies in or upon them, yet more properly (according to the Philosophy
of the Age, which acknowledges the Excellent Mr. Boil its chief refiner) it is
supposed to consist in the greatest measure of springing particles, viz.
oblong, and considerably rigid ones, though very tough, and thence apt enough
to be bent by a great pressure, but yet unapt to loose force of restitution
toward a direct line (which seems most natural) when that pressure is taken
off; and which they, whilst thus bent, are continually (from the action of the
materia subtilis according to Descartes) endeavoring at: From which tendency
to restitution there must be variety of motions impressed on all bodies
conversant in it, according as they are disposed to receive its action. But yet
among these it is supposed there are a considerable number of others, called
Nitrous, whose make may possibly be that a little before described, viz.
Chnicall or Pyramidall (for I suppose either may solve the Phenomenon, which
require only acuminated particles whose other extreme should be bulky) and from
the mechanical effects may very much justify that most ingenious notion of
Descartes, who supposes Niter to have Conicall figures. For on the account of
these the particles of it may, like wedges, easily intrude themselves into the
Interstices of any bodies they happen to be carried against, and, if these be
yielding enough, make themselves more and more way amongst them, and therefore
may intercept the motion of some as well as very differingly determine that of
others of the fluid substances contained in them; since none, of what texture
soever, can be presumed to elude the action of such kind of bodies. Which
supposition concerning their fabric appears to me the more probable, because
fitted to explicate the matter mechanically, that is, intelligibly. For I
conceive all the world of bodies, and their actions, is pure Mechanisme; and
therefore it is requisite all explications relating to them, designed to
inform, and not to puzzle, should be founded on principles of that kind.

And indeed though it be impossible to make so full a discovery of the small
constituting particles of this as well as any other concretes, that we may have
ground to dogmatize on them, they being much below the perception of our sight,
though assisted even by the best Microscopes; yet since few of them act to our
perception, singly, but to do it must be associated into somewhat bulky
concretions; which may possibly be allowed to make deductions from the
observation of such, when we find them to convene in a familiar and natural
way. Consequentially whereupon we may take notice (for the confirmation of
Descartes's notion) of what the curious Mr. Leewenhoeck observed with his
exquisite Microscope, as to the concretion of Niter, dissolved in water, upon
evaporation (to be met with, Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 173. Iul. 26. 1685.)
As, says he, The water in any place began to be evaporated I found many
figures whose basis was square, and rising to a Pyramid. And though there were
other figures exhibited, yet it may very easily happen that upon a coalition of
a multitude of these extremely small particles, in so confused a manner as must
be upon an evaporation (besides that many of other kinds may associate with
them) variety of figures may well emerge from those so convening, though the
principal have the forementioned tendency. And besides, though the figures of
minute ones might not be Pyramidal, yet it may be such as to fit them, from
their congruity to one another, to associate strictly into this; it being by
many Chemical instances of the acting of bodies, salts particularly, on one
another, obvious that these of very different makes do, upon their collisions,
when diluted in a fluid, unite into concretes very strict that have little or
no cognation in their figures to either of those singly that went primarily to
constitute them: So that when freed from their diluting moisture, which brought
them together, and then pressed upon by the strokes of the Elastical particles
of the Air, they may possibly come to cohere so strictly (supposing their sides
smooth and flat, as it seems probable they are even from the obvious figure of
the concrete; and is deducible from that effect of the Air in the much noted
instance of two flat marbles) and be so hardened, as to be fit to act (their
acuminated figure considered) almost equally vigorously, as if they had been
primitive ones, on Bodies not of the very closest texture. Nay since they are
designed to act on such which have no very compact texture, for the most part;
it seems congruous that theirs should be such likewise, to bear a proportion to
them, which perfect solids of those bulkes and figures, that were primitives,
would not.

It Is true, Descartes assigns that figure to the particles of Niter to
explicate the manner of its Accension, which produces Heat, when so modified;
and that perhaps more violent than any other Bodies do. But as it is
sufficiently known that in many instances it much refrigerates; and there must
be a natural reason for one effect as well as the other; I conceive that of
both, however opposite, may genuinely enough be deduced from that fabric,
according to different modifications; and therefore may be presumed to
establish the notion of that kind of figures. For in order to produce the
latter they, by entering with their apex, as I just now said, into the
porosities of the organs (which they must do, if the point be very sharp,
though carried to them with ever so slow a motion) and still piercing more
deeply by degrees, may placidly enough retard the motion of the substances
therein agitated. And indeed to effect this a comparatively slow motion seems
necessary; such as agrees not only to the forementioned notion of Cold, but
also both to the Air in general, which is placed in a boundless expansion, and
therefore being not straightened must move calmly enough when not forcibly
impelled; and especially to these Nitrous particles, which being dissociated by
others of different kinds one from another, and having ordinarily there no
violent impulse, must, on the account of their make, move leisurely when
carried with the whole course of the mass of Air; and the rather, since the
resistance, which their concomitant substances make against the thicker
extremity of them, must much retard their motion. Withal, if it happen that
these pointed particles enter into the passages of those sensible Bodies, they
may be presumed so to strike against some of the fibers that constitute them,
that they must from thence irritate them to contract themselves, and so the
motion of the fluid substances in them must be effectually checked. But as for
the production of Heat, another modification of them must be assigned, viz. a
very brisk agitation from some external occasion; which happening, the apex,
being more easily agitated than the basis, must necessarily describe a circle
about it, which by reason of its greater bulk cannot be so easily moved out of
its place, but only gyrate about its proper center according to the direction
of its cone; and by so doing the cone must needs strike very violently against
such Bodies it meets in its way; whence a sense of Heat to sensible Bodies must
necessarily proceed, in regard the force of this agitation must be supposed to
be greater than that of the moved particles in the organ: which too must be
raised to a much more considerable degree, when great numbers of these
particles conspire to the like motion; especially if minute accensible
substances of other kinds are interspersed among them, which, both from their
own disposition to be so agitated, and their disterminating a little these
nitrous ones, whereby they may have room to begin their gyration, may promote
this accension; as in the too fatally known experiment of Gunpouder. I must
indeed acknowledge that the angles at the basis of these corpuscles, if they be
Pyramidal, according to Mr. Leewenhoeck's observation, may hinder the gyration,
Descartes supposes, in some degree: but it is easy enough to conceive, that, as
well here, as for the making his globuli aetherei, these angles, by the very
brisk motion the corpuscles are put into may presently be ground off, and so
they fitted for this gyration; and this much more easily than in that instance:
because those primitive particles must be supposed to have been exquisitely
solid, whereas these two have been coagmentated of some formerly divided, and
only now cohering from the forementioned correspondency of their sides.

So that the difference seems to consist in this, that to produce Cold it is
requisite that these nitrous particles should both move singly and placidly,
and also insinuate themselves amongst such substances as may confine them,
being once entered, on every side, and so hinder the above mentioned gyration:
Whereas to engender Heat it is necessary that they should be, both in greater
numbers, be briskly agitated, and generally move in a sufficiently yielding
medium, and at only such a distance from one another, as that in their gyration
they may beat off one another with their points; from whence the motions of
others among which they move must needs be considerably increased; and withal
they either previously require, or, if the force of the agitation be the
greater, make in almost ever so close a room a considerable space for
themselves to move in.

But perhaps an objection may be raised against what I intimated a little
before concerning the ordinary motion of the Nitrous, particles in the Air,
which I suppose to be carried with their Cones forwards: For it may be urged,
that, being very confusedly moved, and amongst fluid substances, sometimes the
Basis, and sometimes the sides, may in such an agitation be as well carried so
as the Apex, and then the consequences of their insinuation, which I deduce,
cannot have place; the assigned figure being that which fits them to produce
the effect. To which I return, first that though some may in their motions,
when brisk, so appel to Bodies as is objected; yet there being greater numbers,
than ordinary, in Frosty Seasons floating in the Air, it is probable that some,
at least, of them will be carried as I suppose. But secondly, it seems to me
probable, that being moved placidly enough (according to the supposition) their
natural tendency must be with their points forwards: For in that posture they
both find less resistance amongst those against which they move, and are
supported in their motion by other lateral ones crowding upon them; and also
those which are moved behind them impell them the more easily forward when they
impinge against a flat surface (as the Basis is supposed generally to have, or
at least what approaches toward it) than against that of any other figure; and
therefore determine them to carry their Apex as I said.

But whatever their make be, it is both generally supposed, and seems to me very
probable, that without these the Air could hardly be vital. For some substances
that are fit to be agitated, but unapt to cohere, seem requisite to be
intermixed amongst the various parts of our Blood, and other liquors, which
may, by their vibrations, whether occasioned from without, or from the motion
of our spirits, keep them from too close complications, which that many of them
are much subject to is very obvious: and these I take to be those usually
called Nitrous.

But though these in the Air, may have a very great, if not the principal,
influence, on any Bodies they can enter into to produce many effects, but
particularly, on sensile ones, Cold; yet both the Elastical particles and also
the steams before mentioned, with which the Atmosphere is considerably stored,
must much concur to any of them; these on the account of their great variety
and irregularity, whereby they are apt to be determined to very differing
motion, and thence to solicit the particles of the Bodies they act on to the
like, for the Nitrous ones to enter; and those by their expansiveness enlarging
the passages for them. So that when the Air from any occasion happens to abound
more than ordinarily with Niter, the assigned effect of it may be presumed
easily to be produced, and especially on our Bodies, which being of a
contexture tender and yielding enough, must be injuriously affected, if either
the motions, or other disposition of its particles prove to be disproportionate
to the parts of them, or substances contained in them.

Therefore to enquire, Secondly, how our Bodies, but particularly the Brain,
come to be thus injuriously affected from hence, we may take notice that the
Air (with the substances it carries in it) exerts it influence partly on the
liquors, and partly on the solid parts.

First, for the liquors; we may consider briefly how it comes to be admitted
into, and being so, after what manner it acts upon, first the Blood, and then
the nervous juice (to omit the rest of them, as little conducing to the present
speculation) and this as well amicably as noxiously.

First, As to the Blood (which is most considerable as to quantity and supplys
the matter to the nervous and the rest of the juyces) we may take notice, that
though the Air may even by contact affect it in the surface of our Bodies, as
considerably pressing on us, and so perhaps arrest or variously determine its
motion in some degree, yet it must principally do this by being admitted into
it. This admission seems obvious; since, 1 st, living in it, we cannot take
any, either meats or drinks, but some Air will be admixed, and so be conveyed
into our Blood with them. Besides, 2 dly, it seems not improbable (though it
have undergone some contest) that some of the finer parts of it may be
admitted, in inspiration, farther than barely the cavities of the bronchia,
since it must be owned there are vessels from the little glandules dispersed
throughout them, which transmit from the Blood there: and whether those vessels
may not receive something (though not so much) into them upon inspiration, as well
as cast forth by expiration, may deserve to be considered, since the Air comes
into the Lungs with some violence; and they, being placed in so warm a
situation, may (besides the distention upon inspiration) be presumed to be as
well lax enough to admit a subtle substance as eject a gross one: and it seems
not altogether improbable that nature might design this reciprocation of motion
for that end partly. But withal, 3 dly, the pores every where in the skin seem
well enough adjusted to admit somewhat from the Air, as well as conveigh forth
those very gross impurities, which many times, if not very usually, pass forth
without any trouble. And if it be objected that the transpiration continually
proceeding from within must hinder any admission from without by the same
vessels (which notion heretofore seemed to me to have great weight, as well in
relation to these, as most other vessels, and liquors in the Body, though, upon
farther thoughts, it requires some limitations, which belong not to this place
to be laid down) it may be replied, that this transpiration, though it should
be supposed continual, is not in the same tenor still; so that when it
proceeds minutely, there may be an admission perhaps from without, between the
particles of this gross and slowly moved matters in vessels patulous enough;
when we consider both the great pressure of the Almosphere, which may easily
enough be presumed on that score to intrude some particles of the Air between
them to fill up the spaces left by the exhaling vapors; and also the cessation
in some degree of the extrusive motion, whether proceeding from the
expansiveness of the evaporating matter or the too much contraction of the
parts; both which remitting, the resistance is less, and the room more, for the
admission of those. Being thus admitted, it is obvious to deduce, from what was
intimated before, how it ordinarily operates on the Blood, viz. that partly by
the insinuation of its elastical and other irregular particles among the parts
of it, partly the interposition as well as lancination of the nitrous, the
ramous, and other grosser, being kept in a continual agitation, do both undergo
due comminutions, and also are hindered from too closely adhering, and thence as
well from stagnating in the wider vessels, as obstructing the capillaries and
interstices between the arteries and veins. But such an agitation being
necessary to it for the keeping up its vital crasis, it may easily be inferred,
that if such Air be admitted as shall overmuch check this agitation, the crasis
of it must come to be much altered, and those parts which were before
dissociated by the briskness of their motion must, being considerably ramous,
lay hold on one another, and so either become grumous, or create a viscosity in
it, which, once begun, is not soon, nor easily, corrected; these particles
clasping one another too firmly to be quickly unlocked by the permeating
spirits; whose activity likewise these viscous substances are apt to elude by
their lubricity, thence obliging them to slip by them; or else inviscating them.

Secondly, As to the nervous juice; it being made out of the Blood, must
therefore, in some degree, undergo impressions analogous to what are made upon
this from substances admixed with it; whether we consider it in its due, or
depraved, state: since it may be easily imagined that some of the admitted
substances of the Air, before mentioned, may be deposited into the nerves at
their original, together with the true matter of that juice: and besides if the
Blood in general be once become viscous (from whatsoever cause) it is scarce
possible, but that some part of such a matter must in the act of secretion pass
into the nerves: so that the Air, in some constitutions of it, much disposing
to viscosity, its influence therefore must be interpreted to be partly on this
juice at such times. But moreover, I see no reason but some particles of it may
when more than ordinarily abounding with such substances as are subtle and
active, even through the pores be admitted into this liquor; our Bodies being
every where permeable to subtle substances; since I conceive, they in a due
proportion are necessary even to the due spiritualization of this juice; and
therefore, for its excitation toward that may require to be admitted, partly,
a nearer way than that round-about one of the chyle.

But, Secondly, The Air's influence must be acknowledged to be very great on
the solid parts likewise; as both immediately touching upon some of them, and
also, by reason of their firmness, being longer retained by them, when once
admitted into their porosities (which, by the mediation of the Blood, besides
the other ways mentioned, which are applicable to these as well as the liquors,
it is easy to imagine its particles may) than in those fluid substances. So that
in the forementioned suggestion of its superabounding with noxious substances,
they must be much disposed to be affected by it. And indeed there seem to be
none, even of the most consistent parts of our Bodies, but are pervious enough
to, and consequently apt to be acted on by, such penetrating substances.

But among them all none seem so liable to receive impressions from them as the
Brain, on the account of its tender constitution. For, though Nature has placed
so strong fences about it, that perhaps 'twill hardly be admitted that the
Coldness of the Ambient can greatly prejudice through them; yet that it may, by
the mediation of the Blood passing through it, is, I suppose easy enough to be
allowed from what has been said. But besides, there seem two or three other
ways, by which, in such a constitution of the season, it may be injured; viz.
First, By the Air's affecting the mammillary processes, as it passes briskly by
them upon inspiration: which being considerably large nerves must (besides the
consideration of the impetuosity of the Air's motion in that circumstance) be
acted on by considerable numbers of its particles at once, and so undergo a
strong impression, which may easily enough be conceived to be propagated to the
Brain; partly, by disturbing their regular tonick motion, which must, from
their tensity, be continued up to their original; partly, by the ingress of too
many of the lancinating particles of it into them; which besides the fixing, or
dissipating, the animal spirits (which I conceive to be much of the nature of
volatill salts) may disorder the tone of these nerves first, and then (by the
continuance of the impulse of those behind, which have the same ground to
attempt an entrance) that of the Brain it self; which, being more tender than
the nerves, must therefore, when the cause of the disaffection reaches it, be
proportionally injured. A second way I conceive is at the ears, whose outer
cavity going deep seems to be, in part, contrived for warming the Air, that it
may not by its Coldness disaffect those exquisitely sensible auditory nerves
and the membranes, upon whose due tone and tensity as the sense of hearing
seems mainly to depend, so must it be much impaired if so unusual impressions
are made upon it by intensly Cold Air, and besides those nerves being thence so
disaffected must by their contractions conveigh the like motions up to the
Brain, and so disturb and weaken it. And I formerly knew a very Learned
person, who had a total and irremediable deafness, that was caused, as he told
me, by a journey taken in a very keen frost over the Mountains in Wales: to
which I remember not whether any Apoplectick distemper succeeded, but the
instance at least evidences the great effect of intense Cold upon the nerves,
which had it lasted long, it is to me probable that by being propagated up to
the Brain it might have produced either that or other nerval distempers.
Another way, whereby I conceive the Cold Air may be injurious to the Brain, is
at the extremities of the nerves in all parts of the skin, which having (as
must be owned I presume) apertures there, may possibly admit some such subtle
and lancinating substances, as I have supposed to be constantly, but in frosty
seasons more copiously, carried in the Air; and being once admitted may, on the
same ground as I have urged in relation to the olfactory Nerves by consecution
come to affect the Brain it self: But though their tracts are very long and
small, and so there cannot be a proportionable influence, as in those; yet
their great numbers, and the consideration that they are on every side pressed
upon by the Air, may perhaps be thought to Compensate for that defect.

But this pressure of the Air on the surface of our Bodies (which I distinguish
from that on the olfactory nerves on this consideration, that in one case it is
uniform, depending only on the weight of the Atmosphere, or such general
motions in it, as make it act uniformly on all parts of the surface of them,
which by their make, and private motions, determine it not otherwise; in the
other, some part of it is moved with a greater violence, from the dilatation of
the parts designed for Respiration; whose cavity therefore being to be filled
in proportion to that dilatation, it must happen that that portion of Air that
does it must have brisker agitation than the rest of its mass, and make
impressions accordingly) this pressure, I say, may prove chiefly injurious to
the Brain by its acting on the Nerves in the Ears: Because they, being
terminated at a cavity which is still kept warmer than the rest, by the steames
continually exuding from every side of it and for some time somewhat detained,
there must therefore be more open, and consequently more liable to injuries if
an extraordinary occasion happen, such as I am instancing in, to make an
impression on them. And this must happen rather to tender Bodies, and those who
accustom themselves to keep much within doors, than to the more robust, whose
employments expose them much to the Air at all seasons, both on the score of
the comparative flaccidity of all parts in them, and the defect of a due
digestion in their blood and other liquors through want of due exercise, which
must dispose them to be put into confusion when violent causes come to excite
it; and experience shows that such persons of all others are most obnoxious to
the alterations of the Air.

So that the manner of this action seems to consist in the penetration made by
the Nitrous particles (principally) of the Air upon the Fibers of the Brain
(for that as well as all other solid parts must consist of Fibers) which
thereby undergo some, however small, solution of continuity; and either the
little cavities of those Fibers (for I think the Aeconomy of our Bodies can
hardly be mechanically made out without supposing them all to be Vessels,
though our sensories cannot determine it) become straightened, or their sides
perforated; on the account of either of which, they cannot duly either receive,
or retain, and consequently not regularly transmit, the substances destined to
each part which is to be respectively supplied by them. In that continuity, due
confirmation, and repletion of them, I suppose the Tone of the parts to
consist: and therefore when any thing perverts any of these requisites to it,
as in our present case, all the consequences, emergent from the impulse of the
blood or other liquors disturbed in their motion, may be expected.

Now such an Atony happening to be in so very tender a part as the Brain,
cannot therefore easily be rectifyed, but may continue much longer, than if it
happen to other parts whose Fibers being stronger, and functions fewer, must on
both scores ( caeteris paribus) sooner and more easily return to their natural
constitution. And not only the reason of the thing, but daily experience, shows
it; that whereas most other parts of our Bodies, having once received any
injurious impression, as by falls blows, etc. do after fit remedies used,
return to their due tone quickly, the cause once removed; the Brain on the
contrary long retains its weakness if once injured, though for the present
releived in some degree: as, for instance those that have had an Apoplectick
fit once, do many times, on whatsoever light occasion either find a return of
it, or at least undergo a considerable weakness of their intellectual
faculties, not to be corrected but by a long and constant regularity, if it be
at all: and the like is observable concerning those who have been seized by
Vertiginous and Hypochondriacal distempers (which I take to be properly Nerval,
and to spring from the Brain, or its liquor, disaffected) from which few happen
to be perfectly freed: their imagination indeed, being disturbed, disposing
them to be too immorigerous.

So that I conceive it may be inferred, that if the Ambient Air come to have a
great degree of Coldness, especially if it continue long, both the
forementioned disposition of the Blood to supply matter for Apoplexies must be
introduced, and also such a debility may be impressed on the tone of the Brain,
that they may much more readily invade, if the ordinary (though at other times
innoxious, for the most part at least) occasions happen to bring these
dispositions to effect.

Now it is known that the Winter of the year 1683, (from which I date my Era of
this frequency of Apoplexies) was so intensly cold, and that cold of so long
continuance, that no man's memory living could supply him with a parallel year;
and there was no need to repair to the Northern Region to make experiments of
freezing spirituous liquors in order to find out the extent of this effect of
it: since which time it may be observed that this distemper has been so rife.

But since it is requisite the Assertion should be established as much as
posible by due observations, it came into my thoughts to examine the London
Bills of Mortality; which may be presumed to be a standard for all the Kingdom,
as well as all other places where the same constitution of the Air has
happened. And though it may be urged, that the accounts of diseases in them are
taken by persons who are not Judges of those things; yet many diseases
carrying, by their obvious symptoms, such evidences of their nature, that it is
almost impossible to mistake them, and above all, Apoplexies, as before was
suggested; if the matter of fact (whereof the Searchers are Judges) as to the
number of those that dye suddenly (and it is great odds those, for much the
greatest part, dye of Apoplexies) be clear, as I suppose it is acknowledged by
all, I see nothing but it may be brought to establish the Hypothesis. Having
therefore looked into the general Bills for near Twenty years past, I find the
account of those that dyed of Apoplexies and sudden death (which are there,
and, I conceive, may passably enough be reckoned under the same class) to stand
thus.

An. Dom. Apop. and sud. 1670 79. 1671 63. 1672 65. 1673 84. 1674 101. 1675 86.
1676 84. 1677 66. 1678 83. 1679 103. 1680 95. 1681 94. 1682 100. 1683 108. 1684
152. 1685 112. 1686 129. 1687 110.
From whence I think the probability, at least, of my Era may be inferred,
whatever may be thought of the notions that are brought to give a reason of it.
For the great increase of number in the year 1684 must evidence that; and it
seems obviously deducible, that as some great and general cause from the
constitution of the season must influence such accidents; so that assigned,
from the Coldness, may have that energy here; since both 'twas so remarkable,
and nothing else appeared (either upon my own, or any others observation or
notion, so far as I have yet learnt) fit to stand in competition with it. And
from comparing the accounts of the subsequent years with those which went
before, there seems reason enough to suppose, that since the indisposition
lasted (but in somewhat a lower degree) though the external occasion have
ceased, the weakness impressed on the nervosum genus, according to what has
been before deduced, is not yet obliterated. And indeed if we take notice of a
disease of another denomination in the same papers (which by the dreadfulness
of its symptoms is almost as evident as the Apoplexy) viz. the class of
Convulsions, we may observe the effect of that impression on the Brain to be so
far from vanishing, that it rather seems to be in the increase though the
symptoms that declare it are altered: that class standing thus.

An. Dom. Convuls. 1670 1695. 1671 1650. 1672 1965. 1673 1761. 1674 2256. 1675
1961. 1676 2363. 1677 2357. 1678 2525. 1679 2837. 1680 3055. 1681 3270. 1682
3404. 1683 3235. 1684 3772. 1685 3420. 1686 3731. 1687 3967.
So that though the flaceidity, impressed on the Brain from that occasion, may
be in good measure by this time abated, and unless the like, or some as
forcible causes, happen again may, it is to be hoped, quite cease (and I suppose
it may be observed that the forementioned frequency of Apoplexies is a late
somewhat abated) yet it may however have been so disordered in its tone, as to
make secretions of substances out of the alluent Blood (which carries matter
for those of very many sorts) which may become so disagreeable to the nervous
liquor, as necessarily to produce those terrible symptoms, which though they kill
not so immediately, yet many times prove as certainly fatal at long running.
And the great numbers of vertiginous and other nerval indispositions, which I
presume other Physicians as well as my self usually meet with, may very well
argue some considerable indisposition impressed on the Brain more of late than
formerly which must give a rise to them. And indeed if we observe it we may
find (at least I have) that most Fevers of late years, and even at this time,
have been attended with nerval Symptoms, as either Tremors or Convulsive
motions in the Tendons, or else Comatous affects, Deliria (for the most part
slow) or some others of this original: And the Symptoms mentioned by that most
curious observer of the changes of diseases, my Learned and Worthy Friend Dr.
Sydenham (in his Schedula monitoria de novae Febris ingressu) to discriminate
the Fever of this new Constitution from those foregoing, are obviously those
of the Brain or Nerves affected as may be easily collected by those that cast
their eye on the History of it he lays down.

So that the notion is not to be restrained to Apoplexies, but ought to be
carried farther to many, if not most, other nerval indispositions, which I
conceive, may be occasioned by the same general cause. For if it be determined
to act on the Brain to its weakening (as I have endeavored to demonstrate
intense Cold is) the constitution of it and its appendices, being very much
differing in several persons, it must follow, that diseases of various kinds
and denominations may happen, according as the organization of either the
Brain, or the Systema Nervosum (which may be possibly concluded to be the whole
Body, except the liquors and Parenchymata) happens to be different in some from
what it is in others: And indeed the Brain in all persons, who have even the
most firm constitution of it, being yet of too tender a one to resist all
impressions made by so powerful a cause as the forementioned disposition of the
Air was; and being so hard to be restored when once injured; and if that be not
fully done, easy to be afresh affected even by much less powerful causes of
many other kinds, which frequently happen upon the various mutations of the
Air; it is no wonder that the Bills should be so filled with Convulsions, as well
as that other nerval indispositions should now adays so much invade.

But in relation to the numerousness of Convulsions (mentioned, as I said in
the weekly Bills) it being objected that their fatality happens, probably, most
to Children; which, having been born since that frosty winter, cannot be
presumed to have been influenced by it; I answer, first, that the supposition
is precarious, since the Bills make no such distinction; so that it may be not
altogether improbable that though that mortality may have been most among them,
they being the fittest subject of such diseases, yet adult persons may withal
have gone to make up the number of the increase: and I see no reason but that
since it must be acknowledged some elder persons have before that time dyed of
this disease, they must proportionably contribute to the number now, unless the
contrary can be shown, or else some more probable cause assigned, than what I
am going to give, why more infants must dye of it now than formerly. For,
secondly, there seems reason that parents who have received a morbid
impression on a part of that consequence, that the Brain is, to the production
of seminal matter, and thence the formation of the Foetus, as to the necessary
functions of their proper life, may propagate that to the children they beget
or bring forth, as well as dispositions to the Gout, Stone, Consumptions, or
other confessedly Hereditary diseases; which too, are most of them nervall. And
this impression on the Foetus must, in probability, happen principally on that
part of it, which being chiefly influential on the rest of the body must have
its Stamina laid as soon as any other parts if not before them all: which too
from the congruity of substance this has with the analogous part in the
parents, which has the principal effect in the production, may be supposed to
be principally affected in the Child. And the Brain having been weakened in the
Parents, the reason seems more over much stronger for the production of these
than any of the owned Hereditary distempers, if the Parents have ever formerly
had Convulsions (which very many have whilst Children, as is generally
observable; and I see not but that this is sufficient to make and denominate
the same disease, in the Child that springs from such persons, Hereditary)
since here is so powerful an operating cause superadded to a seminal debility
and impression.

But it is objected by a very ingenious person against the Era I assume, 1 st,
That the increase of Apoplecticks in 1684 being but 44 above the number of
those that dyed of that distemper in 1683 is too small an increase to be taken
notice of for establishing it; 2 ly, That there have been two or three great
Frosts within the 18 years I mention, without any observable increase of
Apoplexies; 3 ly, That (against my suggestion of the great increase of
Convulsions) it is notorious that any one, that has but the least Spasme before
death, in the Bills dies Convulsive, besides those that dye of other
distempers, particularly the French Pox, whose credit their Friends are willing
to save, and so give them in as dying of Convulsions.

To the first of which objections I reply, 1 st, that I think it is not the
number of the increase in general, but the proportion to that of former years
that ought to be considered in this matter. For though the number in it self
be but small, yet comparatively to the rarity of the distemper I take it to be
so considerable, that few diseases flowing from the Anomaly of seasons on
account of the first qualities, except Fevers (which sometimes, I conceive,
prove epidemical, even without what we call Malignity) exceed it; being not
much under a third part more than that of those that dyed the foregoing year,
and by much more than a third exceeding that of several of the years cited, and
more than double the number of those that dyed in some of those years. So that
there is to me a great deal of reason to think the Cold season influenced that
increase unless some fitter cause can be assigned. 2 dly, That those distempers
that lie in the nervosum genus, viz. the solid substance of the Body (or even
in the root of it, the Brain, whose texture yet is finer and more tender than
that of all the rest of it) or in the Liquors that are contained and carried in
it, being seated in a matter less Heterogeneous and more removed from the
brisk agitation impressed by the Heart, as they are more difficult to be
introduced, so a smaller excess in the number of them amounts to a greater
proportion comparatively, than where there are those ready causes of a
commotion, as there are in the diseases which are generally called Epidemical
(as malign fevers, pleurisies, angina's, etc. from the indisposition of the
season.) For these being seated in fluids which are very heterogeneous and
laxe, and agitated not only with a fermentative but brisk circulatory, and
thence very confused, motion, are therefore easily put into disturbances from
external morbifick causes; the matter of which, if active (as there are
particles enough amongst those we converse with that are) may easily insinuate
into the Bodies of most persons, especially those who are not of a very
vigorous constitution, and may thence excite fevers in them so determined in
their symptoms, as this matter is disposed to affect; whereas those that are
founded in the nervosum genus require, on the score of the mentioned
conditions, a long continued action of the morbid causes, to induce those
impressions that must occasion them. From whence,

(To answer the Second objection) it seems to me no wonder that none of the
former Frosts, referred to in the objection, should introduce distempers
(though perhaps of the nature, yet not) of the number of those under
consideration. For none of those in my memory; nor, so far as I can be
informed, in that of any man, were either so violent or long lasting as this,
and consequently the degree of debilitation impressed by them, could not be so
great either on the Brain or Blood. But perhaps, if a due examen were made
(which I have not the opportunity now to do) it might be found that nerval
indispositions of other denominations may have succeeded them, answerable to
the degree of the impression. However this impression (which, I conceive, from
the grounds before laid down, must be somewhat) having not been obliterated
(which it may not perhaps in many years) when this great one invaded, might
facilitate the effects of it, which without such a procatarxis might have been
the less influential on our health.

But as to the third objection; I conceive it is no more than what may be urged
against that symptom in the Bills from their beginning. For I do not think
that either the searchers, or others who give them the account, were more
skilful formerly to distinguish between those distempers we call Convulsions,
and Casual Spasmes, than now. And why there should be more of this latter kind
now than formerly, I cannot conceive, unless they be the effects of true
Convulsions. So that I see nothing but that the assigned compute may hold good;
especially since the increase is so very great that nothing but a real fixed
cause can introduce it. And as to what is urged of the French Pox, etc. being
put in under this Class, the answer is the same, since the same reasons have
always been for the concealment; and it is known the Pox, and its infamy too,
has been considerably longer in the world than Weekly Bills, which are not of
an Hundred years standing.

From these considerations put together, you see my sense of the question
proposed; to which I am sure you expected not so tedious an answer. And I
assure you I designed not this prolixity: but several deductions still falling
in which to me seemed requisite to clear the notion, I am sure you will not
expect apologies for my doing that which your self have occasioned.

But since you farther require the methods of Prevention and Cure of this
distemper, which I have either used or think requisite; Though after what so
many Authors, and particularly Dr. Willis, have written on this subject, it
seems altogether superfluous to say any thing; yet, to let you see how ready I
am to comply with you in this as well as your other desire, I shall venture at
least to give you my thoughts in general concerning them; together with my
reasons, such as they are, of the administrations to be proposed, to justify my
dissent from such, who in any of the particulars think differently from me.

But first, though not pretending to write an exact treatise of Apoplexies, but
only to give an answer to your questions, you are not to expect I should
congest Prognostics, according to the custom of Authors when they propose to
write solemnly concerning any diseases; yet I conceive it is requisite I should
lay down, or rather recapitulate, one or two that respect the fatality: more
indeed to excuse Physicians (who are generally liable to be taxed if success
attend not their endeavors) than for any solid and useful information they can
bring; since the cause of it cannot be certainly known but upon dissection. And

First, if an Apoplexy proceed from any considerable effusion of blood in
Specie, it is, as I intimated before altogether incurable, since the tenderness
of the part is such that it cannot resist the force of the portrusion behind.
And since even any stop in the Sanguiferous vessels will, if not presently
removed by Phlebotomy or other due remedies, so distend them that either an
eruption or stagnation must quickly follow, it is not at all to be wondered at
that so few escape; since so few are convinced of (what I take to be) the true
remedy where there is a possibility of recovery.

Secondly, that likewise which proceeds from a Polypus must needs prove as
fatal, both from the difficultly dissoluble nature of that substance, and the
shortness of time medcines (if such there were) that should effect the
dissolution, are allowed to exert themselves in: the blood, as I just now said,
for want of motion quickly stagnating and growing grumous in any part where
it is stopped, and so hindering the motion of, and alike affecting, the rest.

To which yet, thirdly, give me leave to subjoyne; that if the Pulse continue
any thing strong, the probability of recovery is much the greater, since it is
an argument the Brain is not wholly overflowed, but that the mass of blood yet
continues in its channels, and produces the distemper only by distention: so
that when they shall by due administrations be freed from it, there is hope the
Brain may return to its pristine condition; at least in some degree. But yet,

Fourthly, that those who have escaped one fit, are in very great danger of a
return; since (as I have before alleged) the Brain, having been once injured,
is, by reason of its tender make, so difficultly reducible, in all respects, to
its former Tone; and therefore from any, even slight, occasion be afresh more
easily disordered. Therefore it very much concerns those who have once escaped
that danger, or even that of a great Vertigo, or other Cephalic distempers, to
use a good regulation of themselves for the future, and also to persist long in
the use of such corroborating means as may at last ( Deo annuente) perfectly
restore it, as well as keep the blood in a due crasis, and prevent all
antecedent causes. Which advice yet very few are apt to follow; two many being
apt, when once in some degree recovered, to imagine (and suggest too) that
Physicians urge that more for their own advantage than theirs.

Which premised, I conceive, first, for Prevention, that these two general
Indications ought to be proposed. The removing the Antecedent cause, and the
corroborating the Brain.

The former is to be answered, 1 st, by general evacuations of humors, whether
Laudable, if they be congested in too great a quantity, or Peccant: 2 ly, by
keeping up, or, if it be depraved, restoring the blood to its due crasis.

1 st. As to evacuations; Phlebotomy seems to deserve the first consideration;
since, as I have endeavored to make it out, it is either the congestion of the
blood in the sanguiferous vessels of the Brain, or its inundation upon it, that
is the most general containing cause of it. So that all persons of a Plethorick
habit of Body if fearful of this distemper (Fear, by occasioning the
contraction of the Brain, the seat of our apprehensions, if not determining the
blood to it, at least causing a check of its motion through it, and so a
congestion in, or effusion out of, its vessels) as well as those, whose blood,
from other symptoms, or the emission of some of it, may be collected to be
viscous, especially if they happen, with distention of the Veins and
Lassitudes, to be vertiginous, or inclined to pains in the head, ought to take
so much away as may, in probability, prevent too great a distention here, and
this not only at such times of the year, when the blood is more apt than usual
to rise into a Turgescency, as in the Spring and Summer, but at any time when
they occasionally find it to be so disposed. And though many may (and are
indeed used, to) urge, that not letting blood at all they have hitherto escaped
this, as well as other distempers, when some have been ceased, and dyed too,
notwithstanding such their care (which argument too, by the way, may be urged
by many of vigorous constitutions against all precaution, against all diseases,
and for a liberty for all debaucheries.) Yet since many have fallen into it,
who might probably by Phlebotomy have prevented it, as well as that many have
by it found present relief when actually ceased it is but a secure caution to
use the most probable means of prevention; since though all constitutions are
not alike, and some may be sensible of weakness for the present (which yet
quickly goes off by a little subsequent care) yet experience shows there are
very few but find, though they loose very large quantities of blood, they
quickly regain it, as (to omit the reasons of it, as less proper for this
place) beside abundance of instances that might be brought of those, who, free
from the too general apprehensions of the danger of loosing it, have had it
designedly taken away in large quantities, Spontaneous Haemorrhages, and those
from large wounds, might convince persons unbiassed by their own, or others,
unaccountable fears. Therefore I should propose that any persons who dread this
disease, whose blood has not been depauperated by preceding ones, especially if
their appetites be generally good, and they use not store of exercise (filling
their veins by the one, and not taking care proportionally to empty them by the
other) should take away blood at least every Spring; though oftener if occasion
require; and much the rather if they accustom themselves to (that frequently
fatal custom of) much drinking of Strong liquors; so to keep both the
sanguiferous vessels from too large a distention, and the blood more calm.
Twenty ounces I take to be about a middle proportion for most to loose; which
may, I suppose, bear the proportion of about a twentieth part to that in most
Bodies, and not very much less in most, and I believe can do none (under the
forementioned circumstances) any hurt, but much good to most, by securing them
from the danger of this, as well as many other distempers.

Besides Phlebolomy, I take moderate Purging to be requisite, in order to carry
of viscid and other humors that, from the foresaid impressions made on the
Blood as well as the Brain, are apt to be congested; especially in the Bodies
of sedentary persons. This may be done usually Spring and fall; provided that
it be neither attempted with too violent medcines, nor too long continued, nor
too often repeated (which ill custom yet many Hypochondriacal persons, I have
met with, will not be dissuaded from) least instead of taking a way the
luxuriant humors, these medcines, by too much exagitating and disturbing the
Blood, introduce the distemper they are given to prevent. But if the stomach be
oppressed, it is requisite it should be discharged upwards before medcines of
the contrary tendency be given; since catharticks, as they can only carry a way
thence a small part of that clogge that causes the symptom (their irritation
not being sufficient in comparison with the emeticks, to make it contract it
self for a total discharge) so may likewise take a long with them part of that
into the Blood; in regard they themselves must be carried into it by the way of
the Chyle, to effect the separations of those substances, we find they occasion
a discharge of, from it. And indeed the effects of vomiting are very extensive
toward the preventing these as well as many other, especially nerval,
distempers. For besides the freeing the stomach from any oppressing matter
which it is very apt to congest, and which, whilst lying there perverts
digestion, by either hindering the eruption of, or allaying, or else depraving
the liquor designed to exude out of the glaudulous coat of it into the cavity,
which I suppose to be the principal digestive ferment: so that digestion being,
by the removal of this matter, rightly performed, from the depravation of which
most diseases spring, the cause of them is thus cut off; I conceive the
irritation, and concussion, made by an emetick upon the nerves not only
belonging to the stomach, but (by the consent of the whole nervous systeme) all
the Body over, and upon the Brain it self, must occasion them to contract
themselves to the discharging of whatsoever fills, or is disagreeable to them.

Evacuations by Urine may be likewise procured by those who are of a gross
habit of Body, or whose Blood is of too close a texture or too viscous; and may
be used by such familiarly (premising those forementioned) either by
impregnating drinks for common use with diuretics, of which practical Authors
have store, or by taking fixed, volatile, or acid salts (all which are diuretical
in relation to some or other constitutions) or other more complex ones, as the
particular constitution of each person requires, even with our common meats and
drinks; they, if fitted to the several dyscrasies (for all are not proper for
all indiscriminately; those who abound with acid humors needing alcalizate
salts, either fixed or volatile to retund them, or others of an analogous
effect; as others whose Blood, by reason of its too highly exalted sulphurous
parts, is apt to be overmuch exagitated, as also those in whom even the volatile
salts are too brisk and acrimonious, require acids to mortify them) raising
generally no commotion in our Blood, but diverting the course of it from the
Brain which it is too apt to take. For partly by the congruity their particles
have to the secretory passages in the Kidneys, in order to enter into and open
them more than those in the other secretory parts; partly by the fusion they
make of the Blood, and the reducing many parts of it to such bulkes and figures
as fit them to enter likewise; partly by their action upon the nerves and their
liquor (which I suppose to be the determining ferment in all mixed secretions)
on the account of their angles, which fit them to vellicate and incide, as also
to accelerate the motion of any liquors they come to be mixed with; partly by
absterging, from that inciding power, any obstructing matter, that may lie in
the habit of the Brain, as well as any other parts, between the extremities (or
term of denomination if they are but continued vessels) of the arteries and
veins; they may very well, I conceive, both make the Blood more apt to
circulate more universally, and also direct the course of it to the Kidneys, in
regard some parts of it being continually, and more copiously than usual, thus
taken off from it, the rest must take its course, from other parts where 'twas
apt to stop, hither: it being known that it flows most thither, where it finds
apertures fit to let it, either in specie, or any of its parts go forth.

Those evacuations likewise by sweat may perhaps be sometimes attempted with due
caution; but neither indiscriminately by all persons, not at all times; and
require more than most others the judgment of a Physician to regulate them. For
if medecines to procure it be given when the Blood is of a texture not open
enough (which both frequently it is, especially near the beginnings of most
distempers, and which all persons are not judges of) or when too heterogeneous
substances abound in it, they dispose it many times more readily to fix upon
the Brain and nerves, than to part with its noxious particles at the designed
secretory parts; and a brisker motion being thence impressed on it, the
confusion of its parts must be increased; and so if not an Apoplexy, yet other
distempers, as certainly, though more slowly, deadly (at least very dangerous
and hard to be removed) may be introduced. But this ill custom of forcing
meats (whether by inward medcines or outward application) being so common
nowadayes; as I am satisfied that to this regulation are owing many
contumacious distempers which by calming, instead of exagitating the Blood a
little disturbed, would quickly have gone of, so it is fitting that those should
be admonished of the ill consequences of such a method who, (I will believe)
out of charity (which yet would be more fitly employed otherways) adventure
upon it, especially near the beginning of feverish indispositions, before the
morbifick matter is digested, and fitted to secede; as well as the multitude of
pretenders to Physic, who without a due knowledge of the grounds of Physic
(which those that industriously study it, know are not easy to be attained)
make this their sacred anchor when they know not what to do.

Another sort of evacuations for prevention may be proposed, viz. By
Fontanells. But though these look speciously, and many are fond of them, and
indeed they may be possibly useful to such who have escaped out of one fit, as
a constant draine, to divert some humors from the Brain, which, by too much
relaxing, or otherwise indisposing it, might occasion returns; this part
requiring thence, as I have deduced, a long time, and diligent regulation, to
recover its native tone, and so may need all manner of diversions as well as
other assistances: Yet to persons, free from other indispositions that require
them, I should think them, if not in some degree prejudicial, by drawing away
some part of what should be retained, at least superfluous, the humor
evacuated at them bearing usually but a small proportion to the daily supplies
brought into the blood, which therefore may become much depraved for all the
assistance these can give; especially in regard the evacuation is not of a
peccant humor in general, but made up of any sorts of particles that can get
out of the apertures of the divided vessels, and much different from what is of
natures designation in parts fitly by her Organized upon the first
construction. (For I cannot conceive it otherwise elective, than as those
apertures, which on the score of the Incision, or Erosion of the Vessels must
be large, can only discharge some such, sufficiently for the most part complex,
substances from the blood as are of a bulk and figure commensurate to them or
less, without any relation to them as disagreeable to the rest of the mass;
and so from that largeness of the apertures there must be transmitted a much
greater number of useful, than truly excrementitious, substances.) To say
nothing of the disturbance which the pain must occasion in a Body otherwise
sound. Whereas most of the useful evacuating administrations (except
Phlebotomy, which produces its effect mainly by the quantity it is used in)
make, or presuppose, a laxity, and separation of parts, in the substances from
whence the evacuation is to be had, as well as effect it at emissaries fitly
framed and disposed to let go such or such determinate humors.

Secondly; As to the corroborating the Crasis of the blood: Though those who
are in perfect health need it not, and medecines of that tendency may perhaps
make it ferment too highly, and so perhaps occasionally introduce the distemper
which the pretext of giving them is to prevent; yet to valetudinary persons, or
those whose blood, upon emission, appears viscous, or is otherwise depraved, I
suppose such administrations are very necessary. And to such I would
(universals premised) propose a course of bitter medcines, both at Spring and
Fall, if they are of cold and Phlegmatic constitutions; as I would advise
others, whose blood is too apt on light occasions to be exagitated, the
familiar use of appropriate calming medcines. But to all, Chalybeates (to be
diversified, and given with different vehicles, according to the several
constitutions of persons) may be of most extensive use; and have this to
recommend them, that they need no strict regulation, nay their effect is
depressed by confinement; stirring and changing the Air both actuating them,
and exciting and fermenting the blood, as also strengthening the tone of the
parts. Of these, the Chalybeat waters, as those of Tunbridge, Astrap, and
(which, I believe, is second to none) Ilmington in your neighborhood, and the
like, drank in Summer (and perhaps at other seasons, but that custom has not
authorized it here; though Henricus ab Heers, as great a judge of that as any
man, in his Spadacrene, Prescribed them with as good success in the midst of
Winter as at any time besides) for a month or longer, are, as the most
familiar, and confirmed by the practice of the greatest Physicians of many
ages, so perhaps the most efficacious of any preparation of Steel, as being
taken up by the water running through the Minera whilst the metal is yet in
solutis principiis, as the Chemists speak, and so most subtle and active; if so
be the Brain happen not before to have been too much intenerated: in which case
perhaps the water it self, Symbolizing with the indisposition (especially the
quantity considered) may predominate over the power of the Vitriol, dissolved
in it, to constringe the before weakened part. And the diversion to be used at
the Wells may not a little conduce to the effect of rectifying the blood, by
exciting the Spirits.

But as to the several Chalybeate preparations, give me leave so much to
digress (if you will call it a digression) as to say, that I think, if the
parts of our body and crasis of the blood are only to be strengthened, and no
store of Acids abound; those of them that have been opened by Acids, and so
reduced to a Vitriol, are most useful; since they may easily and immediately be
distributed, without the trouble given to Nature (which is not always able to
actuate a stubborn medecin that needs a strong key to unlock it) farther to
prepare them to be fit to enter into the recesses of the body. But if Acids
abound in us, the judicious Dr. Sydenhams method of giving the brae limature,
unaltered (for I believe his Extractum Absynthii can have little of the effect
of an Acid upon it) must be the most prevalent of all; since both the
intentions, viz. of absorbing Acids, and then strengthening the crasis of the
blood, and the tone of the parts, are by it answered; the Acids in the Stomach
proving perhaps as fit a menstruum for making a Vitriol, for those uses, as
those in the Chemists hands; whereas the intention of absorbing, if it have
place, can hardly be satisfied, if the medecin have been before satiated. And
indeed Acids being apt to be so predominant in us, especially in
Hypochondriacal distempers, which are so very frequent (as not only very common
eructations and vomitings of that kind, but the effect of Urinous Salts,
testaceous medecines, the usual antiscorbuticks which are generally found to
abound with volatile Salts, and other obsorbers of Acids, evince; besides the
rationale of such distempers which is speciously deducible from the
predominancy of Acids) that great persons proposal of it in that, though gross,
yet frequently very effectual, preparation seems to be the most universally
solid: though, as I said, if Acids abound not, the others, I should think,
would be the most effectual.

The second general Indication, The Coroborating the Brain, may be answered in
a great measure by the last mentioned administrations, viz. the use of
Chalybeates; whose effect is generally owned to extend it self to all the
consistent parts in the Body, as well as the blood; nay must more to those,
than this: since their action upon this is but transient; but those may be
presumed to arrest and detain them, though not all, yet as many as their Pores
can conveniently receive. For not only their Vitriolate particles, but also the
grosser ones, which remain after the abruption of those (as in Crocus Martis
Astringens, which is made by the avolation of the Vitriol, upon a long and
intense calcination) are confessedly styptical; and therefore being carried in
circulation (as well as acting on the Nerves in the Stomach) to the remotest
recesses in the Body and amongst them those in the Brain, may be presumed by
their lancinations, as forcing them thereby to gentle contractions, to rectify
their tone, when too lax, which I have supposed before to be a main condition
toward producing the distemper under consideration: And this faculty they must
most exert upon those parts whose indigencies are greatest; those whose tone is
firm not being fitted to receive, or at least be affected by, them. So that
when the Brain has been debilitated, they must exert that action principally
there.

But beside these, a frequent use of the generally owned Cephalicks, as
Rosemary, Sage, Betony, Lilly of the Valley, etc. may possibly much conduce to
corroborate the Brain; and may, without trouble or offense, be used in the Form
that Tea is; the general custom having denizon'd such a use of drinks: and
those whose apprehensions are greater, might besides have those Ingredients
fermented with their usual drinks.

But amongst all the drinks in common use (if you will not suspect the
Character given by one, who loves it so well, as you know I do; but who withal
have drank it near thirty years, not only innoxiously, but, I seriously
affirm, many times to my great advantage, especially when indisposed either at
my stomach or head) that of Coffee may perhaps contribute as much to a
prevention of the distemper as any; and that on a double account. First by
helping the stomach to digest, which it may effect, partly by reason of a
gentle Stypticity the particles which make the Tincture have, from the
torrefaction of the berries; partly from the actual heat it is usually drank
with; both which (but more effectually when conjoined) conduce much to
corroborate the tone of it; so that digestion being well performed here, and
good Blood thence produced, much of the antecedent cause both of Apoplexies and
other distempers must be by such administrations prevented: Secondly, by the
action it performs, I conceive, on the Brain it self: for, by means of the
moderate torrefaction, the aqueous parts of the berry are carried away, and the
viscous are altered in their texture; whereby the sulplureous and saline (I
dispute not whether preexistent, or made by the preparation, upon the
alteration of texture) associating with the terrence, come to constitute little
irregular masses, which are not immediately dissoluble (however those particles
may be in a tendency to avolation too, by reason of their not very strict
combination) but when diluted in the water, after the known manner of preparing
the drink, may be presumed to be carried through the mass of Blood in
circulation to the Brain; and there, entering into the pores of it, both keep
them open for a free passing of the spirits; and withal (especially if daily
but moderately, used) keep up the due tone of the Brain by the gentle
vellication such particles may make upon it; by which last means it becoms, I
conceive principally useful in the present instance. Therefore (for I will not
appropriate it to all) it seems to me (agreeably to Dr. Willis's notion, Pharm.
rat.) most proper for those who have too lax a constitution of the Brain, as
whose intellects or memories generally are slow, and who are much given to
sleeping, or to have a dull pain in their heads, especially upon free eating
and drinking, or such as are apt to vertigoes from to humid a constitution, or
to Catarrhs. But it is scarce proper (that you may see how little partial I am)
for such as are of an overwatchful temper, of very keen apprehensions, with a
thin habit of Body (though I have known some of that habit with whom it has
very well agreed: and that observation of agreeableness ought, by prudent
persons, to be consulted, not only in relation to this, but most other
medecines and even meats, since experience shows that, from undiscoverable, or
at least from our shallow insight into things undiscovered, causes, very
probable administrations ought to be superseded, as well as the contrary used)
and withal for those that are apt to convulsive symptoms upon light occasions
(though, I conceive, where, besides the irritative matter that makes
convulsions, there happens too great a laxity of the Brain, Coffee, by
fortifying the one, may in great measure prevent the admission of the other.)
All which to me show the nervosum genus to be of a texture, in such persons,
considerably compact, and comparatively dry, with which these particles may too
much correspond: and it may be observed that such persons many times contract
an unsteadiness or numness of their hands and other parts, as well as a general
indisposedness, and uneasiness by its (even, as to others, moderate) use. And
from these effects upon the inconsiderate use of it (as it is common to have
any, though the best, remedies abused when grown popular) it has amongst many
got the imputation of being a Paralytick drink, and disposing to Apoplexies;
such never reflecting what multitudes of others, comparatively to the few it
injuries, receive advantage by it.

Perhaps too you will expect my opinion concerning my other favorite, Tobacco.
Concerning which I must say that though I know many have an opinion of its
being Narcotick, or otherwise injurious to the Brain, and consequently
disposing to Apoplexies: yet (to say nothing of my having used it, and not
sparingly, for many years, without finding any such effect of it) the very
common custom of taking it for so many scores of years since it began to be in
vogue, must have made such a quality, if it had it, evidently taken notice of;
and consequently common prudence would have obliged people to have left it off
long ago, as deleterious, if experience did not evidence the contrary: for
there is no man but, if, laying aside prejudices, he will give himself the
trouble to observe, may easily find, that very many live to great years, and in
as great a state of health as those who take it not, that have long used it,
even immoderately. It must indeed be owned that it is not agreeable to all
constitutions: but the same may be said of almost any thing else, whether food
or Physic. And I presume no wise man will conclude from a few instances of the
disagreeableness of any thing to some men, when vast numbers of them on the
contrary side may be brought to warrant its use, that it ought universally to
be avoided, or branded with a note of infamy. My sense of it is, that in those
persons with whom it is found to agree, it is a very good drainer of humors, and
so may supply the place of Fontanels, or at least that fewer of these may be
necessary to those who abound with moisture. For, by its irritating and
occasionally (from the great afflux of the Saliva) enlarging the secretory
ducts in the glaudules about the Mouth, as it is evident there must be a great
discharge, so a great diversion from the Brain (though I own the greatest part of
the matter comes not immediately from thence but out of the Blood) in which
case it is advisable that the persons that take it should drink but moderately;
least otherwise they do themselves more hurt by the supply than they can
receive benefit by the discharge of moisture from this or any other
evacuations. But there seems another reason why Tobacco may be useful to those
who are disposed to Apoplexies (under the supposition of its agreeableness)
viz. that by reason of the vellication the smoke of it impresses on the nerves
in the Mouth, it makes them contract themselves, and so by consecution the
whole Brain comes to be analogously affected. So that if the Brain happen to be
more lax than ordinary, and thereby disposed to receive an afflux of Blood or
Serum, as I take it to be especially after a person has had and escaped one
Fit, as well indeed as in many other cases of preceding nerval indispositions,
I see nothing but it may prove a very useful administration, toward restoring
the tone of it: and it is known to be very advantageous to many Hysterical
persons; of which though perhaps other reasons may be assigned, as the altering
the texture of the Fermentative particles, by the association of those of the
smoke to them as they chance to be admitted, and so those of other figures and
bulks may hence emerge; or else the determination of the nerves to other
motions* by the action of this smoke impressed on the mammillary processes, or
other nerves about the Mouth or parts adjacent; yet this seems to me none of
the least probable, that by corroborating the tone of the Brain it prevents the
admission of those too elastical or otherwise heterogeneous particles into the
tubes of the nerves, which are the cause of the symptoms.

Also the frequent use of Volatile Salts may conduce much to a prevention,
under the limitations alleged for the use of Coffee; such as are spirits of
Sal Ammoniac, Hartshorne, Soot, etc. (which are but such Salts diluted) as
being, I conceive so congenerous to those called Animal Spirits, that they must
needs excite them in us when too torpid, or supply them when wanting; unless
the constitution of the Nerves be too dry or apt to be irritated by them. And
their effects have, in many instances of nerval distempers, found been so
remarkable, that they are now adays become of very familiar use, though
sometimes likewise abused.

But there are two specious administrations, much cried up, and used by many,
which deserve to be taken notice of, viz. Apoplectick Balsams (whose principal
use is to be smelt to) composed of perfumes Aromaticks, and other ingredients,
reputed Cephalicks, and Snush. Concerning the former of which, give me leave to
say, I think them so far from being useful for prevention, that they most
ordinarily prove very prejudicial. For by reason of their grateful smell and
the great activity of their odorous particles (but without any troublesome
irritation) some of them may easily enough be presumed to be admitted into the
Brain at the extremities of the olfactory nerves with the Air in inspiration;
and being once so, are so far from assisting it to contract it self, that,
they much relax and expand it, and consequently dispose it to admit an afflux
of blood, especially when before fitted (as I have said) to be congested in, or
make its way forth of, its vessels in the Brain. And their influence seems to
me to be very great likewise upon the fluid substances in the Brain, which have
all some lentor; and therefore these admitted substances, by reason of their
activity, may easily exagitate them; whereby the passages must come to be
enlarged, and so become capable of an afflux or congestion. I own indeed that,
in some cases of Headache, they may be, and have proved a very effectual
remedy; as perhaps when the matter that causes it may be acrimonious; but not
in the degree or kind to produce convulsive symptoms (all sorts of aculeated
particles being not fit to produce one effect:) which the soft particles of
these may, by their adhesion, so blunt or sheathe, that their lancination must
therefore immediately be taken off. But as these cases are but rare; so also
there ought to be a distinction made between the administration of medecines
upon an emergency, and their common use when no cause requires it; which last
the present caution refers too: for then there is reason to suspect they
meeting with no hostile particles, may too much relax and open the pores of the
Brain, and so give occasion to the suggested inconveniences.

If the experiment of convulsive symptoms (which imply contractions) ordinarily
excited by these medicines in those who are disposed to Hysteric fitts, be
urged against this notion, which supposes the distemper under consideration to
proceed from a laxity; I answer, first, that it seems probable that these
convulsive symptoms proceed from a kind of Explosion, according to the sense of
Dr. Willis, which must first infer an Expansion of them, and then a
contraction when the due requisites to it concur: for Secondly, the Aromatic
particles, though of themselves very soft, and agreeably entering at the pores
of the nerves, yet finding, after their admission, heterogeneous and
fermentative substances in the Brains of some persons, may be very much
inclined from their congress first to agitate, and then in return be agitated
by them; from whence the Brain, being vellicated, is forced into contractions
to expel them: upon which lucta, too, such corpuscles must, in probability be
formed, as may prove very vellicating on a second score, and so continue these
fitts, as being incapable to be suddenly expelled. Whereas when they happen to
be applied to persons not abounding with such fermentative particles, they may
only relax the tone of the Brain, and so dispose to Apoplexies on the
forementioned account.

On the same score, I conceive Snush, especially made as it is usually, with
Aromaticks and Perfumes, and so mild (either on the account of its ingredients,
or from frequent use) as not to cause Sternutation, to be prejudicial, instead
of being advantageous, to the health of those that immoderately use it, and
more perhaps then the Apoplectick Balsoms: because both the matter of it is
more gross, and thence apt to lie longer about the extremity of the Olfactory
nerves, and so continually to affect them; and also the custom of many is, as
I have often observed, ever and anon to be supplying more, whereby the pores of
those nerves are kept continually open. And I must suspect, that should any
Pestilential Season invade (which God avert) such persons, as much accustom
themselves to these pouders, would, caeteris paribus, be in more danger of
receiving infection than others: since from the symptoms delivered by Authors,
the pestilence appears to seyze the Brain particularly; and the sudden fate
recorded of those that, without any preceding indisposition, have, whilst that
raged, fallen down dead in the streets, seems not so easily accountable for any
other occasion, than that the pestilential Miasmes are admitted at those
nerves, since all other ways to the Brain, the source of sense and motion, and
indeed of all the actions of life, is the most likely seat of this sudden
prostration. It Is true, it may be urged, that many which use it receive no
apparent injury: and indeed some are of so firm a constitution of the Brain, as
well as of the whole Body that comparatively great occasions of sickness will
have little or no influence on them, whereas others are affected by very small
ones. But I think the objection may as well be urged (as on another score I a
little before intimated) by those, who having long indulged themselves in
immoderate drinking have yet lived to a great age, when it is obvious that many
more much shorten their Lives by it. But though not Apoplexies, yet Vertigoes,
and other distempers which show the Brain debilitated, may hence perhaps arise.

Secondly, as to the Cure of an Apoplexy; It consists (according to my notion
before alleged of the Cause) chiefly in copious Phlebotomy, since nothing else
seems capable of dislodging (at least suddenly: and this distemper of all
others requires a Sudden remedy) the morbifick matter, For the distention, both
of the Sanguiferous vessels, and habit of the parts, being by a good depletion
taken off suddenly, the Fibers which constitute both must be presumed to
contract themselves by their Tonick motion, but especially those in the habit;
the Elastical pressure of the Ambient, as concurring ordinarily. So in this
case especially when the resistance within is abated. So that when what is
nearest the Heart runs into it with some impetuosity, the rest, both finding
room enough in the Veins, and being urged on, not only by the arterial blood
behind, rushing into the veins the faster when it has more room, but also by
the Systaltick motion now the distention is taken off, must leave its former
recesses, and be restored to circulation. Which action is quickly propagated to
the Brain, and that put into Analogous contractions. But this may be presumed
most effectually to happen whilst the Vessels are only distended before the
blood has made its way forth into the habit of the Brain; which if it once
has, at least in any considerable quantity, the distemper seems scarce at all
remediable, either by this or any other administrations; both on the account of
the forementioned difficulty, if not impossibility, of its getting out of those
recesses into the veins again, and also the yeildingness of the Brain to the
Pulsifick protrusion of the blood behind.

This Phlebotomy, I conceive, ought to be administered to Thirty, Forty, Fifty,
or Sixty, or perhaps more, ounces at a time (some persons requiring more to be
taken away, some less, according as the congestion and obstruction happens to
be greater or less, and the quantity of blood to abound in the Body) if the
Pulse (which should be tried during the bleeding) fail not: Otherwise,
considering the great quantity we have in our Bodies, 'twill not satisfy the
indication. And by such an evacuation, viz. to at least Sixty ounces at once,
D. Gibbons of Oxon, (a person whom you, as well as I, know to be, besides his
great parts, and general Learning, of that sagacity, and judgment in Physic,
that his example must much justify the practice) cured an Apoplexy there some
time since, thought deplorable: as, if you question the relation from me, you
may be satisfied both from himself, and his Surgeon, and also several others
that were present. And were it proper for me I could allege Analogous
instances of such profuse (if you will call them so) evacuations of that kind
in my own observation, attempted with great advantage to my Patients. And if
the first bleeding secure not the Patient, it ought after a few hours to be
repeated, and so, if need be, several times: there being much more danger from
the disease, than loss of blood, which has usually been observed to have been
spent (as I a little before noted) upon wounds, or Spontaneous Haemorhages, in
much greater quantity without loss of Life; and the consequent weakness has
soon been corrected by a due regimen of diet, or perhaps some other
assistances. Nay even Old Age ought not to supersede this remedy, however the
assertion be like to be censured for very bold by many, who more consult their
own fears, than the reason of the thing. For besides that such ancient persons,
who are inclined to Apoplexies, generally abound enough with blood, theirs is
more apt to grow viscous from their decay, in some degree, of spirits, and
their inability to a sufficiently brisk action, requisite to spiritualize, and
keep it in a due crasis: so that when apt to distend, or get out of its
vessels, it ought to be taken away in good quantities, both in regard the
decayed strength of the part affected is not, proportionally to what it
formerly was, sufficient to manage it, and return it into its proper vessels,
or its usual circulation in them; and also because, if it be in them once grown
viscous, it is scarce possible it can be corrected for the forementioned
reasons; and therefore (according to the sense of the deservedly famous
Botallus) ought to be taken away that better, from the supervening nourishment,
may be substituted in the room of it: the sanguifying power, though upon a
considerable abatement of the quantity, being in the rest sufficient, even in
the eldest persons, to transmute the appelling Chyle, which from its previous
preparations (we feeding on nothing but vegetable, or animal, substances, which
must be highly digested and exalted to be brought to either of those estates;
and those farther exalted generally, either by Elixation, assation, or
fermentation) wants little of the perfection of Blood, even before its
admission into the mass of it; as, if prejudices were laid aside, might be
collected from instances, which now and then occurr, of old people, who by
wounds or haemorhages loose great quantities of it, and yet recover, nay many
times increase, the vigor they had before these accidents: and I see no reason
why, what nature or chance authorize to be innoxious, may not be attempted by
art, when great indications occurr, which intimate how unsafe it is to permit
them to go unsatisfyed. And to countenance this opinion, give me leave to
subjoyne (though 'twere not hard for me to bring many more instances of this
kind) that it is near two years since a very worthy Lady, the Lady Yate of
Harvington in Worcestershire, of the age then of 77 years, was taken
Apoplectical, and though the imminent danger of it were taken off before
Phlebotomy was administered; yet it left so great a vertigo, and so general a
weakness on the Brain, and all the Body (her Ladyship, though before very
vigorous, considering her age, and endued with a very great understanding and
memory, as all that have the honor to converse with her must testify, being
reduced to the condition not to turn her self in her bed, besides a great decay
of the intellectual faculties) that to comply with my judgment, and the duty
thence resulting to my patients who put their lives under my conduct, I caused
(as soon as leave could be obtained) between twenty and thirty ounces of Blood
to be taken away, with great, and immediate, success: and the like was done
again, in the same quantity, within a week after, upon a fresh increase of the
symptoms, without any debilitation from it; but on the contrary with remarkable
advantage, both in relation to her recovery of memory and understanding, and
also strength of Body. Since which time her Ladyship, using due medecines and
regulation, has farther attained so great a degree of these powers, as at these
years is much above the expectation of any that were witnesses of her
indisposition.

I conceive indeed (to endeavor to evince a little the utility of Phlebotomy
in ancient people; if you will not call it an excursion) Old Age to consist
more in the Induration of the Solid parts, than in the absumption, vappidness,
depauperation, or any other depression of the spirits in the Fluids; or what we
call the Humidum radicale: for these fluids are daily repaired, and would be in
as high a degree spirituous as ever (considering the previous exaltations just
now mentioned) were the solid parts equally disposed to impress due motions on
them, and the Strainers, and other passages, fitted as formerly for their
transmission and Secretions. Whereas those once growing harder can neither
undergo their due contractive motions, as they were wont, nor thence
sufficiently effect a division of the particles of these, wherein
Spiritualization consists: only the finer and more spirituous (if agreeable)
the substances are that are brought to them by the Chyle, the more they must be
a new intenerated, and so become more fit to perform their office toward the
adapting these for the functions of life. And as to what concerns the
celebrated notion of a Humidum radicale, which begins with our life, and
continues individually the same, though in quantity diminished, and allayed
(which diminution must on the same account, before it arrives at its utmost
periods, cause Old Age;) I can hardly think that, Considering the comparative
tenderness of our Bodies, the motions both of our Blood and other fluids within
us, and of the Atmosphere, that (in more than one sense) unfathomable menstruum
for the dissolution of Bodies, without us, the daily supplies of aliments whose
particles are sufficiently on the score of their texture agitable, and the
openness of the pores every where; any particles that constituted them at first
can continue for any number of years, but must be all, one after another, in no
long time thrust forth as these causes come to act on them, to make way for
fresh ones, that bring with them a sutableness to the parts, which they, on
those accounts, must have lost. For I cannot apprehend any other difference
(according to the slenderness of my capacity) between the Spiritus insiti,
Influentes, Humidum nativum, if these be corporeal, as I know not 'twas ever
doubted, and the Rest of the grosser substance that makes up the Body, than
what depends upon the Figure, Magnitude, Contexture, and Relations thence
resulting: so that the more fine and subtle any of these substances are, I
conceive they are so much the more easily dissipable, and therefore far from
being so durable as the supposition of the Humidum radicale requires.

When therefore on any occasion the Blood; in those who have this induration of
the parts, becomes unapt to be duly moved as 'twas wont, it seems very
requisite that it should be taken away in some such quantity, as to render the
motion of the rest more placid (the distention of the vessels being thus taken
off) so to make room for what is more fine, and apt enough to be quickly
spiritualized, and to become a fitter matter for nutrition (and, if you please,
supplies of the Humidum radicale) whereby also that degree of rigidness of the
parts, by the appulse of this softer Blood, may be corrected, and so, besides
the satisfying many times a present and urgent indication, Life prolonged, if
this administration were more frequently, but prudently, used, to a
considerably longer date, than for the most part it has.

But to return: If we make but a reflection on the quantity of blood which
very able Physicians have concluded to be naturally in our Bodies, viz. from
about 16 to 25 pounds according to the bulk and constitutions of persons;
which, too, by full feeding, and want of due exercise, may possibly at some
times be considerably increased; and withal how that many not only live under
great fastings for many days, whether for want of appetite or constraint, which
(Evacuations proceeding notwithstanding, at least that of Transpiration, which,
according to the observations of the accurate Sanctorius, is much the greatest
of them all) must necessarily diminish the quantity of blood much below the
proportion that any Physician by bleeding dares (though for reasons not so
proper for this place, and the brevity of a letter already swelled too much,
the advantages thence resulting in many cases equal not those of a free
Phlebotomy) and yet afterward recover to as good a state of health as ever
they enjoyed, we ought to lay aside those panick fears of a comparatively
plentiful evacuation this way; especially when the distemper seems hardly
superable without it: and a little delay and oversight in this point, as well
as in war, puts the matter past retriving. I know large bleedings (nay even in
Pleurisies, Peripneumonias, Anginas, etc.) are much dreaded by many, not only
of the unconsidering vulgar, but even persons of all degrees, and education,
and even by many Physicians of great name: And 'twere easy to cite great
Authors, who have either expressed their fears of it, or so mince the matter,
that their apprehensions are obvious enough: and he that frequently uses it
cannot escape aspersions ( expertus loquor) be the advantage to the patient
ever so remarkable, and must expect, notwithstanding that, always to be
dreaded for a Physician; but must at least be sure to be greatly censured, if,
either through the greatness of the distemper, or the (very common
unmanagableness of the Patient, either from his own inclination, or others
suggestion, success attend it not. But certainly he must have a strict account
to give who, taking charge of Lives, will, to their loss or, at least, hazard,
be rather swayed by others, or his own, fear than his judgment, but a much
stricter, if a prospect of Interest, by complying with peoples inclinations
(which I am afraid is too common amongst pretenders to Physic) tempt him to
deflect from it. And therefore he ought not be concerned at these Bruta Fulmina,
but follow the dictates of his reason and conscience. For my own part, though I
am far from thinking Phlebotomy proper for the cure of all diseases, or even
to be largly administered in most, but that a solid judgment (which I am sure
the greatest number of the censurers of it have not) from substantial grounds
in Physic, ought to determine when it is to be advised, and when not; yet I
think it might be more frequently, and in many cases much more copiously used,
than (at least in the place where I live) it is or will be permitted to be: And
I should be obliged to him that should convince me of my mistake in this notion
(having hitherto thought I had Reason, but I am sure I have had Experience, to
confirm me in a good opinion of it) particularly in relation to Apoplexies, as
having not been so happy, in my reading, to meet with that satisfaction; Or
shall propose such other certain remedies, or methods of cure, as would
supersede its use in this, or other cases, that I think require it. But I must
subjoyne, that I cannot but much wonder that Barbette a Physician of
Considerable reputation, and whose Praxis is in the hands of all Physicians,
should have those ill notions of Phlebotomy, as to reflect upon it, as the
cause of the miscarriage of the Apoplectical patients, he instances in; when
both it is probable, from what he says, there was but very little blood taken
away, and also it is easy to be collected he never durst try the remedy in its
due latitude; but, in compliance to his prejudices, would rather let them dye
under a (without this) unpromising method, than attempt a cure by it, against
which (whatever he could) he does not urge any reason of moment.

As to the place where Phlebotomy ought to be administered: though there being a
Circulation of the blould, any part of the Body, where a Vein can be readily
come at, may be proper enough; since the Vessels being considerably emptyed any
where, the remaining blood will, it is known, come from all others, especially
that where it is too much congested, to fill them again, and so keep up the
proportion every where (and the forementioned Systaltick motion must whem the
Plethora is taken off, assist the brisker circulation through parts before
distended:) Yet the Iugular, if it can be met with, is the most proper Vein
for this discharge, since it evacuates immediately only from the head; whereas
those of the Limbs, do it but mediately, as requiring a good quantity to be
taken away, before what lies in the Brain can come to be extruded, according to
the known laws of Circulation. And this may recommend it self the more to the
timorous Assistants; since so it is likely the relief will be as the more
speedy, so with less expense of blood.

But besides (but especially after) Phlebotomy, I conceive other remedies ought
to be, with all speed, used, as Vesicatories, Cupping glasses, Sternutations or
other Errhines, Apophlegmatismes, acrimonious Cataplasmes to the feet and
wrists, Volatile salts or Assa foetida, or the like, in odor, and any other
Administrations in order to excite, and make the Brain contract it self, to
expel the morbid matter, as well as to divert the course of it: as also that
inwardly be given spirit of Salarmoniack or other Volatile salts, Castor, and
other brisk Nerval remedies, which may so irritate, as to cause a corroboration
of its tone; that so the effused, or congested, matter may come to be extruded,
and at last resumed by the veins. To this intent likewise, Vomitories, and
Purgatives (of which, as of the rest, Authors have store, as for the due
administration of them the presence and judgment of a Physician is necessary)
ought, as occasion is, to be brought into use. And if the distemper begin once
to yield to the efficacy of these remedies; As I before intimated, so I must
again suggest, that corroborating ones should for a long time be insisted on,
to restore the Brain and the Nerves to their pristine tone.

After all give me leave to subjoyne that you may collect a great Specimen of
my deference to you from hence, that for the satisfaction (which yet I am
afraid they will think not given) of some of your Friends, as you suggest, to whom
the Latin tongue is not so easy, I publish this (against the advice of some
great ones of my own, and those great Judges) in our own Language, when most of
the speculations had been (perhaps) as easily, but more fitly delivered in
that; and withal, give me leave to say, several of them so much out of the way
of those, that understand only the English tongue, that few such will, perhaps
relish them. And indeed though nothing here brought, can be pretended at all
instructive, either to your self, or other great Physicians of this Age (than
which none ever enjoyed numbers of them of greater, if equal, abilities) but
must be looked on as very jejune, as being drawn up by one who is so very
conscious of his own inabilities, that it may be construed arrogance to appear
at all thus publicly; yet since I must so far dissent from you as to believe,
it is likely the Discourse may meet with not many Readers but those of the
Faculty of Physic; who perhaps out of curiosity may give themselves that
trouble; though but to censure the composer; it ought at least to have been
written in the Language in which you are most accustomed to employ your selves.
But I must needs say the argument you urge, from the example of the very great
Mr. Boil, Dr. Henshaw, and several other great, as well Physicians, as
Philosophers (not to urge that of former Ages) both of our own, and
neighboring Nations, who have thought fit to write in their own Language)
particularly the very learned Dr. Tho. Burnet, who has been pleased to oblige
his own Nation, by publishing his most curious Theory, and that much improved,
in its own, after he had done it first in Latin) has enough in it to plead my
excuse to those who advise the contrary.

But indeed there may be one reason of moment, I conceive, alleged, why it is
fitting something should be written in the language of each country concerning
this, more than any other Disease; viz. because this, of all, requires the
speediest relief: and Physicians not being always at hand, Charity obliges that
all should have such remedies made known to them as may put a stop to the
danger, till farther help can be had. And Phlebotomy being that great, and
almost certain, (not to say only) one, when there is any hope of recovery; as
it is fitting the generality of people should be convinced of it, as well as
their danger without it (though indeed it may be suspected, so great are the
prejudices most have, not very many will) and therefore, if any be seyzed,
others should have immediate recourse to it for them, without staying for a
Physician; so it may be some farther Apology for my adventuring to gratify you,
since no Body else, that I know of, has in English written ex professo of it
singly; at least with those convictions, which I have upon me, of the necessity
of this Remedy.

However I must herein own your friendship; that since you will have me write,
you would have me do it with that advantage to my reputation, not to expose my
weakness, by attempting it in the Learned Language; wherein you must be
conscious, from former instances, how much I am deficient. If any of my
notions, here delivered, suit not with yours, I expect, in return, your sense
upon them; which, If convincing to my understanding, shall be gratefully
acknowledged, and subscribed to, by,

Sir, Your most Faithful Friend, and Servant WILLIAM COLE.
Worcester, Aug. 20. 1688.
ERRATA.
Page 43. line 17. for Excrasie, ^^ad Exercise, p. 76. l. ^^. we may. p. 129.
l. 10. r. may from. p. 142. l. 3. r. Sweats. p. 151. ult. r. absumption. p.
170. l. 4. after Brain, r. seems farther about: and I suppose 'twill be allowed
that the Brain.

FINIS.

