Noah's Dove With Her Olive Branch: OR, The happy Tidings of the Abatement of
the FLOOD of ENGLAND's CIVIL DISCORDS. As it was delivered in a SERMON

Preached at Preston in the County- Palatine of Lancaster, on the 24th of May,
1660.

Being the Public Day of Thanksgiving for the Restoring of His Sacred and most
Excellent MAJESTY, CHARLES THE SECOND.

By William Cole, Bachelor of Divinity, and Minister of the Gospel there.

Imaginem Caesaris Caesari read quae in nummo est, imaginem Dei Deo quae in in
homine est. Tertul. de Idololatr. LONDON: Printed by James Cottrel, for
Nathanael Webb, at the Kings Head in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1661.

To the Right Faithful, and Truly Honorable, Patriot of his Country, Lover of
his Prince, and Servant of his GOD, Sir George Booth, BARONET.
Most Worthy Sir,
IT was the Expression of Varius Geminus concerning Caesar, That whosoever
durst speak to him, Ejus videatur ignorare, magnitudinem; he that durst not,
singularem ejus nesciat humanitatem. Upon this Consideration, as to your self,
there has been some suspense whether I should adventure these unpolished
Meditations upon your Perusal and Protection, whilst on the one hand that
exemplary humility and humanity with which God has brightned the rest of your
Perfections, has invited me to; on the other hand, the Greatness and Elevation
of your State discouraged me from that Enterprise. Yet so fixed and prevailing,
at the last, do the considerations of your Nobleness, Ingenuity, and Candor
prove, that here they lie at your feet; if not to challenge Approbation from
you, yet at least, to pay the Devotion of the Author to your Honorable Name
and Person.

Had I sought the vain applause of men, I should not have communicated to the
World my own imperfections, of which this Tract cannot but be a Discovery unto
all: Nor yet, had I sought my own advantage, should I have suffered these
Conceptions to have had a Birth so late and unseasonable, as being indeed born
out of due time; being that a more early publication of those Principles herein
contained, might have been, perhaps, as effectual to prevent the losses,
disappointments, and pre-occupate the credit of whispering reproaches, which I
have since undergone, as the supposal and surmise thereof, have been in former
years, to procure unto me h^ small adversity from those present Powers.

But of the thing it self, and the exhibition of it now to public censure and
view, these are the Grounds and Reasons.

Since the preaching hereof, I have, with no little sadness of spirit, observed
the impetuous torrent of most unmerciful reproaches, pouring out it self upon
many precious servants of Jesus Christ within this County, and indeed upon the
whole Body of them who labor under continued travels of soul, after necessary
Reformation in the house of our GOD. And according to the platform used by the
Churches Enemies in the primitive Ages of Christianity, so also now the evil
will of some persons endeavors to fasten upon us, the black imputations of
Disaffection, and Disloyalty, and Dissatisfaction with his Majesty's Supremacy
according to the Law. Of what consequences such Disguises by uncharitable
Brethren, put upon us without our desert, may be, to the deprivation of us of
our Ministerial function, the dispossessing of us from any interest in the
Royal Breast of his most Excellent Majesty, and the pre-possessing of the
spirit of authority with prejudice against our humble expectations and prayers
for such a settlement in the Church as may comport in point of righteousness,
with that establishment which now is in our State, your own apprehensions will
readily suggest unto you.

I must confess, I could hardly have believed that a Clergy of so famous a
Fidelity to their Allegiance, as that of this County has been, in the worst of
times, ever since any observation was possible to them of a designed invasion
upon Monarchical Interest, that have so notoriously disavowed the Titles and
Triumphs of Usurpation, and so deeply suffered upon that account, should indeed
and in earnest be thus misunderstood by any sort of men; but that my self have
so lately experienced the revival of that Charge and Calumny, and been
prosecuted thereupon, with so much unseasonable and unreasonable fervor, as
must necessarily arise either from a real persuasion, or a most inordinate
passion.

Sir, It has been and is my great honor and satisfaction, that I have some
considerable acquaintance with those many Orthodox, Godly, and Learned men,
whom God has set up as glorious Lights and Stars in this Northern Hemisphere:
and I am bold to say, that what is in this Paper, as to the sacred Interest of
our lawful present Power, is the Language, Spirit, Principle, and conscientious
Judgment of them all, and dropped from the same Spirit that rules in the hearts
of these precious Dispensers of the Gospel. Since these fatal Circumvolutions,
many Stars of the greatest magnitude have finished their course; such as Herle,
Hollinworth, Gee, and others; and for the rest of us, I can say with knowledge,
as Tertullian speaks of the Christians in his time, Ad Coelum suspicientes
expansis manibus precamur pro imperatoribus vitam prolixam, imperium securam,
domum tutam, exercitus fortes, Senatum fidelem, populum probum, orbem quietum,
quaecunque hominis and Caesaris vota sunt. And if, by misconception,
subordinate Authorities shall yet please to frown upon us, we shall say with
him, Hoc agite, boni praesides, extorquete animam supplicantem pro imperatore.

Sir, Let me add, They are not few, nor small afflictions and losses which my
self, and some others, have undergone now very lately, upon the account of our
objected Nonconformity, and our real desires to wait the Royal pleasure of his
sacred Majesty in point of Public Worship; as also our willingness not to
anticipate or pre-occupate the public resolutions of State, by our own
private determination of that controversy in our particular practice. We are
under good hopes that the Determination of those things (which in their present
posture may so easily be made the advantage of serving the particular spleens
and passions of men, against many godly, and orthodox, and peaceable in the
land) will produce such a Reformation and Moderation as will issue in mutual
satisfaction to all of indifferent persuasions.

For my own part, although I do profess my self zealously affected to a common
Uniformity, provided it be bottomed upon such foundations as do not carry in
them just cause of dissent or discontent: Yet I cannot but remember what
Tertullian speaks, When men do adimere libertatem Religionis, and interdicere
optionem Divinitatis; which he there calls Elogium non Religionis sed
Irreligiositatis. I know nothing, in our Ecclesiastical Affairs, but may with
comfort and consent draw in the whole Body into a common Mediocrity, if the
sober ventilation of controverted things might have place, and the passion,
prejudice and opportunities of divided Interests might be exploded.

Sir, You may be a blessed Instrument for this happy composure. But hour it
shall be, after all such passages, I publish this, that all men may see, That
it was not the confidence of conformity with our Principles, that was the
foundation of our asserting of the Royal Interest; that we bottom not our
Allegiance upon the comporting of Authority with our Judgments; that
subjection is owned to be our duty, although we should fall under the most
diametral opposition of Civil Laws and Sanctions to our Principles in the
things of God; that we will give submission to lawful Powers, though we should
suffer the deepest affliction by lawful Powers, which yet we hope we shall
never see. Subjection to Authority, and subjection to Jesus Christ, are not
things of inconsistencie, but where Christian profession is made up more of the
dross of self-interest, then of the refined Gold of the Sanctuary.

Sir, I humbly beg your Honors Pardon for this account; You are one of the
Healers of our Breaches. You are able to take off the Disguise is put upon us,
by your own knowledge of our Fidelity, when the work of the Lord had little
else to support it but prayers and tears; You may stand as a Mediator in the
behalf of the Church, for Peace, and Reformation, and Moderation. That God that
honors them that honor him, fill your heart more and more with his blessed
Grace and Spirit, Your Soul with Peace, Your Family with Prosperity, Your Life
with Comfort, and Your Death with Blessedness; Your Memorial with the richest
Perfumes; Your Example with a Crowd of Followers, who treading in Your steps,
may know how to confederate those two Sacred Interests of CAESAR and GOD.

Preston, October. 31. 1660. Your HONORS most Humble, and most Affectionate
SERVANT, W. C.

Noah's Dove WITH Her Olive Branch.
ISAIAH 1. 25, 26. And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy
Dross, and take away all thy Tin. And I will restore thy Judges, as at the
first; and thy Counselors, as at the beginning. Afterward thou shall be
called, The City of Righteousness, The faithful City.
IN the midst of those Threats which are given forth from God by the Prophet
against Israel, for the sin thereof, these Words do interweave a Promise of
Mercy. It Is Calvin's observation on the Text, That this is a constant method
of God, in the Prophecies of Judgment to interlineate some comfortable
Promise, to give some lucida intervalla; and that, Ne de Ecclesi^ pror sus
actum esse putent, ne terroribus fracti animos despondeant; left his People
should think he has cast them off, (a thing which he so much abhors the very
apprehension of, Romans 11. 1.) lest their hearts should faint under the
hopelesness of deliverance. And indeed, however both the threats against, and
present seizures of wrath upon a people, be lightly esteemed by the Sons of
^elial, the seated sinners of this generation, whose Brow has Brass, and whose
Heart has Steel enough toward off, and rebound from themselves any the most
piercing Arrow that is shot from the Prophets, if not pointed and sharpened by
that penetrating Spirit of the Almighty: Yet upon them who tremble at the word
of the Lord, it works a necessity of some intermixed Cordials. And my Text is
one.

That Mercy, that signal and capital Deliverance which is promised here, and
promised to be as the pregnant Womb of many subordinate Blessings, which were
to have their birth upon the restoration of this, of it, the Verses I have
read give us to observe,

1. The manner of its Production; how it is brought to pass. And 1* therein is
remarkable, God would bring it about at such a time; and that time was the
worst of times; a time when rational conjecture would have said, Neither shall
People nor Prince be any more. He that shall consider the resolution of the
Lord, heightened with some vehemency of passion (if I may so speak of that
impassible blessed Deity) expressed verse. 24. and part of this, cannot but
admire at the connection of that with this; I will ease me of my adversaries, I
will turn my hand upon thee; and I will restore, etc. Yet thus it is the way of
God to disappoint the fears of his People, when they are fed with the deepest
discouragements; to bring out the greatest hopes, when Good and Restoring, is
in the greatest hazard: though we cannot make such a coherence and connection to
be sense, yet God can make it to be Reason and Experience, does so in the Text,
and has done it at this day. At the same time when he is irat^^s peccatis, he
is propitius peccatoribus, as a Lapide comments on the Text. When one would
think they had been smitten by God with an incurable blow, that they were even
dropping into the pit, and the grave shutting its mouth upon all their glory
for ever* yet then, says God, even then, when Hope is lost, and Expectation
has groaned out its last, then I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and
thy, etc.

2. God would bring this about by such means, in such a way, (...)
and by the influence of such things: and this is further remarkable in the
Text. These means are either 1. More remote; he would do it by a sore and deep
affliction. God his easing of himself, is the loading of the People with a
burden that shall break their hearts, and cause the strongest Axletrees of
Government to crush in pieces under it; the little finger of his displeasure is
heavier then the loins of humane revenge; and yet he will lay his hand, his
whole hand upon them, and yet he will do it again and again: for so the Hebrew
(...) imports, reducam and reversabo manum: and the whole is brought in with
this (...) from God. Ita fissores lignorum gravem daturi ictum, cum gemitu
Corn^l. a Lapi^^.
and suspirio eum eliciunt; the blow shall be so grievous, that he himself
shall as it were gather up all his spirits to set it home with the greatest
violence; so grievous, that when he does but mention it, he cries out, Alas,
alas! and woe unto the people when it falls. And yet by this deadly breach, the
Lord would bind them up: A strange course! that that Providence which tends in
it self to their utter subversion, should be appointed to issue in their happy
Establishment; that God should order that to contribute to their weal, which
they could expect only to contribute to their woe. But this is both usual and
easy for that God, who can bring from evil, good; from darkness, light; from
the Eater, meat; and glorious Beings, from nothing, or from the most indisposed
matter. He oftentimes saves a soul through the operation of affliction and
unsettlement, as Petrus de Valdo Guido Perigran in flor^, Chro^^c.
(from whom the Waldenses) was converted by a sudden judgment upon one of his
Company; and therefore no wonder, if by it also, he can save a State. And
indeed, where the happiness of people is wrapped up in their legal Magistracy,
and yet Magistracy it self has by Violence or Usu^pation been intercepted to
a present fixing in some anticipating power, and this is that stroke with which
God has afflicted any people, in such a case, Motion and Unsettlement, is most
probable to prove the means of Restitution, Authority having a natural tendency
to its proper center, and moving by instinct toward its legal fixation, when
those inter capedixes juris, those stops and obstructions are withdrawn. But
yet in the State of Israel, distress and trouble after the Revolt of the Tribes
under Jeroboam, did not help but hinder Deliverance, did not save but sacrifice
the people to be the Victims of Divine Revenge, till the Assyrian had swallowed
up both the usurping Princes, and People too. And therefore in my Text, 2. The
more near and approximate Medium (...) etc.
of this Mercy is Affliction, not considered simply, and in its Effects
natural, but in its Effects supernatural, and in its sanctification by God,
verse. 25. I will thereby purely purge away thy dross, Facit ut moriatur, v. g.
Petrus impurus, ^brius, incestus, superbus, and resurg at p^rus, sobrius
castus, humilis. A lap. in loc.
and take away thy tin. The affliction of Israel, as to its causual relation
to, and influence upon this promised happy settlement, is not considered in the
Text, otherwise then as blessed by God to be the means of refining the people,
and purging out the dross and tin of corruption from their hearts.
Afflictions that make the object holy, make it happy; where they work good in
them, they work good for them; where their fruit and issue is (...), there it
is also (...), Heb. 12. 11. the (...), Theoph.
peaceable fruit of righteousness. Otherwise they are but as Physic, which
through want of working rather hasteneth then hinders death, rather kills
then cures. Should I have prophesied the issues of our sad calamities, by the
observation of their effects upon the hearts of this people, finding what is
observable in the growth of Popery and Profaneness, Error and Unrighteousness
to any common eye, what word of peace could any Prophet have had from God, but
that there have been some few, though the most despised and rejected of men,
who have come out from great tribulations, and have washed their robes in the
blood of the Lamb, who have come out from our corrections, as gold from the
fire, and as silver purified from the furnace? And although the glory of the
Churches Deliverance be no ways impartable or divi^ble betwixt man and God;
yet let not those persons think they have any share or part in being the reason
of this our present Mercy, whose lives have not been bettered by their losses;
who have carried their wickedness, their lusts, their continued course of
Atheism and Irreligion, their evil spirits along with them, through these evil
times: that happiness of the Nation. which perished by such men's sins, is not
now reviving out of its ashes for such men's sakes. That effect which this
displeasure of the Lord has had upon some, to humble, inform, convert, and
draw their hearts to himself; this has been the way, and this only can be the
way, by which the shatterings of Nations prosper to, and issue in their blessed
settlement. It is usual for men who are really the greatest Blocks in the
passage of Mercy, yet to challenge the greatest share in the honor of
procuring it; when yet it is sent by God in answer to the repentance and
prayers of his people. So they usurp not upon the glory which is due to God
himself, let me say, as Mephibosheth to David, 2* Sam. 19. 30. Let them take
all, for as much as my Lord the King is come again to his own house. Yet this I
would have marked, that indeed the sanctified Ones are those ten in Sodom, for
whose sakes the Lord will not pour out his wrath, if found in it; and that
Blessing in the Vine, the new wine in the Cluster, for whose sake, and for
whose sake only (except for his own Names sake) Isa. 65. 8. he will say,
Destroy it not.

3. God would so accomplish this, as that his own hand and (...)
power should be perspicuous and plain to have been the Fountain of its
accomplishment. I will restore thy Judges, verse. 24. Thus says the Lord, I
will restore. True it is, there is no effect falls out in the world, but what
does owe its origination and production to the concourse of Providence,
separating the action, as to its physical being, from the moral obliquity and
irrectitude thereof, which is to be fastened upon its next and most approximate
agent and principle: Yet there are some things which are the more immediate
Refulgencies of the Wisdom, Power, and Glory of the Deity, the very Finger of
God himself. And such a work is this: If any shall ask, as Amos 7. 2. By whom
shall Jacob arise? for he is small: Who shall repair the broken staff of
Government? The Text answers him in a voice from God, I will restore thy
Judges, as at the first. The Restitution of a Kingdom to the rightful
establishment of its State and Government, is no small, no easy work, is a work
can be done by none but God. Where Usurpation has possessed the Throne, and by
continuance has grown up to a face of legal interest; where the powers and
strengths of interested Parties, lies as an unmovable block in the way of
Righteousness; where the spirits of them that are cordially zealous to its
restoring, yet lie at such distance each from other, by reason of controversies
that are excentrical at least to common peace, and maintain such implacability,
and unreconcile ableness, although bottomed only upon passions and
mis-conceptions; where the power of conscientious Principles in Christian
Loyalty, is to overcome the disobliging height, and heat, and animosity (to say
no worse) of discontented persons; where Christians discharged of their duty to
their natural Prince, may run their comforts in Gospel-things to a possibility
of more or less diminution and eclipse: but especially, where Magistracy,
naked and unarmed of Assistance, is to adventure its Scepter upon the fidelity
of Forces too sadly vertiginous and given to change; I say, here in such a
case, yet to have such a Deliverance brought to pass, This is the Lords doing,
and it is marvelous in our eyes. And thus much for the manner of the effecting
of this Deliverance.

II. The next thing in the Text, is, the Mercy it self; and this for more
perspicuity, I shall divide into three Branches. (...)


1. I will restore Judges and Counselors: there may be some variation and
variety in the sense of these words. You may consider them three ways. 1. As
importing some particular Form and sort of Government. The Scripture sometimes
distinguishes betwixt the administration of Government in the times of (...)*
Sept. Vide Abulensem Menoch. 9 de rep. Hebr.
the Judges, and in the times of the Kings of Israel, Ruth 1. 1. 2 King. 23.
22. Till Saul and David's time, the children of Israel were ruled by Judges,
and had no King over them. At that time the Government was mixed of Monarchy
and Aristocracie; the Principality was elective by the People and their
Parliament, I mean by the Grand Sanhedrim, the Assembly of Seventy Elders,
which may be understood in the Text by the word Counselors, (...), as the
Septuagint renders it; it was not hereditary, but transmitted from Families and
Tribes, as God raised up persons of singular activity and fitness, and as the
people chose; though sometimes (as it usually falls out in all, but most of all
in such kind of States) as Ambition came to have confidence, power and
opportunity, as you may read in Iothams parable, in Judge. 9. Nor was their
power so great as that of the succeeding Menochius de rep. Hebrae^rum.
Kings, but compared by Menochius to the Dukedom of Venice. And thus this
Prophecy or Promise seems to have had its accomplishment at the return from
the Babylonish captivity; when the Government (till the Roman invasion) was
some what like this in the hands of Ezra, Nehemiah, Joshua the Son of
Iosedec, Zerubbabel, and others. For though the Scepter was departed from
Judah, yet he had a Law-give^ (though a Magistracy of a baser metal) betwixt
his feet till Shiloh came. I conceive this cannot be the sense of the Text; and
my reason is, Because, 1. there is no necessity to interpret the words Judges
and Counselors, as importing such a form. The fullest power of Monarchical
Government being often expressed by this word, Psalm. 75. 7. God is the judge:
and when Absalom desires to be King in the room of his Father, 2 Samuel 15. 4. he
speaks thus, Oh! that I were judge: to omit other places, the word Counselors
also may well be applied to the Supreme Authority and Legislative power; it
being common in Scripture for those commands of God which have the highest
Authority to enforce them, and his own decrees, to be expressed by this word,
as may be seen in Isa. 14. 27. Isa. 23. 9. and Counselors may be as this
Sanhedrim afterward was assistant to Monarchy, besides others particularly
chosen to it, as 1 Chronicles. 27. 33. 2. And this sense would too much entrench
upon that which was the Authority settled by God in the Family of David, and
promised to continue in Iudahs posterity until Shiloh come. 3. Nor was there
ever any restoring thereof after the captivity in the exactness of that form by
which it was contradistinguished from regal power formerly; as might be
instanced in diverse particulars. 2. Further then, the words may import
Government in its full administration and execution. You shall not only have
Authority Supreme, but you shall have it fully executed. When Iehoshaphat
provided for the good of his people, he set up Judges in all the Cities, as 2 Chronicles. 19. 8. and these were persons who for the ease and convenience of the
Kingdom, were to be ready to see to the dispensation of right at the
appointment of the Sovereign Power. The Apostle Peter makes a distinction
betwixt those (...), Supreme Authorities, and such as are (...), Magistrates
sent and deputed by him: And thus Counselors may be understood as I mentioned
before, either of the standing Assembly of the seventy Elders, or such persons
as Princes chose, out of a design to bottom their Laws and Government upon the
deepest reason, most mature deliberation and sound advice. Thus then the
promise should be; that as thou shall have Magistracy restored, so thy Princes
shall act by advice, and the Law shall have its full administration in the
hands of his Deputies and subordinate Judges. But this is not full to the
purpose of this Prophecy; for the breach of Israel was not the loss of these,
but the loss of the Supreme Authority; the Kingdom was made base, and they had
no strong rod to be a Scepter to bear Rule: this was their lamentation, Ezekiel.
19.

Therefore lastly, 2. The words do import the restitution of Government and
Magistracy it self; not to lay any stress upon any particular form; for though
it is true that after the Babylonish captivity the Tribe of Judah and family of
David recovered not the fullness of Monarchical power and splendour, yet then
the people had their legal, although not their regal Magistracy. This says
God, I will restore, a lawful, righteous, fixed, settled Authority; I will set
you free from the Babylonish usurpations of the Heathen, wherein you were
vassels to a strange King, and servants to a people of a strange god. What the
state of the people of the Jews was during the seventy years captivity, as to
this total abolition of their rightful Princes, I need not open. But now, says
God, I will restore. And indeed such is the misery of Anarchy, confusion, and
want of Government, that any form is better then none at all; and a Scepter,
though in an unproper hand, is better then the Sword, Wars, and desolations: I
say, Better then none; which may well apolog^ze for the submission to (though
dissatisfaction with) usurped powers which has been yielded by good men in the
time of the violent dispossession and disseisure of our rightful sacred
Principality. But, says the Lord, I will restore Authority; the rightfulness
and legality thereof is more properly couched under the particle, thy, thy
Judges, and thy Counselors; and this is the next.

2. A second Branch of the promise, I will restore thy] Judges, and thy]
Counsellor^: this is no small part, though it be not the main and principal
privilege of the promise. Take up the importance of it in these particulars.
First, I will restore thee such Princes as are thine, as being of thy own
people; The Scripture speaks of it as a judgment upon a people from God, to be
vassaliz'd to the power of foraign Princes of a strange language, and of a
strange god. The command of God in the Law of the Kingdom was, Deuteronomy. 17. 15.
that the King should be one from amongst their brethren; they might in no wise
set a stranger over them, which was not their brother: and it is promised as a
blessing, Ier. 30. 21. their Nobles shall be of themselves, and their Governor
shall proceed from the midst of them; which though applicable to Christ, yet is
by others understood of the restoring of Government after the captivity. This
is a further discovery of this promised mercy, Thou shall lie under the power
and be judged by the Laws of the Babylonish Monarchs no more, but then I will
restore the Princes that are and ought to be of thy own Religion, Nation,
Language, People. Secondly, I will restore thee Princes such are thine, as
being chosen, accepted, embraced, approved, rightfully established over thee,
and sworn allegiance unto by thee; thy rightful, lawful powers, such whose
authority is thy birthright, comfort, satisfaction. The power and prevailing of
persons over a people may produce a Government: but it is not properly [
theirs] unless it be that, and in the hands of such persons with which and with
whom both Right and Law, Justice and the indispensable free Obligations and
Oaths of people are fully satisfied. What a people may do if free, and as the
Apostle speaks of a woman loosed from the Law of her husband, Romans 7. by his
death (which properly cannot be said of the Supreme Magistracy, however under a
present force) is another case; but in the interim the intrusion of the
greatest persons into that sacred bed, is but the ravishment of the people; and
of such it may be said, as in that of Christ to the woman, This which thou have
is not thy] husband. How much the most powerful and fixed sword of usurpation,
may under all the terrors it keeps a people under, yet lie under the secret
disownings, nauseatings and disgusts thereof by them, I need not open to you,
whose hearts have been for many years exercised under that affliction, and
whose many days of prayer and fasting for deliverance, have shown the reality
of such dislikes in your own experiences. And yet I do not think that the
propriety and title of Kings is dependent on the approbation, Oaths and
Covenants of their people, the title of authority being as it was with Israel,
as it is with us. God has not left a people liberty to carve out the model of
their own authority, and take it up, or cast it off as their own reason or
passion shall dictate to them. (...), as Plutarch speaks, meddle not with them;
the duty of Allegiance to Supreme powers is not that which hangs upon the
unfixed and wavering principles of humane choice: for so there should be as
many sorts of Kings, as Israel had of gods, and as many sorts of Governments,
as distempered brains could fancy to themselves. The title of Jeroboam was not
the better for the unanimous consent of the ten Tribes in that revolt. You
inherit as much reason to preserve your Princes, as you do by descent to
possess your Patrimonies. And therefore, thirdly, I will restore thee Princes
such as are thine by designation from God; whether accepted or not accepted by
thee, yet if they come with a mission and unction from God in the active and
approbative influx of his will, this is a mercy for thee; not he whom the
people shall choose (for the people chose Absalom, and outed David; chose
Jeroboam, and rejected the son of Solomon) but he whom God shall choose. And
lastly, I will restore thee Princes that shall be thine, as being such as seek
not thine but thee, such as do possess that honor, splendour, power and
greatness not for themselves but for thee: such as seek thy good and not their
own greatness, thy profit and not their own praise. And surely this is a
blessing to purpose; and then indeed thy Princes may be called thine, when
their Magistratical interest is wholly for peoples benefit and advantage.

3. The last Branch of the mercy, I will restore thy Judges as at the first,
and thy Magistracy as at the beginning. This is the upshot of all. The Question
is, to what time the Prophet relates in those expressions, at the first, and at
the beginning. It may refer either to that time when Israel began to be a
distinct people from the rest of the Nations, and grown up to be a considerable
body, having overgrown the notion of a Family, or a Colony only; and that was
when God fetched them out of Egypt, and set them under the Government of Moses
and Joshua after him; or when Israel began to be a distinct Kingdom, in the
time of David and Solomon. It is not much material which of these ways you
understand it: because I conceive the design of the words herein is not so much
to point out some exact platform of the kind and sort of Magistracy, as it is
to hold forth, 1. The Qualification of the persons that God does promise shall
weild the Scepter of Authority: they shall be such as Moses and Joshua, and
David, and Solomon. 2. The right of such persons to possess the Crown; having a
respect to that captivity in which the people for seventy years shoul lie under
the Tyranny of usurped powers. And so the whole of this promise is, When I have
by afflicting thee purged away the dross of thy sin, then I will restore the
settlement of Authority in its rightful hands, to whom by the institution and
appointment of God it appertains; and thy Princes shall be such as was Moses
and Joshua, and my servant David. And then this promise had its full
accomplishment in the Government of Ezra, Joshua, Zerubbabel, and others,
though not in that fulness of outward pomp and glory as before. And so much
for the second part of the Text.

3. Lastly, The words set before you that influence of this mercy upon the
people, upon the account whereof it is a mercy of so great and precious value.
Afterward thou shall be called (...). 70. Civita^ veritatis, urbs fideles*
Chald.
a City of righteousness, the faithful City. In these last words is
considerable: First, What shall be the effect of that Government so restored by
God. It shall have this influence upon the people, that, 1. They shall become a
City of righteousness and faithfulness: A City or People in which dwells
righteousness, justice, to men, holiness to God, truth and faithfulness; the
very face and countenance of such a Government shall cause error, wickedness,
profaneness, falsenesse and deceitfulness to wither away, what rooting soever
it have got in this interregna, in this time of the destruction or usurpation
of Authority. And 2. they shall not only so become, but so be called, they
shall be taken notice of as a people eminent and famous, and remarkable for
justice, truth and holiness, and all this by the influence of such a restored
Magistracy. And then secondly, the words import, this to be as the effect and
^ssue of this deliverance (as appears in that expression afterward, when this
comes to pass) so also the crown and glory, and perfection of it; This is that
in which thou shall receive the greatest good by (...) of thy lawful Princes,
that their Authority shall be influential and successful to make thee become,
and be called, The City of righteousness. The whole of these words being thus
opened, I shall set before you out of that abundance which the Text affords,
only three Considerations p^^tinent and proper to the occasion of this
Thanksgiving, and such as will comprehend in them the main importance of the
Text.

It is a choice and singular mercy to any Kingdom, Nation or Observe. 1.
People, when (especially after a breach made upon it) God does restore to them
such a Government and Authority as was that of Moses, Joshua, David and Solomon
to his people Israel.

The work of this day is to triumph in the Lord and his goodness upon this very
reason; God his restoring our Judges as at the first, and our Counselors as at
the beginning. And therefore I shall but cast in these Considerations as to the
truth of this Observation, each of which carries light enough to evidence the
Point, but all together do shine with such beams of demonstration, as may not
only convince the judgment, but even sets the heart in flames of affection,
transported with an holy joy; when blessed by God with such a deliverance, and
at such a time. Consider therefore,

1. If God do restore to a people such a Government as was that of Moses,
Joshua, David and Solomon, then they have [ a Government] and Authority settled
over them. They do not lie common each to other, to become the Arbitrary preys
of power and violence. I know this Consideration comes not fully up to what may
be expected to be spoken; yet it is a blessing of no small concernment for a
people to have a Government fixed over them. What the Apostle Paul speaks of
the Gospel, however in the Ministry of evil principled or unduly officed men,
Phil. 1. 18. However Christ is preached; the same I may translate to this case:
however the undue administration or fixation of Civil Powers may sadden the
hearts of the people of God, yet in that condition it is some allay, that
however Magistracy is kept up, and the reins are not left in the neck of the
unruly multitude. When the Author of the Book of Judges (whom some would
suppose to be Samuel, other Hezekiah, and other Ezra, etc.) would set forth the
sad estate of Israel, the Vide Sixth. Senens.
expression is considerable, Judge 21. 25. In those days there was no King in
Israel. I do not suppose that text or the other in that Book, where the same
thing is expressed, to point at the want of a regal form of Magistracy, (for
neither in those days nor in any former days till after, had there been any
such constitution with that people) but to signify those intervals and
interregna that fell out betwixt the times of their Judges, when there was no
Magistracy at all. And in those days, when there was no King, there was no
peace, there was no justice, there was no religion in a sort, but every man did
what was right in his own eyes. Consul^ but a little the cases therein
expressed, to which your Marginal Notes and Quotations upon that Text have
reference. Judge. 17. 5. In those days there was no King in Israel: and what
then? the man Micah had an house of gods, and made an Ephod, and consecrated
one of his sons to be his Priest; people set up their worship as pleased the
liberty of a perverted judgment and erroneous Conscience. Judge. 18. 1. There
was no King in Israel; and what then? the Danites take the boldness to make
rapes upon their Brethren, and to cut out an inheritance by the length of their
swords. Judge. 19. 1. There was no King in Israel; and what followed? the men of
Gibeah do force the Levites Concubine, and most shamefully abuse her even unto
death, and justify the action, with the concurrence of all the Tribe of
Benjamin in the defense of that horrid wickedness. These are fruits, but not
the tenth part of the fruits of Anarchy and confusion; when God threatens the
pouring out of his wrath upon Israel, he tells them in Hos. 3. 4. they shall
abide many days without a King, and without a Priest, and without an Ephod;
which some apply to the time of the captivity, others to the days of Antiochus,
and some to this present state of that people since the time of Christ. It is
indeed observed by Tertullian as the misery of that people, Dispersi palabundi,
coeli and soli qui exterres vagantur per orbem, sine homine sine Deo rege,
without either God or man to be their King. And however Rabbi Benjamin in his
Itinerary lately have attempted to publish their places of abode and forms of
Government; yet the world knows, that the Scepter is departed from that people,
and that they live under the powers and pleasures of others, subjected to the
Laws to which their wandering estate upon the earth does bring them in several
States, Principalities and Kingdoms. Seneca calls Government the very vital
spirits of a Commonwealth, ipsa nihil per se futura nisi onus and praeda, si
men's imperii subtrahatur; she her self would be nothing else but a burden to
her self, and a prey to others, if once she had expired the soul of Government.
And therefore the restitution hereof is a choice and singular mercy to any
Kingdom. But more,

2. If God do restore a Kingdom to such a Government as that of Moses, Joshua,
David and Solomon, then they are restored to a legal, rightful and just
Government and Authority. Those persons were just and lawful Princes, such as
came to the Scepter by a warrant from God. I need not stand upon the proof of
that; They were not such as mounted the Throne by wickedness and force, nor
compassed the Crown by falsehood or flattery; they did not pawn their
Consciences, and stain their reputation, as Tertullian speaks of some in his
time, propter unius Lib. de Poenit.
anni volaticum gaudium, for the fleeting glory of a short time; but they were
sent of God. Nor shall I need to open by what ways, and upon what foundations
Magistracy comes to be rightfully and with justice settled in any person. He
that would have satisfaction in that point, I shall desire him but to do his
own understanding that right as to consult and ponder that renowned and
elaborate Tractate of our reverend Neighbor, Since the preaching of this he is
fallen asleep in Jesus, and gone to his rest; a person of the sad impression
upon all good men; of whose loss, I shall only say as August of Cyprian's, Quos
asflixerat sollicitudo certaminis, hos consol^ta est corona victoris.
Mr. Edward Gee, about usurped powers, Printed and Published in the worst of
times, with no less boldness of his blessed soul for God and the vindication
of his people, then it was penned with laboriousnesse, judgment and depth of
solid reason. But that which I shall set before you, is the unvaluable
blessings of a Magistracy sent, approved, and warranted, and justified by God
himself. To clear up this, let me set before you but a little of what I might
say as to the evil of usurpation upon Authority.

First, Usurpers in Magistracy usually fall most foul upon God and the interest
of Religion, either imposing and enforcing corrupt and wicked innovations upon
the people, or else supporting a wretched toleration of a boundless liberty.
See for this the practice of Jeroboam (for I speak of such Kingdoms and
Principalities as have the knowledge and worship of the true God, or Jesus
Christ whom he has sent.) No sooner was he settled in that Throne which of
right belonged to the Son of Solomon, but the whole course of sacred worship is
changed, and golden Calves set up at Bethel in stead of God; and this thing
became a sin to Israel that was inexpiable. And indeed usurpation contracts
upon its self a sort of necessity of this wickedness. It is one of the Rules
and Principles of Machiavil, Match. disput. cap. 26.
about persons that invade the regal power, In id unice intendat oportet ut
sicut ipse novus princeps est, it a in suo principatu innovet omnia; that they
be sure of this, to bring an innovation of all things else, together with the
mutation and change of Government. What such powers and persons do observe, may
tend to gratify and please the people, or at least the most active, stirring
and tumultuous part of it (for such usually is that part which is the most
corruptly principled) or may lay the greatest foundations for their own
possession of their unjust Authority; this is that Pole Star by which
Usurpation steers its course. And therefore woe unto thee, thou sacred and
blessed interest of truth and true Religion, when such disseisures are made of
lawful Powers, who need not the assistance of such cursed contrivances,
Machiavilian plots, and debauched Consciences to support them. And no marvel if
usurpation be at least the fountain of a boundless toleration, since erroneous
spirits, though the most hateful enemies to a just Authority, yet are the
fastest friends and fittest Instruments for arbitrary Powers, as being
principled to own or approve any Authority only as it is fitted to countenance
and support their way; being not of that ancient Christian spirit (of which
Tertullian speaks) of fidelity to Princes never so opposite to Christianity.

Secondly, Usurpation in Magistracy brings a snare upon the People as to their
obedience and subjection. Alas! what woeful troubles, what scruples to
Conscience, what wracking and tentering of invention and understanding, to
find out nice and subtle distinctions and evasions, does this produce? for
although the imposition and command of sinful and unlawful things be possible
to the most approved and sacred powers, yet it is generally an inseparable
adjunct of any ones violent intrusion into Supremacy, as might be proved at
large both in profane and sacred story, and might be demonstrated from the very
interest of usurpation. Upon this ground, how many both Priests and People were
forced either to quit their Conscience, or to quit their house and home and all
they had, you may read in the case of Jeroboam, in 2 Chronicles. 11. 16. And upon
this ground, in the imposition of Engagements, Oaths, Fasts and Thanksgivings,
some in this Congregation what they have suffered know abundantly. But besides
all this, there lies no small difficulty upon the People of God, as to
obedience of unlawful Powers in even lawful things: what conflicts of the soul
betwixt the goodness and necessity of the action, on the one hand, inducing and
persuading to the acting of it; and betwixt the illegality of the Power that
commands it, on the other hand, and the unwillingness of any sober spirit to do
even good it self to the strengthening of the hands and claim of violence! for
my part, I shall wish we may rather never have occasion to be put to experience
and try, then any more to be exercised under such temptations. But such is the
fate and state of usurped Powers as to the case of people.

Thirdly, Usurpation in Magistracy deprives a people of the liberty and
opportunity of discharging their real, and their confessed duty to their lawful
Prince and Sovereign. Surely Christians, this is no small affliction. Princes
and legal Powers when under bondage, banishment or other separation from their
people, may look with a troubled eye upon them; but alas, the people themselves
do feel no less affliction and smart in that divorce then they. It is as
irksome to a Christian people to be forced from their lawful Powers, as it is
for them to be forced from their people. I know no interest that has deeper
impression upon the Conscience and Spirit of the People of God, under and below
their devotion to God himself, and the happiness of their precious souls, then
their reverence and obedience, affection and fidelity to the majesty of their
Prince. And however the misunderstandings or other fatal providence betwixt
them and their lawful Princes, may sometimes by the righteous judgment of God,
as it has lately been with us, produce the distance of each from other; yet
when the honest and rational ends of men have been abused to the injury and
wrong of the Supreme Authority, it is not unobserved by every common
understanding, how much those rapes and violences have sat upon the spirits of
the godly in this Land, to their deep affliction and grief, and the producing
of those fervent, frequent Fasts and Prayers which have been answered from
heaven, as we now see. Whilst a People therefore have so much of grace,
godliness and fidelity left as not to prostitute themselves to the lust of
usurpation, and not to take a present suspension of their political husbands
power and presence for a dissolution of their matrimonial bond, and liberty to
admit Invaders into that Virgin undefiled Bed (which is a more gross Adultery
then that of a Wife from her Husband, unless endured by force and ravishment) I
say, whilst this is so, what can we imagine of such a People, in such dismal
violent separations, but that they sit solitary as a Widow that has none to
comfort her? When it shall be Treason, Death, Destruction, what not? so much as
to Preach or Pray for their natural Lords, nay, to mention their very Names
with any mark of honor, respect or reverence.

Fourthly, Usurpation in Magistracy commonly proves the extirpation of the
Ministry, in Christian States and Kingdoms, amongst a People that worship the
true God. This is visible enough under the Tyranny of Jeroboam, 2 Chronicles. 11.
14. wherein the Levites either left their possessions or lost their integrity,
and flocked in such numbers to Jerusalem from all their Cities. I know it is
possible for the Ministers of Christ to lie under deep affliction, even under
lawful Powers; and although we are active and laborious to promote the
resettlement of his sacred Majesty, a thing of so indisputable an obligation
upon us all, yet we are not without the pre-conception and foresight of the
evil use which evil men may make of this deliverance, to vassallize and
persecute the dearest of the Truths, Ordinances and Interests, and Ministers of
Jesus Christ. Yet in usurped Powers there lies a kind of fatal necessity of
persecution against such. For besides that obligation which lies upon usurped
Powers to serve the satisfactions of such a Clergy as have been the Stirr^p to
help them to mount the Saddle of Authority; the very truth of God, which is and
ought to be in the mouth of his faithful Prophets, that (be sure) never speaks
good of or to either wicked or usurping Princes, is a continual torture and
vexation to their spirits, a continual dissettlement and disquiet to their
Power. I know the intermeddling of us with matters of State has been mightily
cried against, as a thing out of the Commission of the Ministers of the Gospel;
as if we were not as well to Preach against the sins of great as small, of
Powers as of the People under them. When Jeroboam had set up his Idols, the
Prophet (and he was sent of God) cried out to his face against his Idols and
Idolatry, Oh Altar, Altar, 1 King. 13. Although it was the grief of Ahab, yet
it was the grace of Elijah in a right sense, that he was the man that troubled
Israel, that set his face and sharpened his Ministry against the wickedness of
that Idolatrous Usurper. When the Prophet Amos speaks the truth of God against
the house of Jeroboam, the Land cannot bear his words; and if he will Prophecy
any more, he must flee to the Land of Judah, where his lawful and natural
Prince was, but no more in Bethel, for it was the Chapel, House and Kingdom of
the Usurper, Amos 7. 10, 12. The truth is, if the Ministers of the Gospel do as
they ought to do, publish freely the mind of God against the horrid
encroachments are made upon Magistracy by force and violence, or if they have
not a freedom to take all such Engagements, Oaths and Promises as are imposed
upon them to the renouncing of the just Authority of their legal Princes, the
very interest of usurpation is bound up and concerned in the extirpation of
such; and of this my self and many others have had too sad and ample
experience. Certainly never did Nation know more fearful vexations, more
scornful contempts, more treasonable charges against, more horrid abuses, more
universal dislocations of the most godly Ministers, and more Magisterial
Lordings over them in the work of their callings, then we have done, since the
fatal blow was given in 164^ to our sacred and Supreme Authority. I know these
are unwelcome and unpleasing things to insist upon; and therefore I shall
trouble you with no more then this: Lastly, Usurpation shall not prosper;
Kingdoms and Principalities bottomed upon blood, rapine and injustice shall
shortly expire themselves, and have the hand of vengeance against them, be they
never so strong, potent and magnificent. It was not long before every man that
pissed against the wall was cut off from the race of Jeroboam, 1 King. 14. 10.
1 King. 15. 29. Baasha left not any of his house that breathed; Nor had
Baasha's posterity any long possession of the Crown, 1 King. 16. 10. for Zimri
a Captain of his Army smote and slew him. And had Zimri peace who slew his
Master? 2 King. 9. 31. or had the Family of Iehu any durable possession of that
Crown which they unjustly as to themselves, although justly as to God took off
from the head of Ahab? No, Usurpers have ever this fate attending their
Principality, that by their own justification of force upon their lawful
Sovereigns, they have left that example of liberty to men, that in no long time
proves the cutthroat and destruction of their own Authority; and that
principle and power which dispossessed the rightful, proves as effectual to
dispossess the wrongful and invading Magistracy. How fully has this been
evidenced in our times, and days, may be fully seen by the practices and
declarations of some persons whom I forbear. You may say, The non-prospering of
usurpation is good: Better so by much, then to have it fix and settle. True,
and so say I also, as I marked before. Such fleeting of the Scepter when placed
illegally, is the most hopeful way of its fixation in its natural basis; And
therefore I would advise discomposed States to keep on foot such a variation of
Authority as to form, or persons, as the best way of issuing the dissettlement
in a retrogradation to the peoples common interest and satisfaction. But yet
such grand mutations are not without their sad and severe impressions upon the
peoples good, peace and quietness. And therefore when God shall restore to a
people their rightful Power and Authority, and free them from these inseparable
evils of usu^pation, this is a mercy of no small obligation and advantage.

3. If God do restore to a people such a Government as that of Moses, Joshua,
David, and Solomon, then they have Government vested in the hands of them who
are good and holy, and such as the Lord delights in. Such Persons, and
Princes of such blessed tempers, may well be (as was said of Titus) Deliciae
humani generis, The Darlings and Delights of all the People. I shall not
largely run over the Story of those Authorities; but shall set before you some
remarkable things of them. 1. They were such as ruled in righteousness. David
would not have the floor of Araunah, No, not to build an Altar on to the Lord.
unless he might pay him the value of it, 2 Samuel 24. 24. Of the children of
Israel did Solomon make no bondmen, 1 King. 9. 22. but preserved them in the
possession of those rights which God had given them, Lev. 25. 39. and such was
the administration of his power, that the whole earth sought unto him to hear
his wisdom, 1 King. 10. 24. To enumerate the particular acts of righteousness
in these Princes, would be too long, the sacred story affords you abundant
satisfaction. True it is, the best of Saints have a spot in their Chronicle,
and the best of Kings are liable to have their (...), some rash and
inconsiderate actions, to let them and those that dei^ie them know they are but
men. Such were those two acts of David about Urijah, and the other about
Mephibosheth, in an evil advised, misconceiving of his loyalty, because he went
not with him in his departing from Jerusalem, although he had more affection to
his King then Ziba that wretchedly misreported him to get his estate. But the
general administration of their powers was such, that the rights of people had
a sweet increase, and peaceable growth under the shadow of their wings, and the
blessed influences of their Authorities. 2. They were such as ruled in mercy.
Medean^ur morbis non indigenentur ^grotis, says Masius in his observations
upon Joshua's speech to Achan: and Tacitus tells us, a good Prince non poena
semper, sed saepius poenitentia contentus esse debet, should take more
satisfaction in the penitency then the punishment of transgressors; and with
Antoninus Pius, conclude it more his honor to save one Citizen then to destroy
a thousand enemies. It is the saying of Seneca, Principi non minus turpia multa
supplicia, quam medi eo multa funera: and besides the natural beauty of
clemency and mercy in Supreme Authorities, all Politics inform us it is no
less the pleasure of the people, Claudian, ad Honor.
then it is the preservation of the Prince. Non sic excutiae nec circumstantia
tela quam tutatur amor. What a remarkable president of this was that blessed
David, 2 Samuel 19. 22. when he looked upon the sons of Zerviah as his enemies
for counselling him to destroy that Shimei who had cursed him in the day of his
flight? and raised up Amasa who was General of the host of Absalom his
rebellious son, to be Captain of his own Army continually in the room of Ioab,
2 Samuel 19. 13. by which carriages he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah to
him as one man, so that they sent word to the King, Return thou and all thy
servants. This is a president worth the deepest consideration of such Kings who
have been forced from their Throne as David was. Ignoscere pulchrum est jam
misero poenaeque satis vidisse precantem: and so it comes to pass as is the
observation of Bias, (...), fear not more their Prince, then they are
solicitous for his good, and afraid of evil to befall him. 3. They were such as
preferred the peoples good above their own, their Subjects were more dear unto
them then their Scepter, their Kingdom then their Crown. When Joshua divided
the Land for the inheritance of the people, it is remarkable he kept not a foot
of it for himself, nor had he any but what the children of Israel gave him,
Joshua 19. 49. And when they put him, as Non ante rebus suis privatis consultum
eupivit, quam publicarum procurationem prorsus absolisset. Mas.
Masius judges, by the advice of Eleazar the High Priest to ask for himself, he
fixed upon a very mean and contemptible place, so mean that St. Hierom speaks
in his Epitaph of Parlea, that she was amazed when she came to the Tomb of
Joshua, quod ipse possessionum omnium distributor montana sibi and aspera loca
delegisset, had asked for himself such a mountainous and mean possession in
comparison of that of others. No less remarkable is that of David, 2 Samuel 24.
17. Let thy hand be against me and against the house of my fathers; but as for
these sheep, what have they done? and Moses, Exodus 32. 32. who would rather
wish to be blotted out of the book of God, then that his wrath should break out
against the people. Such Princes are indeed not princeps but patres, the
Fathers of their Countries, and do exercise as Seneca calls it, potestatem
patriam. But further, 4. They were such as were zealous for God and godliness,
set and sharpened the edge of their royal sword against sin and wickedness. How
passionately zealous in the cause of God was Moses, when he sees the Idolatry
of the people? how earnest in his adjuring and exhorting the people to stick
fast to their Religion before he went up to Neb^ to dye there? Joshua could not
(...) till first he had engaged the people to God in a sole^^ Covenant. Josh.
24. David he fetched up the Ark of the Lord to Jerusalem, and bought a place
for the future Temple of it, and Solomon he built it an House. Quis mente
sobrius regibus dicat, says St. Aug. Nolite curare in regno vestro a quo
tueatur vel oppugnetur ecclesia domini vestri? quis velit esse religiosus vel
sacrilegus? This is the glory and excellency of Princes, that as they are Gods,
and Gods Vicegerents upon earth; so nothing should be more sacred to them then
the interest of truth, and power of godliness; and what mercy greater can befall
a people then such a Magistracy? For if the delirium regis, the miscarriage of
the Prince do cause such punishments on the whole body; if the excellency and
glory of any Government lie in the serviceableness thereof to promote and
honor truth and godliness, to discountenance and discourage error and
profaneness; if (as generally it is) an holy Prince makes an happy people: how
great then is this mercy, when God shall restore thee such Judges as at the
first, and such Counselors as at the beginning? But to conclude, 5. They were
such, as what they were, the same they continued to be till the end of their
race, till death it self made their sacred heads to stoop to its impartial
stroke. Indeed in the latter days of Solomon, there arose some cloud upon the
splendour of his former Government, occasioned by the influence of his
Idolatrous Wives upon him, so hazardous a thing it is for Kings to marry the
Daughters of a strange god; but yet he recovered himself from that declination,
and rose up to as great an altitude of holiness and zeal for God as ever
formerly, when his own experience had enabled him to pen the Book of
Ecclesiastes. Moses, and Joshua, and David, their care of their people lived
till they died; and what they were at first, they were till the very last in
their personal graces and profitable Government. It is usual for Kings to begin
their Dominion with more acceptance then to continue it; Mitissima sors est Luc.
regnorum sub rege novo. That, Quinque unium Neronis, is famous Malorum
blandientium virus est occultum, and arridentis nequitiae facies quidem laet^,
sed calamitatis abstrusae illecebrosa fallacia. Cypr.
in that story of the Roman Caesar's; for so long, none so good; for ever after,
none so vile and wicked. True it is, that greatness is a sad temptation to put
the best of men upon exorbitances; Aeneas Sylvius in the Council at Basil
contended stiffly against the Pope; when he got that Chair himself, he was no
more Aeneas Sylvius. I shall not need to lay open the disadvantages of virtue
that fall upon Princes when peaceably settled in the Throne: the Lord I hope
will give us to see the piety and integrity, the moderation and clemency, the
unalterable zeal to the Protestant cause, the fixed detestation of debauchery
and profaneness, the right understanding and apprehension of the principles and
deportments of honest men (however now aspersed) all these, and more then these
precious pearls in the Imperial Crown of his sacred Majesty, shall yet keep
their orient luster and unspotted brightness, notwithstanding what attempts may
be made by temptation to eclipse them, or shadow off their vital influence from
the people. Such Princes were these, who were the older, better; the longer
they lived, the more deeply did they love their people, and the more dearly
were they loved by them, and went to their graves with common lamentation.

4. I might add, if God do restore to a people such a Government, then their
Government is vested in the hands of such as have parts and abilities from God
for the fitting of them to manage their Authority. God had put of the spirit of
Government upon Moses and Joshua, and David, and the whole earth came to hear
the Wisdom of Solomon. He himself that had had the experience of what was
necessary for the Ruler of such a people, cries out, Eccles. 10. 16. Woe unto
thee, O land, when thy King is a child, viz. for Wisdom, Soberness, Judgment
and Understanding; and to the same purpose is Isa. 3. 4, 5. But I shall
conclude this with this Observation: As the giving to a people of such a
Government is a blessing, so the restoring of it is much more; for so the Text
speaks, I will restore, or I will cause to return, as the word imports, thy
Judges as at the first, etc. I have touched at some inconveniences of the force
that may fall out upon legal, gracious, rightful Authorities; And what woeful
effects do attend such violences and usurpations; and therefore shall add no
more. But in such a day as this, when God does not only give, but restore, and
cause to return, a separated Husband to the bosom of his disconsolate Wife, a
banished Father to the arms of his long-lamenting Children: but, I say, in such
a day, and such a day is this, Oh! how obliging is that Deliverance; how full
and fat, and fruitful a Mercy is this? I will restore thy Judges as at the
first, etc. And so much shall serve for that Observation.

The excellency and the choicest chiefest blessing of Authority Observe. 2.
is, when it has an influence upon such persons as live under it, to make them
eminent for righteousness and holiness.

This is that which the Text sets down, as the chiefest Ornament of the
Imperial Diadem, the Crown and Glory of Princes, and that which procures the
greatest good and benefit of the people. Afterward thou shall be called, The
City of righteousness, the faithful City. I shall hasten to a conclusion, and
therefore shall set before you only these three Demonstrations of this
Principle. I know upon what foundations the most of men do build up their joys,
in the restitution of Authority; some upon the outward pomp and grandeur of
such Kingdoms, some upon the hopes of raising themselves and their Estates and
Fortunes by them, some upon the persuasion of the harmony is betwixt their
Princes and them in matters of judgment, and the advantage thereby to promote
and impose their principles about Religion and the things of God; too many
whose triumphing is bottomed not so much upon the righteous establishment of
the Throne, as upon their own bewitching dreams and pleasant fancies of
revenge, and of opportunities thereby to pour out their wrath upon the people
of their hatred (such injury dare wickedness do to sacred Powers, as thus to
imagine it to furnish their lusts with strength and opportunity; such an horrid
aspersion dare men, some unhappy men, cast upon the glorious Scepter of
Majesty.) And they are not few who this day are therefore blessing God because
the Iron-rod of Usurpation is shivered to pieces, and the Scepter is restored
to its rightful Tribe; whatever shall be the issue, Yet thus it should be, thus
the Lord would have it be. Yet Christians, let me add that this, this is that
topmost branch of the glory of Princes, when they are Instrumental to make
their people a City that is eminent for righteousness, truth and holiness. That
I may shut up your understandings under the conviction of this truth, take but
these Demonstrations of it.

1. That is the Glory and Crown of Magistracy, which in the attainment of it,
is the principal end of its institution by God. The suitableness of things to
the cause and reason of their beings, and when they are effectual to the
production of the work, for which and for nothing else they were created,
appointed or raised up by God, this is the glory, this the beauty of them. The
institution of the Ministry of the Gospel, is in order to the begetting of
faith, Romans 10. is for the perfecting of the Saints, and the building up of
Christ's body, Ephesians. 4. and therefore the Apostle concludes that the influence
of his Apostleship upon the Thessalonians suitable to this reason for which he
was sent by God, this was his glory and his crown of joy, 1 These. 2. 20. True
it is that the choicest Instruments are not always blessed with the real
production of that which is the end of their ordination and appointment; the
Prophet Isaiah complains, that he had labored in vain, and spent his strength
for naught: but where there is a disposition, frame and spirit in such persons
suitable to the end of their institution, a laboring and wrestling for the
effecting thereof, so that the frustration arises not from the carelessness,
unsuitableness, indisposition of the persons employed in such an office, but
from the wilfulness, unflexibleness, hardness of the object, there and in such
a case, though Israel be not gathered, yet such persons in the eyes of God are
glorious, Isa. 49. 5. As thus it is in the case of Ecclesiastical, so also in
that of Civil Powers and Ordinances. While men are so taken up in the
consideration of Magistracy, I would wish them to ponder, for what end and
reason it was that ever such an Ordinance or thing was appointed by God. And
let me freely speak it, this in the Text was the end thereof, That the
societies of men might have truth and justice, righteousness and holiness
running down as a mighty stream in the midst of them. When God raised up Moses,
what was his work but this? Numb. 11. 12. Carry my people, this people of the
Lord in thy bosom, as the Father does the sucking-child. Romans 13. He is the
Minister of God to thee for good, to be a terror to evil doers, but a praise
to them that do well. Isa. 49. 22. Thy Kings sometimes shall be, and ever
should be thy Nursing-Fathers, and Queens thy Nursing-Mothers. This was the
glory of Constantine in Lactantius, Thou art he, says he, qui prim^^ Romanorum
principum repudiatis erroribus majestatem dei very and singularis and
cognovisti and honor^sti. Princes are not raised up to serve themselves, or
live in the Pomp and Pleasure of this life, much less to serve the lusts of
their people, and patronize the Atheism and Irreligion or false Religions of
their Subjects. It is a most cursed reflection upon the honor of our
Sovereign, that the practice of so many men takes now the liberty to break out
in such a violent stream and torrent of profaneness, that men begin to be daring
and bold in their Oaths, and Drunkenness, their May Pole horrid and Heathenish
Idolatries, their profanation of Sabbaths and contempt of Ordinances; that
Popery and the grandest Factors for that interest do lift up their heads with
so much imperiousness, as if the restoring of our Government to its proper
Chanel would be the justification or allowance of these or any of these
impieties. Alas, Christians, Curse not the King, no not in your thoughts; do
not apprehend things so injurious and reflecting upon his sacred Crown and
Dignity. The end of his Royal Power is the punishing, suppressing, restraining
of all such Cursers, Swearers, Drunkards, Sabbath-breakes, the lifting up of
the happiness and peace of the holy and righteous, and peaceable in the Land,
whom you despise, scorn, reproach and trample under your feet. And therefore
the Lord forgive those of you that talk most of your affection to his sacred
Majesty, and yet do thus conceive and represent him by your practice, to the
blackest staining of that Princely honor and esteem, which should be sacred
amongst all people. To propagate, preserve and prosper righteousness truth and
holiness in their Dominions, this is the end of Magistracy, this is the beauty,
the most orient perfection in the Imperial Diadem: and upon this foundation it
is that the glory of Constantine, Justinian, and other Christian Princes has
been raised up to such a lasting fabric, as stands still to this day undefaced
in their sacred Monuments. When Job a person and Prince of great Authority
gives an account of the right administration of his power, Job 29. he tells us,
he delivered the poor that cried, the fatherless and him that had no helper;
the blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon him, and he caused the
widows heart to sing for joy; he was eyes to the blind and feet to the lame; he
brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the prey out of his teeth. And thus,
and by this means his glory was fresh upon him. How blessed a thing is it thus,
when it may be truly spoken of our Supreme Authority, as it is by Pontius
Diaconus concerning Cyprian in the management of his Ecclesiastical power,
Nulla vidua reversa est sinu vacuo, nullus indigens lumine non illo comite
directus est, nullus nudus auxilio de potentioris manu non illo tutore
protectus est! for to this end has God raised them up, and set them as the Sun
in their respective Worlds, to communicate to truth and holiness, justice, and
whatsoever has a Moral or Theological excellency and goodness in it; the whole
emanations of their light and influences.

The Author of the Records of the life of St. Cyprian, tells us that he that at
that time was to be Bishop of Carthage, had need to be such an one, Qui doceret
poenitentiam lapsos, veritatem haereticos, unitatem schismaticos; and therefore
concludes upon the fixing of him in that employment, been, been tunc and vere
spiritualiter contigit quod vir tam necessarius tam bonis rebus ^ martyrio
delatus est: Happy was that providence that saved such an hopeful person,
fitted for such a necessary, holy work. I may truly say, That that sacred
person whom God has re-invested in the Throne of these Kingdoms, had need be
such an one, and more then such, as having not only a collapsed, and
disjoynted, and disordered Church, but divided and disparted State to set in
order; and therefore need to be such an one as Cyprian was, Ingenii
spiritualiter temperati qui inter resultantes collidentium fluctus iter medium
librato limite gubernaret. I remember Justinian the Emperor in one of his
Letters to Mennas Patriarch of Constantinople, tells him that the end of his
Office as Imperator was this, (...); to keep the faith of Christ from being
perverted, and the friends of Christ (for in those elder times the name of the
Church was not appropriated to the Clergy) from being persecuted; and he adds,
(...), made it our principal care, (...). For which cause only we are
satisfied, we are both put and prospered in the possession of this Throne. This
then being the end, the pursuit hereof is the excellency of all Power and
Principality.

2. That is the Glory and Crown of Magistracy, which is, and tends to the
greatest happiness of the people that live under their Government and
Authority. He is the Minister of God to thee for good, (...). Romans 13. 4. It is
not unsuitable for Christian ears that saying of Metellus Numidicus a Roman
Censor; Dii immortales plurimum possunt, sed non plus velle nobis debent quam
parents; the gods may do more, but they should not desire more good and profit
to their people then their Princes should. And it was no small part of the
reason of the deifications of many of the Heathens gods, that they had
contributed some remarkable benefit to their people. The Jews themselves will
mourn if a Ruler dye or be afflicted that loved their Nation, and built them a
Synagogue. The Sun it self is more glorious, not so much by that light it has,
but gives, and communicates to this dark be-nighted Globe in which we live. It
is no unusual thing for the fondest people to deal with their Magistrates as
the Frogs in the Fable with their King, when they prove or by prejudicate
vulgar opinion come to be mistaken, as unprofitable, or destructive to common
benefit. I would not have the people to be the Censors of the manners or
deportment of their Princes, so as to suck in the apprehensions of the
discharge of their allegiance upon the supposed inconsistency of their
Authority with common good: but however it hence is manifest that the glory of
their motion in that Orb of Supremacy in which they are fixed by God, depends
upon their beneficial communications to the real welfare and happiness of those
that are concerned in the fatal effects of their Conjunctions, Aspects or
Eclipses. Let me add then, that your greatest benefit you can reap by any
Authority over you, is this in the Text, when by the influence of that Power
you become a City of righteousness, holiness and truth, having thereby the free
distribution of justice amongst all, and the full establishment of Truth in
Doctrine, Purity in Worship, and an encouraged justified holiness in all that
profess the name of God. Alas! the good that you should have by Magistracy,
does not lie in the enjoyment of liberty to serve your lusts, and the profane
principles of a graceless spirit, to set up the Idols and Errors of your own
hearts, and to enforce your will worship or superstition upon the Consciences
of others; but it lies in the enforcing of duty, holiness, righteousness and
reformation, and the perpetual discouragement of whatsoever intrencheth upon
the interest and propagation of grace and truth, as it is in Jesus Christ. He
does you most good, that makes you most good; most Holy, Orthodox, Sincere,
living up to the fullness of your light; and putting a soul into your Worship
and Profession by the Spirit and Power of Godliness. I am not unsensible upon
what foundations many thousands of persons do bottom their joy in the
deliverance of this day. I wish their joy were grea^^^^; but their grounds were
better; and that as their gladness is bottomed on the expectations and hopes of
some future good, so that that good were somewhat of more Divine extraction and
real excellency then what is in the eye of most of men. Oh! what if we shall
have a King, and yet fear not the Lord? what then should a King do to us? what
if we shall have no more Wars with men, and yet still have the most fatal Wars
with God? what if we shall lie under less of suffering, and yet live under more
of sin? what if we shall have better Laws, but worser Lives? what if our
Liberties. and Estates, and we shall meet again, and yet Christ and our souls
shall part for ever and never meet more? what if we shall have plenty, but no
piety? a lawful, merciful, gracious King to Rule the outward man, but a
bloodthirsty implacable Tyrant the Devil to hurry the souls of men to
destruction? Oh! Christians think of it. There are too many who scandalize our
Government, and cast dirt upon the royal Scepter, in promising to themselves, I
know not what, licentiousness without a Curb, revenge without a Law,
destruction of others without distinction, Popery without a penalty, and what
they please to impose upon the Worship and Worshippers of Jesus Christ without
a Scripture. Should it be so (which God forbid the thoughts of should enter
into my heart) yet were this a good for thee? and that good which God has
raised up his Anointed ones to accomplish for thee? Oh! let it not enter into
your thoughts, lest the very Birds of the Air do tell the matter. Thus poison
were better for the body then suitable nourishment, and liberty safer then
restraint to him who through phrenzies or other strong distemper hunts after
nothing more then opportunity to destroy himself. I know indeed there are many
blessed fruits which these Kingdoms may joyfully, and warrantably, and with
much confidence expect to be the product of this blessed restitution of his
sacred Majesty. Such as are the vindication of this Church and Kingdoms honor,
the wiping off the aspersion, and rouling away the reproach of disloyalty from
too many upon whom it is too familiary but most unjustly cast, the settlement
of our peace, and the prosperous future state of all: but let me say of this,
If God shall (as we hope and pray he will) by the influence of the Kings
Authority sentence the reproachers of his ways and people into everlasting
silence, muzzle the mouth of blasphemous swearers, rout the societies of
abominable drunkards into corners that they dare not see the Sun, clear the
streets, and empty the houses from the provoking crew of Sabbath Breakers, and
set up with encouragement the Worship of the Gospel, the practice of holiness
in all orders of men, pray let me say of this, as David of Goliahs sword, There
is none like that; other things do well, but this excels them all. For however
distastful these things may be, and cross to the grain of many, too many with
us, yet this would be the greatest mercy to your souls, your eternal precious
souls, ten thousand to one to be shipwrack'd and lost if left to the boundless
liberty of your own hearts; and this would be the greatest mercy even to your
outward estate. For what hopes of any blessing from above, where settlement and
prosperity is abused? where that deliverance which should be the grave, is made
but the womb and birth of that wickedness, Idolatry and unreformedness, that
does and will keep up the controversy with God without composure. Hence it
has so often come to pass, that people who have not become holy by being made
externally happy in such eminent ways of deliverance as this, have so often
seen the speedy eclipse of the brightest Sun of their own prosperity. Certainly
if the toleration of Profaneness and Heresy and Idolatry in the Church, be
crudelis misericordia, a thing that carries in it more of cruelty then of
charity to the souls of men; and if the drawing of the sword of Ecclesiastical
power in the hands of the Ministers of the Gospel against the growing
corruptions of their Flock, be an act of the greatest mercy, as appears 1 Cor.
5. the same will hold in its proportion in Civil Powers; of whom let me shut up
this, and say, They are then the farthest off from doing unjusty, when they
make us the furthest off from doing wickedly; they have then been truly Fathers
of their Country, when they have made their people at least professedly
children of their God; they have then done their Subjects the greatest good,
when they have put a stop to sin which is their greatest evil; they are then
most like Gods, when by their power the people are less like Devils: they may
save souls by the loss of sensuality, save life by the loss of unbounded
liberty, save the truth by the casting overboard the sinking weight of humane
innovations, save the Church by the necessary allay into some common mediocrity
of inconsistent parties and principles, and entail happiness upon the Throne by
setting up holiness and truth in all their people. What Cyprian writes to the
Confessors, shall close up this, for us in our lower, or Princes in their
greater elevations, Ea concedere quae in perniciem populi vertant est decipere;
nec erigitur sic lapsus sed per offensam dei magis impellitur ad ruinam.

3. Lastly, That is the excellency and glory of Magistracy which tends most to
their own eternal blessedness and acceptance with God. We should judge that to
be the Crown of Princes here, which shall be their Crown at the great day of
the appearing of Jesus Christ. The eminent grace of the Thessalonians, their
purity and constancy in the faith, the Apostle calls 1 These. 2. 19. his hope
and the Crown of his triumphing before the face of Jesus Christ at the day of
his coming: and even an Heathen himself could say, Consulere patriae, parcere
afflictis, for a caede abstinere, dare orbis quietem, sacule pacem suo, hac
summa virtus, petitur hac coelum via; this is the way to everlasting rest, for
Royalty. Oh! what account could Jeroboam give of his Idolatry, Ahab of his
cruelty, Gallio of his indifferency, the Arrian Emperors of their Heresy,
Nero of his inhumanity, Julian of his Apostasy, when they stand before the
Exercitus ducere, aliena vastare, urbes delere, oppida excidere, liberos
populos aut trucidare aut subjicere servituri. Lact. lib. 1. de falsa relig.
judgment seat of God, the King of Princes? how would then those things which
Lactantius observes made the corrupt and sinful world to repute them as gods,
then confine them for ever to the society of Devils? Give me that which God
will own, which the King of Kings delights to honor, when the secrets of all
hearts shall be made manifest, and according to the real goodness of their ways
every man shall have praise of God. Those things cannot be the desirable things
of Government which prove to be the damning and defiling things of Governors
at that day; nor can that be other then the perfection of it now, which then
proves to be the approbation of it with God. Judge you therefore within your
selves wherein the choicest beauty and greatest blessing of Authority lies,
whether in suffering their Dominions to be an habitation of Devils, a Cage of
every unclean Bird, to be Magna latrocinia, the stages of profaneness and
impiety, the Nurseries of Heresy, Superstition and Popery, the grief of
Saints, and the provocation of God; or in causing them so far as the influence
of their sacred power can extend, to become the Cities of righteousness, truth
and holiness. This, this is that which shall have its euge at the last, and be
crowned with the royal approbation of God himself, when all other their works
shall be burnt up as dross, hay, straw and stubble.

I have done with that, and shall have done all when I have spoke a word of
this last Observation, viz.

To have our Judges restored as at the first, and our Counselors Observe* 3^*
as at the beginning, our Authority such as shall be (...) to make us a City of
faithfulness, truth and righteousness, (...) are mercies which it is the method
of God to give a (...), when by his p^^ging away the dross of their iniq^^^y
(...) are prepared and fitted for it. I will purely purge away thy dross, and
take away thy tin; and then I will restore thy Judges as at the first. I shall
not further insist upon this, but ^hut up all with a few words of Application
of these things.

1. Oh! bless then the Lord, for the hopes of such a (...) restored to us this
day, as was that of Moses, I Iosh^^, (...) and David; Authority vested and
re-estated in ^he hands of its rightful Subject; Usurpation which for these
twelve year^ past without dispute has invaded the Throne, broken and ^hiver'd
into pieces in a moment, and the (...) head of him l^^^^d up by God, whose
known ^eportment under his de^pest ^^yals, and whose (...) report and fa^^
(...) him to us as another Titus, d^^icia humani generi^* another C^sar, of
whom Cicero said, Oblivis^i nihil solet nisi injur^* and as another (...),
whose zeal for the truth, and strenuous interposings of his Authority for the
peace and settlement of the discompo^^d Church ma^e (...) the Mir^our of
Monarch^, the Pat^^n (...) the glory of Christian Princes to this day. Such ^n
one report and relation tells us he is, Religion teaches us to believe and
pray that he may be to this people; however, (...) those pregnant presages of
future good to all that are de^^^^^le enough from diverse things, (...) not now
enumerate, yet we have the unquestionable ^oundation of his rightful title to
these Dominions* that may raise up our triumphings to the greatest pitch, and
wind up our hearts i^ thanksgivings to the highest elevation. Bless thou the
Lord, Oh! my soul, and all that is within ^hee bl^^^ his holy Name* I ^^ not
unsensible how many (...) others, whose lot it was in (...) of the^^
distr^ctions to judge it their duty to (...) Parliament, as if this desired
blessed day were the (...) hearts, and (...) with their principles. (...), The
Lord comes with ^en thousand of ^is (...) judgment upon them that are ungodly.
But if the constant profession of their judgment in point of allegiance even in
the saddest times, their Sufferings and Sequestrations for noncompliance with
those Anti-monarchical Engagements which overspread so great a part of the
Nation pretending to greater loyalty, if their volleys of prayers and floods of
tears for the settlement of the Kingdoms upon their own Basis, if their
unwearied activity till the Nation were (as now it is) purged from the guilt
and freed from the yoke of Usurpation; nay, if the blood of diverse of them
spilt in the justification of that part of their Covenant which relates to the
interest of his sacred Majesty: I say, If all these may evidence the reality of
their joy at this deliverance, I know not what can be defective; and a more
assured testimony of their cordial joy, then all those practices of debauchery
in which too many have the hard fate to be involved. But I forbear to harp any
more upon that string; the Lord in his mercy bury those distinctions and
animosities among the people, which in their continuation have too ominous an
aspect upon the settlement and tranquillity of the Kingdom. But Christians, do
you bless the Lord in and for the mercy of this day. Bless him that God has
restored us such a Magistracy whose endowments and qualifications for the regal
Office and Employment carry such a bright and glorious beam of hope to all;
such a Prince as by his public Declaration has held forth such unalterable
resolutions of preserving and supporting the Protestant cause, of burying the
exorbirancies of our times in everlasting oblivion, and of satisfactory care to
the Consciences of good men that they be not tyrannized over by unscriptural
impositions* and however God shall issue the results of this mutation, yet
bless the Lord, that Authority is returned to its natural center, the scandals
upon Covenanters wiped off, and the most necessary part of righteousness done
to the breath of our nostrils, who is worth ten thousand of us, in that
restoration of him which the Saints prayed for, the World expected, the very
Angels themselves approve, and the God of Gods with many pier^ing c^ies and
calls required from us. I hope there is no sufficient reason to suspect any
diminution to come hereby to the interest of the Protestant cause, and the
saving truths of the Gospel; we are not without much ground to hope that the
intended and Coven^nted Reformation of the Church, shall hereby attain some
^^^ther advance to its full accomplishment; and that so it may, we shall with
all subjection supplicate at his royal feet. If in other things of temporal
importance this mutation shall bring any impairing or loss, yet I shall say, as
Mephibosheth when abused by Ziba, No matter, forasmuch as my Lord the King is
returned home in peace to his own house.

2. Be exhorted to pray for your Superior Powers; that forasmuch as their glory
lies in the grace and goodness of their people, God would bless them with being
effectually instrumental that this Nation may become a City of righteousness, a
faithful people. This is the flower of their Crown, and you may be useful to
the adorning of the Imperial Diadem with it; not only by your practice, that it
may be said and observed by all, that since his royal Majesty sat upon his
Throne, iniquity and sin withered and perished, blushed and was ashamed in all
his people, and that the profaneness of your spirits could not breath and live
in the purer air of his pious princely Government; but also by your prayers,
that God would under the impressions of his Sovereignty keep his Saints from
being persecuted, his Sabbaths from being profaned, his Ministers from being
despised or impoverished, men now pretending to be Ministers, but such whose
right eye is utterly darkened, of desperate life and despicable knowledge, from
being advanced, his Worship from being corrupted, his Ordinances from being
defiled, his Sacraments from being disorderly administered, his Name from being
blasphemed, the Antichristian state and apostasy from being encouraged,
profession from being scorned, and the liberty of communion with God and his
people from being abridged or invaded; and in stead thereof, that God would lay
up his precious truths, Ordinances and People in the most intimate shades of
the love and protection, advancement and encouragement of his royal Majesty;
and so shall this and after-generations call him blessed.

3. Lastly, As we expect the full accumulation of these blessings upon us, Oh!
let your dross be purely purged; cease not till the way to these royal
privileges be fully prepared by the purging away of that filth from the
daughter of Zion, which as hitherto it has debarred us from that mercy we now
enjoy, so if still not purged thoroughly, may render even this blessing, but as
the shell and shadow of a deliverance, destitute of that which is the soul, and
marrow, and fatness of it. I might tell you (...) dross is yet unpurged, what
rust lies upon the face of (...) Church and Kingdom; but I conclude, Oh! as you
have a ^^spect to the future honor and excellency of your Pri^^^ and to the
happiness of this whole body, purge away (...) dross of wickedness from your
lives, of Atheism and Irrelig^^^ from your own persons and practices; purge
away the dross (...) erroniousness, instability and Pyrrhenian fluctuations
from yo^^ heads; purge away the dross of violence, extortion, ^apine a^^
injustice from your hands; purge away the dross of will worship, innovations,
superstitions and traditions of men, which (...) not of God, from your
Assemblies; purge away the dross (...) your places too) of blind, and ignorant,
and profane Administrators of holy things, that they may neither creep in, no^
ke^^ in, to the defilement of the sacred Ministerial Office; purg^^^ way the
dross and dregs of that bitter cup of animosities, (...) rences and hatred, of
which the Nation has drunk so deeply, (...) all your spirits, expressions,
deportments; purge away the dro^^ of an empty profession of God, and zeal to
the trifles and fring^^ of external forms and worship without the power and
life (...) godliness; And lastly, purge away the dross of any root of (...)
terness against or contradiction to the sacred interest of law (...) Princes,
which spirit has eaten as a Gangrene to the reproa^^ of our Religion, and
advantage of the Popish cause: in (...) Oh! let every National, Personal sin,
every sin and crook^^ path in Church or State be discovered and discarded. And
(...) when these things, which are the wall of separation betwi^^ people, and
the refreshing beneficial beams of their Supre^^ Authority, are withdrawn, we
may with confidence hope (...) as our Judges are restored, so they shall be as
at the first, (...) our Counselors as at the beginning, and afterward we
shall (...) called, A City of righteousness, a faithful City.

Which God, of his dear love wherewith he has love^ (...) out of the bowels of
his mercy, Grant unto this (...) serving Generation. Amen.
FINIS.

