A DISCOURSE OF FAITH, IN TWO POINTS: VIZ.

I. How Faith comes by Hearing. II. How we are Justified by Faith.
By Thomas Cole Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs over against the
Stocks-Market, 1689.

A DISCOURSE OF FAITH.
ROMANS 10. 17. So then, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.
THE Apostle toward the close of the Ninth Chapter speaking of a twofold
Righteousness, of Works and of Faith, tells us that the Gentiles did attain to
the Righteousness of Faith, but the Jews did not attain to the Righteousness of
Works, which they so much trusted in, for they being ignorant of Gods
Righteousness, and going about to establish their own, have not submitted
themselves to the Righteousness of God, Romans 10. 3. Hence the Apostle takes an
occasion to compare the Righteousness of the Law, with that of Faith; calling
one our own Righteousness, the other the Righteousness of God, which the Law
does tacitly point to, promising Life to perfect Obedience, this not being
found in any mere Man since the Fall, we are directed to seek it in Christ, who
is the end of the Law to every one who believes, ver. 4. he brings in Moses,
verse the 5th. describing the Righteousness which is of the Law, that the man
which does those things shall live by them. Such doers of the Law we are not,
therefore can look for nothing but Death by Law.

Verse 6th. He brings in the Righteousness of Faith by a Prosopopcia, speaking
it self to an afrighted dejected sinner, who is also brought in musing upon his
wretched Condition, full of sad thoughts, saying over many dismal th^^gs to
himself in his own Heart about his Eternal State, how shall I get to Heaven,
how shall I escape Hell, how shall I dwell with everlasting Burnings which I
see no way to avoid by Law, the righteousness of Faith meets this convinced
Sinner, in this great distress of Conscience, communes with him, discourses of
Christ to him, minds him of his Resurrection from the dead, and Ascension into
Heaven, you seem (says the Righteousness of Faith) to deny both in talking at
this rate, your way to Heaven is plain, Christ is ascended, you shall as surely
go to Heaven, if you believe as Christ is gone before you, as surely escape
Hell and overcome Death, as Christ is risen from the dead, and the only way to
get an Interest in Christ is to attend to the word of Faith that is preached,
ver. 8. when once that prevails and brings you to confess with your mouth the
Lord Jesus and believe in your heart that God has raised him from the dead,
you shall be saved ver. 9. this proved out of Isa. 28. 16. Whosoever believes
on him shall not be ashamed, whether Jew or Gentile, ver. 11, 12. and because
Prayer is the principal part of that outward Confession made with the Mouth,
and the best indication of Faith in the Heart, he concludes ver. 13. Whosoever
shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. Whence Observe;

Observe. The chiefest thing we should now pray for, is, that we may have an
Interest in Christ and his Righteousness, desiring to be found in him, etc.
Having spoken so much of the Righteousness of Faith, he does in a certain
gradation show the way and means of attaining it, it is not a Righteousness
that is to be done by us, to be wrought out with our own hands, but prepared
for us by another, freely promised and given to us, therefore it must be asked,
it must be earnestly prayed for, we must beg hard of God to impute it to us, v.
13. the Law propounds the work of Righteousness to be done by us, the Gospel (
Romans 5. 17.) propounds the Gift of Righteousness to be prayed for and
thankfully received, v. 14. there can be no Prayer without Faith, no Faith
without Hearing, no Hearing without a Preacher, no Preachers unless they be
sent, from all which he draws this Conclusion, viz. that the next immediate
Cause of Faith is Hearing.

There is much Preaching and much Hearing in this City, but what comes on it?
Truly if Faith does not come, nothing comes that will turn to any good Account
to you: The Apostles in the Primitive times so spoke that many believed, Acts
14. 1. with that evidence and power, their words had a special Accent in the
Ears and Hearts of those that heard them, God gave a signal testimony to the
word of his Grace, than fear came upon every Soul, Acts 2. 43. Those who were
not savingly wrought upon, were greatly astonished at the Doctrine of the
Gospel; it is otherwise now, how little of this astonishment does appear in our
Assemblies, where is this fear that came upon every Soul, 'twas short of Faith,
yet I am persuaded when Faith comes in some open eminent Conversion, that the
whole Assembly is usually struck with some present fear, the Word comes like a
mighty rushing Wind into the Congregation, shakes all, when it is about to
Convert one; something like this may be observed in the Acts of the Apostles,
and other passages in the New Testament, it is fit that Grace should be
solemnly attended when it goes forth to the public Conversion though but of
one Soul: If God intend the coming of Faith into any of your hearts this day,
he will come along with his Work, he will prepare the way, he will bless your
hearing, and speak something inwardly to you from himself, that shall incline
your hearts to believe the Gospel, though God speaks by the Ministry of man,
yet his voice is distinct from ours, and begins where that ends, carrying the
Word from the Ear to the Heart, there leaving it under those mixtures of Faith
that make it work effectually. Hear I beseech you with diligence least you
obstruct the coming of Faith by not attending to what shall be spoken to you in
the name of the Lord. So then faith comes by hearing, etc.

Doct. Hearing the Word of God Preached to us, is the ordinary means of
begetting faith in us. First, What are we in a more special manner to
understand by Faith here in the Text.

The general Object of Faith is the whole Doctrine of God laid down in the
Scriptures; the special object of Saving Faith, is the Free-promise of Grace in
Christ Jesus, this supports the former, we must believe the Divine Narrative of
the whole Will of God revealed in the Bible, before we can pitch our Faith in
any suitable actings upon any part of it, it is one thing to assent to the Truth
of the Word in General, a further and indeed another thing to apply the
Promises; he believes a Promise who does siducially rely upon it, this is
properly Trusting, we believe something in reference to our selves, living in a
comfortable Hope and Expectation of it, respecting not only the Truth of the
thing, but also the Goodness of it in reference to our selves under that
possibility, probability or certainty of obtaining it, which our Faith,
according to its various Degrees may represent unto us, Faith in the
Righteousness of Christ for justification is here principally intended.

Secondly, Why must this Faith come by hearing. Hearing is always antecedent
to Faith, though Faith be not always the consequent of Hearing, ver. 16. 18.
all Hearers are not believers, though all Believers are first Hearers.

I shall evince the necessity of Hearing in order to Faith, from these
following grounds:

I. Hearing is Sensus Disciplinae, the Sense by which all knowledge is let into
the Soul. There is a twofold Knowledge belonging to Faith, one leading to it,
the other found in it, arising from it, and is the same with Faith it self.

The First, is Litteral or Historical, it is rather notitia then cognitio, a
notice or particular information given us of the Contents of the Bible,
especially of the report which the Gospel makes of the way of Salvation by
Christ, we must know what we are to believe, before we can be supposed to
believe any thing; How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard,
and how shall they hear without a Preacher. Words are the proper Object of this
Sense of Hearing, where nothing is spoken, nothing can be heard, the sound of
Words must reach the ear, before the sense of those Words can enter into the
Understanding. This Historical Knowledge does not lie in Learning the
Scriptures by roat, without any Rational Knowledge of the Litteral Sense and
Meaning of those Propositions of Truth that are contained therein, this would
be only Memory without any Understanding: A Natural Man does not dis-believe
the Scripture, because he has not a Rational Conception of the common Notion of
things spoken of there, but because he has, and sinding them so uncouth, so
seemingly contrary to Humane Reason, he rejects them as Foolishness.

The Second, Is a Knowledge more than Historical, and is of the Essence of
Faith all one with it, it is that which we call a Saving Knowledge; it lies in
the Use and Application of Gospel Truths to our own Souls, when we shape our
selves to a real Conformity to the Call of God in every Gospel Truth, acting in
a way of Duty what the Word of God commands.

There is no Saving Knowledge of Gospel Truths, but the Knowledge of Faith, and
no other Reason for Faith in the highest Mysteries of the Gospel, but the bare
Word of God.

That Faith is Knowledge, I prove thus, Because in Scripture, it is opposed to
Folly, Blindness and Ignorance, Acts 17. 23, 30. Ioh. 17. 3. Ier. 31. 34. Isa.
9. 1, 2.

Besides it has all the effects of Knowledge in the Soul, it gives full
satisfaction to the Mind of a Man, removes all doubts, establishes the Heart in
a full persuasion of the Truth of the Word of God; Humane Knowledge is liable
to many Mistakes but a Divine Faith admits of no Falsehood, therefore Faith
perfects man's Understanding, because it brings in nothing but Truth, no man's
Errors do proceed from Faith, he may err in matters of Faith, but it is not from
his Faith, but his Unbelief, therefore Faith is Knowledge, unerring Knowledge
we believe and are sure, we may be so, if we rightly understand our selves in
an act of Believing, no demonstrations of Reason, do give that Evidence of
Truth as Faith does, as man's Understanding is too low, to take in Divine
Truths, so Gods Understanding is too high, for man to comprehend, therefore we
are called to yield the obedience of faith to his revealed Will, God governs
man rather by giving him the knowledge of his Will, then lifting him up into
his own Infinite Understanding, that is above our Capacity, our Duty lies not
in knowing what God knows, but in doing what God commands, who gives no account
of his matters to us, only commands us to believe his Word, and to look upon
that as a sufficient ground and reason of our faith, when we hear it preached
to us.

II. Because God has appointed hearing the Word, as a necessary means of faith,
he will not immediately speak to our hearts by his Spirit, but has appointed
his Word to be first spoken to our Ears, and promised that way to let it down
into our hearts, thus Faith comes by Hearing.

Quest. How should Hearing of things above our Reason contribute any thing to
our believing them? One would think the oftener we hear them, the more absurd we
should count them to be, and reject them with greater Indignation, having so
often tried them by the Touchstone of our own reason, and pronounced them
unintelligible.

Answ. Hearing alone will not let in these Divine Mysteries into our
Understandings, Isa. 6. 9, 10. God must inwardly Teach us and reveal them to us
by his Spirit, before we can believe them, which brings me to the third head,
viz.

III. How faith is wrought by our hearing the Word.

1. By a special Appearance of God to the Soul.

2. By opening the Heart, enlightening the Mind, and persuading the Will to a
thorough closure with Christ upon Gospel Terms.

To these two heads may be referred all that falls under our discerning and
experience of the work of the Spirit in begetting faith in us.

I. Faith is wrought by a special appearance of God to the Soul, what this
appearance of God is, how it rises out of the Word, in what manner it is let
into the Soul, I shall endeavor to open to the experience of those who know
what it is to hold Communion with God in hearing his Word: there is some
co-incidence in the particulars abovementioned, yet not without some
distinction, which I leave to your own observation, the less of Art or Method
there is in handling experimental points, the better, they come with most power
to the Conscience in their own simplicity, therefore I shall in a joint
Discourse run the matter close together, looking sometimes on one side, and
sometimes on the other, till I have viewed it round, that I may present the whole
Truth to you in so great and necessary a point, we can have no saving knowledge
of God but in and by his word, we must look through that Glass upon him, and
that appearance of God we meet with there, is the beginning of all Religion,
the Word never comes with power to our Consciences, till God appear in it.

How that is, I am now to show. Whilst we are hearing his Word we see God
standing forth, in his own words, declaring himself to be the Author of it,
this draws in our attention, adds that weight and authority to the Word, that
we cannot but receive it as the Word of God, and set our Seals to the Truth of
it, we see sufficient grounds for our Faith in God from this manifestation of
himself to our Souls. Thus God wrought faith in Abraham, Genesis 17. 1. by
appearing to him several times as God Almighty and All-sufficient, that Abraham
might not doubt of any thing that such a God should promise to him, and
therefore it is said Romans 4. 3. that Abraham believed God, being fully persuaded
that what he had promised he was able to perform, ver. 21. Thus God appeared to
Samuel revealing himself to him by his Word 1 Samuel 3. 21. So Christ appeared to
Paul by a voice, and a Light from Heaven, I am Jesus, Acts 9. there are
spiritual appearances of God now to our Souls under the Preaching of the Gospel
answerable to these Visions of Old. God lets himself down into our Hearts,
through the apprehensions of our faith, which frames in our hearts a right
image of God answerable to that Character he gives of himself in the Word, he
shines through the Word in all his Glory, when he spoke of Old to the
Patriarchs by an articulate voice, the unwritten word then was accompanied with
such convincing signs of his Presence, that they could not but believe it, and
so is the written Word now as capable of representing God to us, when he has a
mind to be seen by us, as that was then; the Letter of the Word is but a
Creature, but the Truths contained in it are Eternal, and do all center in God
himself, who is the Essential Word, thus God rises out of the Word, and looks a
man in the Face, tells him, thus says the Lord, I am that Lord God Almighty
who now speaks unto you, he leaves no Objection unanswered, shows what sure
grounds of faith, we have in him, shall God say and not do? it is impossible for
God to lie, it must be so as God says, it cannot be otherwise, Heaven and Earth
shall sooner pass away than one Tittle of the Word be broken, thus in God we
praise his Word, Psalm. 56. 4. 10. Consider the Word out of God: 'twill puzzle
Men and Angels to make out the meaning of it, to think the things spoken of
possible or likely to come to pass, but all things are possible with God, and
to those who believe in God, they stick at nothing, they are sure Omnipotency
knows no difficulties, the Counsel of the Lord must stand, his thoughts shall
come to pass: a Soul thus struck with a sense of Gods Presence yields
immediately, I believe Lord with all my heart, am ready to do whatever thou
requirest of me, so Paul: Oh that God would so manifest himself to every one of
your hearts this day, that he would show himself, come up close to you, look
you in the face, and say, I am Jesus, you could not withstand this mighty
presence of God in Christ Jesus, O speak Lord, it is but thy saying to each of
us I am Jesus, and we shall all be made to know the Lord from the least to the
greatest, I hope the quickening voice of the Son of God, is now sounding in the
Ears of your Faith, while I am speaking to you, and that you do receive the
Word, not as the word of Man, but as it is indeed the Word of God, quick and
powerful, sharper than a two-edged Sword in every one of your hearts.

The knowledge of the Truth as it is in Jesus ( Ephesians. 4. 21.) is one thing, and
the knowledge of the Truth as it is in Ink and Paper is another; they are the
same Truths, but as they are in the Scriptures they lie in the dead Letter, as
they are in Christ they are seen in their living root and principle from whence
they spring, mere Scriptural Knowledge is but Historical, we look upon the
things we read and hear, rather as notions than realities: till God fills up
all expressions of Scripture concerning himself, with a Divine Presence
answerable thereunto, we believe nothing that is said of him, but such a
presence of God in his Word, captivates our hearts to the belief of it, we must
believe him to be such a God as the Word declares him to be, before we shall
count all his sayings true, we must fetch strength from the name of God, Rev.
2. 13. to support our Faith in all its actings upon any part of his revealed
will, and we never deny any Truth plainly revealed but we deny his name, Rev.
3. 8. and question his Attributes; some Truths bare more upon one Attribute,
some more upon another, but all are founded in God and in the essential
properties of his Nature, from whence they have their verification and
accomplishment, so that till God appear and show himself to the Soul, all that
is said to us out of the Scriptures in the name of an unknown God affects us
not, because it wants that which is the ground of its Credibility, no man can
say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 3. he cannot say so
and think so, he cannot say so and believe what he says, till the Father reveal
his Son in him, Paul by the Light of that Revelation of Christ in him, knew all
Gospel Mysteries, and without such an inward spiritual manifestation of God to
our Souls, giving us a sight of him who is invisible, it is impossible we should
ever be thoroughly convinced of the Divinity of the Scriptures, all Divinity
springs from God, leads to him, nay it looks him directly in the Face, and
cannot be considered apart from him, there is but one God and one Faith, God
must be in the view of our Faith whenever we really act it.

Neither can we have that inward testimony of the Spirit convincing us of the
Divine Authority of the Scriptures, without this special Appearance of God in
the Soul as a witness to the Truth of his Word.

While we are hearing the Word, God has invisible ways of access to our
hearts, he conveys himself through his Truth to our Souls, his Divinity leads
the way, without some appearance of this, the contents of the Word would have
no place in our hearts, but coming with so great a presence, in so great a
name, and with so strong an impression, God himself writing them upon the
heart, we cannot but receive his Testimony, the Word comes into our Hearts
suddenly before we are aware, and seises them for God, we cannot but think,
speak, act and judge as God does, the sense of the Word is the sense of our
Souls, so far as the Word is written in our hearts, we read it without the
least variation, the Copy answers the Original: Hence arises that habitual
disposition or inclination to believe, God creates this new heart, I say this
infused habit or principle of faith, is antecedent to all acts of faith put
forth by us, and is in it self the sole act of God upon us in our first
Conversion, it is from this supernatural principle thus infused, that the
natural powers and faculties of the Soul of Man, viz. the Understanding and the
Will, are enabled to take in things purely Spiritual and Divine, Nature never
acts above its sphere, those inbred common Notions that are the Standards and
Measures of Natural Truths in all their consequences will never lead us to
grant, or admit that which is supernatural, when we do this, it is always from
some higher Principle; when we see men acting above themselves, we may conclude
they are acted by something higher than themselves, which is the Spirit of
Christ dwelling in them.

This special Appearance of God, with those inward effects of it upon the Soul
which I have been speaking of, may be known to Believers, they discern it in
others, Acts 11. 17, 18. and do when they give a true reason of their faith,
see it in themselves, that all springs from the Fathers revealing his Son in
them, they can give no other reason why they believe in Jesus, it is God that
opens the door of Faith and makes it effectual, Acts 14. 27.

We are apt to be taken with any appearance of Man in a Sermon, this we look
after, what words of Man's Wisdom, how Man acquits himself in reasoning of this
or that Point. It Is true there is some skill required in Planting, and
Watering, but all the increase comes from God, your Faith consists not in the
Wisdom of Man but in the power of God, if God himself do not appear as a
witness to his own Truth, as the great undertaker of all that he has promised,
what we say will prevail little, your faith must terminate in God himself, and
in that Ability that is in him to perform his word, this was the ground of
Abraham's faith, Paul knew him whom he believed, 2 Timothy, 1. 12. and so must you
if ever you believe to the saving of your Souls. Did you go out of the
Congregation after every Sermon you hear under a sight and sense of this
appearance of God in his Word, speaking to you from Heaven and showing himself
to your souls in some spiritual resemblance suited and adapted to that Word you
are hearing, how could you reject such a Word, so full of God, so exactly
corresponding to what you see in God himself, you must yield and cry out each
of you, who am I that I should withstand God?

This is the first way that God takes to work Faith in us, by our hearing the
Word Preached to us.

Secondly, Faith is wrought by opening the heart, enlightening the mind, and
persuading the will to a through closure with Christ upon Gospel Terms.

I shall now show you how God thus appearing to us in hearing the Word, does
open the heart, enlighten the mind and thoroughly persuade the will, to a
through closure with Christ upon Gospel Terms.

Naturally our hearts are shut up against the Gospel, our Minds are blinded 2
Cor. 4. 4. till God shines into our hearts, to give the light of the Knowledge
of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, ver. 6. Enlightening the eyes
of our Understandings, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18.

Quest. What is this Light of Faith, and how does it differ from the Light of
Reason?

Answ. The Light of Reason lies in the evidence of the thing it self, as it
falls under a Humane Understanding, arguing from the cause to the effect,
drawing certain conclusions from undeniable premises, granted and acknowledged
by all men to be Truths in Nature: Upon such Concessions they build all their
acquired Knowledge, and do put the stamp of Truth upon all fair inferences from
thence, which they judge agreeable to those first principles and notions of
Truth, that pass for current under that name among credulous men, who do but
think they know, and do rather ghess than judge: so great is the uncertainty of
all humane Knowledge, we have little cause to glory in it.

The light of Faith lies in the infallible certainty of Divine Testimony, faith
sees not the causes of things in the things themselves, but in God alone, to
whom all things are possible, faith excells all other knowledge, in as much as
it sees and knows all things in their first Cause, God, and takes hold of them
by the very root from whence they first spring, arguing from the Veracity of
God, to the Truth of all his sayings, we know that God has spoken thus and
thus, as Ioh. 9. 29. we know the Doctrine is of God, Ioh. 7. 17. and that no
prophecy of the Scripture is of private Interpretation, 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21.
under this conviction we cannot but yield the obedience of faith to every word
of God: I do not deny but experience may and does give Believers some Evidence
of the things themselves, but this belongs rather to their after Edification,
then to the first act of Faith in their Conversion, by which they close in with
Christ, upon the credit of a bare word of promise from him who cannot lie,

Object, Since these sublime supernatural Mysteries of the Gospel are so much
above, and so seemingly contrary to humane Reason, how comes it to pass that
any man should own them for Truths, and be brought under the power of them.

Answ. It Is by a Divine Faith, I call it Divine because it is the work of God
that we believe his Testimony, Ioh. 6, 29.

Quest. Does not this Operation of God upon the Hearts of men in working faith
in us, offer violence to man's Nature and force the Will to consent to that
which is above the Understanding: Or how can the efficacy of Gods Grace in
determining Man's Will to such a Spiritual Act of Faith in Christ Jesus be
consistent with the liberty of the Will.

Answ. Many intricate disputes there are about this Point, managed by subtle
heads, not without some show and appearance of Reason, who to secure the
liberty of Man's Will, have denied the efficacy of Gods Grace, placing the power
of believing in man himself, to avoid the force that otherwise they think must
be offered to his Will. But to clear the efficacy of Gods Grace from this
imputation, I need say no more but this, viz.

That the Grace of God enters the Soul of man as a New Nature, and therefore
cannot put any force upon him, Nature works kindly in all, by Inclination, not
by Violence; as Nature is from Generation, so the new Nature is from
Regeneration; one is the birth of the Flesh, the other of the Spirit; as we are
born Men by our first birth, so we are born Christians by our second birth.
Artificial Christians are all name, without any living Nature answerable to it,
being not truly born of God and thereby made partakers of his Divine Nature.

The breathing in of this new Nature into the Soul of man by the Spirit of God,
is that new Creation spoken of in the Gospel, it is the first Act of God in our
Conversion, it is solely the Act of God, without any concurrence of ours, we
have only a passive obediential power to receive the impression! It Is God that
makes it, upon this supernatural Principle are grounded all after proceedings
in bringing the Soul forward to an actual closure with Christ, all the natural
powers and faculties of the Soul are gathered into this supernatural Principle,
do act under it, are moved by it, and directed in all their free motions to a
supernatural end, which they could not of themselves tend unto; and let it not
seem incredible to us that God should do this, he can do no evil from the
perfection of his Nature, and for the same reason all good must needs be in the
power of his hand, the greatest good that can be done to fallen Man, is thus to
restore him. In this new Nature are wrapped up the seeds of all Grace, which by
the efficacy of the Spirit, are drawn out into act, with the free consent of
Man's Will: Should God determine the Will of Man to a good act whilst it is in a
bad state and under a corrupt nature, this would imply force and violence, but
to lead out a man according to his new Nature, is not to put a force upon him.
If Sin had that efficacy upon Man in his perfect state, to incline his Will to
Evil, why should not Grace have the like efficacy upon Man fallen to incline
his Will to good. Though an inclination to Evil in Man standing was possible
from the liberty of his Will in which he was created, yet such an actual
inclination was inconsistent with his perfect state, and left such an inherent
crookedness in his perverted Nature that nothing but Grace can rectify and
make straight again. What is a principle of Grace, but liberty to Good restored
to fallen man, from whence an actual inclination to choose what is good does
follow of course, when God calls and excites him thereunto, here is no force
put upon man's Will, it acts freely in the choice of good, and it cannot be
otherwise, since Grace enters as a new Nature, ingenerating a powerful
Principle of Holiness in the Soul, that does incline a man freely to comply
which the efficacious grace of God exciting him to those acts of Holiness so
agreeable to the Nature of the new Creature, as Sin reigns unto Death, so Grace
will reign through Righteousness unto Eternal Life, Romans 5. 21. Shall not he
that raises the dead be able to quicken a dead Soul, but we are more sensible
of that power that God puts forth upon the bodies of Men, then of that which he
puts forth upon their Souls, that you may know that the Son of man has power
to forgive sins, Take up thy bed and walk, Mat. 9. 6. This you all see, but the
actings of my saving power upon the souls of men, that power that works within,
( Ephesians. 3. 20.) you see not; let this that you see convince you of that which
you see not, and never dispute my power more to forgive sin, I can heal the
diseases of the Soul as well as those of the Body, the power that God has to
forgive sin is the great prerogative of God, belonging to the sovereignty of
his grace. God walks invisibly through the World, doing his mighty works of
Grace, he touches some men's hearts, not others; he draws some and not others,
by the sweet yet irresistible force of his Grace; we see nothing but man, man's
Will, man's Choice, man's Act, and therefore conclude all is by man's own power,
because we see not the wheel within the wheel, the Spirit of God setting the
whole soul in motion toward Christ: This arcanum Iehovae, this secret of the
Lord is with them that fear him, Psalm. 25. 14. The way of the Spirit of God in
the hearts of men is discerned by few, it is a very hard matter to understand
how God works in us to will and to do, because we find it to be our own act to
believe, repent and turn to God, we ascribe all to our selves as if our own arm
had saved us: The truth is, God in all the efficacious operations of his grace
upon the hearts of men, loves to conceal himself, he will not be seen by others
to do what he does in and for his Saints, no noise in the streets, Matthew. 12.
19. The kingdom of God comes not with observation, Luke 17. 20, 21. All is done
within secretly and silently, non are privy to this heart-work, but they that
feel it, this is the hiding of his power from the observation of those whom he
never intends to work upon, and for the hardening of their hearts, that they
may still retain an opinion of their own ability to do that which they see
others so freely and willingly addicting themselves unto: Though this be a
cause of stumbling to many, who boast of a supposed power and freedom of will
to believe and repent when they please, yet such in whose hearts God has
wrought these mighty works of his grace, they see and feel the weight of his
Arm revealed upon their souls, they know it is Gods doing, that a divine power
has touched their hearts, and carried them out to all these acts of Faith that
they put forth, they openly acknowledge this, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Phil, 4. 13. 2
Cor. 3. 5. Gal. 2. 20. Not I but Christ. When they feel themselves most
strengthened by Christ, they are then most sensible of their own
self-insufficiency and weakness, I can do all things through Christ, yet not
sufficient of our selves to think a good thought; when I am weak, then am I
strong, 2 Cor. 12. 10. They would not say so, if they did not find a power more
then humane exerting it self within them, and strengthening them with might in
their inward man, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, till we can thus
distinguish between Nature and Grace, and see God influencing our Wills in all
their free motions to that which is good, we shall vainly assume to our selves
a power that never yet reduced it self to the least real act of Faith in any
man whatever: it is easy talking of a power to believe, before we come to
believe in good earnest, then our strength fails us if God do not support us,
and help our unbelief; I believe, help my unbelief, (...) I cannot hold it, my
faith will fail, if God do not put his Everlasting Arms underneath, if we
consider what difficulties, what strong Objections unanswerable by Reason,
Faith Acts against in keeping up a lively hope of Pardon in the Conscience of a
convinced sinner, we must needs say, it is the work of God that we believe; we
may wonder at our selves as men, when we consider what we believe as Christians.

I have spoken all this to show that God is the Author and Finisher of our
Faith, it is he only can open the heart, and dispose it, to give Credit to the
Word of his Grace.

Application.
By way of Discovery, viz.

How we may know when Faith comes by Hearing, even at the time of Hearing, and
whether it be yet come into your hearts, by all you have heard hitherto.

Faith is a secret and a sudden work, when it comes it gives some sense of it
self to an observing Christian, that quickly convinces us of a change in our
selves, a heart truly turned to God, is not the same it was before, not in the
same posture, not in the same disposition and frame, there is something new
appears in every new Creature, that does not belong to the Old Man but rises up
in opposition to him: this newness does not lie in some one corner of the
heart, but every where, it is universal in every faculty; all things are become
new, though the old leaven be not totally cast out any where, but lest as an
occasional provocation and challenge to the Grace of God to act in more
opposition to those motions of sin, that put a force upon the New Creature, are
directly contrary to the bent and genius of our renewed Nature; till Faith
comes we are never sensible of any such inward Conflicts between the flesh and
the Spirit; but then the fight begins, the good fight of Faith: It Is Faith
strikes the first stroke, makes the first assault upon our reigning sin and
corruptions, and will never cease contending with them, till it has got a full
Victory over them, and thoroughly mortified them.

But how shall we know in the very time of hearing, when Faith comes.

When the word Works effectually after hearing, it usually gives some powerful
touch upon the heart at the time of hearing; so 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. he speaks
there of the occasional Conversion of an Unbeliever, who came into the
Assembly, where there was Prophesying and Preaching, it is probable some such
are come in hither to day; Oh that God would meet with them, that they might be
convinced and fall down upon their Faces, worshipping God, acknowledging that
he is among us of a truth; so Acts 2. 37. their Hearts were pricked, they cry
out in the midst of the Sermon, Men and Brethren what shall we do? We want such
public Conversions, had we more of these New Births in our Congregations; we
should have more of these out cries; which would be very awakening to us all,
if God would honor his Ordinances with such visible signs of his presence, as
in the Primitive Times the Word was preached with that power, that it wrought a
great consternation and astonishment in the whole Assembly, there was a great
impression upon their minds, which had various effects; some blasphemed, and
some believed, but all were moved and stirred, struck inwardly, though many saw
not the hand that struck them; it is otherwise now; hearers are more
unconcerned, in a more drowsy frame; we can hardly keep them waking all Sermon
time; they say these were extraordinary cases, not applicable to us now: I must
tell you, Conversions wrought by ordinary means now, are extraordinary things,
have extraordinary effects; the Light into which we are brought, is, and ought
to be, as mavelous in our Eyes now, as 'twas in theirs heretofore; they who
find nothing of this, neither in nor after Conversion, would do well to make a
stricter inquiry into their state; sometimes we bring down Grace as low as we
can for the sake of weak ones, but we must not make nothing of it, to please
some who would rest in a silent easy* Conversion, and think to go Heaven by
the charitable Opinion others have of them; that so great a change as
Conversion is, should make so little appearance as it does in many pretending
to it, is that we should not easily digest, Let every one examine himself.

Should God come upon any of you with a through Conviction of Sin, and give you
a real sight of Christ as your only Savior, you would not be able to contain
your selves under this mavelous Light; 'twill be like Fire in your Bones,
Ier. 20. 9. you will immediately spring up as the Jailer did, Acts 16. 29. (...),
he did not consider which foot he should put foremost, but leaped up on a
sudden, broke out into a passionate inquiry after the way of Salvation.

Faith especially at its first entrance, when it first comes into our Hearts,
is always accompanied with a through Conviction of our lost undone Estate: I
don't speak now of those legal Convictions that in some may be preparatory to
Conversion, but of that saving Evangelical Conviction that is of the Essence of
saving Faith, always accompanying it, it is the reason of Faiths earnestness
in its first actings upon Christ, Master save us, we perish.

In the Acts we have several instances of Faith wrought in the time of hearing,
Acts 10. 44. While Peter yet spoke, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard
the word: So Acts 14. 1. Acts 18. 8. Acts 28. 24. Paul perceived Faith in the
Cripple by his attentive hearing, Acts 14. 9.

When Faith does not make this public entrance into the Hearts of those who
hear the word; as it did in the Primitive times, in the view and face of the
whole Congregation, and it is much to be lamented that it does not: I fear it
portends more than I am willing to tell you; yet I hope Faith may and does come
in a more silent manner into your Hearts at the time of hearing; this you may
know by a sudden astonishment, and trembling that sezes upon the Soul, Luke 4.
33. Acts 13. 12. Acts 9. 6. When a discovery of the Evil of Sin, and of the
Grace of Christ do meet together in one saving Conviction in the Conscience of
an awakened Sinner, we must needs be variously affected with horror and hope;
Grace clothes it self with contrary passions at the same time, as it looks at
Sin, and at Christ, loathing the one, and embracing the other; this may be
perceived at the first opening of the Heart to believe the Gospel, a present
act of Faith is and will be the present sense of the Soul in and about what it
believes; there is no putting the word from us, when once we believe it in our
Hearts: Men may talk of Gospel Truths under a formal profession of Faith, and
not be affected with them, but the Word works effectually in them that believe.
Faith touches the Soul in the most sensible part of it, gathers up the Mind and
Thoughts of a Man into a close and serious debate with himself, about those
things which he believes in reference to himself; his Heart waxes hot within
him; this is the Power and Dominion that Faith has over us, being the highest
principle in Man; it overcomes all contradictions from the Flesh, answers all
Carnal Objections, thoroughly persuades a Man, firmly establishes the Heart in
the belief of the present Truth, so that we become unmovable from the hope of
the Gospel.

These are the inward Commotions that Faith makes in the Soul at its first
entrance, you cannot so slight the impressions of Faith, as not to be greatly
concerned about them; it is not come to real believing till it comes to this;
you are and must be serious in and about that which with your hearts you
believe concerning your Eternal State.

Whether you now are, or ever have been in such a frame, God and your own
Consciences know best; they are not trifles that you believe, but matters of
that moment that you cannot but be concerned in them, and there is nothing
required to fire your Hearts with a zealous solitude and thoughtfulness about
them, but only your believing them; you can no more step over such an act of
Faith, than you can cease to think while you are actually thinking, or cease to
move while actually moving: An act of believing is the Soul in actual motion
toward Christ, flying for refuge to the hope that is set before him. This is
the way of the Spirit in working Faith at the time of hearing; and if you
observe such a one whose heart the Word has reached; he goes home musing upon
what he has heard: Suppose one standing in the Spirit of Isaiah at the
Meeting-door, as you go forth crying out, Who has believed our report, to whom
has the arm of the Lord been revealed this day; how experimentally would such a
one say, I have believed, to me has the Arm of the Lord been revealed; follow
him further into his House, into his Chamber or Closet; behold he prays, as
the Word brings down the sense of God into the Soul; so Prayer carries up the
sense of the Soul, concerning that word, to God above: Prayer, especially just
after Conversion, is but a Holy enlargement of the Heart about those things
that God first speaks to us by his Word. I will say 'its my people, they shall
say, the Lord is my God.

In hearing expect no other reason for Faith, but the bare testimony of the
Word of God, search the Scriptures whether things are so or no, as Ministers
declare, if you find them so, charge them upon your Consciences as most worthy
of all acceptance and belief: Religion now a days is branched out into so
many speculations and subtle questions wrapped up in such terms of art, under
such nice distinctions, that the power and simplicity of the Gospel is almost
lost, ordinary Professors know not what to believe while the Pulpit gives such
an uncertain sound.

There is not so much Rational Knowledge required to the obedience of Faith as
some imagine, leave others to dispute, to produce their Reasons pro and con, do
you quote Scripture and believe, begging of God to direct your faith into right
apprehensions of his revealed Will, hold fast there and you are safe, the
greatest Scholars in the World must come down to the plain man's Faith, if ever
they die in peace, in all Gospel Truths, their consonancy, not to our Reason,
but to the Scriptures is to be regarded. Man's leaning rather to their own
understanding of the thing, than to their faith in the Word, about that thing,
has led them into Error, into false notions of Divine Mysteries. I grant from
your faith in one Truth you may fetch Reasons for some other Truth depending
upon it, these are Gospel Reasons not your own; we don't believe because we
know, but we know because we believe; this is a new way of knowing things,
which the world is not acquainted with, because it cannot receive the spirit of
Truth, the spirit of Truth is a spirit of Faith; hearing the Word is of
singular use to Believers themselves, 1 Ioh. 5. 13. to confirm and strengthen
your Faith, that you may be built up further in it, furnished with further
matter to act it upon.

Let none be discouraged though never so ignorant and unlearned, of a low,
mean, capacity, yet come to hear with an expectation of Gods working faith in
thee, faith will overcome all these difficulties, as weak and simple and
ignorant as any may be supposed to be, yet be not discouraged, you may be made
to believe more in one moment, than the greatest Scholars in the World can
attain to the knowledge of in many years study.

It is written in the prophets (Joh. 6. 45.) and they shall be all taught of
God, every man therefore that has heard, and has learned of the father comes
unto me; Not that any man has seen the Father. It Is not what men you hear,
what Ministers you follow, till God the Father does speak powerfully to your
hearts by the Ministry of man. It matters not who the man is, your faith
consists not in the Wisdom of man, but in the power of God, when you have a
proof of Christ's speaking in any, 2 Cor. 13. 3 then hearken diligently, till
you hear an inward Word from this invisible Teacher, you will never come to
Christ. If all the Ministers in the World should lay their heads together, they
could never bring a sinner to Christ, till the Father speaks the word and draw
him. We are but Ministers by whom you believe, as the Lord gives to every man;
So then, neither is he that planteth any thing, nor he that waters, but God
that gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3. 5, 6, 7.

The sum of all is this, We are sent to Preach, that you may Hear; we carry the
Letter of the Word to your Ears, the Spirit brings it home in the name of God
to your Consciences, convincing you that it is his Word, under this Conviction
you see the truth of the Word, in the veracity of God, this word of Truth and
your Souls meeting so close, as they always do in an act of Faith, sanctifies
you; this sanctification lies in the ready assent of your understanding, and
free consent of your Will, the one is founded in light, the other in love, so
that when an enlightened Understanding receives the Truth in the love of the
Truth, there is a firm Principle of Holiness fixed in that Soul, flowing from
that Union to Christ that Faith gives us, this is the beginning and progress of
that Faith, the end of which is the Salvation of your Souls.

The Second Point.
How we are Justified by Faith.
WE ought to be Doers of the Word and not Hearers only, to maintain good Works
for necessary uses, Tit. 3. 14. It behooves us therefore to know what use we
should make of our works and doings in the great business of our Salvation, so
as not to entrench upon the Righteousness of Christ, not to degrade that from
being our sole and only justifying Righteousness. Some men are as much mistaken
in grounding their salvation upon doing, as others are in grounding it upon
bare hearing; and therefore these things must be warily spoken unto, and warily
understood. When we urge the necessity of doing the Word of God, Carnal Reason
lies at the catch, and is ready to take every thing in a wrong sense and
meaning, and to bring down the Mysteries of the Gospel to a low loyal vulgar
Notion more suitable to humane Reason. There are two extremes that men are apt
to run into; either they neglect good works, or else, they trust in good works;
either they do in a careless formal presumptuous manner, pretend to cast all
upon Christ, without any serious inquiries after the Truth of Grace in
themselves, or ever proving it by its fruits; conceiving it altogether needless
to be any way active in their own salvation. Secondly, If upon search they find
any actings of Grace in their Hearts, any fruits of Grace in their Lives, these
are their own proper goods they think, Money found in their own Purses; it
matters not how they came by it, they have it, and they are resolved to convert
it to their own proper use, making it nothing less than a part of their
Justifying Righteousness.

Those of this way, with whom I have now to do, do state the matter thus.

They say, that Christ is the meritorious cause of our Justification, having by
his Death satisfied the Law, and discharged us from the Curse of it; and so far
we agree with them.

They say further, That Christ to complete our Justification, has also
purchased for us strenght and ability to perform the condition of the new
Covenant (this we assent to) the performance of which according to them, is to
be taken in as a part of our Justifying Righteousness, and this we deny.

We say the performance of what is required in the New Covenant, is a good
Justification of the Cause, whether it be of Faith or of Good Works, or of any
particular thing or action, the sincerity and truth of which may be in
question. But we deny that it adds any thing to the Justification of the
person, and therefore they speak not ad idem, to the same thing, when they deny
Christ's imputed Righteousness to be the sole Righteousness that justifies the
Person, because there is another Righteousness required, upon another account
to justify or clear up the sincerity of our Faith and Holiness; I say to clear
up this to our selves and other men, which we deny not. For we do not admit any
Faith to be a justifying Faith, but upon good evidence of the Truth of it,
neither do we admit any works to be good works but upon full proof of the
goodness of them.

The Sum of all is this; we say, Faith and obedience once proved to be true and
genuine, are good evidences of our interest in Christ, whose imputed
Righteousness is the sole and only Righteousness by which our Persons are
universally justified from all charges and blame whatsoever in the sight of
God, and to say otherwise is in effect to say that Christ died to justify us,
that we might be justified without him; or at least not only and solely by him;
which is highly derogatory to the death of Christ, neither will their owning
Christ to be the meritorious cause of our Justification salve the matter while
they do in any sense require another Righteousness distinct from that of
Christ's, for the justification of our Persons in the sight of God.

And having given you this brief account of the matter in difference, I shall
now proceed.

The Point in General which I am to speak to is this. That though good works
are highly necessary in a justified person, yet they not required in any way of
causality to the Justification of the Person. Or thus, no part of our inherent
Righteousness can be any part of our justifying Righteousness.

This I might prove to you many ways.

First, From the subject of Justification, an ungodly Person; a believing
Sinner flying in the sense of Sin unto Jesus Christ for Life and Pardon. Sin is
that from which we are Justified, the Righteousness of Christ is that for which
or by which we are Justified, Act. 13. 39.

Secondly, Because there must be a change of stare in Justification, and by
Justification, before we can derive any saving Grace from Christ to enable us
to the least good work. I might also

Thirdly, Argue from the weakness and imperfection of all Inherent Holiness
which is not able to justify it self, much less the Person.

And many Arguments may be brought; but my design is to contract this general
to a particular point, concerning the (...) credere, or the act of believing;
and I shall show that that part of our inherent Righteousness that flows from
our doing the Word of God, that is, the Work of Faith as done by us in an act
of believing, is no part of our justifying Righteousness. This is that which
seems to have the fairest claim to, and interest in, our Justification; and if
this be disproved, the Argument will hold a fortiori against all the inferior
branches of our inherent Righteousness; they must be forced to quit their claim
also.

That which seems to entitle Faith to such an Interest in our Justification as
is pleaded for by some, is the phrase and manner of expression which the
Scripture uses in speaking of Faith, telling us that Faith is imputed to us for
Righteousness, that we are justified by Faith; that he that believes shall be
saved, and the like.

The question is, in what sense these Scriptures are to be understood; whither
we are to take up our standing partly in the act of Faith, and partly in the
object of Faith, making up a Righteousness, partly from our selves, and partly
from Christ, or whether we are by Faith to go out of our selves unto Christ for
our whole, sole and only justifying Righteousness; and this is that which I
affirm, and shall endeavor to make good, and show you that the Scriptures
alleged do not ascribe our Justification to the Act, but wholly to the Object
of Faith; not to our believing, but to Christ believed on, which I prove thus:

First, From those Expressions of Scripture peculiar to Holy Writ, by which the
Holy Ghost does of set purpose limit Faith to its Object, John 6. 47. Romans 9:
33. Ephesians. 1. 13. (...), to believe in, into, or upon Christ, which plainly
points out this, that Faith is always to be taken in relation to its Object;
that by Faith is meant Christ apprehended by Faith. Life is promised, not
simply to believing, but to believing in; in whom? in Christ, or nothing. Faith
is a relative term (as to its whole sense and signification) to the Object
Christ. It must be Faith in Christ, or Faith in nothing. Believing is a
Scripture Phrase, setting forth our leaning upon Christ. Faith, as our Act adds
nothing to Christ, does not make his Death satisfactory; it was so in its self
before, though by an applicatory act of Faith it is made so to us; that is, we
do reap the benefits of his Death and satisfaction; we are not united to Faith,
but by Faith we are united to Christ. Faith is the Medium uniens; we do not
trust in our Faith, but by Faith we trust in Christ; all that Faith signifies
is in relation to Christ; all that it does, is in the Name of Christ; without
Christ it signifies nothing, it does nothing, it is nothing. When we are said
to be justified by the Faith of Christ, or justified by Faith in Christ, Gal 2.
16. pray must the meaning be, that we are justified by Faith, and Christ, as
some would have it, giving the priority to Faith, and making Christ but a
remote cause of our Justification, and our inherent Righteousness to be the
next and immediate cause? Were Men more willing to exalt Christ, and debase
themselves, this would be English plain enough: Faith in Christ would then
signify but one Righteousness; it would not be Faith and Christ. Let Men have
a care how they speak unadvisedly of Christ to the lessening and diminution of
his Honor: God has said he is our Righteousness without any Limitation,
without any restriction: Now for Men to say, ay but not all our Righteousness,
not our only Righteousness; I say, it is a bold word thus to distinguish
whatever remote inferences they may gather out of Scripture to justify their
meaning; yet since God has not thought fit to drop any such diminutive
expression of Christ in Scripture, I say it is a bold word for Men to Speak.
You may see how severely speaking against God was punished, Numb. 21. 5, 6. And
God complains of it, Ezekiel. 35. 13. With your mouths ye have boasted against me,
and have multiplied your words against me: I have heard them. We may safely
deny any thing of God that implies weakness or imperfection; but to deny that
of Christ which tends to the Exaltation of his Name and riches of his Grace;
let Men distinguish how they will, it is dangerous meddling here: This is a
tender point; that is the first.

Secondly, If the bare act of Faith without any relation to the object,
justifies; then any act of Divine Faith will justify us as well as Faith in
Christ; for the Act is specified by the Object: Take away the Object, and all
Acts of Faith are alike, equally insignificant. But I proceed.

Thirdly, To the third Argument that shall be drawn from the Nature of Faith,
which consists in receiving. As it is the Act of a Believer, it implies doing;
but properly as an Act of believing; it consists in receiving, and that with an
empty hand: Now the question is whether by this receiving Act of Faith there do
redound to us a Righteousness of our own, distinct from that which we receive
from Christ? I say no: We are not justified by a Righteousness that we do, but
by a Righteousness that we receive: Now the bare Act of receiving in a common
Natural way, is not counted morally meritorious: A Beggars receiving an Alms,
argues no merit in the Receiver, but mere Grace in the Donor. We count that he
who only receives a benefit, he does nothing for it, it comes freely: Indeed he
does something naturally in receiving, but nothing morally by way of merit for
the thing received. Thus it is among Men, and so we understand it, in all such
actings of ours; but when we come to deal with God, how do our proud hearts put
a value upon them; then we put a value upon every thing, upon our coming, upon
our adhering, upon our relying, upon our asking, upon our receiving; We grow
proud of those very Acts of Grace by which we do express our Poverty and
Beggary, our absolute Dependence upon another; as if Christ was beholden to us
for our accepting of him: So naturally prone are we to rest upon any thing that
looks like our own doing.

Brethren! There are two things to be considered in Faith.

(I.) The Motion of the Soul in receiving, which is an Act naturally necessary
to all manner of receiving; it is as reaching forth, and opening the hand.

(2.) You may consider the passive reception it self, wherein the Nature of
Faith does chiefly consist, in admitting, applying, and owning the Gift.

Though the word Believing does Grammatically imply an Action, yet really and
physically we are passive in believing: For these Reasons.

First, The first Reason is this; They who make our Act of believing a part of
our Justifying Righteousness, do manifestly make Faith to contradict it self in
and by its own Act: If by an Act of believing we go out of our selves to Christ
for all: I do not see how by the same Act we can possibly settle upon any thing
in our selves that is not Christ: If by being justified by faith they
understand the Object of faith, then we agree with them; then faith and Christ
is all one: By faith we mean Christ applied, and nothing but Christ. But if
they understand the bare Act of believing in distinction from Christ the
Object; therein we differ from them. And they must so understand it who make
our Act of believing a part of our justifying Righteousness distinct from
Christ's Righteousness; and therein I say, they make faith to contradict it self
in and by its own Act: I do not know whether I am understood; I think I
understand my self in what I have said: Take it thus, Pray consider what is the
sense of a believing Soul under a present Act of faith in Christ? I appeal to
you all, I desire you would all be Judges in this matter who have ever been
serious, and in good earnest, dealing with God by an act of faith for
Salvation. You believe in Christ, what is the English of that? What do you mean
by it? Is not this your sense; you desire to cast yourself wholly upon Christ,
to be found in Christ not having on your own Righteousness; to be built upon
that Foundation, to lay hold on Eternal Life in Christ; to go out of your
selves unto Christ for Righteousness and Life; to seek that in another which
you have not in your selves; to count all things but loss and dung that you may
win Christ; don't you mean this? Pray what an absurdity then is it, what a
gross contradiction to say I am justified by something in my self, by virtue of
that very act of faith, by which I do purposely go out of my self to Christ for
all. If this be Reason and Sense, I have quite lost the use of both, and will
never pretend to understand any thing. But how do some Men fight with their own
shadows and lose themselves in their own expressions. They cannot speak of
Christ, and of the way and manner of applying Christ, but presently they must
be Co-workers with Christ in their Justification.

Brethren! We must not be persuaded out of our Christian Names, nay out of
Christianity it self by those who would impose their own notions upon us, and
indeed preach another Gospel; let them read on and tremble. But I will say
this, that if Paul were alive, and should hear any man upon Earth, or Angel
from Heaven compound Faith and Works, Works and Christ in the matter of our
Justification, I doubt not but he would curse them in the name of the Lord.
Certainly we are not to be Mealy-mouthed, and silently suffer the grand
principles of the Gospel to be decryed, as if we doubted whether they were true
or no. These are the Pillars of the House, all fall with them, if they be taken
away. These are the Ancient Landmarks and bounds of our Religion; they must
not be removed, for if you suffer that, you will quickly have a dead Child in
the room of the living. New Notions, though not contrary to any received
foundation, should be warily uttered; but supposing there is the least
discrepancy or opposition, it is our duty and wisdom to be silent, and not
break the eye of the Needle, by forcing our Camel through. New Notions must
yield rather to ancient received Truths, they must be governed and overruled by
them. It is dangerous to force plain Scripture, and plain principles to make
good our own private interpretations.

2. Our act of believing is no part of our justifying Righteousness, because
justification is an act of God; not properly subsequent to our Faith, but
simultaneous with it. They are concomitants, so close, so instantaneous, that
we cannot say which is first, or last in time; we cannot say the one takes its
rise from the other. I explain my self thus; it is one thing for the Scripture
to speak Doctrinally of Faith, another thing to speak of a Believer under the
actual exercise of Faith. When the Scripture speaks of the Doctrine of Faith in
the Abstract, it tells us the consequents of it, that according to Gods order
and appointment, Faith is requisite unto Justification, and so Faith is
antecedent to Justification, and Justification is spoken of as a thing to come,
upon our believing. The Doctrine of Faith shows what shall be to all who obtain
it; the actual exercise of Faith shows, what is to them who have it, and do
believe it. It is not only he that believes shall be saved and justified, but
is justified. It is true, who ever believes shall be saved; the just shall live
by faith, this is Doctrinally true. But he that believes has everlasting Life,
John 3. 39. is justified; this is experimentally true. God, if you rightly
consider the point, does justify us, by working Faith in us. It is his way of
Justifying; it is the way God has chosen to communicate the Righteousness of
God, which is a stupendous Mystery, and cannot be otherwise applied to the
soul. He does not justify us because of any antecedent act of Faith we have
lying by us, and which we could now produce as a price (as it were) and
Meritorious Means of our Justification. God justifies us by working Faith in
us; God being willing in so great an act of Grace, to speak to our
Understandings and Knowledge, he has appointed Faith as a fit means by which
the soul not only does the thing, but also lets in a sense of what is done upon
the soul; and therefore faith the Apostle; it is of faith that it might be of
grace: God will be understood in all the acts of his Grace toward us. Now that
there might be in us a sense of reception of so great a benefit, God resolves
to put it into the hand of Faith, which has a natural sutableness in it, and
fitness to receive what free Grace tenders to it; and so it does when it is in
any strength. Christ and our Souls would never meet were it not for Faith.
There is no letting down any thing spiritual and supernatural into the soul,
but by Faith; Faith is our modus habendi, it is the way, the means by which we
come to have God and Christ, and an Interest in the things of Heaven. We have
what we have from Christ by Faith, and we hold it by Faith. Faith and
Repentance as acted by us, and reflected upon, are very good Evidences of our
Justifications, for it is in that reflection only that they do give evidence of
themselves, and of any thing produced from them. Therefore, I say, as they are
reflected upon they have retrospection to our Justification, of which they are
very good and evident proofs; but they have no antecedent causality to produce
the thing signified, because they signify it, as a thing already done, past
and perfect.

3. And lastly, Justification is frequently set down in Scripture without any
relation to these acts of Grace in us, to show that it wholly flows from
Christ; and that by our believing we add nothing to our Justifying
Righteousness, but do only apply it, as wholly derived from Christ alone, 1
Ioh. 5. 12. He that has the Son, has life; they that are in Christ there is
no Condemnation to them, Romans 8. 1. Now because we cannot admit sinners to be
in Christ but by faith, therefore what flows from Christ, is attributed unto
faith; which is, I say, our modus habendi, but still the real cause of our
Justification, that which makes us just in the sight of God, is our being in
Christ, and our having the Son. There is no mention made of having any thing
else; but faith is our modus habendi; we cannot have the Son but by faith, nor
be in Christ but by Believing. Therefore God speaks, to our Understanding, and
has attributed that to the act of faith, which is only derivable from the
Object.

I shall now show you the weakness of those grounds and reasons they go upon,
who differ from us in this point.

1. They speak much of a Charge of Infidelity, Impenitency and Unholiness to be
drawn up against us at the last day, and therefore it concerns us to muster up
all our good works, all our acts of Grace, and every part of our inherent
Righteousness, that we may be in a readiness to answer to this Charge and clear
our selves.

A specious Argument! enough to amuse the World, and fright men back into the
Popish Doctrine of Justification by Works.

Brethren! I do not deny that unbelieving, impenitent and ungodly Persons shall
be charged with infidelity, impenitency and ungodliness, and be condemned; but
to talk of a charge of Infidelity against a Believer at the last day, I say, it
is a groundless, unscriptural Notion. I do not deny that the faith of the
Saints that draws them to Christ, and its efficacy afterward in all its
fruits, will be taken notice of by Christ, when they are admitted into the
Kingdom, Mat. 25. 34. Come ye blessed; and when that blessedness is fixed,
Christ does not put them upon the proof of their faith, but helps them himself
to understand the former actings of their faith and love to God, which they
were ignorant of before. When saw we thee an hungered, and fed thee? or thirsty
and gave thee drink? etc. In as much as ye have done it to one of the least of
these, ye have done it to me. I see more Grace in you says Christ, than ever
you saw in your selves, so and so appearing in your lives; Come ye blessed.

Brethren, Good Works are good Evidences to us, to make out the Truth of Grace
in us; but the All-knowing God needs no such Evidences for his Information; he
knows what is in man, and needs not that any should tell him. He searches the
Heart. Though we see Grace only in the Fruit, yet God sees it in the Root and
Principle. Besides, I conceive, the last Judgment is not to prove who is, and
who is not in a state of Grace; but rather to pronounce the Sentence according
to the state that every one shall appear in at the Resurrection. There will be
no doubting of any man's state at the Resurrection; the method and manner of the
Resurrection will decide it. Christ himself will separate the Sheep from the
Goats; and he will do this before the Judgment, Mat. 25. 32, 33. You shall
know a Believer then by his Station at the right hand of Christ; by his Company
among the Sheep. The Angels are sent forth, Mat. 24. 31. togather up the Elect
from the four Winds, from the one end of Heaven to the other. They will ransack
every corner of the World to find out every Saint; not only the Ninety and
Nine, but the whole Hundred shall be presented to God; not one missing, we
shall all stand together. Now after they are thus ranked by Christ, and the
Angels have declared them to be Sheep, to be true Believers, must they come
under a charge of infidelity? Who must draw up this charge, and manage this
false Indictment? Either God, or good Angels, or Conscience, or the Devil. God
he has justified them here, sealed them by the Spirit of Adoption to the day
of Redemption, and he will never reverse his judgment.

The judgment of God at the last day will be pursuant to the judgment already
past by his Word and Spirit in the Hearts and Consciences of Believers here.
Good Angels are employed to gather up the Elect, and consequently they have a
true discerning who they are. Our Consciences are sprinkled with the Blood of
Jesus, and have an answer in readiness, by the Resurrection of Christ from the
dead. And the Devil will have something else to do in that day, when he stands
at the head of the wicked to receive his sentence with them, the time of his
torment being then come. Though he be now the accuser of the brethren day and
night before God, he must then Eternally be cast down. True, he is now our
accuser, and we must labor to overcome him by the Blood of the Lamp, as Rev.
12. 10, 11. that is, by Arguments drawn from the Blood of Jesus; yet I say fear
him not after death. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is Death, says the
Apostle; and must we have an after rancounter with the Devil? Must we be set
upon a fresh by him? No, no, after death he has done with you for ever; he
will not dare to look you in the face at the last day: He draw up a charge
against you? You shall accuse, judge and condemn him, and all the Devils in
Hell, 1 Cor. 6. 3. Never fear, you that dye in the Lord, shall rise up under
those denyable evidences of a state of Grace, that neither the Devils nor
wicked Men shall dare to gainsay. What, must poor Christians who have lived
under doubts, fears, under buffetings and temptations, under accusations and
challenges from the Devil and their own Consciences, must they rise so? Is this
to be raised in power, with our Spirits made perfect? Surely Paul was out in
his triumph, Romans 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect?
Do you make good your Title to Christ now, and never fear any charges
afterward at that day; it will be a joyful day to Believers. Look up, says
Christ, lift up your heads for your Redemption draws nigh, Luke 21. 28. And
therefore comfort one another; your Witness is in Heaven, and your Record is on
high, as Job speaks, God, Christ, Angles, Conscience, will all be on your side.

Aye, but if this feigned process be not observed, some men's notions will fall
to the ground. Aye, and let them fall; no matter how soon; for they are not
grounded upon the Word of God that endures for ever. Brethren, we must not
draw Schemes and Models from our own Brain, and when we have done, impose them
upon God, and make his proceedings in every particular exactly to suit the
methods of Humane Judicatures: The natural notion of these things is so strong
in some men's heads, that it does carry them out beyond the line of the Gospel.
Good works certainly do best furthest off from the judgment seat of God. They
are good and comfortable evidences here, but they will make but a sorry
Righteousness there for us to plead. Though God may and will take notice of all
the fruits of his Grace appearing in our words or works, when he passes the
solemn declaratory Sentence at the last day, which is but a fuller
manifestation of our justification. God will personally and publicly own that
which he has secretly in our Consciences, done by his Word and Spirit in us.
God does now act mediately by his word, then he will act immediately by
himself; we shall hear the sentence of our Justification from his own mouth,
which now we hear only from the mouths of his Ministers that speak to us in his
name.

Secondly, The second ground they go upon is this, they say, that it is a
conditional service imposed upon us by God in the new Covenant; and therefore
the performance of it must needs be part of our Justifying Righteousness; which
is very specious, and very suitable to Humane Reason, as most things are that
contradict the Mysteries of the Gospel, but it is of like sound and
significancy with the other.

Alas! At how little a hole will self-Righteousness creep in? How apt are we in
the pride of our hearts to distinguish our self-Righteousness into our
Justification, that we may have somewhat whereof to glory. To prevent mistakes
I will premise one thing; that is this, I do not deny, but that to believe in
God, in Christ, is an eminent piece of service, a great act of Divine Worship,
the greatest act of Worship we can perform to God on this side Heaven. But I
deny that it is a service done in order to the procuring or purchasing those
benefits which we receive from Christ as his free gift. Faith receives what
Christ has already procured. Faith does not come to Christ to desire him to
dye for us; but having dyed for us, it comes for the fruit of his death: It
comes on no other Errand but to receive what is already prepared. Faith has no
causality or efficiency at all in contriving, compassing, constituting the
great act of Grace, wherein the pardon of our sin and our justification is held
forth unto us. Our Faith did not move God to promise pardon, but finding all
this Grace in Jesus, Faith applies it, lays hold on it, and God gives us leave,
nay commands us to do this. So that Faith is a service we owe to God by way of
duty in compliance with his free Grace toward us, but it is not a service done
by us in way of procuring that which is freely given. No, no, we owe that to
Christ and not to Faith. Brethren! In common acceptance, when we say come to
me, and I will do this and that for you; pray who is the doer, he that comes to
have the thing done, or he that does it. Certainly if coming be a service in
this case, it is a service done to a Man's self, and can never be urged as a
service done to God.

But they further say, that this is a conditional service: Why? Because God
has commanded us to believe that we may be justified. Commanded us to believe
and pray, what is that? I told you before the meaning of an act of Faith, even
to renounce our own Righteousness, to come in our nakedness and poverty to
Christ, without Money or without Moneys worth, that we may be enriched by him
in all things. Is not this the old, honest, plain downright notion of
believing? And is this the Conditional service required? Why don't you do it
then? Who is against it? Only let them attend to the sense of Faith, and not be
carried away with the mere word and talk of Faith, as their own act, never
regarding the inward sense and signification of the thing it self. Has God
required us to believe in Jesus; let us know what that means and do it; no body
is against it. If that be the Conditional service, let them lie low before God,
and seem more vile in their own eyes, and cast themselves upon Christ for all.
Let them learn to come without Money. This is the proper Obedience of Faith;
that Obedience which the Doctrine of the Gospel does require; and since you
will call this a condition, I say, why don't you perform it? Is this the
performance of such a condition of believing, according to the sense and
meaning of believing, to tell the World that Christ is not our only Justifying
Righteousness, that we must seek for something in our selves to join with him,
if ever we will be saved? Is this the condition? Does God mean this, when he
bids me believe in Jesus? Sirs! Let us not read our Bibles backwards; wresting
Scripture to our own destruction: It is strange to me, that Faith which is all
along in Scripture opposed to Works in our Justification, and is appointed by
God to shut all good works out of Justification, should be thus made an inlet
to bring all good works into Justification. Oh! That we were more under the
powerful actings of true Justifying Faith, it would then open it self more
fully to us, and show us its meaning. I wish we could a little better
understand the actings of our Faith, understand the reason, the sense of it,
the importance, the intent of an act of Faith, what a thing Faith is.

Thirdly, They suppose a double Justification, and a double Justifying
Righteousness; the first to justify us from the accusations of the Law, the
other to justify the sincerity of our Faith and Holiness; and here comes in
all our inherent Righteousness. This is specious too: But I would not have men
coin new heads of Divinity to make good their own notions. We know but of one
Justification, I say, the second Justification, which they talk of, it is
employed in the first; and therefore needless and unscriptural: For since the
Revelation of the Gospel, infidelity and unbelief is a sin against the Moral
Law; and Faith in Christ is enjoined as a duty by the Moral Law; by which we
take God to be our God, and consequently do bind our selves over to believe
whatsoever he had, or hereafter should reveal to be his Will. This we are bound
to by the Moral Law; therefore if we are (as they themselves affirm) freed by
Justification from the Law of Works upon the condition of Faith, then we are on
our first Justification absolutely freed from infidelity, and our Faith is
sufficiently approved to be true, and what then need a second Justification,
unless we will suppose an error in the first Judgment; which is impious to
suppose; as if God should acquit us from the accusation of the Law of Works
upon the condition of Faith; which upon after examination, Christ discovers to
be false and unsound. So that these things do not hang together.

Fourthly, They say that Faith and Holiness are conditions and evidences of our
title to Christ, and all that comes by him; and therefore part of our
Justifying Rightcousness.

It is hard to understand the strength of some men's reasoning; but grant all
this, it amounts to no more but Christ, and a title to Christ, so far we are
agreed, for we desire no more. But how they will make Faith which is our title
to Christ, and unto which Christ and all his benefits are by the Gospel
granted, promised and made over; how they will make this title never so well
evidenced, to be part of our Justifying Righteousness, I see not: A title adds
nothing to the inheritance, makes it neither more nor less, but conveys it down
to us, according to the intrinsic value of the thing, be it more or less. A
title to Land is no part of the Land; only we are invested in it as it is, by
virtue of our title. Now therefore if the Righteousness of Christ be not of it
self sufficient to justify us, I see not how a good title mends the matter;
for if the Estate be never so great, and we have no good title to it, it is
worth nothing to us; and if our title be never so good, we can have no more
then is, and belongs to the title. So that after all this stir about conditions
and evidences of our title to Christ, the result of all is this, we have a
title, a good title, are under all the conditions and evidences of a good
title; but to what? To an Inheritance that is not sufficient to maintain us, to
a Righteousness that is not sufficient of it self alone to justify us; and
where are we now with our conditions and evidences of our title? For ever
distitute of a complete Justifying Righteousness. Is this to Preach Christ? To
Preach the glad Tidings of the Gospel? Is this the way to quiet and settle the
Consciences of poor distressed sinners? surely no.

Fifthly, They urge the literal sense of some few Scriptures that seem to speak
for them; especially two; and I do not know of more in the whole Bible, as to
the literal signification; if there were we should hear enough of it. I know
they quote many others, which add no weight at all to the Argument they would
ground upon them, Therefore I shall not speak to them. Those two are Mat. 12.
37. By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be
condemned; and that in James, where it is said, Abraham was justified by works,
Iam. 2. 23.

For that in Matthew, Calvin charges the Papists with very great weakness in
offering to draw an Argument from that Text for Justification by Works.
Maldonate a Learned Jesuit on the other hand is very angry with Calvin for
supposing any of the Roman Church to be so weak and injudicious, as to argue so
from that Scripture; for, says he, we very well understand that this Text does
not speak De justificatione, qua justi efficimur, sed de judicis sententia,
qua, sumpto ex verbis nostris argumento, justi declaramur. So says the
Jesuit; we know this Text does not speak of that which is the cause of our
Justification, of the thing for which, and by virtue of which we become just
and righteous, only here is the appearance of our Righteousness by our words,
and we are declared to be Righteous. So that this does not touch this cause of
Justification; and yet this is the main Text brought for it, the main proof
repeated again and again, to prove inherent righteousness to have an influence
into our Justification. I say let them take the answer from the Papists or
Protestants, which they please, they are both against them in this thing.

As for the other Scripture, They will take it in no other sense but what
implies a contradiction to all other Texts of Scripture in the case. The whole
current of Scripture is against Works in Justification, and leads us to a fair
construction of that in James, that it is to be understood of a justification
before men, and not of a justification before God. Protestant Writers have
sufficiently cleared up this, to the Conviction of all but such who are
resolved not to be Convinced. Certainly they should have a care how they abound
too much in their own sense. The Learned Lord Bacon says, that a little
Philosophy makes men Atheists, but a great deal will convince them of a Deity.
Some men's Logic and School Learning overthrows Reason, which duly improved
and well managed, would teach them to argue otherwise: Certainly in our
reasoning about Divine things we should be careful not to abound too much in
our own sense. It is better for us to leave the Mystery of the Gospel in its
Mystery where we found it, than to seek to draw it out, and so to explain it,
as to force it into the mould of Humane Reason, shaping it on every side to an
exact conformity to the thoughts and conceptions of our weak imperfect
Understanding; I say, no Gospel Truth will bear this. After all our Faith and
Knowledge and Experience, we know but in part, and there is at the end of every
Gospel Truth, a Mystery; something that is passing our Understanding, that
calls for silence, for an holy Admiration, for an humble submission in Faith to
the Will of God. Therefore I would not have men speak as if they knew all, and
draw particular Schemes, and it must be so, and no otherwise; and thus and thus
you must proceed in this and that way and form, therefore things must be so
stated.

I have done with the Argumentative part. I will now speak a word or two in a
looser way of Discourse.

I say then thus, he may be a true Believer who does not take his faith for any
part of his Justifying Righteousness; I suppose that will be granted: But he
cannot be a true Believer who takes not Christ for his Justifying
Righteousness. I do not say now for his only Justifying Righteousness, because
I would speak in the sense of those I oppose. I say, they cannot be Believers
who do not look upon Christ as their Justifying Righteousness; but they may be
true Believers who do not look upon faith as a part of their Justifying
Righteousness. For the first, suppose it an Error, it is only about the act in
our apprehension which does not alter the nature of the thing at all. The
second is an Error in the act, which quite destroys the very nature of faith.
Therefore the safer way is rather to press persons to believe, to see they have
faith indeed and in Truth, than urge them to such an unscriptural construction
of their faith, putting such a title of Honor upon it to the reproach of Christ
and his Righteousness. They honor faith sufficiently who only prefer Christ
before it. No doubt God will give faith its due praise and place at the last
day; our not knowing or not understanding the reach and truth of our faith in
all circumstances of it, will be no prejudice to faith at the last day. I
heartily wish, we were more in the Exercise of Faith than in Controversies
about it; more in the Practice of Good Works than in Dispute about them; we
should then sooner understand both the one and the other. Sirs! the mysterious,
sublime Doctrine of Justification was revealed for our comfort, and proposed to
our faith to be believed; not to our reason to argue upon in a Quodlibetical
manner and to toss to and fro for Argument sake. What if we know no more of
Justification then is absolutely necessary for our Justification? This is the
case of many plain, sincere hearted Christians; and if it were so with us all,
we may have fewer Notions in our Heads, but possibly more Grace in our Hearts.
The Lord grant, that we may know the Doctrine of Justification so as they know
it who are saved by Christ. But surgunt indocti and rapiunt Coelum, and nos cum
doctrinis nostris sine cord, volutamur in carne and in sanguine. The Learned
they dispute and wrangle themselves into Hell; the unlearned they believe,
practice and gain Heaven, taking up the truth in simplicity according to the
general scope of the Gospel, as it is held forth to the meanest Capacity.
Brethren! what Paul said to the Jailer, Acts 16. 31. that I say to you all,
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou and thy house shall be saved. Don't
you go home now, and tell your Families that they must not understand this Text
so as to look upon Christ as their only justifying righteousness, but look out
for something in themselves, if ever they be saved. No, pray speak Scripture
Language, expound Scripture by Scripture, and tell them, that Christ is all in
all; tell them plainly that they must not be found in their own righteousness;
they must be found in Christ not having on their own righteousness, that they
must count all things but loss and dung that they may win Christ; that there is
no other foundation but Christ, no other name under Heaven by which they can be
saved, but the name of Christ; tell them they must not come for Justification
and Life in the name of their Good Works, of any thing that belongs themselves;
but only in the name of Christ, promote this Doctrine in your Families and
among your Children and Servants. This is the way to save you and your
Household. This is good, wholesome household Divinity, and suited to the
ordinary Capacity of all serious Professors. We must not send our Hearers to
intricate distinctions, to learn the meaning of the Doctrine of their
Justification. The sense of the Gospel is plain enough in this thing, they that
run may read it. Come, come, you shall never be charged at the Last Day for
giving too much to Christ in the matter of Justification. You are bound to
ascribe all to him, and you shall never be charged for giving too much. And
certainly if it be possible to err on that hand, I had rather err in giving too
much then too little to Christ. Do you think that a true Believer, who does not
look upon the act of Faith or works of Holiness to be any part of his
justifying righteousness; but casts himself upon Christ, do you think, I say,
that God will reprove such a person at the last day for ascribing too much to
Christ, and not pleading his own righteousness? Certainly a Believer cannot
plead the righteousness of Christ without Faith; his way of arguing from Christ
will sufficiently evince the truth and reality of his Faith; there needs no
other proof and demonstration of it.

I should have made some Application. I will tell you what I intended.

First, To those who ground their Justification upon the sandy Foundation of
their inherent Righteousness; I would exhort them to pull down the house
presently before it fall upon their heads; and lay a better Foundation, if ever
they think to stand before the Son of Man in his Day.

Then I should exhort them, and press them to study other Arguments, (as there
are very many) to promote Good Works and practical Holiness among men; and not
justle out Christ to make room for self Righteousness in the matter of
Justification. What, must we work for Life still? To work for Justification is
to work for Life, and why should we thus turn the Gospel into the Law?

I should speak also to those who are built upon the right Foundation, and have
cast themselves upon Christ's Righteousness for Justification unto Life. Let
such be careful to maintain good Works; let them be Examplary in the practice
of them; and bring forth fruit meet for the Kingdom of God. For as the
Foundation may be too weak for the Superstructure, so the Superstructure may be
too mean for the Foundation. And therefore down with all this Hay, Wood and
Stubble, and labor to walk more suitable to that Holy Faith under the
Profession of which you live. Brethren! The unsuitable and uncircumspect lives
of Professors, have been the greatest scandal to the Doctrine of Justification
by Faith; it has opened the Mouths of men against it. Therefore labor to live
men into a Conviction of this Truth. Disputes and Words will not do it, till
you make it appear, that the Grace of God that has brought Life and
Immortality to light through the Gospel, has taught you to deny all
Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts. This is the way to promote the Doctrine of
Justification by Faith alone. You that are built upon the right Foundation had
need be careful and circumspect. The House is not yet finished, we do all of us
lie open more or less to Storms and Tempests here below, though they cannot
throw down the house, yet they may shake the house; the rain may beat into the
house, may soak through every room of the house, may foul the house; may
greatly incommode us and distress us. Therefore keep your Souls in good repair,
keep them as tite as you can against Wind and Weather.

And for your Comfort I would have told you that Heaven will mend all the
Errors in the Superstructure, if the Foundation be right. God will then take
away and separate all those weaknesses and sinful mixtures that now run along
with all our Graces; all Cracks and Flawes, the sinkings, and failings, the
bendings and leanings, this way and that way in any part of the building,
Heaven will mend all, will set all right and straight; when we are Sanctified
throughout, and the Top-stone is laid.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE OF REPENTANCE: SHOWING The Difference between Legal and
Evangelical Repentance, AND The Necessary Connection between Evangelical
Repentance and Saving Faith.

By Thomas Cole Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs over against the
Stocks-Market, 1689.

A DISCOURSE OF Repentance.
MARK 1. 15. Repent ye, and believe the Gospel.
THE sum of the Gospel lies in Faith and Repentance, which always go
together, and cannot be separated, though they may and ought to be
distinguished one from the other: I have chosen this Text to show the necessary
connection that is between Faith and Repentance; that I may be the better
understood I shall observe this method.

1. Distinguish between Legal and Evangelical Repentance.

2. Show the nature of Evangelical Repentance, what it is, and wherein it does
consist, how it rises out of faith, what its use and end is.

3. Show the necessary connection that is between Evangelical Repentance and
saving Faith.

4. The real difference that is between them, notwithstanding this necessary
connection.

5. Inquire into the true cause and reason why the Professors of this Age, who
are so much for Faith, do mind Repentance so little.

6. Apply all.

First, Distinguish between Legal and Evangelical Repentance.

You see the Repentance and Faith spoken of in the Text, have both of them a
reference to the Gospel; Repent and believe the Gospel. We shall better
understand the nature of Evangelical Repentance, by comparing it with Legal
Repentance, observing as we go how they differ from each.

(1.) Legal Repentance is the work of the Law, i. e. The work of the Spirit by
the Law, for the Law works but faintly under the influence of mere Natural
Light, unless the Spirit awaken the Conscience, and set home the Law, little
will be done, such a work of the Law you have Romans 2. 15. letting in a Spirit
of Bondage upon the Conscience, accusing us for what we have done against the
Law, and leaving us so convicted without any plea for our selves.

Evangelical Repentance is the work of the Gospel, sweetly melting the Heart by
Arguments drawn from the Love of God, and his free Grace in Christ toward
Sinners; it encourages a trembling Soul to plead with God for Mercy as the
Publican, Lord be Merciful to me a Sinner.

(2.) Legal Repentance is all terror and no hope, it rises from the revelation
of Gods Wrath against Sinners; it is a despairing Repentance without any hope of
pardon, the Curse of the Law lies hard upon a Man; he knows not how to get from
under it, but lives in a fearful expectation of fiery indignation to devour
him, he is a terror to himself: But Evangelical Repentance leaves not an
affrighted sinner altogether without hope, as I shall show under the next head.

(3.) Legal Repentance is from worldly sorrow, not so much for the sin as the
penalty incurred thereby, the apprehension of which is very dreadful to a
convinced sinner; he is more affected with the evil of punishment, then with
the evil of sin in it self; it is not for Gods sake but his own, that he repents
of sin; he could love it well enough if it did not damn him: Though I do not
deny, but a Repentance purely legal, may have some sense of the evil of sin as
sin, not only as malum prohibitum, but as malum in se, as evil in its own
nature; where common notions of good and evil are not utterly extinguished, it
must needs be so, especially under a higher conviction from the Spirit of God,
that gives us a farther discerning of the evil of sin, then the mere light of
nature under its greatest elevation can possibly do. It was so in Judas, Matt.
27. 34. he was convinced, not only that he had broken the Law of God, but that
he had sinned in so doing. I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent
blood: He knew he had a hand in murdering a Man, a good Man, a great Man, who
was more then Man; no doubt all this came up into his mind, concerning Christ,
yet the knowledge of Christ that Judas had, did not reach so far as to beget
the least hope of Mercy from him; and here lay the legality of his Repentance;
it was a despairing Repentance, he conversed only with the Law, and so sunk
under the wrath of God, and the curse of the Law; he had none to accuse him but
his own Conscience, the Rulers and chief Priests were for him, had set him a
work and rewarded him; but seeing him under such horror of Conscience, he had
done their business, what care they, see thou to that; unconvinced sinners do
slight the convictions of others, they may go hang themselves for all them,
they have no pity for them.

I speak this to show that legal Repentance may take in something of the evil
of sin in it self, as well as the destructive nature of it to us; though these
legal convictions of the evil of sin in it self, are far short of those more
through convictions that accompany true Evangelical Repentance: Though the
sorrow that is in legal Repentance be but worldly; yet it is very pungent, it
pierces us through, and pretends to some Devotion too, as if it were for Gods
sake, when self is only at the bottom. Pharaoh confessed his sins, and desired
the Prayers of Gods People, Exodus 9. 27, 28. Saul wept for his sins, 1 Samuel 24.
16. The effects of Gods wrath are very dreadful upon convinced sinners, may
draw Tears from their Eyes, when they see what mischief they have brought upon
themselves; they repent, but how? Not of the sin, but of the punishment: Alas!
What does that signify, how ineffectual is it? What have we to do to repent of
the punishment? We cannot reverse it; it is Gods part to repent of the
punishment, to turn from his wrath, to cease from his anger, which he will do,
when we repent of the sin that occasioned it.

To repent of the punishment, is in effect to be sorry that God is so just,
that he so severely animadverts upon sinners; we wish he would let them go
unpunished, that we might more securely go on in our sins; the only way to
escape vengeance, is to acknowledge the sinfulness of sin, and to repent of our
great folly in committing it; such a frame of Spirit bears some proportion to
the Holiness of God, argues true Godly sorrow, which works Evangelical
Repentance unto Salvation. 2 Cor. 7. 10.

(4.) Legal Repentance is before Faith, without Faith may never issue in saving
Faith, as in Cain, Saul, Judas, but Evangelical Repentance does always
accompany saving Faith; and of this I am now to speak under the second head;
showing you

Secondly, The nature of Evangelical Repentance; what it is in its first rise
and original; upon what it is founded.

It came in with the Gospel, the Law never intended any such thing, the sinner
was to be cut off by Law, to die without Mercy, in the day thou eatest thou
shall die, says the Law; unless ye repent, says the Gospel; here is an
exception put in (in case of repentance) against the peremptory Sentence of the
Law. I say repentance comes in with the Gospel, I will put enmity, etc. Genesis 3.
15. Repentance rises out of this Enmity. This seems to point particularly at
the Conversion of Eve, who by Faith in the promised Messiah should turn against
the Serpent. I will put enmity between thee and the woman; this woman, whom
thou have deceived, shall become thy Enemy, and bring forth a seed that shall
break thy head, thou shall bruise his heel, but his Death shall be thy
overthrow. Repentance is a Gospel Privilege purchased by Christ, it is an act
of Grace in God to enjoin us Repentance, as his leaving men in an impenitent
hardened frame is an act of his Justice and Wrath. The Law in its Original
Constitution, does not intend the amendment of the sinner, but his utter
Destruction; the Law can kill the sinner, but cannot mortify the sin;
Damnation makes no man better, but concludes him Eternally under sin and wrath,
the Justice of God is not obliged to turn a sinner from his sins, but to turn
him into Hell for his sins.

That which makes it a just and righteous thing with God to forgive the sins of
Believer, is Christ's Merits and his own Promise; it is Justice in God to make
good his own Promises, Romans 3. 25, 26. 2 These. 1. 6, 7. he is a debtor to his
own promise, he cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13. he owes the performance of
his Promise to his Faithfulness and Truth; it is an act of Justice to himself to
keep his Promise: God offers Mercy to sinners, not because they do repent, but
that they may repent: Repentance is not the Cause but the Effect of Pardon, God
always intends Pardon to those whom he effectually calls to repentance; he gave
no such call to the Angels that fell; there was no Gospel preached to them. No
fallen Angel was saved, because no Elect Angel fell, but there are many of Gods
Elect among the fallen Sons of Adam to whom promises of Salvation were made
upon their believing in Christ; this being published to all in the Gospel, all
who hear the Gospel do put in for their share in this Salvation, and that they
may render the attainment more easy and feazable to them, they deny absolute
Election, bring in Universal Redemption, assert the liberty of Man's Will to
believe if he please, and supposing it to be in their own power to believe,
they conclude they may be saved as well as others, and this is the ground of
all that security that is among common Professors. Having spoken thus much of
Evangelical Repentance as it implies a real hatred of sin as sin, and a real
turning to God as the chiefest good from an inward change of nature renewed
after the Image of God, I shall now show you,

1. That such a Repentance can never be wrought in any by the Law alone, the
Gospel has a principal hand in this.

Why not by the Law.

Because in the Law there are not sufficient motives and inducements to
Repentance, nothing that encourages to it, that renders it available to man's
Salvation, the law cannot give life to a sinner upon his repentance; the Gospel
can, but the Law cannot, could a man under the Law, Repent, suppose that? What
would he get by it, he must to Hell after all, the Law as a Covenant of Works
does not seek to bring a sinner to Repentance, but to Punishment, the Law
cannot give Repentance unto Life, because it cannot give Life upon our
Repentance.

You Will say then, is the Law against Repentance? I don't say so neither; for
take Repentance as it is a just equitable thing, as a holy disposition of mind;
so the Law is not against it where ever it may be found, as it is not against
any other act of Moral Righteousness as such that a man may do, and yet for all
this 'twill condemn a man for his sin, and all his righteousness shall not be
remembered, though the Law be not against Repentance, yet it will not accept of
repentance as a satisfaction for past sins, but the Gospel provides full
satisfaction for the Law, and promises sufficient and effectual Grace to the
sinner to bring him to repentance; having rescued him from the Curse of the
Law, enables him to walk worthy of the blessing of the Gospel, if those who are
justified were not sanctified, they would live to the scandal of the Gospel.

The Law cannot contradict it self, having already pronounced a peremptory
sentence of death upon the sinner, it is impossible the Law should ever give
repentance unto Life, the Law insists upon the Execution of its own Judgment,
and will not be satisfied till that be done, in this the Gospel yields to the
Law, to have execution done upon man for sin, and provides a man on purpose,
the man Christ Jesus, who bore our sins in his own body upon the cross.

3. This Evangelical Repentance implies real Sanctification, but the Law
sanctifies no man, because it cannot convey its own Holiness to another, cannot
alter the Nature of a Man, but only show him what mischief his sin has done
him, shows him his sin in this or that instance, to his great terror, but if he
happen to outlive those terrors, and not die in the fit as Judas, his evil
heart will incline him as strongly to sin, as ever it did before his former
Convictions, they made him give a present start backwards, but he will quickly
recover himself, and return to his wretched course, he cannot cease from sin,
though he know it displeases God yet he likes it never the worse for that,
might he but escape the punishment, it is not the wrath of God in it self that
he fears, but only as it goes forth in the penal effects of it against himself,
else he could suffer God to be angry, and not be troubled at it, whereas this
goes most to the heart of a Child of God, that he has incurred his displeasure.
There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine anger, Psalm. 38. 3. The Law
alone never works any real Sanctification in a sinner; it is indeed the rule of
Judgment, it judges us according to what we are, but cannot make us better.

4. Repentance is a turning unto God, but the Law gives no encouragement to a
sinner to turn to God, it holds forth the Wrath of God against him, that makes
him run from the presence of an angry God and hide himself as Adam did, how can
dry stubble stand before a consuming Fire, but God out of Christ is a consuming
Fire to a sinner, he dares not come near him.

5. The law by it self cannot work a saving Conviction it is very Instrumental in
conjunction with the Gospel to do this, but of it self it cannot. Saving
Conviction is of the essence of Evangelical Repentance.

Saving Conviction has these four properties.

1. It apprehends upon Scripture grounds a possibility of a sinners Salvation,
and not only so, but a fair probability of it upon the due use of those means
appointed by God in order thereunto, and leads out the sinner to seek relief in
Christ, under some hope of obtaining it.

2. It works a hatred of sin as sin, strongly inclines and disposes the heart
of a sinner to break off from his sins, and to betake himself to a strict
course of Holiness: God offers Grace to sinners, because he intends to give
Faith and Repentance to as many as are ordained unto Life, Faith inclines us to
beg Repentance, disposes us to it, lays open the foulness of sin so plainly,
so convincingly that we cannot but repent of it, under such a saving Conviction
as Faith works in us, I call it a saving Conviction, because it puts us upon
the diligent use of all means tending to Salvation; a man is so convinced that
he cannot rest till he has found out an effectual remedy to cure so deadly a
disease, nothing will satisfy him but Christ, we see not all that is in sin;
till we see an absolute necessity of Christ to save us from it: Here is a deep
discovery of sin indeed, when we know nothing but the Blood of Christ can take
it away; Behold the Lamb of God, etc. a Sacrifice of Gods providing, all the
Bulls, Goats, Sheep and Lambs of Man's procuring will never expiate sin, nothing
that is among men can do it, but God has a Lamb, cherished in his own bosom
from Eternity, this Lamb must be slain to take away the sins of the World, it is
very astonishing to think what God parted with from himself to satisfy his own
Justice; his Attributes conspire together to heighten and advance each other;
infinite Grace lays out it self to satisfy infinite Justice, and satisfied
Justice gives way to infinite Grace to glorify it self in man's free Redemption.

3. It convinces us not only of particular sins, but of the general Corruption
of our Nature, it is by a Divine supernatural Light that we discern this, we
have a feeling of it in our selves, from an inward Principle of a higher Life
raised up in us by the power of God in our Regeneration, which will not suffer
us to walk any more after the flesh, we cry and complain of that proneness that
is in us to evil; O wretched man that I am, etc. Romans 7. No unconverted man is
brought in complaining of the Corruption of his Nature, only David, and Paul,
and such like, but none else. When we look upon the old man with the eyes of
the new, we see that deformity that never appeared to us before.

4. It Convinces us not only of the severity of the Law, in punishing, but also
of the Holiness of the Law in all its just and reasonable Commands; Romans 7. 12.
This is a main difference between Legal and Evangelical Repentance, that
Conviction and Sense that is in a Legal Repentance of the Holiness of the Law,
is very small, next to none at all, and that which is, proceeds chiefly from
the remainders of light in all natural Men, left on purpose in the Conscience,
that all reverence of God and his Law might not be quite cast off, and
something of this may now and then appear under strong legal Convictions of
sin, as in Judas, but all this never begets any true love to Holiness, for
still they go on in their sins and have pleasure in them that do so, Romans 1.
32. which is a great demonstration of the absolute Dominion sin has over fallen
man, in carrying him on not only against the known Law of God written in the
Word, but against all the natural Notions of the Law written in his own heart,
nothing can hold him in, he despises God and man and his own Conscience, he
will not be a Law to himself.

Legal Convictions come short in all these properties of saving Conviction.

Legal Convictions are either such as are antecedent to the Commission of Sin,
or such as follow upon it, which are properly called Convictions.

Convictions antecedent to sin, are all one with the knowledge of the Law, by
which we understand what is morally good or evil in it self; what is sin, and
what is not, Adam and Eve in innocence were under this Conviction, they knew
what God had forbidden, viz. to eat of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil,
and that to eat of it in opposition to Gods express command to the contrary,
was a high act of Disobedience, to be punished with Death, but by the subtilty
of the Devil they yielded to the Temptation, and did eat: if their perfect
knowledge of the Law could not keep them in Innocence, from falling, how can we
expect that our imperfect knowledge of the Law from any Convictions of that
kind, which we may be under should keep us.

And for those legal Convictions subsequent to the commission of sin, by which
we see the obliquity of our own actions, and know our selves to be
Transgressors of a holy righteous Law, they fall short in all the forementioned
properties of saving Conviction, they leave us without hope of Mercy, work no
renovation of nature in us, they may disturb us in the present act of sin, and
terrify us much about that, laying some present restraint upon us, but they
work no real Reformation in us, Judas was in great horror of Conscience for
betraying his Master, was much troubled that he should have a hand in shedding
innocent blood: and yet under the light and power of this Conviction, how evil
it was to Murder another, he hangs himself, which was as contrary to Law, as
killing another: I speak this to show how legal convictions may hurry a man
from one sin to another, but they never lead him into a constant settled way of
true Holiness, whence I infer that Convictions purely legal will never work
Repentance unto Life.

How Repentance unto Life is wrought by the Gospel.

Because God has appointed the Gospel to be the means of Repentance, Luke 24.
47. Romans 16. 25, 26. to the Glory of his Free Grace, as Justice is glorified in
the Damnation of an impenitent sinner, so Grace is glorified in his Conversion;
Evangelical Repentance is from a Discovery of Gods Love and Free Grace: His
goodness leads us to Repentance, Romans 2. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 9. Psalm. 130. 4. A true
Penitent fears least he should miss of Mercy, and come short of it, he rejoices
at the good News of the Gospel, begins to lift up his head in some expectation
of a blessed Redemption, he serves God cheerfully being persuaded that his
Duties and Services will be pleasing to him and accepted by him for Christ's
sake, Psalm. 130. 4. Hos. 6. 1, 2. a sense of love and mercy quicken up a
drooping trembling sinner to return unto God, the Prodigal remembered what a
kind Father he had, Luke 15. 18. 'twas Paul's Argument, Romans 12. 1. 2 Cor. 7. 1.
It Is a sad thing that the Grace of the Gospel which is intended to keep men
from Despair, should by some be made an encouragement to presumption, God
forbid we should continue in Sin because Grace abounds.

2. The Grace of the Gospel is not only an appointed Means, but is in its own
nature a fit means to work repentance, suited and adapted to that end, the
goodness of God leads us to repentance, the Schoolmen tell us that amor est
congregativus, and they give this reason for it, because it does congregate and
gather in our roving scattered thoughts from those various lesser Objects after
which they go, fixing our Minds upon God, the only soulsatisfying Object. Love
is conciliative, when God does through Faith let in any sense of his intended
grace toward sinners, the heart melts under it, a sinner does not repent that
he may believe, but because he does believe, something of the Love of God to
sinners in Christ Jesus, some inkling of this is come to his ear, has touched
his very heart, before ever he sets upon repentance, and now he can hold no
longer, the love of Christ constrains him, great is the power of Love, when it
commends it self to us in some signal expressions of kindness to our visible
advantage and benefit.

3. Because Christ gives repentance, Act. 5. 31. he purchased this and all
other graces for us, by dying for us, he not only obtained pardon of Sin in our
Justification, but all inherent Graces in the Saints come from Christ, he
procured them for us, he works them in us, his sufferings being not only
satisfactory for sin, but meritorious of grace to be bestowed upon us, though
the Law cannot sanctify a sinner yet Christ can, and it is an act of special
grace toward us when he does, but he will first satisfy the Law and Justice
of God, that being brought under grace by our free Justification, we may answer
to the Law of grace in our sanctification, denying all Ungodliness and Worldly
Lusts, living soberly and righteously here below as the redeemed of the Lord
ought to do; the Law commands perfect Obedience, but in case of Failure, the
Gospel Promises Faith and Repentance, Zach. 12. 10. Acts 11. 18.

4. Because God has annexed a quickening Spirit to the Gospel, to make way for
his Grace, and to give it a prevailing efficacy in the Hearts of men, they are
drawn by the loving kindness of God, and cannot resist it, the Spirit opens the
Mystery of the Love of God in Christ, and so charms the Soul with it, that it
is impossible to withstand the allurements of it.

5. Because the ways and means of bringing a sinner to life, are all
supernatural; the Law speaks nothing of this, the Law never puts us upon any
thing that is supernatural; I mean that originally was so to man in his perfect
state, for then it had been quite above the reach and capacity of Man's
Understanding, but God suited his Law to those inbred Notions and Principles of
Truth, that were concreated in us, the way of salvation through Faith and
Repentance being supernatural; we must apply our selves to the Gospel to know
this.

3. The necessary Connection that is between Evangelical Repentance and saving
Faith. I prove, it thus.

It Is so in the first production of Repentance, and in all the subsequent acts
of Repentance, therefore it is always so.

In the first production of Repentance if you consider how this was wrought by
John's Ministry, Mat. 3. and Luke 3. these two things will evidently appear.

First, That Repentance always presupposes Faith.

Secondly, That Repentance rises out of Faith. And how!

I will clear up this by a brief Paraphrase upon those words, Repent ye, for
the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

John is brought in inviting sinners to Repentance; the Argument he uses is
plainly this, God is inclined to Pardon you, therefore Repent: I come as a
forerunner to prepare the way, that by bringing you the first news of Gods
intended grace and favor toward you, I might soften and mollify your hearts
and dispose you to a ready thankful acceptance of Christ, this offer of Grace
is called the Kingdom of Heaven because it is inclusive of all the happiness
that Heaven can afford: all good comes along with Pardoning Grace, I see says
John, you are all lying under the sad damning circumstances of your own sins,
in a very woeful miserable condition, compassed about with Hell and Death, with
horror and darkness, all things round about you, look very black and dismal, I
am come to put you into a better state, to offer you a Kingdom, which will
shortly appear in all its Glory; it is at hand, it is coming toward you, Heaven
it self is come to look after you to lend a helping hand to lift you out of
this horrible Pit, before it shut its mouth upon you, see that you refuse not
this grace, that you put not from you the word of the Gospel, least you judge
your selves unworthy of Eternal Life, as Acts 13. 46. i. e. it will as plainly
appear to be so, as if it had been so declared in open Court, upon a fair
hearing of your Cause, if Heaven and Earth were to sit in Judgment upon you,
they would conclude you most unworthy of Everlasting Life, and by putting the
word from you, you have in effect passed this judgment upon your selves, or
you have done that now which your own Consciences will so interpret at the last
day, they will then tell you you might have had life and pardon, but would not;
you would not come to Christ that you might have life, therefore your damnation
is just, you deservedly perish, and may thank your selves for it, how
speechless will sinners be then: as to remain in impenitency under the outward
Light of the Gospel, does argue the height of unbelief, so to be brought to
Repentance by the Preaching of the Gospel does necessarily imply Faith in the
Gospel, it is impossible that a Tender of Grace should work Repentance till it is
believed, it is of no force, makes no impression upon the Mind of a Man till
then, therefore, Faith must be presupposed, I make it out thus.

That which is brought as a motive for the doing of a thing, must be first
understood, received and believed, before the thing can be done upon that
motive: there is in the Gospel a general offer of Mercy to sinners, this proves
an effectual means to beget Faith in all that are ordained unto life, upon
their believing this general offer of Grace, their hearts begin to melt under
it, and some inclination to Repentance is wrought in them, this Faith and this
Repentance wrought in a more general way at first, do form themselves into more
particular and distinct acts afterward, thus the principles of the Doctrine of
Christ, viz. Repentance from dead works and Faith toward God are first laid,
and then there is (in the light and power of these principles) a going on unto
perfection, Heb. 6. 1. Our first Faith is a more general Faith, and so is our
first Repentance, rather an inclination and tendency to believe and repent,
then actual Faith, or actual Repentance. Our first Faith wrought in us upon the
general proposal of Gospel Grace, contains in it a saving Conviction of Sin,
it is impossible to receive grace without it, grace is nothing to us, of no
signification to us, but as it gives relief against sin, which we must have
some sense of, before we apply our selves to the grace of God for Pardon, we
must see something in our selves that wants a pardon, and which we are willing
to repent of and forsake in Case of a pardon, Repentance is as true an effect
of Faith, as Pardon and Comfort, Faith first brings a sinner to Christ under
some hope of Pardon, and then busies it self in working Repentance, in order to
a comfortable sense of Pardon. The Spirit lets in some sense of Gospel Grace
tendered unto sinners, and affects the heart with it, as very desirable, as a
very seasonable offer, by no means to be slighted, the Soul begins to be taken
with it, conceives some hope from it, and this is the beginning of Faith, and
with our first Faith Light comes in giving us some Gospel Conviction of sin in
order to Repentance, I call it a Gospel Conviction, because it is wrought by
means of the Gospel, all after acts of Faith and Repentance have their rise
from this first work, which brings me to the second Point, viz.

That Faith is not only joined with Repentance in the first production of it,
as has been showed, but in all the subsequent acts of it ever after; which I
make out thus. Faith and Repentance do constantly refer to each other in their
several actings, Faith to Repentance, and Repentance to Faith; he that
believes, repents because he believes, and he that repents, believes because he
repents, i. e. as Faith is the cause of Repentance, so Repentance is the reason
of every particular act of Faith put forth upou Christ for Pardon, it is
impossible to make up the full sense of an act of Faith on our part, if you
fetch not the reason of it from Repentance: Why do we go to the Physician, is
it not because we are sick, weary and faint ready to die of such a Disease: So
why does a weary Soul come to Christ, is it not to be eased of his Burden? that
insupportable burden of sin that is ready to sink him into Hell.

If Faith and Repentance be thus always joined together, does it not follow
that we are justified by our Repentance as well as by Faith? I Answer, No.
Though we are not saved without Repentance, it does not therefore follow that
we are justified by our Repentance; but some to make good this Assertion have
coined many subtle distinctions, relating to both. Before I give a particular
reply to this, let me say something in general. Religion may be considered,
either in its primitive purity and simplicity, as it was laid down in the
Fundamental Principles of it, by Christ and his Apostles.

Or as it has since been drawn through the various Discourses, Reasonings and
Writings of Men for so many Centuries past, this has so much overcharged
Religion with so many nice distinctions, intricate questions, and endless
disputes, that it seems to be quite another thing then it was in the Apostles
days: The best way is to return to the primitive simplicity of the Gospel,
especially in judging of Fundamentals, which are plainly and clearly laid down
there in Terms very intelligible.

Though Faith be the Gift of God, and is given of mere Grace but to a few, yet
all who live under the Light of the Gospel may know what they ought to believe,
which will render their unbelief more inexcusable; did we dwell more upon what
is plainly revealed as fundamentally necessary to Salvation, we should better
discern, by the light of those Fundamentals, the just consequences of them, in
any deductions from them, which may not be so particularly and expressly spoken
unto in Scripture.

But now to answer the query whether we may not be said to be justified by our
Repentance, as well as by Faith, since we are not saved without Repentance?

Answ. There is a great deal of difference between Justification and Salvation,
Salvation includes all qualifications belonging to that state, Justification
lets us into that state; gives us right to Life from whence spring all
Qualifications becoming that Life. Besides, Saving Graces are so called, not
that they are the Causes of Salvation, but because they accompany it, we cannot
be saved without them. Faith it self as a Grace inherent in us, is no
meritorious Cause of our Justification; it is that which carries us out of our
selves to Christ for Righteousness upon the account of which we are justified
in the sight of God, when we say we are justified by Faith, we don't mean we
are justified by any thing in our selves, we cannot understand it so, but the
contrary, that we must be beholding to Christ for all. He that receives all
from another, gives nothing to himself, he does indeed apply to himself, to his
own use and benefit, what is freely given to him by another, but he cannot in
any propriety of Speech be said to ascribe any thing to himself, or to owe
himself thanks for what he receives from another: Faith in its justifying act
does not look to it self as our grace, but unto Christ as our Righteousness,
the inherent grace of Faith is not our justifying Righteousness, though it lead
us out to him who is; Faith is the hand, but Christ is the gift; nay the hand
it self is the gift of God, as well as that which is put into it: God gives us
not only what we believe, but he gives us to believe; the habit and act of
faith are both from God, that he that glories may glory in the Lord only: And
if it be so with faith, if that be shut out from being any part of our
justifying Righteousness, 'twill hold true much more in all other saving graces
that spring from faith, whether Hope, Love, Fear, Repentance, etc. Repentance
proves our Faith to be saving, such a faith as gives us an Interest in Christ,
faith adds nothing to the Righteousness of Christ, but applies it as it is, it
only gives us an Interest in it, and makes it ours by virtue of the Promise
tendering it to us, by receiving the Promise we have a sure interest in the
thing promised, and may ever after count it our own, and if we are not
justified by our graces themselves, much less by our good works, which are the
fruits and issues of them, we must resolve all our graces into faith, and faith
it self into Christ and his Righteousness before we can be clear in the matter
of our Justification.

4. The real distinction that is between them notwithstanding this necessary
Connection.

Faith and Repentance are frequently joined together in Scripture, and
sometimes each of them singly put for the whole work of Conversion, and then
they do always include each other, and imply the whole work of grace in the
Soul, as Luke 13. 5. Luke 15. 10. Acts 3. 19. Acts 11. 18. Though they cannot
be separated, yet they may be distinguished, not only nominally but really;
they are spoken of ( Act. 20. 21.) as two distinct things, as Faith and Hope
are inseparable, yet two distinct Graces, so it is with Faith and Repentance,
they grow together as different Branches from the same Root that bears and
feeds them both, they are the two Vital Constituent parts of a Christian, which
have their distinct Offices and Influences: Repentance is the same in Principle
with Faith, though they receive different denominations, from the different
objects and occasions about which they act: A principle of Grace is that
immortal Seed, or that Spirit that is born of the Spirit; the fruits of the
Spirit are not the Spirit it self, but something produced by him; all Graces
are the fruits of the Spirit and are specified by their different objects: All
Graces are but so many expressions of that holy Disposition, that is wrought in
us by the Holy Ghost. To Repent of Sin is as true Holiness as not to sin at
all; a sinner has no other way to express his Love to Holiness, than by a
declared Hatred of his Sins.

They differ in their Objects, faith as justifying, has Christ's Righteousness
for its Object, Repentance has man's unrighteousness for its Object; as Faith
acts upon Christ for an Interest in his Righteousness, so Repentance acts
toward God, acknowledging our own Unrighteousness and bewailing it, we cannot
rejoice in the Righteousness of Christ, till we mourn for our own sins; Christ
reconciles God to us, by the atonement offered, 2 Cor. 5. 20, 21. and us to
God by working Repentance in us, who were Enemies to him in our Minds by wicked
works, Col. 1. 21, alienated from the life of God, Col. 4. 18. This Enmity
against God and alienation from him, is removed by Repentance: Faith works
upwards to appease Gods Wrath, by holding up the Blood of Christ; Repentance
works downwards upon our selves, changing our Minds toward God, that we may be
conformable to his Will, and rebel no more against him. Besides,

All Graces do not employ, at least equally, the same Affections, there is more
joy and hope in Faith, more sorrow and fear in Repentance; faith lifts up and
comforts a guilty sinner upon one account, Repentance humbles him and lays him
low upon another account, filling him with godly sorrow for his sins.

5. Reasons why the Professors of this Age who are so much for Faith do mind
Repentance so little, are so seldom found in the Exercise of it.

1. Because they rest in general Notions of Faith, and of Justification by
Grace through Christ; they say they have faith, and think this will save them,
we may have right notions of faith in our Heads, and yet be under no real
actings of faith in our Hearts; we may be Orthodox in our Judgments, sound in
the Doctrine of Faith, and yet be strangers to the Grace of Faith; we may hold
the Truth, dispute for it, preach it up, maintain it in our Discourses, as our
Opinion, and yet be rotten at Heart for all this, under the power of unbelief,
if you know these things happy are ye if ye do them. Faith must be done as well
as talked of, it must be really acted by us in our own case, it is not the
doctrine of faith, but your faith in or according to that doctrine, that saves
you, the just shall live by his own faith, the doctrine of faith is an external
thing laid down in the letter of the word, but the grace of faith is an inward
living principle found only in the hearts of real Saints, this is that I am
inquiring after, and pressing upon you as that that will certainly produce
Repentance, Zach. 12. 10. It Is one thing to have a Notional Knowledge of the
doctrine of faith as contained in the letter of the word, another thing to be
under the power of the grace of faith as it passes through the heart in the
lively actings of it: Notions of things may be separated from those effects
that always attend the things themselves when they are in being, we may shake
and freeze under our notions of fire, but we cannot stand before fire it self
and not be warmed by it, were there more real faith; I mean of the grace of
faith, among professors, there would be more Repentance, let us not slatter our
selves in the good opinion we have of our faith, and of our supposed Interest
in Christ, it is all false, our faith is vain, and we are yet in our sins, if
Repentance do not accompany our faith: The visible neglect of Repentance in the
Professors of this age, has brought a reproach upon the doctrine of faith, and
caused it to be evil spoken of, that faith that does not sanctify, will never
justify, and without Repentance there can be no Sanctification: not that we
make Repentance any Meritorious Cause of Pardon, or that it is to be rested in
as any satisfaction for sin, only we affirm that justifying faith always works
Repentance.

2. Because they rest in a general Repentance, which they took up at their
first Conversion and that must serve all their lives long, it is enough they
have once repented, that work is over, they have done with it now, and care not
to return to it again: but because you have once repented, you must always
repent, you entered into Covenant with God for your whole lives, to repent of
every sin you should fall into, and shall we begin in the Spirit and end in the
Flesh.

3. Because they have long since reformed what was amiss in their Lives, and
refrained from the outward acts of those sins they lived in heretofore, all
this may be without any true Repentance, you say you have forsaken your sins
that is a gross mistake, for till you repent of them you have not forsaken them
in Gods account, but are still looked upon as those who justify your selves in
those very sins, if not why don't you repent of them, you always abide under
the guilt of that sin which you have not repented of, the turning of the heart
to God, can never be without Repentance; till then you still retain the good
opinion you had of your sins, your heart is set upon them still, nothing but
Repentance turns the heart another way. There can be no real Reformation of
Life, without a change of Heart; Men may for a spurt force themselves to an
outward Course of Holiness, but they can never hold it, the heart will go its
own way, and carry the man after it, nothing but repentance makes a man a
better man than he was before; a man is the same that ever he was till he
repents, then indeed he is another man, of another Mind.

4. Because they reckon all their particular sins among their Infirmities, and
therefore a slight Repentance will serve the turn, they think they will be
pardoned of Course to them, without any more ado.

I look upon it as a great Error, to hold that all sins committed in a state of
Grace are sins of Infirmity; Saints themselves may be guilty of wilful
presumptuous sins, and when they are, they must not think to shift them off as
common Infirmities. I grant, those grosser acts of sin, that a Saint may be
surprised into, do argue an infirm imperfect state, their state may be good
though imperfect, there may be some good thing in their Hearts toward God, when
they fall foul as David and Peter did; but I am not now inquiring what is in
their hearts, but what is in those grosser acts of sin, viz. Murder, Adultery,
and the like; I say there is nothing but Evil in them, they are all over and
throughout sinful; now, what is morally evil and sinful in its own nature
cannot properly be called a sin of Infirmity, because an Infirmity in the true
Notion of it, is the deficiency of a good Action, it is not so good as it should
be, absolutely evil in it self it is not, v. g. a Child of God prays but not
so fervently as he should, he hears the Word, but not so attentively as he
should; he believes in Christ, but not so firmly, so strongly, so steadfastly as
he would, this is his Infirmity, here the action it self, or the thing done, is
for the substance and matter of it good in it self, what God has commanded, but
when we do that which is materially Evil in its own nature, and forbidden by
God, this is more than an Infirmity, the whole action is naught; it is not a
weak action, but a wicked one. He that is an infirm man, is a living man; a
dead man is more than infirm, he has no life at all in him that is capable of
infirmity, if a Child of God should swear, be Drunk, or commit Whoredom, etc. I
would not say as some do, Oh the Infirmities of the Saints, but I would say oh
the Wickedness, the Leudness of the Saints; you will think these hard words, hard
things must have hard words, they that do well shall hear well, and they that
do ill must hear ill: Sin is not the less sinful because a Godly Man commits
it, it falls under greater Aggravations in him, than in another; there may be
some good thing in his heart, but there is nothing in these sinful acts but
what is morally Evil and abominably wicked. This should awaken us to
Repentance, are there not sins even mong us against the Lord our God?

6. The Application.

Repentance being the plainest and surest Evidence of Saving Faith, let us be
much in the exercise of this Grace: We should repent as often as there is new
matter for Repentance, I do not say we should always be grieving and mourning
for the same sin; Repentance may have its perfect work, in reference to some
particular sin, which God has sufficiently humbled us for. There is a time to
set broken bones, we may rejoice in the Cure, in that Ease and Rest that God
gives us, when he speaks peace to us: By believing we enter into Rest, till
some new sin disturb our rest, and then Repentance is to be renewed: By a new
sin I don't mean common unavoidable Infirmities, but some grosser wilful
Miscarriage: We ought to be humbled under our Infirmities, to confess them, and
so to pass on by a present act of Faith, into our wonted serenity and peace of
Conscience not doubting but God will overlook them for Christ's sake. Faith is
not so put to it, does not labor so much to take in the, pardon of them, as it
does and must do to obtain the pardon of grosser sins, which put the Soul at a
greater distance from God, then common Infirmities do, which are pardoned of
Course to Believers upon their humble acknowledgement of them, but in case of
any particular wilful sin, we must renew our Repentance in a more solemn
manner, and afflict our souls for it, how long God may keep us mourning, before
he restore to us the joy of our Salvation, must be left to him who knows when
to administer comfort to us, in the fittest season: When we are about this
work, it is good to reflect upon former sins already pardoned, there sinfulness
appears through the Pardon. We may join our old scores to this new reckoning,
and carry over all to the present Account, that having the sun Total before us,
we may bewail the late addition we have made to it: When we see how high it
rises, every new offense receives an aggravation, from so many that went
before, it is some Extenuation of a Fault to say, it is the first time; but
frequent relapses into the same sin do heighten the guilt of it, and in such
Cases there is nothing but Repenting, or perishing.

The more you are in the Exercise of this Grace of Repentance, the less
inclinable will you be to any sin: I am persuaded were the Devil sure you would
Repent, he would not be so forward to Tempt you to any sin, nothing does so
enrage the Devil, as the Repentance of the Saints, could he keep them always in
that Mind, they are in, in the hour of a prevailing Temptation, he might Glory
over them, but when they come to themselves, and consider better of it, how do
they inveigh against the Tempter, and cry down the sin as an abominable
Practice, and what does the Devil get by this, he loses more by their
Repentance then ever he got by their Sin, he is laid open as an Impostor, as a
Deceiver; the Repentance of the Saints is the greatest Torment to the Devil
before his time that can be; as there is joy in Heaven at the Conversion of a
Sinner, so there is no small sorrow in Hell upon the same Account.

You cannot Honor God more than by a Daily Repentance, thereby you vindicate
your holy Profession, from giving the least countenance to sin; were the people
of God more ashamed of sin, the wicked of the World would glory less in it,
they would begin to blush with you, and hang down their heads for doing that
which is so openly decry'd by all good men, good men are greatly wanting in the
open Profession of their Repentance, if you did mourn for sin more, others
would rejoice in it less.

FINIS.
Books Printed and Sold by Tho. Cockeril, at the Three Legs in the Poultrey,
over against the Stocks-Market.
THE Works of the late Learned Divine Stephen Charnock. Two Vol. Folio.

Annotations upon all the Books of Old and New Testament; by Matt. Pool. 2 Vol.
Folio.

The History of Philosophy, containing the Lives, Opinions, etc. of
Philosophers; by Tho. Stanley, Esquire Folio.

The complete Works of Mr. Isaac Ambrose. Folio.

The Morning Exercise at Cripplegate, or several Cases of Conscience
practically resolved by sundry Ministers. The 4th. Edition, 4to.

A Supplement to the Morning Exercise at Cripplegate, or several more Cases of
Conscience practically resolved by sundry Ministers. The second Edition, 4to.

The Court of the Gentiles; Part 3. The Vanity of Pagan Philosophy
demonstrated, etc. by Theophilus Gale. 4to.

The Rise, Race and Royalty of the Kingdom of God in the Soul of Man, opened in
several Sermons, by Peter Sterry, sometimes Fellow of Emanuel College in
Cambridge, and late Preacher of the Gospel in London. 4to.

Speculum Theologiae in Christo: Or, a view of some Divine Truths, etc. By
Edward Polhil of Burwash in Sussex, Esquire 4to.

Geography rectified: Or a Description of the World in all its Kingdoms,
Provinces, Countries; etc. The second Edition enlarged, with above thirty
sheets more in the Description and about 20 new Maps. By Robert Morden, 4to.

Large Octavo's.
THE Nature, Powers, Deceit, and Prevalency of the Remainders of In-dwelling
sin in Believers; Together with the ways of its working, and means of
prevention, opened, evinced and applied; with a Resolution of sundry Cases of
Conscience thereunto appertaining.

Precious Faith considered in its Nature, Working and Growth. By Edward Polhil
of Burwash in Sussex.

Christus in Cord: Or, the Mystical Union between Christ and Believers
considered, in its resemblances, bonds, seals, privileges and marks. By the
same Author.

Armatura Dei; or a preparation for suffering in an Evil Day, showing how
Christians are to bear Sufferings, and what Graces are requisite thereunto:
suited for all good Christians in this present time. By the same Author.

The Faithfulness of God Considered, and cleared in the great events of his
World; or a second part of the fulfilling of the Scripture. By the Author of
the first Part.

A Renunciation of several Popish Doctrines because contrary to the Doctrine of
Faith of the Church of England. By. R. R. B. D.


