A COLLECTION Of Curious Original PAINTINGS, And other fine Copies, designed by
the Best Masters; being fine Ornaments for Houses, and neat to adorn Ladies
Closets.

Will be sold by AUCTION (or who bids most) on Tuesday, the 8th of July, 1690,
as also on Wednesday and Thursday following, at the King's-Head-Tavern, near
the Bridge-foot, in Southwark.

The Sale beginning exactly at Four of the Clock every Afternoon.

Catalogues of which, are distributed at the Crown Coffee house in the Strand:
At the Royal Coffee-house in Cornhil, over against the Exchange: At Mr.
Mercer's Coffee-house, over against the King's Bench, in Southwark: At* Mrs.
Povey's Coffee-house, over against King- Edward's-Stairs, in Wapping; and at
the place of Sale; where the said Paintings may be viewed at any time before
the Sale: As also on the days of Sale, in the Forenoon.

Conditions of SALE.
I. THat he or she who bids most is the Buyer, and if any difference do arise,
which the Company cannot decide, then the Painting shall be exposed to Sale
again, and the Sale decided by the Sales-man. II. That the Money for the
Paintings is to be paid when bought, or else at the place of Sale, within three
days after the Sale is ended. III. That all Gentlemen, Ladies, or others, after
the buying any Painting, and do not pay at the time of the Sale, will be
pleased to give in their Names, or places of Abode. IV. That no Person is to
bid less than Sixpence a time, for any Lot exposed to Sale, etc. V. That the
Paintings may be viewed on Saturday and Monday, and every Forenoon, before the
Afternoon Sale, by any that please to repair to the place of Sale.
PAINTINGS.
1 KIng William in little finely painted 2 A whole length posture made for Sir
P. Lilly 3 Two prints of Seaports upon board 4 2 more upon board 5 3 Landskips
of Parrel upon board 6 A Sea Fight upon board 7 a Print of Christ upon the
Cross on board 8 a Print of Lot and his Daughters on Board 9 A Lady and a
Child well painted 10 A Sea* piece with a Turkish Galley 11 a Print of St. Paul
Shipwrack'd on board 12 6 Prints of Land fights upon board 13 A fine Landscape
curiously painted in water Colors on board 14 The 10 Commandments curiously
written and finely colored 15 The City of Amsterdam 16 A Map of the World 17
An Italian Woman's head finely painted 18 a small Water-fall 19 A man's head 20 A
small Landscape 21 Another Ditto 22 a woman's head in little well done 23
Mercators Map of the world on Cloth colored 24 A Map of Europe 25 a large Map
of the Counts of Kent on cloth, curiously colored 26 A large Draft of the
City of Jerusalem on Cloth colored 27 A Sea-plat for Russia 28 a Sea-plat of
the Channel 29 Diana's head finely painted 30 A Mountebank 31 A Landscape by
Flyer 32 a Fruit-piece 33 a Battle well painted 34 The Holy Family 35 Susanna
and the two Elders 36 A fine Landscape 37 a Man a Smoking 38 King William in
little on board 39 12 Roman Emperors heads 40 a Landscape with a Fountain 41 a
Man and Woman painted on board 42 a Seaport in Holland curiously drawn on
board 43 2 Boys at play, curiously done by a great master 44 King Charles the
Second and his Queen 45 A Landscape with Fish^rmen catching fish 46 The Valiant
woman Judith, paint. on board by an Ital. 47 an original landscape, by M^. Van
Deist 48 a Sea-piece by a Dutch master 49 a large piece, containing 9 Cities in
Europe on Cloth 50 King William and Queen Mary in Oval frames 51 a wainscot
Cubboard an Original 52 a Satyr eating pottage 53 a large Landscape with Figures
and an House 54 a large Fruit-piece 55 The Fire of London well painted 56 a
Droll with a Woman Piping 57 Mary Magdalen after an Italian master, well
painted 58 a Sea-piece o^ Vander Velden 59 a Frost-piece by a Dutch Master 60 a
Landscape by the same hand 61 Some Soldiers plundering the Boors 62 a
Stag-hunting 63 a curious piece of two naked women, with a Glass before them 64
Venus and Adonis finely painted by a Dutch master 65 a Lady curiously painted
by an Italian master 66 an Original piece of Still life, with a Book, etc. 67
King William and Queen Mary in rich Gilt Frames 68 an old Usurer and his Wife
finely painted 69 Storming a Fort by the Venetians 70 The City of Jerusalem on
Cloth, in a gilt Frame 71 a Madona after Ruben 72 a piece of Conversation
finely painted 73 a Woman Playing on a Violin, an original by Mr. Boon 74 King
Saul after Titian 75 The Wisemen of the East offering to our Savior 76 a piece
of Boys by Mr. Scot 77 Dobson the Painters Head 78 a large Stag Hunting 79 an
Original Fruit-piece, curiously painted by Boudan 80 a Fire piece by Vander
Velden 81 a Polonian Princess 82 a Landscape on board, with the Front of an
House 83 a large piece of a naked Venus sleeping 84 a Surgeon after David
Teniers 85 Maids a Milking 86 a Counselors Head done by the life 87 a large
Landscape, finely painted by a Dutch master 88 King William and Queen Mary
finely painted 89 a piece of books well painted by Van Hatton 90 a curious
Landscape with Beasts 91 an Empresses Head finely painted 92 a Landscape with a
Ruin 93 an Old man's Head by Van Dyck 94 a Baudy-house by de Castro 95 a whole
length picture, finely painted by the life 96 an Original piece of Vander Vene,
being a Dancing about a May-poll 97 The Learned Dr. Hewet, who was Beheaded on
Tower Hill, for his Loyalty to King Charles the First 98 King Edward the Sixth
finely painted after Holbein 99 King Charles the Second, a half length by Dixon
100 Queen Dowager curiously painted after Houseman 101 a large Hunting-piece
102 a large piece of Birds and Dogs 103 a comical conservation by Brower 104 a
Guard-house of Soldiers 105 an half length of a young Lady 106 a large
Sea-storm, an Original, by Sailmaker 107 an old Head of the Life, by an Italian
master 108 an Original Landscape, by Mr. Van Did 109 another of the same
master, on board 110 Fortune in a Shell, sailing on the Sea 111 The late Queen
Mary, finely painted 112 a Partridge hanging, finely painted by a great master
113 a prospect of Hampton Court, an Original of Mr. Knife 114 a Landscape finely
painted, an Original of Mr. Christian 115 a curious Water-fall, with a House,
by a Dutch master 116 a Boy and a Girl on board 117 Prince Rupert, an Original
by old Fuller 118 a Dead Child in a Bed 119 an Ecce homo, after an Italian 120
a prospect of the Thames and London Bridge, by a good hand 121 a small Landscape
122 King Charles the Second 123 a man's Head on Board, well done 124 a
Flower-piece finely painted 125 a small Landscape in a Black Frame 126 a
water-fall 127 Sr. Jonas Moors large map, of his survey of the Fens 128 a new
map of the world with Descriptions 129 a new map of the English Empire in
America 130 The city of Dunkirk 131 a Landscape an original by Vande Vaert 132 a
neat Landscape 133 Mary Magdalen finely done in water colors 134 a Landscape,
with a ruin 135 Another landscape by a Dutch master 136 a Droll-peice by
Haemskirk 137 a Boy a singing, in a round frame, well painted 138 The Oxford
Almanac 139 a large Landscape with a River 140 a Droll-piece, after Ostade 141
a curious piece of Italian Fruit 142 a Boys Head, by Raembrant 143 a Landscape,
by a Dutch master 144 K. Willi^m and Q. Mary, in rich carved Frames 145 a Dutch
woman keeping Shrovetide 146 The old Countess of Somersets Head, curiously
painted 147 an Original piece of Fish, by Robinson 148 a Sea-storm, well done
by a good master 149 a Droll-piece by a Dutch master 150 a man at Confession,
by Haemskirk 151 a Landscape by a Dutch master 152 a Madona curiously painted on
Copper 153 a naked boy a sleep, curiously painted in an Ebony frame 154 an
obscene piece 155 a Schoolmaster by Haemskirk 156 Two Rusticks a singing, by
Ditto 157 a man with an Owl upon his shoulders, an original, by old Boon 158 an
Original piece of Goats 159 a Landscape with a River and Cattle, curiously
painted 160 Flora curiously painted in a Gold frame 161 A Sea-calm by a good
master 162 King William and Queen Mary, in little, on Copper, by a Dutch
master, in rich carved Frames, after Gibbons 163 a large Frost-piece, with
slyders 164 a fine Landscape by a Dutch master 165 a Droll-piece after Tenier
166 Cephalus and Procris a story in Ovid 167 a little Boy finely painted after
Sir Peter Lilly 168 An Original landscape, by Mr. Edima 169 a curious large
landscape, an Original by Mr. Griffiere 170 Christ upon the Cross, curiously
painted by a great mast. 171 an original piece of Cattle, by Mammours 172 The
last Supper, curiously paint. by a Disciple of Rubens 173 a Woman Bathing her
self, painted by the life 174 a curious Drawing of a Sea port in Holland, an
original 175 a Boar-hunting of Hondius, 4 foot, 4 inches long, and 2 foot 11
inches high 176 an original piece of Flowers 177 Prince George, an half length,
finely painted 178 a large piece of Venus, Cupid, and Mercury, finely painted
179 K. William Landing in England, an original, by Hondius 180 King William and
Queen Ma^y, in Oval frames 181 a Droll after Ostade 182 a Dog after Lazaliere
183 an old Gentleman's head, by the life 184 a Crucifix after Van Dyck 185 The
flight to Egypt, the Figures by Col^nne, the Landscape by Van Deist 186 a large
piece of Mountains, with a Water-fall, by Pazer^ the Italian 187 an original
piece of Fruit, with a Cat 188 a Sea-piece, curiously painted by Percellus 189
Duke of Monmouth finely painted 190 a Landscape after Van Deist 191 King Charles
the Second, when restored to his Crown 192 Flora after an Italian master 193 K.
William and Q. Mary, in little, whole lengths 194 an Italian Landscape, by a
great master 195 a Fruit-piece 196 a Landscape neatly painted 197 a Friar
hearing confession, by Haemskirk 198 an original Landscape by Flyer 199 a Droll
after Brower 200 a Fruit-piece after Boudan 201 a Church finely drawn 202 a
curious Original Landscape, by Everbrodt 203 King Charles the Second and his
Queen, by old Boon 204 Our Lady giving suck, by an Italian 205 Venus and Cupid,
by a good master 106 The Offering of the three Kings to our Savior 207 Diana
and her Nymphs a Hunting 208 a neat Landscape 209 King William and Queen Mary,
in rich Gilt frames 210 a fine Landscape with a Windmill, an original 211 an
original piece of Haemskirk, a Man drinking Coffee 212 an orig. flower-piece by
Montingo, in rich carved frames 213 an Original Obscene piece 214 a piece of
Still-life, an original, by Van Bealing 215 an original Sea-piece, by Castro
216 an original Winter-piece, of Breughel 217 a Man with an Oyster, an
original, by Boon 218 Cupid curiously painted by Benning ton 219 King Charles
the Second, in a rich oval frame 220 a Sea-piece neatly painted 221 a fine
Landscape 222 a little battle neatly painted 223 Solomon's Judgment between the
two Harlots 224 Reynaldo and Armida 225 Cambyces and the u^just Judge 226 a
curious Sea-piece by Vander Velden 227 The Lady Whitmores Head, by the life 228
a Sea-storm, by a good master 229 a Family-piece, a Woman giving her child
Suck, an orig. 230 a sketch of a Madona, by Fuller 231 The Lord Straffords
head, curiously painted 232 an original Hunting-piece of Castile 233 Two
Rusticks smoking Tobacco, by Haemskirk 234 a Moon-piece by Van Deist 235 a
Dancing-piece, painted by a good maste^ 236 an original Fruit-piece 237 an
Obscene piece, by a Dutch master 238 Envy, curiously painted by Fuller 239 a
Woman nea^ly painted, by an Italian master 240 a little Landscape on copper, by
Teniers 241 Five pieces of Paintings on boards, of Shipping and Yatchts 242 a
curious Sea-piece on Cloth, with Gilt Rowls and Ledges 243 The new survey of
Oxfordshire 244 a curious Map of Hungary, with the principal Cities about it
245 The new survey of the County of Kent 246 a Map of New Jersey in America,
with Descriptions 247 a large draught of New Foundland 248 St. Katherine 249 a
Flower-piece 250 a Fruit-piece 251 Sir Thomas Moor finely painted after Holbien
252 The Lady Newport 253 a little Landscape neatly painted 254 an half length of
the Earl of Doncaster, after Kneller 255 a Sketch of King Charles the First, by
Walcot 256 a Landscape, by Mr. Van Did 257 an Original Landscape, by an Italian
master 258 The History of Sampson and Dalilah, by Rycaut 259 a Boy and a Girl,
painted on Board 260 an Ox-Head, as big as the Life, finely painted 261 a
Landscape with Cattle, an Original by a great master 262 a Sea storm, by
Percellus 263 a Dutch Family, where the Woman is giving her Child suck 264 a
man at Confession by old Haemskirk 265 a woman at Confession by the same master
266 an Obscene piece by a Dutch master 267 a curious Sketch of Paris, and the 3
Goddesses by a great master 268 a woman's head, on copper, by Cornelius Johnson
269 a Gentleman playing on a Violin, an Original 270 a Gentlewoman playing on a
Cittern, an Original 271 an Original Sea-piece by Vander Velden 272 King James
the 2d. in little, by old Boon 273 a very fine battle 274 a large crucifix
neatly painted 275 a large piece curiously painted, a story in Ovid 276 K.
Charles the 2d. when Young, a sketch by Van Dyck 277 a large prospect of
Hobekin in Flanders, finely painted 278 a naked Venus, curiously painted after
Titian 279 an Original piece of cattle by Mummors 280 a large Original
landscape, by Mr. Van Deist 281 Windsor Castle, an original, by Mr. Knife 282 an
Original fire-piece, by an Italian master 283 a large Droll-piece, con^ain. 17
Figures, by. Haemskirk 284 a curious original piece of cattle, by Mummors 285
an Original landscape by Mr. Van Deist 286 The Duchess of Grafton, finely
painted, by a good mast. 287 an Italian Landscape, an Original 288 a large
Original Landscape by Loten 289 K. William and Q. Mary, in o^al Frames, with
Glasses before them 290 a man and woman singing ballads by old Haemskirk 291
Susanna and the 2 Elders, an Original by Marshal 292 a piece of Still-life, an
Original by Van Balen 293 a curious Original Landscape, by M^. Griffiere 294
Danaae and Jupiter in a golden shore, ^^nely painted 295 King Charles the First
on Horseback, after Van Dyke 296 a Surgeon dressing a wound, by an I^alian
297 a large History-piece in Ovid, an original, by an Ital. mast. 298 a piece
of cattle, an Original, of Outenbrook 299 a large piece of a man at Confession,
by Haemskirk 300 Dutch men fighting, by Haemskirk 301 a man feeling an Hen,
finely painted by old Boon 302 an Original of Abraham and Hagar, on board, by
Blomaert 303 a Landscape with a Shepherd and Shepherdess 304 The old Earl of
Leicester, on copper by Cornelius Johnson 305 The old Earl of Pembrook on
copper, by Ditto 306 a piece of cattle, by Mr. Van Deist 307 Colonel Fieldings
picture, with a Glass before it 308 a Ladies picture with a Glass before it,
very fine 309 a Baudy-house, by Haemskirk 310 King Ahashuerus and Q. Hester, an
original by Mr. Boon 311 a naked Venus, curiously painted by a great master
312 a Cornucopia after Firene 313 a Young Ladies head, done by the Life, well
painted 314 Mrs Broom the famous paintress 315 A curious Landscape, on copper,
in a rich carved frame 316 Another of the same finely done 317 King James
finely painted 318 a Boy and Fruit well painted 319 A curious Print of Madona
in a frame 320 a Young man's head finely painted by the Life 321 Two Prints of
Drolls in frames 322 The Marriage feast, finely colored, in water colors 323
Venus a sleep, in a gilt frame 324 A Droll-p^ece, finely done by a Dutch mast.
in a gilt frame 325 Another Droll piece by the same hand 326 an orig.
flower-piece of Montingo, in a rich carved frame 327 Prince George, finely
painted, in a rich gilt Frame 328 A Roman Ruin, by a good master 329 A Yatch,
by Sailmaker 330 an Original piece of Bull-baiting by Hondius 331 Hercules
betwixt good and evil, well painted 332 K. W. and Q. M., in little, well
painted by a great mast. 333 Seneca's head, by a good hand 334 an Original
Landscape 335 an Original still-life of Leermans 336 An old Dog, finely painted
by Hondius 337 Mary Magd^len, by an Italian master 338 King William in little
well painted 339 a Ruin, curiously painted by Griffiere 340 a Frog-piece, by a
good master 341 an orig. print of the battle of the Amazons on cloth 342 a
Boy, with singing Birds, well painted 343 Sampson and Dalilah, after Van Dyke
344 an Ita^^an Landscape, an original by Mr. Pazero 345 A market woman, an
Original 346 A large Kitchen-piece, an original

