Dr. COLBATCH'S Relation OF THE CURE Of a Person bitten by a VIPER, etc.

Books published by Dr. John Colbatch.
FOur Treatises of Physic and Surgery, viz. I. A. Physico-medical Essay
concerning, Alkaly and Acid, proving Alkalies to be the Cause of all or most
Distempers. II. Farther Considerations by way of Appendix to the said Essay.
III. Novum Lumen Chirurgicum, or a new Light of Surgery, being a Discovery
of a safer and speedier Cure of Wounds than hitherto practiced. Illustrated
with Experiments in Flanders in 1694. IV. A Vindication of the Novum Lumen from
many unjust Aspersions.

A Treatise of the Gout: Wherein both its Cause and Cure are demonstrably made
appear. To which are added, some Medicinal Observations concerning the Cure of
Fevers, etc. by the means of Acids.

The Doctrine of Acids further asserted, in answer to Dr. Tuthil of Dorchester.
With some things relating to the History of Blood, and an Attempt to prove what
Life is, and by what it is supported. With an Account of the Case of Edmund
Turner, Esquire etc.

A RELATION Of a very Sudden AND EXTRAORDINARY CURE of a Person Bitten BY A
VIPER, By the Means of ACIDS. Together with Some REMARKS upon Dr. Tuthill's
Vindication of his Objections against the DOCTRINE of ACIDS. Wherein are
contained several things in order to the further clearing of the said Doctrine.

By JOHN COLBATCH, a Member of the College of Physicians.

LONDON. Printed for Dan. Brown without Temple Bar; Abel Roper at the
Black-Boy, and Tho. Leigh at the Peacock in Fleetstreet. School.

To the unknown Dr. COLBATCH, Upon his several Most ingenious Tracts in
PHYSIC, Especially that of ALKALIES and ACIDS.
PHYSIC for Ages past has gropt her way
In Paths of Darkness, without any Ray
Of certain Truth, and still was going astray:
When COLBATCH rose, who with reviving Light
Dispelled the Clouds, and chased away the Night.
By him the important Secret is revealed,
Through Fraud and Ignorance so long concealed:
No sordid hopes of Gain e're swayed his Mind,
His only Aim's the Good of Human kind;
Who first with Pains and Labor dug the Oar,
Then freely gave us all the Golden Store.
Let Juggling Quacks grown envious of thy Name,
Combine together to obscure thy Fame;
Such are the Myst'ries which thou do unfold,
They Will write thy Name in Characters of Gold:
To Thee alone Mankind's indebted more,
Than t'all the Doctors that have gone before.
J. C. junior.

TO THE READER.
I Have in all my Writings taken Truth for my Guide, as being the Soul of an
Undertaking, and a Duty which ought to be stipulated by every Writer, both with
God and Man; and this I may say that I have not wanted courage to speak it, nor
means to discern it.

The opposition I have met with has been almost insupportable, Truth at its
first appearance never wanting multitudes of Opposers; but (thanks to God) the
Eyes of the World begin to be opened, and the new Doctrine I have advanced has
gained so much ground, that few Authors in their own life time, have scarce
seen the like. This unwonted and unexpected Encouragement that I have met with,
has filled me with such a sense of Gratitude, that at present I am not able to
express; neither can I better manifest it, than by prosecuting the Work I have
begun, with all the diligence and industry that my Nature is capable of
bearing, and this I do oblige my self to do.

Reason is the true Touchstone by which we ought to examine every thing; and
according as any thing does agree or disagree with it, so we ought either to
embrace or reject it. I remember that that Prodigy of Nature, the learned Mrs.
Ann Baynard, did once, in my hearing, say, That Reason was that eternal
Standard, which God Almighty, as a Ray of his own Image, has impressed on Man,
to the election or dislike of what may hurt or succor him; and where this is
raised and improved, makes him an Angel, but where sunk and depressed, a
grovelling Brute.

I do protest I have never yet advanced any thing before I had weighed it in
the Balance of the best Reason that God has given me; and for fear lest Reason
alone should deceive me, and thereby suffer me to impose upon the World, I have
always joined experience to it; so that both being combined together, I could
not well be deceived my self, nor lead others, into errors. And I am apt to
believe, that if People would but lay aside their Prejudices, and consult their
Reasons, I should not have one Enemy left. But to my no small grief, I have
heard some Physicians of no ordinary reputation, positively declare, That
Authority, and not Reason, was what they depended upon. Of these men I have
little hopes; but since they will not hearken to my Reasons, let them but inquire
into the success of my Practice; and if they find, that by the means of Acids I
am able to cure those Distempers, which are not to be cured by Alkalies, I hope
it will at last cure them of their Skepticism.

From one Generation of Physicians to another it has constantly been handed
down, that the Gout was a Distemper not to be cured; and in spite of all the
Noise that the last Age has made about experimental Philosophy, no man ever
went out of the common Road to try whether this Position were true or false.
But now it does evidently appear, that the Gout is not such a Fury, but that it
may with ease be overcome by the means of proper and powerful Acids; the truth
of which there is scarce any part of England, but there is one or other that
can experimentally attest. Now if it does evidently appear that my Predecessors
have been so notoriously ignorant, as to the Cause and Cure of so common a
Distemper, it is not unreasonable to believe that they have been so in other
Cases, nay it is most certain they have been so: and there are a great many
honest Gentlemen of the Faculty who are not ashamed to acknowledge it, and that
not only in words, but by the alteration of their Method of Practice: tho there
are another sort, who of late have with good success made use of Acids
plentifully, and at the same time have given me all manner of opprobrious
Language: but I thank God I am out of the reach of their malice, and though
they persist in their ingratitude, yet I shall continue my endeavors to serve
them to the utmost of my power.

I have the same just Apology to make at this time as formerly, viz. That being
in a continual hurry of Business, I have not been able to perform things with
that niceness and, exactness that I should otherwise have done; and I know
there are a great many who will read these Papers with no other design than to
find faults: but the Barks of these Critics will never disturb me, because I
have undertaken nothing but with a real design to serve Mankind; and I doubt
not, but in spite of all the imperfections that are to be met with, there are
a great many Candid, Ingenious men, who will make as favorable a construction
of this, as they have done of my former Undertakings. And if men of Candor are
but pleased, I care not what the envious Critics say.

Villers-street York-Buildings, May 1. School. JO. Colbatch.

A Relation of a very sudden and extraordinary Cure of a Person Bitten by a
Viper, by the means of Acids.
ON Saturday, March the twenty sixth, one Mr. Stringer, a Chemist in
Villers-street in York-buildings, was seeing a Collection of Rarities, which
were exposed to public view in Stocks-market; amongst other things there was a
live Viper Kept in a Glass of Bran. The person who showed the Collection, upon
some inducement or other, took the Viper out of the Glass to show Mr. Stringer;
but handling him more rudely than he ought to have done, enraged the Viper, and
he bit him by the Finger; and from the place into which the Tooth entered, there
issued forth a few drops of Blood: it was just above the upper joint of the
fore Finger where the Tooth entered.

At first the man, whose name is Philipson, made nothing of it, but in a little
time his Finger swelled and pained him exceedingly; upon which by the direction
of somebody, a Hot Iron first, and afterward Venice Treacle and Oil of Vipers
were applied to the part; but the symptoms not abating by these methods, Mr.
Stringer advised him to seek out for further help: he perceiving that Mr.
Stringer had some knowledge of the matter, desired his assistance; upon which
Mr. Stringer sent to Mr. Francis Molt a Chemist, for some Salt of Vipers; but
Mr. Molt not being at home, and that not being to be had, he sent to another
place for some dulcified Spirit of Niter, a large quantity of which he gave him
in Claret, and with the rest he embrocated his Finger and Hand, which at the
present afforded him some relief, he being then in extreme Agonies, and had
such a trembling in his Hand and Arm as is scarce conceivable. But in a little
time the symptoms returning, the dulcified Spirit of Niter not being powerful
enough to overcome so subtle a Poison, Mr. Stringer again pressed him to seek
for further help: upon which he told Mr. Stringer that he had a Brother in Pal
Mal, who was an Apothecary, to whom he would apply himself for assistance and
advice: so to his Brother he went in a Coach, Mr. Stringer accompanying him.

When he came to his Brothers, the symptoms were so aggravated, that his
Brother was under very great concern for him, and proposed sending for Dr.
Sloane and several others; but Mr. Stringer mentioning me, he readily assented
to take my advice in the matter; upon which they got into the Coach, and drove
to Mr. Stringer's House, by which time the man was grown so weak that he could
scarce stand. After they had gotten him into a Room, they sent for me; but I
not being at home, Mr. Stringer sent for Mr. Alexander Small a Surgeon in New
Round Court, a young Man of great Honesty and Industry, and one whom I
frequently employ.

Mr. Small having never seen any thing of the like nature before, was at a
stand what to do; he first of all thought of scarifying the Finger, but when he
considered that the Tumor had extended it self even to his Shoulder, in which
part he had very acute Pains, and from the other symptoms that attended him,
concluding the Poison had dilated it self through the whole mass of Blood, he
altered his first resolution, and instead of scarification made use of the
following method. Before I give an account of which, I shall take notice of his
circumstances, as they were related to me, by Mr. Small, Mr. Stringer, and Mr.
Philipson Apothecary, the man's Brother. His Hand and Arm, as is before
related, were extremely swelled and inflamed, and full of pain; but the pain in
his Finger where the Bite was, and that in his Shoulder did much exceed the
pain in other parts; he had a great Vertigo or Giddiness, a Deliquium Animi or
Faintness, even to such a degree, that he could scarce sit without being held
in the Chair; an extraordinary and violent Strangury also attending him, with
cold sweats, and great disorders in his Stomach and Bowels, and his Countenance
turned extremely Yellow, and stretched out, almost, as dead. Mr. Small and Mr.
Stringer provided a good quantity of my Elixir Vitrioli, an account of which
and its preparation may be met with in the second Edition of my Essay of Alkaly
and Acid. With this Elixir Mr. Small embrocated the Fingers, Hand and Wrist for
near half an hour together, and two or three times in the said space he dipped
the end of the bitten Finger in plain Oil of Vitriol: in the interim he gave
him two or three Drams or more of the Elixir Vitrioli inwardly in a large
quantity of water, when the man finding a great propensity to vomit, Mr. Small
advised him to put his Fingir in his Throat and help it forwards; after he had
vomited plentifully, Mr. Small plied him afresh with the Elixir Vitrioli in
water: the quantity he took after his vomiting Mr. Small guesseth to be near,
if not quite, half an ounce.

In less than half an hour after Mr. Small came to him, all the symptoms,
except the swelling of his Hand and Arm, and that was sensibly lessened, were
totally vanished, and he able to walk from York-buildings to the Grecian
Coffee-house in Essex-buildings, to find me out to desire my further directions
in the matter. Now the violence of the symptoms being abated and gone, I
prescribed him more temperate Acids than those he had before taken, and that
had been applied to the affected parts.

Fol. Rutae Contus. manip. Duos

Rad. Angelicae Hispan. pull. Unc. Duas

Micar. Panis Albi Unc. quatuor

Aceti Acerrimi lib. duas

coquantur ad debitam consistentiam, cui add

Ol. Scorpion. Unc. duas. M. f.

Cataplasma.

Elix. Vitrioli Dracm. Duas

Sp. Vini Rect. Unc. Duas. m. f. Mixtura.

Fol. Rutae Manip. Unum

Rad. Serpentariae Virgin. Dracm. sex.

Angel. Hispan. Unc. Unam

Petasitidis Unc. Unam semis

Vini Albi, Aceti Acerrimi, ana lib. Unam

Infunde calide per horam and coletur, Sig. the Infusion.

Ol. Vitrioli Dull. per digest. fact.

Unc. semis,

Sig. Dulcified Oil of Vitriol.


I ordered the man to go to his Lodging, which was in Black Friars; and because
his Brother could not get the forementioned things ready under three or four
hours, I advised him as soon as he came home, to take three ounces of Treacle
Water, (in my opinion one of the best Medicines in the London Dispensatory) and
as soon as he had taken it, to go to Bed.

I ordered that the Cataplasm should be applied warm to the Hand and Arm as far
as the swelling reached, every six hours; and before the application of the
Cataplasm, that the parts should be well embrocated with the Mixture.

Of the Infusion he took four Ounces every four hours.

Whenever he was thirsty, I advised him to take twenty Drops of the Dulcified
Oil of Vitriol in a draught of White Wine and Water.

One Sunday morning about eleven a Clock I went to visit him, and when I came
to his Lodgings, I found Dr. Sloan with him; the Doctor said the method that
had been used was new, but that the Man was in a very good condition, and out
of all danger. He had slept well the whole night, and was not in the least
Feverish, neither had he the least disorder upon him, only a very small pain in
his Finger, the swelling of his Hand and Arm being greatly abated.

I ordered the continuing of his former method, the which I had no reason to
vary. But Dr. Sloan proposed, that if his Infusion should make him puke, as it
once had done, then in the room of it, he should at the same intervals take
half a dram of Virginian Snake Root in powder, drinking afterward two or three
ounces of Treacle-water, sweetened with Syrup of Gilliflowers; the which I
consented to, it no way thwarting the Methods that had before been taken.

At night I visited him again, and then found him as brisk and well as if
nothing had ailed him; the Infusion had not disagreed with him, and therefore
he took not the Powder of Snake Root; but I mixed the Treacle-water and Syrup
of Gilliflowers with the remaining part of the Infusion, and ordered him to
take four ounces of it morning and evening only, so long as it lasted.

The next day I visited him again, when I found him up and eating his Dinner
very heartily: I then ordered him to continue the use of the Cataplasm so long
as he found the least swelling in any part, and then dismissed him from my
care, there not being any more need of my further attendance.

A small swelling of his Finger continued for some time after, but without
trouble or pain.

I believe I may without vanity say, that considering the symptoms that
attended this man, which were as severe as possible, and he survive it, there
has not been a more extraor-dinary Cure wrought, nor such symptoms, raised upon
such an occasion, ever taken off in so short a space.

Now did the poison of Vipers consist in a Volatile Acid, as some would make us
believe, how is it possible for any one to conceive, that ever these dreadful
Symptoms could be so soon taken off, by giving more Acids, and that in so
extravagant a quantity as they were at first given by Mr. Stringer and Mr.
Small? Nay had the Poison been an Acid, it is very reasonable to believe, that
the more Acids they had given him, the more his Symptoms would have been
aggravated. Whereas, on the contrary, it plainly appears, that by the repeated
large quantities that they gave him, the Symptoms were so soon abated, that it
is almost past belief.

I cannot but observe, that in the strange relation that Dr. Stubbs gives of
the severe Symptoms that attended the man at Warwick that was bitten with an
Adder, the only thing that put him out of danger of losing his life, was the
Mixtura simplex that was given him, which is a most noble Acid; but this man
had not the Mixtura simplex given him in such quantities, or in any proportion
to the Acids that Mr. Philipson took; neither was his Cure either so
expeditious or so easy, as may be seen in Dr. Stubbs's relation of that matter.

The hot Iron was equally useless in this, as in that Case; and I am apt to
believe does never do any service at all, unless applied at the very instant of
time, that the bite is received.

Mr. Philipson did suck his Finger as soon as he was bit, and to that a certain
Physician attributes a great deal, and says it helped to expedite the Cure.
Whereas there are several Authors of undoubted credit, who have given relations
of persons that have died by so doing. And if this man had sucked out any great
quantity of the Poison with his mouth, how came the whole Hand and Arm to be so
immediately affected in so dreadful a manner?

Lemery in his Course of Chemistry does confess, that the Viper does abound
more with Volatile (Alkalious) Salts, than most other Creatures, and assigns a
very good reason for it, viz. from the extraordinary closeness of the Cutaneous
Pores, by which means they do not perspire so freely as other Creatures do. Nay
he confesses, that their Poison consists in the emission of a very great
quantity of Volatile Salts, at the time of their being enraged or angered; but
then to square himself with the vulgar Opinion, he tells us, that these
Volatile Alkalious Salts are instantaneously, at the time of their emission,
during the time of the Vipers short rage, turned into Acids of the most
volatile nature: this is such Jargon that nothing can be imagined like it. The
transmutation of Metals (even to those who are the greatest enemies to it) is a
mere jest to it.

If we look into Moses Charras his account of the German that was bit at his
house, after all the pother that he makes about his Volatile Salt of Vipers,
yet the Cure of that man was not performed without a great deal of hazard and
trouble, and the intermixture of a great many other Medicines, besides that of
the Volatile Salt, and those even Acids too, as Treacle-water, and slices of
Citrons with Sugar; but these Acids could not so effectually operate as
otherwise, it is probable, they would have done, by reason of their being
obtunded by the Volatile Salt, that was so frequently given him. But Hoffman in
his Clavis Pharmaceut. Schroderi, page 45, and 46. (as I have elsewhere
observed) does wholly attribute the Cure of this man to the Juice of Citrons,
after all other things had proved ineffectual; and ridicules Charras for
feigning the Poison to be an Acid: For if this were so (says Hoffman) how could
the juice of Citrons (which is an Acid) afford the Patient any relief?

I shall conclude this subject with this one observation, viz. That Physicians
get more reputation by keeping their Patients a long time in hand, and in
continual danger of their lives, than by quick and expeditious Cures. As for
instance:

One Physician has a Patient sick of a Fever; he takes such a method that his
Patient lies a month in continual danger and hazard, but at last recovers and
gets abroad; he then proclaims to every body the miraculousness of the Recovery
and the Danger he was in; upon which enquiry is made who was the Physician? he
immediately replies, the Famous Doctor such a one; and if he be a Person of any
Note, the Physician's work is done.

Another Physician has a Patient that has the very same Fever; this Physician
takes care to obviate all symptoms, and his Patient is abroad in eight or ten
days, and perhaps has never been in the least hazard of his Life. He (instead
of magnifying the skill of his Physician) tells his Friends, my Physician tells
me I have had a Fever, such as my Neighbor such a one had, but I believe he is
mistaken, mine could be no more than a Cold, which would have gone off had I
done nothing at all; and this is frequently the reward that honest men meet
with: and I doubt not but the same reflections will be made upon Mr.
Philipson's Cure, viz. that he would have been well in the same time, had
nothing at all been done to him.

Several Physicians have publicly said, that a prick with a Needle or the
point of a Lancet in some Parts would occasion as dreadful sympoms as this man
had. Supposing this to be true, I believe every body will allow that the taking
off of such Symptoms in so small a time, let the occasion of them be what it
will, is not ordinarily seen; and Dr. G. with the prick of a Lancet only, was
hurried away into another World, who yet was as likely a man to ^ake the
forementioned Objection, ^o undervalue any thing done either by me, or upon the
Basis of my Hypothesis, as any one now living.

I will not pretend to justify Mr. Stringers conduct in a great many things;
but he being a person greatly concerned in the first and most material part of
what was done for Mr. Philipson in order to his Cure, I could not in justice
but make use of his Name as he deserved. But for Mr. Small the Surgeon, he is a
man of an unblemished Reputation, and as hopeful a Young Man as any of his
Profession, the Testimony of whom only were sufficient upon such an Occasion;
but the Testimonies of Mr. Philipson the Apothecary and the man himself being
joined to his, makes the matter of fact unquestionable.

Remarks upon Dr. Tuthill's Vindication of his Objections against my Hypothesis.
Worthy Sir,
YOU are the only fair Antagonist that ever I have had to do with, and
therefore I ought to treat you with all the tenderness and respect imaginable.
You cannot but be sensible that I walk in an unbeaten path, and therefore if I
now and then am out of my way, I am the more excusable. It Is true, some few
other Physicians have heretofore used Acids in the Cure of several Distempers,
and the friendly correspondence I have had with some of them has been of great
use to me; but the assistance I have had from them as to the establishing of my
Principles, has been very inconsiderable. If I have made any false steps,
neither of them are obliged to answer for me, and if I have made any good ones,
(which I cannot forbear flattering my self that I have) I am sure it is owing
to my own labor and industry; and although I were not bred up at the University,
yet I have taken as much true pains to inform my self in all the Parts of
Physic, as perhaps any man ever did.

Let an Hypothesis be laid down with all the caution and care in the World, and
established upon never so certain a Foundation, yet there will still be some
room left for men to object; and he that will spend his time in answering all
trifling Objections, that may and will be raised against a thing that is new,
must lead but an uneasy life. But, Sir, I do not mention this in relation to
you, what Objections you have raised have seeming weight in them, and therefore
I have given my self the trouble to clear my self of them as well as I can.

I no where tell you, that I have said all that is to be said on the behalf of
my New Hypothesis, that requiring several years to perform. But I have already
said so much, that I believe I may boldly say, it is the best and clearest
Hypothesis in Physic now extant, and upon the foundation of which a man may
with greater certainty attempt the Cure of more Diseases, than upon any other
that has yet been made public.

The present business of my Profession, together with another Piece of Work I
am engaged in, viz. A General Treatise of Fevers, does so take up my time, that
I cannot make any very large Remarks upon your further Objections; and were it
not that I am willing to let the World see, that I have a greater esteem for
you, than for those Scoundrels that have heretofore appeared in Print against
me, for the present I should have been silent. For I must assure you, that I do
not think my Hypothesis at all shaken by what you have now said, there being
little or nothing more than what was contained in your first Objections.
However I shall transcribe your fresh Objections in the order I find them, and
make my Remarks in the same manner.

Reply. If you please to compare the Alkaline Spirit that you extracted from
the Consumptive Man's Blood, with that which the healthy Blood afforded, you will
find no great disproportion, especially if you consider the Caput Mortuum of
the sound Blood. For you say that it being broken into small Atoms, each Atom
appeared to be so many little Bodies of Fire in your Microscope. That there is
not the least spark of Fire in the Blood, I shall endeavor to prove anon;
wherefore it is not irrational to suppose that those lucid Atoms were of the
Family of Salts: And if Salts, then Alkaline, according to the Rules of your
own Hypothesis. But then (you reply) the Tabid Blood would have yielded much
more Alkaly, had not the great quantity of Luxuriant Alkaly been thrown upon
the Lungs. Methinks this looks a little strange. For if you remember the
Consumptive Person did sweat prodigiously. Now you make Sweat to be nothing but
an excrementitious Alkaly. If this Alkaly then was carried off in such
quantities, it could not well abound so much in the Lungs.

Remark. This Objection or Reply to my Answer is a tolerable good one, and not
without some seeming weight; but is what I am easily able to clear my self
from. For,

First, I my self have before taken notice of the small disproportion between
the two peoples Blood, and have assigned one very good reason for it; but
according to your wonted Candor, you have furnished me, with a second, and that
is the profuseness of the Sweats. Now if after these two great discharges of
Excrementitious Alkaly by sweating and spitting, the Blood at last abounds with
any quantity of Alkaly more than that of a sound person, it is, I think, very
reasonable to suppose, that the Blood's being at first overcharged with Alkaly
was the cause of the Distemper; and in very many Consumptive Cases it is usual
for the Patient to spit up perfect Chalk, and that in great quantities: Now if
the Blood were overcharged with Acids in Consumptions, the whole Mass passing
so frequently through the Lungs, could not fail of being sweetened by this
Chalky Alkaly. But on the contrary, I think it very plain, that the Tone of the
Lungs being spoiled, and the Blood abounding with Alkaly, a part of this
superabundant Alkaly is thrown upon them, and causes all the havoc that is
made by this Tyrannical Distemper; and this being a Distemper that most of my
Predecessors have died of, and of which I my self am apprehensive, has made me
not a little inquisitive into its Nature and Cause.

Secondly, That you might load the Blood of the healthy person with more Alkaly
than I take notice of, you pretend from my own Hypothesis (tho without reason)
to assign the cause of the Lucidness of the Atoms of the Caput Mortuum, to
proceed from the said Caput Mortuum's abounding with Alkalious Salts. Now I can
assure you, that the whole quantity of Caput Mortuum, which that Blood
produced, would scarce afford one grain of Salt of any kind. But supposing it
to contain but the fourth part of a grain of Phosporus, which is a true Animal
Fire, that would diffuse it self through the whole, and make it lucid. The
Phosporus is a true Animal Fire, and is to be extracted from all Animal
Substances; and if it did not exist in them, how is it possible for it to be
extracted from them? And that the Phosporus is an Acidosulphureous substance,
is to be demonstrated without difficulty. And I have plainly told you, that the
Pabulum of Animal Fires is a sulphurous Acid.

Your second and third Replies I shall not meddle with, because you either
grant me what I have said, or else proceed upon mere suppositions, of which I
can take no notice.

But here you fall upon me again without that order I could wish for, first
with Answer, and then First and Secondly again, and so on. Of this I shall take
no notice, but go on from your first Reply to the Second, Third and Fourth,
etc. in their order, and mark the pages in the Margent.

Reply. Page 6, 7, 8.
You say, That in page not 67th of my Answer, I know not what to make of your
warm Particles. And by way of Reply you say, you mean Alkalious Particles, such
as you believe the Blood abounds with in some Fevers, and in which you grant
Acids are of use. But yet (say you) I cannot agree with your notion of Fevers.

A Fever (say you Page.68.) proceeds from a Constipation of some of the
Emunctories, so that the excrementitious Alkaly, which should be carried off by
them, is detained in the Blood, which by breaking its Globules, etc. This
Doctrine does not seem at all to correspond with your Practice. For Spirit of
Vitriol, and other Acids which are very stiptick, the use of which you applaud
in Fevers, should methinks constipate the pores more closely. And then they
being of a very fixing nature, should fetter or retain those excrementitious
Alkalies, Again, if Fevers are occasioned only by a detention of these
Alkalies, then it must follow, that when ever they have free vent, the Fever
must abate. But the contrary has been sometimes experienced, where the Patient
has sweated very liberally, and yet died at last. If this will not serve the
turn, I hope to make it appear anon, that Alkalies are not capable of breaking
the Globules, and making such a bustle in the Blood. But I cannot but speak one
word or two in their defense before I go any further. I am very apt to think,
that in some Fevers, especially Pestilential and Malignant, the Spirits are
primarily affected, according to the Hypothesis of the ingenious Dr. Morton,
witness those symptoms which attend the Nervosum Genus immediately upon the
first seizure. But you must not admit of this notion, from the soil which you
must lodge in the Blood, and thence be communicated to the Spirits. Well, let it
be so, I will not dispute it: the difficulty on your side will be great still.
For, tho I shall readily grant the Globules to be broken in the aforesaid
Fevers; yet 'twill be a hard matter to convict Alkalies of those tragical
disorders. For first, experience shows, that nothing is more proper in those
Cases Malignant (I shall adventure to use the term, notwithstanding it has been
so scouted of late) than pull. e Chelis, Rad. Serpentar. nay, Sp. C. C. it self,
given in a proper Vehicle. But secondly, Nothing does so readily dissolve the
mass of Blood, or separate its Principles as Acids, which I shall prove by and
by, when I come to speak something of Dropsies. But this long discourse of the
heat of the Blood, does naturally lead me to consider somewhat of its Flame.

Remark. I do still affirm that Fevers in general do proceed from a
constipation of the Emunctories. Now what I mean by Emunctories, are those
parts which are only designed and provided by Nature for the separation of the
Excrements from the Blood; and whenever they are so disordered as not to be
able to perform that office, why then there must either a Fever, or some other
great disorder follow. And that this Doctrine quadrates with my practice is
very plain. For whenever these Emunctories are over relaxed, they cannot
squeeze out the excrementitious Particles in sufficient quantities, and so they
return back again into the Blood, and cause Fevers, or some other disorder; and
so of consequence Spirit of Vitriol, or some such kind of Stiptick is the only
proper remedy to take off this disorder. But to knock this matter on the head,
you say that in many Fevers the Patient sweats so much, that by so doing it has
cost him his life. This I will readily grant you, but the Sweats you mean are
certainly such as we call colliquative ones; in which cases the Emunctories are
so overmuch relaxed, that they cannot bear a congestion at all, and so there is
no such thing as a secretion, but the Juices good and bad are all let out
together; and unless they can be prevented by proper Stipticks, which will put
Nature into her right course, the whole Fabric must soon be destroyed. And it
is also to be observed, that in such Fevers the heat does scarce exceed that of
the natural temper, the Pulse being also exceeding low. In the latter part of
this Reply you altogether go upon suppositions, without the least kind of
demonstration, and so it is scarce worth my taking notice of: but however to
manifest my respect, I shall go on with it. As for what you mean by the Spirits
being primarily affected in Pestilential and Malignant Fevers (all deference
being had to the worthy Dr. Morton) it is Heathen Greek to me: For by my own
experience, (to use your own terms) in such cases I have found the Blood so
full of soil, that from thence I stick not to acount for all the depression of
Spirits and other nervous Symptoms that attend those Fevers. And for a Fever of
the Spirits purely, a very late Author has sufficiently exploded that matter.
And in my own Practice, within the space of a twelve month, I have been
concerned with three Persons (and thanks to God I have seen no more) that have
had the true Pestilence or Plague; the Blood of all which I have seen, and
indeed it has rather deserved the name of Soil than Blood, they being such
masses of Putrilaginous Substance, that no man could without horror behold; and
(by the assistance of Providence) two of these persons I recovered by the means
of Acids, and believe I might have done the same by the third, had I been
called in time. As for what you speak of your Experience as to the efficacy of
Pulvis e Chelis, and Sp. C. C. it is a mere trifle; and if ever any thing was
done after the exhibition of them, Nature her self deserved the whole honor,
nothing in the least being to be attributed to the Medicines, as may
demonstrably be made appear, and to please you I shall endeavor to do. But by
the way I beg of you, that you will not rank the Rad. Serpentariae with the
Pull. e Chelis and Sp. C. C. for the Rad. Serpentariae belongs to me, it being a
most noble sulphurous Acid inveloped; and that it is so I will be obliged to
maintain. But to return. I do boldly assert that in no Fever that ever I have
yet met with, let them be either benign or malign, have I ever yet observed
that the Patient has been in the least sensible of any Acidity in the Stomach
or Mouth, but generally those parts have been clogged up with a Matter that
looks so like Alkaly, that if it be not the very same, I am sure it is no kin to
the Crab-Tree. Now suppose it to be Alkaly, as it is plain it is, what can the
Pull. e Chelis, which is a fixed Alkaly, or the Sp. C. C. which is a volatile
one, do to remove; the Pull. e Chelis, or any Medicines of that Tribe, I mean of
the Testacea, which for want of an Acid to dissolve them, must lie upon the
Stomach, and by clogging of that cannot fail of doing a great deal of mischief
to the whole Body? As for Sp. C. C. or any Medicines of that kind, I cannot see
what reason there can be for the exhibition of them, because it is most
demonstrably manifest, that the Blood of feverish People is always overclog'd
with Particles of the same Nature, viz. volatile Alkalious Salts. But instead
of the Testacea and volatile Salts, if you use any of the following sort of
Medicines, I am apt to believe that your Practice in Malignant Fevers will be
more successful than it has hitherto been; viz. such as Aq. Theriacalis in
large quantities, Mixtura Simplex, Elix, Vitrioli Nr. an Infusion of Virginian
Snake Root, etc. in Vinegar, etc. but here I have not room to expatiate. By the
use of these Medicines you may raise the Pulse, and fortify the depraved and
paul'd Stomach, promote due and regular Secretions, and change the malignant
colliquative symptomatick Sweats into benign and critical ones. But this is not
a place for me to expatiate upon the method of the Cure of Fevers, that being
reserved for a particular Tract by it self; which with some other things that I
have promised the World, shall appear abroad as soon as I am able.

As for what you here say in relation to Acids dissolving the Blood, I shall
now take no notice of it, because you handle that matter more largely in
another place.

Reply. And here the Life of Man you take to be a Fire or Flame, and all we eat
and drink, together with the Air, we draw in, to be Fuel for this Flame. The
chief Arguments you bring to confirm this Doctrine, are taken from the
Excrements of this Flame and its Fuel. The Excrements are Alkalies, which are
near of kind to Ashes, the Relicts of other Flames: And for its Pabulum, it is
Acid and Sulphur the common Pabulum of all Flames. Here I must confess you talk
very ingeniously, and highly improve the Notions of that great Philosopher. But
let us examine this Hypothesis a little. As for Alkalies, I confess they are of
the same nature with Ashes and Soot: Yet it does not follow, that because
Alkalies are found in the Blood there must be a Flame too. We extract Alkaly
out of several Herbs. It Is true the Herbs must be calcined first. But certainly
the Salt was pre-existent in the Herb before the Calcination, or else the Fire
produced it de novo, which you will by no means admit. The Inference then is
plain. I will not adventure to say any thing of Crabs-Claws, Oyster-Shells,
etc. lest you should make them the Recrements of a vital Flame. Come we next to
the Pabulum, and that is Acid and Sulphur. That Bodies, in which Sulphur is
predominant, are inflammable no body questions: But that such in which Acid is
the chief Ingredient should burn, look like a Paradox. To instance in a few:
Acet Spirit. of Vitriol. Suc. Limon. etc. are so far from promiting Fame, that
they immediately quench it: and indeed I know but one Acid in Nature, which is
inflammable, and that is Niter. But then this Vital Flame is not of a Nature
with Culinary Flames. Answer, Since the Pabulum is the same, methinks the Flame
should be so too. Again, tho you speak so much of this Vital Flame, yet you do
not (as I remember) much care to fix the Place of its Existence. I supposed it
must be in the Blood, if any where. Now it is very hard to suppose a Flame in
that Body, of which no part is inflammable. If you open a Vein, and the Blood
spouts out reeking hot on the Fire, it will immediately quench it. So that
methinks, these Notions seem to be a little too finely spun. Acid and Sulphur
did support human Life, Men live upon Coals, Brimstone, etc. in which there is
store of Acid and Sulphur. That we cannot subsist without Air is evident: For
tho there is no Fire in the Blood, there is Motion undoubtedly. Now the
Nitro-aereal Particles give a fresh Fermentation (or Motion) to it, and free it
from Coagulation. If you are not satisfied with this, consult the Ingenious Dr.
Mayow. But then the Blood has heat and warmth; and these are the Properties of
Fire. Answ. May they not be excited by its Motion? No (you reply) we are much
warmer in Bed, when we use no Exercise, than when we are up and in Motion.
Answ. The Body indeed is in no motion there; but the Blood is greater than when
we are out of our Beds; and it is impossible should be otherwise. For do not the
Bed-clothes protect us from the Coldness of the ambient Air? And are not a
great many of the Volatile Alkalies detained by them, which reflecting upon the
Body, warm it, and accelerate the Motion of the Blood? But after all, if we
move violently when out of our Beds, we are much warmer than when in them. You
are pleased to Object, it is impossible mere Motion should cause any Heat in
fluid Bodies. How so? Let a Man put Spirit. Corn. Cerv. and Spirit. Vitrioli
together, and observe their Effects, they will soon grow warm. It Is evident,
they do not stand still, but move very briskly before they are warm. And what
is the Heat of these Bodies occasioned by, but their Fermentation or intestine
Motion? Surely it cannot be by Accension.

Remark. That the Life of Man is a Flame, I think I have sufficiently
demonstrated before, and shall here endeavor to make it somewhat more plain.
The Phosporus is a thing that is to be obtained from all Animal Substances; and
that the Phosporus is a Fire is past dispute, it performing all those things
that common Fire will do, viz. enkindle inflammable Bodies, give heat and
warmth to those things that are near it, afford Light in the Dark, etc. and yet
in very many things does differ from common Fire. Now if this Fire were not
actually existent in Animal Bodies, how is it possible that it should be
extracted from them? Common Brimstone, Tallow, Pitch, etc. do abound with
Sulphur, and so of consequence are inflammable; yet from none of these, by any
Artifice now known, is there the least quantity of Phosporus, or any thing like
it to be obtained. The Phosporus will not burn, without a free access of Air, any
more than common Fire: But herein is a very great difference between the
Phosporus and common Fire. Let any inflammable Body be never so well enkindled,
and afterward the Flame or enkindled part of it immerged in water, and it will
instantaneously be extinguished, so as not to be able to recover it self, tho
exposed to never so free an Air, without being again applied to some enkindled
Body. Let a piece of Phosporus, in a dark night, be placed upon a sheet of
Paper, it will immediately, or its own accord, afford a Light, will heat your
Fingers, and burn the Paper; this piece of Phosporus being put into water,
will, in all appearance, be totally extinguished, but tho it has lain in the
Water for a whole Year, upon being taken out, will of it self burn, etc. in the
same manner it did when put into the Water. Upon stroking of some Cats in the
dark, multitudes of small flashes of Fire will follow ones hand, as I have
frequently experienced: Now this gentle stroking can never cause so violent a
Motion as you make Fire to be, and indeed is, unless it were actually existent
in the Animal before. Although I confess Fire to be a Substance that is constantly
in motion, and that this motion is a very brisk one, yet all brisk motion is
not a Fire, which from the Cartesian Hypothesis, seems to be a necessary
conclusion: But I can assure you, I know several Fluids, that the more briskly
they are moved, the colder they are; as for instance, a River is always colder
in that part where there is a quick Current, than where the Water stands still:
The Air is always more or less cold according as the Motion of it is greater or
less; and I can assure you I have been almost starved when forced to travel in
high Winds in the Wintertime, at which season the Air is most full of Nitrous
Particles, which you own to be inflammable; and behold here your Nitrous
Particles in violent motion, and yet a Man almost starved by them, nay several
have actually been so, so that you may see it is not all kinds of violent
motion, tho of Particles inclined to take Fire, that will cause a Flame. So
that you see I have sufficient reason to maintain my assertion, that mere
Motion, tho never so much excited, will not occasion Heat in fluid Bodies, and
that there is a difference in some respects between the Vital Flame and common
Culinary Fire, tho in many things they agree. I shall here again enumerate some
things wherein Animal Fire and Common Fire do agree and disagree. Animal Fire
will not burn without a due access of Air, no more will not Common Fire; Animal Fire
causes Heat and Warmth, so does Common Fire; Animal Fire cannot subsist
without a constant supply of sulphurious-Acid Particles, neither can Common
Fire subsist without a supply of the same Particles, etc. Animal Fire (for so I
call the Phosporus) being immerged in Water, and afterward taken out again,
will regain all its properties of Light, Heat, etc. without being applied to
other enkindled Bodies: This Common Fire will not do; for let it be once
extinguished by immersion in Water, or otherwise, and it is never able to
recover it self. I do still assert, that those Bodies which are the proper
Pabulum for Fire, are those which are composed of Acid and Sulphur; but those
which abound with most Sulphur, burn with the greatest violence; those which
abound most with Acid, more slowly; and some Acid Substances which have little
Sulphur in them will scarce burn at all, especially if much diluted with
Phlegm, such as Vinegar, Juice of Lemons, Spirit of Vitriol, etc. and therefore
when the Heat of the Body is too intense, I give those Acids which are least
impregnated with Sulphur, to abate the violence of the Flame; when the Heat is
too remiss, I then give sulphurous Acids to excite the Flame. You say you know
but one Acid in Nature which is inflammable, and that is Niter: Now I do assure
you it is my opinion, nay I am very well able to demonstrate, that most, if not
all the pure Acids in Nature have their origins from the Niter of the Air, but
pure Niter alone will scarce burn at all, unless mixed with some kind of
Sulphur. As for fixing a particular place for the existence of the Vital Flame,
I did not think there was any reason for so doing, but now I tell you, that I
suppose it is diffused through all the parts of the Body, and if by accident
any part is destitute of it, a mortification ensues. But then again you say it
is a hard matter to conceive a Flame in that Body, of which no part is
inflammable. Pray what do you think of the Oily Fat Particles contained, not
only in the Blood, but all other parts, are not they inflammable. The reason
why we are warmer in Bed, and after violent exercise, is not to be attributed
to any unknown Doctrine of Fermentation, but because we have a freer
Perspiration at these times, and so of consequence the Flame must burn more
freely. The Comparison you make between the Heat of the Blood and that
occasioned upon the mixture of the Spirit of Hartshorn and Spirit of Vitriol
will not hold good; for in the mixing of those two Liquors, or in any kind of
Fermentation, there is a very sensible commotion and hurry in all the parts of
the said Liquors, whereas in the Blood of well Persons there is no such thing
to be discerned. I confess by the impulse of the Heart it is driven
progressively from the center to the extremities, to supply the necessities of
the Parts; but besides this progressive Motion, I know no other it has, all the
Secretions being performed by proper Strainers, not from any Fermentation. Nay
it is a very easy thing for a man to perceive that there is no such thing as a
Fermentation in the Blood by the following easy Experiment, viz. let a few
ounces of Blood run out of the Veins or Arteries of Man, or other Animal, into
a very clear Glass Vessel, which vessel you may put into a Sand Furness,
wherein the heat may be such as to keep the Blood in the same degree of warmth
as it came out of the Vessels; and if there be any commotion to be seen with
the best Light and best Eyes, like unto what may be seen in such Liquors which
are in a state of Fermentation, upon information I shall gladly own my self
mistaken. There is, I confess, a Froth to be seen upon the surface of some
Blood after it is let out into the Porringer, which looks like the surface of
Liquors which are fermenting: But this Froth is so far from being the effect of
Fermentation, that it proceeds from nothing else but the different stream that
the Blood runs in. For in the same Person, let one Parcel run out in a rapid
stream, and it will occasion froth or bubbles; let another Parcel run out
gently, and it will produce no such thing. Will not simple Water or any other
Liquor do the same? but Blood being a Liquor of greater consistence, the
bubbles when raised will not so soon disappear, as in Water or other Liquors
that are more fluid; from which I hope it is plain, that the constant natural
heat of the Blood does not proceed from Fermentation. And if the progressive
Motion from the Heart to the Extremities gives it its heat, by the same reason,
I think, the Water that runs from our Cocks should be warm also; whereas I dare
be bold to say, that instead of gaining any heat by its rapid propulsion
through the Pipes, it is much colder than the Water in the River at the place
from whence it was received into the Engine. I had like to have forgot to take
notice of what you have said concerning the production of Alkalies; but it
being a very material thing, I shall here expatiate a little upon what I have
before said upon that Subject, and shall take care as much as may be to avoid
repetitions. I have already owned that Alkalies do actually exist in several
Bodies as the principle of their death and destruction, but I never could yet
see or hear of any one that has seen any such thing as either a volatile or
fixed Alkalizat Salt, that was any other ways to be obtained out of Vegetable or
Mineral Bodies, than from the Bodies after they had been burnt, viz. out of the
Ashes or Soot of them, which are their Excrements, or rather the Excrements of
Fire; or else after the Body had undergone a Putrefaction, which is analagous
to Fire. Now this being so in relation to Vegetables and Minerals, I think in
may not be amiss to infer, that the Alkaly to be found in Animal Substances is
the Excrement of their Fire; and which mightily confirms me in this Notion, all
the Excrements of Animals are Alkalious, viz. a Matter thrown away either as
useless or incommodious; and of consequence all the Alkaly to be met with in
the Blood or elsewhere, is an Excrement in a way of being carried off. More
upon this Head I shall not say at this time, by reason I shall have occasion to
enlarge upon this, and upon the Heat of the Blood in my Tract of Fevers. But
what I have now and before said is, I think, sufficient to satisfy any one who
is not a mere Sceptick. But for manifest Acids, they are to be met with every
where almost, both in the Mineral and Vegetable Kingdoms, even in those Bodies
that have never undergone a Putrefaction, but are in the greatest state of
Perfection; and for Vinegar and the like, it is so far from being the effects
of Putrefaction, that it is the last degree of Perfection Nature alone is
capable of bringing those Liquors to. It is also to be observed, that those
Fruits of which Wine is made, were first Acid, before they came to a state fit
to make Wine of; and that Putrefaction is the Cause of the Acidness of Unripe
Fruits, I believe none will assert. This Subject is also too long to treat
fully of in this place, and therefore I shall also omit the further prosecution
of it for a Practical Discourse.

Reply. If Alkalies are the Original of Distempers, whence is it, that in
Dropsies, Catarrhs, some Gouts, and other Diseases, we find the Texture of the
Blood so thin? It Is observable, that those Particles you term Alkalies, the
more the Blood is saturated with them, of the more thick Consistence it is, as
we see in Plurisies, Rheumatisms and other Inflammatory Cases (in which
Distempers, if in any, the Alkalies abound) Is not then its Tenuity rather to
be imputed to Acids? Do not Acids immediately put the Blood in a Fusion, and
render it thin? Your Answer to this is, that it is not the Thinness of the Blood
is the only Cause of these Distempers, but a Destruction of the Tone of the
Parts. Here methinks you do not argue so fairly. For you mention little or
nothing of the Destruction of the Tone of the Parts in your Etymologies of
Distempers till now. And why may not I as well say, in Inflammatory Cases the
Blood is not affected with any Alkaline Particles? These Inflammations only
arise from a Destruction of the Tone of the Parts; especially, if you consider
what you asserted in your Notion of Fevers: For there the Emunctories are very
much out of order. But (you object) since Acids will reduce the Blood to its
due Consistence, it is not reasonable to suppose they should be the Cause of
its Fusion. Answ. Whether Acids will restore the Consistence of the Blood I
shall examine by and by: I fear they will not. But this I am certain of, they
will put it in a Fusion. It Is well known that you celebrated Oil of Vitriol
taken alone, or tho in a Vehicle, if in too great quantity, kills. Now how does
it kill? Does it not by dissolving the Mass of Blood, by separating the Grumous
Parts from the Serous, and breaking its Texture after the same Manner as it
does that of Milk? Sure I am, that Blood coagulated by the aforesaid Oil, does
much more resemble Whey and Curds than Jelly of Hartshorn. Now then, what is
all this but an Extraordinary Fusion? And if a large Dose will make such mad
Work, and put the Blood into so great a Fusion; certainly a less Dose must
cause somewhat of a Fusion. And it is rational to believe that Oil of Vitriol is
proper only in those Distempers, where the Blood is too thick; very pernicious
in such as have it too thin. And here I am very glad, that you so opportunely
give us your Sentiments of Dropsies. A Dropsy (say you) or the Thinness of
Blood in that Disease does not proceed from Acids, but overmuch Drinking. Answ.
That large Draughts (there being little Evacuation by Urin) render the Blood
more thin is very obvious. But now the Patient had no such desire for Drink,
till the Distemper was actually upon him. So that the Question is, what first
brought on the Distemper. Was it not a weakness of Blood or want of due
Consistence? I do not see how you can well deny it. But then (you reply) let it
be so, it is impossible Acids should occasion this ill Habit of Blood. For,
Hydropical People are Thirsty, and it is ridiculous to imagine that Acids should
excite Thirst, when they are the only Things in the World that will quench it.
Answ. This I confess, at first sight, looks like an invincible Argument: But I
must crave leaver to weigh it a liltle. That Acids drank, or held in the Mouth,
usually quench Thirst, is an undeniable Truth: Tho 'twill hardly hold good in
all Cases. For, let a Man drink Brine, which is very much impregnated with
Acids, or eat high-seasoned Meats; I believe tho he were a Stoic he would
immediately grow thirsty. But common Salt is not an Acid of a right Nature.
Well, admit this. The most famous Acids that I know for suppressing Thirst, are
Oil Vitriol. Spirit. Vitriol, etc. Now I hope to make it appear, that these, or
Acids of the same nature, abounding in the Blood, may provoke Thirst. I proved
just now, that Oil of Vitriol had an ugly Faculty of coagulating the Blood, or
separating its Serum. That there is a Separation of the Serum in Dropsies is
evident: If any Man should deny it, let him look upon the Abdomen and extreme
Parts, and his Eyes are enough to convince him. Well then the Serum being thus
separated (pray observe) and the Mass of Blood not enough diluted; the oral
Glands must necessarily be defrauded of their due Moisture, and consequently
Thirst excited. But still you harp upon the same string: Those Medicines which
restore the Consistence of the Blood, cannot well be supposed to impair it. Now
Acids restore it; and Steel in particular. Answ. That Steel is of excellent
Use, and a very great Restorative, is not to be denied. But under favor, tho
you discourse very ingeniously of the Nature of Steel: Yet all you have said
will not amount to a Proof of its being an Acid. I am still inclined to think
it is an Alkaly. For tho it does not discover it self to be such by its Color,
yet it plainly does by its Effects, viz. its Fermentation with Acids. If,
notwithstanding this Phoenomenon, you will needs have it to be an Acid, why
then one Acid will ferment with another; and so one Alkaly with another:
wherefore, tho we should subscribe to the Hypothesis, that Alkalies are the
Original of all Distempers, yet it is hard to exclude the Use of them in general
in Distempers. For some Alkalies or other might be found out that should
dispute it with these offending Alkalies. You are pleased to quote Beeker for a
Confirmation of the Acidity of Steel. The chief Sentence of the Citation seems
to be this. Hoc tantum hic loci allegabo, omne acidum substantiae martialis
esse, in quocunque oleo, pinguedine, fuligine, limo, silice and arena, immo
etiam ipsa flamma reperibile, and ad oculum demonstrari posse; quaecunque ergo
naturae Acidae and martialis sunt, illa potestatem habent Alkali tanquam
substantiam metallorum mercurialem alterandi and transmutandi. If I apprehend
the Sense of the Author, this does not make so much for you. But suppose it
did, Beeker was never reckoned Infallible. And tho Chalybs were an Acid, it
does not follow, because one Acid will renew the State of the Blood, that
others will do so too. But since we have so happily fallen on this Subject,
viz. the strengthening the Mass of Blood; let us see what other Medicines
besides Chalybs are subservient to this End. And here I suppose your bitter
Herbs may not be infimi subsellii. It Is needless to prove it; for hardly any
Physician but what has experienced it. I do not believe you will dare to say,
there is any thing of an Acid in these, since you know very well that Alkaly
may be extracted from most, if not all of them. So that poor Alkaly is
effectual in some Cases you see. But then (you say) Oakbark, Bistort,
Tormentile, Comfrey-roots and others of that Tribe will reduce the Blood to
Consistence. Answ. That they are astringent I grant; whether they will reduce
the Blood, or invigorate its depauperated Principles, I much question. It Is
very rare to see them prescribed in Dropsies, Cackexies and the like Distempers
where the Blood is poor and low. They are proper indeed in Fluxes by virtue of
their astringent Faculty; but then they owe this Astringency to Acids. Whether
they do or not it matters not much. But why may not this Quality be derived as
well from the Terrestrious as the Salt Particles of these Vegetables: Since
Bol. Arm. Terra Lemnia and other plain Earths are very stiptick? I do not say
these Earths are so simple as to have no manner of Salt in them, but surely
they have very little Acid.

Remark. I am very glad you own Alkalies to abound in Plurisies and
Rheumatisms, and other inflammatory Distempers. Upon my work if this be
granted, I have gained a great point; for to have put the World into a true way
of Curing but one single Distemper, is what deserves no small Honor. And for
the business of Dropsies, I do assure you I have no reason to recede from what
I have said upon that Subject; but if you or any one else would favor the
World with as certain a Method of curing a Confirmed Ascites or Belly-Dropsie,
as I have done of curing Rheumatisms, Gouts, etc. I may self would spare no
pains to trumpet up that Man's Fame, let him be who he would: But this is a
thing I am afraid I shall never live to see effected, because the Tone of the
Parts principally affected, is so destroyed and spoiled, that it would be next
door to a Miracle to recover them. And although you are pleased to charge me
with arguing unfairly, for attributing the Cause of Dropsies, in a great
measure, to proceed from a destruction of the Tone of the Parts, because I had
not before in my Etymologies of Distempers, taken sufficient notice of that
Matter: Well, suppose I had before been deficient in that point, I hope it is
no Crime to bring it in late, rather than not at all. But I do assure you, I
have frequently taken notice of that Matter, and do lay as great a stress upon
it as upon any one thing whatsoever; and I do still insist upon it, that the
great Thinness of the Blood in Dropsies dos in great measure proceed from the
great quantities of Liquids taken into the Body, and the small quantity
discharged, by reason the Parts of it have lost their Tone, and therefore the
Secretions not rightly to be performed; a man that drinks two Quarts in twenty
four hours, not being able to piss, perhaps, above four Ounces, perspiration
also being greatly hindered upon the same account. Now for want of a due
secretion by the excretory Vessels, the Blood is clogged with too great a
quantity of Serum; which Serum being admitted into the Lumphatick Vessels, and
being impregnated with Alkaline Particles, cannot freely pass along these
Vessels by reason of its Gelatinous quality, by which means they are distended
to a vast Magnitude, and sometimes broke; and from the broken Lympheducts it
is, that so great a quantity of Liquor is thrown into the Cavity of the
Abdomen, which distends it to such a bigness. But for all this great quantity
that is thrown into the Abdomen, the Blood is still loaded with three parts in
four more of Serum thatn it ought to be, and therefore the Oral Glands cannot
want sufficient Moisture. But here lies the thing, the Matter that in a state
of health is separated by the Oral Glands, is impregnated with a Noble Volatile
Acid, as does manifestly appear. But in this Case the said Acid is almost, if
not totally destroyed, and the said Lympha impregnated with Alkaly, which is
the occasion of the great Thirst that attends Hydropical People. But since I
have attributed an Acidity to the Lympha in a state of Health, and yet assert
that there is no such thing as a Pure Acid to be obtained from the Blood either
in a Morbid State or in a State of Health, that being inveloped in the Oily
Particles, I shall presume, to avoid further Objections, to make a little
excursion concerning the general use of the Glands.

I shall at present divide the Glands into two kinds or sorts, the first of
which separate the Excrementitious Particles from the Blood, and throw them
quite off by some proper Emunctories, such are the Excretory Glands of the
Skin, the Glandulae Renales, the Glands of the Liver, etc. all which do
separate an Alkaly from the Blood, to be thrown off as Excrement; and if by any
accident these Glands are made incapable of performing their office, so that
the Blood cannot be rid of its Excrements, why then a Distemper of some kind or
other must necessarily follow. The Second Kind do receive a Noble Substance
into them to be again mixed with the Blood, or for other Uses, of universal
Advantage to the whole Body. The Glands of the Mouth do separate the thin Juice
impregnated with a Volatile Acid, which Juice was never designed by Nature to
be thrown away, as some Tobacco-takers lavishly do, but to impregnate our Food
as it is chewed in the Mouth, and afterward to dissolve it in the Stomach, and
turn it into a Substance fit for the Nutrition of our Bodies. The other
Receptory Glands, for so I presume to call all those which do not separate
Excrements from the Blood, do, by the extraordinary providence of Nature,
receive into them that fine Substance which is superfluous in the nourishing of
the Parts, and by means of the Lympheducts, in a gentle and easy course, do
convey it to the Ductus Thorachicus, where it is mixed with the Chyle, just
before it is admitted into the Blood; and that this Lympha is a Mild Acid has
already been owned by many. So that here you see, if there be any Acid in the
Body superfluous, Nature is very provident in the preservation of it, and
equally careful in throwing off the superfluous Alkaly by a multitude of
Emunctories or Excretory Glands.

From what has been said concerning the Use of the Glands, a great many
Phenomenon concerning Dropsies, and other Distempers, may with ease be solved.
In Dropsies, for instance, as is before observed, the Excretory Glands not
being able to perform their Office, the Excrementitious Alkaly, together with
its Watery Vehicle, is detained in the Body; by which means, although the Body may
increase in bulk, yet none of the Parts receive their due Nourishment; and the
Tone of the whole being relaxed and spoiled, the Receptory Glands forget their
duty also, and instead of receiving into them a pure acidulated Serum only,
they are forced to let pass some Alkalized Excrementitious Serum, which makes
the whole of a kind of Gelatinous Consistence; which not being able to pass
along the Tracts of the Lympheducts, distends them to that degree that it
causes swellings in the Belly, and Aedematous Tumors in the Legs, etc. And
Belly-Dropsies having for the most part a Jaundice as their Forerunner, nay
frequently goes along with them through the whole course of the Distemper, is
no small Argument to prove the Truth of what I have before taken notice of,
viz. that some of the Excretory Glands have been defective in their duty, by
which means the whole Body is impregnated with this Yellow Die, and the whole
Aeconomy put out of order: And that the Yellowness of the Body does proceed
from a redundancy of Bile, no body denies; and that Bile is an Alkaly you don't
disown. But now come we to the Curative part of this Damnable Distemper; which
although it be rarely to be performed in a confirmed State, yet in the beginning,
nay after it has made some progress, is frequently to be done, and that as
effectually by Calibiats and Bitters as by any sort of Medicines. But here for
want of making Experiments, (by which means only we are capable of arriving to
any sort of Certainty in the knowledge of things) you say that Steel and the
bitter Herbs are Alkalies, and the reasons you give for it are, because Steel
being mixed with Acids will cause an Effervescence, and the bitter Herbs, after
burning, do afford a fixed Alkaly. Solid Reasons indeed! For all Sulphurs being
mixed with Acids will cause an Effervescency, nay some of them take Fire; and
that all Metals are full of Sulphur is past dispute; and from the Ashes of all
Plants, even Sorrel it self, may be extracted a fixed Alkaly; therefore by this
way of arguing, Sulphur must be an Alkaly, and so must Sorrel also. But the
manner of the Production of Volatile and Fixed Alkalies having been spoken to
before, I shall say no more to that Matter. I shall touch a little upon what I
take to be the General Principles of mixed Bodies, not that all these Principles
are to be separated from all Bodies, some containing all, some two, three or
four of them; and according to the different mixture of them, different
Substances are produced. Acidum and Sulphur I take to be the Vital Active
Principles in Bodies, Alkaly the Principle of Death and Corruption, Water and
Earth the two Passive Principles. From these five Principles I think I can more
easily account for the Various Phenomena in Natural Bodies, than from the old
Five of Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, Water and Earth, or from any other
Principles that have yet been broacht in the World. I have only mentioned this
matter to let you know the Principles I go upon, but shall leave the further
prosecution of it to another opportunity. But to return to the business of
Steel and Bitters; as for Steel, I have said so much already concerening that
in several places, that I shall not here trouble my self nor you any more about
it. But if we can cure Distempers with it, it is no matter tho one takes it for
an Alkaly, and the other for an Acid; nay I can assure you, that if you will
but black your Fingers a little with Charcoal, you will find it to be a
sulphurous Acid. As for Bitters, I will be bound to lay a good Wager with you,
that if you put a pound of Centaury or Wormwood dried into a Retort, and distill
it with an easy Fire till all be come off that will, and afterward calcine
the Caput Mortuum, and extract the fixed Alkaly from the Ashes, if you don't
find a treble or much greater proportion of Acid to that of Alkaly, to be
produced from these most bitter Plants, I will be a loser; and I assure you I
will lay you or any one else a good sum upon this matter. But further, if
bitterness did proceed from a predominancy of Alkaly in any Body, why then a
man would suppose the more this Body were impregnated with Alkaly, the bitterer
it would be: but upon my word I have frequently experienced the contrary. For
when I was a Champion for Alkalious Medicines (as I am not ashamed to own I
once was) I have extracted a Tincture from Mirrh, Alloes and Saffron, with well
rectified Spirit of Sal Armoniack, hoping to do great Feats with it. Now after
I had digested them together for ten or twelve days in a gentle Sand-Heat,
instead of having the Tincture bitterer than the Mirrh and Alloes themselves
were, I have always found it almost, if not altogether, without any bitterness
at all in it. Nay after a longer digestion it has been almost perfectly sweet.
However I lay not any great stress upon Tastes, the differences in them being
one of the specific differences the Great Creator has planted in things, of
which we have as yet but very little knowledge. A few degrees of predominancy of
any of the Principles, cause very great alterations in Bodies, both as to
Color, Smell and Taste; and for ought I know, a knowledge of these Minute
Circumstances is what we have no possibility of arriving to in this World. But
one word more concerning Bitters, because you will account them Alkalies, and
lay so great a stress upon them. Vitriol of Silver is the most exalted Bitter I
know, and a Celebrated Medicine in the Cure of Dropsies, but yet is no Alkaly;
and after you have considered it, I believe you will not term it so. What you say
to Acids fusing the Blood, it is directly contrary to what our Predecessors
have asserted, who attributed its coagulation to Acids, and to what you your
self say a little after. But what I attribute to Acids in general is this, that
they keep the Blood in its due state, viz. keep the Fibrous and Globulous Parts
in their due Texture, and keep the Serum fluid, by which means the whole Mass
is capable of performing its proper Offices without being liable to
Stagnations; and also by confirming and strengthening the Tone of the Parts,
they greatly contribute to the aforesaid end, viz. preventing Stagnatitions,
and promoting the Secretions. As for what you say concerning the giving of Oil
of Vitriol alone, I readily assent to it, that it will make mad work. But I
hope you cannot charge me with any such mad Practice. When People are cold,
they naturally run to the Fire for warmth, but none but mad Persons will put
their hands into it; and although Culinary Fire, if People are so imprudent as to
throw themselves into it, will consume and destroy them, yet a prudent use of
it is a very great comfort to Humane Life; and were it not for Fire the
Russians and other Northern People would have but a very sad time on it during
the course of their long Winters: so it is in relation to Oil of Vitriol, although
given alone it will cause Death and Destruction, yet being diluted in proper
Vehicles, and given in very large quantities, will in many cases produce as
noble Effects as any one Medicine now known. It is the business of a Physician
to consider the Nature and Constitution of his Patient in all respects, and to
proportion the Doses of Medicines according to what their Stomachs and Natures
will bear. I hope there was never any one so wild, because Oil of Vitriol is
recommended in Fevers, as to give it alone without a Vehicle. But what you
charge upon Oil of Vitriol may be retorted upon most other Medicines of an
active Nature. Because an ounce of Calamelanos given at once to a Man will
scarce fail of killing him, I suppose that don't deter you from giving a few
grains of it to a young Child. An ounce of Rozin of Jallup will kill a
Plowman, and yet a few grains may with safety be given to a very tender
constitution. I could retort a great many things of this kind upon you, were it
not altogether needless: for that Physician that gives a Medicine without first
considering it in all its circumstances, deserves to be banished from the
society of Mankind; and he that knows most, is generally most cautious: and
although I am so clamoured at by my Brethren, yet I can boldly say, that the
greatest slips that ever I have made, have been from my over-cautiousness; and
I will rather choose to commit three faults from that, than occasion the loss
of one Man's Life from rashness and inconsiderateness. What you have objected
against Oil of Vitriol taken alone, has long since been objected by other
People, and the Objections fairly answered. I shall presume to transcribe what
I have met with in an Apologetick Dialogue between Philerastus and Chemista,
upon the same Subject, Theatrum Chymicum, page 86, 87. Vol. I.

Ph. Absit tamen Vitriolum, Chalcithin, atque alia idgenus leprosa, impura,
atque corrodentia mineralia in humanum Corpus ingeri, and ad perpetuam tui
Nominis ipsiusque artis infamiam usurpari.

Chapter Quid ita, Hospes mi?

Ph. Nam cum Oleum Vitrioli etiam a Gesnero toties laudatum, Scutellam Stanneam
exedit: quit simile periculum in Stomacho nostro membraneo non merito verebitur?

Chapter Aspera tu quidem tela elidis, sed quae facile retundi queant a Philosopho
excitato. Nam si Oleum Vitrioli propter Stannum ex eo exesum humano corpore
exulabit: quid Vino sublimato, Aceti Mellisque Spiritu, quid tale, and Limonum
Citrorumque succo fiet? Nam eorum unumquodque Stannum absumere, vel semestris
Medicus agnoscit.

Ph. At non tarn parvo temporis Curriculo, atque Spiritus ille vitriolatus.

Chapter Imo sane minori, si cum nostro illius exhibendi modo conferatur ratio;
nollem enim te aliquem Chemistam tam stupido ingenio praedilum existimare, ut
Oleum Vitrioli nullis aliis mixtum Liquoribus propinare ausus sit: sed potius
ad aquae Rosaceae vel alterius Liquoris libram Olei Vitriolati guttas totidem
adjicere, quod ad aciditatem comparandam satis esse queant, cui Liquori Oleo
Vitreoli accrescenti, si tantum Stanni immerseris, quantum Aceto: nullum non
invoco supplicium, nisi Stannum multo magis corrosum reperiatur. Verum si hoc
Oleum Vitrioli vel etiam Sulphuris in usu esse non mereatur propter erosionem,
quo se conferent cantharides, a Galeno inter ea Medicamenta relatae, quae ne
gustare quidem audeas propter summam putrefactionem atque erosionem? tamen
veterum fere omnium atque multorum Neotericorum praxes eas ad Urinam
provocandam, penisque (...) and suscitandam Venerem usurpant atque commendant.

Ph. Nequeo diffiteri, sed tamen parva quantitate eas prescribunt, and non nisi
aliis convenientibus rebus admixtas; quo quidem modo exhibitae non solum
innoxiae perhibentur, sed etiam persalutares.

Chapter Vera praedicas, atque ego itidem respondeo; Olea praedicta debita
quantitate, mixtura, praeparatione exhibita, tantum non corrodere corpus
humanum: sed ejus spiritus reficere, Febres extinguere, obstructiones aperire,
putredinem arcere, venena exigere, sitim sedare, Ulcera percurare, omnesque
illas vires cum laud sua plurima exercere, quas illi Gesnerus Epistola ad
Cosmam Medicum, aut Paracelsus in Libro de Vitriolo ascripserunt.

I could produce a great deal more of this kind from many of the ancient
Chemists, who were honest men, and who to the best of their knowledge did
endeavor to reform Physic, and to put Practitioners upon a right bottom: But
they were defective in so many things, that their undertakings wanted success,
tho from some of their Writings honest and inquisitive men may receive great
advantage. Although I shall not trouble you with any thing more from the Ancient
Chemists, yet I shall make bold to transcribe a Letter I lately received out of
Yorkshire, there being something in it that relates to the point in hand.

Tertio Non. Martii.
Vir Dignissime,
TRactatus tuos summis cum deliciis and voluptate perlegi, and tuum in
promovendo illo Nobilissimo Medicinae studio institutum maxim demiror in
humani generis bonum universale: Macte Bone Vir Melioribus Avibus, and Momas
aspernare: Te certum faciam me acidis uti 10. annis elapsis summo cum successu,
and Alkalia tantum ut absorbentia Acidi aestimo: assidua experientia videatur
quantum valet appetitus and digestio, and quid dubious est hoc in casu quam
Alkalia and quid melius Acidis: and Acidum est tantum solum fermentum
Ventriculi, quid Coward audet dicere nemo advertet. Omnibus in seculis
praeteritis quot Morbos edomuit Acidum non necessarium est enumerare. Virum
quendam habui putrida Febre laborantem, quem tantum Sp. Vitrioli in aqua
frigida (Deo favente) restitui: in Haemoptoe, Hydrope, fluxu Muliebri, and fere
omnibus in ventriculi Morbis, Scorbuto infinitos fere curavi Acidis eommixtis,
and in vehiculis appropriatis exhibitis. Equitem Vicinum meum calculo cum
Paralisi and Haemorrhodali fluxu decumbentem quodam Acido ad priorem
valetudinem reduxi, and ab Orco detraxi: immo quamvis in Hypocondriaca
affectione Acidum culpamus, tamen quid emolumenti in isto Proteo accidit a
quodam Acido non est nunc enarrandi locus, hic Acidus meus liquor omnes
obstructiones reserat and flatum, Gas illud Sylvestre compescit, and omnes
istos motus irregulares componit (instar fulminis si quicquid in Praxi vel
Lectione mea occurrit summa cum sedulitate ad te (mi bone Vir) mittetur.

Nam tui favoris sum studiosissimus Jo. Watson.
Postscript.
Be pleased to direct a Letter to me, to be left with Mr. Uster, Apothecary in
Burnsly in Yorkshire, by Doncaster Bag. I beg a Literal Correspondence, and
shall communicate to you some Acid Arcana, for that name they deserve.




I hope what I have said is sufficient to remove that Mighty Objection about
the hazard of giving Oil of Vitriol alone: But I might have spared my self this
trouble, for I am almost positive, that there is not any Physician in
Christendom of any business, tho never so great an assertor of the usefulness
of Alkalies, who has not some time or other made use of even Oil of Vitriol,
that dangerous Acid: but how they can answer for it I cannot tell: for if Acids
are the cause of Diseases, how they dare with a good Conscience give even the
most temperate Acids to their Patients, I cannot understand; and I am sure they
themselves can give no reason for it. But I believe it is from a conviction of
Conscience that nothing is to be done without them. Again, if Acids were so
pernicious to Mankind, as some People would make us believe, I wonder that the
College of Physicians don't unanimously petition the Parliament to prohibit the
Importation of Oranges in such vast quantities as we now have 'em. You greatly
harp upon that string, that Acids held in the Mouth will not quench the violent
Thirst of Hydropical People; to which I answer, that it is impossible when the
whole Mass of Blood and Lympha are contaminated with Alkalious Particles, that
the washing the Mouth only with Acids should take away the Thirst, when the
parts are continually washed with the contaminated Juices, and so, of
consequence, the particles of the Acid must be soon obtunded. But however
nothing is more grateful or delightful to an Hydropical Person, than a slice of
Lemon or any such thing. Common Salt I allow will excite Thirst, but not
quatenus Acid, for Spirit of Salt will take it off as soon as any thing. But,
Sir, I do assure you I have stumbled more at this one thing, viz. Common Salt's
exciting Thrist, than at any thing else besides, and therefore have spared no
cost in making Experiments to find out the reason of it; at last, after much
labor and sweat, I found there was no Salt but what had more or less of a
damned thing called Bittern mixed with it, of which you may be perfectly
informed at any Salt Works; now this Bittern is the most corroding fixed Alkaly
in Nature; and although it be inconsiderable in quantity in respect of the Acid
the Salt contains, yet it will fix it self upon the parts after the Acid of the
Salt is all dissolved, and so excite Thirst. Of this Bittern you may expect
more in another place; for had I not had a design to please and satisfy you, I
would not at all have taken notice of it here; because the allaying of violent.
Thirsts I only attribute to manifest Acids, and common Salt not being one of
that sort, it matters not whether it will allay Thirst or not. I love not
repetitions, but however for once I shall be guilty of it. You may remember
that in another place I tell you, that those things which by Distillation
afford a greater quantity of Acid substances, than of Alkalious ones, are to be
reputed Acids and vice versa; now common Salt affords nineteen parts in twenty
more of Acid than of Alkaly, therefore is an Acid: but before Distillation the
Acid is so inveloped, although it contains so much of it, that it is not at all
discernable to the Taste. I believe no one that has blackt his Fingers will deny
Guaiacum to be an Acid, but at the same time I believe it was never prescribed
to allay Thirst. Things, tho of the same Tribe, are differently to be
administered, according as they are differently specificated by Nature. It is
not a certainty of the knowledge whether Acids or Alkalies are the Causes of
Diseases, will presently make a man a Physician, tho it will go a great way
toward it, but a through knowledge of the different specifications of Nature
must also concur.

You charge me with contradicting my self, and after that you should have been
sure to have avoided any such thing your self; but however in one place you
say, that Oil of Vitriol dissolves the Blood, and in another that it coagulates
it; but I shall take no advantage of this slip, but shall conclude my Remarks
upon this Paragraph, I having already spun them out to too great a length.

The next Paragraph is too long to transcribe, and there being little material
in it, I shall only make some general Remarks upon what I find worthy taking
notice of.

You first of all charge me with saying, that neither too much nor too little
Acid must be given, which is the sum of a Page or two, viz. 19, and 20. In
answer to which, I do assure you, that no Virtuoso need be ashamed to employ
his time in considering the due proportions of things requisite to accomplish
the thing he undertakes. Now in Physic he that does not understand the true
Rules of Proportion, deserves not the Name of a Physician. He that will
prescribe an Ounce of Jallap instead of a Dram deserves to be hanged; and who
but a mad man will give a Pound of Oil of Vitriol, when forty Drops in a Pint
of Water is all that is desired? But, Sir, prudent Physicians have a wonderful
Director in relation to Manifest Acids, and indeed to every thing else, that is
the Stomach, which is a nice judger of things; that which is agreeable to her,
she receiving and retaining with pleasure, that which is disagreeable she
rejecting and abhorring. But however she must not be overloaded with those
things in which she takes the greatest delight. Now Manifest Acids are things
she as much or more covets and delights in than in any thing besides; but when
she has enough to supply her wants she gives sufficient item of it; and if the
Stomach be rightly consulted, it is impossible the Blood should be overcharged
with them; but if at any time People are not sufficiently cautious of that
matter, but load the Stomach with more manifest Acids than the Body has
occasion for, she will not fail of rejecting them by Vomit: this Matter may at any
time be safely experimented by an over-large draught of Vinegar, in any Case
where the Body has no need of it, or at least in so great a quantity at a
time; for which reason I tell you that the Blood cannot superabound with Acids,
as it is plain in fact it does not, neither in a Morbid nor Healthy State,
because the Stomach will not receive or retain more than it has occasion for;
but although it cannot overdo, yet it is very frequently defective in conveying a
sufficient quantity into it, either through its own fault, or the fault of the
Physician who forbids the use of them, and so the whole Body suffers damage.
How greedily will the poor Stomach embrace the Juice of an Orange, or the like,
in a Fever? and how scornfully will she reject and abhor any thing of a
contrary nature? nay the usefulness of Acids is so evident and extensive, that
it is almost a shame they should now want a Champion, after there has, for so
many years together, been so great a noise made about Experimental Philosophy,
and even public Societies, in many Nations, erected on purpose to cultivate
it. But to return from whence we left off; I am apt to believe that if you take
the following advice, you will scarce be guilty of an Error in the giving of
manifest Acids, viz. always give them in such quantities as the Stomach will
receive them with pleasure and delight, and never refuse them when the Stomach
earnestly craves them; this is the method I observe at present, and believe I
shall never have occasion to recede from. I confess it may be lawful sometimes
in very extraordinary cases to strain a point beyond what Nature craves, but
herein if the thing should chance to be overdone, all the damage that can ensue
is occasioning a puke or two; this you may take from my constant experience,
and believe me I would not willingly impose upon you and the World: But in
general, it is always necessary for us Physicians, who are, or at least should
be, only Natures Servants, strictly to observe her Necessities, and not to
outrun her Dictates.

Without making the least Experiment to convince me of being in an error, you
go on to range Sassafras amongst the number of Alkalies; but when, from
Experience, I do assure you that Sassafras is an inveloped Acid, I think you
ought not to trouble me and the World with conjectures; and were it not that I
value and respect you, I would not so much as take the least notice of your
Conjectures. As for the remaining part of this Paragraph, I think I have no
occasion to take notice of it, I having sufficiently answered every thing that
looks like an Objection in it in my former Remarks; and therefore shall, in
your own words, conclude, that if I have any where expressed my self indecently,
I hope you will not attribute it to rudeness or disrespect: for I do assure you, I
think you a Blessing to the Country wherein you live, and don't doubt but that
I shall see you an Honor to our Profession.

I should have concluded, but that you also begin again; and that I may not be
unmannerly, I shall for once keep you company to the end of your Journey; but do
not design any more to trouble the World with Disputes, but if any thing more
of that Nature offers it self, worth my taking notice of, it shall be included
in some Practical Discourse. And so pass we on to your Reflections upon the
First Part of my Essay of Alkaly and Acid. And first,

OF THE Small Pox.
WHAT I think worthy taking notice of at present in your Reflections upon this
Matter is this, That you honestly and fairly allow the giving of Acids in a
Flux Pox, the only dangerous one, and from which our Patients are in most
danger: but in Benign Poxes you commend me for doing nothing, and indeed I
shall always continue so to do where my Patients have no occasion for
Medicines. I am a Friend to Rad. Serpentariae Virg. as well as you, in all
those Cases where there is an occasion for Cardiacks; that and Saffron being as
Noble Cordials, as perhaps, are at all known; yet they must never be given but
with due caution and circumspection. But I am a professed and declared Enemy to
Pull. e Chelis, and all things of that kind. And once again I do assure you,
that Rad. Serpentar. upon distillation will appear to be a sulphurous Acid;
and in cases where the Pox does not come out kindly, and the Pulse is low, an
infusion of that Root in Vinegar, or some such thing, will do very good feats.
I confess the Testaceous Pouders in Benign Poxes, are frequently given without
any evil consequence; but the reason is, that the Patients are generally in so
good a condition, and have so much strength of Nature to support them, that it
is almost impossible to kill them; but what fatal work they make in Flux Poxes,
or any other of a malignant kind, is but too frequently seen. Here observe the
difference between your Method and mine, even by your own confession. Mine is
principally serviceable in dangerous Cases, Yours in those wherein there is no
danger. Granting this, you may still keep your own Method to your self, and I
will stick to that which will stand me in stead in hazardous Cases, and even
only stand by and look on in those where my Patient has no occasion for my
help. You at last blame me for giving Syrupus e Meconio in the beginning of the
Small Pox; but surely you are overhasty in blaming me upon that score, for of
all men in the World I deserve least to be blamed for tampering too much with
Opiats. If you remember, the occasion of my prescribing Diacodium in the
beginning of the Small Pox, was this, viz. If the Patients Stomach be
overcharged or clogged with viscous Matter, I then prescribe an easy Vomit;
and after the operation of the Vomit is over, to allay the hurry and disorder
occasioned by it, I prescribe a little Diacodium, but never prosecute it
afterward, as some people fatally do. I have not time, else I would remark
upon you Line by Line; but having taken notice of what is material, I shall let
fall the rest, and leave you and your Friends to make the best of it. But
cannot forbear to assure you, that two or three of my greatest Enemies in this
Town, have of late prescribed Acids plentifully to their Patients in the Small
Pox, and yet at the same time have railed at me for so doing: whether this be
like Gentlemen, I leave the World to judge.

OF THE Scurvy.
IN this Matter you perfectly agree with me in my Practice, only you would
bring in the Bitter Herbs as great assistants in the cure of this Distemper,
and these Herbs you will have to be Alkalies. As for Bitters I greatly approve
of them in their proper places. But having before put you in a way to be
satisfied that they are not Alkalies but Acids, I shall not here trouble my
self nor you any more upon that Matter: Nay if we can but once agree in the
main Point of curing Diseases by any particular sort of Medicine or Medicines,
tho you account it an Alkaly and I an Acid, we ought not to fall out about that
matter, but give God thanks that we are able to perform the Work we pretend to.
Yet at the same time I think a Physician ought as much as he is able, to know
the true reason why a Medicine performs such and such Operations. And I must
confess I shall be very unwilling, upon any occasion, to prescribe a Medicine,
the manner of whose operation I am not able to account for. As for what you say
concerning the Scurvy that attends the People in the North Part of Devonshire,
I think I have sufficiently accounted for that matter already; and I doubt not
but impartial Readers, who will give themselves the trouble of perusing my
several Tracts, will acknowledge it.

OF Rheumatisms.
WELL met my good Friend! I must confess you have almost come to an agreement
with me in several things before, yet here you say your Practice and mine are
the same, but don't mention how long you have used this Method in the cure of
this Distemper. However I cannot presume you had it from me, but that it was
your own Judgment that led you to it. I hope, for the good of the Country where
you live, that in a little time we shall agree in more things than the cure of
Rheumatisms only. However I would have you remember, that in another place you
blame Acids as the cause of Pain, and yet here you professedly use them in the
cure of a Distemper, the principal Symptom that attends which, is exquisit Pain.

OF Consumptions.
A Consumption is a Distemper, the progress of which in this our Island, I have
oftentimes heartily bewailed. It is likewise a Distemper that most of my
Predecessors (as I have before observed) have died of, even in the Prime of
their Ages; and is also what I have more cause to be afraid of than any thing
else besides; upon which score I have spent a great many days and nights in the
consideration of the Nature and Cause of this Fatal Distemper, which deprived
me of the best of Fathers, whilst I was but a Child, and has also robbed me of
some other of my best Friends. Now the reason why I have not hitherto spoken so
much about it, as of other Distempers, is, because I have been some years in
collecting Observations in order to the Writing a particular Tract of
Consumptions, and was unwilling to anticipate what I had to say upon so weighty
a Subject, tho I was able to say as much concerning that Matter, as of any
Disease about which I have treated. Nay, I am apt to believe, that I may
without Vanity say, that I have cured more true Consumptions in the space of
one Year last past, than any one Physician in England has done, and that by the
means of Acids of one sort or other, viz. either Manifest or Inveloped ones; an
ample account of which, as soon as my business will permit, I design to make
public. But however I shall spend a little time in remarking upon what you
have said. You allow Acids to be proper and beneficial in those Consumptions
not attended with a Catarrh, which is a concession which very few Physicians
besides will give their assent to; or at least if they will, they are but very
lately come over. But considering that the main thing you harp upon, is, that
manifest Acids are not proper to be used in Catarrhs; I shall a little take
that thing into my consideration. Now although a Catarrh will cause a
Consumption, or wasting of the Parts of the Body, yet a Catarrh is not what we
in England commonly call a Consumption; the Distemper called Tabes Anglicana,
or the English Consumption, proceeding from an ulceration of the Lungs: and in
these cases for the most part we have no Catarrh, though sometimes it does
attend them; but one of the principal Symptoms of this Distemper is the
discharge of a great quantity of tough, yellow and greenish Pus, in which cases
you allow Acids to be proper: nay although there be a Catarrh attending them,
yet it is not from that that we make our fatal Prognostics, but from the good
or evil nature and quantities of the aforesaid Pus, with some other Symptoms
not necessary here to enumerate. Nay it is not uncommon for our Consumptive
People to bring up from their Lungs by Coughing, as perfect Chalk Stones as
ever were found in the joints of Persons severely handled with the Gout; which
Chalk I am sure was never the Daughter of an Acid. But however not to insist
any longer upon this matter at this time, it not being the proper place for it,
I shall return to the business of Catarrhs. I have before taken notice, and as
you your self here own, that the Saliva is a noble Acid, and conveyed to the
Mouth for a most noble purpose, viz. to be mixed with the Food in chewing, and
afterward in the Stomach, to turn it into a substance fit for the nutrition of
our Bodies. Now if on any occasion the Glands of the Pharynx, and other Glands
about the Mouth are over-relaxed, that they cannot retain the Lympha in their
proper receptacles, but let it fall continually from them, being what we call a
Catarrh, or defluxion, this must inevitably cause a tickling Cough, not because
it is an Acid, for even a defluxion of the most simple Water would produce the
same effect; but the Body being continually robbed of this most noble Juice,
cannot fail of being wasted and decayed by it. And that the cause of a simple
Catarrh does proceed from a relaxation of the texture of the Glands only, and
not from the Lympha contained in, and continually brought to them being
over-acid, the following easy Cure is sufficient to demonstrate, viz. Let some
Mastick and Olybanum be made into impalpable powder, and with a long Quill or a
hollow Instrument made on purpose, let it be blown upon the Larinx at night
going to Bed; the continuance of which for some Nights together will frequently
do wonders in the cure of Catarrhs. I confess this was none of my own
contrivance, but was communicated to me by my worthy Friend Dr. Jones, who is a
man of the most happy invention that ever I met with. Now the only design in
the using of this Powder is, that being immediately conveyed to the Parts
affected, it should cause them to contract themselves, or regain their Tone,
and of consequence the Catarrh will cease. This is not all that I have to say
concerning Catarrhs, but I think is as much as is necessary at this time. You
tell a famous Story of a Person that had a Catarrh brought upon him by the
over-plentiful use of Sevil Oranges; but are so deficient in relating several
circumstances that are necessary to be known upon such an occasion, that if I
have not already said enough to solve this difficulty, I shall leave you to
make your best advantage of it; for I am so tired that I can go no further. And
I do assure you it shall be the last Controversial Discourse that ever I will
write; for if ever I meet with any Objections against my Hypothesis worth
taking notice of, I shall make it my business to clear my self from them as
well as I can, in those Practical Discourses that I design (God willing)
hereafter to publish. I confess I am over head and ears in debt to the Public,
having promised several things which many have expected should have come abroad
long before this time, and indeed I designed they should; but several
unexpected Accidents have intervened, which have put me by, and hindered me in
my undertakings, yet in due time I will endeavor to fulfill what I have
promised. I shall conclude with assuring you, that I am now so absolutely
confirmed in the truth of my Hypothesis, that I am sure it is not in the power
of any one to overthrow it; tho at the same time I must own that I may have
been deficient in some circumstances relating to the explication of it; but
time and further observation, I hope, will clear all those things. Thus wishing
you to weigh all things in the Balance of Reason and Experience, before you
pass a Censure, is all at present from

Villars-street York-Buildings, May 12. School. Your real Well-wisher, Jo.
Colbatch.

POSTSCRIPT.
DR. Coward took an occasion to make some wonderful Reflections upon me and my
Hypothesis, in order to recommend a Medicine of his own invention to the World.
This Medicine, which he calls Tinctura Sanitatis, is as Noble in its Nature, as
the Author is Generous and Great in his Temper. I can assure the World it is
nothing else but the most ridiculous kind of Sal Volatile Oleosum that ever I
saw; and were it not that I am unwilling to expose a Member of the College, I
would print the Receipt, which was communicated to me by one that has been
employed by him to prepare it. The Doctor cannot but own that I am more
generous to him than he has been to me, in that I have not published the Story
relating to Mr. Bat and Mr. Lord also. But such poor Enemies as him and Lee,
are rather to be pitied than any thing else. However, Sal volatile Oleosum,
being a Medicine in great vogue with almost all other Physicians, I shall
presume to make some few reflections upon the main ingredient in it, which is
the Volatile Spirit, or Salt of Sal Armoniack. Now every body knows that the
Volatile Spirit, or salt of Sal Armoniack, are little else but the Volatile
Spirit or Salt of Urin, which at best is no more than an Excrement of our
Bodies. But however, there is something more that deserves our taking notice
of, in order to deter us from the use of this Medicine, which is now so much in
fashion, to the no small detriment of many. The Salt Armoniack, from which the
Volatile Spirit or Salt is extracted, is a Composition of Urine, Soot and
Sea Salt; and by the addition of a fixed Alkalizate Salt or Quicklime (which is
the usual method in making Spirit and Salt of Sal Armoniack) the Acid of the
Sea Salt is so entangled, that it readily lets go from it the Volatile Spirit
or Salt of the Urine and Soot; but that of the Soot is very inconsiderable in
quantity to that of the Urine. Now the Urine made use of for the aforesaid
purpose, is generally procured from public Houses, which is a jumble of all
together, viz. of People laboring under all kinds of Habitual Diseases, as
Pox, Gout, Scurvy, Scrubbado, etc. Now there is scarce a Disease attending
Man's Body, but some of the Morbifick Particles are imparted to the Urine; and
if the Urine in general partake of them, the Spirit and Salt must do so in a
more eminent degree; so that, I think, a necessary consequence of giving such a
Medicine must be the sowing the Seeds of Diseases in Men's Bodies. And I believe
in my Conscience that one great reason of the late frequency of some Tyrannical
Diseases, more than heretofore was wont to be, has proceeded from the
exorbitant use of Spirit and Salt of Sal Armoniack, and those other things of
which they are prime ingredients. Now I desire that our Ladies, who are subject
to Histerical Distempers, would well consider this matter, because they are
generally armed with it, to fright away that Distemper, of which I am afraid it
is in great measure, if not altogether the cause, or at least of the saline
Particles of the same kind with which their Blood abounds. I shall say no more
at this time, but hope this further Hint, to deter people from the use of
Volatile Alkalious Spirits and Salts, of which the Spirit and Salt of Sal
Armoniack are most common, may not be unserviceable.

I have made use of the words Spirit and Salt of Sal Armoniack, as of things
somewhat different, tho indeed there is no real difference between them; that
which is called Spirit, being only a proportion of the Salt diluted in a proper
quantity of Phlegm: this is well known to Physicians, but it is Very probable
that other Persons into whose hands these Papers may chance to fall, might have
labored under some difficulty about it, without this Intimation.

FINIS.

