The Darkness of ATHEISM Expelled by the LIGHT of NATURE OR, The EXISTENCE of
a DEITY: AND His Creation and Government OF THE WORLD. Demonstrated from
Reason, and the Light of Nature only. With an Appendix touching the most proper
Method of Preaching the Gospel among the Heathens.

Englished by H. C.

Animis, non Auribus. Nullus in Inferno est Atheos, ante fuit. London, Printed
for D. Brown at the Black-Swan without Temple-barr, and T. Benskin in St.
Brides-Church-yard, 1683.

Quisquis profunda mente vestigat verum
^upitque nullis i will devijs falli
In se revolvat intimi Lucem visus
Longosque in Orbem cogat inflectens motus
Animumque doceat quicquid extra molitur
Suis Retrorsum possidere Thesauris
Quod atra dudum texit erroris nubes
Lucebit ipso perspicacius Phaebo
Boet. de Consol. Philos. Lib. ^ Metr. Who e're profoundly searches after truth,
And would not be miss-led by straggling paths;
Let him turn on himself his inmost eye,
And bend into a Ring his ranging thoughts,
Making his Soul see what she seeks abroad
In her own native Treasures stored up lies.
Then what errors black Cloud did hide, will soon
Shine clearer than the Sun it self at Noon.
TO THE READER.
THe publishing a Book to prove the Existence of a Deity amongst People that
have all Enrolled themselves Christians at the Font, may possibly be thought
unnecessary; but it must be only such as are strangers to this unhappy Age of
ours, where it is esteemed by too many a piece of wit to be Profane, and all
things sacred have been made objects of Scoff and Drollery; wherein Atheists
have appeared broad-faced, and with a prodigious impudence defied Heaven in the
sight of the Sun, undertaking to dispute Divinity out of the World by Reason,
and levying Arguments against that Power which gave them Being; how requisite
then it is now to show the abused World, that these Godless ones have all this
while committed a Rape on their own Reason, who freely of her self (would they
but hear her speak) leads them directly to the knowledge of a Deity.

Nor is it only these open Ranters that we are to combat, there is a sort of
secret demure Atheists, who verbally acknowledge a Deity, and perhaps make the
most zealous pretensions of Religion too, but Hearts being not really possessed
with a firm belief and stable apprehension of a most Just and Holy Power, that
being ever present takes an Account of, and will one day severely judge all
their Actions, They thereupon give no other Check to their exorbitant Lusts,
than what external or politic respects may Bridle them in with, whence
proceeds that Innundation of wickedness that at this day overwhelms the World,
and though these last may hypocritically Counterfeit a veneration of the holy
Scriptures, there is only this difference between them and the other Crew; that
whereas the others disclaim all regard to those sacred Oracles; these pretend
to believe them, but really do not.

To meet with them both, we recommend this brief Treatise to public view,
which not with flourishes of Rhetoric, or mustering up Authorities, Fathers,
Philosophers, etc. But merely by Natures Light, and in an undeniable
Mathematical Method, evinces the existences of a Deity; which once firmly and
unfeignedly believed with the necessary consequences thereof would very much
stop the Torrent of Impiety in Men's Lives, and prepare them for the reception
of, and obedience to other Articles of the Christian Faith and Gospel Duties;
The main part of it is an Arrow borrowed from the great Morinus his quiver; He
that was lately Royal Professor of Mathematics, when he first sent it abroad
in its Roman Dress 'twas welcomed with the applauses of the Sorbon and general
approbation of the learned World for its perspicuous Brevity, Orthodoxness, and
close Cogent Method of arguing.

What entertainment it may meet with in this courser English Garb, I cannot
Divine, yet dare venture to say, that whoever shall Seriously and
Understandingly read it over, cannot but confess a Deity, or disown his Reason,
and must acknowledge a God, unless he will deny himself to be Man. If it prove
in the least useful to reduce any to their Allegiance to their Sovereign
Creator, I shall esteem my pains most advantageously laid out in the
Translation, and therefore conclude with imploring his Infinite Majesty, that
he would by commanding a Blessing to attend it, render it Effectual to that
desired end.

ADVERTISEMENT.
BY Dan. Brown next door to the Sign of the Queens Head without Temple Bar, You
may be furnished with most sorts of Plays, both New and Old, to be sold, or
lent to read.

Where you may be also furnished with all sorts of Stationary Wares; As,
Indentures, Recoveries, Blanck-Bonds, and Blanck-Writs of all sorts;
Paper-Books, etc. Writings fairly Engrossed and Copied; and the Best Ink for
Recoveries or Records.

THE PREFACE OR INTRODUCTION.
HOW spreading and Epidemical the Contagion of Atheism is grown of late, there
are few so happy as to be ignorant, That the same not only strikes at the Root
of all Religion, but takes away all sense of Good and Evil, all Trust and
Obligations amongst Men; and consequently is most destructive to humane Society
and Government, is no less evident: To put some stop to this fatal Torrent
which thus threatens all things sacred and civil with a Deluge, not a few have
attempted with endeavors no less laudable than laborious: Yet scarce attaining
that success as was wished, by reason of their not proceeding in such a Method
of Proof, as the Adversaries (who must be allowed to choose their Weapons, or
they will never acknowledge themselves vanquished) have thought fit to expect
for their Conviction; The authority of sacred Scriptures, which pious Souls
devoutly reverence, They Impudently deny; The sense all Nations have of a
Deity, they allege is only a general cheat, and a melancholy Fancy blown into
credulous heads by subtle Polititions. The Beauty and Harmony of the world
they will tell you, is only caused by the curious motion of Dancing Atoms, or the
apt, yet fortuitous concurrence of Actives with Passives: In brief, (for who
without horror can relate their Blasphemies?) whatever you offer of that kind,
they evade; yet still pretend highly to Reason, and intimate they would be
satisfied, could they but meet with such Demonstrations might be necessarily
conclusive to their Understandings, and enforce their Assent: And certainly,
the goodness, and Infinite Mercy of God, (ever legible in all his dealings with
Mankind,) does most illustriously display it self in this, That even when they
not only (like desperate Traitors) renounce all Allegiance to Him, but deny his
very Essence, from whence they received their own: Yet still he affords them
Natures Light, and deprives them not of those common Principles, which if
seriously consulted, are able to reduce them from their horrid Frenzy, and
evidently demonstrate the Existence of a Deity that Created the World, and
continually Governs it by his Providence, and whom to acknowledge Love, and
obey, is not only their Duty, but their glory, perfection, and chiefest
Happiness.

To make it appear that Nature of it self does so far enlighten, and conduct
us, is our present design, wherein the more to comply with their Humor, which
pretends so high a value for Reason, we have chosen to proceed in a Synthetick
Method, familiar in Geometry, whose Students glory in the infalibility of their
Demonstrations, and may justly boast more certainty than the Votaries of any
other Science, A happiness they principally owe to that excellent Mode of
Arguing by Axioms and Theorems, which in the subsequent Leaves, we have
endeavored to imitate: Not doubting but the same may be practicable in all
other Learning, as well as the Mathematics, and that with greater success than
can be expected, from the vulgar Logic, or wrangling Sophistry of the Schools:
The Foundation is laid on Definitions, truly stating the Nature of the Things
treated of, and certain Axioms or common Notions, self-evident and universally
necessary, whence we are apt to conceive the succeeding Theorems by a due and
continued connection built hereon, must be confessed undeniable, unless we shall
abandon our Reason, resolve absolutely to Dispute against Common-Sence, and
proclaim our selves rather Brutes than Men.

And that we may proceed Orderly, we will

First, give brief Definitions of the Terms which we are forced to make use of
in the ensuing Discourse.

Secondly, Lay down several Self-evident Axioms, And,

Thirdly, Deduce thence Theorems necessarily arising pertinent to our present
scope.

DEFINITIONS.
1. Esse is a Term used to signify a Principle of Being, or that whereby
whatever Is, or can be Is. 2. Ens (or a Being) is that which has an Esse, (or
such Principle of Being) And is either Actual or Potential. 3. An actual Being
is that which actually does exist. 4. A Potential Being, is that which may
come, or is able actually to exist hereafter. 5. Nothing, is that which has no
Esse, (or principle of Being) 6. A Finite Being, is that which is included and
bounded within some limits of Being. 7. An Infinite Being, is that which
transcends all, or is included in no bound of Being. 8. Eternity, is an
infinite duration; Or that which transcends all bounds of Continuance or
Enduring. 9. Creation, is the production of a Being out of Nothing. 10.
Providence, is the Method or Reason of Ordaining things for some end. 11. A
pure Act, is the perfection of Being; to exclude from it all Power to be
another thing. 12. Nature, (as here we take it) is every Finite Being so far as
endowed with its proper Virtue; Or, a concourse of Finite Beings, to to effect
something by their proper Virtues.
AXIOMS.
1. Every thing either Is, or Is not. 2. It is impossible the same thing should
at the same time both Be, and not Be. 3. Nothing is before it is. 4. That which
is not, can do or effect nothing. 5. That which is, is not in power to be that
which already it is. 6. Whatever is, is either by or from it self, or has its
Essence from another besides it self. 7. That which Is by it self, is
Independent on any thing besides it self; and so on the contrary. 8. Nothing
can give that which it self has not. 9. As a thing is in it self, so is it in
its posse, or power. 10. The power of a Finite Being is Infinite, both its
active power, and also its passive, so far as it is reducible to Art. 11. The
Effect of a Finite Virtue or power cannot be Infinite. 12. There is no finite
thing, but something more great, or more perfect may be assigned or conceived.
13. Nothing can be, or be conceived greater, than that which is infinite. 14.
To every finite thing, another thing equal may be conceived. 15. The whole is
greater than its part. 16. Those things which are the same with any third
thing, are the same between themselves in that Third thing. 17. That which is
the Cause of the Cause, is also the Cause of the thing Caused. 18. That which
is not Eternal, begins to be in Time, or has some other first beginning of
duration proper to its self. 19. Of that which is Eternal, there can no
beginning of duration be assigned. 20. Everything that is compounded is
dividable into those things of which it is compounded. 21. Nature makes nothing
out of nothing, nor any thing out of every thing. 22. There is no progress to
be made in Cause, or from Cause, to Cause infinitely.
THEOREMS.
1. An Infinite Being, is all that which is, or can be.

FOr otherwise, Infinite being it self would be included in some Limits of
being, against our 7th definition; and hence it follows, that Infinite being in
its self is every finite being, but without, or above all limits, or (as others
express it) Absolutely, Incontractedly, or Eminently.

Nor let any over captious head, conceit that here at first step, we stumble on
a Paralogism, and fall to Beg the Question, by taking that for granted, which
is to be proved, viz. That there is such a thing as Infinite being; For we here
only treat of Infinite being abstractedly, as defined in our 7th definition,
whence this Theorem is necessarily deduced; Now a definition does not
necessarily infer, that there is (exparte rei) and indeed such a thing as is
defined; For Example, The squaring of a Circle is the finding of a right line,
which may be equal to the circumference of a Circle: this is a true definition,
yet there is really no such invention, nor yet is it known whether it is
possible to be done, since it has not yet been found out by any the most
laborious Geometricians; But that there is really such a thing as Infinite
being, we shall prove by and by. Theorem 23.

THEOREM. II.
Infinite being is a pure Act.

For otherwise it should be in power to be some other thing; Definition the
12th; And so would not be. All that which is, or can be, against our First
Theorem; or would be included in some limits of being against our 7th
Definition.

THEOREM. III.
Infinite Being is an Infinite Act, or every Act that is, or can be.

For otherwise it would not be all that is, or can be against our first
Theorem, nor a pure Act against our Second Theorem; Therefore Infinite being
must be an Infinite Act, and by consequence is good, true, potent, wise, and
whatever else can be, or be conceived under the notion of an Act or perfection,
and that in the highest degree.

THEOREM. IV.
Infinite Being is unchangable.

For otherwise it should be in power to be that, into which it is changable;
and so would not be a pure Act against our second Theorem, nor an Infinite Act
against our third Theorem.

THEOREM. V.
A finite being cannot be the adequate subject of an Infinite.

For if it would, The Passive Power of a finite being must be Infinite against
our 10th Axiom.

THEOREM. VI.
There cannot be two Infinite Beings.

For suppose (if it were possible) A. and B. to be two Infinite beings in any
moment of time, now because A. is an Infinite being, therefore it will be
whatever is or can be at that moment of time; but whatever is, or can be at the
same moment of time, does not admit of any Generical Specific, Individual or
other difference from it self, but is one and the same both in reason and
things; And therefore neither A. nor B. do admit of any difference at all
between themselves, but will be wholly the same in entity according to our 16th
Axiom, and so not two Infinite beings against the Hypothesis, whence it is
evident, there cannot be two Infinite beings.

It may possibly be objected, that this Theorem concludes aright of two
infinites in essence or entity, since such an infinite is indeed all that is,
or can be, according to the first Theorem, but not of two infinites, whereof at
least one is finite by Essence, but infinite by Accident; As Body which may be
infinite in extension, or quality by intension.

But we answer, That the finite essence of Body, cannot be the subject of an
infinite accident, as as Infinite extension would be, see our 5th Theorem;
therefore there is no such infinite; the same we say of Quality, and
irrefragably conclude, there cannot be two infinite beings.

THEOREM. VII.
Infinite being is not dividable.

For First, It cannot be divided into two infinite beings, because a part
cannot be equal to the whole, Axiom the 15th, nor can here be two Infinites,
Theorem the 16th.

Nor Secondly, Can it be divided into two finites, for either of such finites
may still be conceived greater, or more perfect Axiom the 12th, and to every
finite thing, something else may be conceived equal, and addition may be made
of them, Axiom the 11th: But by such means something would be conceived more
great, large, or perfect, than that which is infinite, against our 13th Axiom.

Nor Lastly, Is it divisible into a finite and an Infinite; For when the finite
is taken away, still the Infinite Being remains, which hence plainly appears
cannot at all be divided.

THEOREM. VIII.
In an Infinite Being there is nothing before or after.

For if there should, it would be dividable, viz. Into that which was before,
and that which is after; But that cannot be by our 7th Theorem.

THEOREM. IX.
Infinite Being is most simple and uncompounded.

For were it any way Compounded, it would be dividable into those things
whereof it is Compounded, Axiom the 20th, But infinite being cannot be divided,
Theorem the 7th; Therefore is not Compounded.

THEOREM. X.
Whatever is, or can be conceived in an Infinite Being is Infinite.

For whatsoever is, or can be conceived in an infinite being, is such infinite
being it self, which is individable by our 7th Theorem.

THEOREM. XI.
Nothing any way Compounded can be Infinite.

For every compound is dividable, Axiom the 20th, But infinite being is
undividable, Theorem the 7th, therefore no Compound is Infinite.

THEOREM. XII.
Infinite Being is neither a part, nor a whole.

1. Not a part; For it must be a part either of a Finite or an Infinite; if of
a Finite, a part would be greater than its whole; if of an infinite, a part
would be equal to its whole; both which are absurd, and contrary to our 7th
Axiom.

2. Neither is it a whole, for a whole, as a whole consists of parts, into
which therefore it is Dividable, but infinite being is not Dividable, Theorem
the 7th, therefore is neither a part nor a whole, but above both these.

THEOREM. XIII.
The difference between a Finite Being and an Infinite, is Infinite.

For since an infinite being exceeds a finite, which is wanting of the
infinite, if such excess, want, or difference, were finite, the infinite might
be compounded of two finites, or a finite and an infinite, and so would be
dividable into them; against our 7th Theorem.

THEOREM. XIV.
Infinite Being differs in (or of) its self, from finite.

For otherwise, either the difference between them would not be infinite,
against our 13th Theorem, or at least there would be two several infinites
against our 6th Theorem.

THEOREM. XV.
Esse (or the principal of Being) is of it self.

For it is that whereby whatever is is, Definition the first; now because we
see many things are, it is necessary that there be an Esse (or such principles)
For otherwise nothing could be; But one Esse cannot be from another Esse,
because that were to run round from Cause to Cause in Infinitum, against our
22d. Axiom; therefore it follows it is of it self.

THEOREM. XVI.
That only Esse is of its self.

For otherwise, if any thing besides were of its self, Esse could not be that
whereby whatever is, Is, against our 1st. Definition.

THEOREM. XVII.
That Esse it self is Infinite.

For it is included in no bounds of being, and because there are not two
infinites, Theorem the 6th, therefore Esse and Infinite Being are the same; and
whatever is said of this, may be said of that.

THEOREM. XVIII.
Nothing can of it self pass from nothing to an actual Existence.

For either it must do so whilst it is not, or whilst it is; not the first, for
that which is not, can do nothing; Axiom the 4th, not the second; for that
which is, is not in power to be that which already it is; Axiom the 5th,
therefore, etc.

THEOREM. XIX.
No Finite thing is of its self, neineither as to Essence, nor as to Existence.

1. Not as to Essence; for since every finite thing is included in bounds of
being this thing, and not another; if any finite being were of it self as to
Essence, it would follow, that such beinu was bounded by it self, or did impose
Limits on it self of being this and not another thing, which must be done
either before it was, against our 4th Axiom; or after it was, which will be
against our 5th Axiom; and therefore cannot be done at all.

2. Not as to Existence, for if it should, then such Finite being must be Esse
it self, or the first principle of Being, which alone exists by, or of it self,
Theorem the 16th; And then it would be infinite; Theorem 17th against the
Hypothesis; therefore no finite being is of it self.

The same may more briefly be demonstrated another way. Thus.

Only Esse is of it self, Theorem 16th, but Esse is infinite, therefore no
Finite thing is of it self.

THEOREM. XX.
In the production of things there can be no Circulation

For if A. should give being to B. and B, to C, and C, to the same A. it would
follow, that A. in respect of the same C. were both an efficient Cause and an
Effect, and so was before it was, which is absurd, and against our 3d. Axiom.

THEOREM. XXI.
Every Finite being has its being from Infinite being.

For it has its being from Esse, which is that whereby whatever Is is,
Desinition the the First; But Esse is Infinite Being, theorems 9th and 17th,
Therefore, etc.

Again, whatever is, must either be of its self, or have its being from some
other being, Axiom 6th; for nothing, viz. That which has no being cannot give
being to any thing, Axiom the 4th, but no finite thing is of its self, Theorem
19th, and if it take being from another, such other must be either a Finite or
an Infinite; if you say the last, you grant our present Theorem; If the first,
it will be replied, That this other Being must have its being either from
Infinite, or some finite being, and so you must still either grant our Theorem,
or else continue your progress from assigning one finite after another, which
would be against our 22d. Axiom; and though you should be permitted so to do to
never so great a number, yet could not the same be Infinite, because Infinite,
is undividable, Theorem the 7th, but such number (though never so vast) being
composed of the unities of the finite beings produced, will be dividable into
the same; Axiom the 20th, and so will not be Infinite, but Finite, and by
consequence there may be assigned the first of such finite beings whereby the
rest were produced, and which it self was produced by none of them, (for no
Circulation can be, Theorem the 20th) And when such first finite being is
assigned, we shall still say it is not of its self, Theorem the 19th, but has
its being from some other being either finite or infinite, but it cannot be
from any finite; for then, this, not that should be the first of finite beings,
which is against the Hypothesis; and therefore it must befrom infinite being.

Then, agreeing the first finite being to come from Infinite being, It will
follow that the other finite things produced by that first, are likewise from
infinite being; for that which is the Cause of the Cause, is the Cause of the
thing Caused; Axiom 17. whence appears the truth of our Theorem, that every
finite has its being from that which is Infinite.

That the number of finite things, produced by other finite beings, is not
infinite, is thus also demonstrable;

Suppose the number of Men hitherto produced to be Infinite, the same will
contain all the Men that have been, are, or can be, Axiom 13th; and so no Man
would be henceforwards producible; but experience shows us every day and moment
fresh Men are produced (and that without Circulation) therefore the number of
Men produced, is not Infinite, but finite; and consequently there is a First,
etc. as before, now what is here instanced in Men, holdingt, true by parity of
reason in all other finite things which have being one from another, it
therefore undeniably follows, that every finite being has its being from a
being that is infinite.

Here let us take breath a while, and consider, that if a being which is
confined to some limits of being, be properly termed finite, then a being
which. transcends all bounds of being must be called Infinite; Of some of the
proprieties of both these we have treated hitherto, comparing them, one with
the other, yet not at all determining whether there were any such things,
especially any Infinite being; so the explication of the first Theorem, but
only have made it evident, that if there be such things as Finite beings none
of them can be of its self; but every of them can only be from some being that
is Infinite; and now we proceed thus.

THEOREM. XXII.
The World is Finite.

For the Terestical Globe is not the whole World, but a part thereof; the same
we may say of the Sun, Moon, and every Star, or even of Heaven it self; whence
it appears, that the World is a certain whole Composed of those parts, and is
therefore dividable into them, Axiom the 20th, so not Infinite; Theorem the 7th
therefore Finite.

THEOREM. XXIII.
There is really an Infinite Being.

For there is really a finite Being; As, the Earth, the Sun, the Moon, Man,
etc. Therefore there must be an Infinite Being from whom these have their
Being, Theorem the 21st. For it cannot be said, that heretofore indeed there
was an Infinite Being that gave being to these Finites, but the same is now no
more; for then such Infinite being must have been included in Limits of
duration, and consequently not Infinite, Definition the 7th, which is
contradictory and absurd.

THEOREM. XXIV.
Infinite Being is of it self.

For otherwise it has its being from other besides it self, Axiom the 6th,
which must be either Finite or Infinite, but it could not from the first,
because the Virtue of a finite Being, being finite: Axiom the 10th, Its effects
cannot be Infinite; Axiom the 11th, nor from the Second; for there cannot be
two Infinite beings; Theorem the 6th: therefore the Axiom is undeniable.

Again, Infinite being, is Esse it self, Theorem the 17th; but Esse is of its
self; Theorem the 25th: therefore Infinite being must be of its self.

THEOREM. XXV.
Infinite Being is Independent.

For it is of it self, Theorem the 24th, therefore Independent or any other;
Axiom the 7th.

THEOREM. XXVI.
Whatever is Independent, is Infinite.

For, whatever is of its self is Esse it self, Theorem the 16th but whatever is
Independent, is of its self, Axiom the 7th: therefore whatever is Independent,
is Esse it self; but such Esse (...) infinite, Theorem the 17th; Therefore so
is whatsoever is independent.

THEOREM. XXVII.
Infinite Being is Eternal.

For otherwise, either it has its Being from some other, against our 24th
Theorem, or past of it self from nothing to an actual existence, against our
18th Theorem, therefore Infinite being must needs be Eternal, or rather is its
own Eternity, or Eternity it self.

THEOREM. XXVIII.
No real matter flows from Infinite Being out of its self, whereby it may
produce a Finite Being.

For if there should, Infinite Being would be dividable, against the 7th
Theorem.

THEOREM. XXIX.
Infinite Being produces a Finite Being by the simple Act of its will.

For since no real thing flows from it out of its self whereby it may produce a
Finite Being, Theorem the 28th; Therefore it must needs produce the same by
some Immanent Act, which can be no other than the mere Act of its will; for in
the production of finite things we must necessarily at last come to some first
things produced by Infinite being alone, as we have proved, Theorem 21st. But
innumerable things there were producible, which of themselves were equally
indifferent to be produced; therefore when Infinite Being goes to produce
something out of it self, either all things possible to be produced, should be
produced together at once, or nothing (both which it is plain are false and
absurd) or else Lastly, we must admit an election or Act of such Infinite
Beings will whereby it produced one thing rather than another; since it is in
its producing, superlatively, free, powerful and wise, yea supreme liberty and
infinite wisdom and power it self, Theorem the 9th. Yet still the production of
a finite being is peculiarly attributed to the simple Act of its will, and so to
Love, which is the wills proper Act, and not to power or wisdom, because
although Infinite Being, be Infinite Wisdom and Power, as well as Infinite
Love, yet it produces not at all that can be produced, nor all that it
understands its self able to produce but only that which it wills or is pleased
to produce at that moment wherein from eternity, it willed it should be,
because the will of Infinite Being, is the same with its Omnipotence, Theorem
the 9th, and therefore is of its self infinitely efficacious and needs nothing
else either efficiently or subjectively to assist it in producing; for
otherwise it would not be supreamly free and Omnipotent, against the premises,
therefore our Theorem stands undeniable, viz. That Infinite Being produces a
finite by the simple Act of its will.

THEOREM. XXX.
A Finite Being once produced by an Infinite, is continually produced or
conserved by the same Infinite Being.

For since a finite being is produced by an Act of the Infinite beings will,
Theorem the 29th. Therefore it is only so far a finite being as infinite being
wills it to be; but how far that wills it to be, so far it does produce it,
because the Omnipotent will of infinite being is most efficacious, Theorem the
29th. Therefore a finite produced by the infinite, is thereby continually
produced, which continual production we usually call its conservation, which
ceasing, such finite being immediately drops into its original, nothing, and
ceases to be.

THEOREM. XXXI.
Infinite Being concurrs efficiently and immediately to all the real effects of
a Finite Being.

For since infinite being by an Act of its will continually produces a finite
being, by giving it both being and power of acting according to the last
Theorem; therefore at whatever moment such finite does act, infinite being
wills it so to do; for otherwise either it should give it power of acting in
vain, and so would not be infinite wisdom, against our 9th Theorem. oratleast a
finite being should Act contrary to the will of infinite being, which so would
not be infinitely potent against our 29th Theorem; but so far as infinite
being, wills a finite being to Act or produce a new real effect, so far it
causes it to Act, and what it wills, it also produces its will, being most
efficacious: Theorem the 29th.

THEOREM. XXXII.
Every Finite Being, immediately depends in its Being on Infinite Being.

For it is produced either by infinite being alone, or by some other finite
being; if the first, the truth of the Theorem appears; if the last, then since
infinite being does so efficiently and immediately concur to all the real
effects of a finite being, Theorem 31. Therefore also every finite being
produced by another finite depends in its being immediately on infinite being.

THEOREM. XXXIII
No Finite Being is or can be from Eternity.

For since every finite has its being from infinite being, according to our
21st. Theorem; therefore if we suppose any finite being to have actually been
from eternity, since it was produced by the simple Act of infinite beings will,
Theorem the 29th. and thereby continually produced, Theorem the 30th. Therefore
if infinite being will, (as it may) that such finite being shall from hence
forwards be everlasting, it will follow that its duration being included in no
bounds, must be infinite, and so individable; Theorem the 7th. In which by
consequence there will neither be before, nor after; Theorem the 8th. but it
will be all at once; and therefore a true eternity according to our 6th
Definition; but infinite being is also eternal, or rather eternity it self; now
therefore the eternities of the finite and infinite are two, or munerically the
same; if the first, then there will be two eternities against our 6th Theorem;
if the second, than since the eternity of an infinite being is the very same
with its entity, Theorem the 9th. Therefore if infinite being can give to a
finite being its own eternity, it will also give it its own infinite entity,
and so the finite must be Infinite against the Hypothesis.

The same is otherwise demonstrated thus, no finite being can be actually
existing, but the same was producible from eternity; therefore no finite being
was, or could be from eternity; for if it should, it would at the same time be
both in Act and Power, or (which that implies) it would at the same moment be
actually, and not actually existing, the consequence is plain, the antecedent
proved thus; because every finite being is produced only by an Act of infinite
beings will, which in producing is most free and unconfined, Theorem the 29th.
And therefore indifferent in it self, to give; or not give actual being to this
thing, and therefore supposes such finite things to be only in power; for
otherwise its indifferency would be about giving, or not giving being to a
thing which already is in Act, or to a thing impossible, which on either side
is absurd, wherefore there is no finite being can actually be from Eternity,
though it may from all Eternity be possible.

THEOREM. XXXIV.
This World had not its Being by any Physical, or Natural Generation, nor
concourse' of Attoms.

For all Natural Generation tends to some one thing formally and by itself; but
this World is not any one thing formally and by itself, but only by aceident;
that is to say, Composed of several bodies, as Earth, Sun, Moon, etc. Of
different Species and discontinuant, therefore could not owe its Being to any
Natural Generation.

Nor yet to the fortuitous concourse of wandering Attoms according to the Dream
of Epicurus, whose ridiculous Hypothesis being of late revived, has
undeservedly procured to many followers, and is in Sum no more but this. That
in an Infinite Vltramundane space, there is an Infinite Troop of Attoms, or
little Particles which have an eternal motion that makes them Encounter and
justle each other; and that such their casual concourse and shuffling together,
made up this World and danced them by mere chance into all these beauteous
visible Beings, and in that exact order and harmony which we behold.

A conceit so absurd and extravagant that it deserves scarce any other
Refutation but a hiss; yet that we may continue our Method, we thus seriously
and in brief raze its foundations, and say,

That these imaginary Attoms in this fancied vacuity were either eternally
there, or not, if the last, than they were placed thereby somewhat before and
above them, and that leads us to our principles of an Infinite being or Deity;
if the first, then they must of necessity have been without alteration there
still; for whatever is eternal is unchangable, that is, can never cease to be
as it was, or produce any other thing by varying its own form; nor can any
thing be Infinite in change, since what infinitely is, is the highest
perfection of being; now Change is a perfect relative to imperfection, and to
imagine a change in what is Infinite, is to imagine a change from the highest
perfection, which is unimaginable.

THEOREM. XXXV.
This World was Created in time by Infinite Being.

For since it is finite, Theorem 22. Therefore it is not eternal, Theorem 33.
Besides those who with Aristotle conceit the World to have been from all
Eternity, do suppose the motion thereof, or of Heaven to be Eternal, in that
they confess the first mover of the World to be Eternal; which being supposed,
either the number of the revolutions of the primum mobile from Eternity
hitherto, is finite or Infinite; if the first, then its first revolution may be
assigned, and consequently the beginning of the Worlds duration, and so the
same cannot be Eternal, Axiom the 19th. If the second, then such number, will
be no number against the Hypothesis; for that every number is dividable, Axiom
the 20th. Because compounded of a multitude of Unites; Definition the 11th. But
Infinite is undividable, Theorem the 7th. Whence it follows, that no number can
be Infinite and consequently this World not Eternal.

That the number of the revolutions, or turnings round of Heaven hitherto is
not Infinite, may also otherwise be proved; for were it Infinite, it must
comprehend all its revolutions that have been, are, or can be, Axiom the 13th.
And by consequence no more Circulation would be possible, but every week we
know there are new whirlings round of the first Heaven.

Therefore this World cannot be Eternal, but must begin to be in time by a
duration proper to it self, but it neither received being from nothing, Axiom
the 8th. Nor had it by any Physical Generation, Theorem 34. Nor Lastly could it
of its self pass from nothing to actual existence, Theorem the 18th. And
therefore must be brought out of nothing to such actual being, immediately by
that whence every Finite Being takes its Esse, viz. Infinite Being Theorem 32.
But that which is so produced, is properly said to be Created, Definition the
9th. Therefore this World was Created in time by Infinite Being, which is what
we undertook to demonstrate, For Infinite Being having all things virtually
existing in himself, made all matter out of no matter, but from his own active
potentiality, who being without, and above all cause, must necessarily be
acknowledged as the Author of all causes.

THEOREM. XXXVI.
This World, and the several Beings therein, are governed by the providence of
Infinite Being.

For since Infinite being is the immediate efficient cause of this World, and
the several beings therein produced, Theorem 32. And that every efficient cause
Acts for some end, especially infinite being, because it is infinite Wisdom,
Theorem the 9th. Therefore either Infinite being must be said in vain to Act
for some end, or it will order this World, and all the several beings by fit
and agreeable means to some end intended and designed by its self in their
production; and this is properly called to rule by its providence, Definition
the 10th.

The same likewise appears otherwise thus, Since we manifestly see there is a
providence in all Animals; for Brutes provide for their young; Parents for
their Children; A Prince for his Subjects, which finite providence must be from
Infinite being, Theorem 32. And therefore Infinite being it self must be
provident, as well by our 8. as 3. Axiom; yea must be Infinite Providence; that
is, a Providence extended to every finite being; for otherwise it would not be
infinite therefore this World and all things therein are governed by the
providence of Infinite being.

Again, every finite being is continually produced by Infinite being, which is
called the conservation of such finite being, Theorem the 30th. But it is
produced by an Act of its will, which is the same with Infinite Wisdom, Theorem
29. And therefore neither rashly nor to no purpose, but for some end, and
therefore it is continually directed to such end, by the same infinite being
which indeed would not be infinite, if it were not provident, or rather if it
were Infinite Providence, which leaves nothing any where wholly void of it self.

Now this Providence of Infinite Being is found to discharge a threefold office.

1. In placing the several finite beings in their several ranks and orders.

2. In preserving them in such their places and order.

3. In moving and directing them to their respective proper ends according to
every ones Nature; and therefore it provides that necessary causes shall act
necessarily, contingent, contingently, and free causes freely.

And most consonant it was to Infinite Wisdom, to will, that some of its
Creatures should be free Agents; that is, endued with understanding and will,
to the end, that infinite being might not remain unknown amongst all the finite
beings produced by its self, and have none to celebrate its Glory, and return
the tribute of worship and admiration to their Creator; but that it might at
least by such free Creatures (which in this behalf, it has enabled and made
after its own Image above others) be owned in their understandings to be of all
things, the beginning, middle (or preserver) and last end, and by their wills
might be above all Created things, Adored, Loved and desired; that so such free
Creatures by becoming like to the Infinite Being in Purity, Justice, Charity,
Holiness, etc. Should always tend thereunto, and at length obtain, and
everlastingly enjoy the same.

And here we may behold the Basis of those two grand Pillars of the World,
Reward and Punishment; For these free Creatures being made capable of
discerning Truth from Falsehood, and what is just and righteous, from that which
is unjust; and thereby of knowing their own excellency, and consequently their
greater obligations above all other finite beings; therefore by decree of
Infinite Providence, just things are by them either to be done, or suffered, so
that if they follow not the one voluntarily, they fall into the other
necessarily.

THEOREM. XXXVII.
There is some certain ultimate (or last) end of all Finite Beings.

For every finite being is produced by infinite being, Theorem 32. And
therefore is ordained for some end by such infinite being, Theorem 36. Now this
end is either the ultimare end, and so our Theorem is granted, or only a mean
to some ultimate end; and if there be such an ultimate end, our Theorem is
granted, if there be not, then such other end could not be a mean thereunto,
against the Hypothesis; therefore there must necessarily be some certain last
end of all the several finite beings, in which every finite being attains the
complement of its perfection, according to its Nature.

THEOREM. XXXVIII.
Infinite Being is the ultimate, or last end of all Finite Beings.

For otherwise there would be a progress in ends Infinitely, whereby a finite
being would never attain that end intended by Infinite Being in its production,
and so it would be ordained thereunto by Infinite Wisdom to no purpose; or else
there must some finite being be assigned, which was made by Infinite Being for
no other end, than that it might be the end of all other finite beings, Theorem
the 37th. And so such other finite beings would likewise be the last end of
that, and they would mutually be causes to one another in the same kind which
all Philosophers confess cannot be.

Besides, the ultimate end is always extremely desired by those things which
tend thereunto, because it satisfies them, and having obtained the same, they
rest; but if no finite being can so much as satisfy it self, but stands in need
continually to be produced and conserved, least it should sink into nothing and
cease to be; Theorem the 30th. Much less can it satisfy any other finite being,
especially Man's Appetite which can never be satiated with any thing finite; so
that we may safely conclude no finite being can be the last end either to its
self, or another.

Once more since a rational creatures is obliged which its whole understanding
and entire will to tend to that last end for which it is ordained, therefore if
the same shall be any thing besides Infinite being, it will be bound to turn it
self from that infinite being, which as we said before, made such rational
Creatures, merely that by them through understanding and will he might be known
and loved; nothing therefore but Infinite Being can be imagined tg the last end
of all finite beings, and which at last possessed by every thing tending
thereunto according to its proper Nature; and that immediately through the
understanding, and will, or knowledge, and love by rational Creatures, and
through them by other things mediately.

Now this infinite, only one, most simple, immutable, independent, eternal
being; the Creator, Preserver, most provident Governor, and ultimate end of
the World, and all things therein, is by the unanimous consent of all Nations
called God, who is infinite Goodness, infinite Wisdom, infinite Love, infinite
Justice, infinite, and whatever else is becomingly attributed to him; to whom
every creature for its being, power of acting, and preservation received,
whether immediately or by secondary causes, does owe it self, and its being, it
power of acting, and all its operations, since the Causer, original, and maker
of a thing, must needs have a property in it; nor can he be disseised of his
right to a thing, that caused it first to be.

But above all, every rational Creature ought wholly to devote and consecrate
to this Omnipotent and Ineffable Being, the sole and entire use of its
understanding, and its will; since so to do, is both their duty, and their
chief perfection and supreme happiness; which consists in knowing and loving
him, To whose most sacred and infinite Majesty, be thanksgiving, Praise,
Honor, Power, and all Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

THEOREM. XXXIX.
God in Acting is not bound to the Laws of Nature, but by his Power, Infinitely
excells Natures Power.

The first part is proved thus, The Laws of Nature are, that it can make
nothing out of nothing, nor any thing out of every thing, Axiom 21. But only
something out of something, meet and idoneous for that purpose; but God makes
and does whatever he pleases, Theorem the 29th. And that out of nothing,
Theorem 35. Therefore much more out of any thing; since there is a greater
power shown in producing a thing out of nothing at all, than in making it out
of some other thing.

The second part is thus evinced, as a thing is in its being, so is it in its
Power, Axiom the 9th. But God is infinite being, Theorem 38. And therefore his
power is Infinite. But Nature is a finite being, Definition the 12th. And so
its power finite also, Axiom the 10th. Therefore the strength or power of God
does infinitely excel that of Nature, Theorem the 13th.

Now those wretched votaries of Hell, the positive and dogmatical Atheists, who
with a brazen Impudence and imparrallell'd Ingratitude, disown their Creator,
by denying that there is a God; do yet generally admit of Nature, and confess
it took its being from none, and therefore are forced to confess that it is of
it self, Axiom the 6th. And so that it is Infinite, Theorem 19th. And by
consequence omnipotent, Theorem 9. But this is absurd and against experience;
for we daily see that Nature is very strictly subject to rules and Laws, so
that it is not able to beget any thing out of every thing, but only out of its
proper seeds; as Wheat from Wheat, a Wolf from a Wolf, etc. Since Nature
therefore is subject to Laws, Who is the Lawgiver? If she be a Subject, Who is
the Lord? Certainly he who is truly Omnipotent, and did first impose these
bounds, and circumscribe her power in these Lymits; To wit, God the Infinite
Creator of Finite Nature.

THEOREM. XL.
God can do whatever does not imply a Contradiction.

For God can do whatever is possible, otherwise he were not omnipotent, but
whatever implies not a contradiction is in it self possible; Therefore God can
do whatever implies not a Contradiction.

The Conclusion.
Thus far humane understanding is able to dart its proper beams, what remains
requires some more excellent optics, and can only be discovered by the
assistance of Faiths celestial Tube; yet though our Reason, or that mere
natural Light God has planted in our Souls, be not able of it self to fathom
those adorable Depths and sacred Mysteries of the Trinity, Hypostatical Union,
Resurrection, and other verities of the Christian Creed, yet in some measure,
it prepares for the entertainment of the same, and when they are revealed by
God, and declared by his Ministers, It enforces our consent to them by its
proper light, since thereby it knows, First, That God cannot Lie; and Secondly,
That God in acting as well within as without himself, is not bound by the Laws
of Nature, Theorem 39. And therefore able to do whatever implies not a
Contradiction, but in the premises and whole body of our Religion, no
contradiction offers it self; and therefore the Soul lead on by a divine Faith,
and supported by right Reason, embraces these sacred truths when proposed, and
yields an unfeigned and undoubting consent and obedience thereunto.

In Brief, The belief of this proposition, that there is one supreme, eternal,
independent Being, infinite in Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, and Maker,
Governor, Preserver, and ultimate End of the World and all Creatures therein,
viz. GOD, is the first step to Religion, and so asserted by the Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, He that comes to God must believe that he is; where by
coming to God, according to the mode of expression ordinary with the Hebrews is
meant, worshipping him, to which none or can address themselves, without
believing that he is; So that a firm assent to the Existence of a Deity
necessarily precedes all adoration of, and obedience to him. For the more ready
disposing persons unto which (especially such as have been seduced of Satan to
entertain mean thoughts of those sacred oracles wherein God has more fully and
expressly declared himself and his will) it is hoped the premised Demonstrations
may prove in some measure Conducive; Since it is certain that this proleptical
principle of the Being of a God implanted in Man's Nature, with the deductions
which do immediately flow, and may necessarily be inferred from thence, is the
original of all natural Religion, and the foundation of all that Virtue and
Veneration which we admire in the pagan World; to this Idaea engraven in their
Souls, were those gallant Hero' s, Socrates, Plato, Tully, Seneca, Epictetus,
and other Heathen Worthies, endebted for the seminal principles of all that
solid honesty and piety, which sparkled with so much Luster in their Lives and
Discourses, that a serious reflection thereon, cannot but Summon up Blushes on
the guilty Cheeks of most pretended Christians, to see themselves (to whom the
Sun of Righteousness vouchsafes to appear in a Gospel Meridian) surpast in real
goodness by those who had only Natures glimmering Light for their Conduct.

AN APPENDIX Concerning the most Proper Method of Preaching to Pagans and
Infidels.
THe mention of Pagans in the close of the precedent Discourse, invites us on
this Opportunity to offer a few things, touching the most Effectual Course of
dealing with them, in order to their Conviction and Conversion to Christianity.

That the Gospel, viz. The gladtidings of Man's Reconciliation to to God through
a crucified Jesus shall one day be proclaimed in every Land, even to the
extremest corners of the habitable World, and amongst the most savage and
barbarous of Adams Offspring is part of our Belief, warranted by Authority no
less then Infallible; and certainly it is very strange and very sad to consider,
That too many, who appear so passionately zealous about what they apprehend,
concerns the Honor of God in the skirts of Religion, and little Adiapherous
Circumstances, should yet unconcernedly behold near three parts of the known
World lie chained up by the Prince of Darkness in a stoneblind Paganism, or
what is equally wretched, a filthy obscure Mahumatisme, without contributing
ought but a lazy Insignificant Vtinam to their Relief. Do we not much too much
busy our selves about Mint and Cummin, and too little regard the weightier
matters, when we so fiercely reincounter each other to the wounding of Charity,
and banishing peace and Brotherly love out of our streets for a few darling
opinions, in themselves no less indifferent, than to us uncertain; and yet in
the mean time seem not at all affected with their deplorable condition, who
scarce ever heard of a Redeemer. Have we not the highest obligations in the
World upon us, to be thankful to that merciful hand of Providence, that has
ordered our lot so graciously, and fixed our Habitations in those Regions where
Christianity is universally professed? And can we any way more illustriously
evidence our gratitude in this behalf, than by endeavoring with the pious
Samaritan Lepers to make others sharers in the happiness we enjoy. 'Twould
certainly be more glorious, if these great and fervent Spirits would turn the
bright flames of their Zeal to the burning down Ethnic Temples, rather than to
the wasting and unsettling Christian Churches, and strive more to enlarge the
Tents of them in the borders of Japhet, than to promote unseasonable divisions
in Reuben, which must cost each truly pious Christian so many sad thoughts of
heart.

In the Primative days, The Promulgers of the Gospel went out supernaturally
furnished with the gift of Tongues, and enabled to seal the truth of their
Doctrine as well with working of Miracles, as laying down their lives, and by
performing such Actions as could not but be acknowledged the Effects of a
divine assistance, did (as it were) enforce the Gentiles belief; But now those
extraordinary Gifts being generally ceased, there seems a greater need of
improving natural parts to the best advantage, and pursuing the most rational
method of Instruction, which seems to be

First, To cast out the strong man armed, to show the vanity of their present
Apprehensions, taking them off from their worshipping Idols or Devils, by
shewthem, that it is no less ridiculous then wicked and detestable.

Secondly, To lead them by the most suitable perswasives and demonstrations to
the knowledge of one true God, Creator and Governor of the whole World and all
things therein; and that he is most good, most wise, most blessed, Eternal,
Immutable, etc. And that if he were not all this, he would want to be so, and so
could not be God; for who in his wits would admit an indigent God into his
Creed, since all want is Imperfection and misery.

Thirdly, After their minds are hereby settled in this great Principle, The
Existence of a Deity, they are next to be informed concerning their own nature,
in what condition man was Originally created, and how he fell by Satan's
temptation from that glorious state, which may easily be evinced; for since all
other Creatures keep in the same natural order ordained for them from the
beginning; how shall we imagine that man's nature (the noblest part of the
Creation, and for whose sake the rest seem chiefly made) should so prodigiously
be depraved, and become worse than brutish, raging in quarrels, rapines and
cruelties against itself, and abnoxious to ignorance, inconstancy, sloth,
diseases, death, and a thousand miseries which would accuse infinite wisdom of
an error, unless we believe that man first created upright, and endued with
Free will, did by transgression forfeit all his happy privileges, and so
became liable to all these evils as just punishments for such his sin.

Fourthly, hence it follows, that man having offended against an Infinite God,
there was no appeasing Divine Justice without an Infinite satisfaction; This
only, the Son of God could make, whose love to miserable humanity causes him to
quit his mansions of Glory, to take on him our nature, and by his death to open
to us the gates of Life and Immortality: and here may be unfolded the whole
mystery of our blessed Saviors Incarnation, the purity of his life,
grievousness of his Crucifiction, certainty of his Resurrection, and glorious
Ascension, etc.

Fifthly, Add to all this the Excellency of the Doctrine, showing, that there
is nothing required in the whole Christian profession, but what is highly
reasonable in it self, and mainly conducive to the accomplishing and ennobling
humane nature: not a few rigid persons are apt to draw our Religion (the
greatest beauty in the World) in too sad a habit, with a frowning countenance
and sower looks, more ready to frighten than invite raw Proselites to a more
intimate converse.

The persons that undertake this glorious work of propagating the Gospel (which
is attended with the Plaudites of Angels, and prayers of all good men) ought to
be fitted for the same in respect of mission and Abilites. It Is no slight nor
trivial affair attempted out of wantonness, vanity, or vainglory; they are
Gods Ambassadors, and should see they have his Commission and Warrant, without
whom Paul plants, and Apollo waters, but all in vain. A lively vigorous faith
is required to set forth the Word with power and authority, and carry them
through all dangers, hazards and difficulties that may occur; they ought also
to be very expert in the language of those persons they design to instruct,
that they may readily in clear intelligible terms distill their discourses into
their souls. Thus our blessed Lord, though he chose his Apostles Fishermen, and
ordinary Mechanics (lest vain men should suspect his holy Doctrine for the
contrivement of some great worldly wits or plot of subtle self-interested
Politicians;) yet before he sent them abroad into the Nations, he made them the
best Linguists in the World; above all, sweetnesses of nature, and holiness of
Life are necessary. This is a Continual Sermon, and convinces more than all the
charms of the most accomplished Orator. How odious did Coveteousnesse and
cruelty render the very name of Christianity to the poor Americans, Show us thy
Faith by thy Works is every man's propsal. Can we imagine they design any other
but to put a cheat on us, who tell us of Crowns, and Glory, and everlasting
happiness in the other world which we can only a spire to by Purity and
Mortification, Selfdenial, etc. in this; And yet themselves practice things
quite contrary to all these they so eagerly recommend.

These Stumbling Blocks which cause the name of the Lord to be lasphemed
amongst the Gentiles ought to be removed; And these Fishers of men must approve
themselves Lights in Conversation as well as Doctrine; That so God may be
glorified, the souls of their hearers saved, and themselves enjoy that glorious
promise made to such as turn many to Righteousness; Of shining like Stars in
the Firmament for ever and ever.

FINIS.

