ANIMADVERSIONS ON A Late PAPER, ENTITLED, A LETTER to a DISSENTER upon
occasion of his Majesty's late Gracious DECLARATION Of INDULGENCE.

By H. C.

LONDON, Printed for John Harris, at the Harrow against the Church in the
Poultrey, MDCLXXXVII.

ANIMADVERSIONS on a late PAPER, entitled, A Letter to a Dissenter, etc.
WHAT Severities toward the Persons, what Havoc and Devastations on the Goods
and Estates of peaceable English Men, have some years past been practiced by
strained Interpretations, and a rigorous Execution of the several Penal Laws,
is sure too late to be forgot by the Sufferers, too notorious to be denied by
the Actors.

During this Storm the Dissenters of all sorts filled Earth and Heaven with
loud and mournful Complaints, both of the Iniquity of those Laws, and the
Persecution they thereby suffered; which was become so intolerable, that many
actually transported themselves to foreign Parts; Multitudes more, out of a
sense of their present hard usage, or just apprehension of further
Prosecutions, were upon the wing ready to fly at the first opportunity to the
remotest Deserts, choosing by a voluntary Banishment from their Native Country
to expose themselves to all Hazards abroad, rather than continue under those
Evils which they either felt or feared at home. And as Oppression is apt to
make even wise Men mad, not a few distracted with these frightful Idea's,
suffered themselves to be embarked in Designs no less unwarrantable in their
own Nature, than destructive in the Event.

In the height of this Consternation, and when no Interest but that of his
Majties own Princely Generosity and the Public- Weal, could necessitate him to
it (the Western Rebellion being crush't and all his Enemies at his feet) the
KING was pleased to publish his healing Declaration for a general Liberty of
Conscience, together with the Grounds and Reasons inducing him thereunto; it
being no sudden or occasional Overture to serve a present turn, but the
wellweigh'd and long-confirmed Result of his Royal Judgment, which as he had
many years ago declared on sundry occasions, so it is not unknown to whom we owe
the Retarding thereof so long, and consequently all the Disasters attending
that unhappy Obstruction.

By this Gracious Declaration, as his Majesty did freely and fully ease all his
Nonconforming Subjects from those Pressures under which they had groaned for so
many years, and put them into an equal Capacity with the rest of their
Fellow Subjects, to serve his Majesty and their Country, without violating
their Consciences, (a natural Birth-rightPriviledg, which they were before
debarred of) so he particularly expressed his Kindness to that Party who call
themselves, The Church of England, by his Royal Assurance, that they should
without any molestation, fully enjoy all their Possessions, as well as the free
Exercise of their Religion.

Now who that considers Men as acting like rational Creatures, could have
imagined but such a very gracious Procedure, would have obliged all his
Majesty's Subjects to a most joyful Resentment of so vast a Favor?

Who would not have thought that the Churchmen (who seemed to value themselves
upon nothing more than their steady Loyalty, and entire passive Obedience)
should have been extremely pleased, that their Prince, though himself of a
different Communion, was so far from putting them on the Practice of that
uneasy Virtue, as on the contrary he vouchsafed so peculiar a regard of them,
as to continue them in the Figure of the National Church, and sure Enjoyment of
all their former Advantages, except that unaccountable one of forcing all
others, (although by destructive means, and dangerous to the Public Repose) to
conform to their particular Schemes, which yet themselves own to be indifferent.

At worst, if they could be supposed capable of such an unreasonable
Peevishness, as not to be satisfied, because their Nails were pared, and they
could not scratch their Neighbors so as heretofore; yet it could not be
doubted but all the Dissenters of whatever Denomination, would with the highest
Gratitude receive such an indearing Indulgence; the rather because His Majesty
not only assured them of it for his own Reign, but engaged to do his part for
continuing it to their Posterity.

But as what is offered with the Right Hand is not seldom received with the
Left; and the best Actions frequently happen to be traduced by the Sinister
Interpretations of those that postpone the Public Tranquillity to their own
pettish Humors, little Self-Interests, or perhaps only silly Vanity of
appearing more sagacious at the Politics than their Neighbors. No sooner was
this Incomparable Declaration emitted, but some rigid Churchmen vexed by a
Spirit of Pride to think that their power of domineering should be in the least
abbridged; and gaul'd with Envy to behold Dissenters admitted to any degree of
Royal Favor (which they hoped to engross wholly to themselves) studying
likewise by some Wheadling Artifice to manage the Dissenters so, as that they
should expose themselves to his Majesty's just Displeasure, as a sort of savage
Animals, that like Tigers can never be rendered tame; Men that would not be
quiet under any Government, but like Trouts must be always swimming against the
stream; People without Conscience, Reason or common Sense; whom no Kindness
could reclaim, no Clemency oblige (for in such hideous Characters they always
represented them;) and withal designing that the Rods which themselves had both
procured, and so mischievously made use of, might still be reserved in Lavender
for a more opportune Juncture, in order to smarter Lashes on all that will not
truckle to whatever Ceremonies their Reverencies should think fit to impose.
Upon these and such like Motives, I say, a strange sullen Murmur, and grouling
Humor has ever since possessed most of the violent Churchmen, to repine at or
reproach his Majesty's Proceedings, to incense or amuse the People with Fears
and Jealousies, and especially to cajole the Dissenters not to regard this
Indulgence with that Respect they ought to do, or at least to discourage them
from contributing their share toward rendering it perpetual.

To reach these Ends, the Malcontents aforesaid have had their Clubs, and
Cabals, and little Associations acted by united Councils, not altogether
perhaps uninfluenced by foreign Correspondencies (as it is said, they had once
heretofore on somewhat alike occasion) with some that have found Liberty of
Conscience, too advantageous a Plant to themselves, to suffer it, by their good
Wills, to thrive any where else.

The high-flown Churchmen have endeavored to affright such honest Country
Gentlemen, as they thought Bigoted to their Establishment, with Outcries, that
this Indulgence will certainly blow up the Church of England, and then
Goodnight to the Protestant Religion, and so farewell to all their Abbey-Lands.

On the other side the Latitudinarian Divines, as being for their reported
Moderation of greatest Credit and Interest among the Non-Cons, have been
inveigled by specious Pretensions, to amuse and bugbear the Dissenters with a
noise of the Snake in the Grass; that the Constitution of England was unhoop'd,
all the Laws of Civil Property shaken, by the King's dispensing with the
Penalties of these Irreligious Religious ones; that this Indulgence was only a
Scaffolding erected for the building up of Popery, which would be thrown down
as soon as the intended Structure was complete, etc.

These Insinuations were managed at first with Caution, till having (as they
thought) by private Whispers sufficiently prepossessed their own Party, and
created preparative Jealousies amongst others; To crown the Work, out comes a
Paper, called A Letter to a Dissenter, etc. wherein all that Wit or Malice
would rake together, to invenom Men's Minds with false Impressions, is mustered
up, and boldly published to the World.

No sooner was the Press delivered in Hugger-mugger of this hopeful Brat, but
many grave Dons (appointed for that Cue) stood ready to admire and recommend
its charming Features: Industriously were the Papers spread, (and some Crape
Gowns appeared so fond of promoting it, as if they had a mind to play the
Interlopers on the Hawkers) printed it was more than once or twice, and at last
in a single Sheet for Convenience of Postage, that no Corner of the Land might
be unattempted by this excellent Specimen of the Church of England's Loyalty.

As for the Author, since he is so kind to himself, as to play Bo-peep with the
Public, under the Mask of a couple of Letters only, I am not solicitous to
enquire after either the Quality or Habitation of a certain uncertain T. W.
whom perhaps I am never like to find; not did I certainly know the Gentleman,
should I descend to Personal Reflections, how obnoxious soever he might happen
to be to them; that is a base and sneaking Practice used only by such as
thereby confess themselves over-match'd in the Argument.

For this Reason too, I shall not qualify the Paper with any harsh Epethites;
whether it fall within the Statute of false News, or without it; whether it
should be called Libellous or Seditious, or somewhat worse, are Questions that
belong not at all to my Province.

That which I apprehended my Duty (both as a disinterested honest Man, a good
Subject, a hearty Lover of the future Peace of my Country, and a sincere
Professor of, and Well-wisher to the Protestant Religion, that it may be
established on such a Foot as may for ever preserve it free, both from the
danger of being persecuted, and the scandal of persecuting any others) was to
consider the Purport and End of this Writer, atd the Reasons he offers; and
since these, to the best of my Understanding, appear repugnant to all those
Obligations, I hope I may be allowed to offer my Conception thereupon without
any just Offense; to antidote the unwary against those mischievous Notions,
which I conceive he would instill into their Minds, under the Flourishes of a
gaudy Rhetoric.

For it must be acknowledged, that this Pamphlet is wrote with a great deal of
Art, full of pert Sallies of Wit, and gay Language, plausible Expressions of
Kindness, and a Style altogether accommodated to amuse and inveigle; but for
strict Truth, or solid Arguments, the Author has been pleased to dispense with
his Readers Expectations.

To premise thus much, I thought not altogether impertinent, that the State of
the Case being rightly apprehended, we might have done the sooner, and the
Reader, if he please to divest himself for a while of Prejudice and partial
Affections, may be the better enabled to judge of what is offered on either
side: And so let us come to the matter.

Here Is a Letter from Some body to a Dissenter -- Very good! What has the
illustrious unknown T. W. to say to his humble dissenting Servant? Why truly,
after an envious Reflection on the late Addresses in general, and a
fine-spuninsinuating Banter, he has a pair of Advices to communicate to him: 1.
That he must suspect his new Friends. 2. That he must not hazard the Public
Safety, neither by desire of Ease, nor of Revenge. To the first we can give no
Categorical Answer till we better understand his meaning, which I shall enqire
after by and by: But as for the last, I hope there is no Dissenter in England
but was before fully convinced that it was his Duty; and so the Gentleman might
have spared the pains of his elaborate Letter in that respect. But he has also
some News to tell him, viz. That the Papists; always make their first
Court-ship to the Church of England; That they are not in their Hearts so fond
of the Dissenters, as to their Principles, but civil to them, in regard their
Interests at this Juncture happen to unite in aliquo Tertio, viz. A Repeal of
the Penal Laws, under which they have both smarted, and are in danger to do so
again; and that therefore one Reason (and perhaps with many, the only Reason)
why they are content to allow them Liberty, is because they would thereby get a
little for themselves and their Posterity. Having made these wonderful
Discoveries, our Author proceeds to open his Budget full of Supposals, mixed
with known Falsehoods, and thence conjures up a Parcel of horrid Inferences, and
upon the whole concludes, that we had as good be downright Atheists, as
consent to part with the Penal Laws; -- And so he is, dear Sir, your most
affectionate humble Servant.

This is the Sum and Substance of the Pamphlet, when stripped of its Top-knots
and Gallantry; and were not vulgar Ears more open to Rhetoric than Logic,
there need no more be said to expose its Shallowness and Vanity; but since the
Trifle is become so celebrated, I shall briefly overhaul the Particulars.

His first Instruction to Dissenters is, that they have cause to suspect their
new Friends; and have they none to suspect their old Enemies? The truth is, the
Dissenters would gladly be Friends with all their Fellow Subjects, that there
might be an Union in Affections, and all the mutual Offices of Justice and
Humanity, tho under different Apprehensions about Matters of Religion; nor can
they so much as guess at any Expedient able to accomplish that glorious End,
viz. To render both Governors and People easy and safe, by extirpating the
otherwise perpetual Feuds and Fears, each Party much needs entertain against
the other (those infernal Winds which so often have raised Storms, and more
than once ship-wrack'd Civil States.) And in a word, to give God and Caesar
each his due; Unless it be by a total Abolishment of those Penal Laws (that
have hitherto obstructed all these Blessings) and establishing Liberty of
Conscience on so firm a Legal Basis, that it shall not be in the Power (how
violent soever the Inclination may be) of any one Party to invade the
Immunities of the rest.

But this will not answer our Authors End; it is too plainly evident by this
affected Term of New Friends, which runs through all his Paper, he principally
means the King; who indeed has been the best Friend the Dissenters ever had on
this side Heaven; and yet some People are so prodigiously ungrateful as to
persuade them not to thank Him for it.

But if we must always mistrust new Friendships; then we must not credit the
very late Pretensions on behalf of the Church of England, that she is sorry for
her past Rigours, or will be more kind for the future: With what Forehead does
this Gentleman urge us to suspect the solemn repeated Promises of our SOVEREIGN
and yet at the same time expect we should take his bare Word, who neither gives
us his own Name, nor produces any Commission from that Church, for what he
undertakes in Hers?

But why must we needs suspect our King? Is it because amongst the many Royal
Qualities he is invested with; a punctual Veracity, and generous Disdain of all
little tricking dissembling Arts, has been signally remarkable? No it is,
because the Church of Rome cannot by her Principles allow Liberty to Heretics;
and because the Men of Taunton and Tiverton are on a sudden grown eminent for
Loyalty; and because the Quakers give the King Thanks with a boon Grace: --
Worthy Reasons! But let us examine them apart.

As for the first, our Author exaggerates it with his usual Floridness thus, p.
3. This Alliance between Liberty and Infallibility is bringing together the two
most contrary things that are in the World. The Church of Rome does not only
dislike the allowing Liberty, but by its Principles it cannot do it. Wine is
not more expressly forbidden to the Mahumetans, than giving Heretics Liberty to
the Papists. They are no more able to make good their Vows to you, than Men
married before, and their Wife alive, can confirm their Contract with another.
The continuance of their Kindness would be a Habit of Sin, of which they are to
repent, and their Absolution is to be had upon no other Terms, than their
Promise to destroy you: -- Thus He. And because it is a popular Argument
frequently made use of, I shall endeavor to give it a full Answer.

1. What the Church of Rome's Principles are, or what by them she can, or
cannot do, I shall not here take upon me to determine; for many of her
Principles are very abstruse, even this of Infallibility, she has not been
pleased to determine where and in whom particularly it resides; and she can do
great things, as for example (if I am not See my Lord Coke's Charge given at
Norwich Assizes, 4 Aug. 1606 4th page of the sheet F. (for it is not paged.)
misinformed) she offered once to allow of our Common Prayer Book, and that I
hope you will say was kindly done of her. Nor do I see any such necessary
Contrariety between Infallibility and Liberty; for though a Man should think
himself Infallible, (if any can in good earnest think so) it does not follow,
that he must beat, spoil or kill all that will not own such his assumed
Infallibility; at least Liberty and Infallibility may agree, as well as we find
by woeful Experience Conformity has done with Nonconformity; and if Dissenters
must be persecuted, it is much alike to them, whether it be by a
Fellow-Protestant or a Papist's Hand; only the former, Act somewhat the more
absurdly in Imposing on others, since they confess they may perhaps be in the
wrong themselves.

2. But however these things may happen to be, it is plain the Gentleman does
not here argue a Propos; for we have nothing to do with the Church of Rome, she
is no Party to the Transaction: The Dissenters have never that I know of,
entered into any Treaty about Reconciliation with her in Principles, whatever
others have been nibbling at. Our Concern lies with a Prince, our natural
Sovereign, who although he be of that Communion, has solemnly avowed to all the
World, That it has been, and is his constant Sense and Opinion, that Conscience
ought not to be constrained, nor People forced in Matters of mere Religion. In
pursuance of which Principle, his Majesty has at present restrained the
Execution of the Penal Laws and assured the Dissenters that they shall enjoy
the same Ease during his Reign; and that he would be ready to contribute His
Part toward rendering the same perpetual, both by repealing those Laws, and
confirming the Right of free Exercise of Religious Worship, and securing by Law
such a settled and permanent Freedom of Conscience from being invaded by any
Party whatsoever for the future.

The Question is, whether the Dissenters ought not thankfully to embrace his
Majesty's most Gracious Offer herein, and not be wanting on their part toward
bringing it to effect? To which I should answer affirmatively, and take it to
be their true Interest and only Preservative. For,

3. How far soever the Church of Rome's Pretensions to Infallibility, or her
Aversion to those she calls Heretics may extend, we find in fact, that it does
not render all her Members so extravagant as to venture on Impossibilities, and
act contrary to their own apparent Interest; Quia desunt vires is allowed by
their hottest Casuists, a sufficient Ground for tolerating Heretics; else
every one of her Sons should be obliged under Pain of Damnation to run a muck
against all Mankind that differ from her; whereas we see many places, where
both Papists and Protestants live very quietly together, and that there have
been and are Princes of the Roman Creed that have and do tolerate different
Religions, without esteeming themselves ever the worse Catholics; nor does the
Pope venture to excommunicate them on that account.

I doubt not but those of the Protestant Cantons in Switzerland believe as much
as any of our Dissenters that there is Idolatry in the Church of Rome; and
there is no Question but those of the Popish Cantons believe the other to be
rank Heretics, yet they both in a friendly manner coalesce into one and the
same Republic, and live quietly together for their mutual Preservation;
neither the miscalled Heretic thinking himself bound to invade the Civil
Rights of the supposed Idolater; nor the imagined Idolater once dreaming that
he can never go to Heaven, without a Promise to destroy his Neighbor, because
he fancies him to be an Heretic.

Nor do the Roman Catholics of the United Provinces (whose Numbers are not
inconsiderable) esteem themselves bound to cut their Compatriots Throats, but
on the contrary have as vigorously as any drawn their Swords (even though
against the most Catholic King) in defense of their common Liberties.

By all these and many other like instances that might be given, it appears
that Roman Catholics, notwithstanding their Principles, can sometimes live
very sociably with Protestants, where their common Safety and Interest requires
it; And that this is their case in England, shall presently be shown.

But in the mean time, this may serve in some measure to answer and take off
that vulgar reproach now commonly thrown at Dissenters, that they join with
Papists to set up Popery, by destroying the Church of England; Of which Charge
neither Branch is true; they join not with Papists to set up, but rather to
keep down Popery, and not to destroy the Chapter of England, but rather to
establish it upon firm and lasting Grounds; To give every Party their Right in
an uninterrupted Freedom of Conscience, and prevent any of them from using
Violence to the other. To join with People of another Persuasion in a certain
respect where our several Interests happen to unite, may be done without the
just scandal of favoring their Opinions, so when the Pope expostulated with
Cardinal d' Ossat Ambassador from King Henry the 4th of France, that his Master
had entered into an Alliance with the Dutch, who were Heretics, to the danger
of the Church; that most prudent Minister of State replied, That his Holiness
need not wonder how in Reason of State those of different Religions might join
together for Political Ends, without hazard of altering Religion; thus David
sought Protection of the Philistines, and Abraham redeemed the sinful
Sodomites; That he took it to be upon the same Ground, that his Holiness
himself not long before received a Persian Ambassador, who was so far worse
than an Heretic, that he never pretended to the Name of a Christian. -- With
which Reason the Pope was pleased to acquiesce.

Whatever Principles bigoted People may have advanced, wise Princes have, and
always will endeavor to act according to Reasons of State and their true
Interest. The Poets tell us, that the Gods esteemed themselves obliged by no
Oath, but when they swore by Stix: The judicious Bacon mythologizes it thus,
that though some Princes scorn to be Slaves to their Words, yet when their
Interest runs parallel with their Promises, you may rely upon their Performance.

To remove our Suspicions in this case, we have not only the greatest verbal
Assurances that can be given from the most steady and generous of Princes, but
also the concurrence of his Interest, together with that of all those of his
Communion. It is His Interest, as to begin, so to continue Liberty of
Conscience; as it allays Animosities, secures his own Peace, increases People,
augments Trade, advances his Royal Revenue. And to settle it upon an
impregnable Foot, seems the greatest Kindness he can do those of his own
Persuasion; to give them any Encouragement to hope further, will certainly
embroil his Affairs, and in the End may probably occasion some great Disaster
on that Party; They being at most not much above one in sixty, nay perhaps not
one in a hundred, (for I conceive our Author may too much under-calculate, when
he makes them but one in two hundred) in number compared with the rest of his
Subjects; the Force of which over-Proportion is also much augmented by their
inbred Aversion to Popery, than which nothing can be more visible throughout
the Nation; whereunto add that the next Heirs in prospect are both Protestants,
and bestowed in Protestant Alliances, which must needs unravel all the Web, and
perhaps before it may be completely woven.

So that if any of the warmer Religious Orders should think of pushing on any
present Advantages, so far as to make theirs the National Religion; as they are
most unlikely to succeed in such a rash Attempt, so the Nobility and Gentry of
their Party, and all that have Estates (who must ride out any contingent Storm
and stand at mark, whilst others may retreat to safe Covert abroad) cannot be
so dull as not to foresee that whether they fail or prosper at present, they
must certainly expect to pay for it severely hereafter, and they cannot tell
how soon, therefore will undoubtedly be cautious of countenancing any such
precipitate Measures; but rather being content with the Liberty of their own
Consciences and Enjoyment of their Natural Privileges in common with their
Fellow Subjects will adjoyn their Endeavors toward transmitting that Ease and
Happiness to their Posterity, upon so comprehensive a Foundation, that it shall
be the General Interest of the Nation to perpetuate it.

It may therefore upon the whole matter, be most reasonably, as it ought most
dutifully be believed, That his Majesty's reiterated Promises deserve our
entire Confidence; That a Prince so Wise and Generous will not expose both his
own Ease and Grandeur, the Repose of his Realms, the Honor of his Name, nay
the Honor of his Religion, together with the future Safety of all that profess
it in these Realms, to such inevitable hazards; But rather that he intends (as
he has frankly declared) no more than to make his Reign easy to Himself, and
All his People, To leave those of his own Persuasion (as well as others) in a
Condition less Burdensome than for some Reigns past; And by these sweet and
gentle Methods at once secure the future Tranquillity of his Kingdoms, and
raise a perpetual Monument of his own Wisdom and Clemency, whereunto His great
Experience as well as natural Goodness do dispose Him; The past Example of a
mighty Monarchy reduced to a great Declension chiefly by the Maxims of an
over-zealous Fierceness; Or that more Modern and Terrible One of Another (the
Consequences of which may perhaps be foreseen without Consulting Astrology) are
no very inviting Precedents for a prudent Prince to follow; especially when the
Difficulties here are so much more insuperable than they were in either of them.

But after all this very Question, whether we shall trust or suspect, is in
Truth impertinent, and has no room in our present Case. His Majesty, though he
well deserves, is yet so gracious as not to require our Confidence gratis, he
offers a legal Establishment of our common Religious Freedom; you shall have at
the same instant as good Security as can be devised, provided Terms be not
insisted on, that are naturally repugnant to that Liberty intended to be
Confirmed; For if it be not General, it cannot be Effectual; But by a General
Security equally including All Parties, the Fears and Jealousies of Each must
vanish, and their several Interests Concentre to continue Inviolable: For
whatever may be the Desires and Inclinations of Roman Catholics, it is
certainly their Interest to secure themselves with the Multitude; And if it
prove a Security to Them, it is so to others: If not to others, it will likewise
fail them when they may need it; Therefore they are as much concerned as any,
to make a sound Provision. That which defends the Whole, preserves every Part;
But a Partial Security is imperfect and dangerous.

As to the Particulars, or Modalities of such Security, it is the Work of the
Great Council of the Kingdom: And as it would be a saucy Vanity for a private
Person to prescribe, so it can be no less Presumption in any to say, That the
Wisdom of the Nation can find no Expedients instead of the Tests, which without
being (like them) appropriated to the Interest of a single Party, or invading
Men's Civil Rights or Privileges for Matters of Conscience (as they do) may yet
no less, nay more effectually prevent all Apprehensions of any one Parties
overrunning the rest. If Laws be no Security, then the Controverted Laws and
Tests are none: If they be, then why may not another Legal Provision, better,
because more comprehensive, and founded on more equal and reasonable
Principles, secure us All as well as Those? These Reasonings to my mean
Apprension, seem not inconsiderable; but the whole is with all deference
submitted to the consummated Prudence of his Majesty and his two Houses of
Parliament, when he shall think fit to convene them.

The Letter-Writer's next Suggestion why we ought to distrust, is, because
sudden Changes are not natural, and how miraculous a thing it is, That the Men
of Taunton and Tiverton should now be above all other eminent for Loyalty. --
Good Sir! Either cease, or increase your Astonishment; there are other strange
violent Metamorphoses abroad, altogether as surprising; the old Declaimers
against Fears and Jealousies become the busiest Promoters of them; the former
Magnifiers of Prerogative swagger for Magna Charta; they that have an hundred
times avowed, that they had rather be Papists than Presbyterians; they that
have spent their best Breath for more than twenty years in Invectives against
Dissenters, and promoted the most violent Prosecutions against them, as often
as the Government did not restrain them, are now (if your News page 10. be
true) overflowing with the spirit of Peace, Charity and Condescension. And all
their former Haughtiness is for ever extinguished.

This is certainly a sudden unexpected Change, and therefore we are inclinable
to take your Advice page 3. and pause a while before we believe it; for since
we are satisfied our Features are not altered, we are apt to conclude, neither
is your Opinion of us, whatever may be pretended.

We forget not the Affairs of Taunton and Tiverton, and could say there were
more than Dissenters concerned; but suppose them such, were it not the
Severities which they had already suffered from the Church of England, and
those more astonishing ones, they were made believe they must unavoidably
encount^r under a Roman Catholic Prince (the very thing continued to be
insinuated in this Paper) that plunged and hurried them into that desperate
Defection? And when by his Majesty's Gracious Declaration they were secured
from those dismal Apprehensions, could less be expected than that returning to
their Duties, they should express themselves eminent for Loyalty? Is it any
wonder that the Cause ceasing, the Effect should also cease? Or can we think
that Gospelsaying a Paradox, That those to whom much has been forgiven, should
love much?

Let us not flatter our selves, or calumniate others; Rebellion and Loyalty (as
one has well observed) subsist not so much in Parties as Persons; Good, that
is, true Christian Principles, are excellent Qualifications to advance the
Peace of Civil Government: but since the Majority of those that profess them,
rarely walk up to those self-denying Rules; if we turn over Histories, and
survey the Transactions of the World, 'twill appear that the Interest of
Societies is that which generally secures their Obedience. That Government
which protects most, and leaves fewest uneasy, being likely to be freest from
Discontents, and consequently from Disturbance; for when all is done, the
Magistrate that protects and ch^rishes any sort of People in his Dominions, may
justly require their Service, and safely rely upon their Obedience; But if he
persecute them, whether Papists, Church of England-Protestants, or Dissenters,
though perhaps he may violently force many of them to an outward Compliance,
yet he can never prudently rest upon their Affections.

As for the Quakers (on whom our facetious Author is pleased to exercise his
merry Vein) if any have been so censorious as to declare them not to be
Christians, yet they themselves profess the contrary, and have patiently
undergone Sufferings equal at least with any other Party, to make good their
Claim to that Title, however they are Men, and on that score, leading peaceable
inoffensive Lives, ought to be free from Persecutions, or being compelled by
outward Force to a Religion that can only be propagated and entertained by
Love; And also, if they deserve it, may be made use of, and preferred in Civil
Matters as well as others; since we, and I think most other Nations of the
Christian Name refuse not to suffer Jews to live quietly amongst us,
notwithstanding they are open Denyers of our ever blessed Savior.

Hitherto we find this Author's Arguments of no force to persuade us to abandon
our Interest and Duty, which are both inseparably wound up in our lawful
endeavors to get the Penal Laws repealed. -- But if he cannot delude us with
Sophistry, he will affright us with Mormo's and Hobgoblins; Give him leave but
to suppose for you, and then if you do not runout of your Wits, he pronounces
your Courage too dangerous a virtue to be commended.

But as he offers no proofs for his Supposals, so they are founded neither on
Truth nor Probability. He imagines some criminal Alliance between the Roman
Catholics and Dissenters, when there is nothing more than a joint Concurrence
(prompted by their Common Interest, and justified by the first Principles of
Religion, Reason, and Policy) to remove unwarrantable and oppressive Shackles
upon Conscience, and withal at the same time advance such a Legal Establishment
as may secure, not only themselves, but all others too, in their Rights, both
as Men and Christians.

And what need was there of any Mediators armed with Power of giving
Encouragements and Rewards to induce Men to such an innocent undertaking, no
less advantageous to all others (nay more to the Churchmen) than themselves?

As Part of this Alliance or an Effect thereof, it is plain, he reckons the
Dissenters returning of Thanks to his Majesty for his Declaration of
Indulgence, and then at once to cast an insolent Reflection on his Majesty, or
his Ministers of State, and to expose the dissenting Ministers as Mercinaries,
such as act not upon Principles of Conscience or Honor, but may easily be
drawn by a little Money to any lewd Compliance, although to the Ruin of the
Protestant Religion, and Subversion of all our Municipal Laws, and the very
Constitution of our English Government, (for elsewhere he brands Addressing
with no less mischievous Tendencies, see page 9. and 10.) He proceeds to
advance two most scandalous Charges.

The first, page 5. by way of Suggestion, as if some (formerly implied in a
like Negotiation) had now by Authority, sprinkled Money among the Dissenting
Ministers.

The other, page 7. in a positive Affirmation, That the first Draughts of the
Addresses (he speaks generally, that fly abroad every week, and with an Air of
Scorn and Malice, -- murder us with another to the same) are made by the
Priests [which cannot otherwise be meant than of Roman Priests] and that the
Dissenters Part is only to write them out fairer. -- [His Kindness it seems
will allow them to be the better Scribes, tho such Dunces as not able to
express their own Thoughts so well as certain invisible Fathers who know
nothing of them.]

Now if both these, be (as I dare, with all assurance, averr, they are) utterly
false, then I hope the World will partly understand the Temper of the Writer,
and Design of his Paper, and entertain both with that Abhorrence, due to one
that regards neither Respect to his Prince, nor Justice toward his Neighbors,
nor any Measures either of Charity or Truth or common Honesty; so he may but
reach his ends, of dividing the Dissenters amongst themselves, and exposing
them all to the Contempt and Hatred of others; fomenting Misapprehensions and
Jealousies, thereby to frame an Engine both for their Ruin, and for continuing
the exorbitant Power of that Party for whom he is an Advocate.

But how do we demonstrate that there is no Truth in the Particulars he hints
at? I confess it is impossible apodictically to prove such an universal
Negative; but if offering as much toward it as the nature of the thing will
bear, may be sufficient, I doubt not but to satisfy all the impartial World.

1. The manner of our Author's talking, argues a Consciousness of Guilt, and
has all the natural Features of a Libel; nothing asserted, but blind Hints, and
Innuendo's thrown out; Baits fair enough to catch Gudgeons, and make them
swallow the Calumny; but yet so cautiously worded, as to secure a Retreat when
taxed with downright Slander. His Hypothesis he thought, might amuse, but
where is his Assumption that should prove? If those Men that formerly sprinkled
Money amongst the Dissenting Ministers, should (says he) by the SAME AVTHORITY
now do the like, and disburse where they cannot otherwise persuade. -- He ought
to have added; -- But those very Men have now done the same, -- which being
proved, and not till then, he might have inferred (as he does) that is seems
rather an Evidence than a Presumption of the Deceit; Whereas now, his Discourse
is a Rope of incoherent Sand, and may thus, and much better be retorted, -- If
this Author have only dreamed, or invidiously forged this Supposal, as is
highly probable, because he produces no Testimony for it, (which in Reason it
must be thought he would have done, could he have procured any) then it is
rather an Evidence than Presumption of Deceit, and something else which I am
not willing to express by its proper Name.

2. This Insinuation about sprinkling of Money consists of two parts: 1. That
such a thing was once, and by Authority too, done formerly, to the Dissenting
Ministers. 2. The like again now by the very same Men. -- Here we are left
altogether in the dark when, or how long ago this formerly was; but it seems
'twas within Memory, because by the same Negotiators. Now I do well remember,
that Dr. Owen in the Preface to a Book, Entitled, An Enquiry etc. partly in
Answer to the Reverend Dr. Stillingfleet's Discourse of the Unreasonableness of
Separation, printed Anno 1681, takes notice of a Report then advanced, That the
Nonconformists some of them at least, do receive, or have received Money from
the Papists to act their Affairs, and promote their Interest. And then he tells
the World, That it is such a malicious frontless Lie as Impudence it self would
blush at, That those by whom it was first whispered probably understood better
than the Nonconformists what Influence Money, or the things which they knew how
to turn into it, had into their Profession and Actings in Religion; Whereunto
he adds (I had almost said prophetically) these Words, It seems to me that some
such Men are afraid, lest the present Opposition unto Popery should issue in
such an Establishment of the Protestant Religion, as that hereafter it should
not be in the disposal of any, nor in their Power to make a Bargain of it,
either for their Advantage, or in their Necessity.

And a little after, speaking of Dissenters, He says, However they may be
Traduced or Accused, they will continue in giving the highest Security that
Conscience, Profession, Principles, Interest and Actions can give of their
Stability in the same [Protestant] Cause; only the desire to be excused, if
they make not use of this notable Engine for opposing of Popery, namely, the
stirring up of Jealousies, Fears and Animosities amongst Protestants, which
others judge serviceable to that End.

And in the next Page, Because I know my self herein peculiarly reflected on, I
do avow, That never any one Person in Authority, Dignity, or Power in the
Nation, Nor any one that had any Relation unto Public Affairs, nor any from
them, Papist or Protestant, did once speak one Word to me, or advise with me,
about any Indulgence or Toleration to be granted unto Papists; I challenge all
the World who are otherwise minded, to intermit their Service for a season unto
the great false Accuser, and prove the contrary if they can; The Persons are
sufficiently known of whom they may make their Enquiry.

Thus that Learned Worthy Man. -- And can any Body that knew him, judge that he
would either in Piety or Prudence print at such a rate (in a time when enough
would have been ready to detect it), if what he so amply and earnestly denies,
had in it any Color of Truth?

Yet since he remarks, it was at that time become a public Slander, it is
highly probable this was what our Author would hint at, in the first Branch of
his Supposition, if at least he thereby meant any thing, or had so much as any
old baffled Story whereon to ground the Figment; For, perhaps, we shall wrong
the Gentleman's Invention, not to ascribe it altogether to his own teeming
Imagination.

3. Non Entis nullae sunt Affectiones, If there were no such pecuniary
sprinklings heretofore, then none now, according to the Letter-writers own
Account, for he supposes the latter to be done by the same Instruments, and in
the same Methods; And so all his Tattle about Ministers who having fallen under
such Temptations, are engaged to continue their Frailty, by the Awe they are
in, lest it should be exposed, etc. becomes insignificant.

4. If there were any such Artifices of Bribing Ministers, or of having
Addresses penned by Jesuits, or other Popish Priests, sent to Dissenters whose
part was only to Copy, Sign, and Present them, it is most reasonable to
believe, That such Intrigues must be practiced upon those that most early
Addressed, to the end others might be invited to follow. But so far is this
from any Resemblance of Truth, That the first Addressers in this kind, were so
scrupulous as not to impart their Intentions to any but those of their own
Communion, till the Form was adjusted and agreed upon amongst themselves.

And for the full Detection of any such Practices as are insinuated, I have
Commission from Persons sufficiently able to answer such an Engagement, to
Advertise and Assure all the World,

That if any Person or Persons can make appear either, That there was any Money
or Moneys worth whatsoever, directly or indirectly, Given, Promised, or
Propounded to any of the Persons that did first Address, viz. That of the
Baptists, That of the Presbyterians, or that of the Congregational Persuasion
of London, to dispose them, or any of them, to make such Address; Or that there
was any Draught or Copy of any of the said Addresses, or any part thereof
(drawn by any Person or Persons, other than some of those that subscribed the
same respectively) ever sent, shown, or proposed to any of the Subscribers,
That then the Person or Persons making such Discovery, shall, upon his or their
Application to the Bookseller, whose Name and Habitation is hereunto prefixed,
receive Directions where and of whom, He or They, and every of them making such
Discovery, may and shall (besides most hearty thanks) have, and be honestly and
Bona Fide paid a Reward of Fifty Pounds of Lawful Money of England.

The rest of his Supposals are of the same Leaven both for Truth and Charity.
Who are those Dissenters, and on what part of the Globe do they dwell, (For
sure they must be Antipodes to Ours) that preach up Anger and Vengeance against
the Church of England? That are under a Contract which obliges them upon a
Forfeiture to make use of Inflaming Eloquence? That apprehend their Wages would
be retrenched, if they should be moderate? -- Quite contrary, they have, with a
most Christian Moderation, so far overcome the Resentments of their past hard
Usage, or present Provocations, that they treat that Church with all
Friendliness and Respect; But think they mean her no Harm when they wish those
dangerous Weapons out of her hands, which she has so long indiscreetly made use
of, only to ruin other innocent People, and stab her own Reputation.

Does this Sir Politic T. W. or W. T. (for some Critics think that the truer
Reading) imagine Liberty of Conscience, or Freedom to worship our Creator in
such manner as we are convinced to be most agreeable to his Will, without being
jailed or undone for the same; and without being scarr'd by sever Temporal
Penalties to join externally and Hypocritically in a Religious Worship, which
our Consciences tell us is sinful; does he, I say, conceit this noble
Privilege, so cheap and vile a thing that none will appear for it but such as
are either suborned with Money, or have deserved to be hanged? Is it not a
pretty Notion, and much becoming a Statesman, that those who chiefly to assert
Liberty of Conscience (though in a very bad and irregular way) incurred the
Want of a Pardon, must after such Pardon obtained, needs act against their
Consciences, if they offer to persuade any to endeavor the settling such
Liberty regularly in a Legal Course?

Nor is his next politic Squint less impertinent, as if one Prince might not
for Reasons of State continue Friendship with another, whose Conduct in some
Particulars he highly disapproves; nor know I how, in that case, he can more
effectually declare such dislike, than by steering a direct contrary Course
himself.

His Noise of soliciting Addresses, the Tyring Posthorses with Circular
Letters, and threatening, where Persuasions would not serve to procure them, is
all but the Product of a very bold Imagination; And he has been sufficiently
challenged to give but one single Instance. Sure the Gentleman is Master of no
great Stock of Gratitude at home, that he can think the whole Nation so
wondrous barren of it, on one of the most glorious Occasions that ever were
given for that good-natured Virtue to display it self.

Rather than fa^^ of advancing Jealousies, he seems willing to contradict
himself, as well as Truth; and both complains of the Dissenters for their
Forwardness, and yet would have the World believe they were very backward in
Addressing -- But still, wherein I pray, lies the harm of the thing it self,
that either there should need such Variety of Artifices to draw in the
unwilling; Or that can render them criminal that did with all ready Zeal make
those grateful Acknowledgments? This he undertakes to tell us, page 8. and 9.
(for I follow the first Edition) and the Sum of his Discourse amounts to
neither more nor less than this.

That the King's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience was an IRREGVLAR ACT
[Very dutifully spoken!] therefore the Dissenters ought not to have taken any
notice of it, but to have forborne the Public Exercise of their Religion, till
a Parliament had allowed it [which if he and his Associates can help it, shall
never be] But since they did not only receive the Benefit granted, but
publicly return his Majesty Thanks for it, they thereby give a Blow to all the
Laws by which their Religion and Liberty are to be protected, and fall foul
upon Magna Charta [Which Chapter of it I beseech you Sir?] gave up their Right
in the Laws; for after giving Thanks for the Breach of one Law, they lose the
Right of complaining of the Breach of all the rest.

This is sed News! but as good Luck would have it, there is not one Article of
it true; for the Kings's Declaration was in it self, not only a very pious,
prudent and gracious, but (according to the ancient Constitution of this Realm)
a most Legal Act. The Dissenters had been the most inexcusably peevish People
in the World, if they had not accepted of it, the most ungrateful if they had
not thankfully acknowledged it, and will be the most stupid Neglecters of their
own Interest, both Religious and Civil, if they do not exret all their
Endeavors toward having it established for Posterity by a Law.

Upon this occasion it may be expected, that I should enter into a long
Discourse in Affirmance of his Majesty's Right to dispense with Coercive Laws
in Matters of Religion: But since that is already done by a far better Hand in
a Just Treatise (which may possibly er'e long see the Light) I shall not actum
agere, or inlay my Copper with that Noble Author's Gold; but content my self to
say in general,

1. That as it was the Right of our English Kings by the Common Law, so it has
been confirmed to themby several Statutes; and they have accordingly exerted it
time out of mind; and particularly it is reserved to the Crown by the Statute of
22 Car. 2 cap. 1. for preventing and suppressing seditious Conventicles, in
these Words, -- Provided, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein
contained, shall extend to invalidate or avoid his Majesty's Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical Affairs; But that his Majesty and his Heirs and Successors may
from time to time, and at all times hereafter, exercise and enjoy all Powers
and Authority in Ecclesiastical Affairs as fully and as amply as himself, or
any of his Predecessors have, or might have done the same; Any thing in this
Act notwithstanding.

2. As to what is alleged touching all other Laws, being by this Precedent
shaken; and that such as give Thanks for the Breach of One Law, preclude
themselves from complaining of the Breach of all the rest; because on the like
Ground the King may Repeal any other Statutes without Common Consent in
Parliament. -- It may readily be answered (besides what has been already
pointed at in the foregoing graph) That there is a great difference between
Repealing a Law, and relaxing or dispensing with the Penalty; The first can
only be done in Parliament, the latter has been always adjudged to be Part of
the Royal Prerogative. For example, the Law dooms every Person convicted of
Burghlary or picking a Pocket, to die: Our Kings have frequently in all times
remitted the Execution: Was this ever thought to be a Repeal of those Laws? or
any Infringment of all the rest?

And if it be so in Civil Cases, wherein the Subject is concerned in the
Injury, and where the Matter to be restrained by the Laws, is not only Malum
prohibitum, but Malum in se, not merely evil, because forbidden, but forbidden
because intrinsecally evil; Then (a fortiori) much more strongly it follows,
that his Majesty may suspend the Execution of the Penalties, which by these
Laws relating to Ecclesiastical Affairs, are inflicted on Actions or Defaults
so far from being in themselves Criminal, That a very great part of them are
undoubtedly allowed by the Laws of God, Nature, and Reason.

And so much the rather may his Majesty exert this Right, since these Penal
Statutes generally in their Preambles (which are Claves Legum, the Keys that
open to us the Occasion, and consequently the main Scope and End of Enacting
them) affirm that they were made for the Security of the Princes Person, and to
prevent Treason, Insurrections and Sedition; so that his Majesty is principally
and immediately concerned therein; and since He must be allowed the best Judge
of his own Security, if he shall find that there is no need of putting such
Statutes in Execution to that End; but rather that the Non-Execution thereof
will more conduce to his Safety, and the public Repose; and therefore thinks
fit to supersede or forbear the exacting the Penalties, Where is the Wrong? To
whom the Injury?

So that hitherto neither was the King's Declaration an Irregular Act, nor the
Dissenters thanking him for it any such desperate Business as to make them
forfeit their Right in all other Laws of their Country; but most true it is
that whilst these Church-driving Laws stand in Force, if the Execution of them
happen into some Hands, we know by Experience that there are a thousand very
small Matters, of which any one, by the dexterous Management of the Gentlemen
of Doctors Commons, is enough not only to strip any Man of his Interest in the
Laws, but send his Body to the Gaol, and (in their aprehension) his Soul to the
Devil to boot.

And who can but Blush to hear some People upbraid the Romanists with that
Tenet, That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics (which yet they, with the
highest Asseverations, disclaim) whilst at the same time, Themselves would have
so many Laws kept on Foot, that give opportunity to every Villain to cheat any
honest Man, by taking Advantage of his Conscientious Dissent in Matters of
Religion, from the Established Mode; Witness the pleading of Excommunication in
Bar of a just Action; And the Disablement o^ so many to maintain any Suit at
Law, or in Equity, unless they first both receive the Sacrament according to
the Usage of the Church of England, and take the Tests.

But -- Parcius ista viris -- The Gentleman owns, That the Church of England
preserving too long the bitter* Taste of that Usage They had received in the
times of our former Confusions, sacrificed their Interest to their Revenge. [A
great Truth, I had almost said, the only one in his Paper.] But now (quoth he)
they are sensible of their Mistake, all their former Haughtiness is for ever
extinguished; Therefore you may securely trust them, That in the next
Parliament [If you Dissenters will be Quiet and suffer them to carry Elections
as they please] They will do you Reason; Ay, and you shall have Liberty, and
the Papists never a Bit.

Is there any Body that deserves not to wear a Muckender, but must needs see
through all this? What better Hopes can Dissenters conceive of another
Parliament of Bigoted Churchmen than of the Last? who were generally stanch
that way. To go about to wheedle us with Promises of Liberty to Protestants,
but exclusive of Romanists, is, at this time of day, such a palpable Banter as
only shows the contemptible Opinion they have of the Dissenters Intellectuals.
Can it be imagined, That the King can ever pass it? Would it not be extravagant
Rudeness to offer it? Nay, have not They themselves already by their Proxies
made Overtures to the direct contrary?

To pretend now, That They were only the Instruments, not the Authors of the
late Violences toward Dissenters, as it exposes their Prudence and Honesty in
the Fact, so it manifests their Insincerity in the Excuse; did they not by
Concert throughout the Nation both in Pulpits, Prints, and Practices, instigate
and warrantize those Outrages? Have we not seen them in Person animating
Informers, and with their own hands in some places pulling down Meeting Houses.

Nay so high had the inveterate Venom swelled, that even distressed Foreign
Protestants felt part of its Fury; For by some of their good Wills none of the
poor Ruinated Hugenots, should have had any share of that Noble Charity which
Royal Mercy had allowed to be Collected, and true English Bounty plentifully
Contributed for their Relief; But they must notwithstanding starve, unless they
would first conform to certain Rituals, which either they did not understand,
or else could not be supposed (according to their Education) able in Conscience
to comply with, and so in flying one Rape upon their Souls, were dangerously
exposed to another.

Yet notwithstanding all these too common and unwarrantable Transports, it must
be acknowledged, there were diverse of the Established Clergy who kept
themselves free from that Epidemical Infection of the persecuting Spirit, who
did Christianly interpose, and venture far in their Endeavors to stem the
impetuous Torrent: The Author of the several Conformists Pleas for the
Nonconformists; The Reverend Protestant Reconciler; honest Mr. B -- lds, and
probably more than I have met with, did publicly appear in Print; And others
in their Sermons and Practices declared their more healing and pacifick
Principles. May their Names be never mentioned without Respect and Honor! May
they never stand in need of that Compassion which they so bravely vouchsafed to
others under Persecution! May their Memories be had in perpetual Renown; and
especially let their Moderation for ever be imitated!

But as to the Generality of those that pride themselves with the Title of
Churchmen, it cannot be denied, That as they reproached such their moderate
Brethren with the odious Nickname of Trimmers, so themselves went on Jehu's
Pace, nothing but a strict and severe Execution of all the most rigorous Laws
would content them; They daily both irritated Magistrates and the Skum of the
People to the Holy Work; At Guild-Hall-Chappel we have heard such enflaming
Rhetoric as this (speaking of the Dissenters) Let them not call it
Persecution, it is a just and necessary Prosecution, and the most they can
suffer, is the least they deserve. In pursuance of such Pulpit-Maxims, Laws,
tho too harsh in themselves, were wyredrawn abundantly further than the
apparent Intent of the Makers. Common Justice denied to any that appeared under
the Character of Dissenters; palpable Perjuries wink't at; Riots made not only
of the most peaceable Assemblies to worship God, but of the Friendly Visits of
Relations; Nay where the small Number found, were not sufficient to color a
Legal Prosecution on that pretense, a Servant attending one that came to
surprise them, has been clapped in for a Party in the Indictment, and an
Outrageous Fine thereupon enforced to be paid; As in the Case of a worthy
Citizen near London-Bridg; How Juries Brow-beaten, and forced to present Men on
the 23 Eliz. contrary to their Consciences; Some troubled on a double
Conviction before two several Magistrates for one and the same Offense; The
Fines frequently Extravagant, as one Man at a Sessions in Surrey was compelled
to pay down 100 pound, for being at one Meeting. In brief, no Wood came amiss
to make Arrows of, for the Destruction of the Dissenters; Delenda erat
Carthago, all Nonconformists were to be ruined in all places, after the Example
of Bristol, etc.

At this pass matters stood when His Majesty vouchsafed to hold forth his
Golden Scepter, and put a Stop to all these Outrages and Calamities: And what
Security does this unknown Author give us, that it may not be so again one day,
if these Penal Laws be not utterly removed? How does it appear that the
Sentiments of the Church of England toward Dissenters are changed, unless it
be to a greater degree of Malice? Or that their Haughtiness is for ever
extinct, but rather increased? For Example, but ten miles up the Thames, a good
while since the Declaration, a Parson refused to Bury a Child, because Baptized
by a Nonconformist-Minister, so that all the Company assembled for the Funeral
were forced to depart, and the Infant's Corpse to be kept above Ground all
Night; And hardly would he be induced by any Entreaties to permit its Interment
the next day, and then too without vouchsafing his Reverencies Presence.

I would not file particular Men's Failures to the Reproach of a Community
amongst whom are so many Learned worthy Men; But this I cannot forbear to say,
That if the Church of England would be credited, she ought publicly declare
against the Persecuting Spirit, and make her Repentance as notorious as the
Scandal: Whereas her contesting so stiffly for the Continuance of the Penal
Laws, argues too broadly that she still retains the very same Inclinations.

And indeed this mighty Stir and Outery of keeping up the Tests, or else we are
all undone, is no more than that of old, Great is Diana of the Ephesians! For
by these Laws and Tests the Churchmen (though but one Part, and that not the
greatest, of the Nation) have not only engrossed and secured to themselves all
the Preferments and Offices, all Places of Profit, Honor, and Trust throughout
the Kingdom; but also an opportunity of Ruinating all, or any of the other
Parties at pleasure. These are too sweet Morsels to be disgorg'd without some
Reluctance; And they may be excused in Policy, if they use all Efforts to
continue their Enjoyment, or Hopes at least, of such absolute Advantages; But
in the mean time the Dissenters will be unpardonably remiss, if they hearken to
the Voice of these Charmers, and neglect such an opportunity of Enfranchizing
Themselves and Posterity.

Nor can I imagine what our Author means by that Hectoring Rhodomantado, page
12. How his Church can in a moment bring Clouds again, and turn the Royal
Thunder upon the Dissenters heads, Blow them off the Stage in a Breath, if She
would give but a Smile, or a kind word: That the least Glimpse of her
Compliance would throw them back into a state of Suffering, and draw upon them
all the Arrears of Severity which have accrued during this time of Kindness to
them: -- But She will not allow her self to be rescued [From what?] by such
unjustifiable means, but chooses to bear the Weight of Power, rather than lie
under the Burden of being Criminal. And to the same purpose he talks
elsewhere, That his Church had the first Court-ships, which she rejected, and
is ready to suffer, rather than receive all Advantages that can be gained by a
Criminal Compliance. -- Now besides the most insolent Aspersion hereby thrown
on his Majesty (as if he were rather her Servant than her Sovereign) that she
can so easily induce him to violate his solemn Promises for her Pleasure; I
would gladly learn what this expected and so much courted Smile might be, that
can perform such Miracles? What it was His Church refused, rather than
criminally comply with?

Was it that her Sons should all turn Papists? This indeed would notably vary
the Scene of Affairs, and by casting the Overbalance to that Party, alter the
Politic Interest; and yet even in such case the Dissenters would trust God's
Providence and the King's Word for their Security.

Is it that they should consent to repeal all the Penal Laws against Roman
Catholics, with a Reserve of those against Protestant Dissenters? I am much
more confident there never was any such shameful partial Dealing proposed unto
them, than I am, that it was never voluntarily offered by them.

But if it should be true, that they have made frank Overtures to rescind the
Laws against the Romanists, and secure them in the next Reign, Provided
themselves might be continued in their prosecuting Protestant Dissenters in
this; and that the same was rejected with a generous Indignation worthy of such
a Proposition: Then it will not be difficult to guess both at the Nature and
Prevalency of their boasted Smiles, and what Kindness Dissenters are to expect
at their Hands, notwithstanding all their fair Pretensions.

Either the Church of England opposes Liberty of Conscience in general, and
then justly engages the Body of the Nation against her; or only That of Roman
Catholics, and then they recede from their own Principles, for it cannot be
forgot that they heretofore told the Dissenters, there was as much Reason the
Roman Catholics should be tolerated as They; And to confirm it, many of her
Communion frequently declared, That they would rather be Romans than
Presbyterians.

But it may still be urged, that the Church of England is now no more for
persecuting, and would be content to give up all the Penal Laws on either side;
But cannot, dares not, part with the TESTS; especially the last, whereby only
Roman Catholics are kept out of Parliament. For if She quit this Guard;
presently the Two Houses may be full of Roman Catholics, who will establish
their Religion by Law, or perhaps pretend it actually in Possession Jure
Postliminii, And so the Protestant Religion shall be utterly suppressed, and
the Writ, De Haeretico comburendo revived, etc.

This is the Topping Objection, but I think a very satisfactory Answer may be
given to it. For,

1. Not to repeat what has already been offered of the King's Promises, the
Paucity of the Romanists, and how their Interest stands in prospect of
Futurity, I cannot but remind you, that no body that I have met with, supposes
the removal of the Tests, without some equipollent Provision in the very same
Act, that may obviate these Fears. And it is inconceivable that the Wisdom of
the Nation so refined, should yet be so barren, as not to be able to contrive
some Civil Security as strong and safe, without Hampering of Conscience. For
Why may there not be a Civil Test formed, altogether as effectual, and yet not
so obnoxious to Exceptions, as these Religious Ones?

2. If we can secure due Elections and Regular Returns, we are safe; for
undoubtedly the Freeholders, Citizens and Burghers of England are not very
fond of choosing Roman Catholics for their Representatives.

3. As to any Apprehensions, that by taking away these Laws, the Roman should
pretend a Right to be the National, established Religion, by virtue of any
Antiquated Statutes, that may easily be dash't by an Establishment or
Confirmation of the present Church of England, as to all its Privileges, but
such as are Compulsory by Temporal Penalties, altogether unadequate means to
secure Religion, and unnecessary to the Well-being of a Gospel Church.

4. What if in the same Bill that vacates all the Old Penal Laws, it be by the
King in Parliament, asserted and declared, that Liberty of Conscience is part
of the Constitution of this Kingdom; The natural Birthright of every English
Man? And that all Persons endeavoring to undermine of subvert such Settlement,
shall be adjudg'd Criminal, and liable to such Penalties as shall be thought
fit; all Acts tending thereunto, in themselves ab initio and for ever void. And
every Member of either House of Parliament, obliged before he sits or acts,
solemnly to make some such Declaration.

5. Or what if all the Penal Laws, together with the Test, debarring from
Offices and Employments, be abrogated, and only that relating to Members of
Parliament be kept on foot?

Will none of these Expedients, or such better ones as may be contrived, allay
your Fears?

That which alone must conclude any honest Man's Judgment, is the Resolution of
this single Question.

Whether Persecution in it self be lawful? That is, whether for mere Opinions,
or Exercise of Religious Worship, tho different from the national Form, yet no
ways disturbing the Public Peace, injuring Civil Society, or violating
Morality, any Persons whatsoever ought according to the Law of God or Nature,
be punished by Death, Banishment, Mulcts, Fines, or Imprisonments, or be
rendered liable unto any Forfeitures of, or Preclusions from those Advantages
and Privileges, which otherwise they might justly pretend to, or ought to
enjoy?

They, and They only, that will undertake to justify the Affirmative, may
reasonably appear for the Continuance of the Penal Laws and Tests. But then, if
they assert any kind of Persecution to be lawful, they ought also to tell us
the Bounds and Limits of it, why the Penalties may not be sanguinary as well as
pecuniary, positive as well as privative? why we may not burn a Man for his
supposed Error in Religion, as well as take away his Goods, or his Birthright?

On the other side, all Those, who cannot but acknowledge such Statutes, and all
Prosecutions thereupon to be unwarrantable, as being against the main Tendency
of the Gospel, contrary to our Lord's Rule of doing as we would be done by, and
opposite to the Maxims of Reason and Civil Policy, are bound in Conscience as
well as Interest to declare and use their utmost Endeavors for the Abolition
of all these burthensom destructive Laws.

Nor will they be affrighted with any imagined bad Consequences, or a Noise of
what Advantages ill Men may design to make by such a Repeal; for as we are not
to do Evil, that Good may come on it, so we must not omit doing Right, whatever
may be the Sequel. Let us perform our Duty, and then we may rest assured, that
Divine Providence which superintends all the Affairs of this fading World, will
dissipate the Councils of any Architophels, and either preserve us from, or
support us under the worst they can contrive.

But if the Dissenters wilfully lose this Opportunity which God and the King
have graciously vouchsafed; And shall in Distrust of Providence, as well as his
Majesty's Word, multiply to themselves groundless Fears; and for certain
supposed Politic Ends, quit both their Duty and Interest, to rely on Egyptian
Reeds, and future improbable Expectancies, the Courtesy of a sort of People,
whose tenderest Mercies they have found to be cruel; and will assist to
continue those very Statutes which their own Consciences cannot but tell them,
are Irreligious and unjust, and under the Lash of which they have so lately and
so severely smarted; and by reason of this resolute Error against their own
Convictions and Experience, shall happen hereafter to fall under a more
dreadful Persecution, than ever heretofore; ('it is no matter by whose Hand:)
Must they not with Confusion of Face, acknowledge they have justly deserved it?
And that themselves have chiefly contributed to their own Miseries, and
entailed a Plague on all their Posterity?

He who is convinced, that Persecution for Religion is unlawful, and yet
refuses to contribute all he can toward removing those Laws (which either
positively or privatively, for they both depend on the same Bottom) injoin such
Persecution; let him pretend what Fears and Jealousies he will of ensuing
Dangers from the doing of it, I know not how to excuse him from the just
Imputation of being either a Fool or an Atheist.

It Is true, our Orator asserts, That it is as justifiable to have NO RELIGION,
as wilfully to throw away the humane Means of preserving it. But because I
always thought Religion was best to be preserved by Religious Methods, and that
a Church built upon the Rock, needs not the feeble Suports of Civil Force; I
would gladly learn what Humane Means are necessary or Expedient, or indeed
adequate to preserve true Religion? Sure I am the Christian Religion held up
its Head, not only without, but against such Means for the first Centuries; And
yet then it was that it most flourished in purity, and spread it self
throughout the World; but as soon as Politicians would be adding their Humane
Means to preserve it, and interwove it with Interest of State, from thence we
commonly date its Declension.

In a word, if it be the Interest both of the Papists of this Nation, and of
all Protestant Dissenters, to have a General Liberty of Conscience firmly
settled: If this be no real Disadvantage to the Church of England, but only
keeps her from engrossing all Offices and Employments, which caused her to be
envied; and from ruining her innocent Neighbors, which made her hated; and is
both her Guilt and her Shame: If by the Gospel, no Man is to be abridged of any
of his Civil-Rights for his different Opinion in Religion; Since we may have as
good Security for the Enjoyment of this Liberty for ever as we our selves can
reasonably contrive; since we have felt and found so many Evils attending
Persecution, and never any Good, It seems to me Unaccountable why we should not
all readily and harmoniously agree to the Total Extirpation of all Tests and
Penal Laws for Religion, and heartily endeavor the Establishment of that
Universal Liberty, which only can render the Nation lastingly Quiet and Happy.

I am not so unacquainted with the ill-natured World, as not to foresee, that
for this free Publication of my Thoughts, I must expect to encountre a thousand
Scandals and Calumnies; But --

-- Hic Murus ahaenus esto,
Nil conscire sibi.
Being conscious of nothing but an unbiased honest Intention, I can smile at,
and pity the impotent Malice of false Reports. Having taken up that resolution
of Quinctius Cincinnatus -- Vellem equidem vobis placere, Quirites! Sed multo
malo vos salvos esse, qualicunque erga me animo sitis futuri.

THE END.

