A COLLECTION OF CASES AND OTHER DISCOURSES Lately Written to Recover
DISSENTERS TO THE COMMUNION OF THE Church of England. By some Divines of the
City of London. In Two Volumes. To each Volume is prefixed a Catalogue of all
the CASES and DISCOURSES contained in this Collection.

LONDON, Printed for T. Basset at the George in Fleet Street, and B. Took at
the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1685.

A CATALOGUE OF ALL THE Cases and Discourses Contained in the first Volume of
this COLLECTION.
1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England. 2. A Resolution of
some Cases of Conscience, which respect Church Communion. 3. A Letter to
Anonymus, in Answer to his three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about
Church Communion. 4. The Case of Lay-Communion with the Church of England
considered. 5. The Case of mixed Communion. 6. The Case of indifferent things
used in the Worship of God, proposed and stated. 7. A Vindication of the Case
of indifferent things, etc. 8. A Discourse concerning Conscience. In two Parts.
9. A Discourse about a Scrupulous Conscience, containing some plain Directions
for the Cure of it. 10. Considerations about the Case of Scandal, or giving
Offense to weak Brethren. 11. The Charge of Scandal, and giving Offense by
Conformity, refelled, and reflected back upon Separation.
A PERSUASIVE TO COMMUNION With the Church of England. The Second Edition
Corrected.

Ephesians. 4. 15. (...) LONDON, Printed by J. Redmayne, for Fincham Gardener at
the White Horse in Ludgate Street. 1683.

A Persuasive to COMMUNION With the CHURCH of ENGLAND.
THere is nothing that does more scandalize and unsettle the Weak, nor tempt
the Proud and Licentious to a professed neglect of all Religion, than the many
causless Divisions which do sometimes happen in the Church. And he is no lively
Member of that Mystical Body of Christ, that is not sensibly affected with the
Fatal Consequences of these things; and does not endeavor, what he Lawfully
may, to do something toward the healing of those Wounds which have been made
by the extreme Scrupulosity of some; and are still kept Bleeding by the
Subtilty and cunning Artifice of others. For it is manifest enough, and cannot
now be denied, that the Papists have always attempted to pull down the Church
of England by pretended Protestant hands; and have made use of the facility of
our Dissenting Brethren to bring about their own Designs. I wish the eminent
Danger we have been brought into, would prevail with them at last to forbear to
Batter and Undermine us, as they have done; when they cannot but see that the
Common Enemy is waiting all Opportunities, and stands ready to enter at those
Breaches which they are making. They might condemn the rashness of their own
Counsels, and lament it, it may be, when it would be too late, if they should
see Popery erected upon the ruins of that Church which they themselves had
overthrown. We know how restless and industrious the Romish Faction has always
been; and the only visible Security we have against the prevailing of it, lies
in the firm Union of the whole Protestant Profession; and there is nothing
wherein there is the least probability that we can ever be all United, unless
it be the Church of England as it stands by Law established, agreeable to the
Rules of the Holy Gospel, consonant to the Doctrine and Practice of the
Primitive Christians; and not only Allowed, but highly Honored by all the
Reformed Churches in the World. Here is a Point fixed in which we all may
Center; whereas they that differ from us are not yet, and, it may be, never
will be perfectly agreed upon their own New Models of Discipline and
Government; neither can they find one Precept or Example in Scripture or
Antiquity, for the Constituting any Church without an Episcopal Power presiding
over it. And if any Party amongst them could have that Form of Church
Government confirmed by Law, which they esteem the most Apostolical; it is
manifest from reason and experience, that it would be presently Opposed by all
the rest, with no less Violence than ours is; and instead of putting an end to
our Divisions, would most certainly increase them. Therefore though they have
all still imposed their several Forms, with the greatest Rigor, wherever they
have had the Power, or but the Hopes of it in their hands; yet that all Sorts
of Dissenters may be drawn into the Confederacy for the present, we hear now of
nothing so much as the Mischief of Impositions, and the Natural Right, and
great Advantages of Toleration. Which is the very thing which the Romish
Emissaries have always aimed at; and seems to be one of the subtilest parts of
the Popish Plot: As might be made out by diverse undeniable Arguments; and
appears sufficiently from many of the Letters, Trials, and Narratives that have
been lately published: And it can be no wonder that they should give their
Cordial Assistance to such a Design, which if it should ever pass into an Act,
would reward their Diligence with a cheap and easy Victory. For they may
plainly foresee, that it would be so far from Uniting us, that it would
undoubtedly break us in pieces by a Law. Now if Union be always necessary, upon
the common Obligations of Christianity, it will be much more so in the present
Conjuncture; considering the strength and encouragements that may be given to
the Popish Cause, by the continuance of our Dissensions: And if there be far
greater hopes that we may at length, by the blessing of God, be sooner United
in the way of the Church of England, than in any other; then it must needs be
the greatest Service that can be done to the Protestant Interest, if we could
all be persuaded to join heartily in the Communion of that Church, that has
hitherto been, and still is so great a Defense against the Errors and
Superstitions of Rome.

It would be an unpardonable Vanity to imagine that these short Papers should
be able to effect, what so many Learned and Solid Treatises have not yet done.
But I address this little Essay only to those that have not time to peruse a
larger Volume. I have been encouraged to this Undertaking by the Numbers of
those here in London, that have seemed formerly to dissent from us, who have
lately joined with us, not only in Prayer, but in the Holy Communion of the
Blessed Body and Blood of Christ. And I hope that many more may be invited, and
disposed by their good Example, to receive the same Satisfaction that they have
found. These that are already come in will not stand in need of any farther
Persuasion, but only that they would continue Constant in that Communion they
have now embraced. For if they should leave us again, and return to their
Separate Assemblies, they would seem by this to condemn themselves. For if it
were Lawful for them to Communicate with us once, it must be Lawful for them to
do so still; and they will not refuse to submit to Authority in all things that
may Lawfully be done. I cannot therefore see how they can avoid being
self-condemned, if they should forsake our Communion; for if they judge it
Unlawful, they sinned Wilfully when they entered into it; if they think it
Lawful, they would then Sin in withdrawing from it; since it is enjoined by
that Power which they confess they are bound to obey in Lawful things. If they
should say that they once thought it Unlawful, after that they judged it to be
Lawful, and now conceive it Unlawful again: This strange unsteadiness in
Opinion would look a great deal more like Humor than Judgment. And it might
occasion vehement Suspicions in some, not otherwise very Censorious, that this
Uncertainty proceeds not from Conscience, but Design; and that all their
Compliance was only to serve a present turn; to decline an Ecclesiastical
Censure, to keep a beneficial Place, or to be qualified for an Office in some
great Corporation. Thus men might be apt enough to suspect; but I am willing to
believe any thing rather, than that they that have always made show of so great
a Tenderness, should be guilty of so much Hypocrisy and Profaneness together,
as to dare even to approach to the Lord's Table, (under great dissatisfaction
of mind, it may be) merely to advance some Secular end. But I hope their
Behavior for the future, will sufficiently clear them from such an imputation.

I shall therefore apply my self only to those that do still forbear our
Communion; and offer something very briefly, which I conceive may be useful for
the satisfying their most known and ordinary Doubts; that as we do all profess
the same Faith, we may all agree in the same way of Discipline, and Worship;
and all become peaceable and orderly Members of the same Church. And for the
obtaining this most Excellent end, First, I shall desire them impartially to
consider of some things that may incline them to be Peaceably minded, and tend
to the removing of the general Prejudices they have unhappily conceived against
the Church of England: Then I shall endeavor to give what satisfaction I can to
the chief Objections against us, which they are wont to urge in Defense of the
present Separation, And lastly, I shall exhort them to a brotherly Union, upon
such Motives and Arguments as the Gospel suggests, and make for the Credit and
Safety of the Protestant Religion.

The things that I would commend to their serious Consideration, which may
serve to dispose them to Peace, and to remove the Prejudices they have taken
up, are such as these. In the first place, they should be very careful that it
be not any sinister end, or corrupt Passion, that did either engage them in the
Separation at the beginning, or provokes them now to continue in it. I do not
mention this because I know any one of our Dissenting Brethren to be guilty of
it; but because it must be confessed that men's minds are too often influenced
by their carnal Interests and Affections. These will be always mixing
themselves in all their Consultations; these do commonly blind and pervert
their Judgments, and lead them into ten thousand Errors. These are the
occasion that Fancy sometimes passes for Conscience; that Melancholy Fumes are
admired for Divine Inspirations; and that the overflowing of our Gall is looked
upon as pure Zeal. These and the like are very dangerous and usual Mistakes,
that do frequently proceed from the prevalency of our Passions. If therefore we
do divide from a Church, it will most highly concern us to be very Cautious,
that we be not acted by any such Principle. For if we hope to Gain, and grow
Rich by our Departure; if we are Ashamed, or Scorn to retract the Opinions we
have once Professed; if we imagine we have more Light than the first Reformers,
when indeed we are very Ignorant; if we cannot endure to be Opposed in any
thing; if we Murmur and Repine at our Governors, when they require our
Obedience where we are unwilling to pay it; these are signs that our Affections
are turbulent and unruly; and while we are thus disposed, we can never be
assured but that Covetousness, Pride, and Impatience, might be the greatest
Motives that induced us to make a Separation, and the strongest Arguments that
we have to maintain it. But I cannot charge our Dissenting Brethren with these
things; I believe that many of them may be Upright and Sincere in their
Intentions. But because they are all in the same estate of Degeneracy and
Corruption which others are, I would entreat them to be very careful that they
be never led away by these, or the like temptations; but that they would always
labor to preserve those holy Dispositions of Integrity, Meekness, Humility and
Condescension, which are the best Preparatives to the receiving of the Truth in
the Love of it.

After they have thus freed their minds from all irregular Passions and
Designs, it would conduce exceedingly to the PEACE of the Church, if they would
be sure to express their greatest Care and Concern in the more Weighty and
Substantial things of Religion. This would prevent many of the Quarrels that do
often arise in matters but of small Importance. If real Holiness and Piety be
the thing that we aim at, then when we may be secured of this, we should not be
so very forward to enter upon fierce and endless Disputes, about the external
Modes and Circumstances of Worship. If I may serve God there in Spirit and in
Truth, why should a Gown, or a Cloak, or a Surplice fright me from the Church,
when either of these is enjoined by my Superiors? If I may be instructed in the
way of Salvation and eternal Happiness, why should I forsake the Public
Assemblies, because I am not allowed to join my self to what Congregation I
please; and had not an immediate hand in the choice of my Pastor? When our
hearts are bent upon the great things of Religion, we shall see but little
Reason to be Contentious about matters of lesser Consequence; a few indifferent
Rites will scarce be able to tempt us to break off Communion with that Church,
with which we are at perfect Agreement in all Fundamental and Necessary points.

The next thing that may tend to the promoting our Union is the Consideration
of the heinous Nature and Guilt of Schism; which is nothing else but the
Separating our selves from a True Church without any just Occasion given. The
want of due apprehensions of the Sinfulness of this, seems to be the main Cause
of our present Divisions. Men are not generally sufficiently sensible how much
they do Oppose that Spirit of Peace, and brotherly Love, which should diffuse
it self through the whole Body of Christian People, when they suppose every
slender Pretense enough to justify their departing from us, and setting up a
Church against a Church. They think it a matter almost Indifferent, and that
they are left to their own Choice to join with what Society of Christians they
please themselves. Which giddy Principle, if it should prevail, would certainly
throw us into an absolute Confusion, and introduce all the Errors and Mischiefs
that can be imagined. But our blessed Lord founded but One Universal Church;
and when he was ready to be Crucified for us, and Prayed not for the Apostles
alone, but for them also that John 17. 20, 21.
should believe in him through their word; one of the last Petitions which he
then put up, amongst diverse others to the same purpose, was, That they all may
be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee; that they also may be one in
us, that the World may believe that thou have sent me. This it is plain was to
be a visible Unity that might be taken notice of in the World, and so become an
inducement to move men to the embracing of the Christian Faith. Therefore as we
would avoid the hardening of men in Atheism and Infidelity, and making the
Prayer of our dying Savior, as much as in us lies, wholly ineffectual; we
should be exceeding Cautious that we do not wilfully Divide his holy Catholic
Church. We are often warned of this; and how many Arguments does St. Paul heap
together to persuade us to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond Ephesians. 4. 3,
4, 5, 6.
of Peace? One Body, and one Spirit, even as you are called in one hope of your
Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all. And how
pathetically does the same Apostle exhort us again to the same thing, by all
the mutual endearments that Christianity affords; If there be therefore any
Consolation in Christ, Phil. 2. 1, 2.
if any Comfort of Love, if any Fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and
Mercies; fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being
of one accord, of one mind. These vehement Exhortations to Peace and Concord,
do strictly oblige us to hold Communion with that Church which requires nothing
that is Unlawful of us. The Church of Rome will not admit us, unless we profess
a belief of Transubstantiation, and Purgatory, and a certain kind of
Infallibility, no body knows where; unless we will worship the Host, and
Saints, and Images, and do many other things directly repugnant to the Word of
God: We cannot therefore Communicate with her, unless we should partake of her
gross and superstitious Errors. But the Church of England does not exact any
thing from us that God has forbidden; therefore we may Communicate with her
without Sin; and if we may, it must be a Sin in us if we do not do it. Certain
it is that every causless Separation is a very great one; so great, that some
of the Ancients have thought it is not to be expiated by the Blood of
Martyrdom; and I know no Cause sufficient to defend our leaving a Communion,
but a necessity of being involved in Sin, if we should remain in it. Now since
it must be confessed that Schism is a very grievous Sin; we had need be well
assured that we have just occasion for it, before we withdraw from the
Communion of a Church; and if we have rashly withdrawn, we are bound to return
without delay.

Then we may consider farther that all Christians are obliged to endeavor, as
much as they can, to avoid all differences of Opinion that may occasion
Quarrels and Contests among them. This will appear from that passionate
Entreaty and Admonition which the holy Apostle gave the Corinthians, when they
were in danger of being rent into several Factions, upon misunderstandings and
emulations not much unlike unto ours. Now 1 Cor. 1. 10.
I beseech you, Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak the same thing, and that there be no Divisions among you; but that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. Such an
Universal agreement and harmony in the Church is very desirable, and every one
is bound to promote it. And the first step that can be made toward this happy
Concord in Opinion and Affections, is to dispose our minds to a calm and
teachable Temper; to be always ready to acknowledge the force of an Argument,
though it contradict our former Persuasions never so much; to be grieved at the
Animosities, and uncharitable Contentions, which a diversity of Judgment is
wont to produce; to follow after the things which make for Peace; Romans 14. 19.
to be desirous to see an end of these Unchristian Divisions, and glad of every
Opportunity that may bring us nearer to one another, and think we have gained a
glorious Victory, when we have overcome any mistake that kept us at a distance
from our Brethren. This is a generous and truly Christian disposition, and that
which has an immediate tendency toward the reconciling all manner of
Differences. On the other side, there can be little hopes that men should ever
agree, when they seem resolved to maintain the point in Controversy, whatever
it is; when they do not study to be Satisfied, but to cherish their Scruples;
and hunt about for New ones, when their old Objections are fully answered. This
is a most perverse and untractable Humor, which takes away all possibility of
a good Accord. For while either of the Dissenting Parties is thus unwilling to
be Convinced, and searches after Exceptions, there will never be wanting some
Cavil or other that must be sure to serve them to perpetuate the Dispute. But
it is a shrewd Sign we esteem our Cause little better than Desperate, when,
after the Weapons we began the Fight with are wrested from us, we snatch up any
thing that comes next to hand to throw at our Adversary. This Obstinacy does
not well become us: In all our Debates our aim should be to find out the truth,
and not to triumph over our Antagonist. All sober Christians, especially where
the Peace of the Church is concerned, should always strive to bring the
Controversy to a happy issue, and composure; and not seek for Pretenses to
widen the breach. And then we might all join in Praising and Glorifying of God;
and be restored again to that blessed estate they were in, at the first
Preaching of the Gospel, when the Multitude of Acts 4. 32. Chapter 2. 42.
them that believed were of one Heart, and of one Soul; and continued
steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread,
and in Prayers. These few Considerations I have now mentioned might be
something useful to the procurement of such a Holy and Heavenly Peace in all
Christian Societies throughout the World.

And if we were but careful never to be biased by Passion or Interest; if our
greatest Zeal and Concern were placed upon the more Weighty and Substantial
matters of Religion; if we should seriously consider how grievous a Sin it is
to Separate from a Church without any just cause; and if we were disposed to
Peace, and willing to have our Doubts and Scruples satisfied; I think most of
the Prejudices against the Church of England might be easily removed; and we
might all join in the same Communion, to the Glory of God, and the Joy and
Comfort of all good Protestants, and the Confusion of those that design to
swallow us up, and have no other hopes of prevailing, but by the help of those
Differences, which for that end, they have a long time most studiously fomented
amongst us. Let not our unreasonable Fears and groundless Jealousies encourage
their Attempts with too great a probability of Success. It would be a sad
addition to our Miseries, if the Guilt and Shame of them too might be laid to
our Charge. With what remorse should we reflect upon it, (when the heat of our
Passion was over) if the Protestant Profession should be farther endangered,
and the Agents of Rome get greater Advantages daily, by those Distractions
which have been secretly managed by them, but openly carried on and maintained
by our selves! With what face should we look to see our Enemies, not only
triumphing over us, but mocking and deriding us, for being so far imposed upon
by their cunning, as to be made the immediate instruments of our own ruin! But
God Almighty, in his wise and gracious Providence, so confound all their
Devices that tend to the subversion of the Truth; and so Unite and Compose our
Differences, that hereafter we may have no just occasion to fear either their
Treachery, o their Force. This is a Petition, I am sure, in which no good
Christian can refuse to join; and if we do heartily desire this, let us do what
we can to promote it; if our Prayer be not unsincere and hypocritical, we shall
make use of our best endeavors to obtain the thing we have prayed for. And now
if our Union be thus desirable and necessary, what should hinder but that at
last we might be all most happily united under the Discipline and Government of
the Church of England? A Church that is already Framed and Constituted; that
has the Countenance and Establishment of the Laws; that has been Protected by a
Succession of Wise and Pious Princes; that was Defended unto Death by our late
Martyred Sovereign; that was Restored by His Majesty that now is, and has been
ever since so graciously Cherished by him, as if the Care of it were a Quality
inherent and hereditary to the Crown. A Church that was Reformed by full and
sufficient Authority, upon mature and serious Deliberation; with a perfect
submission to the Rule of holy Scripture, and a due regard to the example of
the most Primitive times. A Church that has constantly rejected all the Errors
and Corruptions of Rome; that admits of neither their Infallibility, nor
Supremacy; that allows no Purgatory, nor Indulgences, no adoration of Relics,
and Images, no Praying to Saints nor Angels; that does not think that God can
be pleased with idle Pilgrimages, or a forced Celibacy, or any set number of
Ave's and Paternoster's, or other formal Devotions exactly computed upon a
string of Beads, and muttered over in an unknown Tongue; that does not rob the
Laity of half the Communion, nor teach them that strange and contradictious
Doctrine that the Elements are transubstantiated into the real Body and Blood
of Christ in the Lord's Supper; that does not only constantly deny these, and
many more absurd and erroneous Opinions of the Papists, but has always sent
forth as stout and able Champions to oppose them, as any the Christian World
affords. A Church whose Doctrine is confessed to be Orthodox by the generality
of our Dissenting Brethren, and whose Discipline and Order of external Worship
has nothing in it repugnant to any Law of God. And what imaginable ground can
there then be to justify a Separation from such a Church? Certainly the use of
a few Indifferent things, appointed only for Order's sake, will not be enough
to do it. These are not Forbidden, and therefore cannot be Sinful in
themselves; and where God has not Forbidden, our Superiors may Command; and in
all such cases we are bound to Obey.

Some indeed there are that will not be satisfied with this. They tell us, that
it is not sufficient that a thing be not Forbidden, but that it must be
Commanded, or else it cannot be used in the Worship of God without Sin. But if
this Opinion be true, I must confess that then it is Unlawful to hold Communion
not only with ours but with any Church that is, or ever was in the World; for I
do not believe that One can be found amongst them All, that has not required
the use of some Indifferent thing that was not Commanded. Our Dissenting
Brethren themselves will allow that the Time and Place of Religious Assemblies
may be prescribed by Authority. And if these necessary Circumstances may be
thus Determined, though they be not Commanded by God; then it will be as Lawful
to prescribe what particular Gestures and Habits shall be there used. For these
are things of the same Nature; Circumstances as necessary as Time and Place;
and if we have any respect to the Decent and Reverent performance of the
Service of God, they may be as necessary to be determined too. However it must
be acknowledged that some things that are not Commanded may be Lawfully
Enjoined and Submitted to; and if some, then all that are of the same
Indifferent nature; unless there can be some sufficient reason assigned why
some should be excepted, and some not; which will be very difficult where the
Nature of the things is the same. And in our present case, it will be hard in
the general to conceive how the Command of a Lawful Power should make that
Unlawful which was not Forbidden, and by consequence was Lawful before.

But if it should be still insisted on, that nothing must be Commanded that God
has not Commanded; they that are of this Persuasion, should be very certain
that they have clear proof out of the Scriptures for it before they undertake
to Forbid that which God has not Forbidden; or else they stand condemned by
their own Principle.

Now the Arguments they bring for this out of the New Testament are very few:
And those very obscure, and no way applicable to the matter in hand, without
being mightily strained: Those out of the Old Testament are not many; that
which has been chiefly urged, and seems indeed the most pertinent and material,
is this: The whole Levitical Service was particularly prescribed by God
himself, and Moses was strictly charged to make the Tabernacle and all the
Utensils that belonged unto it, After the pattern that was showed him Exodus 25.
40. Heb. 3. 5, 6.
in the Mount. And Moses verily was faithful in all his House as a Servant; and
so is Christ as a Son over his own House; that is, the Church: Therefore as
Moses laid down all the particular Rules to be observed in the Worship of God,
under the Legal Dispensation, so has Christ under the Evangelical; and it is as
dangerous to add, as it is to detract from these written Rules; we may no more
do what is not Commanded, then what is Forbidden. This I take to be the main
Argument that is brought against us in the present Controversy; and if this
can be Answered, all the rest will be but of little Force.

Therefore to give what satisfaction I can to this, I say first, that
throughout the whole Epistle to the Hebrews, where Moses and Christ, or the Law
and the Gospel are compared, the scope of the Apostle is to show the exact
Correspondence there was betwixt the Type and the Antitype; and not that our
Savior had as particularly prescribed the Order of external Worship, as Moses
by Gods appointment had done. For it is certain he did not; to give but one
instance of very many: The manner Exodus 12.
of Celebrating the Passover, how it should be Killed, and how it should be
Eaten, is it set down with every minute Circumstance: But the Institution of
the Supper of our Lord is not so delivered unto us: We have only a short
Narrative, with a general Command superadded; Do this in remembrance of me. And
when Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25.
St. Paul repeats it again, he does it without any mention of the Posture of
Receiving. The Gospel which teaches us a more Spiritual way of Serving God, is
not so particular in the Circumstantials of Worship as the Law was; and we must
not affirm that it is, because we would have it so. We cannot prove that Christ
has actually done this, because we imagine that he should have done it. It
would be better argued if we should say, The Gospel has not expressly
determined these things, as the Law did; therefore they are left to the prudent
determination of those that have the Rule over Heb. 13. 17.
us, to whom we are Commanded to be Obedient, and submit our selves; that the
Episcopal Power may be equivalent to the Sacerdotal; and the Service of God as
regularly Administered in the Church, as it was in the Temple.

Besides, it was not a Sin, even under the Law, to ordain and observe some
things, relating to the Worship of God, that were not written. And these could
not be esteemed additions to the Word, if they were not imposed as Divine
Precepts, but as Prudent Constitutions, appointed only for the more Orderly
management of the external Offices of Religion. But that any thing should be
Unlawful merely because it is not Commanded, is a Doctrine, I think, that was
never heard of among Jews or Christians, till very lately. God had Commanded
the setting up of a Tabernacle, and most punctually described how it should be
made: We have been told that there was not to be one Pin about it, for which
there was not some special Direction. And God never spoke a word concerning
building of an House; See 2 Samuel 17.
yet this notwithstanding, David, without any Command, 1 Chronicles. 17.
had it in his thoughts to build one; and Nathan in his private judgment
approved of the design; and God himself, though he suspended the execution of
it for some time, commended him for it, and rewarded his pious Intentions, with
a promise of building him 2 Chronicles 6. 8.
another kind of House, by confirming the settlement of the Crown in his
Family. Which is proof enough that every thing then that was not Commanded, was
not therefore Sinful. The ancient Church of the Jews were so fully satisfied in
this, that they made no Scruple of ordering diverse things, for which they could
not find a Command. The Feast of the Dedication is a known and pregnant
instance; it was of modern and humane Institution, and yet our Savior
vouchsafed to be present at John 10. 22.
it. Some things they a little altered, and added others, at the Passover; as
their eating of it not Standing, but Sitting, or Lying at the Table; and their
Singing a Paschal Hymn after it; which with some other like Usages, were
observed by our blessed Lord, and his Disciples; and it can be no less than
Blasphemy then to conceive, that there could be any thing that was Sinful in
them. The whole matter may be concluded thus: If it were not Sinful under the
Law, where the external Form of Divine Worship was particularly specified, to
admit of certain Usages that were not Commanded, then much less is it Sinful to
do so now under the Gospel, where the external Form is not so specified; where
we have little more than such general Rules as these, to be respectively
applied by Superiors and Inferiors: Let all things be done Decently, and in
Order: 1 Cor. 14. 40. Heb. 13. 17. Romans 4. 15.
Obey them that have the Rule over you: Where no Law is, there is no
transgression.

I have been something the longer in considering this Argument, because the
whole debate must issue here; which way soever this be decided, the
Controversy is at an end. If our Church require any thing of us that is
Unlawful, we are bound to Separate from her; if she do not, we are strictly
engaged to Communicate with her. They therefore that Divide, should first show
that she injoyns something Unlawful. But that never was, and I verily believe
never can be made appear. For we are told, in the Person of St. Paul, that All
things are Lawful; which must of necessity be understood 1 Cor. 6. 12. 10. 23.
of things that are not Forbidden: And then since it cannot be charged upon our
Church, that she Commands any thing that is Forbidden; it must be granted that
she Commands nothing, but what the Apostle has declared to be Lawful. What
Reason then can be pretended, why we should rend and tear her very Bowels? Why
should we run so headily into opposite Parties and Factions? Why should we
hazard the Protestant Cause upon a number of little disunited Independent
Interests, that are as much at Difference one with another, as they all are
with us? What should make us so timorous in this, when we are so daring in some
other cases? Why should we be afraid to join in Communion with a Reformed
Church, whose Doctrine is Orthodox, whose Rites ae Innocent, whose Government
is Apostolical? A man would wonder truly what could be pleaded in defense of a
Separation, when none of these can be justly accused. And yet there are certain
Objections brought against us, which those that withdraw would fain persuade us
to think sufficient to justify their Departure. To some of the chief of these
I shall now endeavor to give what satisfaction I can.

Our Dissenting Brethren therefore are wont to plead; That there is a Liturgy,
or Set Form of Public Worship prescribed; That there are certain Ceremonies
enjoined; That the use of these Controverted things gives great Scandal to the
weak; That they cannot Safely join in our mixed Communion; That they leave our
Assemblies for the sake of greater Edification, which they can find elsewhere:
And for these Reasons they think they are necessitated to depart from ours, and
set up Churches to themselves, according to the best Models that every one is
able to draw. This is certainly a very dangerous adventure; and can never be
justified by such Arguments, as are produced; which might be all easily
answered upon the general Principle I have already mentioned; That none of the
things against which the exceptions are made are Unlawful; and therefore they
cannot make our Communion Unlawful; and if that be not Unlawful, it must be
Unlawful to divide from it. This might be Reply enough to the most, if not all
the Objections that are, or can be brought. But because it may be thought more
satisfactory by some, I shall give a particular, though very short Answer to
those I have now proposed.

The First and Great thing that is objected against our Church, is prescribing
a Liturgy, or Set Form of Prayers to be constantly used in Public Worship.
This is that which has raised a great many Clamours; Peoples minds have been
extremely incensed and exasperated against it; it has been cried out upon as
Idolatrous, Popish, Superstitious, and I know not how many hard Names it has
been called. But I am glad to find the temper of our Dissenting Brethren
altered so much for the better: We do not now so often hear those bitter
exclamations of Rome and Babylon, Baal and Dagon: The Common Prayer is not
esteemed such an abominable thing, as some ignorant and heady Zealots were wont
to count it. Among those that have but too openly favored the Separation the
more considerable part, both for Number and Sobriety, do not only allow that a
Form is Lawful, but will freely acknowledge that ours is so; and therefore they
will admit of Occasional; and if so, I cannot see what can withhold them from a
full and constant Communion with us. Certainly that which is Lawful once or
twice, must be Lawful always. However we may take some delight to see the old
Heats in any measure abated, and that the least advances are made toward
Peace. God grant that this Concession may prove a step to a happy and perfect
Reconcilement. And so I hope it may; for our Brethren cannot be any longer
offended with those Forms in which they do sometimes join themselves. Nay those
that have not yet proceeded so far, but are still afraid of being Defiled in
our way of Worship, cannot have any color to Condemn it for being a Form. The
Jews had Forms in their Public Assemblies, which this notwithstanding were
duly frequented by our blessed Savior: He delivered a Form himself, in his
Sermon on the Matthew. 6. 9, etc.
Mount, and taught the same again to his Disciples afterward, Luke 11. 2.
and Commanded them to use it: Some Forms were received very early among the
Ancient Christians; who have been followed in this by all the Protestant
Churches; but the Lawfulness of them was never called in question heretofore:
For how could it, since they are no were Forbidden? Or if a Command be thought
requisite to make them Lawful, the other way is no more Commanded than this;
and therefore upon that Principle they must be both equally Lawful, or
Unlawful: So that if any Prayer be Lawful, a Form must be confessed to be so.
The Arguments in this case are so Convincing, that there are few now but that
will readily agree that a Form may be Lawful in it self; but then they think it
ought not to be Imposed, because of some Inconveniences which they conceive do
attend it. And they are principally these Two; the One, that there may be some
particular Emergencies which cannot be provided for by a Set Form. The other,
that it is an hinderance to the Spirit of Prayer. The first of these has very
little difficulty in it. The ordinary wants and necessities of Christians are
always the same, and we may Petition to have them supplied in the same Words;
and for other things, it may generally be foreseen that they may happen
sometimes; and suitable Forms may be composed to be used upon such Occasions:
Where these cannot be fitly applied, peculiar Offices may be set forth; as has
been usual in such cases: Where the exigency is great, and will not admit of so
much delay as is necessary for that, the Minister is at Liberty to use his own
Conceptions. But this cannot be urged for the Exclusion of a Liturgy. It were
very unreasonable to deprive the Church of known and approved Forms, and leave
her to the mercy of extemporary Effusions only; for the sake of a few
Contingencies, which may happen but very rarely, if at all, in a whole Age.

The other thing that is alleged would be more considerable, if it were really
true, That Forms did indeed hinder the Spirit of Prayer. But this they do not:
For it is a gross and carnal Mistake to imagine that the Spirit of Prayer can
consist in a readiness of Expression, and a natural or acquired volubility of
Tongue; Arts and Accomplishments whereof many Wicked men have been great
Masters; and wherein as many Good ones may be very deficient. The Spirit of
Prayer must be acknowledged to be nothing else but an inward good and pious
Disposition of the Soul, wrought in us by the Grace of God; an unfeigned
Humility and Abhorrence of our selves, when we confess our Sins, and beg for
Pardon; an affectionate Sense of our Wants, when we ask for all things
necessary, both for this and the other Life; an holy exultation of Mind, when
we offer up our Praises and Thanks for the Blessings we have received; a full
Resignation of our Concerns to God's disposal, and a Dependence upon his
Promises for the granting our Requests, when we have made our Addresses unto
him. These are the great Indications of the true Spirit of Prayer; and these
are so far from being Hindered, that they may be very much Helped, and
Advantaged by a Form. A man questionless may be more seriously Affected, in all
these respects, and say Amen more heartily to a Form of sound Words which he
has known, and considered before, than he can to some uncertain Expressions
which he never heard, nor thought on; and possibly may not so well understand,
nor be satisfied in, when he hears them. The perplexity and doubtfulness of
Thoughts, which must often arise, when we would join in Prayers we are
unacquainted with, is directly Opposite to that Faith and Assurance with which
we should Pray; and can scarce be prevented but by a well digested and studied
Form; that may be Weighed, and soberly Assented to, by those that are required
to join in it.

But some think that it may be manifest from Experience, that Forms are a
hinderance to the very inward Spirit of Devotion. They have found their
Affections very cold and flat, at our usual stated Forms of Prayer; but when
they hear a man Pray without a Form, they are mightily ravished, and almost
transported; and this difference of Temper they observe in themselves has
prevailed with many, of the more undiscerning sort especially, to forsake our
Communion. But it is always very dangerous to judge of things not by our
Understandings, but by the various impulses and motions of our Affections. When
we have Scripture and Reason on our side, we cannot be Deceived; but when we
Determine, as we are swayed by the present bias of our Passions; these may be
Charmed, or Raised, or Flattened, by several sorts of Spirits; and quickly
betray us into strong Delusions. Therefore if any one should be tempted, as
some have been, to leave the Church on this Account, that he thinks he may be
more affected in another Place; before he goes, I would desire him to consider
what it is that does thus Affect him: If it be the Matter and Substance of the
Prayer, I suppose that may be usually the same, at least as good in our
ordinary Offices, as it is in their unpremeditated Petitions; and so it will
not be necessary to make a Separation for this: If it be only the chiming and
harmony of the Words he is taken with, this is no more but a kind of sensitive
Delight; and to apply the Prophet's Expressions here, it is but like a very
lovely Song of one Ezekiel. 33. 32.
that has a pleasant Voice, and can play well on an Instrument: This will by
no means excuse our departing from the Public Assemblies; this would be in
effect to say, that we may make Divisions in the Church of God, to gratify our
own private, and it may be mistaken Fancies. But if any one has left us for a
time upon this Pretense, and made some Trial of both ways, then I would desire
him strictly to examine his own Conscience, whether he have not often been as
Dull and Indifferent at a Conceived Prayer, as ever he was at the Service of
the Church: And then on the other side, let him consider, whether he do not
believe that very many may be as serious and devout at the Common Prayer, as
ever he was at any in the other way he is pleased to prefer: And after he has
thus inquired, if he see Reason to acknowledge both, as doubtless he will, then
the Scales will be even at the least: Experience will show, that men may be
Fervent and Affectionate with a Form, and Cold and Inattentive without one. And
therefore when we are heavy, listless, and unaffected at a Prayer by a Form;
this Defect cannot proceed from the Manner of the Devotion, but from the
Indisposition of the Person that uses it. And when we Separate upon this
occasion, we are guilty of a double Iniquity, in Dividing the Church without
sufficient Cause; and charging our own Formality upon a good and wholesome
Constitution.

My intended brevity will not permit me to give a particular Answer to all the
Exceptions that have been taken at our Liturgy; only in the general I say, I
know nothing in it that can be pretended to be Sinful in it self. The most that
is urged are some supposed Inconveniences; which if we should grant to be real,
they cannot make our Communion Unlawful; and then, as I have often intimated,
it must be a Sin to Separate from it; and we may not commit a Sin to decline an
Inconvenience: This would be to do evil that good may come of it. They that are
willing to improve every slight Exception into a Cause of Separation, should
beware of this. The question is not, whether there be not any thing in the
Order of our Divine Service which a man could wish to be altered? For that can
never be expected under any Constitution. The main inquiry is this, whether any
thing Unlawful be appointed to be used, which will make an Alteration not only
desirable, but necessary? And whether we are bound to withdraw till such
Alteration be made? Which has never been proved: Men generally forbear our
Public Worship, without ever examining into it, upon no other ground but
because they prefer their own Arbitrary way before it. Which I do not admire;
but this is very strange and unreasonable, that they should take such a disgust
at our Liturgy, and fly away from it, as if it were Popish and Antichristian,
when they never have so much as read it; at least considered it, as they ought.
And here I shall take the Confidence to affirm that the Liturgy some abhor so
much, was made and reviewed with that Prudence and Moderation, that Care and
Circumspe^tion, that there is not any thing now extant in that kind, that has
been composed with greater Wisdom, and Piety. If we should take the liberty to
compare it with the performances in the other way; (not to mention the many
undecent, incoherent, irreverent expressions, to say no worse, that might be
collected) let any Prayer made occasionally and extempore by the ablest and
most cautious of those that magnify that way, and despise ours, be taken
exactly in writing, and published to the World; and I am very confident, that
one man, without any great pains, may find more things really exceptionable, in
that single Prayer, in a short time, than the several Parties of Dissenters,
with all the diligence they have hitherto used, have been able to discover in
the whole Service of our Church in more than a hundred years. And yet some of
our Brethren, that seek industriously for Scruples in the Common Prayer, will
readily join in other sudden conceived Prayers, without any Scruple; when they
cannot tell but that there may be some dangerous Heresy in every Sentence, and
some great Indecencies and Absurdities in every Word. This is such partiality,
and unequal dealing, as cannot be easily excused.

But if they should allow of the Forms of Prayer in our Liturgy, there are
certain Ceremonies enjoined, which they think give them occasion enough to
depart from our Communion. A man that were unacquainted with the true State of
our case, that should stand by and only hear the bitter Cries and Invectives
that have been made against Ceremonies, would be ready to imagine that sure our
Church was nothing else almost but Ceremonies. But he would be mightily
surprised, when upon inquiry he should find, that these Ceremonies which had
occasioned all this noise, should be no more than Three; the Surplice, the
Cross after Baptism, and Kneeling at the Sacrament. He would be amazed to think
that these should be the things, about which so many massy Books had been
written! So great discords and animosities raised! Such a flourishing Church
once quite destroyed, and now most miserably divided, after it had been so
happily restored! And his wonder must be increased, when he should perceive
that of these Three, there was but One, and no more, in which the People were
any way concerned. The Cross and the Surplice, are to be used only by the
Minister; and if his Conscience be satisfied, no man's else need to be disturbed
about them. To Kneel at the Lord's Supper all indeed are commanded; but
supposing this to be Unlawful, it could hinder us only from partaking in that
Ordinance, and not in the rest. But of that farther by and by.

In the mean time, I do not understand but that some Ceremonies, and particular
Determinations of Circumstances are absolutely necessary in the Worship of God;
since it cannot be performed without them; they that will have no Ceremonies,
can have no external Worship. This I think will not be denied. But the
Ceremonies that are appointed in our Church are thought by some to be
significant, superstitious, and breaches of our Christian Liberty; and
therefore not to be endured. These are the great Objections against the few
Ceremonies, that are in use among us; and these I shall briefly Consider.

First we are told our Ceremonies are significant: And why may not a
significant Ceremony be Lawful? Are not Kneeling, and lifting up the Eyes and
Hands to Heaven significations of the Reverence we owe to the Divine Majesty?
Yes: But Ceremonies that signify something naturally, may be permitted; but not
those that signify by institution. There should be some solid reason, or some
plain Scripture Authority brought, to make this difference good: And here it is
pleaded that every significant Ceremony is a Sacrament; and it is downright
Popery to make more Sacraments, than God has made. This I confess were very
material, if it could be proved. But we acknowledge nothing to be a Sacrament,
but what is An outward and visible sign of Common Prayer in the Catech.
an inward and spiritual grace, given unto us, ordained by Christ himself, as a
means whereby we receive the same, and a pledge to assure us thereof. Now if
this be a true Definition, as it is owned by us, and must be acknowledged by
our Dissenting Brethren that talk so much of their approving the Doctrine of
our Church; then our Ceremonies though they should be never so significant,
cannot be Sacraments, because they want so many Necessary and Essential
conditions that are required to make a Sacrament. They are not of Divine
Ordination and Appointment, they are of no efficacy to confer any Grace,
neither are they any Pledges, and Assurances of it. But suppose we should grant
every significant Ceremony to be a Sacrament; for it is neither pleasant nor
profitable to quarrel about Words: There is but one of the Three Ceremonies,
and that is the Cross at Baptism, that can be pretended Ibid. in Public
Baptism.
to be significant; and that indeed is made, In token that the party newly
Baptized shall not hereafter be ashamed to confess the Faith of Christ
Crucified, etc. But this sign of the Cross was very anciently, if not always,
used at Baptism, and upon several other occasions, by the Primitive Christians,
in defiance of all sorts of Infidels, and as we do it, in Token that they were
not ashamed of a Crucified Savior. Our Church in this does but follow the
example of the Purest and Holiest Professors of the Gospel that ever were; and
that but at a distance too, in doing that but once, which they repeated often.
And this can scarce be called a significant Ceremony. It is not appointed to
Represent any thing unto us, but only to remind us of a Duty we are bound to
do. Like the Altar that was built by the Children of Reuben, and Gad, and the
half Tribe of Manasseh, Not for burnt-offering, nor for sacrifice; but Josh.
22. 26.
that it might be a Witness. And if any one should think the Surplice were
ordered to be worn to denote the innocence of Life, that does more especially
become those that are particularly devoted to the Service of God; it is more
than our Church has declared; but yet no man were to be blamed, that should
take occasion from hence, to let his thoughts expatiate into a pious and
seasonable Meditation, and consider how incongruous it would be, to have his
inward parts full of filthiness and corruption, when his outside was covered
with a clean white Linen Garment. The Sum is, every significant Ceremony is
not a Sacrament; and none of ours can be properly said to be significant,
representing, symbolical; but only Commemorating, or if any man please to call
them so, Professing signs.

But though they cannot be proved to be Sacraments, yet they may be
Superstitious, and that is Objection enough against them. And I confess that
they may be Superstitious; but not in themselves, for so they are perfectly
Indifferent; but according to the Opinion or Conceit of those that use them, or
use them not. There may be Superstition in the Observing of these, and there
may be as much in the forbearing. Superstition is nothing but a groundless
Fancy attended sometimes with an anxious Fear, and sometimes with a fond Hope,
that God is pleased or displeased with the bare performance or forbearance of
what he has neither Commanded nor Forbidden. He therefore that thinks he
offends God in doing of that he has not Forbidden; and he that imagines he
shall please him, by the observing of what he has not Commanded, are both in
some degree, and it may be, equally Superstitious. And then the Superstition
that is exercised about the Observation of these Ceremonies must lie on the
part of our Dissenting Brethren, who think they should Sin in keeping them,
though they generally confess they are not Forbidden; and not on ours, who
declare them to be Indifferent, and no otherwise acceptable unto God, but as
they are the effects of Obedience to our Superiors, and necessary to the
preservation of Discipline and Order in the Church.

But it is farther urged by some, that these Ceremonies are a Breach of our
Christian Liberty. I need not enter upon a Discourse of this; but as far as it
concerns the matter in hand, I say; That the being freed from the Ceremonial
Law is a part, though not the greatest part of Christian Liberty; but then it
is not so much our being freed from observing it, as from the Necessity of
observing it. The Apostles and first Christians did voluntarily observe it for
some time upon Prudential Considerations; and imposed some things, as the
abstaining Acts 15. 29.
from blood, and from things strangled; and yet they were Free, because
whatever they did of this Nature, they did it not with an Opinion of any
Necessary obligation that lay upon them to do it, but upon other Motives; most
commonly out of condescension to the weakness of the Jewish Converts. And if
some Judaical Rites might not only be observed, but imposed then; there can be
no reason why a few Indifferent Ceremonies may not be appointed now, without
any intrenchment upon the Liberty which Christ has purchased for us. Such
things cannot be an infringment of that, but only when they are supposed to be
either Unlawful or Necessary by Divine Command.

Kneeling at the Sacrament, which is the Ceremony that is wont to be the most
scrupled, is as little liable to the Objections, that I have now answered, as
either of the other. It would be ver^ uncharitable, and unjust to say as some
have done, that it is an Act of Worship to the outward Elements; when the
Church has declared this to be Idolatry, to be abhorred of all Faithful Rubr.
after the Communion.
Christians. If it should be said that we ought to receive in the same posture,
that they received at the first Institution: We cannot certainly tell what that
was: If it were that which is most probably Conjectured, it is never used: It
is wholly laid aside by those that argue the most Zealously for it. But sure if
the particular Gesture had been so absolutely necessary, as some do imagine,
there would have been some plain, and express mention of it somewhere in the
Scripture; which there is not, as I have noted before. And then it must be very
unwarrantable in those, that Separate from our Church, because they will not
receive in that reverent manner which She has prescribed. If there had been
nothing enjoined in this matter, a man upon a serious apprehension of the
infinite mercies of God, through the merits and mediation of his blessed
Savior, could scarce have forborne falling upon his Knees, when he came to
partake of the Sacrament of his most precious Body and Blood. The commemoration
of the Death and Passion of the Son of God, by which he was Redeemed would
strike him almost naturally, into the humblest posture of Adoration. But if any
reverence be granted to be due at such a time, I am sure sitting at the Table,
is a very unfit posture to express it. Or if any man should like it better than
that which is required with us; yet to make this an occasion of departing from
our Communion, would argue but too little value for the peace of the Church.

But some there are who though they be convinced of the Lawfulness of all these
Rites and Usages, and for their own particular, could join with us well enough;
yet they dare not do it, for fear of giving Scandal and Offense to those that
are not satisfied in these things. This matter of Scandal has been so
vehemently pleaded sometimes as if it were the only thing to be regarded in all
Church Constitutions; and that they were to be immediately disused, whatever
Authority enjoined them, as soon as any should be offended at them. This puts
all external Order in Christian Assemblies into a very tottering condition,
ready to be presently overturned, by every little Scruple, that may chance to
arise. But for answer to this we must observe: That they are the Weak, and
Ignorant that take Offense: That their doubts and scruples are not to be
nourished and commended, See Romans 14.
but only born with for a time; That they are bound to take all due Care, and
convenient Opportunity 1 Cor. 8.
of Instruction, that they may be fully satisfied; and that it is in things
merely Indifferent, such as Meats and Drinks where we are obliged to any
compliance, for the avoiding of Scandal. These things thus briefly premised,
let it be considered; whether they who esteem themselves rather more Knowing
than others, who seem unwilling to part with their Doubts, and who have
entertained some Prejudices against those that would inform them better, are to
be treated like weak Brethren? And whether we ought to yield to them, where
Authority has determined the contrary; unless we could prove our Obedience as
Indifferent as the things scrupled at are supposed to be? If it should be said
that we ought; yet at least it cannot be safely done, till it be made appear,
that all the weak are of one side. For in our present Case, if there should be
as many, as doubtless there are, that would be offended to see the manner of
our Public Worship altered, as there are to see it imposed; then though the
command of our Superiors should signify nothing, we should yet be upon equal
terms, on the account of Scandal only; and as much bound not to Separate, as
they think they are to Separate, by their own Principle. But in a word, no
Scandal taken at an Indifferent thing, can be so great as the Sin, and Scandal
both, of Confusion and Disorder, and Contempt of Authority.

There is another Exception near akin to this: Some have thought they must
withdraw from us, because of our mixed Communions, and that some which they judge
unworthy Receivers, are admitted to the Lord's Table. This Objection proves
nothing but a Supercilious Arrogance, and a great want of Charity in those that
make it. What care they may take in their new way of Discipline, I cannot tell;
but our Church has given the Minister a Power of rejecting those that are
guilty See Rubr. before the Communion.
of any known and scandalous Sin. And this is as much as can be done; the open
Sinner may be excluded, but the close Hypocrite will escape the narrowest
search, that humane Industry can make. But if any notorious evil Livers should
be admitted through the ignorance, inadvertency, or negligence of the Minister;
their Unworthiness cannot defile those that Communicate with them. It is
generally thought that the Cursed Traitor Judas did partake of the Holy Supper,
when it was first instituted by our Lord. God be praised, I have not heard,
that amongst us, the abuses of this Ordinance, did ever arise to that Degree
that they were at among the Corinthians; when at the very time of receiving,
one was Hungry, and another Drunken: 1 Cor. 11. 21.
and yet the Apostle does not Command them to forsake the Communion of that
Church, where these Scandalous Enormities were committed. Every man is charged
to Examine himself, and not another, before he presume Ver. 28.
to eat of that Bread and, drink of that Cup. And it would be very well, if all
men would hearken to this holy and pious Admonition; for he that inquires
seriously into his own Sins, will find great cause to be Humble and Penitent,
and so may become a worthy Communicant: But he that is curious to pry into the
miscarriages of other men, will be apt to be vain, proud, self-conceited, and
censorious; which will make him as unfit for the Table of the Lord, as any of
those Faults which he so scornfully condemns in his Neighbor, that he esteems
himself, and the ordinances of God polluted by his Company.

But if none of these Pleas, I have mentioned, should be sufficient; many think
they may leave our Assemblies only for the sake of greater Edification, which
they can find elsewhere. This I believe prevails with great numbers, of the
more ignorant especially, to depart from us. And I would to God they might
obtain what they say they depart for; and that they were indeed more Edified,
and did grow in Grace, under what Ministry soever it be. But alas! This talk
of greater Edification is many times mere wantonness, and instability of
humor; and too often rather in Fancy than effect. Men conceit that they are
better Edified, not when they are more fully instructed in any weighty point of
Faith; or more perfectly informed in some necessary Duty; or more efficaciously
moved to the practice of what they Know; but when they are 2 Timothy 4. ^.
more gratified, and pleased, at the hearing of a Sermon, or the like. This is
nothing but one sort of those itching Ears the Apostle speaks of. And they that
are troubled with this disease, instead of being Edified, as they pretend, are
commonly the most ignorant of all; and as blamable as any in their ordinary
Conversation. I wish we had not too many examples of the truth of this. For
besides that, it is great odds but that they make an unwise choice in the
Teacher they set up to themselves at last; they likewise provoke God to leave
them to the vanity of their own Minds, when they depend rather on the supposed
abilities of a man, than the blessed influences of the holy Spirit; and look
more at Paul that plants, and Apollos that waters, then at God that gives the
increase.

If we have all things necessary to the building us up in our most holy Faith,
in the Communion of the Church; it will be but a poor excuse for our Dividing
from it, that we hoped to be better Edified; when we had no encouragement at
all to hope it, as long as we continued in the state of Separation, upon this
pretense For it is the blessing of God alone, and not any man's skill in
dispensing them, that can make the Word and Ordinances any way beneficial unto
us. With the help of his Grace, those means of instruction which we sometimes
undervalue the most, may be profitable to our Salvation: Without it our Ears
may be tickled, and our Fancies pleasantly entertained for the time* but we
cannot be truly Edified by the most fluent and popular Tongue, nor the most
melting and pathetical Expressions in the World.

I have briefly examined the chief Objections that are brought against the
established Order, and Constitution of our Church; and do not find that any, or
all of them together, are of force enough to move an unprejudiced Person to
forsake her Communion. It may not be done upon the account of Liturgy,
Ceremonies, Scandal, mixed Communion, or out of hopes of greater Edification. I
might have easily enlarged upon all these particulars; but the compass of my
present Design would not allow it. And I have some hopes that these and other
points in difference, may be handled by others to better advantage, and to the
satisfaction of those that are not yet convinced, and to the happy settlement
of a lasting Peace and Union, among all the Members of this divided Church. God
grant that all our endeavors may tend this way; and that the Divine Goodness
may make them Successful. If these Papers should chance to fall into the hands
of any one of those that have Separated from us, I would entreat him not to be
Offended at them; but to look upon the Author, as a well-meaning Man, that was
willing to throw a little Water upon the common flame, that is like to consume
us. They were not written, I am sure with any bitterness of Mind, or
Expression; but out of mere pity to see a poor, lamentable, distressed Church,
languishing away, and ready to perish by desperate Wounds and Convulsions
within her own Bowels. Such sad and Melancholy thoughts as these apprehensions
must needs occasion, could scarce be vented in angry and provoking Language.
But some are so tender of the Opinions they have taken up, that whether true or
false, they cannot endure to have them touched: They are impatient of the
calmest Opposition; and when you offer any thing to persuade them, though it
should be to brotherly Love and Peace among Christians, they suspect you for an
Enemy, and think that you come to set traps in their way to ensnare their
Consciences. But I hope this short Discourse will not be incountered by any
such Prejudice; but that it may be perused, with the same Impartiality that it
was written.

On this presumption, I shall be bold to exhort all those that now Dissent, to
a Brotherly Union; upon such motives and arguments, as the Gospel suggests, and
make for the Credit and Safety of the Protestant Religion. It will be readily
acknowledged by every sober and intelligent man, that Peace and Amity, and a
good Correspondence betwixt the several Members of which they consist, is the
only Beauty, Strength, and Security of all Societies; and on the contrary, that
the nourishing of Animosities, and running into opposite Parties and Factions,
does mightily weaken, and by degrees almost unavoidably draw on the Ruin and
Dissolution of any Community, whether Civil or Sacred. Concord and Union
therefore will be as necessary for the Preservation of the Church, as of the
State. It has been known by too sad an Experience, as well in ours as other
Ages, what a pernicious Influence the intestine Broils and Quarrels among
Christians have had. They have been the great stumbling Block to Jews, Turks,
and Heathens; and the main hinderance of their Conversion; they have made some
among our selves to become Doubtful and Skeptical in their Religion; they have
led others into many dangerous Errors, that shake the very Foundations of our
Faith; and some they have tempted to cast off the Natural sense they had of the
Deity, and imboldened to an open and professed Atheism.

These are some of the most usual Fruits, which the unhappy Differences in the
Church are wont to produce; over and above the particular Unkindnesses and
Uncharitable Feuds, which they commonly beget among Christians of the same
Persuasion, as to all substantial and weighty matters of Belief. And it were a
thing very desirable in all respects, that these at least should be all firmly
United in the same holy Communion. They that have the same Articles of Faith,
and hope to meet in the same Heaven, through the Merits of the same Lord,
should not be afraid to come into the same Assemblies, and join seriously in
sending up the same Prayers, and participating of the same Sacraments. Besides
the many strict Precepts and other strong Obligations which we have unto this;
our Savior Died Joh. 11. 52.
that he might gather together in One, the Children of God that were scattered
abroad. And should we not then contradict this end of his Death, if we should
set those at Strife and Variance which he intended to Unite? Nay, might we not
be said, in some sort, to Crucify the Son of God afresh; if we should Mangle
and Divide any sound and healthful part of that Body of which he owns himself
to be the Head? If indeed our Church did require us to make profession of any
false and erroneous Opinions; if in the external Order and Worship we were
injoined to do any thing contrary to any Divine Command; we are bound in such
Instances to withdraw from her: But if her Doctrine be highly approved by most
of our Dissenting Brethren; and her Discipline and Service such, as is not any
way inconsistent with any Law of God; then we are indispensably engaged to join
in Communion with her. For, as has been intimated several times, and it cannot
be inculcated too often, Nothing but the Unlawfulness of Communicating can make
a Separation Lawful.

But if it be resolved that the Church of England must be forsaken,
notwithstanding that neither her Doctrine nor Discipline can be justly
condemned; it would yet convenient to bethink our selves, what might be the
most advisable to be done after we had left it. Whether we should set up
another way of Administration in the room of it: Or whether every one should
have the Liberty of following that which he fancied the best. If we are for the
setting up another way; it must be either Presbytery, or Independency: For if
there should be any other new Forms of Government, they are not yet of
Reputation enough to be put in Competition with these two great Pretenders to
Divine Right. And Presbytery, which had once the fairest hopes of establishing
it self, is now grown weak and inconsiderable in comparison of what it was; and
those few which would still be thought of that Persuasion, are manifestly
departed from their own Principles, and are fain to support themselves by
Gathered Assemblies, which they were not wont to allow. Independency therefore
seems at this time to be the prevailing way; but their manner of Gathering
Members, and Associating themselves into particular Congregations, their holy
Band, special Agreement, or Covenant, which they make essential to the
Constituting of a Church, are things which have not the least foundation in the
holy Scriptures; neither were they ever Countenanced by the practice of any
Orthodox Christians in former Ages. But put the case we should admit of either
of these Forms of Discipline and Government, we should be as far, if not
farther from being United than we are now. For they have both been known to
have been very rigorous Imposers, wherever they have had the Power of
Commanding; and as they have sometimes been, so they would soon again become
more odious to the several Subdivisions of Dissenters than Episcopacy it self.
And this being a thing so easily foreseen, we are not now urged with the
necessity of setting up either of these. The great expedient that has been
proposed of late, is to indulge a Liberty of choosing what Church, and what way
of Worship any man pleases; that is, to grant a public Toleration of diverse
Religions. But this, though it might gratify the present humor of some part of
the Nation, and serve some men's Occasions better than any Establishment, would
be quickly disliked by most of those that now contend so Zealously for it. For
there must needs be a constant Emulation and Struggling betwixt the several
Tolerated Parties, which would give a continual Disturbance; and as soon as any
of them began to grow Numerous and Powerful, and had any Hopes of succeeding,
they would presently imagine it very necessary to impose their own Discipline
upon all the rest; and this probably might soon put an end to the so much
desired and magnified way of Toleration. Or if we could suppose them contented
to allow the same Freedom to others which they enjoyed themselves, yet it could
not possibly be avoided, but that this Indulgence must strangely multiply our
Divisions; while some Members of their Separate Churches would take Offense,
and withdraw, and make choice of a new Pastor, and incorporate themselves into
another new Church, and that after a while, upon the like Pretenses, might be
split into another, and another, and so on without any stop. And then this
would certainly set open the Gate to a Flood of Heresies, and such monstrous
and extravagant Opinions, as must be confessed, by the most prejudiced
Dissenter, to be of far more dangerous consequence to the cause of Religion
than that sober and pious Liturgy, and those few indifferent Rites which are
now injoined. This the experience of the Late Times found to be true. The
Church of England was no sooner overthrown, but some of those that had been the
most forward and busy to pull her down, when they saw how suddenly the swarms
of other Sectaries increased upon them, were forced to acknowledge that the
Constitution which they had destroyed, was a great check and restraint to those
Errors, which grew Bold and Licencious under the Liberty they had procured. The
Bishops then, who just before had been the common Theme of Popular Obloquy, had
some good Words unwillingly dropped upon them, and their Diligence and Success in
suppressing Absurd, Heretical, and many times Blasphemous Doctrines, was
allowed some just Commendation. That Government which they had traduced and
rendered as odious as was possible, by all the arts of Defamation that could be
used, was found upon Trial to be far more desirable, by some of its greatest
Enemies, than that Anarchy and Confusion they had contended for with so much
Violence.

But if we cannot be made sufficiently Apprehensive of the dismal Effects, that
will almost Naturally follow upon a Public Toleration; yet methinks we should
now be a little Suspicious of it, since we know it is the main Engine the
Papists have been working with these many years. If there be no Remedy but that
our Church must fall, let us not throw it down our selves, by methods of their
Prescribing; let us not act as if we were prosecuting the Designs of the
Conclave; and proceed just as if we were governed by the Decrees of the
pretended Infallible Chair. We may be ashamed to look so like Tools in the
hands of the Jesuits; when we suffer our selves to be guided by those measures
which they had taken, and talk and do as they would have us; as if we were
immediately inspired from Rome. For we cannot be ignorant that Toleration has
been a Device of theirs; and it would not be any part of our Wisdom to grow
unreasonably fond of the Invention of our Enemies; and think to strengthen the
Protestant Interest by those very means which their Subtilty and Malice had
contrived to destroy it.

But if this Consideration should be laid aside; What need can there be
otherwise, that we should desire to be Indulged in our departure from a Church,
where we may Communicate with a safe Conscience? As we may certainly do in
ours; whose greatest Adversaries have not been able, after the most curious
Search they could make, to find out one thing in the whole Constitution which
they could positively affirm to be Forbidden; and till that can be made appear,
we must still say that it cannot be Unlawful. If the Imposition of some
Indifferent things be thought a sufficient ground for a Separation; (as it is
now generally urged, since the proof of their Unlawfulness is despaired of)
then we must have Separated from the Apostolical Churches, who had some such
Usages, as the Holy Kiss, and others, whose Indifferency is acknowledged by
their being wholly disused: We must have Separated from the first Churches that
succeeded them, which had all some Indifferent things injoined: We must
Separate at this time from all the Reformed Churches in the World; for there is
none of these which does not require the use of such things, as we should judge
cause enough to depart from them: Nay, when we have once Separated from the
Church of England upon this account, we must then Separate from one another,
and every man must be a Church by himself; for it is impossible that any
Society, whether merely Humane, or Christian, should subsist, without the
orderly determination of some Indifferent things. And sure we can never hope to
maintain our Separation upon such a Principle, as would not only part us from
all the Churches that are, or ever were, and tear Christendom into ten thousand
pieces; but scarce leaves us so much as the Notion of a Church, and makes
Christian Communion absolutely impracticable. Let us not give those of Rome the
pleasure of seeing that Church which has always opposed them with the greatest
Vigor, and been the constant mark of their Envy, quite Ruined, or extremely
Weakened, by a pernicious Mistake, that would Divide and Divide us again, and
again, and never make any end of Dividing. Let us show at least that well are
we inclined unto Peace, by coming as far as we can; and if there should be any
thing that we may possibly suspect to be Unlawful, let not this hinder us from
joining in those other holy Offices, in which we have not any pretense of a
Doubt. Let not our groundless Scrupling at a Ceremony, or two, fright us from
the whole Worship of God, against which we have not any Exceptions.

And for those that esteem our Communion in all particulars utterly Unlawful,
which I suppose are but very few, and I know they have but very slight
Arguments for the severe Judgment they pass upon us; if they will meet, let
them do it in the most private manner that they can, without any vain
Ostentation of their Numbers, which cannot be any Satisfaction to their
Consciences, but may make their Adherents over forward and bold, and tend to
the creating of Jealousies in the Government. And while they are upon these
terms, they cannot reasonably expect any Connivance. They might sooner hope for
it from his Majesty's wonted and often experienced Clemency; when they shall
make it appear that their Dissent is modest and humble, and such as has no
other but a Religious Design in it: Than when they assume a high degree of
Confidence, and think to extort Indulgencies by Clamors and Discontents, and
resolve to Assemble openly in Opposition to a Royal Command; as if it were a
piece of Christian Fortitude to outbrave Authority. These are but ill Methods
of courting the Favor of a Prince. But I hope for the future we shall all,
upon all Occasions, behave our selves as becomes good Subjects, and sober
Christians, and make no Disturbances neither on a Civil nor Ecclesiastical
account.

Let it Pity us at last to see the Ghastly Wounds that are still renewed by the
continuance of our Divisions. Let us have some Compassion on a Bleeding Church
that is ready to Faint, and in eminent Danger of being made a prey to her
Enemies, by the unnatural Heats and Animosities of those that should Support
and Defend her. Why should we leave her thus Desolate and Forlorn, when her
present Exigencies require our most Cordial Assistance? If the condition of her
Communion were such as God's Laws did not allow, we might forsake her that had
forsaken him. But since this cannot be Objected against her; since she exacts
no Forbidden thing of us, Let us strengthen her Hands by our unanimous
Agreement; and since we do not Condemn her Doctrine, let us not Despise her
Worship; since the Substantials of Religion are the same, let not the
Circumstances of external Order and Discipline be any longer an Occasion of
Difference amongst us. And so shall we bring Glory to God, a happy Peace to a
Divided Church, a considerable Security to the Protestant Religion, and
probably Defeat the subtle Practices of Rome, which now stands gaping after
All; and hopes by our Distractions to repair the losses she has suffered by the
Reformation. May the Wisdom of Heaven make all Wicked Purposes unsuccessful;
and the blessed Spirit of Love heal all our Breaches, and prosper the
Charitable Endeavors of those that follow after PEACE. Amen.

FINIS.
A RESOLUTION Of some CASES OF CONSCIENCE Which respect Church Communion. VIZ.
I. Whether to Communicate with some Church, especially in such a divided State
of the Church, be a necessary Duty, Incumbent on all Christians. II. Whether
Constant Communion be a necessary Duty, where Occasional Communion is Lawful.
III. Whether it be Lawful to Communicate with two Churches, which are in a
State of Separation from each other.
The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Jun. for Fincham Gardener at the White Horse
in Ludgate Street. 1683.

A RESOLUTION Of some CASES of CONSCIENCE, Which respect Church Communion.
IN order to state such cases as particularly relate to Church Communion with
all possible clearness, it will be necessary to premise a brief explication of
some words, which must be used in questions of this nature, but are not so
commonly understood.

As,

1. What is meant by a Church, and a Christian Church. 2. What Church Communion
is. 3. What is meant by Fixed Communion and by Occasional Communion.
First, What is meant by a Church. Now the plainest description I can give of a
Church is this, That the Church is a Body or Society of Men separated from the
rest of the World, and United to God, and to themselves by a Divine Covenant. I
shall briefly explain this description to fit it to the meanest understanding.

1. Then a Church is a Body or Society of Men, for I speak only of the Church
in this World, and therefore shall not enter into that dispute, in what sense
Angels belong to the Church.

And when I call the Church a Body or Society of Men, I oppose a Body to single
Individuals, or particular Men, and to a confused Multitude, without any order
or Union among themselves. For tho the Church consists of particular Men, and
when their Numbers are increased, of great Multitudes, yet the Church consists
of such particular Men, not considered in a private and separate capacity, but
as United into a regular Society, which is called a Body, in allusion to the
natural Body, in which all the parts and members are United in an exact Order,
Ephesians. 4. 16. 1 Cor. 12. 15, 16, etc. For God is not the Author of Confusion, but
of Peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints. And if the meanest Societies
cannot subsist without Order wherein their strength and beauty and usefulness
consist, much less the Church of God, which is a Society Instituted for the
most spiritual and Supernatural Ends.

And therefore we find, that God ordained a most exact Order and Government in
the Jewish Church, which for the greater strength and Unity he formed into a
religious Commonwealth: And our Blessed Savior ordained the Apostles, and
committed the Government of his Church to them, and their Successors, with a
promise to be with them to the end of the World. And the Christian Church with
respect to the firm and close Union and orderly Disposition of all its Ephesians. 2.
21, 22. 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Parts, is not only called a Body, but a Spiritual Building, and Holy Temple,
and the House of God.

But then the Church is a Body, or one Body, in opposition to many bodies, for
Christ has but one Body, and one Church, and he is the Savior of this Body.
The Jewish Church was but one, and therefore the Christian Church is but one,
which is not a new distinct Church, but is grafted into the Jewish stock or
Root. Believing Jews, and Christians being United into one Church, built upon
the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief Romans 11. 17, 18.
corner stone: Who unites Jews and Gentiles into one Church, as the corner
stone unites both sides of the House, and holds them together.

Upon the same account the Church is called the Building, the House, the Temple
of God, and we know the Temple was but one, and was to be but one, by the
express command and Institution of God. And for the same reason Christ tells
us, that there should be but one Fold under one Shepherd.

And indeed it is extremely absurd and unreasonable John 10. 16.
to say, that the Christian Church, which is built upon the same foundation,
which worships the same God and Savior, which professes the same Faith, are
Heirs to the same promises, and enjoy all privileges in common, should be
divided into as distinct and separate bodies, tho of the same kind and nature,
as Peter, James and John, are distinct Persons, tho they partake of the same
common nature. That is, it is very absurd to say, that where every thing is
common, there is not one Community. Peter, and James, and John, tho they
partake of the same common nature, yet each of them have a distinct essence and
subsistence of their own (as it must be in natural Beings, otherwise there
could be but one Man in the World) and this makes them distinct Persons: But
where the very nature and essence of a Body or Society consists in having all
things common, there can be but one Body; and therefore if one Lord, one Faith,
one Baptism, one God and Father of all, be common to the whole Christian
Church, if there be no peculiar Privileges, which belong to some Christians
and not to all, to one part of the Church, and not to another, then by the
Institution of Christ, there is but one Church, one Body, one Communion, one
Household and Family: For where there is nothing to Distinguish and Separate,
no Enclosures or Partitions of Divine Appointment, there can be, by Divine
Institution, but one Body.

2. I add, that the Church is a Body or Society of Men separated from the rest
of the World, or called out of the World, as (...), from whence Ecclesia is
derived, may signify, and is so expounded by many Divines, upon which account
the Christians are so of ten called, the (...), and (...), the Called and
Chosen or Elect People of God, which signifies, that the Church is
distinguished from the rest of the World by a peculiar and appropriate Faith,
by peculiar Laws, by peculiar rites of Worship, and peculiar Promises and
Privileges, which are not common to the whole World, but only to those, who
are received into the Communion of the Church. But there is no controversy
about this matter, and therefore I need add no more about it.

3. The Church is a Body of Men united to God and to themselves by a Divine
Covenant: The Church is united to God, for it is a Religious Society,
instituted for the Worship of God; and they are united among themselves, and to
each other, because it is but one Body, which requires a union of all its
parts; as I have already showed, and shall discourse more presently. But the
chief thing to be observed here is this, that this union with God, and to each
other, which constitutes a Church, is made by a Divine Covenant. Thus it was in
the Jewish Church, God entered into Covenant with Abraham, and chose him and
his Posterity for his Church and Peculiar People, and gave him Circumcision for
a Sign and Seal of this Covenant. And under the Gospel God has made a new
Covenant with mankind, in and by his Son Jesus Christ, who is the Mediator of a
Better Covenant, founded upon better Promises; and this Gospel Covenant is the
foundation of the Christian Church. For the Christian Church is nothing else,
but such a Society of Men, as is in Covenant with God through Christ.

I suppose all men will grant, that God only can make or constitute a Church.
For such persons, if there were any so absurd, are not worth disputing with,
who dare affirm the Church to be a human Creature, or the invention of Men.

And I think it is as plain, that the only visible way God has of forming a
Church (for I do not now speak of the invisible operations of the Divine
Spirit) is by granting a Church Covenant, which is the Divine Charter, whereon
the Church is founded, and investing some persons with Power and Authority, to
receive others into this Covenant, according to the terms and conditions of the
Covenant, and by such Covenant Rites and Forms of Admission, as he is pleased
to institute, which under the Gospel is Baptism, as under the Law it was
Circumcision.

To be taken into Covenant with God, and to be received into the Church, is the
very same thing. For the Church is a Society of Men, who are in Covenant with
God. That can be no Church, which is not in Covenant with God, he is no member
of the Church, who is not at least visibly admitted into Gods Covenant, and
whoever is in Covenant with God, is made a member of the Church, by being
admitted into Covenant.

Now before I proceed, I shall briefly observe some few things, which are so
plain and evident, if these Principles be true, that I need only name them, and
yet are of great use for the resolution of some following cases.

As 1. That a Covenant-state and Church State is the same thing.

2. That every professed Christian, who is received into Covenant, as such, is a
Church member.

3. That nothing else is necessary to make us members of the Christian Church
but only Baptism, which is the Sacrament of our admission into the Christian
Covenant. For if Baptism, which gives us right to all the Privileges of the
Covenant, does not make us Church members, then a Church State is no part of
the Covenant; then a man may be in Covenant with God through Christ, and yet be
no member of Christ; or he may be a member of Christ and no member of his Body,
which is the Church.

4. That no Church State can depend upon human Contracts and Covenants, for
then a Church would be a human Creature, and a human Constitution; whereas a
Church can be founded only upon a Divine Covenant. It is true, no man, who is
at age, can be admitted to Baptism till he profess his Faith in Christ, and
voluntarily undertake the Baptismal Vow; but the Independent Church Covenant
betwixt Pastor and People, is of a very different Nature from this, unless any
man will say, that the voluntary contract and Covenant, which the Independents
exact from their members, and wherein they place a Church State, be part of the
Baptismal Vow. If it be not, then they found the Church upon a human Covenant,
for Christ has made but one Covenant with Mankind, which is contained in the
Vow of Baptism. If it be, then no Man is a Christian, but an Independent, and
then they would do well to show, how the Baptismal Vow, which is but one and
the same for all Mankind, determines one Man to be a fixed member of Dr. Owens
Church, another of Mr. Griffiths, or any other Independent Pastors; and if they
could get over this difficulty, there is another still, why they exact this
Church Covenant of Baptized Christians, before they will admit them to their
Communion, if Baptism makes them members of their Church.

This I think makes it plain, that the Independent Church Covenant is no part
of the Baptismal Vow, and then it is no part of the Christian Covenant; and if
there be no true Church State, but what depends on such human Contracts, then
the Church owes its being to the will of Men, not to the Covenant of God.

5. I observe farther, how absurd it is to gather Churches out of Churches,
which already consist of Baptized Christians. Christianity indeed separates us
from the rest of the World, but surely it does not separate Christians from
each other. The Apostles only undertook to Convert Jews and Heathens to the
Christian Faith, and to make them members of the Christian Church, which is a
state of separation from the World; but these Men Convert Christians from
Common Christianity, and the Communion of the universal Church, to
Independency. If the Church be founded on a divine Covenant, we know no Church
but what all Christians are made members of by Baptism, which is the universal
Church, the one Body and Spouse of Christ. And to argue from the Apostles
gathering Churches from among Jews and Heathens, to prove the gathering
Churches out of a Christian and National Church, must either conclude, that a
Church, and Church State is a very indifferent and Arbitrary thing, and that
Men may be very good Christians, and in a safe condition without it; or that
Baptized Christians, who are not members of a particular Independent Church,
are no better than Jews and Heathens, that is, that Baptism it self though a
Divine Sacrament and Seal of the Covenant, is of no value, till it be confirmed
and ratified by a human Independent Covenant.

6. I observe, that if the Christian Church be founded on a Divine Covenant, on
that new Covenant, which God has made with Mankind in Christ, then there is
but one Church of which all Christians are members, as there is but one
Covenant into which we are all admitted by Baptism. For the Church and the
Covenant must be of an equal extent. There can be but one Church founded upon
one Covenant, and all who have an interest in the same Covenant, are members of
the same Church.

And therefore, tho the distance of place, and the necessities and conveniences
of Worship and Discipline, may, and has divided the Church into several parts
and members, and particular Churches, yet the Church cannot be divided into two
or more distinct and separate Churches, for that destroys the unity of the
Church: and unless they could divide the Covenant also, two Churches, which are
not members of each other, cannot partake in the same Covenant, but the guilty
Divider forfeits his interest in the Covenant without a new grant.

A Prince indeed may grant the same Charter to several distinct Cities and
Corporations, but then tho the matter of the Charter be the same, their right
to it depends upon distinct Grants. But if he grant a Charter for the Erecting
of such a Corporation, and confine his Charter to the members of that
Corporation, those who wilfully separate themselves from this Corporation to
which this Charter was granted, forfeit their interest in the Charter, and must
not think to Erect a new distinct Corporation by the same Charter.

Thus it is here, God has made a Covenant o^ grace with Mankind in Christ, and
declares that by this one Covenant, he unites all the Disciples of Christ into
one Body and Christian Church, who shall all partake of the Blessings of this
Covenant. By Baptism we are all received into this Covenant, and admitted
members of this one Church; now while we continue in the Unity of this Body, it
is evident, that we have a right to all the Blessings of the Covenant, which
are promised to this Body, and to every member of it. But if we divide our
selves from this Body, and set up distinct and separate Societies, which we
call Churches, but which are not members, nor live in Communion with the one
Catholic Church, we cannot carry our Right and Title to the Covenant out of
the Church with us.

The Gospel Covenant is the common Charter of the Christian-Church, and if we
are not contented to enjoy these Blessings in common with other Christians we
must be contented to go without them. For it is not a particular Covenant,
which God makes with particular Separate Churches, but a general Covenant made
with the whole Body of Christians, as United in one Communion, and therefore
that, which no particular Church has any interest in, but as it is a member of
the universal Church.

God has not made any Covenant in particular with the Church of Geneva, of
France or England, but with the one Body and Church of Christ, all the World
over; and therefore the only thing, that can give us in particular a right to
the Blessings of the Covenant, is, that we observe the conditions of this
Covenant, and live in Unity and Communion with all true Christian Churches in
the World, which makes us members of the Catholic Church, to whom the Promises
are made.

Secondly, The next thing to be explained is, what is meant by
Church Communion. Now Church Communion signifies no more then Church Fellowship
and Society, and to be in Communion with the Church is to be a member of the
Church; and this is called Communion, because all Church members have a common
right to Church Privileges, and a common Obligation to all those Duties and
Offices, which a Church relation Exacts from them.

I know this word Communion is commonly used to signify a Personal and
presential Communion in Religious Offices: as when Men pray, and hear, and
receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper together, they are said to be in
Communion with one another and to live in Communion with that Church, with
which they join in all Acts of Worship.

Now we must acknowledge, that Public Acts of Worship performed in the
Communion of the Church, are an Exercise of Christian Communion, but
Church Communion is something antecedent to all the Acts and Offices of
Communion. For no Man has a right to any Act of Christian Communion, but he,
who is in a State of Communion with the Christian Church.

What natural Union is in natural Bodies, that Communion is in Bodies Politic,
whether Civil or Religious Societies; a member must be vitally united to the
Body, before it can perform any natural Action or Office of a member; before
the Eye can see, or the Feet can walk, or the Ears can hear; and the union of
the Eye, or Foot, to the Body, does not consist in seeing or walking, but
seeing and walking are the effects of this Union.

Thus in a Body Politic, when Men by any common Charter are United into one
Society, they become one common Body, or one Communion; and this gives them
right to all the privileges of that Body, and obliges them to all the Duties
and Offices, which their Charter requires of them; but should any Man, who is
not regularly admitted into this Society, pretend to the same Privileges, or
do such things, as are required of those, who are members of this Body, this
would be so far from being thought an Act of Communion with them, that it would
be censured as an unjust Usurpation. Should a Man, who is no Citizen of London,
open his Shop, and drive a trade as other Citizens do, or give his Vote at a
Common Hall, and in all other cases Act like a Citizen, this would not make him
a Citizen, but an Intruder. He is a Foreigner still, and his presuming to Act
like a Citizen, when he is none, is no Act of Communion with that Body, of
which he is no member, but justly exposes him to censure and punishment.

Thus it is in the Christian Church, which is one Body and Society united by a
Divine Covenant. Our Communion with the Church consists in being members of the
Church, which we are made by Baptism: The exercise of this Communion consists
in all those Offices and Duties, which all the members of the Church are
obliged to, and which none have any right to perform, but they; such as praying
and receiving the Lords Supper together, etc.

Now should any Man who is no member of the Church, nor owns himself to be so,
intrude into the Church, and Communicate in all holy Offices, this can be no
more called an Act of Communion, than it can be said to make him a member of
the Church, of which he is no member, and resolved not to be: Prayers, and
receiving the Sacraments, etc. are Acts of Communion, when performed by
Church Members in the Communion of the Church; but they are no Acts of
Communion, when performed by those, who are no Church Members, tho to serve a
turn, they thrust themselves into the Society of the Church.

As for Instance, suppose a member of a Presbyterian, or Independent
Conventicle, should, for reasons best known to himself, at some critical time,
come to his Parish Church, and there hear the Common Prayer, and Sermon, and
receive the Lords Supper, according to the order of the Church of England, does
this make this Man a member of the Church of England, with which he never
Communicated before, and it is likely, will never do again? If it does not, all
this is no Act of Communion, which can be only between the members of the same
Body.

So that to be in Church Communion, does not signify, merely to perform some
such Acts, which are Acts of Communion in the members of the Church, but since
the decay of Church Discipline, may sometimes be performed by those, who are
not members, which is such an abuse, as would not have been allowed in the
Primitive Church, who denied their Communion to Schismatics, as well as to the
Excommunicate upon other accounts: but to be in Church Communion signifies to
be a member of the Church, to be Embodyed and Incorporated with it, and I
suppose. what that means, every one knows, who understands what it is to be a
member of any Society, of a City, or any Inferior Corporation; which consists
of Privilege and Duty, and requires all those, who will enjoy the benefits of
such a Society, to discharge their respective trusts and obligations.

To be in Communion with, or to be a member of the Church, includes a Right and
Title to all those Blessings, which God has promised to his Church, and an
obligation to all the Duties and Offices of Church Society; as Subjection to
the Authority, Instructions, Censures of the Church; a Communion in Prayers,
and Sacraments, and other Religious Offices, and he who despises the Authority,
or destroys the Unity of the Church, renounces his membership and Communion
with it. These things are extremely plain, and though Men may cavil for
disputes sake, yet must needs convince them, that no Man is in Communion with a
Church, which he is not a member of, tho through the defect of Discipline, he
should sometimes be admitted to some Act of Communion with it; and I shall
observe some few things from hence of great use.

1. That Church Communion primarily and principally respects the universal
Church, not any particular Church or Society of Christians. For to be in
Church Communion signifies to be a member of the Church, or Body of Christ,
which is but one all the World over. Church Communion does not consist in
particular Acts of Communion, which can be performed only among those, who are
present, and Neighbors to each other, but in membership: now a member is a
member of the whole Body, (not merely of any part of it,) how large soever the
Body be. All the Subjects of England, those, who live at St. David's, and those
at Tarmouth, who never saw, nor converst with each other, are all members of
the same Kingdom, and by the same reason, this membership may extend to the
remotest part of the World, if the Body, whereof we are members, reach so far.

And therefore we may observe, that Baptism, which is the Sacrament of our
Admission into the Covenant of God, and the Communion of the Church, does not
make us members of any particular Church, as such, but of the Universal Church;
and I observed before, that a Church State, which is the same thing, with
Church Communion, is founded only on a Divine Covenant; and therefore since
there is no other Divine Covenant to make us members of particular Churches, as
distinguished from the Universal Church, such particular Church Membership is at
best but a human Invention, and indeed nothing else but a Schism from the
Universal Church: which alone, if well considered, is a sufficient confutation
of Independency, which is a particular Church State, as distinguished from all
other Churches and Societies of Christians.

2. I observe further, that tho the exercise of Church Communion, as to most of
the particular Duties and Offices of it, must be confined to a particular
Church and Congregation (for we cannot Actually join in the Communion of
Prayers and Sacraments, etc. but with some particular Church) yet every Act of
Christian Communion, though performed in some particular Church, is and must be
an Act of Communion with the whole Catholic Church, Praying, and Hearing, and
receiving the Lords Supper together, does not make us more in Communion with
the Church of England, than with any other true and Orthodox part of the
Church, tho in the Remotest parts of the World. The exercise of true Christian
Communion in a particular Church, is nothing else but the exercise of Catholic
Communion in a particular Church, which the necessity of affairs requires,
since all the Christians in the World cannot meet together for Acts of Worship;
But there is nothing in all these Acts of Communion, which does more peculiarly
Unite us to such a particular Church, than to the whole Christian Church.

When we pray together to God, we Pray to him as the Common Father of all
Christians, and do not challenge any peculiar interest in him, as members of
such a particular Church, but as members of the whole Body of Christ: when we
Pray in the Name of Christ, we consider him as the great High Priest, and
Savior of the Body, who powerfully interceeds for the whole Church and for us
as members of the Universal Church. And we Offer up our Prayers and
Thanksgiving, not only for our selves and those, who are present, but for all
Christians all the World over, as our Fellow Members, and Praying for one
another is the truest notion of Communion of Prayers; for Praying with one
another, is only in order to Praying for one another. And thus our Prayers are
an exercise of Christian Communion, when we Pray to the same common Father,
through the Merits and Mediation of the same common Savior and Redeemer, for
the same common Blessings, for our selves, and the whole Christian Church.

Thus when we meet together to Celebrate the Supper of our Lord, we do not meet
as at a private Supper, but as at the common Feast, of Christians: and
therefore it is not an Act of particular Church Fellowship, but of Catholic
Communion. The Supper of our Lord does not signify any other kind of Union and
confederation between those Neighbor Christians, who receive together in the
same Church, than with the whole Body of Christ. The Sacramental Bread
signifies and represents all those, for whom Christ died, that one Mystical
Body, for which he Offered his Natural Body, which is the Universal Church; and
our eating of this Bread signifies our Union to this Body of Christ, and
therefore is considered, as an Act of true Catholic, not of a particular
Church Communion. And the Sacramental Cup is the Blood of the New Testament,
and therefore represents our Communion in all the Blessings of the Covenant,
and with all those, who are thus in Covenant with God. So that there is nothing
particular in this Feast, to make it a private Feast, or an Act of Communion
with a particular Church, considered as particular, but it is the common Feast
of Christians, and an Act of Catholic Communion.

Which by the way plainly shows, how groundless that scruple is against mixed
Communions, that Men think themselves defiled by receiving the Lords Supper
with Men, who are vicious. For tho it is a great defect in Discipline, and a
great reproach to the Christian Profession, when wicked Men are not censured,
and removed from Christian Communion, yet they may as well pretend, that their
Communion is defiled by bad Men, who Communicate in any other part of the
Church, or any other Congregation, as in that, in which they live and
Communicate: For this holy Feast signifies no other Communion between them, who
receive at the same time, and in the same Company, than it does with all
sincere parts of the Christian Church. It is not a Communion with any Persons
considered as present, but it is a Communion with the Body of Christ and all
true members of it, whether present or absent.

Those who separate from a National Church for the sake of corrupt professors,
though they could form a Society as pure and holy, as they seem to desire, yet
are Schismatics in it, because they confine their Communion to their own
select Company, and Exclude the whole Body of Christians all the World over,
out of it; their Communion is no larger than their gathered Church, for if it
be, then they must still Communicate with those Churches, which have corrupt
members, as all visible Churches on Earth have, (unless we will except
Independents, because they have the confidence to except themselves) and then
their Separation does not Answer its end, which is to avoid such corrupt
Communions; and yet if they do confine their Communion to their own gathered
Churches, they are Schismatics in dividing themselves from the Body of
Christians; and all their Prayers and Sacraments are not Acts of Christian
Communion, but a Schismatical Combination.

This does not prove indeed, that particular Churches are not bound to reform
themselves, and to preserve their own Communion pure from corrupt members,
unless all the Churches in the World, will do so too; because every particular
Church, whether Diocesan, or National, has power to reform its own members, and
is accountable to God for such neglects of Discipline: but it does prove, that
no Church without the guilt of Schism, can renounce Communion with other
Christian Churches, or set up a distinct and separate Communion of its own, for
the sake of such corrupt members; which was the pretense of the Novatian and
Donatist Schism of Old, and is so of the Independent Schism, at this day.

3. I observe further, that our obligation to maintain Communion with a
particular Church, wholly results from our obligation to Catholic Communion.
The only reason why I am bound to live in Communion with any particular Church,
is because I am a member of the whole Christian Church, which is the Body of
Christ, and therefore must live in Communion with the Christian Church; and yet
it is Impossible to live in Communion with the whole Christian Church, without
Actual Communion with some part of it; when I am in such a place, where there
is a visible Christian Church; as no member can be United to the Natural Body,
without its being United to some part of the Body, for the Union and Communion
of the whole Body consists in the Union of all its parts to each other.

Every Act of Christian Communion, though performed in a particular Church, or
Congregation, is not properly an Act of particular Church Communion, but is the
exercise of Communion with the whole Church and Body of Christ, as I have
already proved; but it can be no Act of Communion at all, if it be not
performed in the Communion of the Church, which it cannot be, unless it be
performed in the Communion of some particular Church. And this is the only
obligation, I know of, to Communion with any particular Church, that as I am a
Christian, I am a member of the Body and Church of Christ, and in a State of
Communion, and therefore am bound to maintain Actual Communion with the
Christian Church, wherever I find it, and by Communicating with the Church,
wherein I live, if it be a Sound and Orthodox Member of the Christian Church, I
maintain Communion with the whole Catholic Church, which is but one Body.

So that here is no choice, what Church we will Communicate with, for there is
but one Church all the World over, with which we must Communicate; and
therefore we have nothing else to do, but to judge, whether that part of the
Church, wherein we live, be so Sound and Orthodox, that we may Communicate with
it according to the Principles of Catholic Communion; and if it be, we are
bound to Communicate with it, under Peril of Schism from the Catholic Church,
if we do not.

4. From hence we may plainly learn the true notion of a Separate Communion,
and Separate Church. For some Men seem to be greatly sensible of the sin and
mischief of Schism and Separation, but then they use great art, so to confound
the notion of Separation, as that neither they themselves, nor any one else,
shall ever be able to understand what it is, whereas if they will allow, that
there is, or ever can be, any such thing as Separation from the Church, it is
as easy to understand, what Separation is, as what it is for a member to be
divided from the Body.

For if there be but one Church, and one Communion, of which all true
Christians, and Christian Churches, are, or ought to be members, then those
Churches, which are not members of each other, are Separate Churches. It is not
enough indeed to prove a Separation, that two Congregations meet in several
places for Worship, for this is done by all the Parish-Churches of England, who
are in the same Communion, but yet hold distinct and Separate Assemblies, as to
Local Separation. Nor is it sufficient to prove, that there is no Separation,
because these differing Churches agree in all the Articles of Faith, and
essentials of worship; For thus the Novatians and Donatists did, who yet were
Schismatics from the Catholic Church. But where there are two Churches, which
are not members of each other, there is a Schism, tho they agree in every thing
else, but in one Communion; and where Churches own each others Communion, as
members of the same Body, there is no Schism, though they are as distant from
each other in place, as East and West.

And it is as easy to understand, what it is for two Churches to be members of
each other; but to make this as plain, as I can, and as far, as it is possible,
to prevent all Evasions, and Subterfuges, I shall lay down some few rules
according to the Principles of Catholic Communion, whereby we may certainly
know, what Churches are in Communion with each other, and which are Separate
and Schismatical Conventicles.

1. There must be but one Church, in one place, according to that Ancient Rule
of the Catholic Church, that there must be but one Bishop in a City; and this
was observed in the Apostolical times, that in the greatest and most Populous
Cities, and where there were the greatest number of Converts, yet there was but
one Church, such as Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, etc. this is acknowledged by
the Independents themselves, who endeavor hence to prove, that there were no
more Christians in any of those Cities, than could meet together in one place
for Acts of Worship, which is a mighty groundless Surmise, and not much for the
credit of the Christian Church, as has been often shown by learned Men, both
Episcopal and Presbyterian Divines.

And there is an evident reason, why this should be so, because there is no
other Rule of Catholic Communion for private Christians, but to Communicate in
all Religious Offices, and all Acts of Government and Discipline, with those
Christians, with whom they live; for to renounce the ordinary Communion of any
Christians, or true Christian Church, is to divide the Unity and Communion of
the Church, and to withdraw our selves from ordinary Communion with the Church,
in which we live, into distinct and Separate Societies for Worship, is to
renounce their Communion; and when there is not a necessary cause for it, is a
Schismatical Separation.

So that distinct and particular Churches, which are in Communion with each
other, must have their distinct bounds and limits, as every member has its
Natural and proper place and situation in the Body. But when there is one
Church within the Bowels of another, a new Church gathered out of a Church
already constituted; and formed into a distinct and Separate Society, this
divides Christian Communion, and is a notorious Schism. These Churches cannot
be members of each other, because they ought to be but one Church, and
therefore to form and gather a new Church, is to divide and Separate the
members of the same Church from each other.

This is the plain case of the Presbyterian and Independent Churches, and those
other Conventicles of Sectaries, which are among us; they are Churches in a
Church, Churches formed out of the National Church, by which means Christians,
who live together, refuse to Worship God in the same Assemblies, and have
bitter Envyings and Contentions, for the Honor and Purity of their several
Churches.

If all Christians are members of the one Body of Christ, nothing can justify
the distinction of Christians into several Churches, but only such a distance
of place, as makes it necessary and expedient to put them under the Conduct and
Government of several Bishops, for the great Edification of the Church, in the
more easy and regular Administration of Discipline, and all holy Offices; and
therefore nothing can justify the gathering of a Church out of a Christian
Church, and dividing Neighbor Christians into distinct Communions.

Churches at a distance may be distinct Churches under their distinct Bishops,
but yet in the same Communion; but distinct Churches in the same place can
never be of the same Communion, for then they would Naturally Unite and Cement
into one. There must either be Antibishops, or Schismatical Presbyters, set up
in opposition to their Bishops, under different and opposite Rules of Worship
and Discipline, which makes them Rival and opposite Churches, not members of
each other. From hence I think, it plainly appears, that all Separation from a
Church, wherein we live, unless there be necessary reasons for it, is Schism;
and we cannot justify such distinct Churches within one another, from the
examples of other distinct Churches, whose bounds, and limits, and jurisdiction
also, are distinct and separate.

2. It is plain, those are Separate Churches, which divide from the Communion
of any Church, from any dislike of its Doctrine, Government, or Worship, for in
this case, it is plain, they leave the Church, and form themselves into a new
Church, out of the Communion of the Church, from whence they went, because they
did not think it safe to continue one Body with it.

This has often made me wonder, what those Men mean, who take all occasions to
quarrel at our Constitution, and assign a great many reasons, why they cannot
Communicate with us, and yet at the same time will not own, that they have made
any Separation from us. What middle state now shall we find for these Men, who
will neither continue in the Church, nor allow themselves to be out of it?

It is possible for two particular Churches to be in Communion with each other,
and yet not Actually to Communicate together, because distance of place will
not permit it; but for two Churches to renounce each others Communion, or at
least to withdraw ordinary Communion from each other, from a professed dislike,
and yet still to continue in a state of Communion with one another, is a down
right contradiction. To be in Communion is to be members of the same Body and
Society, and he that can prove, and he that can believe, two opposite
Societies, founded upon contrary principles, and Acting by contrary Rules, and
pursuing contrary ends, to the Ruin and Subversion of each other, to be the
same Body, and the same Society, are very wonderful Men to me.

3. Those are Separate Churches, who do not own each others members, as their
own Actual Communion during our residence in any certain place, must be
confined to that particular Church, in which we live, if it be a sound part of
the Christian Church; but Church Membership is not confined to any particular
Church. I am no otherwise a member of any particular Church, then I am of the
Universal Church, which gives me a right of Membership and Communion in all the
particular Churches of the World. Now I would ask whether every Baptized
Christian, who by Baptism is made a member of the Catholic Church, and has not
forfeited this right by a Scandalous life, be ipso facto a member of an
Independent Church; if he be not (as it is plain, by the constitution of
Independency, he is not, for Independent Church Membership is not founded on
Baptism, but on a particular Church Covenant;) then Independency is a Separate
Communion from the Catholic Church; for the members of the Catholic Church
are not by being so, made the members of an Independent Church, and therefore
an Independent Church is a distinct and separate Body from the Catholick-Church.

Nay I would know whether a member of one Independent Church by being so,
becomes a member of another Independent Church; if he does not, as it is plain,
he don't, (for every Independent Church is founded upon a particular
Church Covenant between such a particular Pastor and particular members) then
every Independent Church is a distinct and Separate Body from all other
Independent Churches, and so they are all Schismatics to each other, as not
preserving the Unity of the Body.

And tho Independent Churches should be so civil to each other, as to admit
each others members to some Acts of Communion, yet this is matter of courtesy,
not of right, and therefore their constitution is Schismatical. It is like two
Neighbor Families, which hold good correspondence with each other, and often
visit one another, and Eat, and Drink together, but yet remain very distinct
Families, and have all their concerns apart and separate. But the Christian
Church is but one Household and Family, and whoever makes two Families of it, is
a Schismatic.

Thus let me ask, whether the Episcopal, and Presbyterian Churches in the same
Christian Kingdom, be one Church, and members of each other, and own each
others members, as such, to be members of their own Body and Church; If they do
not, as it is evident they don't, from their holding distinct and separate
Assemblies, under a distinct kind and species of Government, which both of them
assert to be instituted by Christ, and to be essential to the constitution of
the Church, from their forming themselves into distinct Bodies, under different
Governors, which have no Communion, as such with each other, (which yet is
essential to the Communion of particular Churches, that their Governors should
be in Communion with each other) from their Condemning each others
constitution, and particular modes of Worship, and their great endeavors to
draw away members from each other; which necessarily supposes, that they do not
look upon each others members, as their own. I say, if from these
considerations it appears, that they are not, and do not think themselves to
be, one Body, nor members of each other, then they are two separate Churches,
and the Church, which makes the separation is the Schismatic.

And indeed we may as well say, that a Monarchy, and Aristocracy, and Democracy
in the same Nation, with their distinct Governors, and distinct Subjects, and
distinct Laws, that are always at Enmity and War with each other, are but one
Kingdom, as to assert, that the Episcopal and Presbyterian Churches in England,
are but one Church.

3. The last thing to be explained, is, what is meant by fixed or constant, and
by occasional Communion. Now this is a question, which would grievously have
puzl'd St. Cyprian and St. Austin and other Ancient Fathers, who never heard
but of one sort of Communion. For indeed there is no place for this distinction
of constant and occasional Communion, according to the Principles of Catholic
Communion. To be in Communion with the Church, is to be a member of the Church,
and I take it for granted, that a member signifies a fixed and constant, not an
occasional member; not a member, which is one day a member, and the next day
upon his own voluntary choice is no member, which is a member or no member,
just as occasion serves. And if Church Membership be a fixed and constant
relation in it self considered, then the Duties of this relation are fixed and
constant also. And therefore for the understanding of these Terms, which were
unknown to Antiquity, we must consult the meaning of our Modern Authors, who
were the first Inventors of them.

Now by fixed Communion they mean an Actual and constant Communicating with some
one particular Church, as fixed members of it; occasional Communion is to Pray,
and Hear, and receive the Sacrament, at some other Church, (of which they do
not own themselves to be members) as occasion serves; that is, either to
gratify their own Curiosity, or to serve some secular end, or to avoid the
Imputation of Schism.

Now this distinction is owing to such Principles, as I have evidently proved
to be very great mistakes.

For if to be in Communion with the Church signify to be a member of it, and
that not of any particular Church, as distinguished from the whole Catholic
Church, but to be a member of the one Body of Christ, and of every sound part
of it; then our Communion with the Church is as fixed, as our relation and
membership is, and I think no Man, who understands himself, will talk of an
occasional member.

If no Man can perform any Act of Communion with a Church, of which he is no
member (since all Acts of Communion have a necessary relation to a state of
Communion, and that, which is an Act of Communion in a member, is no Act of
Communion, when performed by him, who is no member, as I have already proved)
then it is as plain a contradiction to talk of an occasional Act of Communion,
as of occasional membership; and there can be no place for occasional Communion
with a Church, of which we are no members, unless we will say, that a Man, who
is not in Communion, may exercise Acts of Communion with the Church.

If all the Acts of Christian Communion, which respect Christian Worship, such
as Prayer, receiving the Lords Supper, etc. tho performed in a particular
Church, be not Acts merely of a particular Church Communion, but of Catholic
Communion, with the whole Christian Church, and every sound part of it, then
every true Catholic Christian, is not only in a fixed state of Communion with
the Catholic Church, but lives in as constant an exercise of Christian
Communion with all Sound and Orthodox Churches, as he does with that Church, in
which he lives; for every Act of Worship, which is an Act of Communion with
that particular Church, in which it is performed (if that Church be in
Catholic Communion) is an Act of Communion with the whole Catholic Church,
and therefore the very exercise of Christian Communion, is equally fixed and
constant, or equally occasional with the whole Catholic Church.

There is a sense indeed, wherein we may be said to be members of one
particular Church considered as distinct from all other particular Churches,
but that principally consists in Government and Discipline; every Christian is
a member of the whole Christian Church, and in Communion with it, but he is
under the immediate Instruction and Government of his own Bishop, and
Presbyters, and is bound to Personal Communion with them; and this constitutes
a particular Church, in which all Acts of Worship, and all Acts of Discipline
and Government, are under the direction and conduct of a particular Bishop. And
when Neighbor Bishops unite into one Body, and agree upon some common Rules of
Government, and the Administration of Religious Offices, this makes them a
Patriarchal or National Church, and thus by submitting to the Government and
Discipline of such particular or united Bishops, we become members of a
Diocesan or National Church, considered as distinct from other Diocesan or
National Churches; But this does not confine our Church Membership and
Communion to such a particular Church, tho it strictly oblige us to conform to
the Worship, and Discipline, and Government of that Church, wherein we live,
while it imposes nothing on us inconsistent with the Principles of Catholic
Communion.

But tho particular Christians are more peculiarly obliged to observe the Rites
and Usages, and to submit to the Government and Discipline of the Church,
wherein they live, and to maintain Personal Communion with it, (and upon this
account may in a peculiar manner be called the members of that Church) yet
every Act of Communion performed in this particular Church is an Act of
Catholic Communion; and an exercise of Christian Communion with the whole
Church, and every sound part of it. Baptism makes us members of the whole
Church, and gives us a right to Communion with every sound part of it; every
Act of Christian Communion in a particular Church is a vertual Communion with
the whole Church, with all particular Churches, which live in Communion with
each other; and notwithstanding my relation to a particular Church, by my
constant Abode and Habitation in it, when ever I travel into any other Church,
I Communicate with them as a member; so that wherever I Communicate, whether in
that Church, in which I usually live, or in any other particular Church, where
I am accidentally present, my Communion is of the same Nature, that is, I
Communicate as a member of the Church, and it is Impossible, I should
Communicate otherwise; for I have no right to Communion, but as a member, and
nothing I can do, can be an Act of Communion, if I be not, and do not own my
self to be a member.

And yet this is the occasion of this mistake about Fixed and Occasional
Communion; that according to the Laws of our Church, which are founded on great
and wise reasons, and indeed according to the Laws of Catholic Communion,
every Christian is bound to Communicate with that part of the Church, wherein
he lives; now Men may have Houses in different Parishes, or distinct Diocesses,
or may Travel into other parts of the Country, and Communicate with the
Churches, which they find in those places, where they are, or they may
sometimes go to Prayers, or hear a Sermon, or receive the Lords Supper at
another Parish Church; now our ordinary Communion with those Churches, where
our constant Abode is, may be called constant Communion, and our Communion with
those Churches, which we accidentally visit, and Communicate with, may be
called occasional Communion; and all this without Schism, because we still
Communicate, either with the same National Church, or (which is often the case
of Travelers) with some other sound part of the Catholic Church, of which we
are also members, and so still keep in the same Communion, and Communicate with
no Churches, but those, of which we own our selves members; as being all in the
same Communion; as being either sincere members of the National or Catholic
Church.

From hence our Dissenters Conclude, that their Communion with an Independent,
or Presbyterian, Church, of which they profess themselves fixed members, is as
constant with their occasional Communion with the Church of England, when to
serve some present turn, they hear the Prayers, and receive the Sacraments with
us; as our fixed Communion with our Parish-Churches is, with our occasional
Communion, with other Parish-Churches; which no Body accounts Schism, tho when
it is too frequent and causeless, it is a great disorder.

But the difference between these two is vastly great, for in the First case,
we only Communicate with such Churches, which are all in Communion with each
other, and therefore he, who is a member of one, is a member of them all, and
Communicates with them, wherever he is, as a member. But he, who is a fixed
member of a Presbyterian, or Independent Church, cannot Communicate so much as
occasionally, with the Church of England, as a member, because he is a member
not only of another particular but of a separate Church; and it is impossible
for any Man, who is one with himself, to be a member of two separate Churches,
and whatever Acts of Worship we join in with other Churches, of which we are no
members, they are not properly Acts of Communion.

Having thus premised the explication of these terms, what is meant by Church,
and what is meant by Church Communion, and what is meant by Fixed or Constant,
and occasional Communion, the right understanding of these things, will make it
very easy to resolve those cases, which Immediately respect Church Communion,
and I shall Instance in these three.

1. Whether Communion with some Church or other, especially when the Church is
divided into so many Sects and Parties, be a necessary Duty, incumbent on all
Christians.

2. Whether constant Communion with that Church, with which occasional
Communion is Lawful, be a necessary Duty.

3. Whether it be Lawful for the same person, to Communicate with two separate
Churches.

Case 1. Whether Communion with some Church

Now methinks the resolution of this is as plain, as whether it be necessary
for every Man to be a Christian. For every Christian is Baptized into the
Communion of the Church, and must continue a Member of the Church, till he
renounce his Membership by Schism, or Infidelity, or be cast out of the Church
by Ecclesiastical censures.

Baptism incorporates us into the Christian Church, that is, makes us Members
of the Body of Christ, which is his Church and is frequently so called in
Scripture. For there is but one Body and one Spirit, Ephesians. Ephesians. 5. 23. 4. 12.
4. 4. one Christian Church, which is animated and governed by the one Spirit
of Christ. And we are all Baptized into this one Body. For as the Body is one,
and Col. 1. 18.
has many Members, and all the members of that one Body, being many, are one
Body, so also is Christ, that is, the Christian Church, which is the Body of
Christ, of which he is the Head; for by one Spirit we are all Baptized 1 Cor.
12. 12, 13.
into one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or Free, and
are all made to drink into one Spirit; for the body is not one member, but many.

Now I have already proved, that Church Communion is nothing else, but
Church Membership, to be in Communion with the Church, and to be a member of
the Church, signifying the same thing. And I think, I need not prove, that to
be in a state of Communion contains both a right, and an Obligation to Actual
Communion. He, who is a member of the Church, may Challenge all the Privileges
of a member, among which Actual Communion is none of the least; to be admitted
to all the Acts and Offices of Christian-Communion, to the Communion of Prayers
and Sacraments, and all other Christian Duties, which no Man who is not a
member of the Church, has any right to. And he who is a member, is bound to
perform all those Duties and Offices, which are Essential to Church Communion,
and therefore is bound to Communicate with the Church in Religious Assemblies,
to join in Prayers and Sacraments, to attend public Instructions, and to live
like a member of the Church.

But to put this past all doubt, that external and actual Communion is an
essential Duty of a Churchmember, I shall offer these plain proofs of it.

1. That Baptism makes us Members of the visible Church of Christ, but there
can be no visible Church without visible Communion, and therefore every visible
Member, by virtue of his Membership, is bound to external and visible
Communion, when it may be had.

2. This is essential to the notion of a Church, as it is a Body and Society of
Christians. For all Bodies and Societies of Men are Instituted for the sake of
some common Duties and Offices to be performed by the Members of it. A Body of
Men is a Community, and it is a strange kind of Community, in which every
Member may act by it self, without any Communication with other Members of the
same Body. And yet such a kind of Body as this, the Christian Church is, if it
be not an essential Duty of every Member, to live in the exercise of visible
Communion with the Church, when he can. For there is the same Law for all
Members, and either all or none, are bound to actual Communion.

But this is more absurd still, when we consider, that the Church is such a
Body, as consists of variety of Members, of different Offices and Officers,
which are of no use without actual and visible Communion of all its Members.

To what purpose did Christ appoint such variety of Ministers in his Church,
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
Pastors, and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ; to what purpose has he
instituted a standing Ministry in his Church, to offer up the Prayers of the
Faithful to God, to instruct, exhort, reprove, and adminster the Christian
Sacraments, if private Christians are not bound to maintain Communion with
them, in all Religious Offices?

3. Nay the Nature of Christian Worship obliges us to Church Communion. I
suppose, no Man will deny, but that every Christian is bound to Worship God
according to our Saviors Institution: and what that is, we cannot learn
better, than from the Example of the Primitive Christians, of whom St. Luke
gives us this account, that they continued Steadfast in the Acts 2. 41.
Apostles Doctrine, and Worship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers.

That which makes any thing in a Strict sense, an Act of Church Communion is,
that it is performed in the Fellowship of the Apostles, or in Communion with
the Bishops and Ministers of the Church; They are appointed to Offer up the
Prayers of Christians to God in his Name; and therefore tho the private
devotions of Christians are acceptable to God, as the Prayers of
Church Members, yet none but public Prayers, which are Offered up by Men who
have their Authority from Christ, to Offer these Spiritual Sacrifices to God,
are properly the Prayers of the Church, and Acts of Church Communion. If then
we must Offer up our Prayers to God according to Christ's Institution, that is,
by the hands of persons Authorized and set apart for that purpose; we must of
necessity join in the Actual and Visible Communion of the Church.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is the principal part of Christian Worship,
and we cannot Celebrate this Feast, but in Church Communion; for this is a
(...) a common Supper, or Communion-Feast, which in all Ages of the Church, has
been administered by Consecrated Persons, and in Church Communion; for it loses
its Nature and Signification, when it is turned into a private Mass, so that if
every Christian is bound to the Actual performance of true Christian Worship,
he is bound to an Actual Communion with the Christian Church.

4. We may observe further; that Church Authority is exercised only about
Church Communion, which necessarily supposes, that all Christians, who are
Church Members and in a State of Communion, are bound to all the Acts of
external and visible Communion with the Church. The exercise of Church
Authority consists in Receiving in, or Shutting out of the Church. To receive
into the Church, is to admit them to all external Acts of Communion, to Shut,
or Cast out of the Church, is to deny them the external and visible Communion
of the Church; not to allow them to Pray, or receive the Lords Supper, or
perform any Religious Offices in the public Assemblies of the Church. Now all
this Church Authority would signify nothing, were not External and Actual
Communion, both the Privilege and Duty of every Christian; and yet this is all
the Authority Christ has given to His Church.

5. And to confirm all this, nothing is more plain in Scripture, than that
Separation from a Church, is to withdraw from the visible Communion of it, and
there can be no Notion of Separation without this; now if Separation from
Religious Assemblies be to break Communion, then to live in Communion with the
Church requires our Actual Communicating with the Church in all Religious
Duties.

And that this is the true Notion of Separation is easily proved from the most
express testimonies; 2 Cor. 6. 17. Wherefore come out from among them, and be
ye separate, says the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive
you: Where, come out from among them, and be ye separate, plainly signifies, to
forsake the Assemblies of Idolaters, not to Communicate with them in their
Idolatrous Worship; So that not to join with any Men or Church in their
Idolatrous Worship, is to Separate from their Communion, which is a very Godly
Separation, when the Worship is Idolatrous and Sinful, but a Schismatical
Separation, when it is not. Thus St. John tells us of the Ancient Heretics,
They went out from us because they were not of us, for if 1 John. 2. 19.
they had been of us, they would, no doubt, have continued with us, but they
went out, that they might be made manifest, that they were not all of us. Where
their going out from them, plainly signifies, their forsaking Christian
Assemblies, upon which account the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews
admonishes the Christians, not to forsake the Assembling of themselves
together, as the manner of some is, in which he Heb. 10. 25.
refers to the Separation of those Ancient Heretics.

And thus accordingly to have Fellowship or Communion with any, is to partake
with them in their Religious Mysteries. By this Argument St. Paul disswades the
Corinthians for Eating of the Idols Feast; because they were Sacrifices to Evil
Spirits, and by partaking of those Sacrifices they had Communion with them. But
I say, that the things, which the 1 Cor. 10. 20, 21.
Gentiles Sacrifice, they Sacrifice to Devils, and not to God, and I would not
that you should have Fellowship with Devils. Ye cannot Drink the Cup of the
Lord, and the Cup of Devils, ye cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and of
the Table of Devils. So that, tho we must first be in a state of Communion with
Christ, and his Church, must first be received into Covenant, and by Baptism be
incorporated into the Christian Church, before we have any right to Communicate
with this Church; yet no Man can preserve his Church State without Actual
Communion, no Man has Communion with Christ, or his Church, but he, who
Actually Communicates in all Religious Offices, and Christian Institutions; a
state of Communion confers a right to Communicate, but Actual Communion
consists in the exercise of Communion, and a right to Communicate without
Actual Communion is worth nothing, as no right or privilege is without the
Exercise of it; for enjoyment consists in Acts, and all the Blessings of the
Gospel, all the Blessings of Christian Communion, are conveyed to us by Actual
Communion. So that if we would partake of the Blessings of Christ, if we would
Reap the advantages of Church Communion, we must live in Actual Communion, and
not content our selves with a dormant and useless right, which we never bring
into Act.

This is sufficient to prove, the necessity of Actual Communion with the
Christian Church, when it may be had, for where it cannot be had, Non-Communion
is no Sin, for we are not obliged to Impossibilities; he who lives in a
Country, or travels through any Country, where there is no true Christian
Church to Communicate with, cannot enjoy Actual Communion; the right and Duty
of Communion continues, tho necessity may suspend the Act. But the greater
difficulty is, whether it be not Lawful, to suspend our Communion with any
particular Churches, when we see the Church divided into a great many Parties
and Factions, which refuse Communion with each other, which is the deplorable
state of the Church at this day among us, Presbyterians, Independents,
Anabaptists, Quakers, all Separate from the Church of England, and from each
other, and from hence some conclude it Lawful to suspend Communion with all the
divided Parties, which is just such a reason for a Total suspension of
Church Communion, as the different and contrary opinions in Religion are for
Skepticism and infidelity. Because there are a great many kinds of Religions in
the World, and a great many divided Sects of the Christian Religion, therefore
some Men will be of no Religion; and because the Christian Church is divided
into a great many opposite and Separate Communions, therefore others will be of
no Church; and the reason is as strong in one case, as it is in the other, that
is, indeed it holds in neither: For it is possible to discover, which is the
true Religion, notwithstanding all these different and contrary persuasions
about it, and it is equally possible to find out, which of these divided
Communions is a true and Sound Member of the Catholic Church, and when we know
that, we are bound to maintain Communion with it.

Indeed if such Divisions and Separations, excuse us from Actual Communion with
the Church, Actual Communion never was, and is never likely to be a Duty long
together; for there never was any state of the Church so happy long together,
as to be without divisions; even in the Apostles times, there were those, who
Separated from the Communion of the Apostles, and set up private Conventicles
of their own, and so it has been in all succeeding Ages of the Church, and so
it is likely to continue, and if we are not bound to Communicate with the
Church, while there are any Heretics, or Schismatics, who divide from the
Church, farewell to all Church Communion in this World.

Should any Man indeed Travel into a Strange Country, and there find a Schism
in the Christian Church, it were very fitting for him to Suspend Communion with
either Party, till he had opportunity to acquaint himself with the state of the
Controversy, so as to judge, which party is the Schismatic; and then he is
bound (if he understand their Language) to Communicate with the Sound and
Orthodox part of the Catholic Church, which he finds in that place. But this
does not reach the case of those, who are constant Inhabitants of the place,
where the Schism is; for they must not live in a Skeptical suspension of
Communion all their days.

And there is one plain Rule to direct all Men in this Inquiry; That wherever
there is a Church Established by public Authority, if there be nothing Sinful
in its Constitution and Worship, we are bound to Communicate with that Church,
and to reject the Communion of all other Parties and Sects of Christians. For
the advantage always lies on the side of Authority, no public establishment
can justify a Sinful Communion, but if there be nothing Sinful in the
Communion of the National Church, which is Established by public Authority, to
Separate from such a Church is both disobedience to the Supreme Authority in
the State, and a Schism from the Church.

But it will be convenient to consider, what these Men mean by suspending
Communion. For is it Lawful for an English Man during these Church divisions
among us, never to Worship God in any Public and Religious Assemblies? Never
to Pray, nor Hear, nor receive the Lords Supper together? If this were so, it
were the most Effectual way in the World to thrust out all Religion.

But this they will not, they dare not say, and therefore by Suspending
Communion they mean, that in case of such divisions they may refuse to enter
themselves fixed and settled Members of any Church, but Communicate occasionally
with them all.

But I have already observed how absurd this distinction of fixed and occasional
Communion is. For no Act of Religion is an Act of Communion (not so much as of
occasional Communion) which is not performed in the Communion of the Church;
and no Man is in Communion with the Church, who is not a Member of it, and
whoever is a Member of the Church is a fixed and not an occasional Member; and
whatever Church he Communicates with, tho it may be, it is but once in a Year,
or once in his life, as he occasionally Travels that way, yet he Communicates
as a fixed Member of the Catholic Church, and of every Sound part of the
Catholic Church; for a fixed Member does not signify our fixed abode, or
constant Acts of Communion in any particular Church, but our state of
Communion, and fixed and permanent relation to the whole Christian Church, and
every part of it, and therefore tho a particular Act of Communion may be
performed upon some particular occasion with such a particular Church, yet it
is not an Act of occasional, but of fixed Communion, because tho I Communicate
but once and that occasionally, yet I Communicate as a Member of the Church,
which is not an occasional but a fixed Relation.

So that when Men Communicate occasionally, as they speak, with all the
different Parties of Christians in a divided Church, they either Communicate
with none, or Communicate with all of them. If they perform these Acts of
Communion, without owning their relation to them, as Members, then they are in
Communion with none of them, notwithstanding all these pretended Acts of
occasional Communion, and so they live in Communion with no Church, which yet I
hope, I have made it appear to be the Duty of every Christian to do; if they
Communicate with all these divided Parties, as Members, then they are in
Communion with many Separate Churches, are Members of Separate and Opposite
Bodies, that is, they are contrary to themselves, and on one side or other, are
certain to be Schismatics, but this will appear further from considering the
two following Cases.

Case 2. The Second Case is this; Whether constant Communion be a Duty, where
occasional Communion is Lawful. I have already made it appear, that the very
notion of constant and occasional Communion is absurd, and a Contradiction to
all the principles of Catholic Communion, and therefore there is no place for
this distinction, nor for this question, every Christian, as a Christian, is a
fixed Member of the whole Christian Church, and of every Sound part of it, and
for Men to talk of being Members of any one particular Church, in distinction
from all other particular Churches, of which they will not own themselves
Members, is a Schismatical notion of Church Membership, because it divides the
Christian Church into distinct Memberships, and therefore into distinct Bodies,
which makes the one Church and one Body of Christ, not one, but many Bodies:
for if every particular Church has such a number of Members, which are Members
only of that particular Church, wherein they are fixed, and are not Members of
any other particular Church, then every particular Church is a distinct and
entire Body by it self, which has particular Members of its own, which belong
to no other Body; just as every particular Man has his own Body, which consists
of such a number of Members, united to each other, and distinct from all other
Bodies.

The plain state of the Case in short is this: Every true Christian is in
Communion with the whole Christian Church, that is, is a Member of the whole
Church; but he must perform the Acts of Communion in some particular Church,
and the only allowable difference between constant and occasional Communion is
this; that we must perform the constant Acts of Communion in that part of the
Catholic Church, in which we constantly live, and Communicate occasionally
with that part of the Church, in which we are occasionally present; and
therefore there never can be any Competition between constant and occasional
Communion in the same place. I cannot Communicate constantly with that Church
in which I Communicate occasionally, unless I remove my Habitation, and turn an
occasional presence into a constant and settled abode; nor can I without sin
Communicate only occcasionally with that Church, with which I may and ought to
Communicate constantly, as being constantly present there, for this is only to
do that sometimes, which I ought to do always. This is like a Man's living
occcasionally in his own House, which signifies, that for the most part he is a
stranger at home.

There cannot be two distinct Churches in the same place, one for occasional,
and another for constant Communion, without Schism, For it is evident, these
are two distinct Communions, and that our relation to them is as different, as
it is to a House we live in, and to an Inn, where we lodge for a Night.

So that there is no foundation for this Inquiry among Men, who understand the
true Principles of Catholick-Communion; It never can be a Case of Conscience,
whether I should Communicate constantly or occasionally with such a Church,
unless it be a Case of Conscience, whether I should live constantly or
occasionally within the bounds and jurisdiction of such a Church; for where my
constant abode is, there my constant Communion must be, if there be a true and
sincere part of the Catholick-Church in that place, and where I am only
occasionally, there I can only Communicate occasionally also.

But to meet with the distempers of this Age, and to remove those Apologies
some Men make for their Schism, it is necessary to make this a question. For in
this divided state of the Church, there are a great many among us, who think,
they cannot maintain constant Communion with the Church of England, as constant
and fixed Members, who yet upon some occasions think, they may Communicate with
us in all parts of Worship, and Actually do so.

Now when these Men, who are fixed Members, as they call it, of Separate
Churches, think fit sometimes to Communicate in all parts of Worship with the
Church of England, we charitably suppose, that Men, who pretend to so much
tenderness of Conscience, and care of their Souls, will do nothing, not so much
as once, which they believe, or suspect, to be sinful, at the time, when they
do it; and therefore we conclude, that those, who Communicate occasionally with
the Church of England, do thereby declare, that they believe, there is nothing
sinful in our Communion; and we thank them for this good opinion they express
of our Church, and earnestly desire to know, how they can justify their
ordinary Separation from such a Church, as requires no sinful terms of
Communion.

If any thing less than sinful terms of Communion can justify a Separation,
then there can be no end of Separations and Catholick-Communion is an
Impossible and Impracticable notion, that is, the Church of Christ neither is
one Body, nor ever can be. For if Men are not bound to Communicate with a
Church, which observes our Saviors Insttutions, without any such corrupt
mixtures, as make its Communion sinful, then there is no bounds to be set to
the Fancies of Men, but they may new model Churches, and divide and subdivide
without any end.

Is that a sound and Orthodox part of the Catholick-Church, which has nothing
sinful in its Communion? If it be not, Pray what is it, that makes any Church
Sound and Orthodox? If it be, upon what account is it Lawful, to Separate from
a Sound and Orthodox Church? And may we not by the same reason Separate from
the whole Catholic Church, as from any Sound part of it? Nay does not that Man
Separate from the whole Catholic Church, who Separates from any Sound part of
it? For the Communion of the Church is but one, and he, that divides and breaks
this union, Separates himself from the whole Body.

Excepting the Independency of Churches (which I have proved above to be Schism
in the very notion of it) the great Pleas for Separation from a Church, which
has nothing sinful in its Communion, are the pretense of greater Edification,
and purer Ordinances. But these are such Pleas, as must expose the Church to
Eternal Schisms, because there are no certain Rules to judge of these matters,
but the various and uncertain fancies of Men. What they like best, that shall
be most for their Edification, and these shall be purer Ordinances, and till
Men can agree these matters among themselves, which they are never likely to
do, till they can all agree in the same Diet; or in their judgment and opinion
about beauty, decency, fitness convenience, they may and will divide without
end; and if the Peace and Unity of the Church be so necessary a duty, it is
certain, these Principles, which are so destructive to Peace and Unity, must be
false, as to consider these things particularly, but very briefly.

What purer Administrations and Ordinances would Men have, than those of our
Saviors own Institution, without any Corrupt and sinful mixtures, to spoil
their virtue and efficacy? (as we suppose is acknowledged by those, who
occasionally Communicate in all parts of our Worship, that there is nothing
sinful in it) the purity of divine Administrations must consist in their
agreement with the Institution, that there is neither any such defect or
addition, as alters their Nature and destroys their Virtue. For the Efficacy of
Gospel Ordinances depends upon their Institution, not upon particular modes of
Administration, which are not expressly Commanded in the Gospel; and he, who
desires greater purity of Ordinances than their conformity to their
Institution, who thinks, that Baptism and the Lords Supper lose their Efficacy,
unless they be administered in that way, which they themselves best like, are
guilty of gross Superstition, and attribute the virtue of Sacraments to the
manner of their administration, not to their Divine Institution.

And what Men talk of greater Edification is generally as little understood as
the other; for Edification is building up, and is applied to the Church,
considered as Gods House and Temple, and it is an odd way of building up the
Temple of God, by dividing and Separating the parts of it from each other.

This one thing well considered, viz. That (...) Edification or Building,
according to the Scripture notion of it, does always primarily refer to, or at
least include, Church-unity and Communion, is sufficient to convince any Man,
what an ill way it is, to seek for greater Edification in breaking the
Communion of the Church by Schism and Separation; and therefore I shall make it
plainly appear, that this is the true Scripture notion of Edification; and to
that end shall consider the most material places, where this word is used.

Now the most proper signification of (...), which our Translators render by
Edification, is a House or Building, and this is the proper Sense, wherein it
belongs to the Christian Church, Ye are Gods Husbandry, ye are Gods Building,
that is, the Church is 1 Cor. 3. 9.
Gods House or Building, (...). Thus the same Apostle tells us, that in Christ,
the whole Building Ephesians. 2. 21.
(i. e. the whole Christian Church) fitly framed together, grows unto an holy
Temple in the Lord. Matthew. 21. 42.
Hence the Governors of the Church are called Builders, (...), and the
Apostles are called Laborers Acts 4. 11.
together with God, in erecting this Spiritual Building, and St. Paul calls
himself a Master Builder. Hence 1 Cor. 3. 9.
the increase, growth and advances toward perfection 10.
in the Church, is called the Building, or Edification of it. For this reason
St. Paul commends Prophecy, or Expounding the Scriptures, before speaking in
unknown Tongues without an Interpreter, because 1 Cor. 14. 5.
by this the Church receives Building or Edification. All these Spiritual
gifts, which were bestowed v. 12.
on the Christians, were for the Building and Edifying of the Church. The
Apostolical power in Church censures was for Edification, not for Destruction,
2 Cor. 10. 8. 12. 19. 13. 10.
(...) to Build, and not to pull down, that is, to preserve the Unity of the
Church entire, and its Communion pure.

And we may observe that this Edification is primarily applied to the Church,
That the Church may 1 Cor. 14. 5. 12.
receive Edifying: That ye may excel to the Edifying Ephesians. 4. 12.
of the Church: For the Edifying of the Body of Christ. And it is very
observable: wherein the Apostle places the Edification of the Body of Christ,
viz. in Unity and Love. Till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the
13.
knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect Man, unto the measure of the stature
of the fullness of Christ. Till we are united by one Faith into one Body, and
perfect Man. And speaking the truth in love, may grow up in him into 15, 16.
all things, which is the head, Even Christ from whom the whole Body fitly
joined together, and compacted by that, which every joint supplieth, according
to the Effectual working in the measure of every part makes increase of the
Body, unto the Edifying it self in love. This is an admirable description of
the Unity of the Church, in which all the parts are closely united and
compacted together, as Stones and Timber are to make one House; and thus they
grow into one Body, and increase in mutual Love, and Charity, which is the very
Building and Edification of the Church, which is Edifyed and Built up in love,
as the Apostle adds, 1 Cor. 8. 1.
that knowledge puffs up, but charity Edifieth, this Builds up the Church of
Christ; and that not such a common Charity as we have for all Mankind; but such
a love and Sympathy, as is peculiar to the Members of the same Body; and which
none but Members can have for each other, and now methinks I need not prove,
that Schism and Separation, is not for the Edification of the Church; to
Separate for Edification is to Pull down in stead of Building up.

But these Men do not seem to have any great regard to the Edification of the
Church, but only to their own particular Edification, and we must grant, that
Edification is sometimes applied to particular Christians in Scripture,
according to St. Paul's Exhortation, Comfort your selves together, and Edify
one another, 1 These. 5. 11.
even as also ye do. And this Edifying one another without question signifies
our promoting each others growth and progress in all Christian Graces and
virtues: and so the Building and Edification of the Church, signifies the
growth and improvement of the Church in all Spiritual Wisdom and knowledge, and
Christian graces, the Edification of the Church consists in the Edification of
particular Christians, but then this is called Edification or Building, because
this growth and improvement is in the Unity and Communion of the Church, and
makes them one Spiritual House and Temple. Thus the Church is called the Temple
of God, and every particular Christian is Gods Temple, wherein the Holy Spirit
dwells, and yet God has but one Temple, and the Holy Spirit dwells only in the
Church of Christ; but particular Christians are Gods Temple, and the Holy
Spirit dwells in them, as living Members of the Christian Church; and thus by
the same reason, the Church is Edified and Built up, as it grows into a
Spiritual House and Holy Temple by a firm and close Union and Communion of all
its parts; and every Christian is Edified, as he grows up in all Christian
Graces and Virtues in the Unity of the Church.

And therefore whatever extraordinary means of Edification Men may fancy to
themselves in a Separation, the Apostle knew no Edification, but in the
Communion of the Church; and indeed if our growth and increase in all Grace and
Virtue, be more owing to the internal assistances of the Divine Spirit, than to
the external Administrations, as St. Paul tells us, I have planted, and Apollos
watered, but God gave the 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7.
increase: So then, neither is he that planteth any thing, nor he that
waters; but God that gave the increase: And the Divine Spirit confines his
influences and operations to the Unity of the Church (as the same Apostle tells
us, that there is but one Body and Ephesians. 4. 4.
one Spirit, (which plainly signifies) that the operations of this one Spirit,
are appropriated to this one Body, as the Soul is to the Body i^ Animates) then
it does not seem a very likely way for Edification to cut our selves off from
the Unity of Christ's Body.

3. The Third and Last Case still remains, which Whether it be Lawful to
Communicate with two distinct and Separate Churches. For this is thought of
late days, not only a very Innocent and Lawful thing, but the true
Catholick-Spirit, and Catholick-Communion, to Communicate with Churches of all
Communions, unless perhaps they may except the Papists, and Quakers. It is
thought a Schismatical Principle, to refuse to Communicate with those Churches,
which withdraw Communion from us. And thus some, who Communicate ordinarily
with the Church of England, make no Scruple to Communicate in Prayers and
Sacraments with Presbyterian and Independent Churches, and Presbyterians can
Communicate with the Church of England, and with Independents, whom formerly
they charged with downright Schism; and some think it very indifferent, whom
they Communicate with, and therefore take their turns in all. But this is as
contrary to all the Principles of Church Communion, as any thing can possibly
be.

To be in Communion with the Church is to be a Member of it, and to be a Member
of two Separate and Opposite Churches, is to be as contrary to our selves, as
those Separate Churches are to each other.

Christ has but one Church, and one Body, and therefore where there are two
Churches divided from each other by Separate Communions, there is a Schism and
Rent in the Body, and whoever Communicates with both these Churches, on one
side or other, Communicates in a Schism.

That the Presbyterian and Independent Churches, have made an Actual Separation
from the Church of England, I have evidently proved already; and therefore if
the Communion of the Church of England be Lawful (as those, who can, and
ordinarily do Communicate with the Church of England, must be presumed to
acknowledge) then they are Schismatics, and to Communicate with them is to
partake in their Schism.

Now if Schism be an Innocent thing, and the true Catholic Spirit, I have no
more to say, but that the whole Christian Church, ever since the Apostles
times, has been in a very great mistake; but if Schism be a very great Sin, and
that which will Damn us, as soon as Adultery and Murder, then it must needs be
a dangerous thing to Communicate with Schismatics.

The Sum of all in short is this. Besides these Men, who justify their
Separation from the Church of England, by charging Her with requiring Sinful
terms of Communion, (which is the only thing, that can justify their
Separation, if it could be proved) there are others, who Separate lightly and
wantonly, for want of a due sense of the Nature of Church Communion, and our
obligations to preserve the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. They have
no notion at all of a Church, or no notion of one Church, or know not, wherein
the Unity and Communion of this Church consists; and these Men think, it is
indifferent, whether they Communicate with any Church at all, or that they
secure themselves from Schism by Communicating sometimes with one Church, and
sometimes with another; that they may choose their Church according to their
own fancies, and change again, when ever their humor alters. But I hope, who
ever considers carefully, what I have now writ, and attends to those passionate
Exhortations of the Gospel to Peace, and Unity, and Brotherly Love, which
cannot be preserved but in one Communion, which is the Unity of the Body of
Christ, and the Peace and Love of fellow Members, will not only heartily Pray
to the God of Peace, to restore Peace and Unity to his Church, but will be
careful, how he divides the Church himself, and will use his utmost endeavors
to heal the present Schisms and Divisions of the Church of Christ.

THE END.
A LETTER TO ANONYMUS, In Answer to his Three Letters TO Dr. SHERLOCK ABOUT
Church Communion.

LONDON: Printed for Fincham Gardener, at the White-Horse in Ludgate Street.
1683.

A LETTER TO ANONYMUS, In Answer to his Three LETTERS to Dr. SHERLOCK about
Church Communion.
SIR,
I Am very sorry, that my Silence and Patience has been mistaken by you for an
affront and neglect; which is such a provocation, as I find some sort of great
minds cannot bear.

But yet that you may have a little mercy, I shall give you a brief account of
the reason, why you had not an Answer before.

I did not answer your first Letter in so public a manner as you desired,
because I believed your Objections were such, as no body was concerned in but
your self, and I cannot think it decent to trouble so numerous an Auditory with
every particular man's conceits. I did not answer your Second Letter, because by
the Temper and Spirit of it, I easily foresaw, that it would end in a public
Quarrel; and if I must be in Print, I henceforth resolve to Correct the Press
my self, and not to suffer any man to Print my private Letters for me. But yet
I called at Mr. R's Shop, whither you directed me, several times, to have
Invited you to a private Conference, but could never see him, till I
accidentally met him in the street, the same day I received the present of your
Printed Letters. The reason why I Printed those Discourses, which you heard me
Preach, was because they were designed for the Press, before they were designed
for the Pulpit, and before I dreamed of your terrible Queries; and were Printed
and Preached exactly by the same Copy, excepting the Introduction to fit them
to a Text, which you know is very convenient for a Sermon. And the reason why I
sent you one of those Tracts, when it was Printed, was because I did hope you
might have had understanding enough, upon a careful perusal of it, when it lay
before you, to have answered those Objections which you made against it, at the
first hearing.

And now Sir, I come to consider the Contents of your First Letter; you have
made some Repetition of what I Discoursed, and a very good Repetition to be
done by memory, which gives you the commendable Character of a diligent and
attentive hearer: but when you had the Discourse before you in Print, you ought
not then to have depended upon your memory, but to have given me my own again
in my own words and order, and with that dependence and connection, in which the
whole strength of that Discourse consists; and to have applied your Queries
distinctly to those parts of the Discourse, which they related to: Had you done
this, you would either have been able to have resolved your own Queries, or
would more effectually have convinced me of my mistake, or at least have given
your Readers better satisfaction in the pertinency of what you say; but now you
have only given us a heap of Queries, which it is no easy matter to know to
what they relate.

As for your Repetitions, the Reader who desires satisfaction may compare them
with what I have writ, which is exactly the same with what I Preached: and as
for your Queries, you know how easy a thing it is to ask Questions; however, I
will endeavor to find out to what they belong, and give as plain and short an
Answer to them as I can; for I assure you, I am not at leisure now to write a
long Book upon this Argument, and therefore it is a great comfort to me, that
there is no need of it.

After your Repetition of what you could remember, or what you thought fit to
take notice of in my Sermon, you give us a very mistaken Summary of it.

To sum up (say you) what I take to be the force of all p. 4.
this.

The Apostles and their Successors were by our Savior invested with a power of
receiving Members into his Church upon his Terms, and with such Rites as they
should think fit; and they who are not so received into the Church, have no
right to any of the blessings promised to the Members of Christ's Body.

This Power is by an uninterrupted Succession, derived upon the Governors of
our National Church, wherefore all others, that pretend to the exercise of this
Power within this Nation, are Usurpers; and all the Laity Baptized by their
Pastors, not being duly admitted into any particular Church, are so far from
being Members of Christ's Body, that they are Usurpers and Traitors to that
Power, which is derived from him in a right line. Durus hic Sermo.

Had you not told the World in your Title Page, that you are a Layman, to make
your Triumph over a poor undone Dr. of Divinity the more glorious, I should
have taken you to be the Founder of some new Sect of Conjectural Divines; and
truly you are so happy in your guesses, that I believe few men will ever be
able to outdo you in this Art. For there is not one word of all this matter in
that Discourse, which you pretend to sum up, as it was delivered by me. That to
which you seem to refer, is contained in one short Paragraph, which I shall
Transcribe, and leave the most fanciful Reader to try his skill to sum it up as
you have done. Having before asserted, that God only can Constitute a Church,
I added, And I think it is as plain, that the only Resolut. of Cases, p. 5.
visible way God has of Forming a Church (for I do not now speak of the
Invisible Operations of the Divine Spirit) is by granting a Church Covenant,
which is the Divine Charter whereon the Church is Founded, and investing some
persons with Power and Authority to receive others into this Convenant,
according to the terms and conditions of the Covenant, and by such
Covenant-Rites, and Forms of Admission, as he is pleased to Institute; which
under the Gospel is Baptism, as under the Law it was Circumcision.

I was discoursing of Gods visible way of Forming a Church, which I asserted to
be by granting a Church Covenant, which is that Divine Charter on which the
Church is Founded; but then lest any one should question, how men are admitted
into this Covenant, I added, that God had invested some Persons with Power and
Authority to receive others into this Covenant by Baptism; and by receiving
them into Covenant, they make them Members of that Church, which is Founded on
this Covenant.

Now what of all this will any sober Dissenter deny? Here is no dispute, who is
invested with this Power, what form of Church Government Christ Instituted,
whether Episcopal or Presbyterian; here is no Dispute about the validity of
Orders, or Succession, or in what cases Baptism may be valid, which is not
Administered by a valid Authority; This did not concern my present Argument,
which proceeds upon a quite different Hypothesis, viz. the necessity of
Communion with the one Church and Body of Christ, for all those who are, or
would be owned to be Christians, or Members of Christ's Body. I make no inquiry,
by whom they have been Baptized, or whether they were rightly Baptized or not;
but taking all these things for granted, I inquire whether Baptism do not make
us Church Members; whether it makes us Members of a Particular or Universal
Church; whether a Churchmember be not bound to Communion with the whole
Catholic Church; whether he that separates from any sound part of the
Catholic Church, be not a Schismatic from the whole Church; whether we be not
bound to maintain constant Communion with that particular Church, in which we
live, and with which we can, when we please, Communicate occasionally; whether
it be consistent with Catholic Communion, to communicate with two Churches,
which are in a state of Separation from each other: if you have any thing to
say to these matters, you shall have a fair hearing; but all your Queries,
which proceed upon a mistaken Hypothesis of your own, do not concern me; and
yet to oblige you, if it be possible, I shall briefly consider them.

1. Your first Query is, Whether a Pious Dissenter supposed to be received into
the Church by such as he believes to be fully invested with sufficient Power,
is in as bad a condition as a Moral Heathen, or in a worse than a Papist.

Ans. The Catholic Church has been so indulgent to Heretics and Schismatics,
as to determine against the Necessity of Rebaptization, if they have been once,
though irregularly baptized. This you may find a particular account of, in the
Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Still. p. 22. etc. But the question is,
whether if they continue Schismatics, whatever their other pretenses to Piety
be, their Condition be not as dangerous, as the Condition of Moral Heathens and
Papists.

2. Whether the Submission to the Power and Censures of this Church, (which all
must own to be a sound Church) be part of the Divine Covenant, which Unites the
Members of the Catholic Church to God and to each other.

Ans. This is a captious question, which must be distinctly answered. A general
Submission and Obedience to the Authority and Censures of the Church, though it
cannot properly be called a part of that Divine Covenant whereon the Church is
founded, which primarily respects the promise of Salvation by Christ through
Faith in his Blood; yet it is a necessary Church-Duty, and Essential to
Church Communion, and so may be called a part of the Covenant, if by the
Covenant we understand all those Duties which are required of baptized
Christians, and Members of the Church, by a Divine positive Law, as Obedience
to Church Governors is.

But then Obedience to the Church of England is not an universal Duty incumbent
on all Christians, but only on those, which are, or ought to live, in
Obedience to this particular Church: for the particular exercises of
Church-Authoritie and Jurisdiction is confined within certain limits, as of
necessity it must be; and though all Orthodox Churches must live in Communion
with each other, yet no particular Church can pretend to any original Authority
over another Church, or the Members of it, as is the constant Doctrine of
Protestants, in opposition to the Usurpations of the Church of Rome. But I
perceive Sir you know no difference between the Authority and Power, and the
Communion of the Church.

But you add, If it be, then as he who is not admitted into this Church, is no
Member of the Catholic, and has no right to the benefits of being a Member of
Christ's Body: so is it with every one, who is excluded by Church Censures,
though excommunicated for a slight contempt or neglect, nay, for a wrongful
cause.

Truly Sir, I know not how any man is admitted into the Church of England, any
otherwise than as he is admitted into the whole Catholic Church, viz, by
Baptism, which does not make us Members of any particular Church, but of the
Universal Church, which Obliges us to Communicate with that part of the
Catholic Church wherein we live; and whoever lives in England, and renounces
Communion with the Church of England, is a Schismatic from the Cathelick
Church.

And whoever is Excommunicated from one sound part of the Catholic Church, is
Excommunicated from the whole. But then, there is this difference between
Excommunication and Schism; the first is a Judicial Sentence, the second is a
Man's own Choice; the first is not valid unless it be inflicted for a just
cause, the second is always valid, and does in its own nature cut Men off from
all Communion with Christ's Body. I say in its own Nature, for I will not
pretend to determine the final States of Men, for I know not what gracious
allowances God will make for some Schismatics, no more than I do what favor
he may allow to other Sinners.

But you proceed. If it be no part of the Divine Covenant, then a Man that
lives here may be a true Member of the Catholic Church, though he is not in
Communion with this Sound Church.

This is another Horn of your formidable Dilemma. If Obedience to the
Authority and Censures of the particular National Church of England is no part
of the Divine Covenant, then those Baptized Christians, who live in England,
are not bound to the Communion of the Church of England, and may be Catholic
Christians for all that. As if because the Subjects of Spain are not bound to
obey the King of England, therefore English Men are not bound to obey him
neither, but may be very good Subjects for all that.

We are bound by the Divine Law, to live in Communion with all true Catholic
Churches, and to obey the Governors of the Church wherein we live; and
therefore though Obedience to the Church of England be not a Law to all the
World, yet it is a Law to all English Christians inhabiting in this Church. But
your way of arguing is, as if a Man should say, It is a Divine Law to obey
Civil Magistrates, but there is no Divine Law that all the World should obey
the King of England, France or Spain, therefore French or English Subjects are
not bound to obey their own Prince. Oh what comfortable Doctrine is this to
some Men!

You proceed. But you will say (which I think is not much to the question) that
he ought to Communicate, if Communion may be had.

Yes, I do say this; and I believe by this time you see, or at least others
will see, that it is much to the question.

But then Query, whether the Dissenters may not reply, that they are ready to
Communicate, if the Communion be not clogged with some things, which are no part
of the Divine Covenant.

Yes, they may reply so if they please, or Anonymus for them; but whoever does
it, the reply is very weak and impertinent. It is weak, because Obedience to
Authority, in all lawful things, is in a large notion part of the Divine
Covenant: And it is very impertinent, because the Supposition of Communicating,
where Communion may be had, supersedes that Query. For Communion cannot be had,
where there are any sinful Terms of Communion: and though I assert, that the
Church must be founded on a Divine Covenant, I never said, that nothing must be
enjoined by the Church, but what is expressed in that Covenant. A Corporation,
which is founded upon a Royal Charter, you know, may have Authority to make
Bylaws, which shall oblige all the Members of it, and so are Terms of
Communion with it; and yet it is the Charter, not these Bylaws, whereon the
Corporation is founded. I was not concerned to Examine the Terms of Communion,
(that is, and will be done by other hands) but, supposing nothing Sinful in our
Communion, whether all Christians, that live in this Church, are not bound to
live in Communion with it.

Q. 3. Your next Query concerns the Derivation of Church Power from Christ
himself, without any immediate Derivation from other Church Governors; which
does not at all concern my Doctrine of Church Communion; for whether it be so
or so, still we are bound to maintain Communion with all sound parts of the
Catholic Church; so Church-Authoritie be Derived from Christ any way, it is
well enough, but then we must be sure that it is so: and if Christ have
appointed no ordinary way for this, but by the hands of Men, who received
their Authority immediately from himself, I know not who can appoint any other
way.

But may not a Layman preach the Gospel and gather a Church in a Heathen
Country, where there is none of the Clergy to do it? I suppose he may; and if
you please to consult the Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleets
Unreasonableness of Separation, p. 331, etc. you will find this case largely
debated.

But it seems it does not satisfy you, that this be allowed only in case of
Necessity, for then up start two other Queries.

1. Whether this will not put the being of our Church upon a very hazardous
issue, and oblige your self to prove, that it was a true Church before the
Reformation?

Ans. This is no hazard at all, for the Church of England was certainly a true,
though a corrupt, Church before the Reformation, as the Church of Rome is at
this day. A true Church is that which has every thing Essential to the being of
a Church, though mixed with such other Corruptions, as make its Communion
dangerous and sinful, as a Diseased Man is a true Man; and remove these
Corruptions, and then it is not only a true, but a sound Church, as the Church
of England is at this day. And if you will not allow this, I doubt, Sir, all
private Christians will be at as great a loss for their Baptism, as the Church
will be for Orders. But the case of a True Vindicat. p. 64. etc.
and Sound and Catholic Church, if you please, you may see Stated in the same
Book to which I referred you before.

And thus your second Query is answered, that though this Church was
Antichristian before the Reformation, yet there was not the same Necessity for
private Christians to usurp the Ministerial Office without a regular
Authority, as there is for a Layman in a Heathen Nation, because an
Antichristian, that is, the most corrupt Church, retains the Power of Orders,
as well as of Sacraments.

As for that Independent Principle, that Christ has instituted a Power in the
Church to ordain her own Officers, you may see it Examined in the Defense of
Dr. Still. Vnr. of Sep. p. 306, etc.

But what now is all this to me? I don't charge our Dissenters with Schism from
the Invalidity of their Orders, but for their causeless and sinful Separation.
Let us suppose, that they have no need of any Orders, or that such Orders as
they have are good, or that they had Episcopal Orders, and were Governed by
Bishops of their own, as the Donatists were, yet they would be never the less
Schismatics for that, while they separate from the Church of England, and from
each other. If Orders be necessary, and they have no Orders, then they are no
Churches at all; if they have true Orders, and are true Churches, but yet
divide Christian Communion by Separating from any Sound part of the Christian
Church, they are Schismatics.

4. Q Whether from the Supposition, that there ought to be but one
Church Covenant throughout the Catholic Church, that there cannot be one true
Church within another, and that the Nature of Catholick-Communion is such, that
one ought to be ready to Communicate with any Sound Church, from which one is
not hindered by reason of the Distance of Place? it does not follow.

Ans. Fair and Softly! let us first consider the Suppositions, before we
consider what follows from them; for you have so misrepresented, so curtailed
these Propositions, and so mixed and blended things of a different Nature, that
it is necessary to restore them to their true Sense and proper Place again,
before we can tell what follows.

I asserted, that the Christian Church is founded upon a Divine Covenant, and
since God has made but one Covenant with mankind in Christ Jesus, therefore
there can be but one Christian Church throughout the World, Resol. of Cases, p.
8.
founded on this one Covenant.

Having explained the general notion of Church Communion, which signifies no
more than Church Fellowship and p. 10.
Society, that to be in Communion with the Church is to be a Member of the
Church, I came to enquire, what made a Separate Church. For if there be but one
Church and one Communion, of which all true Christians and Christian Churches
p. 19.
are or ought to be Members, then those Churches, which are not Members of each
other, are Separate Churches. And for a fuller explication of this, I observed
several p. 20.
things.

1. That there must be but one Church in one Place. Because there is no other
Rule of Catholick-Communion, but to Communicate in all Religious Offices, and
all Acts of Government and Discipline, with those Christians with whom they
live. For to Renounce the Ordinary Communion of Christians, or true Christian
Church, is to divide the Unity and Communion of the Church; and to withdraw our
selves from Ordinary Communion with the Church in which we live, into p. 21.
distinct and separate Societies for Worship, is to Renounce their Communion,
and when there is not a necessary cause for it, is a Schismatical Separation.

And a little after I added, If all Christians are Members of the one Body of
Christ, nothing can justify the distinction of Christians into several
Churches, but only such a distance of place, as makes it necessary and
expedient to put them under the Conduct and Government of several Bishops, for
the greater Edification of the Church in the more easy and regular
Administration of Discipline. And therefore nothing can justify the gathering
a Church out of a Church, and dividing Neighbor Christians into distinct
Communions. Now then let us consider what follows.

1. You say, either that the French Protestants have no Church here, but are
Schismatics in not Communicating with ours; Or that ours is guilty of Schism,
in making the Terms of Communion so straight, that it is not the Duty of of
every one (though a licensed Stranger) to Communicate with this Church.

Ans. If any Foreign Church among us, which by Royal Favor is allowed the
Observation of their own Discipline and Rules of Worship, Renounce Communion
with the Church of England, or Communicate with our Separatists, she is
Schismatical her self; as the Protestant Churches in France, Geneva, or Holland
would be, should they do the like. But if there be any reason to allow those
Foreigners, which are among us, to Form and Model their Congregations according
to the Rules of their own Churches to which they originally belong, this is no
more a Schism, than there is between the Protestant Churches of France and
England, which own each others Communion.

A bare Variety of Rites and Ceremonies makes no Schism between Churches; our
Church pretends not to give Laws to other Churches, in such matters, but leaves
them to their Liberty, as she takes her own: and why an Ecclesiastical Colony
may not for great reasons be Transplanted into another Church, as well as a
Civil Colony into another Kingdom, while they live in Communion with each
other, I cannot tell. It is a different thing to gather a Church out of a
Church, and to Transplant some Members of one Church into another (maintaining
the same Communion, though with some peculiar and different usages) with the
consent of the Church to which they come.

The case of Strangers and Natives has always been accounted very different,
both upon a Religious and Civil account: Every particular National Church has
Authority over her own Members, to direct and Govern her own Communion, and
prescribe the Rules of Worship; but as she does not Impose upon other Churches
at a distance, so she may allow the same liberty to the Members of such Foreign
Churches, when they live within her Jurisdiction, without breach of Communion:
for tho the Communion of the whole Christian Church is but one, and all true
Catholic Churches are Members of each other, yet the Authority and
Jurisdiction is different; every Church challenging a peculiar Authority, which
it exercises in its own Communion; and therefore for the Church of England to
suffer Foreign Churches to observe their own Customs and Usages, is not to
allow of distinct and separate Communions in her own Bowels, (which were
Schismatical,) but only to exempt such Congregations of Strangers from her
particular Jurisdiction, and to leave them to the Government and Authority of
the Church to which they belong.

There was no such thing indeed allowed in the Primitive Church, as distinct
Congregations of Foreigners under a different Rule and Government; and it were
very desirable, that all Christians who have occasion to live in other
Countries, would conform to all the innocent and laudable customs of the Church
where they sojourn, which seems most agreeable to Catholic Communion; but yet
distinct Congregations of Foreigners, who own the Communion of our Church, tho
they observe the customs of their own, are not Schismatical, as the Separate
Conventicles of Dissenters are.

2. But does it not follow from the obligation to communicate, or to be ready
to communicate with any true Church where distance does not hinder, that a
Member of the Church of England is not obliged to constant Communion with that
Church, but may occasionally communicate with the French Church, nay with
Dissenters too, if he believes that any of their Congregations is a true Member
of the Catholic Church?

Ans. This is a great Mastery of Wit, to turn my own Artillery upon me. I prove
the Dissenters to be Schismatics, because they set up a Church within a
Church, whereas there ought to be but one Church and one Communion in one
place, every Christian being bound to Communicate with the sound part of the
Catholic Church in the place wherein he lives; for according to the Laws of
Catholic Communion, nothing but distance of place can suspend our obligation
to actual Communion; Hence you conclude, that we must Communicate with
Schismatics, if there be any among us, or so near to us, that distance does
not hinder our Communion. But you should consider, that our obligation to
Catholic Communion does equally oblige us to renounce the Communion of
Schismatics whether at home or abroad; and tho we should allow them to be true
Churches, yet if Schismatical, they are not Catholic Churches, and therefore
not the objects of Catholick-Communion.

But however, we may lawfully Communicate with the French Church that is among
us, as occasion serves. Yes, no doubt we may, because they are in Communion
with us. But then follows the Murdering consequence, that a Member of the
Church of England is not bound to a constant Communion with her. I pray, why
so? every Member, as a Member, is in constant Communion; for to be in Communion
with Resol. of Cases, p. 10.
a Church, is to be a Member of it, as I proved at large: but then
Church Communion does not primarily respect a Particular but the Universal p.
13.
Church, and therefore it is no interruption of our Communion with the Church
of England to Communicate actually with any Church, which is in Communion with
her: for as all Christians, who are neither Heretics nor Schismatics, are
Members of the Catholic Church, so they are in Communion with the Catholic
Church, and every sound part of it. The State of Communion is constant with the
whole Catholic Church, the acts of Communion are performed sometimes in one
part of it, sometimes in another, as our presence, abode, or occasions,
require; and thus it is possible actually to Communicate with the French
Church, either in England or out of England, without interrupting our Communion
with the Church of England; for the Communion is one and the same in all
Christian Churches, which are in Communion with each other, though they may
observe different Rites and Modes of Worship.

And this I suppose is a Sufficient answer to that other untoward consequence,
that if the Members of the Church of England may occasionally Communicate with
the French Church, then Constant Communion is not always a Duty, where
occasional Communion is lawful; I suppose, because we are not bound to a
constant actual or presential Communion with the French Church, though we may
occasionally Communicate with it.

But certainly, Sir, Had you ever considered, what I discourst about constant
and occasional Communion, you would not have made such an Objection as this:
For this is a Modern distinction, which has no sense at the bottom, as I
plainly showed. But however, by constant Communion, our Dissenters understand
the performing the Acts of Communion, always or ordinarily in the same Church;
and by occasional Communion, performing the Acts of Communion sometimes, or as
occasion serves, in another Church; now with respect to this Notion of constant
or occasional Communion, as it signifies the constant and ordinary, or the
Occasional Acts of Communion, must that question be understood, whether
Constant Communion he a Duty, where Occasional Communion is Lawful; the meaning
of which question is this, whether when other reasons and circumstances
determine my Personal Communion Ordinarily to one Church, it be not my Duty to
Communicate ordinarily with that Church, if I can lawfully Communicate
sometimes with it: and there being no other reason to justify non-Communion
with any Church with which I am bound for other reasons Ordinarily to
Communicate, but only Sinful Terms of Communion, and there being no Color for
such a Pretense, where occasional Communion is acknowledged Lawful, (for Sinful
Terms of Communion make occasional as well as constant Acts of Communion
Sinful) I hence conclude, that it is a necessary Duty to Communicate constantly
or ordinarily with that Church in which I live, if it be Lawful to Communicate
occasionally, or sometimes, with it.

But if any Man will be so perverse as to understand this Question, as you now
do, not of the Communion of a Church which for other reasons we are bound to
Communicate Ordinarily with, but of any Church with which I may Lawfully
Communicate as occasion serves, it makes it an absurd and senseless
Proposition, to say, that constant Communion (by that meaning presential and
personal Communion) is always a Duty, where occasional Communion is lawful. For
at this rate, if occasional Communion with the Protestant Churches of France,
Geneva, Holland, Germany, be Lawful, it becomes a necessary Duty for me to
Communicate always personally and presentionally with all these Churches at the
same time, which no man can do, who can be present but in one place at a time.
But yet thus far the Proposition holds universally true, that whatever Church I
can occasionally Communicate with without Sin, I am also bound to Communicate
constantly with, whenever such reasons, as are necessary to determine my
Communion to a particular Church, make it my Duty to do so. And no man in his
Wits ever understood this Question in any other sense.

But this you think cannot be my meaning; For accorcording to me, no Man is
obliged to be a Member of one Sound Church more than another, provided the
distance is not so great, but that he may Communicate with both.

It is wonderful to me, Sir, how you should come to fasten so many absurd
Propositions upon me; and I would desire of you for the future, if you have no
regard to your own Reputation, yet upon Principles of Common Honesty, not to
write so hastily, but to take some time to understand a Book, before you
undertake to confute it.

Where do I say, that no man is Obliged to be a Member of one Sound Church more
than of another? I assert indeed, that no Baptized Christian is a Member of any
particular Church, considered merely as particular, but is a Member of the
universal Church, and of all sound Orthodox Churches, as parts of the Universal
Church. This puts him into a State of Communion with the whole Church, without
which he cannot be properly said to perform any Act of Church Communion, though
he should join in all the Acts and Offices of Christian worship: But is there
no difference between being a Member of the Universal Church, and of all
particular Churches, which are Parts and Members of the Universal Church, and
not to be Obliged to be a Member of one Sound Church more than of another? The
first supposes, that every Christian, whatever particular Church he actually
Communicates in, is a Member of the whole Christian Church, and of all
particular Sound Churches; the second supposes the quite contrary, that
Christians are so Members of one Church, as they are not of another; that
constant Communion in a particular Church confines their Church Membership to
that particular Church in which they Communicate.

So that the question is not, what Church I must be a Member of; for every
Christian is a Member of the whole Church, not merely of this or that
particular Church; but what particular Church I must Communicate in: now our
Obligation to Communicate in a certain particular Church, results from the
place wherein we live; The Church in which we were Born and Baptized, and have
our Ordinary abode and Residence, the Church which is incorporated into the
State of which we are Natural Subjects, if it be a true and sound Christian
Church, Challenges our Communion and Obedience.

Now in the same place, there never can be any Competition between two
Churches, because there must be but one Church in the same place, and therefore
there can be no dispute in what Church we must constantly Communicate, which
must be the Church in which we live.

But is there not a French, and a Dutch, as well as an English Church in
London, and since distance of place does not hinder, may we not choose, which
of these we will ordinarily Communicate with?

I answer no, we have only the Church of England in England. The French Church
is in France, and the Dutch Church is in Holland, though there is a French and
Dutch Congregation allowed in London. These Congregations belong to their own
Original Churches, and are under their Government and Censures; but there is no
Church Power and Authority in England, but only of the Church of England, and
therefore though we may occasionally Communicate with the French Congregation,
our Obligation to constant Communion is with the Church of England, which alone
has Authority and Jurisdiction in England to require our Communion and
Obedience: one particular Church is distinguished from another not by a distinct
and separate Communion, which is Schismatical, but by distinct Power and
Jurisdiction; and that Church within whose Jurisdiction we live, can only
Challenge our Communion; and I suppose no Man will say, that in this sense, we
live in the French or Dutch Church, because there is a French and Dutch Church
allowed among us.

5. Your next Query is, Whether a true Christian, though not visibly admitted
into Church Communion, where he wants the Means, has not a virtual Baptism in
the Answer of a good Conscience toward God, according to 1. Peter, 2. 21.

Ans. What this concerns me, I cannot tell. I speak only of the Necessity of
Visible Communion in Visible Members, you put a question, whether the want of
Visible Admission by Baptism, when it cannot be had, may not be supplied with
the answer of a good Conscience toward God. I hope in some cases it may,
though I do not hope this from what St. Peter says, who only speaks of that
Answer of a good Conscience, which is made at Baptism, not of that, which is
made without it. But what God will accept of in this case, is not my business
to determie; unbaptized Persons are no Visible Members of the Church, and
therefore not capable of Visible Communion, and therefore not concerned at all
in this dispute.

6. Query, Why a professed Atheist, who has been Baptized, and out of Secular
Interest continues a Communicant with this Church, is more a Member of the
Catholic Church than such as are above described.

Ans. Neither Atheists nor Schismatics are Members of the Catholic Church.
But this is a vile insinuation against the Governors and Government of our
Church, as if professed Atheists were admitted to Communion. Though possibly
there may be some Atheists, yet I never met yet with one, who would profess
himself an Atheist. If I should, I assure you, I would not admit him to
Communion, and I hope there is no Minister of the Church of England would; and
I am sure, no Man, who had any kindness for the Church, with which he pretends
to hold Communion, would ask such a question.

7. Query. Whether as the Catholic Church is compared to a Body of Men
incorporated by one Charter should upon supposition of a possibility of the
forfeiture of the Charter to the whole Body, by the Miscarriages of any of the
Officers, does it likewise follow that the Miscarriages of any of the Officers,
or the Church Representative, as I remember Bishop Sanderson calls the Clergy,
may forfeit the Privileges given by Christ to his Church, or at least may
suspend them? As suppose a Protestant Clergy taking their Power to be as large
as the Church of Rome claimed, should deny the Laity the Sacraments, as the
Popish did in Venice, and here in King John's time, during the Interdicts, quid
inde operatur?

Ans. Just as much as this Query does the reason of which I cannot easily
guess. I asserted indeed, that as there is but one Covenant on which the Church
is founded, so there can be but one Church to which this Covenant belongs; and
therefore those, who divide and separate themselves from this one Body of
Christ, forfeit Resol. of Cases, p. 8. etc.
their right to this Covenant, which is made only with the one Body of Christ;
which I illustrated by the instance of a Charter granted to a particular
Corporation, which no Man had any interest in, who divided himself from that
Corporation to which this Charter was granted: but what is this to forfeiting a
Charter by the Miscarriages of Officers? I doubt Sir, your Head has been Warmed
with Quo Warranto's, which so affect your Fancy, that you can Dream of nothing
else.

I was almost afraid, when your hand was in, I should never have seen an end of
these Questions; and I know no more reason, why you so soon left off asking
Questions, than why you asked any at all; for I would undertake to ask five
hundred more, as pertinent to the business as most of these. You have not
indeed done yet, but have a reserve of particular Queries; but general Queries
are the most formidable things, because it is harder to find what they relate
to, than how to Answer them.

You have three sets of Queries relating to three several Propositions, besides
a parting blow of four Queries relating to my Text.

The first Proposition you are pleased to question me about is this, That our
Savior made the Apostles and their Successors Governors of his Church, with
promise to be with them to the end of the World. Which I alleged to prove,
that when the Church is called the Body of Christ, it does not signify a
confused multitude of Christians, but a regular Society under Order and
Government.

Now Sir, is this true or false? if it be false, then the Church is not a
governed Society, is not a Body, but a confused heap and multitude of
Independent Individuals, which is somewhat worse than Independent Churches. If
it be true, why do you ask all these Questions, unless you have a mind to
confute our Savior, and burlesque his Institutions: but since I am condemned
to answer questions, I will briefly consider them.

1. Whether our Saviors promise of Divine Assistance, did not extend to all
the Members of the Church, considering every man in his respective station and
capacity, as well as the Apostles, as Church Governors? For which you may
compare St. John with St. Matthew.

Ans. No doubt but there are promises, which relate to the whole Church, and
promises which belong to particular Christians, as well as promises which
relate peculiarly to the Apostles and Governors of the Church, in the exercise
of their Ministerial Office and Authority: but what then? Christ is with his
Church, with his Ministers, with particular Christians, to the end of the
World, but in a different manner, and to different purposes; and yet that
promise there is peculiarly made to the Apostles, including their Successors
also; for the Apostles themselves were not to continue here to the end of the
World, but an Apostolical Ministry was.

2. Therefore Query, Whether it signifies any thing to say there is no promise
to particular Churches, provided there be to particular Persons, such as are in
charity with all Men, and are ready to communicate with any Church which
requires no more of them, than what they conceive to be their duty; according
to the Divine Covenant?

Ans. It seems to me to be a harder Query, what this Query means; or how it
concerns that Authority, which our Savior has given to his Apostles for the
Government of the Church; to which this Query relates. I asserted indeed, that
Christ has made no Covenant with any particular, but only with the Universal
Church, which includes particulars as Members of it; nor has he made any
promise to particular Persons, but as Members of the Church, and in Communion
with it, when it may be had upon lawful terms. Whoever breaks the Communion of
the Church without necessary reason, tho he may in other things be a very good
natured man, yet he has not true Christian Charity, which unites all the
Members of the same Body in one Communion; and tho the Church may prescribe
Rules of Worship, which are not expressed in the Divine Covenant, this will not
justify a Separation, if she commands nothing which is forbid; for the very
Authority Christ has committed to his Ministers, requires our obedience to them
in things lawful; and if Men will adhere to their own private Fancies in
opposition to Church Authority, they are guilty of Schism, and had best
consider, whether such pride and opinionativeness will be allowed for excuse.

3. Whether if the promise you mention be confined to the Apostles, as
Church Governors, it will not exclude the Civil Power.

Ans. There are peculiar promises made to Church Governors, and to Civil
Magistrates; their Authority and Power is very distinct, but very consistent.

4. What was the extent of the promise, whether it was to secure the whole
Church, that its Governors should never impose unlawful Terms of Communion, or
that there never be a defection of all the Members of the Catholic Church, but
that there should always be some true Members?

Ans. The promise is, that Christ will be with them in the discharge of their
Ministry, and Exercise of their Power, and this is all I know of the matter;
our Savior gave them Authority to Govern the Church, and this was to last to
the end of the World, as long as there is any Church on Earth, which is all I
cited it for, and so much it certainly proves.

The Second Proposition: you raise Queries on, is this. It Is absurd to gather a
Church out of a Church of Baptized Christians.

This I do indeed assert, that since the Church is founded on a Divine
Covenant, and to be in Covenant with God, and to be Members of his Church, is
the same thing; therefore Baptism whereby we are received into Covenant with
God, makes us Members of the Church also; and this makes it very absurd, to
gather a Church out of Churches of Baptized Christians, which supposes that
they were not a Church before: instead of considering the reason, whereon this
is founded, as every honest Writer should do, you only put a perverse Comment
on it.

By which (say you) I suppose you mean, That Men ought not to Separate from
such, and live in a distinct Church Communion from any Church of Baptized
Christians; which I conceive needs explaining. But if this were true, it were
plain enough, but the fault is, that it is not true; for we may Separate from
any Church of Baptized Christians, if their Communion be Sinful; which
justifies a Separation from the Church of Rome, and answers your two first
Queries.

But indeed the Proposition, as asserted by me, does not so much as concern a
Separation from a Church, let the cause be what it will, just or unjust. For
the Independents, who are the Men for gathering Churches, do not own, that they
Separate from any Church, but that they form themselves into a Church State,
which they had not before, and which no Christians, according to their
Principle, have, who are not Members of Independent Churches. Baptism, they
acknowledge, makes Men Christians at large, but not Church Members, which I
showed must needs be very absurd, if the Church be a Body and Society of Men
founded on a Divine Covenant; for then Baptism, which admits us into Covenant
with God, makes us Members of the Church; and they may as well rebaptize
Christians, as form them into new Church-Societies.

This I suppose may satisfy you, how impertinent all your Queries are under
this head.

Your two first concern the Separation from the Church of Rome, which was not
made upon Independent Principles, because they were no Church, but because they
were a corrupt Church.

3. Whether every Bishopric in England be not so many Churches within the
National. Ans. Every Bishopric is a distinct Episcopal Church, and the Union
of them in one National Communion, makes them not so many Churches, within a
National, but one National Church; which you may see explained at large in the
Defense of Dr. Still. Vnr. of Separation.

4. And therefore Independent and Presbyterian Churches are indeed within the
National (Churches within a Church, which is Schismatical) but not one National
Church, as Bishoprics are.

5. And therefore tho we should allow them to have the External Form and all
the Essentials of a Church (which is a very liberal grant) yet they are not in
Catholic Communion, because they are Schismatics.

6. And this is all I am to account for, that they are not in Visible Communion
with that one Church and Body of Christ to which the promises are made. But
what allowances Christ will make for the mistakes of honest well-meaning Men,
who divide the Communion of the Church, I cannot determine. I can hope as
Charitably, as any Man, but I dare not be so Charitable, as to make
Church Communion an indifferent thing, which is the great Bond of Christian
Charity.

3dly. You take occasion for your next Queries, from what I say of the
Independent Church Covenant; you say, I suppose, that the Independents exclude
themselves from Catholic Communion, by requiring of their Members a new
contract, no part of the Baptismal vow.

I prove indeed from their placing a Church State in a particular explicit
Covenant between Pastor and People, that they separate themselves from the
whole Body of Christians; for no other Christians, which are not in Covenant
with them, are Members of their Church, nor can they be Members of any other
Church. And I proved that those are Separate Churches, Resol. of Cases. p. 10.
32.
which are not Members of each other, and do not own each others Members for
their own. For the Notion of Church Communion consists in Church Membership,
and therefore no Man is in Communion with that Church of which he is no Member;
and if no Man can be a Member of a Church, but by such an explicit Independent
Covenant, then he is a Member of no Church but that, with which he is in
Covenant, and consequently is in Communion with no Church, but that particular
Independent Congregation of which he is a Member by a particular Covenant. And
if those be Schismatics and Schismatical Churches, which are not in Communion
with each other, then all Independents must be Schismatics, for they are in
Communion with none, but their own Independent Congregations. Let us now hear
your Queries.

Q. 1. Whether any Obstacle to Catholic Communion brought in by Men, may not
be a means of depriving Men of it, as well as Covenant or Contract?

Ans. Yes it may, but with this Material difference: Other things hinder
Communion as Sinful Terms of Communion, this Independent Covenant in its own
Nature Shuts up, Encloses, and breaks Christian Communion into as many Separate
Churches and Communions, as there are Independent Congregations. Sinful Terms
of Communion are a just cause of Separation; an Independent Church Covenant is
a State of Separation in its own Nature. The Communion of the Church may be
restored by removing those Sinful Terms of Communion, but there can be no
Catholic Unity or Communion in the Church under Independency.

Q. 2. If it may, which I suppose you will not deny, will you not then upon
this account, make the Church you live in more guilty than the Independents?
Baptism you own is the only thing, which admits into the Catholic Church, but
they require no new Covenant at Baptism, Ergo, they admit into the Church
without any clog or hindrance of humane Inventions.

Ans. Pray what comparison is there between the Church of England and
Independency? Whatever fault the Church of England may be charged with, as to
its Rites and Ceremonies (which I will not now dispute with you) yet all this
is capable of a Remedy; she may give occasion to Schism, if she imposes any
unlawful and Sinful Terms of Communion, but yet the Frame and Essential
constitution of the Church is not Schismatical; but Independency is Schism in
the very notion of it, and an Independent Conventicle is never capable of
becoming a Member of the Catholic Church.

But you say, I own that Baptism is the only thing which admits into the
Catholic Church, i. e. which makes us Members of the Universal Church, and all
sound parts of it, and that nothing else is necessary to make a Churchmember.
Very right! I do own this; but what is my owning this, to the Independents? For
they do not, and will not own it; they admit into their Churches, not by
Baptism, but by a Human and Voluntary Covenant, and will own none for
Church Members but such. Baptism at most gives Men only a disposition to be
Church Members, but does not make them Members of any Church.

But they require no new Covenant at Baptism, ergo, they admit into the Church
without any clog or hindrance of human Invention, that is, they admit to
Baptism without any new Covenant: because Baptism does not, as they believe,
admit into the Church, ergo, they admit into the Church without any clog of
human Invention. And yet Sir, I perceive you do not understand this matter
neither: for though what their practice is now I cannot tell, yet according to
their Principles, and former Practice, though they required no new Covenant of
the Child to be Baptized, yet they would Baptize no Children, but of such
Parents, as were in Church Covenant with them, which is the same thing; and a
much greater clog to Baptism, than the Sign of the Cross, which when I know
your exceptions against, I will consider them.

And now Sir, nothing remains of your First Letter, but some few Queries
relating to the meaning of my Text. Your Three first Queries come only to
this, whether every particular Church may not be called the Body of Christ. I
answer, no doubt but it may, and yet Christ has but one Body, and all the sound
Churches in the World are but one Body, and must be but one Communion. As you
may see proved at large in the Defense of Dr. Still. and the Vindication of
that Defense, and thither I refer you. But what you mean by Christ's
Metaphorical Body, I confess, I cannot tell, and therefore cannot answer that
Question.

Your Fourth Query, concerns the nature of Schism, which you would not have
consist in dividing Communion through difference of Opinions, but through want
of Charity, because the Apostle says, that the Members have the same care one
of another. Now methinks in the natural Body, should the Members divide from
each other, though they should pretend to love one another dearly, they would
not be thought to have such care of one another, as the Members of the same
Body ought to have. The Application is easy, and you may find this matter
plainly stated in the Defense to which I have so often referred you.

Thus Sir I have honestly answered all your Queries, which you sent me in your
First Letter, and which you challenge me, and conjure me as a Protestant Divine
to answer Categorically in your Second; whether they were so very considerable
as to deserve either to be Printed or Answered, I leave the Reader to consider.

Your Second Letter, though it be somewhat Peevish, yet creates me but little
trouble. It has brought forth but one Query, and half of that is already
Answered.

Whether, if the nature of Catholic Communion requires a readiness to
Communicate with any sound Church, and yet a Church obliges us to Communicate
with that alone, while distance does not hinder the occasional and frequent
Communion with others, is not that Church guilty of Schism in such an
Injunction contrary to the nature of Catholic Communion?

Ans. No Church can be so supposed to forbid Communion with any Church, which
is in Communion with her: and as for Schismatical Conventicles, which you are
pleased to call sound Churches, it is the Duty of the Church to forbid all
Communion with them, how near soever they be. For Catholic Communion obliges
us only to Communicate in the Catholic Church, from whence Schismatics have
withdrawn and separated themselves; and whoever Communicates with Schismatics,
is in so doing a Schismatic.

Or at least, (as you proceed) is it not impossible, that he who Communicates
sometimes with one true Church, sometimes with another, can be a Schismatic,
or any more than an Offender against a positive human Law?

Ans. If such true Churches be Schismatical, he that Communicates with a
Schismatical Church, is Guilty of a Schismatical Act; and how is it possible,
it should be otherwise? Should a Man sometimes join with his Princes Forces,
and sometimes with his Enemies, and Fight sometimes on the one side, and
sometimes on the other, were he a Rebel or not? To be sure he is a Rebel when
he Fights against his Prince, though sometimes he Fight for him. We may, and
ought as occasion serves to Communicate with any Church, which is in Catholic
Communion; but where there are two opposite and separate Communions, to
Communicate with both, is like taking part on both sides; and if one be in the
right, and the other in the wrong, such a man cannot be in the right always.

Well but however, he is no Schismatic, but only an Offender against a
positive human Law. Yes, certainly he is a Schismatic, and an Offender, not
merely against human positive Laws, but against the Unity of the Church, and
the Evangelical Laws of Catholic Communion.

But this mention of Law puts me in mind of a passage or two at the beginning
of your Preface. You say, perhaps it is no absurdity to suppose, that Men may as
well continue Members of the National Church, notwithstanding their breaking
many positive Laws, made for the outward management and ordering of it, though
not Fundamental and necessary to its being; as he who incurs the penalty of any
Statute of the Realm about Civil affairs, may however be a sound Member of the
State, if he keep from Treason and other Capital Crimes.

Very right Sir! While Men continue in the Communion of the Church, they are
Church Members, though they may be irregular, and guilty of some Acts of
Disobedience; but methinks it is a little absurd to say, that those continue
Members of the Church, who separate from it: Schism and Separation from the
Church, is just what Treason and Rebellion is in the State, and such persons by
your own confession cease to be sound Members.

You add, Nay possibly, that there should be several Religious Assemblies,
living by different Customs and Rules, and yet continuing Members of the
National Church, is not more inconsistent, than, that particular places should
have their particular Customs and Bylaws, differing from the Common Law of the
Land, without making a distinct Government.

Ans. Whatever variety and difference in the Rules of Worship in several
Congregations, is consistent with one Communion, may be granted, when the
prudence of Governors sees it fit and expedient. But Mr. Humphry's project,
which I perceive you are nibling at, of making a National Church by an Act of
Parliament, which should declare Presbyterians, Independants, etc. to be Parts
of the National Church, is certainly the cunningest way of curing Schism, that
ever was thought on: but you may find that expedient for Union at large
considered in the Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Still.

And thus Sir I proceed to your Third Letter, and here you run nothing but
Dregs and Lees; and I hope you will not think it any neglect of you, if I do
not answer you Paragraph by Paragraph, as I have done your first Letter, there
being little new in this, but only a Repetition of your old Queries: and though
you know Repetitions are very convenient to lengthen a Sermon, there is no need
of such Arts to lengthen this Answer, which is too long already.

Your first Charge upon me is, that I only amuse People with Equivocal Words
and Terms: that I play Letters 3. p. 16.
with the words, Church and Schism; which had been no fault, had I played the
right way with them, that is, had I ridiculed them, as you do, who think them
words only fit to be played with, who have found out a Church without any
Government, which is, only an Intreague p. 12.
between Clergymen on all sides, who will not allow causeless Separation from
a Sound part of the Catholic p. 17.
Church to be Schism, but place Schism wholly in want of Charity, and make it
nothing else but some Divisions and Contentions between the Members of the same
Church, who still live in Communion with one another; a true Independent Notion
to justify causeless Separations. Divisions in the Church are certainly very
Sinful, and a degree of Schism, as unnatural, as if the Members of the same
Body should fight with each other, while they are United to the same Body; but
to divide from the same Body is the perfection of Schism, unless a quarrel be a
Rent and Schism, but Separation be none.

You desire me to define, what I mean by a Church, when considered as Catholic
and Universal, and when taken in a more restrained sense. But this, I think I
have done already, if you had eyes to see it; and you may find it done more
largely in the Defense of Dr. Still. But would not any Man, who had ever seen
this discourse, which you undertake to confute, wonder to hear you ask me,
whether a Man has a right to be of a particular p. 18.
Church as he is a Christian; when the whole design of that Tract is to prove,
that every Christian by being so, is a Member of the Catholic Church, and has
a right to Communicate with all sound parts of the Catholic Church, and bound
to Communicate with that part of it, in which he lives?

In the next place you attempt to prove, that the Influences and Operations of
the Holy Spirit, are not confined to the Visible, but Invisible Church: but not
p. 19.
to examine your proof of it, which is nothing to the purpose, you may
consider, that the Visible and Invisible Church on Earth are not two, but one
Church; not that every Member of the Visible Church is a Member also of the
Invisible, that is, every professed Christian is not a true Believer; but whoever
is not a Member of the Visible Church, and does not live in Communion with it,
when it may be had, is not, that we know of, a Member of the Invisible Church.

We have no way to prove, that any Man is a Member of the Invisible, who is not
a Member of the Visible Church; and what we do not, and cannot know, does not
concern us; secret things belong to God, and with him it becomes us to leave
them. But this also you may find more largely discourst in the Vindication of
the Defense.

You urge the case of Pope Victor, who, as you say, in a Council or full
representative of that Church, excommunicated p. 21.
the poor Asians upon the Paschal Controversy. And that each Church was far
enough from owning each others Members for their own -- What should the poor
Lay-Christians do in this divided State? could they not Communicate with both,
or either, without danger of Schism themselves?

Ans. It is an easy matter to put hard Cases, almost about any thing; and if a
particular hard Case, which either may possibly happen, or has sometimes
happened, is sufficient to overthrow a standing and general Rule, and to
confute the most plain and convincing Evidence for it, there is nothing in
Religion can be firm and stable. In the very same manner Men Dispute against
the Being of a God, and a Providence, against the necessity of Baptism, and the
Lords Supper, against the Apostolical Power and Ministry, and all
Church Government, against the necessity of Believing many fundamental Articles
of our Faith, because many, otherwise very good Men, from the Power and
Prejudice of Education, or through weakness of understanding, may be guilty of
some damnable Heresies.

But must there be no standing Laws or Rules, because there may happen some
hard and difficult Cases? Does not humane Power make Provision against such
Cases by Courts of Chancery, or the Prerogative of the Prince, and yet maintain
the Authority and Sacredness of Laws? And will we not allow God himself a Power
of Dispensing with Laws in hard Cases, without destroying the Authority of his
Laws? Is not Church Communion a necessary Duty, because it may so happen, that
sometimes I cannot Communicate with any Church? Is not Schism a very grievous
and damning sin, because it may happen, that Men may be unavoidably,
innocently, and without a Schismatical mind, engaged in a Schism?

I have evidently proved the necessity of Church-Unity and Communion, and the
evil and danger of Schism; and if you can answer the Scripture-Evidence
produced in this Cause, I will carefully consider it; but it is no confutation
of a plain Law, to urge hard Cases against it, which will overthrow all Laws,
that ever were made. If you imagine, or can produce any real Case, wherein it
is almost impossible for the Persons concerned to know, that they are guilty of
Schism, or to discover on which side the Schism lies, or to avoid it without
renouncing all Communion with the Church, which course soever they take, I
leave all such Cases to God, who knows, when it is fit to dispense with his own
Laws; and will take care of my own Duty according to Scripture-Rules, and not
hope to justify the ordinary breach of known Laws by some extraordinary Cases.

And yet the Case, which you propose, is not so unanswerable a difficulty, as
you imagine. Several Councils in Palestine, in Rome, in Pontus, and other
places, Eusebius. b. 5. cap. 23.
Determine the Celebration of Easter on the day of the Resurrection, not on the
Fourteenth Day of the Month, which was the Jewish Passover, (which dispute you
call a Mistake in Arithmetic, but for what reason I know not) the Bishops of
Asia at the same time decree the observation of Easter on the Fourteenth Day,
whatever Day of the week it fell on, according to the Ancient Observation of
the Asian Churches. Pope Victor upon this, writes to several Bishops very
bitterly against them, and was very desirous to have them Excommunicated, and
did as much as in him lay, denounce the Sentence against them. cap. 24.


But this was ill resented by other Bishops in Communion with him; and
particularly Ireneus wrote a Letter to him about it, and earnestly disswades
him from it, and did prevent it from taking effect, if we will believe
Eusebius. So far is it from being true, as you assert, that Pope Victor in a
Council Excommunicated the poor Asians; what he did was only his own Act, which
was displeasing to other Bishops, and which he was forced to undo. So that here
was a great deal of Heat and Warmth, and tendency toward a Schism, but no
Schism followed upon it, among the Catholic Churches.

But suppose Pope Victor had Excommunicated the Asian Churches, and this
Excommunication had taken effect, this could not make the Asian Churches
Schismatics: for there is a great deal of difference between being cast out of
the Communion of a Church, and forsaking the Communion of a Church. The first
is matter of censure, the second is our own choice; the First is an
Ecclesiastical Punishment, the Second when it is causeless, is Schism.

So that had the Church of Rome Excommunicated the Asian Churches, unless the
Asian Churches upon this, had made a Separation from the Church of Rome, this
Excommunication could not make them Schismatics, and therefore any one might
safely Communicate with them without partaking in a Schism.

Nor was it a just reason for the Asian Churches to have renounced the
Communion of the Church of Rome, though they had been Excommunicated by Victor;
for this had been to do as ill a thing as Victor had done, for no other reason,
but because Pope Victor had set them an example. And therefore we find Saint
Cyprian of another temper, when he and the African Bishops were threatened in
the same manner by Pope Stephen, upon occasion of that warm Dispute about
rebaptizing Heretics. At that very time, in his Epistle to Jubaianus, he
declares his resolution, not to break Communion with any Church or Bishops upon
that account, and therefore not with Pope Stephen himself, notwithstanding his
rash and furious Censures. And concludes, that Patience and Forbearance was the
best Remedy in such Cases, and therefore upon this occasion, he says, he wrote
his Book de bono Patientiae.

Well, but if the Asiatick Churches were not Schismatics, yet Pope Victor had
been a Schismatic, had he Excommunicated the Churches of Asia, or withdrawn
Communion from them. And this had made the case of the Roman Christians very
hard: for they must either have suspended Communion with both these divided
Churches, and lived without the comfort and advantages of Christian Communion;
or they must have rejected the Communion of their own Bishop, and Churches, or
have rejected the Communion of the Churches of Asia, or have maintained
Communion with them both, that is, with two Separate Churches, which according
to my Principles, is to Communicate in a Schism. If they Communicate with their
own Schismatical Bishop, this is to Communicate in a Schism, by Communicating
with a Schismatic; if they Renounce his Communion, when he imposes no new
unlawful Terms of Communion upon them, this is to Separate from a Sound and
Orthodox Church, for the sake of a Schismatical Bishop. If they Communicate
with the Churches of Asia, this is to break Communion with their own Bishop,
who has Excommunicated them; if they separate from the Churches of Asia for no
other reason, but because they are unjustly Excommunicated, this is to Separate
for an unjust cause, which is a Schism; if they communicate with both, they
Communicate with two Separate Churches, and therefore must be Schismatics on
one side or other. If you can find any more difficulties in this matter, you
may. And yet after all this, I do believe the Christians of Rome might have
Communicated both with the Roman and Asian Churches without Schism; and this I
believe upon these Principles, which I shall briefly explain, and confirm.

1. That the Personal miscarriage of the Bishop in the exercise of
Ecclesiastical Censures, cannot involve his whole Church in the guilt of
Schism, though it may make him a Schismatic: and certainly since Bishops are
but Men, and Subject to the like passions and infirmities, that other men are,
it would be a very hard case, if his personal Schism should be imputed to the
whole Church.

Though the Bishop have the chief Authority in the Church, yet it is hard to
say, that every abuse of his Authority is the Act of the whole Church; and
therefore the Church may not be Schismatical, when the Bishop is; and it is
possible to Communicate with a Church, whose Bishop is a Schismatic, without
Communicating in the Schism. And therefore though Victor had Schismatically
Excommunicated the Asian Churches, the Christians of Rome at that time might
have Communicated with the Church of Rome without partaking in Victors Schism.

For, tho a particular Church-Society consists in that Relation, which is
between the Bishop and his Clergy and People, yet it is possible, that the
Bishop in the exercise of his Authority may violate the Fundamental Laws of
Communion, on which the Christians of such a Church unite into one Body and
Society: and when he does so, it being an abuse of his Episcopal Authority, it
is his personal fault, which cannot affect the whole Church.

The case is very plain, where there is an Established constitution in a Church
(as it is in the Church of England) which obliges the Bishops as well as
People. For should any English Bishop require any thing of his Clergy or
People, which is contrary to the Established Laws and Canons of the Church, or
should exercise any Authority in Censures and Excommunications, which is not
allowed him by those Canons, this can in no sense be called the Act of the
Church, nor is any one bound to obey him in it; and though such a Bishop should
do any Schismatical Act, the Church is not Schismatical, because he did not
pursue the Laws of the Church, in what he did, but gratified his own Humor and
Passion. If the Church indeed Unites upon Schismatical Principles, as the
Novatians and Donatists did, whatever the Bishops do in pursuance of such
Principles is the Act of the Church, and if the Bishops be Schismatics, the
Church is so too; but when there is nothing Schismatical in the Constitution of
the Church, the personal Schism of Bishops cannot make their Churches
Schismatical.

And though the Primitive Churches before the Empire turned Christian had not
such a Firm and Legal Constitution, as the Church of England now has, yet a
Constitution they had, which consisted either of Apostolical Rules handed down
by Tradition, and confirmed by long custom and usage, or the Canons of
particular Councils, which in ordinary cases made standing Laws of Discipline
and Government, and in extraordinary cases provided for new Emergent
difficulties; and antecedently to all these positive Constitutions, they were
all under the obligation of that great Law of Catholic Communion. So that the
Government of the Church since the Apostles days, was never so entirely in the
Bishops Breast, that what he did, should be thought the Act of the Church, any
farther than as he complied with those Laws, by which the Church was to be
Governed: and therefore there was reason in those days to distinguish between
the Act of the Bishop and the Act of the Church.

As to show you this particularly in the case before us. The Church of Rome
from the time of the Apostles had observed Easter on the day of the
Resurrection, which is the first day of the week, or the Lords day, the Asian
Churches on the 14th day of the Month; and therefore the Bishop of Rome,
according to the Laws of that Church, might require all the Members of his
Church, to observe Easter according to the usage of the Church of Rome, and
might regularly inflict Church Censures upon the obstinate and refractory; and
this would be accounted the Act of the Church, because it was in pursuance of
the Laws and Constitutions of it. But there was no Canon, nor Custom in the
Church of Rome, to deny Communion to Foreign Churches, who observed their own
Customs in this matter, and would not conform to the Custom of the Church of
Rome. Nay, there was the Practice and Example of Former Times against it; for
Anicetus Bishop of Rome received Polycarp, an Asian Bishop, to Communion,
though they could not agree about this matter. And therefore when Victor
Schismatically Excommunicated the Asian Churches for this different observation
of Easter, it was his Personal Act, not the Act of the Church of Rome, which
had no such Law, and owned no such Custom: and therefore though this might make
Pope Victor a Schismatic, it could not make the Church of Rome Schismatical;
the guilt went no farther than Victors Person, unless other Persons voluntarily
made themselves guilty, by abetting and espousing the Quarrel.

So that had Victor persisted in his Excommunication of the Asiatick Churches,
none had been guilty of Schism but himself, and such as approved, and consented
to it, but the Body of the Clergy and People, who had not consented unto it,
had been Innocent, and therefore any Catholic peaceable Christian, who lived
in Rome in those Days, might have Communicated with the Church of Rome without
Schism.

The like may be said of the Quarrels and Controversies of particular Bishops,
which have sometimes ended in formal Schisms, and denouncing Excommunication
against each other; which cannot make their Churches Schismatical, any further
than they take part with their respective Bishops. For this is rather a
Personal Schism and Separation, than a Church Schism; neither of them Separate
from the Communion of the Church, under the Notion of such a Church, though
they Separate from each others Communion upon some personal Quarrels.

This was the Case of St. Chrysostom and Epiphanius, and some other Bishops in
those days, which were Catholic Bishops, and maintained Communion with the
Catholic Church, but yet Separated from each other, which is a very great
fault, as all Contentions and Divisions in the Church are, but has not the Evil
and Destructive Nature of a Church Schism.

But you will say, can we Communicate with a Church without Communicating with
its Bishop? or can we Communicate with a Schismatical Bishop, without
Communicating in his Schism?

I Answer, Yes, we may Communicate with a Schismatical Bishop, without
Communicating in his Schism. When Schism is his personal fault, our Communion
with him makes us no more guilty of it, than of any other Personal fault, our
Bishop is guilty of. While we take care to Communicate with him in no
Schismatical Act, no Man is bound to forsake the Communion of the Church for
the Personal faults of his Bishop.

So that the Roman Christians might Communicate with the Church of Rome without
Schism, notwithstanding Pope Victors Schismatical Excommunication of the Asian
Churches. And now the only difficulty that remains is, whether the Christians
of Rome might have Communicated with the Asiatick Churches notwithstanding
Victor had Excommunicated them, for if they could not, then they must
inevitably partake in Victors Schism, if his sentence obliged them to deny
Communion to the Asian Churches. And in answer to this we may consider.

2. That those, who Condemned the Excommunication of the Asian Churches, did in
so doing own their Communion, which is one way, and the Principal way of
maintaining Communion, between Churches at a Distance, who cannot actually
Communicate with each other.

3. That Victor being the Bishop of Rome, who had the supreme Authority of
receiving in, or shutting out of the Communion of that Church, if any Persons
of the Asian Communion had come to Rome, private Christians could not receive
them into the Communion of the Church without the Bishops Authority, and
therefore could not actually Communicate with them in the public Offices of
Religion, though they owned their Communion; but this is no more their fault,
than the Excommunication of the Asian Churches was; they Communicate with their
own Church, and would be very glad that the Asians, that are among them, might
be received into Communion, but they have no Authority to do it, and therefore
the fault is not theirs, for this is not to Renounce the Communion of the Asian
Christians, but is only a forced Suspension of Communion.

4. If the Christians of Rome should Travel into Asia. I doubt not, but that
they might very lawfully Communicate with the Asian Churches, notwithstanding
they were Excommunicated by the Bishop of Rome. For the Bishop of Rome had no
just cause to Excommunicate the Bishops and Churches of Asia, and therefore the
Sentence is void of it self; and the Roman Christians when they are in Asia,
are not under the Authority and Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, and
therefore must not forbear nor suspend Communion with the Asian Churches,
unless they will justify this Schismatical Excommunication. The Jurisdiction
of a particular Bishop is confined within the Bounds of his own Church, and
every Christian is Subject to the Authority of the Church where he is; and
therefore though the Roman Christians at Rome cannot receive the Excommunicated
Asians to their Communion without the Authority of their Bishop, yet when they
are in Asia, where the Bishop of Rome has no Authority over them, they may and
ought to join themselves to the Communion of the Asian Churches, during their
abode among them, if the Asians would receive them without Commendatory Letters
from their Bishop, which they could not have in such a case as this.

Thus Sir, I have considered the Case you put about Pope Victors
Excommunicating the Asian Churches, which is not a real, but a feigned Case,
for there was no actual Schism upon it, as I perceive some body had told you,
there was. And yet supposing it had been so, I have shown you, how the Roman
and Asian Churches might have maintained Communion with each other, and that
the case of private Christians was not so desperate, as you represent it.

Your following exceptions concerning National Communion, and National
Churches, and the possibility Letters 3. p. 22.
that there should be several Sound and Orthodox parts of the Church at the
same place, have been sufficiently considered already: and you twit me so often
with my repetitions, that though I find you want very frequent repetitions to
make you understand the plainest sense, yet I will for my Readers sake and my
own, correct that fault.

Your attempt to prove Congregational Churches p. 24.
from 1 Cor. 14. 23. has been so often answered by the Presbyterian as well as
Episcopal Divines, that to save my self the labor of transcribing, I shall
refer you to them, and particularly to the Defense of Dr. Still. Vnr. of Separ.
p. 392. etc. where you may find this matter largely debated, in answer to Dr.
Owen's Original of Churches.

You say, it is evident that one of these (Separate Churches) must needs be cut
off from Christ's Body. I readily grant it; for Christ has but one Body, which
p. 26.
is one Communion; and therefore two Churches, which are not in Communion with
each other, cannot both belong to the same Body, or the one Catholic Church;
but the Church which is the Schismatic, according to the Language of the
Primitive times, is out of the Catholic Church, extra Ecclesiam foris, as is
discourst at large in the Vindication of the Defense.

In the next place you endeavor to make me contradict my self, in talking of
occasional Communion and occasional Membership, and different Relations, when
else where I assert, That the Communion of the Church does not make us Members
of any particular Church. But pray Sir, where do I assert this? I am sure I
assert the quite contrary, that Church Communion consists in Church Membership.
I say indeed, That Church Communion Primarily and Principally refers to the
Universal Church, not Resol. of Cases. p. 13, 14.
to any particular Church or Society of Christians. That a Member is a Member
of the whole Body, not merely of any part of it. That Baptism, which is the
Sacrament of our admission into the Covenant of God, and the Communion of the
Church, does not make us Members of any particular Church, as such, but of the
Universal Church. And I do as plainly assert, that every true Catholic
Christian is a Member of the Universal Church, and as such is a Member of every
particular Church, which is a sound part of the Universal Church. That no Man
can properly be said to Communicate with any Church, whatever Acts of Communion
he may perform in it, who does not Communicate with it as a Member, and that
therefore to talk of Occasional Communion, in the sense of our Dissenters, is
as absurd as to talk of an Occasional Membership; these are the very Principles
on which I dispute against those absurd Distinctions of p. 30.
constant and occasional Communion, which I confess to be absurd, and a
Contradiction to all the Principles of Catholic Communion, and therefore you
are concerned to answer this absurdity, not I. I have charged this absurdity
upon our Occasional Communicants, and let any man take it off, that can.

But are you not Sir, admirably qualified to Answer Books, without so much as
understanding the general scope and design of the Book you Answer, without
knowing what makes for you or against you?

As for your next Question, How does it appear? that it is necessary to
Communion with the Catholic Church, that we must perform the constant Acts of
Communion in that part of the Catholic Church, where we constantly live. You
ought instead of asking this Question, to have shown, that what proofs I have
alleged for this are not conclusive, or do not sufficiently prove the thing;
but your Question insinuates, that I have said nothing at all about it, or at
least that you do not know, that I have, though it be the Principal Design of
that discourse, and then I am a very careless writer, or you a very careless
Reader. But the Answer to it in short is this, That every Christian is Bound to
live in Communion with the Catholic Church, no Man lives in Communion with the
Church, who does not perform the External visible Acts of Communion, when he
may do it without sin; The whole Catholic Church being but one Communion,
whoever Communicates with any sound part of it, Communicates with the whole; no
Man can ordinarily Communicate in a Church, in which he does not ordinarily
live, and therefore if he be bound at all to the External and visible Acts of
Communion, he must perform them in the Church wherein he lives, and in so
doing, if it be a true Catholic Church, he lives in Communion with the whole
Catholic Church.

But you attempt to prove, That you are not bound to Communicate so much as
sometimes with a sound part of Ibid^.
the Catholic Church, because you live where there is such an one.

And this you prove from Mr. Chillingworth's Authority, who says, that if you
(speaking to the Papists) require the belief of any Error among the conditions
of your Communion, our Obligation to Communion with you cease. Now is not
this an admirable proof, that we are not bound to Communicate with a sound part
of the Church, where we live, because we are not bound to Communicate with an
erroneous Church, which imposes the belief of her Errors as Terms of
Communion? Is not this a wonderful sound Church? And are not you a very subtle
Arguer?

You produce another passage of Mr. Chillingworth, by which I cannot tell what
you intend to prove, unless it be, that there is no need, there should be any
External or Visible Church-Society, so Men do but Profess the Faith of Christ;
which seems to be the sense of your foregoing Paragraph. But the words are
these; I believe our Savior ever since his Ascension, has had in some place
or other a Visible true Church on Earth, I mean, a Company of Men, that professed
at least so much as was necessary to Salvation; and I believe there will be
some where or other such a Church to the Worlds end. This is his answer to that
Popish Question about the perpetuity of the Visible Church; whereby it appears,
that this Company of Men he speaks of, are not single and scattered
Individuals, which are no Visible Church, but he means a Formed and Visible
Church-Society: and his Answer is true, though there were never a sound Church
in the World. For a corrupt Church, which retains all the Essentials of Faith
and Worship, is a true Visible Church, and this is the meaning of Mr.
Chillingworth's Answer; but how this proves, that there is no need there should
be any Visible Church at all, or that Christians are not bound to actual
Communion with the sound and Orthodox Church wherein they live, is past my
understanding.

At the same rate you defend your self against me in your Preface, by the
Authority of those two excellent Persons, the Dean of Canterbury, and the Dean
of Saint Paul's. Dr. Stillingfleet had asserted, That all things necessary to
Salvation, are plain in Scripture, to all that sincerely endeavor to
understand them; hence S. C. infers, That the Governors of our Church have no
Authority to teach Truth, or to condemn Errors, and all the People are become
Prophets, and all their Articles, Answer to several Treatises, p. 272. etc.
Constitutions, and Ordinances, have been composed and enjoined by an usurped
Authority; and if he had added, as he might have done with the same reason, And
all Church Communion is needless, it had been exactly what you aim at in this
Citation. The Dr. vindicates his Doctrine from such a wild Fanatical inference.
1. By showing the intention of those Principles, which was plainly to lay down
the Foundations of a Christian Faith, living in the Communion of our Church.
And if this was his design, as he says, it was, certainly he could neither
before nor after say any thing, which should overthrow the necessity of
Church Communion; and then he can say nothing against me, nor for you. 2. He
distinguishes between the necessaries to Salvation, and to the Government of
the Church: that is, what is necessary for every Christian, considered in p.
275.
a private Capacity to know and believe, to make him capable of Salvation; and
what care the Church must take to instruct the ignorant, to satisfy the
doubting, to direct the unskilful, and to help the weak; and not barely to
provide for necessity but safety, and not barely the safety of particular
persons, but of it self; which cannot p. 276.
be done without prudent Orders, setting the bounds of Men's Employments, etc.
i. e. though it is possible for a private Christian, who lives alone, and has
the use of the Bible in a Language which he understands, by diligent and honest
inquiries to find out so much truth, as is absolutely necessary to Salvation,
yet this does not overthrow the necessity of a settled Ministry, and a regular
Authority in the Church; all this I firmly assent to, and yet do as firmly
believe the necessity of Church Communion, when it may be had upon Lawful
Terms, and so does this Reverend Person also: and therefore I cannot look upon
your alleging his Authority against me, to have any other design than to
affront the Dean for his excellent Pains in vindicating the Communion of our
Church, and showing people the Evil and Danger of Separation. He has
sufficiently declared what his Judgment is about Separation, and therefore I
need not concern my self any farther to prove that he is not my Adversary in
this Cause.

At the same rate you deal with that great Man (as you deservedly call him) Dr.
Tillotson, who says, I had much rather persuade any one to be a good Man, than
Preface.
to be of any Party and denomination of Christians whatsoever; for I doubt not
but the belief of the Ancient Creed, provided we entertain nothing that is
destructive of it, together with a good life, will certainly save a Man; and
without this, no man can have reasonable hopes of Salvation, no not in an
Infallible Church, if there were any such to be found in the World. How does
this oppose me, who assert the necessity of Church Communion? Is the Catholic
Church then, and the Communion of Saints, no part of our Creed? and is not
Schism destructive to these great Articles of our Faith? or is Schism, which is
the breach of Christian Charity properly so called (which is the Love and
Charity, which the Members of the same Body, ought to have for each other, and
consists in Unity and Communion) consistent with a good Life, if by that we
understand an Universal goodness, of which Charity is the most vital and
essential part?

But do you indeed think, Sir, that the Dean believes a Man may be saved
without Communion with any Church, when it may be had without Sin? when in the
very next Paragraph he so earnestly exhorts them to Communion with the Church
of England? I can easily forgive your usage of me, since I find you cannot Read
the best Books without perverting them, and that you never spare any Man's
Reputation to serve your Designs: for your Reproaches and your Commendations
are but different ways of abuse, though I confess, I should rather choose to be
reproached by you.

Your last Consideration is, whether it be a good way to convert Schismatics,
to prove that Schism is as Letter 3. p. 29.
Damning a Sin, as Murder or Adultery. Truly Sir, St. Cyprian and St. Austin,
and all the Ancient Fathers of the Church, thought this a very good way, for
they insisted very much upon this Argument; and if Men will not forsake their
Schism, though the Salvation of their Souls be endangered by it, I am apt to
think, that no other Arguments will persuade them. And if this be true (as I
verily believe it is, and shall believe so, till I see the Third Chapter of the
Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Still. fairly answered) I think it the
greatest Charity in the World, to warn Men of it; and if it should prove by
their perverseness no Charity to them, it is Charity to my own Soul, and
delivers me from the guilt of their Blood, whether such Doctrine Preach Men
into, or out of, the Church.

And now for your parting Blow. Certainly if our Church required Conformity to
its Rites and Ceremonies as necessary to Salvation, It could not blame Men for
dividing from it. Yes certainly upon such a Supposition, the Church could and
would blame Men for their Separation, though it may be, they might not deserve
to be blamed: for no doubt, the more necessary the Church judges her
Constitutions, the more she will blame Dissenters.

But he, who tells us, or he says nothing, that the divine Spirit confines his
Influences and Operations to the Unity of the Church in such Conformity, not
only makes such Conformity necessary to Salvation, but imputes to the Church
the Damnation of many Thousands of Souls, who might expect to be saved upon
other Terms. That the Divine Spirit confines his influences (ordinarily) to the
Unity of the Church I do assert, but that this is in Conformity to the Church
of England, I do not assert. For Conformity to the Church of England is not
Essential to the Unity of the Catholic Church: for every Church has authority
to prescribe its own Rites and Ceremonies of Worship, in Conformity to the
general Rules of the Gospel. And therefore though the Unity of the Church is
necessary to entitle Men to the ordinary influences of Gods Grace, and
consequently is necessary to Salvation, yet Conformity to the Church of England
is not necessary to the Unity of the Church, because Christians who live under
the Government and Jurisdiction of other Churches, may and do preserve the
Unity of the Church without conformity to the Church of England. Obedience
indeed, and Subjection to Church Authority in all Lawful things, is necessary
to the Unity of the Church, and necessary to Salvation, and consequently it is
a necessary Duty to conform to all the Lawful and Innocent Customs of the
Church wherein we live; but this does not make the particular Laws of
Conformity, which are different in different Churches, to be necessary to
Salvation, unless you will say the Church has no Authority but only in things
absolutely necessary to Salvation; which destroys all the external Order and
Discipline of the Church, and charges all the Churches in the World, with
destroying Men's Souls, if any persons be so Humorsom and Peevish as to break
Communion with them for such Reasons. But such kind of Cavils as these, you may
find answered at large in the Vindication of the Defense; and thither I refer
you, if you desire to see any more of it.

Thus Sir, I have with great patience answered your Questions, not that they
needed or deserved any Answer, but that you might not think your self too much
despised, nor other weak People think your Questions unanswered. And now I have
given you an Answer, I shall take the Confidence to give you a little Ghostly
Counsel too, which you need a great deal more than an Answer.

I have not troubled my Head to inquire Scrupulously, who you are, nor do I use
to trust Common Fame in such matters: but though I know not you, yet I perceive
you know me; and if as you say, you have often p. 1.
heard me with great Satisfaction, and as you hope not without edifying
thereby, I think it would have become you to have treated me with a little more
Civility than you have done, if it be in your Nature to be Civil to a
Clergyman. And I wish more for your own sake, than for mine, you had done so;
for I thank God I have learnt not only by the precepts and example of my great
Master, but by frequent Trials, to go through good Report and evil Report, and
to bear the most invidious and Spightful Reflections with an equal mind. But as
contemptible as a Clergyman is now, these things will be accounted for another
day.

For it is very evident, that you have a great Spite at the whole Order,
whatever personal kindness you may have for some Men; they are but a Herd of
Clergymen, and you know no other use of a Bishop, but to oversee, admonish,
and Censure those, who are apt to Preface.
go beyond their due Bounds. I confess this way of Railery is grown very
fashionable, and I perceive you are resolved to be in the Mode, and to be an
accomplished Gentleman; but I never knew a man that was seriously religious, who
durst affront the Servants for their Masters sake.

But you Sir, are in the very height of the fashion, and think their Office as
contemptible, as their Persons generally are thought to be: you hope to be
saved without understanding the Notion of Church Government as it is intreagued
by Clergymen of all sides. And I hope you may be saved without understanding a
great many other things besides Church Government, or else I doubt your
Salvation may be hazardous.

But this is too plain a contempt of all Church Authority; for though the
Church of Rome has usurpt an unlimited and Tyrannical Power under the Notion of
Church Government, yet what has the Sound Church of England (as you own it)
done? What occasion did I give for this Censure? who have expressly confined the
Exercise of Church Authority to Church Communion, to receiving in, and putting
out of the Church. And if Resol. of Cases, p. 39.
the Church be no Society, I would desire to know what it is; and if be a
Society, how can any Society subsist without Authority in some Persons to
receive in and to shut out of the Society? But the truth is, tho you pretend to
be in Communion with the Church of England, you make the Church it self a very
needless and insignificant thing, for you know no necessity of Communicating
with any Church, you will not allow it to be Schism to Separate from the
Church, you think it a pretty indifferent thing, whether Men be Baptized or
not, or by whom they are Baptized: what your Opinion is about the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper I do not know, though if you are consistent with your self, I
doubt that is a very indifferent Ceremony too.

Truly to deal plainly with you, I think you have more need to be taught your
Catechism than to set up for a Writer of Books; and let me in time warn you,
what the consequence of this way you are in, is likely to be, which is no less
than a contempt of all revealed and institute Religion, and consequently of
Christianity. Natural Religion may subsist without any positive Institutions,
but revealed Religion never did, and never can; for when God Transacts with
Mankind in the way of a Visible Covenant, there must be some Visible Ministers,
and Visible Sacraments of this Covenant. And when the Evangelical Ministers and
Sacraments fall into contempt, Men must think meanly of Christianity, and
return to what they call natural Religion, which is a Religion without a Priest
and without a Sacrifice; which cannot save a Sinner, but by uncovenanted Grace
and Mercy; which no Man can be sure of, and which no Man shall find, who
rejects a Priest and Sacrifice of Gods providing.

And to convince you of this, you may observe, that the contempt of the Notion
of a Church, of the Evangelical Priesthood and Sacraments, is originally owing
to Deists and Socinians, to those who profess to believe in God, and to worship
him according to the Laws of natural Religion, but believe nothing at all of
Christ; or to those, who profess to believe in Christ, but believe him only to
be a mere Man, and a great Reformer of Natural Religion, but make nothing at
all of his Priesthood and Sacrifice. If Christ be our great High Priest, and we
must hope for Salvation only in virtue of his Sacrifice, There must be some way
appointed to apply his Merits and Salvation to us, and this will convince us of
the necessity of Church Communion, and a visible Confederation by Sacraments
See Vindic. of the Def. cap. 3.
of divine appointment: But if Christ came only as a great Prophet to instruct
us more perfectly in the Rules of Virtue, and to give us more certain Hopes of
a future State, there can be no more necessity of a Church now, than there was
in a State of Nature. Christians may associate, if they please, for Acts of
public worship, and they may break Company, when they please, without any
danger; and the Evangelical Sacraments can be only significant Ceremonies,
which may be used or let alone, as every one likes best.

At this Rate you every where discourse; and I believe so well of our
Dissenters, that though they would be glad to be excused from the guilt of
Schism, yet they will not thank you, for excusing them upon such Principles, as
tend to undermine Christianity; and I believe so well of you, that though you
affect to talk in the modish way, yet you do not understand whither it tends:
and I hope this timely Caution may prevent your embracing those Principles,
whereon your Conclusions are Naturally Built.

Another thing I would warn you of, is, that these loose Principles of
Church Communion do not tempt you to Schism, and State-Factions, which usually
go together. You pretend indeed to be in constant Communion with the Church of
England; but according to the Principles of your Letters no Church in the World
can have any hold of you, every Man is a Communicant at his own pleasure who
thinks he may part without Sin; And it is much to be suspected, that no Man,
who is a hearty lover of the Church of England, can make such a Zealous Defense
for Dissenters, who has not some private reasons for his Zeal: and when Men are
not Endeared to each other by one Communion, it is to be feared they are linked
together by some other Common Interest. Now should you prove a Schismatic, to
say no worse, it will not excuse you, how many Fine Questions soever you can
ask about it.

And that which will greatly endanger you, is that great Opinion you have of
your self: for some men are so wanton as to espouse a Schism or Faction only to
show their Wit in Defending it, and to make themselves considerable by
espousing a Party. I will not so much wrong you, as to say that you have shown
any great Wit or Judgment in this Cause; but it is evident to every impartial
Man, who reads your Letters, that you have betrayed too great a conceit of
both, and that is a great deal the more dangerous of the two; for true Wit and
Judgment will secure Men from those mischiefs, which a vain conceit of it
betrays them to.

And now Sir, all that I shall add, concerns your way of Writing, which neither
becomes a wise Man, nor a fair Disputant; you have not offered any Argument to
disprove any one thing I have said, you have no where shown the weakness of my
Arguments to prove what I undertook, but have at all Adventures asked a great
many Questions, and generally nothing to the purpose. Now it had been easy to
have asked you as many cross Questions, which had been as good an Answer to your
Questions, as your Questions are to my Discourse; and thus People might have
gazed on us, and have been never the wiser. For to raise a great many
difficulties only tends to Skepticism, and will never end a Dispute. I am loath
to mind you of the Proverb, because I do not think the application belongs to
you; but yet it should make any Man of Wit ashamed of such Methods of Dispute,
wherein he may be outdone by a Man of no Wit.

I confess I have with some regret stole time from better Employment to answer
your Letters, but do not think my self bound to do so, as often as you think
fit to give a public Challenge. This Controversy, if you had pleased, might
have been ended more privately; which had been less trouble to me, though it
may be you thought it might have been less glorious to your self, which I
presume was your reason of first spreading your Letter in Writing, and then of
Printing it. I shall not envy your Glory; I had rather continue mean and
obscure in a humble Obedience to Church and State, than to raise the most
Glorious Triumphs and Trophies to my memory, by giving the least disturbance to
either. And that you and all sober Christians may be of the same mind, is the
hearty Prayer of,

SIR, Your very Humble Servant. W. S.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for FINCHAM GARDENER.
A Continuation and Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stilling fleet's
Unreasonableness of Separation, in Answer to Mr. Baxter and Mr. Lob, etc.

Considerations of present use, considering the Danger resulting from the
change of our Church Government.

1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England. 2. A Resolution of
some Cases of Conscience which respect Church Communion. 3. The Case of
Indifferent things used in the Worship of God, proposed and Stated, by
considering these Questions, etc. 4. A Discourse about Edification. 5. The
Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of Englands
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England? 6. A Letter to Anonymus, in answer
to his three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about Church Communion. 7. Certain Cases
of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of joining with Forms of
Prayer in Public Worship. In two Parts. 8. The Case of mixed Communion: Whether
it be Lawful to Separate from a Church upon the account of promiscuous
Congregations and mixed Communions? 9. An Answer to the Dissenters Objections
against the Common Prayers, and some other parts of Divine Service prescribed
in the Liturgy of the Church of England. 10. The Case of Kneeling at the Holy
Sacrament stated and resolved, etc. The first Part. 11. Certain Cases of
Conscience, etc. The second Part. 12. A Discourse of Profiting by Sermons, and
of going to hear where men think they can profit most. 13. A serious
Exhortation, with some important Advices, relating to the late Cases about
Conformity, recommended to the present Dissenters from the Church of England.
14. An Argument for Union; taken from the true interest of those Dissenters in
England who profess and call themselves Protestants. 16. Some Considerations
about the Case of Scandal, or giving Offense to Weak Brethren. 17. The Case of
Infant Baptism, in Five Questions, etc.
1. A Discourse about the charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther? 2. A Discourse about Tradition, showing what is meant by it, and
what Tradition is to be received, and what Tradition is to be rejected. 3. The
difference of the Case between the Separation of Protestants from the Church of
Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England. 4. The
Protestant Resolution of Faith, etc.
THE CASE OF Lay-Communion WITH THE CHURCH of ENGLAND CONSIDERED; And the
Lawfulness of it showed, from the Testimony of above an hundred eminent
Non-conformists of several Persuasions. Published for the satisfaction of the
Scrupulous, and to prevent the Sufferings which such needlessly expose
themselves to. The Second Edition, corrected by the Author.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. M. DC. LXXXIV.

TO THE DISSENTERS FROM THE Church of England.
Dear Brethren,
YOU being at this time called upon by Authority to join in Communion with the
Church, and the Laws ordered to be put in Execution against such as refuse it;
It Is both your Duty and Interest to enquire into the grounds upon which you
deny Obedience to the Laws, Communion with the Church of God, and thereby
expose our Religion to danger, and your selves to suffering. In which, unless
the Cause be good, the Call clear, and Mr. Mede 's Farewell Sermon. on 1 Cor. 1. 3.
the End right, it cannot bring Peace to your selves, or be acceptable to God.
Not bring Peace to your selves; For we cannot suffer joyfully the Mr. Read 's
Case, p. 4.
spoiling of our Goods, the confinement of our Persons, the ruin of our
Families, unless Conscience be able truly to say, I would have done any thing
but sin against God, that I might have avoided those Sufferings from Men. Not
be acceptable to God, to whom all are accountable Continuat. of Morn. Exer.
Ser. 4. p. 92.
for what Portion he has entrusted them with of the things of this Life, and
are not to throw away without sufficient reason; and who has made it our Duty
to do what we can without Sin, in Obedience to that Authority which he has set
over us, (as you are told by some Read, Ibid.
in the same condition with your selves.)

To assist Persons in this Enquiry, I have observed, that of late several of
the Church of England have undertaken the most material Points that you do
question, and have handled them with that Candor and Calmness which becomes
their Profession, and the gravity of the Arguments, and which may the better
invite those that are willing to be satisfied, to peruse and consider them. But
because Truth and Reason do too often suffer by the Prejudices we have against
particular Persons; to remove, as much as may be, that Obstruction, I have in
this Treatise showed, that these Authors are not alone, but have the concurrent
Testimony of the most eminent Non-conformists for them, who do generally grant,
that there is nothing required in the Parochial Communion of the Church of
England, that can be a sufficient reason for Separation from it. The sense of
many of these I have here collected; and for one hundred, I could easily have
produced two, if the Cause were to go by the Poll: So that if Reason or
Authority will prevail, I hope that yet your Satisfaction and Recovery to the
Communion of the Church, is not to be despaired of: Which God of his infinite
Mercy grant, for your own and the Churches sake. Amen.

THE CONTENTS.
THE difference betwixt Ministerial and Lay-Communion Page 1 The Dissenters
grant the Church of England to be a True Church, p. 4 That they are not totally
to separate from it, p. 12 That they are to comply with it as far as lawfully
they can, p. 16 That Defects in Worship, if not Essential, are no just reason
for Separation, p. 23 That the expectation of better Edification, is no
sufficient reason to withold Communion, p. 39 The badness of Ministers, will
not justify Separation, p. 48 The neglect or want of Discipline, no sufficient
reason to separate, p. 59 The Opinion which the Non-conformists have of the
several Practices of the Church of England, which its Lay-Members are concerned
in, p. 64 That Forms of Prayer are lawful, and do not stint the Spirit, ibid.
That public prescribed Forms may lawfully be joined with, p. 66 That the
Liturgy, or Common Prayer, is for its Matter sound and good, and for its Form
tolerable, if not useful, p. 69 That Kneeling at the Sacrament is not
idolatrous, nor unlawful, and no sufficient reason to separate from that
Ordinance, p. 71, 72 That standing up at the Creed and Gospel, is lawful, p. 73
The Conclusion, ibid.
THE NON-CONFORMISTS PLEA FOR Lay-Communion With the CHURCH of ENGLAND.
THE Christian World is divided into two Ranks, Ecclesiastical and Civil,
usually known by the Names of Clergy and Laity, Ministers and People. The
Clergy, besides the things essentially belonging to their Office, are, by the
Laws of all well-ordered Churches in the World, strictly obliged, by
Declarations or Subscriptions, or both, to own and maintain the Doctrine,
Discipline and Constitution of the Church into which they are admitted. Thus in
the Church of England, they do subscribe to the Truth of the Doctrine more
especially contained in the thirty nine Articles, and declare that they will
use the Forms and Rites contained in the Liturgy, and promise to submit to the
Government in its Orders. The design of all which is to preserve the Peace of
the Church, and the Unity of Christians, which does much depend upon that of
its Officers and Teachers.

But the Laity are under no such Obligations, there being no Declarations or
Subscriptions required of them, nor any thing more than to attend upon, and
join with the Worship practiced and allowed in the Church. Thus it is in the
Church of England, as it is acknowledged by Mr. Baxter, to whom when it Defense
of the Cure, part 2. page 29.
was objected, that many Errors in Doctrine and Life were imposed as Conditions
of Communion; he replies, What is imposed on you as a Condition to your
Communion in the Doctrine and Prayers of the Parish-Churches, but your actual
Communion it self? In discoursing therefore about the Lawfulness of Communion
with a Church, the Difference betwixt these two must be carefully observed,
lest the things required only of one Order of Men should be thought to belong
to all. It Is observed by one, That the Original of all Our Mischiefs A Book
licensed by Mr. Cranford.
sprung from Men's confounding the terms of Ministerial Conformity, with those
of Lay-Communion with the Parochial Assemblies; there being much more required
of the Ministers than of the People: Private Persons having much less to say
for themselves in absenting from the public Worship of God, tho performed by
the Liturgy, than the Pastor has for not taking Oaths, etc. Certainly, if this
Difference were but observed, and the Case of Lay-Communion truly stated and
understood, the People would not be far more averse to Communion Baxter's Cure,
p. 311.
with the Parish-Churches than the Nonconforming Ministers are, as one
complains; and whatsoever they might think of the Conformity of Ministers,
because of the previous Terms required of them, they would judge what is
required of the People to be lawful, as some Continuat. Morning Exercise, Sermon.
4. p. 89.
of them do. And as the Ministers by bringing their Case to the People's, may
see Communion then to be lawful, and find themselves obliged to maintain it in
a private Capacity; so the People, by perceiving their Case not to be that of
the the Ministers, but widely different from it, would be induced to hold
Communion with the Church, and to join with those of their Ministers that think
it their Duty so to do; and are therein of the opinion of the old
Non-Conformists that did not act Rathband's Epistle to the Reader, prefixed to
the grave and modest Confutation, etc.
as if there were no middle between Separation from the Church and true Worship
thereof, and Subscription unto, or Practice or Approbation of all the
Corruptions of the same. For Nichol's plea for the Puritans.
though they would not subscribe to the Ceremonies, yet they were against
Separation from God's public Worship, as one of them in the name of the rest
does declare. So that as great a Difference as there is betwixt Presence and
Consent, betwixt bare Communion and Approbation, betwixt the Office of the
Minister and the Attendance of a private Person; so much is there betwixt the
Case of Ministerial and Lay-Communion: And therefore when we consider the Case
of Lay-Communion, we are only to respect what is required of the People, what
part they are to have and exercise in Communion with the Church. Now what they
are concerned in, are either, the Forms that are imposed, the Gestures they are
to use, and the Times they are to observe, for the Celebration of Divine
Worship; or, the Ministration, which they may be remotely supposed also to be
concerned in.

The lawfulness of all which, and of all things required in Lay-Communion
amongst us, I shall not undertake to prove and maintain by Arguments taken from
those that already are in full Communion with the Church of England, and so are
obliged to justify it; but from those that in some things do differ from it,
who may therefore be supposed to be impartial, and whose Reasons may be the
more heeded as coming from themselves, and from such that are forward in other
respects to own the Miscarriages of the Church, as those that wholly separate
from it.

For the better understanding of the Case, and of their Judgment in it, I shall
consider,

1. What Opinion the most eminent and sober Non-Conformists have had of the
Church of England. 2. What Opinion they have had of Communion with that Church.
3. What Opinion they have had of such Practices and Usages in that Church, as
Laymen are concerned in.
1. What Opinion the most eminent and sober Non-Conformists have had of the
Church of England. And that will appear in these two things; First, That they
own her to be a true Church; Secondly, To be a Church in the main very
valuable.

First; They own her to be a true Church. Thus Mr. Baily says of the old
Non-Conformists, They Disswasive, ^. 2. p. 21.
did always plead against the Corruptions of the Church of England, but never
against the Truth of her Being, or the Comfort of her Communion: And as much is
affirmed of the present, by a grave and sober Person amongst them, The
Presbyterians generally hold the Church of Corbet's Discourse of the Religion
of England, p. 33.
England to be a true Church, though defective in its Order and Discipline.
Thus it is acknowledged in the name of the rest, by one that undertakes their
Defense, and would defend them in their Separation, We acknowledge the Church of
England to be a true Church, Non-Conformists no Schismatics, p. 13.
and that we are Members of the same visible Church with them. This they do not
only barely assert, but also undertake to prove: This is done by the old
Non-Conformists, in their Confutation of the Brownists, who thus begin, That
the Church of England is a true A grave and sober Confut. p. 1. etc. p. 57.
Church of Christ, and such an one, as from which whosoever wittingly and
willingly separateth himself, cutteth himself off from Christ, we doubt not but
the indifferent Reader may be persuaded by these Reasons following.

1. We enjoy and join together in the use of those outward means, which God
has ordained in his Word for the gathering of a visible Church, and have been
effectual to the unfeigned Conversion of many, as may appear both by the other
Fruits of Faith, and by the Martyrdom which sundry have endured that were
Members of our Church, etc.

2. Our whole Church makes Profession of the true Faith. The Confession of our
Church, together with the Apology thereof, and those Articles of Religion which
were agreed upon in the Convocation-House, Anno 1562. (whereunto every Minister
of the Land is bound to subscribe) so far forth as they contain the Confession
of Faith, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments, do prove this evidently, etc.

So Mr. Ball: Wheresoever we see the Word of God Friendly Trial of the G^ounds
of Separat. c. 13^. p 306.
truly taught and professed in Points fundamental, and the Sacraments for
substance rightly administered, there is the true Church of Christ, though the
Health and Soundness of it may be crazed by many Errors in Doctrine,
Corruptions in the Worship of God, and Evils in the Life and Manners of Men. As
much as this is also affirmed in the Letters passed betwixt the Ministers of
Old-England A. Letter of many Ministers in Old-England to others in
New*England, p. 24.
and New England, It is simply necessary to the being of a Church, that it be
laid upon Christ the Foundation; which being done, the remaining of what is
forbidden, or the want of what is commanded, cannot put the Society from the
Title or Right of a true Church.

And if we enquire into the Judgment of the present Non-Conformists, we shall
find them likewise arguing for it: Thus the Author to Jerubbaal, The Jerubbaal;
or, the Pleader impleaded, p. 18, and 27.
Essentials constitutive of a true Church, are, 1. The Head: 2. The Body: 3.
The Union that is between them. Which three concurring in the Church of
England, Christ being the professed Head, she being Christ's professed Body,
and the Catholic Faith being the Union-band whereby they are coupled together,
she cannot in justice be denied a true (though God knows far from a pure)
Church.

If we should proceed in this Argument, and consider the Particulars, I might
fill a Volume with Testimonies of this kind.

1. The Doctrine of the Church is universally held to be true and sound; even
the Brownists owned it of old in their calm mood, who declare, We testify to
all Brownists Apol. p. 7. An. 1604.
Men by these Presents, That we have not forsaken any one Point of the true,
ancient, Apostolic Faith professed in our Land, but hold the same Grounds of
Christian Religion with them. See more in Baily's Disswasive, cap. 2. p. 20,
33. and Dr. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of Separation, Part 1. 9. p. 31.
The Presbyterians (if I may so call them for distinction sake) do own it. So
Mr. Corbet, The Doctrine of Faith, and Sacraments by Discourse 21 p. 43.
Law established, is heartily received by the Non-conformists. So Mr. Baxter,
As for the Doctrine of the Church of England, Preface to 5 Disp. p. 6.
the Bishops and their Followers from the first Reformation begun by Edw. 6.
were sound in Doctrine, adhering to the Augustan Method expressed now in the
Articles and Homilies, they differed not in any considerable Point from those
whom they called Puritans. The like is affirmed by the Independents, The
Confession of the Church of Peace-Offer. ing, p. 12. See Mr. Baxter's Defense
of his Cure, Part 1. p. 64. and Part 2. p. 3. and Wadsworth in his Separation,
yet no Schism, p. 60, 62. Mr. Throughton's Apology for the Non-Conformists,
cap. 3. p. 106.
England, declared in the Articles of Religion, and herein what is purely
doctrinal, we fully embrace.

2. As to the Worship, they own it for the Matter and Substance to be good, and
for Edification. So the old Non-Conformists, as Mr. Hildersham, There is
Lecture 26. on John, p. 121.
nothing in our Assemblies, but we may receive profit by it, etc. And again,
There is nothing done in God's Public Worship among us, but what is done by
the Institution, Ordinance, and Commandment of the Lord. So among the present,
it is owned by both Presbyterians and Independents; by the former in the
Morning Exercise, Continuat. Morning Exercise, Sermon 4. p. 91.
Why may it not be supposeable, that Christians may be moved by reasonable
Considerations to attend the public Forms, the substantial Parts of them being
thought agreeable to a Divine Institution, though in some Circumstantials too
disagreeable? So it is acknowledged, That in Throughton's Apol. p. 104.
private Meetings the same Doctrine and Worship is used as in the Parish
Churches, only some Circumstances and Ceremonies omitted. By the latter, We
know full well that we Peace Offering. p. 17.
differ in nothing from the whole form of Religion established in England, but
only in some few things in outward Worship. But I shall have further occasion
to treat of this under the third General.

3. As for the Ministry of the Church: 1. It is acknowledged to be true, and
for substance the same which Christ has established. So Mr. Bradshaw, I
Unreasonableness of the Separation, p. 16.
affirm, That the Ministry of our Church Assemblies (howsoever it may in some
particular parts of the Execution happily be defective in some Places) is, for
the Substance thereof, that very same Ministry which Christ has set in his
Church. This he speaks, as he says, of those that do subscribe and conform
according to the Laws of the State. 2. That they have all things necessarily
belonging to their Office; so the grave and modest Confutation maintains, The
preaching of the whole Truth of God's Word, Grave and modest Confutat. p. 28.
and nothing but it; the Administration of the Sacraments and of Public
Prayer, as they are of all parts of the Ministers Office prescribed in the
Word, so they are all appointed to our Ministers by the Law. 3. They own, That
all the Defects in it, whether in their Call or Administration, do not nullify
the Office. Thus much Mr. Bradshaw does contend for, So many of our Ministers
Unreasonableness of Separation, p. 27, 37.
(who in the Book of Ordination are called Priests and Deacons) as in all
Points concerning the substance of their Ministry, are qualified according to
the intent of the Laws, have their Offices, Callings, Adminstration and
Maintenance, for the Substance thereof, ordained by Christ. And yet I deny not,
but there may be some accidental Defects, or Superfluities in or about them
all; yet such as do not, or cannot be proved to destroy the Nature and
Substance of any of them. This is maintained at large in the Letter of the
Ministers in Old England, etc. p. 86, 87.

And the like is also affirmed even by those of the Apologet. Narration. p. 6.
Congregational Way; so the Brethren in their Apology, The unwarrantable Power
in Church Governors did never work in any of us any other Thought, much less
Opinion, but that the Ministry thereof [of the English Churches] was a true
Ministry. So Mr. Cotton. The Cotton's Infant Baptism, p. 181.
Power whereby the Ministers in England do administer the Word and Sacraments,
is either spiritual and proper, essential to their Calling, or advantitious and
accidental. The former they have received from Christ, etc. The latter from the
Patron who presents, or the Bishop who ordains, etc. Whoever has a mind to see
their Ordination defended, may consult Jus Divinum Ministerii Evangelici, part
2, p. 12, 16, 17, 25, etc. Jus Divinum Regim. Eccles. p. 264, etc. Cawdry's
Independency a great Schism, page 116. and his Defense of it, page 35, 37.

Thus far therefore we see how far it is agreed, that the Church of England is
a true Church in its Doctrine, Worship and Ministry. But when we come to
consider what the Church is they own thus to be true, there we shall find that
they do differ. The Presbyterians generally own a National Church, and have
writ much in the behalf of it, as may be seen in the Books quoted in the Jus
Divinum Minist. Evang. p: 12, etc. Brinsly's Church-remedy, p 41, 42. Cawdry
Independ. a great Schism, p. 60, 89, 172.
Margin. Others look upon it as a prudential thing, and what may lawfully be
complied with; So Mr. Tombs, Theodulia, or just Defense, 15, 16. Preface, etc.
9. 3.
It is no more against the Gospel to term the Believers of England, the Church
of England, than it is to term Believers throughout the World, the Catholic
Church; nor is it more unfit for us to term our selves Members of the Catholic
Church; nor is there need to show any Institution of our Lord, more for the one
than the other.

But those that will not own it to be a true Church in respect of such a
Constitution, or that speak doubtfully of it, do yet assert as much of the
Parish Churches. It Is acknowledged by all, that the Distribution into Parishes
is not of Divine but Humane Institution; but withal, its thought by some
Crofton's Reformation not Separation, p. 10. and Bethshemesh clouded, p. 101,
etc. Cawdrey's Independ. a great Schism, p. 132, etc. Church-Reformation, p. 42.
agreeable to the reason of the thing, and somewhat favored by Scripture, and
by Experience has been found to be of such Convenience, Advantage, and Security
to Religion, that Mr. Baxter has more than once said: Mr. Baxter's Plea for
Peace, Epist. Sermon. on Gal. 6. 10. p. 24. Defense, p. 21. par. 1. p. 36.
I doubt not, but he that will preserve Religion here in its due Advantages,
must endeavor to preserve the Soundness, Concord and Honor of the
Parish-Churches. And Mr. Corbet says, Mr. Corbet's Account of the Principles,
etc. of several Non-Conformists, p. 26.
That the nullifying and treading down the Parish-Churches is a Popish Design.
But whatever Opinion others may have of that Form, yet, all of one sort and
another, agree that the Churches so called, are, or may be true Churches. This
was the general Opinion of the old Non-Conformists. Thus says a late
Troughton's Apol. p. 103.
Writer, who, though he is unwilling to grant that they did own the National
Church to be a true Church, yet does admit (as he needs must at least) that
they did own the several Parishes, or Congregations in England to be true
Churches, both in respect of their Constitution, and also in respect of their
Doctrine and Worship; and that there were in them no such intolerable
Corruptions, as that all Christians should fly from them. And even those that
were in other respects opposite enough to the Church, did so declare. It was,
says Mr. Baxter, the Parish Churches that had the Liturgy, Defense of his
Cure, part 2. p. 178. V. Letter of Ministers of Old England to New, p. 49.
which Mr. H. Jacob, the Father of the Congregational Party, wrote for
Communion with, against Fr. Johnson, and in respect to which, he called them
Separatists, against whom he wrote. The same I may say of Mr. Bradshaw, Dr.
Ames, and other Non-conformists, whom the Congregational Brethren think were
favorable to their way.

And if you will hearken to the abovesaid Apologist, he says again, and again,
That the general Sense Apol. c. 4. p. ^17.
of the present Non-conformists, both Ministers and People, is, that the
Parishes of England generally are true Churches, both as to the Matter of them,
the People being Christians; and as to the form, their Ministers being true
Ministers, such as for their Doctrine and Manners deserve not to be degraded.
But lest he should be thought to incline to one side, I shall produce the
Testimony of such as are of the Congregational Way. As for those of
New England, Mr. Baxter does say, That Defense of his Cure, part 2 p. 177.
their own Expressions signify, that they take the English Parishes, that have
godly Ministers, for true Churches, though faulty. Mr. Cotton professes, that
Robinson's denial of Way cleared, p. 8.
the Parishional Churches to be true Churches, was never received into any
Hearts amongst them; and otherwhere says, We dare not deny to bless the Womb
that bare us, His Letter, p. 3. printed 1641.
and the Papes that gave us suck.

The five Diss^nting Brethren do declare, Apologet. Narr. V. Hooker's Survey,
Pref. and part 1. p. 47.
We have this sincere Profession to make before God and the World, that all the
Conscience of the Defilements in the Church of England, etc. did never work in
us any other Thought, much less Opinion, but that Multitudes of the Assemblies
and Parochial Congregations thereof, were the true Churches and Body of Christ.
To come nearer, Dr. T. Goodwin On the Ephesians. p. 477, 488, 489.
does condemn it as an Error in those who hold particular Churches (those you
call Parish-Churches) to be no true Churches of Christ, and their Ministers to
be no true Ministers, and upon that Ground forbear all Church Communion with
them in hearing, or in any other Ordinance, etc. and says, I acquitted my self
[before] from this, and my Brethren in the Ministry.

But the Church of England is not only thus acknowledged a true Church, but
has been also looked upon as the most valuable in the World; whether we
consider the Church it self, or those that minister in it. The Church it self,
of which the Authors of the grave and modest Confutation thus write: All the
known Page 6.
Churches in the World acknowledge our Church for their Sister, and give unto us
the Right Hand of Fellowship, etc. Dr. Goodwin says, If we should not
acknowledge these Ibid.
Churches so stated [i. e. Parish-Churches] to be the true Churches of Christ,
and their Ministers true Ministers, and their Order such, and hold Communion
with them too in the Sense spoken of, we must acknowledge no Church in all the
Reformed Churches, etc. for they are all as full of Mixtures as ours. And Mr.
J. Goodwin says, Sion College visited.
that there was more of the Truth and Power of Religion in England, under the
late Prelatical Government, than in all the Reformed Churches in the World
besides. If we would have a Character of the Ministry of the Church of England,
as it was then, Mr. Bradshaw Unreasonableness of the Separat. p. 97.
gives it, Our Churches are not inferior for number of able Men, yea, and
painful Ministers, to any of the Reformed Churches of Christ in foreign Parts,
etc. And certainly the Number of such is much advanced since his time. But I
cannot say more of this Subject, than I find in a Page or two of an Author I
must frequently Mr. Baxter's Cure of Church Divisions, Dir. 56. p. 263.
use, to which I refer the Reader.

Before I proceed, I shall only make this Inference from what has been said;
That if the Church of England be a true Church, the Churches true Churches, the
Ministry a true Ministry, the Doctrine sound and Orthodox, the Worship in the
main good and allowable, and the Defects such as render not the Ordinances
unacceptable to God, and ineffectual to us; I think there is much said toward
the proving Communion with that Church lawful, and to justify those that do
join in it. Which brings to the second General, which is to consider:

II. What Opinion the sober and eminent Non-conformists Sect. II.
have of Communion with the Church of England. And they generally hold,

1. That they are not totally to separate from it; this follows from the
former, and must be owned by all them that hold she is a true Church: for to
own it to be such, and yet to separate totally from it, would be to own and
disown it at the same time: So say the Members of the Assembly of Divines, Thus
to Papers for Accommodation, p. 47.
depart from true Churches, is not to hold Communion with them as such, but
rather by departing to declare them not to be such. And says Mr. Baxter,
Nothing will Reasons for the Christian Relig. p. 464.
warrant us to separate from a Church as no Church [which yet is the case in
total Separation] but the want of something essential to a Church: But if the
Church have all things essential to it, it is a true Church, and not to be
separated from. When the V. Annotations on the Apologet. Nar. p. 17.
Church of Rome is called a true Church, it is understood in a Metaphysical or
Natural Sense; as a Thief is a true Man; and the Devil himself, though the
Father of Lies, is a true Spirit: But withal she is a false Church (as Mr.
Brinsly says from Bishop Hall) an Heretical, Arraignment of Schism, p. 26.
Apostatical, Antichristian Synagogue: And so to separate from her is a Duty.
But when the Church of England is said to be a true Church, or the Parochial
Churches true Churches, it is in a moral Sense, as they are sound Churches,
which may safely be communicated with. Thus does Dr. Bryan make the Dwelling
with God, Sermon. 6. p. 289, 291.
Opposition: The Church of Rome is a part of the universal visible Church of
Christians, so far as they profess Christianity, and acknowledge Christ their
Head; but it is the visible Society of Traitorous Usurpers, so far as they
profess the Pope to be their Head, etc. From this Church therefore, which is
Spiritual Babylon, God's People are bound to separate, etc. but not from
Churches which have made Separation from Rome, as the reformed Protestant
Churches in France, and these of Great Britain have done, in whose
Congregations is found Truth of Doctrine, a lawful Ministry, and a People
professing the true Religion, submitting to, and joining together in the true
Worship of God. Such a Separation would (as has been said) unchurch it. This
would be to deny Christ holds Communion with it, or to deny Communion with a
Church, with which Christ holds Communion, contrary to a Principle that is, I
think, universally maintained. The Error of these Men, says Mr. Brightman On
Rev. c. 3. V. Jenkin on Jude, v. 19. Allen Vindiciae Pietatis, second part, p.
123. Vindication of Presbyterian Government, p. 130. Cotton on John, p. 156.
, i^ full of Evil, who do in such a manner, make a Departure from this Church
[by total Separation] as if Christ were quite banished from hence, and that
there could be no hope of Salvation to those that abide there. Let these Men
consider, that Christ is here feasting with his Members; will they be ashamed
to sit at Meat there, where Christ is not ashamed to sit? Further, this would
be a notorious Schism; so the old Non-conformists conclude, Grave Consut. p.
57. Cawdrey's Independency further proved, p. 136.
Because we have a true Church, consisting of a lawful Ministry, and a faithful
People, therefore they cannot separate themselves from us, but they must needs
incur the most shameful and odious Reproach of manifest Schism; for what is
that, says another, Brinsly's Arraigment, p. 15, 24, 44.
but a total Separation from a true Church? This, lastly, would not diminish,
but much increase the Fault of the Separation. As another says; Baily's
Disswasive, c. 6. p. 104.
For it is a greater Sin to depart from a Church, which I profess to be true,
and whose Ministry I acknowledge to be saving, than from a Church which I
conceive to be false, and whose Ministers I take to have no Calling from God,
nor any Blessing from his Hand. This therefore is their avowed Principle, That
total Separation from the Church is unlawful: And this the old Non-conformists
did generally hold and maintain against the Brownists; Ames 's Puritanismus
Angl. V. Parker on the Cross, part 2. c. 91. 21. Bax. Defense, p. 55.
and the Dissenting Brethren did declare on their part, Apologet. Nar. p. 6.
We have always professed, and that in those times when the Churches of England
were the most, either actually overspread with Defilements, or in the greatest
Danger thereof, etc. that we both did, and would hold Communion with them as
the Churches of Christ. And amongst the present Non-conformists, several have
writ for Communion with the Church against those that separate from it, and
have in Print declared it to be their Duty and Practice. So Mr. Baxter, Sacril.
desert. p. 75.
I constantly join i^ my Parish Church in Liturgy and Sacrament. It Is said of
Mr. Joseph Allen, The Life of Mr. J. Allen, p. 111.
That he as frequently attended on the Public Worship, as his Opportunities
and Strength permitted: The Doctrine of Schism, p. 64.
Of Mr. Brinsley, that he ordinarily attended on the Public Worship. Dr.
Collins says as much of himself. Reasonable Account, etc.
Mr. Lie in his Farewell Sermon does advise his People to attend the Public
Worship of God, to hear the best they could, and not to separate, but to do as
the old Puritans did thirty Years before. Mr. Cradacot in his Farewell Sermon
professes, That if that Pulpit was his dying Bed, he would earnestly persuade
them to have a care of total Separation from the Public Worship of God. Mr.
Hickman freely declares, I profess Bonasus vapulans, p. 113.
wherever I come, I make it my Business to reconcile People to the Public
Assemblies, my Conscience would fly in my Face if I should do otherwise. And
Mr. Corbet, as he did hold Communion with the Church of England, so says,
Account of the Principles of the Non-conformists, p. 26.
That the Presbyterians generally frequent the Worship of God in the Public
Discourse of the Religion, etc. p. 33. V. Mr. Read's Case, p. 15.
Assemblies. It Is evident then that it is their Principle, and we may
charitably believe it is their Practice in Conformity to it. Non-conformists
Plea for Lay-Communion, p. 1.
Thus Mr. Corbet declares for himself. I own Parish-Churches, having a
competent Minister, and a number of credible Professors of Christianity, for
true Churches, and the Worship therein performed, as well in Common Prayer as
in the Preaching of the Word, to be in the main sound, and good for the
Substance or Matter thereof: And I may not disown the same in my Practice by a
total neglect thereof, for my Judgment and Practice ought to be concordant. And
if these two, Judgment and Practice, be not concordant, it would be impossible
to convince Men that they are in earnest, or that they do believe themselves,
while they declare against Separation, and yet do not keep it up. Those good
Men therefore were aware of this, who met a little after the Plague and Fire,
to consider (says Mr. Baxter) Non-conformists Plea for Peace, 17^. p 240.
whether our actual Forbearance to join with the Parish-Churches in the
Sacrament [and much more if it was total] might not tend to deceive Men, and
make them believe that we were for Separation from them, and took their
Communion to be unlawful: And upon the Reasons given in, they agreed such
Communion to be lawful and meet, when it would not do more Harm than Good; that
is, they agreed that it was lawful in it self.

2. They hold that they are not to separate further from such a true Church,
than the things that they separate for, are unlawful, or are conceived so to
be; that is, that they ought to go as far as they can, and do what lawfully
they may toward Communion with it. For they declare, Burrough's Irenic. p. 182.
That to join in nothing, because they cannot join in all things, is a dividing
Practice, and not to do what they can do in that case, is Schism; for then the
Separation is rash and unjust. Vindication of Presbyter. Governm. Brinsly's
Arraignm. p. 16, 32.
Therefore if the Ministerial Communion be thought unlawful, and the
Lay-Communion lawful, the Unlawfulness of the former does not bar a Person from
joining in the latter. The denying of Assent and Consent to all and every thing
contained in the Book of Common Prayer, does not gainsay the Lawfulness of
partaking in that Worship, it being sound for the substance in the main, etc.
Corbet's Plea for Lay-Communion, etc. p. 2.
as a judicious Person has observed. This was the Case generally of the old
Non-conformists, who notwithstanding their Exclusion from their Public
Ministry, held full Communion with the Church of England. We are told by a good
Hand, That as Irenicum, by Discipulus de tempore, Junior, alias M. Newcomen,
Epist. to the Reader. Friendly Trial, c. 7. p. 121.
heretofore Mr. Parker, Mr. Knewstubs, Mr. Vdal, etc. and the many Scores
suspended in Queen Elizabeth, and King James's Reign: So also of later times,
Mr. Dod, Mr. Cleaver, etc. were utterly against even Semi-Separation; i. e.
against absenting themselves from the Prayers and the Lord's Supper. So it is
affirmed of them by Mr. Ball, They have evermore condemned voluntary Separation
from the Congregations and Assemblies, or negligent frequenting of those
Public Prayers. And Hildersham Lect on John. R. Rogers's 7 Treatises, Tr. 7.
c. 4. p. 224.
some of them earnestly press the People to prefer the public Service before
the private, and to come to the beginning of the Prayers, as an help to stir up
God's Graces, etc. And others did both receive the Sacrament, and exhort others
so to do, as I shall afterward show. 2. Again, if in Lay-Communion any thing
is thought to be unlawful, that is no reason against the things that are
lawful: This was the Case of many of the godly and learned Non-conformists in
the last Age, as we are told, that Vindicat. of the Presbyt. Govern. p. 135.
were persuaded in their Consciences, that they could not hold Communion with
the Church of England, in receiving the Sacrament kneeling, without Sin; yet
did they not separate from her. Indeed in that particular Act they withdrew,
but yet so, as they held Communion with her in the rest. And thus much is owned
by those of the present Age, as one declares. The Church of England Jerubbaal,
p. 28, 30.
being a true Church (so that a total Separation from her is unwarrantable)
therefore Communion with her in all parts of real solemn Worship, wherein I may
join with her, without either Let or Sin, is a Duty. So another says of them;
Throughton's Apol. p. 107.
They are ready and desirous to return to a full Union with the Parishes, when
ever the Obstacles shall be removed. And again, They hold Communion with the
Parishes, not only in Faith and Doctrine, but also in Acts of Worship, where
they think they can lawfully do it. This those of the Congregational-Way do
also accord to, that they ought in all lawful things to communicate with the
Churches of England; not only in Obedience to the Magistrate (in which case
they also acknowledge it to be their Duty as well as others) but Mr. Nye's Case
of great and present use, p. 4, and 5. Mr. Read's Case, p. 14.
also as they are true Churches; and therefore plead for the Lawfulness of
hearing the established Ministry, and undertake to answer the Objections
brought against it, whether taken from the Ministers Ordination, Burrough's
Irenic. p. 183. Lawfulness of hearing the public Ministers of the Church of
England. Nye's Case, p. 24, 25.
or Lives, or the Church in which they are Ministers, etc. as you may find them
in Mr. Robinson's Plea for it of old, and Mr. Nye's of late, as they are
printed together. Upon the Consideration of which, the latter of these thus
concludes. In most of the Misperswasions of these latter Times, by which Men's
Minds have been corrupted; I find, in whatsoever they differ one from another,
yet in this they agree, That it is unlawful to hear in public; which I am
persuaded is one constant Design of Satan in the variety of ways of Religion he
has set on Foot by Jesuits amongst us. Let us therefore be the more aware of
whatsoever tends that way. Of this Opinion also is Mr. Tombs (though he
continued Theodulia; Or, a just Defense of Hearing, etc. c. 10. 15. p. 369. c.
9. 8. p. 319.
an Anabaptist) who has writ a whole Book to defend the hearing of the present
Ministers of England, and toward the close of the Work has given forty
additional Reasons for it, and in opposition to those he writes against does
affirm; Sure if the Church be called Mount Sion from the preaching of the
Gospel, the Assemblies of England may be called Sion, Christ's Candlesticks,
and Garden, as well as any Christians in the World. I shall conclude this with
what Mr. Robinson says in this Case, viz. For my self thus Treatise of the
Lawfulness of Hearing, etc. p. ult.
I believe, with my Heart before God, and profess with my Tongue, and have
before the World, that I have one and the same Faith, Spirit, Baptism and Lord,
which I had in the Church of England, and none other; that I esteem so many in
that Church, of what State or Order soever, as are truly Partakers of that
Faith (as I account thousands to be) for my Christian Brethren, and my self a
Fellow-Member with them, of that one Mystical Body of Christ, scattered far and
wide throughout the World: that I have always in Spirit and Affection, all
Christian Fellowship and Communion with them, and am most ready in all outward
Actions and Exercises of Religion, lawful and lawfully done, to express the
same: And withal, that I am persuaded, the hearing of the Word of God there
preached, in the manner and upon the grounds formerly mentioned, both lawful,
and upon occasion necessary for me and all true Christians, withdrawing from
that Hierarchical Order of Church Government and Ministry, and the uniting in
the Order and Ordinances instituted by Christ. Thus far he.

From what has been said upon this Head we may observe, That though these
Reverend Persons do go upon different Reasons, according to the Principles they
espouse, they agree not in the Constitution of Churches, etc. yet they all
agree that the Parochial Churches are or may be (as I have observed before)
true Churches of Christ, that Communion with such Churches is lawful, and that
we are to go as far as we can toward Communion with them. Though they differ
about the Notion of Hearing, as whether it be an Act of Communion, and about
the Call of those they hear, yet they all agree in the Lawfulness of it. And
therefore to separate wholly in this Ordinance, and from the Parochial Churches
as no Churches, are equally condemned by all.

3. They hold, that they are not to separate from a Church for unlawful things,
if the things accounted unlawful, are not of so heinous a Nature as to unchurch
a Church, and affect the Vitals of Religion, or are not imposed as necessary
Terms of Communion.

1. If the Corruptions are such as do not unchurch a Church, or affect the
vital Parts of Religion. So says Mr. Tombs, Not every, nor many Corruptions
Theodulia. Answer to Preface, 23. p. 47, 48.
of some kind do unchurch, there being many in Faith, Worship and Conversation
in the Churches of Corinth, and some of the seven Churches of Asia, Aid. Blake
's Vindiciae Foed. c. 31. p. 229, etc
who yet were Golden Candlesticks, amidst whom Christ did walk. But such
general, avowed, unrepented of Errors in Faith, as overthrow the Foundation of
Christian Faith; to wit, Christ the only Mediator betwixt God and Man, and
Salvation by him, Corruptions of Worship by Idolatry, in Life by evil Manners,
as are utterly inconsistent with Christianity, till which in whole or in part
they are not unchurched. For till then the Corruptions are tolerable, and so
afford no just reason to dissolve the Church, or to depart from it. So Mr.
Brinsly: Arraignment of Schism, p. 50.
Suppose some just Grievances may be found among us, yet are they tolerable? If
so, then is Separation on this ground intolerable, unwarrantable: in as much as
it ought not to be, but upon a very great and weighty Cause, and that when
there is no Remedy. So Mr. Noyes: Private Brethren may not Temple measured, p.
78.
separate from Churches, or Church-Ordinances; which are not fundamentally
defective, neither in Doctrine or Manners, Heresy or Profaneness. To all which
add the Testimony of Dr. Owen, and Mr. Cotton. The former asserts, That many
Errors in Evangelical Love, p. 76.
Doctrine, disorders in sacred Administrations, irregular walking in
Conversation, with neglect and abuse of Discipline in Rulers, may fall out in
some Churches, and yet not evacuate their Church State, or give sufficient
warrant to leave their Communion, and separate from them. The latter says;
Exposit. on 1 Epist. John, p. 156.
Unless you find in the Church, Blasphemy, or Idolatry, or Persecution [i. e.
such as forces them to leave the Communion] there is no just Ground of
Separation. This is universally owned. But if any one should yet continue
unconvinced, let him but peruse the Catalogue of the Faults of nine Churches in
Scripture, collected by Mr. Baxter, and I persuade my self he will think the
Conclusion inferred from it to be just and reasonable. Observe, says he, that
no Cure of Church Divisions, Dir. 5. p. 40, etc.
one Member is in all these Scriptures, or any other, commanded to come out and
separate from any of all these Churches, as if their Communion in Worship were
unlawful. And therefore before you separate from any, as judging Communion with
them unlawful, be sure that you bring greater Reasons for it than any of these
recited were.

2. They are not to separate, if the Corruptions are not so made the Conditions
of Communion, that they must necessarily and unavoidably communicate in them.
Mr. Vines speaks plainly to both of these. On the Sacrament, p. 239.
The Church may be corrupted many ways, in Doctrine, Ordinances, Worship, etc.
And there are degrees of this Corruption; the Doctrine in some remote Points,
the Worship in some Rituals of Man's Invention or Custom. How many Churches do
we find thus corrupted, and yet no Separation of Christ from the Jewish Church,
nor any Commandment to the Godly of Corinth, etc. to separate. I must in such a
Case avoid the Corruption, hold the Communion --.But if Corruptions invade the
Fundamentals, the Foundation of Doctrine is destroyed, the Worship is become
idolatrous; and what is above all, if the Church impose such Laws of her
Communion as there is a necessity of doing or approving things unlawful, in
that Case, Come out of Babylon. The Churches of Protestants so separated from
Rome.

But if the things be not of so heinous a Nature, nor thus strictly required,
then Communion with a Church under Defects is lawful, and may be a Duty. So
says Mr. Corbet, in the name of the present Nonconformists, We hold not our
selves obliged to forsake a Account of the Principles of N. C. p. 8. and
Discourse of Relig. 16. p. 33.
true Church, as no Church, for the Corruptions and Disorders found therein, or
to separate from its Worship for the tolerable Faults thereof, while our
personal Profession of some Error, or Practice of some Evil is not required as
the Terms of our Communion. And Mr. Buroughs himself does grant as much and
more; for he says, Irenicum, c. 23. p. 162, 163.
Where these Causes are not, [viz. the being constrained to profess, believe or
practice contrary to the Rule of Faith, or being deprived of Means altogether
necessary, or most expedient to Salvation] but Men may communicate without Sin,
professing the Truth, and enjoy all Ordinances, as the Freemen of Christ: Men
must not separate from a Church, tho there be Corruption in it, to gather into
a new Church, which may be more pure, and in some respects more comfortable.
And as tho such Corruptions should be imposed as Terms of Communion, yet if not
actually imposed upon us, our communicating in the true part of God's Worship
is never the worse for the said Imposition, as long as we do not communicate in
those Corruptions, as Mr. Bradshaw does argue: So Unreasonableness of the
Separation, p. 103.
though they should be imposed, and be unavoidable to all that are in
Communion, that is not a sufficient Reason for a total Separation, as it is
also owned; for says one, When the Corruptions of a Church are such as
Jerubbaal, p. 12.
that one cannot communicate with her without Sin unavoidably, that seems to me
to be a just Ground, though not of a Positive, yet of a Negative; though not of
a total, yet of a partial Separation; i. e. it may be a just Ground for the
lesser, but is not so for the greater.

Supposing then the Corruptions in a Church not to be of an heinous Nature, not
respecting the Fundamentals of Religion; supposing again they are not
necessarily imposed and unavoidable, then Separation for the sake of such is
unwarrantable. But to make this the more uncontroulably evident, I shall
consider the Corruptions, as they respect Worship, or Discipline. In Worship, I
shall consider the Defects of it in it self, in the Ministration, the
Ministers, and those that join with it, and show that these do not disoblige
from Communion in it, and Attendance upon it.

1. The Defects of Worship, if not essential, are consistent with Communion,
and no just Reason for withdrawing from it. This the Brownists did acknowledge
Apol. p. 7.
with some Qualification. Neither count we it lawful for any Member to forsake
the Fellowship of the Church, for Blemishes and Imperfections, which every one,
according to his Calling, Exposit. on 1 Epist. John; p. 157.
should studiously seek to cure, etc. So Mr. Cotton, Suppose there were, and
are sundry Abuses in the Church, yet it was no safe Ground of Separation. When
the Sons of Eli corrupted the Sacrifices of God, their Sin was great, yet it
was the sin of the People England's Remembrance Sermon. 2. p. 38.
to separate and abhor. Thus a Reverend Person, in his Farewell Sermon does
rightly instruct his Auditors: A means to hold fast what you have received, is
diligent Attendance on the public Ordinances and Worship of God, if and when
you can enjoy them in any measure according to God's Will, though not
altogether in the manner you desire, and they should be administered in, etc.
Though I dare not advise you to join in any thing that is in it self, or in
your Judgment evil, till you be satisfied about it; yet I must advise you to
take heed of Separation from the Church, or from what is good, and God's own
Ordinance, etc. For the fuller Proof of which, it may not be amiss to produce
the several Arguments used by them in Confirmation of this Truth. As,

First, To break off Communion, or to refuse it for Brownists do declare, None
is to separate from a Church Confession of Faith, Art. 36.
rightly gathered and established, for Faults and Corruptions, which may, and,
so long as the Church consists of mortal Men, will fall out and arise among
them. And Mr. Jenkins argues upon this Principle. Must not Comment on Ju^e, v.
19.
he, who will forbear Communion with a Church till it be altogether freed from
Mixtures, tarry till the day of Judgment, till when we have no promise that
Christ will gather out of his Church whatsoever does offend? This was it that
amongst other Reasons conquered the Prejudices of that good Man Mr. J. Allen,
and kept him from Separation, of which His Life, p. iii.
we have this Account. He knew of how great Moment it was that the public
Worship of God should be maintained, and that its Assemblies should not be
relinquished, though some of its Administrations did not clearly approve
themselves unto him; because upon the account of some Imperfections and
Pollutions in them, supposed, or real, to withdraw Communion, is evidently to
suppose our selves joined before our time to the heavenly Assembly, or to have
found such an one upon Earth exempt from all Mixtures and Imperfections of
Worshippers and Worship. The want of this prudent Consideration makes many to
expect more than can be reasonably expected, and to look upon every Defect or
Corruption as intolerable; to prevent which, therefore Mr. Baxter does give
this Advice to his Brethren. Teach them to know that all Men are imperfect and
faulty, and so is all Men's Worship of God; and that he that will not
communicate with faulty Worship, must renounce Communion with all the World,
and all with him.

Secondly, They argue, our Savior and the Apostles No doubt it was written for
our Instruction, (says one in a Farewel-Sermon) our Lord Jesus Christ
England's Remembrancer, Sermon. 4. p. 94, 95.
(who was as zealous for Purity in God's Worship, as much against corrupt
Mixtures of Men's Inventions therein, as any can pretend to be) used to attend
on the Public Worship in his time, notwithstanding the many Corruptions
brought into it. That he went into their Assemblies not to join in any Worship,
but only to bear witness against their Corruptions, is no where written; but
rather the contrary is held forth in Scripture, when he acknowledges himself a
Member of the Church of the Jews, approves of, and justifies their Worship, as
right for substance, that Salvation might be attained therein, which he denies
to be attainable in any other Worship, John 4. 22. We know (including himself
amongst those that worshipped God aright) what we worship, for Salvation is of
the Jews. This is sufficiently proved by Ball's Trial, p. 132.
many, that Christ did communicate with the Jewish Church, and is granted as
well by those of the Congregational, as The Platform of Discipline in
New England, c. 14. 8.
Presbyterial Way: And yet Doctrine and Discipline, and Worship were much
corrupted, of which Mr. Hildersham does give a Lect. 35 on John, p. 165, 166.
Specimen, but especially Dr. Dwelling with God, p. 294.
Brian; There were many great Corruptions in the Church of the Jews in Christ's
time, the Priests and Teachers were ignorant and wicked, and had a corrupt and
unlawful entrance into their Calling; and the People were like to the Priests,
generally notoriously and obstinately ungodly; and the Worship used in that
Church was woefully corrupt; many superstitious Ceremonies, the Observation
whereof were more strictly urged, than the Commandments and Ordinances of God;
the Temple made a Den of Thieves, the Discipline and Censures shamefully
abused, the Doctrine was corrupt in many Points; yet the Word tells you, Christ
(whose Example it binds you to follow, and you profess your selves Followers of
him in all imitable things) made no Separation from this Church, professed
himself a Memeber of it, was by Circumcision incorporated a Member, received
Baptism in a Congregation of that People, was a Hearer of their common Service
and their Teachers, allowing and commanding his Disciples to hear them,
communicated in the Passover with the People and the Priests: No more did his
Apostles make Separation from this Church after his Ascension, till their day
had its Period, etc. By their Example it appears, that till God has forsaken a
Church, no Man may forsake it, etc. So that we Ibid.
conclude from hence with Mr. Hildersham: Those Assemblies that enjoy the Word
and Doctrine of Salvation, though they have many Corruptions remaining in them,
are to be acknowledged as true Churches of God, and such as none of the
Faithful may make Separation from. We shall need no further proof of this
Doctrine than the Example of our Savior himself, etc. For, why should our
Savior use it if it was unlawful? Or why should it be a Sin to us, The
un^easonableness of Separat. p. 104.
who have not such Eyes to pierce into the Impiety of Man's Traditions as he
had, as Mr. Bradshaw argues.

The same Measures were observed also by the Apostles after the Establishment
of the Christian Church: This is not to be gainsaid, and is therefore granted
by one, in other things rigid more than enough; I Non-conformists no
Schismatics, p. 15.
do not say that every Corruption in a true Church, is sufficient Ground of
Separation from it: The Unsoundness of many in the Church of Corinth touching
the Doctrine of the Resurrection, and in Galatia touching the Doctrine of
Circumcision, and the necessity of keeping the Ceremonial Law, were not
sufficient Ground of Separation from them; for the Apostles held Communion with
them notwithstanding these Corruptions. Now by Parity of Reason it will follow,
that if Separation was not to be allowed from those corrupted Churches, then
surely not from such as are not so corrupted as they; So Mr. Cawdrey Independ.
a great Schism, p. 195.
pleads, Corinth had (we suppose) greater Disorders in it than are to be found
(blessed be God) in many of our Congregations; why then do they fly and
separate from us? And if our Savior and his Apostles did not separate from
such Churches, much less should we, who may without doubt safely follow the
Advice given by an Author above quoted; When you are at England's Remembrancer,
Sermon. 4. p. 111.
a stand, think how Christ would have carried, what he would have done in the
like case with yours, and we may thereby be concluded.

Thirdly; They further argue, That Christ does It is supposed by Dr. Owen, That
there is no such Society of Christians Discourse of Evangelical Love, c. 3. p.
81.
in the World, whose Assemblies, as to instituted Worship, are so rejected by
Christ, as to have a Bill of Divorce given unto them, until they are utterly,
as it were, extirpate by the Providence of God, etc. For we do judge, that where
ever the Name of Jesus Christ is called upon, there is Salvation to be
obtained; however the ways of it may be obstructed unto the most by their own
Sins and Errors. And if this may be said of Churches, though fundamentally
erroneous in Worship, then, Who shall dare, as another says, to judge when
Christ has forsaken a People, Troughton's Apol. p. 110.
who still profess his Name, and keep up his Worship for substance according to
his Word, though they do, or are supposed to fail in circumstances, or lesser
parts of Duty? Now, this granted, the other will follow, that then we are not
to separate from such Churches. Thus Mr. Hildersham concluded of old from the
Practice Lect. 35 on John, p. 165, 166. and Lect. 82. p. 384.
of Christ, and observes: 1. So long as God continues his Word and the
Doctrine of Salvation to a People, so long it is evident that God dwells among
them, and has not forsaken them, etc. And till God has forsaken a Church, no
Man may forsake V. Dr. Bryan's dwelling with God, p. 293.
it. 2. No Separation may be made from those Assemblies, where Men may be
assured to find and attain Salvation: But Men may be sure to find and attain
Salvation in such Assemblies, where the Ministry of his Word, and the Doctrine
of Salvation is contained. So Mr. On the Sacramen. p. 242. Crofton's hard way
to Heaven, p. 36. Noye's Temple measured, p. 79. Jenkin on Jude, v. 19.
Davenport's Apol. reply, p. 281. Ball's Trial, p. 159, etc.
Vines, The Argument, says he, of Mr. Brightman, is considerable, If God
afford his Communion with a Church by his own Ordinances, Grace and Spirit, it
would be unnatural and peevish in a Child to forsake his Mother, while his
Father owns her for his Wife. I might heap up Authorities of this kind, but
shall content my self with a considerable one from Comment. on 1 Epist. John,
p. 156.
Mr. Cotton, who reasons after this manner: The Practice of the Brownists is
blameworthy, because they separate where Christ keeps Fellowship, Rev. 1. 18.
And that he walks with us we argue, because he is still pleased to dispense to
us the Word of Life, and edifies many Souls thereby, and therefore surely
Christ has Fellowship with us; and shall Man be more pure than his Maker?
where Christ vouchsafes Fellowship, shall Man renounce it?

Upon this are grounded the wholesome Exhortations of many eminent
Non-conformists, as that of Mr. Calamy: You must hold Communion with all Godly
Man's Ark, Epist. Ded.
those Churches with which Christ holds Communion; you must separate from the
Sins of Christians, but not from the Ordinances of Christ. Of Mr. R. Allein:
Godly Man's Portion, p. 122.
Excommunicate not them from you, excommunicate not your selves from them with
whom Christ holds Communion. Judge not that Christ withdraws from all those who
are not in every thing of your mind and way. Methinks, says another, in his V.
Bains on the Ephesians. c. 2. 15. p. 297. England's Rem^mbrancer, Sermon. 16. p. 455.
Farewell Sermon, where a Church, as to the main, keeps the Form of sound Words,
and the Substantials of that Worship which is Christ's, some adjudged Defects
in Order cannot justify Separation. I dare not dismember my self from that
Church that holds the Head. I think, whilst Doctrine is for the main sound,
Christ stays with a Church, and it is good staying where he stays: I would
follow him, and not lead him, or go before the Lamb. To such we find a severe
Rebuke given very lately by one of themselves: Proud conceited Christians are
not contented to come out Continuat. of Morn. Exerc. Sermon. 16. p. 459.
and separate from the unbelieving idolatrous World, but they will separate
also from the true Church of Christ, and cast off all Communion with them who
hold Communion with him.

Fourthly; They argue, That to separate for such If this should be, says Mr.
Bradshaw, then no Unreas. of the Separa^. p. 103.
Man can present himself with a good Conscience, at any public Worship of God
wheresoever; because (except it should be stinted and prescribed) he can have
no Assurance, but that some Errors in Matter and Form will be committed. So Mr.
Ball: One Man is of Opinion, Trial of the Grounds of Separat. c. 8. p. 137, 138.
that a prescribed Form is better than another; another, that a prescribed Form
is unlawful, etc. In these Cases, if the least E^ror do stain the Prayers to
others, that they may not lawfully join together, with whom shall the Faithful
join at all? Is not this to fill the Conscience with Scruples, and the Church
with Rents? Such as these must, if they will be true Sacri^eg defer. p. 95.
to their own Principles, renounce Communion with all the World, and be like
those that Mr. Baxter tells us he Defense of his Cure, part 1. p. 47.
knows, That never communicate with any Church, nor ever publicly hear, or
pray, or worship God at all, because they think all your ways [which he directs
to Mr. Bagshaw, and other Non-conformists] of Worship to be bad.

With this there can be no continuance in any Communion: so much Mr. Buroughs
does maintain: There would be no continuance in Church Fellowship Irenic. c.
23. p. 163.
if this [a Separation from a Church for Corruptions in it] were admitted; for
what Church is so pure, and has all things so comfortable, but within a while
another Church will be more pure, and some things will be more comfortable
there? Upon the mischievous Consequences of this did Mr. R. Allein ground his
last Advice to his Parishioners: Destroy Godly Man's Portion. p. 127.
not, says he, all Communion by seeking after a purer Church, than in this
imperfect State we shall ever attain. According to this Principle [no Communion
at all, if not in all] where shall we rest? In all Society something will
offend.

With this, lastly, there can be no Order, Union, or Peace in the Church: So
Mr. Baines, a Person of Comment. on ^phes. c. 2. 15. p. 297.
great Experience: This [seeking the Peace of Sion] reproves such as make a
Secession or Departure from the Church of God, our visible Assemblies, either
upon dislike of some Disorders in Administration Ecclesiastical, or disallowed
Forms, and manner of procuring things which the Communion of Saints for full
Complement and Perfection requires. This is not, in my conceit, so much to
reform as to deform, to massacre the Body, and divide the Head, etc. and will
end in the Dissolution Morton's Memorial, p. 78, etc. Mr. Baxter's Def. of
Cure, part 2. p. 171.
of all Church Communion (if it be followed) as is notoriously evident in the
case of Mr. R. Williams of New England, that for the sake of greater Purity
separated so long, that he owned no Church nor Ordinances of God in the World;
and at his motion, the People that were in Communion with him dissolved
themselves, as we have the account from thence. This therefore is one of the
Doctrines we are to avoid, according to the prudent Advice in a Book
above cited: Doctrines crying up Purity to the England's Remembrancer, Sermon.
14. p. 371.
Ruin of Unity, reject; for the Gospel calls for Unity as well as Purity.

Fifthly; They argue, That to separate upon such Thus Mr. Cawdrey: It is no
Duty of Christ's imposing, no Independ. a. Schism, p. 192.
Privilege of his purchasing, either to deprive a Man's self of his Ordinances
for other Men's Sins, or to set up a new Church in opposition to a true Church,
as no Church rightly constituted, for want of some Reformation in lighter
Matters. Says Mr. Blake, Vindiciae Foed. c. 31. p. 228.
We read not of Separation in his way [for the sake of Abuses and Corruptions]
approved, nor any Presidents to go before us in it; we read a heavy Brand laid
upon it, Jude 19. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, not having
the Spirit. So the Congregations in New England declare: The Faithful in the
Church of Platfo^m of Discipline in New England, c. 14. 8.
Corinth, wherein were many unworthy Persons and Practices, are never commanded
to absent themselves from the Sacrament because of the same; therefore the
Godly in like Cases are not presently to separate. It should rather have been
inferred, are not to separate, for so much must be concluded from the Premises,
if any thing at all. This is accordingly inferred by Mr. Noyes: For Brethren to
separate from Temple measured, p. 78.
Churches and Church-Ordinances, which are not fundamentally defective, neither
in Doctrine or Manners, in Heresy or Profaneness, is contrary to the Doctrine
and Practice both of Christ and his Apostles. Unto whom I shall add the
Testimony of Mr. Tombs: Separation Theodulia Answ. to Pref. 25. p. 48.
from a Church somewhat erroneous or corrupt in Worship or Conversation, etc.
is utterly dissonant from any of the Rules or Examples, which either of old the
Prophets, or holy Men, or Christ and his Apostles have prescribed, is for the
most part the Fault of Pride or bitter Zeal, and tends to Strife and Confusion,
and every evil Work.

Sixthly; They argue, That there is no necessity Confer. Savoy, p. 12, 13. Mr.
Baxter's Defense of the Cure, p. 34, 35.
that not only the hearing, but the reading a defective Liturgy was lawful to
him, that by Violence is necessitated to offer up that or none. And if there
was a Possibility of thus separating the substance from the circumstantial
Defects in the Ministerial Use of such Worship, much more may this be supposed
to to be done by those that only attend upon it, and are not obliged by any Act
of their own to give an explicit Consent to all and every thing used in it. 1.
This Separation of the good from the bad in Divine Worship they grant possible.
So Mr. Ball; If Trial of the Grounds, etc. p. 308.
some things human be mixed with divine, a sound Christian must separate the
one from the other, and not cast away what is of God, as a nullity, fruitless,
unprofitable, defiled, because somewhat of Men is annexed unto them. In the
Body we can distinguish betwixt the Substance, and the Sickness which cleaves
unto it; betwixt the Substance of a Part or Member, and some Bunch or Swelling,
which is a Deformity, but destroys not the Nature of that Part or Member,
etc. So Mr. Calamy: It Is Door of Truth opened, p. 7.
one thing to keep our selves pure from Pollution; another, to gather Churches
out of Churches. 2. They grant, that what is faulty and a Sin in Worship, is no
Sin to us, when we do not consent to it. So Mr. Corbet: My Non-conformists
Plea, etc* p. 6.
partaking in any Divine Worship, which is holy and good for the Matter, and
allowable or passable in the mode for the main, does not involve me in the
blame of some sinful Defects therein, to which I consent not, and which I
cannot redress. So another, in his Farewell Sermon: While all necessary
fundamental Truth is England's Remembrancer Sermon. 4. p. 94.
publicly professed and maintained in a Church, is taught and held forth in
public Assemblies, and the Corruptions there (though great, yet) are not such
as make the Worship cease to be God's Worship, nor of necessity to be swallowed
down, if one would communicate in that Worship, while any Christian (that is
watchful over his own Heart and Carriage, as all ought ever to be) may partake
in the one, without being active in, or approving the other; there God is yet
present, there he may be spiritually worshipped, served acceptably, and really
enjoyed. 3. They grant, that the being present at Divine Worship is no consent
to the Corruptions in it. Thus Mr. Robinson: He that partakes Lawfulness of
Hea^ing, etc. p. 19, 23.
with the Church in the upholding any Evil, has his part in the Evil also. But
I deny, as a most vain Imagination, that every one that partakes with a Church
in things lawful, joins with it in upholding the things unlawful to be found in
it. Christ our Lord joined with the Jewish Church in things lawful, and yet
upheld nothing unlawful in it. So Mr. Nigh: Case of great and present Use, p.
16, 18. Cure, dir. 35. p 196, etc. Defense, p. 96.
Approbation is an act of the Mind, it is not showed until it be expressed
outwardly by my Words and Gestures. This Mr. Baxter undertakes to prove by
several Arguments, as that no Man can in Reason and Justice take that for my
Profession, which I never made by Word or Deed. That the Profession made by
Church Communion is totally distinct from this. That this Opinion would make it
unlawful to join with any Pastor, or Church on Earth, since every one mixeth
Sin with their Prayers. 4. They say, that Corruptions, though foreknown, do not
yet make those that are present guilty of them. Thus the old Non-conformists
declare: It is all one to the People, Letter of Ministers in Old-England, to
the Brethren in New England, p. 12, 13, 16.
whether the Fault be personal (as some distinguish) or otherwise, known
beforehand, or not known. For if simple Presence defile, whether it was known
beforehand or not, all Presence is faulty. And if simple Presence defile not,
our Presence is not condemned, by reason of the Corruptions known, whereof we
stand not guilty. If the Error be such as may be tolerated, and I am called to
be present, by such Fault I am not defiled, though known before. Mr. Baxter
replies to those of a Cur^, p. 200.
contrary Opinion after this manner: Take heed that thus [by affirming that
fore-knowing Faults in Worship makes them ours] you make not God the greatest
Sinner, and the worst Being in all the World. For God fore-knoweth all Men's
Sins, and is present when they commit them; and he has Communion with all the
Prayers of the Faithful in the World: what Faults soever be in the Words or
Forms, he does not reject them for any such Failings. Will you say therefore
that God approves or consents to all these Sins? I know beforehand, that
every Man will sin that prays (by defect of Desire, etc.) But how does all
this make it mine? etc. And he otherwhere adds: It is another Man's Christian
Di^ect. p. 748
Fault or Error that you foreknow, and not your own. 5. It Is granted, that the
Fault of another in the Ministration of Divine Worship is none of ours, nor a
sufficient Reason to absent from it, or to deprive our selves of it. Thus Mr.
Baxter: The Cure, p. 197. V. Jerubbaal justified, p 16, etc. 22, 34.
wording of the public Prayers is the Pastors Work, and none of mine, etc. And
why should any hold me guilty of another Man's Fault, which I neither can help,
nor belongs to any Office of mine to help, any farther than to admonish him.
And that the Faults of him that ministers, are no sufficient Reasons to debar
our selves of Communion in the Worship, Mr. Nigh affirms, and proves by this
Argument: Case of great and present use, p. 10.
If I may not omit a Duty in respect to the Evil mixed with it, which is my
own; much less may I thus leave an Ordinance for the Evil that is another Man's,
no way mine, or to be charged upon me; this were to make another Man's Sins or
Infirmities more mine than my own. Thus is the Case resolved Of Scandal a
Discourse. p. 65.
with respect to the Cross in Baptism: I may not only, says one, do that which
I judge to be inconvenient, but suffer another to do that which I judge to be
unlawful, rather than be deprived of a necessary Ordinance: e. g. If either I
must have my Child baptized with the sign of the Cross, or not baptized at all;
I must suffer it to be done in that way, though I judge it an unlawful Addition,
because the manner concerns him that does it, not me (at least not so much) so
long as there is all the Essence. He must be responsible for every
Irregularity, not I. Thus Jacob took Laban's Oath, though by his Idols, etc. V.
Crofton's Reformat. no Separat. p. 24.
After the same manner does Mr. Baxter resol^^ the Case in his Christian
Directory, page 49.

Seventhly; They grant, That it is a Duty to join Thus the Presbyterian
Brethren at the Savoy: Confer. at the Savoy, p. 3, 12, 13.
An inconvenient mode of Worship is a Sin in the Imposer, and in the Chuser and
voluntary User, that may offer God better and will not: And yet it may not only
be lawful, but a Duty to him, that by Violence is necessitated to offer up that
or none. This is acknowledged by an Author that is far from being favorable to
Communion with the Church: If the Word of God could be no Separat. yet no
Schism, p. 64.
where heard, or Communion in Sacraments no where enjoyed, but only in such
Churches that were so corrupt, as yours is conceived to be; it might be lawful,
yea, and a Duty to join with you, so far as possibly Christians could without
Sin. Accordingly Mr. Baxter declares, That Def. of Cure part. 1. p. 78.
it is a Duty to hold Communion constantly with any of the Parish Churches
amongst us, that have honest competent Pastors, when we can have no better; and
professes for his own part: Were I, says he, in Armenia, Part 2. p. 176. and
Cure, p. 265. q. 6.
Abassia, or among the Greeks, I would join in a much more defective Form than
our Liturgy, rather than none. And he adds, That this is the Judgment of many
New England Ministers (to join with the English Liturgy, rather than have no
Church-Worship) I have reason to conjecture from the Defense of the Synod, etc.
Defense of Synod. Pref. p. 4, 5. Def. of Cure, part 1. p. 78. n. 6. p. 96. n. 5.
Now in what Cases this is to be presumed, that we can have no better; he
shows, 1. When it is so by a necessity arising from Divine Providence. 2. A
necessity proceeding from humane Laws which forbid it. 3. A necessity from the
Injury done to the Public. And 4. When it is to our own greater hinderance
than help, as when we must use none, or do worse. In these and the like Cases
it becomes a Duty, and what is otherwise lawful, is thereby made necessary. And
he that cannot join with a purer Worship, than what is publicly established,
without the breach of Humane Laws, or the disturbance of the Public Peace, or
dividing the Church of God, or the bringing Danger upon himself, is as much,
where any of these or the like Reasons are, restrained from so doing, as if it
did proceed from natural or providential Necessity; that is, the one he cannot
do physically and naturally, the other he cannot do morally, honestly, and
prudently. Having thus far stated the Case, and showed that it is universally
owned by those that dissent from the Church of England, that Communion in a
Worship not essentially defective and corrupted is lawful; and that it is a
received Opinion, that where better is not to be had, it is a Duty; and that
better is not to had, where it is not to be had lawfully. I might freely pass
on, but because there is a common Objection against what has been said, taken
from Malac. 1. 14. Cursed be the Deceiver, etc. that voweth and sacrifices to
the Lord a corrupt thing: I shall briefly return their Answer to it, and
proceed. To this the old Non-conformists reply: 1. No Argument can be Letter of
the the Minist. of Old-England to those in New-Engl. p. 14.
brought from this place to the purpose, but by Analogy, which is a kind of
arguing of all other most ready at hand, but liable to most Exceptions, and apt
to draw aside, if Care be not had (which in this Case we find not) to take the
Proportion in every material Point just and true. 2. The corrupt Ball's Trial
of the Grounds, p. 74.
Sacrifice is that which the Deceiver brings voluntarily, and out of neglect,
having a Male in his Flock; but the Faithful brings himself, and his goodly
Desires, according to the Will of God; and as for Corruptions whether
respecting Matter or Form, they are none of his, they cleave not to his
Sacrifice, to stain or pollute it, etc. 3. He offers not a corrupt thing, who
offers the best he has 4. It is to be considered, says Mr. Ball, that what is
Trial of the Grounds, etc. c. 4. p. 78.
simply best, is not best in Relation to this or that Circumstance or End; what
is best in a time free, is not best in a time not free. It is granted, says
Mr. Baxter, that Def. of Cure, p. 85.
we must offer God the best that we can do, but not the best which we cannot
do. And many things must concur (and especially a respect to the Public Good)
to know which is the best. So that before this Text can be V. Burrough's Iren.
c. 12. p. 86.
opposed to what has been said, it must be proved; 1. That the things in
question are Corruptions, as much prohibited as the blind and lame under the
Law. 2. That they are such as a Person does choose, and it is in his Power to
help, and offers it when he has a Male in his Flock. 3. That such a Corruption
as affects not the substance of Worship, does yet alter the Nature of it, and
makes the whole to be a corrupt thing, and abominable to God. If these things
are not, the Objection reaches not the Case, and there is no ground from that
place for this Objection.

I shall conclude this Head with a remarkable Saying Platform of Discipline, c.
13. 5.
of the Ministers of New England: To separate from a Church for some Evil only
conceived, or indeed in the Church, which might and should be tolerated and
healed with a Spirit of Meekness, and of which the Church is not yet convinced,
though perhaps himself be; for this or the like Reasons, to withdraw from
Public Communion in Word, Seals, or Censures, is unlawful and sinful.

But supposing it may be unlawful to separate from a Church for a defective and
faulty Worship; yet it may be supposed, that it may be lawful when it is for
better Edification, and that we may choose what is for our Edification before
what is not, and what is more for our Edification before what is less. For the
Decision of which Case I shall show from them,

P. 2. That as Defects and Faults in Worship, so neither is the pretense of
better Edification a sufficient Reason against Communion with a Church.
Sometimes they say it is no better than a mere Pretense and Imaginary, a
seeming Contentment of Mind, as one Methermenent. p. 71. On John 4. Lect. 58.
calls it. This Mr. Hildersham takes notice of: Some prefer others before their
own Pastor, only because they show more Zeal in their Voice and Gesture, and
Phrase of Speech, and Manner of Delivery, though happily the Doctrine it self be
nothing so wholesome or powerful, or fit to edify their Consciences, as the
Doctrine of their own Pastor is; of such he says, we may wish them more
Knowledge and Judgment. Mr. Baxter observes the Cure of Di^is. p. 359.
same; One thinks that this is the best way, and another, that the other is
best -- And commonly appearance, and a taking Tone and Voice, do more with them
than solid Evidence of Truth. Therefore it is fit to have a right Notion of
Edification, which, says a Reverend Person of late, lies more in Con^inuat. of
Morn. Exerc. Sermon. 4 p. 95.
the informing of our Judgments, and confirming our Resolutions, than in the
Gusts and Relishes of Affection. These, as he says, are indeed of great use to
the other, but without them are far from making a Person better, and leaving
him truly edified. Again, it may be, and it is no better than a mere Pretense,
when the Fault is in themselves that complain they do not edify. Mr. Hildersham
charges it upon such: Thou Lect. 28. p 129. and Lect. 58.
might receive Profit (if the Fault be not in thy self) by the meanest of us
that preach. And he thus freely again declares himself: I am persuaded, there
is never a Minister that is of the most excellent Gifts (if he have a godly
Heart) but he can truly say, he never heard any faithful Minister in his Life,
that was so mean, but he could discern some Gift in him that was wanting in
himself, and could receive some Profit by him. And therefore they advise to
cure the Fault before they make use of this Plea. So the pious Person
abovesaid argues: How should thou profit by his Ministry, if thou come with
Prejudice, without any Reverence or Delight unto it, nor do scarce acknowledge
God's Ordinance in it? So Mr. Jenkin directs: Labor for Comment on Jude, v. 19.
experimental Benefit by the Ordinances. Men separate to those Churches which
they account better, because they never found those where they were before (to
them) good --. Find the setting up Christ in your Hearts by the Ministry, and
then you dare to account it Antichristian. Thus one (in a Farewell Sermon,
speaking of supposed Defects in a ^nglan^'s Re^embrancer, Sermon. 16. p. 456.
Church) does advise his Auditors: Enlarge your Care and Pains in your
Preparations; a right Stomach makes good Nourishment of an indifferent Meal;
you may be warm (though in a colder Air and Room than you have formerly been)
if you will put on more Clothes before you come: Watch your Hearts more
narrowly, and speak things to your Hearts more than you have done. Ecclesiast.
10. 10. If the Iron be blunt, then must he put to more Strength.

But supposing it be really for Edification, yet this they declare is no
sufficient reason for Separation. So Mr. Buroughs: If you be joined to a
Pastor, Iren. c. 12. p. 85.
so as you believe he is set over you by Christ, to be a Pastor to you, though
this Man has meaner Gifts than others, and it would be more comfortable for
you to have another Pastor; yet this is not enough to cause you to desert him
whom Christ has set over you. And so the Ministers in New England Platform, c.
13. 5.
deliver their Minds: To separate from a Church for greater Enlargements, with
just Grief to the Church, is unlawful and sinful. So when this Question was
put, Are they not at all times obliged to use the Means which are most
edifying? It Is answered by the aforesaid Author, They may say at all times,
when they have nothing to outweigh Continuat. of Morn. Exerc. Sermon. 4. p. 91.
their own Edification. So that Edification may be outweighed, and then it can
be no standing and sufficient Reason. So Mr. Buroughs declares in this Irenic.
c. 12. p. 85, 86.
case: Men must consider not only what the thing is in its own Nature, but what
it is to them, how it stands in reference to their Relations --. It is not
enough to say, the thing is in it self better; but is it better in all the
References I have, and it has? Is it better in regard of others, in regard of
the Public, for the helping me in all my Relations? may it not help one way,
and hinder many ways? Of the same Opinion is Mr. Baxter: Many things, says he,
Defense, part 1. p. 85.
must concur (and especially a respect to the public Good) to know which is
the best. So that Edification is not to be adjudged of alone, our own
Improvement is not to determine us in our Actions, and especially not with
respect to Church Communion, for then other Reasons do give Law to it, and
overruled it. Thus we see, those that dissent from the Church in other things,
agree with her in this: And they give several Reasons and Arguments for it.

First; If we were sure we could not profit, yet we must come to do Homage to
God, and show Reverence to his Lect. 28. p. 129, 309.
Ordinance. This is Mr. Hildersham's Opinion.

Secondly; The leaving a Church for better Edification, Buroughs: To hold what
is in it self best, must be chosen Irenic. c. 12. p. 84, 87.
and done, not weighing Circumstances or References, is a dividing Principle.
And afterward, he says, A Christian without comparing one thing with another,
will hack and hew, and disturb himself, and others in the ways of Religion. I
belive some of you have known those who, whatsoever they have conceived to be
better than other, they have presently followed with all Eagerness, Of this V.
Ball's Trial, c. 4. p. 75, 76, 78
never considering Circumstances, References or Consequences, but the thing is
good, it must be done; yet being wearied with this, they have after grown
loose, in as great an excess the other way.

Thirdly; This Principle of better Edification, if followed, Hildersham: Lect.
66.
This factious Disposition of the Hearers of God's Word, has in all Ages been
the cause of much Confusion in the Church of God, and greatly hindered the Fruit
of the Gospel of Christ. This, says Mr. Brinsly, the moderate Author of the
late Irenicum [Mr. Burroughs] Arraignment of Schism, p. 48.
will by no means allow, but condemns as the direct way to bring in all kind of
Disorder and Confusion into the Church; and I think none who are judicious, but
will therein subscribe to him. It will not be amiss to transcribe his own
Words: It is in it self a better thing to enjoy a Ministry Burrough's Iren. c.
12. p. 85.
of the most eminent Gifts and Graces, than one of lower; but if this should be
made a Rule, that a Man who is under a Pastor who is faithful, and in some good
measure gifted, upon another Man's coming into the Country that is more eminent,
he should forsake his Pastor, and join to the other; and if after this, still a
more eminent Man comes, he should leave the former, and join to him; and by the
same Law a Pastor who has a good People, yet if others be more likely to
receive more good, he may leave his own People and go to them, what Confusion
and Disorder would there be continually in the Church? This is condemned also
by the New England Ministers. This Mr. Cawdrey does expose: If a Man may
lawfully Platform Pref. p. 7. etc. 13. * 1. Independ. a Schism, p. 50.
separate from a true Church, etc. only with a good mind to serve God in
Church-Institutions, true, or conceited by his own Light, all the Sectaries and
Separatists, Donatists, Brownists in the World may be justified. This, says
another (speaking of hearing Methermeneut. p. 72, 74.
for this Reason) is a Church-destroying Principle; sure if one Member be not
fixed, then not another, nor another, etc. and then not the Pastor, nor
Teacher, and so farewell Churches.

Fourthly; This will be endless. So Mr. Buroughs: Irenic. c. 23. p. 163.
be Corruptions in it, to gather into a new Church which may be more pure, and
in some respects more comfortable. First, Because we never find the Saints in
Scripture separating or raising Churches in such a Case. And Secondly, There
would be no continuance in Church Fellowship, if this were admitted; for what
Church is so pure, and has all things so comfortable, but within a while
another Church will be more pure, and some things will be more comfortable
there? And he concludes with this prudent Maxim: The general Peace of the
Church should be more regarded, than some comfortable Accommodations to our
selves. So Mr. Baxter: Defense, part 1. p. 85.
What if twenty Ministers be one abler than another in their several degrees,
does it follow that only the ablest of all these may be joined with, because
that all the rest do worse? And yet this must be, if Edification be always to
be consulted, and is to determine us in our choice of Ministers, Churches, and
Ordinances.

Fifthly; They say, Edification does not depend The former is asserted by Mr.
Hildersham: Lect. 54 p. 254, and Lect. 58.
It Is our Sin and Shame, and is just cause of humbling to us, if we cannot
profit by the meanest Minister God has sent. The Power of the Ministry
depends not on the Excellency of the Teacher's Gift, but God's Blessing. The
latter is maintained by Mr. Vines: It Is said, Order in an Army kills no On the
Sacrament, p. 246.
Body, yet without it the Army is but a Rout, neither able to offend or defend:
So happily Order in the Church, converts no Body, yet without it I see not how
the Church can attain her End, or preserve themselves in begetting or breeding
up Souls to God. Therefore is the Advice of Mr. Baxter; Do not In his Farewell
Sermon.
think to prosper by breaking over the Hedge, under the pretense of any right of
Holiness [so of Edification] whatsoever, following any Party that would draw
you to Separation. The Mischief of which is represented by Dr. Tuckney:
Experience, says Sermon at Paul's on Acts 9. 31.
he, has taught us, that the Church of God has been poorly edified by those
who have daubed up their Babel with untempered Mortar, etc. when the Church is
rent by Schisms and Factions, and one Congregation is turned into many
Conventicles, falsely now called Churches, this does diminish, weaken, and
ruin.

Lastly; When they do grant that Edification may serve to guide us, and that we
may hear where we can most profit, it is with such Limitations and Cautions as
these: it must be seldom, in a great Case, without Offense and Contempt. Thus
Mr. Hildersham: I Lect. 54. p. 253.
dare not condemn such Christians, as, having Pastors in the places where they
live of meaner Gifts, do desire (so they do it without open breach or contempt
of the Churches Order) to enjoy the Ministry of such as have better Gifts, etc.
so they do it without contempt of their own Pastors, and without Scandal and
Offense to them and their People. So again: You ought not to leave your own
Pastor at any Lect. 58.
time with contempt of his Ministry, as when you say or think, alas! he is no
body; a good honest Man, but he has no Gifts, I cannot profit by him. And as
if he could not be too cautious in the case, he lays down this as the Character
of one that does this innocently: He only makes right use of the benefit of
hearing such as have more excellent Gifts, than his own Pastor's, and learns
thereby to like his own Pastor the better, and to profit more by him. That this
is to be but seldom, we have the concurrent Testimony of the Provincial
Assembly of London, who upon this Question, Would Jus Divinum Minist. Evangel.
p. 11, 12.
you have a Man keep constantly to the Minister under whom he lives? do answer,
We are not so rigid as to tie up People from hearing other Ministers
occasionally, even upon the Lord's Day. But yet we believe it is most agreeable
to Gospel Order, upon the Grounds forementioned. Thus it is resolved also by
one of a more rigid way, Methermeneut p. 72.
who puts this Question: Whether Members of particular Churches may hear
indifferently elsewhere? and returns this Answer: God will have Mercy and not
Sacrifice, as distance of Habitation, handing such a point. But most certainly
Members of Churches ought mostly to be with their own Churches --.The imagined
Content in hearing others, is rather a Temptation than Motion of the Spirit.

From all which we may conclude, that the pretense of better Edification is no
sufficient Reason for Separation from a Church, Worship, or Ministry, without
there be other Reasons that do accompany it: and then it is not for this
Reason, so much as those it is in conjunction with.

But admitting this, yet it will hardly be granted to be a reason for
Separation from the Church of England, if the Testimony of many worthy Persons
be of any Consideration. Thus Mr. Hildersham declares, Lect. 29. p. 131.
when he is reproving such as make no Conscience to come to the beginning of
God's Public Worship, and to stay to the end of it; he thus proceeds: Because
I see many of them that have most Knowledge, and are forwardest Professors,
offend in this way, I will manifest the Sin of these Men. 1. They sin against
themselves in the Profit they might receive by the Worship of God --. There is
no part of God's Service, (not the Confession, not the Prayers, not the Psalms,
not the Blessing) but it concerns every one, and every one may receive
Edification by it. This he otherwhere repeats, and says; By the Confession,
Lect. 28 p. 129.
and all other Prayers used in the Congregation, a Man may receive more Profit
than by many other. Of this Opinion, as to the most of the Prayers in our
Liturgy, were the old Non-conformists: We are persuaded, that not only some few
Letter of the Minist. in Old-England to the Brethren in New England, p. 13.
select Prayers, but many Prayers and other Exhortations may lawfully be used,
with Fruit and Edification to God's People.

As for the Word preached amongst us, Nr. Nigh Case of great use, p. 3.
says, That there is a Sum of doctrinal Truths, which in the Enlargement and
Application, are sufficient both for Conversion and Edification, to which the
Preachers are to assent. And, That the Word of God interpreted and applied by
preaching in this way, is a choice Mercy and Gift, wherewith God has blessed
this Nation for many Years, to the Conversion and Edification of many
thousands. And he afterward ascribes the want of Edification to the prejudices
of People; Such reasonings, says he, against Page 25.
hearing, though they convince not the Unlawfulness of it, yet they leave such
Prejudices in the Minds of them which are tender, as perplex, and render
hearing less profitable and edifying, even to those that are persuaded of its
Lawfulness. This Mr. Tombs declares himself freely Theodulia, c. 9. 8. p. 317.
in; If we look to experience of former Times, there is now ground to expect a
Blessing from conforming Preachers, as well, or rather more, than from
Preachers of the separated Churches. Sure the conversion, consolation,
strengthening, establishing of Souls in the Truth, has been more in England
from Preachers, who were Enemies to Separation, whether Non-conformists to
Ceremonies, or Conformists, Presbyterial or Episcopal, even from Bishops
themselves, than from the best of the Separatists. I think all that are
acquainted with the History of things in the last Age, will acknowledge that
more good has been done to the Souls of Men, by the Preaching of Usher,
Potter, Abbot, Jewel, and some other Bishops; by Preston, Sibbs, Tailor,
Whately, Hildersham, Ball, Perkins, Dod, Stock, and many thousands, Adversaries
to the separated Churches, than ever was done by Ainsworth, Johnson, Robinson,
rigid Separatists, or Cotton, Thomas Hooker, and others (though Men of precious
Memory) Promoters of the way of the Churches Congregational. And therefore if
the Bishops and Conforming Preachers now apply themselves (as we hope, when the
heat of Contention is more allayed, they will) to the profitable way of
preaching against Popery and Profaneness, exciting their Auditors to the Life
of Faith in Christ, etc. there may be as good Ground, if not better
(considering how much the Spirits of Separatists are for their Party, and the
speaking of the Truth in Love, and edifying in Love, is necessary to the growth
of the Body; Ephesians. 4. 16.) to expect by them a Blessing in promoting the Power
of Godliness, than from the Separatists. So that whether we consider the
Worship or Doctrine, or the preaching of it, the Church of England in their
Apprehension does not want a sufficiency of Means for the Conversion and
Edification of Souls: And consequently the Argument taken from Edification, in
justification of forsaking the Communion of it, is inclusive and of no force.
But this branch of it will be further confirmed under the third General.

But however, this will not be so easily quitted, for supposing the Doctrine
good, and those that teach it capable (as far as Learning and Parts are
requisite) to improve it to the Conversion and Edification of others; yet if
they themselves are loose and scandalous, it may give just Offense, and be
thought a sufficient cause to separate from the Worship in which such do
officiate.

P. 3. Therefore I shall show, that the badness of the Ministers is of it self
no sufficient Reason to forsake the Communion of a Church, or to separate from
the Worship administered in it. What holy Mr. Rogers says, is a great Truth: It
is not to be denied, Seven Treatises, Tract. 3. c. 4 p. 223.
but that the Example of ignorant and unreformed, especially notorious Persons
in the Ministry, has done and does much harm; and if either they cannot be
convicted, or if their Crimes be such as cannot remove them out of their
places, there is just cause of Grief, that such should have any thing to do in
God's Matters, which are so weighty, and to be dealt withal in high Reverence.

But yet before the Objection is admitted, it is to be premised, 1. That if
there be such in the Church, it does not proceed from their Conformity to it.
For good and pious Men of this sort always were, and still are in the Church.
What there were formerly, Defense, part 1. p. 57.
may be read in Mr. Baxter, who thus delivers himself: When I think what
learned, holy, incomparable Men, abundance of the old Conformists were, my
Heart rises against the thoughts of separating from them; such as Mr. Bolton,
Mr. Whately, Mr. Fenner, etc. and abundance other such; yea, such as Bishop
Jewel, Bishop Grindal, Bishop Hall, etc. yea, and the Martyrs too, as Cranmer,
Ridley, Hooper himself, etc. What there are now in the Church, he also tells
us; I believe there are many hundred godly Ministers Ibid. p. 12.
in the Parish-Churches of England. And of his own knowledge, says, I profess
to know those of Ibid. p. 11.
them, whom I take to be much better than my self; I will say a greater word,
that I know those of them whom I think as godly and humble Ministers, as most
of the Non-Conformists whom I know. So says Dr. Bryan, In some Countries, I am
sure there are Dwelling with God, Sermon. 6. p. 313.
many Sober, Godly, Orthodox, able Preachers yet in possession of the public
Places.

2. It is to be premised, that this Argument, if of any, yet is of no farther
force than against the Congregations where such are, and so is of none against
the Church it self, where are good as well as bad, nor against Parochial
Communion where such are not. So Mr. Baxter argues; I doubt not but there are
many Defense. part 1. p. 11.
hundred Parish Ministers, who preach holily, and live holily, though I could
wish that they were more. And what reason have you to charge any other Men's
Sins on them, etc. or to think it unlawful to join with the Good for the sake
of the Bad? this is to condemn the Sound for the sake of the Infected.

Having premised this, we shall reassume the Case, and consider how it is
stated and resolved by them.

1. It Is granted, that it is not unlawful to join with bad Ministers in some
Cases where they may have better. So Mr. Rogers; As it is far from me to be a
Tract. 3. p. 223.
Patron of such, or to justify them; so yet, while we may enjoy the Ministry of
better, I would not refuse to be partaker of the Prayers which are offered by
them.

2. It Is granted, that it is lawful, and a duty to hear and join with such where
a better cannot be had. That it is lawful, so Mr. Rogers; Who can blame him,
Ibid.
who desires to pray with better than they be? And yet better to join with
them sometimes, than to leave the public Assemblies altogether. So Mr. Baxter;
No Cure, dir. 17. p. 114.
People should choose and prefer an ungodly Minister before a better; but they
should rather submit to such than have none, when a better by them cannot be
had. That it is a Duty, so the old Non-Conformists; The Scripture teaches
evidently, that Letter of Ministers in Old-England, to the Brethren in
New England p. 11.
the People must and ought to join with them [unworthy Ministers] in the
Worship of God, and in separating from the Ordinance they shall sin against
God. For the Worship is of God, and the Ministry is of God; the Person
unworthily executing his place, is neither set up by some few private
Christians, nor can by them be removed: And warrant to withdraw themselves from
the Worship of God, because such as ought not, are suffered to intermeddle with
Holy Things, they have none from God. So Mr. Ball; To communicate with
Ministers no better Trial of the grounds, c. 13. p. 311. V. Tombs Theodulia, p.
17.
than Pharisees in the true Worship of God, is to worship God aright, to
reverence his Ordinances, to rely upon his Grace, to hearken unto his Voice,
and submit unto his good pleasure. This they maintain by several Arguments. As,

First, Such were always in the Church, and Communion So the old
Non-Conformists argue; If the Minister make Letter of the Minist. in Old-Engl.
etc. p. 10.
it unlawful, then all Communion in any part of God's Worship with such
Ministers, is unlawful, and so the Church in all Ages of the World, the
Prophets, our Savior Christ, the Apostles, and the V. Ball's Trial, p. 310.
Faithful in the Primitive Churches, sinned, in holding Communion with such,
when the Priests were dumb Dogs that could not bark, and greedy Dogs that could
never have enough; when the Prophets prophesied Lies, when the Priests bought
and sold Doves in the Temple, etc. when they were such, and did such things,
they were ungodly Ministers; but we never find that the Prophets, our Savior,
and the Apostles, did either forbear themselves, or warn the Faithful not to
communicate with such in the Ordinance of Worship. So much Mr. Nigh does grant;
More cannot be objected against our Ministers Case of great and present use, p.
14.
that Conform, than might against the Scribes and Pharisees in Christ's Time;
either in respect of their Doctrine, which was laden with Traditions; their
Standing, which was not according to Law; their Lives, which were vicious; yet
Christ not only permits, but requires us to attend the Truths they deliver.

Secondly, They plead that our Savior himself did So Dr. Bryan; In some
Countries, I am sure there are many Sober, Dwelling with God, p. 313.
Godly, Orthodox, able Preachers, etc. And if you know any Country where it is
worse. This is attested by another in his Farewell Sermon. Our Savior England's
Remembrancer, Sermon. 4. p. 94.
Christ used to attend on the public Worship in his Time, notwithstanding such
Formalists and superstitious Ones, as the Scribes and Pharisees did Officiate
in it.

Thirdly, They say, that the Sin of the Minister is So Mr. Baxter; A Minister's
personal Faults may damn himself, C^ristian Directory, p. 747. and Cure, p.
113, 114.
and must be matter of Lamentation to the Church, who ought to do their best to
reform them, or get better by any lawful means; but in case they cannot, his
Sin is none of theirs, nor does it make his Administration null or ineffectual;
nor will it allow you to separate from the Worship which he Administreth. So
the Ministers sent to Oxford do assert; Some evil Men may, and always have, de
Account given to the Parliament, p. 27.
facto, been Officers and Ministers in the Church, etc. and the wickedness of
such Men did not null or evacuate their Ministerial Acts; for our Savior would
have the Scribes and Pharisees heard while they sat in Moses's Chair, etc. And
that the Ministrations in such a case are not invalid, and that the People
suffer not by it, they further prove: 1. Because they officiate not in their
own Name. So the Old Non-Conformists; It has ever-more been held for a Truth,
Letter of the Ministers, p. 11.
in the Church of God, That although sometimes the Evil has chief Authority in
the Ministration of the Word and Sacraments; yet forasmuch as they do not the
same in their own Name, but in Christ's, and minister by his Commission and
Authority, we may use their Ministry, both in hearing the Word, and receiving
the Sacraments; neither is the effect of Christ's Ordinance taken away by their
wickedness. 2. The virtue of the Ordinance does not depend upon their Goodness,
but God's Promise. So Mr. Rogers says of Prayer; If this burden [of bad
Ministers] Tract. 3. p. 223.
must be born, I ask, If among many sweet Liberties we enjoy, we may not join
in Prayer with them, if we can pray in Faith, seeing their unworthiness cannot
withold the Fruit of God's Promise from us, which is to one kind of Prayer as
well as another? So says Mr. Cradacot of the Word; Take heed, says he, of
being leavened with prejudice Farewell Sermons, Vol. 3. p. 22, 23.
against the Ministry of the Word, because of the misdemeanors or miscarriage
of the Minister. It is the Word of the Lord which converts, not the Person of
the Dispenser or Speaker. Hence it was that the Ministry of the Scribes and
Pharisees was not to be rejected, but to be esteemed, so long as they failed
not of the Substance thereof, etc. I conceive it is a rare thing for unconverted
Ministers to convert; and yet we must remember not to tie the efficacy of the
Word and Sacraments, to the goodness or badness of a Minister's Person. So when
it is Case of great and present Use, p. 14.
objected; How can we expect a Blessing upon the Labors of such, though they
preach truth? Mr. Nigh replies, Answ. 1. The mixtures in Sermons are nearest,
the irregularities of their Calling next, the sins of their Conversations
furthest from their Doctrine, and therefore have less efficacy at such a
distance to prejudice it. Answ. 2. It Is God's Word, and not their own they
preach, etc. 3. That if Persons themselves do believe and are sincere, they
are, notwithstanding such a Ministry, accepted. The Sacrifice of a faithful
Elkanah, says one, England's Remembrancer Sermon. 4. p. 94.
was pleasing to God, even when Hophni and Phineas were Priests. From all which
we find some declaring, that notwithstanding this they would Communicate. So a
Learned Person; The Peoples Prejudices Bonasus Vapulans, p. 133.
against the Liturgy, are grounded, for the most part, upon the wicked Lives of
those that are the most constant readers and frequenters of it, [doubtless the
Author, if he had considered this, would rather have said that they are
grounded upon the wicked Lives of some of those that read and frequent it.] I
shall never upon that account cease to join in Prayers, and to hear Sermons.
Others, we find, exhorting their Auditors to attend even upon such. So Mr.
Fairclough in his Farewel-Sermons; Get all Pastor's Legacy, p. 125.
good from, show all Duty to him that follows. -- If he should be weak or evil,
yet while he preaches Truths, while he sits in Moses's Chair, hear him
seriously, and carry your selves toward him as becomes a People to their
Minister.

I have thus far considered the Case of scandalous Ministers, because many make
it an Objection, as well those that are not concerned, as those that are.
Otherwise it must be acknowledged, that England was never better provided with
a Learned and Pious Ministry, than at present; who have as good Understanding,
Non-Conformists Plea for Conformists, p. 12, and 23.
preach as good Doctrine, do as much good by their Preaching as any others, as
a late Writer does confess. But though many Congregations are well supplied
with a Pious, Able, and Industrious Ministry, yet there are few or none but
what have some, more or less, amongst the Laity, that are (as it may be
supposed) not fit to be received into Communion with a Church, or to be
communicated with. This brings me to the next thing in Worship, which is,

P. 4. The Case of Mixed Communion. This is a On the Sacrament, p. 235.
Plea, says Mr. Vines, that is plausible to easy Capacities, because it
pretends to set up Holiness of Ordinances and People; but what the eminent
Dissenters do utterly disclaim; Mr. Vines says it is Donatistical, and others,
as Mr. Brinsley and Mr. Jenkin, that it is the common Brinsley's Arraignment, p.
37, 38. Jenk. on Jude, v. 19. Baily's Disswasive, p. 22. Sacril desert. p. 97.
Plea or Pretense which for the most part has been taken up by all
Schismatics, in defense of their separation from the Church; and therefore
that it is necessary the People should be untaught it, as Mr. Baxter does
advise. And as they do disclaim it, so they declare that those that separate
upon this account, do it very unjustly Caw^rey's Reformation promoted, p. 131.
; that the Scandals of Professors are ground of mourning, but not of separation
Manton on Jude, p. 496.
; that there may be a sufficient cause to cast out obstinate Sinners, and yet
not sufficient cause for one to leave the Church, though such be not cast out
Vines on Sacrament, p. 242, Platform, c. 14. 8. V. Cotton's Holiness of
Church Members, p. 2.
. That the suffering of profane and scanlous Livers to continue in the Church,
and partake in the Sacrament, is doubtless a great Sin; yet the Godly are not
presently to separate from it. There is, says Mr. Buroughs Gospel Worship,
Sermon, 11. p. 242.
, an error on both sides; either those that think it concerns them not at all
with whom they come to the Sacrament, or those that if they do what they can to
keep the Scandalous away, and yet they should be suffered to come, that they
themselves may not come to partake of it.

This both the Presbyterians and Independents so far agree in; and for this
their Opinion they urge several Arguments.

First, It Is no where commanded, but is a vain pretending to Holiness above
Rule and Example, says On Sacrament p. 246. p. 31.
Mr. Vines. It Is no Duty, as he elsewhere says, because there is no Command;
it is no Duty, and therefore we read not this word, come forth, in any of the
Epistles written to the seven Churches, against which Christ says he has such
and such things. They that lived in the Impurer, are not called forth into the
Purer, but there are Promises made to them that keep themselves pure, and
Duties injoined them toward the impurer part. For we may not make every Disease
the Plague. Shall the Sons of God, the Angels, forsake the Lord's Presence,
because Satan came also amongst them? etc. The Provincial Assembly of London
does affirm; In the Vindicat. of Presbyt. Govern. p. 134. Brinsly's Arraign. p.
47.
Church of Corinth was such a profane mixture at the Sacrament, as we believe
few, if any of our Congregations can be charged withal: And yet the Apostle
does not persuade the Godly Party to Separate, much less to gather V. Firmin's
Separat. examined, p. 40. Cawdrey's Church-Reformat. p. 71.
a Church out of a Church. From which Consideration, Mr. Tombs concludes
Theodulia, p. 74.
; Sure it can be no sin in any Person to join in the True Worship and Service
of God with any, if he have no command to withdraw himself from that Service
because of their Presence, nor Power to exclude them, and yet is bound to the
Duties there performed.

Nay, they do not only plead that it is not commanded, but that it is forbidden
and unlawful. So Mr. Hooker; To separate from a Church, because of the Survey
of Discipline, Pres. A. 3. Platform, c. 14.. 9.
Sin of some Worshippers, is unlawful. So the New England Ministers do declare;
As separation from a Church, wherein profane and scandalous Livers are
tolerated, is not presently necessary: So for the Members thereof, otherwise
worthy, hereupon to abstain from Communion with such a Church, in the
participation of the Sacraments, is unlawful.

Secondly, They plead, that the communicating in Grave Confut. part 3. p. 53.
or to pollute to them the Holy Things of God: So the old Non-Conformists. So
Mr. Vines; The presence On the Sacrament, p. 242. and p. 31, 32.
of wicked Men at God's Ordinances, pollutes not them that are neither
accessory to their Sin, nor yet to their presence there. This Mr. Buroughs
disclaims; Gospel Worship, Sermon. 11. p. 236, 237.
You are not defiled by the mere presence of wicked Men in the Sacrament, (for
that is a mere deceit and gull, that some would put upon them that differ from
them) but thus are you defiled, if you do not your Duty, and the uttermost you
are able, to purge them out. But if this be done, according to the Power and
Capacity Persons are in, it is universally granted that the Innocent shall not
suffer for the Nocent. So Mr. Ball; The Precept of debarring scandalous
Offenders Trial, c. 10. p. 191, 205.
binds them to whom God has given this Power, and them only so far as God
has put it in V. Jean's Discourse on the Lord's Supper. Rutherford's right of
Presbyt.
their Power. But God regularly does not leave that Power in the hand of one
single Steward, or some few private Christians. -- And if the Steward, or one
or few private Christians, cannot debar the unworthy from the Lord's Table, it
is manifest the Ordinance of God is not defiled to them by the presence of the
Wicked, whom they desire to reform or expel, but cannot, because Power is not
in their hand to do it lawfully.

This they confirm. 1. From the Examples of the Prophets and good Men, who of
old joined with Grave confut. Part 3. p. 53, and 55. Ball's Trial, p. 211.
Platform, c 14. 8. Blake Vindic. p. 235.
many that were notoriously stained with gross Sins; from the practice of our
Savior that communicated with such in the public Service of God; from the
practice of Christians in Apostolical Times, all which the old Non-Conformists
do insist upon. This is also pleaded by those of New England and others.

This would make all the Sins of the Congregation Christian Directory, p. 747.
V. Non-Conformists no Schismatics, p. 16.
to be ours. So Mr. Baxter; If you be wanting in your Duty to reform it, it is
your Sin; but if bare presence made their Sin to be ours, it would also make
all the Sins of the Assembly ours.

From all which it appears, that their sense is, that scandalous Members are no
sufficient Reason for Separation; for that must be, either because it is
commanded in Scripture, or that those that do communicate with such, are in so
doing corrupted also; but if neither of these be, then we may safely
Communicate with such, or in a Church where such are, without Sin.

Thirdly, To separate upon this Ground, is to maintain Vines on the Sacrament,
p. 244.
a Principle destructive to the Communion of the Church visible, which consists
of good and bad. This Mr. Cotton is peremptory in; It is utterly untrue Infant.
Baptism, p. 102. V. Bains on the Ephesians. c. 1. v. 1. p. 5.
to say, that Christ admits not of any dead Plants to be set in his Vineyard,
or that he takes not to himself a compounded Body of living and dead Members,
or that the Church of God is not a mixed Company, etc. From the ill Effects of
which, Mr. Cartwright used to call this Separation, upon In Proverb. Edward's
Apol.
pretense of greater purity, the white Devil.

And because there are some Scriptures that seem to look this way, and are made
use of by those that make mixed Communion an Argument for Separation; therefore
they have taken off the force of them.

If a Brother be a Fornicator, etc. the Apostle exhorts 1 Cor. 5. 11.


To this they Answer;

That if it be meant of excluding such an one from Church Communion, it must be
done by the Church, Defense, Part 2. p. 27. Cawdrey's Church-Reformat. p. 126.
and not a private Person. But you are not commanded to separate from the
Church, if they exclude him not; So Mr. Baxter, etc.

That it concerns not Religious, but Civil-Communion, eating Bread, which is a
Token of Love and Friendship in phrase of Ball's Trial, p. 200. Brinsley's
Arraignment, p. 45. Jenk on Jude, v. 19. Tomb's Theodulia, p. 210.
Scripture; not to partake of, or to be shut from the Table, is a sign of
Familiarity broken off. So Mr. Ball, etc. 2. The eating which is here
forbidden, is allowed to be with an Heathen: but it is the civil eating which is
only allowed to be with an Heathen; therefore it is the civil eating which is
forbidden to be with a Brother. So Mr. Jenkin, etc. 3. The eating here
forbidden, is for the punishment of the Nocent, not of the Innocent. To these
there are added others by the Old Non-Conformists. Grave Confut. Part 4. p. 57.
Tomb's Theodulia, p. 167. Cawdrey's Reformat. p. 75. Cure Dir. 9. p. 81.


As for other Objections, they are also undertaken by the same Hands, and to
which Mr. Baxter's Answer is sufficient; If you mark all the Texts in the
Gospel, you shall find that all the Separation which is commanded in such cases
(besides our separation from the Infidels and Idolatrous World, or
Antichristian and Heretical Confederacies, and No-Churches) is but one of these
two sorts; 1. Either that the Church cast out the impenitent by the Power of
the Keys. Or, 2. That private Men avoid all private Familiarity with them; but
that the private Members should separate from the Church, because such Persons
are not cast out of it; show me one Text to prove it if you can? This, says
Mr. Vines, has not On the Sacrament, p. 246. Tomb's Theod. p. 128.
a syllable of Scripture to allow or countenance it.

But supposing it be allowed, that we ought not to separate from a Church,
where corrupt Members are tolerated or connived at under some present
circumstances, (as for want of due proof, or through particular favor) yet it
seems to be allowable where there is no Discipline exercised, or taken care of.
For then we are without an Ordinance. To avoid this Objection, I shall consider,

2. The Case with respect to Discipline; and shall Sect. 2.
show from them, 1. That the want of that, or defects in it, are no sufficient
reason for Separation. 2. What Discipline is exercised or taken care of in the
Church of England.

The former of these they do own and prove.

First, As Discipline is not necessary to the being This was of old maintained
by Mr. T. C's Letter to Harrison, against Separation in the Defense of the
Admonit. p. 98, 99.
Cartwright, who thus argues; That Church Assemblies are builded by Faith only,
on Christ the Foundation; the which Faith so being, whatsoever is wanting of
that which is commanded, or remaining of that which is forbidden, is not able
to put that Assembly from the Right and Title of so being the Church of Christ.
-- For though there be many things necessary for every Assembly, yet they be
necessary to the comely and stable Being, and not simply to the Being of the
Church. And afterward he gives an Instance in the Dutch Assemblies, (or
Lutheran Churches) which, he says, are maintained in P. 106.
Discipline. So Dr. T. Goodwin; Whereas now in Com. on the Ephesians. p 487, 488.
some of the Parishes of this Kingdom, there are many Godly Men that do
constantly give themselves up to the Worship of God in Public, etc. These,
notwithstanding their mixture and want of Discipline, I never thought, for my
part, but that they were True Churches of Christ, and Sister Churches, and so
ought to be acknowledged. So that if Discipline be not essential to a True
Church, and a True Church is not to be separated from, (as has been proved
above) then the want of Discipline is no sufficient reason for Separation.

Secondly, This they further prove, by an Induction This way Mr. Blake proceeds
in; Vindiciae c. 31. p. 236, 238.
Discipline was neglected in the Church of Israel, yet none of the Prophets, or
Men of God, ever made attempt of getting up purer select Churches, V. Grave
Confut. Part 1. p. 18.
or made Separation from that which was in this sort faulty. All was not right
in the exercise of Discipline in the Churches planted by the Apostles, some are
censured as foully faulty, etc. yet nothing heard by way of Advice for any to
make Separation, nor any one Instance of a Separatist given.

To come lower, we are told by Mr. Vines, On Sacram. c. 19. p. 226.
That the Helvetian or Switzerland Churches, claim to be Churches, and have the
Notes, Word, and Sacraments, though the Order of Discipline be not settled among
V. Gillespie's Nihil respondes, p. 33.
them, and I am not he that shall blot out their Name. To come nearer Home; it
was so in the late Times when this was wanting, as was acknowledged Knutton's
seven Queries. Brinsley's Arraign. p. 48.
, and of which Mr. Vines says On Sacram. p. 219. Troughton's Apol. p. 65.
, we know rather the Name than the Thing. And if we shall look into the several
Church Assemblies amongst the Dissenters, we shall find, that as there are many
Preachers without full Pastoral Charge, as it is acknowledged, that have little
Authority over their Flocks in this kind, that have not so much as the Name of
Discipline amongst them. And so they have little reason to justify themselves
in a Separation by such an Argument, that will as well wound themselves, as
those they bend it against; and they that do so, are guilty of Sin. So Mr.
Baxter; Many that observe the Pollution of the Church, by the great neglect of
Holy Discipline, avoid this Cure Dir. 47. p. 231.
Error, by turning to a sinful Separation. I shall conclude this, with that
grave Advice of Dr. Owen; When Evangel Love, c 3. p. 77.
any Church, whereof a Man is, by his own consent, antecedently a Member, does
fall in part or in whole, from any of those Truths which it has professed, or
when it is overtaken with a neglect of Discipline, or Irregulatities in its
Administration; such a one is to consider, that he is placed in his present
State by Divine Providence, that he may orderly therein endeavor to put a stop
unto such Defections, and to exercise his Charity, Love, and Forbearance
toward the Persons of them whose Miscarriages at present he cannot Remedy. In
such Cases there is a large and spacious Field for Wisdom, Patience, Love and
prudent Zeal to exercise themselves. And it is a most perverse imagination,
that Separation is the only Cure for Church-Disorders. If this Advice be good
in one Case, it is so in another; and if it were well understood, and
faithfully followed, this Argument would be of little or no force.

2. I shall show how little this Plea of the Defective Discipline reaches the
Case. It Is granted, that there is such a Power and Authority of Ecclesiastical
Discipline resident in the Church of England, that if open and scandalous
Persons are not cast out, the Fault is in the Governors, for the Law takes
order they shall be, as Dr. Bryan says Dwelling with God, Sermon. 6. p 301. V.
Grave Confut. part 1. p. 17. ^ermin Separation examined, p. 28.
. And the Power of Suspension put thereby into the Minister's Hands, is so
evident, that after Dr. Collins had proved it from the Rubricks, Canons, etc.
he concludes Provocator provocatus, p. 151, and 154. V. Vines on Sacrament, c.
19. p. 233. Brinsley's Arraign, p. 40. Cawdrey's Church Reformat. p 122.
, It Is plain, that the Judgment and Practice of the Church of England in all
Times, ever since it was a Church, has been to suspend some from the Table of
the Lord. So that if there be Defects, through some past and present
Obstructions in the Exercise of Discipline, yet cannot the Church properly
stand charged with them, as is acknowledged Brinsley's Arraign. p. 48. Jenk. on
Jude v. 19. Blake's Vindiciae, c. 31. p. 236.
; or whatever may be charged upon the Church, there can be no sufficient Cause
from a Defect, Remisness or Corruption therein, for a Separation from it. This
was the constant Judgment of the old Non-conformists, which I shall transcribe
from a grave Author; Those, says he, that for many Years together, during the
Reign of the three last Princes, denied to come up to a full Conformity to this
Church, had a low Opinion of the Discipline then exercised (of which they have
left behind them large Evidences) yet how tender were they of the Churches
Honor to keep Christians in Communion? How zealous were they against
Separation? as may appear in the Labors of Mr. Parker, Mr. Paget, Mr. Ball.
Mr. Brightman laid us low enough, when he did not only parallel us with
lukewarm Laodicea, but made that Church the Type, and we the Antitype, by
reason of our Discipline; yet how zealous is he against Separation from these
Assemblers, and breaks out in these words; Therefore their Error is wicked and
blasphemous, who so forsake the Church, as if Christ were altogether banished
thence.

Having thus far considered what opinion the graver sort of the Non-conformists
have of Communion with a Church, and what Rules they do lay down about it; and
showed that according to those Rules, Separation from the Church is unlawful. I
shall close all with the last Advice given by a Reverend Person to his
Parishioners, in a Farewell Sermon in England's Remembranc. Sermon. 16. p. 454.
these words; Take heed of Extremes. It is the ordinary Temptation, in a time
of Differences, to think we cannot run too far from them we differ from; and so
whilst we decline one Rock, we split upon another. Remember the old
Non-conformists were equal Enemies to Superstition and Separation. Maintain (I
beseech you) sober Principles, such as these are, that every defective
Ministry, is not a false Ministry; that sinful Super-additions, do not nullify
Divine Institutions; that sinful Defects in Ordinances, do not hinder the
saving Effects of them. That there is a difference betwixt directing a Worship,
prescribing things simply Evil, and manifestly Idolatrous, and directing about
Worship, things doubtfully good being injoined, but the unquestionable
Substance of Worship being maintained. This latter ter does not justify
Separation.

And that the supposed Corruptions in the Church of England are of that nature,
as do not affect the substance of it, nor are such but what may be safely
communicated in, I shall now proceed to show from them.

3. I shall consider what Opinion the eminent Non-conformists 3. General.
have had of the several Practices in the Church of England, that are injoined
upon those that hold Lay-Communion with it, which respect Forms, Gestures, etc.
In general, they acknowledge that they are Things tolerable, and what no Church
is without, more or less Letter of the Mi^ist. of Old-Engl. p. 12, 13. Bryan's
Dwelling with God, p. 311. Troughton's Apol. c. 7 p. 68.
. 2. That they are not sufficient to hinder Communion. 3. That they are but few
Owen's Peace-Offer. p. 17. Mischief of Impositions, Epist. Dedic.
.

First, Forms; and so it is required of the Members of the Church, that they
join in the use of Liturgy or Common Prayer. For the better understanding their
Judgment in this Matter, I shall show what their Opinion is of Forms of Prayer,
of public Forms, of Forms prescribed, and of that particular Form of Divine
Service used in this Church.

1. The use of Forms is declared by them to be a thing lawful in it self, and
what God has left us at liberty to use, or not to use, as we see occasion. So
Mr. Ball; The Word of God does not prescribe Trial, c. 2. p. 36, etc. 8. p. 131.
any particular Form, stinted or not stinted, as necessary, but does warrant
both as allowable; for where nothing is in particular commanded touching the
external Form of Words and Order, in which our Petitions should be presented to
the Lord, there we are left at liberty. And to put Religion, in reading or
uttering Words, in a stinted or conceived Form, What is it less than
Superstition? Of the same mind is Mr. Baxter, and others Sacril. desert. p. 98,
99. Cure of Chapter Divis* p 175. Tomb's Theod. p. 137.
: And even Dr. Owen, though he does disallow the composing Forms of Prayer for
our own private use, yet at the same time declares Discourse of the Work of the
Spirit in Prayer, p. 2^0, 235. V. Dissenting Brethren, in 32 Quest. p. 55.
, that he does not argue against Forms of Prayer, as unlawful to be used. And
he adds a little after; If they appear not contrary unto, or inconsistent with,
or are not used in a way exclusive of that Work of the Holy Spirit in Prayer,
which we have described from Scripture, etc. I shall not contend with any about
them.

But they do not only assert, but they also undertake to prove the lawfulness
of Forms Ball's Trial c. 2. Rogers Tr. 223 Bryan's dwelling with God, p. 307.
, from the Nature, Use, and Ends of Prayer, and charge the contrary Opinion
with Enthusiasm Grave Confut. Epist. to Reader. Continuat. of Morn. Exer. p,
1006.
, and Novelty Pressed. Sermon. on Jo. 1. 16.
.

Secondly, As to Forms in Public, they declare;

1. That it is lawful to use them, and that this was the Tenent of all our best
and most judicious Divines Clark's Live. of 10 Divines, p. 255. Ball's Trial, p.
11.
. This Dr. Owen is cautious of denying, who says Discourse of Prayer, p. 231.
, Supposing that those who make use of, and plead for Forms of Prayer,
especially in Public, do in a due manner prepare themselves for it by Holy
Meditation, etc. I do not judge that there is any such Evil in them, as that God
will not communicate his Spirit to any in the use of them.

2. They do not only grant it lawful to use them, but that it is expedient. So
Mr. Egerton declares Pract. of Christianity, c. 11* p. 691. Edit 5.
; As for the Public Congregation, special care must be had, that nothing be
done in Praying, Preaching, or Administering the Sacraments, but what is decent
and orderly, because there many Eyes do see us, and many Ears hear us; and upon
this account, it is expedient for the most part to keep a constant Form, both
of Matter and Words. Mr. Bradshaw Life of Mr. W. Bradshaw, in Mr. Clark's
Collect. in Fol. p. 67. Continuat. of Morn. Exerc. Sermon. 31. p. 1006.
pleads for it, (as Mr. Gataker informs us in his Life) for the avoiding
Hesitation, which in Prayer is more offensive than in other Discourse. And
when, in a late Collection of Sermons, we find it complained of, that in our
days some have such Schismatical Phrases, Notions, and Doctrine in Preaching,
Praying, and Praising, that a sober Christian cannot say, Amen; it renders a
Form so much the more considerable. Collection of the Lives of 10 Divines, p.
255. Life of M Capel.


3. They declare that Public Forms were universally used. So Mr. Clark says,
That Set Forms of Prayer are according to the practice of all Churches, even
the best Reformed; yea, and Mr. Smith himself says, upon the Lord's Prayer,
(though as then he was warping, and afterward wandered far in the ways of
Separation) that it was the practice of the Ancient Church, and of all the
Reformed Churches in Christendom, of the Churches immediately after the
Apostles; nay, (says he) of the Church in the Time of the Apostles, as may be
probably gathered out of 1 Cor. 14. 26. This has also been the practice of the
best Lights that ever were set up in the Churches of Christ. 4. Accordingly
this was the practice of the Old Non-conformists. So Mr. Clark; It is very well
known Ibid:
that the Flower of our own Divines went on in this way, when they might have
done otherwise, if they had pleased, in their Prayers before Sermons. This we
are told of Mr. Bradshaw and Mr. Cartwright Bradshaw's Life publish*d by Mr.
Clark, in Fol. p. 67.
. And we find Mr. Hildersham's Prayer before Sermon Printed His Doctr. of
Fasting and Prayer, Anno 1633.
, and others. This was so universally and constantly practiced, that Mr. Clark
tells us Collect. of 10 Lives, 40. p. 38.
, that the first Man who brought conceived Prayer into use in those parts where
he lived, was Mr. Sam. Crook, who died but in the Year 1649.

Thirdly, As to prescribed Forms and Liturgies; of this Mr. Ball says; I have
showed the use of a stinted Trial, Epist. to Reade^*
Liturgy lawful and allowable by the Word of God, of ancient use in the
Churches of Christ, approved by all Reformed Churches, which is a very
convenient method for the consideration of their Judgment in the case. 1. They
grant that they are lawful, It Is contrary to no Precept or Commandment,
directly, or by Trial, c. 1. p. 5. c. 3. p. 23.
lawful Consequence, says Mr. Ball. So Mr. Norton of New England does
determine; Such things being Answ. to Apollonius, c. 13.
observed as are to be observed, it may be lawful to use Forms of Prayers, etc.
prescribed in the Church; neither are the Churches which use them guilty of
Superstition, Will Worship, and violating the second Commandment. And Dr. Owen
himself Discourse of Prayer, p. 222, and 235.
complies with it, who yields, That Men or Churches may agree upon a prescribed
Form by common consent, as judging and avowing it best for their own
Edification; and only argues against prescribing such Forms of Prayer
universally, in opposition, and unto the exclusion of free Prayer. 2. They
grant that they are not only lawful, but that there are footsteps of this way
of Worship both in the Old and New Testament, as Mr. Tombs and others have
showed Tombs Theodulia, p. 221. Baxt. Cure, p. 176. Balls Trial, p. 128, 129.
Grave Confut. p. 12, 13.
; and Mr. Ainsworth himself (that did otherwise argue against them) does
confess Annot. on Ex. 12. 8.
. 3. They grant that they are very ancient in the Christian Church: The
Christian Churches of ancient Times, for the space of this 1400 Years at least,
if not from the Apostles Time, have had their stinted Liturgies, says Mr. Ball
Trial, p. 96, 106, 111, 138. and p. 80.
: And they answer Objections to the contrary Tombs Theodulia, p. 222.
. 4. They grant that in the best Reformed, nay, in all Reformed Churches, they
are not only used and tolerated, but also useful and expedient Balls Trial, p.
108, etc. Rogers Treatises, p. 224. Tombs Theod. p. 234.
. 5. That those amongst us, to whom the use of the Common Prayer has been
thought most burdensome, have, from time to time, professed their liking and
approbation of a stinted Liturgy, as Mr. Ball assures us Trial, p 96, 106, 120.
. 6. That they thought it altogether unlawful to separate from a Church for the
sake of stinted Forms and Liturgies. This is not only frequently affirmed by
Mr. Ball Trial, p. 121 129, 140, 156.
, but little less even by Mr. Norton Resp. ad Apol. c. 13.
, who says, It is lawful to embrace Communion with Churches, where such Forms
in Public Worship are in use; neither does it lie as a Duty on a Believer,
that he disjoin and separate himself from such a Church: And they give this
reason for it, that then they must separate from all Churches. So Mr. Baxter,
etc. Is it not a high degree Sacril. desert. p. 102. Defense, Part 2. p. 65.
Balls Trial, p. 138. Rogers 7 Tr. p. 224.
of Pride, to conclude, that almost all Christ's Churches in the World, for
these thirteen hundred Years at least to this day, have offered such Worship
unto God, as that you are obliged to avoid it? and that almost all the
Catholic Church on Earth this day, is below your Communion for using Forms?
and that even Calvin, and the Presbyterians, Cartwright, Hildersham, and the
old Non-conformists, were unworthy your Communion? I know there are several
Objections against Forms of Prayer, but I know also that these are answered by
them. But since the most common is, that of quenching and stinting the Spirit;
I shall briefly give their sense of it. They say,

1. To say that Persons should use no set Form, but Roger's 7 Tr. Tr. 3. c. 4.
p. 223. Balls Trial, c. 5. p. 83.
pray as moved by the Spirit, is a fond Error.

2. They say, that the Spirit instructs us what to ask, not in what phrase of
speech. It stirs up in us holy Desires, but gives not ability suddenly and
without help, to express and lay open our Hearts in a fit method and
significant words. -- Ability of Speech is a common Gift of the Spirit, which
the Lord bestows upon good and bad, etc.

3. That the measure of the Spirit stands not in Ibid. p. 91.
Words and Forms, but in fervent Sighs and Groans.

4. That there is nothing lets, but that in such Rogers, Ibid.
Forms, the Hearers Hearts may profitably go with the same, both to humble, to
quicken, and to comfort. And Dr. Owen cannot deny but that they may Disc. of
Prayer, p, 222, 231, 232.
be for edification, and that Persons in the use of them may have Communion
with God.

5. They say, that the Scriptures insisted upon in this Case, are grounded upon
Mistakes, and are misapplied, as Mr. Tombs in particular has clearly
manifested. Theodulia, p. 164, 238.


Fourthly, I shall consider what their Opinion is as to the English Liturgy, or
Common Prayer, both as to the Liturgy it self, and Communion in it. As to the
Liturgy it self, it is acknowledged,

1. That the Matter for the most part is good, sound, Bryan's dwelling with
God, Sermon. 6 p. 312. Baxt. Def. pa. t 1. p. 29, 59. Crofton Refor. no Separ. p.
25. T. D. Jerubbaal, p 35.
and divine, and that there is not any Doctrinal Passage in any of the Prayers,
that may not bear a good construction, and so Amen may be said to it, as Dr.
Bryan with others do maintain.

2. That as no Church for this 1400 Years has been without its Public Forms,
so ours is the best. So the old Non-conformists; Compare the Doctrines, Le^ter
of the Minist. in Old-Engl. p. 12.
Prayers, Rites at those Times [throughout] in use in the Churches with ours,
and in all these (blessed be the Name of the Lord) we are more pure than they.
And it is not much short that we find in Mr. Baxter, in the name of Second Plea
for Peace, p. 101.
the present Non-conformists.

3. That which is accounted faulty, is tolerable, and hinders not but that it is
acceptable to God, and edifying to pious and well-disposed Persons.

Tolerable. So Mr. Corbet; The Worship contained Plea for Lay-Communion, p. 2.
V. Ball's Trial, c. 9. p. 58.
in the Liturgy, may lawfully be partaked in, it being sound for substance in
the main, and the mode thereof being laudable in diverse Forms and Orders, and
passable in the most, though in some offensive, inconvenient, or less perfect.

Acceptable to God. So the old Non-conformists; Letter of the Minist. in
Old-England, p. 13.
In them that join with the Prayers, according to Christ's Command, (and
liberty of absence from Christ, has not been showed) notwithstanding the
Corruptions, we hold the Prayers to be an holy acceptable Sacrifice to God, etc.

Edifying to well-disposed Persons. To this purpose Mr. Hildersham, Mr. Rogers,
etc. Treat. 3. c. 4. p. 224l


And accordingly Mr. Corbet professes his own experience; Corbet. Plea. p. 3.
Though I judge their Form of Worship to be in many respects less perfect than
is desired, yet I have found my Heart spiritually affected and raised toward
God therein, and more especially in receiving the Lord's Supper. I judge this
Form may be used formally by the Formal, and spiritually by those that are
Spiritual. It is my part to make the best of it, being the established Form. As
to Communion in the Liturgy, it is granted, 1. That there is no cause to
renounce it, or the Communion of the Church for it, and that so to do is a Sin
Gifford's plain Decla^ation. Ball's Trial, c. 7. p. 121. Sacril. desert. p. 105.
. 2. That all the Reformed Churches in Christendom, do commonly profess to hold
Communion with the English Churches in the Liturgy, if they come among us where
it is used Mr Baxter's Def. of Cure, p. 68.
. 3. It Is declared on the part of the old Non-conformists, That they ordinarily
and constantly used the Communion-Book in their Public Ministrations Ball's
Trial, p. 121. c. 8. p. 155.
; and that the People generally were in their days satisfied in it Let. of
Ministers of Old-Engl. p. 14.
. And for the present it is declared, We can lawfully not only hear
Common Prayer, but read it our selves Mr. Mead's Case, p. 7. M. Humphry's
Healing Paper p. 5. Mr. Baxter's Disp. 4. of Church-Gov. p. 364. Mr. S.
Fairclough's Life, p. 157.
.

I shall not trouble the Reader with the several Objections against the
Liturgy, and the Answers returned to them by the old and present
Non-conformists, but shall content my self with that, which it seems was much
Trial. c. 8. p. 152.
insisted upon in the days of Mr. Ball, and their Reply to it.

The Liturgy, in the whole Matter and Form thereof, is too like unto the
Mass Book.

If the Liturgy be Antichristian, it is so either in Not of the Form; for Order
and Phrase of Speech is not properly Antichristian.

2. That the English Liturgy is gathered according P. 155. V. Letter of the
Minist. in Old Engl. p. 14. Dr. Bryan's dwelling with God, p. 309, 310. Mr.
Baxter's Cure, p. 281.
to the Ancients, the purest of them, and is not a Collection out of the
Mass Book, but a refining of that Liturgy which heretofore had been stained
with the Mass, etc. and is not a Translation of the Mass, but a Restitution of
the Ancient Liturgy.

Thus says that Learned Person, and much more, to whom many others do likewise
consent. And in this Mr. Tombs is so zealous, that he concludes; I cannot
Theodulia, p. 102.
but judge, that either much Ignorance, or much Malice it is, that makes any
traduce the English Common Prayer Book, as if it were the Popish Mass Book, or
as bad as it; and to deter Men from joining with those Prayers and Services
therein, which are good, as if it were joining with Antichrist the Pope, (when
they can hardly be ignorant that the Martyrs in Queen Mary 's days were burnt
for it) is impudent falsehood.

Having thus far considered the Forms, I shall now Sect. 2.
proceed to show what their Opinion is of the Gestures required in
Lay-Communion, such as Kneeling at the Sacrament, and standing up at the Creed
and Gospels.

As to Kneeling.

1. It Is granted, that the Posture in the Sacrament is not determined. So Mr.
Baxter; I never yet heard Christian Direct. p. 616.
any thing to prove Kneeling unlawful, there is no Word of God for or against
any Gesture.

2. It is granted, whatever the Gesture of our Savior V. Faldo's Dialogue
betwixt a Minister and a Quaker. Noye's Temple measured, p. 81. Theod. p. 168.
in it was, yet that does not oblige. This Mr. Tombs has undertaken to show;
1. Because this Gesture seems not to have been of choice used by Christ. 2.
Because St. Paul omits the Gesture, which he would not have done, if it had
been binding. 3. He mentions the Night, and calls it the Lord's Supper, and if
the Time be not necessary, much less the Gesture. 4. If the Gesture does
oblige, then Christians must use the self-same that Christ used.

3. It is granted, that the nature of the Ordinance does not forbid Kneeling.
So Mr. Bains; Kneeling Christian Letters, Let 24. p. 201. Direct. p. 616.
is not unbeseeming a Feaster, when our joy must be mingled with reverent
trembling. So Mr. Baxter; The nature of the Ordinance is mixed. And if it be
lawful to take a Pardon from the King upon our Knees, I know not what can make
it unlawful to take a sealed Pardom from Christ, by his Ambassador, upon our
Knee. Hence Mr. Bailey reckons it as an Error of Disswasive, c 2 p. 30. etc. 6.
p. 121, 122. V. Johnson's Christian Plea, Treat. 3. c. 10. p. 285.
some Independents, that they accounted sitting necessary, as a Rite
significant of fellowship with Christ, and a part of our imitation of him, and
for both these reasons, declared it necessary to keep on their Hats at the time
of participation.

4. It is granted not to be Idolatrous. So Mr. Bains; Letters, Ibid.
Kneeling is neither an occasion, nor by participation Idolatry: Kneeling never
bred Bread-worship. And V. Baxt. -- Christ. Direct. p. 616.
our Doctrine of the Sacrament, known to all the World, does free us from
suspicion of adoration in it.

To these Mr. Tombs adds; 1. That the Papists. adore Theodulia, p. 256, etc.
not the Bread at putting it into their Mouths, but at the Elevation. It being
inconsistent with their Principles, to worship that which is not above them. 2.
That the Worship of God not directed to a V. T. D. Jerubbaal, p. 41. and Mr.
Crofton's Answ. p. 28. V. Ames Fresh Suit, c. 4. 4. p. 382. Perkins Cases.
Creature, but before it, as an occasional Object of adoration to God, is not
Idolatry. 3. That yet in the Church of England the Elements are not
occasionally so, but the Benefits of Christ in the Lord's Supper. And 4.
Kneeling is not to the Bread, but as the signification of an humble and
grateful mind; as he shows from the Rubric.

Fifthly, Those that do account it inconvenient, yet account it not to be
unlawful. Thus Mr. Cartwright; Evang. Harm. on Luke 22. v. 14, etc. Second
Reply, p. 262.
Kneeling in receiving the Sacrament, being incommodious in its own nature, and
made far more incommodious by Popish Superstition, is not therefore so to be
rejected, that we should abstain from the Sacrament (if we cannot otherwise be
partakers of it) because the thing is not in its own nature unlawful. So it is
said of the old Non-conformists; Troughton's Apol. p. 90.
Kneeling at the Sacrament was disliked by all, but yet thought tolerable, and
that it might be submitted to by some of the most Learned.

From all which we may conclude with Mr. Vines, On the Sacrament, p. 102.
that the Posture being a circumstance of Action, as well as the Time and
Place, is not of the Freehold of the Ordinance; and with Mr. Baxter, that
those that think Sacril. desert. p. 19.
they must not receive kneeling, think erroneously.

As for standing up at the Creed, etc. Mr. Baxter Christ. Direct. p. 858.
Sacril. desert. p. 96.
says, his judgment is for it, where it is required, and where not doing it
would be divisive and scandalous. Nay elsewhere he says, that it is a
convenient praising Gesture, etc.

Thus I have considered the most material Points, in which the Lay-Members of
the Church of England are concerned, and showed that the lawfulness of the
things injoined upon such, is declared and justified by the Suffrage and
Judgment of as eminent Non-conformists as have lived in the several Ages since
that unhappy Controversy was first set on foot amongst us. And now what
remains, but that every one concerned, set himself seriously and impartially to
consider it; and it becomes such so to do, when they go against the stream of
the most experienced Writers of their own Party, who might pretend to
understand the Case as well, if not better, than any that were conversant in
it. It becomes such, when they bury that under the condemnation of false
Worship, which the Lord, the Author of all Truth, does allow in his Service.
Ball's Trial, Epistle to Reader.
When they forsake the Prayers of the Congregation, and depart from the Table
of the Lord, and break off Society and Communion with the Churches of Christ,
etc. when they expose Religion to Contempt, and the Truth of God to Reproach,
by the Rents and Divisions in the Church; as Mr. Ball does represent it.

It becomes them, when our Division gratifieth the Papists, Defense, p. 17. 52.
and greatly hazardeth the Protestant Religion, and by it we may lose all which
the several Parties contend about, as Mr. Baxter has proved.

It becomes them, when the Church of England is the Bulwark of the Protestant
Religion amongst us at Home, and that according to the noted saying of Mr.
Egerton, The withdrawing totally from it, would more effectually introduce
Popery, than all the Works of Bellarmine.

It becomes them, when this is the Bulwark of it abroad, and all the Reformed
Churches in the World Brinsley's Healing of Israel's Breaches, p. 62.
have a Venture in this Bottom, which if compared to a Fleet, the Church of
England must be acknowledged to be the Admiral. And if it go ill with this
Church, so as that miscarry, there is none of the Churches of Christ this day
under Heaven, but are like to feel it; as Mr. Brinsley discourses.

Lastly, It becomes them, when Divisions and Separations draw down the
Displeasure of God, and lay us open to his Judgments. Therefore Dr. Bryan,
after Dwelling with God, Sermon. 6. p. 313. 314.
he has largely insisted upon the Argument, and the present Case amongst us,
does thus apply himself; O that I could prevail with you, to lay sadly to heart
the greatness of the Sin of Divisions, and grievousness of the Punishment
threatened against it, and has been executed for it; and that the Leaders and
Encouragers of private Christians to make this sinful Separation, would read
often, and meditate upon St. Jude's Epistle to verse. 20. and that the Multitudes
that are willing to be led by them, would follow the prescription of the means
here to preserve or recover themselves from this Seduction, verse. 20, 21. And
that both would leave off their reviling the Government Ecclesiastical, and the
Ministers that conform, and submissively behave themselves by the Example of
Michael, etc.

I shall conclude the whole with the peaceable and On the Ephesians. c. 2. p. 297,
298.
pious Advice of Mr. Baines; Let every Man walk within the compass of his
Calling. Whatsoever lies not in us to reform, it shall be our Zeal and Piety
to tolerate, and with Patience to forbear, especially in things of this nature,
which concern not so much the outward Communion with God or Man, essentially
required in a visible state, as the due ordering of Business in the said
Communion, wherein there be many Superfluities and Defects, salva tamen
Ecclesia; yea, and such a Church notwithstanding, as wherein the best and
truest Members (Circumstances considered) may have more cause to rejoice than
to grieve.

FINIS.
THE CASE OF Mixed Communion, Whether it be lawful to Separate from a Church
upon the Account of promiscuous Congregations and mixed Communions?

They are not all Israel, that are of Israel, Romans 9. 6. Many are called, but
few chosen, Matthew. 20. 16. The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for T. Basset, at the George in Fleetstreet; B. Took, at the
Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard; and F. Gardener, at the White Horse in
Ludgate Street. 1684.

THE CASE OF Mixed Communion,
Whether it be lawful to Separate from a Church upon the Account of promiscuous
Congregations and mixed Communions?

THE Foundation of this Pretense seems to be the great mistake of some Men
concerning the matter whereof the Church of Christ is to be composed, which
they will have to be, only real Saints and persons endowed with inherent and
substantial holiness; Accordingly finding in the Communion of our Church many
corrupt Members, who lived not answerable to their Holy Vocation, they, for
that reason, amongst some others alleged by them, cry her down as no true
Church, or, which is all one, deal by her as if she was so totally separating
from her Communion and setting up Churches of their own, consisting wholly of
Persons, in their Judgment, far more pure, that is, really holy and Sanctified.
Into this most false and dangerous conceit concerning the matter of the
Christian Church, I cannot tell what it is that should mislead them, unless it
be,

The not rightly understanding the notion of that holiness, that so often in
Scripture is applied to the visible Church of God. There is a twofold holiness
in Scripture, Inherent and Relative.

Inherent holiness, and that can be in none properly but God, Angels and Men;
In God essentially and originally, as he is the most perfect Being, in whom all
excellencies do possess infinite perfection; As it is applied to God, it does
not only signify a perfect freedom in him from all those sinful impureties,
wherewith the sons of men are tainted, but all the excellencies of the Divine
nature, as wisdom, goodness, and power, and a super-eminent and incommunicable
greatness in them all; hence he is called the holy One of Israel, the Psalm 89.
18.
excellency of Jacob, said to swear by his holiness, that is, Amos 8. 7.
by himself, and there is none holy as the Lord, said Psalm 89. 35.
Hannah, for there is none besides thee, none holy besides 1 Samuel 2. 2.
thee, as the Septuagint renders it, none comparable to thee in the height and
greatness of all thy excellencies. In Angels and Men, by way of participation,
and as far as their natures are capable, hence there are holy Angels, and holy
Men.

Relative holiness, which when it is applied to persons, may be more properly
called faederal, and this is founded in the relation, persons and things have
to God, and the nature of it consists in a separation of them from common uses,
and in appropriating of them to the peculiar use and service of God: hence the
Sabbath is called an holy day, Judea an holy Land, Jerusalem an holy City, and
the Church and People of God an holy Church, that is, a Body or Society of men
called and separated from the rest of the World to God, to worship him in a way
distinguished from the rest of the World, having Laws and Promises and Rites of
Worship peculiar and appropriate to themselves; This account God himself gives
of it, I have separated you, Levit. 20. 24.
says he to the Israelites, from other people, that you should be mine, and ye
shall be an holy people unto me. For the same reason do we find that whole
church of the Jews, even then when its members had generally Deuteronomy. 9. 12. Deuteronomy.
9. 7. Deuteronomy. 32. 5.
very much corrupted themselves, were a rebellious people, a crooked
generation, yet upon the account of their being separated to God, and in
covenant with him, styled by Moses and other inspired men, his saints, his
Deuteronomy. 7. 6. Psalm, 135. 4.
holy people, his peculiar treasure. For the same reason also did the Apostles
dignifie those Churches to whom they wrote, with those great and glorious
titles, of (...).
saints, the sanctified, the called and chosen in Christ Jesus; because they,
as of old the Jews, had entertained the profession of a Religion, distinct from
others of the World, whereby they might be excited to the attainment of those
excellencies, which in the object of their Worship they did admire and adore;
and those Names being of as large a meaning as that of Christian, show rather
what they ought to have been, than assure us what they really were; for amongst
those Saints were found strange immortalities altogether contradictory to the
sacredness of their Vocation.

But does not the Apostle say, Christ loved the Church Ephesians. 5. 25.
and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it by the washing
of water by the Word, that he might present it to himself a glorious Church,
not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and
without blemish?

I answer; Holiness in this place must be confessed to be meant a real and inward
holiness; but then by Church, is not to be understood the whole complex Body of
the Universal Church in this World, but either that part of it that in this
World is really, though imperfectly, holy, and is every day pressing forwards to
higher degrees of it, or else that Church which shall be in the future state,
when all the corrupt and unsound Members shall be by death and the final
decision of God, for ever excommunicated out of it, and all the Members that
remain in it, only such as were in some acceptable degrees holy here, and shall
then be perfected in holiness. Neither is this to make two Churches of Christ,
as the Donatists objected, one, in which good and bad are mingled together, and
another, in which there are good alone; but only to assign two different states
of the same Church, the one in this World, composed of good and bad, externally
holy in respect of all by vocation, and internally holy in respect of some in
it by sanctification; the other in the next World, where there shall be a
separation made betwixt the Sheep and the Goats, and all remaining in the
Church, such, as shall at once be perfectly holy and completely happy: This is
that Church which Christ shall present to himself, glorious, not having spot or
wrinkle or any such thing, but holy and without blemish.

This being spupos'd, all that will be needful to say, in answer to this
Question, may be comprehended under these three Propositions.

1. That an external Profession of the Christian Faith is enough to qualify a
person to be admitted a Member of Christ's Church.

2. That every such Member has a right to all the external Privileges of the
Church, till by his continuance in some notorious and scandalous sins he has
forfeited that right, and by the just censures of the Church he be for such
behavior actually excluded from those Privileges.

3. That some corrupt and scandalous Members remaining in the Communion,
through the want of the du^ exercise of discipline in it, or the negligence and
connivance of the Governors and Pastors of it, gives no such cause to any to
Separate from her.

I begin with the first; That an external Profession of the Christian Faith,
etc.

This Profession in grown and adult persons is to be made by themselves; Thus
it was at the first erection of the Christian Church, when Persons by the
Preaching and Miracles of the Apostles were converted from the Pagan
Superstition and Jewish Religion to the Christian Faith; they were to believe,
and with the Eunuch Acts 8. 27.
to declare their belief, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God,

In Infants and Children not grown up to years of discretion, by their Parents,
and those who at the request of their Parents, do together with them undertake
for them. So great an interest and propriety have Parents in their Children, so
entire an affection and concern for their good and happiness, so unquestionable
an authority over them, so binding and obligatory are all their reasonable
commands upon them, that we have good grounds to believe, that they that are
born of Christian Parents will be brought up in the Christian Religion, and at
years of understanding take upon themselves what their Parents and Sureties
promised for them; and upon this account that profession of Faith made by
others at their Baptism, in their behalf, may in a favorable sense be
reckoned, as made by themselves; so God accounted it in the Jewish Church, upon
the account of their Parents being in covenant with God, were the Children of
the Jews esteemed an holy Seed, and at eight days old admitted by Circumcision
into the same Church and Covenant with them; And the same reason holds for
admitting Children born of Christian Parents into the Christian Church by the
Rite of Baptism, which is the Sign and Seal of the Covenant under the Gospel,
as Circumcision was of that under the Law. Now that this external profession,
without any farther signs of saving Grace, is ground sufficient for those with
whom God has entrusted the Keys and Government of his Church to admit persons
into it, will appear from these particulars:

1. This is the qualification prescribed by our Lord: he is the Head and
Founder of his Church, to him therefore does it appertain to appoint the terms
and conditions of admission into it, and what these are, we may learn from that
commission he gave his Apostles when he sent them out to gather a Church under
him, viz. the becoming his Disciples; Go ye therefore and teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. Teach all Nations, (...), Disciple all Nations; Now a Disciple is
properly one, not that has already attained to the full Mat. 28. 19.
knowledge and saving effects of the Gospel, but only understands so much of it,
as to be willing to be admitted into the Christian Church, in order to his
being farther taught the one, and to have the other more thoroughly wrought in
him. Whether men are sincere in their profession of the Christian Faith, and in
their desires to be admitted Members of Christ's Church, and whether this great
Privilege and Blessing of Church Membership will be effectual, to produce in
them that regeneration and new creature, for which it was designed, the Pastors
and Governors of the Church cannot know; This their bare profession and desire
is enough to give them a title to it and qualification for it. By this rule the
Apostles of Christ walked as to this particular, even when they lived with him
here on Earth, and were under his immediate direction: The Pharisees heard that
Jesus made and Baptized more Disciples than John, though Jesus himself did not
Baptize, John 4. 2.
but his Disciples. Now if, as it was famed abroad, and is not in the Text
contradicted, Jesus's Disciples Baptized more than John, it follows that they
baptized more than were sincere, when we read that so few, not above an Hundred
and Twenty continued with Christ to the last. Acts 1. 15.


2. It appears from the Apostles practice afterward in admitting persons into
the Church. Nothing but a professed willingness to receive the Gospel, tho they
received it not from the heart, was required by them, in order to it: The Text
tells us, that they that gladly received St. Peter 's words were baptized, and
the same Acts 2. 41.
day were added to the Church about 3000 souls; It Is true, St. Peter exhorted
them all to repent in order to it, but whether they did so or no, he stayed not
for proof, from their bringing forth fruits worthy of repentance, but presently
upon their professed willing reception of the Word they were baptized and added
to the Church. One might have been apt to suspect, that amongst so great a
number, all would not prove sincere Converts, and so it fell out; Ananias and
Saphira Acts 4. 34. Acts 5. 1, 2, 3.
were two of the number, in whom ye know, that glad reception of the Gospel was
found to be but gross hypocrisy. By the same rule St. Philip proceeded in
planting the Church at Samaria; when the People seeing the miracles he did,
gave heed to the doctrine he Acts 8. 12.
taught, concerning the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Name of Jesus, and declared
their belief of it, without any farther examination they were Baptized both Men
and Women: And amongst them was Simon Magus, wose former notorious Crimes of
Sorcery, Witchcraft and Blasphemy, might have given just grounds of fear to the
holy Deacon, that his Faith was but hypocritical, and his Heart not right in
the sight of God, as appeared afterward, yet upon his believing, Acts 8. 20.
he was Baptized; such other Members of Christ's Church were Demas, Hymeneus,
and Alexander, they ver. 13.
had nothing, it seems, but a bare outward profession of the Faith, to entitle
them to that Privilege, since afterward, as we read, the one embraced this
present World, and the other two made shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience.

3. This appears from the representation Christ has 2 Timothy 4. 10. 1 Timothy 1. 19.
made of his Church in the Gospel, fore-instructing his Disciples by many
Parables, that it should consist of a mixture of good and bad. It is a Field
wherein Wheat and Tares grow up together; A Net wherein are Fishes of all
sorts; A Flour in which is laid up solid Corn and Mat. 13. 24, 25. verse. 47.
light Chaff; A Vine on which are fruitful and barren Branches; A great House
wherein are Vessels of Gold Mat. 3. 12.
and Silver, and Vessels of lesser value, Wood and Earth; John 15. 1.
A Marriage feast, where are wise and foolish Virgins, 2 Timothy 2. 20.
some with wedding garments, and some without, some Mat. 25.
had Oil, and some but empty Lamps; St. Hierome compares it to Noah's Ark,
wherein were preserved Beasts clean and unclean; when the Apostle said, They
are St. Hier. dial. con. Lucifer. Arca Noae Ecclesiae typus.
not all Israel that are of Israel, his meaning was, that in the Jewish Church
many more were Circumcised in the Flesh, than what were Circumcised in Heart;
and when our Savior said, many are called, Romans 9. 6.
but few chosen, he declared the same thing, that in his Church many more were
called and admitted into it by Baptism, than what were sanctified by his
Spirit, or should be admitted into his Heaven.

4. The many corrupt and vicious Members in the Churches, which the Apostle
themselves had planted, is another proof of this; The number whereof, in all
likelihood, could not have been so great, had they been so cautious and
scrupulous, as to admit none into them, but whom in their judgments they
thought to be really holy. In the Church of Corinth there were 1 Cor. 15. 34.
ver. 12. 2 Cor. 12. 20, 21. 1 Cor. 7.
many, that had not the knowledge of God, that denied the Resurrection of the
Dead, that came Drunk to the Lords Table, that were Fornicators, Unclean and
Contentious Persons. In the Church of Galatia there were many that Nauseated
the Bread of Life, and made it their Choice, to pick and eat the rubbish of the
partition wall, which Christ had demolisht; The Rites of the Law which expired
at the death of Christ, they attempted to pull out of their Graves, and to give
a Resurrection to them; They were so much gone off from the Doctrine of
Christianity, to weak and beggarly Rudiments, observing Days and Months, and
Gal. 3. 7; 10, 11.
Times and Years; that by reason of this their Superstition, St. Paul signified
his fears of quite losing them, and that his labor was bestowed upon them in
vain.

Amongst all the Seven Churches in Asia, there was not one but what had
received such Members into it, that were either very Cold and Lukewarm in their
Religion, or by their Vicious Lives proved a Reproach and Scandal to it; The
Church of Sardis so swarmed with these, that St. John tells us, that there were
but a few Rev. 3. 1, 4.
names in Sardis that had not defiled their garments. Now if the Apostles of
our Lord, who had the extraordinary assistances of the Holy Ghost, for the
discerning of Spirits at that time, and were thereby enabled far beyond what
any of their Successors can pretend to, to distinguish betwixt the good and the
bad, did notwistanding admit many mere formal Professors into the Church of
Christ, we may conclude that they apprehended that 'twas the will of Christ it
should be so.

5. No other rule in admitting persons into the Church is practicable. Whether
Persons are really holy and truly regenerate or no, the Officers of Christ who
know not the hearts of Men, cannot make a certain judgment of, they may through
want of judgment be deceived, through the subtilty of hypocrites be imposed
upon, through humane frailty, passion or prejudice, be misguided, and by this
means, many times, the door may be opened to the bad, and shut against the
good; Now that cannot be supposed to be a rule of Christ's appointment, which
is either impossible to be observed, or in observing which, the Governors of
his Church cannot be secured from acting wrongfully and injuriously to Men.

In sum, Christ has entrusted the power of the Keys into the hands of an Order
of Men whom he has set over his Church, and who, under him, are to manage the
Affairs of it, but these being but Earthen vessels, of short and fallible
understandings, he has 2. Cor. 4 7.
not left the execution of their Office to be managed solely by their own
prudence and discretion, but has given them a certain public Rule to go by,
both in admitting persons into his Church, and in excluding them out of it; for
the one, the Rule is, open and solemn profession of the Christian Faith; for
the other, open and scandalous Offenses, proved by witnesses.

2. The second Proposition is, That every such Member has a right to all the
external Privileges of the Church, till by his continuance in some notorious
and scandalous sins he forfeits that right, and by the just censures of the
Church for such behavior he be actually excluded from those Privileges.

For the explanation and proof of this Proposition, these three particulars are
to be done: (1.) What Is meant by external Privileges? (2) What kind of
Offenders those are that forfeit their right to them, and ought by the Censures
of the Church to be excluded from them? (3.) Upon what the right of those
Members that have not so offended, is grounded?

1. What Is meant by external Privileges? As there are two sorts of Members in
Christ's visible Church, so there are two sorts of Privileges that belong to
them; each sort having those that are proper and peculiar to it, according to
the nature of that relation they bear to the Head and their fellow Members.

1. There are Members only by foederal or covenant-holiness, such as are only
born of water, when by Baptism they were united to Christ and the Church, and
took upon them the Profession and Practice of the Christian Religion; Now the
Privileges that belong to these are of the same make with their
Church Membership, external, and consisting only in an outward and public
Communion with the Church in the Word and Ordinances.

2. There are Members by real and inherent holiness, such as are not only born
of Water, but of the Spirit also, when by the inward operations of the Holy
Ghost their Souls are renewed after the Image of God, and made partakers of a
Divine Nature; And the Privileges that belong to these, are not only the
forementioned ones, but together with them, others that are suitable to their
more spiritual relation, inward, and such as consist in the especial and
particular care and protection of God, the pardon and remission of their sins
by the Blood of Christ, and the gracious influences and comforts of the Holy
Ghost; All comprehended in that Prayer of the Apostle for his Corinthians, The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the
Holy Ghost, be 2 Cor. 13. 14.
with you all. Amen.

Now it is of the first sort of Members, and that sort of Privileges that belong
to them, that the Proposition is to be understood.

2. What kind of Offenders those are that have forfeited their right to, and
ought by the Censures of the Church to be excluded from those Privileges? This
the Apostle has plainly told us, and our own Church in its Exhortation to the
Sacrament fairly intimates: I have wrote unto you, says St. Paul, not no keep
company, 1 Cor. 5. 11.
if any Man that is called a Brother be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an
Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, no, not to eat? Not
only, as much as can be, to have no familier conversation with ver. 10.
him in civil matters (though some must be had whilst we are in this World) but
also, and more especially, to avoid communion with him in religious exercises;
and how that is to be done, the Apostle tells us, viz. not by forsaking the
Church our selves, but by doing our utmost endeavors to have him cast out of
it: So it follows, Therefore put away from among your selves that wicked ver.
13.
person. And, In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered
together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver
such an one ver. 4, 5.
unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may bo saved in
the day of the Lord Jesus. Agreeable hereunto are the words of the Exhortation,
If any of you be a blasphemer of God, a hinderer and slanderer of his Word, an
Adulterer, or be in malice or envy, or in any other grievous Crime, repent you
of your sins, or come not to that holy Table. Such sinners as these have in a
manner undone and made void what was done in their behalf in Baptism; They, by
not performing what was then promised for them, but living directly contrary to
it, do virtually renounce that Covenant they then entered into with God in
Christ, and fall back again into the state of Pagans and Infidels; Their
Sureties engaged for them, that they should believe the Christian Faith, keep
God's Commandments, and renounce the World, the Flesh and the Devil; But such
habitual notorious Offenders as these, say, by their Practice, what had they to
do to undertake such things for us, we will stand to no such engagements, but
we will be at large, to believe what we please, and to practice what we fancy,
and to worship whom we think fit; And thus, as it were, breaking off from being
in Covenant with God, and virtually renouncing their Church Membership, they at
the same time lose all right and title to those Blessings and Privileges that
were due to them upon the account thereof; and in this sad state and condition
did the Primitive Christians reckon all, that had h^ghly and notor^ously
sinned, amongst whom especially were the lapsed that had offered Sacrifice,
they staid not for a formal Sentence to be pronounced against them by the
Church, but looked upon them as ipso facto excommunicate; and though till that was
past, they could not actually be shut out, yet they began before to avoid their
Company, and to forbear all religious commerce toward them. But so long as Men
keep in Covenant with God, and abide in his Church, which may be done by
holding that profession of Faith that they made at their first entrance into
it, their right to the external franchises of it remains inviolable, and their
title without question. As may appear from these particulars,

1. From the Tenor of that Covenant they in their Baptism entered into with
God; which consists of Promises on God's part, as well as Conditions on Man's.
The Promises on God's part, are expressed in these general 2 Cor. 6. 61.
words, I will be their God; The Conditions on Man's, in those, and they shall
be my People: Now so far as Men perform the Conditions, so far will God make
good his Promises; In what sense they are a People to God, in the same he will be
a God unto them. If a bare faederal holiness can give Men a relation to God,
and God upon that account owns them to be a People unto him, the same gives
them some kind of interest in God; and a claim to the blessings that belong to
that relation; Not, that such Members as these are to expect those special and
particular favors, that are the portion of those that are more nearly, and by
a kind of spiritual consanguinity allied to God in Christ, but yet being of
God's household, are to be allowed the liberty to partake of those external
blessings which he in common bestows upon the whole Family.

2. From the nature of Church Membership. Church Membership necessarily implies
Church Communion, or else it signifies nothing; for to be admitted a Member of
the Church, and not to have a right in common with the rest to
Church Priviledges, is to be taken in with one hand, and to be thrown out with
the other, it is to be put back into the state of those that are no Members, and
virtually to be cut off from the Body, by being denied all communications with
it; Should a Man be admitted a Member of any City or Corporation, and yet at
the same time be denied the privilege of his Freedom, and not be permitted to
set up a Trade, to give a Vote, or to Act in any other case, as other Members
do, what would be the difference betwixt him and a Foreigner? unless it be,
that his condition is the worse, by being mocked, and abused and cheated with
the Name, whilst he has nothing of the Privileges of a Freeman.

3. We have the Practice of the Church of God in the Old Testament for this;
The whole Nation of the Jews were not only permitted, but commanded by God,
except in cases of legal uncleanness, and those notorious Crimes for which they
were to be cast out of the Congregation, to observe his Ordinances, and to join
in the celebration of his public Worship, and we know they were not all
Israel, that were of Israel; Three times a year were all their Males to appear
before the Exodus 23. 14, 17.
Lord, to keep Three solemn appointed Feasts unto him; many of which, it is to
be feared, had no other qualification, than what they were beholden to their
birth, and the loss of their foreskin for; Again, All the Congregation of
Israel were too keep the Passover, none Exodus 12. 44.
were denied it but foreigners and hired servants, and they too, no longer, but
till they were Circumcised, and thereby admitted into covenant with God, which
shows, that mere Circumcision was enough to put a Man into a capacity of
Communicating with the Jewish Church in its most solemn and sacred Mysteries.

4. This was also the Practice of the Christian Church in the Apostolic Age;
as is plainly intimated unto us from many Scriptures; St. Paul tells us, By one
Spirit we are all Baptized into one Body, whether Jews or Gentiles, bond or
free, and have been all made 1 Cor. 12. 13.
to drink into one Spirit. To drink into one Spirit, particularly relates to
the Cup in the Lord's Supper, and by a figure of the part for the whole, it is
put to signify the whole Communion; but the thing here especially to be taken
notice of, is, that the Apostle makes the number of those that received the
Lord's Supper to be as comprehensive and universal, as that of those that were
received into the Church by Baptism; As by one Spirit all were baptized into
one body, so all were made to drink into one spirit. The Apostles speaks the
same thing again in another place, alluding to the other part of the Sacrament,
We being many, are one bread and one body, for we are all partakers of one
bread; all the 1 Cor. 10. 17.
members that conspired to make up the one body, did partake of the one bread;
But if any thing yet can be clearer, it is that account St. Luke gives us of the
practice of the first Christian Church at Jerusalem, where it is said of the
three thousand that gladly received St. Peter's words, and were by Baptism
added to the Church, they, all the three thousand, Ananias and Saphira being of
the number, continued in the Apostles doctrine, and in breaking of bread, and
in prayers.

5. From the end of Church Membership; which is not only for the more solemn
Worship of God, and the public profession of Religion, but also for the more
effectual edification and salvation of men's souls; By Baptism we were admitted
into the Church, incorporated into that Divine Society, and entitled to all the
Privileges of the Gospel, to the end, that in the unity of the faith, and the
knowledge of the Son of God, Ephesians. 4. 13.
we might come to a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness
of Christ; But how this is to be attained without being admitted to all the
Acts and Offices of Communion with the Church, to the Communion of Prayers and
Sacraments and the Word, and all other Privileges and Duties, is not easily to
be understood; hence, we may observe, that edification in Scripture is usually
applied to the Church, and tho, the edification of the Church consists in the
edification of the particular Members of it, yet because that is not to be had
but in the Unity and Communion of the Church, it is usually styled, the edifying
of the Ephesians. 4. 12.
Church, and the edifying the body of Christ; hence Faith is said to come by
hearing, and hearing by the Word of God; Hence we are said to be born again,
not of corruptable Romans 10. 17. 1 Pet. 1. 23.
seed, but of incorruptable, by the Word of God, which lives and abides for
ever; The same is expressed in those words of our Savior's Prayer for his
Disciples, Sanctify them through thy truth, thy Word is John 17. 17.
truth. God's Church is his Family, which he especially takes care of and
provides for, he that is of it is under the Schechina, the wing of the Divine
Majesty and his special grace and providence; It cannot but be of mighty
advantage toward our growth and improvement in all Christian graces and
virtues, to have therein dispens't to us the lively Oracles of God, and
provision made for a constant succession of dispensers of the Bread of Life, to
fit it to allneeds and all capacities; Not to be left to the deceits and
whispers of a private spirit, to personal conjectures or secret insinuations,
but to have the public Doctrine of the Church, to be our Guide and Leader; to
have our Devotions mingled with the concurrent Prayers of all God's people, and
so by their joint forces, after an Coimus incaetum and ad Deum quasimanu facta
precationibus ambiamus orantes, Tertul.
humble, but powerful manner, to besiege and belaguer Heaven; to have before
our eyes all the great Examples in God's Church, to have our Faith
strengthened, our Repentance heightened, our Love inflamed, our Hopes and our
Comforts raised by the Holy Communion; Will not the flame of others kindle our
zeal and assections? and will it not put us into a transpo^t of devotion, to
see therein Christ Crucified before our Eyes, pouring out his Blood for us,
bowing his Head as it were to kiss, and stretching out his Arms as it were to
embrace, all that are penitent and return to him? These are some of the great
Blessings and advantages that cannot be had but in Church Communion; To which,
if we shall add, that our improvement in Holiness and Virtue is more to be
ascribed to the internal operations of God's spirit, than any virtue or
efficacy there can be in those external administrations, and that God is
pleased to promise his spirit to believers, only as they are Members of his
Church, and no otherwise, than by the use and ministry of his Word and
Sacraments, we shall farther see the necessity of Men's holding actual Communion
with the Church, in order to their Sanctification and Salvation.

We are not now discoursing what God can or will do in some extraordinary
cases, when Communion with a true visible Church cannot be had, as in a general
Apostasy of the Church, or Persecution for Religion, or unjust Excommunication;
but what is God's ordinary method and means of bringing Men to salvation, and
that he himself tells us, is by adding them to the Church; and the Lord added
to the Church daily Acts 2. 47.
such as should be saved; To this purpose we may observe not only in general,
that whatever Christ did and suffered for Mankind, 'twas for them as
incorporated into a Church; Christ loved his Church and gave himself Ephesians. 5. 25.
for it; Christ redeemed his Church with his own Acts 26. 28.
blood; Christ is the savior of the body, that is, the Ephesians. 5. 23.
Church; But also in particular, that the Apostle confines the influences and
operations of the spirit to the unity of the Church, there is one body and one
spirit; Upon this account, viz. the efficacy of the means afforded Ephesians. 4. 4.
in Christ's Church, and the necessity of keeping in Communion with it in order
to salvation, was it that the Primitive Christians looked upon it as so dreadful
a thing to be shut or cast out of it; as laughing a matter as some now adays
make it, as much as they slight the privilege and benefit to be of Christ's
Church, and count it their glory and saintship voluntarily to cut off
themselves from it, I am sure, the Primitive Christians had a far different
opinion of it; with them to be cast Nam judicatur magno cum pondere ut apud
certos etc. Tert. Apol.
out of the Church, and to be delivered up to Satan, signified the same thing,
and the one accounted full as dreadful a doom as the other; hence was it that
this sentance was rarely past against an offender, but with 1 Cor. 5: 2.
grief and sorrow in him that was forced to do it; and that those against whom
it was past, used the most ardent importunities, and were willing to undergo
the severest penances in order to be restored into the bosom of it; you might
have beheld them kissing the chains of imprisoned Martyrs, washing the feet of
Lazars, Nazion. 12. Or.
wallowing at the Temple-doors, on their knees begging the Prayers of Saints;
you might have seen them stripped and naked, their hair neglected, their bodies
whither'd, their eyes dejected, and sometimes crying out in the words of David,
as the great Theodosius Theod. H. Eccl. 5. c. 15.
in the state of penance, My soul cleaves to the dust, quicken thou me, O
Lord, according to thy Word.

Thus much seems to be enough to be said on the Second Proposition; but that
our passage to the Third may be the clearer, I shall add a little by way of
Answer to an Objection or two that lies in our way. And the first is,

Obj.
Do not all the Members of Christ's Church that come to the blessed Sacrament,
having not the power of Godliness, as well as the Form, come unworthily and to
their own great sin and danger, no less than being guilty of the Body and Blood
of Christ, and eating and 1 Cor. 11. 27, 29.
drinking their own damnation? And can they have a right to that they are so
unworthy of? In doing which they sin so hainously? and for doing which they
shall be punished so severely?

Answ. I Answer these two things:

1. All, even the best men, in a strict, legal sense, are unworthy, and that
even of common mercies from God, much more of this prime Duty and Privilege of
Christianity. Every man in his best estate is altogether vanity: We are all an
unclean thing, and our righteousness Psalm. 39. 5.
is as filthy rags: The meaning is, all men are Isa. 39. 5.
sinners, and their best services imperfect and impure; But then, the right
they have to this Privilege does not depend on their own merit and worth, but,
as was said before, on the promise of God, when they entered at first into
covenant with him, whereby he was pleased to oblige himself to be their God so
far, and so long, as they continued to be his people.

2. Those Members that we have asserted to have a right to the external
Privileges of Christ's Church are not guilty of that unworthiness St. Paul
speaks of, the sin and danger whereof is so great; and this will appear by the
description he gives of those unworthy Communicants:

1. They discerned not the Lord's body; he that eats this (...), S. Chrysostom. 1
Cor. 11. 27. Dr. Lightf. in loc.
bread, and drinks this cup of the Lord unworthily, is guilty of the body and
blood of Christ; how? not discerning the Lord's body. It may be, they did eat
it still, as a part of the Jewish Passover, they understood not the nature of
it what it did represent, or for what end it was instituted, being ignorant of
the infinite value and merit of Christ's blood, not at all affected with the
greatness of his love, nor wrought upon by the infiniteness of his mercy, and
altogether as void of any sincere affection and gratitude to Christ for that
mighty redemption he wrought for mankind, as the Jew and Pagan, that neither
know nor believe in him.

2. They were open and scandalous sinners; The Apostles charges them with
Schisms and Divisions, 18, 21, 22, ver.
pride and contempt of their brethren, sensuality and drunkenness; In those
early days of Christianity, the Lord's Supper was usually ushered in with a
Love-feast that was eaten just before it, but so unchristian were these
Corinthians, that every one took before other his own Supper, they run into
parties, and though they had not yet left the place, they refused to communicate
at the same time with their brethren, The rich despised and excluded the poor,
that came not so well provided as they, from their feast, and that which was
yet an higher aggravation of their sin, the poor were hungry, whilst the rich
fed and pampered there bodies to excess and luxury: When ye come together, says
he, this is not to eat the Lord's Supper, this is no fit preparation for it,
for in eating every one takes before other his own supper, and one is hungry,
and another is drunken: such Swine as these ought not indeed to come to the
Holy Table of our Lord, and such as these, as I said, in the beginning of my
Discourse on this Proposition, have forfeited their right to it, and ought by
the Censures of the Church, to be excluded; This indeed is to be unworthy with
a witness, to be guilty of the body and blood of Christ, or as St. Paul
sometimes words it in the case of Apostasy and other heinous sins, to crucify
Heb. 6. 6. Heb. 10. 16.
afresh the Lord of Life, to tread under foot the Son of God, and to count the
blood of the Covenant an unholy thing; that is, in an high degree to despise
and vilify the person and sufferings of the most holy Jesus, his person, as
one not worthy to be obeyed and followed, his blood, as a thing of no value and
merit; And what could such Persons expect, but that God would vindicate the
honor of his own Son and the infinitely wise contrivance of the redemption of
the World by his great undertaking in some remarkable way upon them, either in
this World, by Temporal Judgments, for this cause many are weak and sickly
amongst you, and many sleep; or in the next, without repentance, by 1 Cor. 11.
30.
their Eternal Damnation?

Obj.
But the Members of Christ's Body that come to this blessed Sacrament, and are
destitute of saving grace, though they make a fair profession and are free from
scandalous sins, are yet in an unconverted condition; and this Sacrament is not
a converting, but a confirming Ordinance.

Answ. Conversion may be taken in a twofold sense.

1. For turning Men from a state of open infidelity, to the poofession of the
Christian Faith, and indeed till Men are in this sense converted, they are not
to be admitted to the Sacrament; neither Jews nor Turks, nor any others in a
state of Gentilism, till by Baptism they are received into Christ's Church, and
make profession of his Name, can come to it.

2. Taking conversion, for the turning of those who are already baptized, and
do profess Christ's Religion, from the Evil of their ways, to a serious and
hearty practice of Holiness and Virtue, and so this Sacrament is a converting
Ordinance. And indeed, I do not know any more forceable Arguments to an Holy
Life, than what are therein represented to us: What can more work upon
ingenuous spirits, than the discovery of such undeserved love and kindness? Is
it not enough to melt the most frozen heart into Floods of Tears and Joy, to
behold therein the Blessed Jesus shedding his Blood to reconcile sinners unto
God; What can more powerfully captivate the most rebellious spirits into
obedience, than the assurance of a pardon of their past transgressions by that
full propitiatory Sacrifice of the Son of God? What can more effectually fright
Men from sin and folly, than the infinite displeasure of God declared therein
against all Iniquity? How accursed a thing is sin, will the considering
Communicant say, that the blessed Jesus, who did but take sin upon him, was
made a Curse for it! What a mighty evil must sin needs be, when nothing could
be sufficient to expiate it, but the Blood of God! What an unspeakable
malignity must sin have in it, when it laid on the shouldiers of Omnipotency
such a load of wrath, as made him complain and sweat, and groan and die! Again,
Here we repeat our Baptismal Vow to God, solemnly engage our selves afresh to
be his faithful servants, and bind our selves by a new Oath, to be true to the
Covenant we have made with him, and certainly that Man must have a mighty love
for Sin and Death, that can break through all these Bonds and Obligations to
come at it.

3. The Third Proposition; That some corrupt and scandalous Members remaining
in the Communion of the Church, through the want of the due exercise of
Discipline in it, or the negligence and connivance of the Pastors and
Governors of it, gives no just Cause for any to separate from her.

Gives no just Cause; That which is chiefly pretended, is, That the viciousness
of those Members do derive a stain and defilement on the whole Assembly, and
pollute the Worship of God to others, as well as to themselves. Here therefore
I shall show what is to be done by us, that we be no way accessory to others
sins, and then, upon that condition, that we cannot be polluted by their sinful
company. Now many things are to be done by good men who are to join in mixed
Assemblies that the Communion receive no perjudice by the corruption of some of
its Members,

They are frequently to exhort and advise them; for this end are we placed in
the communion of Saints, and though to instruct the Flock God has appointed a
whole Order of Men on purpose, yet is it also the Duty of every private
Christian in his place and calling, to exhort one another daily, whilst it is
called to day? to consider one another, to provoke unto love und to good Heb.
3. 13. Heb. 10. 24.
works.

They are prudently and with much affection to admonish and reprove them; we
must not be so rudely civil as to suffer sin to lie upon them without
disturbance: so runs the Precept, Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart,
but thou shall rebuke thy Brother, Lev. 19. 17.
and not suffer sin to be upon him: and if any man be overtaken in a fault,
says the Apostle, ye that are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of
meekness, Gal. 6. 1.
considering that thou also may be tempted.

They are to bewail their sins, and to pray for their reformation; this is the
true spirit and temper of a good man, he cannot see God dishhonour'd, his Laws
trampled upon, his Brother wilfully undoing himself, but he must be deeply
touched and affected with it; Rivers of water run down my eyes, says the
Psalmist, because Men keep not thy law; And when in Ezekiel's time the Jewish
Church, both Priests and People, were very much corrupted, the Holy Ghost gives
it as the particular mark of the faithful and upright, not that they separated,
but sighed and cried for all the abominations that were done in her. Of the
same holy frame and Ezekiel. 9. 4.
disposition of mind was St. Paul, he could not mention those in the Church at
Philippi, who, whilst they professed Christianity, showed themselves by their
sensuality and earthly-mindedness to be Enemies to the Cross of Christ, without
Sorrow and Tears; Of whom, says he, I have told you often, and now tell you
weeping, Phil. 3. 18.
that they are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose God is their Belly, etc.

They are to avoid, as much as they can their company, especially all
familiarity with them; and though in order to their conviction and reformation,
and in such cases where necessary business requires it, and the public Worship
of God cannot be performed but in conjunction with such persons, I may be in
their company without blame; yet in all other cases, I am to show my dislike
and abhorrence of their sins by shunning their society. If any Man obey not our
Word by this 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14.
Epistle, note that Man and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed.
Again says the same Apostle, I wrote to you in an Epistle, not to keep company,
if any man be a Fornicator, or an Idolater -- or, etc. with such an one, no,
not to eat.

If private and often repeated Admonitions by himself, or before one or two
more, will not do, they are then to tell the Church of them, that by its more
public Reproofs the scandalous Member may be reclaimed, or by its just
Censures be cut off from the Communion. If he shall neglect to hear them, tell
it to the Church. Matthew. 18. 17. Rubr. before the Commun.
Our Church has given every Minister of a Parish power to refuse all
scandalous and notorius sinners from the Lord's Supper, and as slack and as
much disused as Discipline is amongst us, were such persons more generally
informed against and complained of, they would not find it so easy a matter to
continue in their Offenses and the Church together.

You see by what means the Church may either be cleared in some measure of
public Offenders, or the Members of it, together with the Ordinances of God
secured from infection by their fellowship. By this did the Primitive
Christians show their Zeal for their Religion, as well as by suffering for it;
They were infinitely careful to keep the honor of their Religion ^nspotted,
and the Communion of the Church as much out of danger, as they could, from the
malignant influence of bad examples; for this reason they watched over one
another, told them privately of their faults, and when that would not do,
brought them before the cognizance of the Church; and though lapsing into
Idolatry, in times of presecution, was the common sin, that for some Ages
chiefly exerciz'd the Discipline of the Church, yet all Offenses against the
Christian Law, all Vices and Immoralities, that were either public in
themselves, or made known and proved to the Church, came also under the
Ecclesiastical Rod, and were put to open Shame and Penance; this was that
Discipline that preserved their Manners so Incorrupt, and made their Religion
so Renowned and Triumphant in the World; and how happy would it be for us in
this loose and degenerate Age, (as our own Church expresses Preface to the
Comminat.
her wishes and desires) were it again in its due Force and Vigor restored and
resetled amongst us.

But, if after all imaginable care and endeavor by private Christians, some
scandalous Members, through the defects of Power in the Discipline, or of Care
and Watchfulness in Governors, should remain in the Church, whatever pollution
those whose Office it is to rebuke with all Authority, may draw on themselves
Tit. 3. last.
by suffering it, private Members, that are no way, neither by consent, nor
council, nor excuse, accessory to their Sin, can receive none; for sin no
otherwise pollutes, than as it is in the will, not as it is in the
understanding, as it is chose and embraced, and not as it is known; I may know
Adultery and yet be Chaste, see Strife and Debate in the City and yet be
Peaceable, hear Oaths and Curses and yet tremble at God's Name; Noah was a good
Man in an evil World, Lot a righteous person amongst the conversation of the
wicked; neither is there any more fear of pollution from wicked Men in Sacred
than in Civil Society; Our Savior and his Apostles were not the least defiled
by that Society they had with Scribes and Pharisees, nor by that Familiarity
they had with the accursed Judas, though he eat the Passover with them, and they
kept him company after they knew him to be a Traitor; What pollution did Abel
receive from Cain when they Sacrificed together? Or Elkanah and Hannah from
Eli's Debauched Sons, when at Shilo they Worshipped together? The good and bad
indeed Communicate together, but in what? not in sin, but in their common duty;
and though to Communicate with sin is sin, yet to Communicate with a sinner in
that which is not sin can be none; Communion is a common union, many partaking
of one thing wherein they do agree, now the common union of the good and bad in
the Church is not in evil, but in hearing of the Word, in receiving of the
Sacrament, and in other holy Ordinances and Exercises; when therefore some do
evil, the Communion in spiritual things is not polluted, because evil is no
part of the union in common one with another, but the error of Man by himself,
out of the Communion, which he himself, and they only that have been partakers
with him in it, shall answer for.

Obj. But does not the Apostle say, A little leaven 1 Cor. 5. 6.
leaveneth the whole lump?

Ans. This is a proverbial speech, and shows only that sin, like leaven, is of
a very spreading and diffusive nature, not that it actually defiles where it is
not admmitted: A People in one Assembly are as a lump, and a wicked person
amongst them is as leaven, but now although the leaven is apt to conveigh it self
through the whole lump, yet only are those parts actually leavened with it that
take the leaven; so it is with the Church, the sinner by his bad example is apt
to spread the infection through the whole body, but only such as allow or any
way communicate with him in his sin, are actually infected; such as Chloe, that
reprove the offender 1 Cor. 1. 11.
and present him, doing their utmost endeavor in their place to reform him,
remain in spite of its malignity, unpolluted: Beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees, says our Savior, he advises not his Disciples to leave their
Assemblies, but to beware that they take no leaven of them; showing thereby,
that a good Man that stands upon his gaurd may be where leaven is and yet not
be leavened; The incestuous person was not cast out of the Church of Corinth,
and yet the Apostle says, at least of some of them, ye are unleavened: ver. 7.
And why may not the joint Prayers of the Church and the Examples of Pious and
Devout Men in the Communion, be as sovereign an antidote against the infection,
as the bare company of wicked Men is of power to convey it? Why should not the
holy Ordinances of God and the presence of holy Men at them be of as much
virtue and efficacy to purge and sanctify the whole body, as the impurities of
the bad are to stain and pollute it; especially considering that the sins of
the 2 Cor. 30. 18.
wicked shall never be imputed to the righteous, but the Prayers of the
righteous have obtained pardon for the wicked.

Obj. But were not the pollutions of sin typified by Numb. 19, 13, 20.
the legal uncleanness? And was not every thing that the unclean person
touched, made unclean?

Ans. Those legal and ceremonial pollutions concern not us under the Gospel; we
may touch a grave, a dead person, a leper, and not at all be the less clean;
it is not any outward uncleanness, but the corruption and depravity of the inner
man that incapacitates men for the Worship of God and Communion with him.

2. Those legal pollutions did not defile the whole Communion, but only those
particular persons whom the unclean person touched, for (1.) There was no
sacrifice appointed for any such pollution as came upon all for the sin of some
few. (2.) Though the Prophets many times reproved the Priests for not separating
the clean from the unclean, the precious from the vile, the Jer. 15. 16. Ezekiel.
22. 26.
holy from the profane, yet did they never teach, that because the unclean
came into the Congregation through the neglect of their duty, the whole
Communion was polluted by it; but as many as touched the unclean person were
unclean, so as many as have fellowship with the wicked in their sins are
polluted by it; to partake with men in their sins in a moral sense answers to
the legal touching an unclean thing.

3. When it is said that the unclean person, that did not purify himself,
defiled the Tabernacle and polluted the Sanctuary, the meaning is, that he did
so to himself, but not to others; so does a wicked man, the Ordinances of God,
in respect of himself, but not of others: The Prayers of the wicked, though
joined with those of the Church, are an abomination unto God, whilst at the
same time the Prayers of good men go up as a sweet smelling savor and are
accepted by him; The person that comes unworthily to the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, eats and drinks Judgment to himself, but that hinders not, but
that those who at the same time come better prepared, may do it to their own
Eternal Comfort and Salvation; To the pure all things are pure, but to them
that are defiled and unbelieving Tit. 1. 15.
is nothing pure, but even their Mind and Conscience is defiled.

The weakness of this suggestion, that the whole Communion and the Ordinances
of God are polluted by the wicked Man's company at and among them, being laid
open; The truth of the Proposition may be farther evinced from these
particulars:

1. From the example of God's People in the Church of the Jews; We do not find
that the sins either of the Priests or the People became at any time an
occasion of separation to them; What sins could be greater than those of Eli's
Sons? What higher aggravations could there be of sin? Whether we consider the
quality of the persons that sinned, being the Highpriests Sons, or the public
scandal aed impudence of the sin, Lying with the women before the door of the
Tabernacle; yet did not the People of God, not Elkanab and Hannah by name,
refrain to come up to Shilo and to join with them in the public Worship: Nay,
they are said to transgress who refused to come, though they refused out of
abhorance and detestation to the wickedness of 1 Samuel 2. 17. 24.
those Men; They abhorred the sacrifices of the Lord; ye make the Lord's people
to transgress: In Ahab's time, when almost all Israel were Idolaters and halted
betwixt God and Baal, yet then did the Prophet Elijah summon all Israel to
appear on Mount Carmel, and held a Religious Communion with them in Preaching
and Praying, and offering a Miraculous Sacrifice; neither did the Seven
Thousand that had kept themselves upright and not bowed their knee to Baal,
absent themselves because of the Idolatry of the rest, but they all came and
joined in that public Worship performed by the Prophet: All the People fell on
their faces, saying, the Lord he is God, the Lord he is God. 1 King. 18. 39.
All along the Old Testament, when both Prince, and Priests, and People, were
very much depraved and debauched in their manners, we do not find that the
^rophets at any time exhorted the faithful and sincere to separate, or that
they themselves set up any separate Meetings, but continued in Communion with
the Church, Preaching to them, and Exhorting them to Repentance.

2. From the Example of God's People in the New Testament; In the Apostolic
Churches of Corinth, Galatia, and the seven Churches in Asia, many of the
Members were grown very bad and scandalous, yet do we not read of the example
of any good Man separating from the Church, or any such Precept from the
Apostles so to do; They do not tell them that the whole Body was polluted by
those filthy Members, and that, if they would be safe themselves, they must
withdraw from their Communion, but exhort them to use all means to reclaim
them, and if neither private nor public Admonitions and Reproofs would do,
then to suspend them from the Communion of the Church, till by Repentance and
Amendment they rendered themselves capable of being restored to Peace and
Pardon; The Spirit of God in the Second of the Revelation, sends his
Instructions to the Angels, that is, to the Bishops of those seven Churches in
Asia, (whose Office it was) to Preach Repentance to them, and by their
Authority, to reform abuses, but gives them no Command to cease the public
Administration, or to advise the unpolluted part to separate from the rest;
nay, although those Candlesticks were very foul, yet was our Lord pleased still
to bear with them, and to walk in the midst of them; Rev. 2. 1.
and certainly so song as Christ affords his presence in a Church, none of its
Members ought to withdraw theirs.

3. From our Savior's own example, who, notwithanding the Church of the Jews
in his time was a most corrupt Church, and the Members of it very lewd and
vicious, yet kept in Communion with it, and commanded his Disciples so to do:
We read that the Scribes and Pharisees, who ruled the Ecclesiastical Chair at
that time, had perverted the law, corrupted Mat. 15. 6, 7, 8.
the worship of God, were blind guides, devoured widows houses, were hypocrites
and such as only had a form of godliness, yet did not our Savior separate from
their Communion; but was made under the Law, freely subjected himself to all
the Rites and Ceremonies of it, he was circumcised on the eighth day, redeemed
by a certain price, being a Son and a Firstborn, Luke 2. 22.
observed their Passover and other Feasts enjoined by their Law, yea, and that
of the dedication too, though Matthew. 26.
but of humane institution, was baptized amongst them, preached in their
Temples and Synagogues, reasoned John 17. 37.
with them about Religion, exhorted his Disciples to hear their Doctrine, though
not to follow their Practice; John 10. 6, 7. Mat. 6. 7.
What greater cause on the account of cortuption in manners could be given to
separate from a Church, than was here? yet how careful was our Savior both by
his Example and Precept, to forbid and discountenance it; They fit in Moses 's
chair, hear them.

4. From the Apostle's express command to hold communion with the Church of
Corinth, notwithstanding the many and great immoralities that were amongst the
Members of it; There were Schisms 1 Cor. 1. 12, 13. 1 Cor. 3. 3. 1 Cor. 5. 1.
and contentions amongst them, strifes and envyings, fornication and incest,
eating at the Idols table, and coming not so soberly as became them to the
table of our Lord; yet does the Apostle not only not command them to separate,
but approves their meeting together, and exhorts them to continue it, But let 1
Cor. 5. 4. 1 Cor. 11. 18
a Man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that
Cup; In which words the Apostle plainly solves the Case I am discoursing on,
and shows what private Christians, in whose power ir is not judicially to
correct Vice, are to do, when they see so many vicious Members intruding to the
blessed Sacrament; viz, not to abstain from it, but by preparation and
examination of themselves to take care that they be not of their number; If to
separate, had been the way, the Apostle would then have managed his Discourse
after this manner, There are many Schisms and Strifes in the Church, there is
an incestuous person not cast out, many proud contemners of their Brethren,
Men of strange opinions, of untamed appetites, and unbridled passions, and
therefore I advise you not to come amongst them, nor to partake of the Holy
Sacrament with them, lest you be infected with their Sores, and partake of
their Judgments; But advising Men to examine themselves, and then to come, he
plainly intimates, that 'twas their duty to continue in the Communion of the
Church notwithstanding these; as if he had said, I do not mention the foul
Enormities of some that come to this holy Table, to discourage you from coming,
lest ye should be polluted by their sins, but to excite you to a due care and
examination of your selves, that you be not polluted by any sinful acts and
compliances of your own, and then there is no danger of being defiled by theirs.

But as clear and satisfactory as this Proposition seems to be, it yet suffers
very much from the Exceptions of some weak Understandings, who meeting often in
Scripture with such Commands and Exhortations as these, to separate, to come
out, not to touch, to have no fellowship with, and the like, presently, without
staying to examine the sense of the Texts, conclude, that it is the duty and
character of good Men to be always separating; and tho, wherever those places
of Scripture are found, they are for the most part to be understood with
relation to Idolaters and Idolatrous Practices, either amongst Jews or
Gentiles, yet will they have them extended to every thing and person that
either really is, or they think fit to call, a Corruption, or a corrupt Member
in the Church of God.

Many Texts of Scripture are misunderstood and misappli'd by them to this
purpose; I shall instance only in two as the chief, and hope in rescuing them
from the false glosses they labor under, to give a deliverance to all the
rest. The first is,

Obj. 1. Those words of the Apostle, Wherefore come out from among them, and be
ye separate, says the Lord, 2 Cor. 6. 17.
and touch not the unclean thing.

Ans. This being the main place to which they fly upon all occasions as their
strongest hold, I shall give it a more particular consideration, and that by
showing these three things; (1.) The occasion of this Apostolical admonition.
(2.) What were the persons the converted Corinthians were to separate from.
(3.) What was the unclean thing they were not to touch.

1. What was the occasion of this Apostolical Exhortation. To this purpose you
must know that the converted Corinthians lived in civil Society amongst the
unbelieving Gentiles, by whom many of them being their kinsfolk and friends
after the flesh, were often invited to their Idol-feasts, to which some of them
1 Cor. 10. 27.
did not scruple to go and eat of the things sacrificed to Idols, even in the
Idol's Temple, thinking it not unlawful 1 Cor. 8. 10.
to do so, so long as they knew that an Idol was nothing, and did not
intentionally go and eat in any honor to the Idol. Now from this Practice the
1 Cor. 8. 4.
Apostle dissuades them by these two Arguments; (1.) Upon the account of
scandal to their weak brethren, telling them that though they that were strong,
knew that an Idol was nothing in the World, and that there was but one God, and
so could not be supposed to worship the Idol when they eat of the Idol's
sacrifice; yet some other weak Christians and new Converts might not know so
much, and consequently by their practice might be drawn into sin, not only to
go to those Feasts, but to do it in honor to the Idol. (2.) As harmless an
action as they esteemed it, that 'twas 1 Cor. 8. 7.
plain Idolatry; Be not ye Idolaters, as were some of 1 Cor. 10. 14.
them, as it is written, they sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to
play; that is, they eat of those Sacrifices that had been offered up to the
golden Calf; Exodus 32. 6,
and that this Action was Idolatrous, he proves by an Analogy it bears to a
Rite of the same nature, both amongst Jews and Christians, for as the Jews,
when they feasted on the Sacrifices, did it in honor to God, to whom the
Sacrifices were offered, and 1 Cor. 10. 18.
as the Christians, when they partake of the Lord's Supper, do it in honor to
Christ, whose Death and ver. 16.
Passion is therein commemorated, so when they did eat of the Idols Sacrifices,
they must have been thought to do it in honor to the Idol, because to the Idol
was the Sacrifice offered. But, blessed be ver. 20.
God, we have not the like occasion for such an Exhortation, we live not in a
civil society with Idolaters, but under a Christian Prince, and with a People
professing the Christian Religion; Here are no public Idols set up, nor any
Feasts kept in honor of them; had the Case been thus with us, we had been as
much concerned in the Text as the Corinthians were, but being far otherwise,
not the least aid can be fetched from hence, to defend Separation from our
Public Assemblies.

2. Who were the persons the Christian Corinthians were required to separate
from: They were no better than Unbelievers, than Infidels, than Idolaters; What
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? And what communion has
light with 2 Cor. 6. 14. ver. 15. ver. 16.
darkness? And what concord has Christ with Belial? Or what part has he that
believes with an Infidel? And what agreement has the Temple of God with
Idols? And then it follows, wherefore come out from amongst them, etc. But now
because Christians, ver. 17.
by the Apostles command were to separate from the Assemblies of Heathen
Idolaters, does it therefore follow that they must separate from the Assemblies
of Christians, because some, who while they profess Christ, do not live like
Christians, afford their presence at them? Is there no difference betwixt a
Pagan and an Infidel, that denies Christ and worships Devils, and an immoral
Christian, who yet outwardly owns Christ and worships the true God; Betwixt a
Church wholly made up of Heathens and Idolaters, and a Church made up of a
mixture of good and bad Christians together.

3. What is the unclean thing they are not to touch; viz. the unclean and
abominable Practices that were used by the Heathens in the Worship of their
Gods. It Is called by the Apostle in another place, the unfruitful Ephesians. 4. 11:
works of darkness, and again, thus described by him, it is a shame to speak of
those things that are done of them in secret; These they were not to touch, to
have no fellowship with them in, but rather to reprove them, that is in
judgment to condemn them, by words to reprove them, in conversation to avoid
them. But now because Christians are not to communicate with Heathens in their
filthy mysteries, nor to partake with any sort of wicked Men in any Action
that is Immoral, does it therefore follow, that they must not do their duty,
because sometimes it cannot be done but in their company? Must they abstain
from the Public Worship of God and their Lord's Table, to which they are
commanded, because Evil Men, who, till they repent, have nothing to do there,
rudely intrude themselves? May they not join with bad Men in some cases, where
it cannot be well avoided, in doing a good Action? because they must in no case
and on no account join with them in doing a sinful one? Because they have
omitted their Duty, must I neglect mine? Because they sin in coming
unpreparedly, must I sin in not coming at all? Will their sin be any plea or
excuse for mine? If I Communicate with them, will their unworthiness be laid at
my door? If I separate because of that, shall they answer for my contempt, as
well as for their own profanation of it? No surely, every Man shall bear his
own burden. The soul that sins, it shall dye. The Ezekiel. 18. 20.
second is, that Text,

Obj. 2. In the Revelation, Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers
of her sins, and that ye receive 18. c. 4.
not of her plagues.

Answ. This place is most certainly to be understood of Idolaters, and
according to most Interpreters, of the Roman Idolatrous Polity, and is a
command to all Christians to forsake the Communion of that Church, lest they
endanger their own salvation by Communicating with her in Masses and other
Idolatrous Worship. And if this be the true sense of the words, it abundantly
justifies our Separation from the Roman Church, But affords not the least plea
for Dissenters to separate from ours, unless any of them are so hardy as to
say, that there is none, or but little difference betwixt the Church of Rome
and the Church of England. But blessed be God, we have a Church reformed from
all her Superstitions, that retains nothing of hers, but what she retains of
the Gospel and the Primitive Church.

Here Is no drowning Religion in shadow and formality, nor burying her under a
load of ritual and ceremonial Rubbish, nor dressing up Religion in a flanting
pomp to set her off, or a gaudy garb to recommend her, much less in such
fantastical Rites, such antic Vestments and Gesticulations that may justly
render her ridiculous and contemptible; but her Ceremonies are few and decent,
countenanced by Primitive Antiquity, and very much becoming the gravity and
sobriety of Religion.

Here are no Half-Communions; no more Sacraments thrust upon us than our Lord
himself instituted, and yet those left whole and entire, for our use and
comfort, that he did; no Prayers in an unknown Tongue, which the votary neither
minds nor understands; no praying to Saints or Angels; no adoring Images,
Pictures, and Relics; no worshipping the Creature besides or more than the
Creator, which (...)
they do, who in all their public Offices of Devotion, for one Prayer to God,
have ordered ten to be made to the blessed Virgin.

Here Is no Doctrine obtruded on our Faith that is contrary to reason, nay, to
sense, to all our senses, no Practices allowed that are forbidden by God, no
Pardons to be bought, no Indulgences to be purchased no expunging any one
Commandment out of the Decalogue, or contriving arts and devices to make void
the rest; but as her Devotions are pure and spiritual, having God, and him
only, for their object, so her Doctrine is found and orthodox, having Christ
for its Cornerstone, and the Prophets and Apostles for its Foundation.

A Church that needs no counterfeit Legends, no incredible Miracles, no
ridiculous Fables to promote her veneration, whose security lies not in the
Peoples ignorance, but in their enlightened understandings, that can defend it
self without the help of spurious Authors, or corrupting the words and sense of
Authentic ones, a Church that dares to be understood, and is sure, the more
she is looked into, the more to be embraced and admired.

And I would to God, 'twas as easy a matter to clear every one of her Members
from Vice, as it is her Constitution from Corruption; But let those that stand,
take heed lest they fall, and be sure to sweep their own door clean, who are so
apt to throw dirt in the faces of their Fellow Christians; St. Paul's advice
is, that every Man should examine himself, and I am much mistaken, if spiritual
pride, a rash and censorious judging of our Brethren; be not as great a crime,
as some of those that are looked upon to be of so polluting and infectious a
nature in other Men; I need not say, how directly oposite this Pharisaical
humor is to that humility, meekness and self-denial that the Gospel of our
Savior injoyns? how unsuitable to the temper of all good Men, who are more apt
to suspect and accuse themselves, than others, who, the more holy they are, the
more sensible of their own imperfections? How contrary to the example of our
blessed Lord; who balkt not at any time the society of Publicans and sinners,
who when he knew what was in Man, and who it was that should betray him, yet
admitted Judas into the number of his Disciples, and familiarly converst with
him? And yet, how fully it answers to the Spirit and Genius of those ancient
Schismatics, the Novatians and the Donatists? Might I stay to run the
parallel, both those Schisms, and this amongst us, would be found to begin on
the same Principles, slackness of Discipline in the Church, and corruption in
Manners; To be carried on by the same pretenses, zeal for purity, and fear of
pollution; to spring from the same bitter fountain, pride and arrogance; But I
speak not this to excuse our selves, or to recriminate them; My hearty Prayer
to God is, that all Isarel may be saved; that they, who dissent from us, would
now, at last, lay aside all passion and prejudice, all groundless scruples and
pretenses, and come in and join their forces with our Church against the common
Adversary; And that we, who profess our selves Members of the Church of
England, would be extremely careful, for the honor of our Religion, for the
preservation of our Church, for the recovery of our straying Brethren, (for
whose sakes, in some cases, we are bound to lay down our lives) to lay down our
sins, and, instead of blocking up the way againgst any, by scandalous living,
invite and allure them all in, by exemplary Holiness and Purity, and this I am
sure, how short soever my Discourse comes of, would be a full Answer to, and a
perfect Confutation of this Objection.

FINIS.
THE CASE OF Indifferent Things Used in the WORSHIP of GOD, Proposed and
Stated, by considering these QUESTIONS, Qu. I. Whether things Indifferent,
though not Prescribed, may be Lawfully used in Divine Worship? [or, Whether
there be any things Indifferent in the Worship of God?] Qu. II. Whether a
Restraint of our Liberty in the use of such Indifferent things be a Violation
of it?


LONDON, Printed by T. Moore, and J. Ashburne, for Fincham Gardener, at the
White-Horse in Ludgate Street. 1683.

Books Printed for FINCHAM GARDENER.
A Continuation and Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's
Unreasonableness of Separation, in An^wer to Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Lob, etc.

Considerations of present use, considering the Danger Resulting from the
Change of our Church Government.

1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England. 2. A Resolution of
some Cases of Conscience, which Respect Church Communion. 3. The Case of
Indifferent things, used in the Worship of God, Proposed and Stated, by
considering these Questions, etc. 4. A Discourse about Edification. 5. The
Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of England's
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England; 6. A Letter to Anonymus, in Answer
to his Three Letters to Dr: Sherlock about Church Communion. 7. Certain Cases
of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of joining with Forms of
Prayer in Public Worship. In two Parts. 8. The Case of mixed Communion. Whether
it be Lawful to separate from a Church upon the Account of promiscuous
Congregations, and Mixed Communion? 9. An Answer to the Dissenters Objections
against the Common Prayers, and some other Parts of Divine Service Prescribed
in the Liturgy of the Church of England. 10. The Case of Kneeling at the Holy
Sacrament, Stated and Resolved etc. The first Part. 11. Certain Cases of
Conscience, etc, The Second Part. 12. A Discourse of Profiting by Sermons, and
going to hear where Men think they can profit most. 13. A Serious Exhortation,
with some Important Advices, Relating to the late Cases about Conformity,
Recommended to the present Dissenters from the Church of England. 14. An
Argument for Union, etc. 15. The Case Kneeling at the Sacrament. The Second
Part, 16. Some Considerations about the Case of Scandals, or giving Offense to
Weak-Bretheren. 17. The Case of Infant Baptism in five Questions, etc.
1. A Discourse about the charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther? 2. A Discourse about Tradition, showing what is meant by it, and
what Tradition is to be Received, and what Tradition is to be Rejected. 3. The
Difference of the Case between the Separation of Protestants from the Church of
Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England. 4. The
Protestant Resolution of Faith, etc.
Question.
Q. Whether things not prescribed in the Word of God, may be Lawfully used in
Divine Worship?
BEfore I proceed to the Case it self, it will be fit to consider what the
things are which the Question more immediately respects. For the better
understanding of which, we may observe.

1. That there are Essential parts of Divine Worship, and which are, either by
Nature or Revelation, so determined, that they are in all Ages necessary: In
Natural Religion, such are the Objects of it, which must be Divine; such are
the acknowledgment of Honor, and Reverence, due and peculiar to those Objects,
as Prayer, etc. And in the Christian Religion, such are the Sacraments of
Baptism, and the Lords Supper. These are always to be the same in the Church.

2. There are other things relating to Divine Worship, which are arbitrary and
variable, and determined according to Circumstances, as Gesture, Place, etc.

As to the former i'ts granted by the contending Parties, that they are all
already prescribed, and that nothing in that kind can be added to what is
already prescribed, nor can any thing so prescribed be altered, or abolished.
Nothing now can be made necessary and binding to all Persons, Places, and Ages,
that was not so from the beginning of Christianity; and nothing that was once
made so by Divine Authority can be rendered void or unnecessary by any other.

Therefore the Question is to be applied to the latter, and then i'ts no other
than, Whether things in their own nature Indifferent, though not prescribed in
the Word of God, may be lawfully used in Divine Worship? Or, Whether there be
any thing Indifferent in the Worship of God?

Toward the Resolution of which, I shall

1. Enquire into the Nature, and state the Notion of things Indifferent. 2.
Show that things Indifferent may be Lawfully used in Divine Worship. 3.
Consider how we may know what things are Indifferent in the Worship of God. 4.
How we are to Determine our selves in the use of Indifferent things so applied.
5. Show that there is nothing required in the Worship of God in our Church, but
what is either Necessary in it self, and so binding to all Christians; or what
is Indifferent, and so may be Lawfully used by them.
1. I shall enquire into the Nature, and state the Notion of things
Indifferent. In doing of which we are to observe, that all things with
reference to Practice are reducible to these three Heads.

First, Duty. Secondly, Sin. Thirdly, Neither Duty nor Sin.
Duty is either so Morally, and in its own Nature, or made so by Divine and
Positive Command. Sin is so in its own Nature, or made and declared to be such
by Divine and Positive Prohibition. Neither Duty nor Sin, is that which no Law,
either of Nature or Revelation, has determined; and is usually known by the
Name of Indifferent, that is, it is of a middle Nature, partaking in it self of
neither extremes, and may be indifferently used or forborne, as in Reason and
Prudence shall be thought meet. Things of this kind the Apostle calls Lawfal, 1
Cor. 10. 23, etc. because they are the subject of no Law, and what are
therefore Lawful to us, and which without Sin we may either choose or refuse.
Thus the Apostle does determine, Romans 4. 15. Where no Law is, there is no
Transgression, that is, it can be no transgression to omit that which the Law
does not in-joyn, nor to do that which it does not forbid; for else that would
be a Duty which the Law does not in-joyn, and that would be a Sin which it does
not forbid; which is in effect to say there is a Law where there is none, or
that Duty and Sin are so without respect to any Law. But now if Duty be Duty
because it is in-joyned, and Sin be Sin because its fordidden, then Indifferent
is Indifferent because its neither enjoyed nor forbidden. For as to make it a
Duty there needs a Command, and to make it a Sin there needs a Prohibition, so
where there is neither Command nor Prohibition, its neither Duty nor Sin, and
must be therefore Indifferent, Lawful, and Free. So that we may as well know by
the Silence of the Law, what is Indifferent, as we may know by its Authority,
what is a Duty or a Sin. And I have no more Reason to think that a Duty or a
Sin which it takes no notice of (since all Obligation arises from a Law) than
that not to be a Duty or a Sin which it does: The Nature of Lawful things being
as much determined so to be, by the want of such Authority, as that of
Necessary is determined by it: And he that shall say that is a Duty or a Sin
which is not so made and declared by any Law, may as well say that is no Duty or
Sin which there is a Law about. To conclude, there must be a Law to make it a
Transgression, and the want of a Law does necessarily suppose it to be none,
and what there is no Law for or against, remains Indifferent in it self, and
Lawful to us. As for instance, suppose there should be a Dispute concerning
Days set apart for the Service and Worship of God, how must this be determined
but by the Law of Nature or Revelation? and how shall we be resolved in the
case, but by considering what the Law injoyns or forbids in it? If we find it
not enjoined, it can be of it self no Duty; if we find it not forbidden, it can
be of it self no Sin; and consequently it is Lawful and Indifferent, and in what
we neither Sin by omitting nor observing. So the Apostle concludes, Romans 14. 6.
He that regards a day, regards it unto the Lord, and he that regards not
the day, unto the Lord he does not regard it; that is, there was no Law
requiring it, and so making the observation of it Necessary; and no Law
forbidding it, and so making the observation of it Sinful; and therefore
Christians were at Liberty to observe, or not to observe it as they pleased;
and in both they did well, if so be they had a regard to the Lord in it.

2. I shall show that there are things Indifferent in the Worship of God, and
that such things, though not prescribed, may be lawfully used in it. It Is
allowed by all, that there is no Command to be expected about the Natural
Circumstances of Action, and which the Service cannot be celebrated without,
such as Time and Place, and that these are left to humane Prudence to fix and
determine. But what those Natural Circumstances are is not so universally
agreed to. And if they be such as aforesaid, that is, such as the action cannot
be performed without, then it will very much serve to justify most of the
things in dispute, and defend our Church in the use and practice of them. For
what is there almost in that kind amongst us, which is not Naturally or Morally
necessary to the Action, and if Time and Place fall under humane determination,
because they are naturally necessary, then why not also Gesture and Habit,
which Worship can no more Naturally be celebrated without, than the former; and
consequently a Surplice, or Kneeling and Standing may be alike lawfully
determined, and used, as Time for assembling together, and a Church to assemble
and Officiate in. And what Natural Circumstances are to a Natural Action, that
are Moral Circumstances to a Moral Action; and there are Moral as necessary to
a Moral Action, as there are Natural necessary to a Natural Action. As for
example, what Time and Place are to Natural, that are Method and Order to Moral
and Religious Acts, and can no more be separated from these than the other can
be separated from the former, and therefore the Method and Order of
Administration in Divine Worship (where not otherwise determined and appointed
by God) may as well be determined by Men, as Time and Place, with respect to
the nature, end, and use of the Service. So that the exception made against
humane Appointments in Divine Worship, viz. (that all but natural circumstances
must have a Divine Command to legitimate their use; and that whatever is not
prescribed, is therefore prohibited) is of no service to them that plead it;
and it remains good so far notwithstanding, that there are things Indifferent
in the Worship of God, and that the outward Order and Administration of it is
left to Christian Prudence; And this I shall more particularly prove.

1. From the consideration of the Rules laid down in the Gospel, relating to
the Administration of Divine Worship which (except what refer to the Elements,
etc. in the Sacraments) are taken from the Nature of the thing; and so always
were obliging to all Ages under the several variations and forms of Divine
Worship, and will be always so to all Christians in the World, viz. such as
respect Order, Decency and Edification, insisted upon, 1 Cor. 14. 26, 40. So
that we are no otherwise bound, than as bound by these measures, and where not
bound by them we are free. For as in former Ages from the beginning of the
World, where Revelation did not interpose (as it did under the Mosaical
Dispensation) all persons were left at liberty, and if so be they had a
respect to those natural rules, might choose what vvays they pleased for the
regulation of Divine Worship: So when under the Gospel we have no other than
those Natural rules (except as above excepted) the particular Circumstrnces are
as much now the matter of our free choice, as they were then, and this or
that may be used and observed, as the Case requires and Occasion serves. So
that if ever there were things Indifferent in Gods Worship, and the
Administration of it was left to the Consideration and Prudence of Mankind, it
is so still, since the Gospel keeps to those eternal Rules, which even the
Nature of the Thing has invariably established, and which, if it ever was
sufficient for the guiding of the Church of God in those particulars, is
certainly so when the Nature of Man is improved by new helps, and so he is more
capable of judging what may be suitable to that Essential Worship which God
has prescribed under the Gospel, and to Him whom that Worship is directed to.
But then that which confirms this, is, that those Rules are also general; and
such as will in their use and end respect all People in the World. The
Apostles in all their Discourses upon this subject rarely do descend to
particulars, and in what they do, show how far Custom and Charity, and the
Reason of the thing ought to govern us; as in the case of men's being Uncovered
in the Worship of God, for which the Apostle does argue not from Institution,
but the Nature and Decency of it, being in token of their pre-eminence, and the
headship they have over the Woman, etc. 1 Cor. 11. 47. But otherwise they
without doubt thought it unpracticable to tie all Nations up to the same Modes
and Circumstances, or if practicable, that it was not worth the while, when the
Worship might as well be Administered, and God as much Honored by one as the
other. Now if they did think it sufficient to prescribe only in this General
way, it must needs be that the particulars of those Generals must be
Indifferent, and that the choosing of one particular before the other was left
to Christian Prudence. And if it should be said (as it is) that when the things
are determined in general, the particulars are therein also vertually
determined, and so are not Indifferent; I shall content my self to reply, that
by this way of arguing there would be nothing Indifferent in the World: There
being nothing, how Lawful and Indifferent soever in it self, but what we are
limited by General Rules in the use of. As for example, all Meats are now
Lawful to Christians, but yet there are General Rules by which we are
determined in the use of them, such as our own Constitution, and our Quality,
or Scandal given to others: But the being thus bounded by such Rules, does not
change the Nature of those Meats, and make them to be other than Indifferent.
So it is in the Worship of God, for the better Administration of which there
are general Rules laid down; and according to which we are to be determined in
our choice of particulars, but yet the particulars notwithstanding are
Indifferent and matter of Christian Liberty, and what humane prudence is to
regulate us in.

All which will yet be further confirmed by considering the Nature of the
things which are the Subject of those general Rules, viz. Order, Decency, and
Edification, which do mostly, if not altogether, depend upon variable
Circumstances, and may be different according to those Circumstances; sometimes
this, and at other times that being subservient thereunto. As for instance,
Decency does generally depend upon Custom, and the Custom of Ages and Countries
being different, Decency in one Age or Country may be and often is quite
different from what it is in another. It was once comely amougst some Nations
to be covered in Divine Worship, and practiced both amongst the Jews in their
Synagogues, as the Apostle does insinuate, 2 Cor. 3. 14. and their own Authors
do acknowledge Lightf. ^or. Hebr. in 1 Cor. 11. 4.
; and also amongst the Plut. Probl. Romans
Romans. But it was Comely amongst others to be Uncovered, as amongst the
Grecians, (c) who in those Times giving Laws of Civility, and in many things of
Religion too to other Nations, it became a prevailing Custom, and was, as a
thing decent, introduced into (b) Macrob. Saturn. l. 3. c. 6.
the Christian Church. Thus it is also as to Edification, which does in like
manner often depend upon Circumstances, and according to those Circumstances
the Edification of the Church in its Peace, Union, and Comfort may be promoted
or hindered, and that may be for Edification in one Age or Church, which is not
so in another.

Thus the being covered in Divine Worship was for Edification in the Jewish
Church, being used in token of Eear and Reverence, Distance and Subjection; in
allusion to which the Seraphims are represented appearing before God, after
that manner, Isai. 6. 2. and in imitation of whom the Apostle pleads that Woman
should be veiled in Religious Assemblies, in token of Subjection and
Shamefacedness, 1 Cor. 11. 10. But on the contrary he does judge and Determine
that, for the Reasons above given, it was better and more for Edification, that
Men should be therein Uncovered. So the Love Feasts, and Holy-kiss of Charity
were at the first thought good for Edification, and were accordingly used in
Apostolical times, (being an Excellent and Useful, Chrysostom. and Theophyl. in 1
Cor. 11. 17. Tertul. Apol. c. 39. de orat. l. 6.
Admirable and Frindly, Custom) as thereby was signified the Universal Love and
Charity that Christians ought to maintain, and which they should at all times
but especially in Divine Worship be forward to express and renew: But when
Disorder and Licentiousness arose from them, they were generally laid aside,
and Council. Laod. c. 28. etc.
Abolished by Authority.

So it was thought to be for Edification in the Primitive Church, to Administer
Baptism by immersion or dipping, and the Apostle does make use of it as an
excellent argument to newness of life, Romans 6. 3, 4. and yet notwithstanding
the signification of it, and the practice of the Church for a long time, a
Charitable reason has overruled it, and brought in Sprinkling instead of it.
Thus sitting at the Lords Supper is accounted decent by some, and Edification,
as it is a table posture and is a sign of our being feasted by God; and yet in a
general Synod of the Reformed Churches in Poland, etc. it was declared, that
forasmuch as sitting was introduced first by the Synod. Petricav. conclus. 4.
An. 1578.
Arrians (beside the Custom used in all the Evangelical Churches throughout
Europe,) we reject it as peculiar to them (that as they do irreverently treat
Christ, so also his Sacred appointments) and as a Ceremony less Comely and
Devout, and to many very offensive. So that Order, Decency, and Edification,
being generally mutable things, and varying as circumstances vary, there could
in the nature of the thing be only general Rules prescribed, and so the
particulars must be left to discretion, and to be determined by those that are
best able and have Authority to judge of the circumstances, and to pick out of
them those which are indifferent, what may best serve the ends of Religion, and
the honor of its institutions.

2. I shall prove that things indifferent in themselves, though not prescribed,
may be Lawfully used in Divine Worship, from the practice of our Savior and
his Apostles. Under the Law the Constitution was very exact, the Rites and
Orders of it very particular, and the Observation of them punctually required.
But as it was not so precise, but that many things respecting the outward Order
were added, so some things were altered upon prudential considerations; and by
the addition or alteration of which the Authority of that Law was not conceived
to be infringed, nor violated; as it is evident from the respect which our
Savior showed to them, and his compliance with them. An instance of this is
the Synagogual Worship; It Is a controversy whether there was any provision
made under the Law for the places themselves, the intimations of that are (if
any) very obscure, but there are not so much as any intimations of the manner
and order or parts of the Worship therein to be observed; and yet we find such
there was, Acts 15. 21. Moses being read and preached there every Sabbath Day;
and that our Savior frequently resorted to it and bore a part in it, John 18.
20, etc. The like temper we find him of, when he used the Cup of Charity after
the manner of the Jews, in the Passover, though there was no institution for
it; and that it was as many other things, taken up and used amongst them by way
of signification, and as a Testimony of entire Friendship, and Charity, Luke,
22. 16. But I conceive alteration of Circumstances in the Institution is much
more exceptionable than the addition of such to it, and yet this was both done
by them and observed by our Savior, when there was nothing else to oblige him,
but only a condescension to them in such usages and rites as were inoffensive
in themselves, and what were then generally used in the Church. That the
posture first required and used in the Pasiover was standing, the
Circumstances, being to be eat with Staves in their Hands and Shoes on their
Feet, etc. do prove, and is affirmed by Philo de Sacrif. Able, etc. Lightf.
Hor. Matthew. c. 26. 20.
the Jews; and it is as manifest that the Jews in the time of our Savior, and
for a long time before, did recede from it, and did eat it in the posture of
discumbency; whether it was as they looked upon themselves as settled in the
possession of Canaan, which they were at the first institution Traveling
toward; or, as it is said by the latter Jews, because it was a sign of Liberty,
and after the manner of Kings and Great Men, is not so material, as it is that
our Savior did follow this Custom, and complied with this practice of theirs
without hesitation. And thus did the Apostles when they observed the hours of
Prayer, Acts, 3. 1. which were of humane institution as well as the Prayers
themselves, (for without doubt they were public Prayers, which were used in
the Temple,) but though the place was, yet that service was of no more
Authority than what was used in the Synagogues. Now if the Jews did thus
institute and alter things relating to external Order and Administration,
according as the case might require, and it was lawful for them so to do (as
it is plain from the compliance of our Savior and the Apostles with them in it)
then much more may it be supposed lawful for the Christian Church to exercise
that liberty when they have no other than such general rules for their
direction as they had then, without such particulars as they had.

And that this is no other than a certain Truth, will appear from the same
liberty taken in Apostolical times in Religious Assemblies, when the Christian
Church not only complied with the Jews in such Rites as they were under no
Obligation, but that of Charity, to use, and which they did use because they
were not forbidden, and so lawful; (as when St. Paul took upon him a Vow, Acts.
21. 26.) but also had some Observances of it is own, that were of a ritual
nature, and as they were taken up, so might be laid down upon prudential
consideration. Such I account was the Washing the Disciples Feet, which was
done by our Savior in token of the Humility he was to be president of, and
would have them follow him in; and which it seems was observed amongst them, 1 Timothy 5. 10. and for a long time after continued in a sort in some Churches
Ambros. Tom. 4. l. 3. de Sacrament. c. 1.
. Such also were the Love Feasts at the Administration of the Lords Supper; and
the Holy-kiss used then amongst Christians, if not as a constant attendant upon
all publik Worship, yet to be sure at Prayer Tertul. de orat. c. 14.
. Which and the like usages, however taken up, yet were in the Opinion of the
Church no other than Indifferent, and accordingly were upon the abuse of them
(as I observed before) discarded. From all which it appears, that there was no
such thing as Prescription expected before any Rite should be introduced into
the Church, or before it would be lawful for Christians to use it, but that
where it was not forbidden, the Practice of the Church was to determine them;
and if Prescription had been thought necessary for every thing used in Divine
Worship, which was not Natural, then certainly our Savior and his Apostles
would never have used or encouraged others to use any thing that wanted such
Authority, and that was not of Divine Institution.

Now if it should be objected that these usages of the Ames Fresh Suit, l. 2.
Sect. ^3, etc. p. 334.
Christian Church were Cilvil observances, and used as well out of God's
Worship as in it; and therefore what there needed no Institution for, and might
be lawfully used without. I answer 1. That this does justify most of the usages
contended for, and there would be nothing unlawful in using a White Garment,
etc. in Divine Service, since that as a sign of Royalty and Dignity was Casaub.
Exercit. 16. c. 73.
used in Civil as well as Religious cases, and according to this Argument may
therefore lawfully be used in Religious, because it was in Civil.

Secondly, They must say that either a Civil observance, when used in Religious
Worship, remains Civil, notwithstanding it is being so applied, or that it is
Religious whilst so applied; if the former, then Kneeling or Standing in the
Worship of God would be no acts of Adoration and not be Religious, because
those postures are used in Civil matters; if the latter, then it must be
granted that there may be Rites used in the Worship of God and to a Religious
end, which there is no Divine Prescription for.

Nay Thirdly, It Is evident that these and the like were not used by the
Christians as mere Civil Rites; this I think is made evident, as to Washing the
Feet, by a Learned Person Buxtorf. Exercit. Hist. Sacr. Coenae
; and not only was the kiss of Charity called the Holy-kiss in Scripture, but
by the Fatherrs, (notwithstanding what is Ames. ibid. p. 342. n. XXX.
objected) the Seal of Prayer, and the Seal of Reconciliation, and both
consistent, the one as it was an attendant upon the office, the other as it was
a Testimony of their Charity and Reconciliation to each other in it.

Fourthly, If the being Civil usages did make them which were originally so, to
be lawful in or at Divine Worship, then there is nothing that is used out of
Worship in Civil cases and affairs, but may be introduced into the Church;
since if it be for that reason that any usages of that kind are defended, the
reason will as well defend all as one. And then the Histrionical Practices of
the Church of Rome might warantably be introduced, as the rocking of a Babe in
a Cradle at night, at the Nativity time; the Harrowing of Hell at Easter, etc.
Then a Maypole may be brought into the Church for Children to Dance-about and
Climb upon, in sign of their desire to seek the things above; and a stiff Straw
put into the Child's Hand, for a sign of Fighting against Spiritual Enemies, as
with a Spear; And all the absurdities of that Nature charged injuriously upon
our Proceedings Ames. Ib l. 1. c. 3. P^id 1
would rerurn with success upon themselves: Since all these are fetched from
Customs and Practices in Secular matters.

Fifthly, If this be a reason to Defend the Use of Rites in the Christian
Church, because they are used out of it, and in Civil cases; then what will
become of that Position, before spoken of, and generally asserted by those who
oppose us, that nothing is to be used in the Worship of God without
Prescription, except the Natural Circumstances of Action; for though Civil and
Natural are sometimes coincident, yet they may be and often are Separated; for
Feasting and Salutation are Civil usages, but are no Natural Circumstances in
Divine Worship, and which that cannot be performed without, And if these and
the like were used in the Church, and applied and annexed to Divine Worship;
then the reason upon which they were introduced and used does, wherever that
reason is, justify the like Practice, and we are left still to choose and act
according to the Permission and Allowance that is given us; that is, all such
things that are not forbidden are just matter of our Christian Liberty, and
there is no Sin in a Prudent exercise of it.

3. I shall further prove and strengthen the Proposition, that things
Indifferent, though not prescribed, may be lawfully used in Divine Worship,
from the ill consequences attending the contrary; one of which is, that if we
hold all things not commanded to be prohibited, we shall find no Church or
Religious Society in the World but are Guilty; and if the doing so makes
Communion with a Church unlawful, there is no Church we can hold Communion
with. There are some Churches that do maintain and use such things as the
Scripture expressly condemns, and do lay aside such as the Scripture requires;
as the Church of Rome, in it is Worshipping Saints and Angels, and denying the
Cup to the Laity, etc. And these things make it necessary for those to quit
it is Communion that are of it, and for those to avoid it that are not in it.
But other Churches there are that are Guilty of no such Fundamental Errors and
fatal miscarriages, and may so far lawfully be Communicated with. But even none
of these are there, but what, either wittingly or unwittingly, do take the
liberty of using what the Scripture has no where required. It was notoriously
so in the Ancient Church when some Customs did universally obtain amongst them;
as the Anniversary Solemnities of the Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension of
Christ, and Descent of the Holy Ghost, the receiving of the Lords Supper
Fasting; Aug. Epis. 118. Januar.
the Praying toward the East Basil. de Spir. S. c. 27.
; the Standing in their Devotions on the Lords Days, Aug. Epis. 119. Januar.
especially from Easter to Whitsontide; the Dipping the Baptized thrice in
Water Ambros. lib. 2. de Sacrament. c. 7.
, etc. Now whatever some of the Fathers might plead for any of these from
Scriptures misunderstood, yet it is plain that none of these are required in
Scripture, and if so, a Person that holds it unlawful to use any thing
uncommanded, and to hold Communion with a Church so using, must have separated
from the Catholic Church, since (if there be Credit to be given to the Fathers
so reporting) they all agreed in the use and Practice of the things above
recited. And he that held all fixed Holy Days of Ecclesiastical Institution
unlawful, and all Ceremonies not instituted by God to be prohibited, must not
have Worshipped with them, who did not only thus do, but thought it unlawful,
when universally Practiced to do otherwise.

But again, as there were some Rites universally held in estimation, so there
were others that were peculiar to some Churches, and that were not thought to
be obliging out of that particular Communion, as when in the Church of Rome it
was the Custom to Fast on the Saturday; and of most orhers to make no such
distinction betwixt that and other days. Aug. Epist. 118.
In the Church of Milain they Washed the Feet of those that were to be
Baptized, but in the Church of Rome, they used it not Ambros. l. 3. de
Sacrament. c. 1.
. Now if Persons did believe such things unlawful, they could have no Communion
with any particular Church, because no Church was without such Uncommanded
Rites; or if they could be so fond as to think the Rites of their own Church to
be of Divine Institution, yet how could they have Communion with a Church,
where the contrary Custom did prevail, as in the cases abovesaid. And as it was
then, so it is now with all stated and settled Churchers in the World, who do
Practice against this Principle, and either expect not or are not able to find
a Command for every thing established amongst them; and that Practice with as
much contrariety to each other as the Church of Rome and Milain once did, so in
some Churches they receive the Lord's Supper Kneeling, in some Standing, in
others Sitting. In some they Sprinkle the Child in Baptism but once, and in
others thrice. Now there would be no reconciling of these one to another, and
no possibility of holding Communion with them under these Circumstances, or of
being a Member of any Church, if we must have an institution for every thing
done in the Worship of God, and that we must join in nothing, which has it not.
As for Instance, what Church is there in the World, which has not some form or
forms of Prayer, and whose Service for the most part (generally speaking) is
not made up of them; especially that does not use them in the Administration of
the Sacraments. But now if a Person holds that whatever is not prescribed is
unlawful, and that forms of Prayer are no where prescribed, then he cannot join
with the Church so using, but while in the body of the Church by residence, he
must be no Member of that Body in Communion.

Nay further, if this be true, then none must hold Communion with them who are
of this Opinion; since those that pretend most to it, and urge it as a reason
against Communion with us, live in contradiction to it, and to Practice and Use
things which they have no more Authority, nor can give more reason for, than we
do for the things they condemn, and that is, that they are lawful, expedient,
and convenient. As for Example, let us consider the Sacraments, in which, if any
thing, we might expect particular Prescription, because they are mere
Institutions; where do they find that the Baptized Person is necessarily to be
Sprinkled? What Command or Example have they for it, or what reason more than
the reason of the thing taken from expedience and the general Practice of the
Church of God in colder Climates? And yet this is as much used amongst them
that pretend to keep exactly to the Rule of Scripture, as it is amongst us that
take a liberty in things Uncommanded; but with this difference, that they do it
upon the supposition of a Command, and so make it necessary, and our Church
leaves it, as it is, Indifferent. Again, where do they find a Command for
Sitting at the Lord's Supper, or so much as an Example? (For the Posture of our
Savior is left very uncertain.) Where again do they find a Command for the
necessary use of conceived Prayer, and that that, and no other, should be used
in the public Worship of God? And that they must prove that maintain public
Forms unlawful. Where again do they find it required that an Oath is to be
taken by laying the Hand on the Gospel and Kissing the Book? which is both a
Natural and Instituted part of Worship, being a Solemn Invocation of God and an
appeal to him, with an acknowledgment of his Omniscience, and Omnipresence; his
Providence and Government of the World; his Truth and Justice to Right the
Innocent and Punnish the Guilty; all which is owned and testified by Kissing
that Book that God has declared this more especially in. And if we more
particularly descend to those that differ from us in this point: Where do those
of the Congregational way find that even Christians were otherwise divided from
Christians than by place, or that they did combine into particular Churches, so
as not to be all the while reputed Members of another, and might be admitted,
upon removal of Place, upon the same terms that they were of that they removed
from; or indeed that they were so Members of a particular as not to be Members
of any or the whole Church of Christ, upon their being Batipzed? Where do they
find that Christians were gathered out of Christians, and did combine into a
Society Excluding those from it that would not make a Profession of their Faith
and Conversion distinct from that at Baptism? Where do we ever read that he
that was a Minister of one Church was not a Minister all the World over, as
well as he that was Baptized in one was reputed a Christian and Churchmember
wherever he came? Again, where do we read that its necessary that Ministers
should be alike in Authority, Power, and Jurisdiction, and that there is to be
no difference in point of Order and Superiority amongst them: Or that there are
to be Elders for Governing the Church, who are not Ordained to it, and are in
no other State after than they were before that Service, both of which are held
by the Prerbyterians, strictly so called? And if it be said these respect
Government but not Worship; I answer the case is the same, for if we are to do
nothing but what is prescribed in the Worship of God, because, (as they say)
it derogates from the Priestly Office of Christ, and does detract from the
Sufficiency of Scripture; then I say upon the like reason, there must be
nothing used in Church Government but what is prescribed, since the Kingly
Office is as much concerned in this as the Priestly in the other, and the
Sufficiency of Scripture in both. Lastly, Where do any of them find that
position in Scripture, that there is nothing lawful in Divine Worship but what
prescribed, and that what is not Commanded is Forbidden? And if there be no
such position in Scripture, then that can no more be true than the want of such
a position can render things not Commanded to be unlawful.

And now I am come to that which must put an Issue one way or other to the
Dispute; for if there be no such position in Scripture, either expressed in it,
or to be gathered by good consequence from it, we have gained the point; but if
there be, then we must give it up. And this is indeed contended for. For its
Objected,

That its accounted in Scripture an heinous Crime to do things not commanded;
as when Nadab and Abihu offered strange Fire before the Lord, which he
Commanded Levit. 10. 1, etc.
them not, etc. From which form of expression it may be collected, that what is
not Commanded is Forbidden; and that in every thing used in Divine Worship
there must be a Command to make it lawful and allowable.

To this I answer, that the Proposition inferred, that all things not Commanded
are Forbidden, is not true, and so it cannot be the Sense and Meaning of the
Phrase; for

1. Then all things must be either Commanded or Forbidden; and there would be
nothing but what must be Commanded or Forbidden; but I have before showed, and
it must be granted, that there are things neither Commanded nor Forbidden,
which are called Indifferent.

2. If things not Commanded are Forbidden, then a thing not Commanded is alike
Heinous as a thing Forbidden. And then David's Temple which he designed to
Build would have been Criminal as well as Jeroboam's Dan and Bethel; and the
Feast of Esth. 9. 27.
Purim, like Jeroboam's Eighth Month 1 King. 12. 32, 33.
; and the Synagogal Worship like the Sacrificing in Gardens Isai. 65. 3.
; and the hours of Prayer Act. 3. 1.
like Nadab's Strange Fire, The former of which were things Uncommanded, and
the latter Forbidden; and yet They were approved and These condemned.

2. The things, to which this Phrase not Commanded is applied, to give no
encouragement to such an Inference from it; for its constantly applied to such
as are absolutely Forbidden. This was the case of Nadab and Abihu, who offered
Fire not merely Uncommanded, but what was prohibited, which will appear; if we
consider that the Word Strange when applied to matters of Worship does signify
as much as Forbidden. Thus we read of Strange Incense, that is, other than what
was compounded Exodus 30. 9,
according to the directions given for it; which as it was to be put to no
common uses, so no common Ver. 34. Chapter 37: 29.
persmue was to be put to the like uses with it. So we also read of Strange
Vanities, which is but another Jer. 8. 19.
Word for Graven Images; and of Strange Gods. And after the same sort is it to
be understood in the case before us, viz. for what is Forbidden. For that such
was the Fire made use of by those Young Men will be further confirmed, if we
consider that there is scarcely any thing belonging to the Altar (Setting aside
the Structure of it) of which more is said than of the Fire burning upon it.
For 1. It was lighted from Heaven Lev. 9. 24.
. 2. It was always to be burning upon the Altar. Chapter 6. 12.
3. If it was not made use of in all Sacred matters (where Eire was to be used)
yet it was most Holy, and when Atonement was to be made by Incense, the Coals
were to be taken from thence Lev. 16. 12, 46.
, and therefore surely was as peculiar to those Offices as the Incense, and to
be as constantly used in them, as never to be used in any other. And it will
yet make it more evident if it be considered 4. That just before there is an
account given of the Extraordinary way by which this Fire was lighted, for the
Text says, there came out a Fire from before the Lord, and consumed upon the
Altar the Burnt-Offering, etc. and immediately Lev. 9. 24.
follows the Relation of Nadab's miscarriage. Now for what reason are these
things so closely connected, but to show wherein they Offended. For before it
was the Office of Aaron's Sons to put Fire upon the Altar, and now through
Inadvertency or Presumption Attempting Lev. 1. 7.
to do as formerly, when there had been this Declaration from Heaven to the
contrary, they Suffered for it. 5. It appears further from the conformity
betwixt the Punishment and the Sin; as there came Fire from before the Lord and
consumed the Burnt-Offering; to teach them what Fire for the future to make use
of; So upon their Transgression there came out Fire from the Lord and devoured
them; to teach others how Dangerous it was to do otherwise than he had
Commanded. So that it seems to me to be like the case of Vzzah, when 1 Chronicles.
13. 7. 10. Ch: 15. 2.
they carried the Ark in a Cart, which the Levites were to have born upon their
Shoulders; and it was not an Offering without a Command, but otherwise than
Commanded, that was their Fault; and without doubt they might with no more
Offense have taken what Fire they would for their Incense, than what Wood they
pleased for their Fire, if there had been no more direction about the one than
the other. But to proceed in the other places of Scripture where this Phrase of
not Commanded is to be met with, its also so applied to things Forbidden; as to
what is called Abomination, which is the Worshipping of Strange Gods, the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, and Deuteronomy. 17: 34. Jer. 7. 31. Chapter 19. 5. Chapter 32. 35.
the Host of Heaven: To the building the High Places of Topheth, and the
burning their Sons and Daughters in the Fire to Baal, and causing them to pass
through the Fire unto Molech. Of such and the like its said, which I Commanded
them not, neither came it into my mind. And lastly it is applied to the false
Prophets, who spoke Lies Jer. 29. 22, 23.
in the Name of the Lord; in which case the mere being not Commanded nor sent
by him, is in the nature of the thing no less than a Prohibition, it being a
Belying God; though there had been no such place, as, Deuteronomy. 18. 20. to forbid
it. Now if so much stress was to be laid upon the Phrase, as the Objection does
suppose, and that we must take a Non-Commanding for a Prohibition, we might
reasonablly expect to find the Phrase otherwhere applied to things that were no
otherwise Unlawful than because not Commanded; but when its always spoken of
things plainly Prohibited, its a sign that its rather God's Forbidding that
made them Unlawful, than his not Commanding. But it may still be said, why
should then the Phrase be used at all in such matters, and why should the case
be thus Represented, if not Commanded is not the same with Prohibited?

To this I answer, 1. That all things Prohibited are by consequence not
Commanded; but it follows not that all things not Commanded are Prohibited. If
it was Forbidden to Offer Strange Fire, then it was a thing not Commanded (for
otherwise the same thing would be Forbidden and Commanded) but if it had been a
thing not Commanded only, it would not by being so have been any more
Prohibited than the Wood that was to be burnt upon the Altar. Now its with
respect to the former that things Prohibited are called things not Commanded;
and not with respect to the latter. 2. Indeed the Phrase not Commanded is only
a Meiosis or Softer way of speaking, when more is understood than expressed. A
Figure usual in all Authors and Languages, that I know of, and what is
frequently to be met with in Scripture. Thus it is given as a Character of an
Hypocritical People, they choose that in which I Delight not, Isai. 66: 3. 4:
Chapter 65. 3, 12.
which is but another Word for what was said in the verse before, their Soul
Delighted in their Abominations, or Idolatries. And when the Apostle would
Describe the evil state of the Gentile World, by the most Heinous and
Flagitious Crimes, such as Fornication, Covetousness, Romans 1. 28. 29.
Laciviousness, Envy, Murder, and what not, he says of these, that they were
things not Convenient. And it is as evident that the Phrase not Commanded is of
the like kind, when the things its applied to are alike Notorous and Abominable.

But its further Objected, that its said in Scripture, ye shall not add unto
the Word which I Command you, neither Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
shall ye diminish ought from it: And that our Savior condemning the Practices
of the Scribes in this kind, concludes, In Vain do they Worship me, Teaching
for Matthew. 15. 9.
Doctrines the Commandments of Men. From whence it may be collected 1. That all
things not Commanded by God in his Word* are additions to it. 2. That such
additions are altogether unlawful.

To this I reply,

1. If they mean by adding to the Word, the doing what that Forbids, and by
diminishing, the neglecting of what that requires (as the next Words do
intimate, and is plainly the sense otherwise Deuteronomy, 12. 32.
, when its no Deuteronomy. 4. 4, 6.
sooner said, What thing soever I Command you, Observe to do it; but it
immediately follows, thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it) its what
we willingly condemn, according to that of our Savior, Whosoever shall break
one of these least Commandments, and shall teach Matthew. 5. 19.
Men so, he shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven.

2. If they mean by adding the appointing somewhat else instead of what God
has appointed, as Jeroboam did the Feast of the Eighth Month; and by
diminishing the taking away what God has Commanded, as Ahaz did the Altar, and
Laver, etc. This is what we condemn 2 King. 16. 14, 17.
also, and do blame in the Church of Rome, whilst they feed the People with
Legends instead of Scripture, and take away both that and the Cup from the
Laity.

3. If they mean by adding, the adding insolent expositions to the Command, by
which the end of it is frustrated. This our Savior condemned in the Pharisees,
Why do ye Transgress the Command of God by your tradition? For God Commanded
saying, Honor thy Father, Matthew. 15. 3.
etc. but ye say, whosoever shall say to his Father, it is a gift, etc. Thus ye
have made the Commandment of God of none effect by your tradition. And this we
condemn in the Church of Rome, who do defeat the Commands of God by their
Doctrines of Attrition and Purgatory, etc.

4. If they mean by adding, the making of that which is not the Word of God, to
be of equal Authority with it; This our Savior condemned in the Pharisees,
when they Taught for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, and esteemed them as
necessary to be obeyed, and to be of equal force with what was Authorized by
him; nay it seems, they had more regard to the Tradition of the Elders, than
the Commandment of God, as our Savior Insinuates, verse. 2, 3. and has been
observed from their own Authors. This we also condemn in the Church of Rome,
which decrees, that the Apocrypha and Traditions should be received with the
like Pious Con. Trid: Sess. 4. Decr. 1.
regard, as the Sacred Writ.

5. If by adding, they mean the giving the same Efficacy to humane
Institutions, as God does to his, by making them to confer Grace upon the
rightly disposed; and by diminishing, that the Service is not complete without
it. This our Savior condemned in the Pharisees, when they maintained, that to
eat with unwashen Hands defiled a Man, verse 20. And this we condemn in the
Church of Rome, in their use of Holy Water, and Relics and Ceremonies.

Thus far we agree; but if they proceed, and will conclude, that the doing any
thing not Commanded, in the Worship of God, is a Sin, though it have none of
the ingredients in it before spoken of, we therein differ from them, and upon
very good reason. For therein they differ from our Savior and his Apostles,
and all Churches, as I have showed. Therein also they depart from the notion
and reason of the thing: For adding is adding to the substance, and making the
thing added of the Nature of the thing its added to; and diminishing is
diminishing from the substance, and taking away from the Nature of it; but when
the substance remains entire, as much after this humane appointment as it was
before it, without Loss and Prejudice, without Debasement or Corruption, it
cannot be called an addition to it, in the sense that the Scripture takes that
Word in.

Nay so far are we from admitting this charge, that we return it upon them, and
do bring them in Criminals upon it. For those that do Forbid what the Gospel
Forbids not, do as much add to it, as those that Command what the Gospel does
not Command: And if it be a Crime to Command what that Commands not, it must be
so to Forbid what it Forbids not. And this is what they are Guilty of that do
hold that nothing is to be used in the Worship of God but what is prescribed,
for if that be not a Scripture Proposition and Truth (as certain it is not)
then what an addition is this? A greater surely than what they charge upon us;
for all that is Commanded amongst us, is looked upon not as necessary but
expedient; but what is Forbid by them is Forbid as absolutely unlawful; the
latter of which alters the Nature, whereas the other only affects the
Circumstances of things.

The second Commandment, Thou shall not make unto thee any Graven Image, etc.
is frequently made use of to prove that we must apply nothing to a Religious
Use but what is Commanded; and we are told that the sense of it is, that We
must Worship God in no other way, and by no other means or Religious Rites,
than what he has prescribed.

The best way to answer this is. 1. To consider

1. In this Command it is provided, that there be no act of Adoration given to
any besides God. By this the Heathens are condemned in their Plurality of Gods,
and the Church of Rome in the Veneration they give to Saints and Angels.

2. That the Honor we give to God be suitable to his Nature, and agreeable to
his Will. Suitable to his Nature; and so we are not to Worship him by Creatures,
as the Sun, etc. for that is to consider him as Finite; nor by Images and
Eternal Representations, for that is to consider him as Corporeal: Agreeable to
his Will; and so we are Forbidden all other Worship of him than what he has
appointed. Its in the last of these we are concerned, for I believe there will
be no attempt to prove that there is any thing in our Worship that does
derogate from the perfections of God, and is unsuitable to his Nature, further
than the defects that must arise from all Worship given by Creatures to a
Creator. And if we come to consider it as to what he has revealed, there can
be nothing deduced thence to prove Rites instituted by Men for the Solemnity of
God's service to be Forbidden; and which for ought I see is not attempted to be
proved from this Commandment, or from Scripture else where, but by crowding
such Rites into and representing them as a part of Divine Worship. This way
goes one of the most industrious in this cause. Ceremonies, says he, are
External Rites of Religious Worship as used to further Devotion, and therefore
being Ames Fresh Suit, part. 2. sect. 2. command, p. 228.
invented by Man are of the same Nature with Images, by which and at which God
is Worshipped. In which are no less than three mistakes. As 1. He makes
whatever is used to further Devotion to be Religious Worship. 2. He makes it a
fault in External Rites in Religious Worship that they are used to further
Devotion 3. He makes External Rites taken up by Men, and used for that end to
be of the same Nature with Images. If I show that these are really mistakes, I
think that in doing so the whole argument taken from 2d. Commandment falls with
it. 1, He mistakes, in that he makes whatever is used to further Devotion, to
be Religious Worship: The error of which will appear from this consideration;
that all things relating to Divine Worship, are either Parts or Adjuncts of it;
Parts, as Prayer, and the Lord's Supper; Adjuncts, as Form and Posture. Now
Adjuncts are not Parts, because the Worship is entire and invariable in all the
Parts of it, and remains the same though the Adjuncts vary. Prayer is Worship,
whether with a Form or without; and the Lord's Supper is Worship, whether
Persons Kneel, Sit or Stand, in the receiving of it. And yet though the
Adjuncts are no part of Worship, they further Devotion in it. This those that
are for conceived Prayer, plead for Their Practice, and this also is pleaded by
those that are for a Form. This do they urge, that are for Sitting at the
Lord's Supper, and this they say, that are for Kneeling; so that these and the
like Adjuncts do further Devotion, and are for Edification, is an argument used
by both. Now if Adjuncts are not part of Worship, and may be yet used to
further Devotion, then the furthering Devotion by any Rite, does not in it self
make that Rite so used, to be Worship. I acknowledge there is False Worship as
well as True; True Worship is of Divine Institution, and False Worship is of
Humane Appointment; and becomes Worship, when either Divine Institution is
pretended for it or its used for the same special ends that Gods Worship is
instituted for, that is, as necessary to acceptance, or as a means of Grace.
And so I confess Adjuncts may be made parts of False Worship, as many
Ceremonies are in the Church of Rome; but this is not the case with any things
used in the Administration of Worship in our Church; we plead nothing of
Divine Authority to enforce them, use them not as necessary, nor as means of
Grace; after the manner we do the Word of God, and the Sacraments. 2. Its
another mistake, that its charged as a fault upon Rites in Worship, that They
are used to further Devotion. Without this end surely they are not to be used,
or at least not to be encouraged; for Divine Worship being the acknowledgment
of God, and a giving Honor to Him, should have all things about it Grave and
Solemn, that may best suit it, and promote the ends for which its used, But if
Rites are used in it, that have no respect to such ends, they become Vain and
Trifling, neither worthy of that nor our Defense. And therefore we justly blame
the Church of Rome for the Multitude of Ceremonies used in their Worship, and
for such, that either have no signification, or whose signification is so
obscure, as is not easy to be observed or traced, and that rather hinder than
further Devotion. Surely it would not so well answer the end, if the Hand in
Swearing was laid upon another Book, as when on the Gospel; nor if the
Love Feasts at the Lords Supper had been only as a Common Meal, without respect
to Charity signified by it. 3. Its another mistake that External Rites taken up
by Men, and used for the furthering Devotion, are made to be of the same Nature
with Images. This there is no foundation for, for the Religious use of Images
is expressly contrary to the Command of God, and Forbidden, because it tends to
debase God in the thoughts of those that Worship him by such mediums. But
there is nothing in the use of such External Ries (as are before spoken of)
that fall under the censure of either of these; but that we may lawfully use
them, and the use of which is not therefore at all Forbidden in the Second
Commandment.

If there be not a Rule for all things belonging to the Worship of God, the
Gospel would be less perfect than Moses, in the care of his Church, Heb. 3. 2.
which is not to be supposed.

The sufficiency of Scripture and Faithfulness of Christ Rome for an Infallible
Judge in matters of Faith, that by an Appeal to him all controversies would be
decided, and the Peace of the Church secured. But notwithstanding all the
advantages which they so hugely amplify, there is not one Word in Scripture
(which in a matter of that importance is absolutely necessary) that does show
that it is necessary; or (were it so) who the Person or Persons are that should
have this Power or Commission. And in this case we must be content to leave
things as the Wisdom of God has thought fit to leave them, and to go on in the
old way of sober and amicable debate and fair reasoning to bring debates to a
conclusion. Thus it is in the matter before us, the pretense is very Popular
and Plausible, that, Who can better determine things Relating to the Worship of
God, than God whose Worship it is? And where may we expect to find them better
determined than in his Word, which is sufficient to all the ends it was writ
for? But when we come to enquire into the case, we find no such thing done, no
such care taken, no such particular directions as they had under the Law; and
therefore its certain that neither the sufficiency of Scripture, nor
Faithfulness of Christ stand upon that foundation. And if we do not find the
like particular prescriptions in Baptism as Circumcision; nor in the Lord's
Supper as in the Passover; nor in Prayers as in Sacrifices; its plain that the
sufficiency of Scripture and Faithfulness of Christ do respect somewhat else,
and that they are not the less for the want of them. Christ was Faithful, as
Moses, To him that appointed him, in performing what belonged to him as a
Mediator (in which respect Moses was a Type of him) and discovering to Mankind
in Scripture the method and means by which they might be Saved; and the
sufficiency of Scripture is in being a sufficient means to that end, and
putting Men into such State as will render them capable of attaining to it. And
as for modes and circumstances of things, they are left to the prudence of
those who by the Grace and the Word of God has been converted to the Truth,
and have received it in the Love of it. I have been the larger in the
consideration of this principle, viz. that Nothing but what is prescribed may
be lawfully used in Divine Worship, that I might relieve the consciences of
those that are ensnared by it, and that cannot be so, without subjecting
themselves to great inconveniences. For if nothing but what is of that Nature
may be used or joined with, and that the second Commandment does with as much
Authority Forbid the use of any thing not Commanded, as the Worshipping of
Images: If Nadab's and Abihu's Strange Fire, and Vzzah's touching of the Ark be
examples Recorded for caution to us, and that every thing Uncommanded, is of
the like Nature, attended with the like Aggravations, and alike do expose to
God's Displeasure: If the use of any thing not prescribed be such an addition
to the Word of God, as leaves us under the Penalty of that Text; If any Man
shall add unto these things, Rev. 22. 18.
God shall add unto him the Plagues that are Written in this Book; we cannot be
too cautious in the Examination of what is, or what is not prescribed. But
withal, if this be our case, it would be more intolerable than that of the
Jews. For amongst them every thing for the most part was plainly laid down, and
though the particular Rites and Circumstances prescribed in their Service were
many, yet they were sufficiently described in their Law, and it was but
consulting that, or Those whose Office and Employment it was to be well versed
in it, and they might be presently informed, and as soon see it as the Book was
laid open. This they all agreed in. But it is not so under the Gospel, and
there is no greater proof of it than the several schemes drawn up for
Discipline, and Order, by those that have been of that Opinion and made some
attemps to discribe them. And then when things are thus dark and obscure, so
hard to trace and discover, that it has thus perplexed and baffled those that
have made it their business to bring these things within Scripture Rules, how
perplexed must they be that are not skilled in it, And (as I have above showed)
must all their Days live in the Communion, it is likely, of no Church; since
though a Church should have nothing in it but what is prescribed, yet it would
take up a great deal of time to examine, and more to be satisfied, that all in
it is prescribed.

3. I shall consider, How we may know what things are Indifferent in the
Worship of God? I may answer to this, that we may know what is Indifferent in
the Worship of God, by the same Rule that we may know what is Indifferent out
of Worship, that is, if the thing to be enquired after, be neither required nor
Forbidden: For the Nature of Indifferency is always the same, and what it is in
one kind or instance, it is in all; and if the want of a Law, to Require or
Forbid, does make a thing Indifferent in Nature or Civil matters; it does also
the same in Religious: And in things Forbidden by Humane Authority, the not
being required in Scripture; and in things required by Humane Authority, the
not being Forbidden in Scripture, is a Rule we may safely determine the case,
and judge of the Lawfulness and Indifferency of things in Divine Worship by. But
I confess the Question requires a more parcicular Answer, because things in
their Nature Lawful and Indifferent, may yet, in their use and application,
become unlawful. As it is in Civil cases and Secular matters, to be Covered or
Uncovered is a thing in it self Indifferent; but to be Covered in the presence
of such of our Betters, as Custom and Law have made it our Duty to stand bare
before, would be unlawful, and it would be no excuse for such an Omission and
Contempt, that the thing is in it self Indifferent. And then much more will
this hold where the case is of an higher Nature; as it is in the Worship of
God, where things in themselves Indifferent may become Ridiculous, Absurd and
Profane, and argue rather contempt of God than reverence for him in the Persons
using them. Again, the things may, though Grave and Pertinent, yet be so
numerous that they may obscure and oppress the Service, and confound and
distract the Mind that should attend to the Observation of them; and so for one
reason or another are not to be allowed in the Solemnities of Religion.
Therefore in Answer to the Question, I shall add,

1. That things Indifferent are so called from their general Nature, and not as
if in practice and use, and all manner of cases, they always were so, and never
unlawful; for that they may be by Accident and Circumstance, being lawful or
unlawful, expedient or inexpedient, as they are used and applied.

2. I observe that there are several Laws which things Indifferent do respect;
and that may be Required or Forbidden by one Law, which is not Forbidden or
Required by another; and that may be Indifferent in one State which is Unlawful
in another, and by passing out of one into the other may cease to be
Indifferent, and therefore when we say things are Indifferent, we must
understand of what Rank they are, and what Law they do respect; As for example,
Humane Conversation, and Religious Worship are different Ranks to which things
are referred; and therefore what may be Indifferent in Conversation, may be
unlawful in Worship. Thus to Enterchange Discourse about Common Affairs, is a
thing lawful in it self, and useful in its place; but when practiced in the
Church, and in the midst of Religious Solemnities, is Criminal. This
distinction of Ranks and States of things is useful and necessary to be
observed, and which if observed would have prevented the objection made by
some, that if a Church or Authority may Command Indifferent things, then they
may require us to Pray Standing upon the head, etc. for that though Indifferent
in another case, is not in that, as being unsuitable to it.

3. Therefore we must come to some Rules in Divine Worship, by which we may
know what things in their Nature Indifferent, are therein also Indifferent, and
may be lawfully used: It being not enough to plead they are Indifferent in
themselves (as some unwarily do) and therefore presently they may be used; For
by the same reason, a Person may Spit in another Face, may keep on his Hat
before the King, etc. the Spitting and being Covered, being in their Nature
Indifferent, But now as there are certain Rules which we are to respect in
Common and Civil Conversation, and which even in that case do tie us up in the
use of things, otherwise Indifferent: So it is as reasonable, and must be much
more allowed, that there are some Rules of the like Nature which we must have a
regard to in the Administration of Divine Worship. And as in Common matters,
the Nature of the thing; in Actions the end; in Conversation the circumstances
are to be heeded, viz. Time, Place, Persons; as when, where, before whom we are
Covered or Uncovered, etc. So in Sacred matters; the Nature of the thing, in
the Decency and Solemnity of the Worship; the end for which it was appointed,
in the Edification of the Church; and the Peace, Glory, Security of that, in
its Order are to be respected. And according to these Rules and the
circumstances of things, are we to judge of the Indifferency, Lawfulness, or
expediency of things used in the Service of God; and as they do make for, or
against, and do approach to, or recede from these Characters, so they are to be
rejected or observed, and the more or less esteemed. But yet we are not come to
a conclusion, for 1. These are general Rules, and so the particulars are nor so
easily pointed to. 2. Decency, and Edification, and Order are (as was observed
before) Variable and Uncertain, and depend upon Circumstances, and so in their
Nature not easily determined. And, 3. Persons have very different Opinions
about what is Decent, Edifying, and Orderly; as in the Apostles time in the
Church of Rome, some were for, and others against, the Observation of Days; and
in the Church of Corinth, some doubtless were for being Covered, others for
being Uncovered, in Divine Worship. And therefore there is somewhat further
requisite to give Satisfaction in the point; and by which we may be able to
Judge what is Decent, Edifying, and Orderly; as well as we are by what is
Decent, etc. to Determine what is fit to be used in Religious Worship. And this
we may be helped in by considering,

1. That some things make so Eminently for, or are so Notoriously opposite to
these Rules, that Common Reason will be able forthwith to Judge of them, and to
declare for or against them. So when the Love Feasts, and the Lords Supper were
appointed for the testifying and increase of mutual Charity; if one took his
Supper before another, it was to make it rather a private 1 Cor. 11 20, 21.
Meal, than a Religious Feast, and so was a Notorious Breach of Order and
Christian Fellowship. So a Tumultuous speaking of many together is less for
Edification, and has more of Confusion than the Orderly speaking of one by
one. And Service in an Unknown Tongue does less conduce to Edification than
when it it is in a Language Vulgarly known and Understood; 1 Cor. 14. 16. 17,
26, 27.
this is a case that Reason as well as the Apostle does Determine to our Hands,
and which Mankind would with one consent soon agree to, were it not for a
certain Church in the Wotld that carries those of its Communion, against sense,
Reason, and Nature, for its own advantage.

2. But there are other things which are not so Clear and Evident, and so the
case needs further consideration. For the clearing of which we may observe,

1. That we are not so much to Judge of Decency, Order, and Edification
asunder, as together; these having a mutual Relation to and dependence upon
each other. So its well observed by St. Chrysostom, That Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Chapter
14. 40. 1 Cor. 14. 26.
nothing does so much Edify, as Order, Peace and Love: And the Apostle when he
had reproved the Disorders of their Service in the Church of Corinth concludes
it, Let all things be done to Edifying. The not observing of this is the
occasion of very great Mistakes in this matter; For Persons when they would
Judge of Edification consider presently what they conceive does most improve
them in Knowledge or any particular Grace; and having no further consideration,
for the sake of this throw down the Bounds of Public Order and bring all into
Confusion; and for Edifying (as they apprehend) themselves do Disturb if not
Destroy the Church of God, and render the means used in it ineffectual to
themselves and others. Thus again they Judge of what is Decent, and Indecent;
and conclude that there is no Indecency in Sitting, suppose at the Sacrament,
or the Prayers; but they mistake in such a conception, whilst what is against
public Order and Practice, is for that reason Indecent, were there no other
reason to make it so. So that if we would Judge aright of either of these we
must Judge of them together; and as Order alone is not enough to make a thing
Decent which is in it self Indecent; so Decency or particular Edification is
not enough to recommend that which is not to be Introduced or Obtained without
the Disturbance and Overthrow of public Order and Peace.

2. When the case is not apparent, we should rather Judge by what is contrary
than by what is agreeable to those Rules. We know better what things are not
than what they are: And if Christians should never agree to any thing in the
External Administration of Divine Worship till they agree in the notion of
Decency, Order, and Edification; or till they can prove that the things used,
or required to be used in a Church, do exactly agree to the Notion and
Definition of it; Worship must never be Administered, or the greater part of
Christians must Exclude themselves from it. And yet this must be done before it
can be positively said (unless in things very manifest) that this is Decent, or
that is Orderly, etc. These things as I have said are variable, and depend upon
Circumstances; and so Persons must needs be Wonderfully Confounded if they come
to Niceties and insist upon them. And therefore as we better know what is
Indecent than Decent, Disorderly than Orderly, against than for Edification, so
its better to take the course abovesaid in Judging about it. As for instance,
if we would enquire into the Decency of the Posture to be used in the Lord's
Supper, or the Edification that may arise from it; some will say its best to
receive it in the Posture frequently used in the Devotions of the ancient
Church of Standing or Incurvation; others would choose Sitting, as the
dissenting Parties amongst us, and some Foreign Churches; others be for the
Posture of Kneeling, used in ours and many more, and all with some show of
Reason. In these different cases it may not perhaps be so easy for a Person
(Educated in a different way from what is practiced and Prescribed) to Judge of
the Decency or Edification; but if he find it not Indecent, or Destructive of
Piety, and of the ends for which the Ordinance was Instituted, he is therewith
to satisfy himself. St. Austin puts alike case, and gives the like answer. Some
Churches Fast on the Saturday, Epist. 118.
because Christ's Body was then in the Grave, and he in a State of Humiliation.
Others do Eat on the Saturday, both, because that Day God Rested from his Work,
and Christ Rested in the Grave. And how in such a case to Determine our selves,
both in Opinion and Practice, that Father thus directs, If says he, what is
joined be not against Faith, or good Manners, it is to be accounted
Indifferent. And I may add, if it be not Indecent, Disorderly and Destructive
of Piety, its lawful.

3. If the case be not apparent, and we cannot easily find out how the things
used, and enjoined in a Church, are Decent, etc. we are to consider that we are
in, or Obliged to be of a Church, and that these things do respect such a
Society; and therefore are to be Cautious how we Condemn this or that for
Indecent, Confused, and Inexpedient, when we see Christians agreeing in the
Practice of them, and such whom for other things we cannot Condemn. When we
find, if we argue against it, they argue for it, and produce Experience against
Experience, and Reason against Reason, and that we have a whole Church against
our particular conceptions of things of this Nature; we should be apt to think
the Fault may be in our selves, and that its for want of Understanding and
Insight, for want of Use and Trial, and by Reason of some Prejudices or
Professions, that we thus differ in our Judgment from them. We see what little
things do Determine Men ordinarily in these matters; how addicted some are to
their own Ways and Customs, and forward to Like or Condemn, according to their
Education, which does form their conceptions and fix their inclinations; how
Prone again others are to Novelty and Innovation. So St. Austin Epist. 1. 3.
observes, some warmly contend for an usage, because its the Custom of their
own Church; as if they come, suppose into another Place where Lent is observed
without any Relaxation, they however refuse to Fast, because its not so done in
their Country. There are others again do like, and are bent upon a particular
Rite or Usage, Because, says he, they observed this in their Travels abroad,
and so a Person is for it, as perhaps he would be thought so much the more
Learned and Considerable, as he is distant, or does disagree, from what is
observed at home. Now when Persons are Prone thus to Judge upon such little
Reasons, and may mistake in their Judgment, and do Judge against a Church (which
they have no other Reason against) it would become them to think again; and to
think that the case perhaps requires only time, or use, to wear off their
Prejudices, and that by these ways they may as effectually be reconciled to the
things Practiced in a Church, as they are to the Civil Usages and the Habits of
a Nation, which at the first they looked upon in their kind as Indecent and
Inexpedient, as they can do of the Usages of a Church in theirs. As suppose the
Dispute should be about Forms of Prayer, or the use of responsals in it, we see
that Decency, Order, and Edification are pleaded by the Parties contending for
and against, but when a Person considers that whatever Opinion he therein has,
yet if he be against them, he is at the same time against all formed Churches
in the World, he may conclude safely that there is a Decency, Order, and
Expediency in the Public use of them; and as St. Austin says of a Christian
living in Epist. 86. Casulano.
Rome where they fasted upon the Saturday that such a one should not so praise
a Christian City for it, as to Condemn the Christian World that was against it,
so we should not be so Zealous against a Practice, as to Condemn those that are
for it, and be so addicted to our own Opinion as to set that against a
Community and a Church, nay against all Churches whatsoever. This will give us
reason to suspect its a Zeal without Knowledge when we presume to set our
Judgment, Reason, and Experience, against the Judgment, Reason and Experience
of the Christian World. Which brings to the Fourth General.

4. How are we to determine our selves in the use of Indifferent things with
respect to the Worship of God? For resolution of which, we are to consider our
selves in a threefold Capacity, 1. As particular Persons, solitary and alone.
2. As we are in Ordinary and Civil Conversation. 3. As we are Members of a
Public Society or Church.

In the first capacity, every Christian may choose and act as he pleases; and
all Lawful things remain to him, as they are in their own Nature, Free. He may
eat this or that; choose this day or another, and set it apart for the Service
of God and his own Soul. In this state, where there is no Law of Man to
require, he may forbear to use what is Indifferent; where there is no Law to
Forbid, he may freely use it.

In the second capacity, as in Conversation with others, he is to have a regard
to them, and to use his Liberty so as shall be less to the prejudice, and more
to the benefit of those he converses with. So says the Apostle, all things are
lawful for me, but all things are 1. Cor. 10. 23.
not expedient; all things are lawful for me, but all things Edify not. In this
Capacity Men are still in their own Power; and whilst its no Sin they may
safely act, and where its no Sin they may forbear in compliance with those that
are not yet advanced to the same Maturity of Judgment with themselves; as the
Apostle did, Though, says he, I be free from all Men, yet have I 1 Cor. 9. 19,
etc.
made my self Servant unto all, that I might gain the more. And unto the Jews I
became a Jew, etc. In such a case the strong should not despise, affront, or
discourage the weak; nor the weak censure and condemn the strong.

In the third Capacity, as we are Members of a Church and Religious Society, so
the use of Indifferent things comes under further consideration, since then the
Practice of a Church and the Commands of Authority are to be respected. And as
what we may lawfully do when alone, we are not to do in Conversation, because
of Offense: So what we may allowably do when alone or in Conversation, we must
not do in Society, if Forbidden by the Laws and Customs of it. For the same
reason (if there was no more) that Restrains or Determines us in Conversation,
is as much more forcible in Society, as the Peace and Welfare of the whole is
to be preferred before that of a part; And if the not grieving a Brother, or
endangering his Soul makes it reasonable, just, and necessary to forego our
Liberty, and to Restrain our selves in the exercise of it, then much more is
the Peace of a Church (upon which the present Welfare of the whole, and the
Future Welfare of many depend) a sufficient reason for so doing, and to Oblige
us to act or not to act accordingly. The Apostle says, Let every one of us
please his Neighbor for his good to Romans 15. 2.
Edification, that is, to his Improvement in Knowledge or Grace, or Christian
Piety, and the promoting of Christian Concord and Charity: Now Edification is
eminently so with respect to the whole, as the Church is the House of God, and
every Christian one of the living Stones of which that Spiritual building is
compacted; 1 Pet. 2. 5.
and so he is to consider himself, as well as he is to be considered, as a part
of it, and to study what may be for the Edification of the whole, as well as
the good of any particular Member of it. And how is that but by promoting Love,
Peace, and Order, and taking Care to Preserve it? So we find Edification
Opposed 2 Cor. 10. 8. 1. Cor. 14. 26. 1 Timothy 1. 4. Romans 14. 19. 1 These. 5. 11.
Ephesians. 4. 12, 16.
to Destruction, to Confusion, to Disputacity and Licentiousness: And on the
contrary, we find Peace and Edifying, Comfort and Edification, Union and
Edification joined together, as the one does promote the other. And therefore
as the Good and Edification of the whole is to be always in our Eye, so its the
Rule by which we ought to act in all things lawful; and to that end should
comply with its Customs, observe its Directions, and Obey its Orders, without
Reluctance and Opposition. Thus the Apostle resolves the case, Writing about
public Order and the Custom newly taken up of Worshipping Uncovered, if any
Man seem, or have a mind to be, contentions, we have no such Custom, neither
the 1 Cor. 11. 16.
Churches of God; looking upon that as sufficient to put an end to all
Contentions and Debates; that whatever might be Plausibly urged against it,
from the Jewish Practice, and the Representation even of Angels adoring after
that manner; and from the reason of the thing as a signification of Shame and
Reverence; or from the Practice of Idolators that d^d many of them Worship
Uncovered; yet he peremptorily concludes, We have no such Custom, etc. The
Peace of the Church is to a Peaceable Mind sufficient to put an end to all
Disputes about it; and the Peace of the Church depending upon the Observation
of its Coustoms, that is infinitely to be preferred before Scrupulosity and
Niceness, or a mere inclination to a contrary Practice. For in public cases a
Man is not to go his own way, or to have his own mind, for that would bring in
Confusion (one Man having as much a right as another.) There must be somewhat
Established, some Common Order and Bond of Union; and if Confusion is before
such Establishment, then to break that Establishment, would bring in Confusion;
and where that is likely to ensue, it is not worth the while for the Trial of a
new Experiment to decry and throw down what is already Established or Used in a
Church, because we think better of another; for says a Grave Author, and well
Skilled in these matters, The very change of a Custom though it may Aug. Epist.
118.
happen to profit, yet does disturb by its Novelty. Public Peace is worth all
new Offers (if the Church is Disquieted and its Peace Endangered by them)
though in themselves better; and it is better to labor under the infirmity of
public Order than the mischief of being without it, or, what is next to that,
the Trial of some Form, seemingly of a better Cast and Mould that has not yet
been experimented. I say it again, Infirmity in a Church is better than
Confusion, or Destruction, which is the Consequent of it: And I had rather
choose that as I would a House, to have one with some Faults, rather then to
have none at all; And if I cannot have them mended (when tolerable) I think my
self bound not only to bear with them, but to do all I can for its preservation
though with them, and to observe all things that are lawful for its support and
encouragement. In doing thus I serve God, and his Church, my own Soul and the
Souls of others; promote Religion and Charity in the World; For God is not the
Author of Confusion but of Peace in all the 1 Cor. 14. 33.
Churches of the Saints. In things which neither we nor the Worship are the
worse for, but the Church the better for observing Peace and Order is far to be
preferred before Niceties: And certainly neither we nor the Service of God can
be the worse for what God has concluded nothing in. What the Gospel looks as
is the Main and Essential parts of Religion in Doctrine, Worship and Practice.
And if these be Secured, we are under no Obligation to contend for or against
the modes and circumstances of things further than the Churches Order and Peace
is concerned in them. So the Apostle, Let not your Good be Evil spoken of: For
the Kingdom of Romans 14. 16.
God is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the
Holy Ghost; the promoting Love and Charity, and substantial Righteousness. He
that in these things Serves Christ is acceptable to God, and approved of Men,
The Beauty of the Kings Daughter is within, Aug. Epist. 86.
says St. Austin, and all its observations are but its vesture, which though
various in different Churches, are no prejudice to the Common Faith, nor to him
that uses them. And therefore what he and his mother received from St.
Ambrose, and looked upon as a Divine Oracle, is worthy to be recommended to
all, That in all things not contrary to Truth and good Manners, Epist. 118. and
86.
it becomes a Good and Prudent Christian to Practice according to the Custom
of the Church where he comes, if he will not be a Scandal to them, nor have
them to be a Scandal to him.

And if the Custom and Practice of a Church should be thus taken into
consideration by a Good Man, then certainly much more ought it so to be, when
that is Established, and is made a Law, and is backed by Authority: For then to
stand in Opposition is not only an Offense but an Affront; and to insist upon
the Gratifying our own Inclination against public Order, is to contend whether
we or our Superiors shall Govern, whether our Will or the public Good and
Order must take place. And what can be the Issue of such a Temper but the
distraction if not Dissolution of Government; which as it cannot be without
Governed as well as Governors, so cannot be preserved without the submission
of the Governed in all lawful things to the Gevernours; and the permitting them
to choose and determine in things of that kind as they shall see meet. Its
pleaded That there should be a Liberty left to Christians in things
Undetermined in Scripture, and such things indeed there are that Christians may
have a Liberty in and yet hold Communion, as in Posture, etc. (though Decency
Would plead for Uniformity in those things also) but there are other things
which they must agree in, or else there can be no public Worship or Christian
Communion, which yet they differ in as much as the other. As now whether
Worship is to be celebrated with or without a Form; whether the Lord's Supper
is to be received in the Morning or Evening; whether Prayers should be long or
short, etc. Now unless one of these disagreeing Parties does Yield to the
other; or there be a Power in Superiors and Guides to determine for them, and
they are to submit to them in it, there will be nothing but confusion. And why
Superiors may not then Command; and why Inferiors are not to obey in all
things of the like kind; In Posture or Habit, as well as the time (above
specified) and Forms, I understand not.

To conlude this, if we find any thing required or generally practiced in a
Church, that is not Forbidden in Scripture; or any thing Omitted or Forbidden
in a Church, that is not required in Scripture; we may and ought to Act or to
forbear as they that are of its Communion do generally Act or forbear, or the
Laws of that Communion require; and in such things are to be determined by the
public Voice of the Communion, that is, Authority, Custom, or the Majority.

But to this it will be said, If we are thus to be determined stand fast in.
Gal. 5. 1.


1. This is no argument to those that say there is nothing

2. A restraint of our Liberty, or receding from it is of it self, no violation
of it. All Persons grant this in the latter, and the most scrupulous are apt to
plead that the Strong ought to bear with the Weak, and to give no Offense to
them by indulging themselves in that Liberty which others are afraid to take.
But now if a Person may recede from his Liberty, and yet is bound so to do in
the case of Scandal, and yet his Liberty be not thereby infringed, why may it
not be also little infringed, when restrained by others? How can it be
supposed, that there should be so vast a difference betwixt restraint and
restraint, and that he that is restrained by Authority should have his Liberty
prejudiced, and yet he that is restrained By another Conscience 1 Cor. 10. 29.
(as the Apostle says) should keep entire? And if it should be said this is
Occasional, but the other is perpetuated by the Order, perhaps, of a Church. I
answer, that all Orders about Indifferent things are but temporary, and are
only intended to bond so long as they are for the good of the Community. And if
they are for continuance, that alters not the case; For though the Apostle knew
his own Liberty and where there was Just Reason could insist upon it, yet he
did not suppose that could be damnified, though for his whole life it was
restrained. For thus he resolves, If meat make my Brother to offend, I will eat
no flesh while the World stands, which certainly he would not have
condescended to, if such a Practice was not reconcilable to his Exhortation of
standing fast in that Liberty, etc.

3. Therefore to find out the tendency of his Exhortation, its fit to
understand what Christian Liberty is, and that is truly no other than the
Liberty which Mankind naturally had, before it was restrained by particular
institution; and which is called Christian Liberty in opposition to the Jews
which had it not under their Law, but were restrained from the Practice and use
of things, otherwise and in themselves Lawful, by severe Prohibitions. Now as
all the World was then divided into Jews and Gentiles, so the Liberty which the
Jews were before denied, was called Christian, because by the coming of Christ,
all these former restraints were taken off, and all the World, both Jews and
Gentiles did enjoy it. And therefore when the Apostle does exhort them to stand
fast in it, it was, as the Scope of the Epistle does show, to warn them against
returning to that Jewish State, and against those who held it necessary for
both Jew and Gentile still to observe all the Rites and Orders of it. Now if
the Usages of a Church were of the same kind, or had the same tendency, or were
alike necessarily imposed as those of the Mosaical Law, then Christians would
be concerned in the Apostles Exhortation; but where these reasons are not, our
Liberty is not at all prejudiced by compliance with them. As long I say, as
they are neither peccant in their Nature, nor End, nor Number, they are not
unlawful to us, nor is our Liberty injured in the use of them. And so I am
brought to the last General, which is,

V. That there is nothing required in our Church which is not either a duty in
it self; and so necessary to all Christians, or else what is indifferent, and
so may be lawfully used by them. By things required, I mean, such as are used
in the Communion and Service of our Church, and imposed upon the Lay-members of
it (for these are the things my Subject does more especially respect.) This is
a Subject too Copious for me to follow through all the particulars of it; and
indeed it will be needless for me to enlarge upon it, if the foundation I have
laid be good, and the Rules before given are fit measures for us to Judge of
the lawfulness, or unlawfulness of things by; for by these we shall soon bring
the Cause to an Issue. I think there is nothing to be charged upon our Church
for being defective in any Essential part of Divine Worship (as the Church of
Rome is in its Half-Communion) nor of any practice that is apparently
inconsistent with, or that does defeat the ends of any Institution (as the same
Church does offend by having its Service in an unknown Tongue, and in the
multitudes of its Ceremonies). I think it will be acknowledged, that the Word
of God is sincerely and freely Preached, the Sacraments entirely and truly
Administered, the Prayers for matter inoffensive and good. And therefore the
matter in dispute is about the Ministration of our Worship, and the manner of
its performance; and I think the things of that kind Objected against, refer
either to Time, or Forms, or Gesture. To Times, such are Festivals, or Days set
apart for Divine Service; to Forms such are our Prayers, and the Administration
of our Sacraments; to Gestures, as Standing up at the Creed or Gospels, and
Kneeling at the Lord's Supper. But now all these are either Natural or Moral
Circumstances of Action, and which, as I have showed, are inseparable from it.
Of the former kind are Days and Gestures; of the latter are Forms of
Administration, and so upon the reasons before given may be lawfully determined
and used. Again, these are not forbidden by any Law, either expressly, or
consequentially, and have nothing that is indecent, disorderly or unedifying in
them; and which if any should engage his own opinion and experience in, he
would be answered in the like kind, and have the opinions and experience of
Thousands that live in the practice of these, to contradict him. And if there
be nothing of this kind apparent, or what can be plainly proved, (as I am apt
to believe there cannot) then the Proposition I have laid down needs no further
proof. But if at last it must issue in things inexpedient to Christians, or an
unlawfulness in the imposure; are either of these fit to be insisted upon, when
the peace of one of the best Churches in the World is broken by it, a
lamentable Schism kept up, and our Religion brought into imminent hazard by
both? Alas how near have we been to ruin, and I wish I had no reason to say,
how near are we to it, considering the indefatigable industry, the united
endeavors, the matchless policy of those that contrive and desire it! Can we
think that we are safe, as long as there is such an abiding reason to make us
suspect it, and that our divisions are both fomented, and made use of by them
to destroy us? And if this be our danger, and Union as necessary as desirable,
shall we yet make the breach wider, or irreparable by an obstinate contention?
God forbid! O pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love
thee: Let Peace be within thy Walls, and Prosperity within thy Palaces. Amen.

THE END.
A VINDICATION OF THE CASE OF Indifferent Things. USED In the Worship of God:
IN ANSWER TO A BOOK, ENTITLED, The Case of Indifferent things used in the
Worship of God, Examined, Stated on the behalf of the Dissenters, and calmly
argued.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, for Fincham Gardner at the White-Horse in
Ludgate Street, 1684.

A VINDICATION OF THE CASE OF Indifferent Things. USED In the Worship of God.
AMONGST some Tracts published within the year for the resolution of such
doubts, as the Dissenters from our Church plead for refusing Communion with it,
there was one that respected the use of Indifferent things in the Worship of
God. This some one of our Brethren chose to examine and to begin his debate
Case examined, p. 2.
with; in the management of which whether he has dealt closely and ingenuously
to use his own words) p. 16.
I shall take the liberty to enquire, and must leave others to judge.

I confess I was not alittle surprised, that before he had set one foot
forward, he should thus assault me, If that R. person had been pleased to have
determined page 2.
who is to be Judge of things Indifferent, as to a man's practice, whether his
own conscience or his Superior etc. he would (in our opinion) have made the
matter in dispute much fitter for an argument, whereas the most Dissenters
judge, that as he has stated it, he has but begged the Question. If the
dispute had been betwixt Protestant and Papist there might have been some
color to have ^^ent 4 pages in 40 upon this Argument; though even betwixt such
there may be 20 cases controverted in which this Demand would be impertinent:
But to put it upon this issue when both sides are in the main agreed (as it is
betwixt Protestant and Protestant) is a running the Question out of its wits,
and an hearty begging it, before he puts it. Its to pos^ess the unwary Reader
with prejudice, to puzle the cause, and is the way to make every little Tract a
Volume. In matters of Controversy there are always some principles supposed,
and to put an Adversary upon the proof of them, shows a design rather to cavil
then to end the dispute, and is a shrewd sign that the person so doing is
either diffident of his cause, or his own ability to defend it; but to return
his own complement, we will not presume any thing so absurd or disingenuous of
so worthy a person. p. 10.


But how remote soever this Question is to the business in hand, yet because
our Author asks it with some kind of seriousness, I shall direct him where he
may have satisfaction, and that in a Judicious Tract lately published The
difference of the Case between the separation of Protestants from Rome, etc. p.
42, etc.
; or if he has the patience to compare the things, as I have done, he may find
it resolved by himself, in his Case examined. p. 36, 37. n. 4. 38.
But in my mind there is a much nearer way to end controversies, which is not
by disputing who shall be Judge? But by enabling men to judge for themselves in
a clear stating of the case, and setting forth the nature of the things
disputed: As in the case before us, the ready way, one should think, is to show
what is the nature of Things Indifferent, and that things thus Indifferent may
be lawfully used in Divine Worship, and because they may be abused, to enquire
how we are to apply them.

This was the way I took, and if I did manage it as it should, I am pretty
confident that the Question was not begged, though I never thought of coming
near his Question, who shall be, the Judge?

But that is the thing to be disputed, Whether the case was rightly stated and
proved, and this brings me to the consideration of what he has offered against
it. Before I enter upon which, I shall only remind the Case of Indifferent
things.
Reader, that in the little Tract concerned in the present dispute, the
Question undertaken was;

Q. Whether things in their own nature Indifferent, though not prescribed in
the Word of God, may be lawfully used in Divine Worship?

In answer to which;

1. I enquired into the Nature, and stated the Notion of Indifferent Things. 2.
Showed that Things Indifferent may be lawfully used in Divine Worship. 3.
Considered how we might know what things are Indifferent in the Worship of God.
4. How we are to determine our selves in the use of them.
To most of these our Author has somewhat to say, to some more to some less;
but to the First, he says, There is none of the Dissenters, but agrees with
this Author in his Notion of Things Indifferent, that they are such p. 3.
things as by the Divine Law are neither enjoined nor forbidden.

Now before I proceed I shall observe that this concession of his will bereave
them of some of the common and most considerable arguments that they use in
this controversy; As,

If Things Indifferent are such as are neither enjoined nor forbidden, it must
follow that things are not unlawful in Divine Worship because they are not
commanded.

The consequence is plain and undeniable: For if the Nature of Things
Indifferent be, as abovesaid, what are neither commanded nor forbidden, there
is nothing can make this or that to be unlawful but the being forbidden: But
now if the being not Commanded is the same with the being Forbidden, then the
notion of Indifferent Things cannot consist in this that they are neither
Commanded nor Forbidden. So that either they must quit the Argument, and grant
that the being not Commanded, does not make a thing unlawful in Divine Worship;
or they must alter the notion of Indifferent things, and indeed utterly
exterminate them, and leave no such middle things in nature, and say that there
is nothing else but Duty or Sin.

Now after our Reverend Author has so frankly granted this, I cannot
understand how he can say that the doing of a thing in Gods Worship, not
Commanded, is guilt enough: nor why he should take such pains to p. 25.
oppose what I have offered in confutation of that principle. For what can he
plead for the unlawfulness of things not Commanded, who has granted that the
being not Commanded is a branch of such things as are Indifferent: And if he
will maintain it, he must do it upon no less absurdity, than the saying a thing
Indifferent is forbidden; or (which is the same) that Indifferent things, are
such as are either forbidden, or not forbidden.

But let us abstract the Case of things not Commanded from this consequence,
and take it as it is in the Tract Case of Indifferent Thing^s p. 20.
aforesaid, an Objection and Answer, and yet then we shall see what an
imperfect account our Author gives of it.

He says, What our Author says is no more than has Case Examined, p. 25.
been many times said, viz. [that by things not Commanded are meant things
forbidden] and has nothing to prove it by, but only that the things mentioned
in Scripture to which that phrase is applied were things forbidden, as
Idolatry, etc.

Though what he produces out of the Case be sufficient, Case of Indifferent
Things, p. 20.
yet he extremely forgets himself when he says, nothing, but only; since in
the page he quotes, there are two arguments, that are sooner flip'd than
answered. But however what has he to reply to that which has been many times
said? He grants, It is true.

And is this nothing toward the proof of it? What fitter way have we to find
out the meaning of a phrase, than to consider the several places where it is
used? Or to ascertain the sense of it, than to show that it is always alike
applied to such a case, or thing?

But in answer to this, he asks, Why are such things expressed to us in this
phrase, as, Not Commanded only?

1st. I answer, they are not thus expressed, as, Not commanded Only. For the
things said to be not commanded, are either in their own nature, or in
Scripture absolutely Forbidden (as I have showed, and he grants) and therefore
to limit the phrase, as if there was no more intended in it than that the
things are not commanded (as the Word Only implies) and not also forbidden is
to thwart Scripture, as well as my reasoning from it.

2ly. If we take the Phrase as it is, yet there his Question, Why are they thus
expressed, and not commanded? is of no Importance; for supposing we could give
no Reason for such an use of it, that would not be sufficient to question the
Thing, as long as we find it constantly so used and applied. But,

3ly. Was there no Reason offered, no account given of it? Let him peruse the
Tract he opposes, (as sure he did) and he will find it expressly undertaken,
and two Reasons given for it; as, 1. Things forbidden are Case of Indiff.
Things. page 23.
called not commanded, because all things prohibited are by consequence not
commanded, and not e contra. 2. It Is by way of Meiosis, etc. But these, though
to the purpose in hand, were not, I am afraid, to his.

Well! Let us consider,

4ly. What Account our Author himself gives at last of this.

1. Says he, Things forbidden in Scripture are said to be not commanded, To
let us know the doing of a thing not commanded in God's Worship, is Guilt
enough. Surely not so great, as to do a thing notoriously Case Indiff. Things.
page 20.
forbidden, (as I there showed.) Surely it can be no Guilt at all to do a thing
not commanded, if not also forbidden, because (as he owns) there are
Indifferent Things in the Worship of God; and what are indifferent Things, but
Things not commanded, as well as not forbidden?

2. He says, it was so expressed, because the Guilt of the Sin of Idolatry and
Superstition lay in this, that it was a thing not commanded: had God commanded
those things, they had been a true Worship, and acceptable.

In which assertion of his, he grossly mistakes. First, as to the nature of
Idolatry and Superstition, when he says, the guilt of them lay in this, that
they were things not commanded: Whereas it is evident that they were Sins,
because forbidden. For what is Superstition but the dreading of that which is
not to be dreaded? (as the Greek word shows;) Such as the Signs of Heaven,
Divinations, and Demons, and even the unreasonable and inordinate fear of God
himself. When we fear Jer. 10. 2.
offending him, in what is not offensive to him. And what is Idolatry but the
giving Divine honor to that which is not God, or prohibited honor to the true
and only God? These are things manifestly forbidden.

Secondly, It Is yet a grosser Error, which is contained in the reason he gives
for it, viz. That had God Commanded those things, they had been a true Worship
and acceptable. An assertion, First, that confounds the Nature of things, that
makes Vice and Virtue alike, and no otherwise discriminated but by Gods written
Law, as if Idolatry and Superstition were not Evil antecedent to all
Revelation, and which are so where Revelation is not, as well as where it is.

Secondly, From hence it follows that those things may be acceptable to God,
which in their own nature do tend to drive Religion out of the World; and that
may be true Worship, which will unavoidably debase the Deity in the thoughts of
Mankind. For so do Idolatry and Superstition.

As for the Instances he there takes notice of, I shall reserve them to a more
convenient place.

Conclus. 2. If things Indifferent be such as are neither not Commanded, then
things thus Indifferent and not commanded are not additions to the Word Case of
Indiff. things. p. 24.
of God: and the places usually insisted upon must be understood, according to
the sense I gave of them; and which may serve as a sufficient reply to what he
has Case examined. p. 26.
said upon that Head. But yet because he has offered somewhat in another place
that looks like an Argument, I shall here consider it. He argues thus;

If obedience be wanting the Salt is wanting to the Sacrifices Page 4.
of our God, which (as we humbly conceive) leaves no more room for perfective
than corruptive Additions to Divine Worship etc. What can be an act of
Obedience to God but what he has commanded, whether he has forbidden it or
no? If we bid our Servant go a mile, and he goes two (possibly hoping to do us
Service in it) we hope his going the Second mile is no act of obedience, though
we did not forbid him. In matters of this Nature no act of Supererogation is
allowable, because it can be no obedience. In answer to which, it will be
necessary to resolve this Question:

Q. Whether the doing of any thing in the Worship of God without a command be a
sinful addition to the Word of God?

I answer that if the Question is understood of the proper and essential parts
of Worship (if I may so speak) then we grant it, and say, that he that shall
institute any thing in that kind without Divine Institution, does challenge
Gods prerogative to himself; and because the rule is sufficient, all such
perfective are corruptive additions (as he speaks) to both Rule and Worship. It
is as if a Servant when bidden to go a mile, he goes two (possibly hoping to
do Service in it) for in matters of this nature no Supererogation is allowable.
Thus far his comparison holds, as to matters of the same Nature, and designed
to the same end: and esteemed to be of the same use. As the going of two Miles
for one, with an intent to do as good Service, and be as well if not better
approved for so doing. But if the question be understood of such things as are
Adjuncts to Divine Worship, that are not used upon the score of any of the
reasons aforesaid, then we are not to expect a command, nor do we Sin if we act
without it. As for example, a Servant is required to go a Mile upon some
service, and he uses a Coat or a Cloak, takes an Horse or goes on Foot, puts a
string about his Finger to remember him of what he is to do; Or if to carry a
Message, considers what to say, and Writes it down, that he may be the better
fitted to deliver it; In such cases his Master would think him impertinent to
ask Directions, and it is no Disobedience nor Supererogation to act, as he sees
fit, without them. And this is the case with us, as I shall afterward show.
This said, there is way made for the next inference.

Conclus. 3. If things Indifferent are neither commanded not commanded, it
follows that it is no Derogation from the Sufficiency of Scripture to maintain
the lawfulness of using such things in Divine Worship, as are not therein
commanded. It Is somewhat a Specious way of arguing which this Author uses, the
Scriptures have determined whatsoever may make us wise to Salvation, perfect,
p. 2^.
thoroughly furnished to all good Works. Now if the Worship of God be a good
work, and the right doing of it has any tendency to make us perfect, they must
have a sufficiency to direct us in that. And he concludes, If there be not a
Rule for all things belonging to the Worship of God (except as before excepted,
etc.) then the Scriptures are not able to make us wise, etc.

By this way of arguing and a challenge he immediately subjoyns, viz. If our
Author can show us any Act of Worship, etc. It may be thought he is a Champion
for the perfection and sufficiency of Scripture, and we the derogators from it.
And that without any more ado he would have brought unanswerable arguments for
that kind of Scripture-sufficiency which we deny. If says he, our R. Author
can show us any Act of Worship for the Page 29.
performance of which in such a manner as God will accept, we cannot show him
direction of Scripture. Well! where is it? Scripture, with the addition of such
circumstances as are naturally necessary to all Humane Actions, or evidently
convenient for an action of a grave and weighty Nature, for the obtaining the
ends of it, or appearing to any Common Judgment to be so decent, that without
them the performance would be sordid. Scripture with the practice of the first
Guides of the Church; Scripture with the light of Nature shining out in every
reasonable Soul, etc. Scripture with the exceptions before excepted, in his
Book. page 21


Suppose then we put it to the question, Is Scripture alone a sufficient Rule
for matters to be used in the Worship of God? He readily answers, Yes. If you
take in the Nature of the thing, the light shining in every reasonable Soul; if
you take in Common Judgment, convenience, and decency; Lastly if you take in
the practice of the first Guides of the Church; that is, it is, and it is not.
Now how he has all this while pleaded for that Sufficiency of Scripture which
we deny. And why he should so loudly exclaim against all Supplements and
Additions, to that, and against page 38.
Reason and Authority, as a Supply: or what difference he has conceived
betwixt Authority and the Guides of the Church; or betwixt Reason and the light
of Nature Shining out in every reasonable Soul, so as to deny to page 29.
the one what he grants to the other, I am not able to understand? Yet for all
this there must be a difference betwixt him and us, and somewhat shall be said
to make it out. For the Sufficiency of Scripture, is a very great argument. And
so indeed it is; and it has been an old page 28.
argument against the practices of our Church, and is not to be easily parted
with: But yet what to give, and what to take, and wherein the difference is
betwixt what we hold and he is forced to grant, he knows not, or has not been
so kind as to discover.

But however when all this is pastover, he concludes as to one part, we cannot
possibly agree with our R. Brother in this thing, viz. (That we have no such
particular directions for Worship under the Gospel as they had under the Law.)
This indeed I touched upon, to show that the Case of indifferent. things. page
30.
faithfulness of Christ and sufficiency of Scripture consist not in giving as
particular directions for Worship as they had under the Law; and in proof of
this I set Baptism against Circumcision, the Lord's Supper against the
Passover, and Prayers against Sacrifices.

Now let us consider, what are the reasons why he cannot possibly agree?
Certainly if ever controversy was like to be ended, we may now expect it,
because it is about plain matter of Fact. But in this case he strangely fails of
performance: For whereas the deciding the case depends upon the comparison
betwixt the Law and the Gospel, he does not so much as offer any thing about
the latter. But let us consider what he says of the former, and as much as we
can, make up his defect in the latter. First, he says, As to Circumcision,
what particular page 31.
direction had the Jews? Their Rule extended no further than to the Act and the
time. Here I must confess there is nothing but the time that is determined; But
since there is nothing of that kind in Baptism prescribed, the Law is herein
more particular than the Gospel. 2ly, As to the Passover, he acknowledges they
had a Rule, but then he adds What Rule, had they to determine them to a Kid or
a Lamb? But was not that a Rule to determine them, when it must be a Kid or a
Lamb, and no other Creature; and is not Two to all the Beasts in the world a
determination as well as one to two? But was there nothing else determined? (as
his cautious way of expressing it would imply) Let him consult the Text, and he
will find that the Creature was not only thus to be one Exodus 12. etc.
out of two, but it was to be a Male, kept the 14th day, and to be killed at
even, without a bone broken, to be roasted, to be eaten in the house, and with
unleavened Bread, with bitter Herbs, and none left to the morning. And they
were to eat it standing (as our Author acknowledges p. 32.) with their loins
girt, etc. And with several other rites too long to enumerate.

But in the Lord's Supper, there is nothing specified or required but the
Elements, and the breaking and pouring out; nothing said of the kind of the
Bread or Wine, nothing required of the time or posture, or number, etc.

As for their Sacrifices, he says, the Rule was sufficient page 32.
and perfect, we hope, though one Jew brought a Bullock, another a Goat, etc. I
may confidently say it was not sufficient if so they did, for God was pleased
to require more (who is the most competent Judge of the perfection of his own
Law) For there was a particular prescription not only as to the kinds of the
Beasts, but as to the disposing and ordering of them in Sacrifice, what was to
be eaten, and what not; whether the blood should be poured out or sprinkled,
whether upon the Altar or at the bottom of it, etc, one would think that a
person that talks so loosely of these things, had never read the Book of
Leviticus.

But now as to Prayers in the Christian Church, we have only a general Form
given us and direction to Pray in the Name of Christ, but nothing as to Words,
Time, Posture, Company, etc.

So that what can be more manifest then that there is no such particular
direction given in Worship, as they had under the law? And therefore however it
comes to pass that this Author has here so bewildred himself, yet it is what he
has granted before, when he was fain to make exceptions, as to things
naturally necessary, etc and of which he says in the beginning of this
argument, that for such it is impossible there should be a Rule; though there,
I Page. 8.
conceive, he has as much erred on one side as he did before on the other,
when he says it is impossible; for then it had not been possible to assign
time, posture, place, etc, under the Law. Had he said in some not possible, in
others not fit, he had been much more in the right: However (to let that pass)
in either way he grants that there is no expectation of Scripture-Authority for
such things, nor does the sufficiency of that or the faithfulness of Christ
suffer by such an opinion.

I suppose I may now close this Argument: For, as for his Or's and, Alias's
(which this Author so much depends upon) I shall consider them in another place.

Conclus. 4. If things indifferent are neither commanded Case examined page 27
who says, that the doing of such things in Acts of external Worship as are
not commanded, is indeed a violation of the second Commandment. For which he
offers this reason, because as in the 6th Commandment it is agreed, that all
injuries to our neighbor's person is forbidden under the highest species of
such Acts: and in the 7th all species of uncleanness are; so in the 2 d
commandment all errors in the matter of external Worship are forbidden under
the species of Idolatry.

The answer to this depends upon the understanding of his phrase, Matter of
Worship, (which he has given us no light in) which either signifies parts of
Worship, and then we yield it, that all such instituted by men are forbidden in
this commandment, for it is false worship: but then we deny that we are
concerned in it, or that any thing not commanded and used by us is a part of
Worship. And if he thinks otherwise he is (as upon other reasons also)
concerned to take up the cause of Dr. Ames that he says, he is not concerned
in.

If by matter of Worship he means the administration Page 27.
and ordering of it, then I deny the parallel, that all errors in Matter of
Worship areas much forbidden in the second commandment, as injuries by the 6th,
etc. For injuries are of the same Species with Murder, and Acts of uncleanness
are of the same kind with Adultery; but errors in the administration of Worship
are nothing akin to Idolatry.

2. I deny that the doing of things not commanded in the Matter of Worship are
so much as errors in his sense, since forbidden by no Law, as I have showed.

The Second point undertaken in the Case of Indifferent Sect. 2. Case of
Indiff. Things, p. 4. etc.
Things was to show, that there are things Indifferent in the Worship of God,
and that such things, though not prescribed, may be lawfully used in it.

Of this, says our reverend Author, none (that we Case examined p. 19, 20.
know of) ever doubted; and again, as it is stated in that Tract, none in his
wits did ever deny it.

I do not think my self obliged to answer for some men's understandings; but if
that be true, what must we think of those whom Mr. Baxter writes of, that will
have a Rule for every thing; and adds, take heed of Defense of the principles
of love, part 2. p. 97.
them? What of such, that when they grant Things Indifferent to be neither
commanded nor forbidden, will yet say, that things not commanded are forbidden?
What of such, that when they have granted (and so it is then granted on both
sides) that there are Things Indifferent in the Worship of God, will yet say,
that the Case examined p. 15.
Indifferency of actions to be done while they are employed in the Worship of
God is all the Question? Lastly, What of those that when they have yielded that
things Indifferent, though not prescribed, may be lawfully used in Divine
Worship, will have it put to the Question, Whether things not necessary to all
human actions may be used in it? Who they are, or how far they are concerned in
the foregoing Character, I leave to this Reverend persons Consideration.

But although none in his Wits did ever deny the Question as stated by me, yet
because it may be of use toward the clearing of the matters hereafter to be
discoursed of, I will briefly consider the case as it was then stated and that
will appear from the things considered in the state of it, and the ways taken
to prove it.

1. It was granted that things naturally necessary to the Action were excluded;
since generals act but in their particulars; and if some of the kind must
accompany the Act, then this or that particular of the kind is lawful to be
used, as it is in time place, habit. This he grants, but only adds, that Habit
surely is not Page 7.
necessary, we read of none before the Fig Leaves were sown together, Genesis 3.

But (1.) We indeed read of no habit before the Fall, but is there nothing
natural to man since the Fall? What does our Author think of the Apostle's
Natural 1. Corinthians. 15. 44.
Body, etc as opposed to Heavenly, or of the description he gives of the state
of mankind, when he says, we are by Nature Children of Wrath: We read of no
Ephesians 2. 3.
such Body or state before the time of the Fig Leaves. And yet the Apostle
makes bold to call them Natural, as belonging to man in his present fallen
State.

(2.) Therefore we have a further notion of Natural given us, and that is when
any thing is suited to the Nature or State of the thing or person. Thus Ames and
others tell us of Natural Ceremonies, as lifting up Fresh Suit p. 1. c. 4. and.
5.
the eyes to Heaven in Sign of Devotion, (which by the way is not so Natural;
but that casting them down Luke. 18. 13.
in Worship is a sign of it too, as in the publicans.) And so habit is Natural
to man, as belonging and suited to his present condition. But, says he, it is
not Natural, for a person may Pray naked; and so he may pray blindfold, and yet
will any one say, sight is not natural to man. But how may he pray naked in
Regious assemblies (for we are speaking of public Worship) can he say it is
suitable to the Solemnity? And so going naked is as little suitable to the nature
of man.

(3.) Again that is natural, which is the effect of Nature, though not born with
us. And I am apt to think that did our Author live within the Circle of the
Frigid Zone, he would without any Tutor, without the knowledge of what is the
custom of Civilized Nations, without any moral reason, have thought upon the
benefit of Frieze, or somewhat of the like use with that. But suppose I am
mistaken, how has he mended the matter? He tells us, that by the custom of
Civilized Nations some habit is necessary. But then what becomes Genesis 3. 21.
of the Fig Leaves, what of the coats of Skins God clothed Adam with. Now to
say it came from custom before custom was, (for it was in the beginning) I
think, is much more absurd than to say that Habit was natural.

But it is time to pass on to a more profitable argument.

2. It was proved that all things, which in general and for kind are morally
necessary are also lawful in their particulars. This was made evident from a
parity of reason 'twixt what is naturally, and what is morally necessary, and
therefore he that grants the particulars of what is naturally necessary, to be
indifferent, must also grant the particulars of what is morally necessary to be
indifferent. And as it follows this Time or that, this Place or that, this
Habit or that is lawful and indifferent, because Time, Place and Habit are
necessary: So it also follows this Method or that, this Form or that, this
Order or that is lawful, and may be used, because Method, Form, and Order are
necessary. And therefore we need look no more for an institution for a Form,
than, as he says for a Case examined page 18.
Bell to call to Worship, or for a Gown or Cloak to preach in, etc. For what
Naturally necessary is to the particulars of its kind, that is Morally
necessary to its particulars: And one is no more unlawful for want of an
institution or command, than the other. This our Author also yields to, We,
says he, having agreed Page 14.
that there are some circumstances of Humane actions, in Gods Worship, not only
Natural, common to all actions, but of a Moral nature too, relating to them as
such actions, which God having neither commanded nor forbidden, may be used,
are not much concerned, in what our Author says upon his second Head.

3. It was further showed in the aforesaid Treatise, that such things in Divine
Worship as were agreeable to the Rules of the Apostle, and served for Order,
Decency, and Edification, were also lawful, though they were neither Naturally
nor Morally necessary; nor did necessarily arise from the nature of the Thing,
as Method and Form, etc. do; that is, that there are a certain sort of things
that are ambulatory and contingent, that Case of indifferent things p. 8, 12,
13.
vary with circumstances, ages, places, and conditions, etc. As, the being
covered or uncovered in Worship; such and such fixed hours of Prayer; The
Love Feasts, and Holy-kiss, and besides, several Civil usages transferred from
secular affairs into the Service of Religion; which were used therein not as
mere Civil Rites; as I there showed.

This argument taken from Civil usages our Author endeavors to avoid several
ways.

1. He says, If we do not mistake, the reason why Case examined. page 18.
Dr. Ames and others do think that Civil usages may be used in Acts of Worship,
is because they are either necessary to the action, as Humane, or convenient,
comely or grave, etc. And because I had said Case of indifferent things. page
14.
that if the being Civil usages did make them lawful in. Divine Worship, then
there is nothing in Civil cases but may be introduced into the Church, though
never so absurd, he says, he cannot apprehend the consequence, because Case
examined, page 19.
what is granted about Civil usages is to be applied to grave actions and none
other. But to this I answer, Grant they are thus to be understood of such Civil
usages as are grave, yet then it is not so much because they are Civil, as
because they are grave, that they may be used, and provided that they were
grave, they might be used if, they were not Civil, as well as if they were, and
are not the sooner to be used, because they are Civil. And then what becomes of
their argument for such and such practices and customs that they were Civil?
And what have they got when to avoid the force of what we say from the
Love Feasts, etc. plead, as he does, that they are Civil usages. So that when
he and his brethren grant, that such usages which may ordinarily Page 18.
be used in other Humane actions of a grave nature, may be used in Acts of
Worship (which is more than we dare say; for then standing crosses may be
introduced into Worship, which are used to very grave purposes in Civil
matters, as to distinguish Christian from Heathenish or Turkish Dominions,
etc.) I know not what they can deny.

2. He gives a very partial account of Civil usages, when he tells us of
Orators Pulpits, and Seats, and Bells, Gowns and Cloaks: But in the mean while
forgets that there are Civil usages, that are of a Ceremonial Nature, and that
are used by way of signification, distinction, etc. As now a garment is (I may
still say) Naturally or (as he will have it) Morally necessary, but when in a
particular case it is required that it be White or Purple, it is a Civil usage,
and is by way of signification; and so the signification is transferred with it
from a civil to a sacred use, which how consistent it is with their principles
I leave it to his consideration.

3. He takes no notice of the Argument used by me, that if civil usages without
institution may be lawfully used in Divine Worship, this (with his concessions
before about Natural and Moral circumstances) will justify most, I had almost
said, all the practices of our Church, as I instanced in the Surplice, since
White was used as a badge of Royalty and Dignity, of joy and innocence, in
Civil cases, and so may be used by V. Brightman in Ames Fresh Suit, part 2. p.
505, 510.
way of signification in Religious; and so of the rest. All that he has to say
about the Surplice is, that it is tied to Worship, which is remote from the case
in hand, and shall afterward be considered.

To this I may also add the Cross, which he says, they Page 15.
do not stumble of making upon a pack of Cloth or Stuff, or upon a Sheep for
note of distinction, and may be, and is used for graver purposes in the like
way of signification in Civil matters as I have observed) and so may be, by
this Argument transferred into the Service of Religion.

4. It was further maintained in the stating of the Case, Case of Indiff.
Things, p. 5, 6.
that the ordering and administration of the things relating to Divine Worship,
was left to Christian prudence. To this our Author says, It is very true,
these must be determined Case examined, p. 7.
by human prudence, but that they must necessarily be determined by the
prudence of the Superior, and may not be determined by the prudence of the
agents, is another Question. Who ever affirmed it? That they are left to human
prudence to fix and determine, is all that I maintained; but how far Superiors
may determine, and how far Inferiors must submit to things so determined, is
another Question, and belongs to another place.

From what has been said, it may appear whether no man ever doubted of the
truth of the Case as I have stated it, when he himself speaks so dubiously and
uncertainly about it. But because I have not stated it to his mind, and that
it is not the Dissenters position, page 19.
but only a position, which their adversaries have imposed upon them without
any ground, as he says; let us see how he states the Question, which is thus:

Q. Whether things, the doing, or not doing of which Ibid.
God has not prescribed, being neither necessary to the action as an human
action, nor convenient for it (with reference to those that perform it) for the
ends of it, nor naturally, nor in common judgment such, without which it cannot
be done decently, may be lawfully used in the Worship of God by all persons, or
by any persons, who judge that God has forbidden the part to which they are by
men determined, either in the letter, or by the just reason, and consequence of
Holy Writ, as forbidding all useless and superfluous things, in so sacred
actions, or things not necessary, and used ordinarily in Idolatrous and
Superstitious services, or judging that in Worship every man is sui juris, and
ought not to be deprived of the liberty God has left him, may be universally
and lawfully used?

This he has elsewhere formed into a position, and page 23, 24.
from thence does declare, that it lies upon his Adversary to prove, that those
things which he would have all Dissenters conform to are,

1. Things naturally necessary to all human Acts. Or, 2. Things convenient for
them as human acts. Or, with reference to the true end of such acts: Or, 3.
Such as Nature shows to be comely for all human acts, or such grave acts at
least, or which common judgment so judges. Or, 4. That men may do what they
reasonably judge sinful. Or, 5. That there is no reason to judge useless, and
superfluous actions in the Worship of God sinful. Or, 6. No reason so to judge
of the things not necessary to be used in Gods Worship, and which have been,
and are ordinarily used in Idolatrous Worship. Or, 7. That there is no reason
to judge, that Christians in matters of Worship ought to be left at liberty in
things when God has so left them.
Whether this be indeed the Dissenters position he best page 19.
understands (as I should think) but whether it be their position explained,
(as he says) or confounded, I leave page 24.
to the judgment of others. This only I am sure of, that for as much as I can
understand of it, I may turn his own words upon him, and whereas he says of
the Case as I have stated it, None in his wits did ever deny it, I can say as
it is stated by him, None in his wits did ever affirm it. For who in his wits
will ever affirm that it is lawful to use such things in the Worship of God,
that are sordid and indecent, disorderly and confused, idle, useless, and
superfluous, hurtful and pernicious?

And yet (according to him) this must he do, that will undertake to prove, that
things that are not comely, convenient, or edifying, may be admitted thereinto.
For this Author tells us, that by Decency we can understand page 11.
nothing but what is opposed to sordidly, etc. And if it be not decent by his
rule, it must be sordid: And so of the rest.

Again, Who in his wits will affirm that men may do what they reasonably judge
sinful? And yet these things must they affirm that will attack this position of
our Authors: By which stating of the Question and mingling things of a
different nature together, he has provided well for his own security, and may
without fear of being conquered, or so much as opposed, fling down the Gantlet,
with, If our R. Author has taken the page 25.
position, as here stated, and argued it, we shall consider what he has said;
if not, we shall lightly pass over what he has said, etc. and expect till he
has justified all or any of the last Seven mentioned particulars.

But I shall not so lightly pass over what he has said without clearing what
may be cleared, and reducing the Case into its proper principles, though it be
what he has taken no care to explain or prove.

If we review his seven particulars, we shall find that the V. case of a
scrupulous Conscience, Dr. Calamy's Sermon on that subject.
4th. and 6th. the case of Symbolizing, and the defense.
belong not to this case, and are otherwhere resolved: And of the Five
remaining Four of them are reducible to one argument, which come now to be
considered; and the last of Christian Liberty, I shall treat upon in the close
of this Discourse.

In treating upon the Four that belong to one argument and have for their
subject Human Acts; I think it may be done by putting and resolving the
following Question.

Q. What is it that does make things in themselves lawful and indifferent, to
be unlawful in Divine Worship?

This is the main seat of the controversy; it being agreed that there are
indifferent things in the Worship of God; But since we afterward divide upon
it, and say that notwithstanding this there are some things of that nature,
that are by circumstance unlawful, it is fit to understand, how this Question
is resolved by one and the other.

If We state the case, we say the Rules we are to guide our selves by, are
those of the Apostle, of Decency, Order, and Edification. And we trouble not
our selves nicely to consider whether the Decency arise from the nature of the
thing, or from common usage, or prescription, or institution, since we think
that decency may arise from any, and it matters not from what cause the thing
proceeds, nor how it came to be Decent, when it is now thought and found to be
so. And as little curious arewe about the first reasons of Order and
Edification, for we are so little speculative in matters of practice, that we
think the peace of the Church, and Unity amongst Christians, are much more fit
to determine us in these cases than all the accuracy in Metaphysics.

So that if a thing be found to be decent, orderly and for Edification, though
we were assured it did Spring from Humane Institution, we think it to be
lawful, and that Humane Institution cannot make that unlawful; which is found
by use and experience to be for Decency and Order.

Again we think that those things which in kind are necessary to Humane Acts in
all cases, and comely and grave in Worship as well as out of it, may be
appropriated to Worship: and that the appropriation of Places, Time and Habit
to Worship, does not therefore make such Places, Times, and Habits, unlawful to
be used.

And if things indifferent in themselves are unlawful in Worship, we conclude
it must be when Divine Institution is pretended for what is Humane, and when
the things suit not the Nature, or defeat the ends Case of indifferent things.
p. 24, etc.
of Divine Worship; or for the like reasons which I in the controverted Tract
did insist upon.

But now on the contrary, by what may be Collected from him, it appears to be
the Sense of his position,

1. That nothing of Humane Institution is to be admitted or may lawfully be
used in Divine Worship. For thus he says, they must be things necessary to all
Humane Acts, or convenient for them as Humane Acts, or comely for all Humane
Acts, etc.

2. That nothing, though necessary, or convenient, or comely, ought to be used
in, and much less be appropriated to the Worship of God; for they are to be
considered in Worship only as they have a reference to such Humane Acts.

In the consideration of these I shall

1. Consider how he attempts to prove it.

2. Endeavor to discover the mistake; and vindicate the arguments and
instances, produced in the case of Indifferent things to the contrary, from his
Exceptions.

These are the chief things that all his discourse is founded upon, and that
are scattered through it: But though they are rather supposed than proved by
him; and therefore (to use his own Words) I may lightly pass them over, and
expect till he has justified them: yet because I would make somewhat of it, I
shall collect from the Hints he gives, what it is that he does think may be
said for them.

As for the first of these, that nothing is to be used i^ Prop. 1.
Divine Worship that is merely of Humane Institution* his arguments are fetched
from the Nature of the things pleaded for them, viz. Decency, order,
edification. As, says he,

1. We cannot apprehend it in the power of Man t^ Page 11.
Create a Decency. The greatest Emperors wearing a^ Antic Habit, would not
make it Decent, till it could prescribe, or had obtained a common consent. This
^ the rather mention, because it is an argument much i^ vogue amongst those
that would artificially handl^ this matter. But here let me ask them what it is
creates a Decency? He says, the Law of Nature and prescription, common consent
and the guise of Countries. But how began that Prescription, whence arose that
consent, whether from chance or institution? Or what is it whence i^ arises,
if it be found to be decent? Certainly if it began in one of these institution
is the more noble of the two, and the less disputable: And then it would be
har^ to conceive how that which came by chance should be sawful, and that which
came by Institution should be unlawful.

But (2.) If Prescription, and Common Consent, and the Guise of Countries be
the measure of Decency, may not these things also be the measure of it in the
Church, and in things relating to Divine Worship? And is not the custom of the
Churches of God a reason as sufficient to conclude us in this matter as the
grave and Civil customs of a Nation? Or (3.) Is there any Church on this side
Rome that by a Sic volo does stamp a decency upon its Institutions, without
respect to prescription and the custom of Churches? Or that can do it? By his
way of expressing himself, he would make the Argument great, as if to Create a
Decency was an invasion of God's Prerogative; We cannot apprehend it in the
Power of man to Create a Decency. The greatest Emperor, etc.

But if a Decency arise from the Guise of Countries, and Prescription, and
Common Consent, it might be questioned, whether according to him, God himself
can then Create a Decency, and by his authority make that to be at once which
requires time and Custom (as he says) to produce and form it? So high does the
power of a little School-subtilty and Imagination sometimes transport men, that
their Arguments vanish out of fight, and are lost to all those that converse
with what is gross and tangible.

But supposing it is not in the power of man to Create a Decency, yet Order may
be Order without those dilatory reasons of Custom and Prescription; and
therefore what holds against establishing Decency by institution, will not
hinder but that order may be thereby established. Therefore,

2. He further argues from the Nature of Decency and Order, that things of mere
Humane Institution are not capable of that plea. We can understand, says he,
nothing, Ibid.
by orderly, and according to order, but without confusion. By Decency we can
understand nothing but what is opposed to sordidly; nor can we think of any
action that is not Decent, if the contrary to it be not indecent. So then
nothing ought to be done in the Worship of God, but what may be done without
Confusion, etc. of which Nature can nothing be that is idle and superfluous,
etc.

I was at a great loss at first to find out the drift of all this, but upon
consideration I think it contains these things: (1.) That it is unlawful to
ordain or use any thing superfluous in the Worship of God. (2.) That whatsoever
is not for Order, Decency and Edification is superfluous. (3.) That nothing is
Decent, if the contrary to it be not indecent. It Is the last of these we are
now concerned in; which by the help of the great managers of this Argument, may
be better understood. Ames 's Fresh Suit, and answer to Bp. Morton. Jean's
Uniformity in answer to Dr. Hammond.
And it amounts to this, that Decency and Indecency are contraries (rather
privatives says Jeans) And if one of them be not Indecent, the other cannot be
Decent: And if the Action may be performed decently without what is called
Decent, then that which we call so is not Decent. As suppose it is pleaded that
a Surplice is Decent, but if the contrary be not Indecent, and the Service may
be performed decently without it, then that Vestment is not Decent.

In answer to which I shall not concern my self in a tedious and nice dispute
about the nature of Contrarieties and Privatives, but readily grant the
opposition which they insist upon betwixt Decent and Indecent; And yet
notwithstanding shall make bold to deny the whole they infer from it: And that
for this reason, because our Dispute is not about the Nature of Decency and
Indecency, but about things Decent and Indecent: And although Decency and
Indecency be opposed as above said, yet it is not so in the things
controverted, but that things different may be both of them, Decent.

As for Example, he grants that it is comely and grave to preach in a Gown, and
that they look therefore for Page 18.
no Institution; but now by this way of arguing it could not be so: For if a
person may preach decently without a Gown, then it cannot be Decent to preach
with it, because Decency and Indecency are contraries, and if the contrary be
not Indecent, (as it is not to preach without it, must he say,) then to preach
with it is not Decent.

So again, what Decency is to Indecency, that is Reverence to Irreverence: But,
he says, that kneeling at the Sacrament is Decent, (for says he, no Page 36.
Page 13.
Dissenter refuses to receive the Sacrament kneeling because it is not Decent)
and Reverent. But it can be neither of these by his argument, for they also
affirm that it may be Decently and Reverently received, though they do not
kneel; and therefore the contrary to kneeling being not Indecent, kneeling
cannot be Decent. And thus I might run on in infinitum; and the like may be
argued from the account he gives of Order.

The ground of his and the others mistake is, that they argue from the kind to
the individuals of the kind, as if one individual was as much opposite to the
other as kind to kind, whereas the individuals are mutable things, which the
guise of Countries, and custom, etc. alter; and two things different in use or
figure, or the like, may be both of them Decent, as to wear a Cloak or a Coat
in Secular business; a Cloak, Gown, or Surplice in Religious Solemnities,
(according as the custom is.)

Therefore the Brethren at the Savoy let this curious Proceedings at the Savoy,
p. 62.
speculation fall, and grant, there are some things Decent and orderly, when
the opposite species is not undecent or disorderly. And a greater than they
said it was comely, with respect to the then state of the Church, not to marry,
and yet without doubt it was 1 Cor. 7. 35.
not thought uncomely to marry too; which yet the Apostle could not have said,
if our Authors way of arguing had been of any force.

After all this pert discourse against things instituted we are little
concerned, not only because there is nothing like things merely instituted by
men in our Church except the Cross, (which Lay-Communion is not concerned in)
but also because even that and all things that can be forced to look this way
are not now instituting, but are received as having been so long before, and
are not the subject matter of Institution, but of Civil and Ecclesiastical
Command betwixt which there is a vast difference, as, Mr. Jeans Against Dr.
Hammond. page 80.
rightly observes; There is difference 'twixt Institution, and Commandment or
Appointment; for though every Institution be a Commandment or Appointment, yet
every Commandment or Appointment is not an Institution. And hence a Church in a
place may command and appoint the uniform observance of Ceremonies, instituted
unto its hand by the Church in former ages.

As for such particular things as were owing to mere Institution (which I
produced in the above said tract) in respect of their use and signification, I
shall keep them in my eye, though I lay them aside for the present to come to
his next head.

Nothing, though necessary, or convenient, or Prop. 2.
comely, ought to be used in, and much less appropriated to the Worship of God;
being all such things are to be considered therein only as they have a
reference to humane acts. This he asserts not only in the Propositions which he
draws from his general position, but also elsewhere; so he says, that they
comply with mere necessary, or conventent circumstances Page 23.
either of Actions, or such or such Actions, considered abstractly from any
Religion. And therefore he concludes,

1. They must not be used in Religious Worship. So he says, Those who stumble
at the Surplice (as not Page 15.
many do) or the Cross, or kneeling at the Eucharist, scruple to do it in an
Act of Worship. So again, The Minister must wear his Surplice in his Acts of
Worship, and sign with the Cross within the complex Act of Worship, (for he
after it with prayers concludes the Action.) The People must kneel in the act
of Receiving. What then? Why then they are unlawful Now how the things that are
necessary in general (as Posture, Habit, etc.) can be used without particulars,
or how those particulars can be used in Worship lawfully, and yet be unlawful,
because used in Worship, I understand not. For then sitting would be unlawful,
if alike required, and a Gown be unlawful, and the Ring in Marriage unlawful,
and the laying the hand on the Book unlawful, (at the former of which is a
prayer annexed, and at the latter it is implied,) and all Civil Usages in
Worship would be unlawful: And then what will become of what he has elsewhere
said? Dr. Ames and others do think that such usages which may ordinarily Page
12.
be used in other humane actions of a grave nature, may be used in Acts of
Worship; and being so used are no more than appendants to the Action, etc.

But being sensible that this will not do, and that unless he can make the
being used in Worship to be the same with Worship, to be an act or a part of
it, he cannot make it unlawful, and that if he should attempt it, it would be
but to disparage the cause, he makes a second adventure.

2. That which is appropriated to Worship is unlawful. Some of them cannot but
look for an Institution Page 12.
for a Garment [meaning the Surplice] which they must be tied to use in the
Worship of God, and restrained from the wearing of at other times. Now because
this would open a gap too wide for him to stand in, and would condemn Places,
as well as Habits, and make it as unlawful to use a Church as a Surplice, he
therefore cautiously begins it with Some of them: But yet however he gives us a
reason for it, viz. Because the appropriation of it to the Religious act,
speaks something of Religion and Homage to God in it. Elsewhere he expresses
himself after the like manner, We think they (civil usages) must not have any
thing of the nature of Worship in them, but may as well be used in merely Civil
actions, as in Religious Duties. If there be any thing of Homage to God in them
they are Worship which must have an Institution. But, First, What does he mean
by appropriation, does he thereby understand that what is for the present
appropriated to a Religious use and Service cannot be omitted, nor altered, nor
upon any reason whatsoever be applied to any other use? This our Church does
not hold. Homilies Sermon of good works pt. 2 Sermon of Prayer. pt. 2. Article.
34.


Is it that out of a Reverence to Divine Ordinances, it is not fit that the
things used in or at Divine Worship be prostituted to vulgar use, that what are
Churches for an hour or two on the Lord's day be not Stables all the week
after; nor the Tables and Plate used in the Lord's Supper, be employed, in the
service of the Taverns? This we agree to, and think our selves well able to
defend against any arguments we have yet seen to the contrary. 2ly. Does
appropriation necessarily employ homage to God; may not things be thus
separated, for Order and Uniformity, for Gravity and Decency, for Reverence and
Respect to the Solemnities of Religion? And may not this Reverence and Respect
we show to the solemnities of Religion, and the Devotion we show in external
Worship redound to God himself?

Indeed what are all the outward acts of Reverence but expressing of Homage,
Veneration and Adoration to God? I do not think the Holy Psalmist forgot
himself when he said, Come let us Worship, and fall down, and Ps. 95. 6.
kneel before the Lord our Maker:* Or that our Author himself said amiss, when
he maintains, that Nature Page 29.
teaches us to Worship God in the most decent manner we can. For though
Adoration be to be given to God alone, Page 13. and Jean's answer to Hammond.
Page 21.
yet Reverence (as our Author distinguishes) is due to all things relating to
him, and to that Worship we pay to him: And as there are several Acts of
Worship due to God; So there are some things due to his Worship, by which his
honor is advanced and devotion furthered. But for this I refer him to what
Case of Indifferent things. Page 29.
was said otherwhere, which he was pleased to take no notice of.

But to bring all to an issue I shall now consider the several arguments, and
instances I produced to prove that things indifferent, though not prescribed,
may be lawfully used in Divine Worship.

This I proved from the old Testament and New, from the practice of the
Primitive and Modern Churches, and from their own Concessions.

1. The instances I chose to give from the Old Testament were David's Temple,
the Feast of Purim, and the Synagogal Worship: To these he answers at once,
that they are answered long since by Dr. Ames in his Case examined. Page 25.
Fresh Suit. And perhaps may be answered by him after the manner he def^^^^^
the objection taken from the second Commandment, which our Author himself Page
27.
gives up: But (...) ^^guments are of force, I suppose, we shall find it in our
Author. And he first begins with David's Temple, of which he says, David indeed
designed Page 26.
a Temple for God without a command, But God checked him for it for this very
reason, 2. Sam. 7. 7. and though he approved his generally good intention, yet
he restrained him as to his Act, as may be seen in that Chap.

This being matter of Fact the Text must determine it, and from thence I
observe.

1. That God had at no time given a command concerning building a Temple. So in
the Text quoted, in all the places with all the children of Israel spoke I a 2 Samuel 7. 7.
word with any of the tribes, etc. saying, why build ye not me an house of
Cedars?

2. David in designing it went upon rational grounds (1.) as God had given him
rest, and so it became him to do it in point of gratitude, and because he had
an opportunity for it. (2.) From comparing his own house See now I dwell in an
house of Cedar, but the Ark of God dwells within curtains.

3. It was no rash act, for it seems he had at that time made ready for the
building, having it a long time before in his thoughts. Of this see Dr.
Lightfoot, Temple c. 40. 1 Chronicles. 28. 2. 3.


1. From all which I infer, that neither David in designing, nor Nathan in
approving what he designed thought it absolutely unlawful to do what was not
commanded in the Worship of God, or that what was not commanded was forbidden.
This must be granted by our Author, that says, God approved his generally good
intention, now what was his intention generally but to do somewhat in honor to
God, and for the solemnity of his Worship? Thus much Mr. Pool does yield, The
design being pious, and the thing not forbidden by God, Nathan hastily approves
it. Now if he approved it because not forbidden by God, then they did not think
that what was not commanded, was forbidden; nor does that of our Author appear
to be reasonable, that God checked him for it, because it was without a command.

2ly. Supposing that particular Act condemned, yet it is not reasonable to
suppose it to be for the general reason, given by our Author, that nothing must
be done without a command, but because in a matter of that consequence, the
Prophet did not advise about it, and that he did too hastily approve it, as Mr.
Pool says. But,

3ly. It Is evident that the particular Act was not condemned. 1. Because God
commended him for it, thou did well 1 Kings, 8. 17, 18.
. So Mr. Hildersham, Though the Lord would not let David build him an House,
yet he commends his affection for it, etc. Lect. on Joh. Lect. 28.
2. God rewarded him for it, for upon it it was promised, 2 Samuel 7. 11. 1 Chronicles. 17. 10.
He will make thee an House. So Mr. Pool, For thy good intentions to make him
an House, he will build thee an House. 3. He presently gave order upon it for
the building such an House; and as a mark of approbation, and a further reward
of David's good intention* did both reveal what he would have built, and how 1 Chronicles. 28. 19.
; And appoint his immediate Successor for the building of it 2 Samuel 7. 13.
. 4. Though God did deny this Privilege to David, yet it was not without giving
him good reason for it, and that was (1.) because things were not settled. So it
was before with the tribes, therefore God says he walked with them 2 Samuel 7.
6, 7. verse. 1.
: And so it was with David, for though he had at that time rest, (which was
about the 10th, or at most the 20th, of his Reign;) Yet it was far from a
settled Peace, and therefore Mr. Pool reads it as the Margin, v. 11. I will
cause thee to rest. (2.) It was not fit for David, Because he had been a man of
War, and shed much blood. 1 Chronicles. 22. 7, 8, 9. 28, 3.
Now in opposition to this (1.) God says, I will ordain a place for Israel,
and plant them, etc. 1 Chronicles. 17. 9
(2.) Of Solomon, he says, He shall be a man of rest, and I will give him
Peace 1 Chronicles. 22. 9
.

So that it appears that it was not unlawful for David to design a Temple nor
unacceptable to God that he did design it, but it was deferred for the reasons
before given, and because it was unseasonable.

Now because the Author has referred me to Ames, I will send him back thither,
and let him see whether he has answered all this or no. Ames Fresh Suit. part
2.. 6, and 7. Case examined p. 26.
.

As for the Feast of Purim, This Reverend person says, It lies upon our
Author to prove, the Feast of purim was kept as a Religious Feast. There is no
order for any Religious Acts to be performed in it. If it were, it was
generally commanded under the precepts of giving thanks for public mercies.

I shall therefore undertake to prove it a Religious Feast. But before I
proceed I shall 1. observe, That the lawfulness of Religious Feasts and Fasts
admit of the same general proof, and if I prove one I prove the other. 2. I
observe that the Jews did think it lawful to institute Religious Feasts and
Fasts, both occasional and anniversary. Of the latter sort (which is the matter
in dispute) were the Fasts of the 4th, 5th and 10th Months, instituted in the
time of the Captivity Zech. 8. 19.
.

Such was the Feast of Dedication instituted by the Jews in the time of the
Maccabees 1 Mac. 4. 59.
, And kept to the time of our Savior John 10, 22.
, nay to this very day amongst them Buxtorf. Synag. Jud.
. And so Mordecai and Esther did establish this Feast of Purim, and the Jews
took upon themselves to keep it Est. 9, 20, 27, 29.
. Now that it was a Religious Feast will appear,

1. As it was a day of thanksgiving to God for that great deliverance. Thus
it is called a day of gladness, a good day ^. 8. 17. 9. 18, 19, 22.
, which Mr. Pool thus paraphraseth, a time of feasting, rejoicing and
thanksgiving On c. 8. 17. Chapter 9. 27.
. This further appears from the reason given for the celebration of it. It was,
says the Text, That the memorial of their deliverance should not perish: or as
Mr. Pool, Because they had seen and felt this wonderful work of God on their
behalf. C. 9. 25, 31.
It appeared further from the circumstances of it, it is said They sent portions
one to another, and gifts to the poor. C. 9, 22.
Which, says Pool, they used to give upon days of thanksgiving, of which see
Neh. 8. 10.

And I may add, that it is impossible to conceive that persons of such signal
piety as Mordecai and Esther, should institute, and under the present sense of
such a deliverance, as the Jews were, should observe this Feast, only as a day
of Civil Joy, without respect to God that wonderfully brought it about.

2. It was as much a Religious Feast, as their Fast was a Religious Fast; So
the Text makes them parallel, They confirmed these days of Purim, etc. As they
had decreed for themselves and for their seed the matters of the fastings and
their cry. C. 10, 31.
But what their Fasting was, the nature of the thing, as well as the Cry here
spoken of does declare. So to go ye and fast, Pool adds, and pray, which was
the main business, to which fasting was only an help. On. c. 4. 16, and 9, 31.
But our Author says; There is no order for any Religious Acts to be performed
in it. As if they did not know what became them to do upon such a gracious and
wonderful deliverance. But we read of no order for such Acts on their days of
Fasting, were they not therefore Religious? Nay we read not of the name of God
in the whole Book, or of any duty to him plainly expressed, and shall we
therefore esteem it not to be Religious and Canonical?

But says our Author, If it were a Religious Feast, it was generally commanded
under the precepts of giving thanks. And I desire no more: For in one Breath he
has yielded all. So that now we have gained, that fixed and anniversary
festival days set apart for Commemoration of God's Mercies to us, are not only
lawful, but what we have a command for. And thence it follows, that a Church
has Power to determine them, as they did. And further that things not
commanded may be used in Divine Worship.

The next thing is the Synagogal Worship.

To this he replies, The Worshipping of God in Synagogues wanted no special
Command; Being but a Circumstance convenient, if not necessary to public
Worship considered as an Humane Act. A Multitude of people could not meet to
Worship God together without a fit place. But First why did not Synagogues want
a Special Command as well as the Temple *which he contends for?) For, which is
worse, to build a more convenient place for one already instituted, a Temple
for a Tabernacle; or to build places for which they had (as he yields) no
special command, as the Synagogues? But suppose they needed not a Command for
Synagogues, because a Multitude could not meet together without a Fit Place;
yet how will that be a reason that the Worshipping in Synagogues wanted it not?
That place is a circumstance convenient, and that Synagogues were fit places
for a Multitude of people to Worship in, we grant; and we will grant that this
may be a reason to justify the building and using such places without a special
Command; yet what is that to the Worship so and so ordered in those places?
What is that to Days and Hours, which the Scripture speaks of, and he contends
against? What is this to the Forms used in their Service, which the Jews do
write of?, If these are not to be justified though they wanted a Special
Command, how was it that our Blessed Savior and his Apostles did not only
frequent the places, but the Service, as our Savior's Customary Preaching in
them does show? What is this to the Ritual Observations our Savior complied
with, such as the Passover Cup, and their posture at it, which he showed his
approbation of in his taking the materials of his last Supper from the Rites
used in the Passover, as learned men have observed; of which Casaubon says,
Hoc primum observare juvat, quomodo Filius Dei umbras Legis ad veritatem
traduxerit.

This he will by no means hear of, and therefore uses several evasions (for
they are no better). Thus when it is recorded that our Savior told the
disciples, with desire have I desired to eat this Passover with you before I
suffer: and in prosecution of it, that he took the Cup, and gave thanks, and
said, Divide it among your selves, for I will not Drink of the Fruit of the
Vine. etc. he irreverently represents it as if it was no more than if he drunk
only to satisfy Nature. For so he says; Before Christ Case examined. Page 14.
did eat the paschal Supper, he drank a Cup of Wine, and doubtless at it he
drank also, though it be not recorded. People need no Institution to drink
while they are eating.

As if the Evangelist had no more to do than to tell us Christ drank a Cup of
Wine with his Meat. Surely there is a better account to be given of this
matter; The Text it self shows it. And the Jewish Authors and others that write
of their customs, do sufficiently inform us. In which he must be very ignorant
or incredulous, that will say (as he does) that no more is signified by it than
that Case examined. Page 32.
every one might drink as his appetite required; and no less irreverent that
can think that what is recorded of our Savior's taking the Cup, and blessing,
and drinking in the Passover, was only to serve that end.

The next thing I insisted upon was our Savior's compliance with them in the
posture used by them at the Passover, Page 3.
contrary (as he owns) to what was used at the first Institution. Of this, he
says, Our Savior used the Jewish posture in eating the passover, being a
posture no where, that Page 84
we know of, used by Idolaters, nor being any posture of Adoration, but their
ordinary posture of eating Meat. 2. He says, that every one might use the
posture which was most convenient for the Nature of the Action: and that he
does not see any reason to conclude they would have shut out any that because
of the institution desired to eat it with his loins girt, etc. 3. That, if they
did use any uniform posture, yet it was because they agreed it among
themselves. In all which there is hardly any thing said but is full of mistake.
As,

1. He says, the posture used by our Savior was no where, that he knows of,
used by Idolaters, nor was a posture of Adoration. I cannot tell how far our
Author's Learning may extend in this matter, but that the posture of discumbing
was used at festival Solemnities from ancient times, by the Grecians, Medes,
Persians, Indians, Romans, and Jews, etc. and from thence translated to their
Sacrifical Feasts, which the Heathens did very anciently observe Herodotus, l.
1. c. 31.
, is sufficiently known Casab exercit. 16. c. 22
insomuch that the whole Solemnity was called amongst the Romans Lectisternium
Rosini antiq. l. 4. c. 15.
. This is Confirmed by Scripture. So Amos. 2. 8. They lay themselves down upon
Clothes laid to pledge by every Altar, etc. That is, the Beds which they used
in the Temples of their Gods, says Casaubon, Ibid.
from the Jews: So Ezekiel. 23. 41. For satisfaction in which I refer this
Reverend Author to others Buxtorf. Exercit. xxxv. and xxxviii.
.

And whereas he says this was no posture of Adoration, he must needs be
mistaken, if he grants what they did in those Solemnities in Honor to their
Gods to be Adoration. And this they did, for it was an entertainment made for
them, the heathens conceiving that the Gods did then feast with them; hence the
Poets phrase of Horat. l. ^. i. ode. 37.
ornare pulvinar Deorum dapibus. So the Apostle calls their Table, the Table of
Devils? 1 Cor. 10. v. 21.
and their lying down there, an having fellowship with Devils. v. 20.
Having said thus much, I shall not need to pro^eed, and show how sitting, as
well as discumbing, has been also used in Idolatrous Service, both amongst
Heathens of old and Romanists now, especially since I have it sufficiently
Falkner's Libert. Eccles. part. 2. c. 3.. 4. n. 10.
proved to my hands in a book I suppose our Author well acquainted with.

As for what he further says, If the Jews did use one uniform posture, etc.
there needs not many words to show how precarious or false it is. For what more
precarious than to speak doubtfully (If they did) of that which yet is clearly
evident they did observe? Or affirm, that if they did, it was because they
agreed it among themselves, which is to suppose the reason of the thing to be
certain, when the thing it self according to him is uncertain? Or what more
false since whether it was by agreement among themselves, or by the Authority
of the Church, that there was this Uniformity of posture is not so certain, as
it is that there was this Uniformity, and that they were universally obliged to
use and observe it? For it was required that discumbiture should be used in all
Religious Feasts, but especially at the Passover by all without exception* in
the first part of the Solemnity. For which I refer our Author Lightfoot.
to one well-versed in these matters.

So little Truth, or certainty is there in what our Author asserts, that every
one might use the posture which was most convenient; and that there was no
reason to conclude they would have shut out any from their paschal Societies
that desired to eat it with his loins girt, etc. or standing.

The next instance produced in the abovesaid Case of Indifferent things, and
objected against by our Author, is the Hours of Prayer, which were observed
amongst the Jews, at Morning, Noon, and Evening. Act. 2 15. c. 10. 9. c. 3. 1.

Of these our Author gives this account: Thus the Apostles Case Examined, p. 19.
used the hours of Prayer, which also they might have changed, if they had
pleased. That the Jews sent any to Goals, or excommunicated any for not keeping
to those hours we do not find. There is nothing of Religion in the time, more
then in any other part of time. Thus St. Paul used Circumcision and
Purification.

Thus: How is that? Did the Apostles use the hours of Prayer only as necessary
circumstances of Humane actions, or such without which the light of Nature, or
Common usage shows the thing cannot be done, or conveniently or Page 1. Page 14.
comelily done, as he says? Or rather did they not use them as they found them
instituted and observed in the Jewish Church? And not for his Thus, and the
reasons given by him? Will those reasons justify those very hours of the day,
or the just number of three hours? Or however, how will they Justify the
Prayers used at those hours; But whatever exceptions he had against the time,
he it seems found nothing to say to the Service, which yet was pleaded as well
as that. Case of Indifferent things. P. 11.


But he says, There is nothing of Religion in the time. If so (as is granted)
then it is in the power of a Church to institute and determine it, where there
is no other Religion in the Time, than as it is thus separated to the Service of
God.

Lastly he says, The Apostles might have changed the Hours of Prayer, if they
had pleased. How might they have changed them? Might they do it as Apostolical
Persons, or as Private Members of the Jewish Church? As to the former I find
not they did exercise any such Power within the Jurisdiction of the Jewish
Church, nor that they had any Commission so to do. As for the latter, I deny
it. For if it lay in the power of Private Members of a Church to alter the
Hours in which the Church is to assemble, it is in their power to Dissolve the
Assembly, and there could nothing but Confusion issue from it. I must confess
he seems to be at a perfect loss what to say as to this matter. And it appears
so when he dares not so much as touch upon the Prayers used in those hours, and
applies his Thus to St. Paul's using Circumcision and Purification, as if they
also were necessary circumstances of Humane action; or such without which the
light of Nature or Common Usage shows the thing cannot be done, etc. which were
things of pure Institution at the first, and what though peculiar to the Jewish
Church, the Apostle complied with them in for a time.

The next instances produced in proof of the Proposition were, Washing the
Disciples feet, Love Feasts, and Holy-Kiss which he joins together, and of
which he says,

1. It Is impossible to prove, that they were any more Page 12, 15, 16, 19.
than Civil usages, etc. 2. They were not used in Worship.
Whether it is impossible to prove the first or no, does not rest upon our
Author's authority, and yet that is the Case of Indifferenc things. P. 13.
only thing which he has thought fit to confront what I produced in proof of
it. That they were Civilrites is granted, but that they were used by Christ and
the Apostles as no more than Civil, is (I may safely venture to say) impossible
to prove. First, Because there is the reason of the thing against it, as they
were instituted and used for Spiritual ends, and in token of Christian Humility
and Charity (as I then showed). Secondly, Case of Indiff. p. 9. 12.
Because of the great Difference there was betwixt them when used as merely
Civil, and as used by our Savior and the Apostles. What this was as to washing
the feet, I then showed where he might be Satisfied and to Hor. in Joh. c. 13.
5.
Buxtorf I may add the Learned Dr. Lightfoot.

It appears further they were not merely Civil from the Character given to the
kiss of Charity, being called the Holy Kiss. But This was (says he) because
the Apostle commanded Christians to use it in a Sober, Temperate, Chaste, Or
holy manner. But if this was the reason, then all Kisses, and all Feasts would
be holy: But now Holiness stamps somewhat peculiar upon the thing it is applied
to, and signifies that by Some act, end, or use, it is Separated from the rest
of the same kind. And for this reason was it more likely the kiss was called
Holy, from its end, use and signification (as it was a Testimony of that Holy
and entire love, which was or ought to have been amongst Christians) rather
than in respect of the manner; for what reason was there for that, when it was
betwixt persons of the same, and not a different, Sex. Besides, if it was a
mere Civil rite, and designed for no Religious end, could we think the Apostle
would require it, and close his Epistles so frequently with it? Lastly, it
appears they were not used as mere Civil Rites, because they were used in
Religious Assemblies, and some of them annexed thereunto. Of this (he says) he
can never Page 16.
prove, that while Our Savior was Worshipping his Father he stepped aside to
wash his Disciples Feet: Or that the Primitive Christians were either Kissing
or Feasting one another in the Time or Act of Worship, as Praying, etc. It
would have become our Author rather to have removed the proofs given of this,
than to call for more: which if he had considered he would have expressed
himself with more caution and reverence. That washing the Disciples feet had a
Spiritual signification, I have showed, and so was not unfit for a Religious
Solemnity; and that it was used in such, the Apostle shows, Joh. 13. 4. for a
further account of which I leave him to the Learned Exercit. 16. n. 22. and 24.
Casaubon; How and when the Holy Kiss was used, and how it was called the Seal
of Prayer and reconciliation, I then showed, and is so fully proved by Dr.
Falkner, that Libertas, l. 2. c. 1.. 3.
there needs no more to be added, till that, at least, be refuted. That the
Love Feasts were joined to, and used at the same time as the Lord's Supper, not
only the Apostle's discourse upon it shows; but also the change of Names, and
the giving of one to the other does confirm it. For Theophylact supposes that
the Apostle 1 Cor. 11. 20.
calls the Love-Feast by the name of the Lord's Supper: And on the contrary
Tertullian declares that from hence Apel. c. 39.
the Lord's Supper came to be called (...). It were easy to heap up Authorities
in this kind, but that is done to my hand by such as write upon this Custom. V.
Vines on the Sacram. c. 2. p. 25, etc.


After I had proved that things Indifferent, though not prescribed, might be
used in Divine Worship from the practice of the Jewish Church and that of
Christ and the Apostles: I further confirmed it from the incapacity we should
be in of holding Communion with any Church (if it were otherwise) whether
Ancient or Modern.

But our Author does endeavor at once to overthrow it. For says he, that
every particular Christian must Case examined. Page 21.
practice every thing which the Churches practice which he has Communion with,
or be concluded to have no Communion with it, is to us a New Assertion. And so
it is to me, who only did maintain these two things, That there Case of
Indifferent things. Page 15.
was no Church or Society but would be found guilty if things uncommanded were
unlawful; and if the having such uncommanded things would make Communion with a
Church unlawful, then no Church could be Communicated with. So that all that I
affirmed was, there could be no Communion Lawful to such as held it unlawful to
communicate with a Church for the Sake of things uncommanded. And who are
concerned in this, our Author very well knows; such I mean, as plead this as an
argument for their present Separation. But though the Assertion, as he words
it, is neither mine, nor true; yet I dare affirm there are some things
uncommanded which every particular Christian must practice, or else he can be
said to have no Communion with the Churches where such things are practiced;
Such are Forms of Prayer, and receiving the Sacrament in the Forenoon, and
without sitting, where there is no provision made for them that would use that
posture, as well as where it is not allowed.

And this was the case in the ancient Churches. To which he replies, Their
practices are great uncertainties, and their writings depraved, or, it cannot
be made appear, that none could have any Communion with those Churches, unless
he did eat the Lord's Supper fasting, or prayed toward the East. That their
writings are depraved is very true, But that they are so depraved as that there
is nothing certainly theirs, is what no one will assert. And that they are not
depraved in the passages or things I quoted from thence, is very evident from
the concurrence of the Fathers therein, and the general consent of learned men
of all sides. As to what he says that it does not appear that none could have
Communion with them, unless, etc. It were easy to refute it, and to show it in
the Instances I gave; and to make it out in one for all, viz. That of receiving
the Lord's Supper Fasting; of which St. Austin says thus, Liquido apparet,
etc. It plainly appears that our Savior and Epist. 118. ad Januar.
his Disciples did not receive it Fasting, but shall the Universal Church be
therefore reproached, because it receives Fasting? And this pleased the
Holy Ghost, that in Honor of so great a Sacrament, the Body of Christ should
First enter into the mouth of a Christian. For therefore is this custom
observed through the universal Church. And more to the same purpose may our
Author read in that Epistle.

Now when this was the practice (as they say) of the Universal Church, and that
they so practiced upon the score of an Apostolical Precept, as St. Austin there
says, (how truly is not my business to enquire) can we think that it was not
required? Or that there could be any Communion with those Churches, if any did
otherwise? I added to the ancient Church, the State of the Reformed Churches
abroad, and showed how they do use things uncommanded in the Worship of God,
and how impossible it is upon the principles of those that dissent from our
Church to hold Communion with theirs. To this he replies, we have not heard of
any thing used among them in Worship, etc. but what is prescribed, excepting
only some Forms of Prayer relating to the Sacrament. 2. None of these receive
the Sacrament kneeling. 3. They compel not any to receive Standing or Sitting.
I would be loath to charge our Author with want of diligence or integrity, but
how reconcilable this is to it that he says, I must leave to the impartial
Reader. Supposing however the first to be true, yet if they have some Forms
they have somewhat not prescribed. But have they only some Forms relating to
the Sacrament? What then shall we say to Capellus, that says diverse These.
Salmur. part 3. p. 307.
of them have set Forms of Liturgies? What to their Formularies, as those of
Holland and Switzerland? What to the Bohemian Churches that have also Forms in
Singing Comen. de bono unit. Annot. cap. 3.
of Humane Composure? Have they nothing but Forms of Prayer, what then thinks
he of Anniversary Festivals observed in the Helvetick and Bohemick Churches?
And Confess. Helvet. Comen. ibid. c. 7. c. 3.. 2.
of Godfathers in Baptism? As much mistaken is he when he says, None of these
receive the Sacrament kneeling, as appears from the Petricov^an Synod, that I
quoted Case of Indiff. Things, p. 9. Case examined, Page 13.
in the foresaid Tract. But to this he answers, it is not at all to be wondered
that the Lutherans in that Synod, should determine as they did, etc. Does he
hereby mean that there were none but Lutherans in that Synod, or that the
Lutherans, in that Synod, only determined it? Which way soever he would be
understood it is a wretched mistake. For the Synod was composed of those of the
Helvetick, Augustan, and Bohemick Confession, and subscribed by all of them,
and was indeed but one of several Synods they held in Common together. If he
had but looked into this Synod, all this discourse might have been saved, and
he might have answered his own Question, We desire to know what more receive
Sitting except the Lutheran Churches? What he produces the 3d. for, I cannot
well understand, for it is all one if those Churches forbid any one particular
posture as if they required another. And yet some do forbid Sitting, as the
Synod above V. Case of Kneeling. p. 14. 15.
quoted, and one Church Kneeling.

I proceeded further to show that they themselves could not then be
Communicated with, since they do things without prescription; as in
administering the Sacraments, conceived Prayer, Swearing, and Church-Governments
and order. He says, we do not make Sitting necessary; but that is not the
point in dispute, for he by his principles should show where it is commanded.
For conceived Prayer he argues, How this is prescribed, he and others have been
told elsewhere, and those that have told it, have had a sufficient answer.

Laying the hands on the Book, he says, is a civil, no sacred usage; as if the
invoking God, and a solemn testimony of our so invoking him by some external
Rite, were merely civil. Such then was lifting up the hand, which was anciently
used in swearing, and so appropriated to it, that it was put for swearing it
self, Genesis 14. 22. Ex. 6. 8. They that can affirm such things as these, may
affirm any thing.

As for the things relating to Church Order, he says, Ten times more is
allowed to matters of Government than Worship. But he undertakes not my
argument taken from the parity of reason betwixt the Kingly and Priestly
offices of our Savior: And which the Presbyterian Vindicat. of Presbyt. Gov.
p. 4.
Brethren so approve of as to use the same Arguments for Government as Worship.

The Third general was to enquire, how we might. 3.
know what things are indifferent in the Worship of God. The main things he
herein objects against, respect Edification; In handling of which, he thus sums
up my sense of it; Our Author would not have us judge of Edification from what
most improveth Christians in Case examined. Page 33.
knowledge and grace, but from what tends most to public Order; as if I spoke
of Order, in opposition to, and as exclusive of a Christians improvement,
whereas I plainly say, and he acknowledges it, that we are not so much to
judge of them asunder, as together. The meaning and design of what I said, was
to show that Christians are to consider themselves as members of a Church, and
so to have a tender regard to Communion with it, and not to think their own
Edification a sufficient reason, to break the Peace and Order of it.

To this he says several things. In Answer to which it will be convenient to
give a clear representation and state of the Case, which I shall do in these
Propositions.

1. We must consider that Edification is not the laying a Foundation, but a
building upon it, and so there is not the same reason for the breaking Order
for the sake of Edification, as there is for the sake of things absolutely
necessary to Salvation, and that which will warrant and does oblige to the one,
will not warrant nor oblige to the other. This will serve to show the little
force there is in what this Reverend Author confidently asserts, We know and
are assured, that no man, to keep up any such human Page 34.
bounds (of Order,) ought to omit means by which he may improve his own Soul in
the knowledge of Christ, or the exercise of his habits of Grace; by which
assertion of his he makes Edification and improvement in knowledge, etc. as
necessary as the knowledge of the Fundamentals of Religion.

2. We must consider (as I then observed) that Order is a means of Edification,
and therefore if there happens Case of Indifferent things. P. 36.
a dispute betwixt observing Order, and improvement in knowledge or grace, it is
'twixt means and means, 'twixt what is for Edification in one way, and what is
for it in another, and not betwixt what is for, and what Case examined. Page 35.
is against Edification, as he would have it understood.

3. We must observe that when there is a dispute betwixt means and means, the
less is to give place to the greater, and what is most for Edification, is to
yield to that which is least.

4. That for that reason the Edification of the Church, and the welfare of the
whole is to be preferred before the spiritual advantage of any particular
member; for what the less is to the greater, that is a member to the Church;
and if a person cannot serve and improve himself without damage to the Public,
he is rather to sit down without that improvement, than to do mischief to the
Community for the obtaining it; And as long as he is not without means
sufficient for Salvation, he is in that Case to recede from some further
seize; in doing which, for so good an end, he is acceptable to God, and
approved of men. So that however our Author may Romans 14. 18.
seem to shelter himself under the phrase of Human Order, yet as long as no
Church can subsist without it, and he Case Examined p. 34. 35.
that takes away Order takes away the Church, and he that says a person ought
to throw it down to improve his Soul, takes away Order; he must pardon me if I
think that he talks without consideration, for he that talks of Edification of
particular Souls, in a distinct notion from the building them up as members of
a Church, or of members of a Church without being united as a Church, or of a
Church without any means to unite it, does (to return him his own words) but
discourse of building Castles in the Air, and what he would be loath his own
Congregation (if he has one) should at every turn put into practice; Of all
which, if this will not Case of Indifferent things, p. 41, 42. Case of
Lay-Commun. p 39. etc.
convince him, I shall desire him impartially to view the places of Scripture
quoted by himself from the Apostle; as also what was said before in the
controverted Tract, and he has not yet answered, or has been since discoursed
of in another Case.

The 4th. enquiry in the Tract aforesaid was, How. 4.
we are to determine our selves in the use of Indifferent Things in the Worship
of God? Under which head I showed what respect is to be given to Authority,
whether Ecclestiastical or Civil.

In Answer to which our Author takes up the Case of Case Examined, p. 39.
Imposition, and propounds Two Questions, which in effect are these.

Q. 1. Whether there be any Authority in Church or State, to determine the
things which God has left Indifferent to his people?

Q. 2. Whether in Case they make any such Law, the people may, without sin,
obey them?

As for the First, he says there and elsewhere, We Page 5. 9. 17. 32. 40.
cannot conceive how it is possible that in things of Divine Worship, things of
an Indifferent nature should be the matter of any human determination; and
again, that in matters of Worship, no Superiors may restrain, what God has
left at liberty. We are not immediately concerned in this First Question, for
our business was to consider not so much the extent of our Superiors power, in
what Cases they may lawfully command, as in what we may lawfully obey. But yet
because he has herein offered somewhat like an Argument, and because the
clearing of this will make way for the Second, I shall take it into
consideration. To render his Argument the more complete, I shall repair to a
foregoing part of his Book, and make use of that in conjunction with what he
says here, and he thus represents it.

We cannot be fully of our Brothers mind, that in the Page 9.
Worship of God Superiors may determine circumstances which God has left at
liberty. God left it at liberty to the Jews, to take a Lamb or a Kid,
Turtle-Doves or Young-Pigeons, etc. We offer it to the judgment of the whole
reasonable World, whether Moses after this might have made a Law commanding the
Jews to use none but Kids, and only Turtle-Doves, etc. [for it had been a
controulment of the Divine Wisdom.] If not, let not our B. think it strange if
we judge the same of words in Prayer, which God has left at liberty, etc. This
is an Argument I find offered long since by Dr. Ames, Fresh suit. part 2. p.
300.
and which is so considerable in our Authors opinion, that he often repeats it
elsewhere Page 17. 30. 32. 39. 41.
.

In Answer to this,

1st. I shall consider the Case under the Law, and how far what he has said
will hold good.

2ly. I shall show that there is not that parity betwixt the Case Then, and the
Case Now, as to render that unlawful Now, which would have been unlawful Then.

1st. I shall consider the Case Then, and I doubt not to affirm, it would have
been no controulment of the Divine Wisdom, for Moses and Aaron to have enjoined
the Jews in some circumstances, to have taken a Kid or a Turtle only; As when
it was for a public convenience and necessity: There was somewhat of this kind
of Equity in the first establishment of it; So the poor was to bring such of
these as he could get: And Mr. Lev. 14. 30.
Pool says, These Birds were appointed for the relief of On Lev. 1. 14.
the poor, who could bring no better. And certainly he that grants it was to be
left to the discretion and convenience Page 30.
of the offerer which to determine, (as our Author does) should not deny the
like power to Superiors for a public convenience and benefit; nor can this be
to blot out (as his phrase is) what God has written, as Page 17.
long as they do it not in opposition to his Authority.

2ly. Supposing, that where God had wrote Or's (as he says) and that to
command the use of one of them alone, had in that Case been a controulment of
his wisdom, yet the Case Then is not parallel to ours. For, (1.) The Case was
then determined, it was indeed a Lamb or a Kid, but so as no other Beast, a
Turtle or a Pigeon, but so as no other bird was to be used instead of them.

But now though there is the Or under the Gospel, yet it is without such
restraint, for ours is free through the whole kind, and nothing determines us,
but a consonancy to the general rules. It Is so an Or and an Alias, that nothing
of the kind is excepted. So says our Author himself; In Prayer God has left
standing, sitting or Page 30.
kneeling, to our choice and convenience, etc. He has left us at liberty what
words to use, what method or order to observe, etc. (2.) As the disjunction was
then determined, so the very disjunction it self was of Divine institution, and
the liberty they had to choose one of the two, as well as the restraint of not
choosing any but one of the two, was from the special Law of God. And then for
Authority to have determined what God had left free, had some show of
controulment of the Divine Wisdom; especially if it had been required (as our
Author somewhere supposes) that they should never have Page 9.
offered any other but one sort of them. But under the Gospel it is otherwise,
for the disjunction, the Or and the Alias, does not proceed from Divine
Institution, but from the nature of things, and sometimes from human Art and
Contrivance. As when Washing is commanded, (for I shall not contend about it)
all the particulars are comprehended, and the person might be dipped or
sprinkled, or have water poured on him, as he observes; so in receiving the
Sacrament, the posture Page 22.
of the Primitive Church (not of mere standing, as he mistakes me, but) of
standing (as I said) by way Page 35.
of incurvation; or sitting, or kneeling, are all comprehended under the
general species of posture. Again sometimes this Or and Alias proceeds from
human Art and Contrivance, hence the diversity of habits, as a Gown, Cloak,
Surplice. Now when this disjunction does proceed not from Divine Institution,
but from the reasons aforesaid, and that there is no special Command of God to
interpose, determine, restrain, or disjoyn, it can be no controulment of the
Wisdom or Authority of God for a Church to interpose, restrain, or determine
these matters in his Worship. This is plain in the Case of Meats and Drinks, in
which under the Law there was a restraint, an Or and Alias, This and not That,
and there is still an Or arising from the nature of these things, and yet a
determination or restraint herein is no controulment of the divine Wisdom, as
it might have been under the Law, because there is no Institution that does
interpose: And the Case must be the same in Divine Worship, in which since
there is no Institution about these matters, it is no sin to Act in the same
way; that is, it is no sin for Authority to limit and determine, and for others
to be limited, and determined; which brings me to the next Question.

Q. 2. Whether in Case such things are determined, people may, without sin,
obey? Upon this our Author speaks very variously, sometimes determining for
Authority against the Principle, P. 7. 38.
sometimes for the Principle against Authority P. 9. 30.
. And at last leaves it problematical, and says they are divided upon it
amongst themselves P. 39, 40.
. I think not my self at present concerned to show the absurdity of this
Principle, as, how (if this be true) the same things must be lawful and
unlawful according as they are required or forbidden by our Superiors, etc.
But shall only consider what he offers on its behalf.

1. He says they may not in this Case obey, without sin, because nature
teaches us not to part with all our natural liberty. 2. Because we have a
command to stand fast in the liberty, etc.
As to the former, I only say (and that is enough) that Nature teaches us and
does oblige us to part with some of our liberty in Communities: And they are
far from being required to part with all in ours, and so if his argument have
any thing in it, it has nothing in it as to our Case.

For the Second, I leave him to what was said by way Case of Indiff. Things, p.
46.
of prevention, in the Tract he opposes, and which he should have Answered
before he had made use of this as an Argument.

All that he has excepted against upon that subject is the notion I laid down
of Christian Liberty, which I said was no other than the Liberty which mankind
had, before it was restrained by particular Institution, and he gives this
reason against it, For in that [viz. Natural Case Exam. p. 40.
Liberty] we must not stand fast, because Divine Institution has restrained us
in it, etc. neither has Christ restored us to any such Liberty. In Answer to
this I shall consider what Natural Liberty is, and then what Liberty it is that
the Apostle did treat of? As to the Former, it is no other but the free use or
disuse of things Indifferent, whether out of, or in the Worship of God. As to
the Latter, it was no other than a freedom from the Jewish yoke of bondage, and
that Law that gendred to it, as the whole current of the Apostles discourse
does show. And therefore it could be with respect to no other condition than
that which mankind would have been, had there been no such particular
Institution, and was in before that Institution. 'Twas the nature of the Law,
and the injoining of it by divine Institution, so as it became necessary to
them, that made it a Yoke, and a Act. 15. 18.
Yoke intolerable, and it was a freedom from that Law that constitutes the
Liberty which the Apostle treats of in that Epistle: And if it be also to be
taken as our Author would have it for a freedom, in matters of Worship, from
any thing but what is of Divine Institution, that is a secondary sense, and
which may be taken from some parity of reason betwixt Case and Case, but is not
the Apostles, nor the primary sense of it. But take it how we will in this or
the other, I there showed that the Apostles exhortation was of no use to them
that Case of Indifferent things. Page 47.
plead it against submission to Authority in Indifferent Things, when imposed
in or about Divine Worship.

I am now come to the last general head of the aforesaid. 5.
Tract, which contained a short account of the things required in our Church,
as they were either Duty or Indifferent. And for an inforcement of that, and
conclusion of the whole, I shall briefly show how far this Reverend Author
consents to, or by his concessions must be bound to acknowledge it. Indeed he
sometimes does tell us, that Nine parts of Ten of all Dissenters say they
cannot comply with things required in the English Case Examine. page 3. 36. 38.
Liturgy, because they believe the things sinful and unlawful; And elsewhere,
Two hardly of an Hundred think them Indifferent: But whether our Author be of
that number, or at least has reason so to be, I shall leave to his own
conscience, as to himself, and to his concessions as to others. In which I
shall observe the method taken in the aforesaid Tract, where I said all things
objected against, might be referred to Posture, Forms, and Times, and showed
these to be Natural or Moral circumstances of Action, and inseparable from it.
Now in general he grants what are such may be lawfully used; And if we page 14.
come to particulars, he does at last yield it.

As for postures what more scrupled and opposed than Kneeling at the Sacrament?
Yet of this he says, There page 22.
is no command in it, and it is Indifferent; that in all probability our
Savior administered it Kneeling, and sitting page 12.
backward upon his Legs; that no Dissenter refuses it, page 36.
because it is not decent, but because it is a posture of Adoration; that our
Church does not intend it as an homage to the Body of Christ there really
present, but declares that to do it as to the bread, were an Idolatry to page
12, 13.
be abhorred; And in conclusion tells us, that those that hesitate in that
point, fear a posture of Adoration used by Idolatrous Papists; which is a
consideration of no moment as has been already showed.

As to Forms of Prayer, (he says) God has lest us page 30.
at liberty what words to use; and further, that for conceived Prayer, we know
no body says no other must be used page 22.
in Gods Worship; and if so, then Forms may be lawfully used in it: But suppose
any scruple the use of them, Case of Indiff. p. 18.
he says however, We know no reason but people may hear them, if any scruples
the use of them, he may yet Case Exam. p. 22.
have Communion with the Church, we hope, though he does not act in it as a
Minister.

As to time, he says, the Law of Nature directs; and for Festivals, such as
Purim amongst the Jews, he page 29.
says, It was generally commanded under the precepts of page 26.
giving thanks for public mercies.

Lastly, Are the things required unlawful because imposed? He answers, Some of
us including surely himself are not of that mind; nay he affirms that the most
page 39.
sober Dissenters will agree in these things, [that is, Natural page 7.
circumstances] to obey the command of Superiors, provided it be not such as
by circumstances is made sinful: But if imposition would make them sinful, such
a command must not have been obeyed. So that in the conclusion, I see no reason
why our Reverend Brother, and the Dissenters he defends, and that in all things
(as he says) agree to the Doctrine professed in the Articles page 1.
of the Church of England, should dissent from the Liturgy and Ceremonies of
it, as far as Lay-Communion is concerned in them. Nor why he should tell us so
much of Goals, and Sessions, and Judicatures, and of the Sufferings they
endure, when (if these things be true) page 41, 44.
it is for not doing what they lawfully can. It is no wonder when such withold
communion from the Church, and set up other Churches against it, that some call
them (as he complains) perverse and contumacious persons, ^bid.
and others call them damnable Schismatics and page 1.
are so bold as to say that such a separation from that Church, is a separation
from Christ; And it is likely he will meet with such that will speak very severe
things of his following appeal to God, Judge O thou righteous Judge between
these people, and those who thus pursue page 41, 44.
them. I am far from one (God is my witness) that is a smiter of his
fellow servants (as he calls them) nor page 41.
would have any one do what he verily believes is unlawful; but I do think it
is the duty of all to do what they lawfully can, to hear readily, and consider
impartially what may be offered for their satisfaction, and to suffer patiently
where they cannot receive it. This I think every truly conscientious person
will do, and I should question his conscience that does it not. Certainly (to
return him his own words) if our Brethren have any value for the Glory of God,
for the good and ibid.
peace of others Souls, for the preserving the Protestant Religion, for the
union of Protestants against Popish adversaries, for any thing indeed that is
good and lovely, they will rather break than any longer draw this saw of
contention, and will do as much as in them lies for the repairing of those
breaches which must be confessed are no less dangerous than scandalous to our
Religion.

The Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but righteousness and peace, and Joy
in the Holy Ghost.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 3. l. 13. r. I should. p. 30. l. antepenult, r. imply. p. 31. l. 6. r.
expressions. p. 39. Marg. add to Lightfoot. Hor. in Matthew. and Mark. p. 46. l.
17. 1. Government.

Books Printed for FINCHAM GARDENER.
1. A. A Persuasive (...) with the Church of England. 2. A Resolution of some
Cases of Conscience, which Respect Church Communion. 3. The Case of Indifferent
things used in the Worship of God, Proposed and Stated, by considering these
Questions, etc. 4. A Discourse about Edification. 5. The Resolution of this
Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of England 's Symbolizing so far as it
does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to hold Communion with the
Church of England? 6. A Letter to Anonymus, in Answer to his Three Letters to
Dr. Sherlock about Church Communion. 7. Certain Cases of Conscience resolved,
concerning the Lawfulness of joining with Forms of Prayer in Public Worship.
In two Parts. 8. The Case of Mixed Communion. Whether it be Lawful to separate
from a Church upon the Account of p^omiscuous Congregations, and Mixed
Communion? 9. An Answer to the Dissenters Objections against the Common Prayer,
and some other Parts of Divine Service Prescribed in the Liturgy of the Church
of England. 10. The Case of Kneeling at the Holy Sacrament, Stated and
Resolved, etc. in Two Parts. 11. A Discourse of Profiting by Sermons, and of
going to hear where Men think they can profit most. 12. A serious Exhortation,
with some Important Advices, Relating to the late Cases about Conformity;
Recommenced to the Present Dissenters from the Church of England. 13. An
Argument to Union; taken from the true interest of those Dissenters in England
who profess and call themselves Protestants. 14. Some Considerations about the
Case of Scandal, or giving Offense to the Weak Brethren. 15. The Case of
Infant Baptism, in Five Questions, etc. 16. The Charge of Scandal and giving
Offense by Conformity Refelled, etc. 17. The Case of Lay-Communion with the
Church of England Considered, etc.
1. A Discourse about the charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther? 2. A Discourse about Tradition, showing what is meant by it, and
what Tradition is to be Received, and what Tradition is to be Rejected. 3. The
Difference of the Case between the Separation of Protestants from the Church of
Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England. 4. The
Protestant Resolution of Faith, etc. 5. A Discourse concerning a Guide in
Matters of Faith with respect especially to the Romish pretense of the
Necessity of such an one as is Infallible.
A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Conscience; WHEREIN An Account is given of the Nature,
and Rule, and Obligation, of it. AND The Case of those who Separate from the
Communion of the Church of England as by Law Established, upon this Pretense,
that it is Against their Conscience to join in it, is stated and discussed.

LONDON, Printed for Fincham Gardener at the White-Horse in Ludgate Street.
1684.

A DISCOURSE OF CONSCIENCE: With Respect to those that Separate from the
Communion of the Church of England upon the Pretense of it, etc.
THere is nothing more in our Mouths than Conscience; and yet there are few
things we have generally taken less Pains to understand. We sit down too often
with this, that it is something within us, we do not know what, which we are to
Obey in all that it Suggests to us, and we trouble our selves no further about
it.

By which means, it frequently comes to pass; that though we have espoused very
dangerous Errors, or happen to be engaged in very Sinful Practices; yet
believing, and Acting, as we say, according to our Conscience; we do not only
think our selves perfectly Right and Safe, while we continue in this State; but
are Effectually Armed against all sorts of Arguments, and Endeavors that can
be used for the bringing us to a better Mind.

This is too Visible in many Cases; but in none more than in the Case of those
that at this Day Separate from the Communion of the Church as it is Established
among us. Though the Laws of the Land both Ecclesiastical, and Civil, do oblige
them to join in our Communion; though many Arguments are offered to convince
them, not only that they Lawfully may, but that they are bound to do it: though
they themselves are sensible, that many-fold, and grievous mischiefs, and
dangers, do ensue from this breach of Communion, and these unnatural Divisions,
both to the Christian Religion in General, and to our Reformed Religion in
particular, yet if to all these things, a Man can reply, that he is Satisfied
in his Conscience that he does well in refusing his Obedience to the Laws; or
that he is not satisfied in his Conscience that he ought to join with us upon
such Terms as are required; this single pretense shall be often thought a
sufficient Answer, both to Laws, and Arguments.

A strange thing this is; that Conscience, which among other ends, was given to
Mankind for a Preservative, and Security of the Public Peace; for the more
Effectually Obliging Men to Unity, and Obedience to Laws; yet should often be a
means of setting them at distance, and prove a Shelter for Disobedience, and
Disorder: That God should Command us to Obey our Governors in all Lawful
things for Conscience sake, and yet that we should Disobey them in Lawful
things for Conscience sake too.

It is the Design of this Discourse to examine what there is in this Plea, that
is so often made by our Dissenters for their not complying with the Laws, viz.
That it is against their Conscience so to do; and to show in what Cases this
Plea is justly made, and in what Cases not; and where it is Justly made, how
far it will Justify any Man's Separation, and how far it will not. And all this
in order to the possessing those who are concerned, with a Sense of the great
Necessity that lies upon them, of using their most serious endeavors to inform
their Conscience aright in these matters, before they prefume to think they can
Separate from us with a good Conscience, which is all we desire of them; for it
is not our business to persuade any Man to conform against his Conscience; but
to convince every Man how Dangerous it may be to follow a misinformed
Conscience.

But before I enter upon this disquisition, it will be necessary in the first
Place, to prepare my way by laying down the Grounds, and Principles, I mean to
proceed upon. And here that I may take in all things, that are needful to be
known beforehand, about this matter, I shall treat distinctly of these Five
Heads.

1 Of the Nature of Conscience. 2 Of the Rule of Conscience. And under that, 3
Of the Power of Humane Laws to Oblige the Conscience. 4 And particularly in the
instance of Church Communion. 5 Of the Authority of Conscience; or how far a
Man is Obliged to be guided by his Conscience in his Actions.
I. And first, as for the Nature of Conscience, the truest way to find out that
will be, not so much to enquire into the Signification of the word Conscience
or the several Scholastical Definitions of it; as to consider what every Man
does really mean by that word when he has occasion to make use of it; for if it
do appear that all Men do agree in their Notions, and Sense, about this matter;
That without doubt, which they all thus agree in, is the true Notion, and Sense
of Conscience.

Now as to this, we may oberve in the first Place, that a Man never speaks of
his Conscience, but with respect to his own Actions, or to something that has
the Nature of an Action which is done or omitted by him, or is to be done or
omitted, Matters of mere Knowledge, and Speculation, we do not concern our
Conscience with; as neither with those things in which we are purely Passive;
as neither with Actions, if they be not our own. We do not for instance, make
it a Point of Conscience one way or other, whether a thing be true or false; or
whether this or the other Accident that befalls us, be prosperous or
unfortunate; or whether another Man has done good or bad Actions, in which we
are no way concerned. These kind of things may indeed prove matters of great
Satisfaction or Disquiet; of Joy or Grief to us: But we do not take our
Conscience to be affected with them. That word never comes in, but with respect
to something willingly done or left undone by us; or which we may do or may
forbear.

Secondly, we may observe that in Common Speech, we do not neither use this
word Conscience about our Actions, but only, so far as those Actions fall under
a Moral consideration; that is, as they have the Nature of Duties or Sins, or
as they are Lawful or Unlawful. Always when we speak of Conscience in our
Actions, we have respect to some Law or Rule, by which those Actions are to be
directed, and governed, and by their agreeableness or disagreeableness with
which they become morally Good or Evil.

Thirdly, this being so; the only thing remaining to be enquired into for the
finding out what Conscience is, is, what can be reasonably thought to be our
Sense, and meaning, when we use the word Conscience, with such Application to
our Actions as we have now said. Now for that I desire it may be considered;
that when we talk of our Actions as we concern our Conscience in them, they can
but fall under these two Heads of Distinction, that is to say, in the first
place, we either consider our Actions as already done or omitted: or we
consider them as yet not done, but as we are deliberating about them. And then
Secondly, whether we consider them as done or not done; as past, or future; yet
we Rank them under one of these three Notions.

We either look upon them as Commanded by God, and so to be Duties; or as
forbidden by God, and so to be Sins; or as neither Commanded nor forbidden, and
so to be indifferent Actions. (With these last Actions indeed Conscience is not
properly or directly concerned, but only by accident, to wit, as those
indifferent Actions do approach to the Nature of Duties or Sins:) Our Actions,
I say, do not touch our Conscience, but as they fall under some of these Heads.

Now in all these Respects we have indeed different ways of bringing in
Conscience but yet as it will appear, we mean the same thing by it in them all.
First of all when we are considering an Action as yet not done; if we look upon
it as Commanded by God, we say we are bound in Conscience to do it; if we look
upon it as a Sinful Action, we say it is against our Conscience to do it; if we
look upon it as an indifferent thing, we say we may do it or not do it with a
Safe Conscience. Now I pray, what do we mean by these expressions? I desire
that every one would consult his own Mind, and deny if he can, that this is the
Sense of his words. If he says he is bound in Conscience to do this or the
other thing, whether he does not mean this? that he verily thinks it is his
Duty to do that Action. If he says that it is against his Conscience to do
such an Action; whether he means any more than this? that he is persuaded in
his Judgment that to do such an Action is an Offense against God. If he says
that he can do it with a Safe Conscience whether he has any other meaning than
this? that to the best of his Knowledge, and Judgment, the Action may be done
without Transgressing any Law of God. This is now undeniably, the Sense that
every Man in the World has, when he makes mention of Conscience as to Actions
that are not yet done, but only proposed to his Consideration. So that taking
Conscience as it respects our Actions to be done or omitted, and as it is to
Govern, and Conduct them (in which Sense we call Conscience a Guide or a
Monitor, and sometimes, though very improperly, a Rule of our Actions) it can
be nothing else in the Sense of all Men that use that word, but a Man's Judgment
concerning the goodness or badness; the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of Actions
in order to the Conduct of his own Life.

But Secondly if we speak of our Actions that are done and past, and consider
Conscience with Reference to them; here indeed we do a little vary the
Expression about Conscience, but the Notion of it is the same we have now
given. As for instance, when we talk of Peace of Conscience, or Trouble of
Conscience, with Reference to some Action we have done or omitted; when we say
My Conscience bears me Witness, that I have Acted rightly, and honestly in this
Affair; or my Conscience acquits me from blame, as to this or the other Action;
or I am troubled in Conscience for doing what I have done: If we turn these
Phrases into other words, we shall find that there is nothing more at the
bottom of them than this; that reflecting upon our own Actions, we find that in
this or the other instance, we have either Acted or omitted, as we are
convinced in our Judgment we ought to do; and the remembrance of this is some
Pleasure, and Satisfaction to us: or we have done or forborne something contrary
to what we take to be our Duty; and the remembrance of this affects us with
grief and trouble. But still, in both these instances of Expression, that which
we mean by Conscience is the same thing, as in the former Cases, viz. It is our
Judgment and Persuasion concerning what we ought to do, or ought not to do, or
Lawfully may do; only here we add to it this Consideration, that the Action
which we are persuaded to be good, or bad, or indifferent, is now done or
omitted by us, and we do remember it. In the Former Case, Conscience was
considered as the Guide of our Actions. In the latter Case it is considered as
the Witness of our Actions. But in both Cases, Conscience is the Judge, and
consequently in both Cases the Notion of it is the same, only with this
difference, that in the former it was a Man's mind, making a Judgment what he
ought to do or not to do; in the latter it is a Man's mind reflecting upon what
he has done or not done, and Judging whether he be Innocent or Culpable in the
matter he reflects upon.

I do not know how to give a clearer account of the Nature of Conscience in
general than this I have now given. This I believe is the Natural Notion that
all Men have of it, and there is no Expression in Scripture about it but what
does confirm this Notion. If indeed we put Epithites to Conscience, and talk of
a Good Conscience or an Evil Conscience; A Tender Conscience or a Seared
Conscience or the like. Then it includes more, both in Scripture, and in Common
Language, than I have now mentioned. But to give an account of those things I
am not now concerned, as being without the Limits of our present enquiry.

II. And now we are sufficiently prepared for our Second general Point which is
touching the Rule of Conscience; if indeed after what we have already said it
be not superfluous to insist upon that.

It appears plainly by what I have represented, that Conscience must always
have a Rule which it is to follow, and by which it is to be Governed. For since
Conscience is nothing else but a Man's Judgment concerning Actions, as good, or
bad, or Indifferent; it is certain that a Man must have some measures to
proceed by in order to the framing such a Judgment about Actions; that is to
say, there must be something distinct from the Man himself that makes Actions
to be good, or bad, or indifferent; and from which, by applying particular
Actions to it, or comparing them with it, a Man may be able to Judge whether
they be of the one sort or the other. Now this, whatever it be, is that which
we call the Rule of Conscience; and so much it is its Rule, that Conscience can
be no farther a safe guide than as it follows that Rule.

If now it be asked what this Rule of Conscience is, or what that is which
makes a difference between Actions, as to the Moral goodness or badness of
them; the Answer to it is Obvious to every Body: That it can be nothing else
but the Law of God. For nothing can be a Duty but what Gods Law has made so;
and nothing can be a Sin but what Gods Law has forbidden (the very Notion of
Sin being, that it is a Transgression of the Law;) and lastly we call a thing
Lawful or Indifferent upon this very account, that there is no Law of God
either Commanding or Forbidding it; and where there is no Law, there is no
Transgression. So that undeniably the great, nay I say, the only Rule by which
Conscience is to be Governed is the Law of God, considered either as it
Commands* Actions, or Forbids them, or as it neither Commands them nor Forbids
them.

But in order to the giving a more distinct account, of this Rule of
Conscience, there is this needful to be enquired into, viz. In what Sense we
take, or what we mean by the Law of God; when we say it is the Rule of
Conscience.

Now to this our Answer is, That by the Law of God, we here understand Gods
Will, for the Government of Men's Actions, in what way soever that Will is
declared to them.

Now the will of God is declared to Men two ways; either by Nature, or by
Revelation; so that the just, and, adequate Rule of Conscience is made up of
two parts the Law of Nature, and Gods Revealed Law.

By the Law of Nature, we mean those Principles of Good and Evil, Just and
Unjust, which God has Stamped upon the Minds of all Men, in the very
Constitution of their Natures. There are some things Eternally good in
themselves; Such as to Worship God, to Honor our Parents, to stand to our
Covenants, to Live Peaceably in the Government, from which we receive
Protection; and the contrary to these will be Eternally Evil; the Heads of all
which things thus good in themselves, are writ so plainly, and Legibly, in the
Minds of Mankind, that there is no Man who is come to the use of his Reason,
but must of necessity be convinced, that to Practice these things will always be
his Duty, and not to Practice them, will always be Evil, and a Sin. Now all
these Heads, and Principles put together, is that we call the Law of Nature,
and this is all the Rule of Conscience, that Mankind had, before God was
pleased to discover his Will by more particular Revelation. And this is that
Law, which the Apostle speaks of when he says that the Gentiles, who had not
the Law of Moses yet had a Law written in their Hearts; by their Acting
according to which, or contrary to which their Conscience did bear Witness to
them, and did either Accuse them, or Excuse them.

But then Secondly, to us Christians, God to this Law of Nature has superadded
a Revealed Law, which is contained in the Books of Holy Scriptures. Which
Revealed Law yet, is not wholly of a different kind from the former, nor does
it at all void the Obligation of it. But only thus; God has in his Revealed
Law, declared the Precepts of the Law of Nature, more certainly, and accurately
than before; He has given greater Force, and Strength to them, than they had
before, by the Sanctions of greater Rewards, and Punishments: He has likewise
herein perfected the Law of Nature, and has Obliged us, in point of Duty, to
more and higher Instances of Virtue, than Nature did strictly Oblige us to: And
Lastly, He has added some Positive Laws for us to observe which were not at
all contained in the Law of Nature, as for instance, to believe in Jesus
Christ, in order to Salvation, to make all our Applications to God, in the Name
of that Mediator Christ Jesus; to enter into a Christian Society, by Baptism,
and to Exercise Communion with that Society, by partaking of the Lords Supper.

And this is that Law, which we Christians are Obliged to, as well as to the
Law of our Natures, and which as it is a Summary of all the Laws of Nature, so
indeed is it a Summary of all our Duty. So that if any Man will call it the
great, or only Rule of Christian Conscience, I shall not much oppose him,
provided that this be always Remembered, that,

In the Third Place, when we say that the Natural and Revealed Law of God, is
the just Rule, by which we are to Govern our Conscience, or when we say that
the Law of God, as Revealed, and contained in the Bible, is to us Christians,
the just Rule. We are so to understand this Proposition as to take into it, not
only all that is directly, and expressly Commanded, or Forbidden by either of
those Laws: But also all that by plain Collection of Right Reason in Applying
Generals to Particulars, or comparing one thing with another does appear to be
Commanded or Forbidden by them.

So that by the Law of Nature, as it is a Rule of Conscience, we are not only
to understand the prime Heads, and most general Dictates of it, (which are but
a few) but also all the necessary Deductions from those Heads. And by the Law
of Scripture, as it is the Rule of Conscience, we are not only to understand
the express Commands, and Prohibitions, we meet with there, in the letter of
the Text; but all the things likewise, that by unavoidable Consequence do
follow from those Commands, or Prohibitions. In a word, when we are
deliberating with our selves, concerning the goodness, or badness; the
Lawfulness, or Unlawfulness of this, or the other particular Action: We are not
only to look upon the letter of the Law, but to attend further to what that Law
may be supposed by a Rational Man to contain in it. And if we be convinced,
that the Action we are deliberating about, is Commanded, or Forbidden, by
direct Inference, or by Parity of Reason; we ought to look upon it as a Duty,
or a Sin, though it be not expressly Commanded, or Forbidden, by the Law, in the
letter of it. And if neither by the letter of the Law; nor by Consequence from
it; nor by Parity of Reason; the Action before us, appear either to be
Commanded, or Forbidden: In that Case, we are to look upon it, as an
indifferent Action; which we may do, or let alone, with a safe Conscience; or,
to express the thing more properly, we are to look upon it as an Action in
which our Conscience is not so much concerned as our Prudence.

III. Having thus given an account of the Rule of Conscience, that which
Naturally follows next to be considered, with Reference to our present design,
is, what share Humane Laws have in this Rule of Conscience? whether they be a
part of this Rule, and do really bind a Man's Conscience to the Observance of
them or no? which is our Third general Head.

Now as to this, our Answer is, that though the Laws of God be the great, and
indeed the only Rule of Conscience, yet the Laws of Men, generally speaking, do
also bind the Conscience, and are a part of its Rule in a Secondary Sense, that
is, by Virtue of, and in Subordination to the Laws of God.

I shall briefly explain the meaning of this, in the Four following
Propositions.

First, there is nothing more certain than that the Law of God, as it is
declared both by Nature, and Scripture does Command us, to Obey the Laws of Men.

There is no one Dictate of Nature, more Obvious to us, than this, that we are
to Obey the Government we Live under, in all honest, and Just things. For this
is indeed the Principal Law, and Foundation of all Society. And it would be
impossible, either for Kingdoms, or States; for Citys, or Families to subsist;
or at least to maintain themselves in any Tolerable degree of Peace, and
Happiness, if this be not acknowledged a Duty.

And then, as for the Laws of God in Scripture, there is nothing more plainly
declared there, than, that it is Gods Will, and our Duty to Obey them that have
the Rule over us; and to Submit our selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the
Lords sake, and to be Subject not only for Wrath but for Conscience sake. So
that no Man can doubt that he is really bound in Duty to Obey the Laws of Men
that are made by Just, and Sufficient Authority. And Consequently no Man can
doubt that Humane Laws do really bind the Conscience, and are one part of the
Rule by which it is to be directed, and Governed.

But then having said this, we add this farther in the Second Place, that
Humane Laws do not bind the Conscience, by any Virtue in themselves; but merely
by Virtue of Gods Law, who has Commanded that we should in all things be
Subject to our Lawful Governors, not only for Wrath, but for Conscience sake.
Conscience is not properly concerned with any Being in the World, save God
alone, it has no Superior but him: For the very Notion of it, as I have often
said, is no other than our Judgment, of what things we are bound to do by Gods
Law; and what things we are Forbidden to do by Gods Law.

So that all the Men in the World, cannot bind any Man's Conscience, by Virtue
of any Power, or Authority, that is in them: But now God having made it an
everlasting Law, both by Nature, and Scripture, that we should Obey those who
are set over us, whether they be our Parents, or our Masters; and much more our
Princes, and the Sovereign Legislative Power, under whom we Live; by Virtue of
this Command of God, and this only; we are for ever bound in Conscience, to
Govern our Actions, by the Commands, that they impose upon us; and those
Commands of theirs are a Rule, (though a Consequential, or a Secondary Rule,)
by which we are to Govern our Conscience, because they are the Instances of our
Obedience to the Laws of God.

But then in the Third Place, this is also to be remembered; that Humane Laws
do no farther bind the Conscience, and are a Rule of it, than as they are
agreeable to the Laws of God. If any Law, or Command of Man, do Clash with any
Law of God; that is, if it be either Evil in it self, or Contradictory to the
Duty of Christians, as laid down in the Scriptures; in that Case, that Law or
Command, by what Humane Authority soever it was made or given, does not bind
our Conscience, nor is any Rule of our Actions. On the contrary we are not at
any Rate to yield Obedience to it; but we are here reduced to the Apostles
Case, and must Act as they did; that is, we must Obey God, rather than Men, and
we Sin, if we do not. For since God only has proper, and direct Authority over
our Conscience, and Humane Power, only, by Delegation from him: And since God
has not given any Commission to the most Sovereign Princes upon Earth, to
alter his Laws, or to impose any thing upon his Subjects, that is inconsistent
with them. It follows by necessary Consequence, that no Man can be Obliged to
Obey any Laws of Men, farther than they are agreeable to, and consistent with
the Laws of God.

There is yet a Fourth thing, necessary to be taken in for the clearing the
Point we are upon, and that is this, That though Humane Laws, generally
speaking, may be said to bind the Conscience, and to be a part of its Rule: Yet
we do not Assert that every Humane Law, (though it does not interfere with any
of Gods Laws) does at all times, and in all Cases, Oblige Every Man's Conscience
to Active Obedience to it; so as that he Sins against God, if he Transgress it.
No, it would be a very hard thing to affirm this; and I do not know what
Manamong us, upon these Terms, would be Innocent.

Thus much I believe we may safely lay down as a Truth; That where either the
Matter of the Law is of such a Nature; that the Public, or some private Person
shall Suffer Damage, or Inconvenience, by our not Observing it. Or Secondly,
Though the Law, as to the matter of it be never so Trifling, nay, though
perhaps all things considered, it be an inconvenient Law; yet if the Manner of
our not Obeying it, be such, as gives Offense to our Superiors, or to any
others; that is, either Argues a Contempt of Authority, or sets an ill Example
before our fellow Subjects: I say in either of these Cases, the Transgression
of a Humane Law, renders a Man guilty of a Fault, as well as Obnoxious to the
Penalty of that Law. But out of these two Cases, I must consess, I do not see,
how a purely Humane Law does Oblige the Conscience; or how the Transgression of
it, does make a Man guilty of Sin, before God. For it is certain if we secure
these two Points; that is to say, the good of the Public, and of private
Persons; and with all the sacredness, and respect; which is due to Authority,
(which is likewise in Order to the Public good:) We Answer all the Ends, for
which the Power of making Laws, or laying Commands upon Inferiors, was
Committed by God to Mankind.

So that though it be true, that Humane Laws do Oblige the Conscience, yet it
is also true that a great many Cases may, and do happen, in which a Man may Act
contrary to a purely Humane Law, and yet not be a Sinner before God. Always
supposing (as I said;) there be no Contempt, or Refractoryness expressed
toward the Governors: Nor, no Scandal, or ill Example given to others, by the
Action. For if there be either of these in the Case; I dare not acquit the Man,
from being a Transgressour of Gods Law, in the instance, wherein he
Transgresses the Laws of Men.

For this is that which we insist upon; that the Authority of our Governors
ought to be held, and esteemed very sacred, both because the Laws of God, and
the Public good require it should be so. And herefore, wherever they do
peremptorily lay their Commands upon us, we are bound in Conscience so far to
comply, as not to contest the matter with them; nor to seem to do it. And
though their Commands, as to the matter of them, be never so slight; nay,
though they should prove really inconvenient, either to our selves, or the
Public. Yet if they stand upon them, if they persist in requiring our
Obedience to them; we must yield, we must Obey; always supposing they be not
against Gods Laws. For we are at no hand either to affront their Authority our
selves; or to encourage others, by our Example, to do it. For to do either of
these things is a greater Evil to the Publtck, than our Obedience to an
inconvenient Law can easily be.

IV. And now it is time for us to apply what has been said in General,
concerning the Rule of Conscience, and the Obligation of Humane Laws; to the
particular Matter here before us; that is, the business of Church Communion;
The Obligation of Conscience to which, in such manner as the Laws have
appointed, is the Fourth general Head we are to consider.

This point of the Obligation to Communion with the Church, as by Law
Established, has been largely handled by several Learned Men of our Church,
and particularly it is the Argument of one of those Discourses which have
lately been writ for the sake of our Dissenters. Thither therefore I refer the
Reader for full Satisfaction about this Matter being only just to touch upon it
here, as one of the Principles we take for granted, and shall proceed upon in
the following Discourse.

And here the Proposition we lay down is this, That it is every Man's Duty, and
consequently every Man is bound in Conscience to join in Communion with that
Church, which is Established by Law in the place where he lives; so long as
that Church is a true, sound part of the Catholic Church, and there is nothing
imposed or required as a Condition of Communicating with it, that is Repugnant
to the Laws of God, or the Appointments of Jesus Christ.

This Proposition is Evident, not only because it Necessarily follows from the
foregoing Principle; which was, that every Man is bound in Conscience to Obey
the Laws of Men that are not contrary to the Laws of God; and therefore
consequently a Man is bound to Obey in Ecclesiastical matters, as well as
Civil; (unless it can be showed that Christ has forbid all Humane Authority,
whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, to make any Laws or Orders about Religion;
which I believe never was or can be showed:)

But it is Evident upon another Account, which I desire may be considered. We
are all really bound by the Laws of Jesus Christ, and the Nature of his
Religion to preserve as much as in uslyes the Unity of the Church: Which Unity
does consist not only in professing the same Faith, but joining together with
our Brethren under Common Governors in the same Religious Communion of
Worship, and Sacraments. And therefore whoever breaks this Unity of the Church,
by withdrawing his Obedience from those Church Governors, which God has set
over him in the place where he Lives; and Separating from the Established
Religious Assemblies of Christians under those Governors; does really
transgress the Laws of Jesus Christ, and is Guilty of that Sin of Schism, which
is so very much cautioned against, and so highly Condemned in the Scriptures of
the New Testament: Unless in the mean time it does appear to the Man, who thus
withdraws, and Separates, that there is something required of him in those
Assemblies, and by those Governors, and that as a Term, and Condition of
holding Communion with them, which he cannot Submit to without Sin.

And this Point I do heartily wish was well considered by our dissenting
Brethren. They do seem often to look upon this business of coming to Church,
and joining with us in Prayers and Sacraments, no otherwise to bind their
Conscience than other purely Humane Laws. They think they owe no Obedience to
the Laws in these matters, different from that which they yield to any common
Act of Parliament. And therefore no wonder they often make so slight a business
of them.

But this is a great mistake, there is much more in these things than this
comes to. The withdrawing our Communion from the Church carrys a far greater
guilt in it* than the Violating any Law, that is purely Humane. For though we
do readily grant that all the Circumstances of Public Worship enjoined in the
Church, as for Instance, the Times, the Gestures, the Forms of Prayer, the
Methods of Reading the Scripture, and Administering the Sacraments; as also the
Habits of the Ministers that are to Officiate; be all of Humane Institution,
and may be altered, and varyed at the discretion of our Governors: Yet the
Public Worship it self under Public Lawful Governors is of Divine
Appointment, and no Man can Renounce it without Sinning against Jesus Christ,
as well as Offending against the Ecclesiastical Laws.

A Humane Law grounded upon a Divine, or to speak more properly, a Divine Law
modified or Clothed with several Circumstances of Man's Appointment, does Create
another kind of Obligation upon every Subject, than a Law that is purely
Humane; that is to say a Law, the matter of which is neither Good nor Evil in
it self, but perfectly indifferent. In the former Case, we must yield Obedience
to the Law, as to the Law of God; however it comes Clothed with Circumstances
of Man's Appointment. In the other Case we only yield Obedience, as to the
Command of Man; and for no other reason, than that God in general has Obliged
us to Obey our Superiors.

To make this a little plainer, let us for Instance take the business of Paying
Tribute, and Custom in this Nation, in which Case there is a Complication of a
Divine Law, with a Humane, as it is in the Case we are now upon. That every
Subject should Pay Tribute to whom Tribute is due; Custom to whom Custom is
due; is a Law of God; as being a branch both of Natural and Christian Justice:
But out of what goods we should Pay Tribute or Custom, or what Proportion of
those Goods should be Paid, this is not defined either by the Law of Nature or
the Law of the Gospel, but is left to the Determination of the Municipal Laws
of every Kingdom. But now, because Humane Authority does interpose in this
Affair, and settles what every Man is to Pay to the King, and out of what
Commodities; does it therefore follow, that if a Man can by Fraud or
Concealment detain the Kings Right from him, that he incurs no other guilt for
this, but only the Transgressing of an Act of Parliament, and the being
Obnoxious to the Penalties, in Case he be detected? No certainly; for all that
the Customs in that manner, and form be settled upon the King by Humane Law
only; yet the matter of that Law being a point of Natural Justice between Man
and Man; the Man that is thus Guilty, ought to look upon himself as an Offender
against the Divine Law; as an unjust Person before God. And his willingness to
Submit to the Forfeiture of his Goods, will not render him less unjust, or more
excuseable.

The Case is much the same as to the matter we have now before us. It is not a
mere Humane Law, or Act of Parliament that Obliges us to keep the Unity of the
Church; to bring our Ch^ldren to be made Christians by Baptism; to meet
together at Solemn times for the Profession of our Faith, for the Worshipping
God, for the Commemorating the Death of our Savior in the Sacrament of his
Supper. All this is tied upon us by the Laws of Christ. These things are as
much required of us by God, as Christians; as it is required that we should Pay
the King, and every Man, what is due to them, if we would not be dishonest and
unjust. It is true that the particular Forms, and Modes, and Circumstances of
doing these things, are not Commanded, nor Prescribed, by the Laws of Christ,
in this Instance of Church Communion, no more than they are prescribed by the
Laws of God in the other Instance I gave: But they are left entirely to the
Prudence, and Discretion of the Governors that God has set over us in
Ecclesiastical matters; just as they are in the other. But in the mean time
these things thus Clothed by Humane Authority, as to their Circumstances: Yet
being for the Matter of them bound upon us by Christ himself, we can no more
deny our Obedience to the Public Laws about them, than we can in the other
Instance I have named. And that Man may as well for Instance, purge himself
from the Imputation of Knavery before God, that will contrive a way of his own,
for the Paying his just Debts contrary to what the Law of the Land has
declared to be Just and Honest: As any Man can acquit himself from the Sin of
Schism before God, that will choose a way of his own for the Public Worship,
different from, and in Opposition to what the Laws of the Church have
prescribed; always supposing, that the Worship Established be Commanded by just
Authority, and there be nothing required in it as a Condition of Communion that
is against the Laws of Jesus Christ.

The Sum of all this is, that it is every Man's Duty by the Laws of Christ, as
well as the Laws of Man, to Worship God in the way of the Church; so long as
there is nothing required in that Worship, that can justly offend the
Conscience of a Wise and Good Christian. And therefore there is more in
departing from the Communion of the Church, when we can Lawfully hold it, than
merely the Violation of a Statute, or a Humane Law, for we cannot do it without
breaking the Law of God. Nay so much is it against the Law of God to do this,
that I think no Authority upon Earth can warrant it. So that even if there was
a Law made, which should Ordain that wilful, causless Separation from the
Established Church should be allowed and tolerated, and no Man should be called
to an Account for it: Yet nevertheless such a Separation would still be a
Schism, would still be a Sin against God; for no Humane Law can make that
Lawful which Gods Law has forbid.

There now only remains our last general Head about Conscience to be spoken to,
and then we have done with our Preliminary Points: And that is concerning the
Authority of Conscience, or how far a Man is Obliged to follow or be guided by
his Conscience in his Actions.

When we speak of the Obligation of Conscience, or of being bound in Conscience
to do or not to do an Action, it sufficiently appears from what has been said,
that we can mean no more by these Phrases than this, that we are convinced in
our Judgment that it is our Duty to do this or the other Action, because we
believe that God has Commanded it. Or we are persuaded in our Judgment that we
ought to forbear this or the other Action, because we believe that God has
forbidden it.

This now being that which we mean by the Obligation of Conscience, here we
come to inquire how far this Persuasion or Judgment of ours, concerning what is
our Duty, and what is Sinful, has Authority over us, how far it does Oblige us
to Act or not Act, according to it.

Now in Order to the resolving of this we must take Notice, that our Judgment
concern^ng what God has Commanded, or Forbidden, or left Indifferent, is
either true or false. We either make a right Judgment of our Duty, or we make a
wrong one. In the former Case we call our Judgment a Right Conscience; in the
latter we call it an Erroneous Conscience. As for those Cases where we doubt
and hesitate, and know not well how to make any Judgment at all (which is that
we call a Doubting Conscience, but indeed is properly no Conscience, unless by
Accident,) we have nothing here to do with them, but shall reserve them to
another place. Here we suppose, that we do make a Judgment of the thing; that
is, we are persuaded in our Minds, concerning the goodness, or badness of this,
or the other Action: And that which we are to inquire into, is, how far that
Judgment binds us to Act according to it.

Now if our Conscience be a Right Conscience; that is, if we have truly
informed our Judgment according to the Rule of Gods Law: It is beyond all
Question, and acknowledged by all the World, that we are in that Case
perpetually bound to Act according to our Judgment. It is for ever our Duty so
to do; and there can no blame, no guilt fall upon us, for so doing, let the
Consequence of our Acting, or not Acting, be what it will. So that as to a
Right Conscience, or a well informed Judgment, there is no dispute among any
sort of Men.

But the great thing to be inquired into, is, what Obligation a Man is under to
Act according to his Judgment, supposing it be false, supposing he has not
rightly informed his Conscience, but has taken up false measures of what God
has Commanded, or Forbidden.

Now for the Resolution of this, I lay down these Three Propositions, which I
think will take in all that is needful, for the giving Satisfaction to every
one, concerning this point.

First, Where a Man is mistaken in his Judgment, even in that Case it is always
a Sin to Act against it. Be our Conscience never so ill instructed, as to what
is Good, or Evil, though we should take that for a Duty, which is really a Sin;
and on the contrary, that for a Sin which is really a Duty: Yet so long as we
are thus persuaded, it will be highly Criminal in us, to Act in contradiction
to this persuasion; and the reason of this is evident, because, by so doing, we
wilfully Act against the best light, which at present we have, for the
direction of our Actions; and consequently our Will is as faulty, and as
wicked, in consenting to such Actions, as if we had had truer Notions of things.

We are to remember, that the Rule of our Duty, whatever it be in it self,
cannot touch or affect our Actions, but by the Mediation of our Conscience;
that is, no farther than as it is apprehended by us, or as we do understand and
remember it. So that when all is done, the immediate Guide of our Actions, can
be nothing but our Conscience; our Judgment and Persuasion, concerning the
Goodness, or Badness, or Indifferency, of things.

It is true in all those Instances where we are mistaken, our Conscience proves
but a very bad and unsafe Guide; because it has it self lost its way, in not
following its Rule as it should have done: But however our Guide still it is,
and we have no other guide of our Actions but that. And if we may lawfully
refuse to be guided by it in one Instance, we may with as much reason reject
its Guidance in all.

What is the Notion that any of us has of a Wilful Sin, or a Sin against
Knowledge, but this? That we have done otherwise than we were convinced to be
our Duty, at the same time that we did so. And what other measures have we of
any Man's Sincerity or Hypocrisy? But only this; that he Acts according to the
best of his Judgment, or that he does not Act according to what he pretends to
Believe.

We do not indeed say, that every one is a good Man, that Acts according to his
Judgment; or that he is to be commended for all Actions that are done in
pursuance of his Persuasion: No, we measure Virtue and Vice by the Rule,
according to which, a Man ought to Act; as well as by the Man's intention in
Acting. But however we all agree that that Man is a Knave, that in any instance
Acts contrary to that which he took to be his duty. And in passing this
Sentence we have no regard to this; whether the Man was Right or mistaken in
his Judgment, for be his Judgment Right or Wrong, True or False; it is all one
as to his Honesty, in Acting or not Acting according to it.

He that has a false persuasion of things; so long as that persuasion
continues, is often as well satisfied that he is in the Right, as if his
Persuasion was true. That is, he is oftentimes as Confident when he is in an
Error, as when he is in the Right. And therefore we cannot but conclude, that
he, who being under a mistake, will be tempted to Act contrary to his Judgment;
would certainly upon the same Temptation Act contrary to it, was his Judgment
never so well informed And therefore his Will being as bad in the one Case, as
in the other, he is equally a Sinner as to the Wilfulness of the Crime, tho
indeed in other respects there will be a great difference in the Cases.

This I believe is the Sense of all Men in this matter. If a Man for instance,
should of a Jew become a Christian; while yet in his Heart he believes that
the Messiah is not yet come, and that our Lord Jesus was an Impostor. Or if a
Papist should to serve some private ends, Renounce the Communion of the Roman
Church, and join with ours; while yet he is persuaded that the Roman Church is
the only Catholic Church; and that our Reformed Churches are Heretical or
Schismatical: Though now there is none of us will deny that the Men in both
these Cases have made a good change; as having changed a false Religion for a
true one: yet for all that, I dare say, we should all agree, they were both of
them great Villains and Hypocrites, for making that change; because they made
it not upon Honest Principles, and in pursuance of their Judgment, but in
direct Contradiction to both. Nay I dare say we should all of us think better
of an ignorant well meaning Protestant, that being seduced by the persuasions
and Artifices of a cunning Popish Factor, did really out of Conscience, abandon
our Communion, and go over to the Romanists; as thinking theirs to be the
safest: I say we should all of us entertain a more favorable Opinion of such a
Man in such a Case; Though really here the change is made from a true Keligion
to a false one; than we should of either of the other Men I have before named.
All this put together is abundantly sufficient to show that no Man can in any
Case Act against his Judgment or Persuasion, but he is Guilty of Sin in so
doing,

But then, our Second Proposition is this, The mistake of a Man's Judgment may
be of such a Nature, that as it will be a Sin to Act against his Judgment, so
it will likewise be a Sin to Act according to it.

For what Authority soever a Man's Conscience has over him, it can never bear
him out, if he do an Evil thing in compliance with it. My Judgment is (as we
have said) the guide of my Actions; but it may through my negligence be so far
misguided it self; as that if I follow it, it will lead me into the most horrid
Crimes in the World. And will it be a sufficient Excuse or Justification of my
Action in such a Case to say; that indeed herein I did but Act according to my
Persuasion? No verily; I may as certainly be damned without Repentance, for
Acting according to my Judgment, in some Cases, where it is mistaken, as I
shall be, for Acting contrary to it in other Cases where it is rightly informed.

And the Reason of this is very plain. It is not my Judgment or Persuasion that
makes Good or Evil, Right or Wrong, Justice or Injustice, Virtue or Vice. But
it is the Nature of things themselves; and the Law of God, (and of Men under
that) Commanding or Forbidding things, that makes them so. If the Moral
Goodness, or badness of Actions was to be measured by Men's Opinions, and
Persuasions; then Good and Evil, Duty and Sin, would be the most various,
uncertain things in the World. They would change their Natures as often as Men
change their Opinions; and that which to Day is a Virtue, to Morrow would be a
Crime; and that which in one Man, would be a Heroically good Action, would in
another Man be a Prodigious Piece of Villainy; though yet there was no
difference in the Action it self, or in the Circumstances of the Man that did
it, save only the difference of Opinion.

But such consequences as these are intolerable, nor indeed do Men either talk
or think after this manner. Every Man when he speaks of Good or Evil, Lawful or
Unlawful, means some certain fixed thing which it is not in his Power to alter
the Nature and Property of. That Action is good, and a Duty, which is either so
in it self, or made so by some positive Law of God. And that Action is Evil,
and a Sin, that is Forbid by God in either of these Ways. So that unless it was
in our Power to change the Nature of things; or to alter the Laws of God: It
will unavoidably follow; that we shall be for ever Obliged to do some Actions,
and to forbear others, whatever our Judgment concerning them, is: And
consequently we may be Guilty of Sin, if in these instances we Act contrary to
this Obligation; though at the same time it should happen that we are firmly
persuaded that we ought so to do.

And thus is our Proposition fully proved; but then for the further clearing of
it, I desire it may be taken notice of: that we do not thus lay it down, that
every mistake of Judgment about Good or Evil, does involve a Man in Sin, if he
Act according to that mistake: But only thus, the mistake of a Man's Judgment
may be of such a Nature, that as it will be a a Sin in him to Act against it,
so it will likewise be Sin to Act according to it. It is not every Error in
Morals that brings a Man under the necessity of Sinning, if he pursues it in
his Actions. A Man's Conscience may mistake its Rule in a Hundred instances, and
yet he may safely enough Act according to it. And the Reason is because a Man
may entertain a great many mistakes, and false Notions of his Duty, and Act
according to them too; and yet in such Actions he shall not Transgress any Law
of God.

Now this that I say, holds chiefly in these two inslances. For example in the
first place, if a Man believe a thing to be Commanded by God which yet indeed
is not; but neither is it Forbidden: As if a Man should think himself Obliged
to retire himself from his business, Seven times or Three times a Day, for the
purpose of Devotion; or to give half of his Yearly Income to Pious, and
Charitable uses, if he can do it without Prejudice to his family. Now in this
Case he is certainly mistaken in his Duty; for the Law of God has not bound
him up to such measures in either of these instances: But yet because God has
not on the other hand laid any Commands upon him to the contrary; it is certain
he may in both these instances Act according to this mistake, without any Guilt
in the World; Nay, so long as that mistake continues, he is bound to Act
accordingly.

Again in the second place, if a Man believe a thing to be Forbidden by Gods
Law, which yet is not; but neither is it Commanded: As for instance, if a Man
think that he ought by Virtue of a Divine Command to abstain from all Meats
that are strangled or have Blood in them; or if he believe it unlawful to Play
at Cards or Dice; or that it is Forbidden by Gods word to let out Money at
Interest: Why in all these Cases he may follow his Opinion, though it be a
false one, without Sin; Nay, he is bound to follow it, because it is the
dictate of his Conscience, however his Conscience be mistaken. And the reason
is plain, because though he be mistaken in his Judgment about these matters,
yet since God has not by any Law, Forbid these things; there is no
Transgression follows upon Acting according to such a mistake.

But then in other Cases where a Man's mistake happens to be of such a Nature,
as that he cannot Act according to his Conscience, but he Transgresses some
Law of God; by which Conscience ought to be Governed: As for instance, when a
Man looks upon that as a Lawful Action, or as a Duty, which God has Forbidden;
or looks upon that as a Sin, or at least an indifferent Action, which God has
Commanded; here it is that the mistake becomes dangerous. And in such Cases the
Man is brought into that sad Dilemma we have been representing, viz. That if he
Act according to his persuasion he Transgresses Gods Law, and so is a Sinner
upon that Account: If he Acts against his persuasion, then he is self
condemned, and very guilty before God upon that Account.

Well, but is there no avoiding of this? Must it be laid down as a constant
Universal Truth; that in all Cases where a Man's Judgment happens to be contrary
to the Rule of his Duty, Commanding, or Forbidding an Action; he must of
necessity Sin; whether he Act, or not Act, according to that Judgment? If
indeed he Act against his Conscience, it is readily granted he Sins; But it
seems very hard, that he should be under a necessity of Sinning when he Acts
according to it; especially when he is perfectly ignorant of, or mistaken in
the Law against which he Offends.

This is indeed the great difficulty that occurs in this matter; and for the
untying it, I lay down this third general Proposition, viz. That the great
thing to be attended to in this Case of a Man's following a mistaken Judgment,
is the Culpableness or Inculpableness; the Faultiness or Innocence of the
mistake, upon which he Acts; for according as this is; so will his Guilt in
Acting according to it be either greater, or less, or none at all.

We do not say that a Man is always Guilty of a Sin before God, when upon a
misinformation of Judgment he Omits that which Gods Law has Commanded; or does
that which Gods Law has Forbidden. No though these Omissions or Actions may be
said to be Sins in themselves; that is, as to the Matter of them; as being
Transgressions of Gods Law: Yet before we affirm that they will be imputed to a
Man as such; that is prove formally Sins to him; we first consider the Nature
of the Action, and the Circumstances of the Man. If we find upon Examination
that the instance wherein Gods Law is Transgressed, is such an instance as even
an Honest minded Man may well be supposed to mistake in: And if we find
likewise that the Man had not sufficient means for the informing himself aright
as to this matter; and that he has done all that he could do in his
Circumstances to understand his Duty: If in such a Case as this he be mistaken
in his Duty; and Act upon that mistake; yet we do not say that the Man is
properly Guilty of any Sin in that Action, however that Action is indeed
contrary to the Law of God. On the contrary we believe him to be Innocent as to
this matter; nor will God ever call him to an Account for what he has done or
omitted in these Circumstances.

And the Reasons and Grounds upon which we affirm this are plain, and Evident
at the first hearing. No Man can be Obliged to do more then what is in his
Power to do. And what ever a Man is not Obliged to do, it is no Sin in him if
he do it not. So that if a Man do all that one in his Circumstances can, or
should do; for the right understanding of his Duty: If he happens to be
mistaken, that mistake cannot be imputed to him as a Sin; because he was not
Obliged to understand better. And if his mistake be no Sin, it is certain to
Act according to that mistake can be no Sin neither.

So that the whole point of Sinning, or not Sinning, in following an Erroneous
Conscience, lies here. Whether the Man that is thus mispersuaded, is to be
blamed, or not blamed, for his Mispersuasion. If the Error he has taken up do
not proceed from his own Fault and Negligence; but was the pure unavoidable
Effects of the Circumstances, in which he is placed; (which Circumstances we
suppose he contributed nothing to, but he was put into them by the disposition
of Divine Providence:) Then of what Nature soever the Error be; he does not
contract any guilt by any Action which he does in pursuance of that Error. But
if it was in his power to Rectify that Error; if he had Means and
Opportunities to inform his Conscience better; and the nature of the Action was
such, that it was his Duty so to do: So that he must be accounted guilty of a
Gross and Criminal Neglect in not doing it: In this Case the Man is a
Transgressor, and accountable unto God, as such, for all the Actions that he
does, or omits, contrary to Gods Law; while he Acts under that mistake, or in
pursuance of it. And accordingly as this Neglect or Carelessness is greater or
less; so is the Sinfulness of the Action which he does in pursuance of it,
greater or less likewise.

And this is a plain account of this matter. So that we see there is no Fatal
unavoidable necessity laid upon any Man to commit a Sin by Acting according to
his Conscience. But if at any time he be brought under those sad Circumstances,
he brings that necessity upon himself. God never put any Man into such a
Condition, but that he might do that Duty which was required of him; and be
able to give a good account of his Actions. But here is the thing; Men by their
Vice and Wickedness; by neglecting the Means of Instruction, that are afforded
them; and not using their Reason and Understanding as they should do; may
suffer themselves to be brought under the Bondage of such False and Evil
Principles; that they shall so long as they hold those Principles, fall into
Sin, whether they Act according to their Conscience, or Act against it.

I have done with the general Points concerning Conscience, which I thought
needful to be premised, as the Grounds and Principles of our following
Discourse. I now come to that which I at first proposed; and for the sake of
which all this is intended; that is, to speak to the Case of those that
Separate from the Communion of the Church of England, upon this pretense; That
it is against their Conscience to join with us in it.

Now all that I conceive needful to be done, in order to a full discussion of
this Case, and giving satisfaction about it, are these Two things,

First, To Separate the pretenses of Conscience that are truly and justly made,
in this matter, from the false ones: Or to show who those are that can rightly
plead Conscience for their Nonconformity; and who those are that cannot.

Secondly, To inquire how far this Plea of Conscience, when it is truly made,
will Justify any Dissenter that continnes in Separation from the Church, as
Established among us; and what is to be done by such a Person, in order to his
Acting with a safe and good Conscience in this affair.

Our first inquiry is what is required in order to any Man's truly pleading
Conscience for his refusing to join in Communion with the Established Church.
Or who those Persons are that can with justice make that Plea for themselves.

I think it very convenient to begin my Disquisition here, because by removing
all the false Pretenses to Conscience; the Controversy will be brought into a
much less compass; and the difficulties that arise will be more easily untyed.
The truth is, if the thing be examined, I believe it will be found, that the
pretense to Conscience in the matter we are talking of, is, as in many other
Cases, extended much farther than it ought to be. My meaning is, that of all
those who think fit to withdraw from our Communion, and to live in Disobedience
to the known Laws of the Church, and pretend Conscience for so doing; in a
great many of them it is not Conscience, but some other thing mistaken for
Conscience, which is the Principle they Act upon. So that if the true Plea of
Conscience be separated from those counterfeit ones, which usually usurp that
Name; we shall not find either the Persons to be so many that refuse Communion
with us, upon the Account of Conscience truly so called; nor the Cases to be so
many in which they do refuse it upon that Account.

Now in Order to the making such a Separation or Distinction between Conscience
truly so called, and the several Pretenses to it, in this business of not
conforming to the Established Worship, I lay down this general Proposition;
That, if the Principles I have laid down about Conscience be admitted; then it
is certainly true, that no Man among us can justly plead Conscience for his
Separation from the Church of England; or can say that it is against his
Conscience to join in Communion with it; but only such a one, as is persuaded
in his own mind, that he cannot Communicate with us without Sinning against God
in so doing.

For since, as we have said, Conscience is nothing else but a Man's Judgment
concerning Actions, whether they be Duties, or Sins, or Indifferent: And since
the Law of God Commanding or Forbidding Actions; or neither Commanding them,
nor Forbidding them; is the only Rule by which a Man can Judge what Actions are
Duties, and what are Sins, and what are Indifferent: It plainly follows; that
as a Man cannot be bound in Conscience to do any Action which it does not
appear to him that Gods Law has some way or other Commanded, and made a Duty:
So neither can it go against a Man's Conscience, to do any Action which he is
not convinced that Gods Law has some way or other Forbidden, and so made a
Sin. And therefore in our present Case. That Man only can justly plead
Conscience for his Nonconformity that can truly say he is persuaded in his
Judgment that Conformity is Forbidden by some Law of God: Or which is the same
thing; No Man can say, it is against his Conscience to join in our Communion,
but only such a one as really believes he shall Sin against some Law of God, if
he do join with us,

If against this it be excepted; that it is very possible for a Man to be well
satisfied that there is nothing directly Sinful in our Worship; but yet for all
that it may be against his Conscience to join with us in it: As for instance,
in the Case where a Man takes it really to be his Duty to hold constant
Communion with some other Congregation, where he believes he can be more
Edified, or to which he is related by some Church Covenant: To this I answer,
that in this Case, I grant, Conscience is rightly pleaded for Separation
(though how justifiably I do not now Examine:) But then I say this Plea
proceeds upon the same grounds I just now laid down. For if the Man (as is
supposed in the Case) be convinced that it is his Duty by Gods Law, (as there
is no other measure of Duty) to hold Communion with others, and not with us;
then he must at the same time be convinced that he cannot without Transgression
of Gods Law, (that is, without Sin,) join with us; And that is the same Account
which we give, of its being against any Man's Conscience to hold Communion with
us.

Further, If it be urged against our Proposition, that not only in the Case
where a Man is persuaded of the Unlawfulness of our Communion, but also in the
Case where he only doubts of the Lawfulness of it, a Man may justly plead
Conscience for his Nonconformity, so long as those doubts remain: And therefore
it is not truly said of us, that in Order to the Pleading Conscience for
Nonconformity, one must be persuaded in his own mind, that Conformity is
Forbidden by some Law of God. I Answer, that if the Man who thus doubts of the
Lawfulness of Conformity, has really entertained this Principle, that it is a
Sin to do any thing with a doubting Conscience; I grant that it must go against
his Conscience to conform so long as he doubts. But then, this is but the same
thing we are contending for; for therefore it goes against his Conscience to
Communicate with us, doubting as he does; because he believes he shall Sin
against God if he should. But if the Man we are speaking of, do not think it a
breach of Gods Law, to Act with a doubting Conscience; then I do not see how it
can in the least go against his Conscience to Communicate with us upon that
pretense. So that notwithstanding these two Exceptions; which are all I can
think of; it will still remain true, that no Man can justly Plead Conscience
for his Separation from the Church, but he that is persuaded that he cannot
join with it without Sinning against God.

Now if this Proposition be true, as certainly it is; then how many Men's
pretenses to Conscience for their Separating from us, are hereby cut off: And
indeed how few (in Comparison of the multitude of Dissenters among us) will be
left, that can be able with Truth to say that it is against their Conscience to
Communicate with us in our Prayers, and in our Sacraments.

In the first Place, it is Evident that all those who Separate from us upon
Account of any private grudge or pique; because they have been disobliged, or
have received some disappointment in the way of our Church, or by the Men that
are favorers of it; and therefore out of a Pet will join themselves to another
Communion. All those that think they can serve their own turns more
effectually, by being of another way; as for instance, they can thereby better
please a Relation from whom they have expectances; they can better advance
their Trade, or increase their Fortunes; they can better procure a Reputation,
or regain one that is Sunk. In a word, all those that to serve any ends of
Pride, or Interest, or Passion, or out of any other worldly Consideration, do
refuse us their Company in the Worship of God. I say, all such are certainly
excluded from Pleading Conscience for their Separation.

In the second Place, all those Lay People who refuse our Communion upon
Account that the Pastors, and Teachers, whom they most Love, and Reverence, are
not permitted to Exercise their Function among us; whose Pretense it is, that
if these good Men were allowed to Teach in our Churches, they would come to our
Congregations; but so long as that is refused, they will hear them where they
can: I say, all these are likewise excluded from Pleading Conscience for their
Separation. For, however it may really and truly be against the Conscience of
their Ministers to conform, (there being other things required of them, than of
ordinary People,) yet it is not against their Conscience so to do; for they
know no ill in Conformity, but only that so many good Men are silenced.

In the third Place, all those that refuse our Communion upon a mere dislike of
several things in our Church Offices: They do not for instance, like a Form of
Prayer in general, and they have several things to Object against our Form in
particular; they do not like our Ceremonies, they do not like the Surplice, or
the Cross in Baptism; and sundry other things they find fault with: Not that
they have any thing to say against the Lawfulness of these things; but only
they have an Aversion to them: All these Men likewise are cut off from.
Pleading Conscience for their Separation. For they do not pretend that it is
unlawful, or a Sin against God to join with us in our Service (which is the
only thing wherein their Conscience can be concerned;) but only they are not
pleased with many things in our Service; as fancying them not to be so decent,
or convenient, or not to be so prudently Ordered as they would have them. But
what of all this? Admit the things to be so as they fancy them; yet still so
long as they do not think there is any Sin in them, it cannot go against their
Conscience to join with any Assembly in which they are Practiced. Because
Conscience as we have often said is not touched, is not affected where no Law
of God is Transgressed.

In the fourth Place, all those that are kept from our Communion, purely upon
the Account of Education, or acquaintance with Persons that are of another
persuasion. Those that have nothing to say against our Worship; but only that
they were bred in another way; or those that would join with us in it, but that
they know a great many Religious Godly Persons that do Condemn it, and
therefore they dare not come at us. These now may be very well meaning Men, but
yet they cannot reasonably Plead Conscience upon this Account for their
Separation. For it is not a Man's Education, or the Example, or Opinion of other
Men, that makes any Action to be a Duty, or a Sin, but the Law of God
Commanding or Forbidding that Action. And therefore before I can say that this,
or the other Action, is against my Conscience, I must believe that Gods Law
has either in general, or in particular; either directly, or by Consequence,
made that Action unlawful. I grant the Opinions of other Men, especially those
that are Learned, and Pious are always to be listened to in doubtful Cases. But
then, no Man's Opinion can be the Rule of my Conscience; nor am I at all
concerned in Conscience to follow it, any farther than I am convinced that it
declares Gods Law to me. And therefore sure in this Case of Church Communion, I
can be but very little concerned to follow any Man's Opinion; when, both there
are so many Persons, and those as Learned and as Pious as any others, that are
of another Opinion; and when also the Public Law, which has much more
Authority than any private Opinion; has determined what I am to do in the
Case. So that it is great weakness, and sillyness; and not Conscience, that
prevails with these Men I am speaking of, to live in disobedience to the Laws.
If indeed they be really persuaded in their own Minds, that our way of
Worshipping God, is in any part or instance of it Unlawful or Forbidden, (let
that Persuasion be upon what grounds it will,) then they may truly say it is
against their Conscience to join with us. But if they be not convinced of this;
I do not see how the Example, or the advice of their Friends and Acquaintance,
can in the least give them a Title to Plead Conscience for their refusing our
Communion.

Fifthly, those that withdraw from the Church upon this Account, that our
Governors in their Laws and Prescriptions about Gods Worship, have not rightly
used the Power which they are entrusted with, but have exceeded their bounds;
have made perhaps too great Encroachments upon Christian Liberty; or laid more
stress than was meet upon Indifferent things: These likewise are excluded by
the former Rule from Pleading Conscience for their Separation. For admit the
Lawgivers have been to blame in the Exercise of their Power in these matters,
(which yet is sooner said then proved,) and have really done more then they can
answer to God for; yet what is this to them? The Conscience of the Governors
is indeed deeply concerned about these things; and they must give an Account to
God for the abuse of their Authority if there be any, But how this does concern
the Conscience of the Subject, is not easily understood: So long as what is
Commanded or Enjoined, does not appear to interfere with any Law of God. But
having said this; I fear there is too much reason to add; that those who so
much stand up for Christian Liberty, and would be thought the great Patrons of
it; do by their endless scruples about Indifferent things, and refusing to Obey
Authority in such matters, in all appearance, take the most Effectual Course
to destroy all Christian Liberty, in the true Notion of it; and to bring in a
Religion that shall consist of Touch not, Taste not, Handle not; and such other
Uncommanded things.

Sixthly, and lastly, (to name no more instances) All those that can
Communicate Occasionally with us, in our Prayers and Sacraments: As for
instance, those that when they have a turn to be served, when there is an
Office or some such thing in the Case; can come to Church, and receive the
Communion, but at other times they do not afford us their Presence: These are
also excluded from pretending to Conscience, for their not constantly joining
in Communion with us. For if indeed they did believe, it was a Sin in them to
join with us in our Prayers and Sacraments; with what Conscience dare they do
it at all? They ought not for any worldly good, to venture upon such an Action
as they do believe to be forbidden by Gods Laws; But if they do not believe
that to join in our Communion is a Sinful thing, (as I dare say none of these
Persons do) then I will be bold to make the Inference; that it cannot be more
against their Conscience to do it Thrice, than to do it Once; and do it
constantly than to do it Thrice.

But let us leave the false Pretenders to Conscience, and come to the Case of
those who can justly Plead Conscience for their Separation; or that can truly
say it is against their Conscience to join in our Communion.

Of this sort are all such, and none but such, as do teally believe that our
Communion is unlawful, or that they cannot Communicate with us without Sin, as
I have before proved.

As for those that only doubt of the Lawfulness of our Communion, but are not
persuaded that it is unlawful; I do not here consider them; because they cannot
say that it is against their Conscience to Communicate with us; any more than
they can say, that they are bound in Conscience to Communicate with us: For
they are uncertain as to both these things, and are not determined either way.
But however because these men may justly Plead Conscience upon this Account;
that they think it is a Sin to join with us so long as they doubt of the
Lawfulness of our Communion: I shall consider their Case afterward in a
particular Discourse upon that Argument.

Those that I am now concerned with, are such, as do believe, or are persuaded,
that there is some thing in our Worship which they cannot comply with without
Sinning against God.

And my business is to Examine whether such a Belief or Persuasion of the
Unlawfulness of our Communion will justify any Man's Separation from us? Or how
far it will do it? And what is to be done by such Persons, in order, either to
their Communicating, or not Communicating with us, with a safe Conscience? This
is our second Point, and I apply my self to it.

There are a great many among us, that would with all their Hearts (as they
say) Obey the Laws of the Church, and join in our Worship and Sacraments; but
they are really persuaded that they cannot do it without Sin: For there are
some things required of them as Conditions of Communicating with us, which are
Forbidden by the Laws of God.

As for Instance, it is against the Commands of Christ to appoint, or to use
any thing in the Worship of God, which God himself has not appointed. For this
is to add to the word of God, and to Teach for Doctrines the Commandments and
Traditions of Men.

It is against the Commands of Jesus Christ to Stint the Spirit in Prayer;
which all those that use a Form of Prayer, must necessarily do.

It is against the Commands of Jesus Christ to use any Significant Ceremony in
Religion: As for Instance, the Cross in Baptism, for that is to make new
Sacraments.

It is against the Commands of Jesus Christ to kneel at the Lords Supper, for
that is directly to contradict our Saviors Example in his Institution of that
Sacrament, and Savours besides of Popish Idolatry.

Since therefore there are these Sinful things in our Worship; and those too
imposed as Terms of Communion; how can we blame them, if they withdraw
themselves from us? Would we have them join with us in these Practices which
they verily believe to be Sins? Where then was their Conscience? They might
perhaps by this means show how much they were the Servants of Men: But what
would become of their Fidelity to Jesus Christ.

What now shall we say to this? They themselves are so well satisfied with
their own doings in these matters, that they do not think they are in the least
to be blamed for refusing us their Communion, so long as things stand thus with
them. They are sure they herein follow their own Conscience; and therefore they
cannot doubt but they are in a safe Condition; and may justify their
Proceedings to God, and to all the World; let us say what we please.

This is the Case. Now in Answer to it, we must grant them these two things.

First of all, that if indeed they be right in their Judgment; and those things
which they except against in our Communion be really Unlawful, and Forbidden by
Jesus Christ; then they are not at all to be blamed for their not Communicating
with us. For in that Case, Separation is not a Sin but a Duty: We being for
ever bound to Obey God rather than Men.

And Secondly, supposing they be mistaken in their Judgment, and think that to
be unlawful, and Forbidden by God which is not really so: Yet so long as this
persuasion continues (though it be a false one) we think they cannot without
Sin join in our Communion. For even an Erroneous Conscience (as we have showed)
binds thus far, that a Man cannot without Sin Act in Contradiction to it. These
two things I say we grant them, and let them make the best advantage of them.

But then this is the point we stand upon, and which if it be true, will render
this whole Plea for Nonconformity upon account of Conscience, as I have now
opened it, wholly insufficient, viz. If it should prove that our Dissenters are
mistaken in their Judgment; and that our Governors do indeed require nothing
of them in the matter of Church Communion, but what they may comply with,
without breach of Gods Law: Then I say it will not acquit them from being
Guilty of Sin before God in withdrawing from our Communion; to say, that they
really believed our Communion to be unlawful; and upon that Account they durst
not join with us.

It is not my Province here to Answer all their Objections against our Forms of
Prayer, our Ceremonies, our Orders and Rules, in Administering Sacraments, and
other things that concern our Communion: This has been done several times; and
of late by several Persons which have treated of all these particular matters;
and who have showed with great clearness and strength, that there is nothing
required in our Church Appointments, which is in the least inconsistent with,
or Forbidden by any Law of Jesus Christ: But on the contrary, the
Establishments of our Church, are for Gravity, Decency, Purity, and
agreeableness with the Primitive Christianity; the most approvable, and the
least Exceptionable of any Church Constitutions at this day in the World.

These things therefore I meddle not with, but this is the point I am concerned
in: Whether, supposing it be every Man's Duty to join in Communion with the
Established Church; and there be nothing required in that Communion, but what
may be Lawfully Practiced? I say, supposing these two things; whether it will
be sufficient to acquit any Man from Sin, that withdraws from that Communion,
upon this Account, that through his mistake, he believes he cannot join with us
without Sin? Or thus, whether will any man's persuasion that there are Sinful
Terms required in our Communion (when yet there are not any) justify his
Separation from us.

This is the general Question truly put; And this I give as the Answer to it:
That in general speaking a Man's Erroneous Persuasion does not dissolve the
Obligation of Gods Law, or justify any Man's Transgression of his Duty. So that
if Gods Law does Command me to hold Communion with the Church where I have no
just cause to break it: And I have no just cause to break it in this particular
Case, but only I think I have: My misperswasion in this matter does not
discharge me from my Obligation to keep the Communion of the Church; or acquit
me from Sin before God if I break it.

The Truth and Reason of this I have fully showed before, in what I have said
about the Authority of Conscience. I shall now only by way of further
Confirmation ask this Question: Was St. Paul guilty of Sin or no, when he
Persecuted the Christians; being verily persuaded in his own mind that he ought
so to do, and that he Sinned if he did not? If any will say that St. Paul did
not Sin in this, because he did but Act according to his Conscience; they
contradict his own express words. For he acknowledges himself to be the
greatest of Sinners, and that for this very reason because he persecuted the
Church of Christ. If they say that he did Sin in doing this: Then they must at
the same time acknowledge, that a Man's persuasion that a thing is a Duty, will
not excuse him from guilt in practicing it; if really and indeed it be against
Gods Law: And on the other side, by the same reason, that a Man's persuasion
that a thing is unlawful, will not excuse him from guilt in not Practicing it;
if indeed Gods Law has made it a Duty.

So that it infinitely concerns all our Dissenting Brethren to consider very
well what they do, when they withdraw from our Communion. Schism undoubtedly is
a great and crying Sin. A Sin, against which, there are as many hard things
said in the Discourses of our Lord and his Apostles; and in the Writings of the
Ancient Christians; as against any other Sin whatsoever. And therefore let
those that forsake our Communion; and set up, or join with other Assemblies in
Opposition to ours: I say, let them look to it that they be not involved in the
Guilt of this dreadful Sin. They must be sure that their Separation proceeds
upon good grounds, if they would free themselves from the imputation of it. It
is not always enough to excuse them; that they do believe there are Sinful
Conditions imposed in our Communion, and consequently it is their Duty to
withdraw. For unless the thing be so indeed; their believing so will not cancel
their Obligation to our Church Communion; or make it cease to be Schism to
withdraw themselves from it.

This may perhaps at the first hearing seem very strange Doctrine to many, but
yet it is true for all that; and will appear a little more Evident, if we put
the Case in another instance, wherein we are not so nearly concerned.

Here is one of the Roman Catholic persuasion, (as they call it,) that has
been trained up in Popery; and heartily believes it to be true Religion, and
the Only one, wherein Salvation is to be had; and therefore in Obedience to the
Laws and Customs of that Church, does pay Religious Worship to Images; does
pray to Saints and Angels; does give Divine Adoration to the Consecrated Bread
in the Sacrament; as really believing it to be turned into the Body of Christ,
to which his Soul, and Deity is personally United.

Is now such a Person as this Guilty of Idolatry in these Practices or is he
not? He does verily believe that he is not. He would abhor these Practices, if
he did in the least believe, that God had Forbid them as Idolatrous. Nay he is
so far from believing that they are Forbid, that on the contrary he has been
taught to believe that they are necessary Duties; and he cannot be a good
Catholic, unless he thus Worship Images, and Saints, and the Bread of the
Host. Well, now the point is, Whether such a Man, believing as he does, be upon
that Account acquitted from the Sin of Idolatry? We all grant, that if he had
such clear Information about these things as we Protestants have; he would
certainly be an Idolater if he should contitinue in these Practices: But
whether his belief, and Opinion, and persuasion concerning these things, do not
excuse him; and make that cease to be Idolatry, that would otherwise be so;
This I say is the question. But yet none of us make any great question of it.
For we do charge the Papists indiscriminately, with Idolatry in their Worship;
notwithstanding their disclaiming it; notwithstanding their Profession to
Worship God, no otherwise than according to his own Will; notwithstanding they
do really take themselves Obliged in Conscience to give Divine Worship to the
Consecrated Elements, and those other Objects. And we charge them rightly in
this. For if it be really Idolatry by Gods word, to do these things; then it
will be Idolatry in any Man to do them, let his Opinion about them be what it
Will. A Man's Ignorance, or mistake, or false Opinion does not alter the nature
of things; it can neither make that cease to be a Duty, which God has
Commanded, nor that cease to be a Sin which God has Forbidden. All that it
will do, is, that according to the Nature and Circumstances of it, it may more
or less Extenuate the Transgression that is committed upon the Account thereof.

And the Case is just the same in the matter before us. For any Man to withdraw
his Communion from that Church, with which he ought, and with which he may
Lawfully Communicate; That is as properly the Sin of Schism, as it is the Sin
of Idolatry to give Divine Worship to that which is not God. For any Man,
therefore, to break the Unity of the Church; though it be upon this very
Account, that he does believe it is his Duty so to do; or that he cannot
Communicate with that Church without Sin: Yet if this persuasion of his be
false, and Erroneous; he is no less a Schismatic for all this; than the other
Man is an Idolater that thinks it his Duty to adore Images, and those other
undue Objects of Divine Worship among the Romanists. It is true, the Man's
Ignorance or Misperswasion will according to the greater or less Culpability of
it; more or less excuse the Man's Person before God, as it does in the other
Case. But it cannot in the least make that which God has made to be Schism to
be no Schism; no more than in the other Case, it makes that to be no Idolatry
which Gods word has declared to be Idolatry.

Well now admitting all this; here comes the pinch of the thing. It will be
said, What, would you have a Man do in this Case? He cannot conform with a safe
Conscience; and yet he is a Transgressor if he do not. If he comply against his
Conscience, you grant he is guilty of Sin in so doing: If he does not Comply;
then you say he is a Schismatic; and so is a Sinner upon that Account. Why to
this I say, that both these things are often true; and here is that Dilemma,
which Men by Suffering their minds to be abused with Evil Principles, and
Persuasions, do frequently run themselves into. They are reduced to that
Extremity that they can neither Act, nor forbear Acting: They can neither Obey,
nor Disobey without Sin.

But what is to be done in this Case? I know nothing but this: That all
Imaginable Care is to be taken that the Error and false Principles which misled
the Man be deposed; and that his Judgment be better informed; and then he may
both do his Duty which Gods Law requires of him, and avoid Sinning against his
Conscience.

But how is this to be done? Why no other way, but by using Conscientiously all
those means which common Prudence will Recommend to a Man, for the gaining
Instruction and Information to himself about any point that he desires
thoroughly to understand. That is to say, Freeing his Mind from all Pride, and
Passion, and Interest, and all other carnal Prepossessions; and applying
himself seriously and impartially to the getting right Notions and Sentiments
about his Duty in these matters: Considering without prejudice what can be said
on both sides: Calling in the best assistance of the ablest and wisest Men that
he can come by: And above all things seriously endeavoring to understand the
Nature and Spirit of the Christian Religion; and to practice all that he is
undoubtedly convinced to be his Duty: And for the matters in question, most
earnestly imploring the Assistance of Gods Spirit to guide and direct him.

Well, but supposing a Man has endeavored to inform his Judgment as well as he
can, and has used all those Prudent means that were in his Power, to satisfy
himself of the Lawfulness of our Communion; But yet after all, he is of the
same persuasion that he was, viz. That he cannot join in our Worship without
Sin: what will we say to such a Man as this? Will we still say that this Man
must either Conform, though against his Conscience; or he is a Schismatic
before God? This is the great difficulty, and I have two things to say to it.

In the first place, we do heartily wish that this was the Case of all, or of
the most of our Dissenters, (viz. that they had done what they can, to satisfy
themselves about our Communion.) For if it was, I do verily persuade my self
that there would presently be an end of all those much to be lamented Schisms,
and Divisions, which do now give so much Scandal to all good Men, and threaten
the Ruin of our Reformed Religion; And this poor Church of England, which has
so long Labored and Groaned, under the furious Attacques that have been made
upon her, by Enemies without, and Enemies within her own Bowels, would in a
little time, be perfectly set free from all apprehension of Danger, at the
least from the one sort of her Adversaries.

If all our Brethren of the Separation would most seriously follow after the
things that make for Peace, and walk by the same Rule as far as they were able,
and in things where they were otherwise minded, would Religiously apply
themselves to God for direction; and to the use of Prudent means for
Satisfaction: I doubt not but the Face of things would presently be changed
among us; and we should near no more of any Division or Schism in our Nation,
that was either dangerous to the Church, or to the Salvation of the Men that
were concerned in it.

But alas, we fear we have too great reason to say, that the generality of our
Dissenting Brethren, even those of them that Plead Conscience for their
Separation, have not done their Duty in this matter; have not heartily
endeavored to satisfy their Minds about the Lawfulness of Conformity in those
Points which they stick at.

If they had; one would think that after all their endeavors they should,
before they pronounced Conformity to be unlawful, be able to produce some one
plain Text of Scripture for the proving it so, either in the whole or in any
part of it; but this they are not able to do. They do indeed produce some Texts
of Scripture which they think do make for them: But really they are such, that
if they had not supinely taken up their meaning upon trust; but would have been
at the pains of carefully examining them; and using such helps as they have
every where at hand for the understanding them: It would have been somewhat
difficult for them to have expounded those Texts in such a sense as would infer
the unlawfulness of our Communion.

But further I say, it is not probable that the generality of our Dissenters,
who condemn our Communion as unlawful, have ever anxiously applied themselves
to the considering the Point, or gaining Satisfaction about it; because they do
not seem to have much consulted their own Teachers in this affair, and much
less those of our way. If they had, they would have been disposed to think
better of our Communion; than they do: For not to mention what the Churchmen do
teach and press in this matter; the most Eminent of their own Ministers, are
ready thus far to give their Testimony to our Communion. That there is nothing
required in it, but what a Lay-Person may Honestly and Lawfully comply with;
though there may be some things incovenient, and which they wish were amended.
Nay they themselves are ready upon occasion to afford us their Company, in all
the instances of Lay-Communion.

But I desire not to enlarge upon this Argument, because it is an Invidious
one. All that I say is, that we wish it was not too apparent by many Evidences,
that most of those who separate from us, are so far from having done all they
can to bring themselves to a compliance with our Church Constitutions; that
they have done little or nothing at all toward it: But have taken up their
Opinions, hand over head, without much thinking or enquiring, and having once
taken up an Opinion, they adhere to it, without scarce so much as once
thinking, that it is possible for them to be in the wrong.

If you speak of a Man that may with reason be said to have done his endeavor
to satisfy himself about the Points of his Duty in this matter: Give us such a
one; as has no end, no interest to serve by his Religion, but only to Please
God, and to go to Heaven; and who in the choice of the way that leads thither,
has the Indifference of a Traveller; to whom it is all one, whether his way
light on the right Hand, or on the left; being only concerned that it be the
way which leads to his Journeys end.

Give us a Man, that concerns himself as little as you please, in the
Speculative Disputes, and Controversies of Religion: But yet is wonderfully
Solicitous about the Practice of his Duty; and therefore will refuse no pains
or trouble that may give him a right understanding of that.

Give us a Man, that in the midst of the great Heats, and Divisions, and
different Communions of the Church; is yet modest, and humble, and docible:
That believes he may be mistaken, and that his private Friends may be mistaken
too, and has such an Esteem and Reverence for the Wisdom of his Governors in
Church or State; as to admit that it is probable they may see farther into
matters of State and Religion, than he does: And that therefore every Tenent,
and Opinion that was inbibed in his Education; that was infused by private Men
of his acquaintance; or that was espoused upon a very few thoughts, and little
Consideration; ought not to be so stiffly maintained; as to control, or to be
set in Opposition to the Public Establishments of Authority.

Lastly, give us a Man, that where the Public Laws do run counter to his
private Sentiments; and he is at a loss to reconcile his Duty to Men, with his
Duty to God: Yet does not presently upon this, set up a Flag of Defiance to
Authority; but rather applies himself with all the Indifference, and Honesty he
can, to get a true Information of these matters: And to that end he Prays to
God continually for his assistance, he calls in the best helps, and consults
the best guides he can; his Ears are open to what both sides can say for
themselves; and he is as willing to read a Book which is writ against his
Opinion, as one that defends it: In a word if he be prejudiced, or biassed any
way; it is on the side of Authority; being rather de^^rous to find himself
mistaken, and his Governors in the Right; than himself in the Right, and his
Governors mi^taken. I say show us such a Man as this; and we readily grant,
you have produced a Person, that does sincerely use his endeavors to satisfy
himself about the Lawfulness of our Communion. But then we must say this also;
that as the Case stands between the Church of England, and the Dissenters; we
can hardly believe, that such a Man will long continue in Separation from the
Church; but will in a little time gain the Satisfaction of seeing, not only
that he may Lawfully join with us, but also that it is his Duty so to do.

But let us admit, that a Man may have endeavored to Inform his Judgment as
well as he can; and yet be so far from being convinced that it is his Duty to
join with us in our Worship; that he is still of Opinion that it is his Duty to
Separate from us: What will we say of such a Man? Will we still brand him for a
Schismatic, notwithstanding he has done all he can, to bring himself over to
us; but cannot?

To this I answer in the second Place, according to the Principles I have
before laid down, that if such a Case do ever happen; though the Man cannot be
excused from Schism, as to the matter of it (because wherever there is an
Actual Separation from a Church, with which we ought, and with which we may,
Lawfully Communicate; there is an Actual Schism Commenced; let the pretense for
the Separation be what it will:) yet I trust he shall not be charged before
God, with the Formal guilt of the Schism; any farther than the Error that led
him into it, was contracted by his own fault.

Though Schism in it self (as we have said) be a great Sin: yet we do not say
that all those who are engaged in the same Schism, are equally Guilty before
God.

In the first place, those that separate from the Church, to serve any private
secular turn; these are most horribly guilty of Schism, and there is nothing to
be said in their excuse.

In the second Place, those who separate from the Church, through
misperswasions, and mistakes of Judgment, which they groundlessly, and
foolishly took up; and might have avoided; and would yet still certainly
correct in themselves, if they were but so Careful, and Conscientious about
their Duty as they ought to be: These Men, have indeed far more to say for
themselves, than the former; but yet they are very blameable, and are bound as
they Love their Souls, to take more Care of Informing their Conscience aright;
that so they may leave that Sin they are engaged in.

But Thirdly, those that separate from the Church of God, because they know no
better, nor never had means to know better: Or those that have sincerely
endeavored to understand their Duty as much as could be expected from one in
their Circumstances; yet through weakness of understanding, or want of
Opportunity, light into wrong Paths: In a word, those that are unhappily
engaged in a Schism, but God Almighty who searches the Hearts, knows, that
it is not through the Fault of their Wills, but the misfortune of their
Circumstances: I say, if there be any Man among us that is in this Condition;
though he be a Schismatic Materially; yet he is Innocently, at least,
Pittiably so. And if he be as free from blame in the other parts of his Life;
be may be a good Christian for all that. And God Almighty we hope who Judges
of Men by their inward Sincerity, and not by their outward Circumstances; will
impute that Schism (which in others perhaps is a wilful Crime) to this Man, no
otherwise then as a pure Sin of Ignorance, which shall not (upon a general
Repentance for all Sins known and unknown,) be accounted for at the last day.
Especially if this Innocently mistaken Man we speak of, do to the other
Regularities of his Life, add a diligent Care in these four following Points.

First, that he be not Obstinate, and Pertinacious in his way, but that he keep
his mind readily prepared and disposed to receive any Conviction, which God by
any Means or Instruments shall offer to him.

Secondly, That he Separate no farther from the Church, of which he ought to be
a Member, than he needs must; but do cheerfully comply with the Public Laws,
and Establishments in all those Instances, where he is Satisfied he may do it
with a safe Conscience.

Thirdly, that where he cannot give Active Obedience to the Laws; he do in
those Instances Patiently, and Christianly, submit to the Penalties, which
those Laws inflict: Neither exclaiming against his Governors, or the
Magistrates, as Persecutors; for enacting, or Executing those Laws: Nor using
any undue, Illegal means to get himself more ease and Liberty: But in all
things behaving himself as a quiet and peaceable Subject to the Government he
lives under.

And Fourthly, and lastly, that he show himself a good Neighbor as well as a
good Subject; in avoiding all peevish and bitter Censures of those that differ
in Opinion, and persuasion from him; and Exercising Humanity, and Friendliness,
and Charity to all his Fellow Christians.

Whosoever I say, of our Brethren, of the Separation make good these Points:
That is to say, are in the first place, very sincere in their endeavors, to
inform their Conscience aright in the matter of our Communion: And in the next
place, when they cannot Satisfy their Conscience about our way; do yet in
their Dissent from us, Observe the four Particulars I have now named: I should
be loath for my part to Censure them either as ill Men, or ill Subjects, or ill
Christians.

But then all that I have said in this matter, does no more justify the Sin of
Schism, or Extenuate the hainousness of it in its own Nature; Than it would
serve to justify or Extenuate the Sin of Idolatry; if all that I have now
said, was applied to the Case of an Ignorant, well meaning, devout Papist. For
I do verily believe that what I have now represented by way of Apology for an
innocent mistaken Separatist; will hold true, mutatis mutandis, in the Case of
a deluded Romanist, who is invincibly, and without any fault of his, entangled
in the Practice of their Idolatries. But I believe for all that, the Sin of
Idolatry is in it self a most grievous Sin, and so I believe is the Sin of
Schism and therefore notwithstanding all that may be said; concerning the
Innocence, or Excuseableness of some Men's mistakes about these matters; yet
nevertheless, it infinitely concerns every Person, to have a care how he be
engaged, either in the one, or the other.

To come to a conclusion, that which I would most seriously press from what
has been said is this. It appears from the foregoing Discourse, how absolutely
necessary it is; that every Man should endeavor to inform his Judgment aright
in the matters that offend his Conscience; before he withdraw his Obedience
from his Lawful Governors, and his Communion from those that Worship God in
Public under them. It appears likewise that it is not enough to justify a
Man's Separation; that this or the other thing in our Worship, is really against
his Conscience; for he may be a great Sinner notwithstanding that, for leaving
our Assemblies, if it should prove at last that he is mistaken in his Notions.

What therefore should every Dissenter among us do, that has any regard to his
Duty, and would preserve a good Conscience? I say, what is there that more
concerns him to do? than presently to set about the true informing of his
Judgment in the points where he is now dissatisfied; for ^ear he be found to
live in a grievous Sin all the time he Separates from us.

And therefore, let no Man that Lives out of our Communion, satisfy himself
with such frivolous pretenses as these: That as for all the Substantials of
Religion, the matters of Faith and Good Life, they do agree with us; and that
as for the other matters which concern Ceremonies and Discipline; these are
Nice, Controverted Points; Points disputed pro and contra amongst the Divines:
And therefore why should they trouble their Heads about them; nay perhaps if
they should, they have neither Abilities nor Opportunities to understand them.

It must be confessed that something of this is true; But yet it is nothing to
their purpose. It is very well, that we all agree in the Rule of Faith, and
Manners; and it would be happy if all the Christian World did so too: But still
Schism is a dreadful Sin: And a Man may as certainly, without Repentance, be
damned for that, as for being an Heretic in his Opinion, or a Drunkard, for
instance, in his Manners. Sure I am, the Ancient Christian Fathers thought so.

It is true likewise, that the business of Church Government and Discipline,
and other Points of Ecclesiastical Conformity, is a matter of Dispute, and
Controversy among us: But who is it that made it so? The Church of England
without doubt, would have been very well pleased, if there had been no dust
raised, no dispute or contentions moved in these matters; but that every Member
would have done his Duty peaceably, and quietly in his Station: Or that if any
Controversy had arose; it should have been debated among Learned Men; and never
have proceeded to Separation from the Communion.

We do not pretend to lay any stress upon Skill, and Knowledge about these
matters, in Order to a Man's Salvation. We believe, and teach that a Man may be
a very good Christian, and go to Heaven; that never understood how to justify
the Cross in Baptism, or to defend the Common Prayer Book against all the
Exceptions that are made against it. All that we say is, that if any Man will
scruple, and except against the use of these things; it lies upon him, nay he
is bound as he would keep a good Conscience, to use the best means he possibly
can, to get Satisfaction about them: Or if he do not; at his own Peril be it,
nay even at the Peril of his Salvation, if he breaks the Churches Peace, and
Communion upon that Account.

And as for those that pretend, that these are Subtle Points, and above their
Reach, and Capacity; and they have not understanding, and Wit enough to dive
into them: Why, in Gods Name, who desires them? We say that they might
Innocently enough, and with a good Conscience, comply with their Governors in
these Points, as they do in a hundred others, without ever diving into them;
But since, it seems, they have Wit, and Understanding enough, to cavil and find
fault with these things, and upon that Account, to deny their Obedience to
those Lawful Powers, which God has set over them: One would think they should
at the same time have so much Honesty, as seriously to endeavor to give
themselves Satisfaction as to those things they find fault with: And this is
all we desire of them: And it is for their own sakes too; as well as ours, that
we desire it. For otherwise they will never be able to answer either to God or
Man, for the horrible Inconveniences, and mischiefs, that arise to the Church
of Christ, by the Division, and Separation which they are engaged in.

To conclude, if in any Instance, that Famous Precept of the Apostle, of
proving all things, and holding fast that which is good, do Oblige Christians;
it does especially in this. If ever it be a Man's Duty to satisfy himself,
about the goodness, and Lawfulness of a thing, that he is apt to doubt of; it
is certainly in the Case, where his Superiors have laid their Commands upon
him: For there he cannot disobey without Sin; unless he can assure himself that
he has done all that he can, to reconcile their Commands with his Duty to God;
but upon the best means he has used, he finds them irreconcilable. For a Man
to disobey till he has done this, is an unwarrantable thing, and in the Case
that I now speak of, it is no less than the Sin of Formal Criminal Schism.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE OF CONSCIENCE. THE SECOND PART. Concerning a Doubting Conscience.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1685.

THE CASE OF A Doubting Conscience.
I Have in a former Discourse spoken to the Case of those Dissenters who
separate from the Established Church for this Reason, That they are Persuaded
that they cannot Lawfully join in our Communion. I now come to speak to the
Case of those who separate from us for a less Reason, viz. Because they Doubt
whether they may lawfully Communicate with us or no; and so long as they thus
Doubt, they dare not come near us, because they fear they should sin against
God, if they should do any Action with a doubting Conscience.

To this indeed a short Answer might be given from the former Discourse, and
that is this, That let the Obligation of a doubting Conscience be as great as
we can reasonably suppose it, yet if Communion with our Church as it is
Established be really a Duty, then a Man's Doubts concerning the Lawfulness of
it, will not make it cease to be so, or justify his Separation from it. For if
a Manssetled Persuasion, that an Action is unlawful, will not ordinarily acquit
him from Sin if he omit that Action, supposing Gods Law has commanded it (as I
there showed); much less will a man's bare Doubt concerning the Lawfulness of an
Action, justify his Omission of it in such a Case.

But because this Answer seems rather to cut the Knot, than to unty it; it is
my meaning in the following Discourse, particularly to examine and discuss this
Plea of a Doubting Conscience, and to show what little force there is in it to
keep any man from Conformity, that would otherwise Conform. Hoping that some
Reader whose Case this is, may, by what he here finds offered toward his
satisfaction, either be prevailed with to lay aside his Doubts in the matter of
our Communion, or at least be convinced, that it is more reasonable and safe to
communicate with us doubting as he does, than to continue in separation from us.

In handling this Case of a Doubting Conscience, I shall observe the same
Method I did in the former Discourse, because indeed I cannot think of a
better. That is, I shall endeavor to give an account of these four things:

I. Of the Nature of a Doubting Conscience, and how it is distinguished from
the other Kinds of Conscience. II. Of the Rule of a Doubting Conscience, or
what Measures a man is to proceed by for the determining himself in a doubtful
Case. III. Of the Power that Humane Laws, Ecclesiastical or Civil, have to
Overruled a man's Doubts in any matter. IV. Of the Authority of a Doubting
Conscience, i. e. Whether at all, or how far a man is Obliged by it?
These four Heads do, I think, take in all the Difficulties that are in the
Case of a Doubting Conscience.

I. I begin with the first Head, The Nature of a Doubting Conscience. In
speaking to which, I shall Treat of these three things. 1. Of Doubting in
general. 2. Of such Doubts as do affect or concern a Man's Conscience. 3. Of the
Difference between the Doubting Conscience, and the Scrupulous.

1. As to the first of these, which is concerning the Nature of Doubting in
general, we may take Notice, That a man is properly said to doubt, when he
cannot give his Assent to either part of a Contradiction, that is, cannot make
a Judgment whether the thing he is considering, be so, or be not so; but
through the equal, or at least fair probability that is on both sides of the
Question, continues irresolute and undetermined; now, perhaps, he thinks this
Side the more probable, and by and by the other, but he is uncertain as to
both, and cannot fix upon either.

So that a Doubting Mind is not more usually than properly, resembled to a
Balance, which by Reason of the equal Weight which is put into both Scales, is
not cast on either side, but hangs in the same Posture, or waves up and down,
without either Scale coming to the bottom.

Nevertheless, in a doubtful Case, a man may lean more to one side of the
Question than the other, and yet continue doubtful still. Just as there may be
so much more Weight put into one Scale than the other, as will be sufficient to
incline the Balance more to that side; while yet that Weight is not so
considerable as to be able perfectly to turn it, so as to carry down the Scale
to the usual mark of Down-Weight, and there to settle it.

There is indeed this difference between these two things, that a Balance
through the exact equality of the Weights put into each Scale, may be so
poised, as to hang perfectly in oequilibrio, without inclination either way,
and continue so to do: but it will be difficult, if not impossible, to put a
Case or a Question, where a man's Mind, after all things considered, is so
perfectly indifferent to both sides of it, as not to be more inclined to choose
one, than the other.

When once there appears so much more Evidence on one side of the doubtful
Case, that the Mind is enabled to determine it self, and to give a settled
assent on that side, then the man cease to doubt any longer; for that which
was a Doubt before, is now turned into a Persuasion. And if it be a Case
wherein Conscience is concerned, that which was before a Doubting Conscience,
is now changed into a Resolved Conscience. Here, to resume our former
Comparison, the Balance no longer hangs in oequilibrio, or moves unsetledly
this way or that way, but is plainly turned and fixed on one side.

It is true, in this Case a man does not always determine himself with the same
degree of Persuasion, or Satisfaction to his own Mind. Sometimes the Evidence
is so strong, as to command an entire Assent of his Understanding; an Assent so
full, that it has not the least mixture of doubtfulness in it; and this we
call an Assurance, or a full Persuasion. At other times, the Evidence may be of
force enough to gain an Assent, but yet not so strong an Assent as to exclude
all Doubt of the contrary; and this kind of Assent we call an Opinion, or a
probable Persuasion. And something like this we may observe in the Balance:
The Scale that preponderates, is not always carried down with the same Force
and Briskness; but according as the Weight that turns the Balance is greater
or less, so in proportion it may plainly be discerned that the Scale descends
eithe more strongly and nimbly, or more weakly and slowly. But still, in both
these Cases, the man has formed a Judgment of the Point; the Balance is
turned, and where ever this happens, there is an end of the Doubt or
Aequilibrium, and consequently, if it be in a Case that concerns a man's
Conscience, it ceases to be any longer a Doubting Conscience, and becomes
resolved and determined, though perhaps not fully satisfied and free from all
kind of doubt and scruple about that thing.

2. And thus much of Doubting in general. I now come to consider it with
Respect to Conscience, i. e. to enquire How far, or in what Cases a man's
Conscience is affected with his Doubts? Which is our second Point under this
Head.

There are a thousand Cases in which a man may be doubtful, as to which his
Conscience shall be no way concerned. A man's Doubts may indeed be as various as
are the Objects he has to consider, and to make a judgment of; and therefore
unless we will say, that every thing that a man thinks of, or says, or does,
affects his Conscience, we must not say that every Doubt does.

As a man's Conscience is not touched, nor affected with any thing but his own
Actions; so neither do a man's Doubts affect or touch his Conscience any further
than they concern his Actions. So that Doubts about matters of mere
Speculation, (as whether such a Proposition be true or false,) and likewise
Doubts about matter of Fact, (as, whether such a thing was done or not done,)
which do not relate to the Government of a man's own Actions, these doubts do
not concern his Conscience.

As a man's Conscience is not affected with his own Actions under any other
Notion, or Consideration, than only as Gods Law is to regulate them, viz. as
they are either commanded by that Law, or forbidden by it: so neither do a man's
Doubts concerning his Actions affect his Conscience any farther, or upon any
other account, than only as Gods Law may be transgressed by doing or not doing
the Action he doubts of; that is, as he may sin against God, either by omitting
the Action when Gods Law has commanded it, or by doing it when Gods Law has
forbidden it.

So that in all doubtful Cases, where a man apprehends no danger of
transgressing Gods Law, whether he does the Action he doubts about, or does it
not, there his Conscience is not properly concerned.

And this is so true, that though we should suppose one side of the Action in
question to be really, all things considered, more expedient and more eligible
than the other, yet so long as we are satisfied that we may without breach of
Gods Law choose either side, we are not concerned in Conscience to choose that
side which is the most expedient, or the most eligible. For the truth of this,
besides the reason of the thing, we have the authority of St. Paul, who when
this Case was proposed to him, Whether it was better for the Christians in
those times to marry, or not to marry? he thus resolves it, That though indeed,
as things then stood, it was better not to marry, yet they might do what they
would; for if they did marry, they sinned not: and though (as he says) he that
gave not his Virgin in marriage did better than he that gave her in marriage;
yet he allows, that he that gave her in marriage did well, and consequently
did act with a good Conscience. Vid. 1 Cor. 7.

3. From what has been said, we may be able to give a clear account of the
Nature of a Doubting Conscience, and to distinguish it from the other sorts of
Conscience; particularly, that which they call the Scrupulous; which is our
Third Point under this Head.

Conscience is usually, though how properly I will not now dispute, distributed
into these three Kinds, the Resolved, the Scrupulous, and the Doubting.

When we speak of a Resolved Conscience, every body knows that we mean no more
by that Phrase than this, that a man is satisfied and resolved in his own Mind,
concerning the action he has been deliberating upon, viz. that he is bound to
do it, as being a Duty; or that he is bound to forbear it, as being a Sin; or,
that he may either do it, or forbear it, as being an Indifferent action,
neither commanded, nor forbidden by God. Now this Persuasion, if it be
according to the Rule of the Divine Law, we call it a Right Conscience. If it
be contrary to that Rule, we call it an Erroneous Conscience: But of this we
need speak no more here, since it was the whole argument of the former Discouse.

As for the Scrupulous Conscience, as that is made a distinct sort of
Conscience from the Resolved and the Doubting, we may thus define it: It is a
Conscience in some measure resolved, but yet accompanied with a Fear of acting
according to that Resolution. It is the unhappiness of a great many, that when
they are pretty well satisfied in their Judgment concerning this or the other
Point, which they made a Matter of Conscience, and have nothing considerable to
Object against the Evidence that is given them, but on the contrary are
convinced that they ought, or that they may lawfully Act thus or thus* Yet for
all that, when they come to act, they are very uneasy, and make a World of
Difficulties. Not that there is any new Reason appears that can pretend to
unsettle, much less overthrow the Grounds of their first Determination: But
only their unaccountable Fears must pass for Reasons. This now is to have a
Scrupulous Conscience in the proper Sense.

But a Doubting Conscience, (which is that we are now concerned in,) though in
Common Speech it be often confounded with the Scrupulous, is quite different
from both these sorts of Conscience. For in both those a man is supposed to
have passed a Judgment in his own Mind whether the Action before him be
according to Gods Law, or against it. But in the Case of a Doubting Conscience,
it appears from what I have said, that a man has not, nor cannot, so long as
he doubts, make any Judgment at all, but is uncertain as to both sides; having,
as he thinks, as many Arguments to incline him one way, as the other; and when
once he comes to have so much Evidence as to create a Persuasion or Opinion on
one side, then he cease to have a Doubting Conscience.

So that the True Definition of a Doubting Conscience, as it is commonly
called, is this. The Suspense of a man's Judgment in a Question about the Duty
or the Sin of an Action, occasioned by the Equal (or near Equal) Probalities on
both sides.

And likewise the true Difference between a Doubting, a Resolved, and a
Scrupulous Conscience, is this; That the Resolved Conscience is satisfied about
its Point, and acts confidently, at least cheerfully: The Scrupulous Conscience
is likewise satisfied in the general, but either dares not act, or acts
fearfully. The Doubting Conscience is not satisfied at all, for the Point
before it is still a Question; of which it can make no Judgment, no Resolution,
because of the equal appearances of Reason on both sides.

This is a plain account of the Doubting Conscience. But after all, it must be
acknowledged, that this which we call a Doubting Conscience, and which we have
been all this while discoursing of, is, truly and strictly speaking, so far
from being any particular sort or kind of Conscience, as we have hitherto
supposed it, that it is no Conscience at all.

Conscience, as we have often said, is a Man's Mind making a Judgment about the
Morality of his Actions; But that which we are now talking of, is a man's Mind
making no Judgment as to that Point, but continuing wavering and undetermined.
Now how a man's Judgment and his no Judgment, which are the Contradictories to
one another, should agree in the same Common Nature of Conscience, is not easy
to be understood. The Truth is, by the same Logic or propriety of Speech, that
we say a Doubting Conscience, we may also if we please say an unresolved
Resolution, or a Persuasion without an Assent. But however, because Use has
given the Name of Conscience to the Doubting Mind; and because Conscience is
sometimes really concerned about Acting in Doubtful Cases, I choose to follow
the common way of speaking.

II. I now proceed to our Second general Head, which is concerning the Rule of
a Doubting Conscience.

In speaking to this, I shall do these two things. viz. I shall show,

First, What kind of Rule we here speak of, that is, which Conscience needs in
a Doubtful Case.

Secondly, What that Rule is, or wherein it does consist.

1. As to the first of these. When we speak of the Rule of a Doubting
Conscience, we do not mean such a Rule by which a man shall be enabled to
resolve all his Doubts concerning every Point, so as that he shall cease to
doubt any longer concerning that Point: But we mean only such a Rule by which a
man may be directed how to determine himself in every Doubtful Case, so as to
act with a safe Conscience, whether he can get rid of his Doubts or not.

There is just as much difference between these two things, as there is between
Doubting, for Instance, whether a thing in general be lawful, or not lawful;
and Doubting what I am to do in a particular Case, where I doubt of the
Lawfulness of the thing. The first of which Doubts, the Casuists call a
Speculative Doubt, the other a Practical.

It is plain, that a man may often very easily come to a Resolution of this
latter kind of Doubt; that is, be very well satisfied what it becomes him to do
as to this present Action, without being able to resolve his Doubt of the
former kind.

Thus, for instance, a man may not be able to resolve this Question, Whether it
be lawful or not lawful to play at Cards or Dice? which is the speculative
doubt, as the Schools call it: But he may be very able to resolve this
Question, What is most reasonable for him to do in the Case of such a Doubt?
Again, a man may not be able to resolve this Doubt, Whether the present War in
which his Prince is engaged, be a just War or no? But yet he may be very well
able to satisfy himself as to the practical Doubt; that is, What is his Duty
to do in case his Prince command him to serve in that War, concerning which he
does thus doubt?

Now it is the Doubts of this latter kind, these Practical Doubts, as they are
called, that Conscience is directly and immediately concerned with, and
consequently, for the resolving of which, it chiefly needs a Rule to direct it.
For if a man can but get satisfied what is most agreeable to his Duty to do, as
to the present Action he doubts about, it is no great matter as to his
Conscience, whether he can get his General or Speculative Doubts about that
Action resolved or no. These kind of Doubts, if they cannot be Resolved, must
be Overruled.

The truth is, it is a very idle thing for men to talk, that a man must do no
Action, till all his Doubts about it be resolved. Thus far we grant it concerns
him, that his Doubts should be resolved, viz. That he should be satisfied in
his own mind, that that side of the Action he determines himself to, is, all
things considered, the more fit and reasonable to be chosen: And to direct a
Man in making such a Choice, is our principal business under this Head. But if
it be meant, that a Man must so resolve all his Doubts about an Action, as to
see clearly through all the Speculative Points which occasion his Doubts, so as
to be able to untie all the Difficulties which before entangled his
Understanding, and from Intrinsic Arguments, drawn from the nature of the
thing, to pronounce concerning the merits of the Question: I say, if this be
their meaning, there is nothing more absurd than to say, That a man is not to
do an Action till he has resolved or deposed all his Doubts about it.

For in many Cases this is utterly impossible to be done; the person concerned
perhaps having no sufficient Means for the obtaining such a Resolution of his
Doubts as we spoke of; or if he had, the Case may be such as will not allow him
sufficient time of Consideration for the doing it; for he must either act or
not act presently; and he is in equal Perplexity, both as to the one, and as to
the other. What now in such a Case can a Man possibly do more than this? viz.
by his own Reason, and the advice of his Friends, to get satisfied what is most
reasonable, and most agreeable to his Duty, for him to do in the present
Circumstances, and to proceed accordingly; for as for other kind of Resolution
of his Doubts, as things stand with him, he has not the least Prospect of it.

And indeed, when all is said, we see de facto that this is the usual way of
proceeding among Men, even those that are very Honest and Conscientious. I dare
say, if we take all the Doubtful Cases that happen; where there is one Case in
which a Man proceeds to Action upon such a Resolution of his Doubts as we
before spoke of, there are ten Cases where the Doubt is overruled, and the Man
proceeds to Action without such a Resolution; sitting down satisfied with this,
that though he cannot answer the Difficulties on both sides, yet, all things
considered, it is most reasonable for him, in the present Circumstances, to act
thus, rather than otherwise; for this he takes to be most agreeable to his
General Duty; or this is that which Wise and Good Men, whom he has consulted,
do advise him to.

And now having sufficiently explained what kind of Resolution of Doubts that
is, which a Man's Conscience stands in need of in order to his acting safely in
a doubtful Case,

II. I come now to the second Question upon this Head, which is, What that Rule
is by which we are to proceed in thus Resolving our Doubts, or determining our
selves to one side or other, in any Doubtful Case that happens to us.

In answer to this Enquiry, I shall do these two things. First, I shall give
some account of the General Rule by which a Doubting Conscience is to be
guided. Secondly, I shall apply this General Rule to the several Heads, of
Doubtful Cases wherein a man's Conscience may be concerned: That so every one
may be furnished with some Principles, for the determining himself in any
Matter concerning which he happens to have a Doubt.

1. As to the first of these, Whoever has Considered what we have before said,
will easily be persuaded, that nothing ought to turn the Balance in a Doubtful
Case, but the greater Weight of Reason on one side than the other. For since
the very Notion of Doubting, is the suspense of a man's Judgment in a Question,
upon account of the equal appearances of Reason on both sides of it: It is
plain, that that which is to settle the Judgment, and to determine the Doubt
can be nothing else but this, viz. That, after all things considered, there
does appear greater Reason to lie on this side of the Question, than there does
on that. So that the General Rule of a Doubting Conscience, and from which the
measures of resolving all particular Cases are to be taken, cannot be laid down
otherwise than thus. viz. That in all Doubtful Cases, that side which, all
things duly considered, does appear more reasonable, that is to be chosen.

I am not ignorant that the Casuists have usually proposed this Rule in other
Terms. viz. That in all Doubtful Cases the safer side is to be followed. But I
do purposely avoid the expressing it so, because of the uncertain meaning of
the safer side? For according as that Word is expounded, (as it may be
expounded different ways), so is the Rule so worded true or false.

If we take safety in the strict and proper Sense, and as it is indeed usually
understood, viz. as it is opposed to any Hazard or Danger: it is so far from
being an Adaequate Rule of a Doubting Conscience, in all Cases to follow the
safer side, that in many Cases it will be very unadvisable so to do.

Sure I am, that in Doubtful Cases which concern the Civil Life, no Wise man
does always make this a Rule to himself. We see a hundred Instances every day,
where men venture upon the less safe and the more hazardous side, upon the
account of other Reasons and considerations, which they think ought more to
prevail with them.

It is certainly, in general speaking, more safe (that is, more free from
hazard or danger) to Travel on Foot, than on Horseback; to stay at home, than
to go into Foreign Countries; to Traffic by Land, than to venture ones Stock
on the uncertain Seas. But yet for all this, the consideration of the Ease and
Expedition that is to be had in the first Case, and the Improvement and Benefit
that is to be hoped for in the second, and the Gain and Profit in the last, do
we see every day overballance the consideration of Safety in these Cases, and
determine a man not to that side which is freest from Danger, but to that which
is more Convenient, or more Useful, or more Advantageous.

And thus it is likewise as to those Doubtful Cases wherein a man's Conscience
is concerned. I suppose that when we speak of the safer side of any Action with
reference to Conscience, we generally mean that side on which there appears the
least Hazard or Danger of transgressing any Law of God. But now in this Sense
of safety, I do not think that it is always a good Rule, for a Doubting
Conscience to choose the safer side: On the contrary, I think, that if the Rule
be thus put, and thus understood, it will often prove a Snare to a man's Mind,
and rather entangle him further in Difficulties, than help him out of them.

If it was received as a Rule, That a man is in all his Actions to keep himself
at the greatest distance he can from the Danger of sinning, (which is the
Notion of safety I here speak of), I dare say, there are very few Persons that
converse much in the World, but have reason, almost every day, to call
themselves to account for transgressing this Rule. For they do every day engage
in such Actions, in which they cannot but acknowledge that they do expose
themselves to a greater danger of sinning, than if they had not engaged in them.

Thus, for instance, what man is there among us who, although he know himself
to be prone enough to the sin of Intemperance in eating or drinking when
Temptations are offered, and accordingly for this reason does most seriously
set himself against this particular sin; yet makes any great Scruple of going
to Feasts and Entertainments when he is invited by others; nay or of making
them himself, when Decency or Civility, or the serving any of his Temporal
affairs does require him so to do? But yet it is certain, that by thus doing,
he runs a much greater Hazard of falling into the sin he fears, than if he
should forbear all such Occasions or Temptations of Intemperance.

Many other Instances which daily occur in Humane Life might be given, wherein
good men, nay even the best of men, do for the sake of their Business, or other
Laudable Designs which they think fit to pursue, frequently venture to expose
themselves to such dangers of sinning as they might have avoided; and this
without any Reproach from their own Conscience, or any Censure from other Men.

The truth is, God has no where commanded us to avoid all possible danger of
sinning, but only to avoid all sin when we are in danger. It is enough for the
securing a man's Duty, that he does not transgress the Laws of God in any Action
that he takes in hand: But it is not required that he should in every instance
of his Conversation, preserve himself from the utmost possibility, or, (if you
will) Danger of so doing. For upon this Supposition, it would be impossible for
one to live like a man of this World, and perform the common Offices of Civil
Life, and much more to live to any great purposes for the serving his
Generation. Indeed the Result of all would be, That whoever would approve
himself to be truly Religious and Conscientious, must abandon all Secular
Affairs, and retire to a Cloister or a Desert.

But it may be said, What is this to our Business? Those we now spoke of are
supposed to be fully satisfied in their own Minds, that they may safely venture
on the more dangerous side of an Action, for the sake of some considerable good
that they design in that Action: But the Case we are now concerned in, is that
of one who is altogether Doubtful whether he may Lawfully do the Action or no.
To this I answer, That my Business is now to give an account of the Rule by
which men are to proceed, in determining themselves in Doubtful Cases; and that
which I have said, does thus far I think come home to that Business, that if it
be allowed that it is advisable in any Case to forsake the more safe side of an
Action, and to choose the more hazardous: we will take it for granted, that it
may be as advisable in a Doubtful Case as in any other, until it be made to
appear, that God has appointed a Rule for Doubting persons to govern themselves
by, different from that he has given to other men: Or, to speak the thing more
plainly, till it be made to appear, that those who are so unhappy as to Doubt,
are debarred of the privilege of Acting according to the best of their Reason
and Discretion, which men that do not Doubt are allowed to do.

But to come more strictly to the Point. I do believe there do abundance of
Doubtful Cases, properly so called, frequently happen, in which no Man of
Understanding, although we suppose him never so Honest, does think he is
obliged to determine himself to that side of the Action on which he apprehends
there is least Danger of sinning: But on the contrary, he will often forsake
that side which is safer in this sense, for that which does more recommend it
self to him upon other Accounts.

Thus for instance, some times Doubtful Cases do happen, in which the greater
Probability on one side, will turn the Balance against the greater Safety on
the other. Thus if a Man should Doubt whether it may be Lawful to eat any thing
Strangled, or that has Blood in it, (because there are some Passages in the
Scripture that seem to forbid these Meats); and should repair to some
intelligent Person about this matter, who should give him such an account of
those Texts, and of all the other Difficulties in this Affair, that the Man
comes away satisfied, that it is far more Probable that all kinds of Meats are
allowed by the Christian Religion, than that any are forbidden.

I ask now, Whether this degree of Satisfaction have not weight enough to put
an end to a Man's Doubt in such a Case as this, so as that he may with a quiet
Conscience eat of these Meats as there is occasion? I believe most Men will be
of this Opinion; but yet the Doubt here is not determined on the safer side,
but on the more unsafe. For it is certain, a Man is in less Danger of sinning,
if he wholly forbear these Meats, than if, for the serving a present
Convenience, he do eat of them. And the Reason is plain; because there are fair
Grounds from the Scripture, and Antiquity, for making it a Question whether
these Meats be Lawful or no; and it is really yet a Question among many, and it
was lately so to the Man himself: But no man in the World ever made a Question
whether these Meats might not at any time be Lawfully forborne; there being no
Law of God pretended that obliges a Man to eat of them.

Again, As a greater Probability will turn the Balance against the safer side
of a Doubt: So oftentimes such Doubtful Cases do happen, in which, when the
Probabilities are equal on both sides, the Consideration of the greater
Temporal Advantages on the one side, will have Weight enough with a very Honest
Man to overbalance the Consideration of the greater Safety on the other.
[Still taking Safety in the sense we before gave.]

Thus for Instance, Suppose one should demand of another Man a Sum of Money
which he pretends to be due to him, and the Man of whom it is demanded, after
the strictest and most conscientious Enquiry he can make, is not satisfied in
his own mind that it is due. But such is the Confidence of the Demander, and
such appearances of Reason he offers, that the Man comes to doubt equally,
whether it be due or no; so that there are here equal Probabilities on both
sides. The thing in Question now is, Whether it be advisable in point of
Conscience for the Man to pay the Money demanded, till he have better Evidence
of the Justice of the Demands?

If a Man be to follow the safer side, it is certain he must pay it. For it is
undeniably more safe, that is, farther removed from the Danger of Sin, to
satisfy the Demands, though it be to his own loss. For by this means he
perfectly sets himself free from the Apprehensions even of the possibility of
wronging his Neighbor, which is the sin that he fears in this Case: Whereas if
he do not pay the Money, he is uncertain whether he detains the Man's Right from
him or no.

But then, on the other hand, if he should pay the money when it is no way due,
(as he has as much Reason to believe that it is not due, as that it is), how
shall he answer to his Wife and Children for parting with such a Sum, which, as
his Circumstances may be, he cannot spare without great prejudice to them?

This is the Case, and these are the Arguments that are to be urged on both
sides of it, And I leave it to any considering Man to judge which ought to
prevail. I am pretty confident, that most Men will thus determine, viz. That
since in this Case it is as Probable, that the Demands aforesaid are Unjust, as
that they are Just; and since no man is obliged to depart from that he is
possessed of, till it do appear by good Evidence that it is due to another Man:
And since withal it is unreasonable so to do, when it will be to the Prejudice
of a Man's Self and his Family: These things being so, it will be more advisable
for the Man in this Case to keep his Money, till it be either by Law adjudged,
or he have more convincing Proofs to his own Conscience, that he ought to pay
it.

I think I need not use either more Instances, or more Words, to show that it
is not always a Rule to a Doubting Conscience to choose the safer side of the
Doubt, taking the safer side for that which is at the greatest distance from
the danger of sinning: It being abundantly plain, that many Doubtful Cases may,
and do happen, in which, though one side may appear farther removed from the
Danger of transgressing Gods Law; yet while it does not appear that the other
side is unlawful, and withal it is evident that upon other accounts that side
is more eligible to a Prudent Person, no good Man (if he be but as Wise as he
is Good) will make any Difficulty of waveing the safer side for the more
Prudent, and that without thinking himself ever the less Conscientious for so
doing.

But after all this, If on the other hand, any man have another Notion of
Safety than that we have now been speaking of; that is to say, will enlarge the
signification of the Word, and will call by the name of the Safer side, not
that which has only this to recommend it, that it is farther removed from the
danger of sinning; but that which is freest from all Dangers and Inconveniences
of all kinds whatsoever: So as that shall always be the Safer side of a
Doubtful Case, which, after all things considered, does appear to be most
agreeable to the Man's Duty in the Circumstances he is in, or which is attended
with the fewest Absurdities and evil Consequences of all sorts, and does best
serve all the Interests Spiritual and Temporal taken both together, that a Wise
and a Good Man can propose to himself: I say if any man do mean this by the
Safer side, I do readily agree with him, that it will for ever, and in all
Cases, be a True, and a Wise, and a Good Rule (nay, I add), the only one, to a
Doubting Conscience to follow the safer side.

But then, in this sense of Safety, the safer side and the more Reasonable is
all one thing. And consequently, this Rule of following the safer side, and
that I before laid down, of following the more Reasonable, are the same in
sense, through differently expressed. Only I think this latter way of
expression is more plain, and less liable to misconstruction, and therefore I
chose it. But it is indifferent to me how Men Word things, so long as we agree
in our Sense.

II. Having thus given an Account of the General Rule by which a man is to
determine himself in Doubtful Cases; I come now, in the Second place, to treat
of the several Heads, or Sorts of Doubtful Cases, wherein a Man's Conscience is
concerned, and to make Application of this Rule to them; and this it will be no
hard matter to do, admitting the Grounds we have before laid down.

There is no Doubt wherein Conscience is concerned, but it will of necessity
fall under one of these two Sorts. It is either a Single Doubt, or a Double one.

We call that a Single Doubt, when a man doubts only on one side of the Action,
but is very well satisfied as to the other. As for Instance, he doubts
concerning this or the other particular Action, whether it be Lawful for him to
do it: But on the other side, he has no Doubt, but is very well assured, that
he may Lawfully let it alone. Or, on the contrary, he is very well satisfied
that the Action is Lawful, and that he may do it: But he doubts whether Gods
Law has not made it a Duty, so that he cannot Lawfully omit it. This is that
which we call a Single Doubt.

We call that a Double Doubt, where a man doubts on both sides of an Action,
that is to say, he doubts on one side whether he be not bound to do this
Action; Gods Law, for any thing he knows, made it a Duty: But on the other
side, so is the Action circumstantiated with respect to him, or he with respect
to it; that he doubts whether he be not bound to forbear the Action as it is
now presented to him; Gods Law having for any thing he knows forbid it. So that
he is at a loss what to do, because he fears he may sin, whether he does the
Action or does it not. I say, it will be impossible to put any doubtful Case
wherein a man's Conscience is concerned, which will not fall under one of these
two Heads.

I. Now, as to the Case of a Single Doubt, we may thus apply the General Rule.
That when a man doubts only on one side of an Action, there it is more
Reasonable to choose that side of the Action concerning which he has no Doubt,
than the other, concerning which he Doubts, supposing all other Considerations
be equal.

And here comes in that famous Maxim which has obtained both among Christians
and Heathens, Quod dubitas ne feceris; which, with the restriction I have now
mentioned, will for ever be good Advice in all Cases of this Nature.

It must needs be unreasonable to venture upon any Action where a man has the
least Fear or Suspicion that it is possible he may transgress some Law of God
by it, when it is in his power to Act without any Fear or Suspicion of that
kind; supposing all along this Consideration of the possibility of offending by
this Action, be not over-ballanced, and so the Fear of it removed, by other
Considerations which the Circumstances of the Action do suggest.

Thus for Instance. Here is a Man Doubts whether it be allowable in a Christian
to drink a Health, or put out Money to Interest, or to go to Law; as having
conversed with such Men, or such Books as do condemn these Practices, and that
not without some Color from the Word of God. The man is not indeed so
convinced by their Discourses, as to have taken up any Opinion or Persuasion
that these Practices are unlawful; nor would he censure any man that uses them,
because he sees there are as Good Men, and for any thing he knows, as good
Arguments for the other side: But he is not so clear in his judgment about
these Points, as to be able to pronounce any thing positively concerning them
either way. He cannot say, that he believes them Lawful, though he is not
persuaded that they are unlawful, which is the true state of a Doubting mind.
Now in these and all other such like Cases the Rule is plain, That while a man's
judgment continues thus in suspense, it is more Reasonable for him to forbear
these Practices. For there is no pretense of obligation upon him from Gods Law
to engage in any of them, and why should he rashly throw himself into danger,
by venturing upon an Action concerning which he is uncertain whether it be
Lawful or no? He runs no hazard by forbearing these things; but if he practice
them, he does.

Thus far is right. But then, as I said, this is always to be understood with
this Proviso, Caeteris paribus. For if there should happen to be such other
Considerations in the Action, as have force enough to overbalance this
Consideration of Uncertainty; it will then be reasonable to choose that side of
the Action concerning which I did before doubt, rather than that of which I had
no doubt at all.

Thus if the Man that makes a Question about any of the three things I before
mentioned, should light into such Circumstances, that, for Instance, he must
either drink such a single Health, or a quarrel is like to ensue, nay, and that
perhaps to the danger of some of the Lives of the Company. Or again, that he
has no means of improving his Money (in which his whole Fortune consists) in
any other way but by that of Usury; so that he and his Family must in time
starve, unless they be maintained by this Course. Or lastly, if an Orphan be
trusted to his Care; and the Estate of that Orphan is so entangled, that he
must be put upon the necessity either of waging a Law Suit for the clearing it,
or suffering his near Relation, committed to his Charge, to be defrauded of his
Right. I say, if the Cases happen to be thus circumstantiated; he that before
doubted in General, whether it was Lawful to drink a Health, or to put out
money to Usury, or to engage in Lawsuits; may, I should think, certainly
satisfy himself, that it is not only Lawful, but Expedient in this particular
Case, notwithstanding his General Doubt, to do any of these things; and if he
be a Wise Man, he will make no Scruple of Acting accordingly.

Indeed he cannot be well excused if he do not thus Act. For it will not be
sufficient to say, I doubt whether these Practices are Lawful or Unlawful, and
therefore I dare not engage in them. Why Man? if you only Doubt about them, you
do by this ackonwledge, that for any thing you know they may be Lawful, as well
as that for any thing you know they may be Unlawful. And if you be thus in
aequilibrio, sure such pressing Considerations as those which are presented in
this Case, ought to turn the Balance. Otherwise I do not know how you will
answer either to your self or the World for the Consequences that may ensue.
For my part, in such Cases as these I should think, that nothing less than a
Belief or Persuasion, that the thing in Question is unlawful, will justify a
man's Prudence in Acting on that side which he calls the Safer, and which, had
not these Circumstances happened, would really have been so.

To conclude, if a great Good may be compassed, or a great Evil may be avoided,
by doing a thing concerning which we have a General Speculative Doubt whether
it be Lawful or no: This very Consideration is in Reason sufficient to silence
the Doubt: That is, it is enough to persuade us, that it is not only Lawful but
Advisable to do that in the present Circumstances, which before, and out of
those Circumstances, we Doubted in general whether it was Lawful to be done or
no.

II. And thus much concerning the Rule by which we are to proceed in the Case
of a Single Doubt, I now come to consider that which we call a Double Doubt,
and to show what is to be done in that Case.

A Double Doubt, as I have said, is this, when a man doubts on both sides of an
Action; that is to say, he doubts on one side whether he be not bound to do
this Action, Gods Law having for any thing he knows commanded it; but on the
other side, so does the Action come circumstantiated to him, that he doubts
whether he be not by some other Law of God bound to forbear it as it is now
offered: So that he is at a loss what to do, because he fears he may sin
whether he do the Action, or do it not.

That which is commonly said in this Case, viz. That the Man that is entangled
must get his Doubt removed, and then he may with a safe Conscience act or not
act, according as he is satisfied in his own mind; is, as I said before, very
often impertinent: For it is no more in a man's power to leave off Doubting when
he will, than it is in the power of a Sick man to be Well when he will. And
besides, though it might be supposed, that the man with Time and good Counsel
might be enabled to extricate himself out of this Perplexity; yet in our Case
that Benefit is not always allowed: For perhaps the Circumstances of the Case
are such, that the man is under a present necessity either of acting or not
acting, and whether he does the one or the other, he doubts he offends God.

But what then is a man to do in this Case? Why, he is to follow the same Rule
that he does in all other Doubtful Cases, and which we have been all this while
insisting on; that is to say, he is to Act as reasonably as he can: And if he
do this, I am sure he incurs no blame, whether he do the Action he doubts
about, or do it not. If there should happen to be any sin in the Action, it
comes upon some other account than that of Acting with a Doubting Conscience.

But now the Application of this General Rule to our present Case is various,
according to the Degrees of the man's Doubtfulness, compared with the Degrees of
the sin he is in danger of, by acting on the one side or the other. And
likewise according as other Considerations do happen about the Action, which
ought to have some influence in determining the man. However, I think all those
varieties may be comprised in these Four following Propositions.

First, If the Sin we are afraid of, in doing or not doing the Action, does on
both sides appear equal, there we are to determine our selves to that side
where we have the least Doubt of offending God; that is to say, to that side
which to our Reason appears more Probable to be free from the dnager of sin,
rather than that other which is less Probable to be free from that danger: For
certainly this will always be reasonable, that a man should choose a greater
Probability before a less, supposing all other things equal.

But Secondly, If we doubt equally on both sides; so that we apprehend that we
are in like danger of transgressing Gods Law whether we do the Action or do it
not: In this Case we are to determine our selves to that side on which it does
appear we shall be guilty of the least sin. For certainly, by the same reason
for which we are obliged not to sin ^n at all, we shall be obliged to choose a
less sin rather than a greater, where we annot cavoid sinning.

Thirdly, If the Doubt be unequal, and the Sin likeways unequal; that is, if it
so happen that one side of the Case is more probable, but the other side less
sinful, as not involving a man in so heinous a Crime as the other would, if it
should prove that he was mistaken: In this Case a man may choose either the one
side or the other; according as the degree of the Probability, or the degree of
the Sin, compared with one another, do preponderate.

The Case may be such, that there is so much more Probability on the one side
than the other, and likewise so inconsiderable a difference and disproportion
between the sins we are in danger of on each side, that a Wise man will be
determined to the more Probable side, and venture all the consequences of his
mistakes on the other.

But then, on the other hand, the Case may likewise be such, that the
Consequences on one side, if a man should happen to be mistaken, are so
terrible, that they will overbalance all the Probabilities on the other side,
let them be never so great; (supposing they do not amount to so much evidence
as to create a Persuasion, and so put a man out of the state of Doubting). Now
here a Wise man will not Act on the more Probable side, but on that which sets
him free from the danger of these Consequences. Thus if a Prisoner was tried
for a Capital Offense, and the Evidence against him does not appear so full as
to create a Persuasion in the Judge or Jury that the man is Guilty, though
indeed it is more Probable that he is, than that he is not: In this Case I
believe all men will say, that considering there is so great a disproportion
between the Evil of condemning an Innocent Person and acquitting a Guilty one,
(it being Murder in the one Case) the Judge or Jury should rather follow the
safer side than the more Probable, and so clear the man, rather than find him
Guilty.

Fourthly, If the Case be such, that the Man doubts equally on both sides, and
the sin he is afraid of appears likewise to him to be equal on both sides: Here
other Considerations are to turn the Balance. In this Case he is to consider
what Prudential Inducements he has to do the Action, or forbear it; as how far
his Ease and Quiet, his Advantage and Benefit, his good Name and Reputation,
his Friends or his Family is concerned one way or other; and since all other
Considerations, that are of a Moral Nature, are equal on both sides; those of
this kind, which are the strongest, must add so much weight to the Scale, as to
determine the Man either to do the Action he doubts about, or to let it alone.

And indeed, it cannot be denied that these Considerations will often have a
great Influence even upon a good Man, not only in the Case I have now put,
where the directly Moral Arguments are equal on both sides, but in all the
other doubtful Cases I before mentioned.

We may talk very rationally about the Degrees of Probability, and the Degrees
of Sin, and what weight each of them is to have with us, and all this with so
much Evidence, that no Man can deny the reasonableness of the Rules we lay down
in Thesi: But yet when we come to Act, we find that scarce any Man does exactly
proceed according to these Rules; but mixes some of these Prudential
Considerations which I have mentioned with his Deliberations, and though they
do not wholly, yet they help to turn the Balance. And for my part, I dare not
say, that all those who thus proceed, are to be blamed for so doing; supposing
that the Case wherein they thus Act, be a Case of pure Doubt, and there be no
Persuasion on either side; and withal, that the Man who thus proceeds, is
satisfied in his own Mind with his proceeding. The truth is, when all is said,
every Man in doubtful Cases is left to his own Discretion; and if he Acts
according to the best Reason he has, he is not culpable, though he be mistaken
in his Measures.

These are all the Rules that are to be given in the Case of a Double Doubt.
And I think no body can object against the Truth of them. But I am sensible of
another Objection that may be made, and that is, Why I do mention them at all.
Since to the Generality of Men, for whom this Discourse is intended, they seem
altogether unpracticable. For how few are there who are Competent Judges of
these different Degrees of Probability or Sinfulness in an Action that we here
talk of, and much less are capable of so ballancing these things one with
another, as to be able from thence to form a good Judgment upon the whole
Matter?

But to this I answer, That if Rules are to be given at all for the determining
Men in Doubtful Cases, we must give these, because we can give no other. These
being the only Principles that Men have to govern their Actions by in these
Cases. And I trust also, they will not be wholly useless to the most ordinary
Capacities, for the Purposes they are intended. Because all may hereby at least
learn thus much, viz. What Methods they are to proceed by for the guidance of
their Actions in Doubtful Cases. And though they may have false Notions of the
Dangers and the Degrees of particular Sins, and so may sometimes make false
Applications of these Rules to their own Case; yet it is enough for their
Justification, as I said before, that they have Reasoned as well as they can.
Since they are not bound to Act in Doubtful Cases, according to what is best
and most reasonable in it self: But it is abundantly sufficient, that they do
endeavor it.

But to render these Rules about a Double Doubt more intelligible and more
useful, I think it will not be amiss to give my Reader a Specimen, both how
they are to be applied to particular Cases, and likewise when they are applied,
what light they give to a Man for the choosing his way in any Doubtful Case he
happens to be engaged in. And since it would take up too much room to give
every particular Rule a several Instance, I shall pitch upon one Case, under
which I may consider all the Varieties of a Double Doubt I have now
represented; and it shall be that Celebrated Case of the Sacrament, than which
we have not a greater or a more frequent Instance of this kind of Doubt in any
Case among us. And because I would not by the discussion of this Case, divert
my Reader (against his will) from the main Argument, I have taken care to have
it so marked in the Print, that every one may without trouble (if he have no
mind to read it) pass it over as a long Parenthesis, and go on to the next
Point.

This is the Case.

Here is a Man that believes it to be his Duty to take all opportunities of
Receiving the Sacrament, or at least to take them frequently. But on the other
side, such is his condition, that he is constantly under great Fears and
Apprehensions of his being unqualified for it; and to receive the Sacrament
Unworthily he knows to be a great Sin: Not that there is any grievous notorious
Sin lies upon his Conscience unrepented of; much less that he is engaged in
some vicious Course, which he is unwilling that his new Vows at his approach to
the Lords Table should divorce him from: For indeed he desires and endeavors
in all things to live honestly, and to keep a Conscience void of offense
toward God and toward Man.

But this is the Case, He is not so devout a Christian, nor lives so Pure and
Spiritual a Life, as he thinks becomes the Partakers of such Heavenly Food. Or
perhaps he cannot bring himself to so feeling a Sense and Contrition for his
past Sins, or such ardours of Love and Devotion to our Savior, as he has been
taught that every worthy Communicant ought to be affected with. Or perhaps he
wants Faith in the Blood of Christ, not being able to apply the Benefits of his
Passion so comfortably to his own Heart as he thinks he ought to do. Or
perhaps, in the last place, his mind is so haunted with a company of idle and
naughty Fancies, especially when he sets himself to be more than ordinarily
serious, that he thinks it would be a great Profanation of the Sacrament, for
him to come to it in such Circumstances.

These, or such like, are the things that trouble him. And though he has
several times endeavored to put himself into a better condition, yet he could
never satisfy himself, nor get over these difficulties. What now must this Man
do? He would fain receive the Sacrament, as thinking himself bound to do it;
but he dare not receive it, as looking upon himself to be unqualified for it.
If he do not come to the Lords Table, he denies his Attendance on the most
Solemn Ordinance of Christianity, and so doubts he sins on that account: If he
do come, he doubts he approaches unworthily, and so sins upon that account.

It is here to be remembered, that the Question to be spoken to in this Case, is
not this; What course the Man is to take for the Curing or Removing his
Doubtfulness in this matter, that so he may come to the Sacrament with
Satisfaction to his own mind: But this; Supposing the Man after all his
endeavors cannot cure or remove his Doubt, what he must do? must he come to
the Sacrament, or must he forbear? One of them he must do, and yet, which of
them soever he chooses, he fears he sins.

If the former had been the Question, the Resolution of it would have been
thus: That the Man is to use the best means he can to get better Instruction
and Information about the Nature and Ends of the Christian Sacrament; and about
the Qualities and Dispositions that are needful to fit a man for it,
particularly those of Faith and Repentance. For it is the Man's Ignorance or
Mistake about these things, that makes him pass so hard a Censure upon himself,
and so occasions all the Doubtfulness in this Case. If he once come rightly to
understand these Points, his Doubts would of themselves fall to the Ground; and
the Man would be perfectly satisfied, that as his Case is (supposing it to be
such as I have now represented) he may without any Fear or Scruple in the World
at any time approach to the Holy Table; because he is indeed in such a state
and disposition of mind as renders him habitually qualified for the performance
of that Duty.

But this, as I said, is not the Question before us; we here suppose the Man,
either through want of Means of Instruction, or through strong Prejudices from
Education, or the like, to be incapable at present of this Satisfaction, and to
be in great perplexity on both sides; and that which we are to enquire into is,
to which side of the doubtful Case he must determine himself. Shall he receive
the Sacrament doubting as he does? or shall he forbear it doubting as he does?

Now I say, a man has no other way of coming to a Resolution of this Question,
but by applying the Rules I before laid down to his present Case: which may be
done in this manner.

Since the Man we speak of doubts that he sins whether he come to the
Sacrament, or forbear, the First thing to be considered is, on which side he
doubts least; or which side appears to him most likely and probable to be free
from the danger of sinning: For, if all other things in the Case be equal, the
Balance is to be turned on that side according to our first Proposition.

Now if our present Question be put upon this Issue, I am confident the Man
whose Case I am representing will think it more reasonable to repair to the
Sacrament, even in that evil posture he takes himself to be; than customarily
to abstain from it: Because by thus doing, he does certainly follow the more
probable, and the less doubtful or dangerous side of the Question. For it is
evident, he cannot pretend to be half so certain of this Particular, viz. That
he is unprepared for the Sacrament, which is the reason of his abstaining, as
he is certain in the General that it is his Duty to frequent it.

If indeed the Man was a person of ill Life and Manners: Or if he had been
lately guilty of any Notorious Wilful Sin, and came to the Lords Table with
that sin upon his Conscience unrepented of: Then I will grant, he had some
reason to believe that he was as much in danger of sinning, by receiving
unworthily; as by withdrawing himself from Gods Ordinance. But the Case here is
not so. The Man is really an honest well-meaning Christian, nor has he done
any thing of late, which can give him any suspicion of his having forfeited
that Title. Only through his Mistake about the Notion of preparation for the
Sacrament, he apprehends he is not qualified as he ought to be, though yet if
most others were to be Judges of his Condition, they would say he was. Why?
certainly in this Case, it must be evident to the Man that he runs a greater
danger of transgressing the Law of God by absenting himself from the Communion,
especially if he do it customarily; than if he should come to it with all his
Fears and Doubts about him. For, as I said, his Fears and Doubts of his own
unworthiness, cannot possibly be so well grounded as his Fears and Doubts that
he sins against God by habitually denying his attendance on that great
Christian Service. For those are founded on the express Laws of the Gospel: The
others are founded only on uncertain conjectural Surmises about his own
condition. That is to say, he is certain that he is bound to take frequent
opportunities of paying his homage to Jesus Christ in the Sacrament; but he
cannot pretend to have such assurance in his Case that he is unqualified for
paying that homage.

But Secondly, Let us suppose the Doubt is equal on both sides: That is to say,
that the Man has as much reason to believe that he is an unworthy Receiver if
he receives at all, as he has reason to believe that it is a Sin in him if he
do not receive. Which yet can hardly be supposed in our Case, but let us
suppose it, nay, if you please, let us suppose the Man does certainly sin,
whether he recives or forbears: Here then this comes to be considered; which of
these two Sins is the least: To Receive unworthily, yet out of a Sense of Duty,
or not to receive at all. For on which side soever this last sin happens to be,
to that side the Man is to determine himself according to our second Rule. It
being eternally reasonable, That of two Evils we should choose the least, when
we cannot avoid both.

Now putting the Case before us upon this Issue, there needs no more to be done
for the resolving it, than only to ask this general Question.

Which is the greater sin of these two; for a Man to omit a known Duty, and so
to break a known Law of God for Conscience sake: Or to yield Obedience to that
Law for Conscience sake, when yet it so happens, that a Man cannot do that,
without breaking another Law of God in the manner of his Performance of that
Duty? For my part, I should think that the Man who does this last, though he
cannot be said to be Innocent, yet is he guilty in a far less degree, than the
Man that practices the former, and a great deal more is to be said in his
justification.

Let us suppose two Men, both of them conscious to themselves, that as things
stand with them, they are not in a fit condition, so much as to say their
Prayers, or to perform any other act of Religious Worship as they ought to do;
now one of these Men does upon this account forbear all Prayers both Public
and Private; neither using his Closet, nor frequenting the Church. The other
has such a Sense of what both Natural Religion and Christianity do oblige him
to in this matter, that he dares not forbear his usual Offices either in
Public or Private, though yet he believes he sinfully performs them.

If the Question now be put, which of these two is the better Man, or the least
Offender, I dare say that all men will give their Judgment in favor of the
latter, though yet no Wise man will think that this Person is to be excused for
living at such a rate, that he cannot say his Prayers without Sin.

This Judgment, I say, men would pass in this Case; and there is a great deal
of Reason for it. For certainly, no indisposition that a man has contracted,
of what nature soever, will take off from his Obligation to obey the Laws of
God. If a man cannot do his Duty so well as he ought, he must at least do it as
well as he can. And therefore let his Circumstances be what they will, he must
needs be less Criminal in performing a known Duty in the best manner that his
Condition will allow him, though with many and deserved Reflections upon his
own Unworthiness, than in wholly omitting or disusing that Duty. Because a
neglect in the manner of performing a Duty, is a less fault than to neglect the
Substance of it.

Let this now that I have said be applied to our Case, and we have an easy
resolution of the Question before us. viz. That since a greater sin is to be
avoided before a less, when a man supposes himself to be under a necessity of
being guilty of one; it is more reasonable that the man we speak of, should
come to the Sacrament with all his Doubts concerning his unworthiness, than
that he should customarily and habitually withdraw himself from it, because it
is a greater sin to do this latter than the former.

Well, but some say, How can this consist with St. Paul's Doctrine? Who
expressly affirms, That whoever eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks 1 Cor. 11. 29.
Damnation to himself. Can there be any more dreadful sin than that, which if a
man be guilty of, it will actually Damn him? Certainly one would think by this,
that a man runs a much less hazard in not Receiving at all, than in venturing
to Receive whilst he has the least Doubt that he Receives unworthithily,
considering the dreadful Consequences of it.

But to this I briefly answer. Such a man as we all along suppose in our Case,
is in no danger at all of Receiving unworthily, in the Sense that St. Paul
uses this Term. For the unworthy receiving that he so severly Censures in the
Corinthians, was their approaching to the Lords Table with so little a sense of
what they were about, that they made no distinction between the Lords Body and
common Food: Ibid. v. 29. v. 20, 21, 22.
But under a pretense of meeting for the Celebration of the Lords Supper, they
used the Church of God as if it was an Eating or Tippling House: Some of them
Revelling it there to that degree, that they went away Drunk from these
Religious Assemblies. All this appears from the Text. But I hope none among us
(especially none of those who are so doubtful about their being duly qualified)
do profane the Sacrament in this manner.

But further, Perhaps the Damnation which St. Paul here denounces, is not so
frightful as is commonly apprehended. For all that he says (if either the
Original or the Margin of our English Bibles be consulted) will appear to be
this, He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks Judgment to
himself. Meaning hereby, in all probability, that he who does thus affront our
Lords Instistution, by making no distinction between the Bread of the Sacrament
and common Meat; does by this his profaneness draw severe Judgments of God upon
himself. For, for this cause (says he) many are weak and Ver. 30.
sickly among you, and many are fallen asleep: But here is not a word of
Everlasting Damnation; much less of any man's being put into that State by thus
receiving unworthily: Unless any man will say, that all those who are visited
with Gods Judgments in this World, are in the State of Damnation as to the
next. Which is so far from being true, that St. Paul in this very place affirms
the contrary, viz. in the 32. Verse, where he tells us, That When we are thus
judged [in this World] we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the World, i. e. with Wicked men in another Life.

But further, Admitting St. Paul in these words to mean Damnation in the usual
Sense, yet still the utmost they can come to, will be no more than this: That
whosoever eats and drinks thus unworthily, as the Corinthians did, is
guilty of a Damnable sin. But now there are a great many other Cases besides
this of the Sacrament, in which a Man is equally guilty of a Damnable Sin, if
he do not perform his Duty as he ought to do. He that Prays or Hears
unworthily; He that Fasts or gives Alms unworthily. In a word, He that in any
Instance performs the Worship of God, or professes the Christian Religion
unworthily: I say, such a Man, according to the Protestant Doctrine, may be
said to do these things to his own Damnation, upon the same account that he is
said to Eat and Drink his own Damnation that Communicates unworthily in the
Sacrament; though indeed not in so high a degree. That is to say, such a Man is
guilty of a Sin that is in its own Nature Damnable, and may prove actually so
to him, unless either by a particular or general Repentance he obtains Gods
pardon for it. But yet for all this, there is no man will for these Reasons
think it advisable to leave off the practice of these Duties; but the only
Consequence he will draw from hence, is, that he is so much the more concerned
to take care that he perform them as he ought to do.

But in the last place. Let the sin of coming to the Sacrament unworthily, be
as great and as damnable as we reasonably can suppose it: Yet this is that we
contend for, the sin of totally withdrawing from it, is much greater and more
damnable. So that if he who partakes of it unworthily, does eat and drink
Damnation to himself; He that partakes not at all, is so far from mending the
matter, that he does much increase that Damnation.

The truth of this does fully appear from what I have before spoke in General,
concerning the much greater sin of transgressing a known Law of God, than of
observing that Law as well as we can, though with much unworthiness. I will
only add this further, with reference to this Particular of receiving the
Sacrament.

Though I am far from encouraging any to approach to the Lords Table without
due Qualifications; or from extenuating any man's sin that comes unworthily;
(unworthily I mean in the Scripture Sense of that word, and not as it is
understood by many melancholy scrupulous Persons) Yet this I say: That if Men
did seriously consider what a sin it is to live without the Sacrament, it being
no other, than living in an open affront to the express Institution of our Lord
Jesus, and a renouncing the Worship of God and the Communion of the Church, in
the great Instance of Christian Worship and Christian Communion: And withal,
what dreadful Consequences they bring upon themselves hereby, even the
depriving themselves of the chief of those ordinary means which our Lord has
appointed for the obtaining Remission of sins, and the Grace and Influence of
his Holy Spirit: I say, if men did seriously consider these things, they would
not look upon it as so slight a matter, voluntarily to Excommunicate themselves
as to the partaking in this great Duty and Privilege of Christians; but what
apprehensions soever they had of the sin, and the danger of receiving
unworthily, they would for all that, think it more sinful and more dangerous
not to receive at all.

I have said enough in answer to this Objection from St. Paul; perhaps too
much, considering how often these things have been said. I will now go on with
our Case.

In the Third place, therefore let us suppose our Doubting Man, (for these or
such like Reasons as we have given) to have such a Sense of his Duty, that he
generally takes the opportunities that are offered him, of doing Honor to our
Lord, by partaking in his Supper, though perhaps he is not often very well
satisfied about his Preparation: But so it happens, that since his last
Communicating, he finds his Mind in a much worse frame than it used to be. He
has lived more loosly and carelessly than he was wont; or perhaps he has been
very lately guilty of some grievous sin that lies heavy upon his Conscience: So
that when his next usual time of Receiving comes, he cannot but apprehend
himself in a very unfit condition to Communicate in so sacred a Mystery. Upon
this he is in a great perplexity what to do. For on the one side, he thinks he
has more reason to believe that he offends God if he comes to the Sacrament in
these Circumstances, than if he forbears; because he is more certain, that
there is a Law of God that forbids him to come unworthily; than he is certain,
that there is a Law of God that commands him to receive every time that he has
opportunity. But now, on the other hand, if it should prove that he is really
bound by Gods Law to Commemorate the Death of Christ in the Sacrament, every
time that an opportunity is offered; He is sensible in that Case, it is a
greater sin to neglect this Duty, than to perform it unworthily, so long still
as he performs it out of Conscience. What now is the Man to do in these
Circumstances?

This is an exact Instance of the Case I spoke to in my third Proposition;
where on one side the Man runs a greater danger of sinning; but on the other
side, if he should prove mistaken, he sins in a greater degree.

Now for a Resolution of this Case, I say; That if the Question be put
concerning the Man's absenting himself only once or twice from the Communion, in
order to the exercise of Repentance, and the putting himself into a better
frame of mind, against another opportunity: The Answer (according to our Third
Proposition) must be this, That it is very reasonable thus to do.

And there is good ground for this Answer. For certainly a Man is more in
danger of sinning, if he receive unworthily, than if he do not receive every
time that there is a Communion. There being an express Law against the one; but
no express Law obliging to the other. For Christ has no more appointed that we
should receive the Sacrament so many times in a year; than he has appointed
that we should Pray so many times in a day; or that we should give such a
determinate proportion of our Annual Income to Charitable Uses. As to these
things he has bound us in the General; but as to the Particulars, the
Circumstances of our Condition, and the Laws of our Superiors are to determine
us. Only this we are to remember, that the oftener we perform these Duties, it
is the better; and we can hardly be said to be Christians if we do not perform
them frequently.

This now being so: Though it be true, that a Man would be guilty of a greater
sin, if he should at any time, though but once, abstain from the Communion,
than if he should come to it with such unworthiness as we are here speaking of;
supposing that Christ's Law had precisely tied him up to communicate every time
that a Communion is appointed: Yet since there is so little appearance of
Reason to conclude that Christ has thus tied him up; and withal on the other
hand, he runs so certain a danger of sinning if he should Communicate at this
time, apprehending himself to be so unworthy as he does: This Consideration of
the certain danger must needs in this Case overballance the other of the
greater sin, and make it appear more Reasonable to the Man to suspend his
receiving to another Opportunity, against which time he hopes to be better
prepared; than to adventure upon it in his present Circumstances.

But then if the Question be put concerning the Man's absenting himself
Customarily and Habitually from the Lords Table upon this account of
unworthiness; that which I have now said, will not hold. For in this Case, the
Man is in as much danger of sinning by not receiving at all, as by receiving
unworthily, nay, and a great deal more, as I showed in my first particular
about this Case. And withal he is guilty of a much greater sin in wholly
withdrawing from the Sacrament, than in coming to it though with never so great
Apprehensions of his own unworthiness, as I showed in my second. And therefore
since the danger is at least equal on both sides, he must choose that side on
which the least sin lies: That is to say, he must Communicate frequently (at
least so often as the Laws of the Church do enjoin him, which is three times a
year, though he be in danger of doing it unworthily; rather than not
Communicate at all.

Having thus gone through Three of our Propositions concerning a Double Doubt:
All that remains is, to put our Case about the Sacrament so, as that it may
serve for an Instance or Illustration of our fourth and last.

Here therefore we are to suppose our Doubting Man to be in such a Condition,
that he apprehends he runs an equal danger of sinning whether he receives the
Sacrament, or receives it not. And withal, so unskilful a Judge is he of the
morality of Actions, that he apprehends no great difference in the degree of
the sin, whether he do the one or the other.

In this Case now, all the Man can do, is to consider what Inducements he has
in Point of Prudence or Interest to do or to forbear the Action he doubts
about; for since all other Considerations in the Case are equal, those of this
kind are to turn the Balance, according to our Fourth Proposition.

But if the Case turn upon this Point, I dare say no man will be long doubtful,
whether he should frequent the Sacrament in obedience to the Laws, or forbear
it. For it is plain, that he Acts more Prudently, and more consults his own
Advantage both Temporal and Spiritual.

As for the Temporal Advantages which a Man receives by obeying the Laws in
this matter, I will not now insist on them, though they are neither few nor
inconsiderable. That which I desire chiefly to be here considered, is this,
That in point of Spiritual Advantages; it is much more advisable for our
Doubtting Person to come to the Sacrament, than to abstain from it.

For by frequenting this Ordinance, he takes the best method both to grow more
worthy, if he be now unworthy; and likewise to cure the Doubts and Scruples he
is now troubled with. But if he neglect this means of Grace, he not only takes
an effectual course to increase and perpetuate his Fears and Doubts (it being
very probable that the longer he defers his receiving the Sacrament, still the
more doubtful will he be of his being qualified for it): But also is in great
danger to lose that sense of Virtue and Religion that he now has upon his
Spirit; because he denies himself the use of those Means and Helps which are
most principally necessary for the preserving and maintaining it.

Now I say, supposing all other things in the Case equal, this very
Consideration alone will prevail with a reasonable Man to come to the
Sacrament, rather than forbear it, even at the same time that he mightily
doubts whether he shall not receive unworthily.

Thus have I given a large Exemplification of all our Rules concerning a Double
Doubt in this instance of receiving the Holy Communion. If I have dwelt too
long upon this Subject, I hope the Frequency and the Importance of the Case,
will in some measure excuse me.

III. Having thus prepared our way by settling the Notion and the Rule of a
Doubting Conscience, I come now more directly to the main Business that is
before us, and that is, to give an Account what share Humane Laws,
Ecclesiastical or Civil, have in the Rule of a Doubting Conscience, or what
Power they have to overruled a man's Doubts in any Case? which, according to the
method I proposed, is the Third general Enquiry I am to resolve.

This is indeed the great Point that is disputed between us and those of the
Separation. Nay, I may say it is the Point upon which that whole Controversy
turns, so far as a Doubting Conscience is concerned in it. And therefore I
shall discuss it as carefully as I can; but yet in such a general way as that
what I have to offer, may serve for all other Doubtful Cases of this Nature, as
well as this which we are now concerned in.

Their Assertion generally is this, (generally, I say: For there are some of
the Dissenters, and those as Learned and Eminent as any, who have declared
themselves of another Opinion) viz. That wherever a Man Doubts concerning the
Lawfulness of an Action; that very Doubt of his is a sufficient Reason to make
him forbear that Action, though Lawful Authority has commanded it.

On the other side, our Assertion is; That wherever Lawful Authority has
Commanded an Action, that Command is (generally speaking) a sufficient Warrant
for a Man to do that Action, though he Doubts whether in it self it be Lawful
or no.

That I may speak clearly to this Point; I shall First premise some things in
order to our more distinct understanding the State of the Question. Secondly, I
shall show the Grounds and Reasons of our Assertion. Thirdly, I shall endeavor
to answer the Chief Arguments that are brought on the other side.

I. What I think needful to be premised for the right apprehending the State of
the Question, I shall comprise in these following Particulars, by which it may
be easily discerned how far we agree with the Dissenters in this matter, and in
what we differ from them.

First, We do readily own with them, that no Authority upon Earth can oblige
its Subjects to do any Action which the Law of God has forbidden, or to
forbear any Action which the Law of God has commanded.

Secondly, We agree likewise with them in this; That wherever any Subject has
taken up an Opinion or Persuasion that such an Action which his Governors have
obliged him to, is against the Law of God; though it be a false Opinion or
Persuasion, yet it will so far bind him, that he cannot in that Instance obey
their Laws without offending God. But then we say, on the other hand, That
though he cannot Obey without sin, so long as this Persuasion continues; yet he
is at the same time guilty of sin in disobeying, if he should prove to be
mistaken; supposing that it was through his own fault that he fell into that
mistake.

Thirdly, We acknowledge further, That in a Case where a Man cannot be said to
be Persuaded that the particular Action enjoined by Authority is a sinful
Action; but only he Doubts whether it be so or no: Yet if the Man has a
general Persuasion that no Public Law will warrant him to act against his
Private doubt; in this Case he can no more do the Action enjoined without sin,
than he could in the former Case. But then if this Notion of his be false (as
it is my present business to show that it is so;) he cannot be excused from
sin, in disobeying his Superiors, unless upon the former account of inculpable
Ignorance.

Fourthly, We say this farther, That a Culpable Doubt does no more excuse the
doing an Evil Action, than a Culpable Ignorance, i. e. it does not excuse it My
meaning is this. If a man should be so little instructed in his Religion, as to
Doubt whether that which is plainly enjoined by Gods Law be a Duty or no: Or
whether that which is plainly forbid by Gods Law be a sin or no: (so plainly, I
mean, that it is the duty of every Honest Man to know this, and he must be most
criminally Ignorant that can be so stupid as to make a Doubt of it). If, I say,
in such a Case as this a man should Doubt whether the thing commanded by his
Superiors was Lawful or no: We are so far from saying that a Man does well in
obeying his Superiors in such an instance where their commands do so
manifestly contradict the Laws of God; that on the contrary, we affirm the man
is highly accountable to God for all such Actions that he does, though they
were done purely in obedience to that Authority which God has set over him;
and purely in compliance with this Principle we are now contending for, viz.
That in all Doubtful Cases it is most reasonable to govern our Actions by the
Commands of our Superiors.

Far are we therefore from asserting, That whatever our Governors do command,
the Subject is bound to perform, so long as he only Doubts, but is not
persuaded of the unlawfulness of the thing commanded: And that if there be any
sin in the Action, he that commands it is to answer for it, and not he that
obeys. For we do believe, that in matters where a man's Conscience is concerned,
every one is to be a Judge for himself, and must answer for himself. And
therefore, if our Superiors do command us to do an Action which their
Superior God Almighty has forbid; we are offenders if we do that Action, as
well as they in commanding it, and that whether we do it Doubtingly, or with a
Persuasion of its Lawfulness.

But then these two things are always to be remembered. First, That this is true
only in such Cases where (as I said) a man is bound to know that Gods Law has
forbid that Action which his Governors do command, and it is either through
his gross carelessness, or some other worse Principle in him, that he knows it
not, or is doubtful of it. For wherever a man is innocently, and inculpably
Ignorant or Doubtful, how the Law of God stands as to such a particular matter
which Authority has obliged him to; as neither having means to cometo the
knowledge of it; or, if he had, the Circumstances of his condition not
requiring that he should so accurately inform himself about it: In such a Case
as this, I say, a man cannot formally be said to be guilty of sin in obeying
his Lawful Superiors, though the instance in which he obeys should happen to
contradict some Law of God. For the Law of God here, is as no Law to him, that
is, it does not oblige him, because he neither knows it, nor is bound to know
it. And where there is no Law, there is no transgression.

And then further this is also to be remembered, that when we own that a man may
be guilty of sin as well in obeying his Superiors, when he only doubts of the
Lawfulness of the Action commanded, as when he is Persuaded that the Action is
unlawful: I say, this we are to remember, that when ever this Case happens; the
man's sin does not lie in his obeying his Superiors with a Doubting Conscience
(which is commonly run away with): For the man would as certainly sin, if in
this Case he did the Action with a Persuasion that it was Lawful; as he does in
doing it with a Doubt, whether it be Lawful or no. But the sin lies here: viz.
in doing an Action which Gods Law has forbid; and which the man would have
known to be an ill Action, if he had been so honest, and so careful in minding
his Duty as he should have been. It is his Acting contrary to a Law of God,
that here makes the matter of the sin; and it is his vicious criminal Ignorance
of that Law which gives the Form to it. But as for the obeying his Superiors,
whether with a Doubt or without one, that is no part or ingredient of the sin
at all.

Fifthly, We add this further, That whatever Power or Right we give to our
Superiors, for the overruling a Private Doubt; It is not to be extended so
far as either to destroy the Truth; or to supersede the Use of those Rules I
have before laid down in order to the directing a man's proceeding in the Case
of a Double Doubt. For this Case of obeying the Commands of our Superiors when
we doubt of the Lawfulness of them being a Double Doubt as properly as any
other, those Rules are here to take place as much as in any other instance.

And therefore where ever a man's Doubts are in this Case very unequal: That is
to say, he apprehends himself in much greater danger of sinning if he obey his
Superiors in this particular instance, than if he obey them not; as having
abundantly more Reason to believe that their Commands are Unlawful, than that
they are Lawful: In that Case we cannot say ^e is obliged to obey, but should
rather disobey, supposing all other Considerations be equal. For no man is
bound to obey his Superiors any farther than they command Lawful things. And
therefore if it be two to one more Probable that their Command is Unlawful than
that it is Lawful, it is likewise more Probable that a man in this Instance is
not to obey them. And a greater Probability, caeteris paribus, is always to be
chosen before a less, according to our First Rule

But, then though the Authority of our Superiors alone will not in this Case
be of force enough to retrieve the Balance which is so far inclined the other
way, and to turn it on its own side: Yet there may be, and very usually are,
such other Arguments drawn from the Consideration of the greater sin, and the
more dreadful Consequences, of disobeying in this instance, than of obeying: As
will to any reasonable man outweigh all the Probabilities on the other side
(so long as they are not so great as to create a persuasion) and make it
reasonable for the man rather to do the Action; how strong soever his Doubts be
of the unlawfulness of it (so long as they are but Doubts); than to omit it
after Lawful Authority has enjoined it.

But however this happen: It is always to be born in mind, as before, that if
it should prove that our Superiors do command nothing in the particular
Instances, but what they Lawfully may do: It will not justify any man's
disobedience, to say, that he apprehended it was more dangerous or more sinful
to obey them, than to disobey them: For our Mistakes and false Reasonings, will
not take off from the Obligation that is upon us to obey our Lawful Superiors
in their Lawful Commands; unless, as I have often said, we can satisfy our
selves, that in those Instances we neither were bound, nor had sufficient means
to understand better.

And now having thus cleared our way, by removing from our Question those
things that are Foreign to it, and which indeed, by being usually blended with
it, have made it more Intricate than otherwise it would be; we are pretty well
prepared to propose our Point.

In the Sixth place then. Excluding (as we have done) out of our Case all those
Things and Circumstances we have been speaking of, with none of which we have
here to do; the plain Question before us is this.

Whether in the Case of a pure Doubt about the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of an
Action, where the Probabilities are on both sides pretty equal and where
likewise the Man concerned, has done all that he was obliged to do for the
satisfying himself: Whether, I say, in this Case the Command of a Lawful
Superior ought not so far to overbalance the Doubt, as not only to make it
reasonable for the Man to do that of which he doubts; but also to oblige him
so to do?

We hold the Affirmative of this Question, and I now come to give the Reasons
why we so hold, which is the Second thing to be done under this Head.

II. Our Proposition is this, That if Lawful Authority do Command us to do a
thing which as on the one hand we cannot say it is Lawful; so on the other
hand, we cannot say it is Unlawful; but our Judgment remains suspended, as
having equal, or near equal Arguments on both sides: In such a Case as this,
though if we were left to our own Choice, we should generally forbear the
Action for the Reasons I before gave; yet being Commanded by our Superiors,
who by the Law of God have Authority over us; it is not only reasonable, but
our Duty to do it.

For First of all, even in point of Humility and Modesty, though there was no
other consideration; one would think that a Subject owes as much deference to
the Judgment and Discretion of his Superiors as this comes to.

So much influence as this, even a Confessor or a Private Friend has over our
Consciences. In a Case where we are altogether uncertain on both sides, we
usually so far submit our selves to them, as to be swayed and overruled by
what they advise; and that oftentimes not so much upon Consideration of the
weight and force of their Reasons, as merely upon this account, that we take
them to be abler to guide us in these Affairs than we our selves are, as having
better considered them, and seeing farther into them than we do.

I dare say there are few of those we are now disputing with, if a Doubt should
happen to arise in their Conscience about the Lawfulness of any Practice in
their Trade, or their other civil Concernments, and they should upon this apply
to some Friend of theirs, of whose Learning and Prudence, and Honesty they have
a good Opinion, and put their Case to him: But would (if the Doubt was so equal
on both sides as in our Case we suppose it) without any great difficulty be
concluded and determined by the Judgment of the man they thus apply to;
especially if that Judgment be seconded by the suffrage of some other Learned
Pious men, whom they have thought fit upon this occasion to consult likewise.

If now the Opinions of one or two Private men be of so much weight as to
overruled a Doubt about the Lawfulness of an Action, when the Reasons on both
sides are equal: Is it not very hard if the joint Resolution and Determination
of our Public Governors, whose Office and Business it is to Consult and
Command for the Best, should not in such a Case have the same Influence upon
the Minds of their own Subjects? Or would it not argue much Self-conceit and
Arrogance, and a very mean Opinion of our Superiors, and a great Contempt of
their Authority, to refuse that respect to them which we give to every private
Man almost that we think wiser than our selves.

Secondly, I desire that may be taken notice of, which the Casuists, and in
particular our Excellent Bishop Sanderson have urged in this affair, viz. It is
a known Rule in Law, That in all disputed Cases, he that is in possession of
the thing contended for, has the advantage of the other that contends with
him, supposing all other things be equal. In controverted Matters, the Right is
always presumed to be on the side of the Possessor, unless there be a good
Reason shown to the contrary.

Thus for Instance, If I be in possession of an Estate which another man makes
a claim to: And it is equally doubtful whether that Estate belongs to him or
me, yet so long as I have the Possession of it, I have a good Title to it by
the Laws of God and Man; nor can I without injustice be dispossessed of it,
till my Adversary has made it appear that he has a better Title to it than I.

Let us now apply this Rule to our present Case. Here is a Contest or Dispute
between the Superior and the Subject, about a matter of Right as to a
particular Action. The Superior says it is his Right to Command his Subject
in this Instance, and accordingly does Command him. The Subject says that he
doubts whether his Superior has Right to Command him in this Instance,
because he doubts whether this Command be not against the Law of God.

But in the mean time the Superior is in actual possession of the Power and
Authority to Command, though it be uncertain and doubtful whether as to this
Instance he do not exceed the just Limits of his Power.

Why, certainly by the former Rule, so long as the Case is thus doubtful, the
Subject must yield; and at no hand by his disobedience dispossess his Superior
of that Authority he is possessed of, till he be convinced in his own
Conscience that he has greater reason to disobey in this Instance than to
obey; which in our Case it is impossible he should have, because we here
suppose that the Reasons on both sides are equal.

But, Thirdly, If this Argument appear too subtle; let the Question before us
be decided by the Common Rule, viz. That in all Doubtful Cases the safer side
is to be chosen.

Now putting the Point upon this Issue, I ask which is safest, with respect to
Conscience, for a man to obey his Superiors in such a purely Doubtful Case as
we here speak of: Or to disobey them? I think this Question will soon be
answered by any Man that will attend to what I am going to represent, viz.

There is a Plain Law of God, and acknowledged by us to be so, that Commands us
to obey our Superiors in all Lawful things: But as to the particular Case
about which we are now supposed to Doubt, it is very Uncertain and Questionable
to us, (even after our best endeavors to satisfy our selves) whether there be
any Law of God which forbids that thing which our Superiors have enjoined
us.

This now being so, we thus argue. If it should prove that our Superiors do in
this Instance command an Unlawful thing; yet the hazard we run in obeying them
is very small and inconsiderable, in comparison with that we run in disobeying
them, supposing it should indeed prove that they command nothing but what is
Just and Right, and conducing to the Public Good.

For by doing the former, by obeying our Superiors, the only hazard we run, is
of transgressing some Unknown Law of God; some Law which does no way appear to
us; all that we can pronounce after our best enquiry being no more than this,
that it may be there is such a Law, and it may be there is not: And therefore
we may reasonably presume that if there should indeed be such a Law of God; it
is either not of such consequence that we in our Circumstances were bound to
know it, or if it was, that we had no sufficient means to cometo the Knowledge
of it: in each of which Cases, as I said, a Man's Ignorance does excuse the
violation of the Law.

But now, on the other side, if in such an Instance as this we disobey
Authority when it has peremptorly laid its Commands upon us; we venture upon a
much greater danger. For in that Case we run the hazard of transgressing a
Plain Law of God; a Law of which no man can or ought to be supposed Ignorant;
and withal, a Law it is of such Importance and Consequence to Mankind, that we
may truly say, the very being, as well as the Happiness of all Societies depend
upon it.

Supposing now this to be a true Account of the hazard we run in Acting on one
side or the other in our present Question, I leave it to any indifferent person
to judge, whether it be not much safer in such Circumstances as we here speak
of to obey our Lawful Superiors with a Doubting Conscience, than to disobey
them with a Doubting Conscience.

Fourthly, If there yet remain any dispute in this matter, let, if you please,
our Savior's Rule determine it, As ye would that men should do unto you, even
so do ye unto them. We desire no more favor for our Superiors, than this
eternal Law of Equity will oblige us to.

If a man will but be so impartial, as to pass the same Judgment in the Cause
of Authority when he is a Subject, as he does in his own Cause when he is a
Superior, we believe there would be presently an end of this Controversy.

For let men talk as gravely as they please about the danger of obeying the
Public Laws with a Doubting Conscience: Yet I dare appeal to themselves,
whether they would not think it very unreasonable for any Domestic of theirs,
over whom they have Lawful Authority, to live in Contradiction to the Private
Rules and Orders of their Family, upon a pretense of doubting whether those
Orders were Lawful or no.

If a Parent, for Instance, should command his Son to sit uncovered before him;
He would not take it for a good Answer from the young man, to say, Sir, I am
doubtful whether it be not unlawful to use any such Ceremonies to Men, and
therefore I pray excuse me, if I do not pay you that Respect you require.

If a Master should order his Servant to provide Dinner for him on the Lords
Day; and he should reply; I would do it with all my heart, but that I am in
doubt whether it be not forbidden by Gods Word to do any Work on the Sabbath. I
am not indeed persuaded that it is forbidden, but in the mean time I am not
satisfied that it is Lawful, and therefore till I be resolved in this Point, I
pray Sir, be pleased to Pardon me.

Would now a Parent or a Master think these Answers Reasonable? would he take
them in such good part as to think his Son or his Servant had done nothing but
what they were bound to do in thus refusing to obey his Commands? No, I dare
say he would not, but on the contrary would tell them; you are my Son or my
Servant, and you must leave it to me to judge what is fit for me to command and
for you to do. I will take care to command you nothing but what is lawful and
justifiable: But in the mean time, you must not think by your foolish Doubts
and Scruples (so long as you confess you know nothing unlawful in what I bid
you do) to control my Orders and Commands, that I think neither becomes you to
do, nor me to suffer.

I dare say most men would judge this a very fitting and just Reply in such a
Case. And if so, it is a strong Argument, that we are all naturally apt to
think that in purely Doubtful Cases, our Superior is to be obeyed
notwithstanding our Doubt, and that if in any Case we think otherwise, it is
where our own Liberty and Interest are concerned, and where consequently we may
be justly presumed unequal Judges, as being prejudiced in favor of our selves.

Fifthly, Let me add this one Consideration more, and I have done. If in merely
Doubtful Cases, our Superiors have not a Power of Determining us; what will
their Authority signify? If it be not of weight enough when the Scales hang
even to turn the Balance; it is truly the lightest thing in the World. Indeed
it is worth nothing; and there will not be left Power enough in those that are
to govern us, for the securing in any tolerable degree the Peace and Happiness
of the Society they are to govern.

For I pray consider, What can there be so wisely Commanded, or Provided for,
either in a Family, in a City, or in a Kingdom, but may be liable to exception,
and become a matter of Doubt to some Person or other?

There is nothing in the whole compass of indifferent things (and such chiefly
are the Matters of Humane Laws) but some Person or other will be found to doubt
whether it be fit or lawful. And if such a Doubt be a just Reason to deny
Obedience to the Law or the Command, in what a condition are all Families, and
Corporations, and Societies in the World? What will be the Consequence of such
a Principle? Why certainly nothing but perpetual Jars, and Disturbances, and
Confusions.

For Instance, If whenever a Prince declares War against his Enemies, it should
be supposed Lawful for any Subject to withdraw his Assistance from his
Sovereign in Case he doubts whether that War be a Lawful War or no; in what a
sad case would that Prince or that Kingdom be, that is to be supported and
protected upon these Terms? Every man is hereby made a Judge of the Merits of a
War; and though he be never so Ignorant, never so Unexperienced, never so
Ignorant, never so Unexperienced, never so unable to make a Judgment of these
momentous Affairs of the Kingdom; yet if some Rumors or uncertain Stories have
reached his Ears, that make him doubt whether this War was lawfully begun or
no: Why he is upon this Principle warranted to deny not only his Personal
Service, but his Contributions toward the Charge of that War. But these
Consequences are intolerable; and therefore the Principle from whence they
flow, must needs be thought intolerable also.

III. Having thus given the reasons of our Assertion, I come now in the Third
place to answer the Arguments that are brought on the other side.

All the Arguments I have met with against the Doctrine we have been
establishing, may be reduced to Three; and of those three, the First I have
prevented by my stating the Question; the Second I have already answered in my
Proofs of our Assertion: so that the Third only remains to be spoken to.
However I will name the two first.

The First Argument is drawn from the mischievous Consequences of our Doctrine.
For, say they, If a man should think himself obliged in every doubtful Case to
be determined by the Command of his Superiors, it would be the ready way to
involve him often times in most grievous sins. As for instance, if a man should
so halt between two opinions, as to doubt whether Jehovah or Baal was the true
God, as the Isralites sometimes did; and at the same time (as it then happened
among them) the Chief Ruler should command that Baal should be worshipped: Why
now in this Case (say they) according to your way of resolving Doubts, the man
must be obliged to worship an Idol, and to renounce the true God.

This is the Argument. But it is no Argument against us: Because in the stating
of our Question, we have excluded all such Doubts out of it, as do proceed from
a man's Gross and Criminal Ignorance of his Duty (as it is Apparent and
Notorious that the Doubt in this Instance does). On the contrary, we are as
forward to acknowledge as they, that if any man do an Action that is plainly
contradictory to the Laws of God, it is not his Ignorance, and much less his
Doubtfulness, that will excuse him, though he do it in obedience to his
Governors. So that though this Argument would fall heavy enough upon those
that plead for an Absolute Blind Obedience to Authority in all things
indiscriminately, (which no man of the Church of England does): Yet it does not
at all touch us, who only assert, That where we doubt equally, whether an
Action be Lawful or no, and have used our best endeavors to satisfy our
selves how the Law of God stands as to that matter, there the Command of our
Superiors is to overruled our Doubt.

But further, to show what little force there is in this Argument, which indeed
has made a great deal of noise; we will try whether it will not make as much
against our Adversaries, if they will give us leave to put the Case, as it
seems to make against us, when they put the Case.

Let us suppose therefore, as before, that an Israelite was very Doubtful
whether Jehovah or Baal was the true God: And let us suppose likewise (as we
reasonably may) that the King of Israel made a Law, that all the Temples and
Altars of Baal should be demolished, and that Jehovah only should be
worshipped. What advice now would they give to the doubting Man in this Case?
Will they say that he must comply with the Kings Laws, and worship Jehovah
only, while yet he is doubtful in his own mind whether Baal be not the true
God? Why this is against their own Principle, and gives away the Cause to us.
But, will they then say, that while this Doubt remains, the Man must not obey
Authority in worshipping Jehovah only; but he must either worship Baal and not
Jehovah; or both Baal and Jehovah together; Why, this is indeed agreeable to
their Principle; but then I appeal to my Reader, whether according to their way
of resolving of Doubts, a man is not as necessarily engaged in Idolatry, and
other grievous sins, as he is by our way.

So that you see this Argument concludes as strongly against them, as against
us. But in Truth it concludes nothing either one way or other, but is wholly
Foreign to the Question, as I showed in my stating of it, whither I refer the
Reader.

The Second Argument is drawn from the Limitations which God himself has put
to the Obedience we are to pay to our Governors, and it may be formed thus.
God has not commanded us to obey our Superiors absolutely, and in all things;
but only in all such things as are not contrary to his Law: So that where ever
we are uncertain whether the Commands of our Superior be Lawful or no, we must
at the same time be as much uncertain whether we be bound to obey: And if so,
how can you say that it is any more our Duty to obey them, than to disobey them
in a Doubtful Case?

To this we answer, That though we acknowledge that no Man is bound to obey his
Superiors any farther than they command Lawful things: Yet when ever it
happens that they command such things as we equally doubt whether they be
Lawful or no; there are so many weighty Reasons to be given, why a man should
obey rather than disobey in that Case, as will persuade any Wise and Good Man
to think it his Duty to obey. And for those Reasons I refer my Reader to the
Five Particulars I before insisted on.

The Third and indeed the Principal Argument, is drawn from the words of St.
Paul in the 14th of the Romans, and the last verse, He that doubts is damned
if he eat, beause he eats not of Faith; and whatsoever is not of Faith is
sin. From whence they thus Argue, If it was a sin in those Christians that St.
Paul speaks of to eat any Food, though in it self Lawful to be eaten, so long
as they Doubted whether it was Lawful or no: Then, by parity of Reason, it must
be a sin to do any other Action, so long as we have a Doubt in our minds
concerning the Lawfulness of it; and if so, it is not the Magistrates
commanding that Action, that will make it cease to be a sin in us to do it.

This is the great Argument that is brought against our Point, and I shall give
it a full and a just discussion: Because, in truth, if we come clearly off from
this Text of St. Paul; not only all that is said against Obeying Authority with
a Doubting Conscience will fall to the ground: But likewise most of the
difficulties which entangle and perplex the Case of a Doubting Conscience in
other matters, will be in a great measure removed.

But before I enter upon a particular discussion of this Text, with reference
to our present Controversy, it will be needful to premise some general Account
of it, for the sake of ordinary Readers, that so understanding before hand the
Case which the Apostle speaks to, and the meaning of the Expressions he here
uses, they may be the better able to go along with us.

First, therefore, I shall give an Account of the Subject matter of St. Paul's
Discourse in this Chapter. II. Of what is meant by Doubting in this Text. III.
What is meant by eating not of Faith. IV. What is meant by being Damned or
Condemned for so doing.

First, As to the Subject Matter of St. Paul's Discourse in this Chapter; it is
undoubtedly the Case of those Jewish Christians that were not so fully
instructed in their Christian Liberty, but that they still believed all the
Ceremonial Laws of Moses, concerning the Observation of Days, and the
Difference of Meats, to be still in force, and to oblige their Conscience: Or
at least they mightily doubted whether they did or not. So that whereas other
Christians, who were better instructed, made no scruple of eating any kind of
Food, though forbidden by the Law of Moses: These men had great Reason to
forbear such kind of Meats, because they were Persuaded, or at least it
appeared more probable to them, than otherwise, that they were bound so to do.

That this was the Case of those that St. Paul here styles the weak Christians,
appears from several passages of this Chapter, nor I think is it much
questioned by any. As for what is intimated in the second Verse, concerning
their abstaining from Flesh altogether, and only eating Herbs; which would make
one think that it was not purely their respect to the Law of Moses, but some
other thing, which made them thus to put a difference between Meats; because by
that Law, they were no more tied from Flesh (excepting only Swines-Flesh and a
few other sorts) than they were from Herbs: St. Chrysostom has well obviated
this difficulty, in the Account he gives of the Case of those Christians. There
were (says he) several of the Believing Jews, who taking themselves to be
obliged in Conscience by the Law of Moses even after their Christianity, did
still retain the Observation of Meats, not daring wholly to throw off the Yoke
of the Law: These now, lest they should be found out, and reproached by the
other Christians for thus abstaining from Swines-Flesh, and the like, upon
account of Conscience; chose to eat no Flesh at all, but to feed altogether
upon Herbs; that so this way of living of theirs, might pass rather for a kind
of Fast or Religious Abstinence, than for a Legal Observance. Thus St.
Chrysostom; and to the same purpose Theodoret and Theophylact.

But if any one be not satisfied with this Account of that Business; but will
further contend, that St. Paul here does not only speak to the Case of Jewish
Christians who were zealous for Moses's Law: But also takes in the Case of some
Gentile Christians at that time, who (upon a Pythagorean Principle they might
have entertained) were Averse to the eating any kind of Flesh; as thinking all
such Food to be Unclean: They may, notwithstanding what I have said, enjoy
their own Opinion. For it is indifferent to our Controversy, whether the
Persons whose Case is here spoken to, were Jews or Gentiles. Only thus much
appears plainly, that the most of them were Jewish Christians, who, together
with their Christianity, had a Conscientious regard to the Law of Moses.

Secondly, As for what is meant by [Doubting] in the The word [(...)] does no
where, either in Scripture or any other Author, signify to Doubt; but most
usually to Discern, or Distinguish, or make a D^fference, as it is frequently
used in the New Testatament. Vid. Matt. XVI. 3. Acts XV. 9. I Cor. IV. 7. VI.
5. XI. 29. The word [(...)] is sometimes taken Actively, and then it has the
same Signification with [(...)] i. e. to make a difference. As is plain, not
only in St. Judes Text here quoted; but in St. James, Chapter II. 4. Where our
English Translation has indeed very well rendered the Apostles Sense thus [Are
ye not Pa^tial]. But if they had truly rendered his Words, they must have thus
Translated [Do ye not make a difference?]

Again, sometimes it is taken Passively, and then the Signification of it is
this, to be Divided, or Severed, or Distinguished. And when it is used in this
Sense, it sometimes happens that the English word [Doubting] does conveniently
en^ugh express it. Doubting, being indeed nothing else, but a Man's being
Divided as to his own mind. And accordingly in some places, our Translators
have thus Englished it (though I belive in some of those, more proper words
might be found out to express its Sense). But though in a Few Texts it be thus
used in Scripture; yet I do not find that any Profa^e Author did ever use it in
this Sense of Doubting. And therefore unless there be evident reason, I do not
know why we should depart from the natural and usual Signification of the Word
in the T^xt we are now upon.


Text, the Reader may be pleased to take notice, that the word [(...)] which we
here translate [He that doubteth] does as properly signify to distinguish or
make a difference, as to Doubt, or Hesitate. And thus it is used both by
Profane Writers, and in Holy Scripture, as particularly in the 22 d. of St.
Jude's Epistle. And of some have compassion, making a difference, [(...)] the
very word in the Text.

Now considering the Apostles Argument in this Chapter is the Case of the
Jewish Christians, who were divided in their Persuasions about the Legal
Observations, some making a difference between clean and unclean Meats, and
such like things; and others making none: It seems every whit as proper and
natural, and more suitable to the scope of the Place, to take the Word in this
Sense in this place, rather than in that other, according to which it is
usually translated. So that the Text is thus to be rendered, He that makes a
difference between clean and unclean Meats; If he do eat any thing which he
judges to be unclean, he is damned or condemned for so doing, because he
eats not of Faith.

And so probable is this rendering, that our English Translators took care to
put it in the Margin of our Bibles, as may be seen by every one. Nor does it
want good Authority, for the Vulgar Latin thus translates the place, and not
only so, but Erasmus Hentenius, and generally all the Latin Expositors, if we
may believe Estius, who yet himself interprets it the Common way.

Indeed I doubt not but this is the true Version of this Word in this Text,
However I do not so much stand upon it, as to preclude any man from the liberty
of taking the other if he likes it better. For though this way of rendering
does better serve our Purpose, (as quite putting an end to the Controversy):
Yet our Cause does not so absolutely depend upon it, but that we may very well
allow of the common Translation; as will appear hereafter.

Thirdly, As for the Word Faith, which is here used; let it be taken notice of,
that when in the verse before the Text, the Apostle speaks of having Faith; and
in the Text, of eating without Faith, or not of Faith; and that, whatsoever is
not of Faith, is Sin; We are not to take Faith here in the large sense, as it
signifies a Belief in Jesus Christ, or an Assent to Gods Revelations,
particularly those of the Gospel; which is the usual Notion of Faith in the New
Testament: But only for a man's Assent to the Goodness or Lawfulness of any
particular Action that he takes in hand.

So that to have Faith about an Action, is to be persuaded that that Action may
be Lawfully done in the present Circumstances, or at least not to be Conscious
of any Reason that should make it unlawful. And, on the other side, to do an
Action without Faith, or not of Faith, as the Apostle here expresses it, is to
do an Action of the Lawfulness of which we are no way satisfied, but, on the
contrary, think we have good reason to believe that it is an unlawful Action.

Fourthly, Whereas St. Paul says, that he that doubts or differenceth, is
damned or condemned, if he eat; we are to take notice, that that expression is
not to be understood of the punishment of his eating in the other World, (which
is that which in common speech we call Damnation): But only of the guilt of his
eating as to his own Conscience. Indeed there is no color why our Translators
should here use the Word [Damned], since [Condemned] is the natural Word,
whether we consider the Propriety of the Greek or the English Language.: So
that this is the meaning of the Proposition. He that doubts (with such a
Doubt as is here spoken of) and yet eats; such a Man is condemned for so
doing. Condemned, how? why condemned of himself, (as the Apostle had expressed
it in the verse before), condemned of his own Conscience, because without
necessity, having free power over his own Actions, he does that which he
apprehends to be sinful.

I dare say, the Reader will be satisfied of the Truth of our Interpretation,
as to both the last named Particulars, if he will carefully read the foregoing
verse together with the Text (as indeed they do but both make one complete
Sentence) and judge of one by the other.

St. Paul has for a good while been addressing himself to the stronger
Christians, in order to the persuading them so to use their Knowledge and their
Christian Liberty, that they might edify the Weak Brethren among them, but in
no ways give Scandal to any of them, and he thus concludes his Advice in this
Chapter.

Have thou Faith? have it to thy self before God. Happy is he that condemns
not himself in that thing which he allows: But he that doubts (or makes a
difference) is condemned if he eat, because he eats not of Faith, and
whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin.

I dare appeal to any indifferent person, that has read St. Paul's foregoing
Discourse in this Chapter, whether the meaning of this whole Passage be not to
this Effect.

Art thou so well instructed in thy Religion, as to be persuaded that the
Gospel has taken away all difference of Meats, and that thou may Lawfully
eat of any Food that is set before thee? why, it is very well for thee; but
then, be content that thou art thus persuaded, and do not upon every occasion
make such an ostentation of thy Faith in this matter, nor despise others that
have it not; as to lay a Snare before thy Weak and Un-instructed Brethren, who
are of another persuasion, to sin against their Conscience, by Acting as thou
do. It is sufficient for thee that God sees thy Faith, and that thou can
justify thy eating to thy own Conscience. For I can assure thee, it is no
small Happiness for a Man to be able to satisfy his own Conscience in that
Action which he takes in hand.

[This is undoubtedly the meaning of that expression, Happy is he that
condemns not himself in that thing which he approves. That is, it is a great
Comfort to a Man that his Conscience does not condemn him in that Action which
he thinks fit to do. In ea re quam agendam suscipit, says Grotius; In eo quod
agendum elegit, says Estius; En ce qu'il veut fair, says the late excellent
French Translation. And it is just the same thing that St. John says in other
words. Ephesians. I. 3, 21. My Brethren, if our own hearts (i. e. our Conscience)
condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God.]

But then, (as the Apostle goes on) as to those that are so uninstructed in the
Nature of Christianity, as still to make a difference between clean and unclean
Meats; as it infinitely concerns them to have a care what they do; so it
concerns thee likewise to have a care how thou layest a stumbling block before
them. For in what a Condition would any of them be, if being tempted by thy
Insolent Carriage, and Unreasonable Example, he should through Fear or base
Compliance venture to eat such things as he judges to be unclean? Why,
certainly he is both an ill and a miserable man for so doing; because he is
condemned of his own Conscience. For he eats not only without being convinced
of the Lawfulness of his eating, but presuming the contrary, and whatever is
thus done against Conscience, must needs be a sin. This I take to be the true
meaning of this whole Passage, for which, if need was, we might produce several
Authorities, particularly that of St. Chrysostom, who gives much the same
account of it.

Having thus given an account of the Text as it lies in the Chapter, and with
relation to the Business that St. Paul had there in hand. I now come to
consider it with reference to our present Controversy with the Dissenters, and
to take off the Argument they bring from it, against the Position we are now
contending for.

Their Argument, as I said, is this.

St. Paul here affirms, That whosoever Doubts about the Lawfulness of any
particular Meat, and while that Doubt remains, eats of that Meat, such a
man Sins, and is Condemned for so doing; because he eats not of Faith. If now
it be so in this particular Case, it must be so in all other Doubtful Cases;
and consequently in the Case of Obeying Authority, where a Man Doubts of the
Lawfulness of the thing enjoined. That is to say. Whosoever, in any Case
whatsoever, does an Action of the Lawfulness of which he Doubts; he sins, and
is Condemned for so doing, because he acts not of Faith.

This is the Argument fairly put, and I shall now endeavor as fairly to answer
it.

And first of all, I say, This Argument proceeds upon a false Ground. For it
supposes St. Paul in this Text to speak to the Case of a purely Doubting
Conscience, (which is the Subject of our present Controversy): Whereas it may
be made to appear with good Evidence, that it is the Case of a resolved
Conscience only, that he here Treats of. So that this Text is wholly misapplied
by the Dissenters, and makes nothing at all to the Business. For though there
be indeed in this Text a very severe Censure of all those that Act against any
kind of Persuasion; yet there is nothing here said that touches a man's Acting
Doubtingly, either one way or other.

That this is true, appears from the Account I have before given of the Subject
matter of the Apostles Discourse in this Chapter; which is, the Case of those
Christians who were not barely Doubtful and Wavering in their own Minds,
whether they might Lawfully eat of such Meats as were then Disputed: But were
Persuaded they ought not; as believing that the Law of Moses, which had
declared them Unclean, was still in force; or else believing them to be Unclean
in themselves.

That this was indeed the Case here discussed, seems very clear from the 2 d
and 5th Verses of this Chapter, where the Apostle states it; and more
particularly from the 14th Verse, where he gives a summary Resolution of it;
and in my Judgment the very same Resolution that he does in the Text. I know
(says he) and am persuaded that there is nothing unclean of it self, but to
him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean. So that it
seems the Person whose Case St. Paul speaks to, was not uncertain or unresolved
whether the Meats under Deliberation were clean or unclean; but he was
persuaded they were unclean, he esteemed them to be such, and he must of
necessity do so, so long as he believed the Law of Moses to be in force, as by
all that appears in this Chapter he did believe.

But may some say, If this was the Case, why then does St. Paul use the word
Doubting in the Text? To Doubt of the unlawfulness of an Action, is quite
another thing, than to be Persuaded of the unlawfulness of it.

In answer to this, I refer my Reader to the Account I have before given of the
Word [(...)] which may as properly be rendered, He that makes a difference
between Meats; as he that Doubts about Meats. Now if this Version be admited,
the ground of this Objection is quite taken away. And I see no reason why it
should not be admitted, since (as I said) it is as natural as the other, and
withal, it makes the Apostles Sense to run more coherently with what he had
said before.

But further, Let if you please the common Translation be retained; let the
Text be interpreted of one that Doubts, and not of one that makes a
difference: Yet still this will make nothing against what we have now said. For
it is undeniably plain, that what St. Paul here calls Doubting, is in our way
of speaking a degree of Persuasion. My meaning is this. The Doubting which St.
Paul here speaks of, is not that where a man's Judgment is suspended, upon
account of the equal Probabilities on both sides of the Question, which is the
proper Notion of Doubting, and that which we are now concerned with: But he
speaks of a Doubt strengthened with so many Probabilities, that it wanted but
very little of a Persuasion; or, to speak more properly, it was a real
Persuasion, though with some mixture of Doubtfulness in it. That is to say, the
man had so strong Convictions of the Unlawfulness of eating on the one hand;
and so little satisfaction about the Lawfulness of it on the other; That if he
was not fully persuaded that it was a sin to eat; yet it appeared by many
degrees more probable to him that it was a sin, than that it was not.

That this now was the Case, is evident beyond all exception, from the words
that follow. He that doubts (says the Text) is condemned if he eat, that is,
Condemned of his own Conscience, as I showed before. Now how could that be, if
the man was not in some degree persuaded that his eating was unlawful? It is
certain no man can be further Condemned of his own Conscience for doing any
Action, than he does believe that Action to be forbidden by some Law of God. To
say therefore, that a man is Condemned of his own Conscience for eating, must
of necessity imply, that he does believe his eating to be unlawful, and if so,
it is certain he does more than simply douht whether it be lawful or no.

Well, But does not the Apostle say in this very Chapter, Let every one be
fully persuaded in his own mind? What is the meaning of That, but that every
one should assure himself that the Action he takes in hand is a lawful Action,
or else he does not act with a safe Conscience? And is not that the very same
thing that is here said, He that doubts is condemned if he eat, because he
eats not of Faith, or with a full persuasion? There is therefore good Reason
why we should interpret this Text in the proper Sense of Doubting, the Apostle
himself directing us so to do by this passage.

This is the most considerable Objection that can be made against our way of
expounding this Text, and probably it was with a respect to that passage that
so many Interpreters have Translated it as they have done; but whether they had
any just reason from thence so to do, is the Question. Or rather I think it
will be no Question with any one who attends either to the design, or the words
of the Apostle in that passage.

The passage is in the 5th Verse of this Chapter, where the Apostle is giving
an Account of the state of the present Controversy. One man (says he)
esteems one day above another, another man esteems every day alike: Let
every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. So we render it, but how truly, I
shall now examine.

It cannot well be conceived by the coming in of these words, that St. Paul had
any such thing in his mind when he writ them, as we would now make them to
express. It was certainly none of his business in this place to oblige the
contending Parties to get full persuasions in their several ways, and then all
would be right, for there was too much of that already amongst them. Neither
was it his meaning here to tell them, that if in any Case they acted without a
full persuasion of the Lawfulness of the Action, they sinned against
Conscience; for besides that this is certainly false, it was nothing at all to
his purpose.

But this was that which he designed in this passage, to persuade both the
contending Parties quietly to permit each other to enjoy their several Opinions
and Persuasions (in those little matters, which did no way concern their Duty,)
without Censuring or Judging one another.

This now is a meaning that perfectly suits with all the other good advice he
gives them in this Chapter, and this meaning he does express in as apt words as
can be thought on. One man esteems one day above another, another man
esteems every day alike. Let every man be filled with his own mind. Or,
satisfied with his own Persuasion. The Original words are [(...) (without the
Preposition) as is read in some good Copies) (...)]. Which, says Grotius, is
an Hebrew way of expression, and signifies no more than this, Quisque fruatur
sua Sententia. Let every Man enjoy his own Opinion: Or, as the Vulgar Latin
most properly Translates, Vnusquisque in suo sensu abundet. i. e. Let every one
abound in his own Sense: Or lastly, as the Commentaries that go under the Name
of St. Ambrose, Vnusquisque remittatur suis Consiliis, Let every one be left to
his own Counsels. And to the same sense also both St. Crysostome and Theodoret
do expound this passage. This Interpretation, though it be very different from
that in our English Bible, yet expresses the Signification of the Original
Text as well as that, and withal, has better Authority to recommend it: but
that which we chiefly stand upon, is, that the Subject Matter, and the scope of
the Apostle does necessarily require this Interpretation.

For, in truth, If this passage be rendered the common way, so as that it shall
import that every Man, in every Case, is to be fully persuaded in his own mind,
I do not know how the Precept here given, can be supposed to be either
Reasonable or Possible. It is certainly no more in every Man's Power to be
satisfied about all his Doubts; than it is to believe or disbelieve what he
pleases. When there appears Reason of Doubting, it is in vain to command a Man
not to Doubt. Nay, it is as much a Man's Duty to Doubt, and to keep his Judgment
in suspense, when the weight of Probability is on both sides equal, as it is to
believe or to disbelieve upon clear Evidence. Or rather in that Case a Man
cannot choose but Doubt. He cannot reasonably, nay, he cannot possibly do
otherwise.

I think, by what has been said, it does plainly appear, that this Text of St.
Paul we are upon, [viz. He that Doubts is condemned if he eat] has nothing
to do with a Doubting Conscience in our Sense; but only with a resolved one;
and consequently, that the Argument which is brought from hence against our
Assertion, is nothing at all to the purpose, because it is grounded upon a
false Exposition of the Text.

But though this is (as I think) the true Answer to this Argument; and the
Answer indeed which I mainly stand upon: Yet there is another Answer given to
it by the Casuists; which, because it is the Answer that our Learned Bishop
Sanderson thought fit to pitch upon, I ought not to pass it by without mention,
nor, if I can, without some improvement.

I must confess, if we do admit this Answer, the Authority and Obligation of a
Doubting Conscience will be set higher than I do in this Discourse suppose it:
But however, it may be a good Answer to the Dissenters; because it unties the
difficulty upon their own Principles: The Answer is this.

2. In the Second place, Allowing that the Man whose Case St. Paul speaks to in
this Text, was really a Doubting Person, and not one that was Persuaded (as we
have hitherto supposed): Yet it does by no means follow, that, because this Man
was guilty of Sin, and Condemned for eating those Meats, of the Lawfulness of
which he Doubted: Therefore a Man that Obeys Authority in an Instance where he
Doubts of the Lawfulness of the Command; that such a Man Sins and is Condemned
for so doing. This, I say, does not at all follow.

For there is a vast Disparity in the Cases; and to argue from one to the
other, is to argue from a Particular to an Universal, or from one Particular to
another, without respect to the different Circumstances of each Case; which is
against all the Rules of Logic.

If St. Paul had said, [He that Doubts is Damned if he Act] there had been
some pretense for making his Sentence an universal Proposition, so as to extend
to all Doubting Men in all Cases: But now only saying, [He that Doubts is
Damned if he eat] it shows that he only spoke to the Particular Case that was
before him; and that other Cases are no farther concerned in his Proposition,
than as they do agree in Circumstances with the Case he there speaks to.

Now the Case the Apostle there treats of, and That which we are now concerned
about, are so far from any way agreeing in the main Circumstances, by which a
Man is to measure the Goodness or the Badness of an Action, that there cannot
be two Doubtful Cases put, that are more different, as ^ shall now show.

If St. Paul do at all here speak to the Case of a Doubting Man; he speaks of
one that Acted Doubtingly in a matter where it was in his own Power to Act
without a Doubt: That is, He was in such Circumstances, that he knew he might
certainly without sin refuse to eat those Meats concerning which he doubted;
for there was no color of obligation upon him to eat them: But yet in this
Case, where he was perfectly at Liberty to let alone; for the serving some evil
unwarrantable ends, he would not choose that side which was safe, and where he
need fear no sin, which was to forbear; but would choose that side that was
Doubtful; that is, would run a needless hazard of transgressing some Law of
God. It is of such a Man, and in such a Case as this, that St. Paul speaks,
when he says, He that Doubts is condemned if he eat: Supposing indeed that
his words are at all to be expoundin this Sense.

But now because it is thus in this Case (and in all such like, if you please):
Does it therefore follow from these words, that a Man that is in other
Circumstances; that is not at Liberty to choose his own way; as not being at his
own disposal, but under the Direction and Government of Authority: That this
man sins and is condemned if he obey the Orders of his Superiors, when he is
Doubtful of the Lawfulness of the thing in which he expresses his Obedience?
No, by no means. For this Case has a quite different Consideration.

In the former Case there was only danger on one side, and that was in Acting,
and the Man might forbear if he pleased, and that without any danger: But in
the other Case there is danger on both sides, and the man runs at least as
great a hazard in forbearing the Action, (nay, we say, a much greater,) as if
he should do it.

So that undeniably (unless we will make one Rule to serve for all Cases,
though never so different, which is the absurdest thing in the World): For any
thing that St. Paul has here said to the contrary; this latter man may not
only without sin do the thing he doubts of; but is bound to do it. Whereas, if
the other man spoken of in the Text, should do the Action he doubts of, it
might be a sin in him.

But further, That St. Paul meant not to extend his Proposition to all Doubtful
Cases, but only to such Cases as he here treats of; is pretty evident from the
Reason that he gives, why he that eats Doubtingly sins in so doing; viz.
Because he eats not of Faith.

He does not say, He that Doubts is Condemned if he eat, because he eats
with a Doubting Conscience. If he had said so, I grant the Reason of his
Proposition would have reached all Doubting men in all Cases; but this is that
which he says, He that Doubts is condemned if he eat, because he eats not
of Faith.

So that if there be any Doubtful Cases wherein a Man may Act with Faith
notwithstanding his Doubt: I hope it will be allowed, that those Cases are
excepted out of St. Paul's Proposition.

Now, that there are such Cases; and that our Case of Obeying Authority is one
of them, I thus prove.

Whosoever so Acts, as that he is satisfied in his own mind, that what he does
is according to his Duty in the present Circumstances: Such a Man Acts with
Faith in reference to that Action. This is evident from the very Notion of
Faith, as it is here spoken of, of which I have before given an Account.

But now it is very possible, that a Man may have a Doubt concerning the
Lawfulness of an Action, and yet be in such Circumstances, as that he shall be
satisfied that is very reasonable and agreeable to his Duty, nay, (as the Case
may be) that he is really bound to do that Action concerning which he thus
Doubts, rather than not to do it: Because the not doing that Action, all things
considered, appears to him more dangerous, or attended with worse Consequences.

This now being granted, it undeniably follows: That wherever a man lights into
these Circumstances, he is not a Sinner, even according to the strictest Sense
of these words, though he Act with some kind of Doubt, because he Acts in
Faith; That is, he is resolved in his own Conscience, that thus it behooves him
to act in the present Case, and that it would be unreasonable or sinful to act
otherwise.

So that let our Adversaries make the most of St. Paul's words that they can,
it is a very Illogical Inference, to say, That whoever Acts with a Doubt upon
his Conscience in any Case, is guilty of Sin; and much more is it so, to affirm
it in our present Case of Obeying Authority. For it is certain, that many Men
are (and I believe all Men may be) satisfied, that in a purely doubtful Case,
it is not only more reasonable, but their Duty to Obey their Superiors.

Well, But it will be said, Do not we here talk contradictions? Can a Man have
Faith about an Action, that is, be resolved in his own Conscience that such an
Action is to be done, or may lawfully be done, and yet Doubt concerning it at
the same time?

I Answer, This is so far from being a Contradiction, that it is a Case that
every day happens, where a Man has a Doubt on both sides, as it is in the
Instance before us. A man often has very great Doubts of the Lawfulness of
this or the other Action, when he considers the Action in general: But yet when
he comes to weigh the Circumstances he is in, and the Reasons he has in those
Circumstances for the doing the Action; he may be persuaded, that it is better
for him to do the Action, than to let it alone, notwithstanding all the Doubts
he has about it. That is, Though he doubt of the Lawfulness of the Action it
self, considered without his present Circumstances; yet as it comes
Circumstantiated to him, he does not doubt but it may be lawfully done by him.
But of this I have spoke largly before, in my Explication of the Rule of a
Doubting Conscience.

But is not all Doubting contrary to Faith? I answer, No, it is not: For such
kind of Doubting as we here speak of, does, we see, very well consist with
Faith. My meaning is, it is not necessary, in order to a Man's having Faith
about an Action, that all his Doubts concerning that Action should be
destroyed; it is abundantly sufficient that they be over-ballanced.

That which I would say, is this. Wherever a man has such a degree of
Persuasion touching any Action he is deliberating about, that he believes it
more advisable to a reasonable man, all things considered, to do than Action,
than to forbear it; such a man has all the Faith that is needful to the doing
that Action with a safe Conscience; though in the mean time he may have such
Doubts concerning that Action, as will perhaps be too hard for him to resolve,
and will create him likewise some trouble and uneasiness in the doing of it.
Though indeed, to speak properly, I think these ought not any longer to be
called Doubts, after they are thus overruled or over-ballanced; but rather to
go under the Name and Notion of pure Scruples, which the Casuists of all
Persuasions do not only allow, but advise that a man should act against.

In plain English, That Doubtfulness about an Action which St. Paul speaks of,
and which he Censures as a sin; was such a Doubtfulness, as after the Action
was done, rendered the man Self-condemned; his Conscience could not but reproach
him for doing as he did: But now in our Case, the Man is not at all
Self-condemned, because he has the Testimony of his Conscience that he has
acted according to the best of his Judgment and Discretion. Though he acts with
a Doubt, yet he is satisfied he has made the most reasonable Choice that he
could in his Circumstances. And wherever a man does so, he both acts in Faith,
and without any danger of Condemnation from his own Conscience.

So that after all the Bustle that is made about doing or forbearing an Action
with a Doubting Conscience; you see there is no great intricacy in the Case,
nor any necessity of sinning on both hands, always supposing a man to be
Sincere and Honest. For if he be really so, he will always do that which he
judges most according to his Duty, or at least, that which he judges to be
consistent with it; and wherever a man does thus, it is certain he Acts with a
safe Conscience, notwithstanding any Doubt he may have about the Action.
Because more than the former a man cannot do, and more than the latter he is
not bound to do.

As for what sins an Erroneous Conscience may engage a man in; or what
troublesome Reflections a Melancholy Imagination may occasion to him in these
Cases; I am not to answer for them, they are of another Consideration.

IV. Having thus largly treated of the Nature of a Doubting Conscience, and of
the Rules by which a man is to Act, whenever it happens; and that, both when he
is left at his own Liberty, and when he is under the the Commands of others:
All that remains to be done, is to speak something about the Authority or
Obligation of a Doubting Conscience; which is our Fourth and last general Head.

But in truth the Discussion of this might very well be spared, after what I
have said relating to this Argument in several places of the foregoing
Discourse, particularly under my last Head. However I shall endeavor to give
some Account of this Point; though I intend it a very short one, because,
indeed what I have to offer is not so much any new matter, as an Application of
the Principles I have before laid down to our present purpose.

The Point in question is concerning the Authority of a Doubting Conscience:
Or, Whether a Doubting Conscience does bind at all, and how far?

In answer to this, I say in general; It is certain that a Doubting Conscience
of it self lays no Obligation at all upon a man any way: Indeed it is a kind of
Contradiction to suppose that it should.

For, I pray, What is the Notion of a Doubting Conscience, but this, That a man
is uncertain or unresolved in his mind, whether as to this particular Action he
be bound or not bound? To suppose now, that a man is obliged in Conscience
either way, by virtue of this Doubt; is plainly to suppose, that a man takes
himself to be bound, while yet at the same time he is disputing with himself
whether he be bound or no.

To speak this plainer if I can. Since Conscience, as I have often said, is
nothing else but a man's Judgment concerning Actions, whether they be Duties or
Sins, or indifferent: And since the Law of God Commanding or Forbidding
Actions, or neither Commanding or Forbidding them; is the only Rule by which a
man can judge what Actions are Duties, and what are Sins, and what are
Indifferent: It plainly follows, that a man cannot be bound in Conscience to do
any Action, which it does not appear to him, that Gods Law has some way or
other Commanded, and made a Duty; or to Forbear any Action which he is not
convinced in his Judgment, that Gods Law has some where or other Forbidden,
and so made a Sin. And therefore, since in a Case where a Man is purely
Doubtful, he cannot be supposed to have any such Convictions that the Law of
God does either Command or Forbid the Action Doubted of (for if he had, he
would no longer Doubt:) It follows likewise by undeniable Consequence, that a
Man's Conscience is not bound on either side of the Action, but he may either do
it or forbear it with a safe Conscience.

So that if there be any Obligation at all upon a man to Act thus, rather than
otherwise in a Doubtful Case; that Obligation must arise upon one of these two
Accounts, viz. Either there is some Law of God concerning a Doubting
Conscience, which has tied a man up to such precise measures of Acting: Or, at
least a man has a Persuasion that there is some such Law of God.

Now I grant, That in both these Cases, there does a direct Obligation pass
upon the man's Conscience: But then it is to be remembered, that this Obligation
does not arise from the man's being Doubtful in his Conscience; but from his
being resolved in his Conscience. That is to say, if there be really any such
Law of God; it is the Obligation of a Right Conscience. Or if there be not, but
the man only judges that there is; it is then the Obligation of an Erroneous
Conscience: But as for the Obligation of a Doubting Conscience there is no such
thing.

The great, therefore, or indeed the only Point that is to be inquired into, in
order to the Resolution of our present Question, is this. Whether there be any
Law of God which does determine our Actions one way or other, in the Case of a
Doubt; and what that Law is?

Now in answer to this Inquiry, I say, That it does not appear that there is
any express Law of God in Holy Scripture, that has laid any Obligation upon us
as to this particular of a Doubting Conscience, either one way or other.

The only Texts that I know of, which are thought to make for this purpose, are
the two passages in the 14th of the Romans, which I have before largely given
an account of, viz. That in the 5th Verse, Let every man be fully persuaded in
his own mind. And that other in the last Verse, He that doubts is damned if
he eat, because he eats not of Faith. But now I think I have made it plain,
by several Arguments, that these Texts do not at all concern our present Case
of a Doubting Conscience, properly so called.

So that there being no express Particular Law of God in Scripture, about
acting with a Doubting Conscience, we seem to be left as to that Affair, to the
General Laws of God, as they are declared, whether by Nature or Scripture.

Now the most that any Man can be Obliged to by the General Laws of God,
whether Natural or Revealed, in the Case of a Doubt, is only these two things.
First, to use his Endeavor to get himself as well instructed in his Duty as
his Circumstances and Opportunities will allow him. And Secondly, where he is
at a loss for Information in that Case, to Act as reasonably as he can.

I do not say, that a Man in every Doubtful Case that happens, is strictly
obliged to thus much. But I say, it is impossible he should be obliged to more.
Because indeed more than this he cannot do; and no man can be obliged to more
than is in his Power.

Wherever therefore a Man in a Doubtful Case takes care to observe these two
things, he Acts with a safe Conscience, however he may act Doubtingly in that
Case.

Thus far I think we are clear beyond Exception. But it may be, some will not
be satisfied with this Account of our Point, but will be putting a farther
Question.

We have before laid down several Rules about a Man's Acting in a Doubtful Case,
the sum of all which comes to no more than what we have now said, viz. That in
every doubtful Case a man is to act as reasonably as he can. The Question now
is, Whether a man is strictly bound in Conscience always to follow this Rule?
Or, which is to the same effect, Whether a man in a matter concerning which he
has only a pure Doubt, may not without sin indifferently choose either side of
the Action, though yet perhaps one side does appear to him more reasonable or
more safe than the other?

This Question is indeed more curious than useful. But however, since it
properly falls under the Argument we are now treating of, and tends somewhat to
the clearing of it: I shall venture to say something to it. Only I declare
beforehand, that I mean not in what I shall say, to assert any thing
Dogmatically, but only to propose, in order to further Examination: And withal,
that whether that which we say be true or false; it does not at all affect the
Merits of the main Cause we have undertaken.

That now which I have to say to this Question, is this. That though it be
eternally fit and natural, and conducing to a man's Happiness both in this World
and the other, that he should in all Cases, and especially in Doubtful Cases,
govern his Actions by the best Reason that he has, (and certainly the Wiser
and the Better any man is, the more steadily will he pursue this Rule): Yet, on
the other hand, I dare not say, that a man is strictly bound in Conscience so
to do; so as that he is properly guilty of sin if he do not.

My Reason is this. Because there is no Law of God which does oblige us in all
Cases, to do that which is Best: And if we be not bound to do always that which
is Best, we are not bound to do always that which is most Reasonable; for
certainly, that which is Best, is always most Reasonable: And if we be not
bound to do that which is most Reasonable much less are we bound to do that
which is Safest, because that which is Safest, is not always either Best or
most Reasonable And if there be no Law of God that does oblige us to any of
these things; then it is certain we do not sin if we Act otherwise, For where
there is no Law, there is no Transgression.

Now, That the first of these Principles is true, we have as good Proof as can
be desired, viz. the Authority of St. Paul, who has in the 7th. of the first
of the Corinthians thus determined: And if that be true, the other two must
needs be so likewise, because they follow from it by unavoidable Consequence.

Taking now this for granted. I ask what Law does a man Transgress, that in a
purely Doubtful Case chooses either side indifferently, without respect to what
is Safest or most Reasonable. Always supposing that the side he chooses, be not
in it self evil and forbidden by God. I say, according to these Principles he
transgresses no Law at all, and consequently cannot properly be said to sin at
all.

If the man be at all guilty, it is upon one of these accounts, viz. either
because he Acts against the dictate of his Conscience, or because he Acts
against the Law of God, in preferring that which is less reasonable and safe,
before that which is more so.

Now, Upon the former account he is not at all guilty, for his Conscience has
passed no Dictate, no Verdict in this matter, and therefore he cannot be
supposed to act against any such Dictate or Verdict: The man is in such a state
that he either believes he may act as he does, without violation of his Duty:
Or, at least he has no belief to the contrary; so that his Conscience does not
any way Condemn him.

And as for the other thing, of his not choosing that side of the Doubtful Case
which appeared to him most reasonable; it is true, if there was any Law of God
which obliged him to make such a Choice, he would be guilty of sin if he chose
otherwise. But now it does not appear, that there is any such Law of God. Nay,
so far from that, that it appears from St. Paul that there is no such Law, but
that every man is left to his own liberty in this matter; always supposing that
he take care not to choose, or do any thing that he judges to be inconsistent
with his Duty; which in our Case we do lik^wise suppose.

But then having said this, we must add further. That though we here have
concluded, that no man in a Doubtful Case properly so called, is strictly
obliged by any Law of God under the penalty of sin, to choose one side more than
another, but may indifferently choose either.

Yet in the first place, Whoever does believe, or is persuaded in his own Mind,
either that he ought not at all to Act against a Doubt, or that in every
Doubtful Case he is bound to follow the safer side such a man, so long as he so
believes, cannot without sin Act according to the Principles we have now laid
down.

And Secondly, We are far from encouraging any man to act thus hand over head
in a Doubtful Case; much less from commending him for so doing. For though we
say, that, strictly speaking, a man does not sin which way soever he Act in a
purely doubtful Case; yet on the other hand, I think he is but in a low
Dispensation as to Virtue and Goodness, that never looks further into his
Actions, nor takes more care about them, than only that they be not directly
sinful.

He that is heartily Good, will with St. Paul not only consider what things are
Lawful, but what things are Expedient and do Edify.

It will not ordinarily be sufficient to engage such a man in an Action, to
satisfy him, that he may do that Action without transgressing any Law of God:
But he will examine whether the doing or forbearing the Action does more serve
the ends of Virtue and Charity. And accordingly as that appears to him, so will
he determine his Choice.

In a word, The Better and the more Virtuous any man is, the more delicate and
tender sense will he have, not only of that which the Law of God has precisely
made his Duty, and so in a proper Sense does oblige his Conscience; but also of
every thing that is Reasonable and Excellent, and Praiseworthy: So that it
will really grate upon his mind, to do many things which, in strict speaking,
cannot be accounted unlawful or forbidden.

And thus it is in our present Case. If we suppose a man to be a Devout
Christian, and a sincere Lover of God, he will not be able to prevail with
himself, in a Case where he Doubts, to choose either side indiscriminately
(though if he should, I do not know, as I said before, what Law of God he
transgresses): but he will weigh and consider the Reasons on both sides, and
that which appears to him after such Consideration, to be most reasonable, and
conducing to Gods Glory, and his own and the Worlds good, that shall have the
preference.

To come to a conclusion. The sum of what I have now said is this. As
Conscience is the immediate Guide of our Actions: So the Rule by which
Conscience it self is to be guided, is the Law of God, and nothing else.

Though therefore we cannot be safe in following our Conscience, where our
Conscience is not guided by the Law of God, (because, as I have often said, our
false Judgment of things does not cancel our Obligation to act according to
what the Laws of God require of us; unless we can justly plead unblameable
Ignorance of those Laws):

Yet, on the other hand, wherever Conscience tells us, that we must do this
Action, because the Law of God has commanded it; we must do it, or we sin.

And again, Wherever Conscience tells us that we must avoid this Action,
because the Law of God has forbidden it, we must forbear that Action, or we
sin.

But if Conscience cannot say that this Action is commanded or forbidden; there
we are not tied under the penalty of sinning, either to do or to forbear that
Action.

But yet if a Man's Conscience should thus suggest to him; Though I cannot say
directly that this Action is a Duty, or that it is a sin, because I am at a
loss how the Law of God stands as to this matter, and consequently, I cannot
lay any direct Obligation upon you either way; yet my advice is, that you would
choose this way, rather than the other: For this way, all things considered,
appears most fit and reasonable to be chosen, for there is more Probability
that this is the right way than the other; or there is less harm, though you
should be mistaken, in going this way than the other: Now in this Case, though
a man be not properly obliged under the Guilt of Sin to obey his Conscience,
because Conscience does not propose the Choice to him under that Condition; yet
if he be a Wise and a Good man, he will undoubtedly choose that side which
Conscience, all things considered, has represented to him to be the most fit
and reasonable to be chosen.

And thus much concerning our Fourth and last General Head.

Thus have I largely discussed the Case of a Doubting Conscience in general,
and answered all the Considerable Enquiries that can be made about it. I am not
sensible that I have left any material difficulty in this Argument untouched;
though I am very sensible I have said a great deal more than needed, in order
to the Resolution of that Case, for the sake of which, I undertook this
Discourse. But I intended such a discussion of this Argument, as would serve
for all other Cases as well as that.

I do not know whether it be needful to make a particular Application of what I
have said upon a Doubting Conscience to the Case of our present Dissenters.
However, it will not be amiss if I offer something toward it; if it be but to
save the Reader who is concerned in that Case the Labor and Trouble of doing
it.

The Case which I am to speak to is briefly this. There are several Persons
that are unsatisfied about the Lawfulness of our Communion, as it is
established and enjoined; and that, upon several Accounts. Some perhaps Doubt
of the Lawfulness of all Forms of Prayer. Others about the Lawfulness of our
Form. Others Doubt about the Lawfulness of our Ceremonies, or our way of
Administering the Sacrament: And others it may be about other things. None of
them can indeed say, that any of these things do go against their Conscience,
or that they believe the use of them to be unlawful: For that is the Case of a
Resolved Conscience, with which we have nothing here to do: But they are
undetermined and uncertain whether they be Lawful or no; and so long as they
continue under this Suspense of Judgment, they dare not join in our Worship;
fearing they would sin against God if they should.

Now of those that thus Doubt there may be two sorts.

There are some perhaps that have only a Single Doubt in this matter. That is
to say, They make a Doubt whether they may Lawfully join with us, so long as
those suspected Conditions are required of them: But they make no Doubt, but
are very well satisfied that they may Lawfully Separate from us.

Again there are others that Doubt on both sides, as they have good Reason to
do. That is, As they Doubt on one hand, whether the Terms of our Communion be
not sinful: So they Doubt on the other hand, whether it be not sinful to
Separate upon account of those Terms.

Now of these likewise, there may be two sorts.

Some perhaps are equally Doubtful whether the Terms of our Communion be lawful
or no.

Others Doubt unequally; that is, are more inclined to believe that they are
Sinful than that they are Lawful.

That now which is to be enquired into is; What is most Reasonable and
Advisable in Point of Conscience to be done in each of these Cases.

Now as to the first of these Cases where a man has only a Doubt on one side,
and that is, Whether he may Lawfully Communicate with us; but he has no Doubt
that he may lawfully Separate. To this I say two things.

First, That the man's Doubting only on one side in this matter, does not make
it more safe for him to Separate, than if he had Doubted on both sides. Because
indeed if he must Doubt at all, it is his Duty, he is bound to Doubt on both
sides; and he is guilty of gross and criminal Ignorance of the Laws of God, if
he do not. And if so, then his Doubting only on one side, does not alter the
Case, but it must have the same Resolution as if it was a Double Doubt properly
so called.

If it be said that it is a constant Rule of a Doubting Conscience, and we have
allowed it as such; that in Cases where a man has only a Doubt on one side of
an Action, it is more safe to choose that side on which he has no Doubt, than
that other concerning which he Doubts: I do readily grant it. But then it is to
be remembered, that that Rule is always intended, and does only obtain in such
Cases where a man may certainly without danger of sinning forbear that Action
of the Lawfulness of which he Doubts; though he cannot without danger of
sinning do the Action so long as he Doubts about it. But now in our Case here,
it is evident to all men that are not wilfully blind, that as there may be a
danger of Sinning, if a man should conform with a Doubting Conscience: So there
is certainly a danger of Sinning (nay, and we say a much greater danger) if a
man do not conform. So that that Rule has here no place at all.

The truth is, Our Case if it be rightly put, is this. A man is here supposed
to reason thus with himself. I am very well satisfied in my own mind, and I
make no Doubt at all, that I may Lawfully and without danger of Sin, cut my
self off from the Communion of the Church [which yet by his Christianity he is
bound to maintain and preserve as far as he can] And I may likewise lawfully
and without danger of sinning, live in a constant Disobedience and
Refractariness to all that Authority that God has set over me [to which yet by
as plain Laws as any are in Nature, or the Gospel, he is bound to be subject:]
I say I am satisfied in my own mind, that I may lawfully do both these things.
But I am very unsatisfied and doubtful whether in my present Circumstances, it
is not my Duty thus to do so as that I shall Sin if I do not.

What now would any Prudent man say to this Case? Why certainly he would say
this? That he who can Doubt after this fashion, is either a very Ill man, or a
very Ignorant one. And that such a man does a great deal more stand in need of
good Advice, and wholesome Instructions about the plain Duties of Christianity;
than of Rules and Directions how to behave himself in Doubtful Cases. Because
indeed the best Rules of that kind are not to his Case, so long as he continues
thus Ignorant. And if he should observe them, yet that would not justify his
Acting, if it should indeed prove contrary to the Law of God, because it was
both in his power; and it was his Duty to know better. A man's Right proceeding
according to the Rules of a Doubting Conscience, in a Case where he is
entangled by a wilfully Eroneous one; will no more discharge him from Sin as to
his Soul, if he do an evil Action; than the Second Concoction though never so
regular, can rectify the Errors of the First as to his Body.

But Secondly, Though that which I have now offered be the proper Answer to the
Case before us: Yet there is this further to be said to it, viz. Though we
should suppose that the Law of God had not obliged us to keep the Unity of the
Church, or to obey our lawful Superiors; but had left it as an indifferent
matter, and that there was no danger at all in forbearing these things; but the
only danger was in doing them: So that the Doubt about Conformity, should have
perfectly the Nature of a Single Doubt as it is put in the Case. I say, now
even upon this Supposition it will bear a just Dispute, whether Conformity or
Nonconformity be the more eligible side; Nay, I say further, that if the Rule
I laid down about a Single Doubt be true, it will appear, that as things now
stand, it is more reasonable for a man to Obey the Laws, and Communicate with
the Church, so long as he has only a bare Doubt about the Lawfulness of these
things, than to Disobey and Separate.

For thus I argue. Though in a Single Doubt the Rule be, That a man should
choose that side of an Action concerning which he has no Doubt; rather than
that concerning which he Doubts: Yet as was said before, that Rule is always to
be understood with this Proviso, that all other Considerations in the Case be
equal. If it should happen that a very great Good may be compassed, or a very
great Evil may be avoided, by Acting on the Doubtful side: That very
Consideration has weight enough with a Wise man to turn the Balance on that
side; and to make that which abstractedly considered, was a Doubtful Case, to
be clear and plain when it comes clothed with such Circumstances. As I gave
Instances in the Case of Usury and Law Suits. And twenty more might be added to
them, if it was to any purpose.

If this now be admitted for Truth, we have a plain Resolution of the Case
before us, and that is this. There are so many great Advantages both to the
Kingdom, and to a man's self, to be obtained by Worshipping God in the way of the
Church; and likewise so many both Public and Private Mischiefs and
Inconveniences that are consequent upon Separation: That if in any Case these
Considerations have weight enough to Overbalance a simple Doubt about the
Lawfulness of an Action, they will certainly have sufficient weight in this
Case. And that man who is not swayed by them, does not Act so reasonably as he
might do.

For my part, I should think it very foolishly done of any man, that so long as
he is utterly uncertain whether he be in the right or in the wrong (as every
one that Doubts is) should be so confident of his Point; as to venture upon
it no less a stake than the Peace of the Kingdom where he lives, and the
Security of the Religion Established; and withal his own Ease and Liberty, and
lastly, the Fortunes also of his Posterity. And yet such a wise Venture as this
does every one among us make, that upon the account of a bare Doubt about the
Lawfuless of the things enjoined in our Communion, does persist in disobedience
to the Government, and Separation from the Church.

I wish this was well considered by our Doubting Dissenters: They are wise
enough as to the World in other matters; it is to be desired that they would be
as wise in this. And if they were, I dare say it would not at all prejudice
their Wisdom as to the other World. It will be but little either to their
Comfort or their Reputation at the long run, to have it said of them; that
besides the Disturbance they have all along occasioned to the Public Peace and
Unity, they have also brought their Estates and Families into danger of Ruin,
by the just Prosecutions of Law they have drawn upon themselves; and all this
for the sake of a Cause which they themselves must confess, they are altogether
uncertain and unresolved about.

But this will appear much clearer, when we have set the Doubt about Conformity
upon the right Foot, viz. Considered it as a Double Doubt, as indeed it is, in
its own Nature: Which I come now to do.

In the Second place, There are other Dissenters who (as they have good reason)
do Doubt on both sides of this Question. As they Doubt on one hand, whether it
be not a sin to Conform to our Worship; because there are several things in it
which they suspect to be unlawful: So on the other hand, they Doubt whether it
be not their Duty to Conform to it; because the Laws of the Church and of the
Land, do require them so to do. And of these, as I said, there are likewise two
sorts. Some perhaps are equally Doubtful whether the Terms of our Communion are
Lawful or no, and consequently must Doubt equally whether they be bound to
Conform or no. Others Doubt unequally. That is to say, of the Two, it appears
more probable to them, that our Communion is Sinful, than that it is a Duty.

Now as to the first of these Cases, The Answer is very short, and it is this.
We have before proved by many Arguments, that in a Case of a Pure Doubt, about
the Lawfulness of an Action where the Probabilities on both sides are pretty
equal: In that Case the Command of Authority does always turn the Balance on
its own side; so, as that it is not only reasonable for the man to do that in
Obedience to Authority, of the Lawfulness of which he Doubts; but it is his
Duty to do it; he sins if he do not. For this I refer my Reader to the Third
General Head of this Discourse.

The only difficulty therefore is in the other Case, where the Doubt is
unequal. And here the Case is this. As the man apprehends himself in danger of
sinning if he do not come to Church, and obey the Laws: So he apprehends
himself in a greater danger of sinning if he do. Because it does appear more
probable to him, that our Communion is Sinful, than that it is a Duty: And a
greater Probobility, caeteris paribus, is always to be chosen before a less.

But to this likewise we are ready provided of an Answer from the foregoing
Discourse, viz. That though it should be supposed that in such a Case as this,
where the Balance is so far inclined one way; the Authority of our Superiors
alone will not have weight enough to cast it on its own side: Yet in this
Particular Case of Church Communion, there are so many other Arguments to be
drawn from the Consideration of the greater Sin, and the more dreadful
Consequences, of disobeying the Laws than of obeying them; as will with any
Impartial Conscientious Man outweigh all the Probabilities on the other side,
so long as they are not so great as to create a Persuasion; and make it
reasonable for him rather to Conform, how strong soever his Doubt be about the
Lawfulness of Conformity (so long as it is but a Doubt;) than to continue in
Separation. Vide Third Proposition about a Double Doubt. page 27.

This is the Issue upon which we will try the Point before us, and I refuse no
indifferent Man, that will but have the Patience to hear what we have to say,
to be Vmpire between us and our Dissenting Brethren, as to this Controversy.

In the first place, let us suppose and admit, that the man who has these
Doubts and Suspicions about the Lawfulness of our Established Worship, does
really Doubt on the true side; and that he would indeed be a Transgressor of
the Law of God, if he should Conform to it. But then it must be admitted
likewise, that That Law of God which forbids these things in dispute, is
wonderfully obscurely declared.

There are no direct Prohibitions, either in the Law of Nature or the Book of
God about those things that are now Contested; so that the unlawfulness of them
is only to be concluded from Consequences.

And those Consequences likewise are so obscure, that the Catholic Church from
Christ's time till our Reformation, was wholly ignorant of them. For though it
does appear, that either these, or the like Usages, have always been in the
Church: Yet it does not appear, in all that compass of Time, either that any
Particular Church ever condemned them as sinful: Or indeed, that any Particular
Christian did ever Separate from the Church upon the Account of them.

And even at this Day, these Consequences by which they are proved unlawful,
are not discovered by our Governors either in Church or State. No, nor by as
Learned and Religious Divines of all Persuasions as any in the World.

The most Divines, by far the most; and those as Pious and as Able as any, are
clearly of Opinion, that there is nothing Unlawful in our Worship; but that, on
the contrary, all things therein prescribed are at least Innocent, and free
from sin, if not Pure and Apostolical.

So that if it should at last prove, that they are all mistaken: Yet the Law of
God, which forbids these things, being so very obscure, and the Sense of it so
hardly to be found out; it is a great Presumption that a man may very
innocently and inculpably be Ignorant of it. And if so, it will be a very
little, or no sin at all in him to act against it. Because if it was not his
Duty to know this Law, it cannot be his Sin that his Practice is not according
to it. And if it was his Duty to know it, yet it being so obscurely delivered,
and only to be gathered by such remote Consequences; it can at most be but a
Sin of Ignorance, in an ordinary Person, where so many of the best Guides are
mistaken, if he should transgress it.

And then farther, This must likewise be considered. That if Conformity to our
Liturgy and Worship should prove a sin in any Instance: Yet the Evil
Consequences of it extend no farther than the Man's Person that is guilty of it.
There is no damage arises either to the Christian Religion, or to the Public
Interest of the Kingdom, by any man's being a Conformist. But on the contrary,
as things stand with us; Unity and Conformity to the Established way, seem to
bring a great advantage to both (as I hinted before) and to be a probable means
to secure us from many Dangers, with which our Reformed Religion, and the Peace
of the Kingdom is threatened.

Well, but now on the other hand. Let us suppose the contrary side of the
Question to be true, viz. That our Governors in this matter are in the Right,
and we are in the Wrong. That there is nothing required of us in the Church of
England, as a Term of Communion, but what is very Innocent and Lawful; however
it be our misfortune to Doubt that there is, and in a zealous Indulgence to
these Doubts, we take the liberty to live in open disobedience to our Lawful
Governous, and to break the Unity of the Church into which we were Baptized.

I say, admitting the thing to be thus; what kind of Sin shall we be guilty of
then? Why certainly we are guilty of no less a Sin than causlesly dividing the
Body of Christ, against which we are so severely cautioned in the New Testament.

We are guilty of the Breach of as plain Laws as any are in the Bible, viz. Of
all those that oblige us to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace:
that Command us to Obey those that are over us in the Lord; to be subject to
the Higher Powers; to submit to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake; to
be subject not only for Wrath. but for Conscience sake. I say, these plain Laws
we disobey for Conscience sake; and we disobey them too in such Instances,
where we have the whole Catholic Church of old, and far the greatest and the
best part of the present Church, of a different Persuasion from us.

Well, but as if this was not enough. What are the Consequences of this our
Sin? (For by the Consequences of a sin, the greatness of it is always to be
estimated, I speak as to the Material part of it, with which we are here
concerned.) Why, they are most Terrible and Dreadful, both with respect to our
selves and others.

By this unnatual Separation, we do, for any thing we know, put our selves out
of the Communion of the Catholic Church; and consequently out of the enjoyment
of the ordinary means of Salvation.

We maintain and keep up Divisions and Disorders in the Church, and lend a
helping hand to all those Animosities and Hatreds, all that bitter Contention
and Strife, and Uncharitableness, which has long torn the very Bowels of
Christ's Church, and given occasion to that Deluge of Atheism, and Profaneness,
and Impiety which has overspread the Face of it.

We put Affronts upon our Lawful Governors, who should be in the place of God
to us. We give Scandal to all our Brethren that make a Conscience of living
Peaceably and Piously. And lastly, as we offer a very fair Handle and Pretense
to all Discontented and Factious men to Practice against the Best of
Governments: So we take the most effectual course to Ruin the Best Constituted
Church in the World, and with it the Reformed Religion in this Kingdom.

This now being the Nature, and these being the Consequences of our Separation
from the Established Church among us: I leave it to any indifferent man to
Determine, whether any Doubt about the Lawfulness of our Communion, though that
Doubt be backed with greater Probabilities than do appear on the other side;
nay, if you will, with all the Probabilities that can consist with the nature
of a Doubt; can have weight enough to Balance against such a Sin, and such
Consequences as Separation in our Case does involve a man in? I think there is
no unconcerned Person but will pronounce, that supposing where there are Doubts
on both sides, a man is to choose that side on which there is the least
appearance of Sin; he is in this Case certainly bound to choose Communion with
the Established Church, rather than Separation from it. And that is all I
Contend for.

But now, after all this is said; it must be acknowledged, that if there be any
man who has other apprehensions of these matters, and that after a
Consideration of all things that are to be said for or against Conformity, it
does appear to him upon the whole matter, both more probable that our Communion
is sinful, than that it is a Duty; and withal, that to Communicate with us,
will involve him in a greater sin, and in worse Consequences, than to continue
in Separation: I say, if any man have so unfortunate an understanding as to
make such an estimate of things; we must acknowledge, that according to all the
Rules of a Doubting Conscience, such a man is rather to continue a
Nonconformist, than to obey the Laws of the King and the Church. But then let
him look to it; for his acting in this Case according to the best Rules of a
Doubting Conscience, will not (as I said before) at all acquit him either of
the Guilt or Consequences of Criminal Schism and Disobedience: Supposing that
indeed he is all along under a mistake as (we say) he certainly is; and that
there is nothing required in our Communion, that he might not honestly and
lawfully comply with, as there certainly is not. Unless in the mean time, the
man fell into these mistakes without any fault of his, and God Almighty, who is
the Judge of all men's Hearts and Circumstances, does know he had not means and
opportunities to understand better.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 27. l. 7. for annot cavoid, r. cannot avoid. p. 35. l. 3. for this last,
r. the least. p. 43. l. 28. after Spiritual, add by doing the Former. p. 61. l.
1. r. because. p. 62. l. penult. r. Chrysostom. p. 66. l. 9. r. no wise. p.
94. l. 19. r. Probability.

ADVERTISEMENT.
1. A Discourse concerning Conscience, the first Part. Wherein an Account is
given of the Nature, and Rule, and Obligation of it. And the Case of those who
Separate from the Communion of the Church of England as by Law Estalished, upon
this Pretense, That it is against their Conscience tojoyn in it, is stated and
discussed.

2. A Resolution of this Case, viz. Whether it be Lawful to Separate from the
Public Worship of God in the Parochial Assemblies of England, upon that New
Pretense which some Men make, of the Case being much altered now from what it
was, when the Puritans wrote against the Brownists, and the Presbyterians
against the Independent?

3. Resolution of two Cases of Conscience in two Discourses? The First, Of the
Lawfulness of Compliance with all the Ceremonies of the Church of England. The
Second, Of the necessity of the use of Common Prayer in Public.

A DISCOURSE ABOUT A SCRVPVLOVS CONSCIENCE: Containing some PLAIN DIRECTIONS
For the CURE of it.

LONDON, Printed for T. Basset at the George in Fleet Street, and B. Took at
the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1684.

A DISCOURSE ABOUT A Scrupulous Conscience, etc.
IT is not my Design in the following Discourse, to expose or upbraid the
Weakness of any of our Dissenting Brethren; but rather charitably to contribute
what I can toward the healing and curing of it: and this I take for granted,
That we cannot do greater Service either to the Church of Christ, or Souls of
Men, than by all prudent Means to root those needless Scruples out of their
Minds, which have been the Occasion of such unchristian Separations and
dangerous Divisions amongst us; at first begun, and still maintained,
generally, upon the Account of such Things, as I verily believe, a
well-instructed Conscience need not be concerned or disturbed about.

Here I shall first show what I understand by a Scrupulous Conscience, then
observe some few things concerning it; and lastly, offer some plain Rules and
Means by which we may best get rid of it.

First, What is a Scrupulous Conscience? Now Conscience, as it is a Rule of our
Actions, is nothing else but a Man's Mind or Judgment concerning the moral
Goodness or Evil, Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of Things; and as this Judgment is
either true or false, so is our Conscience either good and well-grounded, or
erroneous. The Divine Law made known to us either by the light of Nature, or
plain Scripture, or direct consequence from it, such as any honest man may
understand, is the Rule of Conscience, or of that Judgment we make of the
lawfulness or unlawfulness of things: so that our Conscience is a safe Rule and
Guide of Actions no further, than as it self is directed and warranted by the
Law of God.

1. A good and well grounded Conscience is, when we carefully abstain from
whatever God has forbidden, don't neglect doing any thing which he has
commanded, and as for other Mattes left indifferent and at liberty, we do them
or forbea doing of them, according as the Rules of obedience to Superiors,
Prudence, and Charity, do require. This is the Health and sound State of the
Mind.

2. An erroneous Conscience is, when we judge that to be evil or unnecessary
which God has expressly commanded, and is our Duty; or that to be good and
necessary which he has plainly forbid, and is really sinful. Now our
Consciences cannot alter the nature of things: that which is our Duty remains
so, and we sin by omitting it, notwithstanding we in our Consciences think it
unlawful to be done; and what is really Evil continues such, and is Sin in us,
however our Consciences tell us it is our duty to do it: and the fault is more
or less compassionable and pardonable, as the causes of the Error are more or
less voluntary and avoidable. This is a grievous Disease and deadly Sickness of
the Mind, when we thus grossly err in our Judgments, and act according to our
mistaken Opinion of Things.

3. A scrupulous Conscience is conversant about things in their own Nature
indifferent, and it consists

Either in strictly tying up our selves to some things which God has no where
commanded; as the Pharisees made great conscience of washing before they did
eat, and abundance of other unnecessary Rites and Usages they had of Men's own
inventing and devising, which they as religiously, nay more carefully observed
than the indisputable Commands of God himself:

Or in a conscientious abstaining from somethings which are not forbid, nor any
ways unlawful. Touch not, taste not, handle not, doubting and fearing where no
Fear is, thinking that they should as much offend God by eating some kind of
Meats, wearing some Garments, as they should do were they guilty of Murder and
Adultery. Which is the Case of many amongst us, who by such Scrupulosity about
little matters, seem more precise and austere than other good and honest
Christians are, or themselves need or ought to be.

Far be it from me, by any thing I shall now say, to discourage the greatest
and tenderest care any Christian can take, to keep himself from all Sin, from
all Occasions and Temptations to it, from the least appearance of Evil, of what
is really such: and to do any thing that is in it self sinful, out of
confidence that it is lawful, is far worse and a more grievous Offense than to
abstain from many things which are truly lawful, out of an Opinion that they
are sinful. Notwithstanding this, I cannot but reckon it the chief Policy of
the Devil, the grand Enemy of all that is good, when he cannot persuade us that
there is nothing at all sinful or unlawful, than to make us suspect every thing
for such, or at least, that there is great danger of displeasing God by the
most indifferent and innocent Actions; by these means ensnaring and entangling
Men's Consciences, and rendering Religion a most troublesome Burden to them.

A scrupulous Conscience therefore starts and boggles, where there is no real
Evil or Mischief; is afraid of omitting or doing what may be omitted or done
without Sin. Which I know not how better to illustrate than by those
unaccountable Antipathies or Prejudices that some men have against some sort of
Meats, or living Creatures, which have not the least harm or hurt in them, yet
are so offensive and dreadful to such Persons, that they fly from them as they
would from a Tiger or Bear, and avoid them as they would do the Plague or
Poison. Just thus do some Men run out of the Church at the sight of a Surplice,
as if they had been scared by the Apparition of a Ghost.

I proceed to the second thing I propounded, to observe to you some few general
things concerning this scrupulous Conscience; as,

1. That this is a very sickly, crazy temper of Mind, a great Indisposition, a
state of Weakness and Infirmity, It arises from Ignorance and want of right
Understanding our Religion, from undue timerousness or unsetledness of Mind,
from Melancholy, or unreasonable Prejudices and Mistakes about the Nature of
things. Such scrupulous Persons are like fearful Women, that wander in the
Dark, who seeing nothing to affright them, yet fancy many things, which make
them tremble every step they take: or like those who see only by an uncertain
glimmering twilight, their Imagination once abused and prepossessed, transforms
every Object into a Monster or Giant.

Thus this Scrupulous is the same with what in other Words some call a tender
Conscience, so tender that every thing hurts and wounds it, like a tender Eye
which the least Dust or Smoke greviously offends, or a tender Constitution of
Body, which the least Air or Wind mightily disorders and discomposes. Now this
is far from being any Virtue or Commendation in us, this is no desirable
Qualification, nor a matter of Ambition to be thought Men of such tender
Consciences, no more than it is for a Man's Reputation to be sickly and often
indisposed. A good Conscience is firm and steady, well settled and resolved, and
such needless Scruples about things lawful are at the best a sign of an
ungoverned Fancy, and a weak Judgment. As the niceness and squeamishness of a
man's Stomach that distasts wholesome Food is a symptom of an unsound and
unhealthy Body. This does not argue any extraordinary holiness or purity above
others, as the Pharisee conceited of himself, Stand off, come not nigh me,
touch me not, for I am holier than thou, because he washed himself so often.
No, we are yet in a childish state, and whilst we are frighted with such
Bug-bears and Phantasms, we have not yet arrived to the Understanding or
Resolution of a Man.

2. This Scrupulosity about little matters may be, and is often a sign of
Hypocrisy. I take not upon my self to judge any Persons. Let every man look to
himself; but thus certainly it was with the Scribes and Pharisees of old; They
strained at every Gnat, stumbled at every Straw, would starve sooner than eat
their Meat with defiled hands, would not for the World wrong a Man of a
Cummin-seed, or a spear of Mint, and by this wonderful exactness and strictness
in some instances, they easily gained the Reputation of the greatest Saints; so
that it is said to have been an ordinary Proverb among the Jews, That if but
two Persons in the World went to Heaven, one of them would be a Scribe the
other a Pharisee. Yet for all this, if we will believe our Savior's account of
them, they made nothing of swallowing Camels, living in the greatest and most
known Wickedness.

Alas! their Consciences would not give them leave to enter into the Governors
Hall to go amongst the Heathens, for fear of being polluted by them, yet at the
same time they stuck not at suborning false Witnesses against the best and most
innocent Person that ever lived. They blamed the Disciples for plucking the
ears of Corn on the Sabbath Day, as if they, poor tenderhearted men, were
offended and grieved to the Soul at such Profaneness, and yet they thought it
nothing to deny relief and succor to their own Parents, when in Want or
Distress; they made no Bones of Rapine and Extortion, oppressing the Poor, or
devouring Widows Houses. By their curiosity about some external Observances,
they hoped to make amends for their gross Transgressions in other Cases of far
greater weight and moment. Since they denied themselves many things which God
had allowed them, they hoped he would readily forgive them, tho in some other
things they took a greater Liberty than he had permitted them.

Had any of us been present when Mary, St. John 12. 3. took the Ointment of
Spikenard, very costly, and anointed the Feet of Jesus, and had heard Judas's
Rebuke, Why was not this Ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to
the Poor? (He scrupled such a profuse expense, tho about our Savior himself.
He thought it might have been better employed, to more useful purposes.) Should
we not from this have strait concluded him the most charitable and
conscientious of all Christ's Disciples, and yet this overgreat care for the
Poor was only a pretense and covering for his theevish Intention.

They therefore who are so scrupulous about little indifferent matters, ought
to approve their Honesty and Sincerity by the most accurate Diligence in the
Practice of all other Duties of Religion, which are plainly and undoubtedly
such. They who pretend to such a tender Conscience above other Men must know,
that the World will watch them as to the fairness and justice of their
Dealings, the calmness of their Tempers, their behavior in their several
Relations, their Modesty, Humility, Charity, Peaceableness, and the like. If in
all these things they keep the same Tenor, use the same caution and
circumspection, and be uniformly conscientious, then it must be acknowledged,
that it is only Weakness or Ignorance that raises their Scruples, not any
vicious Principle; and the condition of those who are under the Power of such
Scruples, is much to be commiserated.

But, when I see a Man scrupling praying by a Book or Form, and yet living
without any sense of God or fear of him, afraid of a Ceremony in God's Worship,
and not afraid of a plain damnable Sin, of Covetousness, rash censuring his
Brethren, of Hatred and Strife, Faction and Schism, and Disobedience to
Superiors; when I see one that out of Conscience refuses to kneel at the
Sacrament, and yet dares totally neglect the Communion; who takes great care
not to give offense to his weak Brother, but can freely speak evil of
Dignities, and despises his lawful Governors; it is not then uncharitable to
say, That it is not dread of displeasing God, but some other bye end or
Interest that acts and moves such a Person, and in pleading the Tenderness of
his Conscience he is no other than a downright Hypocrite.

On the other side, Let a Man be never so punctual and critical in his
Conformity to all the appointed Ceremonies and Usages in our Church, let him
constantly attend God's solemn Worship, and behave himself most reverently and
decently at the Public Prayers; yet if this Man be profane and intemperate, a
Derider of true Piety and Godliness, if he lives loosly and at Random, all his
regular Devotions, all his bowing and kneeling to the Honor of our Savior,
all his niceness about his Worship to perform it in the most orderly manner,
all his Zeal for the Church shall avail him nothing. He is no better than the
Pharisee, washing the outside, whilst he is within full of all Wickedness and
Uncleanness. To be so concerned about little things, whilst we make no
Conscience of the greater, is the most evident sign that can be given of a
false Christian. And has it not often happened in the World, that such a mighty
Scrupulosity about our Duty has proved a very successful way of growing great
or raising an Estate, by giving Men so fair an opportunity of imposing upon the
credulous and unwary? So that I have known it advised as an useful Caution to
those who would live in the World, always to stand upon your Guard and look to
your Pockets, when you deal with those who pretend to greater Tenderness and
Exactness than other undoubtedly sober and honest Christians generally do.

3. Where Persons are truly honest and mean well, there is nothing more
troublesome and vexatious than such unreasonable Scruples about things lawful.
This must needs be an intolerable disturbance to a man's Mind, and breed great
Anxiety and Inquietude, when Persons are continually shivering and trembling
lest by every thing they do they incur the Divine Displeasure; and it certainly
disables a man from performing his necessary Duty. He is likely to make but a
slow Progress in his Journey, who instead of going on cheerfully in his way, is
frequently at a stand, doubting which foot he should set forward, or what
particular Path he should choose. This robs men, in a great measure, of that
Peace and Satisfaction which they might otherwise find in Religion, whilst they
are daily perplexing themselves with untying Knots which themselves only have
fastened. Scruples about things indifferent, when once we attend to and
entertain them, like the Plague of Flies amongst the Egyptians, will be
constantly buzzing in our Ears, and tormenting us with their Impertinency; till
at length we come to distrust every thing, and there is nothing that belongs to
ordinary Civility, no recreation we can use, no clothes we can wear, no
discourse we can hold with others, no conversation we can maintain, or business
which we transact in the World, but we shall raise some trifling Objections or
Scruples about it, which will make our Condition continually uneasy and
restless. For,

4. These Scruples are infinite and endless: for, being grounded upon some very
little and inconsiderable Reason, there is hardly any thing to be done but some
small Exceptions may be started against it, which may soon puzzle and confound
the more ignorant sort of Christians. Thus he that scruples a Minister's
officiating in a white Garment, may easily be brought to doubt of the fitness
of his doing it in Black, and then he proceeds against any solemn distinct
Habit, and at last against the Office of Ministers it self, and tells you all
Gods People are holy, and that all Christians are a Royal Priesthood, and we
have no need of Teachers, for we are all taught of God. From scrupling the Sign
of the Cross after Baptism, Men have soon come to question Infant Baptism it
self: they have at first perchance disliked only some significant Ceremonies in
God's Worship, of Humane Appointment, but thence they have gone on to deny all
outward bodily Reverence, and thought it not expedient to pull off their Hats
in Churches, then not to do it before Magistrates, at last not at all: and thus
by giving place to such little Scruples, they become afraid of speaking,
looking, or doing any thing like other Men.

This is notorious amongst us. Those who have taken Offense at some things in
our Church, and have thereupon separated from us, and associted themselves with
a purer Congregation, have soon disliked something amongst them also; and then
they would reform themselves farther, and after that refine themselves more
still, till at last they have sunk down either into Quakerism, Popery, or
Atheism. This does not only now and then happen in the World, but is the
probable effect of embracing and cherishing such Scruples, that men go on
scrupling one thing after another, till at length they doubt of every thing.

5. Lastly, This needless scrupling of lawful things has done unspeakable
mischief to the Church of Christ, especially to the Reformed Church of England;
a Church reformed according to the most Primitive and Apostolical Pattern, by
the best and wisest Rules, in which, even by the Confession of the soberest and
most considerable of our Dissenters nothing is required, as a condition of
Communion, that is sinful; yet how is she rent and torn, mangled and divided,
how has she been assaulted, undermined, and in danger to be the second time
overthrown upon the Account only of Habits and Gestures, and particular Forms,
Rites, and Modes of Discipline and Worship, with which some Men are not well
satisfied or pleased, which they judge might be better done and ordered another
way, or which they rather would have left at liberty, that every man may do
therein according to his own Discretion or Opinion.

In the great and necessary Truths of Religion we all profess to be agreed. We
all worship the same God, believe in the same Lord and Savior, have the same
Baptism, the same Faith, the same Hope, the same common Interest, our
Sacraments, as to the main, are rightly administered according to our Savior's
Institution, our Churches are acknowledged to be true Churches of Jesus Christ:
but there are some Constitutions, which respect chiefly outward Order and the
decent Performance of Divine Worship, against which men have received strange
Prejudices, on the account of them have raised a mighty noise and clamor
against the Church, and have openly separated from its Communion, as if by
renouncing of Popery we had only exchanged one idolatrous Service for another.
About these skirts and Borders, the dress and circumstances of Religion has
been all our quarelling and contention; and these Differences have proceeded to
such an height, as to beget immortal Feuds and Animosities, to break and
crumble us into little Parties and Fractions, whereby mutual Edification is
hindered, our common Religion suffers Reproach, the Enemies of it are
strengthened and encouraged, public Peace endangered, and brotherly Love, the
Badge of Christ's Disciples, quite lost amongst us: and the continuance of
these miserable Distractions amongst us upon such frivolous Accounts (if
compared with the Interests of Peace and Charity) is a matter of sad
consideration to all lively Members of Christ's Body, and forebodes great evils
impendent over our Church and State. I doubt not to say, that the Devil has
fought more successfully against Religion under the Mask of a zealous Reformer,
than under any other disguise whatever.

The grand Enemy of Mankind has by various ways and means all along contrived
and endeavored to defeat the designs of Heaven for the Good and Happiness of
Men: and as the Divine Wisdom has in several Ages of the World manifested it
self for the encouraging and promoting of true Righteousness and Holiness, so
has the Devil always been at work to oppose what he could find most proper for
the hindering the good effect of God's Kindness toward us. When the fullness of
Time came, by the appearance of the Son of God in the World, he was in a great
measure dethroned, his Kingdom overthrown, and the last and most effectual
means were used for the recovery of Men out of his Snare and Power. When
therefore he perceived that by all the grievous Persecutions he raised against
the Church it spread only so much the faster, that at last the whole Heathen
Idolatry fell down before the Cross of Christ; when he was shamefully expelled
out of his Temples, and from his Altars, his Oracles silenced, and the Religion
of Jesus prevailed every where; he then betook himself to his old Serpentine
Arts of dissimulation. Since he could no longer oppose Christ's Kingdom by open
War, he resolved to turn Christian, and to set up for Christ's Deputy, and
substitute here on Earth, to fight against Christians under Christ's Banner,
and by adulterating and corrupting the Christian Doctrine, to spoil it of all
its Efficacy, to introduce his old Heathen Rites and Idolatrous Ceremonies, as
unwritten Traditions from Christ himself or his Apostles, and so under his Name
and pretended Authority to exercise all that cruelty, oppression, and fraud,
which is so pleasing to his own infernal Nature, hoping to burn, destroy, root
out all true Christians from the face of the Earth, under color of propagating
the Catholic Faith, and enlarging Christ's Kingdom in the World.

When Christendom had long groaned under this miserable Tyranny, it pleased God
in many places of Europe, but especially here in England, to set on foot a
Reformation of Religion, which was happily and peaceably accomplished among us
by the favor and countenance of public Authority and the wise Counsel and
Advice of our Reverend Bishops and other Ministers. To nip this in the Bud, the
Devil raised that sharp Persecution in Qu. Mary's days, in which our first
Reformers gloriously sealed what they had done with their Blood: but this
proving ineffectual, that he might the better frustrate the ends of our
Reformation, himself would turn Reformer too; A great Cry was soon raised
against our Church, as not sufficiently purged from Popery, our Bishops, our
Prayers, our Ceremonies were all Antichristian, and it was not long before all
Ministers, Tithes, Temples, and the Universities too, were condemned as such;
and God knows they had well nigh reformed away all Learning, true Religion, and
Worship of God, and under the specious Pretense of paring off all
Superfluities, had grievously shaken the Foundations of Christianity it self;
insomuch, that it came to pass, as some of those who now dissent from us did
then complain, That Professors of Religion did openly oppose and deride almost
all that Service of God out of Conscience, which other Men used to do out of
Profaneness. And what infinite mischief this rash and intemperate Zeal for
reforming Abuses and Corruptions has done to our Church and Nation, if the
Experience of this last Age will not sufficiently convince men, it is not to be
hoped that any Discourse should. We little consider whose Interest we thus
serve and promote: we do his work who is most delighted with Strife and
Confusion, and every one can tell who that is, and where he reigns. To be sure
by these uncharitable Separations we highly gratify the common Enemy, whose
great Design and Policy it has all along been, by the Follies and invincible
Scruples of Protestant Dissenters to weaken, and by degrees pull down the
Church of England, and then we all become an easy Prey to Rome.

If any now tell me, that to prevent this great Mischief and Danger that
arises from our Divisions, it is not so necessary that the People should lay
down their Scruples, (which they cannot well do, since no one can at any time
think or believe as he will) as it is that the Impositions themselves, the
Matters scrupled at, should be removed and taken away, and then Peace and Unity
may be better secured. To this I only answer these two things:

1. I now consider things as they at present stand amongst us. We have a Church
settled and established by Law, in which nothing that is sinful is enjoined.
What the Duty of our Governors and Superiors is, how far they may or ought to
condescend to the Weakness or Scruples of others, I shall not take upon me to
determine; that is another Question which belongs not to us. But I consider now
only what private Members of such a Church are to do, and then I say, scrupling
the Use of some things prescribed by the Church, will not justify our leaving
it; nay, as I shall show afterward, it is our best and safest course to submit
and comply with such Orders, notwithstanding our Scruples. But I add,

2. If this were a sufficient Reason why the Constitution of any Church should
be altered, because some things are scrupled in it, there never could be a
settled Church as long as the World stands; for, since there will be always a
difference in Men's Understandings and Tempers, some weak and injudicious,
others peevish and proud, there will consequently be many that shall scruple
and be offended at the best and most innocnt Constitutions. And if the
Ceremonies now in use amongst us had not been retained at our first
Reformation, those very Persons, who are now so much dissatisfied with the
Imposition of them, would perhaps have been the first that should have then
complained of the want of them. Of which we have this notorious and undeniable
Evidence in the late times, when our Church was laid in the Dust, when none of
those Ceremonies or Forms which are now objected against were imposed or
commonly used, yet even then were men gathering Congregations out of
Congregations, purifying and reforming still further; Scruples increased, Sects
and Divisions upon them multiplied, and never such Distractions and Confusions
in Religion as in those days; and without the gift of Prophecy one may
foretell, that if what is principally found fault with in our Church was now
abolished, yet those that are given to Scruples would at least in time find
cavelling Objections against any Constitution that can be made. They are like
Men given to sue and go to Law. They never want some Pretense to disturb
themselves and their Neighbors.

Men may talk of reconciling our Differences, and making up our Breaches to
their Lives end, and propound their several Projects, and frame their Models,
and conceive fine designs of Union and Accommodation, yet none of these will
have any effect, or do any good, till Men learn Humility and Modesty, and be
contented to be governed by others in things indifferent, till Self-conceit and
Pride be in some measure rooted out; and when this is effectually done, there
will then be found but little need of any Alteration in the present
Constitution.

The foundation of our Peace and Agreement must be laid in the reforming our
selves and our own Tempers. The way to unite us lies not so much in amending
the present Establishment, Government, Liturgy, endeavoring to add to it, or
leave out of it, till all Parties amongst us are satisfied, (which indeed can
never be effected) as it does consist in our becoming more truly Christian in
our Lives and Tempers. They are our vicious Dispositions, more than our
different Apprehensions, that keep us at such a distance. Let the terms of
Communion with the Church be what they will, yet as long as Men retain the same
quarrelsom Mind, and industriously seek for Doubts and Scruples, and are glad
to find them, and prefer their own private Opinion and Judgment before the
Wisdom and Authority of all their Governors, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical,
it is plain our Divisions and Animosities will not, cannot cease.

But this leads me to the last thing I designed to discourse of; which was, to
propound to you the best ways and means by which men may get rid of and ease
their Minds of such Scruples; where I shall especially consider those that
relate to our communicating with our Parish-Churches. You must not expect that
I should descend to, and answer the particular Exceptions which hinder men from
constant Communion with us; but only in general I shall crave leave to advise
some few things, which would mightily tend to the removing those Doubts and
Scruples that yet detain so many in a state of utter Separation from us, or at
least discourage their total and hearty joining with us. Which charitable
Design and Attempt, however unsuccessful I may be in it, yet cannot, I hope, be
unacceptable to any, whose Consciences are pestered with such Scruples, since I
endeavor only to deliver them from those Mistakes, which beside the disservice
they do to Religion and the Protestant Interest, do also expose them to trouble
and danger from the Public Laws and Civil Magistrate. Of many Rules that might
be given in this case, I shall insist only on these following.

1. We should take great care to beget and cherish in our Minds the most high,
and worthy, and honorable Thoughts of God Almighty. This is the Foundation of
all Religion; and as our Apprehensions of God are, such for the most part will
be his Worship and Service. Accordingly as we conceive of his Nature, so shall
we judge what things are most pleasing to him, as also what they are that are
most offensive and distastful to him.

Now consider, I beseech you, Can that Man have becoming and excellent Thoughts
of the Divine Nature, who imagines that God regards any particular Gestures,
Habits, and Postures so far, as that the acceptance of our Service and Worship
should depend upon such Circumstances of our Religious Actions? When with all
Humility and true devotion of Heart a sincere Christian prostrates himself at
the Throne of God's Grace, and with earnest Desire and Affections begs those
good things that are according to Gods Mind and Will, can we believe that the
Father of our Spirits shall refuse and reject his Petition because it is
delivered in a certain prescribed form of Words? Shall his importunate renewed
Requests fail of Success because he still uses the same Expressions, and reads
his Prayers out of a Book? Is God pleased with variety of Words? or the
copiousness of our Invention, or the elegancy of our Phrase and Style? Is it
not the Heart and inward frame of Spirit that God principally respects in all
our Prayers? Or can we think so meanly of God, that he should shut his ears
against the united Prayers of his People, because offended at the color of the
Garment in which the Minister officiates?

Suppose two Persons, both with equal Preparation, with true Repentance and
Faith to approach the Lord's Table; one of them, out of a deep sense of his
Unworthiness to receive so great Blessings, and out of a grateful
acknowledgment of the Benefits therein conferred upon him, takes the Sacrament
upon his Knees, in the humblest Posture; the other sitting or standing: can you
think that the Sacrament is effectual or beneficial, or that God blesses it
only to him that sits, or that it would not have been of the same advantage to
him if he also had received it kneeling? To surmise any such thing, is surely
to dishonor God, as if he were a low, poor, humoursome Being, like a Father
that should disinherit his Child, tho in all Respects most dutiful to him, and
every way deserving his greatest Kindness, only because he did not like his
Complexion, or the color of his Hair. The wiser and greater any Person is to
whom we address our selves, the less he will stand upon little Punctilio's.

Under the Jewish Law the minutest circumstances of Worship were exactly
described and determined by God himself, and it was not ordinarily lawful for
the Priests at all to vary from them. But it was necessary then that it should
be thus; because the Jewish Worship was typical of what was to come hereafter,
and those many nice Observances that were appointed were not commanded for
themselves, as if there were any Excellency in them, but they were shadows of
things to come, which are all now done away by the Gospel, and the bringing in
of everlasting Righteousness, the only thing always pleasing to God, and
agreeable to his Nature: It is a spiritual rational Service God now expects
from us, and delights in; and he must look upon God as a very fond and captious
Being, who can persuade himself that our Prayers and Thanksgivings, and other
Acts of Worship, tho we be most hearty and devout in them, yet shall be
rejected by him only because of some particular Habits or Gestures we used,
which were neither dishonorable to God, nor unsuitable to the nature of those
religious Performances.

Such mean Thoughts of God are the true ground of all Superstition, when we
think to court and please him by making great Conscience about little things;
and so it has been truly observed, that there is far more Superstition in
conscientious abstaining from that which God has no where forbid, than there
is in doing that which God has not commanded. A man may certainly do what God
has not commanded, and yet never think to flatter God by it, nor place any
Religion in it, but he may do it only out of obedience to his Superiors, for
outward Order and Decency, for which end our Ceremonies are appointed, and so
there is no Superstition in them. But now a Man cannot out of Conscience refuse
to do what God has not forbid, and is by lawful Authority required of him, but
he must think to please God by such abstaining: and in this conceit of pleasing
or humouring God by indifferent things, consists the true Spirit of
Superstition.

2. Lay out your great care and zeal about the necessary and substantial duties
of Religion, and this will make you less concerned about things of an inferior
and indifferent nature. As on the one hand our fierce Disputes and Debates
about little things and circumstances are apt to eat out the Heart and Life of
Religion, so on the other side, minding those things most, in which the Power
of Religion does consist, is the best way to cure our Scrupulousness about
little things. This was the Apostle's Advice to the Romans, cap. 14. amongst
whom eating or not eating some Meats, observing or not observing some days, had
occasioned as much Trouble and Scruple as Forms of Prayer and Ceremonies do now
amongst us, ver. 17. The Kingdom of God is not Meat or Drink, but
Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. What needs all this Stir and
Bustle? This censuring, disputing, and dividing about Standing or Kneeling,
these are not the great matters of our Faith; they are not worth so much Noise
and Contention. The great stress and weight in our Religion is laid upon the
Duties of a righteous and holy Life, and a peaceable Spirit and Conversation,
and then he adds, ver. 18. For he that in these things serves Christ is
acceptable to God and approved of Men.

Thus when you betake your selves to your Prayers, let it be your greatest care
to fix in your Minds a due sense of God's Infinite Majesty, of your own
Vileness and Unworthiness, of your manifold Wants and Necessities, and the
greatness and goodness of the things you petition for, and his readiness to
grant them upon your humble Request; and the more you do this, the less
sollicitous you will be about the form or words of your Prayers. He that minds
those things most on which the efficacy of his Prayers for Christ's sake does
depend, will not stand in need of, nor require new Phrases every time to stir
his Attention or to raise his Affection. Thus let Men be very diligent and
conscientious in preparing themselves for the Holy Communion; let them come
thereunto with lively Apprehensions of Christ's Love in dying for us, with
hearty Resolutions of Amendment, and true Charity toward all Men; the more
concerned they are about these necessary things, the less afraid will they be
of offending God by kneeling at the Administration, or coming up to receive it
in one part of the Church rather than another: for, they will find that they
are quite other things in which true Religion consists, in a new Nature, in a
divine temper of Mind, in the constant Practice of Holiness, Righteousness, and
Charity; which make a Man really better, and more like unto God.

He that places any Religion in not putting off his Hat, or sitting at the
Sacrament, or not standing up at the Creed or Gospel, as I before showed you,
has no worthy Thoughts of God; so neither has he any right Notion of
Christianity, which consists only in unfeigned Piety toward God, and sincere
Love to our Brother, not in any external Rites or Observances, which are in
their own Nature variable and mutable, and are different in several Churches.

3. It would greatly contribute to the removing these Scruples which hinder the
blessed Union of Christians amongst us, if men were but really willing to
receive satisfaction. This alone would go half way toward conquering them. But
when they are grown fond of and nourish their Doubts and Prejudices, and
converse only with those Men, read only those Books, and hear those Discourses
which are made of their side, which serve to heighten and strengthen their
Jealousies and Suspicions, when they avoid the means of Conviction as dangerous
Snares and Temptations, and look upon this tenderness or aptness to be
offended, as a sign of Grace and extraordinary Conscientiousness, there can be
but little hopes of recovering such Persons to a right apprehension of things.
Whereas would they come once to distrust their own Judgments, to suppose that
they may perhaps be all this while mistaken, would they calmly and patiently
hear, faithfully and impartially consider what is said or wrote against them,
as eagerly desire and seek for satisfaction, as Men do for cure of any Disease
they are subject unto; would they, I say, thus diligently use all fit means and
helps for the removal of their Scruples, before they troubled the Church of
Christ with them, it would not prove so very difficult a Task to convince and
settle such teachable Minds.

If therefore any Man be possessed with Doubts or Scruples against any thing
practiced or required in our Church, let him first read some of those excellent
Books, that are written with all the fairness and evidence imaginable, on
purpose to explain and justify those things that are most usually excepted
against; let him consult with some of our Church before he leaves it. Let him
honestly repair to the Minister of his Parish, or some other whom he has in
greatter estimation, and ingenuously open his Mind to him, declaring what it is
he most stumbles at, and hear what can be offered for the Resolution of his
Doubts. If consulting with one Person will not do it, let him advise with
others, and try this often, before he condemns us, and divides from us. Would
Men do this seriously, with earnest desire of instruction, without doubt we
should have far fewer Separatists, and they who after this did still dissent
from us, would be far more excusable in it, than otherwise they are, and this
is no other than what men ordinarily do in their temporal Affairs. When they
have any fear or suspicion about their worldly concerns, they presently repair
to those who are best skilled, and most able to resolve them, and in their
judgment and determination they commonly acquiesce and satisfy themselves.
Has any man a scruple about his Estate, whether it be firmly settled, or he
has a true legal Title to it? The way he takes for satisfaction is to advise
with Lawyers, the most eminent for Knowledge and Honesty in their Profession.
If they agree in the same Opinion, this is the greatest assurance he can have
that it is right and safe. Thus is it with one that doubts whether such a
custom or practice be for his Health, the opinion of known and experienced
Physicians is the only proper means to determine him in such a Case. The reason
is the same here. When any private Christian is troubled and perplexed with
fears and scruples that concern his Duty, or the Worship of God, he ought in
the first place to have recourse to the Public Guides and Ministers of
Religion, who are appointed by God, and are best fitted to direct and conduct
him; I say, to come to them, not only to dispute and argue with them, and
pertly to oppose them, but with all modesty to propound their doubts, meekly to
hearken to and receive Instruction, humbly begging of God to open their
Understandings that they may see and embrace the truth, taking great care that
no evil affection, love of a Party, or carnal interest influence or bias their
Judgments.

We do not by this desire men to pin their faith upon the Priests Sleeve, or to
put out their own Eyes that they might be better guided and managed by them;
but only diligently to attend to their Reasons and Arguments, and to give some
due regard and deference to their Authority: for it is not so absurd, as may by
some be imagined, for the Common People to take upon trust from their lawful
Teachers, what they are not competent Judges of themselves.

But the difficulty here is, how shall a private Christian govern himself, when
the very Guides and Ministers of Religion determine differently concerning
these matters in question amongst us? Some warranting and allowing them, others
as much disapproving and condemning them: by what Rule shall he choose his
Guide? To which I briefly reply;

1. As for those who scruple at Conformity, and are tolerably able to judge for
themselves, let not such rely barely upon the Authority either of the one or
the other. All we desire of them is, that they would equally hear both sides,
that they would think that the Ministers of the Church of England have some
Sense and Conscience too as well as other Men, and are able to say somewhat for
what they do themselves, or require of others; that laying aside all
Prejudices, Favor to or admiration of Men's Persons, they would weigh and
consider the Arguments that may be propounded to them, being diffident of their
own Apprehensions, and indifferent to either part of the Question; that they
would think it no shame to change their Mind when they see good reason for it.
Could we thus prevail with the People diligently to examine the Merits of the
cause, our Church would every day gain more Ground amongst all wise Men: for we
care not how much Knowledge and Understanding our People have, so they be but
humble and modest with it, nor do we desire Men to become our Proselytes any
further than we give them good Scripture and Reason for it.

2. But as for those who are not so capable of examining or judging for
themselves (as few of the common People who separate from us really are; they
not being able to give any tolerable account of their dissent from us, only in
general Words declaiming against Popery, Superstition, Antichristian and
Unscriptural Ceremonies, Humane Traditions, etc.) such had better trust to and
depend on those Ministers, of known Sufficiency for their Office, who are
regularly and by the Laws of the Land set over them, than any other Guides or
Teachers that they can choose for themselves. This to be sure is the safer
course, which in doubtful cases is always to be taken. I speak now of these
present Controversies about Forms and Ceremonies so hotly agitated amongst us,
which are above the Sphere of common People, out of their profession; not of
such things as concern the Salvation of all men, which are plain and evident to
the meanest Capacities. When therefore in such cases, about which we cannot
easily satisfy our selves, we follow the Advice of the publicly authorized
Guides and Preachers of Religion, if they chance to mislead us, we have
something to say or apologize for our selves. Our Error is more excusable and
pardonable, as being occasioned by those, to whose Judgment, by God's Command,
we did owe a great Respect and Submission. But when we choose Instructors and
Counselors to our selves according to our own Fancy and liking, and they teach
us contrary to the Doctrine of our lawful Ministers, if then we prove to be in
the wrong, and are betrayed into Sin, we may thank our own Wantonness for it,
and are more severely accomptable for such Mistakes.

Thus let a Man that is troubled with any threatening disease, apply himself
rather to the Licensed Physicians or Chyrurgions, of approved Skill and
Honesty; and if he chance to miscarry under them, yet he has this contentment,
that he used the best and wisest means for his Health and Recovery. But if he
leaves them all, and will hearken only to Quacks and Empiricks, tho they advise
him quite contrary to what the others prescribed, if under their hands he grows
worse and worse, he must then charge his own perverse Folly or idle Humor, as
the cause of his Ruin.

4. In order to the curing of our Scruples, we should thoroughly understand and
consider, what is the true Notion of lawful, and how it differs from what is
necessary, and from what is sinful. That is necessary or our Duty which God
has expressly commanded, that is sinful which God has forbid; that is lawful
which God has not by any Law obliging us either commanded or forbid: for,
Where there is no Law, says the Apostle, there is no Transgression, Romans 4.
15. There can be no Transgression, but either omitting what the Law commands,
or doing what the Law forbids. For instance, If any Man can show where kneeling
at the Sacrament is forbid in Scripture, where fitting is required; where
praying by a Form is forbid, and extemporary Prayers are enjoined, then indeed
the Dispute would soon be at an end: but if neither the one nor the other can
be found, as most certainly they cannot, then kneeling at the Sacrament, and
reading Prayers out of a Book, must be reckoned amongst things lawful. And then
there is no need of scrupling them, because they may be done without Sin: nay,
where they are required by our Superiors, it is our Duty to submit to them,
because it is our Duty to obey them in all lawful things.

This way of arguing is very plain and convincing, and cannot be evaded but by
giving another Notion of Lawful. And therefore it is commonly said, that
nothing is lawful, especially in the Worship of God, which God himself has not
prescribed and appointed, or that has been abused to evil Purposes. And on
these two Mistakes are chiefly grounded Men's Scruples about indifferent Rites
and Ceremonies in God's Worship.

1. That only is said to be lawful in God's Worship which he himself has
prescribed and appointed; so that this is thought Exception sufficient against
the Forms and Usages of our Church, that though they are not forbid, yet they
are no where commanded in Scripture. Who has required these things at your
hands?

Now here I only ask, Where our Savior or his Apostles have forbid us doing
any thing in God's Worship, which is not by himself commanded, or where in the
New Testament we are told, that God will be angry with us for doing any thing
which he has no where forbid, either by general or particular Laws? For unless
this can be shown, there can be no color for this Pretense, and we are
sufficiently sure, that no such Place can be produced out of the Bible. It is
acknowledged by all, that the Holy Scriptures, as to all that is necessary to
be believed or done in order to Salvation, as to all the essential and
substantial Parts of Divine Worship, is a plain and perfect Rule; but it is as
certain, that the outward Circumstances of Time, Place, Habit, and Gesture, are
not determined in the New Testament, as they were in many cases by Moses's Law:
and yet God cannot be, at least visibly and publicly, worshipped without them.
If therefore these be not determined in Scripture, and it is unlawful to do any
thing in God's Worship but what is so determined, it follows that God cannot be
worshipped at all, unless we could worship him in no Time, Place, Habit, or
Gesture: nor indeed can I learn how a Christian can, with a good Conscience,
perform any part of God's Worship, if this Principle be admitted for true, that
whatsoever is not commanded is forbid, since the external Circumstances of
religious Actions, without which they cannot be performed, are not prescribed
or determined in Scripture; and so he must commit a Sin every time he prays or
receives the Holy Sacrament.

Besides, this Reason would oblige us to separate from all the Churches that
ever were or are in the World, there being no constituted Church in which there
are not some Orders and Injunctions for the regulating the public Worship of
God no where commanded in Scripture. We could never, upon this Principle, have
held Communion with the Primitive Churches, which undoubtedly had their
instituted significant Ceremonies; nor is there any Church at this day, that
has not by its own Authority determined some of the Circumstances of Divine
Service for the more decent and orderly Performance thereof. Nay, those very
Persons that make this Exception, do themselves practice many things in the
Worship of God, without the least shadow of a Divine Command, to which they
oblige their Hearers and Communicants: for, conceived Prayers, sitting at the
Eucharist, sprinkling the Infant at Baptism, the Minister's officiating in a
black Cloak or Coat, are full out as unscriptural, humane, uncommanded, as any
Gesture, Habit, or Form used in our Church.

2. That is said to be unlawful which has been abused to sinful Purposes, to
Idolatry or Superstition; so that nothing ought to be retained in our Worship,
tho it be not forbid by God, which was used in times of Popery. Hence the
ordinary Objection against our Parish Churches is, that they are not
sufficiently purged from Popery; that our first Reformers were indeed excellent
and worthy Persons for the Times they lived in; that what they did was very
commendable and a good Beginning, but they were forced to comply with the
necessities of the Age, which would not bear a complete Reformation* They left
a great deal of Popish Trash in the Church, hoping by degrees to reconcile the
Papists to it, or at least, that they might not make the Breach too wide, and
too much prejudice or estrange them from it. But we now live under better
means, have greater Light and Knowledge, and so a further and more perfect
Amendment is now necessary. Thus the Order of Bishops is decried as Popish and
Antichristian, our Liturgy as taken out of the Mass Book, and our Ceremonies as
Relics of Idolatry.

But the truth of the case is this. We must consider, that those of the Church
of Rome do hold and maintain all the Essentials of Christianity, but then by
degrees, as they found Opportunity, they have added a number of impious and
pernicious Doctrines to the Christian Faith, the Belief and Profession of which
they equally require of all that are in their Communion. Besides this, they
have introduced several idolatrous, and superstitious Rites and Practices into
the Service of their Church, never heard of for the first four hundred Years,
by which they have miserably defaced and corrupted the Worship of God, and made
it necessary for all those that love their own Salvation, to separate from
them. Now our first Reformers here in England did not go about to invent a new
Species of Government, to devise new Rites and Ceremonies and a new form of
Worship, such as should be least excepted against, and then obtrude it upon
this Nation, as was done at Geneva, and some other places; but they wisely
considered, that if they did but reject what the Romanists had added to the
Faith and Worship of Christians, lay aside their novel Inventions, Usurpations,
and unwritten Traditions, there would remain the pure, simple, Primitive
Christianity, such as it was before the Roman Church was thus degenerated: nor
have we any thing of Popery left amongst us, but what the Papists had left
amongst them of Primitive Religion and Worship.

As we must not receive the evil for the sake of the good, so neither must we
reject the good for the sake of the evil. In our Church we pray neither to
Saints nor Angels, nor the Virgin Mary, our Liturgy is in a known Tongue, we
deny the Laity no part of the Sacrament, nor the reading of the Scriptures, we
offer no Mass Sacrifice, nor Worship Images or the consecrated Bread. We have
not one Doctrine or Ceremony in use amongst us, that is purely Popish. But we
must be obliged to part with the most sacred, venerable and usefullest things
in our Religion, if this be a sufficient reason of our forbearing any thing,
because the Papists abuse it.

This therefore I conclude to be the best and plainest rule for the governing
of our Consciences, not wilfully to omit any thing that God has commanded, to
avoid to the utmost of our Power what God has forbid; and what ever else we
have no particular Divine Law about, to guide our selves by the general Rules
of Scripture, the commands of our Superiors, and by the measures of Prudence,
Peace, and Charity. This one rule (and it cannot but seem a very reasonable
one) would soon put an end to our squabbles and janglings about Forms and
Ceremonies and other indifferent things.

5. In order to the bringing men to a compliance with the Laws of our Church,
we must desire them to consider that there never was nor ever will be any
public Constitution, that will be every way unexceptionable. The best policy,
whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, that can be established will have some flaws
and defects, which must be borne and tolerated. Some Inconveniences will in
process of time arise, that never could be foreseen or provided against; and to
make alteration upon every emergent difficulty may be often of worse
consequence, than the evil we pretend to cure by it. Let the Rules and Modes of
Government, Discipline, public Worship, be most exact and blameless, yet there
will be faults in Governors and Ministers as long as they are but men. We must
not expect in this World a Church without Spot or Wrinkle, that consists only
of Saints, in which nothing can be found amiss; especially by those who lie at
the catch and wait for an advantage against it.

If men will scruple and reform, as long as any thing remains which they can
object against, they must even come at last, as a Reverend Person of our Church
has observed, to the state of that miserable Man who left all humane Society
that he might not be defiled with other Men's Sins, and at last cut out the
Contents of Chapters and Titles of Books out of the Bible, because they were
humane Inventions added to the pure Word of God. Men must be willing, if ever
they would promote Peace and Unity, to put candid Constructions and favorable
Interpretations upon things, to take them by the best handle, and not strain
things on purpose that they might cavil the more plausibly, and raise more
considerable Objections against them. We must not make personal, accidental
Faults, nor any thing a pretense for our leaving the Communion of our Church,
which arises only from the necessary condition and temper of all humane
Affairs, that nothing here is absolutely perfect.

6. And lastly, if you cannot by these, and other the like considerations, not
now to be mentioned, get rid of, and conquer your Scruples, then be advised to
lay them aside, to throw them out of your Minds as dangerous Temptations, and
act positively against them.

But here I easily imagine some ready presently to ask me, Do you persuade us
to conform to the Orders of the Church tho we are not satisfied in our Minds
concerning them? I answer, That I think this the best Advice that can be given
to such scrupulous Persons. It would be an endless infinite thing, and
Communion with any Church would be altogether unpracticable, if every private
Christian was obliged to suspend joining himself to it, till he was perfectly
satisfied about the reasonableness and expediency of all that was required, or
was in use in that Church: for indeed, private Persons are by no means proper
Judges of what is fit and convenient in the Administration of
Church Government, Discipline, or public Worship, no more than they are of
matters of State, or the Reasonableness of all Civil Laws. Common People
generally have neither Patience to consider, nor Judgment to weigh all
Circumstances, nor Wisdom to choose that which is best; these things of a
Public Nature belong only to our Superiors and Governors, and if they
appoint what is unfit, indecent, or inconvenient, they only are accountable for
it. It is not the fault of those that join with such Worship, or yield to such
Injunctions (not plainly sinful) for the sake of Peace and Order.

I know therefore no better Rule for the directing and quieting Men's
Consciences than this, that as to all such Matters as relate to Public Order
and decent Administration of God's Worship, they should without any
superstitious Fearfulness comply with the Customs of the Church they live in,
never troubling themselves, nor curiously examining what is best and fittest,
as long as there is nothing enjoined or done, which (after due enquiry) appears
to us contrary to any Law of God. Thus St. Augustine directs us in that often
quoted place, where he tells us, He knew no better course for a serious prudent
Christian to take, in matters of Rites and Customs, than to follow the Churches
Example where he is: for whatsoever is prescribed neither against Faith or
Manners, is a matter in its self indifferent, and to be observed according to
the Custom of those he lives among. This was agreeable to the Counsel St.
Ambrose, Bishop of Milan, gave him when he was sent by his Mother to enquire
his Judgment about the Saturday Fast, When I am at Rome, says the Bishop, I
fast on the Sabbath, but at Milan I do not. So thou likewise, when thou come
to any Church, observe its Custom, if thou would neither be an offense to
them, nor have them be so to thee. Which St. Augustine ever after looked upon as
an Oracle from Heaven.

I do not by this encourage Men to venture blindfold on Sin, or to neglect any
reasonable care of their Actions; but if People raise all the Difficulties and
Objections they can start, before they proceed to a Resolution about things
that have no manifest Impiety in them, nor are plainly nor by any easy
consequence, contrary to the revealed Will of God, this cannot but occasion
infinite Perplexity and Trouble to Men's Minds, and there are but few things
they shall be able to do with a safe and quiet Conscience. Should all those
that have some little Arguments against the Sign of the Cross, puzzle
themselves with the Objections usually urged against Infant Baptism, and defer
baptizing their Children till they were fully satisfied about it, I doubt not
but the baptizing of Infants would soon be as much scrupled at as the crossing
them now is. But there is no apparent Evil in it; it is the Practice of the
Church we live in, it is no where forbid in Scripture: this ordinarily is
sufficient Warrant for what we do.

Before we separate from a Church, or refuse to comply with its Orders, we
ought to be fully satisfied and persuaded of the Unlawfulness of what is
required, that it is forbid by God; because by leaving the Communion of any
Church, we pass Sentence upon and condemn it, which ought not to be done upon
light and doubtful causes: but there is not the same necessity that we should
be thus fully satisfied about our Conformity to all things prescribed by the
Church. We may presume them to be innocent, unless they plainly appear to us
otherwise.

The Judicious and Learned Bishop Sanderson thus expresses it in his fourth
Sermon Ad Clerum, The Law takes every Man for a good Man and true, till his
Truth and Honesty be legally disproved: and as our Savior sometimes said, He
that is not against us is for us: so in these matters (he speaks of those
Ceremonies that for Order's sake, and to add the greater Solemnity to sacred
Actions, are appointed in the Church) we are to believe all things to be lawful
for us to do, which cannot be shown by good Evidence either of Scripture or
Reason to be unlawful.

If any one be afraid that this Principle once imbibed would introduce Popery,
make People greedily swallow, and without any Examination submit to every thing
their Superiors please to impose upon them, let him only consider (which we
all agree in) that there are many things in the Popish Worship and Religion
manifestly evil, and forbidden by the revealed Will of God, which renders our
Separation from them necessary, and so consequently justifiable: whereas the
things objected against in our Church are at worst only doubtful and
suspicious, or rather not so good and expedient as might be devised: and this
surely makes a wide difference in the case.

But does not St. Paul say, Romans 14. 19. I know and am persuaded by the Lord
Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it self, but to him that esteems any
thing unclean it is unclean? Does not he expressly tell us, That whatsoever is
not of Faith is Sin? that is, Whatever we do without a full Persuasion of the
lawfulness of it, tho it be not so in it self, yet is a Sin in him that does it
against his Conscience. And does not the Apostle say, He that doubts is
damned if he eat, before he is convinced that it may be done? I desire here
therefore only to be rightly understood, and then these things are soon
reconciled.

1. When I speak of a Scrupulous Conscience, I suppose the Person tolerably
well persuaded of the lawfulness of what is to be done, but yet he does not
like or approve of it, he has some little Reasons and Exceptions against it,
it is not the best and fittest, all things considered. This is properly a
Scruple, and is certainly the case of all those, who do sometimes (to save
themselves from the severity of the Laws) join in our Worship, and communicate
with us; which we presume they would never do did they judge it absolutely
sinful and forbidden by God. So that though it should be granted that a man
cannot innocently do that of which his Conscience doubts whether it be lawful
or not, yet a Man may, and in some cases is bound to do that which is not
unlawful, though upon some other Accounts he scruples the doing of it.

2. If the Question be about things wherein we are left wholly to our selves,
and at Liberty, having no very weighty Reason for the doing of them, then it
may be the safest way to forbear all such things we scruple at. Of such cases
the Apostle speaks in the forementioned Places, of eating or not eating some
Meats; neither of them was required by any Law. Eating was no instance of Duty,
nor was it any ways forbid Christians: where to do or not to do is perfectly at
our own choice, it is best for a Man to forbear doing that of which he has
some suspicion, tho he be not sure that it is sinful. As suppose a man have
Scruples in his Mind about playing at Cards and Dice, or going to see
Stage Plays, or putting out his Money to Usury, because there is no great
Reason or Necessity for any of these things, and to be sure they may be
innocently forborne without any Detriment to our selves or others; though we do
not judge them absolutely sinful, yet it is safest for him who cannot satisfy
himself concerning the Goodness and Fitness of them, wholly to deny himself the
use of them. But in these two cases it is most for the quiet of our
Consciences, to act against or notwithstanding our Fears and Scruples, when
either our Superiors, to whom we owe Obedience, have interposed their
Commands, or when by it we prevent some great Evil or Mischief.

1. When our Superiors, either Civil or Ecclesiastical, whom by the Will of
God we are bound to obey in all lawful things, have interposed their Commands,
our Scruples will not excuse or justify our Disobedience. If indeed we judge
what is commanded to be absolutely unlawful, tho it be a false erroneous
Judgment, yet whilst we are under such persuasion we are by no means to do it
upon any Inducement whatever.

If I only doubt of the lawfulness of any particular Action, and it be an
instance wherein I am at liberty, I am still bound not to do it. For,
Whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin. I am certainly innocent when I forbear; I
may commit a Sin, If I do it, Wisdom would therefore, that the safer part be
chosen. But now if I am by the command of my Superiors obliged to it, my
choice is then determined, it then becomes my Duty, and it can never be safe or
advisable to neglect a plain Duty for an uncertain Offense. Thus most and best
Casuists do determine about a doubtful Conscience, particularly the forenamed
reverend Bishop, in the same Sermon, Whatsoever is commanded us by those whom
God has set over us, either in Church, Commonwealth, or Family (quod tamen not
sit certum displicere Deo, says St. Bernard) which is not evidently contrary
to the Law and Will of God, ought to be of us received and obeyed no otherwise
than as if God himself had commanded it, because God himself has commanded us
to obey the Higher Powers, and to submit our selves to their Ordinances.

But now this is more plain concerning Fears and Scruples only about the
convenience and expediency of things, these ought all to be despised when they
come in Competition with the Duty of Obedience. Would men but think themselves
in Conscience bound to pay the same Duty and respect to the Judgment and
Authority of Magistrates and Governors, whether in Church or State, as they do
expect their Servants and Children should to themselves, they would soon see
the reasonableness of such submission. For all Government and Subjection would
be very precarious and arbitrary, if every one that did not approve of a Law or
was not fully satisfied about the reasonableness of it, was thereby exempted
from all Obligations to obey it. This is to give the Supreme Authority to the
most humoursome or perverse sort of Christians: for, according to this
principle, no public Laws and Constitutions can be valid and binding, unless
every scrupulous, tho a very ignorant Conscience, consent to them.

2. We are not to mind or stand upon our Scruples, when they probably occasion
a great evil, a general mischief. They are not fit to be put in the balance
with the Peace of the Church and Unity of Christians. Suppose for once that our
public way of Worship is not the best that can be devised, that many things
might be amended in our Liturgy, that we could invent a more agreeable
Establishment than this present is (which yet no man in the World can ever
tell, for we cannot know all the inconveniences of any Alteration, till it
comes to be tried) yet granting all this, it cannot be thought so intolerable
an Evil as contempt of God's Solemn Worship, dividing into Sects and Parties,
living in Debate, Contention, and Separation from one another. If there be some
Rites and Customs amongst us not wisely chosen or determined, some Ceremonies
against which just Exceptions may be made, yet to forsake the Communion of such
a true Church of Jesus Christ, and set up a distinct Altar in opposition to it,
to combine and associate into separate Congregations, is (as it is somewhere
expressed) like knocking a man on the head because his Teeth are rotten, or his
Nails too long. How much more agreeable is it to the Christian Temper, to be
willing to sacrifice all such Doubts and Scruples to the Interests of public
Order and divine Charity; for better surely it is to serve God in a defective
imperfect manner, to bear with many Disorders and Faults, than to break the
Bond of Peace and brotherly Communion.

For this we have the Example of our Blessed Lord and Savior, who lived and
died in Communion with a Church where there were far greater Corruptions both
as to Persons and Practices, than can be pretended to be in ours at this day;
yet though he was the great Reformer of Mankind, he forsook not the Jewish
Church, but assembled with them in their public Synagogues, which answer to
our Parish-Churches, preached in the Temple though they had made it a Den of
Thieves, observed their Festivals, tho some of them of humane Institution, nay
commanded his Disciples to continue to hear the Scribes and Pharisees, tho they
were a most vile and wretched Generation of Men. Great were the Pollutions and
Misdemeanors in the Churches of Rome, Corinth, Galatia, yet no one Member of
them is ever commanded to come out or separate from those Churches to join in a
purer Congregation or to avoid mixed Communions, or for better Edification. For
Men to be drunk at the Sacrament was certainly a worse Fault than to kneel at
it, or for a wicked Man to intrude himself; yet the Apostle does not advise any
to withdraw from that Church, but only every one to examine himself. We ought
to do all that we can do without Sin, submit to an hundred things which are
against our Mind or we had rather let alone, for the sake of Peace and Unity,
so desirable in it self, so necessary for the Glory of God, the Honor of
Religion, for our common Interest and Safety, for the Preservation of what I
may, without Vanity, call the best Church in the World.

I cannot stand now to tell you, how earnestly this Duty of maintaining Unity
amongst Christians is pressed in the New Testament; how concerned our Blessed
Master was, that all his Disciples should agree together and live as Brethren;
how severely the Holy Apostles chid and rebuked those that caused Divisions and
Strife amongst Christians, reckoning Schism and Contention amongst the most
heinous and dangerous Sins. It should make both the Ears (one would think) of
some amongst us to tingle, but to hear what Sense the Primitive Christians had
of the sinfulness of separating from and breaking the Communion of Christians,
nay, what the old Non-conformists here in England have said of it, yet
remaining in Print, charging the People to be as tender of Church-Division as
they were of Drunkenness, Whoredom, or any other enormous Crime. And did Men
know and consider the evil of Schism, they would not be so ready, upon every
slight occasion, to split upon that Rock.

Let us therefore divert our Fears and Scruples upon greater Sins. It is far
more certain, that causless Separation from the Communion of Christians is
sinful, than that Kneeling at the Sacrament, or Praying by a Book, is such. Why
then have Men such invincible Scruples about one, and none at all about the
other? They run headlong into the Separate Assemblies, which surely are more
like to Schismatical Conventicles than any thing in our Church is to Idolatry.
Let Men be as scrupulous and fearful of offending against the Christian Laws of
Subjection, Peaceableness, and Charity, as they are of worshipping God after an
impure manner, and this alone will contribute much to the making up those
Breaches which threaten sudden Ruin to our Church and Nation. I only add here,
that in all that I have now said I am not conscious to my self, that I have
used any Argument or affirmed any thing, but what many of those very Ministers,
who now dissent from us, did teach, and maintain, and print too, against the
Independents and other Sectaries that divided from them when they preached in
the Parish-Churches. And if this was good Doctrine against those who separated
upon the account of Corruptions, for purer Ordinances in those Days, I see not
why it is not as good against themselves, when upon the very same Pretenses,
and no other, they divide from us now.

The Lord grant that we may all come at last to be of one Mind, to live in
Peace and Unity, and then the God of Love and Peace shall be with us.

FINIS.
SOME CONSIDERATIONS About the CASE OF SCANDAL, OR Giving Offense TO Weak
Brethren.

LONDON: Printed by H. Hills Jun. for T. Basset, at the George in Fleet Street;
B. Took, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard; and F. Gardener, and the White
Horse in Ludgate Street. 1683.

Of giving OFFENSE TO Weak Brethren.
IT has been often observed concerning our Dissenting Brethren, that when they
are urged to mention any one thing required of the People in the Public
Worship of God in our Parish Churches, judged by them absolutely sinful, on the
account of which their separation from us is necessary, and consequently
justifiable, they either put us off with some inconveniences, inexpediences or
corruptions, (as they call them) some things appointed and used, which in their
opinion render our service less pure and spiritual; (the chief of which
exceptions have been considered in several Discourses, lately written with
great temper and judgment for the satisfaction of all honest and teachable
minds:) Or else some of them tell us, that they are indeed themselves
sufficiently persuaded of the lawfulness of all that is enjoined, they do not
see but a good Christian may serve God acceptably and devoutly our way, and may
go to Heaven living and dying in our Communion; but then there are many other
Godly, but weaker Christians of another persuasion, with whom they have been
long joined: And should they now, at least totally, forsake them, and conform,
they should thereby give great offense to all those tender Consciences, which
are not thus convinced of the lawfulness of holding such Communion with our
Church, in Prayers and Sacraments, as is by Law required. Which is a sin so
Heinous and of such dreadful Consequence, that our Savior tells us, St. Matt.
18. 6. Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it
were better for him that a Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and that he
were drowned in the depth of the Sea; and in St. Paul's account it is no less
than Spiritual Murder, a destroying of him for whom Christ dyed, Rom 14. 15.

Now this Case of giving Offense to weak Brethren, I have undertaken briefly to
consider, where I once for all suppose (as all those must do who make this the
ground of their refusing to Communicate with our Church) that nothing is
amongst us imposed as a condition of Communion, but what may be done without
sin; for were any thing in it self sinful required by our Church, there could
be no room for this Plea of Scandal: That alone would be sufficient reason for
Separation from us. I Discourse therefore at this present only with such, who
for their own particular could well enough join with us, but dare not do it for
fear of Offending those, who yet scruple and are dissatisfied at the use of our
Prayers and Ceremonies.

Nor do I design exactly to handle the whole Doctrine of Scandal, or
Elaborately explain all the places of Scripture concerning it, or state the
Cases there treated of; Nor shall I now meddle with the Duty of Governors and
Superiors, how far they ought to condescend to the weakness, ignorance,
prejudices, and mistakes of those under their care and charge; but I shall
confine my self to this one Question.

Whether there does lie any obligation upon any private Christian (as the case
now stands amongst us) to absent from his Parish Church, or to forbear the use
of the Forms of Prayer and Ceremonies by Law appointed, for fear of Offending
or Scandalizing his weak Brethren?

Here I shall First of all inquire, what is the true notion of a weak Brother.
Secondly, What it is to Offend such an one. Thirdly, How far and in what
instances we are bound to consider the weakness of our Brother.

First, For the resolution of this Question it is necessary to know, what is
the true notion of a weak Brother. Now a weak Brother or weak in Faith in
Scripture denotes one newly converted to Christianity; and so neither thoroughly
instructed in the principles, nor well settled in the practice of it, the same
whom our Savior calls a little one, and the Apostle a babe in Christ. 1 Cor.
3. 1.

Conversion to Christianity is often called our new birth, and consequently at
Men's first entrance into the Christian Church, they were for a while reckoned
as in an Infant state; and accordingly were to be most tenderly handled and
nursed, and gently used, with all favor and indulgence, not driven faster than
they were able to go; till by degrees, by the improvement of their knowledge
they came to be of full Age, as the Apostle expresses it, Heb. 5. 14.

They were at first to be fed with Milk, to be taught the easiest and plainest
Doctrines, against which least exceptions could be made; (as our Blessed
Savior himself would not at first tell his Disciples of the shame and
sufferings he was to undergo, and when he did speak of them it was covertly and
obscurely, so that they did not perfectly understand him, lest they should by
it have been presently discouraged and tempted to have forsaken him;) no
unnecessary burdens were to be laid upon them, which might render their new
Profession grievous to them; every Stumbling Block and prejudice was to be
removed out of their way, that might occasion their falling; the grown
Christians and proficients were Charitably to condescend to the capacity of
these Novices, and make allowances, and for a time bear with their Ignorance
and many mistakes and Childish humors, and deny themselves their own Liberty,
and become even as Children with them, as if themselves were of the same mind
and understood no better, than these raw beginners.

Now these fresh Disciples, little ones or Babes are the same with those St.
Paul Romans 14. calls weak Brethren, weak for want of Age or Growth, or as the
Original word rather signifies, Sickly and Feeble; like a Man beginning to
recover from a wasting Disease, his distemper, tho cured, yet hangs a long time
upon him, the Dregs of it still remain: He must for a while be carefully
attended and watched, since every little thing discomposes him, and hazards a
relapse. So was it with these first Converts. As soon as ever they were brought
to acknowledge Jesus to be the Son of God, and were willing to become his
Disciples, they were immediately Baptized, tho as yet they understood but
little of the Nature or design of the Gospel. The Apostles and first Preachers
of our Religion were in have to make more Proselytes, and therefore presently
Baptized all that were willing to it without that previous Instruction and
Preparation, which afterward, when Churches were settled, was made necessary
before Heathens or Jews could be admitted by Baptism. Thus the same day the
Apostles Preached Christ to the Jews, Acts 2. they Baptized about three
thousand of them, and Philip without any delay Baptized the Eunuch, as soon as
he professed to believe that Jesus was the Son of God: and the Jailer and his
Household were Baptized the same hour at midnight, at which Paul and Silas
spoke unto them the word of the Lord. After their Baptism they were to be
tutored and trained up in their new Religion, where great care was to be taken,
great prudence and caution used toward them, lest they should suddenly fly
back and repent of their change; for having been bred up, and so long lived
Jews or Gentiles, and then of a sudden turned Christians, they retained still a
great love and kindness for many of their old Customs and Opinions, they had
mighty and inveterate prejudices to overcome, the Old man was by degrees to be
put off, and therefore they were at first treated with all the tenderness and
condescension imaginable, the stronger and wiser Christians would not stand
rigidly on any little matters, would for the present tolerate many things,
which were necessary afterward to be done away, hoping that in time they might
be better taught, and be brought off those mistakes they now Labored under.

Had the Apostles in the beginning plainly told all the Jews of the ceasing of
their Laws, the abrogation of their Ceremonies and Worship, the no necessity of
Circumcision, the taking in of the Gentiles, they would never have born such
Doctrines, they would never have become Christians upon such terms, nor ever
endured those Teachers, who seemed to make so little account of Moses and their
Temple. Now to gain these St. Paul became weak himself, tied up himself while
amongst these Jewish Converts to such observances, which he was really free
from, as if he had the same doubts and were of the same opinion with those weak
Christians, and advises all others who did understand their Liberty, yet to
oblige their Brethren by the same inoffensive carriage.

This then was the difference between the strong and the weak, the strong were
the well-grounded, understanding Christians, that knew it was lawful for them
to Eat all kind of Meats, that Christ had set them free from the burdensome
Yoke of the Jewish Ceremonies, the weak, tho Brethren, that is, believers in
Christ, yet abstained from some Meats, judging them unlawful or unclean, and
observed days, and Zealously retained the Mosaical rites, not being yet
sufficiently instructed in that Liberty our Savior had purchased for them, or
in the nature of his Kingdom, which consisted not in Meat or Drink, but in
Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Hence I observe,

1. That the rules which are laid down in Scripture concerning weak Brethren
principally respect those times when our Religion made its first appearance in
the World, and were temporary provisions for the easier proselyting men to the
Faith of Christ, or the better securing and fixing those that were already come
into the Church. They are not standing Laws equally obliging all Christians in
all Ages, but were suited to the Infant state of the Church, or rather to its
condition whilst it was but an Embryo, till Churches were formed and settled,
and our Christianity had got firm Footing and Possession in the World. Thus St.
Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 9. 19. For tho I be free from all Men, yet have I made my
self servant unto all, that I might gain the more. And unto the Jews I became
as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to them that are under the Law, as under
the Law, that I might gain them that are under the Law. To them that are
without Law, as without Law (being not without Law to God, but under the Law to
Christ) that I might gain them that are without Law. To the weak became I as
weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made all things to all men, that I might
by all means save some. And this I do for the Gospels sake, that I might be
partaker thereof with you. This was the Apostles design in all these
Compliances and Civilities to win many to the Faith of Christ, by these wise
arts to insinuate himself and his Doctrine into them: but when he had once made
his way, he then taught them another lesson, and behaved himself after a far
different manner. Now to do as St. Paul did, would always be the duty and
wisdom of one in his circumstances, who had his office and was to propagate any
Religion amongst Heathens and Infidels; like a Master that deals not so
sharply with his Scholar at his first entrance into the School, as he thinks
fit to do afterward. But the directions St. Paul gave, and according to which
himself practiced at the first planting of Christianity, do no more agree with
our times, wherein Christianity is become the National Religion, countenanced
by the Civil Laws and Authority, and so generally professed by every one
amongst us, that we hardly know of any other Religion, than the same Clothes we
did wear in our Infancy would serve us now when we are of full Age.

We ought indeed to be very careful of Children, and lead them by strings, and
remove every straw and rub out of their way, lest they stumble and fall, but it
is ridiculous to use the same care toward grown men. None of us Labor under
those prejudices the first Christians did, who forsook a Religion in which they
had been bred, and long lived; and as to the Jews had left a way of Worship
commanded them by God himself, confirmed to them by many Miracles and Wonders,
delivered to them from their Fathers by a constant succession of Prophets sent
from God. There is not now amongst us any such competition between two
Religions, but every one learneth Christianity as he does his Mothers Tongue.
The Apostles therefore and Governors of the Church carried themselves toward
these new Converts, as God Almighty did toward the Children of Israel, when he
brought them first out of Egypt. He for a while led them by a Pillar of Fire
and of a Cloud, gave them Water out of the Rock, and rained down Bread and
Flesh from Heaven. This he did for them whilst in their passage, thus
extraordinarily provide for them, and in some cases even humor that People,
lest upon every little pretense they should return back to the Garlic and
Onyons of Egypt; but after they were settled in the Land of Canaan, he then
left them in their own hands, by ordinary Common means to take care of and
provide for themselves, he did not show the same indulgence to them, as he did
whilst they were in the Wilderness.

St. Paul would not take that reward that was due to him for Preaching the
Gospel, but himself Labored hard night and day, because he would not be
chargeable to his Converts, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 9. and this he did for the furtherance
of the Gospel, that all might see he did not serve his own Belly. But surely
our Dissenting Brethren do not think themselves obliged by this Example, in
places where Public maintenance is settled on Ministers by Law, to refuse to
take it, and earn their own Bread by some manual occupation, tho thereby they
avoid giving offense to Quakers, and those who call them hirelings, and say
they prophecy only for filthy lucre.

Thus it is usually observed, that St. Paul writes quite after a different
manner to the Romans and to the Galatians, tho upon the same subject. In his
Epistle to the Romans amongst whom he had never yet been, he pitieth and
pleads for the weak Christians, charge that they should not be despised or
cast off, that no cause of offense should be given them, but to the Galatians a
People that had been fully instructed in the nature of their Christian Liberty,
amongst whom himself had planted the Gospel, and had been present in person,
and so knew that they understood better; when some of them fell into the same
Error, thinking Circumcision and the observation of the Mosaical Law necessary
to Christians, he chides them sharply and rebukes them more severely; Who has
bewitched you O foolish Galatians, etc. He who would condescend to the Ignorant
Novices amongst the Romans, would not in the least comply with the Galatians,
that had or ought to have had more knowledge and light: and afterward when the
reason of such forbearance ceased, when the nation of the Jews had rejected
Christ, and the Gentile world was come into the Church, the observation of the
Mosaical Law, and the distinction of meats contained therein, was so far from
being tolerated in those, whether Jews or Gentiles, who through mistake thought
themselves obliged to it, that it was condemned by the Rules and Canons of the
Church. The sum of all this is, that whatever Argument may be drawn from St.
Paul's discourses about weak Brethren by way of Analogy, or Similitude, or
Parity of reason, yet there are no such weak persons now amongst us, as those
were for whom the Apostle provideth, or as those little ones were, for whom our
Savior was so much concerned.

2ly, I would desire our Dissenting Brethren to consider by what pretense they
can challenge any privilege belonging to them under the notion of weak
Christians, when according to their own opinion and conceit of themselves, they
are of all men furthest off from being such in any sense. This is as if a man
worth a Thousand pound per annum, should Sue in forma pauperis.

They who take upon themselves to be teachers of others, wiser and better than
their Neighbors, the only Sober and Godly party, and are too apt to despise
all other Christians as Ignorant or Profane, with what color of reason can
they plead for any favor to be shown, or regard to be had to them in
compliance with their weakness? Tho they love to argue against us from the
example of St. Paul's condescension to the uninstructed Jews or Gentiles, yet it
is apparent that they do not in other cases willingly liken themselves to those
weak believers, or Babes in Christ. They have really better thoughts of
themselves, and would be Leaders and Masters in Israel, and prescribe to their
Governors and give Laws to all others, and do prefer their own private opinion
(which they call their Conscience) before the Judgment of the wisest men, or
the determinations of their Lawful Superiors. And if in all instances we
should deal with them as weak persons, turn them back to their Primmer, advise
them to learn their Catechism, they would think themselves highly wronged and
injured.

If the several Dissenters amongst us did in good earnest look upon themselves
as weak, that is, Ignorant, Wavering, half Christians, did they think their
dislike of the Constitutions of our Church to be the effect of such weakness,
they would be either more careful to hide it, or would more diligently seek out
for remedy; they would be more modest and humble, not so forward to judge and
condemn what they do not understand; they would not encourage one another to
hold out and persist in this their weakness, nor breed up their Children in it,
nor so Zealously endeavor to instill the same prejudices and mistakes into all
with whom they converse. But the truth is, they ordinarily look upon their
opposition to the orders of our Church as the effect of an higher illumination,
greater knowledge than other Men have attained unto, they rather count us the
weak Christians, if some of them will allow us so much; for otherwise if they
do not take us for the weaker and worse Christians; Why do they separate from
us? Why do they associate and combine together into distinct Congregations, as
being purer, more select Christians than others? Now tho such persons as these
may be in truth very weak, of little judgment or goodness, notwithstanding this
conceit of themselves and their party, yet these are not by any means to plead
for indulgence under that Character, nor to expect we should forgo our just
Liberty to please and humor them.

And that this is nothing but the plain truth is sufficiently evident from this
one observation, that many amongst them will grant our Reformation to have been
very excellent and laudable for those days of Darkness and Ignorance wherein it
was first made: But we now, say they, see by a clearer light, have greater
knowledge, and have arrived to higher perfection, and so discover and cannot
bear those faults and defects, which before were tolerable. Now who does not
see that these two pleas are utterly inconsistent and destructive of one
another? to desire abatement of the Ceremonies, and abolition or alteration of
the Liturgy in compliance with their weakness, and to demand the same because
of the greater knowledge and light they now enjoy, above that Age wherein this
present Constitution of our Church was established. This shows they will be
either weak or strong according as it best suits with the Argument they are
managing against us; they are contented to be reckoned as weak, only that on it
they may ground a plausible objection against us.

3 Those who are really weak, that is, Ignorant and injudicious, are to be born
withal only for a time, till they have received better instruction. We cannot
be always Bahes in Christ, without our own gross fault and neglect; he is
something worse than a weak man who is fond of, and resolutely against all
means of Conviction persists in his Ignorance and mistake. The case of young
beginners and Novices is very pittiable, who have not been taught their lesson,
but the same condescension is not due to those, who are ever learning and yet
are never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, not for want of capacity
to understand, but for want of humility and willingness to be instructed. Such
who are peevish and stubborn, whose Ignorance and Error is Voluntary and
affected, who will not yield to the clearest reason, if it be against their
interest or their party, can upon no account claim the privileges of weak
persons.

It is a great piece of inhumanity and cruelty to put a stumbling block in the
way of a blind man, but he walks at his own peril, who has eyes and will not
be persuaded to open them, that he might see and choose his way. Thus our
Savior answered his Disciples when they told him that the Pharisees were
offended at his Doctrine, Let them alone, they be blind leaders of the blind.
And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the Ditch, St. Matt. 15.
14. They were resolved not to be satisfied with any thing our Savior said or
did, they watched for an advantage and sought occasion against him. It was
their Malice, not their Ignorance, that made them so apt to be offended. Of
these therefore our Savior had no regard, who were so unreasonable and
obstinate in their opposition.

Not that I would be so uncharitable as to condemn all, or the generality of
our Nonconforming Brethren for malicious and wilful in their dissent from us.
God forbid that I should pass such an unmerciful sentence on so many (as I
believe) well meaning, tho miserably abused persons, to their own Master they
stand or fall. But however,

1. I would out of charity to them beg earnestly of them, that they would
thoroughly examine whether they have Conscientiously used all due means in their
power for information of their judgments concerning those things they doubt of;
whether they have sincerely endeavored to satisfy themselves, and have
devoutly Prayed to God to free their minds from all prejudices and corrupt
affections, and have patiently considered the grounds and reasons of their
Separation from us; for unless it be thus really with them, their weakness is
no more to be pitied, than that man's Sickness, who might be cured by an easy
remedy if he would but vouchsafe to apply it, or would submit to good Counsel.

2. I must say that old and inveterate mistakes, that have been a thousand
times answered and protested against, are not much to be heeded by us. If
people will by no means be prevailed upon, having sufficient light and time
allowed them, to lay aside their Childish apprehensions and suspicions, they
can hardly be thought to deserve that compassion and tenderness St. Paul
prescribes toward weak Brethren. I shall give one plain instance. Let us
suppose that at the first Reformation of Religion amongst us some very weak
(and such they must be if honest) were offended at the Church's requiring
Kneeling at the receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as seeming to them
to imply the adoration of the Bread and Wine, and as likely to harden some
Ignorant People in that monstrous conceit of Transubstantiation: But now after
so many public Declarations made by our Church, wherein she avows that no such
thing is intended, after the constant profession of so many, that have used
that decent Ceremony, that they abhor the Doctrine of Christ's bodily presence,
nay after the courageous sufferings, even death it self, of those that first
Established this Reformation, rather than they would worship the Host; if after
all this, people shall still clamor against this gesture as Popish, and be
offended with those that use it, as if thereby they gave divine honor to the
Elements, all that I shall say is this, it is a great sign that it is not
infirmity only, to which condescension is due, but something worse that raises
and maintains such exceptions and offenses.

This I suppose holds true even in things where the offense arises from their
doubtful or suspicious nature, that are capable of being misunderstood and
abused, and may be apt through mistake to provoke or tempt others to evil. Yet
if there be no moral evil in them, and the doing of them is of some
considerable consequence or advantage to me, I am bound to forbear them no
longer, than till I have taken due care to inform others rightly of the matter,
and warn them of the danger, till I have endeavored to rectify their
judgments concerning the innocence of my action and intention, and given them
notice of the evil that might possibly by my action happen to them. If I dig a
pit, or lay a block in the way, whereby others not knowing any thing of it are
hurt and wounded, here I stand chargeable with it, and am guilty in causing
them to fall; but if they are plainly and often told of it, and being
forewarned yet will run into the danger, they are then only to thank
themselves, and it is purely their own fault. Now if it be thus in cases that
are liable to suspicion and misinterpretation, it holds much more in our
Ceremonies and the orders of our Church, where the offense that is taken at
them arises not so much from the nature of the injunctions, as from men's gross
Ignorance, misconceit or perverseness. Thus men are no longer weak in Scripture
sense, than they are inculpably Ignorant, or which is all one, the Plea of
weakness is gone, after that sufficient instruction has been given or offered
to them, and other allowances made according to men's different capacities of
understanding. This shall suffice for the first thing propounded, to show what
is the true notion of a weak Brother.

2 I proceed to give you an account what it is to offend such an one. Because I
write for the use of the Common people only, I shall not trouble them with the
several significations of the Greek word which is Translated Scandal or
offense, nor distinctly consider the several places of Scripture where it is
used, only so far as plainly to show, First, that people are generally mistaken
in the sense they have of it. Secondly, What it is truly to offend or give
offense.

1. That people are generally mistaken about the sense of offending or giving
offense. For by it they commonly understand displeasing or grieving another,
and making him angry with them, and so consequently they think themselves in
Conscience bound to forbear all those things, which godly persons do not like
or approve of, or is contrary to their fancy and judgment. It is notorious,
that most of the ordinary sort of Dissenters, who assign this as the reason of
their not conforming to the Established Laws of the Church, because by doing so
they shall offend their Brethren, mean nothing else by it, but that they shall
fall into disgrace with, incur the displeasure and provoke the anger of those,
with whom they have held Communion for a long time in religious exercises.
They, good men, will be mightily troubled and vexed to see or hear such a sad
thing, and this is taken by many amongst them for an heinous crime, even the
same which St. Paul calls Scandalizing a weak Brother, to do any thing which
may chance to put any of their Godly Brethren out of humor.

The occasion of this false apprehension is in all likelihood the Ambiguity of
our English word offend, which is used in the Translation of our Bibles. In our
Language it signifies to displease, or to do something which another dislikes;
but the Greek word, which is so rendered, signifies to lay a stumbling block in
the way of another, which causes him to fall, or to ensnare and deceive him
into something that is evil, as I shall show more largely presently. We must
not therefore interpret the places of Scripture, where offend or offense are
found by the common importance of the words amongst us, but by the undoubted
signification of the Original word, which all learned men agree to have quite
another sense.

It must not be concealed that there is one place in the famous fourteenth
chapter of the Romans that seems to favor this popular conceit v. 15. If thy
Brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not charitably, and it is
the only one I know of that sounds this way, but surely it is more reasonable,
that this one verse should be interpreted by all the other places of Scripture
about this matter, than all the rest explained agreeably to this single verse.
Nay it sufficiently appears that by grieving our Brother, is not meant
displeasing him, or making him sorry or sad, but wounding or hurting him, and
so it is used to denote, that which causes grief or sorrow. For in the very
next words it follows, destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ died; and
what is here expressed by grieving is v. 13. called, putting a stumbling block
or an occasion to fall, and v. 21. it is good neither to eat Flesh, nor drink
Wine, nor any thing whereby thy Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made
weak; all which signify the same with being grieved. To be offended or grieved
is not to be troubled at what another has done out of pity and concern for his
Soul, but to receive hurt our selves from it, being by it drawn or deceived
into some sin, and our own fall occasioned by what our Brother has done, is
that which creates the grief and trouble. But because this mistake does so
generally prevail amongst many, as I hope, well disposed people, who think that
they must not do any thing, at which good men are displeased or grieved, I
shall offer these few things to their consideration.

1. That thus to censure and condemn the actions, and to be displeased and
angry with the persons of those that differ from them, or refuse any longer to
join with them in their Separate Congregations, is a great instance of
peevishness and uncharitableness, and is that very sin which St. Paul often
warns his weak believers against, viz. that they should not rashly judge those
who knew their duty, and understood their Christian liberty better than
themselves. This seems to be the same with that Argument the Papists use to
persuade men into, or to keep them in their Communion, as the safest way to
Heaven; since they so confidently damn all Men, whom, tho never so unjustly,
they thrust out of their Church. Because some of our Dissenting Brethren are so
froward and unmerciful in their censures, and so fond of their own way, as to
brand all that return to the Church with the infamous names of Apostates,
Time-servers, Men that have made Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, and
have forsaken Christ for fear of Persecution, and the like, therefore all
those, who are convinced of the lawfulness of Conformity, yet ought still to
continue with them in their Separation, lest they provoke and irritate their
anger and displeasure against them; and thus any company of men, that shall
join together and resolve to quarrel with all that do not as they do, or that
shall leave their society, must oblige all for ever to remain with them, for
fear of giving them offense. If what I do is not evil in it self, it cannot
become such, because another Man is causelessly angry with me for doing of it.
Let but those, who Separate from us, mortify all pride and overweening opinion
of themselves, and their own way, let them lay aside all Zeal of parties and
little singularities, and learn to judge righteously and soberly of themselves
and others, and then the cause of all this offense will be soon removed.

2. they that pretend that this fear of offending, that is, displeasing their
weak Brethren hinders their compliance with the Church, ought seriously to
examine themselves, whether it is not really only the care of their credit, and
reputation with their party, that keeps them from Conformity. They are ^oth to
lose that share they have in the affections of so many, or to sink in that
estimation they have obtained of great Sanctity, by joining with the strictest
and purest Christians. For undoubtedly Men's reputation amongst a part is a very
great temptation to detain them in Error, and is a mighty prejudice to their
understanding and receiving the truth, or the doing of their Duty, when it will
expose them to reproach and opprobrious nicknames. Thus our Savior said of the
Jews, John 5. 44. How can ye believe, who receive honor one of another, and
seek not the honor that comes from God?

When therefore Men tell us, it will be a Scandalous thing for them now to
conform, they often mean nothing else by it, but that it will be unhandsom, and
a disgraceful thing for them to change their mind, and confess their mistake,
and retract what they have so long, and so Zealously defended. Or else let them
look well, that it is not some paltry secular interest, that lies at the
bottom, they dare not Offend their weak Brethren, that is; they are afraid they
shall lose their trade, they shall disoblige many of their good customers, they
get their livelihood by such a Congregation, and therefore they must continue
of it. But this is truly to become the servants of Men, such as these are the
most rank Men-pleasers, and therefore it is good advice of Mr. Baxter in his
Cure of Church divisions, p. 141. Please men in all things lawful for their
good and Edification; and become all things to all men in a lawful way: But
depart not from the principles or practice of Christian Union, Communion,
Charity or Sobriety, to please a dividing hot brained Party, not to escape
their sharpest censures.

3. If to displease our weak Brother were the sinful offending him, condemned
by St. Paul, it would prove an intolerable Yoke upon Men's Consciences, would
beget endless perplexities and difficulties, so that we should not be able to
do any thing, tho never so indifferent, with a quiet and well assured mind,
since as the World now is, some one or other will in this sense be Scandalized
at it. By doing we shall anger some, by forbearing we shall provoke others; and
since those, who call themselves weak, are divided and shattered into several
Sects and Factions, each condemning all the other, it is impossible for us to
comply with any one of them, but we shall thereby displease all the rest. He
therefore, that would with a good Conscience perform his duty, in whatever
place he lives, or relation he stands in, must displease both good and bad Men,
as things now are amongst us. It is a very small thing, as St. Paul tells us,
to be judged of Men, when they pass their unwarrantable censures upon us, and
our actions; and they, who govern themselves by the opinions and fancies of
others, can never tell whither they shall be led by this principle. They are
slaves to the Party they espouse, and must run with them into all the Folly and
Extravagance they can be guilty of; or if at last they are forced to leave
them, they shall in the end be more hated and despised by them, than if they
had never humoured them at all.

4. I add only, that according to this Rule, that we must not do any thing
which may displease or grieve our weak Brethren, we do in effect submit our
Judgments and Consciences to the conduct of the most ignorant and injudicious
Christians, and yield to them that Power and Authority over us, which we deny
to the Magistrate and our Lawful Superiors; and it cannot but seem a very hard
case, that they who are so tender of their Christian liberty, and think it so
highly infringed and violated by the determinations of their Superiors about
indifferent matters, should yet suffer themselves to be thus straightly tied up
by the wills and passions of their weak Brethren. If this were so, says Mr.
Baxter, p. 134. of the forenamed Book, the most Childish and Womanish sort of
Christians, who have the weakest judgments, and the strongest wills and
passions must rule all the World; for these are hardliest pleased, and no man
must displease them. Whatever condescension therefore may be due to the weak
and Ignorant, yet it was never intended that they should govern the wiser, and
better instructed Christians in all their actions; and who can Govern more
Absolutely, than they whose wills must never be crossed, and whom none must
displease? From all this I conclude, that this cannot be the sense of
Scandalizing or giving Offense, viz. doing of something, which another takes
ill, or is angry with us for it.

2. I am now in the Second place to show, what is the true meaning of Offending
or Scandalizing in Scripture. The Greek word which we Translate Scandal or
Offense signifies either a Trap and Snare, or else more commonly something laid
in the way of another, which occasions his stumbling or falling, by which he is
bruised and hurt, and so consequently, whatever it was that hindered Men from
becoming Christ's Disciples, or discouraged them in their new Profession, or
tempted them to forsake that Faith they had lately embraced, is called a
Scandal or Offense. It is sometimes rendered an occasion to fall as Romans 14. 13.
occasion of stumbling, as 1 John 2. 10. a stumbling block, Revel. 2. 14. or a
thing that does Offend, as St. Matt. 13. 41. In all which places there is the
same Original word.

Hence to Offend or Scandalize any one, as it is commonly used in the New
Testament, is to do something, which tends to estrange or fright Men from the
Christian Profession, to beget in them hard and unworthy thoughts of it, or is
apt, when they are converted, to turn them from it, and make them repent of
their change. Of this I shall give some few instances out of the discourses of
our Savior and his Apostles.

Thus our Blessed Lord, St. Matthew. 17. 27. is said to have paid tribute, lest
he should Offend or Scandalize the Jews. This was more than he was bound to;
for he tells us, the Children are free. But he did it, that he might not give
any occasion to his Enemies to represent him to the People, as a contemner of
their Law, or an Enemy to Caesar, (according as you understand that Tribute to
be paid either to the Romans or the Temple) and so prejudice them against his
Person and Doctrine. Thus our Saviors own Countrymen, who were acquainted
with his Father, and Mother, and Kindred, who knew the meanness of his Birth
and Education, Mark 6. 3. were Offended or Scandalized at him. They were
astonished at the great things he did, and the greater things he spoke, and
would in all probability have believed on him, had they not known his mean
Original and employment. Is not this the Carpenter, the Son of Mary, etc. After
the same manner, when our Lord, St. John 6. 61. had discoursed of eating the
Flesh of the Son of Man, they that heard him, taking it in a gross carnal
sense, were Offended or Scandalized at him. They began to doubt of his being a
true Prophet, or the Messiah, who would teach his Disciples to turn Cannibals.

Thus again our Savior, before the night in which he was betrayed told his
Disciples, St. Matt. 26. 31. all of ye shall be Offended or Scandalized,
because of me this Night; that is, shall fly away and shamefully forsake me,
when you behold my hard usage, and dismal sufferings. So Christ Crucified, 1
Cor. 1. 23. to the Jews was a Scandal or stumbling block; that is, they had set
their minds and hearts on a temporal earthly King, and expected to be freed
from the Roman Yoke, and to be restored to their former Dominions and
greatness, as the effect of the coming of their Messiah, and therefore could
not be persuaded to own him for their Prince, and Savior, and the Son of God,
who was put to such a Cursed and Ignominious death. In the same sense they who
heard the Word of God, Mark 4. 17. and received it with gladness, but having no
root in themselves, when Affliction or Persecution arose for the Words sake,
were presently offended or Scandalized; that is, were ready to leave and
renounce that Profession, that was likely to cost them so dear.

After the publishing of the Gospel by the Apostles, that which most stumbled
the Jewish Converts, was the danger Moses's Law and their Temple Worship, and
the singular preeminences of the Seed of Abraham, seemed to be in of being
undermined by Christianity. They were strangely wedded to their Legal
observances, fond of Circumcision and those peculiarities, which distinguished
their Nation from the rest of mankind, they were jealous of any Doctrine, that
encroached upon their Privileges, or tended to bring them down to the same
level with the Uncircumcised World. This mightily Offended them, and hardened
them against Christianity; whereas on the other side, the Gentile Converts with
as much reason, were afraid of putting their Necks under so heavy a Yoke, or
being brought into subjection to the Jewish Law, and there was no such
effectual way to scare them from Christianity, as when it came attended with
the burden of the Mosaical Ceremonies; which were an Offense to them; that is,
did discourage them from believing in Christ, or continuing in his Faith. Now
to prevent the mischiefs, that might arise from these different apprehensions
amongst the Christian Proselites, was the occasion of the meeting of that first
Council at Jerusalem, mentioned Acts 15. and of those directions which St. Paul
gives Romans 14. concerning our behavior toward weak Brethren.

Another case there was concerning eating of things offered to Idols, of which
St. Paul discourses in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, chap. 8. and 10.
the sum of which seems to be this, that the stronger and wiser Christians ought
to abstain from eating what had been offered to Idols, tho as ordinary meat, in
the presence of any one, who with, Conscience of the Idol, did eat it as a
thing offered to an Idol. For such there were in the Church of Corinth so weak,
as not yet to have quite left off their Idolatrous Worship, and a Christians
eating what had been Offered in Sacrifice before such an one might serve to
harden, and confirm him in his Error, whose Conscience being weak is defiled.
Of whose Soul St. Paul professed himself to have so great regard, that he would
eat no such meat as long as the World lasted, rather than lay such a
stumbling block before, or wound their weak Consciences. In all these places
and many more that might be named (for the fuller explication of which I refer
you to interpreters, and those that have written largely on this subject) no
less than Apostasy from the Christian Faith was the sin, into which these weak
Christians were so apt to fall, and by an undue use of our Liberty to give
occasion to another forsaking the Christian Religion, whereby our Savior
loses a Disciple, and the Soul of our Brother perishes, is the proper sin of
Offending, or giving Scandal.

I shall mention but one place more, which is Revel. 2. 14. where Balaam is
said to have taught Balac, to cast a stumbling block or Scandal before the
Children of Israel, which relates othis enticing them by the Daughters of Moab
to Fornication and Idolatry, and by that means provoking God against them. So
that in the most general sense to Scandalize or Offend any one, is, to give
occasion to his sin, and consequently his ruin and undoing; and this I suppose
will be granted by all, that do not receive their opinions from the mere sound
of words. Hence I shall conclude these few things.

1. The better Men are, the harder it is to Scandalize them: Those are not such
Godly persons, as they would be thought, who are so ready at all turns to be
Offended; for how can they be reckoned to excel others in knowledge or goodness,
who are so easily upon every occasion drawn or tempted to sin? Thus Mr. Baxter
himself tells the Separatists in his Cure of Church Divisions. Usually, says
he, men talk most against Scandalizing those, whom they account to be the best,
and the best are least in danger of sinning; and so they accuse them to be the
worst, or else they know not what they say; for suppose a Separatist should
say, if you hold Communion with any Parish Minister or Church in England, it
will be a Scandal to many good people: I would ask such an one, Why call you
those good people that are easily drawn to sin against God? Nay, that will sin
because I do my duty: Therefore if you know what you say, you make the
Separatists almost the worst of men, that will sin against God, because another
will not sin.

The great thing our Nonconformists pretend unto above other men is tenderness
of Conscience, by which they must mean, if they mean any Virtue by it, a great
fear of doing any thing that is evil; and this, where it is in truth, is the
best security that can be devised against being Scandalized or Offended, by
what other Men do; that is, against being drawn into sin by it. So that they do
really disparage and severely reflect upon the Dissenters, who are thus afraid
of giving them Offense* as I have explained it.

2. No man can with sense say of himself, that he shall be Scandalized at what
another man does; for it is as much as to say, that by such a person and
action, he shall be led into sin ignorantly, and his saying this confutes his
ignorance: If he knows it to be a sin, he is not betrayed into it, nor does he
fall into it through ignorance and mistake (which is the case of those that are
Scandalized) but wilfully commits it. This a great Bishop compares with the
peevishness of a little Child, who when he is commanded to pronounce the word
he has no mind to, tells you he cannot pronounce that word, at the same time
naming the word he pretends he cannot speak. Such Nonsense it is for a man to
forbid me doing any thing upon pretense it will be a Scandal to him, or make
him through mistake fall into some sin, when by this it is plain, that he knows
of it beforehand, and so may, and ought to avoid the stumbling block that is
laid before him, and the danger that he is exposed unto. Surely says Solomon,
Prove. 1. 17. in vain is the Net spread in the sight of any Bird.

If to Offend or Scandalize, any one is to tempt and draw him into some sin,
whereby his Conscience is wounded, there then can be no fear of giving Offense
by our Conformity to the orders and usages of our Church, because there is
nothing appointed by or used in it, but what may be complied withal without
sin: For this, as I before observed, is supposed in the Question I at first
propounded to discourse of; that he, who absented from his Parish Church for
fear of Offending his weak Brethren, was convinced in his own mind of the
lawfulness of all that is enjoined; and therefore by his own Conformity, he can
only engage others to do as he has done, which as long as he is persuaded to
be lawful, I do not see how he can be afraid of Scandalizing others by it, or
making them to sin by his Example, unless he will imagine his Brethren, not so
weak, but so wicked, as to Worship the Host, because he Kneels at receiving of
the Sacrament, and to adore the Cross because he bows at the Name of Jesus, or
that they will renounce all Religion because he has forsaken their ways of
Separation: This cannot but prove a vain excuse for me to forbear doing that,
in which there is really no evil, lest by the Authority of my example I make
others sin in doing the same innocent action; which in this case is so far from
being to be feared, that if by my example I prevail with others to return into
the Communion of our Church, they are not thereby at all Scandalized, but I
have done them a most signal kindness and benefit.

If it be said, that tho what I do is in it self lawful, yet it may minister
occasion or provocation to others to do something else that is unlawful, and so
I become truly guilty of giving Offense; I Answer, that we are accountable only
for the natural tendencies, or probable effects of our actions, which may be
easily foreseen and prevented. Remote probabilites and contingencies and bare
possibilities come not into reckoning, nor are they at all to be weighed. If in
every action I am bound to consider what advantage a wicked sensual Man, or a
weak silly man might take, and what Arguments he might possibly thence draw to
encourage himself in sin and folly, or excuse himself from the care of his Soul
and Religion, this would open the door to infinite Scrupulosity and trouble,
and I should hardly be able to do or speak any thing without the incurring the
guilt of giving Scandal. Now this being supposed, I dare boldly challenge any
Man to name any one sin either against God, our Neighbor, or our selves, that
our Conformity does give any real probable occasion unto; and it is very
uncharitable to conceit, that our Nonconforming Brethren will out of mere
perverseness, or spite and revenge run into sin, on purpose to make our leaving
them criminal and vicious; which if any should be so wicked as to do, yet they
would lose the design of their malice, and prove the only guilty persons
themselves.

The only thing I imagine can be further said in this case is, that tho I am
well satisfied my self, yet by my Conformity I may tempt and provoke others
that are not satisfied concerning the lawfulness of it, nay those who judge it
absolutely sinful, yet rather than stand out, or being moved by the opin on
they have of my goodness and Wisdom, to follow my example with a doubting or
gainsaying Conscience. Suppose a Master of Family that used to frequent the
private Meetings, and his Wife and Children and Servants used to follow him
thither; but afterward, by reading of such good Books as have been lately
written, is himself satisfied concerning the lawfulness of going to Church, and
at last thinks it his duty so to do, only he is afraid that the rest of his
Family to please and humor him, will be apt also to forsake the private
Meetings, and go along with him to Church, tho it be altogether against their
judgment and Conscience: Or suppose him a man of eminency amongst his
Neighbors, on whose favor many do depend, of great interest and reputation,
by whose example many are swayed and led. Tho himself does conform upon good
reasons and principles, yet his example may invite many others to it, tho they
have received no satisfaction concerning the lawfulness of it.

Now here I desire these three things may be considered.

1. It is certain that it is as unlawful to go to the Separate Meetings against
ones Conscience, as it is to go to the public Church against ones Conscience.
Why then ought not this man to be as afraid, when he leaves his Parish Church
and frequents the private Congregation, lest he should draw some to follow him
thither with a doubting Conscience; as well as he fears, if he leaves the
Meetings and resorts to his Parish Church, some not satisfied concerning the
lawfulness of it, should come after him thither? The influence of his Example,
interest, reputation, is the same in both instances; the danger of giving this
Scandal is equal; that therefore which ought to determine his practice must be
his own Judgment and persuasion.

2. Such an one, who has been a Separatist, but is now himself satisfied of
the lawfulness of Conformity; ought to take great care and pains in
endeavoring to satisfy others also, especially those, whom he has any cause
to think to have been led into the ways of Separation by his example: He must
not be ashamed to own his former mistake, to set before them the reasons on
which his change is grounded, and must do this publicly and frequently,
persuading others to use the same helps and means, which were so effectual for
his own conviction. And thus he does all that lies in his power to prevent
this ill effect and shall not be further answerable for the consequences of
what he does.

3. It is truly observed by some that considering the known temper of the
Nonconformists, it is not very likely any such mischief should ensue, viz. that
by the example of one or more leaving their Separate Assemblies, others should
be moved to follow them against their own Judgment and Conscience. It is
abundantly notorious how they have used to treat those that have deserted them;
with what irreconcilable enmity they have prosecuted them, looking upon them
as their worst Enemies, passing more grievous censures upon them than upon
those who have all their lives long continued in our Communion.

4. I proceed in the last place to observe from what I have discoursed
concerning giving Offense, that if to Offend any one, be to lead him into sin,
then we may Scandalize and give Offense to others, as soon by pleasing them and
complying with them, as by dipleasing them and going contrary to their mind and
humor.

St. Paul, who Circumcised Timothy, Acts 16. 3. in favor of the weak Jews that
he might insinuate and ingratiate himself into them, refused to Circumcise
Titus, Galat. 2. 3. tho he made the Jews angry by it, yet he would not give
place by subjection, or submission and condescension to them, no not for an
hour: He considered the different states and conditions of the persons he had
to deal withal. He complied to Circumcise Timothy, lest all the Jews with him
should have forsaken the Christian Faith, and for the same reason he denied to
Circumcise Titus, lest those of Jerusalem should think he was of opinion, that
the Jewish Law held still in force, and so the Cross of Christ should become of
no effect to them. He pleased indeed the former for fear of driving them from
Christianity, and for the same reason he displeased the latter, lest he should
give them occasion to think the observation of Moses's Law always necessary. He
had truly Scandalized them, if he had done as they would have had him: He had
Offended them in the true Scripture sense, if he had pleased and humoured them;
and this is the most ordinary way of Scandalizing Christians amongst us, by not
plainly telling Men of their faults and mistakes, by not speaking freely and
roundly to them, nor acting courageously, whereby they become hardened and
confirmed in their folly and ignorance.

To this purpose I cannot but repeat the words of Mr. Baxter in the Book I have
so often cited; Many a time, says he, I have the rather gone to the
Common Prayers of the public Assemblies for fear of being a Scandal to those
same men that called the going to them a Scandal: that is, for fear of hardening
them in a sinful Separation and Error; because I knew that was not Scandal
which they called Scandal; that is, displeasing them, and crossing their
opinions; but hardening them in an Error or other sin, is true Scandalizing.
Understand this, or you will displease God under pretense of avoiding Scandal,
p. 135.

Thus by complying with our Dissenting Brethren we really do them that mischief
which we would avoid, and fall into the sin of giving Scandal, whilst we are
running from it; We countenance and encourage their sinful Separation and
Division; we confirm them in their dangerous Errors and Mistakes; we by our
practice condemn those things, which yet in our Consciences we allow and
approve of, and by our Authority and influence harden others in their
unreasonable prejudices and opposition against the lawful Commands of their
Superiors. They think us of the same mind with themselves, whilst we do the
same things, and that we judge as ill of the Church of England, as long as we
refuse to Communicate with it, as themselves do; and thus we give occasion to
their sin, and those infinite mischiefs which have happened both to Church and
State, upon the account of our Religious disputes and divisions; which surely
ought to be well thought of and considered by a sort of Men amongst us, who
shall go to Church in the Morning, and to a Conventicle in the Afternoon; who
halt between both, and would fain displease neither side, but indeed give real
Offense to both. From all this I think it is very plain, that he, who is
satisfied in his own mind of the lawfulness of Conformity, but is afraid of
giving Offense by it, if he be true to this principle, ought to hasten the
faster to his Parish Church, that he might not Offend those very Dissenters of
whom he would seem to be so tender; and thus I have done with the Second thing
I propounded to show, what is meant by Offending or Scandalizing,

3. It remains in the Third and Last place to enquire; how far, and in what
instances we are bound to consider the ignorance or weakness of our Brother? In
Answer to this, that I may proceed with all the clearness I can, I shall now
suppose notwithstanding all I have already said, that our Dissenting Brethren
are truly weak persons, and that there may be some danger of their being
through their own fault Offended by our Conformity; yet taking this for
granted, I shall plainly show that he, who is in his own mind convinced of the
lawfulness of coming to his Parish Church, and using the Forms of Prayer and
Ceremonies by Law appointed, ought not to forbear doing the same for fear of
giving such Offense to his weak Brethren. There are many other things to be
considered in this Case, besides this matter of private Scandal; and if there
be greater evil in, and greater mischief to others, and a more public Scandal
does follow our forbearing Communion with the Church and withdrawing into
private Assemblies, than can happen by our leaving them and returning to the
Church, and complying with its orders, we ought then to conform notwithstanding
the Offense that is imagined may be taken at it. For these two things, as I
suppose, are agreed on all hands; one is, that nothing which is sinful may be
done to avoid Scandalizing others; the other is, that to avoid a less Scandal
being taken by a few, we must not give a greater Scandal and of vastly more
pernicious consequence to a much bigger number of persons; and by these two
Rules I shall now judge of the Case at first propounded.

1. Nothing that is sinful may be done to avoid others being Scandalized, which
is directly the Apostles Doctrine, Romans 3. 8. That we must not do evil, that
good may come; nor is any necessary duty to be omitted out of prudence or
charity to others, lest they through Error or Ignorance be hurt by it: We must
not to prevent the greatest sin in another, commit the least sin our selves,
nor disobey Gods Law, and so run the hazard of our own damnation, tho it be to
save the Soul of our Brother. Thus Calvin tells us, Instit. lib. 3. c. 19. Quae
necessaria sunt factu, nullius offendiculi timore omittenda sunt. Whatever is
necessary to be done by virtue of Gods Command is not to be omitted for fear of
Offense; and again in the same place, Hic Charitatis rationem haberi decet, sed
usque ad aras. Our charity to our Brother ought to be limited by this, that we
do not for his sake displease God.

The very best things and actions may be perverted by Men of ill-disposed or
weak minds, false consequences and unjust inferences may be strained from them;
as we know the grace of God in the Gospel was abused into an argument for
licentiousness, and Christ himself is said to be set for the fall of many, St.
Luke 2. 24. but still this does not Cancel our obligations to universal
obedience to Gods Law, nor can it alter the nature of good and evil, duty and
sin; which are no such uncertain contingent things, as to depend upon the
constructions others shall make of our actions, or the conclusions they shall
draw from them. God Almighty in the making of his Laws has a perfect
comprehension of all the accidental events, that may happen either through the
weakness or wickedness of Men; and we must not think our selves to be wiser
than God, taking upon our selves to dispense with his Commands without any
allowance from him, as if himself had not foreseen those inconveniences which
may arise from our doing our duty: it can therefore never be, that obedience to
God should give any real Scandal; and whatever Offense may be taken at my doing
of my duty, it is a contradiction to imagine it imputable to me, as a sin or
fault, (for it is to suppose one to disobey God, in obeying him) but they alone
are chargeable who are Offended by it.

Now by the express Command of God, we are obliged to obey the lawful
injunctions of our Superiors, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical; and if any are
so hardy as to deny this, they must seek for another Bible out of which to
judge of Gods will; for there is hardly any one duty of Religion more plainly
Commanded, more frequently and earnestly pressed in the New Testament, than
quiet and peaceable subjection to Authority, both in Church and State, in all
things lawful, and that not only to avoid punishment, but for Conscience sake;
and to refuse obedience in such things, is a sin against the fifth Commandment.
That the Conformity required by our Church, contains not any thing in it
unlawful, must be granted, as I have already observed, by all those who make
use of this Plea of Scandal, from all which the necessary Conclusion is,

Since we may not redeem a Scandal by disobedience to God, since God has
plainly required our submission to those whom he has set over us in all
things, lawful; since it is acknowledged by those I now discourse with, that
Conformity to the Church is enjoined by a competent Authority, and is lawful; I
say the necessary conclusion is, that no Man can with a good Conscience refuse
to conform only for fear of Scandal.

Our Dissenting Brethren, when they are urged with this Argument neither do nor
can deny any of the Premises, they must confess that no sin may be committed
upon any account whatsoever, and that a Man is not bound to provide for his
Brothers safety by wounding his own Soul; they cannot deny but that God has
Commanded us to be subject to Lawful Authority in all things lawful, but then
to evade the force of this reasoning, they have endeavored to load the
conclusion with some seeming difficulties and absurdities, which they pretend
follow from this principle, that we are bound to obey, notwithstanding the
Scandal that may ensue upon it. The chief of these I shall mention, and briefly
return an Answer to them.

1. It is pleaded that those precepts, which contain only rituals, are to give
place to those, which do concern the welfare of Men's Bodies, and much more to
those, which do respect the welfare of our Brothers Soul; so that, when both
together cannot be observed, we must neglect or violate the former, to observe
the latter: That this is true even of some Commands given by God himself; to
which purpose our Savior does produce that saying of the Prophet Hosea, I will
have Mercy and not Sacrifice. Now if Sacrifices prescribed by God himself,
which were so considerable a part of the Divine Worship under Moses's Law, yet
were to give place to acts of mercy, how much more are the positive injunctions
of Men, that concern only the externals and circumstantials of Religion to
yield to the Royal and indispensable Law of Charity, of which this duty of not
giving Offense to others, is such an Eminent part. Thus says Mr. Jeans in his
Second Part of Scholastical Divinity, What Laws of any Earthly Wight whatsoever
concerning Ceremonies can be more obligatory, than the Commands of God touching
the externals of his Worship and Service; and yet it is his will and pleasure,
that these externals of his Worship should be laid aside for the performance of
outward works of mercy: If therefore the sacred Ordinances of God are to give
way unto works of mercy unto the bodies of Men, surely then much more is the
trash of human inventions to yield unto a work of mercy to the Souls of Men.

In answer to this, it is readily acknowledged that when there does happen any
such interfering between two Commands of God, the one Positive, the other
Moral, the Positive ought always to give place to the Moral; and by the same
reason the positive Commands of our Superiors ought certainly to give way to
the Moral Commands of God, which are of eternal and immutable obligation. They
cease to bind us either in case of absolute necessity, or when they plainly
hinder our performance of any Moral duty to God or our Neighbor; and the
Church is presumed to dispense with its orders, as God Almighty does allow the
neglect of his own positive Institutions in such circumstances. But then this
is only, where the necessity is urgent and extreme, the sin we must otherwise
commit evident and certain; and at last our Obedience is dispensed withal only
for that one time.

Thus in a case of necessity, Our Savior St. Matthew. 12. 5. acquits David and
his followers of all blame, who being ready to perish for hunger, did eat of
the Shewbread, which otherwise, was not lawful for them to eat; but had they
taken a particular fancy to that Bread, and refused to have eaten of any other,
because that best agreed with their Stomachs and was most pleasing to their
Palate; can we think our Savior would have so easily excused them? Or which is
nearer to our Case; because God did prefer acts of Mercy before Sacrifices
where both could not be done, yet this would not have justified any man's wholly
leaving off Sacrificing, or refusing to do it at Jerusalem, inventing another
way of Worship, as more expedient than Sacrificing, or choosing another place
to Sacrifice in, which might be more convenient for all the Jews than that City
was. We may leave our Prayers, forsake the Church to save the life of our
Neighbor, or to quench the firing of his House, but still this would be but a
pityful pretense for our wholly absenting our selves from Church, and constant
neglect of our Prayers, because in the mean time our Neighbors life may be
invaded, or his house fired by ill Men, of which there is great store in the
World, and so he may stand in need of our help, which is a more acceptable
Service to God than any acts of Devotion. So that however this Argument may
serve to excuse the omission of some things Commanded by lawful Authority, by
those who otherwise are perfectly conformable, in extraordinary cases which
very rarely happen, and for which no provision could be made by Law; yet to be
sure this will not at all help those, who bid open defiance to the Laws, stand
out in manifest opposition against them, live in plain disobedience and
contradiction to them as if they were altogether free from them, nay set up a
distinct way and form of Worship of their own, and all this because they are
loath to Offend those, who are not satisfied of the wisdom and goodness of what
is appointed.

Thus our Dissenting Brethren can gain but little by this Plea if granted to
them; for upon this account of exercising mercy and charity toward their
Neighbors, they can be excused from Obedience to their Superiors in such
cases only, in which they may be excused also from the observation of the
Sabbath, from Prayer public or private, from Worshipping of God either in the
Church or in a Conventicle, nay from Obedience to God himself; had he pleased
in the Scriptures positively to have required whatever is at present enjoined
by our Church; and let them well consider, whether if God had plainly in his
Word prescribed all that our Church does Command, they would have thought it
self to have refused compliance with such divine impositions, because they
were unreasonably offensive to some Godly people: If our Dissenters will but
acknowledge themselves bound to submit to the determinations of their
Superiors about the things in controversy between us, so far, as the Jews
were bound to obey the ordinances of God concerning his external Worship
delivered by Moses; and that they are freed from such obligation to obey the
Laws of their Governors only in such cases, as the Jews were excused from
offering their accustomed Sacrifices, or as they think themselves at liberty to
break the Sabbath, to omit Gods Public Worship, I suppose this dispute would
soon be at an end, for they dare not own, that the Scandal others may take at
such things, which yet are to give place to moral duties, is sufficient to void
their obligation to the doing of them.

Mr. Jeans (whose objections I shall the rather consider because of his
eminency amongst the Presbyterians, tho I find my self somewhat prevented by a
late Writer, who has taken particular notice of them) thus puts the
Question, Suppose, says he, the greatest Monarch upon the face of the Earth
should command the meanest and lowest of his Slaves, upon some important affair
to ride Post through such a City, without any of the least stay or diversion,
and then it should happen that a company of little Children should be playing
in the Streets, can this Slave think that he is obliged to ride over them? No
surely, he ought to use all means, and take all care possible to execute his
Commission without doing any hurt, or damage to any person whatever; but if he
would have stated the case right, it should have been done thus; suppose this
Slave should utterly refuse to do as he was Commanded, and for his
justification should plead, that he must be forced to ride through many Towns
and Cities, where are many little Children, who are often playing at the Doors
or in the Streets; he knows not but that some of them may be in his way, or
chance to run between his Horses legs, and therefore to avoid the doing of this
mischief, which might possibly happen, he resolves not to stir one foot from
his own home. Is this pretense sufficient to excuse his disobedience? No more
can our Nonconformity to the rules given us by our Superiors be innocent,
because some may be Scandalized at our Obedience.

2. It is further said that Scandal is in the nature of it spiritual murder,
and if where Authority has determined our choice, we must hold to their
determination, any Scandal to the contrary notwithstanding, it seems then in
case the Magistrate command it, we may lawfully murder the Soul of our
Brother, wound his weak Conscience, and destroy with our meats, our Ceremonies,
the work of God, and him for whom Christ died. It is good, says St. Paul, Romans
14. 21. neither to eat Flesh, nor to drink Wine, nor any thing whereby thy
Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak. But our Prelatists, says
Mr. Jeans, determine quite otherwise. If Authority enjoin it, it is good, say
they, to eat Bread, drink Wine, wear a Surplice, use the sign of the Cross in
Baptism, tho thereby never so many Brethren stumble, or are offended, or made
weak.

But all this is mere bugbear, fitted only to fright Children and such weak
persons, as we are now treating of; for it can never be shown, how wearing a
Surplice, or Kneeling at receiving of the Sacrament, or Crossing the Infants
forehead, has any tendency toward the scaring Men from Christianity, or
making them to deny Christ, and forsake and grow weary of his Religion, which I
have sufficiently proved to be the only proper Scandalizing of our Brother,
which St. Paul so highly aggravateth, and charge with the guilt of destroying
and murdering his Soul; none of these things do directly and immediately lead
or tempt any man to any sin: Whatever Scandal may follow is wholly accidental
and the fault and mistake of those only, who are Offended, and to provide
always against such Scandals is an impossible undertaking; for they may follow
the most innocent actions, nay the most necessary duties, and this Argument
concludes as strongly against obedience to any other Command of God, if by it
my Brother may stumble, or be offended, or be made weak, as it does against
submission to our Superiors in things lawful.

They that make these Objections do not sufficiently consider, that by Gods Law
we are bound to obey the Lawful Commands of our Superiors; and it is not only
the Law or Ordinance of Man, of which they seem to make so little account, but
it is the Law of God also, that is violated by our disobedience to our
Governors in things Lawful: The Comparison therefore ought not to be only, as
they make it, between an human Authority determining some indifferent things,
and the divine Law of charity to the Soul of our Brother, but between the
divine Command of obedience to our Superiors, and the avoiding of Scandal:
Here we affirm, that we cannot be bound to transgress a plain Law of God, or
which is all one in this Question, a lawful command of our Superiors for fear
of some evil that may by chance happen to some others through their own fault;
and we prove it by this reason, which our Dissenting Brethren must own for true
and good, because every one is bound to have a greater care of his own than
others Salvation, and consequently rather to avoid sin in himself, than to
prevent it in his Brethren.

If it be here asked, as it is by some, whether any human Authority can make
that action cease to be Scandalous, which if done without any such Command had
been criminal upon the account of the Scandal that followed it, I Answer, that
no Authority, whether divine or human, can secure that others shall not be
Offended by what I do out of obedience to their Commands, but then it does free
me from all guilt and blame, by making that to become my duty to do, which if I
had done needlessly without any great reason, and my Brother had been hurt and
his Conscience wounded by it, might have been justly charged with
uncharitableness, greater or less according as the Scandal was more or less
probable to follow.

This must be granted, that the Laws of God or Man, otherwise obligatory, do
not lose their binding force because of some Scandal, that may possibly happen
from our Compliance with them, or else all Authority is utterly void and
insignificant, and every Man is at liberty to do all things as himself
pleases; for, to borrow the words of the excellent Bishop Sanderson, To allow
Men under pretense that some offense may be taken thereat, to disobey Laws and
Constitutions made by those that are in Authority over us, is the next way to
cut the sinews of all Authority, and to bring both Magistrates and Laws into
contempt; for what Law ever was made, or can be made so just and reasonable,
but some Man or other either did or might take offense thereat. Whether such a
Constitution or Command of our Superiors be Scandalous or no, every one must
judge for himself; and so according to his own private opinion of the goodness
or hurtfulness of what is required, he is free to obey it or not, which is
directly to dissolve all Government, and to bring in certain disorder and
everlasting confusion, every one doing what is good in his own Eyes.

3. It is said, that Avoiding of Scandal is a main duty of charity; May
Superiors therefore at their pleasure appoint, how far I shall show my charity
toward my Brothers Soul? then surely an inferior Earthly Court may cross the
determinations of the High Court of Heaven: This Mr. Jeans urges also out of
Amesius; but it is easily replied,

That here is no Crossing the determinations of God, since it is his express
will, that in all lawful things we should obey our Governors, and he who has
made this our duty, will not lay to our charge the mischiefs, that may
sometimes without our fault through the folly and peevishness of Men follow
from it, and certainly it is as equal and reasonable, that our Superiors
should appoint how far I shall exercise my charity toward my Brethren, as it
is, that the mistake and prejudice of any private Christians should set bounds
to their Power and Authority, Cancel the public Laws, or that every ignorant
and froward Brother should determine, how far we shall be obedient to those,
whom God has set over us either in Church or State.

But to give a more full Answer to this we must know, that, tho charity be the
great duty, especially of the Christian Religion, yet duties of justice (as
they are commonly called) are of stricter obligation than duties of charity,
and we are bound to pay our debts, before we give an alms. Now obedience to
Superiors is a debt we owe to them, which they have right to exact of us, so
that they may accuse us of injury, if we perform it not. But a great care to
hinder sin in others, or not to Scandalize them is a duty of charity, which
indeed we are obliged unto as far as we can, but not till after we have given
to every one what is his due and right. It is therefore no more Lawful for me,
says the forenamed most Judicious Bishop Sanderson, to disobey the lawful
Command of a Superior, to prevent thereby the offense of one or a few
Brethren; then it is lawful for me to do one man wrong to do another man a
courtesy withal; or than it is lawful for me to rob the Exchequer to relieve
an Hospital. According to that known saying of St. Austin, Quis est qui dicat,
ut habeamus quod demus pauperibus, faciamus furta divitibus? Who is it, that
says it is lawful to steal from the rich, what we may bestow on the poor? or
to refuse to pay Taxes, on pretense that you know those who have more need of
your money?

To this Mr. Jeans replies, Suppose, says he, the care of not giving offense
be in respect of our Brother but a debt of charity, yet in regard of God it is
a legal debt, since he may and does challenge it as due, and we do him wrong if
we disobey him: Here I grant indeed, that both are required by God at our
hands, that we should be obedient to our Superiors, and that we should be
always ready to show charity to our Brethren; but then I say, this is not the
charity which God requires, when I give to those in want, what is none of mine
own. This is not an instance or expression of that love and kindness, which by
the Law of God we owe to our Brother, to do him good by wronging our
Superiors. God has obliged Servants to be merciful to the poor to their
power, as well as to be true and faithful to their Masters; but that is no part
of the mercy which God requires from them, to give away their Masters goods
without his leave, tho it were to those who stand in great need of relief. God
has Commanded all Christians to have a great care of being any occasion of
their Brothers sin or fall; but then this must necessarily be understood only
of things subject to our own ordering and management. In all cases, wherein we
are at our own disposal, we are bound charitably to regard our Brother. But in
instances, where our practice is determined by Authority, our Superiors only
are to consider the danger of Scandal; we must consider the duty we owe to
them, this being a matter wherein we cannot show our charity without violating
the right of our Superiors; It remains then, in the words of another great
Bishop, in what case soever we are bound to obey God or Man, in that case and
in that conjunction of circumstances we have nothing permitted to our choice,
(and consequently there is no place for any act of charity) and have no
Authority to remit of the right of God or our Superior; and to comply with our
Neighbor in such Questions, besides that it cannot serve any purposes of
piety, if it declines from duty in any instance, it is like giving Alms out of
the portion of Orphans, or building Hospitals with the Money and spoils of
Sacrilege.

4. It is further said by Mr. Jeans out of Amesius, If determination by
Superiors is sufficient to take away the sin of Scandal, then they do very
ill, that they do not, so far as is possible, determine all things indifferent,
that so no danger may be left of giving Offense by the use of them. Then the
Church of Rome is to be praised in that she has determined so many indifferent
things. Then St. Paul might have spared all his directions about forbearance
out of respect to weak Brethren, and fully determined the matters in debate,
and so put an end to all fear of Scandal.

This truly seems a very odd way of arguing, and all that I shall say to it
is, that it supposes nothing else worthy to be considered in the making of
Laws, or in the determinations of Superiors about indifferent things, but only
this one matter of Scandal; and the project it self, should it take, would
prove very vain and unsuccessful. For tho we truly say, that we are bound to
comply with the Orders and Ceremonies of the Church of England, they being but
few and innocent, and so giving no real ground of Offense; yet we do not say
the same upon supposition our Church had determined all circumstances in Gods
Worship she possibly could, which would perhaps have been a yoke greater, than
that of the Ceremonial Law to the Jews; nor if she had prescribed as many
Ceremonies as the Church of Rome has done, which manifestly tend to the
disgrace and Scandal of our Christian Religion; and as for the course St. Paul
took, it is plain that some things upon good reasons were determined by the
Apostles, as that the Gentile Converts should abstain from blood, and things
strangled, and offered to Idols, which decree, I presume, they might not
Transgress out of charity to any of their Brethren, who might take Offense at
such abstinence, and other things for great reason were for a time left at
liberty, which reason was taken from the present circumstances of those the
Apostles had to deal withal; tho afterward, as I observed before, when that
reason ceased, determinations were made about those things which St. Paul had
left at liberty, and if St. Paul had determined the dispute about meats and
days one way, they, who had followed so great an Authority, whatever had
happened, had surely been free from the sin of Scandal; but still the Scandal
had not been prevented, but all the contrary part had been in danger to have
been utterly estranged from Christianity; and that was reason sufficient why
St. Paul did not make any determinations in that case. For Governors are not
only to take care to free those that obey them from the sin of Scandal, but
also to provide, that as little occasion, as is possible, may be given to any
to be Scandalized.

There are other Objections offered by Mr. Jeans, out of Amesius and
Rutherford, against this Doctrine of our obligation to obedience to Superiors
in things lawful, notwithstanding the Scandal that may follow; but they either
may be Answered from what I have already said, or else they chiefly concern the
case of Governors, and are brought to prove that they act uncharitably, and
give great Offense contrary to St. Paul's rules, who take upon them
determinately to impose unnecessary rites by which they know many good Men will
be Scandalized, but this is not my present business to discourse of, tho I
cannot forbear saying these two things, which I think very easy to make out.

1. That our Church of England has taken all reasonable care not to give any
just offense to any sort of persons, and the offenses that have been since
taken at some things in our Constitution could not possibly have been foreseen
by those who made our first Reformation from Popery, and so they could not be
any reason against the first establishment: Nor,

2. Are they now a sufficient reason for the alteration of it; unless we can
imagine it reasonable to alter public Laws made with great wisdom and
deliberation as often, as they are disliked by, or prove Offensive to private
persons. If this be admitted, there then can never be any settled Government and
order in the Church; because there never can be any establishment, that will
not be liable to give such Offense. They who now take Offense at what the
Church of England enjoins, on the same or a like account will take Offense at
whatever can be enjoined, and the same pretenses of Scandal will be good
against any establishment they themselves shall make; for tho they will not use
these reasons against their own establishment, yet in a short time others will
take up their weapons to fight against them, and what served to destroy the
present Church will be as effectual to overthrow that, which shall be set up in
its room: so that whatever alteration is made, if this be allowed for a
sufficient ground of it, viz. to avoid the Offense that some men take at the
present constitution, yet still we shall be but where we were, and new Offenses
will arise, and so there must be continual changing and altering, to gratify
the unreasonable humors and fancies of Men; and should any one party of
Dissenters amongst us get their Form of Government and Worship established by
Law, I doubt not but they would Preach to us the very same Doctrine, we do now
to them. They would tell us that private persons must bend and conform to the
Laws, and not the Laws to private persons; that it was our own fault that we
were Offended; that our weakness proceeded from our unwillingness to receive
instruction; that the weak were to be governed, not to prescribe to their
Governors; that we must not expect that what was with good reason appointed
and ordered should be presently abrogated or changed out of compliance with
Men's foolish prejudices and mistakes. It is sufficiently known how strict and
rigorous botht the Presbyterians and Independents are and have been where they
have had any advantage, and what little consideration or regard they have had
of their Dissenting Brethren, tho they would have us so tender of them.

Thus much I think sufficient to show that the Precept of Obedience to
Superiors in things Lawful is more obligatory, than the Precept of avoiding
Scandal; whence it follows that it is our duty to obey in such instances, tho
Offense may be taken at it, because no sin is to be committed for the avoiding
Scandal.

I might from this head further argue, that if we must not commit any sin to
avoid giving Offense, then it is not Lawful to Separate from our
Parish-Churches upon that account; because all voluntary Separation from a
Church, in which nothing that is unlawful is required as a condition of
Communion, is the sin of Schism, and that is a sin of the blackest dye and
greatest guilt, noted the in Scriptures for an act of carnality, a work of the
Flesh and of the Devil; for the necessity of our coming to Church, and
Worshipping God in the same public place with our Neighbors, and submitting
to the Government, Discipline and Customs of that particular Church we live in,
does not depend only upon the Statutes of the Realm which enforce it, and the
Command of the Civil Magistrate who requires it; but by the Law of our Religion
all needless Separation or Division amongst Christians, breaking into little
Parties and Factions, from whence comes strife, envying, confusion and every
evil work, is to be most carefully avoided, as the very bane of Christianity,
the rending of Christ's body, and as utterly destructive not only of the peace,
but of the being of a Church. So that should all the Laws about Conformity and
against Conventicles be rescinded and voided, should the Magistrate indulge or
connive at the Separate Assemblies, yet still this would not make our joining
with them not to be sinful. Since to preserve the unity of Christians and one
Communion, is the necessary duty of every member of the Church, and it can
never be thought a justifiable thing, to cut off our selves from the Communion
of the Church or the Body of Christ, out of compliance with any erring or
ignorant Brethren. But the sinfulness of withdrawing from the Communion of our
Church, either totally or in part, has been so evidently shown in some late
discourses written on that subject, that I do despair of convincing those of
the danger of it, who can withstand the force of all that has been already
offered to them: I only conclude thus much, that there is far more of the sin
of uncharitableness in such Separation and Division, than there can be in all
the Offense that is imagined to be given by our Conformity.

From what I have already at large discoursed it plainly follows, that they are
things merely indifferent, not only in their own nature, but also in respect to
us, in the use of which we are obliged to consider the weakness of our
Brethren. What is our duty must be done, tho Scandal follow it: What is evil
and sinful ought to be left undone upon the score of a greater obligation, than
that of Scandal; but now in matters, wherein our practice is not determined by
any Command, we ought so to exercise our liberty, as if possible to avoid
giving any Offense to our Brethren. This is an undoubted part of that charity,
which one Christian ought always to be ready to show to another, by admonition,
instruction, good example, and by the forbearance of things Lawful, at which he
foreseeth his Neighbor out of weakness will be apt to be Scandalized, to
endeavor to prevent his falling into any sin or mischief; and this we teach
and press upon our People as much as Dissenters themselves can, in obedience to
St. Paul's rules about meats and days, things neither in themselves good or
evil, nor determined by any Authority, and therefore they were every way a
proper instance, wherein Christians might exercise their charity and compassion
one to the other; and in such cases St. Paul declares, that he would rather
wholly forego his liberty, than by these indifferences endanger the Soul of his
Brother; as in that famous place 1 Cor. 8. 13. If meat make my Brother to
offend, I will eat no Flesh while the World stands, lest I make my Brother to
Offend; where by Flesh and meat is to be understood such as had been Offered
unto Idols, which tho lawful for a Christian to eat at common meals, yet the
Apostle would wholly abstain from, rather than wound the weak Conscience of a
Brother. If I by the Law of charity (as the Reverend Bishop Taylour says,
Great exemp. p. 420) must rather quit my own goods than suffer my Brother to
perish, much rather must I quit my privilege. And, We should ill die for our
Brother, who will not lose a meal to prevent his sin, or change a dish to save
his Soul; and if the thing be indifferent to us, yet it ought not to be
indifferent to us whether our Brother live or die.

After this manner do we profess our selves ready to do or forbear any thing in
our own power, to win and gain our Dissenting Brethren to the Church. We grant
that those, who conform, are obliged by: this Law of charity not needlessly to
vex and exasperate our Dissenters, nor to do any thing which they are not bound
to do, that may estrange them more from the Church; but to restrain themselves
in the use of that liberty God and the Laws have left them, for the sake of
peace and out of condescension to their Brethren. We dare not indeed omit any
duty we owe to God, or our Superiors either in Church or State, nor can we
think it fit and reasonable, that our Apostolical Government, Excellent
Liturgy, Orderly Worship of God used in our Church, should all be presently
condemned and laid aside, as soon as some Weak men take Offense at them; but in
all other things, subject to our own ordering and disposal, we acknowledge our
selves bound to please our Brother for his good unto Edification.

I only add here, that this very rule of yielding to our Brother in things
indifferent and undetermined ought to have some restrictions and limitations,
several of which are mentioned by Mr. Jeans, whom I have so often named; as
First, That we are not to forbear these indifferent things, where there is only
a possibility of Scandal, but where the Scandal consequent is probable; for
otherwise we should be at an utter loss and uncertainty in all our actions, and
never know what to do. Secondly, Our weak Brethren must have some probable
ground for their imagination that what we do is evil and sinful, or else we
must wear no Ribbands, nor put off our Hats, but come all to Thou and Thee; and
for this exception he gives this substantial reason, that if we are to abstain
from all indifferent things, in which another without probable ground imagines
that there is sin, the servitude of Christians under the Gospel would be far
greater and more intolerable, than that of the Jews under the Mosaical
administration. Thirdly, This must be understood of indifferent things that are
of no very great importance; for if it be a matter of some weight and moment,
as yielding me some great profit, I must only for a while forbear it, until my
Brother is better informed. Lastly, We must not wholly betray our Christian
liberty to please peevish and froward people, or to humor our Neighbor in an
erroneous and superstitious opinion; for which he quotes Mr. Calvin, who in his
Comment upon 1 Cor. 8. 13. tells of some foolish Interpreters, that leave to
Christians almost no use at all of things indifferent, upon pretense to avoid
the Offense of Superstitious persons.

Now tho all this is generally true, yet I think there are no certain
unalterable rules to be laid down to direct our practice in this affair. For it
being an exercise of charity, must be determined by the measures of prudence
according to circumstances, and we may as well go about to give certain rules
for Men's charity in other cases, and fix the proportion, which every Man ought
to give of his estate toward the relief of the poor, as positively to tell how
far a Man must deny himself in the use of indifferent things, and forego his
own liberty for the sake of his Brother, and so I end this head with those
words of the learned Dr. Hammond in his little Treatise of Scandal: This whole
matter is to be referred to the Christians pious discretion or prudence, it
being free to him either to abstain, or not to abstain, from any indifferent
action (remaining such) according as that piety, and that prudence shall
represent it to be most charitable and beneficial to other Men's Souls. Thus I
have done with the first proposition, that nothing sinful is to be committed to
avoid Scandalizing others.

2. I proceed now to the Second, that to avoid a less Scandal being taken by a
few we must not give a greater Offense, and of vastly more pernicious
consequence to a much bigger number of persons: Not that such a case can ever
happen, wherein we must necessarily give just Offense to one side or other, and
so are uncharitable, whether we do or forbear to do the same action; for then
we should be under a necessity of sinning, which implies a contradiction, but
yet it may and often does happen, that some weak persons may take Offense at my
doing, and others be more Offended at my forbearing to do the same thing, and
thus whether I do it, or not, I shall give Offense, tho not justly, nor through
my own fault, to some one or other. In such circumstances therefore we are to
consider, which way is given the greater and more dangerous Offense, and it can
never be either prudence or charity to abstain from that, which may Scandalize
our Brother, when by forbearance a greater and more public Scandal is
ministered to others; for in this case we have greater reason on the account of
Scandal it self to do, than to forbear that action, as all that write on this
subject do and must acknowledge, and for which they usually quote that saying
of Bernard, Prudenter advertendum est scandalum scandalo non emendari, etc. We
are prudently to mark that one Scandal is not mended by another; which kind of
emendation we should practice, if to take off offense from one party, we give
offense unto another.

This was the occasion of that famous Contest between the two great Apostles
mentioned in the second Chapter of the Epistle to the Galatians, St. Peter had
freely conversed with the Gentile Christians, and had eat with them all kind of
meats; but afterward when certain believing Jews from Jerusalem, who were
still Zealous for Moses's Law, and the distinction of meats, came to Antioch,
out of fear of Offending them and occasioning their falling off from the Faith
of Christ he abstained from that liberty, and withdrew from that conversation,
which before he had without any scruple used; and all the believing Jews that
were at Antioch followed his example, and separated themselves from their
Gentile Brethren. Now St. Paul considering the greater Scandal and mischief,
that would follow this pretended tenderness of St. Peter and his compliance
with the Jewish Christians, and that it was a likely way not only to confirm
them in their error, but also wholly to exclude the Gentiles from the Faith of
Christ, and so to hinder Christian Religion being propagated in the World, he
withstood Peter to the face, and chid him sharply for his imprudent behavior,
who to avoid offending some of the weak Jews did give a far greater Offense,
and of much more dangerous consequence to the Gentile Converts, of whom the
Christian Church was chiefly to consist. In this case therefore of Scandal we
are not only to regard one side or party of Men, but as the same St. Paul
directs us, 1 Cor. 10. 32. We must give none offense neither to the Jews, nor
to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God.

It would swell this discourse much beyond my present design to set forth at
large the many and great Scandals, which are given by those, who Separate from
the Church of England; and I doubt not but if this matter was rightly
considered, and we were but impartially careful to avoid giving all Offense to
others, we should soon find our selves much more obliged upon this account of
Scandal peaceably to communicate with our Church, than to continue divided from
it. I shall hint at some few of the most obvious considerations, by which we
may a little Judge which way the greater Scandal is given.

1. By leaving the Parish-Churches and joining to the Separate Assemblies, we
do mightily establish and harden (as I have before observed) those Dissenters,
with whom we associate, in their sinful Separation and Erroneous persuasion of
the unlawfulness of conformity; for it is but reasonable with them to judge,
that we do the same things for the same reasons with themselves; and this is
the true Scandalizing of our weak Brethren, leading them into, o confirming
them in an evil course: Whereas by our forsaking them and returning to the
Church we may possibly incline some, that are sincere amongst them, to consider
and suspect their own way, and enquire after the Arguments that prevail with us
to conform, and they may begin to think that there is not so much evil in it as
they have all along supposed, and thus our Authority or example may contribute
something toward the gaining our Brethren.

2. Which also I have just mentioned before, whatever Sect or denomination of
Dissenters we join with, we Offend all the other Sects or Parties amongst them:
for they agree only in their opposition to the Church of England, but in other
things they have their distinct Forms and Models of Worship, and Shibboleths,
and they think as ill, and sometimes speak as hardly of one another, as they do
of Conformists. Which would evidently appear, if any one sort of them should
get the upper hand; the rest of them would all act as fiercely, and complain as
loudly of that Party that did prevail, as they now do of the Church of England.
Till therefore they all agree in one way and speak the same Language there is
no reason why any one Sect of them should challenge our condescension to them,
to the dissatisfaction and Offense of all the other Dissenters, who have as
good a right to this Plea of weakness as themselves.

3. Hereby great Offense is given to all those who do conform; for this
Separation from the Church is a public condemning of the Government, Orders,
Discipline or Doctrine of our Church, and is apt to breed scruples and
perplexities in well meaning, but less knowing members of it, and by degrees
produces a distaste or dislike of our Worship, and plainly hinders the efficacy
of the ordinances of Christ as administered in our Church, whilst it creates
prejudices in people against them as impure and corrupt; and why there should
not be a due regard had to those many, who are Offended at our Dissenters
Conventicle Worship, as well as of those, who are said to be Scandalized by our
Church service, I cannot at all guess. I shall only say here, that irreverent
sitting at the receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, Men's unmannerly
wearing their Hats in time of Divine Worship, and oftentimes putting them off
but half way at their Prayers, their indecent postures and antic gestures at
their devotions, the extravagancies and follies (not to say worse) some of them
are guilty of in their extemporary effusions, the strange uncouth Metaphors and
Phrases they use in their Preaching; in a word, the slovenly performance of
Divine Worship amongst the Dissenters is much more Scandalous, then all the
Ceremonies of our Church can ever be.

4. Consider the Scandal that is hereby given to Magistrates and our
Superiors, by bringing their Laws and Authority into contempt; concerning
which the forenamed Mr. Jeans in his first Edition of his Discourse about
Abstinence from all Appearance of Evil, has these words, If, says he, it were
better to be thrown into the bottom of the Sea with a Millstone about ones
Neck, than to offend a little one, a poor and illiterate Artizan, what
expression shall we then find answerable to the heinousness of a Scandal given
to a Pious Magistrate, to a Religious Prince, to a Parliament, and Convocation,
to an whole Church and Commonwealth?

5. By this Separation from the Church, great Scandal is given to the Papists;
not that they are displeased at it; they are not indeed offended in that sense,
but this serves wonderfully to harden them in their false and Idolatrous
Worship; it increases their confidence, that their Church is the only true
Church of Christ, because amongst them only is found Peace and Unity; and this
is a mighty temptation to many wavering Christians to turn Papists: insomuch
that Mr. Baxter has told us, that Thousands have been drawn to Popery, or
confirmed in it by this Argument already, and he says of himself, that he is
persuaded, that all the Arguments else in Bellarmin, and all other Books that
ever were written, have not done so much to make Papists in England, as the
multitude of Sects among our selves. This indeed is a great Scandal to our
Protestant Religion, and is that which the Papists are on all occasions so
forward to object against us, and hit us in the teeth with; and by our hearty
uniting with the Church of England, we may certainly wrest out of their hands
the most dangerous weapon they use against the Reformation.

6. This tends to the Scandal of Religion in general. It prejudiceth men
against it as an uncertain thing, a matter of endless dispute and debate; it
makes some Men utterly reject it as consisting mostly in little trifles and
niceties about which they observe the greatest noise and contention to be made
or as destructive of the Public Peace of Societies, when they see what
dangerous feuds and quarrels commence from our Religious Differences, and all
the disorder and confusion that they have caused here in England, shall by some
be charged upon Christianity it self.

Thus our causeless Separations and Divisions open a wide door to Atheism, and
all kind of Profaneness and Irreligion: After this manner it was of old, and
always will be, where there are Parties in Religion, and one contends that
their Separation is lawful, and the other that it is unlawful, the Common
people soon become doubtful and ready to forsake all Religion.

I might add here, that such Separations necessarily occasion breach of
Charity; they beget implacable enmities and animosities: Hence comes strife,
emulation, envying, one Party continually endeavoring to overtop the other,
watching for one another halting, rejoicing in one another sins and
misfortunes, constant undermining one another, to the disturbance of the
Public Government, and endangering the Civil Peace; of all which and much more
than I can now mention the present distracted condition of our Nation is so
great and undeniable an evidence, that there need no more words to show the
mischiefs that attend such Divisions; and now let any one judge, whether the
Peace and Unity of the Church, the maintaining of Charity amongst Brethren, the
keeping out Popery, and Atheism, the preservation of the Authority of the
Magistrate, and quiet of the Society we are Members of, the honor and credit
of our Religion. Lastly, Whether giving Offense to all both Conformists and
Nonconformists, those only excepted of our own particular Sect and Division,
nay Scandalizing them also in the true and proper sense of Scandal, be not of
far greater and more weighty consideration, than the fear of displeasing or
grieving some few weak dissatisfied Brethren; Woe to those, by whom Offenses
come. But these things I have very lightly touched, because they have been the
subject of many Sermons and discourses lately published.

To sum up all I have said,

Since they, who dissent from the Church of England, are not such weak persons
as St. Paul all along describes and provides for; since we cannot by our
Conformity really Scandalize or Offend them in that sense, in which the
Scriptures use those words; since tho we did give Offense to them by our
Conformity, yet that would not excuse us from doing our Duty, and by refusing
to Conform we should do both them and others greater hurt and mischief; I think
I may safely conclude, that there cannot lie any obligation upon any private
Christian (as the case now stands amongst us) to absent himself from his
Parish Church, or to forbear the use of the Forms of Prayer or Ceremonies by
Law appointed, for fear of Offending his weak Brethren.

I end all with one word of Advice. First, to those who are not convinced of
the lawfulness of Conformity. Secondly, to those who are satisfied that it is
lawful.

1. To those who are not convinced of the lawfulness of Conformity, and
therefore urge so hard that they ought not to be Offended by us. I would
beseech them that they would take some care and make some Conscience to avoid
giving any needless Offense to those of the Church of England, and this cannot
but be thought a reasonable request, since they require all others to be so
tender of them. They ought not therefore to meet in such numbers, nor at the
same time at which we assemble to Worship God in our public Churches. Let them
not affront our Service and Common Prayers, nor revile our Bishops and
Ministers, nor put on their Hats when at any time they chance to be present at
our Service in our Churches, nor talk nor read in Books, nor make sour faces at
our Devotions, and when they observe these and other the like rules, they may
then with a better grace (tho with little reason) find fault with our
Conformity as Offensive to them. I would be loath to say any thing, that should
exasperate or provoke any of the Dissenters whose satisfaction I design: I very
well know their weakness, that they cannot endure to be told of their faults.
However I must tell them, that there are no sort of persons in the Christian
World professing Religion and Godliness, that have done such Scandalous things,
as some of those who call themselves Protestant Dissenters. I forbear to name
particulars.

2. As for those who are satisfied concerning the lawfulness of Conformity, I
would desire them so to order their return to the Church, as not to give any
just Offense to those whom they forsake; that is to say, that they would do it
heartily and sincerely, that all may see they Conformed with a willing mind,
being persuaded that it is their duty so to do, and not merely to satisfy the
Law, or to save their Purses, or to get into an Office, or to capacitate them
to Vote or the like. For such a kind of Conformity, as some practice, and call
Occasional Communion, which is coming to Church and Sacrament to serve a turn,
is truly Scandalous to all good Men of what persuasion soever.

FINIS.
Books Printed for FINCHAM GARDENER.
A Continuation and Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's
Unreasonableness of Separation, in Answer to Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Lob, etc.

Considerations of present use, considering the Danger Resulting from the
Change of our Church Government.

1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England. 2. A Resolution of
some Cases of Conscience, which Respect Church Communion. 3. The Case of
Indifferent things, used in the Worship of God, Proposed and Stated, by
considering these Questions, etc. 4. A Discourse about Edification. 5. The
Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of England's
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England? 6. A Letter to Anonymus, in Answer
to his Three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about Church Communion. 7. Certain Cases
of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of joining with Forms of
Prayer in Public Worship. In two Parts. 8. The Case of Mixed Communion. Whether
it be Lawful to separate from a Church upon the Account of promiscuous
Congregations, and Mix^ Communion? 9. An Answer to the Dissenters Objections
against the Common Prayers, and some other Parts of Divine Service Prescribed
in the Liturgy of the Church of England. 10. The Case of Kneeling at the Holy
Sacrament, Stated and Resolved, etc. The First Part. 11. Certain Cases of
Conscience, etc. The Second Part. 12. A Discourse of Profiting by Sermons, and
of going to hear where Men think they can profit most. 13. A serious
Exhortation, with some Important Advices; Relating to the late Cases about
Conformity, Recommended to the Present Dissenters from the Church of England.
14. An Argument for Union, etc. 15. The Case of Kneeling at the Sacrament. The
Second Part.
1. A Discourse about the charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther? 2. A Discourse about Tradition, showing what is meant by it, and
what Tradition is to be Received, and what Tradition is to be Rejected. 3. The
Difference of the Case between the Separation of Protestants from the Church of
Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England. 4. The
Protestant Resolution of Faith, etc.
THE Charge of Scandal, And giving OFFENSE BY CONFORMITY, Refelled, And
Reflected back upon SEPARATION. And that place of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 32. that
has been so usually urged by Dissenters in this Case, asserted to its true
Sense, and vindicated from favoring the end for which it has beed quoted by
them.

Give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church
of God. LONDON: Printed for Fincham Gardener, at the White-Horse in
Ludgate Street. 1683.

To the Christian-Reader.
THou art not ignorant (I suppose) that this Argument has been handled by a
far better Pen, an Author that does every thing he undertakes with that
accuracy of Judgment, and strength of Reason, that becomes a person of his
Character; and therefore may wonder what so mean a Scribe has to do after
him.

I have but this Answer only to give thee; that it is neither affectation, nor
conceit of this Paper, that is the cause. This Discourse was showed to some
persons, both friends to the world and the Author, who was wholly ignorant that
the Subject was undertaken by another, and was thought fit to be stayed till it
was seen what that Discourse expected then would be; with a design to suppress
it wholly, had the Method or the Management been near alike: which because it
was not, and because the same thing that hits one fancy, may not do so to
another, or not to all, it was determined to venture this to the Public also.

Which the Author does with Prayer for, and true Charity unto all that need
such Discourses; beseeching God, that they may honestly and impartially
consider what has been offered to them of late, to satisfy all their most
material Scruples and Objections, and that they may find a suitable effect upon
their own minds.

THE Charge of Scandal, And giving OFFENSE by CONFORMITY REFELLED.
THere are very few things within the Sphere of Christian Religion, that more
trouble and distract the thoughts of men, than how to govern themselves, and
order their actions with respect to things that are called Indifferent.

In things that are essentially good or evil, or are made so by some plain
Command or Prohibition of our great Law giver, all Parties are soon agreed; and
there needs not any question or dispute between them in these: The Rule is
plain, and (supposing men honest) there cannot be any great mistake about them.

But in things that are left wholly undetermined by God, and neither directly,
nor by just and natural consequence either enjoined or prohibited by any Law of
his, there men sail not by so plain a Compass, but have a larger Scope, and may
more easily mistake their Course.

It cannot therefore be less than a good service to men, to direct them safely
in this Unbeaten track, and to prescribe to them such Rules, to which if they
carefully attend, they can never fall into any dangerous error.

This is our Apostles charitable design in this Chapter; to which I shall have
a respect in managing this present Argument, viz. 1 Cor. 10. and by governing
our selves by the measures of his discourse in it, we may be able to hit those
great Rules of our actions in these things.

The Apostles discourse is indeed but of one particular instance of these, i e.
the eating, or not eating things that had Leen offered in Sacrifice by the
Gentiles to their Demons; which I shall have occasion to explain at large
hereafter to you.

But it is equally applicable to all things of the like Indifferent nature. And
there are two Rules laid down by him there, which men ought to govern
themselves by in the use of such things.

1. The First is the Glory of God, v. 31. Whatsoever therefore ye do, whether
ye eat or drink, do all to the glory of God; i. e. whatever ye do in these
things, be sure you have respect to the Law and Will of God, and take heed that
you violate none of the divine Commandments, either by what you do, or what you
refuse to do in things of this nature. For this is the true notion and meaning
of doing all to the glory of God, i. e. Keeping us close to the observance of
those Laws and Rules that he has commanded us. For then God is most truly
glorified by us, when we express a great sense of his Sovereignty and Laws in
all that we do. But this by the way.

The 2d Rule is Charity, and respect to the benefit and advantage of those we
converse with, and live among; that we neither grieve nor injure them by any
thing that we do, or neglect to do: and this is the meaning of these words, so
often quoted by our dissenting Brethren: Give none offense, neither to the
Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God.

This is that Rule of our actions in all indifferent things, which I have
chosen to consider in this discourse: and the rather, because we have some
contest with our dissenting Brethren about it.

There has been great talk about Scandal and giving Offense to weak and tender
Consciences, by Conformty and Compliance with all those things which the Church
of England requires in her Liturgy: and amongst all the other Arguments and
Pretenses against it, this has been pressed to serve in the Cause, either to add
some real weight to the rest, or at least to add to their number.

Though (to tell you plainly) I think it is only to make a show, and to render
the bulk of their Exceptions the bigger, that this is summoned to the Muster,
and not for any real weight that there is in it to serve the Cause.

However, whatever there is in it, a great noise is made with it; and as a
mighty noise has been made about Scandal, and great pains used to wrest the
notion of it to serve men's purposes in these things: so great art has been
employed to accommodate it to the present purpose, and to fright men with the
guilt and danger of it, from complying with the Institutions of the Church,
which (as is pretended) are so very great a Scandal and Offense to weak
Consciences.

Two great and popular Pleas against the Liturgy of the Church of England, and
the Ceremonies retained by it, have been these: tenderness and scruples of
Conscience, in some; and fear of Scandal and giving Offense to such, in others.

Some men have pleaded their own Scruples, and want of sufficient Conviction
and Information, and excused their omission of these things, from that saying
of the Apostle, Romans 14. 23. Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

And some have alleged their fear of Scandal and offending others, and pleaded
that in bar of their compliance, from these words of the same Apostle, Give
none offense, etc.

How much the sense of the first place is mistaken, and how false the
consequence that is made from it is, I am not now obliged to show. My Province
at this time is about the second, this place that I have now quoted: in order
to which, I intend to do these two things.

1. Show that this place is not at all concerned in our present Question, nor
will serve that purpose that the Dissenters from our Church allege it for. 2.
That if it were, it would conclude against them and their practice, in the
present Case betwixt us.
1. I begin with the first, which is to show, that this place is not concerned
in our present Case, nor pertinently urged by our Brethren against their
Conformity to the present Rites and Usages of the Church.

And this I might do, from two things mistaken greatly in the application of
this Text.

1. The true notion of Scandal and Offense here mentioned. 2. The nature of the
things to which it is applied, which is vastly different from what men scruple
or forbear in our Case.
1. From the true notion of Scandal and Offense that is mentioned in this
place, and in many other places in the New Testament.

I do not intend here a large Discourse of the nature of Scandal in the
general, or a removing and rectifying those many common mistakes in the world
about it; but only to observe so much as will be sufficient to my present
purpose.

1. Then I observe, that as there are only two notions of Scandal in the New
Testament, so there are only two Cases in which men are properly and primarily
capable of being guilty of it, I mean in giving it to others.

1. The first notion of Scandal is, That it is a Snare or a Gin, by which men
are intrapped and drawn into some plain sin and wickedness. In which sense it
is used in many places, and particularly in that famous Speech of our Saviors,
Matthew. 18. 6. to 10.

And men do then give offense, or scandalize others, when they do that which
directly and in its own nature tends to induce others either to do that which
God has forbidden, and is a sin; or omit that which he has commanded, and is
a plain Duty: both which men may do several ways, which it is not now so very
needful to reckon up singly.

2. The second notion of Scandal^is, That it is some just cause of grief or
trouble to others in their Christian course, and that which hinders them from
walking in it with that cheerfulness and security that they otherwise would.

According to which sense it is rendered Offense in this, and many other Texts
of Scripture, i. e. some just cause of offense, of trouble or grief given to
another by something that he sees us either omit, or do.

In this sense it is used in many places of the New Testament, not for that
which is a direct occasion of another man's sin, but a just cause of his grief
and sorrow, and discouragement in the way of Duty: So it is used particularly,
Joh. 16. 1. and Romans 14. 15. it is expressed by grieving.

And in this sense men give offense to others, when either by doing, or
neglecting something themselves, they give just cause of sorrow or grief to
others, and discourage them in their Christian course, and occasion to them
some trouble and grief of mind, that otherwise might be free from.

2. Having observed this therefore, I proceed in the second place to observe,
that neither of these notions of Scandal can be accommodated to our present
case; nor can we be said to give offense to others, in either of these senses,
by conforming to the Institutions and Rites of the Church of England.

1. Not in the first sense; for that can only be in one, or both of these two
cases: either first, by doing that which is essentially and in its own nature
evil and a sin; Or secondly, by doing that which is directly a temptation and a
snare to induce another to do that which is a sin.

Now if it can be shown, that complying with the Rites and Service of the
Church of England is giving offense in either of these senses, then I here
profess, I will my self immediately turn their Proselyte, and renounce
Conformity, and protest against it for ever.

1. It has scarce ever yet been so much as intimated, that the Church of
England requires any thing as a condition of Communion with her, that is
essentially evil. None of our adversaries (that I know of) have yet dared to
charge her Doctrine with falsehood, or her Discipline with any thing that is in
it self evil: And when any shall adventure to do it, I doubt not but he will
find enough to enter the lists with him.

Even our bitterest Enemies of the Romish Communion have dared to charge us no
further in either of these, but only that we are defective in both, and reject
many things which the Church of Christ (as they pretend) has believed and
practiced in the ancient and primitive ages of it.

They would rather choose to call us Schismatics, than Heretics, or to prove
us Heretics; not because we believe or teach any things for necessary
Doctrines which are false, but rather because we do not teach or believe all
things that are Christian and true.

Neither do they charge our Liturgy, and Service, or Form of Worship, with any
thing that is materially evil, no nor redundant, but only deficient in many
Usages and Rites, which they pretend to be Apostolical. And if our own Brethren
must be more spightful and bitter against us than our worst Adversaries, let
them look to it, that even they become not their accusers at the great day.

But yet (thanks be to God) they have not adventured to do this, and will be
unsuccessful enough when they do it; and therefore themselves free us from
giving any offense in our Conformity, in this sense of giving offense, i. e.
doing any thing which is formally a Sin our selves, and thereby inducing others
into the same evil by joining with us.

2. Neither secondly do I see any one sin, that Conformity is directly
introductive of, or a temptation unto; and I will believe it will puzzle the
most curious and inquisitive to find out any such.

I have so much charity for my dear Mother the Church, and so much duty (I
thank God) yet left in me, as to dare to justify her from this imputation. I
am sure she intends no sin in what she does, nor knowns of any evil, that her
Communion will betray any man into.

All that she designs in her Doctrine, is to teach the truth as it is in Jesus,
and to keep close to that Symbol of Faith, which was once delivered unto the
Saints.

And what she intends and aims at in her Liturgy and Discipline, is by the one
to keep men from innovating and corrupting that Faith, or debauching it in
their manners, and deteining it in unrighteousness: And by the other, to direct
them to worship God in such a way, as is suitable to his own nature, and to the
Principles of such a holy Religion; and thereby conciliate that grace that may
enable them to live so, as the Worship of such a God, and the Belief of such a
Religion require, and oblige them to do.

I must confess, in one thing the Church of England may be an occasion of a
great deal of sin in the world; but it is such as will as little advantage our
Brethren to have it granted, as it will be any disparagement, or disadvantage
to be caused by it.

I mean, in being an occasion of all that in and guilt that all those bring
upon themselves, that rail and cry out so much upon it; that separate and
divide from it, and studiously maintain and keep up an unreasonable and
downright Schism against it.

But certainly all men will see that this is an offense only taken, and not
given; and ought no more to be objected against the Church, than Murder and
Adultery, Theft and Robbery ought to be charged upon the Laws of God, that
declare the same to be sin. Were there no such thing as the Constitution of a
Church, these men would not be guilty of Schism, and unjust Separation from it.
But so, if there were no Law, there would be no transgression; and Adulterers
may as well accuse the Law for their sin in one case, as Schismatics can
accuse the Constitution of the Church in the other. They are both in this case
equally culpable, i. e. indeed not at all.

In a word, and to conclude this Period; if Piety, and becoming expressions of
Devotion in the public Worship of God: If Gravity, Decency, and Order in the
Offices of Religion; And if engaging men to a due respect and regard to the
rules of the Gospel, be sins or evils to be eschewed and dreaded by men; then I
will grant that Conformity to the Church of England may possibly give offense
(in this sense of giving of it) but if not, I do not see any reason to
apprehend or fear any danger at all of it.

By these considerations it will appear, we are free from giving offense by our
Conformity to the Rules of our Church, in this first sense of Scandal and
giving Offense.

2. I proceed therefore now to enquire, if we cannot clear our selves
sufficiently from it in the second notion of these things also.

And this I think will best and most plainly be determined, by considering what
can be thought just cause of sorrow and grief to a good man, or a reasonable
discouragement or hinderance to him in his way of Duty. I mean still, cause of
these given to him by another.

Now these, I think, I may reduce pretty safely to these three Heads.

1. Some dishonor offered to God and his Religion. 2. The Wickedness and
Profaneness of men. 3. The making the way of Religion and Duty more cumbersome,
and difficult than otherwise it would be.
These are great and just causes of offense and grief to a good man. It cannot
but greatly afflict a good man to behold his God (whom he adores, and honors,
and loves above all things) affronted and dishonored, his Laws violated, his
Authority contemned and trampled upon by daring and foolish men: Rivers of
waters (says the holy Psalmist) run down mine eyes, because men keep not thy
law. Psalm. 119. 136.

And it cannot but be cause of the like sorrow to such a man, to see other men,
for whom he has a great and concerning charity, and whom he loves as his own
soul, to live in sin, and a contempt of God, to wound and destroy their
precious Souls, and to provide matter for eternal torments.

And any thing that discourageth a man in the way of his Duty, or renders it
more perplexed and troublesome to him, may be justly called an offense or grief
to him. I do not easily understand how this kind of offense can properly be
said to be given any other, but by some of these ways.

Now let our debate be determined by these things, and let the issue be,
Whether Conformity can be grieving others upon any of these accounts.

It cannot, I am sure, be said, or at least nothing like a proof be offered,
that we offend men hereby, because we either do any dishonor to God, or to his
holy Religion by it: It is much truer, that we bring honor and reputation to
both by it.

To God, by taking the best course we can pitch upon to secure the Solemnity
and Decency of his Worship: And to Religion, by taking care that all the great
Services of it be performed decently and to edification, and not profaned by
the ignorance, or temerity of every bold and unskilful undertaker.

2. Nor secondly can it be pretended that hereby we let men be spectators of
our wickedness and profaneness, and so grieve and make sad the hearts of good
men, while they see us without any fear of God before our eyes.

I have that charity for the modesty and integrity of our Dissenting Brethren,
that they will not call our Worship Idolatry, and the service of Baal any
longer; though it cannot be dissembled, that a great part of the lessdiscerning
Rabble have been taught by them, so to account and think of it. But if any have
been misled into such an Opinion, I would beg them to come, and behold our way
of public Worship, for their better conviction.

3. No, nor thirdly do I see how it can be any offense upon its making the way
of Religion and Duty more cumbersome, or difficult to others, than it would be.

It would be a hard matter for any to show where he is hindered from being good,
by seeing others conformable to the Church; or what obstruction that casts in
his way of Duty. I will at any time undertake to show, that it may be an help
and advantage to him, and a furtherance to him in the way of Religion and
Salvation; but let or hinderance it can be none.

If it be pretended, that by this we make Religion cumbersome, and clog that
with Rites and Ceremonies, that is a plain and easy thing; I grant the
Objection were reasonable, and the Charge of giving offense undeniable, were it
either so as it began to be of old in St. Augustin's time, or is at present in
the Roman-Church, clogged with so many antic and garish Ceremonies, that it
requires a great deal of study to be an exact Ritualist, and is a thousand
times harder to remember, and observe all the Rites and Modes of any Service
and Office in Religion, than to do the thing a hundred times over.

But let me beg men to consider whether this Charge can be just against a
Church and its Liturgy, which enjoin but three Ceremonies, against which the
Dissenters themselves can object, and these too not in the same, but so many
distinct Services, and which are little more than barely determining those
circumstances of Habit and Gesture, which are natural and necessary to all our
actions.

If these things can be thought to make the Practice and Services of Religion
burdensome, then any of the Postures in which our Brethren perform their
Worship will make that so too; and then the Directory will be as chargeable and
faulty in this, as the Liturgy.

These things will be sufficient, upon this first way that I proposed, to show,
that conforming to the Institutions of the Church is not concerned in any thing
the Apostle speaks in this place, nor can come under his notion of giving
offense to any, which he speaks against in it.

I will not deny, but that some may be offended and troubled at it. It is too
visible how much some men are troubled to see a Church constituted among us; to
behold it protected by Law and Power, and to see so great a deference and
respect paid unto it, and its way of Worship (as blessed be God is at present)
by multitudes both of great and good men. I do not doubt but it is greatly
maligned and envyed by men, and it is little less than a continual trouble and
grief to them. It is contrary to their private Interest, and so long as it is
so, their designs and aims will never be effected.

But so ill men are troubled at a good Government; and Thieves and Robbers may
be vexed that Honest men are secured from them; and these may as well cry out,
that the Laws and the Government are an offense to them, as others may, that
they are offended at the Church and Conformity.

Sure we know things better than to call every thing a Scandal that any man is
vexed or troubled at: If we must acknowledge that an offense, or forbear doing
every thing for fear of Scandal, that every ill designing man is pleased to
take exceptions against; it is more than probable we must do nothing at all,
nor venture to undertake any thing, till we see whether all persons will be
pleased with it or not: We must not call every thing an offense that pleases
not the humor of every man; for then nothing can avoid that character.

But this is not enough to say in this matter; for it will serve us much
further, not only to justify our selves from this imputation, but to reflect
it back upon those that charge us: For when we have well considered things, we
shall find, that the Scandal will fall upon our Accusers; and not Conformity,
but Separation will be found to be the giving Offense, and that in both the
notions of giving it that have been named.

Separation is indeed the Scandal, as being both an evil in it self, and that
which betrays others into many evils.

If ever there were such a thing as Schism in the world, or if the Separation
of the Donatists, or any that were ever made from the Communion of a National
Church were a Schism, I think it has been sufficiently proved on our behalf,
that the present Separation from our Church is really a Schism.

And if Schism be a damnable sin, (and so it is, if we will judge either by the
Doctrines of the Apostles, or their best Successors, yea and few sins greater)
then we shall need no other argument to prove Separation to be indeed the
Scandal, and that in the greatest notion of Scandal too.

And we sadly see what great mischiefs it is introductive of; what
uncharitableness and railing, what pride and censoriousness it betrays men into
Schism was scarce ever content to be alone. Men think it not enough to separate
from the Communion of the Church, unless they go to justify their Separation,
by aspersing what they separated from; and so men are inevitably betrayed into
envyings and bitter railings, into strife and contention, and all those evils
that such things are naturally productive of.

And I am sure it is a sore grief and trouble, and an offense (in the second
notion of it) to many good men, who cannot but be grieved greatly.

To see the Institutions of Christ so disregarded, the great Duties and
Services of Religion so slighted and neglected; and to behold the Peace and
Welfare of the Church (which cost the Savior of the world so dear, and is so
greatly beloved by him) so very little consulted, or rather purposely betrayed.

To behold men allow themselves (nay glory) in such damnable sins; destroy
their Souls by the guilt of them, and wilfully forfeit the benefit of all that
Christ has done, and suffered for them.

And lastly, to see the way of Religion so perplexed with idle Questions, and
made intricate by needless Disputes; and to see so many unreasonable
Controversies started, and such eager Quarrels amongst Christians, which the
best men sometimes have much ado to weather, and get over so as they should do.

These are the things that make many sad, and aching hearts among those whom God
has not made sad, and these are the effects of the sad Divisions and
Separations among us. These therefore are the Scandal, and the things that so
much offend, and these are the Divisions for which there are such searchings of
heart at this day.

I would to God some men would seriously consider things, they might then
possibly begin to reflect upon themselves and their own actions, and perhaps
see cause to take some part of that reproach upon themselves, which they are
pleased so prodigally to cast upon us.

2. But I have another thing yet, to show the error of applying this Speech of
the Apostle to our case: For as there is a mistake in the notion of Scandal and
Offense, so there is too, in those things to which the giving offense here
relates; and they are vastly different from those things in the Church, that we
conform unto, by which the offense is pretended to be given.

The difference I mean is this; that however they may be things in their own
nature equally indifferent, yet the supervening command from lawful Authority
may make a vast difference between them. Those things to which this Text
relates, were indifferent, and undetermined too, no humane Law had taken
cognizance of them; but the Institutions or Ceremonies of the Church, in which
it is pretended we give offense, are things already determined by the Laws of
men, and such as a lawful Authority has bound us to the practice of.

I shall not need to have any controversy, I hope, with any about the nature
of them; nor will any of the tragical Outcries against them prove them
essentially evil. Though some men have been taught to call them Rags of Rome,
Instances of Superstition, and Relics of Idolatry; these are words of course,
and arts of railing, which proclaim indeed the rancour and malice of some men's
spirits, but do not change the nature of things. And certainly a stranger that
should hear all this outcry, and at last find the things declaimed so against
are but pure Modes and Circumstances of things, he would either greatly
question the judgment and honesty of some men; or at least conclude, that a
little thing will serve those men to quarrel with, that are resolved either to
find faults, or to make them.

2. Nor secondly shall I need here to dispute whether such things may be
enjoined by a lawful Authority in the Service of God: This has been done fully
already by a more learned hand; to which I have nothing here to add, but that
our Brethren, and all the several denominations of them, do the same thing
themselves, and sufficiently confute their own Objection. So hard is it for
them to frame any argument against us, which may not like a two-edged weapon
wound themselves.

And time was, when some of them found it sadly true; the Arguments that they
had used against the Church of England, others galled their own sides with; and
they were forced to think those answers good for them, which they will not
allow to be so for us against them. And what dealing that is, I leave others to
judge!

3. No nor thirdly do I think it worth the while, to stay to answer that
trifling Objection, That this command of men alters the nature of the things;
and sure the Church of England thinks them more than Indifferent, or else it
would not lay so much weight upon them, nor make so very great a stir about
them.

It is a great mistake, to think that the commanding of things indifferent
makes any alteration in the nature of them; it alters them indeed with respect
to us and our practice, but the things remain the same; and the Church commands
them as things fitting to be done, but Indifferent still in their nature; and
so the Church of England declares them to be, after her commanding them: And
her public Declarations and Rubricks sufficiently acquit her from all such
thought; and if men will not believe her own Protestations, but still pretend
that she believes contrary to what she solemnly professes, it is but another
instance of some men's ingenuity and candor toward her, and needs not be
counted strange in this Age.

Nor is her standing so stiff (as men speak) for these things, any argument of
her thinking otherwise of them: for however a Ceremony be in it self a small
thing, yet Faction and Disobedience is a great one, and ought with all care to
be suppressed; and that Church needs not be blamed for its sharpness against
Dissentions about these, which has already by sad experience found, that
gratifying Faction in these, has in the issue been the utter overthrow of her
whole Constitution.

If any Church may be excused in this, certainly this may, which has already
felt the smart of Indulging in them; and cannot but be concerned, when it sees
the same practices pursued again; and that too, by those very men who trampled
upon her with so much cruelty and scorn in the late time of her visitation.

The beginning of strife (says Solomon) is as when one lets out a River:
and so we have found Faction in these things to be also; and therefore no
wonder if the wisdom of the Church apply it self with so much care, and
quickness to obstruct the smallest beginnings in that, as men do to repair the
least breach in those Banks, which keep in the waters of the other.

4. Nor fourthly do I think I have any pertinent occasion here to assert the
obligation of humane Laws, or to dispute whether they oblige the Consciences of
men in things that God has left undetermined: We need but consult Scripture
for this, which will be plain, so long as the 13 Chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans, and the first Epistle of St. Peter shall remain in the Canon, and not
be expunged utterly by those men, that truly would not be much more injurious
to it in this instance, than they are in some others.

But were there no Scripture for it, I suppose we should not need to dispute it
with any men, that ever are in Authority. There are few of these that will
permit their own Authority to be disputed, or Conscience pleaded against it, by
their Children or Servants, or those that they have the conduct of.

And we are beholding to our Brethren for letting us know their minds in this:
For no men have been more rigorous in exacting obedience to all their
Ordinances, and reproaching and punishing all that dissented from them, as
Enemies to God and Christ, than they know who in times past were.

Never were Institutions of men magnified more for promoting the honor of God,
exalting the Kingdom and Scepter of Christ, nor men charged more strictly in
point of Conscience with obedience to them. So that the crying out against
becoming the servants of men, is but an artifice to pull down Government, which
when men have once leaped into, they will by no means endure to be used against
themselves.

5. But that which I am more directly concerned here to show is, that the
things related to in this Text were not only indifferent, but undetermined
too: I mean, no Law had been made by the Church about them one way or other.
The truth of which it concerns me to make out, not only to serve my present
purpose, but because it may be something questioned, from what we read Acts 17.
29. where among the Canons of that Apostolic Council, this is the first; That
ye abstain from meats offered to Idols: which seems to be the very thing that
the Apostle is discoursing of in this place.

And first, it cannot be denied, that in the beginning of the Apostles
Discourse upon these things, from v. 14. to v. 25. the same things are related
unto, that are prohibited by that Canon of the Council; i. e. the eating in the
Idolatrous Feasts of the Heathen, and of those meats which they knew were by
that Rite offered in Sacrifice unto their Idols. For the Heathen Sacrifices
were not finished only at their Altar, but the Solemnity was continued and
completed by their eating and drinking together upon the remainders of what
they had actually offered and consumed in Sacrifice: Just as some of the Jewish
Sacrifices (we know) were, from whom the Heathen transcribed many of their
practices, aping them in almost all their Institutions.

2. But then secondly, that which he takes occasion to discourse of afterward,
and to which this Speech immediately relates, seems to be very different from
what he had been speaking of before, and which is the thing prohibited by the
Council of the Apostles.

Which will appear sufficiently, from these two Considerations.

1. That the Apostle here takes upon him a liberty to indulge a Latitude in
these things; which be sure he would never have done, had it been in that very
Case, that the Apostles had determined before.

And this we may be the more certain of, by considering the circumstances of
that whole affair, which (so much as concerns our present business) was briefly
thus: The Jewish Converts retained a great veneration for the Ceremonial Law,
to which they had been inured, and educated in the observation of: these being
interspersed abroad in many places, where many of the Heathens were converted
to Christianity, were greatly offended with that liberty, which they saw the
others took in the use of those meats which their Law prohibited as unclean.

This caused hot Contests, and sharp Disputes between the two Parties, to the
breach of Christian Communion, and the great Scandal of their Religion. The
Apostles therefore are consulted in this great affair; and having maturely
considered, and canvassed the matter, determine only to restrain the liberty
that the Gentile-Converts took, in these three instances: To abstain from
things offered to Idols, and from things Strangled, and from Blood.

St. Paul, as he was the Apostle of the Gentiles, so he was the great Agent for
them in this business, and the chief person that carried these Constitutions of
the Apostles unto their Churches; of which at this time the Church of Corinth
was one principal, and most considerable.

Now it is not to be supposed that the Apostle would carry this Constitution
and Order to them, which they so joyfully and thankfully embraced (says St.
Luke) and afterward presently would take upon him to dispense with the strict
observation of, and to grant a great Indulgence and Latitude in.

This would be the ready way to expose himself and his Doctrine too, to
contempt and censure, and to give cause for a sharper reproof of himself, than
he gave to St. Peter, for a lesser matter than this was.

So that we may be sure, the particular matter here related unto, was not the
Case which the Canon of the Apostles had regulated, but that it was some other
thing which had not been determined by them.

2. And this we may collect also from the Phrase in which he discourses this
matter here in this Text: Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, asking
no question for Conscience sake, v. 25. and, If any of them that believe not,
bid you to a feast, (...), invite you to an entertainment [for there is no
(...) in the Greek] and ye be disposed to go, whatsoever is set before you,
eat, asking no question for conscience sake, v. 27.

By both which expressions it is plain, that the Apostle here is discoursing of
another matter than what was enjoined by the Canon, or at least of the same
thing under a very different denomination and circumstance from that it is
considered in there. For meat bought in the Shambles, and eating in the common
entertainments of their Heathen Neighbors, are plainly different from the
notion of things offered to Idols, taken notice of by the Canon.

And this whole matter will be made plain, by giving an account of it, and
showing wherein the things offered to Idols intended by the Apostles, and those
discoursed of by the Apostle in this place do differ.

The things offered to Idols, forbidden by that Council were such, part whereof
was not only offered in Sacrifice, but was solemnly eaten afterward as the
Idols meat; and the whole Feast continued as a solemn act of Religion and
Sacrifice, (as we know it was) and performed not only as a Rite of
confederating with the Idol, but of being more closely united unto him, and
receiving a divine afflatus, and influence from him.

And although the Idol to which this was done, was really nothing, and the
whole performance a mere vanity, having no real foundation at all in nature,
and so possibly these meats might have been safely partaken of, by those that
were well instructed, and knew these things: Yet the Apostles thought fit to
forbid them, for the forementioned reason of giving offense to the Jews; and
St. Paul enlarges their reason in this Chapter; because it was a confederating
with Devils, and being partakers at the table of Devils, which he condemns as
hugely unbecoming them that eat at the Lords Table, verse. 20, 21.

Grotius is so exact in this matter, as to tell us there were two ways by which
men might eat of things sacrificed to Idols, in the sense that the Apostles
mean.

1. Vel aliquid a Tabula, etc* i. e. when at their public Feasts they sent
some part off the Table to be offered solemnly to the Idol, and to entitle him
to the whole Feast.

2. Vel ab Aris ad Mensam defertis; or when they took some considerable portion
from the Altar, and fed upon it at the Table, as part of the Idols portion, as
was hinted before.

Now for the Christians to be present at, and to partake of these things, was
that which the Apostles forbid in that Canon; and which St. Paul also is so
sharp upon, from 14 to 24 of this Chapter.

But that which he speaks of afterward, is vastly different from it, and
plainly means, either that part of the Offering which they afterward spent in
their ordinary meals, or which was publicly sold afterward in the Shambles.

The first of these is easily understood, and was common among them, to offer
some part of the Sacrifice to their Idols, and to reserve the rest for their
own common use; not looking upon it as sacred, and the Idols portion, as in
some great and solemn Sacrifices they did; but that which was truly their own,
and at their own disposal, especially having given a part of it to their Gods.

The other, i. e. what was sold in the Shamble^, Critics give two accounts of:

1. It was either that which the Butcher sold, part of which he himself had
offered to the Idol, before he brought the rest to the Shambles. Vel a
Macellario, qui ante quam ad marcellum carnes ferret, aliquid de Aram in
dedisset.

2. Or that part which belonged to the Priests, and which they often sold;
having (it is probable) either more than they could spend themselves; or perhaps
having a mind to exchange it for other meat, which they might purchase with the
money they sold it for. Vel a Sacerdotibus, qui parts quae ipsis cederent,
venderent, says the same Author.

Now these were the meats about which the Apostles had made no order at all. So
that men were at their liberty to buy and eat them if they pleased, without
asking any questions, or troubling themselves with any scruples of Conscience
about them.

And which the Apostle commands them to abstain then only from, when knowing
what they were, their eating them might wound the Conscience of another, and
they might give offense thereby either to the Jews. or to the Gentiles, or to
the Church of God. To the Jews, by seeing them make so little a matter of
Idolatry: to the Gentiles, by encouraging and confirming them in that Idolatry,
which they ought by all means to seek to wean them from: and to the Church of
God, by seeing them so careless and regardless of the good and benefit of
others, and without all charity to them.

By all which I hope it is sufficiently clear, that these things to which this
Speech relates, were not only indifferent in their nature, but undetermined
also as to their use, no Law having passed one way or other upon them.

Now this makes them vastly different from the things scrupled among us, and by
conformity to which Offense is pretended to be given: For the use of these is
already determined, and several Laws both of the Church and State, both of the
Spiritual and Temporal power, have passed upon them.

So that how indifferent soever they may be in themselves, yet it is not
indifferent to us whether we observe them or not; but it is now matter of
Obedience, and plain Duty; and these things are tied upon the Conscience, as
strongly as any matter of humane command is or can be.

And therefore in these we cannot show favor and indulgence to others if we
would; for we our selves are under Authority, and bound up by the Laws of those
above us. We have not the power of doing or forbearing, nor can we now abstain
for fear of offending another man's Conscience, without grievously wounding and
worse offending of our own; and whatever may be the consequence of our
Conformity, as to another man, yet we certainly Know, the neglect of it will be
a downright sin, and a grievous guilt unto our selves.

So that in this matter the fear of giving offense to others is impertinent, a
Snare, and a direct Temptation; and as improperly urged against Conformity, as
it would be against any other Duty how necessary soever, to tell us that there
are a great many men that will be offended with our doing of it. In this and
all such cases, we stand immediately responsible unto God, and may justly
retort that so much abused and mistaken Apology of the Apostles, Whether it be
not right to obey God, rather than regard men, judge ye.

2. But there is a second thing yet incumbent upon me, and that is to show,
that supposing the Text were pertinently urged against Conformity, and there
were a real possibility of giving offense by it, yet it would not serve that
purpose that it is produced for by our Dissenting Brethren, but on the contrary
make very much against them.

And this I shall endeavor to make good, by considering who the persons are
that the Apostle here cautions us against giving offense unto; not only the
Jews, nor only the Gentiles, nor both these only, but the Church of God.

From whence, before I come to the main Improvement of this place against the
purpose and practice of our Dissenting Brethren, we may take occasion to
consider what the object of Scandal is, and who they are that men ought
especially to regard in their cares not to give it.

At the time of the Apostles writing this, there were three different sorts of
men that might be offended with eating things offered to Idols: the Jews, the
Gentiles, and the body of Christians, which he here calls the Church of God.

In analogy to which, there are, and always will be, different Parties among
which men converse: Upon which account it will concern us to enquire, what our
respects to them in this matter ought to be, and whether we ought to make any
difference among them. And this we may resolve our selves in, by considering
the Cases that concern us; which I think are only these two.

1. When we perceive, or have reason to think, that what we are going to do
will offend all Parties equally, then no doubt but we ought to forbear it. This
was plainly the case here.

The Jews might be prejudiced against Christianity by this practice, seeing its
Professors make so little a matter of Idolatry, which their Law so strictly
prohibited, and God had always declared himself so severe against.

The Gentiles might be encouraged and confirmed in their Idolatry, by feeing
men of the most holy Religion (as they called themselves) consent with them in
it.

And the Church might be offended too, by seeing her Members have so little a
regard to her Constitutions, and the plain Canons of her great Founders.

And therefore they ought to be extremely careful and cautious what they did in
this nice point; and so ought we always to be in such cases.

2. But secondly, it may so happen, that what we do may only offend some.
These different Parties may have different apprehensions of the same thing.
Some may think it lawful, or a Duty; others may scruple it, or condemn it as a
sin. Now in this case it will concern us to consider how we ought to govern our
selves, and our actions, and what difference to make in our respects to men.

And the Apostles Rule in this Text, will be a safe measure and direction to
us, especially it Ecumenius his Note be true, as it commonly is in all places
where a Climax or Gradation is used, as it seems plainly to be in this place:
His words are these; (...), etc. consider what the Apostle says, how he puts
the chief thing last, and makes giving offense to the Church of God that which
especially we ought to have a care of: and he gives this reason for the equity
of this Rule, (...). it concerns us to endeavor to win others unto the Faith,
but by no means to offend and grieve those that already profess it. And
certainly nothing can be more just and reasonable than this is.

So that the sum of this advice is plainly this; You ought, as near as you can,
to do nothing to offend any; but however, take care not to offend the Church:
You ough to have a charitable respect to all particular persons, of what
denomination soever, whether Jews or Gentiles; but especially to the Church,
and never to give offense to that by any thing that you do.

Now this will be a clear guide to us in our present case: and not only acquit
Conformity, from all guilt of Scandal, but cast it wholly upon Separation, and
refusing to comply with the present Constitutions of the Church, since that is
a direct giving offense to those which the Apostle chiefly respects in this
prohibition, i. e. the Church of God.

I stay not now to give the notion of the Church: I doubt not but all
contending Parties understand that competently well.

Nor to prove the present national Church of England to be justly called the
Church of God: this (God be thanked) is fully done, against both the opposite
Factions against her; those that call her Heretical or Schismatical, on one
hand; and those that reproach her as Popish and Antichristian, on the other.

Were her present Constitutions to be tried by Apostolical and Primitive
practice; her Faith to be judged by that of the first Centuries, and four most
truly General-Councils; or her Liturgy and Discipline, her Rites, Ceremonies,
and way of public Worship, to be compared with what we can collect and judge
of those purest times: Or were she to stand or fall by the judgment and
suffrages of the most able and learned of Protestant Divines abroad since the
Reformation; she would not only be justified, but commended; not only pass
for a true and sound part of Christ's Church, but the most sound and Orthodox,
the most truly Primitive and Apostolical of any at this day on the face of the
earth.

But I wave all this, and proceed to apply this Advice and Rule of St. Paul to
our own Case, as it is at this day, with respect to Scandal, and the danger of
it, by conforming to the Church; which is plainly this.

The Church of England having reformed it self from those Corruptions that had
sullied the truth and beauty of Christian Doctrine and Worship; not by Noise
and Tumult, and popular Faction, which too much influenced some foreign
Reformations, but upon grave and sober advice, with the concurrence of the
lawful Civil Power; digested her Doctrinals into such a number of Articles, as
she judged most consonant to the Faith and Doctrine of the Apostles and first
Councils: established such a Form of Worship, as upon most diligent enquiry and
search, she found most agreeable to the practice of pure and Primitive Ages;
and retained only such Rites and Usages as she found most ancient, and freest
from any just and reasonable Exceptions and Abuses.

All these thus constituted and framed, she imposes as Conditions of her
Communion, and requires Conformity unto of all her Members. She will be
grievously offended if any of her Children reject, and comply not with this
Constitution, as knowing her Knowledge and Integirty questioned, her Authority
despised, and that Power that has confirmed all this, contemned by so doing.

On the other hand, there are some particular men, some Heretics, some
Schismatics, some either designing or less instructed persons, that declare
themselves offended by conforming to this Constitution.

The question now is, how we shall govern our selves, and which of these
Considerations we will permit to sway us: Whether respect to the Church and
just Authority, and fear of giving offense thereto, shall engage us to conform;
or whether respect to some private persons, and fear of offending and angring
them, shall cause us to cast off all regard to those Laws and Constitutions,
and all care to comply with them.

This is the plain Case; and were there no other Considerations to determine
us, (when yet there are many) I would desire nothing plainer than the direction
of the Apostle in this Text; where he tells us, that the persons we ought
chiefly to have a care not to give offense unto, are the Church of God. If some
private persons and the Church come in competition, and we must needs offend
some, we ought to have a greater respect to the Church, than unto them. And
were it truly giving them offense, (which yet it is not) yet were it so, I say,
we ought not to attend so to that Consideration, as to cast off all regard and
care to the Church of Christ.

This (I think) is a Rule so very reasonable at the very hearing of, and so
fair upon its own reasons, that I do not know whether it be really worth while
to go to add any strength to it: We might venture it to its own strength to
stand or fall, and may challenge any one to assault or undertake it.

Yet however, I shall proceed to enlarge a little more upon it, and to add
some Considerations which may make it something more popularly plain and
convincing.

1. And first, I desire to have it fairly considered, whether we ought not to
have at least as fair a respect to the Church of God, as to any private
persons, of what character or denomination soever.

I do not see upon what reasons any person can deny this to me, especially in a
case where we cannot charge the Church with any plain degeneracy, or open
Apostasy from the Doctrine or Practice of the Scriptures.

When any particular Church degenerates plainly either in Doctrine or Worship,
there I am not concerned to determine how far she forfeits all that respect
that she might otherwise claim from men, nor how much the Credit of a single
person may vie with her. Perhaps when the Church was degenerated into
Arrianism, the judgment of Athanasius, and some few other Bishops, was more to
be regarded than that of a whole Synod; and in the horrid Apostasy of the Roman
Church, perhaps the single Doctrine of John Huss was preferable to that of the
whole Council of Constance. But still in both these Cases (or any other
parallel ones) that respect derived it self not from their persons, but was
wholly owing to truth, and the holy Scriptures that stood with them.

But blessed be God, this is not our case; our Church does challenge and
triumph over all charges of any such Apostasy; and all the disputes and
contests with her by any of these men, are about things confessedly doubtful,
and such as are in their own nature indifferent: things about which (to say the
least) it is as possible that single persons may err and mistake, as it is for
the Church; unless in this also (as in many other instances) men fall in with
the grossest Tenet in Popery, that single persons may more reasonably pretend
to Infallibility than the whole Church.

Every man derides, and thinks he can baffle all the pretenses of the Bishop of
Rome to Infallibility, and therefore should blush and be ashamed of his own
either arrogating it to himself, or ascribing it to another. For, the truth is,
I do not see but his pretenses are as just as another man's, i. e. indeed they
are both monstrously unreasonable.

And yet alas this is not the least source of the unhappiness of this Age; nor
need I be condemned for staying a little while to drop a tear upon it. Men turn
Dictators in Religion, and impose their own Dreams as magisterially upon their
Followers, as if they were oracular; and I am persuaded, their Disciples hang
as much upon their single authority and confidence, and yield as absolute and
implicit Faith to all their Doctrines, as ever any poor Papists, against whom
they exclaim so tragically for blind Obedience and Faith: They are kept in as
absolute subjection to their placits, and dare no more read and consult Books
that are written to inform them, than a poor Papist dare let a prohibited Book
be seen in his House, by a Father of the Inquisition.

If ever people followed their leaders blindfold, these men do: they will not
hear any thing against them; They have their persons in admiration; and I wish
I could not say of some, for filthy lucres sake, or at least some mean reasons
equivalent thereto. They will not so much as submit to means of Information;
they commonly say they are satisfied already; and the single blustering of one
of their own Rabbis, shall signify more with them, than all the Arguments of
the most Learned and sober men living beside.

But I am insensibly drawn aside from my chief Subject, which is not to treat
so much of a respect of Credit and Faith, as of Tenderness and Charity; which
is certainly as justly due from us to the Church, as to any private persons
whatsoever; and it cannot but be as unreasonable to fail in the one, as in the
other. It is every whit as unjust for men to be more regardless of grieving and
troubling the Church of Christ, as it is foolish and unreasonable to set up one
single man's opinion against that of many others, that are in the same
circumstances and advantages of Knowledge, and every way both as knowing and as
upright as himself.

Whatever considerations there are to determine our Charity to single persons,
there are the same (at least) to make it necessary toward the Church, and as
strong reasons to restrain us from offending the one, as the other: Whatever
becomes an Argument in one case, is equally so also in the other; and if it be
not as effectual with us, we are partial in the Law, and distinguish without
any reasons, but those of our own partial and unjust respects.

Let men be pleased to look into the Scriptures, and consult the practices of
our Lord himself, or his Apostles after him, and their thoughts will soon be
resolved in this matter; they will find the one calling for as much deference
and respect to the Church, as to private persons, and the other upon all
occasions as careful to pay it; and in all cases extremely careful not to give
offense to it in any thing whatsoever; as were easy to show in Instances
enough that are plain and obvious to all that read, and can scarce pass
unobserved by any.

This is the first Consideration; and I appeal to all, if it be not a very
easy Postulatum, a very modest and reasonable intimation: and yet (I assure
you) it were a good point gained, and a very good step toward our peace, were
men hearty in their concessions of it. Would men pay but the same deference to
the Church of Christ, and her Constitutions, as they readily do to their own
single Opinions, or the confident suggestions of some admired Leader, we might
quickly hope to see some end of our Questions and Disputes: And would they be
but as tender of giving any offense to the Public, as they are of doing so to
every little person of their own party, we might begin to hope, that the
Constitutions of our Church might gain some respect, and some measure of
peaceableness and modesty bless the Inhabitants of this Nation once more.

2. But this is too little to suggest, and the lesser part of what I would
propose to consideration upon this Subject: and therefore in the second place,
I desire it may be considered, whether we ought not to have a greater respect
to the Church of God, than to any single or private persons whatsoever.

And truly I think this is as reasonable a Postulatum as the other, and that
which will be as soon granted true by all that duly consider things. In all
things whatsoever, the Public requires more respect from us than any private
person; and the welfare of the one, is to be preferred by us before that of the
other.

If the Church of Christ and any private Party of men come in competition, and
it so happen, that we probably may give offense to one, we ought to let our
regard to the Church sway and determine us, and think it a less evil that some
particular persons be offended, than that trouble or offense be given to the
whole Church.

That saying of Caiaphas, recorded Joh. 11. 50. though spoken with an unjust
and barbarous design, yet is a certain and rational truth: It is expedient that
one man suffer, and not the whole Nation perish: And it is certainly a less
evil to grieve or offend some private persons, than to trouble and disturb, and
endanger the Constitution of the whole Church; which we must needs do, if at
every private persons pleasure, we take upon us a liberty to dispense with the
Commands and Institutions of it.

And this is a Rule that not only all wise Nations, but even all men still act
by, in Cases that are any way like to this.

All Nations prefer the Public good before the Private: and think it much
better, that some single persons suffer inconvenience, than that the Public be
endangered; and have ever set the worst Characters upon those men, that have
sacrificed the good of their Country to their own private Ambition and Revenge;
and never regarded what Confusion and Mischief thus bring upon it, so they may
please and gratify their own Passions. All the world has ever hated and
reproached these as Monsters of men, and I hope we in time shall learn to do so
also.

Nay, we see nothing more common among the wisest Nations, than to punish
single persons for the correction and good of the whole; and many times to cut
off those, whose crimes in their own nature were not so great, and who seemed
fairly capable of mercy, only to be Examples and Warnings to others, and to
deter them from any thing by which the Public might be endangered, and which
were but the least steps to the dissolution of its Government,

And we shall see all men act by this Rule too, in their own concerns, even any
of our dissenting Brethren themselves. They do not suffer every particular
person to neglect, and speak against their establishments, but choose rather to
punish and molest them, than endanger their whole Constitution.

And they prefer their own Body, and the health of it, before any particular
Member: they readily gash and cut one, to save all; yea, and will have a putrid
and mortified Member taken off, rather than it shall endanger the good of the
whole Body. So true is it, that the more Public good ought to be preferred to
the more private, and that all men naturally yield a greater respect to the
whole Society, than they do to any single Member of it.

And that the same Rule ought to be observed by us in our present Case of
giving Offense, I shall endeavor to make evident, both by plain Warrant of
Scripture, and by some proper Considerations, which all men allow the
reasonableness of in other cases.

1. I begin first with searching what warrant for this we can find in holy
Scripture, either in the Precepts and Directions of it, or in the Lives and
Actions of those who are proposed there to our imitation.

And first, as for Precept and Direction, I think that of St. Paul, Gal. 6. 10.
to be very plain, and a firm foundation for what I am upon: As we have
therefore opportunity, let us do good to all, especially to those of the
household of faith. Where it is plain, the Apostle not only allows, but enjoins
us to make a difference in our Charity, and to show this upon all occasions,
rather to the household of Faith, (i. e. to the Church of God) than to any other
person or persons whatsoever.

This place is full, and directly comes up to our present Case, and the
pretenses made about it: For Charity is as direct and plain a duty, as the not
giving offense; it is as strictly enjoined as the other; and the neglect of
Charity is as severely threatened, as the giving Offense is, or can be: And yet
for all this, when the Church of Christ, and any other persons whatever, come
in competition, and are Candidates for our Charity, we ought to show it unto
that, and not unto these. And the same reasons that determine thus our Charity,
will determine as well our care of not giving Offense; especially since this is
a proper and principal act of Charity, and no one (that I know of) more so.

This will be a sufficient answer to all the tragical stories of the sin of
Scandal, and the great necessity of not giving it to any.

We are expressly charged not to give Offense, and so we are expressly charged
above all things to put on Charity.

In giving Offense, we must have a regard to the meanest person in the Church,
and a woe is denounced against him that offends a little one. And so we are in
charity commanded too, and a woe threatened to him that shuts up his bowels of
Compassion from the meanest servant of God. Yea, this is commanded even to the
creatures below us.

And yet for all this, we must prefer the Church before all others; and if it
should so happen, that Charity could not be showed unto both, we ought to
determine our respects and Charity to the Church, and to suspend the acts of it
unto the others; and must do so too in our Charity of not offending or grieving
the Church, unless some disproportion could be showed in this from the other
acts of Charity, or some reasons here to alter the case; which, I am very sure,
cannot. This place alone, if there were none others, sufficiently determines
this Case.

And that we are warranted also by the Precedents of the New Testament to act
by this Rule, the actions of those great men whose lives are there recorded for
our imitation, do show us.

The Life of our blessed Savior is a good example for us in this, as well as
in all other instances of duty that are incumbent on us: We find him in every
thing paying a mighty deference to the Church of the Jews, and studiously
avoiding to give any displeasure or offense unto them; and this in many things
which they themselves had introduced, without any express Warrant or Command
from God; as were easy to show, and has been by many learned men of late.

But there is one instance which comes pretty well up to our present case; and
that is his paying Tribute, of which you have the story, Matthew. 17. 27. there
is no doubt but by this he might give some offense (in this loose notion of
offense) i. e. occasion some trouble in his followers, by owning himself a
stranger, and paying Tribute as such; nevertheless he chose to do that, rather
than to give any offense to the Public: Notwithstanding, that we offend them
not, etc.

Whether the persons he was so careful here not to offend were the Roman
Government, or the Church of the Jews, it is all one to our present Case. If it
were the Church of the Jews, then we see he was more careful not to offend them
than his own Followers. But if it were the Government of the Romans, it
concludes more strongly for us and for our present Case, where the Government
is Christian, and that of the Church and of the Kingdom one and the same; where
we cannot offend the Church, but we must offend the Government and Civil Power
too, under whose protection and favor it is established, and whose Canons it
has adopted into its own Laws.

After this great example, I proceed to take notice of some that we find
registered in the life of St. Paul to the like purpose. I instance only in two,
which will be sufficient.

The first was his circumcising Timothy, of which you have the story, Acts 16.
1, 2, 3. It is certain, Timothy might have objected against Circumcision, and
pleaded his freedom from any obligation to it, being the Son of a Grecian
Father; and there is no reason to doubt but it must be irksome and troublesome
to him: yet for all that, St. Paul has greater respect to the Church of the
Jews in those parts, which might be offended, had he not been circumcised, his
Mother being a Jew.

The other is that famous story of St. Paul's shaving his head and purifying
himself in the Temple with the men that had a vow upon them, just according to
the manner prescribed in the Levitical Law: you have the account of it Acts 21.
from 23, to 27.

I do not at all question, but this action of St. Paul must be strangely looked
upon at first by Trophimus, and those other Heathen Converts that came with him
to Jerusalem, who knowing his Doctrine, and manner of conversation abroad,
could scarce choose but reflect with some trouble upon this action; and the
truth is, it was a plain temptation to them to have some hard thoughts of him.
Yet notwithstanding this, St. Paul preferred his respect to the Church of
Jerusalem, and chose rather to incur this censure of theirs, than to give any
offense to the Church of Christ which was there.

From which example a great advantage may be drawn, not only to direct us what
regard to have to the Church of God in general, above any private persons; but
even to a National or Local Church, which is but a member and part of Christ's
Church, and from which, the constitution of other Churches as to Customs and
Usages may be different.

St. Paul might have pleaded strongly against this thing, to which St. James
advised him, especially upon the account of offense to those that were with
him, and to others from whom he came; yet for all this, his respect to the
present Church where he was, and his care not to offend it, overcame all other
considerations, and caused him readily to do that, which neither they were
greatly pleased with, nor himself in all probability neither.

Which has often brought to my mind, the Apostolical temper of St. Ambrose, in
that famous answer of his to St. Austin's Mother, which he magnifies so highly
for Oracular and Divine; That at Millain he did not observe the Sabbath-fast,
because it was not the usage of his Church; but at Rome he did, because it was
the custom there: advising her in all such things, to make the custom of the
present Church her Precedent and Rule, and by no means to give any offense to
it.

By both which notable Examples, we may learn by what measure to govern our
selves in these things; namely, a respect to the Usages and Constitutions of
the present Church we are in, provided they be not sinful, and plainly contrary
to any Law of God: for of such things I am speaking all this while, and about
such things it is that our present dispute about giving offense is by both
sides acknowledged to be.

I only add one thing more, before I leave this Precedent, That if we ought to
have this great and overruling respect to any National Church of Christ, to
which we chance to come, and in which we sojourn, we certainly ought much more
to have the same to our own National Church, in which we not only live, but
were born and baptized Members of; and therefore suffer our regard to it to
overruled all other respects to private persons that may interfere with it.

These things might be enough to assure the reasonableness of the present
Consideration; and I do not see what can well be objected against them.

2. And yet I shall proceed to some Popular Considerations here also, which are
owned for sound and good Rules to act by in all other like Cases, by all sorts
of men; and which, when applied in our Case, will presently determine it our
concern and duty, to have greater care not to give offense to the Church of
God, than to any private persons.

Four of these I shall just mention, and leave to take effect by our leisurely
consideration of them.

1. That offending the Church, is offending the greater party: I hope, I may
say, not only greater than any other single denomination of men, but than all
of them together.

I know how forward each party has been to boast its number, and some to
threaten Authority with their strength; and to that purpose, to make false
musters, and great shows; to crowd together upon all occasions, and to make it
piacular for one to be absent, when either the Party or the Cause was to be
credited.

But thanks be to God, that we have public evidences now, and of late, that
the Church-party is not so small and inconsiderable as some men would have it
thought to be.

It is true, honest men are not apt to be noisie and tumultuous; the sense of
their own Integrity satisfies them, and the assurance that they are known to
God, is to them more than Ten thousand witnesses. They do not use to boast of
themselves, nor court greatly man's observance; they keep their station, and
use not to run from place to place; an art by which the same man may appear ten
or twenty; and this perhaps has made some good men fearful, and some others
confident: But thanks be to God, they know one another better now, and have
signalized their numbers to material purposes.

Now this ought to be a swaying consideration with all scrupulous persons in
this case. In all others, it is thought safest to offend the lesser party,
supposing them but in the same circumstances with others: And when a Dissenter
considers that by Conforming, he can but offend some few of his own small
party, or at most but some few of others, but by his Separation shall certainly
offend the whole Church, methinks it should soon teach him which side of the
Question to choose.

Unless those few must be counted the only wise, and the only good, the sober
and the godly party; and the whole Church be disparaged, as consisting only of
ignorant and loose, silly and dissolute persons.

When, blessed be God, plain experience contradicts both, and shows them to be
equal at least to their supercilious accusers, both for knowledge and virtue;
and there is nothing to make them appear otherwise, but only the Pride and
Uncharitableness of some men, whose interest it is to have them believed to be
so. But Wisdom is justified in her Children.

2. Offending the Church of Christ must needs be of worse consequence than
offending any private party of men. I need not stay to remark each single
instance in which this is evident, every man's reason will suggest enough to
him.

Neither God, nor Religion, can be so much concerned in the one, as in the
other; nor can the Souls of men, or the peace of the World, be so much
endangered by private offenses, as by those against the public Church: Men's
guilts are higher and more injurious to themselves, and the effects are more
dangerous and mischievous to others: which is another good consideration to
sway men in this case.

For a wise man will weigh the probable effects of what he does; and where an
honest and uninstructed man is uncertain whether he may do or forbear such
things, and after his enquiry remains scrupulous and unresolved, it is a good
means to determine himself by, to consider as well as he can what the effects
and consequences of what he is going to do or forbear, in all likelihood will
be; and that which he sees attended with a train of the worse, and more
mischievous consequences, disargues it self, and pronounces its own
condemnation: And by these effects he may make as true a difference, as if the
plain essence and nature of the things were naked unto his view.

3. Offending the Church of God, is offending those to whom we owe more duty
than we do unto any private party whatsoever.

I confess, charity and respect, and all the possible ininstances of it, we owe
to every private person with whom we converse, and to whom we are any way
related; and God has made all this, matter of plain duty.

But it is a great deal more than this, that we owe those that are over us in
the Lord, and his whole Church; even as much more as we owe of deference and
Duty, of Obedience and Submission to a Father and a Governor, and those that
God and Nature has set above us, above that common Charity and Duty that we
are to owe to one that is in all respects our equal.

The Laws of all Nations consider us under greater obligations to our Parents,
and to our Country, than to any single persons whatsoever; and make injuring of
a Father or our Prince, more heinous than doing the same to a common person
upon the same level with us.

And I am sure the Laws of God, and Religion too, considering us as Members of
the Church, and calling the Governors of it our Fathers in Christ, let us know
what great duty we owe to them; and of how much greater guilt it must needs be,
to offend them, than our Fellow-christian, or any Party in which we can be
engaged. There is a complication of sins and guilt in the one, when there is
but the breach of common charity in the other.

I deny not but men may join themselves to such a Party, and make another man
their Guide, and commit themselves to the Conduct of him, and thereby oblige
themselves to more duty than they owe to others. But this is duty of their own
choice, and the failure in it a sin of their own causing; and does no more
supercede their original and primer obligations, which God and Nature had laid
on them, than the being faithful to a company of Banditi will excuse disloyalty
to our Prince and Country; or than giving a gift to the Corban among the Jews,
would atone undutifulness to a wanting Parent.

However men may divide themselves from the Church, of which Providence and
Religion have made them Members, and enter themselves into separate Factions;
yet they must remember that they owe duty to it still; that no voluntary and
second Compacts of their own, can dissolve their primitive Obligations; or
their care to continue faithful to the one, expiate their regardless offending
of the other: for they do owe more duty to the one than to the other; what they
pretend to owe to one, is contracted by themselves; but what they owe to the
other, is bound on them by the sacred and strong ties of Religion and
Providence.

And this is another good Argument to determine a scrupulous person in this
matter: If he be in doubt which he had best to offend, the Church of Christ, or
his own private Party, and know not by what considerations to determine his
resolution; let him in Gods name consider to which he owes most, what the Laws
of God make his duty to the one more than to the other; and then, if he be
honest and single-eyed, he will soon be able to resolve his scruple, and know
what choice he ought to make.

4. Offending the Church of God is truly a grievous Scandal, and an Offense, in
the true Gospel-notion of it; but the offending particular persons may possibly
not be so.

That which I mean is this; the Church of God we may be sure will not take
offense but upon just reason; but other men may call that an offense to them,
which really is not. If we do that which grieves and injureth the whole Church,
then we do properly offend, and are guilty of Scandal in the true notion of it.
But if we only offend some private persons of our own party, they may call
that an offense which is not so: For every grieving (and offending of another
in that sense of the word) is not a formal Scandal, as I hinted before, and
has been since this, made clear by a better Pen.

And to apply this to our present matter in debate, this is really so in our
Case of Conformity: the refusal of it, and separating our selves from the
Communion of the Church, is truly that giving of offense which the Gospel
condemns; it is laying a snare in the way of men, intrapping them into that
damnable sin of Schism; it is an obstructing the effect of Religion, and a
direct hinderance of that Concord and Love, that Unanimity and Peace, that it
so strictly calls for among Christians, and designs to render the World happy
by.

But you may challenge any dissenting person to show how angring some private
persons, and a single party of Schismatics, can be a Scandal to them; or to
name any one sin that it is temptation to them to commit, and to instance that
prejudice or disservice that it does to Christian Religion.

It is possible (I must confess) that grief and anger at such a persons
Conformity, may irritate and provoke men to some things that are evil. But then
I say that this is the fault of them that are angry, and not his, with whom
they are causelessly offended; it may be taking an offense on their parts, but
not giving it by him. For if we must call every thing an offense, that any man
does pervert into an occasion of evil, there will scarce any, no not the best
actions of men, escape that denomination.

This methinks is a very material consideration, and ought always to sway with
men in this Case; and if men could not determine themselves in it by other
Reasons, yet they might by this: They should consider which is most likely to
judge truest what is Scandal, and what is not; and when both sides say they are
offended, which is likely to be so indeed.

Particular persons, and Parties of men may mistake, and it is notorious, often
do call that an Offense and Scandal, which is not so. But the whole Church is
not so like to take cognizance of, and be offended publicly with any thing
which does not deserve that name. To which we may cast in this consideration,
to add weight to the other: Every offense to a single private person or
persons, is not the sin of Scandal; but no man can offend the Church of God,
but he sins grievously, and is directly guilty of a great Scandal.

To conclude, the sum of all that I would have considered on this Subject, is
this.

1. That the fear of giving offense to weak and uninstructed persons by
Conformity to our Church, and returning to the Communion of it, is causeless,
and wholly without any just reason: Conformity being neither a sin, nor causal
of any, nor any just cause of offense to any persons whatsoever.

2. That it is now matter of plain and indispensible duty, tied on us by the
Commands and Laws both of God and man, and therefore carefully to be done,
whatever may be the consequences of it to others: That no snares or
possibilities of offense to some men by it ought to supersede our care, or can
atone the sin of neglecting of it: That we cannot forbear it now, for fear of
offending others, without grievously offending our selves, and our own
Consciences.

3. That our refusing to Conform, will greatly offend the Church of God; and
indeed it does so: Not only our own National Church of England, but even all
the Reformed Churches abroad too, as may be seen in some Declarations of the
Great men among them of late, who cannot but grieve to see their great Bulwark,
and the whole Reformation, so battered and weakened by this means, and such
great advantage thereby given to the great Enemy against it.

And therefore that this consideration ought to preponderate all the scruples
and fears, and fancied possibilities of giving offense to private persons of
our own party by it.

And lastly, that the effect of all this, discover it self in a speedy
conscientious care, and honest endeavor to put a period to our causeless
Separations and Divisions, which are the only true Scandal and giving Offense
that I know of in this Case.

That we no longer go on madly to contrive our own Ruin, in pulling down those
Walls, and making those Breaches in our Churches Banks, at which the Enemy may,
and, without Gods immediate interposition, will suddenly break in as a mighty
resistless torrent.

That we may all of us return to the Communion of the Church, whose Doctrine is
Orthodox, and Government Apostolical, and whose terms of Communion none of us
dare term sinful: In which we may acceptably serve our God, and happily save
our own Souls; live happily, and die comfortably, and pass into the Communion
of that Church Triumphant above, which sings incessant Hallelujahs to God the
Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. To whom let us also give all
possible praise and Thanksgiving, both now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for FINCHAM GARDENER.
A Continuation and Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's
Unreaso^ableness of Separation, in Answer to Mr. Baxter and Mr. Lob, etc.

Considerations of present use, considering the Danger resulting from the
change of our Church Government.

1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England. 2. A Resolution of
some Cases of Conscience which respect Church Communion. 3. The Case of
Indifferent things used in the Worship of God, proposed and Stated, by
considering these Questions, etc. 4. A Discourse about Edification. 5. The
Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of Englands
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England? 6. A Letter to Anonymus, in answer
to his three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about Church Communion. 7. Certain Cases
of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of joining with Forms of
Prayer in Public Worship. In two Parts. 8. The Case of mixed Communion: Whether
it be Lawful to Separate from a Church upon the account of promiscuous
Congregations and mixed Communions? 9. An Answer to the Dissenters Objections
against the Common Prayers, and some other parts of Divine Service prescribed
in the Liturgy of the Church of England. 10. The Case of Kneeling at the Holy
Sacrament stated and resolved, etc. The first Part. 11. Certain Cases of
Conscience, etc. The second Part. 12. A Discourse of Profiting by Sermons, and
of going to hear where men think they can profit most. 13. A serious
Exhortation, with some important Advices, relating to ^he late Cases about
Conformity, recommended to the present Dissenters from the Church of England.
14. An Argument for Union; taken from the true interest of those Dissenters in
England who profess and call themselves Protestants. 15. The Case of Kneeling,
etc. The Second Part. 16. Some Considerations about the Case of Scandal, or
giving Offense to Weak Brethren. 17. The Case of Infant Baptism, in Five
Questions, etc.
1. A Discourse about the charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther? 2. A Discourse about Tradition, showing what is meant by it, and
what Tradition is to be received, and what Tradition is to be rejected. 3. The
difference of the Case between the Separation of Protestants from the Church of
Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England. 4. The
Protestant Resolution of Faith, etc.
A COLLECTION OF CASES AND OTHER DISCOURSES Lately Written to Recover
DISSENTERS TO THE COMMUNION OF THE Church of England.

By some Divines of the City of London.

THE SECOND VOLUME.

LONDON, Printed for T. Basset, at the George in Fleet Street, and B. Took, at
the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1685.

Books Printed for FINCHAM GARDENER.
A Continuation and Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's
Unreasonableness of Separation, in Answer to Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Lob, etc.

Considerations of present use, considering the Danger Resulting from the
Change of our Church Government.

1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England. 2. A Resolution of
some Cases of Conscience, which Respect Church Communion. 3. The Case of
Indifferent things, used in the Worship of God, Proposed and Stated, by
considering these Questions, etc. 4. A Discourse about Edification. 5. The
Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of England's
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England? 6. A Letter to Anonymus, in Answer
to his Three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about Church Communion. 7. Certain Cases
of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of joining with Forms of
Prayer in Public Worship. In two Parts. 8. The Case of Mixed Communion. Whether
it be Lawful to separate from a Church upon the Account of promiscuous
Congregations, and Mixed Communion? 9. An Answer to the Dissenters Objections
against the Common Prayers, and some other Parts of Divine Service Prescribed
in the Liturgy of the Church of England. 10. The Case of Kneeling at the Holy
Sacrament, Stated and Resolved, etc. The First Part. 11. Certain Cases of
Conscience, etc. The Second Part. 12. A Discourse of Profiting by Sermons, and
of going to hear where Men think they can profit most. 13. A serious
Exhortation, with some Important Advices; Relating to the late Cases about
Conformity, Recommended to the Present Dissenters from the Church of England.
14. An Argument for Union, etc. 15. The Case of Kneeling at the Sacrament. The
Second Part. 16. Some Considerations about the Case of Scandal, or giving
Offense to Weak Brethren. 17. The Case of Infant Baptism, in Five Questions,
etc. 18. The Charge of Scand. I and giving Offense by Conformity Refelled, etc.
1. A Discourse about the charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther? 2. A Discourse about Tradition, showing what is meant by it, and
what Tradition is to be Received, and what Tradition is to be Rejected. 3. The
Difference of the Case between the Separation of Protestants from the Church of
Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England. 4. The
Protestant Resolution of Faith, etc.
A CATALOGUE OF ALL THE Cases and Discourses Contained in the second Volume of
this COLLECTION.
1. CErtain Cases of Conscience resolved concerning the Lawfulness of joining
with Forms of Prayer in public Worship. In two Parts. 2. An Answer to the
Dissenters Objections against the Common Prayers, etc. 3. The Resolution of
this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of Englands symbolizing so far as
it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to hold Communion with the
Church of England? 4. A Defense of the Resolution of this Case of Symbolizing,
etc. 5. The Case of Infant Baptism. 6. The Case of the Cross in Baptism
considered. 7. A Persuasive to frequent Communion in the Holy Sacrament of the
Lords Supper. 8. The Case of Kneeling at the Holy Sacrament stated and
resolved. In two Parts. 9. A Discourse about Edification. 10. A Discourse of
Profiting by Sermons. 11. An Argument of Union, taken from the true Interest of
those Dissenters in England, who profess and call themselves Protestants. 12. A
Serious Exhortation, with some important Advises relating to the late Cases
about Conformity, recommended to the present Dissenters from the Church of
England.
CERTAIN Cases of Conscience RESOLVED, Concerning the Lawfulness of Joining
WITH Forms of Prayer IN Public Worship.

PART I.

VIZ.

I. Whether the using of Forms of Prayer, does not stint and limit the Spirit.
II. Whether the using Public Forms of Prayer be not a sinful omission of the
Ministerial Gift of Prayer. III. Whether Praying by a Public Form does not
deaden the Devotion of Prayer.
The Second Edition

LONDON: Printed by H. Hills Jun. for T. Basset, at the George in Fleet Street;
B. Took, at the Ship in St. Paul's Chuch-yard; and F. Gardener, at the White
Horse in Ludgate Street. 1683.

A RESOLUTION OF THE Cases of Conscience, Which concern the Use of FORMS of
PRAYER.
ONE of the main Points which our dissenting Brethren insist on to justify
their Separation from our Church, is, That our Public Worship is performed in
a Form of Words of Man's Invention; which, they conceive, is unlawful; for
hereby, say some of them, the Holy Spirit, who inspires our Prayer, is stinted
and limited, and hereby the Gift of Prayer, say others, which the Holy Spirit
communicates to Ministers, to enable them to express the Devotions of their
Congregations to God, is rendered useless; and not only so, but even the
Devotions of the Congregation too are mightily deaden'd, by being continually
expressed in the same form of words: besides, that the wants of Christians
being various, casual, and emergent, cannot be so fully represented in a fixed
Form, as in conceived Prayers, which upon the account of their variation in
Expressions, may be the better extended to the continual variations of Men's
cases and circumstances: besides all which, say they, we have no warrant for
the use of Forms, either in Scripture, or pure Antiquity; and if we had, yet an
universal imposition of them, can by no means be lawfully compli'd with: this,
according to the best recollection I can make, is the sum of what our Brethren
urge against the lawfulness of joining with us in a stated Liturgy, or Form of
Public Worship: and therefore, in order to the satisfying their Consciences in
this matter, I shall reduce their whole Plea to these following Cases, and
endeavor a plain and clear resolution of them.

1. Whether Praying in a Form of Words, does not stint or limit the Spirit of
Prayer? 2. Whether the Use of Public Forms of Prayer, be not a sinful neglect
of the Ministerial Gift of Prayer? 3. Whether the constant Use of the same Form
of Prayer, does not very much deaden the Devotion of Prayer? 4. Whether the
common wants of Christian Congregations may not be better represented in
conceived Prayer, than in a Form of Prayer? 5. Whether there be any warrant for
Forms of Prayer, either in Scripture, or pure Antiquity? 6. Whether, supposing
Forms to be lawful, the imposition of them can be lawfully compli'd with?
Case I. Whether Praying in a Form of Words, does not stint and limit the
Spirit of Prayer?
In order to the resolution of this Case, it will be necessary to explain
first, what it is that the Scripture attributes to the Spirit in Prayer; and
secondly, what is meant by stinting or limiting the Spirit in Prayer.

1. What is it that the Scripture attributes to the Spirit in Prayer? I answer,
there are some things attributed to him which were extraordinary, and
temporary; and others that are ordinary, fixed, and standing: The through state
and distinguishing of which will very much contribute to the resolution of this
present Case, and therefore I shall insist more largely upon it.

First, I say there are some things attributed to the Holy Spirit in this
matter of Prayer which were extraordinary and temporary; and that was the
immediate Inspiration of the matter of Prayer, together with an ability to
express and utter it in known or unknown Languages: thus as for the immediate
inspiration of the matter of Prayer, we read in the Old Testament of Prayers
and Praises, which, upon special occasions, were immediately indicted by Divine
Inspiration: for so when Hannah presented her Son to the Lord in Shiloh, the
Text only says, that she praid, and said; but the Targum paraphrases it, that
she praid by the Spirit of Prophecy, and accordingly praying and praising by
immediate inspiration, is frequently called prophesying: So 1 Samuel 10. 5. The
Spirit of the Lord shall come upon thee, and thou shall prophecy; that is, as
Expositors generally interpret it, thou shall utter Spiritual Psalms and Hymns
by immediate inspiration on the place; and to the same purpose is the word used
Numb. 11. 25. 1 Chronicles. 25. 1. and accordingly in the New Testament it is said
of Zacharias, that he was filled with the Holy Ghost, and prophesied, saying,
blessed be the Lord God of Israel, etc. The matter of all which Prayers and
Praises, together with those in the Book of Psalms, and sundry others recorded
in Scripture, was immediately dictated to those inspired persons by the Holy
Ghost, and delivered by them without any recourse to their own invention or
consideration, though as to the words of them, it may be justly questioned,
whether they were not left to their own composure, as it seems very probable,
the words of all other inspirations were; for considering how the inspired
persons differed in their style, according as they differed in their education,
in their natural parts, and intellectual improvements, it is very likely they
themselves composed and worded their own inspirations, the Spirit of God taking
care only so to oversee and direct them, that their words might not
misrepresent their matter; and if so, how much less reason have we to suppose,
that the Spirit inspires the words of our Prayers: but this I shall not insist
on.

However, after that great descent of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost, wherein the
gift of Tongues was communicated to enable the first Planters of the Gospel, to
propagate it through the World, it is certain that not only the Matter of their
Prayers, but even the very Language too in which they express them, was
immediately inspired, insomuch that they were not only enabled to Pray upon the
place in apt and fluent Expressions, but also to Pray in Languages, which they
never understood before, and which even then they understood but very
imperfectly, and also to interpret those Prayers into the vulgar Language,
which themselves or others had uttered in unknown Tongues; and this, among
others, the Apostle calls a Spiritual Gift, 1 Cor. 12. 1. which, as I remember,
is the only place where the Gift of Prayer is mentioned in Scripture: and in 1
Cor. 14. 14. it is also called a Spirit, where he gives us an account at large
of this miraculous way of praying.

Now that this miraculous Gift of praying in, and interpreting Prayers out of
unknown Tongues was extraordinary, and temporary, and peculiar to the Primitive
Ages of Christianity, is evident, because the design of it was not only to
enable the first Planters of the Gospel to perform their Ministerial Office in
the vulgar Languages of the several Nations they were sent to, but also to be a
sign from God, as all other Miracles were, for the confirmation of the Gospel;
for so the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 14. 22. That Tongues were for a sign, not
to them that believe, but to them that believe not: and therefore since it is
granted of all hands, that the gift of Miracles was extraordinary, and intended
only for a demonstration of the Gospel to the Infidel World, and after that to
cease, there can be no doubt but this miraculous Gift of Prayer was so too.

But that the Spirit's inditing the Matter, and, if you will, the words of
those inspired Prayers, was also extraordinary, will require a larger proof;
because it is looked upon by many of our dissenting Brethren as an ordinary and
standing Gift, which the Spirit does and will communicate to all successive
Ages of the World. Against this Opinion of theirs, therefore I shall briefly
offer these following Reasons to their consideration:

1. That there is no promise of any such Gift, and therefore no reason to
expect the continuance of it. For whatsoever standing and ordinary benefits we
receive from God, we receive them by virtue of the New Covenant, in which he
has promised to us all those good things which we can reasonably expect at his
hands; and the promise of God being the only foundation of our hope, it is
presumption to promise our selves what he has not promised us: but now in all
the New Covenant we have not the least intimation of any such promise, viz.
That the Spirit will immediately indite to us the Matter and Expressions of our
Prayers; For as for that of Zachary 12. 10. which is the only promise that is
pretended in the case, it is evident, at first sight, that it is nothing to the
purpose; I will pour out upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of Grace
and Supplications, and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn. What is all this to the immediate inspiration of the Matter and
Expressions of our Prayer, when it is plain, that the Spirit of Supplication
here is the same with the Spirit of Grace, or of inward Piety and Devotion?
even as the following words imply, and they shall look upon me whom they have
pierced, and mourn: that is, for their horrid sin of crucifying me. But that
there is no such promise in the New Covenant is evident, from what is
acknowledged of all hands, viz. That there are many good Christians who could
never pretend to any such inspiration, who are some of them fain to be
beholding to their own recollection and invention for the Matter and Words of
their Prayers, and others, for want of a sufficient quickness of invention, to
be beholding to Forms of Prayer of other men's composure; neither of which they
need, were they immediately inspired: And I am very confident 'twould be looked
upon by all sober Dissenters as a very rash and unjust censure to affirm, that
a man cannot be a good Christian, who does not pray by immediate inspiration,
but is always fain to depend either on his own invention, or a Form of Prayer
for the Matter and Expressions of his Devotions: and if so, how can this
consist with a standing promise of immediate inspiration of Prayer in the New
Covenant? unless we will suppose that there are Blessings promised in the New
Covenant, to which good Christians may have no right or title, and of which
they may never actually partake, which is utterly to destroy the nature of the
Covenant, which extends to all who perform the conditions of it, and to cut off
all our dependence upon it.

2. That as there is no promise, so there is no need of any such immediate
inspiration. It Is true, Christ has promised by his Spirit, to be with us to
the end of the World, and assured us, that he will give his Spirit unto every
one that asks, and to what end has he promised this, but only to supply our
Necessities, and enable us to perform those Duties, which, through our own
impotency, we cannot perform without him? for so he argues from the readiness
of Parents, to supply their Children with what is necessary to their bodily
life and subsistence, to the readiness of God to bestow his Spirit (that is to
all the purposes that are necessary to their Spiritual Life, as the parallel
plainly implies) upon them that ask him. So that all we can expect by virtue of
these promises is only this, That the Spirit of God will be ready to aid and
assist us in all those necessary cases, wherein our Duty and Spiritual Life is
concerned; and therefore if there be no necessity of an immediate inspiration
of either Matter or Words to enable us to Pray, it is an unwarrantable
presumption to expect it by virtue of these or such like promises.

And that there is no necessity, I conceive, is very apparent; for,

First, As for the Matter of our Prayers, the Holy Spirit has already
sufficiently revealed it to us in the Gospel, and as plainly instructed us what
we are to pray for, as he can be supposed to do by any immediate inspiration:
so that with a very little consideration, we may thence easily recollect what
it is that we need, and what we are warranted and commanded to pray for; and
for a summary of the whole, we need go no further than our Churches Catechism,
which in answer to that Question, after the Lord's Prayer, What desire thou
of God in this Prayer? sums up the whole matter of our Prayer in a few, plain,
and easy words. And to suppose, after such a clear revelation of the matter of
Prayer, a necessity of immediate inspiration of it, is in effect to suppose,
that we have neither reason enough to understand the sense of plain words, nor
memory enough to retain and recollect it. But against this, that passage of St.
Paul is objected by our Brethren, Romans 8. 26. We know not what we should pray
for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with
groanings, which cannot be uttered. For which words, We know not what to pray
for as we ought, they infer, that how plainly soever the matter of Prayer is
revealed to us, we cannot in all cases know what it is without an immediate
inspiration: which must either suppose, that all matter of Prayer is not
plainly revealed to us, or that though it be, we cannot understand it; whereas
the Apostles words imply neither the one nor the other, for it is plain those
words, we know not what to pray for, are not to be understood simply, but with
reference to, as we ought; (...) (...), for what to pray for as we ought, we
know not; which plainly refers to the manner, and not to the matter of our
Prayer, how to pray for any thing with that fervency of desire, that dependence
upon, and resignation to God, as we ought, of our selves, we know not without
the assistance of the Spirit of God; if therefore the Spirit has already
sufficiently revealed to us, what the matter of Prayer is (as he must be
supposed to do, if the Scriptures be sufficient) I see no reason why he should
reveal it again by immediate inspiration; and if there be no necessity of it, I
know no warrant we have to expect it. But then,

2. As for the Words of Prayer, by which we are to express the Matter of it,
what necessity can there be that these should be immediately dictated to us,
when as if we have not quickness enough of fancy and invention to express our
wants and desires in our own words, we may readily supply that defect by Forms
of Prayer of other Men's composure, which with very short additions and
variations of our own, we may easily adapt to all our particular cases and
circumstances? and to imagine that with such helps and assistances we cannot
word our desires to God without an immediate inspiration, is to suppose, that
we are mere whispering Pipes, that can breath out nothing but what is breathed
into us.

3. That as there is neither promise, nor need of any such immediate
inspiration of Prayer, so there is no certain sign or testimony of it remaining
among us: whenever God inspired men with Divine matter and words, his Way was
always to attest the divinity of their inspiration with some certain sign by
which themselves, and others, might be well assured of it; and though at this
distance from the inspired Ages we cannot certainly determine by what token it
was that the Prophets knew the divinity of their own inspirations while they
were seized with them; yet this we know, that after they were delivered of
them, God always took care to attest them by some miraculous operation: for so
Miracles are styled by the Apostle, the evidence and demonstration of the
Spirit, as being the constant signs and tokens of Divine inspiration; and
indeed without such signs to distinguish it from false pretenses, we were
better be without inspiration, than with it, because we shall be left under an
unavoidable necessity, either of admitting all inspirations which pretend to be
divine, or of rejecting all that are truly so: as to instance in this case of
Prayer, we know it is possible for men to have the matter and words of it
dictated to them by a natural, or Diabolical, as well as a Divine Enthusiasm,
and therefore it is highly requisite if such Divine Enthusiasm, or Inspiration,
be continued to us, that the proper signs and testimonies of it should be
continued too, that so we may be able to distinguish that which is divine, from
that which is natural or diabolical; otherwise we must either conclude them all
to be natural, or diabolical, or believe them all to be divine, and entertain
them accordingly.

If you say there is no need of either, because the Scripture is sufficient to
distinguish them; I answer, that thought the Scripture may be sufficient to
distinguish the matter of the inspiration, whether it be true or false, yet it
is not sufficient to distinguish the inspiration it self, whether it be divine,
or natural, or diabolical: For

First, as for natural Enthusiasm, it is not at all impossible for a man to
pray agreeably to Scripture by natural inspiration, by which I mean a natural
or accidental fervency of temper, arising either from a constant heat of
constitution, or a casual agitation of the spirits, occasioned either by
vapors of heated melancholy, or an intermixture of sharp and feverish humors
with the blood; which as all men know, who understand any thing of the nature
and composition of humane bodies, naturally heightens and impregnates the
fancy, and causes the images of things to come faster into it, and appear more
distinct in it, and consequently produces a very ready invention of matter, and
extraordinary fluency of words: so that if under a fit of this natural
fervency, a man's fancy happens to run upon God and Religion, he cannot fail to
pray with great readiness and fluency, and sometimes with that extraordinary
passion and enlargement, as shall cause him assuredly to believe himself
immediately inspired by the Spirit of God: of the truth of which, instances
enough might be given not only among Christians, but also among the Devoto's of
Mahomet, and the Poets and Orators of the Heathens, whose fancies have been
very often so strangely exalted by the fervor of their temper, or disease,
that not only they themselves, but they that heard them, believed that they
were inspired by God. Supposing then, that under a fit of this natural
Enthusiasm a man should pray agreeably to Scripture, how shall he be able to
know by Scripture whether the present inspiration he is under, be natural, or
divine? and how will it be possible for him to avoid, many times, attributing
the natural effects of his temper, or disease, to the immediate operation of
the Spirit of God?

But you will say, we all agree that the Spirit of God inspires good men with
holy and fervent affections in their Prayers, and yet it cannot be denied that
this fervency of affection does sometimes also proceed from the present temper
of our bodies, notwithstanding which, we have no other sign or testimony
besides that of Scripture, whereby to distinguish when it is divine, and when
natural; does not therefore the want of such sign as effectually conclude
against the Spirits inspiring the fervor of our Prayers, as against his
inspiring the matter and words of them? I answer, no; For, as for the former,
we have a sure word of promise, which we have not for the latter; and therefore
if we can claim the promise, we have just reason to conclude when we feel our
affections actually excited, that how much soever other causes might contribute
to it, the Holy Spirit was the principal cause; but where we have no promise,
we have no ground for such conclusion: besides which, we have no such need of
signs to enable us to distinguish in the one case, as in the other; For as for
the inspiration of affection, we may easily distinguish whether it be natural
or divine, by our own sense; if our present fervor be accompanied with a fixed
and constant devotion of soul, we may certainly conclude, that the same Spirit
which inspired the one, inspired the other; and whether it be so accompanied or
no, that natural sense and feeling we have of our own motions and affections,
will quickly inform us, and we have no more need of an outward sign to satisfy
us in this matter, than we have to know whether we are hungry or thirsty: but
if the present fervor of our affections in Prayer be only a sudden fit and
pang of devotion, that finds and leaves us habitually indevout, we have just
reason to conclude, that it is entirely owing to our present bodily temper:
whether therefore our affections in Prayer are inspired by God, our own sense
will inform us, if we impartially consult it; but whether our matter and words
are so, no sense we have can resolve us: we may feel the matter of our Prayer
pour in upon us with extraordinary readiness, and be enabled to pour it out
again with extraordinary fluency, and yet all this may proceed from our own
fancy and invention, quickened and enlarged by merely natural Enthusiasm; and
therefore, unless we had some other sign, besides that of Scripture, 'twill be
impossible for us to distinguish between a divine and natural inspiration of
matter and words, because that which is natural, may be as agreeable to
Scripture, as that which is supposed to be divine; and God has given us no
inward sense to distinguish betweeen one and the other: and can it be imagined
that had he meant to continue this Gift of inspiration to us, he would have
thus left us in the dark concerning it, without any certain sign whereby we
might distinguish, whether it be from his Spirit, or from an ill-affected
Spleen, or a Fever?

But then, secondly, as for Diabolical Inspirations of Matter and Words in
Prayer we have sundry very probable Instances, such as Major Weir, who is said
to have received his Inspirations through a Staff, Hacket, David George, and
that Monster of wickedness John Basilides Duke of Russia, who were all of them
possessed with such a wonderful Gift of Prayer, as did not only charm and
ravish those that heard them, but seemed, in the opinion of the most wise and
impartial, to exceed the power of nature; which renders it very probable that
the matter of their Prayers was for the most part agreeable to Scripture,
otherwise it is hardly conceivable how they could have procured to themselves so
many admirers, and abused so many honest minds into a belief that they were
immediately inspired by God. And since by inspiring his Votaries with such
matter of Prayer as is agreeable to Scripture, the Devil may sometimes serve
his own ends, since he may thereby puff up giddy minds with pride, and
self-conceit, and more effectually recommend Seducers and false Teachers to the
World; it is very reasonable, to suppose that this subtle Agent who so thoroughly
understands his own game, will in some case be forward enough to do it: and if
in any cases we may reasonably suppose, that the Devil may inspire men with
such matter of Prayer as is agreeable to Scripture, then we can never certainly
distinguish by Scripture, whether it be the Spirit of God, or the Devil, that
inspires us. And can we, without blaspheming the goodness of God, imagine, that
if he had continued this Gift of immediate inspiration to us, he would have
neglected to continue such signs and testimonies of it as are necessary to
distinguish it from the inspirations of the Devil? doubtless it is much better
for us that this Gift should be totally withdrawn, and that as to the matter
and expressions of our Prayer, we should be left to the guidance of Scripture
and Reason, than that by the continuance of it without some certain sign to
know and distinguish it, we should be left under a fatal necessity, either of
rejecting Divine Inspirations, or of admitting Diabolical for Divine. And
therefore since we have no such sign continued among us, we have all the reason
in the world to conclude, that this Gift is discontinu'd, and ceased:
especially considering that we have not only no certain sign of any such
inspiration in the conceived Prayers of those which most pretend to it, but
many very certain ones of the contrary; I will instance in four.

1. The great impertinence, and nonsense, and rudeness, to say no worse, that
are sometimes mingled with these Extempore Prayers. I will not give Instances
of this, because it is so notorious, that our Brethren themselves cannot but in
part acknowledge it: now to attribute these faults of conceived Prayers, to
immediate inspiration, would be to blaspheme the Holy Ghost, and father our own
follies upon him, and yet sure had he thought meet to have continued to the
Church this Gift of inspiration of Prayer, it would have been in order to the
securing the Worship of God from those rudenesses and indecencies to which
extemporary Prayers of men's own conceiving are liable; and if so, to be sure in
public Prayer at least, he would have constantly taken care to inspire such
matter as is fit to be offered up to God, and such expressions as are fit for
such matter; that so the Public Worship of God, which is the most serious and
solemn thing in the World, might not be rendered ridiculous by the folly and
inadvertency of men. Whereas on the contrary, we see those public Prayers
which arrogate to themselves the honor of being inspired, are generally more
liable to these indecencies, than Forms of humane composure, and that those
Prayers which consist of premeditated matter and words, are commonly much
better sense, and far more decent and pertinent, than our extemporary
effusions; which how it should come to pass I know not, supposing the
continuance of inspiration of Prayer, unless we will suppose, that Humane
Composures may exceed Divine Inspirations, and that men may ordinarily
premeditate better Prayers than the Spirit of God inspires. And methinks it
seems very strange, that the Spirit should continue this Gift of inspiration to
secure the Worship of God from nonsense and impertinence, and yet that after
all, it should remain more liable to these indecencies, than if our public
Prayers were offered up in premeditated Forms, composed out of our own or other
men's inventions

2. Another sign that our composed Prayers are not immediately inspired is,
that they are so generally tinctured with the particular opinions of those that
offer them. You may observe that in all public Controversies of Religion, men's
Opinions are generally to be known by their Prayers, especially if they
zealously espouse either side of the Question: for then the debate runs so much
in their heads, and they look upon God and Religion so very highly concerned in
it, that they can hardly frame a Petition, Confession, or thanksgiving, without
giving some intimation of their particular Persuasion; and many times one of
the Petitions is, That God would hinder the propagation of the contrary
Persuasion, and convince their Adversaries of the Error and Falsehood of it.
Thus for instance, when the Contest ran high between the Presbyterians and
Independents, the Arminians and Calvinists, how easy was it to distinguish
them by their Prayers from one another? Whether this be not so, I appeal to our
Brethren themselves, and to all the World? And if so, what plainer evidence can
be given, that their Prayers were not inspired, but of their own invention, and
composure? For either we must suppose this Gift of Inspiration to be confined
to one Party, which would be to stint the Spirit with a witness, and
everlastingly to puzzle our selves where to find it, among so many contending
Parties that pretend to it; or else we must affirm a horrid Blasphemy, viz.
That the Spirit inspires Contradictions, and indites contrary Prayers to men of
opposite Parties.

3. Another plain sign that our conceived Prayers are not immediately inspired
is, That that which gives them the reputation of being so, is not so much the
matter, as the way and manner of expressing them. For as for the matter of
Prayer, I suppose our Brethren will not deny, but our Forms may equal at least,
if not exceed their conceived and extemporary Prayers, and that it is possible
for men, upon mature thoughts and deliberations, to compose and pen a Prayer,
that shall be as full and comprehensive of the common cases, and necessities of
Christians, as if he had conceived, and indicted it upon the place. And if all
the matter that is in a conceived Prayer, may be easily contained and expressed
in a Form, then all the difference between one and the other must lie in the way,
and manner of expressing it, and consequently it must be only upon this
account, that the one must pretend to inspiration more than the other. Now there
are only two differences between Forms, and conceived Prayers, as to the way,
and manner of expressing the matter in them; neither of which are so
considerable, as to give the one a fairer pretense to inspiration than the
other: The first is, that whereas the matter of a Form of Prayer is expressed
in set, and premeditated words, the same matter in conceived Prayer is
expressed in extemporary words; and is it not strange, that upon such a slight,
and inconsiderable difference, the one should be thought to be more inspired
than the other? as if the Spirit of God continued the Gift of Inspiration to no
other purpose, but to enable men to ask those Blessings in extemporary words,
which they might as well have asked in premeditated ones. The second is, that
conceived Prayers do generally more enlarge and amplify on the matter of
Prayer, than Forms, in which we being always tied to such a set of words, have
not that liberty to expatiate on our several cases, and necessities; but this
is so far from adding to the value of conceived Prayers, that it rather
lessens, and depreciates them; for if you observe these admired enlargements,
and amplifications, are generally nothing else but only the same matter
expressed again in different words, which makes our conceived Prayers run out
many times to that inordinate length, the same matter being repeated in them
over and over in varied phrases and expressions: how then can we entertain such
mean conceits of the wisdom of the holy Spirit, as to imag^n he would continue
to us the Gift of immediate inspiration, merely to enable us to repeat the same
matter of Prayer to God ten or twenty times over, in different phrases and
expressions? especially considering that by so doing he would cross the orders
of our Savior, who expressly forbids us in our Prayers to use vain repetitions,
(or as Munster's Hebrew reads it, to multiply words above what is fit and
seasonable) thinking we shall be heard for our much speaking; to which he
subjoins this reason, For your Father knows what things you have need of before
you ask him, Matthew. 6. 7, 8. As if he should have said you need not lengthen
out your Prayers with so many copious enlargements, and varied repetitions of
the same matter, as if you meant thereby more fully to instruct your Father in
your wants and desires, for before ever you ask, he knows your needs, and
therefore a few words will suffice to express your desires to him, And when our
Savior has required that our Prayers should be short, and pithy, and stripped
of all needless multiplicity of words, what reason have we to think that the
Holy Spirit, who is his Vicegerent in the Church, would continue the Gift of
Inspiration merely to amplify and enlarge them? These enlargements of
conceived Prayer therefore, are so far from being, signs of their immediate
inspiration, that supposing the Spirit to be of the same mind with our Savior,
they are generally signs of the contrary.

4. Another plain sign that our conceived Prayers are not immediately inspired
is, That that extraordinary manner, and way of expressing them, for which they
are thought to be inspired, does apparently proceed from natural causes: for,
as I showed before, the reason why our conceived Prayers are thought by us and
others to be inspired is, that we are many times enabled in them to enlarge
extempore, with so much readiness, and fluency: which may be easily resolved
into mere natural Enthusiasm, or present fervor of temper. And that from hence
this fluency and enlargement in Prayer does ordinarily proceed, seems very
evident by two undeniable signs; first, that according to our Brethrens own
confession, it comes upon them much oftener in their public, than in their
private Devotions. For this is an ordinary case in their Divinity; how comes it
to pass that good men often find themselves so enlarged in their public and so
strengthened in their private Prayers? And indeed, supposing the Spirit did
ordinarily inspire the matter and words of their Prayer, I see not how it could
be well resolved, unless we suppose the Spirit to be more concerned to inspire
us with fluency of matter and words, when we are to speak before men, than when
we are only to speak before God. The true resolution therefore of the case is
this, that in our private Prayers we want the sighs, and groans, and passionate
gestures of a devout Congregation, to chafe and excite our affections, and the
reverence of a numerous Auditory, to oblige us to teaz and wrack our
inventions; for want of which our spirits are not ordinarily so vehemently
agitated and heated as when we Pray in public; where being more than
ordinarily warmed, partly with our own efforts and struglings, to invent, and
partly with the warmths and pious fervours of the Congregation, we are many
times transported by this natural Enthusiasm, into raptures of passion and
enlargement; this I say is the only reason that can be assigned of it, unless
we will suppose that which is very unsupposeable of the Spirit of God, viz.
That he is more solicitous to indite our Prayers when we are in the presence of
men, than when we are only in the presence of God. Secondly, Another sign that
this admired fluency and enlargement in Prayer proceeds from mere natural
Enthusiasm is this, that generally in the beginning of the Prayer they find
themselves streighten'd and confined, both as to the matter and words of it,
till they have Prayed on for a while, and then they grow more ready and fluent;
which how it should come to pass, I know not, supposing the Prayer were
inspired, unless perhaps the Spirit comes in only in the middle, or toward the
latter end of their Prayer, but leaves them to their own invention in the
beginning, and what reason there should be for such an imagination, I confess I
am not able to guess. The true account therefore of the matter is this, that in
the beginning of the Prayer their Spirits are usually dull, and sluggish, and
do not flow and reflow so briskly to their heads and hearts as afterward, when
they have been thoroughly chaft and heated with a labor and exercise of
invention; by which being excited and awakened, they naturally raise the
drooping fancy, and render the invention more copious, fluent, and easy. So
that merely by the Laws of Matter and Motion, as plain an account may be given
of this extemporary fluency, and enlargement of Prayer, as of any other natural
effect whatsoever; and therefore for our Brethren to attibute to the immediate
inspiration of the Spirit of God, that which has such apparent signs of its
derivation from natural causes, is, I conceive, very unwarrantable. By all
which, I think, it is very evident, not only that we have no sign of the
continuance of this Gift of Inspiration of Prayer remaining among us, but that
we have manifest signs of the contrary.

4. And lastly, That to suppose the continuance of this Gift of Inspiration of
Prayer, is to suppose more than our Brethren themselves will allow of, viz.
That their conceived Prayers are infallible, and of equal authority with the
Word of God. For if our Prayers are dictated to us by the Spirit of God, they
must be as infallible as he, whose infinite knowledge cannot suffer him to be
deceived, and whose infinite veracity will not admit him to deceive: and if so,
then whatsoever he dictates, or inspires, must be removed from all possibility
of error, or mistake; and consequently our Prayers must be so too, supposing he
inspires the matter and words of them. And as they must be infallible in
themselves, so they must be of equal authority with Scripture: for that which
gives the Scriptures the authority of the Word of God, is, their being inspired
by the Spirit of God, and therefore whatsoever matter or words are so inspired,
are as much the Word of God, as any matter or words in Scripture: All Scripture
is given, says the Apostle, by the Inspiration of God. And therefore
whatsoever is given by his Inspiration, must necessarily be his Word: for what
those Holy Men of God spoke, who delivered the Scripture, they spoke as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost, 1 Pet. 1. 21. and therefore what they delivered
was the Word of God, because their Mouths were the Oracles through which God
spoke; if therefore when we Pray, we are moved, as they were, by the immediate
inspiration of God, what we pray, must be as much the Word of God, as what they
spoke. So that either our Brethren must affirm, that their conceived Prayers
are of equal authority with Scripture, (which I am sure no sober Dissenter will
presume) or deny that they are immediately inspired by the Holy Ghost.

And thus I have shown what those extraordinary Operations are, which the
Scripture attributes to the Spirit in Prayer. I proceed in the next place to
enquire what the ordinary and standing Operations are, which the Scripture
attributes to him, and which he has promised to continue to the end of the
World. Of which I shall give but a very brief account, because herein we are
all agreed.

In short therefore, the ordinary Operations of the Spirit consist in exciting
in us the graces and proper affections of Prayer, such as shame and sorrow in
the confession of our sins, a sense of our need of mercy, and a hope of
obtaining it in our supplications for pardon, resignation to God's will, and
dependence on his goodness in our Prayers for temporal mercies, and
deliverances, hunger and thirst after righteousness in our Petitions for his
grace and assistance, and in a word, gratitude, and love, and admiration of God
in our Praises and Thanksgivings for Mercy. For in these divine and gracious
Affections, the life and soul of Prayer consists: as for the Words and
Expressions of it, about which our Brethren disagree with us, they are of no
other account with God, than as they signify to him the graces and affections
of our Prayers without which he regards them no more, than he does the
whistling of the wind; and therefore since these affections are the main of our
Prayer, and words are nothing in his account in comparison with them; can any
man be so vain as to imagine, that those affections will be ever a whit the less
acceptable to him, because they are presented in a form of words, and not in
extemporary Effusions? Sure that Father would be very capricious, that should
deny Bread to his hungry Child, merely because he asked it to day in the same
words that he did yesterday; and to imagine that God will dislike or reject the
good affections of our Prayer, merely because they are every day expressed in
the same form, is to suppose him a very captious Being, and one that is more
taken with our words, than with our affections: the contrary of which he has
given sufficient proof of in this very particular, in that whereas he has
withdrawn from us as I have proved at large) the inspiration of the words of
our Prayer, and left them to the composure of our own or other men's invention;
he still continues to inspire us with the affections of Prayer, and to excite
them to a due activity. For to this, among other purposes, it is, that he has
promised to continue his Holy Spirit to us, to enable us to address our selves
to him with devout and holy affections: thus Gal. 4. 6. Because ye are sons,
God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba father:
that is, by kindling devout and filial affections in your souls, inabling you
to cry to God with all earnestness and assurance, as to a kind and merciful
Father: and hence also we are said to Pray in or by the Holy Ghost, Jude 20. it
being by him that those good affections are raised in us that we offer up to
God in our Prayers: and therefore we may well be said to Pray by the Spirit,
because it is by the Spirit that we are inspired with those holy affections
which are the soul of our Prayer; and accordingly the Spirit is said to make
intercession for us with sighs and groans, which are not to be uttered, Romans 8.
26. which words are far from asserting the inspiration of the matter and words
of our Prayer, though they are urged by our Brethren for that purpose: for as
for the matter of Prayer, here is not the least hint of the Spirits inspiring
it, for as to that, the Christians, whom he speaks of, were well instructed
already by their Christian institution; but all that is affirmed, is, that the
Spirit enabled them to offer up the matter of Prayer to God in a most devout
and affectionate manner; with sighs and groans, that is, with earnest and
flagrant affections. And as for the words of Prayer, the Text is so far from
implying the inspiration of them, that it plainly tells us, that those sighs
and groans which the Spirit inspired, were such as were not to be uttered or
worded. And surely to inspire us with affections that are too big for words,
cannot imply the inspiration of words. So that the Spirit's interceeding for us
with sighs and groans that are not to be uttered, can imply no more, than his
exciting in us the proper affections of Prayer; and in this sense he is said in
the next Verse, to make intercession for the Saints according to the will of
God, viz. by inabling them to offer up the matter of Prayer to God with such
fervent and devout affections as are necessary to render it acceptable to him:
which is properly to interceed for us; for as Christ, who is our Advocate in
Heaven, does offer up our Prayers to the Father, and enforce them with his own
intercessions; so his Spirit, who is our Advocate upon Earth, begets in us
those affections which render our Prayers prevalent, and wings them with
fervor and ardency: the one pleads with God for us in our own hearts, by
kindling such desires there as render our Prayers acceptable to him; and the
other pleads with him for us in Heaven, by presenting those desires, and
soliciting their supply and acceptance. And thus you see what that standing and
ordinary Operation is which the Scripture attributes to the Spirit in Prayer.

And now, before I proceed to determine the present case, I shall only farther
inquire, what is means by that Phrase of stinting and limiting the Spirit. In
short therefore, to stint or limit the Spirit, is a modern Phrase, of which
there is not the least intimation in Scripture, or Antiquity; but it is a term
of Art coined and invented by our Brethren, and applied only to the present
controversy, concerning the lawfulness of Forms of Prayer. Which, by the way,
is a plain evidence that this argument against Forms, viz. That they stint the
Spirit, is very new, since, though Forms of Prayer were used not only in the
Scripture Ages, as I shall show hereafter, but also in all successive Ages of
Christianity; yet, till very lately, we never heard one syllable of stinting or
limiting the Spirit by them.

The meaning of which Phrase is this; That by using Forms of Prayer, we hinder
the Spirit from affording us some assistance in Prayer, which otherwise we
might reasonably expect from them: for so our Brethren explain the Phrase, viz.
That by confining our selves to a Form of Words, we restrain the Spirit from
giving us that assistance, which he ordinarily vouchsafes in conceived Prayer.

And now, having fully stated the Case, the resolution of it will be short and
easy. It has been shown at large, that there are two sorts of assistances in
Prayer which the Scripture attributes to the Spirit; the first extraordinary,
and temporary; viz. the immediate inspiration of the matter, and words of
Prayer: the second ordinary, and abiding; viz. exciting the devotion, and
proper affections of Prayer: If therefore the Spirit be stinted, hindered, or
restrained, by Forms of Prayer, it must be either from inspiring the words and
matter, or from exciting the affections of Prayer; as for the latter, to which
this Phrase of stinting is never applied by our Brethren, I shall discourse of
it at large in the third Case, wherein I shall endeavor to prove, that Forms
of Prayer are so far from restraining the devotion of it, that they very much
promote and improve it. And as for the former, viz. the inspiration of the
matter and words of Prayer, that I have proved was extraordinary, and intended
only as other miraculous Gifts were, for the first propagation of the Gospel;
and therefore since as to this matter, the Spirit has stinted himself, it is
certain, that Forms of Prayer cannot stint him; for how can that be stinted
which is not? and if now there be no such thing as immediate inspiration of
Prayer, how can it be limited by a Form of Prayer? In a word, if the Spirit of
his own accord has long since withdrawn this Gift of inspiration, how can it
be now said that he is restrained from communicating it by any cause without
him?

Case II. Whether the Use of Public Forms, be not a sinful neglect of the
Ministerial Gift of Prayer?
In order to the resolution of which Case, it would be necessary to give a
brief state of it, according as it is put, and urged by our Brethren. By the
Gift of Prayer then, they mean an ability to express our minds to God in
Prayer, or to offer up our desires and affections to him in words, befitting
the matter of them: which ability, say they, is given by God to his Ministers,
as a means of public Prayer, and in order to their being the Mouths of their
Congregations to God, to represent to him the common Cases and Necessities of
their People; and therefore since God, say they, has given us this Gift, as a
means of public Devotion, and in order to our offering up the Prayers of the
People, it may be justly questioned, whether we may lawfully omit the use of
it, by using public Forms of other men's composure.

Now, before I enter into a particular consideration of this Case, I shall
briefly premise these two things:

1. That this Case concerns the Clergy only, and not the Laity: For suppose
that it be unlawful for Ministers to omit the use of their own abilities to
express the Devotions of their Congregations, what is that to the People? are
they accountable for their Ministers faults? or will God reject their sincere
Devotions, because the Person that utters them is guilty of a sinful omission?
if so, it will be of dangerous consequence to them to join in any public
Prayers at all, whether they be Forms, or Extemporary; they being every whit as
accountable for the nonsense, impertinence, and irreverence of their Ministers
in the latter, as for their omitting the use of their own abilities in the
former: if therefore this omission be a sin, it is the sin of the Minister; as
for the People, they join with him indeed, in offering up the matter of Prayer,
which is contained in the Form he pronounces, but they join not with him in the
omission of the use of his ability; that is his own proper act, and deed; and
therefore if it be unlawful, it is he, and he only that is accountable for it:
and if the matter of Prayer in which they join with him be good, and expressed
in decent and suitable words, they join with him in nothing but what is
acceptable to God, and it is not to be imagined that God will be angry with
them, because he neglected to express their desires in words of his own
composure and invention.

2. I shall also premise, that this is not the case of the Clergy of the Church
of England, who, though they stand obliged to the constant use of a stated
Liturgy, yet are not hereby restrained from the exercise of their own abilities
in public Prayer: for after they have finished the Service appointed in the
Liturgy, they are permitted to use their own conceived Prayers in the Pulpit:
in which they have the same liberty, that the dissenting Ministers can claim or
pretend to; that is, to express in their own words all the matter of public
Prayer, with all the sobriety, affection, and seriousness they are able; And a
long and unrestrained permission of our Governors, though it be against Law,
is a kind of allowance, until they reinforce the Law upon our parties, and
some there are who believe the conceived Prayers which we generally use to be
expressly allowed in our 55th Canon, which directs, that before all Sermons,
Lectures, and Homilies, the Preachers and Ministers shall move the People to
join with them in Prayer, in this form, or to this effect, as briefly as
conveniently they may. Now that, to this effect, as it stands opposed to this
form, is meant some Prayer of our own, composed to this purpose, seems in their
opinion very probable from what is generally practiced in the Church, which in
doubtful cases, is the best explication of her meaning. Since therefore the use
of our Liturgy does not exclude the exercise of our Gift of Prayer, But leaves
us free to exert it, so far as it is fit, that is, with convenient brevity, I
see not how this Case can concern our Clergy; for if the evil of Forms consists
in the Ministers omission of his own Gift, as this Case supposes, then where
the use of Forms does not oblige us to this omission, but leaves us as free to
exercise this Gift, as those are who use no Forms at all, the supposed evil is
removed from it.

Having premised these things, I shall proceed to a particular resolution of
the Case, which I shall do in these following Propositions.

1. That this Ministerial Gift of Prayer, or ability to express in our own
words, the common Devotions of our Congregations to God, is either natural, or
acquired. It Is true, if we had any reason to believe, that in their admission
to holy Orders, God did inspire his Ministers with this ability, we might
thence more plausibly infer, that 'twas his will that we should ordinarily
exercise it, and that it was not lawful to neglect or omit it, by using Forms
of other men's composure; it being unlikely that God should inspire them with an
ability, which he did not intend they should make use of: but of Gods inspiring
us in our Ordination with this Gift, or Ability, we have not only no promise in
Scripture, which is the only foundation upon which we can reasonably expect it;
but in fact, we have no experience of any such matter among us: for not only
we, but the Dissenting Ministers must own, if they will speak ingenuously, that
just before their Ordination, they were as able to express the Devotions of a
Congregation, as they were just after; which shows that they had no new ability
to Pray, inspired in their Ordination: and as yet, I could never find any
proof, either from Scripture, or Experience, that this ability to Pray in words
of our own composure, had any thing more in it, than a promptness of invention
and speech; which some men have by nature, and which others have acquired by
art and practice; and if so, this ability is no otherwise the Gift of God, than
our natural strength and vigor, or our skill in Languages and History. And
methinks it is very strange, that after all this talk of the gift of Prayer,
which is supposed ordinarily at least to be conferred on rightly ordained
Ministers, our Brethren should not be able to produce one Promise, wherein God
has engaged himself, to confer it; no nor one Text of Scripture, which implies
such a Promise; all that he has promised his Ministers is, to concur with
their honest endeavors, so far forth as it is necessary to enable them to
discharge the Duties of their Office, and to suppose that they cannot do this,
without praying Extempore, or in their own words, is to take the matter in
question, for granted.

2. That this natural or acquired Gift, is no where appropriated by God to
prayer, but left common to other uses, and purposes; For though in Ministers
especially, it is ordinarily called a Gift of Prayer, yet it is no where styled
so in Scripture: indeed the ability of praying in unknown languages, is once
called a Gift, as I observed before, but as for this ordinary ability, whether
natural, or acquired, of praying in our native language, it is no where spoken
of in Scripture, under the name of a Gift of Prayer, nor is there the least
mention of any such ability given by God to men, purely to enable them to pray,
and unless our Brethren can produce some Text of Scripture, which yet they
never attempted, wherein God has appropriated this Gift to the purpose of
Prayer, they must give us leave to conclude, that he has left it common to all
other honest uses, and purposes that it can be applied to; and that in short,
it is nothing but a freedom of Utterance, and Elocution, which in some is
natural, and in some acquired, by which they are enabled readily to express
their minds to God, or men; and therefore to how many honest purposes this
common Gift of God is applicable, to so many it is designed, and intended; and
consequently, may as well be called the Gift of Conversation in good company,
and the Gift of pleading at the Bar, and the Gift of disputing in the Schools,
or the Gift of Oratory in the Forum, as the Gift of Prayer in Private, or
Public worship; it being all but one and the same Gift applied to several
uses, and purposes; accordingly we find that those who have this Gift, have it
not only while they are speaking in Prayer, but when they are speaking upon
other occasions; and that ordinarily they can express themselves to Men with
the same readiness, and fluency in conversation, as they express their minds to
God in Prayer, which is a plain argument that their Gift is not appropriate to
Prayer, but common to all the other uses, and purposes of Elocution.

3. That this Gift of utterance not being appropriated by God to Prayer, may
upon just reason, be as lawfully omitted in Prayer, as in any other use or
purpose it is designed for: I do confess had God any where appropriated it to
the end of Prayer, those who have it, were obliged to use it to that end, and
to omit it ordinarily, by confining themselves to forms of other men's inditing,
would be to neglect a means of Prayer of Gods special appointment and
institution; for had he any where intimated to us, that he gave it us purely to
enable us to pray without any respect to any other end, we could not have
omitted the use of it in Prayer without crossing his intention, and frustrating
him of the only end for which he intended it, but since he has given us no
such intimation, we may justly conclude that he intends it in common for all
those honest ends to which it is applicable, and if so, it is no more unlawful
to omit using it to one end than to another, so that either it must be wholly
unlawful to omit using our own Elocution to any purpose whatsoever whereunto it
may be honestly applied, or it must be lawful to omit it in Prayer, and
consequently supposing I have this Gift of utterance, either I may not use a
form in petitioning my Prince, or a Court of Justice, or I may use a form in
addressing my self to God in Prayer, since my Gift is common to both these
purposes, and no more appropriated to the one than the other; in short
therefore, as for those common Gifts of God which are applicable to sundry
purposes, and which he intends no more for one than for another, it is left to
our own liberty and discretion, whether we will apply them to this or that
particular purpose or no, and no man is obliged to use his Gift to all those
just and lawful purposes it is capable of, and if he has two Gifts which serve
to the same purpose, there is no doubt but he may lawfully omit the one, and
use the other as he sees occasion; and so it is with this Gift of utterance,
which is naturally serviceable to sundry excellent purposes, and among others
to this of expressing our minds to God in Prayer, but it being serviceable to
this in common with others, it is left to our liberty whether we will employ it
in this, in that, or in another purpose, and we are neither obliged to employ
it in all, nor in this more than in another, but if we have another Gift that
is serviceable to the purpose of Prayer as well as this of utterance, it is
left to our own pious discretion whether we will use this or the other; so that
unless our Brethren can prove that this Gift of Utterance or Elocution is by
special command of God made an appropriate means of Public Prayer, they will
never be able to prove, either that it is more unlawful to omit the use of it
in Prayer, than in any other Office of Elocution, or that if we have any other
means of Prayer, we are determined to this more than to another.

4. That to read our desires to God in other Men's Words, is as much a means of
Prayer, as to speak them in our own, for to speak in our own Words, is no
otherwise a means of Public Prayer, than as it serves to express to God the
Common cases and necessities of the Congregation, and if these may be as well
expressed by Reading them in other Men's Words, as by speaking them in our own,
the end of Public Prayer is as effectually served by the one, as by the other,
and sure no man will deny, but that by a Form of Words composed by another, he
may express the common Devotions of a Congregation, as well as by extempore or
premeditated words of his own invention; for this would be in effect to say,
that none but himself can compose a public Prayer, or at least none so well as
he; for if another Prayer may be as expressive of the Devotions of a
Congregation as his own, I can see no reason why the reading of that may not be
as proper a means of public Prayer, as the speaking of this; here then are two
means of Prayer, viz. reading other men's Forms, and speaking our own
Conceptions, and therefore unless our Brethren can prove, that God has
expressly chosen the one, and rejected the other, they must acknowledge both to
be lawful; and if we cannot lawfully omit the one, because it is a means of
Prayer, neither can we lawfully omit the other, because it is so too; and
therefore either we must be obliged to use them both, which is impossible at
the same time, or we must be left at liberty to use either, according to our
own discretion. In sum therefore, since we are not inspired with any peculiar
Gift of Prayer in our ordination, and since our Gift of praying in our own
words is not appropriated by God to this use, but left in common to other
purposes, and since what is not appropriated by God, may be lawfully omitted,
when there are other means of Prayer, and since in fact there is another means
of Prayer besides this of praying in our own words, viz. praying in the words
of others, which God has left as free to us as the former, it plainly follows
from the whole, that to omit the use of our own Gift, and in the stead of it to
use that other Gift of praying in the words of others, is not in it self any
way sinful or unlawful.

Case III. Whether the Use of Public Forms of Prayer does not deaden the
Devotion of Prayer?
For thus our Brethren argue, that by the command of God we are obliged not
only to pray, but to pray with the utmost devotion we are able, and accordingly
to use such means of Prayer as are most apt to heighten and intend our
devotion, and thus far we agree with them; if therefore Forms are in
themselves, and not through our fault and erroneous prejudice, less apt to
quicken and raise devotion than conceived Prayers, it will be granted of all
hands, that this is a good Argument against the use of them. This therefore is
the case wherein we differ, our Brethren say, that Forms of Public Worship,
(for it is that we are now discoursing of) are in themselves apt to dispirit and
deaden the Devotions of those that use them; we say the contrary, viz. that
public Forms are in themselves more apt to improve and quicken the common
Devotions, than Extemporary Prayers of the Ministers own conceiving: In order
therefore to the clearing and full resolution of this Case, we will briefly
enquire into these three things:

1. What these advantages to Public Devotion are, which conceived, or
extemporary Prayers pretend to?

2. Whether these Advantages are not for the most part fantastical and
imaginary, and whether so far as they are real they are not much more peculiar
to Forms than to extempore Prayer?

3. Whether besides these common advantages public Forms have not peculiar
advantages, which conceived Prayers cannot pretend to?

1. We will enquire what those advantages to the public Devotions are which
conceived or extemporary Prayers pretend to; in short, it is pretended in the
behalf of conceived Prayers, that they do much more fix the attention, and
raise the intention of the Peoples minds in Prayer, than public Forms; that
is, that they do more confine the rovings of men's thoughts in Prayer, and keep
their minds more attentive to it, and that they do much more warm and enliven
their affections in it; for, say our Brethren, the Devotions of the people are
very much raised or deaden'd by the performance of the Minister, according as
he is more or less devout in it; and as for the Minister, he must needs be much
more devout in a Prayer of his own conceiving, than in the use of a public
Form; because first, say they, it is impossible for him to keep his mind so
attentive in reading a Prayer, as in conceiving one in his own mind, and
speaking it from his own conceptions; the care of performing which naturally
bounds the wanderings of his thoughts, and keeps them more fixed and attentive;
and secondly, because when he utters his words immediately from his affections,
his thoughts have not that scope to wander, as when he reads them out of a
Book. And as conceived Prayer does more fix the attention of the Minister, so
it does also more raise his intention, or in other words, more warm and inflame
his affections; for first, whereas in reading a Form, his affections follow his
words, and are raised and excited by them, in conceived Prayer, his words
follow his affections, and are immediately uttered from, and indicted by them;
and secondly, How is it possible, say they, that the words of another, which he
reads out of a Form, should so well express his affections as his own; besides,
thirdly, that while he is reading his Form, his soul is so intent in directing
his eye to read, that it cannot direct its affections to God with that fervor
and intention as it might do in conceived Prayer. These are the supposed helps
which the Ministers devotion, and from his the Peoples receive from conceived
Prayers, above what Forms of Prayer can afford: and as conceived Prayer has
these peculiar advantages to raise the Ministers devotion, and by his the
Peoples, so it has another advantage by which it more immediately influences
the devotion of the People, viz. that the matter of it is still expressed in new
words, which must needs much more affect the attention of the People, than when
it is always expressed in the same words without any variation; And this, so far
as I can gather from the Writings of our Brethren, is the sum of what they
plead in behalf of conceived Prayer, as to its peculiar advantageousness to
public Devotion above stated Forms.

2. Therefore we will inquire whether these Advantages are not in a great
measure imaginary, and whether so far as they are real, they are not much more
peculiar to Forms, than to conceived Prayer. And here I will readily grant,
that by expressing a serious and devout affection, the Minister does really
advantage the Devotion of the Congregation, even as by his good example in all
other things he excites the people to a pious and virtuous imitation; in whose
eyes devotion never looks so amiable, as when it is expressed in serious and well
composed words, accompanied with a devout, a sober, and affectionate behavior:
both which are equally necessary to excite the devotion of the People: if
therefore it be really true, that the use of conceived or extempore Prayer is
in its own nature most apt to fix the attention, and excite the intention of
the Minister in Prayer, it must be confessed that herein it has the advantage of
Forms. 1. Therefore we will inquire whether these advantages it pretends to, as
to the exciting the Ministers attention in Prayer, be real, or no: The first
advantage is, that the very conceiving the matter of his Prayer, and speaking
it from his own conceptions, does naturally more bind his attention, than the
reading it out of a Form; but I beseech you, what does it more bind him to
attend to? is it to attend to the words and phrases? if so, then it is not to
attend to the acts of Prayer, or is it to attend to those acts which are the
proper business of Prayer? that is to be ashamed of sin, and to bewail it in
confession, to be sensible of the common wants, and common dependancies upon
God for supply in petition, to admire God's perfections, and gratefully
commemorate his goodness in praise and thanksgiving; for in these things the
true devotion both of Minister and People consists; and it is only by being an
example of these in his Prayer, that the Minister excites the devotion of his
people: it is by confessing sin, as if he were ashamed of, and sorry for it,
that he excites their shame and sorrow; by petitioning for mercy, as if he were
sensible of the want of it, and did heartily desire it, and depended upon God
for it, that he excites their sense of need, and their desire, and hope of
relief, and supply; by praising and thanking God, as if he heartily admired his
excellencies, and gratefully resented his goodness that he excites their
admiration and gratitude; that mode of Prayer therefore which is most apt to
fix the Ministers attention to these acts of devotion, must needs be most apt
to excite the devotions of the people: Now as for the mode of praying from his
own conceptions, I really think that it is much more apt to unfix the Ministers
attention to these acts, than that of praying by a Form; because it forces him
to attend to other things at the same time, viz. the recollection of matter,
and invention of suitable expressions, which must more or less divert him from
attending to the inward acts of devotion, according as his fancy and tongue are
more or less pregnant and voluble; it being impossible for him to attend at the
same time, to several things, as closely as he may to one: but when he prays by
a Form, his matter and words are ready before him, and so he has nothing else
to do, but to attend to his devotion; and certainly when a man has but one
thing to do in Prayer, he may attend to that more fixedly and closely, than
when he has two or three: it is true, by being released from attending to the
invention of his matter and words, his mind is more at leisure to wander, and
instead of attending as he ought more closely to the acts of devotion, by
employing those thoughts which in conceived Prayer he imploys in invention, in
a closer attention to the acts of devotion, he may, if he please, permit them
to rove abroad; but if he does, the fault is in himself, and not in the Form he
prays by: the design of his Form is to release his mind from all other business
in Prayer, but only that of inward devotion, which is the life of Prayer, that
so it may be the more attentive to it: but if instead of applying his mind to
this design, he suffers it to wander abroad, he makes an ill use of a good
thing, and converts that which is in it self a help to devotion, into an
occasion of indevotion: But it is objected, that while his thoughts are employed
in inventing the matter and words of his Prayer, they are attending to the duty
of Prayer, and while they are so they are well employed, though they should not
be so attentively fixed upon the inward devotion of Prayer, as they might be in
the use of a Form: to which in short I answer, That to invent the matter and
words of Prayer, is not to pray, but to study a Prayer; and till our Brethren
have proved, that our inventing the matter and words, is a part of our duty of
Prayer, which is the Question in debate between us, we can by no means grant,
that our attention to it is attending to the duty of Prayer; we believe that
when we pray devoutly by a Form, we discharge the whole duty of Prayer, though
we do not invent the matter and words our selves, and when we see the contrary
proved, we will not only yield that to attend to inventing, is to attend to the
duty of Prayer; but that it is unlawful to pray by a Form: but in the mean time
we can yield neither one, nor the other. Seeing then that Forms are in themselves
more apt to fix the Ministers attention to the inward acts of devotion, and
seeing that it is by attending to these acts, or at least by seeming to do so,
that he influences the attention of the people, it necessarily follows, that in
this respect Forms are more advantageous to public devotion, than conceived or
extemporary Prayer. But then,

2. It is pretended that conceived Prayer is in it self more apt to fix the
Ministers attention in Prayer than Forms, because in conceived Prayer he utters
his words immediately from his affections, by reason of which his thoughts have
not that scope to wander, as when he reads them out of a Book: to which, in
short, I answer, That if he has devout affections, he may utter his words as
immediately from his affections in a Form, as in a conceived Prayer; and
therefore this pretense is altogether insignificant; for his own invention is
as much a medium between his affections and utterance in Praying extempore, as
the Book in praying by a Form; as for instance, suppose that in confessing sin,
he be affected with shame and sorrow, he cannot express it in words, but by
using his own invention, or a Form, and whether he uses one or the other, he uses
a medium to express it; and why those words which he reads should not be as
immediate to his affections as those which he invents, provided they do as
fully express them, I am not able to apprehend; in short therefore, if he has
devout affections, they will at least as much confine his thoughts from
wandering when he prays by Form, as when he prays Extempore, if he has not, he
cannot utter his words from his affections, either in the one or the other.

2. We will inquire whether those advantages which our Brethren ascribe to
conceived Prayer above Forms, as to the raising the Ministers intention in
Prayer, be real, or no: first they pretend that in reading a Form, his
affections follow his words, and are raised and excited by them: whereas in
praying extempore, his words follow his affections. This I confess is a very
curious distinction, but I am not able to apprehend either what foundation
there is for it, or how it is applicable to the matter; for first what
necessity is there either that his affections should follow his words in a
Form, more than in a conceived Prayer, or that his words should follow his
affections in a conceived Prayer, more than in a Form? why may not a man be
devoutly affected with the matter he prays for, before he expresses it in a
Form of words, as well as before he expresses it extempore? since if he be
acquainted with the Form, he cannot but know beforehand what he is to pray for
in it; and therefore if he be truly devout, cannot but be affected with it,
before he prays for it; and so on the other hand, why may not a man as well be
unaffected with the matter he prays for in conceived Prayer, till he has
expressed it, as with the matter he prays for in a Form? or what reason can be
assigned, why the affection may not follow the words, and be excited by them in
the one, as well as in the other? may not a man pray inconsiderately, and
suffer his tongue, to run before his heart in both? and may not his affections
which were before asleep, be awakened by the sound of his words in either? In
short therefore, since in praying by a Form, a man may know as well at least,
and has as much time to consider the matter he is to pray for beforehand, as
in praying extempore; what reason is there why it should be more difficult for
him to affect his soul beforehand with it in the one, than in the other? and
if it be equally hard and easy in both, than it is equally possible for his
affections to go before, or follow his words in either. But then secondly,
suppose it were true, that in conceived Prayer the words follow the affections,
and in a Form the affections the words, how does it from hence follow, that
conceived Prayer does more intend and heighten the affections, than Forms? what
reason can there be assigned, why those acts of inward affections, which follow
our words in Prayer, should not be as intense and vigorous as those which go
before them? why may not a man exert as flagrant an act of desire, immediately
after he has expressed his Petition, as immediately before, especially if that
be true which our Brethren affirm, and which most men find by experence; that
the words of Prayer, if they are proper and expressive, do naturally quicken
and excite the affections; so that if it be the matter only that excites the
affections, they may be as vehemently excited after the words are spoken as
before; if it be the words also, the afflections must be less vehemently
excited excited before the words, than after: in short therefore, when the
Minister prays in public, whether it be by Form, or extempore, he prays on,
without making any long pauses between one Petition and another, so that as
soon as ever he has conceived the matter, he expresses it, and whether it be
immediately before or immediately after, or while he is expressing it, that he
joins his affection to it, there can be no reason assigned, if it be the matter
he joins them to, why he should more affect it now, than then, there being
nothing in the order of before or after, to raise and excite his affection: and
if so, his affections following his words, though it were necessary to his
praying by a Form, can be no disadvantage to his Devotion, nor the contrary an
advantage to it, though it were necessary to his praying extempore: but then
secondly, it is pretended that the Minister cannot so well express his devout
affections in other men's words, as in his own, and therefore when he prays in a
Form of words of other men's composure, it is impossible his affections should be
so livelily represented, as when he prays extempore: To which in short I
answer, That the Ministers business in public Prayer is not to express the
degrees and heighths of his own affections, or to acquaint God of the
particular and extraordinary fervencies of his own soul: for in public he
prays as the common mouth of the Congregation, and therefore he ought not to
express to God in the name of the People, any matter that is peculiar to
himself, or to represent his own particular extraordinary fervours, as the
common case of the Congregation, but his words ought to be such as every honest
and ordinary Christian may truly join with, as the sense and meaning of his own
soul; and for him to express to God in the name of the People, such heights of
Devotion as few or none of them are arrived to, is as bad as to confess in
their names such sins to God, as few or none of them are guilty of. So that if
the Minister has such peculiar heighths of affection as can be fitly expressed
only in his own words, he ought not to tell God of them in a public Prayer, in
which he is to express nothing but what is the true and common sense of every
honest and sincere Christian; and this certainly may be as fitly expressed in
another man's words as in his own, unless we will suppose that no man can so
well express the common sense of a Christian Congregation, as he that prays
extempore, yea, and that he himself cannot so fitly express it in premeditated
words, as in extemporary ones; neither of which I suppose any sober Dissenter
will affirm. But then Thirdly and lastly, it is also pretended, that in the use
of Forms, the Ministers soul is so engaged in directing his eye to read, that
it cannot be so intensly affected with what he prays for, as when he prays
extempore; in answer to which, I leave the Reader to judge, whether the
recollecting of the matter of Prayer, the disposing of it into a due method,
and inventing of proper phrases to express it, (neither of which are acts of
Prayer, as I showed before) must not much more busy and engage the Ministers
foul when he is praying publicly, than the directing of his eye to read; that
is, whether one that has so perfect a habit of reading as that he can readily
exercise it without employing one thought about it, cannot read a Prayer more
easily, than invent one? for so much easier as it is to read than to invent a
Prayer, so much less his soul has to divert it from being affected with what
he prays for when he prays by a Form, than when he prays extempore. And thus
you see that those advantages which are ascribed to conceived Prayer, as to the
raising the Ministers Devotion, are such as are either imaginary, or as ought
rather to be ascribed to Forms.

But it is pretended, that Forms of Prayer do not only deaden the Ministers
Devotion, and so by consequence the Peoples, but that they do also deaden the
Peoples by a more direct and immediate influence, because they still express
the matter of Prayer in the same words, which when the People have often heard,
will be apt to cloy their attention, whereas the very newness and variety of
words, in which conceived Prayers are expressed, does naturally awaken and
entertain their minds and keep them more fixed and intent. For answer whereunto,
let us consider upon what it is that this novelty and variety of expression
does keep our minds so fixed and intent on; is it upon the matter of Prayer?
doubtless, No; for that is generally the same, especially the matter of public
Prayer, and therefore if it were that that fixed our minds, 'twould as well do
it in the same as in new and varied expressions; and since the matter of
public Prayer is old, and for the main will be always so, why should it not as
well affect us in old words as in new, provided they expressed it with equal
propriety and fitness; but if it be merely the nowness of the phrase it is
expressed in, that fixes their minds: there is nothing in it but a mere
surprise and amusement of their fancies, which instead of fixing does unfix
their minds from the internal acts of Prayer, and divert its attention from the
devotion to the oratory of it; so that this fixation of their minds on the
novelty of the phrase and method of Prayer, is so far from being an advantage,
that it is a distraction to their devotion. As for Forms of Prayer, there is no
doubt but they may be composed with the same advantage of expression, and
pronounced with the same affection as the Prayers of our own extempore
composure, and if they are so, they will have the same advantage of the music
of speech to excite the Devotions of the People; but as for novelty of method
and expression, that may indeed entertain their minds and divert them from
roving out to other objects, but even this entertainment is a roving and
excursion of their minds from the acts of Prayer, which, while they are amused
with the novelty of the phrase and method of the Prayer, can be no more intent
on the devotion of it, than while they are busied about secular objects and
affairs. And indeed that seeming devotion that is raised in the minds of the
People by the gingling of the Ministers words about their fancies, is generally
false and counterfeit, for as words do naturally impress the fancy, so the
fancy does naturally excite the sensitive affections; so that when the
affections are excited merely by the art and music of the words of Prayer, it
is not Devotion but Mechanism; for there is no doubt but men may be and many
times are strangely affected with the words of Prayer, when they have not the
least spark of true devotion to the matter of it; for when they fancy the
matter of Prayer, and are affected with it merely for the sake of the words,
the movement of their affection will cease as soon as the impression is worn
out which the words make upon their fancies, and if in the mean time they
happen to hear any other matter expressed in the same affectionate words, they
will in all probability be as much affected with it, as they are now with the
matter of Prayer, but if the mind be truly devout and does affect the matter of
Prayer for it self and not for the sake of the words, I cannot imagine how new
words should any way advantage its devotion, unless they were to express new
matter. Since therefore the matter of public Prayer neither is nor ought to be
new, unless it be upon extraordinary public emergencies, what color of reason
can there be assigned, why the devotion of the hearers should be more affected
with it in new words than in old, supposing it be expressed and pronounced with
the same propriety and affection in both. And thus I have shown that those
advantages of public Devotion, which are pretended to be peculiar to conceived
Prayers, are for the most part imaginary, and that so far forth as they are
real they are more peculiar to Forms of Prayer, I proceed to the third and last
enquiry, viz.

3. Whether there are not sundry advantages of public Devotion peculiar to
Forms of Prayer, which conceived Prayers cannot pretend to? That there are, I
do affirm, and will endeavor to prove by these following Instances.

1. One great advantage that is peculiar to public Forms of Prayer, is, That
the People may address themselves to them with greater preparation; for if they
please, they may peruse the words beforehand, and consider the sense and
matter of them, and endeavor to affect their minds with it; as for instance,
when I know beforehand what words my sins will be confessed in, when I am to
join in the public Devotions, I can consider beforehand the sense and meaning
of them, and prepare such affections as are suitable to them; as suppose the
confession be that of our Church's Liturgy, wherein we begin with Almighty and
most merciful Father; I can consider the meaning of these words before I come
to Church; and from the consideration of God's almighty and most merciful
nature, excite my affections to an awful dread of his power, and an ingenuous
sense of his mercy; by which, when I come to join with these words in the
public confession, I shall be duly affected with the sense of them, and my
soul will be ready melted into all that filial sorrow and humiliation for my
sin, which the consideration that I have offended by it an Almighty and most
merciful Father suggests; and so if I consider, and apply beforehand all the
rest of the confession, I shall thereby tune and set my affections to the sense
and matter of each particular phrase and expression in it; which 'twill be
impossible for me to do when I am to join with an extempore Prayer; because I
cannot know beforehand what the phrases and expressions of it will be; besides
which, upon the words of public Forms, there may be written excellent
Paraphrases and Meditations, such as is that of the Companion to the Temple; by
reading of which the Devotions of the People may be very much excited and
improved; which is such an advantage as the words of extempore Prayer will not
admit of.

2. Another advantage peculiar to public Forms, is, That in joining with them
the People may pray with more understanding, than they can well be supposed to
do in conceived and extempore Prayer, wherein generally the Minister is forced
to make use of such words and expressions as come first to hand, having not
leisure enough to pick and choose his words, without making long and undecent
pauses and interruptions, so that sometimes he is fain to use a hard word,
which perhaps not half the People understand, because an easier does not come
to his mind, and sometimes to entangle his expressions with long Parentheses,
sometimes to darken his matter with far fetched Metaphors, or to express it by
halfs in broken Sentences, and sometimes to run out his Periods to an
inordinate length, by which the sense of them is very much clouded and
obscured: these and such like inconveniences all the World knows do very
commonly attend extempore Effusions: and let a man's fancy and tongue be never
so fluent and voluble, he can never be so secure of expressing himself
intelligibly to the People when he prayers extempore, as he might be if he took
time enough beforehand to choose his words, and form his expressions, so that
the People may be much more secure of understanding what they pray for when
they join with a Form, than when they join with an extempore Prayer; for to be
sure in composing public Forms more care will be taken of the phrase, that the
words may fit the matter, and express it intelligibly to the People, than there
can be in extempore Prayer; which admits of no long consideration, no
alteration upon second thoughts, no after-scanning or revisal, as Forms of
Prayer do, but it must pass as it happens, whether it be intelligible or no, by
reason of which those who occupy the room of the unlearned, are many times
forced to break off praying for want of understanding what the words and
expressions of the Prayer mean; for whether the Prayer be spoken in an unknown
Tongue, or in words that are unintelligible to the People, it is all one to
them, for still their understanding is unfruitful, and so long their devotion
must be broken and interrupted.

3. Another advantage peculiar to public Forms, is, That the People may join
with them with much more faith and assurance, than they can with extempore
Prayers; it must doubtless be of great advantage to a man's devotion in public,
to be satisfied beforehand that the matter he is to pray for is good and
acceptable to God; for by this means he will be enabled to pray on with a
stronger says and surer hope of being heard and accepted; but this a man can
never be satisfied of aforehand, that joins in extempore Prayer, unless he has
an implicit faith in his Minister, that he will say nothing to God but what is
true, nor ask any thing of him but what is lawful; which how he can certainly
depend on, I cannot imagine, especially consisidering that the Minister who
prays is many times a stranger to him, both as to his person and principles,
and for all that he knows may be very erroneous, rash, and unadvised, or very
ignorant of what is matter of Prayer, and what not; And even those Ministers
whom he knows, and can best confide in, are not always so very sure of their
hands, but that some times they may mistake their passion for their zeal, and
reak their anger or faction in their Prayers, or in the heat and hurry of
speaking what comes next, let drop an error before they are aware, or express
themselves so doubtfully, or unadvisedly, that an honest and discerning mind
may not be able to join with him; so that in joining with an extempore Prayer,
it is very necessary, (as has been observed by an excellent Divine upon this
Argument) that as we go along with the Minister, we should judge of what he
says before our hearts consent to it, and if it should so happen, that by
reason of the novelty, or ambiguity, affectation, or indigestedness of his
expressions, or any such rub in our way, we cannot readily judge, but are fain
to hesitate, and deliberate upon this, or that passage; in the mean time he who
prays is gone on, and now upon a new subject, and we are left behind, and at a
loss, and perhaps miserably confounded before our Devotion can close in again,
and no sooner it may be, is it well fixed, but it is led away again into the same
inconveniency and maze: all which may be easily prevented by the use of public
Forms; of the matter and expressions of which, the People may easily satisfy
themselves aforehand, and when this is done, they will have nothing else to do,
but to pray and keep their holy affections a going, they will have no new
Judgment to make of what is said, no doubtful phrase or matter to examine, and
their judgment being satisfied before they begin to pray, with the words and
matter of the Prayer, their devotion may go on with it, without pause or stop
in an even and uninterrupted current.

4. Another advantage peculiar to public Forms, is, That they have much less
in them to divert the affections of the People from the matter of Prayer. For
as for extempore Prayer, it is very apt to disturb the devotion of the People,
whether it be well or ill performed, if he who performs it hesitates, or
blunders, or expresses himself in crude, undecent, or fantastic phrases,
instead of attending to the matter, and joining their affections with it, they
will in all probability be pitying, or contemning him, carping at what comes
next, and running descants on his weakness and impertinence; if he perform
well, and his method be orderly and artificial, his matter good, and his
expressions fluent and apt, and easy, they will in all probability be admiring
his parts, and entertaining their curiosity with the elegancy of his phrase,
the solidity and promptness of his judgment, and the art and finery of his
composure; either of which must very much divert and call off their affections
from the matter; whereas while they are joining in public Forms, to which they
have been accustomed, and in which neither the strength, nor weakness of the
Ministers parts appears, they have none of all these snares to entangle their
devotion: for being used to the words, and phrase, and method, they have no
temptation to concern their minds any farther about them, than as they convey
the matter of the Prayer to them, and having none of the abovenamed
diversions, to carry away their minds from the matter, they may doubtless, if
they please, attend to it with much more fervor and affection.

5. Another peculiar advantage to the Peoples Devotion in joining with public
Forms, is, That they are more secured as to the decency and solemnity of their
public Worship; and I suppose there is no body will question, but that the
decent and solemn performance of public Worship, is highly advantageous to the
Devotion of the People. But now whilst they join in extempore Prayers, the
decency and solemnity of the performance, does altogether depend upon the
ability and present disposedness of the Minister: So that if he happen to be a
man of a mean elocution, of an unready memory, or an unfruitful invention, it
is impossible the Office should be performed with that decency and solemnity,
that is necessary to affect the minds, and excite the devotions of the People;
yea instead of that perhaps, the wretched dullness, the blundering, confusion,
and impertinence of the performance, may turn their devotion into scorn and
laughter; for of this I have seen too many sad experiments: but suppose the
Minister be a man of pregnant parts, and ready invention and elocution, yea and
of great Piety and Devotion too, yet it is possible he may be frequently liable
to great indispositions of body, and mind, to dullness, and inadvertency, to
wandering, and distraction of thoughts, to deficiencies of invention, and
failures of memory, and encumbrances of mind, with outward cares and accidents;
and if he be, what remedy is there, but that he must many times pray
confusedly, and omit a great deal of the matter of Prayer, and utter a great
deal of it in broken or undecent expressions? and how can he avoid being
sometimes at a loss, both for words and matter, and being forced to supply the
present defects of his invention, with fulsome repetitions of what went before?
and how is it possible almost but that a great deal of flat and empty nonsense,
a great many crude and undigested conceptions, and rash and unadvised
expressions should escape from his lips before he is aware? and this, if he
has any grain of modesty in him, must, upon the least reflection, put him into
a greater confusion, and so amaze, and bewilder him, that throughout the whole
Prayer perhaps, he will hardly be able to recover himself to any consistency of
thoughts: Now is it not a hard case, that the decency and solemnity of the
public Prayers of a Congregation, should depend upon the uncertain and
variable temper and disposition of one single person; so as that if he happen
to be indisposed or disordered in his body or mind, the Devotions of 500 or
1000 persons must partake of his disorders and distractions; for how much
soever he is indisposed, their Prayer can be no better than what he is able to
pour out extempore, and how flatly, unadvisedly or confusedly soever he prays,
they must pray after him, or not pray at all; which vast inconvenience is
wholly cured and prevented, by a well composed Form of Prayer, for how weak
soever the Ministers parts be, or how much soever he may be at present
indisposed, if he can but read distinctly and seriously, the Devotion of the
People will not be at all affected or influenced by it; for whatsoever his
parts, or present temper be, they will be sure to find an orderly and
methodical Prayer to join with; a Prayer that is comprehensive of all their
common cases and necessities; that is sober and good, mature and well advised
as to the matter; that is full and plain and decent as to the phrase and
expression of it; and in a word, that is every way suited to all the parts, and
ends, and offices of public Devotion; And if they please, they may satisfy
themselves beforehand, that there is nothing in the Prayer they are to join
with, but what becomes public Worship, which is the most serious and solemn
thing in the World.

6. Another peculiar advantage of public Forms, is, That in joining with them
the People may be better secured of the reality and sincerity of their own
Devotion. For in joining with extempore Prayers, there is no doubt but they
may, and many times do mistake the tickling of their fancies, for true and
sincere Devotion; for their fancies being surpised, and amused, merely by the
novelty of the expressions, will naturally influence their sensitive passions
and chafe them into such warmths as an undiscerning judgment may easily mistake
for the holy fervours of Devotions; they find themselves strangely heated in
the Prayer, and upon that immediately conclude, that they are wonderfully
devout, without ever enquiring, whether it be the matter, or the phrase and
expression that heats them; and so from those transports of passion, which are
merely the effects of new and surprising words striking briskly on their
fancies, they many times take occasion to flatter themselves into a great
opinion of their Piety and Godliness; whereas many of these persons are
notoriously immoral in their lives, and utterly disaffected to the matter they
pray for with so much seeming earnestness and affection; which is a plain
argument, that their affection is not to the matter, but merely to the words
and expressions; and in all probability the same surprisingness of expression
would have as much effected them at a Play, as it does at a Prayer: thus for
instance, when they hear God or Christ spoken of, and their goodness and
perfections presented in a new and surprising strain of expressions, their
fancy many times is strangely smitten with it, and this makes their spirits
flow with a sweet and placid torrent to their heart; and by their frisking
about it, to sooth and tickle it into great complacency and pleasure; till at
last it opens and dilates its orifices, and the grateful flood breaks in, and
drowns it in delight and ravishment; and yet all this many times, instead of
being a real complacency of their souls in God, is only a complacency of their
fancies in the phrase by which he is described and represented, and had they
heard the Hero of Play described in the same phrase, they might probably have
been moved to the same affection to him, as they are now to God and their
Savior; for the same kind of influence that new and surprising expressions
have upon men's fancies in Prayer, they will have when applied to other matters;
And if we will believe Plutarch, it was an ordinary thing with the Greek
Sophists, by their honied words, surprising phrases, singing tones, and
effeminate accents, to excite their Auditors into a kind of Bacchical
Enthusiasm; and no doubt but those hearers, of whom he there speaks, who were
wont to applaud their Orators at the end of their Declamations with a (...),
divinely, heavenly, unimitably spoken; found themselves as much moved, as many
a man does at an extempore Prayer; who yet verily believes, that it is not
merely a movement of his fancy, but of his sincere and true devotion. This
therefore is a great disadvantage of extempore Prayer in public, that merely
by amusing the fancies of the people with the surprising novelty of its
expressions, it puts them into fits of counterfeit devotion, and makes them
many times imagine that they are heartily affected with the matter of the
Prayers, when it is merely the phrase of it that by striking on their fancies,
moves their sensitive affection. But whether this movement of affection be
fancy, or devotion, a man may much more easily distinguish when he joins with a
Form, than when he joins with an extempore Prayer; for he being acquainted
aforehand with the phrases and expressions of the Form, it is not to be
supposed, that they should much surprise and amuse his fancy, and therefore if
notwithstanding that, he finds himself heartily affected in the Prayer, he may
much more securely conclude, that it is the matter, and not merely the words
that moves and affects him. And thus, with all plainness and sincerity, I have
endeavored to represent those peculiar advantages, which Forms of Prayer have
above extempore ones, as to the quickening and improving the Devotions of the
People: I might have given other Instances of it, but these I think are
sufficient to determine the case in debate, and to convince any unprejudiced
man, that pious and well composed Forms, are so far from deadening the public
Devotions, that they contribute sundry great advantages to it. And indeed if
public Forms do deaden the Peoples Devotion, it must be either as they always
confine the Devotions of the People to the same set of words, which, as I have
proved at large, is a great advantage to their Devotion; or as they do pro
tempore confine them to a certain set of words; in which sense the Ministers
extempore Prayer is a Form to the People, and does as much confine their
Devotions to a certain set of words, pro tempore, as any stated Form whatsoever.

And now, if after all this, it be objected by our Brethren, that they find by
Experience, which is the best Argument, that Forms do actually deaden their
Devotion, I would beseech them seriously to consider, whether this experience
of theirs be not founded in an unreasonable prejudice; and if it be, whether
it is fit that their unreasonable prejudice should prescribe to the whole
Church? it is certain, that there are other men as truly pious and devout as
they, who find by experience, that joining with the public Forms is a great
advantage to their Devotion; so that here is experience against experience; and
certainly where there are two contrary experiences of the same thing, they
cannot both proceed from the nature of the thing; but one, or the other must
necessarily arise from the disposition and temper of those who are conversant
about it: Now I have showed that Forms of Prayer are in themselves real
advantages to public Devotion, and that they are so, there are many thousands
of good Christians can attest by their own experience; and therefore if our
Brethren do not experience the same, the fault must lie in their own prejudice,
or temper, and there is no doubt to be made, but would they heartily endeavor
to cure their own prejudice, and to dispossess their minds of those groundless
Piques they have entertained against our Liturgy; would they but peruse it with
impartial eyes; consider the contents, and labor to affect their minds with
the sense and matter of it; they would quickly find the same experience of its
advantageousness to public devotion, as those blessed Martyrs did who composed
it, used, and at last died for it, and valued every Leaf of it as an
inestimable treasure; and as we should consent in our experience, so we should
also in our communion, and with one heart and one mouth glorify our Father
together.

FINIS.
CERTAIN Cases of Conscience RESOLVED, Concerning The Lawfulness of Joining
WITH Forms of Prayer IN Public Worship. PART II. VIZ.

IV. Whether the common wants of Christian Congregations may not be better
represented in conceived Prayers than in Forms? V. Whether there be any warrant
for Forms of Prayer either in Scripture or pure Antiquity? VI. Whether
supposing Forms to be lawful, the imposition of them may be lawfully complied
with?
LONDON: Printed by J. C. and F. C. for T. Basset, at the George in
Fleet Street; B. Took, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard; and F. Gardener,
at the White Horse in Ludgate Street. 1684.

CASE IV. Whether the common Cases and Wants of Christians can be so well
expressed in one Constant Form, as in a Conceived Prayer?
IT is objected, That not only the Cases of particular Christians, but the
common Cases of Christian Societies and Assemblies are subject to infinite
Changes and Alterations; that they have many times new Judgments to be humbled
for, new Blessings to return thanks for, new Dangers to deprecate, and new
Hopes to pursue and solicit, which the Composers of our standing Forms could
not foresee, and for which by consequence they could not provide suitable
Petitions and Thanksgivings; besides which, particular Churches may at one time
be more pure and reformed, and at another time more depraved and degenerated;
and certainly such different states require different Confessions and Prayers:
and therefore to suit and adapt one common Form to common Cases and
Necessities, which are so very variable and alterable, seems as vain an
attempt, as 'twould be to make a Coat to fit the Moon in all its changes;
whereas were the public Prayers left to be conceived and worded by the
Ministers, sufficient provision might be made for all these alterations and
changes, by their varying their Confessions, Petitions, and Thanksgivings,
according as the common Cases and Exigencies of their People vary: and
therefore since conceived Prayers are most fit to represent the public Cases
and Necessities, they think it very unlawful that the public Prayers should be
performed by a Form. In order to the full and plain resolution of this Case
therefore I shall lay down these following Propositions:

1. That the common Cases and Necessities of Christians are for the main always
the same, and therefore may be more fully comprehended in a Form, than in an
extempore Prayer: for public Prayers ought not to descend to particular Cases
and Necessities, because they are the Prayers of the whole Congregation, and
therefore ought to comprehend no more than what is more or less every man's
Case and Necessity: They ought to confess sin in no other particular instances
or aggravations, than such as are justly chargeable upon a Congregation of
Christians; nor to petition or return thanks for any other Mercies, but what a
Christian Congregation may be supposed either to stand in need of, or to have
received; because the Confession, Petition, and Thanksgiving is in the name of
the whole Congregation, and therefore ought to comprize nothing in them but
what is the common Case of all, and what every one may truly and sincerely join
with. Now as for these matters of Prayer which are common to Christian
Congregations, they are for the main always the same; the same sins and
aggravations of sin which were fit for a common Confession of Christians one
thousand years ago, are for the main as fit for our common Confessions to this
day; and the Mercies which we need and receive in common now, are for the main
the same with what all Christians before us have needed and received in common.
As for instance, the Mercies which in public Prayer ought to be petitioned
for, are such as all Christians have a common need of, and ought to have a
common concern for; such as the forgiveness of our sins, the peace of our
Consciences, the assistance of Divine Grace to deliver us from the power of sin
and Satan, and make us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in
light, redemption from Death and Hell, protection and success in all our honest
Concerns and Undertakings, and the daily supply of our bodily Wants and
Necessities; and in general, the preservation and direction of our Governors,
the peace and welfare of our native Country, the prosperity of the Church, the
propagation of the Gospel, and the success of its Ministers in the work of the
Lord. And these were the main matter of the common Petitions of Christian
people a thousand years ago, and will be so a thousand years hence. Since
therefore the matter of public Prayer is for the main always the same, I can
see no reason why, so far as it is the same, it may not be more comprehensively
expressed in a Form, than in an extempore Prayer; which depending on the
present invention and memory of the speaker, it is impossible almost, but of so
many particulars, some should be many times omitted, or at least not so fully
and distinctly expressed, as it might be in a well-consider'd Form; the
Composer of which has much more time to recollect the matter, and may supply
whatsoever was omitted at first, upon a second or a third revisal: and I dare
appeal to any impartial Judge, whether in our Churches Litany, how meanly
soever our Brethren may think of it, there be not a much more distinct
enumeration of the main particulars of public Petitions, than ever he met with
in any extemporary Prayer.

2. That such alterations of the common Cases and Necessities of Christian
Churches as could not be for^seen and provided for at the first forming of
their Liturgies, may for the most part be provided for in new Forms, when they
happen; for so our Church, we see, has done in all such new Cases as are of a
more public and general concern: though the Composers of our Liturgy could not
foresee the Horrid Powder Plot, and the strange discovery of it, the impious
Murder of the late King, and the happy Restoration of this, yet upon the
happening of those great Events, our Church has always taken care to provide
such Forms of public Prayer as are every way suitable to the Case: and as for
those extraordinary Cases which might be foreseen, because they happen more
frequently in the course of things, such as want of Rain, or fair Weather,
Dearth and War, Plague and Sickness, there may be Forms composed for them
aforehand, as there are in our Church's Liturgy; so that it is no Argument at
all against public Forms, that they cannot make a due provision for
extraordinary Cases and Events: for before they happen, extempore Prayers can
no more make due provision for them than Forms; and after they happen, as due a
provision may be made for them by Forms as by extempore Prayers.

3. That supposing such provision for extraordinary Cases be not or cannot be
made in the public Form, yet that is no Argument why it should not be used so
far forth as it comprehends the main of the common Cases and Necessities of the
People: for, as I showed before, the main matter of public Prayer may be much
more fully comprehended in a studied Form, than it can reasonably be supposed
to be in an extempore Prayer; in which, in all probability, there will be more
omissions, as to what respects the ordinary cases of Christians, than there are
in the public Form, as to what respects their extraordinary cases: so that if
the Form ought not to be used, because it extends not always to all their
extraordinary Cases, for the same reason extempore Prayer ought not to be used,
because it extends not always to all their ordinary Cases. But since, as has
been proved at large, the use of Forms is upon sundry accounts of great
advantage to the public Devotion, it is very reasonable that they should be
used so far forth as they can and do express the common Cases and Necessities;
and that the people should not be deprived of the benefit of joining with them
in the main matters of public Prayer, because such extraordinary matters may
occur as either are not or can be expressed in them; especially when

4. The defect of such new provision, for extraordinary Cases, may be supplied
by the Minister in a public Prayer of his own: for, as I observed before, our
Church allows, or at leasts permits the Minister to use a Prayer of his own
composure in the Pulpit; in which, if any extraordinary Mercy or Judgment, for
which there is no provision in our Liturgy, happen to the place he lives in,
there is no doubt but he may and ought to supply the Devotion of his People
with such Confessions, Petitions, and Thanksgivings, as are proper and suitable
to the occasion: and where this is allowed of or permitted, the non-provision
for such extraordinary Cases in the established Liturgy can be no bar at all
against the use of it, provided its Prayers be good, and comprehend all
ordinary matters of Prayer; it is sufficiently provided for ordinary public
Devotion, and so far doubtless may be lawfully used, sufficient provision being
otherwise made for all those extraordinary matters which it does not or could
not comprehend. The sum of all therefore is this, That as for the ordinary and
main matters of public Prayer, they may be more fully and distinctly
comprehended in a Form, than in an extempore Prayer; and as for those new
matters which extraordinary public Emergencies do administer, they may for the
generality be as well comprehended in a new Form, as in a new extempore Prayer;
and though it should not or could not be expressed in the public Form, yet
that is no bar against our joining with it in all other matters of Prayer,
especially when these new matters of Prayer may be comprehended and expressed
in a public Prayer of the Minister's own composure.

CASE V. Whether there be any Warrant for Forms of Prayer in Scripture, or pure
Antiquity?
IN which Case there are two Enquiries to be made: 1. Whether there be any
Warrant for Forms of Prayer in the holy Scripture? 2. Whether there be any
evidence of the public use of them in the primitive and purer Ages of the
Church?

1. Whether there be any Warrant for the use of Forms of Prayer in holy
Scripture? Where by Warrant must be meant either, first, positive Command; or
secondly, allowed Example; for upon both these our Brethren insist: First, they
require us to produce some positive Command, upon this pretense, that nothing
ought to be used in the Worship of God, but what is commanded by him; which,
how true it is, is not my present business to enquire, that being done already
to excellent purpose, in the Case about Indifferent Things. But because upon
this pretense our Brethren reject the use of Forms as unlawful, I shall
endeavor to prove these two things:

1. That supposing this pretense were true, yet it does not conclude against
the use of Forms. 2. That supposing it did conclude against the use of Forms,
it equally concludes against conceived or extempore Prayer.
1. That supposing this pretense were true, viz. That what is not commanded by
God, ought not to be used in his Worship, yet it does not conclude against the
use of Forms: for though we do not pretend that God has any-where commanded us
to pray to him by Forms and no otherwise, or that all the Prayers which we at
any time offer to him, should be first composed into a Form; yet we do assert,
that he has enjoined some Forms to be used and offered up in Prayer, though
together with those particular Forms we grant there might be, and doubtless
sometimes were other Prayers to be offered up to him. Thus in the Old Testament
we read of sundry Forms of Prayer enjoined to be used by God himself, and which
is the same thing, by persons immediately inspired; so Numb. 6. 23, 24, 25, 26.
On this wise, or thus, shall Aaron and his sons bless the children of Israel,
saying unto them, The Lord bless thee and keep thee, the Lord make his face
shine upon thee, the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee
peace. In which words the Priest did solemnly invocate and pray for a Blessing
on the people, and he is commanded to do it, saying unto them this very Form of
words, The Lord bless thee, etc. which is as plain an injunction of this Form,
as words can well express. So also in the expiation of uncertain Murder, Deuteronomy.
21. 7, 8. the people are enjoined by God to say, Be merciful, O Lord, unto thy
people Israel, whom thou have redeemed, and lay not innocent blood unto thy
people of Israel 's charge. So also at their paying their third years Tithes,
they were expressly enjoined to use this Form of words, I have brought away the
hallowed things out of mine house, etc. Look down from thy holy habitation from
heaven, and bless thy people Israel, and the land which thou have given unto
us, as thou swarest unto our fathers, the land that flows with milk and honey.
And as God enjoined them these and suchlike Forms for particular occasions, so
David, by inspiration from God, appointed them the Book of Psalms for their
Public Service: for so in the Titles we find several of them particularly
recommended to the Choires of the Priests and Levites for parts of their Vocal
Service, some to the Sons of Korah, others to Asaph, others to Jeduthun, and a
great many to the Master of the Music. And though others have no title at all,
as particularly the 96th and 105th, yet 1 Chronicles. 16. 7. we find that they were
delivered by David into the hands of Asaph and his brethren, for Forms of
Praise and Thanksgiving to God; and accordingly, 2 Chronicles. 29. 30. we are told
that Hezekiah the King commanded the Levites to sing praise unto the Lord, with
the words of David and of Asaph the seer. And this Liturgy was renewed by Ezra,
at the laying the Foundations of the second Temple; for so, Ezra 3. 10, 11. the
Priests and Levites were ordered to praise the Lord after the Ordinance of
David King of Israel, and accordingly they sung together by course, in praising
and giving thanks unto the Lord, because he is good, for his mercy endures for
ever toward Israel. And besides all these instances of Forms of Prayer
appointed by God in the Old Testament, we have a very considerable one in the
New, and that is the Lord's Prayer, which in Luke 11. 2. our Savior thus
prescribes, When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. in which he does as expressly
enjoin them the using of that Form of words as was possible for him to do in
any humane Language: for if he had said, When ye pray, say or use this Form of
words, it could not have been more expressive of his intention to impose it as
a Form, than his bidding them, when they prayed, to say, Our Father: And if we
will not admit that to be the sense of a Text, which the words of it do as
plainly signify as they could have done if it were, we have no way to
determine the sense of any Scripture, but may eternally play upon the plainest
words of it with quirks of wit and fancy. But it is objected by our Brethren,
That in Matthew. 6. 9. where our Savior also delivers this Prayer to the
Disciples, instead of bidding them say Our Father, he only bids them pray
after this manner, Our Father, etc. which is a plain argument, say they, that
he gave it to them not as a Form, but as a Pattern and Directory of Prayer. To
which I answer, 1. That where the same matter is mentioned ambiguously in one
Text, and plainly and expressly in another, it is a necessary rule of
interpretation, that the sense of the doubtful and ambiguous Text should be
determined by the words of the plain and express Text. Now it is plain, that
(...), pray thus, is of a doubtful signification, and may as well denote, Pray
in these words, as after this Pattern and Direction; and he who is bid to pray
thus, obeys the command, whether he prays for the same things in others, or in
the same words; so that had our Savior expressed himself in no other words but
these, it might have been doubtful whether he meant to prescribe it as a Form,
or as a Directory of Prayer: but say Our Father, is plainly and expressly, say
these words, Our Father; and he who is bid to say such words, disobeys the
command, though he should say the same thing in other words: so that had our
Savior expressed himself in no other words but these, there could have been no
doubt but that his meaning was to prescribe those words for a Form of Prayer;
unless we could have supposed, that by this Injunction, say Our Father, we are
not obliged to say Our Father; and how could we have supposed that, without
high presumption, had it not been for this pretense of (...), pray thus? Since
therefore pray thus is a doubtful expression, it is very reasonable it should
be interpreted by say Our Father, which is a plain and determinate one; and if
so, the sense of both must be this, When ye pray, use this Form of words, which
I here prescribe you, Our Father, etc. 2ly. I answer, that our Savior gave not
this Prayer to his Disciples after the manner of a Directory, but after the
manner of a Form of Prayer: had he given it to them merely as a direction what
they were to pray for, in all probability he would have expressed himself after
another manner, and instead of bidding them say Our Father, or pray thus, Our
Father, he would have bid them call upon God by the Name of their heavenly
Father, and beseech him to cause his Name to be glorified and hallowed in the
World, and his Kingdom to spread and advance, etc. instead of which, he gives
them a formed Prayer, and bids them say it: And therefore since he gave it to
them after the manner of a Form, and not after the manner of a Directory, and
since we may reasonably suppose that he intended they should use it after the
same manner in which he gave it, it follows, that he gave it to them to be used
as a Form, and not merely as a Pattern, or Directory. 3 ly. I answer, That
supposing that when he bid them pray thus, in the sixth of St. Matthew, he
prescribed it only as a Directory for Prayer, yet it does not follow but that
when he bad them say Our Father, in the 11th of Luke, he might prescribe it as
a Form, because it is not the same prescription in both, but different, and
given them at a different time, and upon a different occasion: the first was
given them in the Sermon upon the Mount, and in the second year after his
Baptism; the second was given them upon their own request, after he had done
praying, and in the third year after his Baptism: and whosoever shall consult
both places, will soon be convinced that the Lords Prayer in St. Luke was
delivered at another time, and upon a quite different occasion from that in St.
Matthew. It Is highly probable therefore that the Disciples, when 'twas
delivered in St. Matthew, looked upon it merely as given 'em by way of a
Directory or Copy by which they were to frame and compose their Prayers: for if
they had thought it given 'em as a Form of Prayer, it is not imaginable why
they should request him to teach 'em a Form to pray by again, when he had
taught 'em one before: either therefore their request in St. Luke must be very
impertinent, or it must be to desire him to teach 'em something more than they
apprehended he had taught 'em in St. Matthew; but they knew that in St. Matthew
he had taught 'em already how, and in what manner to pray; and therefore what
further could they now request of him in St. Luke, but that he would teach 'em
a Form of Prayer? Supposing then that St. Matthew's words were intended by our
Savior merely for a Directory according as his Disciples apprehended, yet it
does not follow that St. Luke's were so intended too, because it was not only
given at a different time, and upon a different occasion, but the occasion was
their requesting our Savior to teach 'em something more than what he had
taught 'em in St. Matthew, that is, something more than a mere Pattern or
Directory for Prayer; and what else could that something more be but a Form?
Especially considering, 4ly. That the occasion of Christ's giving 'em this
Prayer in St. Luke, was their requesting him to teach 'em to pray as John
taught his Disciples: for it was the custom of the Jewish Doctors, as our
Learned Lightfoot has proved, to teach their Disciples a Form of Prayer as the
Badge and Livery of their Discipleship; according to which custom it seems,
John the Baptist had taught his Disciples a Form of his own composure; which
the Disciples of Jesus understanding, they make it their request to him, that
he, according to this laudable custom, would teach them to pray also, that is,
teach 'em a Form of Prayer even as John had taught his Disciples: And that it
was a Form, and not merely a Directory of Prayer which they requested, is
evident not only from this custom of the Jewish Doctors, but also from the
reason of the thing: for how can we reasonably imagine that either John or our
Saviors Disciples should be ignorant how to pray, since as they were Jews,
they had their set hours of daily Prayer which they constantly observed? viz.
the third, the sixth, and the ninth, besides which, as I observed before, the
Disciples of our Savior had already received a Directory of Prayer from him;
so that without all controversy, that which they now request of him was not a
Directory but a Form: When therefore upon this their request he bid 'em say,
Our Father, they had all the reason in the World to believe that he prescribed
it as a Form; and unless he prescribed it as a Form, he did not answer their
request even when he pretended to answer it.

But it is further objected by our Brethren, That supposing our Savior did
prescribe it as a Form of Prayer to his Disciples, yet it was only pro
tempore, till such time as they were more fully instructed and enabled to pray
by the coming of the holy Ghost. To enforce which, they observe, that this
Prayer was not directed by Christ to be offered up in his Name, as all their
Prayers were to be after his Ascension into Heaven: for though hitherto, that
is, while Christ was upon Earth, his Disciples had asked nothing in his Name,
John 16. 44. yet he enjoins 'em after his Ascension to ask in his Name, John
14. 13, 14. John 16. 23. which is a plain token, say they, that if he did
prescribe 'em this Prayer as a Form, he intended it should be of no longer use
than till after his Ascension; otherwise he would have inserted into it his own
Name, in which from thence to the end of the World all Christian Prayers were
to be offered up: and accordingly, say they, in all the New Testament we have
not the least intimation of the Disciples using this Form.

In answer to which Objection, I shall endeavor to make out these three
things: 1. That our Savior has not given us the least intimation, that he
prescribed this Form pro tempore only, or for a certain time. 2. That his not
inserting his own Name into it, is no argument at all that he so meant or
intended. 3. That though there be no mention in the New Testament of the
Apostles and Disciples using it, yet this is no argument either that they did
not use it, or believe themselves obliged to use it.

1. That our Savior has not given us the least intimation that he prescribed
this Form pro tempore only, and not for continual use; nor indeed do those who
object it, produce the least shadow of any such intimation: and I would beseech
my Brethren to consider of what dangerous consequence it may be for them to
pronounce Christ's Institutions null, and extinguish the Obligations of them,
without producing his authority for it: for, at the same rate, they may make
void all the Institutions of our Savior, and pronounce even Baptism and the
Lord's Supper temporary Prescriptions, as the Quakers do, as well as the Lord's
Prayer. Whatsoever Christ has instituted without limitation of time, does
always oblige, though the perpetuity of the Obligation be not expressed by him:
and therefore unless the Objectors can prove that Christ has limited the use
of the Lord's Prayer to such or such a time, say Our Father must as much oblige
now, as it did when it was first delivered. But perhaps it may be said, that
though Christ has not in express words limited the use of this Form to such a
time, yet since his own Name, wherein all Prayers were to be offered up after
his ascension, is not inserted into it, this is a fair intimation, that he
never intended it should be used after his ascension. I answer therefore,

2. That his not inserting his own Name into it, is no argument at all that he
never intended it should be used after his ascension: we do acknowledge, that
after he was ascended and sat down at the right hand of his Father, all his
followers were obliged to offer up their Prayers in his Name or Mediation; but
withal we do affirm, that they may offer up their Prayers in his Name, though
they do not name him: for thus we have several Prayers of Christ's Disciples
recorded in the New Testament, which, without doubt, were offered in his Name,
and yet his Name is not inserted in them, at least not as implying his
mediation, as particularly Acts 4. 24. for indeed to pray in the Name of
Christ, is to pray in his mediation, and to hope and depend upon his sacrifice
and intercession for a gracious answer of our Prayers: and if we expect all
good through Jesus, and wholly rely upon his merit for the acceptance of our
Prayers, we pray in his Name though we do not name him; so that Christ's not
inserting his Name into this Prayer of his, does not at all hinder us from
offering it up in his mediation. It Is true, could it be made appear, that he
did not intend we should offer this Prayer in his Name, it would thence follow,
that he did not intend we should use it after his ascension; but his not
inserting his Name into it, is no argument at all that he did not intend we
should offer it in his Name, since we may as well and truly offer it in his
Name, though he is not named in it, as if he were; and he has not given us the
least intimation of his will to the contrary: it is true, he did not express his
Name in it, because as yet they to whom he gave it, were not to ask in his
Name, he being not yet ascended; but now that he is ascended, we can as well
offer it in his Name, as if his Name had been expressed in it: how then does it
follow, that because he did not direct them to offer it in his Name* before his
ascension, therefore he did not intend they should offer it in his Name
afterward? especially considering that he himself had so framed it, that after
his ascension, when the Doctrine of his Mediation was to be more fully
explained to them, they could not offer it at all but in and through his
mediation: for now that we understand his mediation, we know that we are the
Sons of God, in and through him; and therefore when we thus invoke God, Our
Father which art in Heaven, we must implicitly invoke him in and through Jesus
Christ, through whom alone we acknowledge it is that God is peculiarly our
Father. Since therefore our Savior has so composed this Form, as that after
his ascension his Followers could offer it up no otherwise, but in and through
his mediation, this is a plain indication, that he intended that after his
ascension they should offer it in his mediation, though his Name be not expressed
in it; and what though it be not expressed? yet it may be expressed, and always
has been in the Prayers immediately preceding it: for though we do believe
that our Savior has commanded us to use this Form, at least in our public
Worship, yet we do not pretend that no other Prayer is to be used besides,
either in public or in private; and if we use another Prayer before it, we may
express in the transition to it, as we ordinarily do, that it is in the Name and
Mediation of Jesus Christ that we pray, Our Father, etc. Since therefore when
we say Our Father, we do implicitly pray in Christ's mediation, and also
explicitly in the Prayers annexed to it, how does it follow, that because
Christ's Name is not expressed in it, therefore he did not intend we should
offer it in his mediation, or therefore he did not intend it for a standing
Form?

3. That though there be no mention in the New Testament of the Apostles and
Disciples using it, yet this is no argument either that they did not use it, or
that they did not believe themselves obliged to use it: for the great design
of the New Testament being to give an account of the Life of Jesus, and of the
Doctrines and Precepts of his Religion, together with those miraculous Works by
which it was confirmed, it can no more be expected that the Prayers of the
Christian Assemblies should be recorded in it, than that the Liturgy of the
Church of England should be recited in the Exposition of the Creed, or the
whole Duty of Man. And therefore as the New Testament takes no notice of their
using the Lord's Prayer, so neither does it take notice of any other particular
Prayer that they used in their public Assemblies: from whence we may as
reasonably conclude, that they used no Prayer at all, notwithstanding our Lord
commanded them to pray, as that they did not use the Lord's Prayer,
notwithstanding he commanded them to say, Our Father; or at least that they did
not Baptize in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
since notwithstanding Christ commanded them to do so, yet there is no record in
the New Testament of their baptizing any persons in that Form. So that from the
silence of the New Testament in this matter, it would be very unreasonable to
infer, that the Apostles omitted the Lords Prayer, notwithstanding he once
commanded them to use it; especially considering that those who lived nearest
the Apostolical Ages, and so were the most competent Judges of what was done in
them, where the Scripture is silent, did always use this Form in their public
Prayers, and believe themselves obliged to do so: For thus in the Apostolic
Age Lucian makes mention of a Prayer which they used in their public Worship,
(...), beginning from the Father; which doubtless was the Lords Prayer: vid.
Lucian. Philop. And Tertullian, who lived about an hundred years after the
Apostolical Age, discoursing of the Lord's Prayer, tells us, that Novis
Discipulis, novi Testamenti Christus novam Orationis Formam determinavit, (i.
e.) That Christ has instituted a new Form of Prayer for his new Disciples. St.
Cyprian, who was but a small matter his Junior, reckons his giving a Form of
Prayer among those divine and wholesome Precepts which he imposed on his
People: and a little after, Oremus, says he, Fratres dilectissimi, sicut
Magister docuit, etc. Let us pray as our Master has taught us, let the Father
own the words of his Son; and since, says he, we have an Advocate with the
Father, when we ask pardon for our sins, let us ask it in the words of our
Advocate; and how much more shall we prevail, for what we ask in Christ's Name,
if we ask in his Prayer? De Orat. Domin. So St. Cyril acquaints us, that after
the general Prayer for all men, followed that, (...), i. e. the Prayer which
Christ taught his Disciples. Cyril. Cat. Mist. 5. Thus also St. Jerome: Docuit
Apostolos ut quotidie in corporis illius sacrificio, credentes audeant loqui
Pater Noster. Hieron. in Pelag. l. 3. And St. Austin tells us, that in his time
the Lords Prayer was every day said at the Altar, and that almost every Church
concluded with the Lords Prayer. And St. Chrysostom speaking of those who would
not forgive injuries, tells 'em, etc. When thou say, Forgive us Hom. 42. 50.
ep. 59. ad Paul. Qu. 5. St. Chrysde simultat. (...).
our Trespasses as we forgive; if thou do not forgive, thou beggest God to
deny thee forgiveness: which is a plain evidence that this Form of Prayer was
of ordinary use in his Age; and that 'twas then thought matter of duty to use
it syllabically, is evident from what follows. But, says he, you will say, I
dare not say, Forgive me as I forgive, but only Forgive me: To which having
answered, That however he said it, God would forgive him as he forgave, he
concludes thus: Do not imagine (...).
that you are secured from this danger by not pronouncing all the Prayer; do
not therefore curtail it, but as it is instituted, so use it, that so the
necessity of daily using the whole, may compel thee to forgive thy Brother. And
St. Gregory expressly affirms, That the Apostles themselves Ep. l. 7. c. 6.
did always at the Consecration of the Eucharist make use of the Lords Prayer.
By these and sundry other Testimonies which are quoted by learned men upon this
argument, it is evident that the Church of Christ in all Ages looked upon the
Lords Prayer as a standing Form given by our Savior, to be perpetually used by
Christians: and to be sure, they who believed the institution of it to be
perpetually obliging, could not make the least doubt, but that it was
constantly used in the Apostolic Age. And my thinks it is very strange, that
had the institution been temporary, the Church of Christ for fifteen hundred
years should never be wise enough to discover it; and it seems to me a very
high presumption for us to determine against the constant belief and practice
of the Church in all Ages, without the least warrant so to do, either from our
Savior or his Apostles.

By all this therefore it is abundantly evident, that both in the Old and New
Testament there have been Forms of Prayer instituted and appointed by God
himself; so that were that true which our Brethren affirm, that nothing ought
to be admitted into the Worship of God which he has not commanded, yet this
will not conclude against the admission of Forms of Prayer, since there are
Forms which God himself has commanded.

But they object yet farther, That all that this proves is, that Forms of
Prayer of Gods appointment may and ought to be admitted into his Worship; which
no body doubts of: but from hence it does by no means follow, that men may
appoint Forms of humane composure: for those Forms of Prayer which God
prescribed were immediately dictated by him to those inspired persons who
delivered 'em; and therefore we may as well pretend to appoint new Scripture
for public instruction, because those inspired persons did so, as to appoint
new Forms for public Worship. Now because I perceive this Objection is very
much insisted on by our Brethren, I shall endeavor to return a full and clear
answer to it, in these following Propositions: First, That this Objection
allows the prescribing of Forms of Prayer to be lawful in its own nature.
Secondly, That it must allow the prescribing of public Forms to be not only
lawful, but good and useful. Thirdly, It must also allow that Gods prescribing
Forms of Prayer by inspired persons, is so far forth a Warrant for our
imitation, as the thing it self is good and useful, and lawfully imitable by
us. Fourthly, That though it follows, that because God by inspired persons has
prescribed Forms of Prayer, therefore the Church may prescribe them upon Gods
reasons; yet it does by no means follow, that therefore it may prescribe them
as Scripture or divine Inspirations.

First, That this Objection allows the prescribing of Forms of Prayer to be
lawful of its own nature, that is, to be void of all intrinsic evil, and to
have no contrariety in the nature of it to the eternal Rules and Dictates of
right reason: for this Objection granting, as it does, that God has prescribed
Forms of Prayer, must either admit that God may do, and has done that which is
intrinsically evil, and repugnant to right reason, or grant that the
prescribing of Forms has no intrinsic evil in it. And in particular, it is to
be considered, that our Saviors prescribing his Form was a tacit approbation
of other Forms that were prescribed before, and that not only by God, but by
men too: for though besides those Forms which were prescribed by God for the
public Worship of the Jews, their Doctors tell us of sundry Forms of humane
Composure that were used in their Temple and Synagogues in our Savior's time,
yet he was so far from disapproving either them, or that which John Baptist
taught his Disciples, that in conformity to the later, he prescribed a Form to
his own Disciples; which Form of his, as our Learned Gregory has proved, he
collected out of Forms of Prayer which were then used among the Jews, in whose
Books the several parts and clauses of it are extant almost verbatim to this
day: and certainly had he disapproved their Forms as evil and sinful, he would
never have collected his own Prayer out of 'em. Since therefore our Savior
has not only given us a Form, but has also given it under such circumstances
as do plainly signify his approbation of other Forms, it necessarily follows,
that either he has approved that which is evil, or that Forms of Prayer are
not evil.

Secondly, That this Objection must allow the prescribing of public Forms to
be not only lawful in it self, but also good and useful: for whatsoever God
does, he is directed to do by his own infallible Wisdom; which always proceeds
upon the best reasons, and proposes the best ends of action to him, and the
most effectual means to compass and obtain 'em: when therefore we grant that
God has done such or such a thing, we must either allow the thing to be good
and useful to some excellent end and purpose, or suppose that he did not
consult his Wisdom in it, or that his Wisdom was mistaken. He therefore who
allows that God has prescribed Forms of Prayer, must either blaspheme his
Wisdom, or grant the prescribing 'em to be good and useful. But it is objected
that the prescribing 'em was good and useful only at that time, and under
those circumstances wherein they were prescribed: as for instance, in the times
of the Old Testament it may be allowed, that the prescribing of Forms might be
good and useful, the Jews, to whom they were prescribed, being a carnal, dull,
and stupid People; and yet under the times and circumstances of the
Gospel-state, which is so vastly different, the prescribing 'em may not only
cease to be good, but become hurtful and injurious. To which in short, I
answer, 1st. That supposing it were the Carnality, Dullness, and Stupidity of
the Jews that rendered Forms so useful to 'em; I doubt that as to those
particulars, the case is not so much altered with the generality of Christians,
but that they may be useful still: and though it is to be hoped we are not
altogether so very dull and carnal as they were, yet, as it has been made
appear in the former part of this Treatise, we are not so perfectly refined
from Dullness and Carnality, but that Forms of Prayer may still be very useful
to us. But, 2ly. this Objection allows not only that there were Forms of
Prayer prescribed in the Old Testament, but that our Savior himself has also
prescribed one in the New, for all successive Ages to pray by; and if so, then
we must either blaspheme the Wisdom of our Savior for prescribing what is vain
and useless, or grant the prescription of Forms to be good and useful, not
only for the Jewish, but also for the Gospel-state.

Thirdly, This Objection must also allow that Gods prescribing Forms of Prayer
by inspired persons is so far forth a Warrant for our imitation, as the thing
it self is good and useful, and imitable by us: if God does such or such a
thing because it is good, and useful to some end, that is a sufficient Warrant
for us to do the same, provided we have the same reason: for, to imitate God is
not only our privilege, but our duty. But how can we be said to imitate Him,
if so far as our power extends, we do not the same things that he does, when we
have the same reasons? Since therefore God as supreme Governor of his Church
has prescribed Forms of Prayer because they are good and useful, those whom he
has substituted to govern for him, are thereby sufficiently warranted to
prescribe 'em too, so long as they continue so; so that Gods prescribing 'em is
a sufficient argument that they are useful; and that they are useful, is a
sufficient reason for the Governors of the Church to prescribe 'em also,
because for that reason God himself has prescribed 'em: and certainly our
Spiritual Governors, who are in Gods stead, are sufficiently warranted to do
as God has done, when they have Gods own reason to do it. Against this I know
nothing can be objected, but only that common and fundamental Principle of all
our Separations, viz. That God himself has forbid the prescribing of any thing
in or about his Worship but what he himself has prescribed: and therefore
whatsoever reason there may be for it, no other Forms ought to be prescribed
but what are of his own inditing and prescription. The falseness of which has
been sufficiently demonstrated in the Case about Indifferent Things: And
therefore as to the matter in hand, I shall only say, that the Objection
strikes with equal force against Extemporary words which God has not
prescribed, as against Forms of words which he has not prescribed: for as I
have already proved, Part 1. and shall yet further prove hereafter, praying
Extempore by our own Gift of expression is no more prescribed by God than
praying by a Form; and therefore the words of Extempore Prayers are no more
prescribed by him than the words of Forms: so that if the latter may not be
admitted into the Worship of God, because they are not prescribed by him,
neither may the former. And indeed, he who prays extempore, does as much
prescribe a Form of words to the people in public Worship, as he who prays by
a Form, their devout desires and affections being equally confined to this
particular Set of expressions in both. And if each single Presbyter may
prescribe a Form of words to the People which God has not prescribed 'em, how
much more may the Governors of the Church? Admitting therefore that such words
may be prescribed in Prayer as God has not prescribed, his prescribing of
Forms of Prayer must be a sufficient Warrant for the Governors of his Church
to prescribe 'em when they have his reason so to do.

Fourthly, and lastly, That though it follows that because God by inspired
persons has prescribed Forms of Prayer, therefore the Governors of the Church
may prescribe 'em upon Gods reasons; yet it does by no means follow, that
therefore they may prescribe 'em as Scripture, or Divine Inspiration. As
briefly to instance in another case: Because God the supreme Governor of his
Church, has taken care to instruct it by inspired persons, it thence follows
that those whom he has appointed to govern it, should take care to instruct it
too; but it does by no means follow, either that they should instruct it by
inspired persons, or that they should pretend to instruct it by Divine
Inspiration: for they have the same reason that God had to instruct it, viz.
because it is good and useful to the best purposes. And so far as they have the
same reason with God, they ought to do the same thing; but they cannot have the
same reason that God had to instruct it by inspired persons, because it is not
in their power so to do: and therefore as they cannot be obliged to it, so
neither ought they to pretend to it. And so it is as to prescribing Forms of
Prayer: for, That God himself has prescribed 'em to his Church by immediate
Inspiration, may be a sufficient Warrant for Church Governors to prescribe 'em
too; but it cannot be a sufficient Warrant for 'em to prescribe 'em by
immediate Inspiration: for they may have the same reasons to prescribe 'em that
God had, viz. because they are good and useful for public Devotion; but they
cannot have the same reason to prescribe 'em by immediate Inspiration, because
that is not in their power, and therefore 'twould be a manifest cheat for 'em
to pretend to it. Had they the same common reasons with God for both, his
Example would warrant 'em not only to prescribe 'em, but to prescribe 'em as
Scripture and Divine Inspiration; but since there is a peculiar reason why they
may not prescribe 'em as Scripture, viz. because they cannot without manifest
falsehood and presumption, which reason is not at all applicable to the bare and
simple prescribing 'em, therefore it does by no means follow, that if they may
lawfully do the latter, they may lawfully do the former also. Having thus
answered the Objections of our Brethren, it remains, that supposing that
Principle were true, viz. That nothing ought to be admitted into the Worship of
God, but what God has commanded; yet it does not universally conclude against
the admitting Forms of Prayer into his Worship, because he himself has
commanded some Forms, and by commanding them has licensed and authorized the
Governors of his Church to prescribe others upon the same reasons.

I proceed therefore to the second general Head proposed, which was to show,
that supposing this Principle, viz. That nothing ought to be admitted into the
Worship of God but what is commanded by him, did conclude against Forms of
Prayer, it equally concludes against conceived or extempore Prayers; because
these are no more commanded by God than Forms, nay indeed as to public
Worship, have much less claim to Divine Authority than Forms: but we will
suppose at present the Forms of Prayer were not at all commanded, yet this we
assert makes no more against them than it does against Extempore Prayers, there
being no command of God requiring us to pray Extempore, or to utter our
affections in Prayer in our own conceptions and expressions. It is indeed very
confidently asserted by our Brethren, That wheresoever we are commanded to pray
vocally, we are commanded to pray in our own conceptions and words: but that
this is not so, is evident from what has been discoursed before, viz. that God
has commanded men to pray in sundry Forms of his own composure; and sure in
those cases wherein they were commanded to pray vocally in Gods Conceptions and
Words, they could not be commanded to pray vocally in their own. Thus far
therefore our Brethren must grant, if they will be determined by express words
of Scripture, that the commands to pray vocally are not to be always understood
of praying Extempore, but sometimes of praying by a Form: and therefore by the
way, I cannot but wonder why they should appropriate as they do the name of
vocal Prayer to praying in their own words, and not as well allow the
expressing our desires to God in the words of a Form to be called Prayer, but
only saying or reading of a Prayer: for I would fain know, did the Priests and
Levites praise the Lord when they praised him in the words of David and Asaph?
did they pray to him when they expressed their desires to God in those
Petitionary Psalms which were directed to be used in their public Worship? or
did the Primitive Christians pray when they pronounced the Lords Prayer in
their solemn Devotions? If so, then there is no doubt but speaking to God in a
Form of words may as well be called Prayer, as speaking to him in our own
Extempore words: for vocal Prayer consists in the speaking of our devout
affections to God; and if they are spoken, they are vocal, whether it be in our
own Extempore words, or in a Form: if we only speak the words of Prayer,
whether they be Formed or Extempore, and do not send up our affections with
them, we only say a vocal Prayer, but do not vocally pray; but if the words we
speak carry our affections with them, we vocally pray whether they be the one
or the other. If our Brethren can prove that vocal Prayer consists in speaking
our desires to God in words of our own Extempore effusion, we will readily
yield them the whole Cause; but this they will never be able to prove, whilst
there are so many instances in Scripture of vocal Prayer by a Form. But they
pretend that whatsoever instances there may be of Forms in Old times, God has
declared in the New Testament that it is his will we should pray by our own
Gifts of Expression and Utterance for the future; which if they can prove, we
will readily yield that praying by Forms is unlawful, though not impossible:
but as for the matter of proof, they do not so much as pretend to produce any
express prohibition of praying by Forms; and all that they urge is only some
remote and far-fetcht consequences against it. Now supposing it had been the
will of God and our Savior, that we should not pray by Forms, it seems very
strange, that in all the New Testament there should be no express prohibition
of it; for first, the Jews, as I showed before, had several Forms prescribed
them in their public Worship; and that they used Forms in our Saviors time,
not only their Modern Rabbis do assert, but Philo himself, who lived not
longer after, makes mention of the holy Prayers that Phil. de victim. p. 843.
were offered by the Priests in the time of Sacrifice. And the Samaritan
Chronicle, as has been observed upon this. Argument, makes mention of a Book
in the year of the World 4713, which contained those Songs and Prayers that
were always used before their Sacrifices. And since the Jews, who were a most
tenacious People of their Rites and Customs, were always wont in their public
Administrations to worship God by Forms, how necessary was it to have given
some express prohibition of them, had it been his intent to exclude them out of
his Worship for the future? especially considering that the Sect of the
Essenes, who, as it is highly probable, did of all the Sects of the Jews, most
readily embrace Christianity, are particularly remarkt by Josephus, for that De
Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 7. p. 785.
they did use before the Sunrising, (...), certain Prayers which they received
from their Ancestors. And when those Jews who were the most disposed for
Christianity, and did most readily embrace it (insomuch that in a little time
the whole Sect of them seems to have been swallowed up into the Christian
Church) were so addicted to the use of Forms, how can it be imagined, that had
our Savior intended they should use them no longer, he would not have taken
care to give them some express warning of it? But when, instead of so doing, he
bids them, when they prayed, to say Our Father, how could they otherwise
apprehend, but that it was his meaning, that they should still continue to pray
by a Form, as they had always done before? And if he had not so intended, it
seems very strange he should take no care to undeceive them, or to prevent
their being deceived in this matter by some express command to the contrary:
for considering all, there was not a more urgent occasion for an express
prohibition of any Rite or Usage of the Jewish Church, than of this of praying
by a Form, supposing the prohibition of it had been intended; and yet I dare
boldly affirm, that there is not one Rite of that Church which our Savior
intended to forbid, but is much more plainly and expressly forbidden than this
is pretended to be. For the proof of this, and which is more, of the main
assertion, viz. that there is no injunction in Scripture of praying by our own
gifts of utterance without a Form, I shall particularly examine the several
Pretenses from which our Brethren infer such an Injunction.

1. Therefore, they pretend that God has promised and given to all good
Christians an ability to utter their minds in vocal Prayer to him; and
therefore for them to omit the using this ability to the end for which God has
given it to them, and pray by Forms of other men's composure, is contrary to his
mind and intention: which Objection has for the main been answered already,
Part 1. Case 2. wherein it has been proved at large, that this ability which
they pretend is promised and given by God for the purpose of vocal Prayer, is a
common Gift which God has no more appropriated to Prayer, than to any other
common end of utterance and elocution; and that therefore to omit the using it
in Prayer, is no more contrary to the intention of God, than to omit the using
it upon any other just and lawful occasion. But because our Brethren urge some
places of Scripture to prove that God has promised and given it merely to
enable them for vocal Prayer, I shall briefly inquire, whether it be so or no.
First therefore they urge Zech. 12. 10. I will pour out upon the house of
David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and
supplications, which, as I showed before, Part 1. Case 1. singnifies nothing to
their purpose. It Is urged indeed, that the Hebrew (...) here translated
Supplications, does always denote vocal Prayer, and that therefore pouring out
the Spirit of Supplications, must imply communicating an ability to Pray
vocally; but this is not so: for if we examine the places where this word is
used, we shall find it is no more restrained to vocal Prayer, than any other
word by which Prayer is expressed in Scripture; so that it may be as truly
said, that Prayer always signifies vocal Prayer, as that this Hebrew word for
Prayer does so. Nor indeed does it necessarily signify vocal Prayer in the
only place that is urged to prove that it always signifies so, viz. Psalm 28.
2. Hear the voice of my supplication when I cry unto thee: for this phrase, the
voice of my Supplication, and the voice of my Prayer, is a Hebraism, and
denotes no more, than my Supplication, or my Prayer: for so in Genesis 4. 10. it is
said, The voice of thy brother's blood cries from the ground; that is, it cried
just as mental Prayer does, without any material voice or sound, yet so as to
move God as effectually as the loudest vocal Prayer: so that the Psalmist might
cry to God with his mind, without opening his lips; and supposing he did, his
Prayer had a voice which God could hear as well as if he had pronounced it
never so loudly. But then in other places this Hebrew word plainly signifies at
large both mental and vocal Prayer indifferently: so in Psalm 86. 6. Give ear,
O Lord, unto my Prayer, attend to the voice of my Supplications: and Psalm 6.
9. The Lord has heard my Supplication, the Lord will receive my Prayer. And as
Prayer and Supplications signify the same thing, so the word Supplications is
used to express Prayer in general; as in Jer. 31. 9. They shall come with
weeping, and with supplications will I lead them: where the word plainly
denotes Prayer in general, without restriction to any kind of it; and so in
several other places, which it would be needless to name. But suppose it were
true, that the word were always used for vocal Prayer, there is no doubt but
this promise of pouring out the Spirit of Supplications, intends a much greater
good than the Gift of extempore utterance in Prayer, of which bad men may have
a greater share than the most devout and pious; and if it does denote a greater
good, what can that be but the gift of pious and heavenly affections in vocal
Prayer, of which we may as well partake in praying vocally by a Form, as by our
own extemporary utterance? But it is yet farther urged, that in pursuance of
this promise, the Apostle tells us, Gal. 4. 6. God has sent forth the Spirit
of his Son, crying, Abba, Father; and that we have received the Spirit of
Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father, Romans 8. 15. Now because (...) signifies
crying with a loud voice, it is from hence inferred, that we are gifted and
enabled by the Spirit, to express our selves to God in vocal Prayer, and that
therefore we ought not to pray by Forms. To which I answer, first, That if by
any thing in these words we are obliged to cry vocally to God by our own Gifts,
we are equally obliged to cry to him in these words, Abba, Father, in all our
vocal Prayers, because that is the cry or vocal Prayer which the Spirit inables
us to make; and the Text is every whit as express for the one as the other: and
therefore if crying by the Spirit must needs denote receiving a Gift from him
to pray vocally, then crying, Abba, Father, by the Spirit, must needs denote
receiving a Gift from him to pray vocally, Abba, Father; and consequently, not
to use these very words, when we cry vocally to God, will be altogether as
sinful an omission, as not to cry vocally by our own gift of utterance or
expression. Secondly, I utterly deny that crying here does necessarily denote
vocal Prayer: for how often do we find the word applied to things that have no
voice at all? Thus Luke 19. 40. I tell you, that if these should hold their
peace, the stones would immediately cry out; and yet no body imagines that our
Savior meant that the stones should make a Speech to prove him the true
Messiah. Thus also the Laborers hire unjustly detained by rich oppressors, is
said to cry to God, James 5. 4. not because it offered any vocal Prayer to him,
but because it moved and provoked him, as the vocal cries of injured persons do
us, to avenge them upon their oppressors: and in this sense mental Prayer may
be said to cry, because it moves and affects God as effectually as vocal. And
accordingly it is said of the Jews, That their heart cried unto the Lord, Lam.
2. 18. so that crying unto God signifies in the same latitude with Prayer,
which includes both vocal and mental. Thirdly, That supposing that our crying,
Abba, Father, by the Spirit, were to be understood of vocal Prayer, yet all
that can be gathered from it is only this, that when we pray vocally, we are
enabled by the holy Spirit to address our selves to God with boldness and
assurance, as to a kind and merciful Father; and this we may as well do, when
we pray by a Form, as when we pray extempore: for if we never cry, Abba,
Father, by the Spirit, but when we word our own Prayers, we can no more be said
to do it when we join with a public extempore Prayer, than when we join with a
public Form, because we word our own Prayers in neither.

But it is further insisted on, that the Scripture makes mention of a Gift of
utterance, which the Spirit communicates to true believers, as particularly 1
Cor. 1. 5. 2 Cor. 8. 7. which Gift, say they, was doubtless given for the
purpose of Praying, as well as of Preaching. To which, in short, I answer, That
it is most evident, that this Gift of utterance, or readiness of Speech, was
extraordinary, and peculiar to the primitive Ages of miraculous Gifts, wherein
the Preachers of the Gospel were ordinarily inspired with a supernatural
fluency, assurance, and volubility of Speech: for as St. Chrysostom observes,
Hom. 24. ad Ephesians. c. 6. this Gift of utterance is that which our Savior
promised his Disciples in Mark 13. 11. When they shall lead you and deliver you
up, take no thought beforehand what ye shall speak, neither do ye premeditate;
but whatsoever shall be given to you in that hour, that speak ye, for it is not
ye that speak, but the Holy Ghost: So that what they spoke was by immediate
inspiration, without any forethought or premeditation of their own; and it
being God that spoke immediately in and through them, what they delivered was
the Word of God; and this Gift certainly no sober Dissenter will pretend to:
and that this gift of utterance was extraordinary, is evident from Acts 2. 4.
where it is said, That the Apostles were filled with the Holy Ghost, and began
to speak with Tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance: so that we may as
well pretend to the Gift of Tongues, as to this Gift of Utterance, they being
both miraculous and extraordinary.

This, I think, is a sufficient Answer to those Scriptures which our Brethren
urge, to prove that God has promised and given to every good Christian an
ability to express their minds to him in Prayer, these being the only
Scriptures that are urged by them to prove it. But they object yet further,
That supposing God has not given to all Christians the Gift of praying
extempore, yet to a great many he has; and therefore these at least he
requires to pray by their Gift and not by a Form: for so in 1 Timothy 4. 14. He
expressly requires them not to neglect the gift that is in them, but to stir up
the gift of God that is in them: 2 Timothy 1. 6. And as they have received the
gift, even so to minister the same to one another: 1 Pet. 4. 10. And that
having gifts differing according to the grace given to us, whether prophecy to
prophecy, according to the proportion of Faith. And if they are obliged by
these Texts to exercise their Gifts in general, then are they obliged by them
to exercise their Gift of praying extempore in particular. In answer to which,
I shall need do no more than explain the nature of the Gifts here mentioned;
from which, I doubt not, it will evidently appear, that these Texts make
nothing to the purpose for which they are cited. First then, as for the Gift
spoken of in 1 Timothy 4. 14. the words themselves will sufficiently inform us
what it is; Neglect not the gift ^^t is in thee, which was given thee by
prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. By which Gift
it is evident St. Paul means that of the Episcopal Dignity: for first, it is here
said to be given him by prophecy; for so at the first plantation of the
Gospel, when the Apostles, after they had made some Converts in any City or
Country, could make but a short stay among them, and were forced to substitute
some new-made Convert to supply their room and perfect their beginnings, it was
impossible that in so small a time they should be able by any humane means to
discern which of their Converts was most fit for that employment; and therefore
the Holy Ghost did ordinarily point out the person to them by immediate
revelation: for so Clemens Romans tells, that at their first preaching in every
City and Country, (...); i. e. they ordained their first fruits, making proof
of them by the Spirit, Bishops and Deacons. And thus Acts 20. 28. it is said of
the Bishops of Asia, that the Holy Ghost set them over the Flock: and in Acts
13. 2. that as they were ministering, the Holy Ghost said, Separate to me
Barnabas and Saul. And St. Clemens Ep. 1. ad Cor.
tells us, that in those times they ordianed Bishops, (...), i. e. discerning
by the Spirit who should be ordained; and that they did it (...), upon perfect
foreknowledge who should be the man; even as Moses says, he foreknew by
divine revelation, that Aaron should be advanced to the Priesthood. And
accordingly St. Chrysostom upon this place thus discourses: The dignity of
being a Doctor and a Priest being great, wants God's suffrage, that a worthy
person may receive it; thereupon the Priests were made anciently by prophecy,
that is, by the Holy Ghost; thus Timothy was chosen to the Priesthood. Since
therefore this Gift of Timothy's was conferred on him by prophecy, it is
evi^^nt 'twas the Episcopal Office, which in those days was always conferred by
prophecy, i. e. by the immediate direction of the Holy Ghost; especially
considering, 2ly. That it was not only given him by prophecy, but also with
or together with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, which was the
outward sign or ceremony of ordination to spiritual Offices, as is evident,
Acts 6. 6. and 8. 17. and 13. 3. And that this Gift was not the Gift of
prophesying and of laying hands upon others, as has been pretended, is evident
not only from the words of the Text, which assert it to be given him by
prophecy, together with the laying on of hands; but also from 1 Timothy 1. 18.
compared with 2 Timothy 1. 6. where this phrase, by prophecy, is thus explained;
According to the prophesies which went before on thee: and this phrase, with
laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, is thus rendered; By the putting of my
hands: that is, together with the hands of other Presbyters. Which is a plain
evidence, that by this phrase here, by prophecy, with the laying on of hands,
must be meant, by divine Pred^ctions concerning thee, together with the laying
the hands of the Presbytery upon thee: and if so, what other Gift can be here
meant, but only that of his Episcopal Office, which was always conferred by
prophecy and imposition of hands? So that the meaning of these words, Neglect
not the Gift which is in thee, stir up the Gift which is in thee, is only to
admonish him to a diligent exercise of his Episcopal Power and Authority in the
Flock of which he was Overseer. And what does this signify toward the proving
it necessary that we should exercise our own Gifts in vocal Prayer, and express
our Affections in our own words?

And then as for those other Texts, viz. 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. and Romans 12. 6. I
answer, 1. That there can be nothing in them against praying by a Form: for if
so, they would make as much against using the Lord's Prayer, as any other Form.
2. That all that is intended in these Texts, is to stir men up to diligence and
fidelity in those particular Offices and Capacities wherein they are placed: So
1. Pet. 4. 10, 11. As every man has received a Gift, i. e. according to the
Office or Capacity he is placed in, even so minister the same to one another,
as good stewards of the manifold grace of God. If any man speak, that is, if it
be his Office to teach, let him speak as the Oracles of God: if any man
minister, or distribute to the poor, (...) let him do it as of the ability
which God gives; that is, proportionably to his estate: for just before, he
had been pressing them to be hospitable to one another without grudging. So
also Romans 12. 6. Having then Gifts differing according to the Grace that is
given to us, that is, being put into various Offices and Capacities, according
to the various dispensations of Divine Grace, whether it be that of prophecy,
let us prophecy, according to the proportion of faith; i. e. according to
those principles of faith and good life which are known and received among us:
or whether it be Ministry, that is, Deaconship, let us wait on our ministering:
or he that teaches, on teaching: or he that exhorts, on exhortation: he that
gives, let him do it with simplicity: he that rules, with diligence: he that
shows mercy, with cheerfulness. In all which it is evident, the design is to
excite them faithfully to discharge those several Offices whereunto God had
called and appointed them: for so the word Gift, as all agree, does in
Scripture frequently signify an Office; and that in both these Texts it is so
to be understood, is evident, because those things which the Apostles exhort
them to, are the proper acts and exercises of those several Offices and
Capacities of Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, and rich men: and the Argument by
which they exhort them, is, that they had received the proper Gifts to which
these acts appertain. So that if by these Gifts we understand abilities to
perform those acts, we shall force the Argument to prove too much, viz. that it
is the duty of every one to Rule, and Teach, and Minister, and Prophecy, that
has received an ability to do so; whereas, in truth, none can have a right to
perform these acts, (as all sober Dissenters will acknowledge) but only such
as are vested with the Offices to which they appertain. Wherefore either this
Argument, having received Gifts, must oblige all men to rule, etc. that are
able to do so, or else by Gifts must be meant the Offices to which those acts
of ruling, etc. belong. But you will say, It Is evident that by some of these
Gifts must be meant the ability of doing the acts here specified, as
particularly that of distributing to the Poor, and showing Mercy. I answer,
That as for these acts, the mere ability to relieve the poor and miserable not
only authorizes, but obliges us to them; and by putting it in our power, God
does as much make it our Office to relieve them, as if he had set us apart to
it by a solemn Ordination: and because the ability here confers the Office, the
Gift, though it signifies the Office, must necessarily include the ability too;
but in all those other particulars, where the Office and Ability are distinct
things, the Gift must signify the Office, distinct from the Ability; because
here it being the Office and not the Ability that authorizes and obliges us to
perform the acts, the necessity of performing the acts must be argued from the
Office, and not from the Ability. So then, if by the Gifts here spoken of,
only such and such Offices are intended, by what consequence does it follow,
that because those who are vested with these Offices, are here exhorted
faithfully to discharge them, therefore those who are able to pray extempore,
are hereby obliged to do so? Our Brethren may as well argue from these words,
that all those who are able to rule, are obliged to exercise the Episcopal
Office, as that those who are able to pray extempore, are obliged to pray
extempore. But then thirdly and lastly, I answer, That supposing that by these
Gifts were not meant Offices, but only Abilities, yet all that can hence be
argued is, that those who have them, are obliged to exercise them so far forth
as is consistent with edification: for so the Apostle exhorts, That all things
be done to edification; and to be sure, what he exhorts to in one Text, does
not at all clash with what he exhorts in another: and even of those
extraordinary Gifts that were poured out in the Primitive times, the Apostle
declares, 1 Cor. 14. that those who had them were no farther obliged to use
them in the Church, than the use of them tended to edification, verse. 2, 6, 18,
19. and particularly for the Gift of Tongues, though it was immediately
inspired, he totally forbids them the use and exercise of it where there was no
interpreter, verse. 23, 27, 28. If then we are not to exercise our Gifts, merely
because they are Gifts, but because the exercise of them tends to Edification;
and if when they do not tend to it, we are to suspend the exercise of them, as
it is plain we are, by this instance of the Gift of Tongues; then, although by
the Gifts mentioned in the above-named Text were meant Abilities, and not
Offices, yet it does not follow, that those who have an ability to pray
extempore, should therefore be obliged to exercise it any further than as it
tends to Edification: and therefore if praying by a Form in public Worship be
more for the public Edification, (and that it is, has been proved, Part 1.
Case 3.) we are no more obliged to pray extempore, though we have an ability to
do so, than he who had the Gift of Tongues was to exercise his Gift, when he
could not edify the public by it; and if we ought to suspend the exercise of
our Gift, when it is not at all edifying, at least we are not obliged to
exercise it when we may perform the same thing, without exercising it, in a
more edifying manner. Having thus shown the insufficiency of those Scriptures
which our Brethren urge to prove that those who are able to pray extempore are
obliged to do so, it remains that hitherto no discovery can be made of any
Command of Scripture by which we are obliged to pray vocally by our own gift or
ability of expression: for upon the utmost enquiry I can make, these which I
have answered, are the only Texts which with any show of argument our Brethren
produce to this purpose. Supposing therefore it were true, that nothing ought
to be admitted into God's Worship, but what he has commanded, yet this makes a
great deal more against praying by our own Gift, and in our own words and
expressions, than it does against praying by a Form, because there are express
Commands for praying in some cases by a Form, but there is no Command at all
for praying by our own Gifts. Since therefore there are sundry instances of
God's prescribing Forms of Prayer, and since no instance can be given of his
requiring us to pray by our own Gifts and Abilities, this certainly is a
sufficient Scripture-warrant of the lawfulness of worshipping him by Forms.

I proceed to the second Enquiry included in this Case, and that is, Whether
there be any Warrant for the use of Forms in pure Antiquity? For it is
pretended by some of our Brethren, that in the primitive Ages of the Church all
public Prayers were performed by the Gifts and Abilities of him that
minister'd, and that there was no such things as Forms admitted into their
public Worship: for the proof of which bold Assertion, they only urge two or
three doubtful Authorities against a whole current of plain and express
Testimonies to the contrary. In the prosecution therefore of this Enquiry, I
shall endeavor, 1. To answer those Authorities which are objected by our
Brethren against the use of Forms in the Primitive Ages: 2. To prove that they
were used in those Ages, by a short Historical Account of the Matter of Fact.

The first Authority which they object against the Primitive use of Forms of
Prayer, is that of Justin Martyr, Apol. 2. p. 98.
who tells us, that at the Communion the Chief Minister did send forth Prayers
and Thanksgivings, (...); that is, say they, according to his ability: from
whence they infer, that in Justin Martyr's days, the Ministers prayed by their
own Gifts and Abilities. But this has been so fully answered by our learned
Doctor Faulkner Libert. Eccles. 113.
, that I am apt to think 'twill hardly be objected any more: for he has proved
at large, that (...), must signify with all his might, i. e. with his utmost
intention and fervency: for so, as he shows, it must necessarily signify in
another place of his Apology, Apol. 2. p. 60.
where, speaking of the praying of Christians in general at the Eucharist, he
tells us, that they did praise God with Prayers and Thanksgivings, (...), that
is, with all their might; which cannot signify, according to their Gifts and
Abilities. Since whatsoever the Minister might do, it is certain, the People did
not compose their own Prayers at the Eucharist; and therefore it must signify,
with their utmost fervor and intention: in which sense, as he shows, the same
phrase is used by Nazianzen. Nazian. Orat. 3.


Another Testimony they object against the use of Forms, is that of Tertullian,
who affirms, Sine Monitore, quia de pectore Oremus. Tertul. Apolog.
That the Christians did pray without a Monitor or Prompter, because they
prayed from their hearts: in which words, say they, he plainly alludes to a
Custom of the Heathen, who in their public Worship had a Monitor to direct
them in what words, and to what God they were to offer up their Prayers. When
therefore he says, that they prayed without a Monitor, his meaning must be, say
they, that they prayed without any one to direct them what Form of words they
were to pray in. To which I answer, first, That supposing he here speaks of the
public Worship, as it seems most probable, it is evident that by this phrase,
without a Monitor, he cannot mean, without any one to dictate or prescribe a
Form of words to them; for in their ordinary public Prayers, their Minister
was the Mouth of the Congregation; and whether he prayed by Form, or Extempore,
his words were a Form of words to them, in which they were obliged to frame and
express their Devotions: so that either this phrase, without a Monitor, must
import, that they had none to dictate and minister to them in their public
Prayers, or it cannot import that they had no public Forms to pray by, because
if they had any to dictate to them, his extempore Prayer would have been as
much a Monitor to direct them what words to pray in, as if it had been a stated
Form of Liturgy. Whatever therefore this obscure phrase means, it is certain it
cannot mean without a Form, unless it be allowed to mean without a Minister
too. But then, 2ly. not to take notice of the various guesses which learned men
make at the meaning of it, and by which it is sufficiently vindicated from
meaning without a Form of Prayer, it seems to me most probable, that, without a
Monitor, here, is meant, without any one to correct them, when either they
repeated, or the Minister recited the public Prayers falsely: for the Gods of
the Heathen being various, and having each their various Offices and Provinces
allotted them, it was the manner of their Priests to begin their public
Sacrifices with a Form of Prayer, A. Gellins Noct. Attic. l. 13. c. 21.
which began with an Invocation of Janus and Vesta, and proceeded with various
Invocations of all the greater Deities by name; Rosm. Antiq. Romans l. 3. c. 33.
in which they implored such favors of each Deity, as lay within their
particular Province to bestow: thus, for instance, when they invocated Bacchus,
they began thus; O Bacchus, Son of Semele, the bestower of Riches: Casaub. in
Ann. Eccl. Exercit. 16. N. 42.
when they offered the Cake to Janus; O Father Janus, with this I offer thee my
good Prayers, that thou would be propitious to me, etc. Festus in verbor.
signif.
So for Jupiter Dapalis; With this Cake, O Jupiter, I offer thee my good
Prayers, that thou would have mercy on me, my House and Family: Cato de re
Rustic. c. 134.
and so for Mars; I pray thee, O Mars, to be propitious to me, my Field, and
Corn, and Wine, and Cattle. Ibid. 141.
Which several Invocations, that there might be none of the names of their
greater Gods pretermitted, nor none of the Prayers falsely or disorderly recited
or repeated, were with great care recited by a Priest, out of the Ritual, and
repeated after him by the People, Brison. de formal. l. 1. p. 61.
there being another Priest appointed for a public Monitor: for so Pliny tells
us, Plin. l. 28. cap. 2. Vidimus certis precationibus obsecrasse summos
Magistratus, ut nequid verborum praetermitatur aut praeposterum dicatur, de
scripto praeire aliquem rursusque alium custodem dari qui attendat.
When any of the Chief Magistrates offer certain Prayers, lest any of the
Sacred Words should be omitted or preposterously pronounced, they have one to
dictate them to them out of a Book, and another, who is Overseer, diligently to
attend. And accordingly Livy observes, Live. l. 4. Obsecratio itaque a populo
duumviris praeeuntibus est facta.
That Prayer was made by the People, two men going before, or dictating to
them: now that this latter of the two, whom Pliny calls the Custos, or
Overseer, was the Monitor whom Tertullian alludes to, se^ms very probable,
because, as Livy observes, his business was proeire populo, i. e. to dictate to
the People after him, who, according to Pliny's account, did de scripto
praeire, i. e. dictate to them out of the Book; and to what other purpose
should he dictate to them what had been dictated before, but only to admonish
and correct them when they repeated falsely or disorderly? especially
considering that the reason which Pliny assigns why this Custos was appointed,
was, lest any of the Sacred Words should be omitted or preposterously repeated;
which was looked upon as a very ill Omen: But how could he prevent this, unless
it were his Office to admonish and correct either the Priest or People, or
both, when he read, or they repeated them falsely? This Monitor therefore was
not he who read the Prayers, or dictated them to the People out of the Book,
but he whose Office 'twas to oversee either that they were rightly dictated, or
rightly repeated, or both: and indeed, there was more need that he should
oversee that they were rightly repeated, than that they were rightly dictated,
because they were dictated out of a Book; and so could not be so easily
dictated as repeated falsely. But suppose his Office were to oversee both, yet
since they were dictated in order to their being repeated, he only oversaw
their being dictated rightly, in order to their being repeated rightly. When
therefore Tertullian says, We pray without a Monitor, his meaning is not that
we pray without a Priest to dictate our Prayers to us, whether it were out of a
Book, or extempore; but that we pray without a Custos, or Overseer, either to
admonish our People of their repeating the Prayers falsely, or to admonish our
Priests of their dictating them falsely, in order to the Peoples repeating them
rightly; Because, says he, we pray from our hearts: which words may admit of a
twofold interpretation; first, because we do not vocally repeat our Prayers
after our Priest, but only join our affections with them, and send up* our
hearts and desires after them; or, 2ly. because we can say our Prayers by
heart, and so are in no great danger of repeating them falsely, and consequently
have no such need of a Monitor to observe and correct us: for it is well known
how much Tertullian in all his Writings affects to imitate and express the
Greek, which renders him oftentimes so very obscure; and therefore it is
probable enough, as has been observed, Thornd. Relig. Assem. p. 237.
that his de pectore here, or from the heart, may be only a translation of
(...), which signifies, to say by heart; according to which account, these
words of Tertullian are so far from testifying against the use of Forms, that
they rather argue the use of them: for since he only denies their having a
Monitor, he does in effect grant their having a Priest to read the public
Prayers to them, as well as the Heathen; and if from the heart be in
Tertullian's Language the same with by heart, it is a plain case, that they used
Forms; for otherwise how could they have them by heart? That this is the true
account of this difficult phrase, I will not confidently affirm, because it is
only my own single guess; but whether it be or no, it is certain it can no more
signify without a Form of Prayer, than without a Minister to pray extempore,
the one being as much a Monitor to the People, as the other.

The last Testimony which our Brethren urge against the Antiquity of Forms of
Prayer, is that of Sucrates Scholasticus, Soc. Hist. l. 5. c. 21.
whose words they thus translate: Everywhere, and in all Worships of Prayer,
there are not two to be found that speak the same words; and therefore, say
they, it is very unlikely they should pray by received Forms. But how far this
is from the sense of the Author, will evidently appear by considering what he
had been before discoursing of. In short therefore, he had been just before
relating the different Customs that were used in several Churches; and among
the rest, he tells us, that in Hellas, Jerusalem, and Thessalia, the Prayers
were made whilst the Candles were lighting, according to the manner of the
Novatians at Constantinople; and that in Caesarea of Cappadocia and Cyprus, the
Presbyters and Bishops always interpreted the Scripture on the Saturday and
Lord's Day in the evening, the Candles being lighted: that the Novatians in the
Hellespont did not observe the same manner of praying with those of
Constantinople, but that for the most part they followed the Customs of the
chief Churches among them: and then he concludes, (...). i. e. upon the whole,
every where, and among all the Worships of Prayer, there are not two to be
found that agree in the same thing; where, by Worships of Prayer, it is plain,
he means the Ceremonies and Rites of Prayer that were used in several Churches:
for 'twas of these he had been immediately before discoursing; and therefore
his meaning can be no more than this, that among all the constituted Rites and
Ceremonies of Prayer that were used in the several Churches, there were not two
to be found that agreed in the same: and how does it follow, that because they
did not use the same Rites and Ceremonies of Prayer, therefore they did not use
Forms of Prayer? for even now we see there are different Rites of Prayer among
those Churches which do yet agree in using Forms of Prayer.

And now I proceed to the second thing proposed, which was, to prove the use of
Forms of Prayer in the primitive Ages, by a short Historical Account of the
Matter of Fact. That in the first Age there was a Gift of praying extempore by
immediate inspiration, seems highly probable, both from what the Apostle
discourses of praying in unknown Languages, 1 Cor. 14. and from what St.
Chrysostom asserts concerning it, Chrysostom. in Romans 8. 26.
viz. That together with those miraculous Gifts which were then poured out,
there was a Gift of Praying, which was called by the Apostle, a Spirit, by
which he who was endued with it, poured out Prayers for all the People: and
while this Gift continued, perhaps (which how long it was, is very uncertain)
there might no other Form be used in public Worship in those places,
especially where it abounded, but only that of the Lord's Prayer; and it may
be in imitation of this Gift, upon which even in the Apostles time the
Christians were apt to overvalue themselves, some might affect to pray
extempore after it was wholly expired; but it is highly probable, that upon the
ceasing or abatement of it, it was in most places immediately supplied by Forms
of Prayer, which were composed either of the words, or according to the method
and manner of those inspired Prayers, by Apostolical persons that heard and
remembered them; for so, as the same St. Chrysostom goes on, Chrysostom. ibid.
For we being ignorant of many things which are profitable for us, do ask many
things which are unprofitable; and therefore this Gift of Prayer was given to
some one person that was there, i. e. in the Congregation, who asked for all
that which was profitable for the universal Church, and taught others to do so;
that is, to form Prayers according to those inspired Models: for though I do
not pretend that there were no other Prayers used in public, but only Forms
either in or presently after the Age of the Apostles, yet it seems most
probable that even from the Apostolical Age some part at least of the public
Worship was performed in Forms of Prayer; and if so, we have all the reason in
the world to conclude, that these Forms were composed according to the Pattern
of those primitive inspired Prayers. Now that there were Forms from the
Apostolical Age, seems highly probable, because, so far as we can find, there
never was any dispute among Christians concerning the lawfulness of praying by
a Form. Had this way of praying been introduced after the Primitive Ages, it
would have been a most observable innovation upon the Primitive Christianity,
and that in such a public matter of fact, that every Christian could not but
take notice of it. Now that such an open Innovation should be so silently
admitted into the Church, without the least contest or opposition, seems very
strange, if not incredible. It Is true, there were some Innovations that crept
in very early, without any opposition, but none that was of such a public
cognizance as this; and unless the whole Christian World had been fast asleep,
it is hardly supposeable they would ever have admitted such a remarkable
alteration in their public Worship, as from praying extempore, to pray by a
Form, without the least contradiction. If therefore praying by a Form were an
Innovation upon their Primitive Worship, it was certainly the most lucky and
fortunate one that ever was of that kind, there being no one Innovation besides
it of that public nature, but what has always found powerful Adversaries to
withstand it. But not to insist upon probabilities, we will inquire into the
matter of fact: And first, we have those three ancient Liturgies, which are
attributed to St. Peter, St. Mark, and St. James; which though they have been
all of them woefully corrupted by later Ages, yet are, doubtless, as to the
purer parts of them, of great antiquity, and, probably, even from the
Apostolical Age: for besides that there are many things in them which have a
strong relish of the simplicity and piety of that Age, that of St. James in
particular was of great authority in the Church of Jerusalem, whereof he was
the first Bishop, in St. Cyril's time, who wrote a Comment upon it, Cyril
Catech. Mystag. 5:
and is declared by Proclus, Archbishop of Constantinople, Alat de Liturg. S.
Jacob.
and the sixth General Council, Council. Trull. c. 32.
to be St. James's own composure; which is a plain argument of the great
Antiquity, if not Apostolicalness of it: for St. Cyril flourished in the year
350, and, as St. Jerome observes, S. Jerome de Scrip. in Cyr.
composed this Comment on St. James's Liturgy in his younger years. Now it is
not to be imagined he would have commented on it, had it not been of great
authority in the Church of Jerusalem: and how could it have obtained any great
Authority, had it not been long before received, that is, at least seventy or
eighty years? Supposing then that he wrote this Comment Anno 347, as it is very
probable, Vid. Dr. Cave 's Life of St. Cyril.
and that this Liturgy had been received in the Church of Jerusalem but seventy
or eighty years, (and less cannot well be supposed) it could not be above a
hundred and seventy years after the Apostolical Age that this Liturgy was
received in the Church of Jerusalem. And that there are Forms of Worship in it
as ancient as the Apostles, seems highly probable: for first, there is all that
Form, with a very small variation from ours, called Sursum corda, Lift up your
hearts; we lift them up unto the Lord; it is meet and right so to do; it is
very meet, right, and our bounden duty to praise thee, etc. Therefore with
Angels and Archangels, etc. all which is in St. Cyril's Comment Cyril Catech.
Mystag. 5.
; which is a plain argument that 'twas much ancienter than he. And the same is
also in those ancient Liturgies of Rome and Alexandria, and in the
Constitutions of St. Clemens Constit. Clem. l. 8. c. 22.
, which all agree are of great antiquity, though not so great as they pretend.
And St. Cyprian, who was living within an hundred years after the Apostles,
mentions it as a Form that was then used and received in the Church: Cyprian de
Orat. Dominic.
The Priest, says he, in the Preface before the Prayer, prepares the minds of
the Brethren, by saying, Lift up your hearts; that so while the People answer,
We lift them up unto the Lord, they may be admonished, that they ought to think
of nothing but the Lord. And lastly, St. Austin tells us, that this Sursum
corda, which is the Name and Title of the whole following Form, and
consequently includes it, even as Te Deum and Venite exultemus do the Hymns
that go under that Title, are verba ab ipsorum Apostolorum temporibus petita,
i. e. words derived from the very Age of the Apostles. And the same is asserted
by Nicephorus of the Trisagium in particular, Hist. lib. 18. cap. 53. And that
even from that Primitive Age there was a certain Form prescribed in Baptism, is
evident by those solemn Questions and Answers that were made by the Priests,
and returned by the person to be baptized; for so Tertullian Tertul. de
Resurrect. Carn.
speaking of Baptism, tells us, That the Soul is not established by the
washing, but by the Answer: And St. Cyprian expressly calls it Interrogatio
Baptismi, the questioning of Baptism Cyp. 76. 80.
; which plainly shows that there were certain Questions and Answers given and
returned in Baptism: and what the Question was, may be guessed by the Answer,
which was this, (...), etc. I renounce Satan and his works, and his pomps, etc.
Clem. Constit. lib. 7.
And accordingly Tertullian; Coron. Milit.
In the Church, and under the hand of the Priest, we protest to renounce the
Devil, his pomps and works. Which form of Question and Responsal, Origin, who
lived not long after, derives from Christ or his Disciples: Who is there, says
he, In Numer. Homil. 5.
can easily explain the reason of some Words, and Gestures, and Orders, and
Interrogations, and Answers, that are used in Baptism? which yet we observe and
fulfill, according as we first took them up, they being delivered to us by
Tradition from our Great High Priest, or his Disciples. If it be objected, that
this is no Form of Prayer; I answer, that it is a limiting the Minister from
exercising his own Gift in performing his Ministerial Office; and if in
performing he might be limited to a Form of Question, why not to a Form of
Prayer? And if the Church thought fit not to leave him at liberty to question
extempore in Baptism, it is very improbable it should leave him at liberty to
pray extempore in public, there being as great a necessity to prescribe him a
Form for the later as for the former. And that de facto there were Forms of
Prayer as well as of Question and Answer used in Baptism, is not only affirmed
in the Constitutions of St. Clemens, but some of the Prayers also are there
inserted Clem. Constit. l. 7.
. But that the Christians did very early use Forms of Prayer in their public
Worship* is very evident from the denominations which the Primitive Writers
give to the public Prayers, such as the Common Prayers Just. Mart. Apol. 2. p.
93. Ignat. Ep. ad Magn.
, the Constituted-Prayers Orig. Cont. Cells. l. 6.
, and the Solemn-Prayers Cyp. de laps. sermon. 14.
; which last was the Title by which the Heathens then distinguished and
expressed their public Forms of Prayer Vid. Ovid. l. 6. de fastis. Statius
Papin. l. 4. Senec. in Oedip. Act 2. Sect 2.
, and consequently in the Language of that Age, must signify a public Form.
And as for that particular Form of Prayers so often used in our Liturgy, Glory
be to the Father, etc. St. Basil fetches the Original of it, (...), from the
tradition of the Apostles; and cites this Doxology from St. Clemens the
Apostles Scholar, and from Dionysius of Alexandria Basil. de sp. s. c. 27. and
29.
, who was living Anno 200. and Clemens of Alexandria, who was living Anno 160,
sets down these words as the Christians Form of praising God, (...), Clem.
Alex. Paedag.
Praising the Father and the Son, with the Holy Ghost. And therefore, though
there are some who attribute the composure of this Eucharistical Hymn to the
rise of the Arian Sect, yet from these Authorities it is much more probable
that it was long before composed and used in the public Worship of the Church:
for the Arians are sharply reproved by the Orthodox Fathers, for altering this
ancient Form into Glory be to the Father by the Son, and in the Holy Ghost
Theod. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 24.
. And indeed a great-part of the Primitive Worship consisted of Hymns and
Doxologies; which could no longer be extempore than while the miraculous Gifts
continued, after which they must necessarily be composed into set Forms: for
Tertullian tells us, that their Coetus antelucani, their meetings before day
were, ad canendum Christo ut Deo, to sing to Christ as God Tertul. Apologet. c.
2.
. And Lucian before him thus describes the practice of Christians, that they
did (...) spend whole nights in watching and singing of Psalms Lucian. Philop.
. So also Justin Martyr describing the Christian life, tells us, (...), We are
to sing Hymns, and Psalms, and Odes, and Praise Just. Mart. Epist. ad Zen. and
Heren.
. Now it is evident that in Pliny's and Lucian's time, the Christians used set
Forms of Hymns, not only of divine, but also of humane composure; for so Pliny
tells us Plin. Epist. l. 10. Ep. 97.
, That early in the morning it was their manner to sing by turns a Hymn to
Christ as to God; which Hymn was doubtless of humane composure, there being no
Hymn to Christ in Scripture of that length, as to take up a considerable part
of their public Service. And besides, Eusebius tells us, That very early there
were various Psalms and Odes composed by Christians concerning the Divinity of
Christ Eusebius. Hist. lib. 5.
; and that Paulus Samosetanus was condemned for suppressing those Hymns that
were made in the Honor of Christ, as being the compositions of men of late
days Ibid. Hist. lib. 7.
, though in all probability those Hymns were composed within much less than an
hundred years after the Apostolical Age: but as for this Hymn which Pliny
speaks of, it was earlier, for it could not be much above ten years after the
death of St. John, that Pliny gave this account of Christians to Trajan; and
therefore to be sure the Hymn he there speaks of, was used in the Age of the
Apostles. And about the same time, Lucian makes mention of a Prayer which they
used in their public Worship, (...), beginning from the Father; which
doubtless was the Lord's Prayer: and of a famous Hymn added to the end of their
Service Lucian. Philop.
, which in all probability was the Hymn that Pliny speaks of. Since therefore
the Primitive Worship did in a great measure consist of Hymns, which were Forms
of Praise intermixed with Prayer, and some of these of humane composure; this is
an evident Testimony of the Primitive use of Forms. And doubtless, they who
made no scruple of praying by Form in verse, could not think it unlawful to
pray by Form in prose: for, that praying in Meeter or composed Hymns was a very
early Practice in the Christian Church, is evident from the Apostolical
Constitutions, where it is enjoined, (...), Let the People sing the verses
which answer adversly to one another Constit. Apost. l. 2. c. 5.
: which way of singing was so very ancient, that Eusebius Eusebius. Hist. Eccles.
l. 2. c. 17.
urges it as an argument to prove the Essenes Christians, because they sung by
turns answering one another: But how could they thus answer to one another in
their Hymns and Prayers, unless they had constant Forms of Prayer? But that
they had such Forms of Responsal in Prayer, is evident, because, when Julian
for the credit of Gentilism would needs dress it up, (...), Sos. Hist. l. 5. c.
15.
after the Order of the Christian Worship; one thing wherein he sought to
imitate it was, (...), in their constituted Prayers, that is, not in having
constituted Forms of Prayer, for that the Heathen had before, but in having
such constituted Forms as the Christians had; that is, as Nazianzen explains
it, (...), a Form of Prayer to be said in parts Nazian. Orat. 1. p. 102.
: for this way of praying in parts Nicephorus Niceph. l. 13. c. 8.
derives from Ignatius, who was a Scholar of the Apostles. All which to me is a
plain demonstration of the great antiquity of Forms. And that in Constantine's
time the Church used public Forms of Prayer, is evident from that often-cited
place of Eusebius Eusebius. d^ Laud. Constant.
, where he tells us of Constantine's composing Godly Prayers for the use of his
Soldiers; and elsewhere tells us in particular what the Prayer was: We
acknowledge thee, O God, alone, etc. Id. de vit. Constant. c. 20.
which is a plain evidence that it was a set Form of words. But it is objected
that this Form was composed only for the use of his Soldiers* who were a
great part of them Heathens; and that Constantine's composing it is a plain
evidence, that at that time there were no public Forms in the Church; for if
there had, what need Constantine have composed one? To which I answer, That
this Form indeed was composed only for his Heathen Soldiers; for as for his
Christian Soldiers, the story tells us, that he gave them liberty to go to
Church Ibid. c. 19.
. And therefore all that can be gathered hence is, that the Christian Church
had no Form of Prayers for Heathen Soldiers; which is no great wonder; for if
they had, it is very unlikely that the Heathen Soldiers would have used it: but
that they had Forms is evident, because he calls the Prayers which Constantine
used in his Court, (...), according to the manner of the Church of God, (...)
Ibid. c. 17.
authorized Prayers; which is the same title which he gave to that Form of
Prayers which he made for his Heathen Soldiers Ibid. c. 19.
; and therefore if by the authorized Prayers which he prescribed to his
Soldiers, he meant a Form of Prayers, as it is evident he did, then by the
authorized Prayers which he used in his Court after the manner of the Church,
he must mean a Form of Prayer also; and since he had a Form of Prayers in his
Court after the manner of the Church, then the Church must have a Form of
Prayers too.

Thus, for the first, second, and third Centuries, sufficient Testimony has
been given of the use of public Forms of Prayer; after which (not to insist
upon St. Basil's, St. Chrysostom's, and St. Ambrose's Liturgies, which without
all question are of great antiquity) we have undeniable Testimonies of the use
of public Forms: thus, St. Chrysostom Chrysostom. 2. ad Cor. Hom. 18.
, (...), For those who are possessed with a Devil, and those who are under
Penance, Common Prayers are made both by the People and Priest; and we all say
one and the self-same Prayer, the Prayer which is so full of mercy. And then he
goes on, and tells us how when the Priest had prayed for the People, that is,
in that ancient Form of dismission, The Lord be with you, they prayed again for
him in these words, And with thy Spirit.

I confess, to me it seems at least highly probable, that they were not at
first so strictly limited to one constant Form of Liturgy, but that upon
occasion they might intermingle other Forms either of their own or other men's
composure; though in process of time, this liberty became very prejudicial to
Religion: for by this means the Prayers of Heretics were often mingled with
the public Offices, and many unadvised and illcomposed Forms were introduced
into the public Worship; and this St. Austin complains of: Multi irruunt in
preces, non solum ab imperitis loquacibus, sed etiam ab haereticis compositas,
and per ignorantiae simplicitatem non eas valentes discernere, utuntur eis,
arbitrantes quod bonae sint Austin de Baptism. cont. Donat. lib. 6.
: Many there are (speaking of the Office of Baptism) who take up Prayers
hand-over-head, which are composed not only by unskilful persons, but also by
Heretics; and not being able to discern what they are through their simplicity
and ignorance, do use them, thinking they are very good. To prevent which great
inconvenience, the Church was forced by degrees to limit and restrain this
liberty: and first the Council of Laodicea, which was held about the year 314,
or as others think 364, made a Canon, (...), Council. Laod. c. 18.
About using the same Office of Prayers in the Morning and Evening; that is,
that they should not bring in new Forms at their pleasure into the public
Worship, either of their own or other men's composure, as they had done before,
but always confine themselves to one and the same Liturgy: for so not only
Zonarus Zon. in Council. Laod. c. 18.
and Balsamon Balsam. ibid.
, but Smectymnuus Smect. Ans. to Remon. p. 7.
and the Presbyterian Commissioners at the Savoy Grand Debate, p. 11.
understand it, viz. that they should use no other Prayers in the public
Service, but such as had been constantly received by the Church. And that this
Canon is to be understood of the received Forms, is evident both from the 15th
and 19th Canon of this Council: for in the 15th they forbid that any should go
up into the Desk to sing or call the Psalm, but only the appointed Singers,
who were to sing out of the public Parchments, in the which only the received
Hymns were inserted; for so in the 59th Canon they forbid the calling of the
Psalms of private persons Conc. Laod. c. 15, 18, 19.
: for before, it is plain that they took the same liberty to introduce new Hymns
into the public Service of their own, or other men's composure, as they had
done to introduce new Prayers; and not only so, but any one who would was
allowed to call the Hymn: for so Tertul. Post aquam manualem and lumina,
Tertul. Apolog. c. 39.
ut quisquis de Scripturis sanctis, vel de proprio ingenio, potest and vocatur
in medium Deo canere; After their washing their hands, and lighting the
Candles, any one is called forth to sing to God as he is able, either out of
the Scripture, or by his own Gift of composure: But the consequence of this
liberty being afterward found as prejudicial to Religion as that of
introducing new Prayers, the Council thought fit to restrain it; and therefore
in this 15th Canon they forbid the introducing new Psalms into the public
Worship. So in the 18th they forbid the introducing new Prayers, there having
been the same liberty and the same ill consequence in both. And then in the
19th Canon they direct, That after the Homily the Prayers should be said for
the Catechumeni; and when they were gone, the Prayers for such as were under
penance; and when they have received the imposition of hands and are departed,
then let the three Prayers for the faithful be offered up, the First softly, or
every man to himself, the Second and the Third aloud; which is a plain argument
that their meaning is to direct to the use of their stated Forms of Prayer for
the forenamed occasions: for how could the Congregation say the First of the
three Prayers for the faithful to themselves, and the other two aloud, unless
they were Forms which they had learnt by heart, and were constantly used too?
After this there being, as St. Austin complains, very great disorders in the
African Churches through the ill-composed and heretical Prayers which the
Ministers foisted into their public Worship, and in which as it seems the
Father was sometimes mentioned for the Son, and the Son for the Father; it was
ordained in the third Council of Carthage Council. Carth. 3 d. c. 12.
, That none in their Prayers should name the Father for the Son, or the Son for
the Father; but that when they came to the Altar they should direct their
Prayers to the Father; Et quiccunque sibi preces aliunde describit, non eis
utatur, nisi prius eas cum instructioribus Fratribus contulerit: i. e. And
whosoever shall write out Prayers for himself from elsewhere, that is, from any
Book that has not been publicly received and allowed (for what else can be
meant by aliunde?) he shall not presume to use them till he has first
consulted about them with his more learned Brethren. Which is a plain evidence
that they used Forms before; otherwise how could they have written them out
from elsewhere, or from other men's composures? Whereas before, therefore, they
had liberty to add new Forms, as they thought fit, to the received Liturgy,
they are so far restrained by this Council, as not to do it without the advice
and approbation of their more learned Brethren: but this restriction being
found insufficient to prevent the ill consequences of their former liberty, it
was ordained a few years after in the Council of Mela Council. Milev. c. 12.
, That those Prayers which had been approved of in the Council, whether
Prefaces, or Commendations, or Impositions of Hands, should be used of all; and
that none should be said in the Church, but such as had been treated of by the
more prudent, or allowed in the Synod; lest any thing contrary to the Faith
should be inserted, either through ignorance or want of care. Now though these
indeed were but Provincial Councils, and so in themselves could oblige no
farther than their particular Provinces, yet the very Canon above cited out of
the first of them Council. Laod. c. 18.
is taken into the collections of the Canons of the Catholic Church, being the
122th therein; which Collection was received and established in the General
Council of Chalcedon Council. Chalced. c. 1.
An. 451. By which establishment the whole Christian Church was obliged to the
use of Liturgies, so far as the authority of the General Council extends. And
then in the year 541, these Canons are made Imperial Laws by the Emperor
Justinian, who enacted Justin. Novel. 131. c. 1.
that the Canons of those four General Councils of Nice, Constantinople,
Ephesus, and Chalcadon, should oblige as far as the Empire did extend. Of what
authority the use of formed Liturgies were in this Emperor's time, and long
before, may be easily collected from his Novels; for he complains of the
remissness of some Bishops, that they did not take care to enforce the
observance of the sacred Canons; and tells us, that he had received several
complaints against the Clergy, Monks, and some Bishops, that they did not live
according to the Divine Canons; and that some among them, (...) not acquainted
with the Prayer of the Holy Oblation and Holy Baptism Id. Nov. 137. Preface.
: and then he declares that for the future he was resolved to punish the
Transgressors of the Canons; which had it been done before, says he, (...).
Id. ib. c. 1.
Every one would have endeavored to learn the Divine Liturgies, that he might
not be subject to the condemnation of the Divine Canons. Which is a plain
argument, not only that there were formed Liturgies before Justinian, (for
otherwise how could he expect the Clergy should learn them?) but that these
Liturgies had been long before established by the Canons of the Church. And
then among other things he requires, that for the future, such as were to be
ordained should (...), Id. ib. c. 2.
Recite the Office for the Holy Communion, and the Prayer for Holy Baptism, and
the rest of the Prayers: which Prayers were not made in Justinian's time, but
long before; they being, as he tells us before, established by the
Ecclesiastical Canons. And after this, he enjoins all Bishops and Presbyters,
(...) Id. ib. c. 6.
That they should not say these Prayers silently, but so as that the People
might hear them, that so their minds might be raised to an higher pitch of
Devotion. Thus, for near six hundred years after Christ, we have sufficient
testimony of the public use of Forms of Prayer.

And from henceforth, or a little after, down to Mr. Calvin's time, all are
agreed that no other Prayers were admitted into the public Worship, but what
were contained in the established Liturgies of the respective Churches: and
even that great Light of the Reformation, Mr. Calvin, though he used to pray
extempore after his Lecture, yet always used a Form before Praef. ad praelect.
Calv. in Min. proph.
: and his Prayers before and after Sermon were rather bidding of Prayers,
according to the ancient usage, than formal Prayers Beza, in praef. ad Conc.
Calv. in Job.
: and as he used a Form himself, so he composed one for the Sunday-service,
which was afterward established by the Order at Geneva: And in his Letter to
the Lord Protector in the Reign of Edward the Sixth, he thus declares his
judgment concerning public Forms Calvin Ep. 87.
: For so much as concerns the Forms of Prayers, and Ecclesiastical Rites, I
highly approve that it be determined so, as that it may not be lawful for the
Ministers in their Administration to vary from it. Nor is there any one
reformed Church, whether Calvinistical or Lutheran, but what has some public
Office or Form of Prayer, especially for the Administration of the Sacraments.
So that our Dissenting Brethren in England, who disallow the use of public
Forms, do stand alone by themselves from all the World. And as for that
extempore way of praying which they so much celebrate, and for the sake of
which they despise and vilify our public Liturgy as a Relick of Popish
Idolatry; they would do well to consider who it was that first introduced it
into England, and set it up in opposition to our Liturgy. For first, there was
one Faithful Commin a Dominican Friar, who in the 9th of Eliz. to seduce the
People from the Church, thereby to serve the ends of Popery, began to pray
extempore with such wonderful Zeal and Fervor, that he deluded a great many
simple People; for which he was afterward amply rewarded by the Pope Vid.
Foxes and Firebrarnds, p. 7, etc.
. After him one Thomas Heath a Jesuit pursued the same method, exclaiming
against our Liturgy, and crying up Spiritual or Extempore Prayers Id. p. 17.
, thereby to divide the People from our public Worship, telling the Bishop of
Rochester by whom he was examined, That he had been six years in England,
laboring to refine the Protestants, and to take off all smacks of Ceremonies,
and to make the Church purer Of which see more in the Preface of the Learned
Treatise, The Unreasonableness of Separation, beginning at p. 11.
. And I hope when our Brethren have well considered who it is they join with,
and whose Cause they advance, while they thus decry our Liturgy, and advance
their own extempore Prayers in the room of it, they will at last see cause to
retract a mistake which none but the Church of Rome will have cause to thank
them for.

CASE VI. Whether it be lawful to comply with the use of Public Form,s when
they are imposed?
IN answer to which, a very few words will suffice: for it has been already
proved, that the use of public Forms is universally lawful, there being
nothing either in Scripture, or the nature of the thing, that forbids it; but a
great deal in both, that approves and warrants it: so that now the Question is
no more than this, Whether a lawful thing when imposed, may be lawfully
complied with? The affirmative of which is sufficiently proved in the Case of
Indifferent Things. And indeed, if the Imposition of Praying in public by
Forms, though lawful in it self, may not be lawfully complied with, then
neither may the Imposition of praying extempore; and if so, then we must act
quite contrary to what we are commanded by Authority, and pray by Form when we
are commanded to pray extempore, as well as extempore when we are commanded to
pray by Form: and if in lawful things Authority can oblige us to comply with
this by commanding the contrary, our liberty will be altogether as liable to
restraint this way as the other, because we shall be as much obliged this way
to forbear a lawful thing as we are to comply with it the other. And if all men
were of this opinion, that no lawful thing ought to be complied with when it is
commanded, Authority might as effectually oblige them to do whatsoever it would
have by commanding the quite contrary, as it can now by commanding the thing it
would have. But this being quite besides the Province I have undertaken, I
shall insist no farther upon it.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Fincham Gardener.
1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England. 2. A Resolution of
some Cases of Conscience which respect Church Communion. 3. The Case of
Indifferent things used in the Worship of God, proposed and Stated, by
considering these Questions, etc. 4. A Discourse about Edification. 5. The
Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of Englands
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England? 6. A Letter to Anonymus, in answer
to his three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about Church Communion. 7. Certain Cases
of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of joining with Forms of
Prayer in Public Worship. In two Parts. 8. The Case of mixed Communion: Whether
it be Lawful to Separate from a Church upon the account of promiscuous
Congregations and mixed Communions? 9. An Answer to the Dissenters Objections
against the Common Prayers, and some other parts of Divine Service prescribed
in the Liturgy of the Church of England. 10. The Case of Kneeling at the Holy
Sacrament stated and resolved, etc. In two Parts. 11. A Discourse of Profiting
by Sermons, and of going to hear where men think they can profit most. 12. A
serious Exhortation, with some important Advices, relating to the late Cases
about Conformity, recommended to the present Dissenters from the Church of
England. 13. An Argument to Union; taken from the true Interest of those
Dissenters in England who profess and call themselves Protestants. 14. Some
Considerations about the Case of Scandal, or giving Offense to Weak Brethren.
15. The Case of Infant Baptism, in Five Questions, etc. 16. A Discourse
concerning Conscience; wherein an Account is given of the Nature, and Rule, and
Obligation of it, etc. 17. The Charge of Scandal, and giving Offense by
Conformity, Refelled, and Reflected back upon Separation, etc.
1. A Discourse about the charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther? 2. The difference of the Case between the Separation of
Protestants from the Church of Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the
Church of England. 3. The Protestant Resolution of Faith, etc.
AN ANSWER TO THE Dissenters Objections Against the COMMON PRAYERS, And some
other Parts of Divine-Service Prescribed in the LITURGY OF THE CHURCH of
ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed for T. Basset at the George in Fleet Street, B. Took at the
Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, and F. Gardener at the White-horse in
Ludgate Street, 1684.

AN ANSWER TO THE Dissenters Objections Against the COMMON PRAYERS, And some
other Parts of DIVINE*SERVICE Prescribed in the LITURGY of the CHURCH of
ENGLAND.
I Believe all Considering Persons are by this time sensible what advantage the
Papists make of the Separation of some Protestants from the Church of England.
And the ill effects of it at present, and the worse which we have reason to
fear, are so very discernible, that it may now be hoped the Consideration
hereof will something abate those Prejudices of Dissenters against us, which we
think have hitherto hindered the prevailing of our Reasons. Though Prejudice is
hard to be removed, yet it is not impossible. Several Ingenuous Persons of that
Persuasion have been rescued from their Prejudices against our Communion, when
the mischief of these Divisions was not so apparent as it is now. I trust
therefore, that at this time many more will, and I pray God that all of them
may seriously and impartially look over the Grounds upon which they have kept
up the Separation. For I am persuaded that their Objections against our
Communion are not of that Conse^uence; ^s to Justify their forsaking it; and
that themselves would discern it, if they would consider our Answers with the
same Meekness and Charity wherewith we offer them. I have with great pleasure
read some short Discourses lately Published that tend to this purpose, the Good
Spirit where with they are written seeming to be a very likely means of
conveying the Argument with all its advantage into the Minds of those that
shall take the pains to read them. And though I think that which has been said
already, is enough to satisfy Judicious Men, yet by the persuasion of some
Friends, I have taken upon me to Answer those Particular Objections against the
Public Service of God by the Book of Common Prayer, which the Dissenters are
said to insist most upon. I must confess that I have always thought the
Liturgy of the Church of England to be such a truly Evangelical Form of
Public Worship, that it would rather have invited Protestants to our
Communion, than kept them from it. And I believe, if the Dissenters would
seriously read over that Sermon of Dr. Beverege concerning the Excellency and
Usefulness of the Common Prayer, they would go near to be of the same mind. And
I hope many of them are so, excepting only as to those Particulars wherein they
are not so well satisfied: And therefore I shall endeavor through Gods
assistance to lay some things together, of which People of ordinary Capacities
may make a Judgments and which may afford reasonable satisfaction to those that
Doubt.

It is by some pretended, That the Confessions of Sin in our Liturgy are too
General, and that there are many Particular Sins which ought to have been
Distinctly Confessed, of which there is no mention.

Now I desire those that are of this Mind to consider, that there is hardly any
thing in Public Worship which requires more Caution and Prudence in the
ordering of it, than that Confession of Sin which is to be made by the whole
Congregation: It may be too Loose and General on the one side, or it may be too
Particular and Distinct on the other. And it is not so very easy to avoid both
inconveniences. The reason is, because it should be framed as all may in good
earnest use it, notwithstanding the great Difference amongst those that are
within the Communion of the Church; the Sins of some of them being more in
number, and greater in kind, and more heinously aggravated, than the Sins of
others.

There may be this Inconvenience in a Confession very short and General, that
takes in all, that it does not so well serve to excite or to express that due
sense of Sin, nor to exercise that humility and self abasement wherewith we
should always Confess our Sins to God. On the other hand, the Inconvenience of
a very Particular and Distinct Confession of Sins will be this, That some Sins,
with their Aggravations, may be Confessed in the Name of the whole
Congregation, of which it is by no means to be supposed that all are guilty;
and then they who through the Grace of God have been kept from them, cannot in
good earnest make such Confession.

Now I take it, that the Confessions of Sin in the Daily and in the Communion
Service, are so Judiciously framed as to avoid both extremes: Since the
Expressions have that large meaning as to take in the case of the best of the
Congregation, who may in good earnest use them, and thereby join their
Confessions with the rest. And on the other side, though they are General, yet
they are so affectionately amplified, that they may well serve to express that
Contrition which they ought to feel who labor under the Conscience of most
hemous Sins; and, if they come duly prepared, to excite a godly sorrow for Sin,
and to exercise a due sense of their own unworthiness of Gods Mercy. And I
desire those who are made to believe otherwise, that they would venture to use
their own Judgment in this matter, and upon this occasion seriously to read
over those two Confessions in our Lyturgie; the one, that which our daily
Worship almost begins with; the other, in the Communion Office before the
Absolution. And then let them judge impartially, as in the fear of God, if I
have not said the Truth.

But besides this, the Confession of Sin after the Minister has recited each of
the Ten Commandments, is not only General enough to take in all sorts of Men;
but it seems also to be as particular as can reasonably be desired in a
Congregation, because it goes particularly through the Ten Commandments, to
which it has been usual to reduce the whole Duty of Man. And this Method of
Confession makes it easy for all that consider their own ways, and endeavor
to understand their own state, to confess every one of them to God, yet more
particularly, his known Offenses in thought, word, or deed, against each
Commandment.

These things being well provided for, to find fault with this part of our
Service, seems to argue want of Modesty or Judgment in those that do so. They
seem to believe ours to be amiss, because they believe themselves could make a
better. But, if for this and such like reasons, they think fit to break
Communion with us, where will be an end of Division and Separation? I hope none
of our Brethren will say, that they are not to make a Confession of their Sins
in a way of expression that is possible to be mended; lest by this means they
should never make any Confession of Sin at all: Since it may still remain a
Question, Whether this had not been better left out, or that added, after the
best care is taken. If a Form of Confession of Sins were Composed by the wifest
of them, I suppose he would pretend no more than that it is so Composed, that
Gods People might safely and profitably use it. And this is that we may
confidently say of the Confessions in our Liturgy; and if this be truly said,
it ought to end the Dispute.

And yet they who Object the Generalness of our Confessions against us, would
not find it an easy task to give us better and more unexceptionable. I may
safely say, they would not mend the Matter, if they could prevail to have them
as Particular as they are wont to be in the Prayers of some that separate from
us. For besides that they Confess against themselves so many particular Sins as
many sincere Christians cannot in good earnest acknowledge themselves to be, or
ever to have been guilty of, there is this other great inconvenience in such
Confessions, that gross Hypocrites, and other Carnal Professors, are very apt
to go away with an opinion, that their case is as good as that of the best;
since by these Confessions of Sin, which describe their own case perhaps truly
enough, it should seem that the rest are no better than themselves. We find it
needful to warn those of our own Communion against such like mistakes, though
they are not in so much danger of falling into them. We are afraid lest they
that live in the Practice of wilful Sins, should think the better of
themselves, because we do all confess that we have erred and strayed from Gods
ways like lost sheep, and have followed too much the devices and desires of our
own hearts, and have offended against the holy Laws of God, and have left
undone those things which we ought to have done, and have done those things
which we ought not to have done, and that manifold sins and wickedness in
thought, word, and deed, have most grievously been committed by us, against the
Divine Majesty, whereby we have provoked most justly his wrath and indignation
against us. But it is not hard for us to show these Men, that all this may be
truly Confessed by the sincere and godly, as well as by Hypocrites; that though
the Confession does not mention a difference, yet it does not imply that there
is no difference between them, but after all, that these are in a state of
Impenitence and Damnation, while those are in a state of Salvation, who yet
truly confess their Sins in the same General Words with the rest of the
Congregation. But there is greater danger of this self-flattery we are speaking
of, where the Common Confession of Sins is so very particular as some would
have ours to be. And though there is greater need of Caution against it in such
places, yet the way of their Confession makes the mistake more difficult to be
prevented.

Indeed we find in the Scripture Examples of Holy Men confessing such Sins as
themselves were not guilty of. Thus did Jeremiah, Nehemiah, Ezra, etc. But this
was upon Solemn Humiliation for those known and public Idolatries of the
Nation, which had brought Gods heavy Judgments upon them, or for Common and
Scandalous Transgressions afterward. They considered themselves as part of that
Community which had provoked God to send them into Captivity, and therefore
they bore their part in the Common Calamity with such meekness, and confessed
the Common Sins with such humility, as if themselves had offended as greatly in
their own Persons as their Contrymen had done. But I conceive there is a
great deal of difference between those Confessions of Sin, that such
extraordinary occasions of Public Humiliation require, and those that are fit
for the ordinary Service of God in the constant and stated Assemblies of the
Church.

But it ought not to be forgot, that those particular Confessions of Sin, which
some Men want in our Liturgy are not properly the matter of that Public
Service we are to offer daily unto God in Religious Assemblies, but of that
Private Devotion which is necessary to be performed in our Closets. And if we
could be persuaded seriously to enter upon this Work of Examining our selves
impartially concerning those Sins which we have more openly or secretly
committed, and then to humble our selves before God for them, with particular
Confessions and suitable Prayer for his Grace and Pardon; we should then find
our Affections prepared to comply with those more General Confessions of Sin,
which we make with the whole Congregation; we should then have less reason to
complain, that those Confessions are not apt to move us, because this way would
cure the deadness of our hearts, which commonly are most to blame, when we find
fault with the means that God has provided for us.

To conclude this Matter, There is great need of Particular Confession of Sins
in Religious Assemblies, but that of another sort than what I have yet been
speaking of; and that is the particular and humble Confession which every
Scandalous Sinner ought to make in the Congregation, for the satisfaction of
the Church, and the declaration of a true Repentance. This is not properly an
Act of Worship, but of Discipline, but alas! almost lost in this miserably
divided state of the Church; a loss never enough to be lamented! For so it has
fallen out, that by quarreling for a Reformation in things of an Indifferent
Nature, that ought to be left to the Prudence of Governors; and the Communion
of Christians is broken, and the Spiritual Authority which Christ left in his
Church is exposed to Contempt, which is a Matter of a thousand times more
concern, then all the Objections against the Book of Common Prayer put
together, though they were as considerable as our Adversaries seem to believe
they are.

The second Objection I shall take notice of, is that against the shortness of
the Collects, by reason of which it is pretended, that the Prayer is often
suddenly broken off, and then begun again: And this is thought not so agreeable
to the Gravity wherewith this Duty ought to be performed, nor so likely a means
of exciting Reverence and Devotion in the People, as one continued Form of
Prayer that might be as long as all those put together. Now in answer to this,
I say,

1. That the mere shortness of a Prayer, is not to be found fault with by any
understanding Christian; since this would be to disparage that Form of Prayer
which our Lord taught his Disciples, it being not much longer than most of our
Collects, and not so long as some of them.

2. That it will be hard to prove, That many of these short Prayers being
offered up unto God one immediately after another, is either not so Grave or
not so Edifying, as one Continued Form. I do not believe the difference to be
so great, as it is made by those that do not approve our way. For the Work of
Praying is as much continued all the while, as if there were but one Continued
Form. Indeed, in the Book the Printed Prayer breaks off somewhat often, and
there is a distinction made between the several Collects, by a New Title
showing the Matter of the Prayer, and by beginning a New Line. But I hope our
Brethren do not mean, that in this there is a defect of Gravity, or any
hindrance of Devotion and Edification. For the abruption of the Printed Forms
is by no means an interruption of our Prayer; since we still go on in Praying
or in giving Thanks to God, and without breaking off, pass from one Petition,
or Matter of Invocation, to another, as immediately as if the Distinct Forms we
use together were all brought into the Compass of One.

And as there is no Interruption of our Praying, caused by the frequent
beginning and ending of the Collects; so neither can this cause an Interruption
of Attention in the People, which is rather helped by that frequency of saying
Amen, which this way requires. Nor can it be charged with a tendency to
Interrupt that Devout Affection, and Godly Disposition of Mind, which is the
best thing in Prayer: But on the other hand, this may be kept alive and more
effectually secured, by calling upon the Name of God, and pleading the Merits
of Christ so often as we do. I know some have said, this is done more
frequently than is meet. But it would be a lamentable thing, if there should be
any difference about this Matter. When the Decence and Convenience of a thing
is considered, we should attribute much to the Wisdom of Authority, and to the
Judgment of Prudent and Holy Men, such as our first Reformers were, and great
numbers of Learned Persons since their time were also, who thought this manner
of Praying to be Grave and Edifying. And I believe others would be of the same
Mind, if they would not altogether dwell upon their Prejudice against our way;
but attend a little to those considerations that favor it, and which discover
the advantage and usefulness of it; which sort of Equity they that are Wise and
Humble will show to all Men, much more to their Governors.

Now the Invocation of God somewhat often by his Attributes, does of it self
tend to maintain in our Minds a reverent sense of his Majesty and Presence,
which we all know is of necessary use to make us Pray unto him as we ought to
do. I make no question but those that have been blamed for repeating Lord,
Lord, so very often in their Extempore Prayers, would think themselves somewhat
hardly used, if they should not be believed, in saying, that this was not for
want of Matter, but for the exciting of a reverent sense of Gods Authority in
themselves and others. And I think there is a little more reason why this
Construction should be made of the frequent calling upon God by his Name and
Perfections, in the Prayers of the Church.

In like manner the frequency of mentioning the Merits and Mediation of Christ,
is profitable for the strengthening of our Faith and Assurance that we shall be
heard. And to Pray unto God in the Name of Christ being the most distinguishing
Character of our Christian Devotion, This also will justify our frequent use
of it. And the reason is so much the stronger, because this is one main thing
that distinguishes us from the Church of Rome, which pretends the Mediation
of the Virgin Mary, and the Angels, and the Departed Saints, as well as of
Jesus Christ. And it had not been so agreeable to the Principles of the
Reformation, to have left the Name and Mediation of Christ out of the
Conclusion of any of the Collects, when this Church declared her detestation of
calling upon God in any other Name, but the Name of Christ. This is all I shall
say to this Matter; and I hope enough is said to remove the Prejudice of all
Sober and Understanding Persons against the shortness of the Collects, and
against the recital of the Name or Attributes of God, and of the Name and
Merits of Christ in every one of them.

The next Exception I shall take notice of, is that against the Repetition of
the Lords Prayer in the Offices of the Liturgy, and of that Hymn, Glory be to
the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, etc. and of that Petition,
Lord have mercy upon us, and the like.

Now I hope that they are but very few, and I heartily wish they were none at
all, that so little understand the Christian Religion, as to disapprove all use
of these Forms in our Worship: I do not mean of the Lords Prayer only, but of
those Affectionate Petitions, Lord have mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon
us, and of that excellent Doxologie, Glory be to the Father, etc. which
moreover contains a short Confession of our Faith, in opposition to the Arians
and Socinians. But that which is thought too much, is that these things are too
often repeated, and that regard enough is not had to that Rule of our Savior,
When ye Pray use not vain Repetitions.

But I hope nothing of this will appear upon farther Examination. For by our
Savior's Caution against Vain Repetitions, it seems that there are some
Repetitions which are not vain, and which therefore he does not forbid. And
this we must necessarily suppose, because himself Praying in his Agony, thrice
used the same Petition, and that in the same Words. Now the Vanity of this kind
among the Heathens which our Savior would have his Disciples to avoid, seems
to be that Repetition which proceeds from the Affectation of much speaking in
Prayer, or from a belief that God will not be moved to help us, unless we use
many Words, or repeat the same thing over in a tedious manner. And thus the
Prophets of Baal cried out from Morning till Noon, O Baal hear us; O Baal hear
us. We are far enough, I hope, from such kind of Repetitions. And since they
are such tedious Repetitions as these, which our Savior here calls Vain, Men
should have a care of calling those Repetitions of Good Prayers and Praises
Vain, which are nothing like these, especially in contempt of a Public Rule.

I never yet could find, that those who charge our Liturgy with this fault,
have attempted to show us those marks of difference, by which we might
distinguish Vain Repetitions from those that are not Vain, which I think their
pretense obliged them to do. But although the Gravity and Usefulness of that
part of our Service, which they make this Objection against, might well excuse
us from any farther Vindication; yet I shall say something to this purpose, for
the satisfaction of those that are willing to be satisfied.

I conceive there are these two things only to be regarded in using Repetitions
in Prayer or Thanksgiving, that they may not be liable to the charge of Vanity.

1. That the Matter Repeated be very weighty and considerable, and that it be
singularly apt to move those Pious Affections which God is most pleased with in
our Addresses to him. And in this respect I dare say there is no sober
Christian but will grant our Repetitions to be secured from Vanity. Such
Petitions as Lord have mercy upon us, deserve the putting forth of the whole
strength of our Desires and Affections. And when we ascribe Glory to the Holy
Trinity, we express what we ought to make the end of all our Worship, and of
all the Actions of our Lives. And therefore these things will bear being
Repeated, and the Repetition of them may be profitable both to excite and to
express the fervor of our Minds. And I trust we shall agree, that if any one
Form of Prayer will bear being used more than once, when we Worship God, it is
the Lords Prayer.

2. The second thing required to secure Repetitions from Vanity, is, That they
be framed with Judgment, both with regard to the frequency, that they do not
come over too often, and with regard to the disposal of them, that they come in
fitly and in due place. I do not mean that this is so very nice a thing, that
the difference of an hairs breadth, as we use to say, will spoil all: For in
things of this Nature there is a Latitude in which Prudent Men may take their
choice; but only that this is to be done with discretion and choice, and with
respect to the Ends for which Repetitions may be useful. And I am persuaded
that this also is not wanting in our Liturgy. For I do not find that this was
ever Objected against the Repetitions we mean, that they are ordered
injudiciously, unless upon the only account of too much frequency. And yet the
Lords Prayer is but twice in the Ordinary Service, and but once in every other
distinct Office of Prayer or Thanksgiving. The Gloria Patri is used but once at
our beginning to Praise God with Spiritual Hymns, and once at the Conclusion of
every Psalm, and of some of the Hymns, besides one recital thereof in the
Litany, when that is used. And as for those short Ejaculations. Lord have mercy
upon us; Christ have mercy upon us. The former is repeated but once in the
Ordinary Service, and both but twice in the Litany. So that there is no such
ground of Complaint as is pretended, that there are many Repetitions in our
Form of Worship, much less that those are Vain which are there. And I do not
see how they that charge our Common Prayer Book with Vain Repetitions upon
these accounts, can have a reverent esteem of the 136 Psalm, where for 26
Verses together, His mercy endures for ever, is repeated in every Verse.

There is indeed one thing more requisite to secure our Repetitions of the same
thing in calling upon God from being Vain, and that is, That our Desires and
Affections should be raised to keep pace with our Expressions. But this belongs
to us to take care of. And if we would endeavor to stir up in our selves that
Zeal and Devotion of Heart, which should answer that Appearance thereof which
these Repetitions make, this would satisfy us beyond all other Argument that
they are not Vain. To Conclude this Matter, I desire those who do not yet
approve our Repetition of the Lords Prayer, and the other short Devotions, to
consider whether it be so easy to spend the time it takes up more profitably,
than by joining in good earnest with the Congregation in these Prayers.

In the next place, the Responsals of the Congregation are Matter of Offense to
some Persons; They do not approve the Peoples saying the Confession and the
Lords Prayer after the Minister, nor their alternate Reciting some Petitions in
the daily Service, with the Psalms and Hymns, and least of all do they approve
that part which the Congregation bears in the Prayers of the Litany.

Now it were well, if they, who blame our Prayers upon this account, would
consider what has often been said to show the usefulness of this way. Namely,
That it is apt to check a wandering Spirit, and to help and relieve Attention;
and withal, that it tends to quicken a lively Forwardness and Zeal in Gods
Service, whilst we invite and provoke one another to Pray and to give Thanks.
These things we say not without some experience of their Truth, and we think
they carry plain Reason along with them, and I do not find that they have been
Contradicted by the Leaders of the Dissenting Party. It is True, they have
declared their dislike of this way, but still without taking notice of what may
be said for it. If I have observed right, the main Reason of their dislike is
this, That the Minister, as they say, is appointed for the people in all
Public Services appertaining to God, and that the Scripture makes the Minister
to be the Mouth of the People to God in Prayer. And therefore I shall Examine
this Reason in the first place.

And, 1. If it were granted that the Scripture makes the Minister to be the
Mouth of the People to God in Public Worship; yet this must by no means be so
Interpreted, as to make all Vocal Prayer and Thanksgiving in Religious
Assemblies unlawful to the People. For then they must not declare their Assent
to the Prayers which the Minister utters, by saying Amen, which yet the
Scripture approves, and is not disapproved by any of those that Object our way
against us. Nor must it be so taken, as if the People were to be excluded from
a Vocal Part in Praising God by Hymns and Spiritual Songs. For this also is
warranted by Scripture, and seems to be confessed by our Dissenting Brethren,
who allow the People to Sing Psalms with the Minister.

Now he that audibly says Amen to the Prayers of the Congregation, makes a
short Responsal to the Minister: And moreover, they that sing Psalms, in which
there are Passages of Prayer, Confessions, or Petitions, containing matter of
Invocation proper for us, as the Psalms often do, they pray Vocally. So that
notwithstanding what is pretended concerning the Ministers being the Peoples
Mouth to God, it shall still be lawful for the People, sometimes to join
Vocally in Prayer as well as in Praise, and not only by saying Amen, but by
expressing the very words of Confession or Petition.

But, 2ly. Where is it said in Scripture, that the Minister is the Mouth of the
People to God, or that no Prayer may be Offered up to God in Religious
Assemblies, otherwise than by the Mouth of the Minister? I doubt these sayings
are grown so samiliar amongst some People, that they believe them to be the
Words, or very near the Words of Scripture: But there are no such Words nor
meaning in the Bible that I can find, or that they have found for us. It is not
good to pretend the Authority of Scripture for a Doctrine that is not to be met
with there.

It is true that the Minister is the Mouth of the People to God in all those
Prayers which he utters for them, and because these are many more than what the
People themselves utter, he may be said to be their Mouth to God Comparatively,
but not Absolutely. It will be true also, that the Minister is appointed for
the People in all Public Services appertaining to God, if this be understood
for the most part, or of All with little exception. Some Public Services there
are which are enclosed in his Office, and he is appointed for them in behalf of
the People; that is, for Administering the Sacrament, Absolving the Penitent,
and Blessing the People. And therefore Prayers that immediately concern these
things are to be pronounced by him only. And as for the rest, the Order of the
Church, and the Authority and Dignity of the Ministerial Function, makes it fit
and decent that the Minister should utter most ever of them; and that in those
wherein the People have their part, he should ever go before, and lead them,
and guide the whole performance: which is all taken care for in our Liturgy.

I said before, that the Dissenters do not utterly debar the People from all
Vocal Prayer and Thanksgiving of their own in God's Solemn Worship. And
therefore it were great pity that they should keep at a distance from us upon
Questions of this Nature. And I heartily entreat them to consider whether they
may not upon their own Principles come up to the Rules and Customs of our
Church in this thing.

1. If they grant the Peoples interest in Vocal Praise, let them consider
whether they have reason to Condemn the Peoples bearing a part in any of the
Hymns and Psalms by alternate Responses. For the plain End of reciting those
Psalms in the Congregation, is to Praise and Magnify God's Name, and to excite
in our Hearts such like devout affections in doing so, as those Holy Men felt
in themselves, who were assisted by God's Spirit in Composing them. And
therefore the Dissenters are not obliged to demand that the People be silent
all this while. I have heard some of them say, that if these Psalms and Hymns
were Sung, the Congregation might then challenge to put in their Voices with
the Minister. But when they are read, as they generally are in our Parish
Churches, they say this ought to be the Work of the Minister only. But I cannot
see why singing or not singing should make such a Difference. I grant it were
better if they were every where sung, because this is more suitable to the
Design of Psalms, than bare reciting is. But if they be not sung (which is
customarily omitted in Parish Churches, for want of skill as I conceive) the
next use of them that is most agreeable to their Nature and Design, is not that
the Minister should read all, as he does other parts of the Scripture; but that
the People should recite the Psalms and other Godly Hymns, with the Minister by
way of Answering in turns, as the Custom is with us, more or less in most
Places. For when the People rise up to do this in order to the Solemn Praising
of God, this is much nearer to singing, wherein the People are allowed to bear
a part in God's Vocal Praise, than the Ministers reciting all himself, and
shutting out the People from any part thereof.

But it is Objected particularly against the reciting of one Verse of the
Psalms by the Minister, and another by the People; that the Peoples Verse is in
a manner lost to some of the Congregation, since in the confused murmur of so
many Voices nothing can be distinctly heard.

Now if our Brethren should admit of what has been already said in Vindication
of these Responsals; I hope this Objection will not be insisted upon. I grant,
that which is uttered in the Congregation ought to be understood. But then
those Verses of the Psalms which are uttered by the Congregation may be well
enough understood by every one that has a Book, or who is acquainted
competently well with the Psalms themselves. I need not say much in answer to
this Objection, because it may be removed by every one that makes it, if he can
read, and will bring a Book along with him. And as for those that cannot, I
must needs say, that it is not so hard as is pretended for them also to take
those Verses which are uttered by those that are near them, if they will
carefully attend. And I have been credibly informed, that some devout People
that could never read, have attained to an ability of reciting most of the
Psalms without Book, by often hearing them in those Churches where they are
alternately recited; which shows that the Murmur is not so confused, but that
the Words may be heard ditinctly enough to be understood, if one has a mind to
it. And then they that cannot read may by this means be more quickened, than
otherwise they would be, to learn to read; however to attend, and to learn the
Psalms without Book, that they also may bear their part Vocally with the
Congregation in God's Praises.

I shall add, That for the most part the Psalms are recited alternately in
those Churches only, where it may be reasonably presumed that the whole
Congregation can read, very few excepted. For by the way, this Method of
reading the Psalms is not Commanded, but every Parish Church is left at liberty
to observe her own Custom about it. In the Country Parishes the Minister
generally recites all, (which way I do not think so convenient as that of
Responsals, for the Reason I gave before.) But there ought to be no breach
amongst us about things of this Nature, in which one way may perhaps be more
convenient in one respect, and the contrary more convenient in another; and
then we should not altogether dwell upon Considerations that favor our own
opinion, but attend also to those that may be offered for another, and put the
best construction upon it, especially in favor of a Public Rule, or a
received Custom. This is more Christian-like, and will be more for the honor
of Religion, and the good of other Men's Souls, and for our own Comfort at last,
than to strain our utmost Wit to find faults with, and to aggravate
Inconveniences against the Laws or Usages of the Church where we live. This
that I am now speaking of is not a Law imposed on all the Churches of our
National Communion, but a Custom of some of them, which I thought good to
desend, that they who think not so highly well of it as I do, may not yet break
Communion with those that use it. And I hope our Brethren, who grant the People
are not to be excluded from Vocal Praise, will consider that there is no
inconvenience in uttering the Psalms by Responsals, but that which is pretended
concerning the difficulty to understand what is said: And that there is very
little reason for this pretense, seeing the Psalms are the most known parts in
the Bible, and that if those few who cannot read, will be careful, they may
reap great benefit by attending to the Congregation, as some have done, till
themselves have been able to recite the Psalms.

2. If they grant it Lawful and Expedient, that the People should join in Vocal
Praise; I cannot see how they can Dispute the lawfulness or expedience of their
joining with the Minister sometimes in Vocal Prayer. It will not be easy to
show a Reason why this should be disallowed, if that be allowed. If it be said,
there is some Example and Warrant in the Scripture for the one, but not for the
other; it seems to be a good answer, that there is such a parity of reason, as
that the express warrant of the Scripture for one, is an implied warrant for
the other: Unless a Man will say, that Nothing must be done in Gods Worship for
which there is not express and particular Warrant; which though a Man may say
when he is opposing a way of Worship which he likes not, yet he will not say
it, when he comes to defend his own. It is a Principle that no Man will stand
by, though sometimes he may take it up to serve a turn. The truth is, the
Scripture does not pretend to give us a perfect account of the Order and Manner
of the Solemn Worship of God either in the Synagogues of the Jews, or in the
Churches of Christians; nor to prescribe a Form for the Service of God by the
Church in after times. Several things were done in the Religious Assemblies of
Christians first of all, that were peculiar to the extraordinary effusion of
the Spirit in those times, and several that were fit enough for the conduct of
God's Service when Miracles should cease; and of both sorts some are intimated
in St. Paul's two Epistles to the Corinthians; but no Man that understands
these things will say, that they are all intimated there, or any where else in
the New Testament. And therefore it does not follow that they did not observe
in their Worship, this or that Custom; from hence, that we do not find it
written that they observed it. We do not read that the Lords Prayer was used in
the time of the Apostles; but I suppose they are very few who will therefore
make a question whether it was used or not. We are able to show that the
Peoples joining in Vocal Prayer with the Minister was very anciently practiced.
In imitation of the way of the Christians, Julian the Apostate appointed a Form
of Prayer for the Heathen, to be recited in Parts; which shows that this was a
known Custom Naz. Orat. 3.
of the Church in those days, and that it had been generally practiced before.
And if this was the Primitive way, it is more probable that it was the way in
the Apostles time, than that it was not. But of this let every one Judge as he
sees cause. This is certain, That the Apostles left the Governors of the
Church under the Obligation of ordering the Service of God according to General
Rules, and prescribed that all things should be done Decently and in Order, and
to Edification. And I do not think that our Brethren will ever be able to show,
that this Practice which they except against, is not agreeable to such General
Rules; which yet they ought to do very fully and plainly, to excuse their
Nonconformity.

That which is most urged, is, That the People speaking to God in the Church is
Disorderly, and a breaking in upon the Ministers Office. But will they say that
the Children of Israel entrenched upon the Priest, when they all bowed
themselves upon the Pavement, and Worshipped the Lord, and Praised him, saying,
For he is good, for his mercy endures for ever; 2 Chronicles. 7. 3.? I have already
observed, That Ecclesiastical Order is in this matter secured by the Ministers
Presiding in God's Public Worship, and guiding the whole performance of it.

But not to allow the People to make an audible Confession of Sin after the
Minister, nor to utter some few affectionate Petitions, and those very short,
to which they are also invited and led by him; this rather seems to savor of
an affectation of undue superiority over the People, than to proceed from any
fear, lest by this means they should be encouraged to invade the Ministerial
Office. I believe the Laity of our Communion have as Reverend an esteem of the
Sacred Function as their Neighbors, and to raise the Comparison no higher,
have shown themselves ever since the Reformation, as much afraid to usurp the
proper Offices of the Clergy, as those that have been drawn away from the
Communion of the Church, and have been taught that they must not say a word in
Public Prayer, but Amen. We should not think that we endanger our Order and
the respect that is due to it, if we do not arrogate more to our selves than is
meet. It has been one great fault of the Church of Rome to advance the Priest
unreasonably above the People in the Administration of Holy Things. The
Dissenting Ministers may be a little guilty of this, though in a particular
wherein that Church is not guilty of it. They seem to make too little account
of the Flock of Christ, in Condemning our Church for permitting and requiring
the People to Offer up those Petitions to God with their own Mouths, which are
appointed for them in the Liturgy. The Minister assuming the whole to himself
does not indeed make him much greater in the Church than he is, but they that
obstinately deny any part of it to the People, do make them of much lower and
meaner Condition in the Church than they ought to be. And it is something
strange, that those very Persons who Contend for the interest of the Laity in
some business in Religious Assemblies that more nearly touches upon
Ecclesiastical Authority, than the bare offering up of a few Petitions to God,
should be so unwilling to allow them this. They affirm that the People have a
right to be heard before Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons are Ordained, and as
several of them contend to interpose also in all Acts of Discipline: and yet
they do not think them qualified to bear any part in the Prayers of the
Congregation, unless by saying Amen to what the Minister utters. These things
do not seem to hang well together. And I am persuaded our Church has ordered
this Matter with more Judgment and Impartiality, in assigning to the People
their Interest both in Acts of Worship and Discipline, within such Rules and
Limits that the Clergy and Laity may know what their proper place and business
is in all Ecclesiastical Assemblies.

I have heard some Object against the Peoples uttering Prayers and Praises in
the Congregation, that it is Forbidden Women to speak in the Church. But this
is strangely misapplied to the Matter in hand. For it is plain, that the
speaking mentioned by the Apostle, signifies nothing but Prophesying,
Interpreting, Preaching, or Instructing; and that the reason why he will not
allow this to the Woman, is because Preaching is an Act that implies Authority,
whereas the Woman's part is Obedience and Subjection. They that will read the
whole Chapter, will find that this is the true meaning of St. Paul. And indeed
the place it self sufficiently shows it, which I shall therefore set down. Let
your Women keep silence in the Churches, for it is not permitted unto them to
speak, but they are Commanded to be under Obedience, as also the Law says. And
if they will learn any thing, let them ask their Husbands at home, for it is a
shame for a Woman to speak in the Church, 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35, The Subject of
this Discourse is briefly expressed in the 39 Verse, Brethren covet to prophecy,
and forbid not to speak with tongues. Now the reason given why the Woman is not
to speak, viz. because she is to be under Obedience, does plainly restrain that
Speaking to Prophesying, and the like, which is moreover the only sort of
Speaking that is discoursed of in this place.

I know no particular Exception under this Head which remains to be spoken to,
unless it be, that the People are said to utter the Words of Invocation in the
Litany for the most part, the Minister all the while suggesting the Matter of
it to them. But this Objectin will be of no force, if what I have said
concerning the lawfulness of allowing the People an Interest in Vocal Prayer be
admitted; unless the Objection be this, That they are allowed to bear too
considerable a part in that Prayer, and somewhat to the disparagement of the
Ministers Office. And then I answer, That, upon Reasons which I shall presently
Offer, it seems to me to be otherwise. I shall only premise that I am really
troubled for their sakes who put us upon this Defense, that in Matters of
Prudence and Expedience wherein there is a considerable latitude to order them
well enough, that in these things I say they seem to yield so very little to
the Authority and Judgment of their Governors. I do not think it hard to make
out the Prudence of these Determinations so much disliked: This is not the
thing I am troubled at. But I think it hard that a Public Rule should not be
thought reason enough to justify things of this sort, and to oblige the People
to compliance without more ado. I am sorry that our Dissenting Brethren do not
consider that it is some diminution to their Modesty and Humility, to
challenge, as in effect they do, a nice and punctual account of the prudence of
the Public Orders of this Church, before they will Submit to 'em in Practice.
Now as to the Objection before us. The Peoples Vocal Part in the Litany seems
to be no disparagement at all to the Ministers Office upon these accounts.

1. Although the Formal Words, of Good Lord deliver us, and We beseech thee to
hear us Good Lord, be uttered by the People; yet it must be acknowledged that
this is but part of the Prayer of the Litany, that which the Minister utters
being the other part and the far greater part.

2. That the Words of Prayer are begun by the Minister, not only in the
Invocation of the Holy Trinity first of all; but in that Prayer Remember not
Lord our Offenses, and Spare us Good Lord, and We beseech thee O Lord God, etc.
So that the Minister does utter the Formal Words of Prayer, and the People take
them all afterward from him, excepting only the Words of that Petition, Good
Lord deliver us.

3. They are but these two short and known Petitions, Good Lord deliver us, and
We beseech thee to hear us Good Lord, upon the uttering of which by the People
the weight of the Objection lies. And if they will allow the People any Vocal
part in the Words of Prayer, I know not what Petitions are more proper for them
than such as these. As for the Repetition of them, there is this reason for it,
that there is still new and distinct Matter to which they are applied. And I
will be bold to say, that the repeated application of them is a great relief to
attention and minding the business we are about, and evidently contributes to
keep up an affectionate and ardent frame of Heart, in desiring those weighty
things we ask of God in this Prayer. I could almost appeal to the keenest of
our Adversaries, if that Petition, Good Lord deliver us, were applied but once
in gross to the Deprecations and Supplications of that part of the Litany to
which it belongs, whether we should not be more apt to let our attention fall,
and to forget the meaning, and to languish in the offering up of those Prayers,
than as it is now ordered. But,

4. I think it is plain, that in offering up these Prayers to God, the Minister
has the Principal and Guiding part, in that he utters all the distinct Matter
of the Prayer, which the People do not, whereas he utters Words of Invocation
as well as they. And now I desire our Brethren to consider, whether if the
People were to utter that which is the Ministers part now; and the Minister to
say that only which is theirs, they would not have more grievously complained
that the Ministers Authority was slighted in the whole design, since he seemed
only to learn from the People what the Congregation was to pray for.

It is of great Consequence with what Mind we come to consider any thing; if
with prejudice and dislike, we are then ready to turn all that is reasonably
produced in favor for it, into an argument of distaste; and that seems
unreasonable, with the quite contrary, to which we should have been more
displeased if this had been instead of the other. But surely we may judge of
these things with Impartiality, and if need be with Candor, as we ought to do.
And if the difficulty of doing so be seen in the frequency of doing the
Contrary, even amongst Men otherwise good, we have the greater need to entreat
of God to enlighten our Understandings, and to rescue us from prejudices and
passions in the Judgment we make of all things of this nature. I do not
intimate this any way in affectation of seeming not to need this exhortation my
self; but remembering my own frailty. I do hereupon admonish my self as well as
others. In the mean time, if there be any Biass upon my Judgment in that
esteem, I declare my self to have of the Prayers of the Church; I must confess
that I believe my self to be biased on the right hand. For I take it to be
much more for the safety of my own Soul, as well as the security of the
Churches Peace, that I should be inclined rather to Judge too favorably of
Public Rules, than to value them beneath their just worth and usefulness. But
I must confess, That of all the Prayers in our Liturgy that are of Humane
Composition, I should be most unwilling to part with the Litany as it now
stands there. It seems to be, what it was designed to be, a Form of Prayer apt
to excite our most intense and servent desires of God's Grace and Mercy.
Whilst the Minister leads the people to pray against those several Sins and
Evils which a Christian is most concerned to be afraid of, and at the end of
every convenient period, the Congregation with one voice cries out, Good Lord
deliver us; while the Minister leads them to pray for all those particular
Blessings which ought to be most dear to a Christian, and the whole
Congregation with one voice cries out, We beseech thee to hear us Good Lord.
These Prayers seem to be offered with such affection, as I am not well able to
express by any ordinary instance: In Offering them we seem to be as
passionately concerned as a Malefactor upon his knees, that begs his own life.
The whole Office is framed with respect both to matter and contrivance, for the
raising of the utmost Devotion of good Christians, and for the warming of the
coldest hearts by the heat of the Congregation. And in such a disposition it is
then most fit to express our Charity, by praying for others, even all sorts of
Men, as distinctly and particularly as Public Prayers will bear. And this the
fullness of this Prayer does admirably provide for, as no Man will deny, who
considers it without aversion and prejudice against it, which I pray God
deliver all well meaning people from, that they may not deprive themselves of
so great a benefit.

I shall say no more concerning this Matter of the peoples joining in Vocal
Prayer and Praise. And indeed the Reason why I have dwelt so long upon an
Answer to this Objection, is, because I have observed, that some honest persons
are very confident, that in this thing at least our Liturgy is to be blamed.
And I hope what has been said will to such persons give reasonable
satisfaction, that for this thing it is rather to be commended. But because
upon this occasion the part of the Congregation in the Litany was last
mentioned: I shall now speak briefly to some other Objections against the
Litany which are commonly made.

The first of these is, That we pray to be delivered from all deadly sin, which
seems to imply that there are some Sins which are not deadly.

Now in answer to this it is by some truly enough said, That these Words do not
necessarily imply a distinction between Sins that are, and Sins that are not
deadly. But admitting that such a distinction was intended, yet I think no
understanding Christian has reason to be offended with it. By Deadly Sin a
Protestant means all such Sin as puts a Man out of a state of Favor with God.
But all Sins are not thus Deadly. For in many things we offend all, and as for
those Sins which the Regenerate commit through Humane Frailty only, they are
not thereby put into a state of Damnation. And though all Sin be in its own
Nature Deadly or Damnable; yet through the Mercy of God, and the Merits of
Christ, Sins of mere Infirmity are not imputed to true Believers, and therefore
not Deadly to them. But there are some Sins so heinous, that he who Commits
them is thereby put into a Damnable state, and till he recovers himself by true
Repentance and Actual Reformation, he cannot upon any good ground promise to
himself that the wrath of God does not abide upon him. And it is of such Sins as
these that this passage is to be understood, as appears by Deadly Sin being
added to Fornication. From Fornication and all other Deadly Sin, Good Lord
deliver us. So that this Petition seems to be of the same Nature with that of
the Psalmist. Keep back thy Servant also from presumptuous sins, let not them
have dominion over me, then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from
the great Transgression, Psalm. 19. 13. Whereas therefore these Words of the
Litany seem to suppose that some Sins are not Deadly, we should be very unjust
to make such a Construction of them, as if they employed that some Sins are in
their own nature Venial, and so slight, that they will be forgiven without any
consideration; for as I have shown, we may hold that distinction which the
Words suppose, and yet retain that Protestant Doctrine, that no Sin is
forgiven, but through the Mercy of God, and the Merits and Mediation of Christ.

Again, some are offended with our praying against Sudden Death.

But why should we not by Sudden Death understand our being taken out of this
World when we are not fit to die? For sometimes a thing is said to be Sudden to
us when we are not prepared for it. And in this sense can any good Christian
find fault with the Petition? But suppose, that by Sudden Death we mean what is
commonly understood by it, that is, a Death of which a Man has not the least
warning by Sickness: Are there not reasons why even good Men may desire not to
die suddenly? May they not when they find themselves drawing toward their end,
by their good Instructions and Admonitions make impression upon their Friends,
Companions, and Relations to the bettering of them? May not their Counsels be
more effectual with them than ever they were before? And is it not reasonable
to believe they will be so? As for themselves, may not the warning they have of
Approaching Death be improved to make them more fit to die than they were in
their perfect health? In a Word, he that thinks himself to have sufficiently
perfected holiness in the fear of God, and not to stand in need of those Acts
of Self-Examination, Humiliation, and Devotion, by which good Men improve the
warnings of Death, which Mortal Sickness or Extreme Age gives them, let him
suspend his Act, and refuse to join with us when we pray God to deliver us from
Sudden Death.

There is yet another Objection which I should not have named, but that some of
the Dissenters, who seem to understand very little of Religion by making it,
have it often in their Mouths. That is, when we pray to be delivered by the
Mystery of Christ's Holy Incarnation, etc. by his Agony and Bloody Sweat, by his
Cross and Passion, etc. and by the coming of the Holy Ghost: They say, some of
them, that this is Swearing, some that it is Conjuring, and I know not what.
For which sayings, favoring of great profaneness, they ought to be severely
rebuked; and that is all the answer they should have, were it not that some of
them may be grossly ignorant of the true Sense of these Petitions.

And therefore I say, that they might easily suppose, if they would give their
Minds to it, that we pray to be delivered through the Saving Efficacy of
Christ's Incarnation and Passion, etc. And yet I do not take this to be the
principal meaning, or that which was intended. For I conceive that to be this,
that when we say, By the Mystery of thy Holy Incarnation, and by thy Cross and
Passion, etc. Good Lord deliver us; we implore Christ, who has already showed
such inestimable goodness toward us, by taking our Nature to his Divinity, to
Die upon the Cross, to be Buried, to Rise again, to ascend into Heaven, and
there to intercede with the Father for us, and by sending the Holy Ghost to
qualify the Apostles for their great Work of carrying the Word of Salvation
into the World: I say we implore him who has already done such mighty things
for our Salvation, and we plead with him by that goodness which he has already
given us such great demonstrations of, by those wonders of Mercy that he has
wrought for us, that he would now go on to deliver us by his powerful Grace
from these Evils which we pray against. And this is so reasonable, so devout
and affectionate, so humble and thankful a way of Praying, that I am sorry that
any who call themselves Believers should be so ignorant as not to understand
it, or so profane and unlike what they pretend to be, as to deride it. Though
God does not need to be put in mind of his former benefits toward us; yet it
is fit for us to mention them in our most earnest Prayers, not only because we
are to make a grateful acknowledgment of them to him, but likewise, because by
this means we encourage our selves to ask in Faith; since he who unaskt has
done such great things for us, will not fail upon our earnest and humble
prayer, which himself also has required, to give us all other good things that
we need, and to deliver us from all real evils of which we are in danger.

I proceed next to consider whether there be any just cause to find fault with
the reading of the Apocryphal Lessons in our Church.

And, 1. It must be acknowledged by those who allow the usefulness of Sermons
and Catechizing in the Church, that those Chapters may be read in the Church,
though they are not Divinely inspired Writings, since no sober Man will pretend
that the Minister Preaches or Catechises by Inspiration. But if other good
Instructions may be read or recited in the Church, besides the Word of God it
self, why may not some Lessons out of the Apocryphal Books be read, which
contain excellent Rules of good Life; and Exhortations and Encouragements to
Virtue and Piety; especially since those writings were greatly esteemed by the
Church in its purest Ages, when they and other Humane Writings were also
Publicly read, as well as the Holy Scriptures?

2. If it be said that those Chapters of Canonical Scripture which are omitted
in the Calendar, would be more profitably read instead of the Apocryphal
Chapters; it ought also to be observed, that the Chapters omitted are those of
the Old Testament, which either recite Genealogies, or the Rules of the
Levitical Service, or which relate matters of Fact delivered also in other
Chapters that are read, or which are hard to be understood. This seems to
Apologize for the Churches leaving those to be considered at home by them that
have ability so to do, and appointing some Apocryphal Chapters to be read,
which are more plain, and in that respect more profitable for the Common
People: Unless a Man will say, that because the Scripture is all of Divine
Authority, it must be always more profitable to read any part of that to the
people, than to use any other Exhortation, or read any other good Lesson. And
then I do not know what place will be left for Sermons, since as I said before,
they are no more of Divine Authority, than the Apocryphal Lessons.

3. If it be said, that the reading of these as Lessons; is a prevailing
Temptation to the Vulgar to take them for God's Word, or to think them equal to
the Writings of the Old and New Testament: I believe there is no sufficient
ground for this. I never heard of any of our Communion that were led into that
mistake. It is certain, that our Church declares those Lessons to be no part
of Canonical Scripture, and in the 6th Article says, That they are read for
example of Life, and instruction of Manners, but that it does not apply them to
establish any Doctrine: And herein she follows the Judgment and Practice of the
Primitive Church, which distinguishes between the Canonical and Apocryphal
Books, esteeming those to be of Divine Authority, these not so, but indeed
Godly Writings, profitable to be publicly read. And why the same use of them
may not be retained with the same distinction, I can see no good Reason. For
the Church of Romes receiving the Apocryphal Books into her Canon, is not
likely to mislead any of our Communion; since we are not so forward to take
their Opinion in any Matter of Religion.

But in the last place, There is no Apocryphal Lesson read in our Churches upon
any Lords day in the year, and so there is not this pretense against Communion
with us upon the Lords days, when it is that we do so earnestly desire the
Communion of those that have separated from us. And therefore I shall at
present say nothing to those Exceptions which are taken from the Matter of some
of the Apocryphal Books, as that some Relations are pretended to be Fabulous,
etc. For this would engage me to a greater length than I intend. But whoever
thinks himself capable to judge of this Controversy, may receive satisfaction
from what Dr. Falkner has said upon it in his Libertas Ecclesiast. p. 164, etc.

To proceed; Although the Communion Service for the Gravity and Holiness
thereof is preferred by the Dissenters before all other Offices in the
Common Prayer Book, yet that has not past free from Exception. The Passages
that seem to be disliked are two.

1. That Petition in the Prayer before Consecration, That our sinful Bodies may
be made clean by his Body, and our Souls washed by his most precious Blood.
Here they say a distinct efficacy of cleansing, and a greater efficacy is
attributed to the Blood of Christ, than to his Body; inasmuch as the cleansing
of our Souls is attributed to the Blood of Christ, whereas our Bodies are said
only to be cleansed by his Body.

Now in answer to this, I suppose it is plain from those Words at the delivery
of the Bread and Wine; The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for
thee, preserve thy Body and Soul unto everlasting life. And the Blood of our
Lord, etc. It is, I say, plain from hence, that our Church teaches the
Sanctification and Salvation of our Souls and Bodies, to flow from the Body as
well as the Blood of Christ. And therefore that former Passage is not to be
Interpreted, as if our Souls were not cleansed by the Body of Christ, because
they are said to be washed by his Blood. For the saying of this does not
exclude the other. When the Apostle said, We being many are one Bread and one
Body, for we are all partakers of that one Bread, 1 Cor. 10. 17. Though he
expressed only the Bread of the Eucharist, yet no man will say he meant to
exclude the Cup, as if the Unity of the Church would be argued only from their
partaking in that one kind. And when he said, that we have been all made to
drink into one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 13. he meant not to exclude the Participation
of the Bread, as if that one Spirit which animated the Church, was signified
only by partaking of the Cup. Nor will any Man argue from hence, that he
attributes a distinct efficacy to the Bread to prove the Unity of the Body, and
to the Cup to prove the Unity of the Spirit. I must needs say, that this
Exception was sought, but never offered it self.

2. The Ministers delivering the Elements into every Communicants hands, with a
Form of Words recited to every one of them at the Distribution, is blamed also,
as being thought a departure from the Practice of Christ at the first
Institution of this Sacrament. For they say, our Lord's Words were, Take ye,
Eat ye, Drink ye all of this, and therefore the People are not to take the
Elements one by one out of the Ministers hand, nor ought any Form of Words to
be used particularly to every one that receives. To this I answer,

1. That it does not appear from those Words, Take ye, etc. which are spoken in
the Plural Number, that our Savior did not speak particularly to every one of
his Apostles when they received, or that he did not deliver the Elements into
every particular Man's hand. For the Evangelists may well be supposed to give a
short account of the Institution of Christ, not of every Word he then said, but
what was necessary to be related. And then what might be particularly said or
done to every one, would be sufficiently related, in being related as spoken or
done Generally to all. That is, if Christ had said, Take thou, Eat thou, to
every one of them; this were truly related by the Evangelists, who tell us that
he had said to all, Take, Eat, etc. And therefore I do not see how it can be
proved, that our Practice varies from this Circumstance of the Institution:
Tho, if it did, I suppose it might be as easily defended, as the Celebration of
the Eucharist about Dinner time, and not at Supper, which the Dissenters
themselves scruple not. But he that thinks not this Answer sufficient, let him
consult the aforesaid excellent Book of Dr. Falkner, p. 218, etc. where he
shall find, that it is indeed more probable that our way is agreeable to the
way of the First Institution in this Matter, than that which the Dissenters
would have instead of it. But for their sakes who may not have that Book by
them, I shall add out of it, another answer which I think may satisfy a
Reasonable Man. Supposing then that the Evangelists did not relate the Matter
Summarily, but as distinctly as the Words were spoken by our Savior. Yet,

2. Our Savior also Commanded his Disciples, Mat. 28. 19. to teach all
Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost: But will any Christian think it hence deducible, That where diverse
Persons, or great numbers are to be Baptized together, the Solemn Words of
Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
may not lawfully be expressed severally to every Person? And if the Baptismal
Form of Words may be Solemnly and Suitably to that Sacrament applied to every
Person Baptized, by the General acknowledgment of all Christians, there can be
no Reason why the like may not be allowed in the Lord's Supper. Wherefore the
Practice of our Church herein is no way unsuitable to the Institution of
Christ, or the Nature of the Sacrament; and the Alteration of it would be for
the worse, and to the abating the Solemnity of its Administration, Lib. Eccl.
p. 224.

There remains but two more particular Exceptions which I think needful to take
notice of, and those are in the Office of Baptism. And the first I mean, is,

1. That all Baptized Infants are supposed to be Regenerated; of which, as some
say, we cannot be certain.

But I desire those that say so, to consider if the Scripture does not
attribute to Baptism, as much as the Liturgy does. We are said by Baptism to
be made Members of Christ's Body, By one Spirit we are all Baptized into one
Body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. And to be Baptized into Christ, and to put on Christ, Gal.
3. 27. and he that is in Christ is a new creature. And to be Baptized for the
Remission of sins, Acts 2. 38. Baptism is also called the washing of
Regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. Now if it be made a Question, Whether Infants are
Regenerated in Baptism; the Question at last must come to this: Whether they
are Qualified to become Members of Christ's Body, to be admitted into God's
Covenant, to receive Pardon of Original Sin, and to become New Creatures,
gaining that State by Grace, which they could not have by Nature? And I do not
see, that any but Anabaptists can deny this. For they that contend, as we do,
that Infants are capable of Baptism, must not deny them to be qualified for
this Grace of Baptism, unless they will make the Ordinance and Promises of God
to be of none effect toward them. Now if Infants do by Baptism gain Remission
of Sin, and are made Members of Christ; they are Regenerated and Born anew. If
they do not gain this by it, what does their Baptism signify? Or what benefit
can they be supposed to have by it, if they die in their Infancy, more than if
they had not been Baptized at all? This is the only means of Salvation they can
have. And those expressions of the Scripture above recited, with many more,
will justify our Church, which supposes that this means will be effectual, so
long as they are capable of none other, and therefore ought to be considered by
those that make it to be of none effect.

I shall only add, That this had been thought a strange Question in the Ancient
Church, Whether Infants were Regenerated by Baptism, when the Pelagians, whose
cause led them to deny it, yet durst not do it directly, because they knew it
would not be endured; and therefore they confessed that Infants were to be
Baptized, to qualify them for the Kingdom of Heaven, but not for the Remission
of Sin. So that they themselves seemed to acknowledge the saving effect of
Baptism to Infants; though as St. Austin often showed them, they contradicted
themselves by so doing. But they durst do no otherwise, because the Doctrine of
the Church was so plainly against them in this matter, and every Believer was
so settled in it, that I remember St. Austin somewhere speaks to this purpose,
that the Pelagians would have come to the point, and denied that the Baptism of
Infants signified any thing at all to their Salvation, and therefore might be
as well let alone; but that they were afraid the Mothers themselves of those
Children would every where reproach them for it.

The other Objection against the Office of Baptism, is this, That the
Godfathers and Godmothers, that answer for Infants, are not their Parents or
Guardians, but others, who have, they say, no Authority to Covenant or Act in
their Names. In answer to whih, I shall omit several things that might be said,
and content my self with these two things, which I think may be sufficient.

1. That in all cases where the Sureties are procured by the Parents, there
they have Authority to Covenant in behalf of the Infant; and this the Objectors
must grant, I think, upon their own Principles: since they contend that Parents
or Pro-parents are fittest to act in behalf of the Baptized Infants, as having
Authority so to do, since they have the Power to dispose of their Education
afterward. For then the Sureties which are by them prevailed with to stand for
their Children, have at least all that Authority which the Parents can give
them. And this is sufficiently known to be the case with us. And this is that
which the Church might well suppose, viz. that the Sureties, which contract
with the Church in the Infants Name, would be procured by the Parents; so that
the Parents Contracting in behalf of the Infant, is included in the Undertaking
of the Sureties, who although they are required by the Church to answer for the
Infant, yet are they supposed to be Authorized by its Parents also, so to do,

2. The good Design of this Order and Appointment in the Church ought to be
considered, which is not the less, for the fault of Men, and the looseness of
these times, does often defeat it. For hereby the Church takes greater
security, that the Infant shall be brought up in the Knowledge and Practice of
that Holy Covenant into which it is Baptized: In as much as besides the care of
the Parents, which is in effect promised, and may be more reasonably relied
upon without their own Solemn Act, upon the account of that Natural Affection
which makes them particularly concerned; besides this, I say, there is a
Particular Obligation laid upon others also, to see that the Infant be so
Educated, as much as in them lies. In case the Parents should die before the
Child is grown to years of Discretion, the Sureties are then more Particularly
Obliged to look to their Godchild, that he be put into a way of learning and
doing his Duty. If they should not die before, but be remiss, the Sureties have
Authority to come to them and Admonish them of their Duty, and to let them
know, that since themselves were desired by them to undertake for this Child,
they as such Sureties are particularly concerned to mind the Parents of their
Duty, and if need be to rebuke them sharply for neglecting it; since they did
in effect, and to all purpose of Obligation undertake for the performance of
it, when the Sureties undertook for the Child. Moreover when the Child is grown
to years of Knowledge, and come abroad into the World, he is liable to the
Charitable Admonitions of his Sureties as well as of his Parents, in case he
does amiss, and their Reproofs are more likely to take place, than those of
most other Persons. Now though all Christians, as Members of one Body are to
take care of, and to watch over one another, yet some are more Particularly
Obliged, and have greater Advantages to do those Works of Spiritual Charity
than others. And I appeal to all considering Men, if Sureties at Baptism, may
not with great Authority, and with likelihood of good effect, Reprove both
those Negligent Parents and Unruly Children for whom they have undertaken to
the Church. The Parents for not minding to Educate their Children in the
knowledge and keeping of the Baptismal Vow; or the Children for not hearkening
to good Admonition. And in this Age when the Duty of Christian Reproof is so
generally omitted; it were well if the defect were this way a little supplied.
But it is by no means desirable that the opportunity thereof, and the
obligation thereunto should be taken away. I know some will be apt to say, that
this is but rarely Practiced. But that is no sufficient Answer to what I have
said. For when we use to judge of the goodness of a Rule or Custom by the good
that comes of observing it, we must look where it is kept, though it be kept but
by few, and not where it is broken. And if the Dissenters have nothing to say
against the use of Sureties, but that the end of this Appointment is seldom
regarded, themselves may help to remove this Objection, by returning to the
Church, and increasing the number of those that do pursue the End of it. And
thus doing they shall have the benefit of this Order of the Church, and the
Church the benefit of their good Examples.

As for the use of the Interrogatories put to the Sureties, and their Answers,
they are a Solemn Declaration of what Baptism does oblige all Baptized Persons
to, and that Infants do stand engaged to perform the Vow of Baptism when they
shall come to years of knowledge. This is the known meaning of the Contract,
nor did I ever hear of any that otherwise understood it; and therefore I see
not why it should be said to be liable to misunderstanding.

After all, there is one General Objection yet remaining which still prevails
with some Persons, and that is, That some of our Prayers are to be found in the
Mass Book, and the Breviary, and the Offices of the Church of Rome. This
Objection has made a great noise, but I appeal to Understanding Men, if there
be any sense in it.

No Man will say, that it is enough to make any Prayer, or Form of Devotion or
Instruction unlawful to be used, that the same is to be found in the Mass Book,
etc. For then the Lords Prayer, the Psalms, and a great part of the Scriptures
besides, and the Creeds must never be used by us. And therefore whether any
part of the Roman Service is to be used by us or not, must be judged of by some
other Rule, that is by the Word of God. So that it is a vain Exception against
any part of our Liturgy, to say it was taken out of the Mass Book, unless it
could be shown withal, that it is some part of the Romish Superstition. I know
it has been said, that the Scriptures being of necessary use are to be retained
by us, though the Church of Rome retains them; but that there is not the same
Reason for Forms which are not necessary; but in those we ought to go as far
from that Church as ever we can. But what reason is there for this? For the
Danger that may happen to us in coming too near them, lies in things wherein
they do ill, not in which they do well. And as for the Papists themselves, we
do not in the least countenance them wherein they are wrong, by agreeing with
them wherein they are right. And as for the Things themselves, they are not the
worse for being used by them. We should allow the Papists a greater Power to do
mischief than they have, if their using of some good things should render all
use of them hurtful to us. The Case in short is this, When our Reformers were
intent upon the Reformation of the Liturgy, they designed to Purge it of all
those corrupt Additions, which the usurpt Authority of the Church of Rome had
long since brought into it; and to retain nothing but what was agreeable to the
Holy Scriptures, and to the Practice of the purer Ages of the Church. And in
this they did like Wise Men, because thus it would be evident to all the World,
that they Reformed upon just and necessary Reasons, and not merely out of a
desire of Change and Innovation; since they Purged the Forms of Divine Service,
from nothing but Innovations and Corruptions, and an unprofitable crowd of
Ceremonies. No Man can show a good Reason why those Passages in the
Common Prayer Book, which are to be found in the Mass Book, but which were used
also by the Church before Romanism had Corrupted it, are not as much to be
Valued because they were once used by good Christians, as to be run down
because they have been since used by Superstitious and Idolatrous Men. But to
conclude this Matter, If any Man would set himself to expose the Mass Book, he
would I suppose lay hold upon nothing but the Corruptions that are in it, and
things that are obnoxious to just reproof; not on things that are justifiable
and may easily be defended. And the reason of this is plain, because the
Mass Book is to blame for those parts of it only, but not for these. Now for
such Passages as the Mass Book it self is not to be blamed for, neither is our
Liturgy to be blamed, if we will speak justly of things, and without Prejudice
and Passion.

I have now considered all those Exceptions against the Solemn Service of God
by our Liturgy, which the Dissenters are thought to insist most upon. Not but
that some other Exceptions have been made by the Ministers of that persuasion:
But this I hope was without design to prejudice the People against our
Communion, but rather to gain some alterations, which in their Judgment would
have been advantageous to the Book of Common Prayer, and given it a greater
perfection; whether they were right in this or not, I will not now dispute;
being very desirous, as I pray God we may all be, to avoid Controversies in
this Matter as much as may be. Nay, I believe those Prejudices of the
Lay-Dissenters against the Common Prayer, which I have endeavored to remove,
have wrought in them a greater a version to it, than the best Divines of that
way intended; (I should be very sorry to find my self mistaken in this.) And
this consideration was some encouragement to me to give a true account of those
things they seemed to dislike most of all.

Which I have endeavored upon the plain grounds of Reason and Scripture,
almost wholly avoiding appeals to other Church Antiquity, not but that great
regard is to be had of it, and that we can defend our selves by it; but because
they are very few in Comparison who are qualified to Examine this kind of
Argument. And the like I say of the Concurrence of other Reformed Churches with
us in those things that are disliked.

As for the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, it is pretended that this is a part
of Worship, or a Sacrament of Man's making. The contrary to which, has been so
plainly shown in late Discourses, that unless I am called to give an account of
it, I cannot think fit to trouble you with this Dispute. But I heartily desire
our Brethren to consider at length, that though the use of this Ceremony were
not so easy to be defended as I think it is, yet that it is no Condition of
Communion, because the People are not required to Sign with the Sign of the
Cross, but the Minister only.

As for Kneeling at the Communion of the Holy Table, that is indeed every
Communicants Act, but of this you may expect a Discourse from another Hand,
which I hope will give satisfaction to all Sober Persons, that are yet
unsatisfied about it.

And now I entreat all those of the Dissenting Party, into whose hands these
Papers shall fall, that they would seriously consider, whether it be fit to
venture the Guilt of Schism, and the sad Consequences of it, likely to come to
pass, upon such grounds as these: Let us at length consult for the Honor of
this Age with Posterity, who will stand amazed to find a Separation of
Protestants from this Church, carried on so long upon so little occasion given,
and such weak Objections so strongly insisted upon, as to build an opposite
Communion upon them. Let us Consult the Honor and the Safety of the
Reformation, and no longer suffer it to be exposed to scorn and dnager, to be
Laughed at, and Disgraced by the Papists, our dangerous Enemies always, but
never more dangerous than now. If the Dissenters are not yet convinced, that
the wide breach they have made in the Communion of Protestants, will certainly
let in Popery, if it be not prevented by a timely closing with the Church of
England: Nothing remains but to wait till they are convinced by the last
Extremity. I can take no comfort in being assured that at last they will
believe it, when, alas! it will be to no purpose to believe it. I beseech them
to consider, whether we are likely to be united in any other Communion, but
that of the Church of England as it is by Law Established; and whether so
little account ought to be made of Law and Authority, as to say that our
Governors may as well come down to them, by forbearing to require what they
dislike; as they come up to the Law, by doing what it requires. Will our case
bear this wantonness? Will such Expressions consist with our Duty? I beseech
them by what is most dear to them, by the Honor of God, and the Love of
Christ, and the Care of their own Souls, and the Charity they have for the
Souls of other Men, that they will take pains with themselves to lay aside
Prejudice, and Anger, and all Passions that obstruct a clear Judgment of things
that have been disputed amongst us, and that they would consider impartially
what we have said, as in the sight of God who knows the Hearts of Men. Can
they propound to themselves more beneficial Designs, than to check the
Profaneness and Atheism which in this last Age has been so much complained
of, than to restore in some measure the Ancient Discipline of the Church for
the excluding of vicious Men from the Communion of the Faithful, than to
transmit the Profession of the true Religion Established among us, down to their
Posterity? The most effectual means by which they can contribute to all those
good Ends, is to return heartily and unanimously to the Communion of the Church
of England; all the true Sons whereof are ready to receive them with open Arms,
with joy and thankfulness to God, and to them, for the good they will do us and
themselves by it. But as for them, that for Worldly and Corrupt Interests,
encourage and support the present Separation from this Church, I cannot
expostulate with them in this manner, since such Men have not the fear of God
before them, and it is impossible they should be touched with tenderness for the
Concerns of Religion, while they continue as they are. All I shall say to them
is, That when that great day of Judgment comes, which they of all Men have most
reason to be afraid of, then all the dismal Consequences of this Schism which
are likely to happen, will be fully required at their hands to be sure; whilst
those that in mere Ignorance and Mistake have contributed to them, shall have
an easier Account to give, especially if they have taken pains to inform
themselves better.

What good Effect our Applications to Men will have, we cannot say; but if it
shall appear that they are not yet prepared for Instruction; we have the more
reason to turn our selves to God by earnest Prayer, that he would please to
open the Understandings of the simple, and to detect the ill Designs of
dishonest Men; and to enable us to bring forth more and better Fruits of
Repentance, that whatever happens to this Church, it may not be forsaken of his
Favor and Protection, Amen.

FINIS.
THE RESOLUTION OF THIS CASE OF CONSCIENCE, Whether the Church of England's
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it Unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England? The Second EDITION.

LONDON: Printed for Fincham Gardener, at the White-Horse in Ludgate Street.
1683.

The Case. Whether the Church of Englands Symbolizing so far as it does with
the Church of Rome, makes Communion therewith Unlawful?
IN speaking to this Case, we will,

First, Premise, that there is a wide and vast distance betwixt the Church of
England and that of Rome.

Secondly, Show, that a Churches Symbolizing or agreeing in some things with
the Church of Rome, is no Warrant for Separation from the Church so agreeing.

Thirdly, Show, that the Agreement that is between the Church of England and
the Church of Rome, is in no wise such, as will make Communion with the Church
of England Unlawful.

First. We think it necessary to Premise, that there is a wide and vast
distance betwixt the Church of England and that of Rome. Our Church having
renounced all Communion with the Church of Rome, this speaks the greatest
distance in the general betwixt the two Churches. And as their distance
particularly in Government is manifest to all, from our Churches having utterly
cast off the Jurisdiction of the Papacy; so it is easy to show, that there is
likewise a mighty distance betwixt them, in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline.
But we shall not stand to show this in each of these distinctly, but rather
make choice of this Method, viz. to show that our Church is most distant from,
and opposite to the Church of Rome.

1. In all those Doctrines and Practices, whereby this Church deprives her
Members of their due Liberty, and miserably inslaves them. 2. In all those
Doctrines and Practices, in which she is justly Charged with plainly
Contradicting the Holy Scriptures. 3. In each of their public Prayers and
Offices. 4. In the Books they each receive for Canonical. 5. In the Authority
on which they each of them found their whole Religion.
First, Our Church is at the greatest distance from that of Rome, in all those
Doctrines and Practices, by which she deprives her Members of their due
Liberty, and miserably inslaves them. For instance,

1. This Church denies her Members all Judgment of discretion in matters of
Religion: She obliges them to follow her blindfold, and to resolve both their
Faith and Judgment into hers; as assuming infallibility to her self, and
binding all under pain of Damnation to believe her Infallible.

But our Church permits us the full enjoyment of our due Liberty in believing
and judging; and we Act not like Members of the Church of England, if
(according to St. Paul's injunction) we prove not all things, that we may hold
fast that which is good, if we believe every Spirit, (which St. John cautions
us against) and do not try the Spirits, whether they be of God; which he
requires us to do. It Is impossible that our Church should oblige us to an
implicit Faith in herself, because she disclaimeth all pretense to
infallibility: Our Church tells us, in her 19th Article, that, As the Churches
of Jerusalem, and Alexandria, and Antioch, have erred; so also the Church of
Rome has erred, not only in their Living and manner of Ceremonies, but also in
matters of Faith. And our Churches acknowledgment is plainly employed, in
asserting the most famous Churches in the World to have erred from the Faith,
that she her self must needs be Obnoxious to Error in matters of Faith; and
that she would be guilty of the highest impudence in denying it.

2. The Church of Rome imposes a deal of most slavish Drudgery in the vast
multitude of her Rites and Ceremonies, and unreasonably severe Tasks, and cruel
Penances. As to her Ceremonies, they are so vast a number, as are enough to
take up (as Sir Edwyn Sandys has observed) a great part of a man's life merely
to gaze on: And abundance of them are so vain and Childish, so marvellously odd
and uncouth, as that they can naturally bring (to use that Gentleman's words,
who was a curious observer of them in the Popish Countries) no other than
disgrace and contempt, to those exercises of Religion wherein they are
stirring. In viewing only those that are enjoined in the Common Ritual, one
would bless ones self to think how it should enter into the minds of Men, and
much more of Christians, to invent such things. And the like may be said of the
Popish Tasks and Penances, in imposing of which the Priests are Arbitrary, and
ordinarily lay the most Severe and Cruel ones on the lightest offenders, when
the most Lewd and Scandalous come off with a bare saying of their Beads thrice
over, or some such insignificant and idle business.

But the Church of England imposes nothing of that Drudgery, which makes such
Vassals of the poor Papists. Her Rites are exceeding few, and those plain and
easy, grave and manly, founded on the Practice of the Church, long before
Popery appeared upon the Stage of the World. Our Church has abandoned the five
Popish Sacraments, and contents her self with those two which Christ has
ordained: As is to be seen in her 25th Article, where she declares, that There
are two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel; that is to say,
Baptism and the Supper of the Lord. Those five commonly called Sacraments; that
is to say, Confirmation, Penance, Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme Vnxion, are
not to be counted for Sacraments of the Gospel; being such as have grown,
partly of the Corrupt following of the Apostles, partly are states of life
allowed in the Scriptures: But yet have not like Nature of Sacraments with
Baptism and the Lords Supper: For that they have not any visible Sign or
Ceremony ordained of God. The Sacraments were not ordained of Christ, to be
gazed upon, or to be carried about, etc. And in saying that our Church owns not
the forementioned Popish Sacraments, is implied that she has nothing to do
with any of those very many Superstitious Fopperies which are enjoined in the
Offices appointed for the Administration of those Sacraments.

Again, Our Church no whit more imitates that of Rome in her Cruel Tasks and
Penances, than in her Ceremonies; as is needless to be showed.

In short, in our Churches few Rites, she has used no other Liberty, but what
she judges agreeable to those Apostolical Rules of Doing all things decently
and in order; and Doing all things to Edification. And she imposes her Rites
not (as the Church of Rome does hers) as necessary, and as parts of Religion,
but as merely indifferent and changeable things; as we find in her 34th
Article, where she declares that, Every Particular or National Church has
Authority to Ordain, Change and Abolish Ceremonies, or Rites of the Church,
Ordained only by Man's Authority, so that all things be done to Edifying. And
this Article begins thus: It is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be
in all places one, or utterly like; for at all times they have been diverse, and
may be changed according to the diversities of Countries, Times and Manners; so
that nothing be Ordained against Gods Word.

2. The Church of Rome subjects her Members by several of her Doctrines to
inslaving Passions. For instance, that of Purgatory makes them all their
lifetime subject to the bondages of Fear; at least those of them who are so
sollicitous about the life to come, as to entertain any mistrust or doubting
(as it is strange if the most Credulous of them do not) concerning the Efficacy
of Penances and Indulgences.

Her Doctrine of Auricular Confession subjects all that are not forsaken of all
Modesty, to the passion of Shame.

Her Doctrine of the Dependence of the Efficacy of the Sacraments upon the
Priests intention, must needs expose all considerative people, and those who
have any serious concern about their state hereafter, to great Anxiety and
Solicitude.

But these Doctrines are all rejected by the Church of England. That of
Purgatory she declares against in these Words, Article 22 d. The Romish
Doctrine of Purgatory, is a vain thing fondly invented, and grounded on no
Warranty of Scripture, but rather Repugnant to the Word of God. As to that of
Auricular Confession, nothing like it is taught or practiced in our Church. Her
Members are obliged only to Confess their Sins to God, except when it is
necessary to Confess them to Men, for the relieving of their Consciences, and
their obtaining the Prayers of others; or in order to the righting of those
they have wronged, when due satisfaction cannot otherwise be made; or in order
to their giving Glory to God, when they are justly accused, and their guilt
proved: in which cases, and such like, it is without dispute our duty to confess
to Men.

Nor have we any such Doctrine in our Church, as that of the Dependence of the
Efficacy of the Sacraments on the Priests intention; but the contrary is
sufficiently declared, Article 26th, viz. that The Efficacy of Christ's
Ordinance is not taken away by the Wickedness of those that Minister.

3. The Church of Rome subjects her Members by not a few of her Doctrines and
Practices to Vile Affections and Vices of all sorts: As might be largely
showed, See Libertas Evangelica, Chap. 17.
and will be in part, under the next Head of discourse.

But our Church neither maintains any Licentious Principle, nor gives
Countenance to any such Practice; our Adversaries themselves being Judges.

Secondly. The Church of England is at the greatest distance from that of Rome,
in all those Doctrines and Practices in which she is justly charged with
plainly contradicting the Holy Scripture. For instance, (not to repeat any of
those ranked under the foregoing head, several of which may also fall under
this) Her Doctrines of Image Worship, of Invocation of Saints (with her gross
practicing upon them) of Transubstantiation, of Pardons and Indulgencies, of
the Sacrifice of the Mass, wherein Christ is pretended to be still offered up
afresh for the quick and dead. Her keeping the Holy Scriptures from the Vulgar,
and making it so heinous a crime to read the Bible, because by this means her
foul Errors will be in such danger of being discovered, and the People, of not
continuing implicit believers. Her injoyning the saying of Prayers, and the
Administration of the Sacraments, in an unknown Tongue. Her Robbing the Laity
of the Cup in the Lords Supper. Her prohibiting Marriage to Priests. Her
Doctrines of Merit, and works of Supererogation. Her making simple Fornication
a mere Venial sin. Her damning all that are not of her Communion. Her most
devilish cruelties toward those whom she is pleased to pronounce Heretics.
Her darling Sons Doctrines of Equivocation and Mental Reservations; of the
Popes power of dispensing with the most Solemn Oaths, and of absolving Subjects
from their Allegiance to their Lawful Princes: with many others not now to be
reckoned up.

But the Church of England Abominates these and the like Principles and
Practices. As to the instances of Image Worship, Invocation of Saints, and
Pardons and Indulgences, what our Church declares concerning Purgatory, she
adds concerning these things too, Article 22 d. viz. That the Romish Doctrine
concerning Pardons, Worship and Adoration, as well of Images as of Relics, as
also Invocation of Saints, is a fond thing vainly invented, and grounded on no
Warranty of Scripture; but rather Repugnant to the Word of God. And as there is
no such Practice as Worshipping of Images in our Church, so all are destroyed
which Popery had Erected among us. Nor have we in our Church any Co-Mediators
with Jesus Christ; we Worship only one God, by one only Mediator, the Man
Christ Jesus. And the now-mentioned Practices, our Church does not only declare
to be Repugnant to the Holy Scriptures, but to be likewise most grossly
Idolatrous, viz. in the Homilies.

As to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, our Church declares her sense
thereof, Article 28th. in these Words: Transubstantiation (or the change of the
substance of Bread and Wine) in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by
Holy Writ, but it is repugnant to the plain terms of Scripture; overthrows
the Nature of a Sacrament; and has given occasion to many Superstitions. The
Body of Christ is given, taken and eaten in the Lords Supper, only after an
Heavenly and Spiritual manner; and the mean whereby the Body of Christ is
received and eaten in the Supper, is Faith. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
was not by Christ's Ordinance reserved, carried about, lifted up, or Worshipped.
As to the Sacrifice of the Mass, see what our Church says of it, Article 31st.
viz. That the offering of Christ once made, is that perfect Redemption,
Propitiation and Satisfaction for all the Sins of the whole World, both
Original and Actual; and there is none other Satisfaction for sins but that
alone. Wherefore the Sacrifices of Masses, in the which it was commonly said,
that the Priest did offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to have Remission
of pain or guilt, were Blasphemous Fables, and dangerous deceits.

As to the Church of Romes locking up the Scriptures, and prohibiting the
reading of them, Our Church has not only more than once caused them to be
Translated into our Mother Tongue, but also, as I need not show, gives as free
Liberty to the reading of the Bible, as of any other Book; nor is any duty in
our Church esteemed more necessary, than that of Reading the Scriptures, and
Hearing them read.

As to Praying and Administering the Sacraments in an unknown Tongue, as this is
contrary to the Practice of the Church of England, so is it to her Declaration
also, Article 24th. viz. That it is a thing plainly Repugnant to the Word of
God, and the Custom of the Primitive Church, to have public Prayers in the
Church, or to Administer Sacraments in a Tongue not understanded of the People.

As to Robbing the Laity of the Cup in the Lords Supper; in Our Church they may
not receive the Bread, if they refuse the Cup. And Article 30. tells us, That
the Cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the Laity; for both the parts of the
Lords Sacrament, by Christ's Ordinance and Commandment, ought to be Administered
to all Christians alike. As to prohibiting Marriage to Priests, this is
declared against, Article 32. Bishops, Priests and Deacons are not Commanded by
Gods Law, either to vow the Estate of single Life, or to abstain from Marriage;
therefore it is Lawful for them, as for all other Christian Men, to Marry at
their own discretion, as they shall judge the same to serve better to godliness.

As to the Popish Doctrine of Merit, Our Church declares against this, Article
11. We are accounted righteous before God, only for the Merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ by Faith, and not for our own Works, or Deservings.
Wherefore, that we are justified by Faith only, (viz. such a Faith as purifies
the Heart, and works by Love) is a most wholesome Doctrine, and very full of
Comfort; as more largely is expressed in the Homily of Justification.

As to the Doctrine of Supererogation, this is confuted, Article 14. Voluntary
Works, besides, over and above Gods Commandments, which they call Works of
Supererogation, cannot be taught without Arrogance and Impiety: For by them Men
do declare, that they do not only render unto God as much as they are bound to
do, but that they do more for his sake than of bounden duty is required:
whereas Christ says plainly, When ye have done all that are Commanded to you,
say, We are unprofitable Servants.

As to making simple Fornication a mere Venial sin; Our Church will endure no
such Doctrine. For as in the Litany she calls Fornication expressly a deadly
sin, so has it ever been accounted in Our Church, one of the most deadly, even
considered as distinct from Adultery.

As to the Church of Romes Damning all that are not of her Communion, the
Church of England is guilty of no uncharitableness like it; and never
pronounced so sad a sentence against those in Communion with the Church of
Rome, as great a detestation as she expresses, in the Homilies, especially of
her Idolatrous and Wicked Principles and Practices. She is satisfied to Condemn
the gross Corruptions of that Apostate Church, and leaves her Members to stand
or fall to their own Master, nor takes upon her to Unchurch her.

And as to the remaining most Immoral Principles and Practices of the Romish
Church, which are all as contrary to Natural as to revealed Religion, the
greatest Enemies Our Church has, cannot surely have the forehead to charge her
with giving the least countenance to any such. There being no Church in
Christendom that more severely Condemns all instances of Unrighteousness and
Immorality.

Thirdly, The Church of England is at a mighty distance from the Church of
Rome, in reference to their Public Prayers and Offices. Whereas our Liturgy
has been by many Condemned, as greatly resembling the Mass Book, all that have
compared them do know the contrary, and that there is a vast difference between
them, both as to matter and form: Although some few of the same Prayers are
found in both: and three or four of the same Rites; of which more hereafter. To
show this throughout in the particulars, would be a very long and tedious task:
I will therefore single out the Order of Administration of Infant Baptism, as
we have it in the Roman Ritual, and desire the Reader to compare it with that
in our Liturgy; and by this take a measure of the likeness between our Liturgy
and the Mass Book, etc. there being no greater agreement between the Morning
and Evening Services, and the other Offices of each, than is between these two;
excepting that, besides the Lords Prayer, there is no Prayer belonging to the
Popish Office of Baptism to be met with in ours.

For the sake of the Readers who understand no more of the Language that the
Popish Prayers and Offices are expressed in, than the generality of those that
make use of them, take the following account of the Popish Admonistration of
Infant Baptism in our own Tongue.

To pass by the long Bedroul of Preparatory Prescriptions, the Priest, being
dressed in a Surplice and Purple Robe, calls the Infant to be Baptized by his
Name, and says, What ask thou of the Church of God? the Godfather answers,
Faith. The Priest says again, What shall thou get by Faith? The Godfather
replies, Eternal Life. Then adds the Priest, If therefore thou will enter into
Life, keep the Commandments; Thou shall Love the Lord thy God with all thine
heart, etc. and thy Neighbor as thy self.

Next, the Priest blows three gentle puffs upon the Infants face, and says (as
if we come all into the World possessed by the Devil,) Go out of him, O unclean
Spirit, and give place to the Holy Ghost the Comforter. Then with his Thumb he
makes the Sign of the Cross, on the Infants Forehead and Breast, saying;
Receive the Sign of the Cross both in thy Forehead, and in thy heart: Take the
Faith of the Heavenly Precepts, and be thy manners such, as that thou may now
become the Temple of God.

After this follows a Prayer that God would always protect this his Elect one
(calling him by his Name) that is Signed with the Sign of the Cross, etc. And
after a longer Prayer (the Priest laying his hand on the Infants head) comes
the Benediction of Salt: of which this is the Form.

I exorcize (or conjure) thee, O Creature of Salt, in the Name of God the
Father Almighty, and in the Love of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Power of
the Holy Ghost. I conjure thee by the Living God, by the true God, by the Holy
God; by the God which Created thee for the safeguard of Mankind, and has
ordained that thou should be consecrated by his Servants, to the People
entering into the Faith, that, in the Name of the Holy Trinity, thou should
be made a wholesome Sacrament, for the driving away of the Enemy. Moreover, we
Pray thee, O Lord our God, that in Sanctifying thou would Sanctify this
Creature of Salt, and in Blessing thou would Bless it, that it may be to all
that receive it a perfect Medicine remaining in their Bowels, in the Name of
the same Jesus Christ our Lord; who is about to come to judge the quick and
dead, and the World by fire, Amen. This Idle and profane Form being recited,
the Priest proceeds in his Work with the poor Infant; and next, putting a
little of this Holy Salt into his mouth, he calls him by his Name, and says,
Take thou the Salt of Wisdom: (and adds most impiously) be it thy propitiation
unto Eternal Life, Amen. This ended with the Pax tecum, God Almighty is next
mocked with a Prayer, That this Infant, who has tasted this first food of Salt,
may not be suffered any more to hunger, but may be filled with Celestial Food,
etc.

Now follows another Exorcising of the Devil, wherein he is conjured as before,
and most woefully becalled. And next the Priest Signs the Infant again with his
Thumb on the Forehead, saying, And this Sign of the Holy Cross which we give to
his Forehead, thou Cursed Devil never dare thou to Violate. By the same Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen. And now after all this tedious expectation, we see some
Sign of Baptism approaching, for the Priest puts his hand again on the Infants
head, and puts up a very good Prayer for him, in order to his Baptism.

The Prayer being ended, he puts part of his Robe upon the Infant, and brings
him within the Church, (for he has been without all this while) saying,
(calling him by his Name) Enter thou into the Temple of God, that thou may
partake with Christ in Eternal Life, Amen. Then follow the Apostles Creed, and
the Pater Noster. But after all this, here is more exercise for our Patience;
for the Priest falls to his fooling again: For now comes another Exorcising or
Conjuring of the Devil. And this being also concluded, the Priest takes Spittle
out of his Mouth, and touches therewith the Ears and Nostrils of the Infant.
And in touching his right and left Ear, he says, Ephphatha, (i. e.) Be opened.
Then, touching his Nostrils, he says, for a savor of sweetness: (no doubt
mighty sweet!) Another Conjuration of the Devil follows, in these Words, Be
packing, O Devil, for the judgment of God is at hand.

And now the Priest will make you hope again that he has not forgotten his
main business: For he asks the Infant, whether he renounces the Devil, and all
his Works, and all his Pomps; of which he makes three Questions; and the
Godfather distinctly answers to them. But alas he is thus soon gone off from
his proper Work again, for now you have him dipping his Thumb in Holy Oil, and
Anointing the Infant with it in his Breast, and betwixt his Shoulders, in the
figure of a Cross, saying, I Anoint thee with the Oil of Salvation, in Christ
Jesus our Lord, that thou may obtain Eternal Life, Amen.

Then next he puts off his Purple Robe, and puts on another of a White Color,
and falls in good earnest to the great business: for having asked three more
Questions out of the Creed, and received the Godfathers Answers, and this
other Question, Whether the Infant will be Baptized? and received the
Godfathers answer to that, he pours Water thrice upon the Child's head, as he
recites over it our Saviors Form of Baptism, doing it each time, at the
naming of each of the three Persons.

And now (that the Priest may not conclude less wisely than he began) comes the
Chrism or Holy Ointment, in which dipping his Thumb, and Anointing the Infant
upon the Crown of his head in the figure of a Cross, he thus Prays: O God
Omnipotent, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has regenerated thee of
Water and the Holy Ghost, and who has given thee Pardon of all thy Sins,
Anoint thee with the Chrism of Salvation, in the same Christ Jesus our Lord, to
Eternal Life, Amen. And next, after the Pax tibi, and the wiping of his Thumb,
and the Anointed head, he takes a White Linen Cloth, and putting it on the
Child's head, uses this Form: Take the white Garment which thou may carry
unspotted before the Tribunal of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou may have
Eternal Life, Amen.

And Lastly, He puts into the Child's, or his Godfathers hand, a lighted
Candle, and says, Receive the burning Lamp, and keep thy Baptism blameless;
keep Gods Commandments, that when the Lord shall come to the Wedding, thou
may meet him, together with all his Saints, in the Celestial Court, and may
have Eternal Life, and live for ever, Amen. Concluding all with this Form, Go
in Peace, and the Lord be with thee, Amen.

And as if there were not fooling and ridiculous doings enough in this Office
of the Common Ritual, there are diverse other added to them, in the Pastorale:
For instance, the Ceremony of blowing thrice in the Child's Face is here to be
done Crossways. And after the Conjuration following, to which two more are here
added, the Priest Crossing his Forehead, says, I Sign thee in the Forehead in
the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou may trust in him. Then he
Crosses his Eyes, saying, I bless thy Eyes, that thou may see his
Brightness. Then his Ears, saying, I bless thine Ears, that thou Which
Crossings are also prescribed by the Ritual in the Office of Adult Baptism, but
with a variation of the Forms.
may hear the Word of his truth. Then his Nostrils, saying, I bless thy
Nostrils, that thou may smell his sweetness. Then his Breast, saying, I bless
thy Breast, that thou may believe in him. Then his Shoulders, saying, I bless
thy Shoulders, that thou may bear the Yoke of his Service. Then his Mouth,
saying, I bless thy Mouth, that thou may Confess him, who Lives and Reigns
God with the Father, etc. Again, The Child here receives the Sign of the Cross
in his Right Hand, the Priest saying, (calling him by his Name) I deliver thee
the Sign of our Lord Jesus Christ, in thy Right Hand, that thou may Sign thy
self, and drive away the Enemy on all sides from thee, and may have Eternal
Life, etc.

Here also the Priest is to lay his Robe on the Child in the Figure of a Cross,
with a many dire menaces tormenting the Devil before his time. Here also the
Ave Maria is added to the Pater Noster. The Infant likewise has this
Benediction pronounced over him before his going to the Font; The Benediction
of God the Father Almighty, and of his Son and Holy Ghost descend and abide
upon thee; and the Angel of the Lord keep thee, until thou come to Holy
Baptism. As if the poor Creature were in mighty danger of being carried away by
the Devil, before he could be Baptized, notwithstanding all the past
Conjurations, and dreadful doings that had been made with him, and all the
Crosses, together with the holy Oil and holy Spittle bestowed on the Infant.
And lastly, (to name no more additions, though there are diverse others) the
Flax wherewith the anointed places are wiped is ordered to be burnt over a Pond
of Water.

If those who are unacquainted with our Churches Office of Baptism would, after
the Reading of this of the Romish Church, consult ours, they will immediately
acknowledge that no two things can well be more unlike than are these two
Offices. And the like, as was said, may be seen in the rest, as those may
perceive who, if they understand sorry Latin, will take the pains to compare
theirs with ours. And whereas we asserted the same thing of their and our Forms
of Morning and Evening Prayers, we might particularly instance in the Litanies.
Our Litany (which I think, if comparisons may be allowed, is the choicest part
of our Service), is more than any other part of the Liturgy condemned by
Dissenters, as Savouring of Popish Superstition. But, as nothing but great
Ignorance can make any man think it really does so, so I am persuaded that the
mere comparing it with that of the Romanists, might incline the most prejudiced
to call it a most Protestant piece of Devotion: For they shall find Invocations
of Saints and Angels to pray for them, the greater part of the Popish Litany.
Next after the Holy Trinity, St. Mary is there invoked first by name, then as
the Mother of God, then as the Virgin of Virgins. Next to her, three Angels are
invoked by name. Then all the Angels and Archangels together. Then all the
holy Orders of Blessed Spirits. Next, John the Baptist. Next, all the
Patriarchs and Prophets. Next, St. Peter and all the other Apostles and
Evangelists by name. Then Altogether. Then all the holy Disciples of our Lord.
Then all the Holy Innocents. Then the Protomartyr St. Stephen, and Ten other by
Name. Then all the Holy Martyrs together. Then Seven more Saints. Then all the
Bishops and Confessors together. Then all the Holy Doctors. Then Five more of
their own great Saints by Name. Then all the Holy Priests and Levites. Then all
the Holy Monks and Hermites. Then Seven She Saints by Name. Then all the Holy
Virgins and Widows. And Lastly, All the He and She Saints together.

But the brevity I am confined to in this Discourse, will not permit me to
abide any longer upon this Argument, of the vast distance between these two
Churches in reference to their Public Prayers and Offices.

Fourthly, We proceed to show, that there is also no small distance between the
Church of England, and that of Rome, in reference to the Books they receive for
Canonical. This will be Immediately dispatched: For no more is to be said upon
this subject, but that, whereas the Church of Rome takes all the Apocryphal
Books into her Canon, the Church of England, like all other Protestant
Churches, receives only those Books of the Old and New Testament for Canonical
Scripture, as she declares in her Sixth Article, of whose Authority there was
never any doubt in the Church. And she declares concerning the Apocryphal
Books in the same Article, citing St. Hierom for her Authority, That the Church
does read them for Example of life, and Instruction of manners; but yet it does
not apply them to Establish any Doctrine. And after the example of the
Primitive Church, no more does ours; and appoints the reading some of them only
upon the foresaid Account.

In the Fifth and Last place, The Church of England is at the greatest distance
possible from the Church of Rome, in reference to the Authority on which they
each found their whole Religion. As to the Church of Rome, she makes her own
Infallibility the Foundation of Faith. For,

1. Our belief of the Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures themselves, must,
according to her Doctrine, be founded upon her infallible Testimony.

2. As to that Prodigious deal which she has added of her own to the Doctrines
and Precepts of the Holy Scriptures, and which she makes as necessary to be
believed and practiced, as any matters of Faith and Practice contained in the
Scriptures (and more necessary too, than many of them) the Authority of those
things is founded upon her unwritten Traditions, and the Decrees of her
Councils; which she will have to be no less inspired by the Holy Ghost, than
were the Prophets and Apostles themselves.

But Contrariwise, the Church of England does,

1. Build the whole of her Religion upon the Sole Authority of Divine
Revelation in the Holy Scriptures: And therefore she takes every jot thereof
out of the Bible. She makes the Scriptures the Complete Rule of her Faith, and
of her Practice too, in all matters necessary to Salvation, that is, in all the
parts or Religion; nor is there any Genuine Son of this Church, that makes any
thing a part of his Religion that is not plainly contained in the Bible. Let us
see what our Church declares to this purpose, in her 16 Article, viz. That
Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to Salvation; so that whatsoever
is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any
Man, that it should be believed as an Article of Faith, or be thought requisite
or necessary to Salvation. So that, as Mr. Chillingworth says, THE BIBLE, THE
BIBLE IS THE RELIGION OF PROTESTANTS: So you see the Bible is the Religion of
the Protestant Church of England: Nor does she fetch one Tittle of her Religion
either out of unwritten Traditions, or Decrees of Councils. Notwithstanding she
has a great Reverence for those Councils which were not a Company of Bishops
and Priests of the Popes packing, to serve his purposes, and which have best
deserved the Name of General Councils, especially the Four first; yet her
Reverence of them consists not in any opinion of their Infallibility: As
appears by Article 14. General Councils may not be gathered together without
the Commandment and Will of Princes; and when they be gathered together (for as
much as they be an Assembly of Men, whereof all be not Governed with the Spirit
and Word of God) they may Err, and sometimes have Erred, even in things
pertaining unto God. Wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to
Salvation, have neither Strength nor Authority, unless it may be declared (that
is, manifestly proved) that they be taken out of Holy Scripture.

Let us see again how our Church speaks of the matter in hand, Article 20. The
Church has Power to decree Rites or Ceremonies, and Authority in Controversies
of Faith: And yet it is not Lawful for the Church to Ordain any thing that is
contrary to Gods Word Written; neither may it so Expound one place of
Scripture, that it be Repugnant to another. Wherefore although the Church be a
Witness and Keeper of Holy Writ (that is, as the Jewish Church was so of the
Canon of the Old Testament, by whose Tradition alone it could be known, what
Books were Canonical, and what not; so the Catholic Christian Church, from
Christ and his Apostles downwards is so, of the Canon of the New;) Yet as it
ought not to decree any thing against the same, so besides the same ought it
not to enforce any thing to be believed for necessity of Salvation. If it be
asked who is to Judge, what is agreeable or contrary to Holy Writ? it is
manifest that Our Church leaves it to every Man to Judge for himself. But it is
Objected, that it is to be acknowledged, that if the Church only claimed a Power
to Decree Rites and Ceremonies; (that is, according to the general Rules of
doing all things Decently and Orderly, and to Edification, which Power all
Churches have ever Exercised) this may well enough consist with private Persons
Liberty to Judge for themselves: but it is also said in the now Cited Article,
that the Church has Authority in Controversies of Faith; and accordingly Our
Church has Published 39 Articles, and requires of the Clergy, etc. Subscription
to them. To this we answer, that we shall make one Article Egregiously to
Contradict another, and one and the same to Contradict it self, if we
understand by the Authority in Controversies of Faith, which Our Church
acknowledges all Churches to have, any more than Authority to Oblige their
Members to outward Submission, when their Decisions are such as Contradict not
any of the Essentials of our Religion, whether they be Articles of Faith, or
Rules of Life; not an Authority to Oblige them to assent to their Decrees, as
infallibly true. But it is necessary to the maintaining of Peace, that all
Churches should be invested with a Power to bind their Members to outward
submission in the Case aforesaid; that is, when their supposed Errors are not
of that Moment, as that it is of more pernicious Consequence to bear with them,
than to break the Peace of the Church by opposing them. And as to the
forementioned Subscription that is required to the 39 Articles, it is very
Consistent with Our Churches giving all Men Liberty to Judge for themselves,
and not Exercising Authority (as the Romish Church does) over our Faith; for
she requires no Man to believe those Articles, but at worst only thinks it
Convenient that none should receive Orders, or be admitted to Benefices, etc.
but such as do believe them (not all as Articles of our Faith, but many as
inferior truths,) and requires Subscription to them as a Test, whereby to
Judge who does so believe them. But the Church of Rome requires all under Pain
of Damnation, to believe all her long Bed-roul of Doctrines, which have only
the Stamp of her Authority, and to believe them too as Articles of Faith; or to
believe them with the same Divine Faith that we do the indisputable Doctrines
of our Savior and his Apostles.

For a proof hereof, the Reader may consult the Bull of Pope Pius the Fourth,
which is to be found at the End of the Council of Trent. Herein it is Ordained
that Profession of Faith shall be made and sworn, by all Dignitaries,
Prebendaries, and such as have Benefices with Cure, Military Officers, etc. in
the Form following:

IN. Do believe with a firm Faith, and do profess all and every thing contained
in the Confession of Faith, which is used by the Holy Roman Church, viz. I
believe in one God the Father Almighty; and so to the end of the Nicene Creed.
I most firmly admit and embrace the Apostolical and Ecclesiastical Traditions,
and the other Observances and Constitutions of the said Church. Also the Holy
Scriptures according to the Sense which our Holy Mother the Church has held,
and does hold, etc. I profess also that there are truly and properly Seven
Sacraments of the New Law, instituted by Jesus Christ our Lord, and necessary
to the Salvation of Mankind; although all are not necessary to every individual
Person, etc. I also admit and receive the Received and approved Rites of the
Catholic Church, in the Solemn Administration of all the foresaid Sacraments
(of which I have given the Reader a taste) I Embrace and Receive all and every
thing which has been declared and defined concerning Original Sin, and
Justification in the Holy Synod of Trent. I likewise profess that in the Mass,
a True, Proper, and Propitiatory Sacrifice is Offered to God, for the quick and
dead: And that the Body and Blood of Christ, is truly, really and substantially
in the most Holy Eucharist, etc. I also Confess that whole and entire Christ,
and the true Sacrament, is received under one of the kinds only. I constantly
hold that there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls there detained are relieved
by the Prayers of the Faithful. And in like manner that the Saints Reigning
with Christ, are to be Worshipped and Invoked, etc. And that their Relics are
to be Worshipped. I most firmly assert, that the Images of Christ, and of the
Mother of God, always a Virgin, and of the other Saints, are to be had and
kept, and that due Honor and Worship is to be given to them. I Affirm also,
that the power of Indulgences is left by Christ in his Church, and that the use
of them is very Salutiferous to Christian People. I acknowledge the Holy
Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church, the Mother and Mistress of all Churches;
and I Profess and Swear Obedience to the Bishop of Rome, the Successor of St.
Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and the Vicar of Jesus Christ. Also all the
other things delivered, decreed and declared by the Holy Canons, and
Ecumenical Councils, and especially by the Holy Synod of Trent, I undoubtedly
receive and profess: As also all things contrary to these, and all Heresies
Condemned, Rejected and Anathematized by the Church, I, in like manner,
Condemns, Reject and Anathematize. This true Catholic Faith, (viz. all this
Stuff of their own, together with the Articles of the Creed) without which no
Man can be Saved, which at this present I truly profess and sincerely hold, I
will, God Assisting me, most constantly Retain and Confess entire and
inviolate; and, as much as in me lies, will take Care, that it be held, taught
and declared, by those that are under me, or the Care of whom shall be
committed to me; I the same N. do Profess, Vow and Swear; So help me God, and
the Holy Gospels of God. Who, when he Reads this, can forbear pronouncing the
Reformation of the Church of England, a most Glorious Reformation?

2. As to the Motives our Church proposes for our belief of the Doctrine of
the Holy Scriptures, viz. that that Doctrine is of Divine Revelation, they are
no other than such as are found in the Scriptures themselves, viz. the
Excellency thereof, which consists in its being wholly adapted to the reforming
of men's Lives, and renewing their Natures after the Image of God; and the
Miracles by which it is confirmed. And as to the Evidence of the truth of the
matters of Fact, viz. that there were such Persons* as the Scriptures declare
to have revealed Gods will to the World (such as Moses, our Savior Christ and
his Apostles;) and that these Persons delivered such Doctrine, and Confirmed it
by such Miracles, and that the Books of Scripture were written by those whose
Names they bear; I say, as to the Evidence of the truth of these matters of
Fact, our Church places it not in her own Testimony, or in the Testimony of
any Particular Church, and much less that of Rome, but in the Testimony of the
whole Catholic Church down to us from the time of the Apostles, and of
Universal Tradition; taking in that of Strangers and Enemies, as well as
Friends; of Jews and Pagans, as well as Christians.

Secondly, We proceed to show, that a Churches Symbolizing, or agreeing in some
things with the Church of Rome, is no Warrant for Separation from the Church so
agreeing. Agreement with the Church of Rome in things either in their own
nature good, or made so by a Divine Precept, none of our Dissenting Brethren
could ever imagine not to be an indispensable duty: Agreement with her in what
is in its own nature Evil, or made so by a Divine Prohibition, none of us are
so forsaken of all Modesty as to deny it to be an inexcusable sin. The Question
therefore is, whether to agree with this Apostate Church, in some things of an
indifferent nature, be a Sin, and therefore a just ground for Separation from
the Church so agreeing. But, by the way, if we should suppose that a Churches
agreeing with the Church of Rome in some indifferent things is sinful, I cannot
think that any of the more Sober Sort of Dissenters (and I despair of success
in arguing with any but such) will thence infer, that Separation from the
Church so agreeing is otherwise warrantable, than upon the account of those
things being imposed as necessary terms of Communion. But I am so far from
taking it for granted, that a Church is guilty of Sin in agreeing in some
indifferent things with the Church of Rome, that I must needs profess, I have
often wondered how this should become a Question: Seeing whatsoever is of an
indifferent nature, as it is not Commanded, so neither is it Forbidden by any
Moral or Positive Law; and where there is no Law, the Apostle says, there is
no transgression; Sin being, according to his definition, the transgression of
the Law. And whereas certain Circumstances will make things that in themselves
are neither duties nor sins, to be either duties or sins, and to fall by
Consequence under some Divine Command or Prohibition; I have admired how this
Circumstance of an indifferent thing's being used by the Church of Rome can be
thought to alter the Nature of that thing, and make it cease to be indifferent
and become sinful. But that it does so, is endeavored to be proved by that
general Prohibition to the Israelites, of imitating the doings of the
Egyptians and Canaanites, in those Words, Lev. 18. 2. After the doings of the
Land of Egypt wherein ye dwell, shall ye not do, and after the doings of the
Land of Canaan whither I bring you, shall ye not do, neither shall ye walk in
their Ordinances. This place diverse of the Defenders of Nonconformity have laid
great weight upon, as a proof of the Sinfulness of Symbolizing with the Church
of Rome, Even in indifferent things. But I choose to forbear the Naming of any
whose Arguings I purpose to inquire into, because I would prevent (if it be
possible) the least suspicion in the Readers, that I design in this Performance
to expose any Man's weakness in particular, or that I am therein Acted by any
Personal Piques.

Now then, as to the Text now Cited; not to insist upon the Fallaciousness of
Arguing, without mighty caution, from Laws given by Moses to the Israelites, so
as to infer the Obligation of Christians, who are under a dispensation so
different from theirs, and in Circumstances so vastly differing from those they
were in; I say, not to insist upon the Fallaciousness of this way of Arguing,
(which all considering Persons must needs be aware of) if this general
Prohibition be not at all to be limited, then it will follow from thence, that
the Israelites might have no usages whatsoever in common with the Egyptians or
Canaanites; and therefore, in as general terms as the Prohibition runs, our
Brethren must needs acknowledge that there is a restriction therein intended:
it being the most absurd thing to imagine, that the Israelites were so bound up
by God, as to be Obliged to an unlikeness to those People in all their Actions:
For, as the Apostles said of the Christians, if they were never to Company with
Wicked Men, they must needs go out of the World, we may say of the Israelites
in reference to this Case of theirs, they then must needs have gone out of the
World. Now if this general Prohibition, After their doings ye shall not do, be
to be limited and restrained, what way have we to do it, but by considering the
Context, and confining the restriction to those Particulars Prohibited in the
following verses? But I need not show that the particulars forbidden in all
these, viz. from v. 5th. to the 24th. were not things of an indifferent Nature,
but Incestuous Copulations, and other abominable Acts of Uncleanness. And God
does Expressly enough thus restrain that general Prohibition, in the 24th v. in
these Words: Defile not your selves in any of these things, for in all these
the Nations are Defiled, which I cast out before you.

But those that allege this Text to the foresaid purpose, will not hear of the
general Proposition's being thus limited by the Context; (as apparent as it is,
that it necessarily must) because, say they, we find that God forbids the
Israelites in other places to imitate Heathens, in things of an Indifferent and
Innocent Nature.

To this I Answer, First, That supposing this were so, it does not from thence
follow, that God intended to forbid such imitations in this place, the contrary
being so manifest as we have seen. But,

Secondly, That God has any where prohibited the Israelites to Symbolize with
Heathens, in things of a mere Indifferent and Innocent Nature; I mean, that he
has made it unlawful to them, to observe any such Customs of the Heathens,
merely upon the account of their being like them, is a very great mistake:
Which will appear by considering those places which are produced for it. One
is, Deuteronomy. 14. 1. You shall not Cut your selves, nor make any baldness between
your Eyes for the dead. Now, as to the former of these prohibited things, who
sees not that it is Unnatural, and therefore not indifferent? And as to the
latter, viz. the disfiguring of themselves by Cutting off their Eyebrows, this
was not merely an indifferent thing neither: It being a Custom at Funerals much
disbecoming the People of God, which would make them look, as if they sorrowed
for the dead as Men without hope.

Another place insisted upon for the same purpose, is Lev. 19. 19. Thou shall
not let thy Cattle-Gender with a diverse kind, thou shall not sow thy ground
with mingled seed, nor shall a Garment of Linen and Woollen come upon thee.
Now these three, it is said, are things of so indifferent a Nature, that none
can be more indifferent. I answer, It Is readily granted. But where is it said,
that these things were forbidden because the Heathens used them? Maimonides
indeed (as I learn from Grotius) says, that the Egyptians used these mixtures
of Seeds, and of Linen and Woollen in many of their Magical Exploits; but it is
universally acknowledged that these things, among many other, were forbidden to
the Jews, as Mystical instructions in Moral Duties.

I have found no other Text made use of to prove mere indifferent things to
have been forbidden the Israelites, only in regard of Heathens using them,
which make more for this purpose than these two do, nor hardly another that
makes so much. But if there were never so many, it is not worth our while to
concern ourselves now with them, because, though we should suppose a great
number of instances of such things as were forbidden those People, for no other
reason, but because the Egyptians or Canaanites used them, yet this would
signify nothing to the proving Our Churches Symbolizing with that of Rome in
indifferent things to be Unlawful, because there is not the like reason, why in
such things we may not Symbolize with Papists, that there was why the Jews
should be forbidden to Symbolize in such with those Heathens. For there could
not be too great a distance and unlikeness between those People and these in
their usages, in regard of their strangely Vehement inclination to their
Superstitious and Idolatrous Practices. And upon this account, the distance was
made wider (as our Brethren themselves will acknowledge) between the Jews and
the Pagans, than it ought to be between Christians and them, or between
Protestants and Papists. And we find that the distance that God made between
the Jews and Heathens, as very wide as it was, was not wide enough to preserve
the Jews from being very often (and that generally too) infected with their
Superstitions, and various kinds of Idolatry: No, though they frequently paid
most dear for these their Wicked Imitations of them. But, thanks be to God,
there is no such inclination in the Members of Our Church to go over to that of
Rome, nor has any such inclination been observed ever since the Reformation.
And where one of our Communion has Revolted out of Love to Popery, (of those
few Comparatively who have played the Apostates) we have cause to believe that
many have so done merely upon the score of interest. And I need not say, that
such Persons would not have been preserved from Apostasy, by our Churches
being set at the widest distance possible from the Church of Rome, in
indifferent things. Nay it is so far from being true, that there is a general
inclination in our Protestants to Popery, that nothing is better known, or has
of late been more observed, than the greatest Antipathy and Aversation thereto
imaginable in the generality. Upon which account, I say, the foresaid and the
like Prohibitions to the Jewish Nation (although they should be understood in
the sense of our Dissenting Brethren) can by no parity of reason be obliging to
us Protestant Christians.

And indeed most of them have seemed of late years to be pretty well aware of
this, and therefore diverse of their Writers have limited the unlawfulness of
Symbolizing with the Romish Church, to things that have been abused
notoriously, in Idolatrous and grossly Superstitious Services. And that our
Symbolizing with that Church in any such things is Unlawful, they endeavor to
demonstrate both by Scripture-Precepts and Examples.

First, They endeavor to demonstrate this by Scripture-Precepts. And if any
such Precept as this could be produced, That all such things as have been
notoriously abused and Polluted in Idolatrous or grossly Superstitious services,
should by all be abolished and laid aside, there could be no place left for
dispute about this matter; and I doubt not but we should all of us express as
great Zeal, as our Brethren do, for the abolishing of all such things. But no
such express and unlimited Precept is pretended, but the chief of those Texts
from whence our Brethren endeavor to Infer this Proposition, That it is the
will of God, that all things so polluted should be utterly destroyed and laid
aside, are these following: Isaiah 30. 22. Ye shall defile also the covering of
thy Graven Images of Silver, and the Ornament of thy Molten Images of Gold:
Thou shall Cast them away as a Menstruous Cloth, thou shall say unto it, Get
thee hence.

Deuteronomy. 7. 25, 26. The Graven Images of their Gods shall ye burn with Fire; thou
shall not desire the Silver or Gold that is on them, nor take it unto thee,
lest thou be snared therein: for it is an Abomination to the Lord thy God.
Neither shall thou bring an Abomination into thy House, lest thou be a cursed
thing like it; but thou shall utterly detest it, and thou shall utterly abhor
it, for it is a Cursed thing.

Jude 23. -- hating even the Garment spotted with the Flesh.

Revel. 2. 14. I have a few things against thee, because thou have there them
that hold the Doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a Stumbling block
before the Children of Israel, to Eat things Sacrificed unto Idols, etc. V. 20.
Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer that
Woman Jezebel, which calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and to seduce my
Servants to commit Fornication, and to Eat things Sacrificed to Idols.

Now to their alleging of these Texts to prove the foresaid Proposition, I
reply:

First, That the last of them is altogether impertinent. For the eating of
things offered to Idols condemned in those two verses, is nothing better than
joining and complying with Idolaters, and Communicating in Idol-worships. Which
the vile Gnostiques held they might do (and accordingly practiced this
Doctrine) to avoid Persecution: Which abominable Sect arose in the Church (as
we learn from Irenaeus, Epiphanius, Eusebius, etc.) even in the Apostles times,
of which Simon Magus was the first Founder. But St. Paul has given us his
Judgment concerning Eating of things offered to Idols, without any respect to
Idols in Eating, in 1 Cor. 8 chap. viz. That upon no other account but that of
Scandal it is unlawful.

And the like he has done, 1 Cor. 10. 27, 28, 29. If any of them that believe
not bid you to a Feast, and you be disposed to go, whatsoever is set before
you, Eat, making no question for Conscience sake. But if any man say unto you,
This is offered in Sacrifice unto Idols, Eat not, for his sake who showed it,
and for Conscience sake, etc. Conscience I say not thine own, but of the
others: For why is my liberty judged of another man's Conscience? That is, so as
to make a thing indifferent in it self, simply unlawful to me. But the stating
of this case of Scandal is the business of another Pen, to which I refer those
who need satisfaction in this matter.

Secondly, As to those words of St. Jude -- hating even the Garment spotted by
the Flesh: Nothing more can possibly be gathered from them, than what we and
all Christians must acknowledge, as well as our Brethren, viz. that we ought to
be as Cautious of exposing our selves unnecessarily to temptations to sin, as
we naturally are of touching the Garments of infected Persons. But if the Text
had run thus -- hating even the Garment that was once spotted with the Flesh,
or once fouled with a Plague Sore, though it be never so well cleansed from
infection, then I must confess it would be an argument for our Brethrens
purpose, we could make no reply to.

Thirdly, As to the two places cited out of the Old Testament, they indeed not
only serve to prove, that it was God's will that the Jews should destroy Idols,
but also the Appurtenances of them. And the reason of these Precepts being
given to those People has already been showed, viz. because they were so
strangely, so prodigiously addicted to the Superstitions and Idolatry of their
Heathen-Neighbours. But if these and the like places should really make for our
Brethrens design in Citing them, and do prove that Christians are obliged to
destroy, or cast away, all things notoriously defiled in grossly Superstitious
and Idolatrous services, they would certainly prove more, than the more sober
sort of Dissenters do desire they should. For they do not object against the
lawfulness of our using the Churches, or Fonts, or Bells, which heretofore were
most notoriously so defiled by the Papists. But if these Texts speak it to be
the duty of Christians as well as Jews to destroy all such things, then it is
manifest that down we must with all our Old Churches, etc. or we are guilty of
an inexcusable violation of the Divine Law. And to except such things as these,
after they have Evinced from such Scriptures our obligation to destroy all
things notoriously polluted in grossly Superstitious and Idolatrous Services,
seems to be making too too bold with the express Laws of God, which make no
such exceptions, nor does the forementioned reason of them imply any such. And
therefore they have been highly condemned for making such like exceptions, by
others of their Brethren who have Attained to a higher dispensation. And
considering this Concession that such things as the forenamed may still be
lawfully used, as also the Concessions of a nameless Author in his famous Book
called Nehushtan, that no Creature of God is to be refused, nor any necessary
or profitable devices of men need be sent packing upon the account of their
having been much abused to the foresaid ends; I appeal to their own more sedate
thoughts, whether all that can be concluded from such Scriptures is any more
than this, that things so abused ought to be destroyed or abolished, by all who
have power to do it, in some certain case or cases, and not merely for this
reason, because they have been so abused. This, I presume, none of us will
deny; and if they will acknowledge it, as they must do if they will stand to
those their Concessions, they will be Constrained to give up this Cause.

I will conclude the Argument in hand with the judgment of that Eminent
Reformer Mr. Calvin, whose Authority goes farther with the generality of our
Brethren, than, I think, any Man's next to the Apostles. Says he upon the
Second Commandment, I know that the Jews, throughout the time of their
Paedagogy, were Commanded to destroy the Groves and Altars of Idolaters, not by
virtue of the Moral Law, but by an Appendix in the Judicial or Politic Law,
which did oblige that People for a time only, but it binds not Christians: And
therefore we do not in the least scruple whether we may Lawfully use those
Temples, Fonts, and other Materials, which have been heretofore abused to
Idolatrous and Superstitious uses. I acknowledge indeed, that we ought to
remove such things as seem to nourish Idolatry, upon supposition that we our
selves in opposing too violently things in their own Nature indifferent, be not
too Superstitious. It is equally Superstitious to Condemn things indifferent as
Unholy, and to Command them as if they were Holy. Thus you see Mr. Calvin's
sense agrees exactly with Ours, touching this Point of Controversy between us
and many of our Dissenting Brethren.

Secondly, They endeavor also to make out this Doctrine of theirs by Scripture
Examples. There are four or five of these Examples insisted upon, but I will
trouble the Reader with considering only one of them; both because it is the
Principal Example, and that which they lay most stress on; and because the
Reply I shall make to this, will be as satisfactory in reference to the rest.
It is that of Hezekiah his breaking in pieces the Brazen Serpent that Moses had
made, because the Children of Israel burnt Incense to it, 2 Kings 18. 4. Now,
says a certain Noted Author, What Example is more considerable than that of
Hezekiah, who not only abolished such Monuments of Idolatry, as at their first
Institution were but Men's inventions, but brake down also the Brazen Serpent
(though Originally set up at Gods Command) when once he saw it abused to
Idolatry. And he adds, that this deed of Hezekiah Pope Stephen does greatly
Praise (citing Wolphius for it) and professes that it is set before us for our
imitation; that when our Predecessors have wrought some things, which might
have been without fault in their time, and afterward they are converted into
Error and Superstition, they may be quickly destroyed by us who come after them.

Which soever of the Stephens this was, he was a strangely Honest Pope;
especially had he Practiced according to this his Profession, and his
Infallibilityship had judged Impartially of Errors and Superstitions. And he
cites Farellus (out of an Epistle of Calvin's) for this saying, That Princes and
Magistrates should learn by this Example of Hezekiah, what they should do with
those significant Rites of Men's devising which have turned to Superstition. And
he farther adds, that the Bishop of Winchester, (in his Sermon on Phil. 2. 10.)
acknowledges, that whatsoever is taken up at the injunction of Men, when it is
drawn to Superstition, comes under the Compass of the Brazen Serpent, and is
to be abolished. And he says, he Excepteth nothing from this Example, but only
things of Gods own Prescribing. But it is strange if a Bishop should not except
Churches, and some other things besides which are of an humane make; and as
strange if there be nothing going before or coming after this acknowledgment,
to lead us to a better understanding of it. We will not question our Authors
faithfulness in Transcribing it, but wish he had told us which Bishop of
Winchester this is, and in what page of his Sermon we might find this
Acknowledgment.

But that this Fact of King Hezekiah will not prove, that whatsoever has been
notoriously defiled in Idolatrous or grossly Superstitious Services ought to be
abolished, and much less, that the not abolishing some such things is a good
ground for Separation from the Church that neglects so to do, will, I presume,
sufficiently appear by these following Considerations.

First, The Brazen Serpent was not only a thing defiled in Idolatrous Services,
but it was made an Idol it self.

Secondly, It was not only a thing that had once been made an Idol, or Object
of Religious Worship, but it was Actually so at that time when it was
destroyed. Nay, it was at that instant an Object of the most gross kind of
Idolatry: It being not only bowed down to, but had likewise Incense burnt to
it; this being a Rite which is never used in mere Civil Worship, like bowing
the Knee, etc. but so proper and peculiar to Divine Worship, that no Rite is
more so. Nay farther:

Thirdly, It was not thus notoriously Idolized by some few of the People, but
the People were generally lapsed into this Idolatry: As the Text plainly
shows. Nay:

Fourthly, There was as little hope as could be of the Peoples being reclaimed
from this Idolatry, while the Idol was in being: Seeing that of a long time
they had been accustomed thereunto. For it is said, that unto those days the
Children of Israel burnt Incense to it; which speaks it to have been not only a
Custom, but a Custom also of a long standing.

Fifthly, Although it had been only a thing defiled in Idolatrous Services, yet
we freely grant that it ought to have been destroyed, or removed from the
Peoples sight, if the continuance of it in their View were like to be a Snare
to them, and a Temptation to Idolatry: Since now the use of it was ceased, for
which, by Divine appointment, it was first Erected. But there was no necessity
for this, upon supposition that it had ceased to be abused for any considerable
time, and there were no appearance of an inclination in the People to abuse it
again. And no doubt, all things of an indifferent Nature, that have formerly
been abused to Idolatry or Superstition, ought to be taken away by the
Governors, whenever they find their People again inclined so to abuse them;
at least, if such abuse cannot probably be prevented by other means.

Sixthly, But had Hezekiah suffered the Brazen Serpent still to stand, no doubt
private Persons (who have no authority to make public Reformations) might
Lawfully have made use of it, to put them in mind of, and affect them with the
wonderful mercy of God expressed by it to their Forefathers; notwithstanding
that many, had not only formerly, but did at that very nick of time, make an
Idol of it. And much more might they have Lawfully continued in the Communion
of the Church, so long as there was no constraint laid upon them to join with
them in their Idolatry: As we do not read of any that Separated from the Church
while the Brazen Serpent was permitted to stand, as woefully abused as it was by
the generality.

I will also conclude this Head with the sense of Mr. Calvin concerning Rites
used (and consequently superstitiously abused) by the Papists, expressed in
these Words; Let not any think me so austere, or bound up, Calv. de vitanda
Superstitione etc.
as to forbid a Christian without any exception, to accommodate himself to the
Papists in any Ceremony or Observance: for it is not my purpose to Condemn any
thing, but what is clearly Evil, and openly Vicious. To which may be added many
other such like sayings of this Learned Person.

And thus much shall suffice to be discoursed upon our second general Head,
viz. That a Church's Symbolizing in some things with the Church of Rome, is no
Warrant for Separation from the Church so Symbolizing.

We now proceed, in the Third and last place, to show, That the Agreement which
is between the Church of England and the Church of Rome is in no wise such as
will make Communion with the Church of England unlawful.

We have showed, what a vastly wide Distance and Disagreement there is between
the Church of England and that of Rome: And we have sufficiently (though with
the greatest brevity) made it apparent, that a Church's Symbolizing or agreeing
in some things with the Church of Rome, and those such too as she has abused
in Idolatrous and grossly Superstitious Services, is no just ground for
Separation from the Church so agreeing; And we have answered the Chief of those
Arguments which have been brought for the Confirmation of the contrary
Doctrine. And now, from what has been discoursed, it may with the greatest
ease be proved, that those things wherein our own Church particularly, agrees
with the Romish Church, do none of them speak such an Agreement therewith, as
will justify Separation from our Church's Communion.

Now the particulars wherein our Church Symbolizeth with that of Rome, which
our Dissenters take offense at, and make a pretense for Separation (though all
Dissenters are not offended at all of them, and much less so offended as to
make them all a pretense for Separation) are principally these following.

First, The Government of our Church by Bishops.

Secondly, Our Churches prescribing a Liturgy, or Set-Forms of Prayer, and
Administration of Sacraments, and other Public Offices.

Thirdly, A Liturgy so contrived as that of our Church is.

Fourthly, Certain Rites of our Church. Particularly, the Surplice, the Cross
in Baptism, the Gesture of Kneeling at the Communion, the Ring in Marriage, and
the Observation of certain Holy Days. And to all these I shall speak very
succinctly, the limits I am confined to not permitting me to enlarge much upon
any of them.

But I must first premise concerning them all in the general these following
things.

First, That I take it for granted, that they are all indifferent in their own
nature: That there is nothing of Viciousness or Immorality in any of them to
make them unlawful. I know no body so unreasonable as not to grant this.

Secondly, That there is no Express positive Law of God against any of these
things. I do not know of any such Law objected against any one of them. And
therefore if all, or any of them are unlawful, they must be made so either by
Consequences drawn from Divine Laws, or certain Circumstances attending them.

Thirdly, That I am concerned in this Discourse to vindicate them from being
unlawful, upon the account only of this one Circumstance, viz. Our Symbolizing
with the Church of Rome in them. Now then,

First, As to the Government of our Church by Bishops: This is so far from
being an Unlawful Symbolizing with the Church of Rome, that we have most clear
Evidence of its being a Symbolizing with her in an Apostolical Institution. And
what Eminent Divines of the Presbyterial Party have acknowledged (and is too
evident to be denied or doubted by any, who are not wholly ignorant of
Church History) is sufficient (I should think) to satisfy unprejudiced persons
concerning the truth of this: And that is, that this was the Government of all
Churches in the World from the Apostles times, for about 1500 years together.
Beza, in his Treatise of a Threefold kind of Episcopacy, Divine, Humane, and
Satanical, asserts concerning the second (which is that which we call
Apostolical) that of this kind is to be understood whatsoever we read
concerning the Authority of Bishops, in Ignatius, and other more Ancient
Writers. And the famous Peter Du Moulin, in his Book of the Pastoral Office,
written in defense of the Presbyterial Government, acknowledges, that
presently after the Apostles times, or even in their time (as Ecclesiastical
story witnesses) it was ordained, that in every City one of the Presbytery
should be called a Bishop, who should have pre-eminence over his Colleagues; to
avoid Confusion, which often times arises out of Equality. And truly, says he,
this Form of Government all Churches every where received. Mr. Calvin says in
his Institution of Christian Religion, Quibus docendi munus injunctum erat,
etc. Those to whom was committed the Office of Teaching, they called them all
Presbyters. These Elected out of their number in L. 4. cap. 4.. 2.
each City one, to whom in a special manner they gave the Title of Bishop; lest
Strife and Contention (as it commonly happens) should arise out of Equality.
And in his Epistle to Archbishop Cranmer, he thus accosts him: Illustrissime
Domine, and Ornatissime Praesul, etc. Most Illustrious Sir, and most Honorable
Prelate, and by me heartily Reverenced: And tells him, that if he might be
serviceable to the Church of England, he would not think much of passing over
ten Seas, for that purpose. Again, in his Epistle to the King of Poland, he
thus speaks of Patriarchs and Archbishops; The Ancient Church did appoint
Patriarchs and Primates in every Province, that by this bond of Concord the
Bishops might the better be knit together.

In short, (for I must not proceed farther upon this vastly large head of
discourse) I know not how our Brethren will defend the Apostolical Institution
of the Observation of the Lords Day, while they contend that this of Episcopacy
cannot be concluded from the uninterrupted Tradition of the Catholic Church,
for so many Centuries from the time of the Apostles. Nor how those that
Separate from our Church upon the account of its Government by Bishops, and
call it Antichristian, can defend the Lawfulness of Communicating with any
Church in Christendom for about 1500 years together.

Secondly, As to Our Churches prescribing a Liturgy or set Forms of Prayer and
Administration of Sacraments, and other public Offices; It is easy to show
that Symbolizing with the Church of Rome herein is so far from being culpable,
and much more from being a just ground of Separation from our Church, that it is
highly Commendable. For as herein our Church no less Symbolizeth with the
Primitive Church, than with that of Rome, as she is now Constituted (nothing
being more certainly known, than that Liturgies are of most Ancient standing)
so nothing is more highly expedient, for the due management of the public
Worship of God, than the use of a Liturgy. And, indeed, instead of Expedient I
might say Necessary; it being impossible to secure the performance of public
Worship with that solemnity and gravity that becomes it, in a Church where its
Ministers are wholly left free to the Exercise of Extemporary invention. But
the handling of this Argument is the business of another new Discourse, to
which I refer the Reader. I shall therefore conclude it with a citation out of
Calvin's Epistle Ad Protectorem Angliae; says he; As to a Form of Prayers and
Ecclesiastical Rites, I do very much approve of the publishing of a fixed one,
from which it may not be Lawful for the Pastors to depart in the exercise of
their Function: Thereby to provide against the simplicity and unskilfulness of
some, and that the consent of all the Churches with each other may more
certainly appear: And lastly, to put a bar to the skipping Levity of others,
who Affect certain innovations. And therefore (as he proceeds) Statum esse
Catechismum oportet, Statam Sacramentorum Administrationem, publicam item
precum Formulam, there ought to be an Established Catechism, an Office for the
Administration of the Sacraments Established, and also a Public Form of
Prayers. And he accordingly composed a Liturgy, to be used by the Ministers in
Geneva, on Sundays and Holydays. And the Exiles that resided at Geneva, in the
days of Queen Mary, did by his advice draw up a Liturgy, which was Printed in
the English Tongue, in the year 1556.

Thirdly, As to a Liturgy so contrived as that of our Church is, what has been
said of the vast distance between our Church and that of Rome herein, is
sufficient to show that there can be no warrantable pretense for Separation
from our Church, upon the account of the Symbolizing that is between these two
Churches in this particular. But we will perticularly consider those instances
of agreement between ours and the Roman Service which are most offensive to our
Brethren; they are especially these four.

1. Our many short Prayers, which some have too lighly called short Cuts, and
Shreddings, and rather Wishes than Prayers. But there needs no other reply
hereunto, than that our Learned Hooker gives, viz. That St. Augustine says,
Epist. 121. That the Brethren in Egypt are reported to have many Prayers, but
every of them very short, as if they were Darts thrown out with a kind of
sudden quickness, lest that Vigilant and erect attention of mind, which in
Prayer is very necessary, should be Wasted and dulled through Continuance, if
their Prayers were few and long. But that which St. Austin allows, they
Condemn, etc. He might as well have said, What that good Father Commends; nay
his words imply no small commendation. And I fear not to appeal to all Pious
Souls, who without prejudice join with us in our Public Prayers, whether they
find the shortness of many of them an hindrance or help to their Devotion. I
don't question but that such will readily acknowledge that they find it an
help. And therefore, in my weak judgment, our Symbolizing with the Church of
Rome in this particular, is Symbolizing with her in that which is highly
commendable, as it is so also in that wherein she Symbolizeth with very Ancient
Churches.

2. Another instance is, The Peoples bearing a part with the Minister in Divine
Service. But Mr. Baxter has said enough in his Christian Directory, on Q. 83.
not only to vindicate the Lawfulness, but the Fitness and Expediency also, of
Symbolizing herein with the Church of Rome. Says he,

1. The Scripture no where forbids it.

2. If the People may do this in the Psalms in Meter, there can be no reason
given, but they may Lawfully do it in Prose.

3. The Primitive Christians were so full of Zeal and Love of Christ, that they
would have taken it for an injury, or quenching of the Spirit, to have been
wholly restrained from bearing a part in the Praises of the Church.

4. The use of the Tongue keeps awake the Mind, and stirs up Gods graces in his
Servants.

5. It was the decay of Zeal in the People, that first shut out the Responses:
while they kept up the Ancient Zeal, they were inclined to take their part
vocally in the Worship. Though I were under no obligation of brevity, I should
add nothing more of mine own about this matter.

3. Another instance of this Nature is, the taking of some of the Collects out
of the Mass Book. But to this I give this, I hope as satisfactory as short
Answer, viz. That these Prayers are either good or bad: if they are bad ones,
they may not be used, though they were not in the Mass Book; and upon that
account the use of them would be Unlawful, not upon the account of our
Symbolizing in them with the Roman Church. But if they are all good ones, as
they are very good, then from what has been said, it is Evident that this
Symbolizing cannot make them bad; and it is a hard case that we should not be
allowed the use of whatsoever is good in their Service. Our Brethren will allow
of reading the same Scriptures that they do, and why then should they disallow
of using what perfectly agrees with Scripture, because they use it? Our
departure from them was designed to be a Reformation, not a total Destruction
and Extirpation.

4. The last instance is, The appointing of Lessons out of the Apocryphal
Books. But herein we Symbolize with the Primitive Church, rather than with this
of Rome: For (as has been showed out of the 6. Article of our Church) they are
not appointed to be read as Canonical Scripture; and we perfectly agree with
the Primitive Church, in reading them for Example of Life, and instruction of
Manners, but not for the Establishing of any Doctrine: Which, in that Article,
is showed from St. Hierom, to have been the Practice of that Church. And
besides, they are not now appointed to be ordinarily on Sundays read in Our
Churches.

These I take to be the chief of those instances of our Churches Symbolizing
with that of Rome, in the Composure of the Liturgy, that Our Dissenters are
offended at: And as for their other Objections of this kind, they are as easily
answered. And I most sincerely profess, that it is not to me imaginable that any
thing better than Extreme prejudice can make any Man a Separatist from Our
Communion upon such accounts as these: As also, that I cannot understand how
any devout and pious Souls that come to our Public Prayers without prejudice,
can find themselves in the least tempted not to join in them heartily with the
Congregation. Absolute perfection is not to be expected in any thing of a human
make; but if all would read Our Liturgy with that Candor they use in reading
the Books of those they have a good opinion of, as I am sure they could think
nothing intolerable therein, so am I as sure, they would freely acknowledge it
to be exceedingly well adapted to the design of it, viz. the exciting of
Devotion, and that good temper of mind, that is necessary to Our Worshipping of
God in Spirit and in Truth. I am certain, the experience of very many as
excellent Christians as this Age can boast of, do bear me witness, that this is
no lavish commendation of Our Prayers. Dr. Tailor that blessed Martyr gave this
Testimony to Our Liturgy: There was set Acts and Monuments, p. 1696.
forth by the most Innocent King Edward (for whom God be Praised everlastingly)
the whole Church Service with great deliberation and advice of the best Learned
Men in the Realm; and Authorized by the whole Parliament, and received and
Published gladly by the whole Realm; which Book was never reformed but once, and
yet by that one Reformation it was as fully perfected, according to the Rules
of Our Christian Religion in every behalf, that no Christian Conscience could
be Offended, with any thing therein contained. I mean of that Book Reformed.
What then would he have thought of it, had he lived to see it twice more
Reformed, as it has been since?

Lastly, I proceed to the forenamed Rites and Ceremonies of Our Church, in
which Our Symbolizing with Popery is so much Condemned, and made a pretense for
Separation. But before I come to particulars, I will observe in the general,
that the distance Our Church keeps from that of Rome in the imposition of
Ceremonies, is infinitely greater than her Agreement therein with her. For, as
those imposed by our Church (as has been already said) are exceeding few, not
the hundredth part scarcely of those imposed by the Roman Church, so does not
our Church impose them (as the other does) on the Consciences of her Members as
things of necessity, as parts of Religion or meritorious Services, as has been
proved out of the Articles. Now then,

1. As to the Surplice, our Church requires not the wearing of this Garment, as
an Holy Vestment, like the Priestly Garments under the Old Law, but merely for
the sake of Order and Uniformity: whereas in the Church of Rome a Surplice may
not be worn till it is hallowed in a solemn manner by the Bishop, or some one by
his Allowance (as may be seen in the Missal) with diverse Prayers, that it may
defend him who wears it from the Assaults of the Devil; the Prayers being
accompanied with a number of Crossings, and, in fine, the Surplice besprinkled
with Holy Water, in the Name of the Blessed Trinity. But, I say, in our Church
it is used only as a Garment of distinction; no more holiness is placed in it,
than in the Hoods worn over it merely for distinction of degrees: And the White
is preferred before any other Color, because it was a very ancient Custom in
the Primitive Church for the Ministers to Officiate in White Garments. Beza
says of the Surplice, These linen Garments Contra Westphalum vol. 1. p. 255.
we do not so stick at, that we would have the progress of the Word of God
hindered in the least for them. And we might show that Mr. Calvin much blamed
contending with Authority about the wearing this Garment: Particularly in his
Epistle to Bullinger. And since all the Popish abuse of this Garment is
perfectly removed, I know not why all Ministers should not be of their mind;
and much less can I imagine, why those who are not obliged to wear it, should
be affrighted from our Churches by the mere sight of so Innocent a thing.

2. As to the Cross in Baptism; Our Church holds so little Conformity with the
Papists herein, that in no one thing of an Indifferent nature can our
Symbolizing with them be less scandalous. Dr. Burges in his defense of Dr.
Morton, Shows, that we hold no Conformity with the Papists in the use
thereof, either in the P. 416. etc.
time when, or place where, or manner how, or end whereto. The Minister with us
(as he there shows) may not Cross Himself, or the People, or Font, Water,
Communion Table, or Cups, or the Bread and Wine, or any other of Gods
Ordinances: All which in Popery the Priest is bound to do, for their
Consecration, or blessing of himself, or them, as without which nothing is
Consecrated. The Child to be Baptized with us, may not be Crossed before
Baptism on the Forehead, Breast, or any part; which in Popery, the Priest must
do, to drive away the Devil, and make the Efficacy of that Sacrament more easy
and strong, as they teach. After Baptism, the Minister may not with us Cross
the Children with Oil or Chrism, or without, on the Crown of the Head, as in
Popery is required, to give them their full Christendom, lest they should die
before Confirmation. Yea at Confirmation, the Minister is not to make the sign
of the Cross on the Forehead with Chrism or without, which is enjoined in
Popery as an Essential part of the Sacrament (as they call it) of Confirmation.
Nay (as he proceeds) if the Child be in danger of present death, and not like
to live to make profession of Christ Crucified, the Minister is directed not to
use the sign of the Cross; that all may know, that we hold it not to be either
Operative upon the Child, or at all necessary to the Efficacy of the Lord's
Sacrament, but do only retain it, according to the first and best intention,
as an outward badg of the Constant profession of Christ Crucified. And whereas
it is said in the 30 Canon, that by this lawful Ceremony and honorable badg,
this Child is dedicated to the service of Christ, the Doctor declares that he
has good warrant to assure those who are offended at that Explication, that
the word dedicated does there import no more, than declared by that Ceremony to
be dedicated, viz. by the foregoing Baptism: like as the Priest is said to have
cleansed the Leper, whom he only declares to be clean, Lev. 14. 11. And it is
manifest from the account given of the imposing of this Ceremony in that Canon,
that this Phrase cannot otherwise be understood. I shall not need to add any
thing more about this Ceremony, after I have said, that our Church retains it
not in imitation of the Church of Rome, but of the Primitive Christians, they
thereby (to use the Words of the foresaid Canon) making an outward profession
even to the astonishment of the Jews, that they were not ashamed to acknowledge
him for their Lord and Savior, who died for them upon the Cross, etc. And (as
it follows) this use of the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, was held in the
Primitive Church, as well by the Greeks, as the Latins, with one consent and
great applause, etc. I conclude with Beza's judgment of the Lawfulness of Resp.
ad Baldw. p. 324.
this Ceremony. Says he, I know many too have retained the use of the Sign of
the Cross, the Adoration of the Cross being taken away: Let them, as is meet,
use their own Liberty. But in our Church, not only the Adoration of the Cross,
but likewise all Superstition in the use of it, is perfectly abolished. How
then can it be thought such a Symbolizing with the Church of Rome as may
warrant Separation from our Communion?

3. As to the Ceremony of Kneeling at the Communion: If our Churches
Declaration at the end of the Communion-Service, will not vindicate her from an
Unlawful Symbolizing with Rome herein, I have nothing to say in her defense.
The declaration is this: Whereas it is ordained in this Office for the
Administration of the Lords Supper, that the Communicants should receive the
same Kneeling (which order is well meant, for a signification of our humble and
grateful acknowledgment of the benefits of Christ, therein given to all worthy
Receivers, and for the avoiding of such Profanation and disorder in the Holy
Communion, as might otherwise ensue) yet lest the same Kneeling should by any
Persons, either out of Ignorance and Infirmity, or out of Malice and Obstinacy,
be misconstrued and depraved; It is here declared, that thereby no Adoration is
intended, or ought to be done, either unto the Sacramental Bread and Wine,
there bodily received, or unto any Corporal-Presence of Christ's Natural Flesh
and Blood: For the Sacramental Bread and Wine remain still in their very
Natural substances, and therefore may not be adored, (for that were Idolatry to
be abhorred of all faithful Christians) And the Natural Body and Blood of our
Savior Christ are in Heaven, and not here; it being against the truth of
Christ's Natural Body, to be at one time in more places than one. We see that
our Church does here, not only declare that no Adoration is in this Gesture
intended, either to the Elements or to Christ's Corporal Presence under the
Species of Bread and Wine; but also that, as such a Pretense is absurd and
contradictions, so the adoring of the Sacramental Bread and Wine, would be
Idolatry to be abhorred by all faithful Christians. So that, as nothing is in
it self more indifferent than this Gesture in receiving the Holy Communion,
there being not one Word said of the Gesture in our Saviors Institution of
this Sacrament, either before his Death to his Disciples, or after his
Ascension to St. Paul, (who has delivered to us what he received of the Lord
about this matter, as he said, that is, all that he had received) and as Christ
has Consequently lest the particular Gesture to the determination of the
Church, a Gesture being in the general necessary; so this Circumstance of
Symbolizing with the Church of Rome herein, cannot make Our Churches requiring
Kneeling to be Unlawful (and much less our Obedience to the Church in using
this Gesture) seeing all the Idolatry and Superstition too, wherewith the
Church of Rome has abused it, is perfectly removed, and it is required by our
Church merely as a decent Reverend Gesture.

4. As to the Ring in Marriage: The Church of Rome (as is to be seen in the
Office of Matrimony, juxta usum Ecclesiae Sarisburiensis) abuses it most
notoriously. There you have it, first blessed with two Prayers; in the former
of which, God is beseeched to send his blessing on this Ring, that she who
shall wear it may be Armed with the Power of Heavenly defense, and it may be
beneficial to her, to Eternal life, through Christ our Lord. And in the latter,
the Priest, Crossing himself, Prays, that God would bless this Ring, which we
in thy Holy Name bless, that whosoever shall wear it, may abide in his Peace,
etc. Next, Holy Water is sprinkled upon the Ring: And lastly, the Bridegroom
puts it upon the Brides Thumb, the Bridegroom saying, In the Name of the
Father: Then upon her second Finger, saying, And of the Son: Then on the third,
saying, And of the Holy Ghost: Then on the fourth, saying, Amen. And there he
leaves it. And there is expressed a special Mystery in leaving it upon that
Finger. But there is used nothing of this impious or Superstitious fooling
about the Ring in our Office of Marriage. All the doings about it are, the
Bridegrooms putting it on the fourth Finger, he saying after the Minister, With
this Ring I thee Wed; and the mentioning of it in the Prayer following, as a
Token and Pledge of the Vow and Covenant made between the Married Persons. So
that it is so far from being used as a Sacramental sign among us, that it no
otherwise differs from a mere civil Ceremony, than as it is a Token and Pledge of
a Covenant made between the Parties in the most Solemn manner, viz. as in the
presence of God. And in truth, this is such a Symbolizing with the Church of
Rome, as I should be ashamed to bestow two Words about, but that so many of our
Brethren have been pleased to take offense at it.

Lastly, As to our Observation of certain Holy days: All I shall say about it
is,

1. That there is no Comparison between the number of our Holy Days and the
Popish ones.

2. Our few are purged from all the Superstitious and wicked Solemnizations of
the Popish ones.

3. We observe scarcely any besides such as wherein we have the Primitive
Church for our Example: Excepting those which are enjoined upon the account of
Deliverances and Calamities, in which our own Nation is peculiarly concerned.

4. An observation of them, void of Superstitious conceits about them, and
only as our Church directs, can have no other than a very good Effect upon
our Hearts and lives. If we could say as St. Austin did of the Christians in
his time, viz. By Festival Solemnities and set days, we dedicate and sanctify
to God, the memory of his Benefits, lest unthankful forgetfulness of them,
should in tract of time creep upon us, we should certainly be much the better
Christians for the observation of our Holy Days. Mr. Calvin says, In Festis
non recipiendis cuperem vos esse Constantiores, etc. I could wish In Epist ad
Monsbel-gardenses, p. 81, 82.
that you would be more constant in your not receiving Festivals, but so, as
not to contend and make a stir about all, but about those only which nothing
at all tend to Edification, and which have a manifest appearance of
Superstition, etc. And he instanceth in those Days which Popery dedicates to
the Celebrating of the immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary, and of her
Assumption, on which Holy Days nothing, he says, can be said in the Pulpit, by
a servant of God, besides exposing the folly of those who have invented them.

And in another Epistle, Caeterum cum Festi dies hic In Epist. ad Hallerum.
abrogati, etc. Moreover, whereas some of your Country are much offended at the
Abrogation of Holy Days among us, and it is likely that much odious talk is
spread about it: And I make account that I am made the Author of this whole
matter, and that by the Ignorant as well as Malicious; I can solemnly testify
of my self, that this was done without my knowledge o desire, etc. Before I
ever came into the City, there was no Holy Day at all observed besides the
Lords day; those which are Celebrated by you were taken away by that same Law
of the People, which banished me and Farel: And 'twas rather Tumultuously
extorted by the violence of Wicked Men, than decreed legally. Upon my return I
obtained this temper (or mean) that Christmass-day should be observed after
your manner, but upon the other days extraordinary supplications should be
made, the Shops being kept shut in the Morning, but after Dinner, every one
should go about his own Business.

And, no doubt, the Governors of our Church would be abundantly satisfied with
such an observation of most of our Holy Days, as Mr. Calvin ordered at Geneva,
would the People be generally so far conformable.

And thus I have, I hope, sufficiently showed, that our Church's Symbolizing in
this Rite too with the Church of Rome no otherwise than she does, can be no
color for Separation.

It may be objected, that notwithstanding our having several times cited Mr.
Calvin, for the unlawfulness of Separation from the Church of England, on the
account of her Symbolizing as she does with the Church of Rome, yet he calls
her Ceremonies tolerabiles ineptiae, tolerable fooleries, which would make one
think that he was not in earnest in calling them tolerable; fooling in the
Worship of God being no doubt intolerable.

In Answer hereto, let Mr. Calvin account for his joining ineptiae and
tolerabiles together; but the instances he gives of things he so censured, were
such as the Liturgy was cleared of, in the amendment of it under Queen
Elizabeth, viz. Prayers for the dead, (that is, that they might have a happy
Resurrection, not such Prayers as supposed Purgatory) Chrism at Baptism, and
Extreme Unction. And besides, he says, he was informed by Mr. Knox, of several
other Popish Ceremonies that were retained, viz. the Use of Wax Candles, diverse
Crossings at the Communion, etc. which Information was not true.

And now, how happy should we think our selves, would our Brethren at length be
persuaded to cease fearing where no fear is; as also to fear what is really
very frightful; namely, the guilt of so great a sin as that of Schism, or
making and continuing a breach in the Church by Separation without just cause:
The greatness of which sin none have more aggravated than Mr. Calvin, and
several of our old Non-conformists; who have also zealously born their
Testimony against Separation from the Church of England, and accordingly did
themselves hold Communion there with generally (viz. all the Presbyterian
Party) to their dying day, though they could not Conform as Ministers. And
there is another very formidable Evil too, which I wish more of our Brethren
had a greater sense of, viz. the advantage that our Common Enemy is too like to
make of our Sad Divisions, and being crumbled into so many Sects and Parties,
and has already made, in order to their final accomplishing their designs upon
us. The truth on it is, they themselves have had the main hand in those
Divisions, they so upbraid us with, (of which we have abundant Evidence) having
most industriously followed that advice of the famous Jesuit Campanella, viz.
There is no such effectual Jam vero ad enervandos Anglos, nihil tam conducit,
quam dissensio and discordia inter illos excitata, perpetuoque nutrita: Quod
cito occasiones meliores suppeditabit, Camp. de Mon. Hisp. p. 304. Amstel.
way to weaken the English, as to stir up strife and discord among them, and
still to feed it: This will quickly put into our hands very fair advantages and
opportunities. Their main spite is at the Church of England, as being well
aware, that it has ever since the Reformation been their most formidable
Enemy, and the most impregnable Bulwark in all Christendom against the mighty
Power and Policy of their Church of Rome. What a madness therefore is it in
hearty Protestants, to join with those People in laying this Church as low as
ever they are able! And by contending with our Church about innocent, if not
commendable things, upon the account of her Symbolizing in them with the Church
of Rome, eminently to endanger the opening such a breach as shall let in all
her Heresies, Superstitions, and Idolatries among us. Which God in his infinite
Mercy prevent, by causing us to live more answerably to the happy Means and
Opportunities we now enjoy, by quenching our as unreasonable as unchristian
fierce Feuds and Animosities, and by making our Church like Jerusalem of old, a
City compact together, and at Unity within it self. Amen.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 9. read unction. p. 8. l. 14. r. the Mass. p. 10. l. 8. r.
Homilies especially. p. 15. l. 1. r. others. p. 32. l. 21. r. dispensation.

FINIS.
A DEFENSE OF THE RESOLUTION OF THIS CASE, VIZ. Whether the Church of England's
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it Unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England. In Answer to a Book Entitled A
Modest Examination OF THAT RESOLUTION.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons, against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1684.

A DEFENSE OF THE Resolution, etc.
SIR,
I who know the Author of the Book, which has given you this trouble, better
than any man, do conclude that you are not more a stranger to him, than he is
to you, from the Epithets you so frequently bestow upon him throughout your
Papers; except you do it (which I would not be so uncharitable as to think) by
way of Irony.

In your First Paragraph you express a Liking of the Complexion of his Book;
and I perceive you mean, that it pleases you to find it not written in a heat,
and that there is nothing of a Censorious or Peevish humor, or of a haughty
contempt of those he deals with, therein expressed. And he hopes that upon the
same accounts, you are no less pleased with the other Resolutions of Cases,
which bear this company. But he thinks it no mighty Attainment, to be able in
writing to manage a Controversy Coolly and Sedately; without bitter or
provoking Reflections, or contemptuous Expressions. Though men of warm Tempers
may find it somewhat difficult, to govern their Spirits and Passions, as it
becomes them, in the heat of disputing by word of mouth; one would think that a
small measure of Humility or Good nature, or of Discretion and Prudence, should
make it no hard matter to acquire that other Attainment: And, much more, that
no one who is a Christian in Spirit and Temper, as well as in Notion and
Profession, can find it a difficult thing to arrive at it. But enough of this.

In your Second Paragraph, you seem to intimate, that our Author might have
spared his pains in dwelling so long upon the Distance between our Church and
the Church of Rome, in points of Doctrine: But he is not satisfied with the
reasons you give for the needlesness of so doing. Your reasons are two; First,
because he argued chiefly for Communion in Worship. And Secondly, you never met
with the Doctrinal part of the 39 Articles charged as Popish, nor our Church
reflected on, as symbolizing with that Idolatrous Church, in Points of
Doctrine. But these reasons have not convinced our Author, that he is over long
upon this Argument; for it was not his design to show, that our Church does not
symbolize in Points of Doctrine with that of Rome, but that She stands at
greatest defyance with that Church: Not, that She does not teach her Corrupt
Doctrine in her Articles; but that she designedly confutes them, and exposes
the falsity and corruption of them. And this surely was worth the showing in so
many instances, for their sakes who never read or considered those Articles; as
I fear very few of the Dissenters have done.

And, whereas you say, you never met with the Doctrinal part of the 39 Articles
charged as Popish (and it would be strange if you had) I say, there is too
great cause to suspect, that very few of our Dissenting Brethren do understand
how Anti-popish they are, though they do not charge them as Popish. And I doubt
you have met with many (I am sure very many are to be met with) who have
reflected upon our Church as an Idolatrous Church, though you never heard her
accused as symbolizing with the Idolatrous Church of Rome, in Points of
Doctrine. But they will find it somewhat hard to understand, how a Church can
be Idolatrous in matters of Practice, and yet be pure in her Doctrine from any
tang of Idolatry. Surely her Practices must be grounded upon her Doctrines, or
they would be strange Practices indeed. And it would be wonderful, if she
should Practice Idola try, and yet Believe nothing that tends to the
encouragement of that foul Sin; nay believe and teach all those Doctrines that
are as Opposite to Idolatry, as Light to Darkness. So that I conceive nothing
could be more to our Author's purpose, than to endeavor to remove that
prejudice of many, against the Constitution of our Church, which is grounded
upon an Opinion of its being near of kin to Popery. And what could signify
more to their Conviction, that there is not any ground for such an Opinion,
than the showing how abhorrent to Popery our Church is in her Doctrine; and
what a testimony she bears in her Articles against the Idolatrous and
Superstitious Doctrines of the Romish Church, and the Practices which she
foundeth upon those Doctrines?

As to the several Additions you say may be made to the page 4.
Anti-popish Doctrines contained in the 39 Articles, our Author conceives he
was not guilty of any Oversight in not preventing you, because some of them are
not properly Anti-popish, but contrary to the Doctrine of other Sects, which
are to be found among Abhorrers of Popery as well as Papists; and others of
them our Author has not omitted, but if you will look again, you may find them
in their proper places. Viz. those Doctrines contained in Artic. VI. and Artic.
XI. This, under the head of Doctrines flatly contradicting the Holy Scriptures,
page 9. That, under the head of the Authority on which each of the two Churches
founds its whole Religion, page 18.

Now I hope by this time, you understand very well what our Author would have
you conclude, from this first part of his Performance, which you say page 4.
you do not well understand.

And whereas you ask, whether it be that the 39 Articles have in them nothing
of kin to Popery, as to matters of Faith? And add that you dare say, there is
not a judicious Dissenter in England will say they have. I answer, if there be
any injudicious Dissenters in England, that will say they have, I hope these
poor people ought not to be so despised, as that we should use no means for the
undeceiving of them. But our Author would have you conclude, that he has done
what he designed, which is (as has been already said) not to show that the 39
Articles have nothing of kin to Popery, but that they are most abhorrent from
it; and that our Church is at the widest and vastest distance from Popery in
her Doctrinals; and consequently one would think too, in matters of Practice.
But our Author does not satisfy himself to prove this by this consequence; but
goes on to show it in the particular instances of matters of Practice, after he
had done it in Points of Doctrine.

To return now to your Second Page, You say that it is mightily Satisfactory to
you to hear our Author assuring you, that our Church allows her Members the
judgment of Discretion, etc. But, Sir, you needed no Authors to assure you of
this, since our Church has done it as fully, as it can be done by words; and
our Author no otherwise assures you of it, than by citing our Churches
Articles. But whereas you add, that this you cannot but think implies a
Liberty, not only to Believe and Judge, but to Do also according to what a
man believes and judges; surely you will find your self able to think
otherwise, when you have considered, what is the necessary and immediate
consequence of such a thought, viz. that all such things as Laws are utterly
inconsistent with allowing to men the Judgment of Discretion, according to this
large notion: And that, therefore our Church does faultily Symbolize with the
Church of Rome, in having any such things as Government and Discipline.

You next say, that our Author speaks very true as to the Popish Rites and
Ceremonies, and that those in our Church are comparatively few; but you much
doubt, whether the use of those few was long before Popery appeared in the
world, unless he means Popery at its full growth; for that Mystery of Iniquity,
as to Rituals, began to work very early. To this I answer, that the Papists may
con you great thanks for this passage, it plainly enough intimating that the
Primitive Fathers and Christians were for the most part Papists, though not
fully grown Papists. And as to those words of St. Paul, The Mystery of iniquity
does already work, if you can do any thing like proving that the Apostle meant
by the Mystery of iniquity, which began to work in his days, the use of such
Rites as those you are offended with in our Church, I will engage for our
Author, that he shall immediately set up for a Nonconformist.

You say in your Third Page, that you cannot well understand how our Author
says, that our Church does not impose her Rites as necessary, unless he means
as necessary in order to Salvation, etc. But does he not expressly tell you what
he means by necessary? you found he did, if you read the whole Sentence, which
runs thus, page 4. And she imposes her Rites not (as the Church of Rome does
here is) as necessary, and as parts of Religion, but as merely indifferent and
changeable things, as we find in her 34th Article, etc. And why, Sir, did you
conceal this part of the Sentence, and thus stop at a Comma?

You thus proceed; Nor do I well understand how they are not made necessary to
Salvation, when the non-observance of them is made sinful, and meritorious of
a being cast out of the Church, etc. And I assure you, that I do as little
understand, if this be good arguing, how whatsoever the King commands of his
Subjects, or a Master of his Servants, is not made by them necessary to
Salvation, since the non-observance of the Lawful Commands of each, is
acknowledged to be sinful, by all that believe these Precepts binding, viz.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man, for the Lord's sake, etc. And,
Servants obey in all things your Masters, etc. And as to the Penalty you
mention, of being cast out of the Church, and cut off from the Body of Christ,
which is the same thing, it amounts to thus much; That those who will by no
means be prevailed with, to conform to the Laws of the Society of which they
are Members, shall be cast out of it: which all Societies and Bodies Politic
whatsoever, have ever thought fit to have inflicted, upon obstinate
Transgressors of their Laws, in order to the preservation of themselves, and
the upholding of Government amongst them. And our Author I am certain will
readily grant, that none but Obstinate Transgressors of the Churches Laws, and
such as are incorrigible by all other means first tried, ough^ to be cast out
of the Church, and that the Sentence of Excommunication should never be
pronounced against them, but as the last Remedy: As also that the design
thereof ought always to be the Reformation of the Offender (as well as for
example to others) never his Destruction. But how does this Penalty's being
made the Sanction of the Laws of our Church, which ordain Rites and Ceremonies
for Order's sake, and the decent administration of Divine Worship in Public,
speak these to be enjoined as necessary to Salvation, when the non-observance
of any of them is no otherwise judged to be sinful, than as it is an Act of
disobedience to Humane Authority; and when this Penalty is never (according to
the Rules of our Church) to be inflicted, but in case of the Offender's adding
contempt to his disobedience? If any instances can be given of persons being
Excommunicated upon the account of Nonconformity, who are humble and modest and
peaceable, and that give good evidence of their willingness to comply with the
Laws of their Governors as far as they are able with safe consciences, this I
am sure is wholly the fault of Persons, not of our Constitution. But this
Objection is too inconsiderable to deserve our bestowing so many words upon it.

All that follows to the bottom of your Fifth Page, wherein our Author is
concerned, has been replied to: And there you thus speak. As in England we
have a Silent and a Speaking Law, so we have also a Silent and a Speaking
Church, etc. We know the Doctrine of the Church of England in the 39 Articles;
but this is but Ecclesia Muta: How many have we that will tell us, We are
Ecclesia Loquens, the Living Church of England; and we tell you, etc. Here
follow no fewer than thirteen Doctrines taught by this Ecclesia Loquens,
contradictory to the 39 Articles. But

1. You have given us (we thank you) the very first information of this
Ecclesia Loquens: But why do you expect, unless we knew you better, that we
should take your bare word for it? Nay we have hardly that, for you do not in
express terms affirm, but ask this Question, How many have we that will tell
us, we are Ecclesia Loquens? And therefore it might suffice, to give you only
this short answer, Do you tell us how many, or whether there are any, if you
know. Surely this Church of yours is an Invisible Church; or, if not, none but
Dissenters Eyes are clear enough to get the least glympse of it. But the truth
of it is, it is a mere Figment, and the very Dream of a Shadow. But

2. Whereas a Positive Assertion of the being of such a Church of England is
implied in this Question, you cannot well be otherwise understood, than as
asserting, that the Prevailing party of our Church of England Divines, have
obtruded upon the World this long Beadroll of Heresies, as Articles of Faith;
and so have turned the Old Church of England out of doors: And therefore you
are brought to this miserable pass, that you cannot hold Communion with this
New Church, except you will separate from, and bid adieu to the Old. And, in
good earnest, if this be so, Dissenters are the only true Friends of the
Church of England, as by Law Established; and this Church is hugely obliged to
them for their Separation. But

3. I am well assured, that you will never be able to make good this charge, or
any part of it, against any number of the Divines of our Church. For I who
know, I am confident, as many of them, as most men in England, can truly
declare as follows,

That I cannot name any one Divine of our Church, who teaches your First
contradictory Doctrine to the 39 Articles, viz. That although we may not
terminate our worship in an Image, yet we may bow down and worship the true God
before an Image.

Nor your Second, viz. That departed Saints know our states here upon Earth,
and are praying to God for us; and therefore we may pray to them.

Nor know I any one of our Church, who teaches your Third, viz. That any
Priest may absolve, by commission from God, more than declaratively. I mean, I
know no one that makes the Priest's Absolution to be other in Effect than
declarative, though it signifies more than if pronounced by a Layman.

Nor your Fourth, That the Natural Body and Blood of Christ, is in the Elements
of Bread and Wine really. Our Church-Catechism says that, The Body and Blood
of Christ, are verily and indeed taken and received by the faithful in the
Lord's Supper: And I know no Divine of ours that explaineth this otherwise than
thus, That Believers feed on the Body and Blood of Christ, in the Lord's
Supper, as truly and really as they do on the Elements; but not after a
corporal and carnal manner, but after a spiritual, viz. by applying to
themselves the Benefits of Christ's death by faith. And I presume you will
neither assert this to be Popish Doctrine, nor deny that it is true Doctrine.

Nor do I know any one of our Divines that holds your Fifth Proposition, for it
may not be called a Doctrine, viz. That our Conformable Congregations are no
better than Conventicles, where the Minister reads not the Communion Service at
the Altar. Which you assert to be tantamount to the allowing of Prayers in an
Unknown Tongue; because in multitudes of Congregations, the People cannot hear
a line from him. I say, I know of no Divine of our Church, that ever asserted
that such Congregations as the forementioned, are no better than Conventicles.
There was indeed lately a foolish Book published to Prove them Conventicles,
but it is strongly conjectured that this Book was written by a certain Layman:
And what Church he is of I cannot say, nor is it a pins matter to know. But I
may as much suspect him to be a Protestant Dissenter, as a Popish, upon the
score of that his Position; it being nothing of kin to the allowing of Prayers
in an Unknown tongue. For (as there is not One of your Multitudes of
Congregations, wherein the People cannot hear a line from him that reads at the
Communion Table, except you mean, wherein every one of the People cannot; for,
I doubt not, the Major part can in all where the Minister has a voice to be
well heard from the Pulpit, so) all that is read is known before to those who
are not Strangers to our Prayers, or at least they may have Books to enable
them to go along with the Minister, whether they can, or cannot hear distinctly
one sentence from him.

Nor do I know any one of our Divines that has ever taught your 6th Doctrine,
That whole Christ is under each Element: which you intimate is the only
foundation on which the Sacrilegious Romish Practice stands. But if I could
believe that Doctrine to be true, I should notwithstanding judge it an
intolerable thing to refuse the Cup to the Laity, against the express
Institution of our Lord.

Nor know I any Divine of ou Church guilty of the 7th particular of your
Charge, viz. That there are those who interpret the Ten Commandments so as that
he who will ever be saved must do a great many works of supererogation. And if
I did know any one that so interpreted the Commandments, as to make any one
such work necessary to Salvation, I would not call him a Papist for it, but an
Ignoramus; who understands not the word Supererogation.

Nor know I any one that teaches Original Sin, (thereby understanding
Corruption of Nature) to be rather our Misfortune than our Fault: which is your
8th Doctrine.

Nor consequently, that Concupiscence is no sin; which is your 9th.

Nor your 10th, That man has a power in his own will to choose and do what is
spiritually good; (i. e.) without the Assistence of Divine Grace: And with this
Assistence I hope you Dissenters do all hold it.

Nor know I any one of our Divines who teaches, That we are not accounted
righteous before God (or Justified) only for the Merits of Christ: that is,
that there is any other Meritorious cause of our Justification besides the
Active and Passive obedience of Christ.

Nor your 11th, That we are not Justified by Faith alone: Understanding by
Faith, not a dead but a living Faith, that purefies the heart, and works by
love.

Nor your 12th, That good works must go before justification, and are not the
fruits of Faith, but Faith it self. For I know no one of our Church that
asserts more than this, that a sincere Resolution to obey all God's
Commandments must, in order of nature, go before Justification.

Nor your 13th, That there is no Eternal Predestination of persons to life, and
the means tending thereunto. I know of none of our Church that have ever taught
this Doctrine, as you have expressed it; nor any worse than this, That Eternal
Predestination to life is not Irrespective or Absolute; which no Article of our
Church says it is. And Abundance of you Dissenters hold this Doctrine, as well
as Church of England men.

And thus have I gone over all the Doctrines contradictory to the 39 Articles,
taught by your Ecclesia Loquens, yours I say, for she is not ours; and I
declare again, that I know of no Divine of our Church, that teaches or holds
such Doctrines. If you know any, as one would think you do very many, I pray
name them. You say, we spare any names in these cases; but be you entreated not
to spare them. But if you will not be prevailed with, we shall very shrewdly guess
at the reason.

Sir, to deal freely with you, I cannot but wonder, at your adventuring into
the World this other Celeusma; since the Author of the former had so ill
success, and must needs have repented him heartily of that Undertaking. All
that have consideratively read his Answerer, I am confident are convinced, that
after a Great Cry, Little Wool appeared; or rather none at all. Nor can such
be ignorant, what foul play was used to make our Divines of the Church of
England broach Heresy. And I doubt not but you your self have blushed at it,
if you have ever read the Parallela imparia; sive Specimen fidei Celeusmaticae.
Could you catch us thus dealing with the Books of your Authors, as ours have
been dealt with by that Author, and some others that might be named, we should
at another kind of rate have been exposed, than they have been.

But, Sir, for God's sake, let us make as much Conscience of vile Calumny, than
which there is not a more express Transgression of the Law of God, nor of the
very Light of Nature, as of Obedience to Authority in such things as no Divine
Law can be produced against; and nothing but strained and far-fetcht
Consequences. And, for God's sake also, let us at length be persuaded to have
so great a concern for our common Religion, as to give over exposing it by such
unchristian doings, to the Scorn and Derision of our Common Enemy.

But I cannot take my leave of this heavy Charge of yours, till I have asked
you, what you infer from thence, on supposition you can make good proof of it?
It is plain your design in all this talk, is to justify, if not a total, yet a
partial Separation. You do indeed (to conceal nothing of your Candor) after
all acknowledge, p. 7.
That you are very far from thinking that there are not multitudes of Holy and
Learned men in our Ecclesia Loquens, that in these things are of another mind:
And therefore, I hope, you will not excuse Separation from their Churches.

Nay you say, p. 9.
That hundreds of the Speaking Church are, as we believe, as far from
symbolizing with the Church of Rome (you mean in Doctrine) as the Articles; And
that in this thing a Separation from the Silent, as well as this part of the
Speaking Church, must needs be highly Sinful. And in thus declaring, you
condemn the generality of those that Separate; it being well known that
Communion with those whom you will acknowledge to be Orthodox Divines, and
those which you account Heterodox, is much alike boggled at. But I fear, when
all is done, you condemn only separation in Heart from these Orthodox men;
your Undertaking in your 8th Page makes me fear this; viz. That all the
Valuable persons in Presbyterian and Independent Congregations, shall give any
reasonable assurance, that they are not in Heart divided from a Single Person,
in the Church of England, that speaks in matters concerning Doctrine, as our
Church does in her Articles: But if you think that all the Communion you are
obliged to hold with these Div^nes, is only that of the Heart; that is,
thinking them Orthodox, and loving them as such, but allow it to be lawful, to
refuse to worship God with them, nay and not so much as to hear them, we thank
you for nothing. This is such Church Communion as will well consist with
rending and tearing the Church in pieces.

But I pray do not think that all this while I take it for granted, that it is
lawful to separate from the Congregations of those Divines whom we take to be
in some points Heterodox. Nay upon supposition that your Ecclesia Loquens did
as generally depart from the Doctrine of our Church, as the Pharisees in our
Savior's time did from the Law of Moses, I shall be far from granting that
Separation from their Congregations is lawful, except there be a constraint
laid upon us to subscribe to their Heterodox Opinions, till you can prove that
our Savior allowed of the Jews Separation from the Pharisees; which you never
can, but the contrary who cannot show? He bad his Disciples indeed, to beware
of the Leaven of the Pharisees; and so are we to beware of the Leaven of such
Heterodox Teachers; but not so to beware of it, as not to come within their
Churches; for that that caution of our Savior is not to be so interpreted,
appears not only from his own practice (who was far from being a Separatist
from the Jewish Temple or Synagogues) and by what he says, Mat. 23. 2, 3.

In the last Paragraph of your 9th Page, you return to speak more directly to
our Author: And first you reflect upon these words in his Book, p. 24. But I am
so far from taking it for granted, that a Church is guilty of Sin in agreeing
in some indifferent things with the Church of Rome, that I must needs profess,
I have often wondered, how this should become a Question: Seeing whatsoever is
of an indifferent nature, as it is not commanded, so neither is it forbidden by
any Moral or Positive Law; and where there is no Law there is no Transgression,
etc. To this you say, that it is an obvious begging the Question. And it might
be so, if our Author stopped here, but he thus proceeds: And whereas certain
circumstances will make things, that in themselves are neither Duties nor Sins,
to be either Duties or Sins, and to fall by Consequence, under some Divine
Command or Prohibition; I have admired how this Circumstance of an indifferent
thing's being used by the Church of Rome, can be thought to alter the nature of
that thing, and make it cease to be indifferent, and become sinful. So that
this is the Obvious meaning of our Author's words, that he has wondered how it
should become a Question, whether a Church may lawfully agree in some things
with the Church of Rome, which the Law of God has not forbidden: And whereas
some things that are not forbidden by the Law of God directly, are
notwithstanding forbidden thereby Consequentially, he has admired how the mere
Circumstance of a thing's being practiced by the Church of Rome, can speak it
to be forbidden by God's Law Consequentially. And then he immediately betakes
himself to the consideration of some of those Laws given to the Israelites,
that prohibit their imitating the Doings of the Egyptians and Canaanites, which
are urged by Nonconformists, to prove it unlawful to imitate the Church of
Rome in things of a mere indifferent nature, and that that circumstance of
their being practiced by that Church makes them cease to be indifferent, and to
become Sinful: And endeavors to show, that this cannot with any show of
reason be gathered from these Laws.

And how, I pray, is this an Obvious begging of the Question? which is, Whether
a Church's symbolizing, or agreeing in some things, with the Church of Rome, be
a warrant for separatian from the Church so agreeing? This, I say, is the
Question which our Author handles.

But you next make a Question for him, and say it is this, p. 10.
Whether a thing in its own nature indifferent, be still indifferent as to
Christians use in God's worship, when it has been once used in Idolatrous
Services; if the use of it be neither Naturally necessary to the worship of
God, as it is an humane Act, nor suitable to the Ends of it, nor such without
which it cannot in common judgment be decently performed? But our Author much
more wonders, how this should become a Question, than how that of his own
propounding should. For

First, There are three apparent Contradictions in it. It being a contradiction
to say concerning the same thing, that it is in its own nature indifferent, and
yet naturally necessary to the Worship of God, as it is an humane Act. It being
so too, to say of the same thing, that it is in its own nature indifferent, and
yet Unsuitable to the Ends of Divine Worship. It being a contradiction again,
to say of the same thing, that it is in its own nature indifferent, and yet such
as without which the Worship of God cannot in common judgment be decently
performed. For you must mean by things in their own nature indifferent, things
that are so in Divine Worship: for otherwise, you trifle egregiously in putting
this Question, or make your Nonconformists so to do, for whom you put it. But
you abuse them, if you do so; for that which diverse of them do assert, and
which occasioned our Author's Resolution of the Case of Symbolizing, etc. is
this; That things which might otherwise be lawfully used in the Worship of God,
do become unlawful, by their having been abused in Idolatrous or Superstitious
Services. And some of them do understand this in a more limited and restrained
sense (as our Author has showed) than others of them do.

Secondly, as this Question is put, you are sure to have no Adversaries. For
who ever doubted whether a thing be unlawful in the Worship of God, that is
Unsuitable to the Ends thereof, whether this thing has been abused or no in
Idolatrous Services?

Now, having thus strangely put the Question, you proceed to show that from
thence will follow several things, as things out of controversy betwixt us.
And I perceive you are very cautious herein of reviving a certain Old
controversy among your selves, viz. Whether our Old Churches, Bells and Fonts,
etc. may still be used. For you thus word your third particular wherein we are
agreed, viz. That things of mere convenience for a Religious Action, for the
Service of the Ends of it may be used, though Idolaters have used the like (you
are shy, I perceive, of saying the same) so as none scruple the using of
Churches to meet in, etc. You say not, none scruple the using of the Old
Churches which were built by Papists.

In your next Page, you tell our Author, that you think that, p. 11.
Zanchy's Rule is at least Safest, and that he knows that, in dubiis animae
tutior pars est eligenda. But I think you might have Englisht it better than
thus, in matters of Sin, the Safest part is always to be preferred. For in
matters of Sin, or sinful matters, in my silly judgment, there is no safest
part to be preferred.

Next you positively assert, that in matters of Divine Worship, if the things
used by Idolaters be not necessary, both the abuse and the use also ought to be
abolished. And you say, you cannot understand what else is the meaning of the
Apostle in that his Application of the words found, Psalm. 24. 1. in 1 Cor 10.
28. viz. If any man say unto you, this is offered in Sacrifice unto Idols; Eat
not, for his sake that showed it, and for Conscience sake: For the Earth is the
Lord's and the fullness thereof, etc. That is (you say) you shall not need to
starve, though you do not eat of that meat, etc. To this I answer, that our
Author has freely acknowledged, page 36. That all things of an indifferent
nature, that have formerly been abused to Idolatry, or Superstition, ought to
be taken away by the Governors, whenever they find their People inclined
again so to abuse them: At least, if such abuse cannot probably be prevented by
other means. But our Author utterly denies, that those Rites which our Church
retains, that have been abused, and are still, by the Church of Rome, have
been observed to be any temptation to Idolatry, or to the embracing of Popery.
And therefore there is (upon this supposition) no Argument to be drawn from
that Text, against the Sinfulness of using those Rites: because the Apostle
there forbids the Strong Christian the eating of that meat, which a Weak
Christian shall inform him, was a portion of an Idol-sacrifice, for this
reason, lest he be confirmed in, or betrayed to, the sin of Idolatry by his
example, not rightly understood by him. And consequently this Christian is
supposed to be such a weak one, as would be in danger of making this ill use of
his Example; as being but lately converted from Paganism, and not yet
sufficiently instructed in the precepts of Christianity. It is manifest from
the immediately following verse, that the Apostle forbids the eating of meat
offered to Idols upon this sole account: For saying in the former verse, Eat
not for his sake that showed it, and for Conscience sake, he adds in the
latter, that he means not that he should forbear for the sake of his own
Conscience, but only for the sake of the others Conscience. If therefore you
can prove that these Rites of our Church are Temptations to any of its Members
to go over to the Romish Church, or to commit Idolatry still continuing
therein, you shall be so far from being opposed by our Author, that he will
heartily join with you in endeavoring by all lawful means to have them
abolished; on supposition that the Temptation cannot otherwise be taken away.
But I desire you, by the way, to take notice, that it is not the Design of his
Book (which you could not but see, though you would seem not to see it) to
plead for the continuance of these Rites (as innocent and harmless things at
least as he takes them to be) but only to persuade Dissenters not to separate
from our Church upon the account of such things; and to show that their having
been abused is no just ground for Separation. And, having minded you of this, I
shall not need to tell you, that the other Old Testament Text, which you have
added to those which he has replied to, is alleged very impertinently: which
yet we'll bestow two or three words in answer to.

But first let us see what you reply to what he says to these Texts. You say,
p. 12.
you cannot possibly get leave of your self (considering under what terms of
Divine Abhorrence God every where mentions Idolatry in Holy writ, etc.) to be
of the mind of our Author, that the Texts, Lev. 19. 2. Deuteronomy. 14. 1. Lev. 19.
19. are merely to be understood of things in themselves evil. Nor, by the way,
is our Author of that mind, for he acknowledges, page 27. that the things
forbidden in the last of these places are things of so indifferent a nature,
that none can be more indifferent. But, he asks, where it is said, that these
things were forbidden, because the Heathens used them? And he adds, that
though Maimonides says, that the Egyptians used these Mixtures of Seeds, and
of Linen and Woollen in many of their Magical Exploits, yet it is universally
acknowledged, that these things, among many others, were forbidden to the Jews,
as Mystical instructions in Moral duties. But to this you are perfectly silent.
But why cannot you be of our Author's mind, as to the two other Texts? You say,
The following part of the Chap. Lev. 18. gives some color to interpret that
place of things morally evil; yet, why are they forbidden under the notion of
things done, after the doings of the Egyptians and the Canaanites? I answer,
because they were the doings of those people, whom they were exceedingly prone
to imitate, even their greatest Immoralities: And this is a sufficient Answer.
Then you tell us, Nor is Deuteronomy. 14. 1. or Lev. 19. 8. capable of such a sense.
But our Author says not a word of Lev. 19. 8. for it is verse the 19th that he
speaks to, and (as has been said already) he never says that in this place
the things forbidden are morally evil, but the contrary. But as to those things
forbidden in Deuteronomy. 14. 1. he shows that they are morally evil, nor is your
bare saying, that that place is not capable of such a sense, a confutation of
him.

And now we come to the Text, which you desire your Author to consider, in
these words. p. 12.
But because our Author tells us, he can find no other Texts, that make more,
if so much, for this purpose, I shall desire you, Sir, but to consider Hos. 2.
16, 17. And it shall be at that day says the Lord, that thou shall call me
Ishi, and shall call me no more Baali. For I will take away the names of Baalim
out of her mouth; and they shall no more be remembered by their name. Now upon
this Text you say, That Baali was a very good name; if we consider it in its
self what does it signify more than my Lord? Adonai is of the same
signification, by which name it was never unlawful to call God: But because
the Idol was called Baal, God abhorred it; though he allowed himself to be
called by another name of the same significancy. Nor will I believe our Author
himself owns that it was lawful for the Jews, to apply themselves to God under
the name of Baali. Now because you lay so much weight upon this Text, you shall
have the fuller Answer. And,

1. I say that God does not in the former verse give the Jews a Prohibition no
more to call him Baali, but makes them a gracious Promise that they shall not.
It Is plain by what goes before, that the words are a Promise, viz. by the two
foregoing verses: wherein God promises them to cease from plaguing them for
their Idolatry, (that is, upon their true Repentance) and to give them again
happy days. And then he says, Thou shall call me Ishi, and shall call me no
more Baali. That is, thou shall call me no more by a name of Fear as (...) was,
but by a name of Love as (...) is, this signifying Sponsus Benignus, but that,
Durus and imperiosus Maritus, or Dominus, such as Baal was to his Worshippers;
as the Critics will tell you. Which is as much as to say, there shall no more
be an occasion given you from my severe usage of you, to call me by a name that
signifies, a harsh Lord, or he would not be to them like such a Lord as Baal
was, but he would show them the kindness of a tenderly loving Husband, for the
time to come.

2. It is manifest that God's meaning was not, that they should never use that
word Baal, because Idolaters used it, and an Idol was called by that name; for
then they might not use the name Jah neither, because the Heathens used the
name (...). Nor would God have called himself by the name of Baal, as you will
find he does, Isa. 54. 5. if you consult your Hebrew Bible, as that word
signifies no more than Husband.

3. Whereas it follows in the next verse, For I will take away the names of
Baalim out of her mouth; and they shall no more be remembered by their name. The
following Critics do give such a sense of them as will not in the least favor
your purpose. This is Liveleius's, In the renovation of the Church, Idolatry
shall be abolished. Calvin's is, I will cause my people to cast away all their
Lies, and to be content with the pure Doctrine of my Law. The Exposition of
Vatablus is this, By Baalim God understands the various Images of Baal, which
had various names according to the places wherein they were erected; as there
were many Jupiters among the Heathens. And whereas you say, because the Idol
was called Baal, God abhorred that name, I must needs tell you, that to think
God can abhor a good name merely because of its having been given to an Idol,
speaks a childish notion and opinion of that Infinitely perfect Being.

But after all this, let us suppose that God here forbad the Jews to call
himself for the future by the name of Baal; this will not in the least affect
our Author; for if it were so, it could be only upon the account of their
vehement inclination to the worship of the Idol Baal; and therefore they might
not take his name into their mouths, that so they might not be tempted, by
using it, to worship him again: But our Author has said enough to convince
you, that there is not the least appearance of an Argument to be fetched from
hence, against the lawfulness of our Ceremonies; or to prove, that since they
were used without any Idolatry or Superstition by the Ancient Fathers, before
they were abused by the Apostate Church of Rome, they may not return to their
first use, the Idolatry and Superstition being perfectly removed: and moreover,
no danger arising from the using of them, to the Members of our Church, of
returning to Popery.

But in your p. 13.
next Page, you find fault with our Author for asserting, as he does in his
28th Page; That there is no such inclination in the Members of our Church, to
go over to that of Rome (nor has any such inclination been observed, ever
since the Reformation) as was in the Jews, to the Superstitious and Idolatrous
practices of the Heathens. But need I show you the impertinency of your Answer
to this passage? which is this, that the people now are more devoutly inclined,
I very much doubt; I am sure they had much more reason then than now, to be
averse to it; having more miraculous Operations and extraordinary appearances
of God to them, than we can pretend to. And I am sure the hearts of all are by
nature now, as bad as then. But,

1. Does it argue that our people are more devoutly inclined, than the Jews
were, because they are not so inclined to Idolatry? Men that have nothing of
Devotion in their tempers, may have no inclination at all to some certain
Vices. But I need only to ask you, whether the Turks be a devouter sort of
people than the Jews then were, or whether the Jews be more devout now, than
they were then? because (as every body knows) they both have at present not
only no inclination, but the greatest abhorrence to Idolatry, and so have had
for many ages.

2. What if the Jews had more miraculous Operations among them, etc. does it
thence follow, that we must therefore be necessarily as much inclined to
Idolatry, as they were? why then are not the Turks as much inclined, or the
present Jews, who have no more Miraculous Operations among them, than we have
among us?

3. What though our hearts be as bad by nature, as the hearts of the Ancient
Jews were, must we needs be therefore as much inclined to Idolatry as they
were? Why then, I ask again, are not the hearts of the Turks and Modern Jews as
much inclined thereunto? And yet I fear the hearts of each of these are no
better by nature, than theirs were. But I am almost ashamed to make any reply
to such talk as this. And how, Sir, is it, that you can persuade your self thus
to object, against so plain a matter of fact, as no one can be plainer, or more
indisputable?

But in what follows, you suppose that we have a greater antipathy to Popery
now, than we had formerly, though you do not grant it; and then add, that if
so, you fear the Irish Rebellion, and the Fire of London and other places, have
more contributed to it, than peoples natural inclinations to true Worship; or
aversion from Idolatry. Well, let the cause thereof be what it will, if we have
a greater Antipathy, that is as much as our Author asserted: He did not assign
the Cause of it.

But, I pray, did you observe any greater inclination to Popery before the Fire
of London, than you now observe? Or before the Irish Rebellion either, if you
are so old as to be able so early to make Observations? I may ask too, what
has made the so often mentioned Turks or Modern Jews to be so exceedingly
averse to Idolatry, that the Irish Rebellion, and Fire of London must needs
make us so, and nothing else?

By this time, I hope you need not to be told the reason, which you say you
understand not, why there is not a necessity, for the keeping as wide a
distance between Protestants and Papists, as God appointed should be kept
between the Jews, and the Egyptians. Though I will lay you a wager, you cannot
prove that there is not as great a distance in Rites and Ceremonies between our
Church and the Church of Rome, as there was by Divine Appointment between the
Jews and the Egyptians. And I Will lay you another, that there is a greater than
was by Divine Approbation between the Jews and diverse of the Heathen Nations.

The next Page, viz. the 14th, contains nothing but what has been already
fully answered; or what is so trifling as not to deserve the least
consideration.

In your 15th Page, you say that our Author cannot but know that Calvin, P.
Martyr, and Zanchy, and others of our Famous first Reformers, have said much
more against the retaining unnecessary things abused to Idolatry, than he can
bring to testify any of their Approbation of them. But, in the mean time, I
perceive you are very willing to have it thought, that Mr. Calvin made no bones
of contradicting himself; though we beg your pardon for not believing it, till
you are pleased to cite those passages wherein he does so. Methinks you might
have favored us with one at least, in opposition to those many our Author has
cited. But why should you be so altogether silent too, in the quoting of your
other Authors? But if you had been never so copious herein, except you could
have brought them in pleading for the Lawfulness of Separation upon the account
of the Rites retained in our Church, which are abused by the Papists, you
cannot but be aware that all your Quotations had been nothing to the purpose of
confuting our Author. But you are so far from being able to do this, that you
cannot find them so much as pleading against the Lawfulness of Ministerial
Conformity. But, on the other hand, I presume you need not be told, that diverse
of them have declared their Judgments for it: Nor that Zanchy particularly, at
the same time endeavored to persuade Queen Elizabeth to moderate the urging of
Ceremonies, and to persuade the Ministers not to stand it out against her
Majesty's pleasure, if she could not be prevailed with. And this he says he
did by the advice of his Prince, and many Ministers.

You proceed to tell us, That our Famous Reformers by the Spirit of Prophecy
have lamented the probable future state (you should have said the certain
future state, if they were acted by the Spirit of Prophecy) of those Churches,
that have retained any Nest Eggs belonging to those Old Birds. What Religion is
come to the Saxon, and diverse other Lutheran Churches, we need not tell our
Author; what is coming among us, time will show. But no considerative man needs
to be told, Sir, that if we should be so miserable as to have Popery again
prevail in this Kingdom, we are not to thank our Liturgy, or our Rites and
Ceremonies for it, as the true cause thereof, but our as Unreasonable as
Unchristian Divisions, and our being crumbled into so many Sects and Parties,
which have extremely weakened our Church; which, were she as a City united
within her self, would still be, no doubt, as impregnable a Bulwark against the
Assaults of the Romanists as she has (God be thanked) hitherto been. And for
this reason alone, though these Divisions tended to no other Mischief (as
several other great and lamentable ones are produced by them) I would not for
all the world fall under the guilt of having contributed to them, by instilling
such prejudices into the minds of people as might cause them to withdraw from
the Communion of our Church, and embody themselves in separate Congregations.

Page 15. You next reply to what our Author says in reference to Hezekiah's
breaking in pieces the Brazen Serpent, in his 35th Page. And whereas he says,

1. That it was not only a thing defiled in Idolatrous Services, but was made
an Idol it self. You reply, but no more than the Cross, or the Picture of the
Virgin Mary, is at this day made by the Papists. I answer, do you show, if you
can, what Papists have made an Idol of an Aerial Sign of the Cross. And as to
the Picture of the Virgin Mary, is that one of our Ceremonies?

2. Our Author says that the Brazen Serpent was at that time actually used as
an Idol. You reply, So is the Cross by the Papists. But is this an Answer? You
know the only pertinent Answer would have been, that it is made use of as an
Idol by Church of England-men, as the Brazen Serpent was by Jews. But this is
so far from being true, that there is no Cross used among us, that was ever
made an Idol, or Object of Worship, by the Papists.

3. Our Author says, That the Jews were generally lapsed into this Idolatry.
You reply, so are the Papists universally. But if you would speak to the
purpose, you should have said, and proved, that so are Church of England-men,
either universally or generally.

4. Our Author says, that there was little hope of reclaiming the Jews any
other way. You say, there is as little hope of reclaiming the Papists from
their Idolatry of the Cross. But I will not a third time repeat the same
Answer. Only I will ask whether there be any hope of reclaiming the Papists
from their Idolatry by our laying aside our Ceremonies?

5. Our Author says, that although the Brazen Serpent had been a thing only
defiled in Idolatrous Services, yet we freely grant, that it ought to have been
destroyed, or removed out of the peoples sight, if the continuance of it in
their view were like to be a snare to them, and a temptation to Idolatry. You
reply, may not the like be said of what Dissenters plead against? But you have
been already told, that the like may not be said, with any color or show of
reason.

6. Our Author says. That if Hezekiah had let it stand, private persons might
have made use of it, to put them in mind of the wonderful mercy of God,
expressed by it to their Forefathers. This you acknowledge, but say, that the
Question at present under our debate is, whether Hezekiah might lawfully have
let it stand, and removed it into the Temple? whether his setting it up by the
Ark, or Mercy Seat would have purged it? But for shame, Sir, do not say that
this is the Question in debate between us.

In your 16th Page, you express very great offense, at those next words of our
Author, page 36. And much more might they have lawfully continued in the
Communion of the Church, so long as there was no constraint laid upon them, to
join with them in their Idolatry. But you leave out what follows, viz. as we do
not read of any that separated from the Church, while the Brazen Serpent was
permitted to stand, as woefully abused, as it was, by the Generality. And do you
find that the pious Jews did separate upon this account? Or if they did not,
will you say that they were guilty of Sin? For my part, I dare not say so; nor
that it would be a sin now, not to separate from our Church, though our
Governors were so remiss as not to Excommunicate Idolaters, if such were found
therein; any more than it is so, upon the account of Promiscuous Congregations,
and Mixed Communions: As the Worthy person that published the Resolution of that
case, has clearly proved, and proved too that it is Unlawful to separate upon
that pretense. But you say, you can never believe this, till some can prove to
you, that a Wife may lawfully, contrary to the command of her Husband, stay in
a Family of Whoremongers, provided that she be not compelled to play the Whore.
I answer, that a Wife may not lawfully, though her Husband has not expressly
forbidden it, stay in a Family consisting wholly of Whoremongers, except to
bear her Husband company, and in that case it is her duty to stay. But where
has Christ forbidden us to Communicate with a Church out of which Idolaters
are not ejected, though Idolatry be not enjoined. You say he has done it in
those words, Rev. 18. 4. -- Come out of her my people, but I pray read on, and
you have an answer, that ye be not partaker of her sins, and that ye receive
not (viz. by partaking of her sins) of her plagues? And moreover, I presume you
will acknowledge, that the Babylon which the Christians were commanded to come
out of, is the Idolatrous Church of Rome: But I need not acquaint you, that you
cannot continue in this Church, except you will your self also be an Idolater.

But I will not stand to dispute this point with you, it being nothing to the
business of our Author's Book; and all he asserts as to this matter, does
amount to no more than this, That we are not obliged to renounce Communion in
pure Ordinances, with such as we know to be guilty of Idolatry, when it lies
not in our power to keep them away.

And now you have brought me to our Author's Third Head of Discourse, viz. That
the Agreement which is between the Church of England, and the Church of Rome,
is in no wise such, as will make Communion with the Church of England unlawful.

You say, Page 17th, That if our Author had said all Communion, (viz. with the
Church of England) is not unlawful, you had fully concurred with him;
believing that this Church cannot be justly charged with Idolatry, and that
some Communion may, and ought to be held with any Church that is not so
charged. If you mean by some Communion, a not being divided in heart, as you
before express it, I say again, we thank you for nothing; the Communion which
our Author pleads for, being (as your self observes in your first Page.)
chiefly Communion in Worship. But you proceed, saying, but as he has laid it,
I cannot agree with it. I am sure Christ had Communion with the Jewish Church,
and I believe he had so, in all acts of worship of his Father's Institution,
and I am as sure he had no Communion with them in the Traditional part of their
worship, as I am, that he would not himself practice, what he condemned so
severely. But are you not as sure that our Blessed Lord had Communion with the
Jewish Church, in all acts of worship instituted by his Father, as you are that
he had no Communion with them in the Traditional part of their Worship? I am
sure, that in the former part of that saying you are too too cautious, and in
the latter not so cautious as you ought to have been: For you may be sure of
the contrary to what you affirm so positively, when you have considered, that
our Lord could not have so freely been admitted into the Temple, had he not
observed diverse Traditions or Canons of the Elders, without complying with
which none might come thither. I shall not stand to instance in particulars,
but refer you to Dr. Leightfoot's Temple Service, page 115. to 120. And again,
you may yet be more sure of the contrary, when you have considered, how our
Lord complied with Jewish Traditions, in the celebration of the Passover; and
such too as altered certain circumstances prescribed in its First Institution.
Particularly, his ordering the Preparation of the Lamb on the 14th day, when
Moses ordained the taking of it up upon the 10th day. His eating the Passover
lying along, being the posture in which they ate their ordinary Meals,
according to a Jewish Tradition, as you may see in Dr. Leightfoot's foresaid
Book, page 143, 144. whereas, according to Moses his Institution, it was to be
eaten with their Loins girded, etc. and in haste, or standing. His complying
with the Jewish customs of drinking Wine at the Passover, and concluding with
the Hallel, or a Hymn. And not these only but more Traditions than these, Dr.
Leightfoot will satisfy you, were conformed to by our Blessed Savior.

But you say Christ condemned severely the Jewish Traditions: But I say, he did
not at all condemn all Jewish Traditions, and none but such as by which they
made the Commandments of God of none effect: And such as they placed special
Holiness in, and necessary to acceptance with God; as is too evident to need my
standing to prove it. And, Sir, when you can prove that our Ceremonies are like
to those condemned Traditions, I will undertake that our Author shall be as
zealous against complying with them, as he is now against separation from our
Church upon the account of them.

But to go on, whereas our Author says, of Episcopal Government and the three
other following things, page 38. That he takes it for granted that there is
nothing of Viciousness or Immorality in any of them, to make them Unlawful;
and therefore that they are indifferent in their own nature. You reply, page
18. That there are few things to be named unlawful in this sense. I answer,
there are as many things unlawful in this sense, as there are things
prohibited by the Moral Law, and if you please to consult our Expositors of the
Decalogue, I presume you will find those things not a few.

You say at the bottom of this 18th Page, That it troubles you to read your
Author saying, I know not how our Brethren will defend the Apostolical
Institution of the Observation of the Lord's day, while they contend that this
of Episcopacy cannot be concluded from the uninterrupted Tradition of the
Catholic Church, etc. And why, I pray, Sir, does this trouble you? You give
this reason why, viz. Because certainly, for the Apostolical practice in the
Observation of the Lord's day, we have the infallible evidence of Holy
Scripture, Acts 20. 1 Cor. 16. But you must prove that we have in those
Scriptures, or some other, infallible evidence for the Apostolical Institution
of the Observation of the Lord's day, and not for the mere Apostolical
practice, or you will say nothing to the purpose. But to save my self the
labor of saying more upon this Argument, and of replying to those few lines
that follow against the Primitiveness of our Episcopacy, I entreat you to
consult Mr. Chillingworth's Apostolical Institution of Episcopacy demonstrated,
together with the most Learned Dean of St Paul's his Ample Proof of these two
Propositions, in his Unreasonableness of Separation, p. 244, etc. viz. First,
that our Diocesan Episcopacy is the same for substance which was in the
Primitive Church. And Secondly, That it is not repugnant to any Institution of
Christ, nor devising a new species of Churches without God's Authority.

As to what you say, p. 19. about Liturgies, viz. that they cannot be
indifferent, if indeed (as our Author speaks) they be highly expedient to be
universally imposed, yea necessary. I reply, you have not caught him in a
Contradiction, as you think; for his saying concerning Liturgies, etc. page 38.
is, That he takes it for granted, that they are all indifferent in their own
nature. And tells you what he means by those words, in the next; viz. that
there is nothing of viciousness or immorality in any of them, etc. Now is it a
contradiction to say of the same thing, that it is indifferent in its own
nature, and that it is necessary considering certain circumstances? And I
farther say, that Liturgies are necessary, considering, that through humane
Weakness and Frailty, the performance of public worship with that Solemnity
and Gravity, which it calls for, cannot be secured; and yet notwithstanding
they are still things in their own nature indifferent; and so are all those
things too which God 's Positive Laws have made necessary; as all know who
understand the difference between Moral and Positive.

But as to the Antiquity of Liturgies, which you say our Author knows to be
denied, you have had a good while extant that Discourse which he said was
expected, and which you say you will patiently wait for, to give you
satisfaction, about this matter. And it is excellently fitted (as I hope you
have before now found) not only for the satisfying of Dissenters about that
point relating to Liturgies, but diverse others also.

In your next Paragraph, you tell us, that all Divines will readily
acknowledge, that such a Method and Order of a Liturgy, as is not contrived in
Subserviency to the 3 General Rules, of Doing all to Edification, the Glory of
God, and not giving offense to any of the Churches of God, may make it
unlawful. And I also do readily acknowledge this, and am confident that you
cannot prove, that Ours is not so contrived as to be made not Subservient unto
those Rules. And as to the last of them, whatsoever Churches please to take
offense at our Liturgy, I am sure it gives no offense to them.

In what follows you profess, that you never thought it unlawful for any
Laick, wholly to separate from the Church of England, because of our Liturgy
(and I hope you think it no more Lawful for a Clergyman) nor did your self
ever so separate. But for all that, you know that many hundreds and I fear some
thousands do. But you say, there is a new Generation started up, that not only
makes you a Separatist, but all Conformable Ministers, if they do not every
time read the Second Service at the Altar. This in good earnest, is somewhat a
hard Case; but I pray Sir, by what figure do you call one Start-up Warm Head a
new Generation?

In your next Paragraph, page 20. You say, Our Author has spied four little
Thorns in some Dissenters Flesh, which he has very charitably endeavored to
pick out. And you add, that you will heartily enquire if no bit of them remain
which may cause pain, and hinder healing. To make no reflection, Sir, upon your
expressing your self thus phancifully, your meaning must be, that you will
enquire whether our Author has not well defended the four things in our
Liturgy, which Dissenters object against as symbolizings with the Roman
Service, from being liable to just Offense: Of which,

The First is, The shortness of many Prayers. But you say not one word in
answer to what he speaks in the Vindication thereof: But tell us, that if some
Dissenters think that throughout the Scriptures there is nothing like this to
be found, either in the Prayers of Solomon, etc. or any others, and be a little
stumbled at it, you cannot condemn them: But you must needs condemn it as an
error in them, to think there are no short Prayers to be found in the Holy
Scriptures, when there are many more short, than there are long Prayers: When
our Savior used in the Garden thrice, a shorter Prayer than is any one in our
Service: And when the Form he left behind him for our use is a very short one.
But if the using of a short Prayer be not the thing blamed, but the using of
several such in the same Service, instead of one very long one, I must take
leave to say, this is mere Wantonness. And whereas you say, you cannot condemn
Dissenters, if they be a little stumbled at it; I say, to be stumbled at it so,
as to make it one pretense for not joining with us in our Prayers, is not to be
a little stumbled at it. And you know that that which our Author is concerned
to do is, to persuade Dissenters not to be so much stumbled at any thing in
our Prayers, as to leave our Communion upon the account thereof. Though he
would be very glad to have them so well pleased with all of them, as not to be
in the least stumbled at any of them.

The Second instance is, The Peoples bearing a part with the Minister in Divine
Service. And whereas our Author has thought it enough to transcribe what Mr.
Baxter has said in five particulars, to vindicate both the Lawfulness and
Fitness hereof; you reply not one word to any of them. But you think you have
balanced (as your word is) those five with five of your own. 1. You say, These
Responses do not suit the gravity and solemnity of Divine Worship. But we say
they do; and our yea is as good as your nay. 2. You say, many read false
oftentimes. And whose fault is it, if they do? But it appears from what is
coming, that you cannot prove it. 3. You say, Many Children and Girls,
understand not what they do. And therefore why do you permit them to join in
Singing? And why do you suffer them to hear Sermons? 4. Those that cannot read,
you say, are not edified in a confused noise, not being able to understand what
is read. And then I hope you might have spared your second particular; for
those that read falsely cannot then be observed so to do in this confused
noise. 5. You say, Many lewd and profane persons, are thus made to bear their
share in the Ministerial part of Public Worship, etc. But do you prove that
this is bearing a share in that part of Public Worship which is proper and
peculiar to the Minister; and then we will grant that not only no profane men,
but no Laymen neither, be they never so good, may have their part therein. 6.
You say, There is no such practice in the Churches of God, in New England,
Scotland, France, Holland, etc. Do you think that our Author has taken the
Solemn League and Covenant, that you urge such an Argument as this to him? If
you do, you are much mistaken, Sir. But Mr. Baxter tells you, in his fifth
particular, That it was the decay of zeal in the people that first shut out the
Responses: And therefore those Churches you mention should do well to imitate
ours in this particular. I am constrained, Sir, to tell you again, that I am
ashamed of taking any notice of such talk as this.

The Third instance is, The taking of some of the Collects out of the Missal.
You say you wish our Author had told us how many. But I say, it is not worth the
knowing (if it were I could soon tell you) if those that are taken thence are
all good ones. And (considering what has been said) this is a sufficient
Answer. Remember our Author has told you, that our Departure from the Church
of Rome, was designed to be a Reformation, not a total Destruction and
Extirpation. And I suppose the zeal of some Reformers that hurried them upon
making no discrimination between things faulty, and those that were innocent,
occasioned that honest saying of Zanchy's, which I have heretofore somewhere
met with, viz. Non intelligo istam Reformatorum Mundi Theologiam.

As to that which follows to the last Paragraph of page 23 d. Enough abundantly
has already been said to satisfy you that you might have spared it. Only let
me once for all tell you, that whereas both here and elsewhere, you insist upon
our being at perfect liberty as to the using or not using those unnecessary
things, wherein we symbolize with the Church of Rome; you ought to know that
while they are Enjoined, we who are under Government are not at liberty; as the
Christians in the Apostles days were, as to the Eating of Meats, etc. And
whereas you touch here upon the topic of Scandal, I can not hope to satisfy
you about this Point; if the two late judicious Resolutions of that Case cannot
do it: To which I refer you, and ought so to do, it not falling within our
Author's Undertaking.

The Fourth instance is, The Appointing of Lessons out of the Apocryphal Books.
And what you say under this head, amounts to thus much, that you think it were
better if they were not appointed. And therefore I perceive you are not for
making this a Pretense for Separation, and Consequently you can have no
controversy with our Author about it. Whether it were better or not, that we
should imitate the Primitive Church in reading them now and then on Holy Days
and ordinary Weekdays, merely for Example of life, and instruction of Manners,
but not for the Establishing of any Doctrine, let it be left to our Superiors
to judge. But though you have a greater latitude than many other Dissenters, as
to this matter, yet you say that all should not be forced out of their wits,
nor made to do what, they cannot, as well as you, apprehend lawful. No, God
forbid, that any one should be forced out of his wits upon such an account. But
whom can you name that has had the least trouble given him, for not being at
Church on a Weekday Holy Day?

But I must take notice of one more passage, before I proceed, viz. Holy Days
are the same with Sabbath Days, with those who judge that there is nothing but
Tradition for either. Here is a good Wipe for our Author. But I pray, Sir, did
he say that there is nothing but Tradition for the Observation of the Sabbath?
He said that indeed, page 40th, from whence it may be inferred, that he
believes that the Apostolical institution of the Observation of the Lord's day,
is wholly to be gathered from the uninterrupted Tradition or Practice of the
Catholic Church; and is that such a small matter to found it upon? When it is
the foundation on which is built the Canon of the Holy Scriptures. But who are
they that tell you, that from the Uninterrupted Tradition of the Catholic
Church may be gathered the Apostolical institution of the Other Holy Days? Name
any one if you are able that so says, or that says that they are of
Apostolical institution.

Now we are come to those particular Rites and Ceremonies of our Church, in
which our Author says, page 45. Our symbolizing with Popery is so much
condemned. And you say, page 24th. that he observes in the general,

1. That our Ceremonies are not the hundredth part (you should have added
scarcely) of those used by the Papists. And this you grant; but you add, that
we may as well Symbolize in thirty as in three. But I must make bold to tell
you, you never uttered a more inconsiderative saying. It seems then, it is no
matter how many Ceremonies are used in Divine Worship, so they be all innocent.
I am sure St. Augustine was not of this mind. But it may be you will say there are
none innocent. But if so, you cannot say that we may as well use thirty as
three: Because the thirty must necessarily be a great hindrance to that
attention of mind that Divine Worship calls for; but he must have a Weak head
indeed, whose mind must needs be diverted by three.

2. Our Author says, that our Church imposes them not, as the other does, on
the Consciences of her Members, as things of Necessity, as parts of Religion or
meritorious Services. And you need not one word more of Answer to what you
object against this than you have had already given you, viz. page 6.

In your 25th. page, you begin, as our Author does, with the Ceremony of the
Surplice; and

1. You say, he rightly observes that all are not obliged to wear it. And this
is sagaciously indeed observed by him, if he does observe it; but he only
says, that he cannot imagine why those who are not obliged to wear it, should
be affrighted from our Churches, by the mere sight of so innocent a thing, as
he before had proved it to be, as it is used in our Church; but showed it is
far from being an innocent thing, as it is used in the Church of Rome.

2. You say, that you are not scandalized at the sight of it. But for all that,
you know that not a few Dissenters do profess to be so.

3. You say, that you are not sure, that they use a Garment of the same form in
the Church of Rome; though they use some Garment of the same Color; so that
you doubt, whether in that we do symbolize with the Church of Rome or no. I was
in good hope when I had read thus far, that there would have been no
Controversy between you and our Author about this Ceremony. But I presently
found my self mistaken; for

4. You make us notwithstanding faultily to symbolize with the Church of Rome,
in that we will not suffer this Garment to be worn but in Acts of Worship. So
that, you say, it is neither merely for necessity, nor natural decency, nor
Ornament, nor for distinction. But I say that this Garment is required, both
for Ornament and Distinction. You say it is not required for either, because
all Ministers wear it not at other times. But I deny your Consequence; for it
is required as an Ornamental Garment in Divine Worship, and for distinction
between a Minister officiating and not officiating. You may as well say that
for the same reason, the Judges Scarlet is neither for Ornament nor
Distinction. And seeing it is such an Offense that this Garment should be
appropriated to Divine Worship, I desire you, Sir, at your Leisure to answer
our Famous Hooker's Question, viz. To solemn Actions of Royalty and Eccl. pol.
Book 5th. p. 228. Last Edit.
Justice, their suitable Ornaments are a Beauty; are they only in Religion a
Stain? Time was when putting on a Gown merely for the Desk and Pulpit was
accounted no Offense by Nonconforming Ministers, and consequently they did not
then espy any Unlawfulness, in appropriating a Garment to Religious exercises.
Nor do we place one jot more holiness in a Surplice than in a Gown, or Cloak
either. But you say, may not jealousies of some homage by it intended to God,
and such thoughts, as those you suggested, arise in weaker Christians? I
answer, whether these thoughts may arise in them or no, you take as effectual a
course as you can that they should arise in them. And as for Homage intended to
God by wearing the Surplice, I don't think any Christians so weak as to fancy
such a thing, if you and others would but let them alone, and not fill their
heads with objections against innocent things, when you might employ your time
with them to infinitely better purpose. I pray, Sir, be not offended if I once
for all freely tell you, that by your possessing these weak Christians with all
imaginable objections against the Lawfulness of obeying Governors in things
which are made by your selves doubtful to them, and not with one Objection
against the Unlawfulness of Disobedience in doubtful matters; is the way to
make them everlastingly weak, and to make them worse than weak too. It saddens
the hearts of not a few good people to observe, that the fearful consequents
of such doings have not yet made you sensible whose interest you have all along
served, by the means of them.

You next object three things against the Ceremony of the Cross in Baptism,
page 26.

1. You say, it is an adding to the Divine Institution unnecessarily. I answer
we add nothing to Divine Institution. I mean we add nothing more to Baptism, or
any other Ordinance, as of Divine Institution, than your selves do. And as to
the Vnnecessariness of this Ceremony: if it were necessary it would be no
Ceremony, at least no humane one. If you mean there is no necessity of imposing
it. It is enough for a Ceremony that it is imposed for good and profitable ends
and uses: And our Church tells you for what ends and uses this of the Cross is
required, in the 30th Canon. If you mean there is no necessity of using it, now
it is imposed: I beg your pardon for being of a contrary opinion, till you
prove it to be a Transgression of any law of God: And when you have done this,
I will grant that it is necessary not to use it.

2. You say, we attribute to the sign of the Cross, more than is truly due to
it, as the Papists do. But we say, we do not, and shall persist in saying so,
till you prove we do.

3. You say, that to expound Dedicated in the Canon by Declared (you should
have said declared to be dedicated) is a Catachrestical use of the word. What
care I for that, if the word ought so to be expounded. You say, you will take
no private Doctor's word for it, though greater than Dr. Burges. But you cannot
otherwise understand that word, except you will make our Church to speak
contradictions in that Canon.

There is nothing you object, or I think can object, against the Ceremony of
Kneeling at the Communion, but you may find most satisfactorily answered in the
Learned Resolution of the Case of Kneeling, etc. But yet we will not wholly
pass by what you say against it. Having called the Declaration of our Church
concerning it, an excellent Declaration, page 26th, you say, page 27th, that it
may be it satisfies you, abstracting your thoughts from the Bread, while you
are upon your Knees: And he that cannot, with the greatest ease in the world,
abstract his thoughts from the Bread, must be almost starved with fasting. But,
it follows, if all cannot be so satisfied, shall they therefore be Ruined for
their doubt in this thing? You shall have no new answer to this, besides asking
you this Question, if there be any danger of Ruin in this case, who are most
charitable to these Doubters, those that do their utmost to satisfy them,
that they may not come near the danger, or those that use their utmost
endeavors to make all means unsuccessfull, that are used for their
Satisfaction?

I must needs take notice also of your pleasant answer to this passage in our
Author, page 49. viz. That there being nothing said of the Gesture in our
Savior's Institution of this Sacrament, he has consequently left the
particular Gesture to the Determination of the Church; a Gesture being in the
general necessary. Your answer is, Our Savior bad his Disciples Baptize, but
says nothing of Water, nor from what Fountain or River; has he therefore left
it to the Churches determination; that Ministers shall Baptize only with
Rose Water, or Water fetched from the River? Truly, Sir, a smile is the best
Reply that is due to this. But do you in sober sadness then think, that nothing
is left by Christ to the Churches Determination, neither place, nor time, nor
any other Circumstance? If this be not wild Fanaticism, there is no such thing
in nature; and I know you will acknowledge it. But if the Church may determine
the place of public worship, and the times of day when to meet, because our
Lord has not determined such particulars; why may not the Church determine
particular Gestures, when they are not by him determined? And can you think,
Sir, that it is well done after this manner to Ridicule the Church's Power?
No, I know you cannot think so, and therefore this was an hasty Slip from your
Pen, which you will not upon Second thoughts justify.

You say at the Bottom of this page, That you do not think what our Author
mentions, page 50. of the Ring in Marriage worth the speaking to: Because
Dissenters generally believe the Ring a Civil Pledge, etc. I wish they
universally thought so, and if they do not (as time was when you know they did
not) I know not why you should add, that How it comes into our debate you
cannot tell.

Next you spend the best part of two pages upon our Holy Days, which is our
Author's last instance of Rites which Dissenters are offended with, upon the
account of our Symbolizing in them with the Church of Rome. And

1. You say, That it is God's Prerogative alone to make a day Holy, i. e. such
as it shall be sinful for any to labor in. But do you think that God 's
Vicegerents have not power given them to set apart days to a holy use? And in
any other sense we do not think that any day is capable of being made Holy.
It Is manifest from what follows, that you do not think so. And if you do not,
can you think that our Governors have no power to forbid ordinary Labor upon
those days, which they have so set apart? And if they have this power, can you
think it lawful to disobey those laws of theirs, that prohibit working on
those days? And, if this be not lawful, then I fear it is Sinful.

2. You say, That God's Revelation of his Will for solemn Praises upon the
Receipt of Signal Mercies; or solemn Prayers in times of great Distress,
justifies Magistrates, or Churches in setting apart in such Cases, Days for
Praise and Prayers. Then, I hope, the Magistrates or the Church, have power to
make a day Holy; and Consequently, they may forbid opening of Shops, and
Ordinary labor, on such a day: And therefore it is sinful to disobey them
herein.

3. You say, That all such days ought to be entirely spent in Religious
Exercises. But notwithstanding you are so dogmatical, in this thing, I am
Confident upon second thoughts you will acknowledge you were too rash: For you
cannot really think what you assert with such Confidence, except you can find
in your heart to reprove Ringing of Bells, and innocent Recreations after
Sermon, on the Fifth of November, as Profanations of that Holy Day. And I hope
we may make bold to call that day a Holy Day; it being so according to your own
Concession in the foregoing particular.

4. You say, That to spend an hour of such a Day in Prayer, and all the rest in
Idleness, Drinking, Revelling, Gaming, etc. is not to keep a Holy but a
Licentious Day. No body doubts this: But are you obliged by our Church so to
spend Her Holy Days? And if you are not, but may keep them as strictly as you
please, what a strange objection is this against the lawfulness of observing
them!

5. You say, That there is no need of keeping any such days, in Commemoration
of the Birth, Death, Resurrection or Ascension of Christ; because God has
appointed fifty two, every year for that purpose. I answer, if you mean by no
need, that there is no absolute necessity of the Churches setting apart days
for the Commemoration of Christ 's Birth, Death, etc. we will perhaps grant it;
but what then? Does it thence follow that the well observing such days does not
tend to our Edification, to the more building us up in our holy Faith, and
increase in Holiness? you dare not say or think so. But I say farther, that the
well observing them is of admirable use. And nothing would tend more to our
Growth in all the Christian Virtues, than besides the general Meditation on the
Birth, Death, Resurrection and Ascension of our Lord every Lord's day, to set
days apart for the particular Meditation on Each of these Grand Mysteries of
our Religion: There being in each of them more than enough to employ a whole
day in admiring thoughts of it, and in praises to God for it, and in making
Applications of it to our Spiritual Advantage. And therefore I am certain, you
would spend your pains to far better purpose, if instead of prejudicing Peoples
minds against the observance of such days, you would Excite them (like the good
Fathers of the Primitive Church) to the well observing, and making the best
improvement of them. The generality, God knows, of Professors of Christianity,
are too too carelessly and irreligiously disposed of themselves, to need to be
dissuaded from the using of any helps to their being made more devout, and
better People. And where there is one among us that is apt to be too
superstitiously inclined, I fear there are some hundreds, who are more inclined
to the other Extreme, that of profaneness. But our Author has sufficiently
showed, that the Popish Superstitions are perfectly removed by our Church from
the Observation of Holy Days. And no man that observes them as our Church
directs, can have the least temptation from the Observance of them to be
superstitious.

6. You say, That to keep a day Holy to any Saint, is to make an Idol of that
Saint. And do you think our Church in her Festivals, designs keeping Days holy
to Saints? if you do not think so, why are you thus impertinent? But if you do,
then you declare that she makes Idols of Saints. And if so, why did you page
17th declare it, as your belief, that the Church of England cannot be justly
charged with Idolatry? But I think, that the making an Idol of a Saint, is
idolatry.

7. You say, That to keep a Day of Thanksgiving, for blessing the world with
such a Saint, is what God has no where prescribed; what neither the Jews, nor
Christians, in the first times ever did. So that it seems you are not so
ignorant, as you now seemed to make your self; but, do know why many of our
Festivals receive their names from certain Saints. And why may we not, on
certain Days, meet together, to praise God for blessing the world with such
Saints, as have been next to our Blessed Lord, the most Glorious instruments of
good to the world; and at the same time hear those Chapters read wherein their
worthy deeds are recorded; and together with other Prayers put in one, for
grace to follow those blessed Examples of a holy Life (of both active and
passive Obedience) which they have, through the Divine grace, left behind them?
What Sin is there in all this? Nay, why should not this highly become us, and
be of singular advantage to us?

You give two reasons why this is unlawful. 1. Because God has no where
prescribed it. But must we be at this time of day, told that nothing is lawful
relating to the Worship of God, but what is expressly commanded; when the
Idleness and Folly of that Doctrine, has been over and over exposed as it has
been? But 2dly you say, That this is that which the Jews, nor Christians in the
first times never did. But, if you mean by the First times, the times of the
Apostles, it is more than you can prove, that the Martyrdom of St. Stephen was
never solemnly commemorated by the Christians in their time. And I presume you
would not have had the Martyrdoms of the Apostles commemorated, before they
were Martyred, what if this be not recorded, is it therefore a certain Argument
that it never was? You find not I think the Martyrdom of any one of the
Apostles recorded in holy Scripture, except St. James's. But if you mean by the
first times, the Primitive times, I perceive you never read, or have forgotten,
The Epistle of the Church of Smyrna, concerning Policarp's Martyrdom. But I
hope it needs not to be proved to you, that the Catholic Church observed
Martyrum Natalitia, the Days whereon they were crowned with Martyrdom, even
from the Second Century: But where do you find it prescribed in God's word, or
recorded that it was practiced in the Apostles times (for to be sure you mean
those by the First times) to praise God for the good Examples of Holy men,
among other great Blessings, is it therefore unlawful so to do, as well as to
do it upon Set Days? You will not assert so absurd a thing. In short, Sir,
think not that we need either Precepts or Examples, to justify our doing of
that, which the very Light of Nature, and Right Reason, do plainly declare to
us, to be, though not a necessary duty, yet highly becoming us, and
praiseworthy. And we are certain that it is dictated thereby to be highly
becoming us, to commemorate, at Annual Selected times, the unspeakable Goodness
of God to us in giving us such Shining Lights as the Holy Apostles, etc. and to
meditate upon Christ glorified in them, who with admirable courage first
preached and propagated his Gospel in the World, and with admirable Patience,
for the sake thereof, endured the greatest of Miseries and Calamities, and at
last Sealed it with their Blood.

8. You say, But if Devout persons will set apart Days, (you might have said
too, will observe Days set apart by the Church) to give God thanks for any
signal mercies (among which I think, every Apostle is a most signal one) or to
put up Prayers for any people in distress, provided they do not mock God, in
giving him an holy hour, instead of an holy day, and spend the rest of the day
in Idleness, Gaming, Drinking, etc. (And can you think that any of our Devout
people, do not abhor such practices as much as you?) Dissenters will never
blame, or condemn them for it. I hoped you would have said, they will join with
us, since Authority requires it.

9. You say, Finally Dissenters will never separate from the Church of England,
for the true keeping of a day holy to God, etc. Yes surely they will, if it be
a Saint's day at least, as one would think by what you have said. But you add,
that they will separate from the Looseness and commonly practiced Profanation
of it (and so do thousands of those that are no Dissenters, I hope) or such as
were only so, in the Pope's Calendar, as St. George, etc. Now you would, Sir,
again feign your self more ignorant than you are; for, no doubt, you know as
well as we, that St. George his day is no Church of England Holy Day. And for
all your [etc.] you cannot but know too, that Our Church has no Festival-days
called by any Saints names, but such as all Christians own for the Greatest of
Saints, except those Innocents who had the honor to suffer for Christ's sake,
before they were of age to know him. We have indeed a Fast Day, occasioned by
the Horrid Murder of King Charles the Martyr, whom we deservedly honor as a
Great Saint. But I never heard that this Saint stands in the Pope's Calendar,
and I Will warrant you never shall. We should be glad to hear, that He stands in
yours; however we hope He will never be blotted out of ours.

And now, having done with our Author, you spend a good part of your five last
Pages in such discourse, as is so far from tending to the composing of our
Differences, and healing our wide and most dangerous Breaches, that it has the
most apparent tendency to the making them irreparable beyond all Remedy. And
it is enough to convince all sober people, that the cause of those that separate
is desperate, to observe what strange principles are taken up of late in the
defense of Separation; even such as the Old Non-conformists would have thought
very wild ones, serving no better purpose than the Unhinging of all. And those,
Sir, which you here lay down so dogmatically not offering any proof of them,
you shall find most shamefully baffled by the Dean of St. Paul's, in his
forementioned excellent Book.

For my part, I am too much tryred with Scribbling thus long, to take into
consideration this close of your Book, farther than reflecting upon two or
three passages; though I am not at all obliged to take notice of those neither,
as a Defender of our Author. And indeed (to deal like a plain-hearted Friend
with you) it was but the other day before I could be persuaded to think it
needful to Reply at all.

You say, page 31. That Separation in these three Cases is Lawful, if not
Necessary.

Your First case is, When such errors are in the Constitution of a Church, as,
if they had been known before, ought to have hindered Union with it. But you do
not tell us what Errors those are. Would you have your Readers take it for
granted, that there are such Errors in the Constitution of the Church of
England? But we may guess at one of those Errors in our Constitution, from
that which you say, page 30. viz. That Governing Churches must have proper
Officers, which cannot be, unless elected by the Governed; who could never part
with their Right in choosing Officers, etc. But what Right they have you will
soon learn from the Reverend Dean Stillingfleet, in his Unreasonableness of
Separation, page 307, etc. There you will find they have no Right at all, or I
am much mistaken. From what you say in these two Pages, and that which follows
(in which your discourse is such, that it is hard to say certainly what you
would be at) I shrewdly conjecture, that you believe it Lawful to separate
from the Church of England, although she had neither Ceremonies nor Liturgy to
scare men away.

Your Second case is, When a Church is turned Idolatrous; that then it is
necessary to depart from it. And here we have no Controversy.

Your Third is, When a Church will not admit a man's abiding in it, unless he
will do something which his Conscience tells him is sinful. But, Sir, will
you not acknowledge, that it cannot justify our Separation that something is
required which we judge sinful, whilst we will not impartially use all means
for the duly informing of our judgments: whilst we call it a running into
Temptation, to read what is offered us in Defense of the Lawfulness of that, we
have a prejudice against: Whilst we so confide in our own judgments, or in the
judgments of our Party, as not to bear to hear that it is possible we should be
mistaken? Surely all truly good men will acknowledge this.

You say, in all these Cases Separating is Lawful, if not Necessary: For in
the two first Cases we ought to Separate (And then I hope in those cases it is
Necessary and not only Lawful to Separate) in the last we may prudently and
warily depart, etc. And why do you so mince the matter, by changing your
phrase, when your meaning is that you may Separate? And why do you so mince it
too in saying, in the two first Cases we ought to Separate? which supposes
that in this Case you are at your Liberty, and that, though you may lawfully
Separate yet it is not a necessary duty so to do. And why again do you say, we
judge this no sinful Separation? Why don't you speak out and say it is a
Necessary one? Except you think that a man may lawfully act against his
Conscience. But you have given me sufficient assurance in your Book, that this
you do not think.

You say, page 33. If any others in former Ages, or in our own, have had any
other apprehensions of the significancy (you would have said signification) of
the Terms, Church, Schism and Separation, whom we own to have been Holy and
Excellent men, till we see their Notions justified from Holy Writ (which alone
can determine these things) we must crave leave to dissent from them, and
believe that had they lived in our times, they would have dissented from their
own Apprehensions under a more perfect light, etc. But

1. What would you have said to us, if we had given this Answer to your citing
Holy and Excellent men, such as Calvin (whom our Author has so often appealed
to in his Book) and others against our Notions? I am sure you would have
severely upbraided us with having a wonderful opinion of our own judgments.
Especially if our Notions ran counter to all Antiquity, and the Judgments of
all Holy Excellent men in former Ages, and to the generality of such in our own
Age and Time. But this I dare say may be asserted of your Notions concerning
the Terms, Schism and Separation; and much of your talk concerning the Term
Church too.

2. How came you to have more light than the Holy and Excellent men in former
Ages, and in our own Age too? which you plainly suppose your selves to have.
Nay you suppose this, as to multitudes of such persons also as are your
Contemporaries. For you say, page 7. We are far from thinking that there are
not multitudes of Holy and Learned men, in our Ecclesia Loquens, etc. that is,
Among Conformable Divines of the Church of England.

3. This Answer would far better become the Quakers than you; they pretending
to inspiration, which you do not.

I will now conclude with a Remarque or two on those words, with which you
begin the concluding part of your Book.

You say, page 29. And now how happy should we not only think our selves, but
indeed be, would our Brethren but leave disputing; how far it is lawful for
the Spouse of Christ, to have Communion with the Great Whore; and only argue
how far we come short of symbolizing with the First and Purest Gospel Churches,
of which we have Records in Holy Writ. To this I say

1. How Unaccountable is this Charge you lay against your Brethren! when you
know that they are in as perfect a Separation as your selves, from the
Communion of that Apostate Church, which you mean by the Great WHORE.

2. It lies not in your power to show us a Church, which more symbolizeth with
the First and Purest Gospel Churches, than the Church of England. And as for
those Churches which you believe do come nearer to the First and Purest, it
has often enough been demonstrated with invincible strength, that the main
thing (viz. the point of Government) in which you conceive they more agree with
these Churches, does speak them far less to agree with them, than the Church of
England does: And speaks them to be therein unlike to the whole Catholic
Church of Christ for fifteen hundred years together, from the time of the
Apostles.

We do not pretend that the Constitution of our Church is absolutely perfect,
we do believe that such a Constitution is the peculiar privilege of the Church
Triumphant; but we bless God that it is no more imperfect, and we who live in
complete Communion with this Church are well assured that there is nothing
either in the Constitution thereof, or in what is required thereby, that
hinders us from being as good Christians as ever were in the world. We cannot
find after all the pains that you and others have taken to prove the contrary,
that there is imposed upon us any one condition of Communion that does
contradict any Law of God; that tends in the least to the depraving of our
Souls, to the gratifying of any one corrupt Affection, or the making us unmeet
for the Heavenly Happiness. And this our Holy Martyrs thought as well as we:
And gave a Demonstration hereof by their Excellent Lives, and Heroic Behavior
under the greatest Torments; they not only patiently but also joyfully
enduring them for the sake of Christ. Nor do we find, any more than they did,
that we are debarred by our Church of any Helps for the building of us up in
our most holy faith. And whereas you express such mighty zeal for Purer
Ordinances, we think that zeal would be much better employed in endeavoring
after Purer Hearts: And that this contending with your Superiors, and your
Brethren about some things enjoined, has been infinitely more prejudicial to
men's Souls, and contributed unspeakably more to the impurity both of men's
hearts and lives, than the impure Ordinances you so complain of. And therefore
all good and pious Church of England men cannot but say, How happy should we
not only think our selves, but indeed be, would our Brethren but leave
disputing with such mighty concern about little things, and things that are
perfectly harmless and innocent: Would make no more Sins, than God and their
Blessed Savior have made: Would be as fearful of culpably Disobeying
Authority as of culpably Obeying it: Would be as thankful that they are in no
worse Circumstances, as they are full of Complaints that they are in no better:
Would take as much pains to satisfy themselves, how far they may lawfully hold
Communion with our Church, as how far they may lawfully Separate from it: Would
be as willing to read those Books that are written in the defense of the things
enjoined by our Church, as to read those which are written in opposition to
them: Would as impartially consider the vast distance between our Church and
that of Rome, as thus dwell upon the most inconsiderable Agreement that is
between them; which our Author has convincingly to any unprejudiced person
proved, to be no justifiable pretense for Separation. And if we would well
digest those excellent words of the Apostle, Romans 14. 17, 18. The Kingdom of
God is not meat or drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost:
For he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God and approved
of men. And, if we would follow after the things that make for v. 19.
peace, and things wherein one may edify another. And lastly, if we would at
length be persuaded to Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and Ephesians. 4.
31, 32.
clamor, and evil speaking, against one another, be put away from us, with all
malice: And to be Kind and affectionate one to another (notwithstanding the
Difference of Apprehensions) tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God
for Christ's sake has forgiven us. I say, if we could once be brought to this
temper, we should be unspeakably more happy, than those things you express so
passionate a desire of could possibly make us. And without this blessed temper,
we shall be miserable wretches, though there were no Agreement in any one Rite
between Rome and us, and though our Ordinances were as pure as it is your wish
to have them: Nor will our bidding the greatest defiance to the Antichrist in
the Roman Chair one whit avail us, while the Spiritual Antichrist, which is the
worse of the two, continues possessed of his Seat in our Hearts.

And so, Sir, I heartily bid you Farewell.
ERRATA.
Page 19. Lin. 12. read in their greatest. p. 27. l. 30. dele? p. 32. l. 1.
read is so contrived.

FINIS.
Books sold by R. Horn, T. Basset, R. Chiswell, B. Took, Brabazon Aylmer, W.
Rogers, and F. Gardener.
1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England. 2. A Resolution of
some Cases of Conscience which respect Church Communion. 3. The Case of
Indifferent things used in the Worship of God, proposed and Stated, by
considering these Questions, etc. 4. A Discourse about Edification. 5. The
Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of England 's
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England? 6. A Letter to Anonymus, in Answer
to his three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about Church Communion. 7. Certain Cases
of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of joining with Forms of
Prayer in Public Worship. In two Parts. 8. The Case of mixed Communion: Whether
it be Lawful to Separate from a Church upon the account of promiscuous
Congregations and mixed Communions? 9. An Answer to the Dissenters Objections
against the Common Prayers, and some other parts of Divine Service prescribed
in the Liturgy of the Church of England. 10. The Case of Kneeling at the Holy
Sacrament stated and resolved, etc. In two Parts. 11. A Discourse of Profiting
by Sermons, and of going to hear where men think they can profit most. 12. A
serious Exhortation, with some important Advices, relating to the late Cases
about Conformity, recommended to the present Dissenters from the Church of
England. 13. An Argument for Union; taken from the true interest of those
Dissenters in England who profess and call themselves Protestants. 14. The Case
of Lay-Communion with the Church of England considered. 15. A Persuasive to
Frequent Communion in the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. 16. Some
Considerations about the Case of Scandal, or giving Offense to the weak
Brethren. 17. The Case of Infant Baptism in five Questions, etc. 18. The Charge
of Scandal, and giving Offense by Conformity, Refelled, and Reflected back upon
Separation, etc. 19. A Defense of the Resolution of this Case, viz. Whether the
Church of England's Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome,
makes it unlawful to hold Communion with the Church of England. In Answer to a
Book Entitled, A Modest Examination of that Resolution.
THE CASE OF Infant Baptism. In Five QUESTIONS.

I. Whether Infants are incapable of Baptism? II. Whether Infants are excluded
from Baptism by Christ? III. Whether it is lawful to separate from a Church,
which appoints Infants to be Baptized? IV. Whether it be the Duty of
Christian Parents to bring their Children unto Baptism? V. Whether it is lawful
to Communicate with Believers, who were Baptized in their Infancy?
LONDON, Printed by T. Hodgkin, for Tho. Basset, at the George in Fleet Street;
Benj. Took, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard; 1685.

THE CASE OF Infant Baptism. The Previous Discourse.
THE better to prepare the mind of my Reader for what I shall say in this
Discourse about Infant Baptism, I think it requisite to premise a short
Introduction.

First, Concerning the Original, And Secondly, Concerning the Nature of the
Jewish Church.

Thirdly, Concerning the initiatory Sacrament into it, and the Persons that
were capable of Initiation.

And Lastly, Concerning the alteration of it from the Mosaic into the Christian
Economy, or to express my self more plainly in the Heb. 2. 5, 6.
Scripture Phrase, concerning the alteration of the House of Moses into the
House of Christ.

As for the Original of the Jewish Church, it is to be referred unto Abraham
the Romans 4. 11.
Father of the Faithful purely considered as a Church. But if it be considered
as a Commonwealth, or as a Church under such a Political Regulation, then it
is to be referred unto Moses, who was called, even by Heathen Writers, the
(...). Sect. 7.
Legislator of the Jews. These two Considerations of the Jewish Church, purely
as a Church, and as a Commonwealth, or as a Church under such a mixture with a
Commonwealth ought heedfully to be distinguished.

1. Because there is ground for such a distinction in the nature of the thing.

2. Because this distinction is made by the Apostle, who was of the Seed of
Abraham, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, and by consequence very well qualified to
understand the difference betwixt the Jewish Economy as a Church, and as a
Commonwealth.

First, I say, there is a Ground for such a distinction in the Nature of the
thing, as is evident to any Man, who is capable of considering the difference
betwixt the Church-Christian before, and after its Union with the Empire.
Before its Union with the Empire, it subsisted by it self purely as a Church
above three hundred years, in a State of Persecution, from Christ unto
Constantine the Great; and just so the Jewish Church for above four hundred
years subsisted by it self in a State of Peregrination and Captivity from
Abraham unto Moses, who brought them out of Egypt, and gave them the Law.

But Secondly, As there is ground for this distinction in the nature of the
thing, so is it in effect made by the Apostle, Gal. 3. 17. This I say, that the
Covenant that was before confirmed of God [with Abraham] in Christ, the Law
which was four hundred and thirty years after cannot disannul, that it should
make the Promise [to Abraham] of none Effect. Here is a plain difference made
between the Covenant or Promise which God made with Abraham and his Seed, when
he separated him from the World unto himself, and that Political one, which he
afterward made with the Jews, when he gave them the Law: And this difference
is also observed, Romans 4. 13. The Promise, that he should be the Heir of the
World, was not given to Abraham, or to his Seed through the Law, but through
the Righteousness of Faith: For if they which are of the Law be Heirs, Faith is
made void, and the Promise is of no effect

From these words, which distinguish so plainly between the Covenant which God
made with Abraham, or the Promise, which he made unto him, and the Law, it is
evident that the beginning of the Jewish Church purely considered, as a Church,
is to be dated from the Covenant which God made with Abraham, and therefore in
the second place, the way to find out the nature of the Abrahamical, or pure
Jewish Church, is to consider the nature of the Covenant, or Promise upon which
it was founded; and if we examine the Scriptures, we shall find, that it was an
Evangelical Covenant: For substance the same with that which is since made
betwixt God and us through Christ. This will appear upon a Review of those
Scriptures which teach us, That Faith was the Condition of this Abrahamical
Covenant; that it was made with Fide autem stare justitia^, and illic esse
vitam praedicta^ est apud Habbaccuc. Justus autem ex fide vivet. Inde Abraham
pater Gentium credidit. In Genes. credidit Abraham Deo, and deputatum est ei ad
justitiam. Item Paulus ad Galatas. Abraham credidit Deo and deputatum est ei ad
justitiam. Cognoscitis ergo qui ex fide sunt hi sunt filii Abrahae, providens
autem Scriptura quia ex fide, etc. Cyprian. advers. Judaeos. Judaeos a Deo
recessisse. -- successisse vero in eorum locum Christianos fide Dominum
promerentes, and de omnibus Gentibus, ac toto orb venientes. Cyprian. ad
Quirin. Testim. L. 3.
Abraham, as the Father of the Faithful, and in him with all Believers, with
his Spiritual, as well as Carnal Seed, proceeding from him by Spiritual, as
well as Natural Generation; and that the Blessings or Promises of this Covenant
belonged unto them upon the same Account of their Faith.

To this purpose speaks the Apostle in the Fourth Chapter of his Epistle to
the Romans, from the 9th. to the 15th. Verse: Comes then this Blessedness [of
Justification by Faith] upon the Circumcision only, or upon the Uncircumcision
also? For we say, that Faith was reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness; how was
it then reckoned? When he was in Circumcision, or in Uncircumcision? Not in
Circumcision, but in Uncircumcision; and he received the Sign of Circumcision a
Seal of (the Promises made to) the Righteousness of Faith, which he had being
yet uncircumcised that [so believing before Circumcision] he might be the
Father (both) of all them that believe, though they be not circumcised, that
righteousness might be imputed unto them also (as his Children) and the Father
of Circumcision to them, who are not of the Circumcision only, but (who) also
walk in the Steps of that Faith of our Father Abraham, which he had, being yet
uncircumcised; for the Promise that he should be the Heir of the World (in his
Posterity) was not to Abraham, or his Seed, through (the Righteousness of) the
Law; but through the Righteousness (which comes) of Faith: For if they [only]
which are of the Law be Heirs, (his) Faith (so much celebrated is made void,
and the Promise made (to it) of no effect. So Gal. 3. from the 5th to the 10th
Verse: He therefore that ministers unto you the (extraordinary Gifts of the)
Spirit, and works Miracles among you; does he it by the works of the Law, or
by the Faith, which you have heard preached, even as (it is written of) Quoniam
autem and in Abraham praefigurabatur fides nostra, and quoniam Patriarcha
nostrae fidei, and velut propheta fuit, plenisfime Apostolus docuit in ea
Epistola, quae est ad Galatas dicens, Qui ergo tribuit vobis Spiritum and
operatur virtutes in vobis -- Irenaeus Lib. 4. cap. 38.
Abraham, (he) believed God, and it was imputed unto him for Righteousness;
know ye therefore, that they which are (the Children) of Faith, the same are
the Children of Abraham; and God in the Scripture foreseeing that he would
justify the Heathen through Faith preached before the Gospel unto Abraham,
saying, In thee shall all Nations be blessed. So then they which be (the
Children) of Faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham who is the Father of them
that believe. Afterward in Verse 26. Now to Abraham, or his Seed, or Race were
the Promises [of God] made: He, (i. e. God, or Moses his Penman) says, Not to
Seeds, or Races, as if there were diverse of them; but to thy Seed, i. e. to one
of thy Seed, which is Christ. And this I say, that the (Abrahamical) Covenant
that was before confirmed by God in Christ, the Law, which was four hundred and
thirty years after cannot disannul, that it should make the Promise (made unto
Abraham) of none effect.

From all these Texts put together, it is plain, that the Abrahamical Covenant,
upon which the Jewish Church, as such, was founded, was of a Spiritual,
Evangelical Nature, and perfectly verified and fulfilled in Jesus Christ, who
was made of the Seed of Abraham, and in whom all the Families of the Earth are
blessed, and whose Day Abraham himself saw, and rejoiced. It is farther evident
from them, that this Covenant was made with Abraham, as the Father of
Believers, and with his Posterity, not as proceeding from him by natural, but
by spiritual Generation, as Heirs of his Faith, as is plain from Romans 4. 16.
Therefore (the Promise) is of Faith, that so also it might be by Grace; to the
end the Promise might be sure to all the Seed (of Abraham) not to that only,
which is of the Law; but to that also which is of the Faith of Abraham, who is
the Father of us all, both Jew and Gentile, that believe. So Chap. 9. 6. etc.
not as though the Word or Promise of God to them had taken none effect: For they
are not all (the) Israel which are descended of Israel; neither because they
are the Seed of Abraham, are they all Children (of God's Covenant) but ('it is
said) in Isaac shall thy Seed be called; [tho' Abraham had more Sons] that is
(all) they which are the Children of the Flesh, these are not the Children of
God; but the Children of the Promise (only as Isaac was) are counted for the
Seed.

Hence says the Apostle in the name of the Christians, Phil. 3. 3.
we are the Circumcision, which worship God in the Spirit, and have no
Confidence in the Flesh, and it is one God which shall justify the
Circumcision by Faith, and the Uncircumcision through Faith; and if ye be
Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and Heirs, according to the Promise,
which God made unto Abraham.

Furthermore, that this Covenant was Evangelical, and made with the Posterity
of Abraham, not as his Natural, but as his Spiritual Offspring, will appear in
the third place from the initiatory Sacrament into it, which was Circumcision,
or cutting off the Foreskin of the Flesh; as it is written, You shall
Circumcise the Foreskin of your Flesh, and it shall be a Sign of the Covenant
betwixt me and you. Hence the Covenant of which it was the Sign, is called by
Acts 7. 8.
St. Stephen, the Covenant of Circumcision; and* Circumcision on the other hand
is called by St. Paul, the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith; Faith, or
Faithful Obedience being the Condition of that Covenant which God required of
the Children of Abraham, and which they promised to perform. It also signified
the Circumcision of the (...), Justin. Mart. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 260. (...).
ibid. p. 261.
Heart; as Moses said unto the People of Israel, Circumcise the Foreskin of
your Hearts, Deuteronomy. 10. 16. and in Deuteronomy. 30. 6. The Lord thy God will Circumcise
thine heart, and the hearts of thy Seed, that thou may love the Lord thy God
with all thine. Heart, and with all thy Soul, that thou may live. And
agreeable unto this Spiritual Signification of Circumcision, St. Paul says
Romans 2. 28. He is not a Jew, which is one outwardly, neither is that
Circumcision, which is outwardly in the Flesh, but he is a Jew, which is one
inwardly; and Circumcision is that of the Heart, in the Spirit, and not in the
Letter, whose Praise is not of Men, but of God.

As to the Persons who were capable of initiation into the Jewish Church by
this Sacrament, we have a very plain account at the institution of it in Genesis
Chap. 27. I will (says God unto Abraham) establish my Covenant between Me, and
thee, and thy Seed after thee for an Everlasting Covenant to be a God unto
thee, and thy Seed after thee -- Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore thou and
thy Seed after thee in their Generations; this is [The Token of] my Covenant,
which ye shall keep between Me and you, and thy Seed after thee, every Male
among you shall be Circumcised. And ye shall Circumcise the flesh of your
Foreskin, and it shall be a Token of the Covenant betwixt Me and you, and he
that is eight days old shall be Circumcised among you, every Male in your
Generations, he that is born in the House, or bought with Money of any
Stranger, which is not of thy Seed, he that is born in thy House, and he that
is bought with thy Money must needs be Circumcised, and my Covenant shall be in
your flesh for an everlasting Covenant.

From this account of Persons to be Circumcised, it is plain,

First, That Gentiles who were born of Exodus 12. 48, 49.
Gentile Parents in Abraham's House, or bought with his Money, as Servants then
were, and Blacks are now among us, were to be initiated into the Covenant by
Circumcision, from whence it appears, that the Spiritual Race of Abraham were
the Children of the Covenant, and that when God promised to be a God to him,
and his Seed after him, he meant the Children of his Faith. Hence in all Ages
of the Jewish Church, if any Gentiles embraced the Jewish Faith and Religion,
they were admitted into it by Circumcision, and thereupon reckoned among the
Posterity of Abraham, and the peculiar People of God, although they were not
the Children of Abraham according to the Flesh. There were great numbers of
Gentiles thus converted to the Jewish Faith and Religion, and grafted like wild
Branches into the Olive Tree, in all the Ages of the Jewish Church. Not to
mention particular Persons, we read that many of the Medes and Persians became
Jews in the time of Ashuerus, Esther 8. 17. Seldom de jure l. 2. c. 2.
Likewise, in the time of David and Solomon, vast numbers of the neighboring
Countries embraced Judaism, and in the time of Hyrcanus the whole Nation of the
Idumaeans turned Jews, and lived in their own Country according to the Jewish
Rites. This short account of the Jewish Proselytes may satisfy any Man, who is
not perverted beyond cure, that the Church of the Jews was not founded upon,
nor constituted by natural Generation, but by Spiritual Regeneration, as the
Church Christian is, and that those, who were then related unto God, as Members
of his Church were so, because they were the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, who
then was and still is the Father of the Church, and Church Members, to whom he
is related not in his Natural, but in his Religious Capacity, as he was a
Believer, and the Father of all those that believe.

But Secondly, It is manifest from this Scriptural account of persons to be
Circumcised, that Circumcision was an Ordinance of Latitude, comprehending
Persons of all Ages, and that Children, and Minors not yet arrived at years of
Discretion, who were incapacitated, as to some ends of Circumcision, were
notwithstanding to be solemnly initiated by it, as well as grown Men, who were
capable of all. God was pleased to call them his; nay, they were his Property,
as much as their Parents of whom they descended, he looked upon them as holy
and separate, and as Candidates of the Covenant, and he thought them so well
qualified for admission into it, that he would not have it put off beyond the
eighth day.

He that is eight days old, or as it is in the Original, a Son of eight days,
shall be circumcised among you. God was so far from excluding of them from
Sacramental Initiation upon the account of natural incapacity, that he limited
the time for the administration of it, beyond which he would not have it
deferred. And accordingly the Jews ever did most religiously observe it, from
the time of Abraham unto the time of John the Baptist, and Christ, who were
both Circumcised the Luke 1. 59. 2. 21.
eighth day. Nay when any Gentile turned Jew, they immediately Circumcised his
Children if he desired it; always understanding that Children were called and
elected by God in their Parents. Thus says God unto Abraham, I will establish
my Covenant between thee and me, and thy Seed after thee for an everlasting
Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and thy Seed after thee.

The great Goodness of God made him thus separate the Children with their
Parents from the rest of the World, and look upon them as part of his chosen
peculiar People, by which they became relatively Holy, and of a religious
Consideration, and differed from the Children of Unbelievers, as much as their
Parents did from the Unbelievers themselves. Since therefore God was pleased to
be so gracious as to choose the Children with their Parents, and look upon them
as Holy upon their account, it is no wonder that he should oblige them to
dedicate, and devote them betimes unto him, by solemn initiation into his
Church. I say, he called and elected them in their Parents, and with them
separated them unto himself from the World, and, agreeably to the nature of
this Gracious Call, and separation, he made it a sufficient qualification for
their actual admission into the Church, by the initiating Ordinance, which the
Children of Heathens were not capable of, because they were not so called, and
chosen, and separated of God.

This was ground enough for their admission into the Church, and for God to
look upon them, as Believers, though they could not make open Profession of
their Faith, as Abraham did before he was Baptized, and it is certain, after
the example of Abraham, all Seldom de Synedr. l. 2. c. 3.
adult Proselytes did. But though Abraham professed his Faith before he was
Circumcised, Isaac the next Heir of the Promise was Circumcised before he
professed, or could profess his Faith, because if he lived he was as sure to
profess it by virtue of his Calling, and Election as any adult Proselyte was to
continue in the Profession of his.

In the mean time the Faith and Consent of the Father, or, if the Child had
none, of the Susceptor or Godfather, 1 Maccab. 2. 46.
and of the Congregation under which he was Circumcised, was believed of old by
the Jews to be Seld. de jure lib 2. c. 2. de Synedr. l. 1. c 3.
imputed to the Child, as his own Faith and Consent. They had very good ground
in the Scriptures for this Opinion, because the Infidelity and Disobedience of
the Parents, in wilfully neglecting, or despising Circumcision, was imputed to
the Children, who were esteemed and punished as Breakers of the Covenant, when
they were not circumcised, as it is written, Every uncircumcised Male, whose
Flesh of his Foreskin is not circumcised, that Soul shall be cut off from his
People; he has broken my Covenant; and therefore if the Act of Parents
Cassand. de Baptism. Infant. p. 732.
in neglecting to bring their Children to Circumcision was reputed theirs, much
more their Act in bringing them to it might well be reputed as their Act and
Deed. Thus in Numb. 3. 28. we find the keeping of the Sanctuary imputed to the
Males of the Cohathites of a month old and upwards, because their Fathers
actually kept it, and they were to be trained up unto it; and in Deuteronomy. 29. 11,
12. the little ones are expressly said to enter into Covenant with God, because
the Men of Israel did so; and thus also our Blessed Lord, who took upon him the
Seed of Abraham, although he healed Matthew. 9. 29.
grown Persons for their own Faith; yet he healed Mark. 9. 23. Matthew. 8. 13.
Joh. 4. 50. Vid. Cassand. de Baptismo Infant. p. 729. Dr. Tailor of Baptizing
Infants, Great Exemplar. Part. 1. Sect. 9.
Children upon the account of the Faith of their Parents; or others who
besought him for them; as it were imputing it to them for their own Faith.

Having now briefly discoursed of the Original, and Evangelical Nature of the
Jewish Church, and the Initiatory Sacrament of it, and the persons that were
initiated thereinto, I now proceed to make a few Observations upon the
Alteration of it, from the Mosaical into the Christian Economy; or from the
Legal State of it under the Old Testament, into the Evangelical under the New.

For as it was the same for Substance under the Law that it was before it; so
it still remains the same for Substance under the Gospel, that it was under the
Law. The Foundation is the same, though the Superstructure and Fashion of the
House be very different. For Abraham is still the Father of the Faithful; and
we that believe under the Gospel, are as much his Seed, and Children in God's
prime Intention, and the true meaning of the Words, as those that were
Believers under the Law.

Hence it comes to pass, that the Church-Christian is called in the New
Testament, the New and Supernal Jerusalem; to let us know, that Christianity is
nothing but Spiritual Judaism, the same City new reformed, constituted upon a
new Charter, blessed with more noble and ample Privileges than formerly; and
every way better built, and more August than it was. Thus in Rev. 3. 12. Unto
him that overcomes (says the Son of Man) I will write the Name of my God, and
the Name of the City of my God, which is New Jerusalem, which is come down out
of Heaven, from my God: that is, I will acknowledge him that holds out to the
end for a person truly godly, and for a true Member of the pure Catholic
Christian-Church, which is the Spiritual Jerusalem descended from above. And so
Chap. 21. 2. I saw the Holy City New Jerusalem coming down from God, down out
of Heaven prepared as a Bride, adorned for her Husband, meaning Jesus Christ.
So in Gal. 4. Jerusalem which is from above, or the Supernal Jerusalem is [a]
free [City] which is the Mother of us all.

Hence also it comes to pass, that St. Peter in his first General Epistle,
calls the Christians by those proper Titles and Appellations which God gave
unto the Jews, as unto his peculiar People, viz. a chosen Generation, a Royal
Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a peculiar People; which must needs imply, that the
Christian Church is fundamentally, and radically the same with the ancient
Church of the Jews. Accordingly St. Paul though he was the Doctor of the
Gentiles, yet compared the calling of them to the engrafting of the wild
Olive Tree into the old Olive Trees Stock. If some of the Branches (says Romans
11. ^.
he unto them) be broken off [through Unbelief] and thou being a wild Olive
Branch, was grafted in amongst them, and with them partakest of the Root and
Fatness of the [Ancient] Olive Tree, boast not against the Branches [so cut
off] but if thou boast [remember that] thou bear not the Root, but the Root
thee; and afterward, If thou were cut off from the Olive Tree, which is wild
by Nature, and were grafted contrary to [thy wild] Nature into a good
Olive Tree, how much more shall these [unbelieving Jews] which be the natural
Branches, be re-grafted into their own Olive Tree? From this Comparison it is
plain, that the Jewish and Christian Church are the same in the Root and Stock:
And from this radical Argument that is betwixt them, it proceeds, that St. John
in his Symbolical way of Writing in the Apocalypse, calls the Christians Jews:
Behold I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan which say they are Jews but
are not, Rev. 3. 9. 2. 9. Indeed, as Judaism was nothing but mystical
Christianity; so Christianity is nothing but reformed Judaism, which made our
Savior, who was the Reformer of it, say unto the Jews, Think not that I am
come to destroy the Law, and the Prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to
perfect and fulfill. And unto his Disciples, who under him were to be
Master Builders of his House, he said, That a Scribe, or Doctor rightly
instructed unto the Kingdom of God, was like a Man that is an Householder, who
brings out of his Storehouse things both new and old. Thereby showing, as
Irenaeus observes, that he must be a L. 4. c. 21. and 43.
very skilful Scribe in the Old Testament, that was fit to make a Workman of
the new. The Old Testament and legal Economy was to be his Magazine, and
Storehouse, out of which he was to fetch many serviceable pieces for the new
Building; and accordingly our Savior, though in reforming the House of Moses, he
was fain to pull it down, that it might be enlarged, yet both he that began the
Reformation, and his Apostles, who finished it, like Men that were
House-holders, used much of the Old Timber and Materials, and conformed it too,
as much as they could, after the manner of the old. Dr. Hammond of
Infant Baptism.
They introduced as much of Judaism into the Christian Religion, as the nature
of the Reformation would well bear, and adhered as much as they could to the
old, both in the Matter and Form of the new Economy; and laid by few Jewish
Rites and Customs, but such as were fulfilled in Christ and Christianity, as
the Antitype and Substance of them; or else such as were inconsistent with the
Nature of the Church-Christian, as it was to be a manly, free, and universal
Church.

These were the two reasons for which Christ and his Apostles so much altered
the Face of the Church from what it was under the Mosaical Economy, First,
because very many of the Jewish Rites and Ceremonies were Ac primo ita his in
rebus comparatur, ut antitypus in typi locum succedat, eumque adeo loco moveat,
ut simul atque antitypus adsit, nullus deinceps typo locus, nullus usus
reperiatur. Outramus de Sacrificiis, Lib. 2. c. 16. p. 204.
fulfilled in Christ and Christianity; and Secondly, because many of them were
inconsistent with the nature of a manly, free and universal Church, such as
Christ intended his should be.

First, Then, many of the Ecclesiastical rites, and usages of the Jews were
laid aside, at the time of Reformation, because they were fulfilled in Christ,
as the Antitype, and Substance of them, as is plain from the words of the
Apostle, Col. 2. 16. Let no man judge you in Meat, or in Drink, or in respect
of an Holyday, or of the New Moons, or of the Sabbath days, which are a Shadow
of things that are to come to pass; but the Body is Christ: that is to say, Let
no Man impose upon you the Doctrine of Mosaical Abstinence, or condemn you for
eating and drinking things prohibited by the Jewish Religion, or for not
observing their Feasts, New Moons and Sabbaths, which are but Types of
Christianity; and therefore ought to be laid aside. The like he does show in
his Epistle to the Hebrews, concerning the Temple, Priesthood, Altar,
Sacrifices, and the whole Temple-Service; as is plain from many Passages,
whereof I shall recite some. The Priesthood being changed, there is made also
of necessity a change in the Law, Chap. 7. 22. The Holy Ghost, this signifying
thereby, that the way into the holiest of all, was not yet made manifest,
while, as the first Tabernacle was yet standing, which was but a Figure for the
time then present, in which were offered both Gifts and Sacrifices; that could
not make him that did the Service perfect [and cleansed] as pertaining to the
Conscience, which stood, or consisted only in a certain use of Meats and
Drinks, and diverse Washings, and other carnal Ordinances imposed on them, [as
Types] until the time of Reformation [by Christ] Chap. 9. 8, 9, 10. So verse.
24. Christ [with the Blood of his Sacrifice] is not entered into the Holy Places
made with Hands, which are the Figures of the true. And after all, Chap. 10. 1.
the Law having only a Shadow of the good things to come, and not the Solidity
of the things themselves, can never with those [umbratical] Sacrifices, which
they offered year by year continually make the Comers thereunto perfect.

It would make a Book of it self, to recite all the Types and Shadows of the
Old Testament, which are applied to Christ and Christianity by the Writers
under the New. Besides what occurs in the Apostles Writings, there is much to
the same purpose in the Epistle of St. Barnabas, which is very ancient; the
Dialogue of Justin Martyr, with Trypho the Jew; and the Fourth Book of
Irenaeus, who after insisting upon many typical things, and persons in the Old
Testament, at last concludes in the 38th Chapter, Nihil enim vacuum, nihil sine
signo; that almost every thing in it was typical, and had a mystical Reference
to something under the New.

But Secondly, as many of the Ecclesiastical Rites, and Usages of the Jewish
Church were taken away, because they were fulfilled in Christ and Christianity,
so many others were annulled, as being inconsistent with the nature of the
Church-Christian, as it was to be a manly, free, and universal Church.

First, As it was to be a manly Church in opposition to the legal Pedagogy of
the Jews, as St. Paul called it in saying, That the Law was but a Schoolmaster
to bring them unto Christ [Gal. 3. 24] and that the Jews were under it as
Children are under Tutors, and Governors, until the time appointed by the
Father, the Fullness of Time, when God sent forth his Son, [Chap. 4. 1, 2, 3,
4.] Hither we may refer abundance of those Precepts which concerned their
Washings, and Purifications, or their Abstinence from menstruous Women, and
unclean Creatures, which God imposed upon them in that State of Minority,
chiefly to lecture unto them moral Purity and Temperance: For they had childish
Understandings, and were, like Children, to be instructed by Symbols, and
Symbolical Lessons, as is plain from the Precept about their Phylacteries,
Numb. 15. 38. Speak unto the Children of Israel, and bid them that they make
Fringes in the Borders of their Garments throughout their Generations, and that
they put upon the Fringes of their borders, a Ribband of Blue, and it shall be
unto you for a Fringe, that you may look upon it, and remember all the
Commandments of the Lord, and do them, and that ye seek not after your own
Heart, and your own Eyes, after which ye use to go a Whoring.

But Secondly, As many of their Rites and Ceremonies were annulled at the time
of Reformation, because they were inconsistent with the manly nature of the
Christian Religion, so others were annulled, because they were not consistent
with the free nature of it, in opposition to the Servile nature of the Jewish
Church, which is excellently set forth by the Apostle, Gal. 4. 22, etc. Abraham
had two Sons, the one by a Bond-maid, the other by a Freewoman, but he that
was born of the Bond-maid was born according to the Flesh, but he that was born
of the Freewoman, was born [by virtue of the] Promise which God made unto
Abraham: Which things are an Allegory, for these [two Women] are the two
Covenants. The one the Covenant which was made on Mount Sinai, which gendreth
to Bondage, and this was Agar. For this Agar is [the figure of] Mount Sinai in
Arabia, and answers to Jerusalem which now is, and is [still] in Bondage with
her Children. But [Sarah is the figure of the Spiritual] Jerusalem, which is
[come with Christ from] above, which is the Mother of us all.

Now this Ecclesiastical Bondage, and Servitude of the Jews, consisted in the
vast number of their Religious Rites and Observances, which if a Man consider
in retail as to the Days, Weeks, Months, and Years, which they were bound to
observe; the multitude of Sacrifices of all sorts, which they were bound to
offer; the frequent Washings and Purifications they were bound to undergo; the
strict distinction they were to make of clean from unclean Animals; the Rules
and Ceremonies they were bound to observe at Births, Marriages, Burials, at Bed
and Board, at Home and Abroad, in Sickness and in Health, nay, even in Plowing,
Sowing, and Reaping, he shall find that they were left almost in nothing to
their own Freedom and Discretion, but that the Observances, to which they were
bound in almost all their Actions, took up half of their time.

Such a burdensome and grievous Economy was that under which the Jews lived,
but yet how severe and slavish soever it was, it was suitable to the slavish
temper of that People, upon whom God imposed all these Carnal Ordinances for
the hardness of their hearts, and propension to Idolatry, as (...).
Justin Martyr often observes in his Dialogue with the Jew.

They were apt to forget God, and therefore he loaded them with so many Divine
Rites and Observations, that at all times and places, and in every action, they
might be put in mind of him, and this Ceremonial Yoke was so heavy upon them,
that it was little less than intolerable, according to St. Peter, who said, Why
tempt ye God to put a Yoke upon the Neck of the Disciples, which neither we nor
our Fathers were able to bear? This he said in the Council at Jerusalem,
against the believing Pharisees, who taught, that it was needful to Circumcise
the Gentile Christians, and to command them to keep the Mosaical Law, not yet
rightly understanding, or believing, that it was one end of Christ's coming to
set them free from the Mosaic Observances, as the Apostles then declared, and
as St. Paul afterward instructed the Galatians, who were led away into this
error, saying, Stand fast therefore in the Liberty, wherewith Christ has made
us free, and be not entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage.

Hither therefore we are to refer the annulling not so much of any particular
sort of Jewish Ceremonies as of the whole Mass of them, even the dissolution of
the whole Ceremonial Law, of which the Jews were grown weary, and with which
they had been for a long time heavy laden, when Christ called them to take his
Yoke and Burden upon them, which was to be so easy, and light.

But then in the last place, as the obligatory force of all the Jewish Rites
and Ceremonies were taken away, because they were inconsistent with the free
nature of the Christian Church: So some more especially were annulled, as being
inconsistent with the universality of it, as it was to be a Catholic Church.

Hither we may refer all those which were set up by God as Maimonides more
Nevoch. p. 3. c. 37.
Mounds and Hedges to keep the Jews from mixing and conversing with their
Idolatrous Neighbors, and their Idolatrous Neighbors from being too familiar
and well acquainted with them. Such as these were those of not rounding the
Corners of their Heads, and of not shaving of the Corners of their Beards, of
not letting their Cattle gender with diverse kinds, of not sowing their Fields
with mingled Seed, nor their Vineyards with diverse Seeds; of not Plowing with
an Ox and an Ass together, and of not wearing a Garment of Linen and Woolen.
God injoined them these, and other things in opposition to the neighboring
Idolatrous Nations, that there might be a mutual strangeness and hatred betwixt
them, and that by these and other Ceremonial Singularities, they might be
distinguished from the rest of the World. But then Christ coming to break down
the middle wall of Partition betwixt the Jews and Gentiles, and to abolish the
Enmity of Ordinances that was betwixt them, that he might make Peace betwixt
them, and reconcile them both into one Body in the Cross, it was requisite to
this end, that he should abolish these, and all other distinguishing Characters
betwixt them, which would have hindered the Progress of the Gospel, had it been
clogged with Jewish Rites and Ceremonies, which were become so odious, and
ridiculous to all the Gentile World.

In particular, For this reason he was obliged to change the Initiatory
Sacrament, and the Seal of the Covenant of Grace, I mean Circumcision, by which
the Jews (excepting a few The ancient Egyptians, Ethiopians, Ismaelites,
Cholchians.
Nations) were distinguished from all the World.

They were become Jura Verpe per Anchialum. Mart. Credat Judaeus Apelles.
Horat. Ferro succiderit inguinis oram. Petron. Mox and praeputia ponunt. Juven.
1 Cor. 7. 18. Is any Man called, being circumcised, let him not be
uncircumcised. i. e. Let him not use means to attract the Praeputium, which the
Jews did often to avoid Shame, and Persecution in Gentile Countries.
odious and ridiculous to all other People upon the account of it, and for this
reason it would have been a mighty bar to the Progress of the Gospel, had the
Gentiles been to be initiated thereby.

Furthermore, it alone was reckoned as a grievous burden by reason of the
painful and bloody nature of it; and for that Reason also was laid aside, as
being inconsistent with the free and easy nature of the Christian Religion;
for if Zipporah was so much offended at Moses, and called him a bloody Husband
upon the account of it, we may well presume how much the Gentiles would have
been offended at the Apostles, and at their Doctrine, upon the account thereof.

No Religious Rite could be more ungrateful to Flesh and Blood, and therefore
the Wisdom of our Lord is to be admired in changing of it into the easy and
practicable Ceremony of Baptism; which was of more universal significancy, and
which Diabolus ipsas quoque res Sacramentorum divinorum idolorum mysteriis
aemulatur, tingit and ipse quosdam, utique credentes, ac fideles suos --
caeterum si Numae superstitiones revolvamus -- nonne manifest diabolus
morositatem illam Judaicae legis imitatus est? Tertull. de praescrip. haeret.
c. 40. O nimium faciles! Qui tristia crimina caedis tolli fluminea posse
putatis aqua.
Pagans (as Paganism was nothing but Judaism corrupted by the Devil) practiced,
as well as Jews.

Hitherto I have given the Reasons of altering the Jewish Economy, and of
reforming of it into the Christian Church, but then my undertaking obliges me
to prove what before I observed, that Verissimum enim est, quod vir doctissimus
Hugo Broughtonus ad Danielem notavit: Nullos a Christo institutos ritus novos,
etc. Grotii opusc. Tom. 3. p. 520. See Dr. Hammond in his discourse of the
Baptizing of Infants.
Christ and his Apostles, who were the Reformers of it, did build with many of
the old Materials, and conformed their new house, as much as they could, after
the Platform of the old. This will appear from Baptism it self, which was a
Ceremony by which Seld. de jure l. 2. c. 2. de Synedr. l. 1. c. 3. Lightfoot
Horae Hebraicae, p. 42. Hammond on Matthew. 3. v. 1. and of the Baptizing of
Infants. Jacob Altingius dissert. Philologica Septima de Proselytis.
Proselytes both Men, Women, and Children were initiated into the Jewish
Church. Though it were but a mere humane Institution, or, as the dissenting
Parties usually phrase it, a mere humane Invention; yet so much respect had our
blessed Lord for the Ancient Orders and Customs of the Jewish Church, that
being obliged to lay by Circumcision for the reasons above mentioned, he
consecrated this instead of it to be the Sacrament of initiation into his
Church, and a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith. So likewise the other
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was certainly of Mede 1 Book disc. 51. b. 11.
Christian Sacrifice. Grot. Opusc Tom. 3. p. 510. Dr. Cudworth on the Lord's
Supper. Thorndike of Religious Assembly. chap. 10. Dr. Tailor 's great
Exemplar. p. 1. disc. of Baptism. Numb. 11.
Jewish Original, as has been showed by many Learned Men, and the
Correspondence of the Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, to the High Priest,
Priests and Levites, does show that the Subordination of the Christian
Hierarchy is taken from the Jewish Church, as St. Jerome observes in his
Epistle to Evagrius. Et ut sciamus traditiones Apostolicas sumptas de veteri
Testamento, quod Aaron, and filii ejus, and Levitae in Templo fuerunt, hoc sibi
Episcopi, and Presbyteri and diaconi vendicent in Ecclesia. What the
High Priest, Priests, and Levites, were in the Temple, that the Bishops,
Presbyters, and Deacons, are in the Church according to Apostolical
Constitution taken from the Old Testament.

Hither also is to be referred that wonderful Correspondence betwixt the
Priesthood and Altar of the Jewish and Christian Church, as it is most
excellently discoursed by the Learned, and Pious In his Discourse concerning
the one Altar, and the one Priesthood, etc.
Mr. Dodwell.

To all which, I may add many other Institutions, as that of Dr. Tailor his
great Exemplar Disc. of Baptism. Numb. 11. Lightfoot on 1 Cor. c. 5. v. 4.
Excommunication, and of the ritual performance of Ordination, Confirmation,
and Absolution of Penitents by Imposition of Hands, all which are of Jewish
Original.

Likewise, the Observation of the ancient Love Feasts before the
Holy-Eucharist, which for their extreme inconvenience, were taken away by the
Council. Sext. in Trull. c. 24.
Churches Authority; the use of Festivals and Fasts; the Institution of the
Lord's day, which is nothing but the Sabbath translated. In a word, the
manifold and almost entire Correspondence of the Church in her public
Assemblies, and Worship with the Synagogue, as it is set forth by Mr.
Thorndike, in his Book of Religious Assemblies, even to the formal use of the
Hebrew-word, 1 Cor. 14. 16 Romans 11. 36. Ephesians. 3. 21. Phil. 4. 20. 2 Timothy 1. 17.
Heb. 23. 27. 1 Pet. 4. 11. Rev. 1. 16. Rev. 1. 7. Just. Mart. Ap. 2. p. 97.
Iren. l. 2. c. 10. Athan. Apol. ad constable. Imper. p. 683.
Amen.

Hitherto I have made a short Previous Discourse concerning many useful
Particulars. As

First, Concerning the beginning, or Original of the Jewish Church.

Secondly, Concerning the Nature of it.

Thirdly, Concerning the initiatory Sacrament into it, and the Persons that
were capable of Initiation.

And Lastly, Concerning the alteration of it from the Legal into the
Evangelical Dispensation; wherein I have briefly showed the true grounds of
that blessed Reformation, and how tender Christ, and his Apostles were of
Altering or rejecting, more than was necessary, or of receding more than was
needful from the Jewish Church.

All these things I thought necessary to be discoursed [as Praecognita] to fit
and prepare the Reader's mind to understand the State of the Controversy about
Infant Baptism, as it is proposed in these five Comprehensive Questions. 1.
Whether Infants are incapable of Baptism? 2. Whether they are excluded from
Baptism by Christ? 3. Whether it is lawful to separate from a Church which
appoints Infants to be Baptized? 4. Whether it be the duty of Christian
Parents to bring their Children unto Baptism? 5. Whether it is lawful to
Communicate with believers, who were Baptized in their Infancy? The whole merit
of the Controversy about Infant Baptism, lies in these five Comprehensive
Questions, and I shall presently proceed to the stating of them after I have
showed, that Circumcision was a Sacrament of equal Significancy, Force, and
Perfection with Baptism, and that Baptism succeeded in the room of it, not as
the Antitype succeeded in the place of the Type, but as one positive
Institution succeeds in the place of another, and this also is necessary to be
foreknown by the Reader, because the Anabaptists endeavor to shift off the
force of many good Arguments, which otherwise are not to be evaded, by saying
that Circumcision under the Old Testament, was a Type of Baptism under the New.

Now to show that Circumcision was not a Type but only the Forerunner of
Baptism, we must note, that strictly and properly speaking, there was the same
difference betwixt the Type and the Antitype, as betwixt the Shadow, and the
Substance, or betwixt a Man and his Picture in a Glass; Deinde (quod maxim
advertendum) id inter Antitypum and Typum interest, quod quae revera in
Antitypo vis in est, ea non nisi specie tenus, aut gradu long exiliori in Typo
extiterit. Enimvero quamvis Typus nonnunquam rem aliquam cum Antitypo suo
communem habuerit, ea tamen res multo minus in Typo, quam in Antitypo semper
valet -- ita ut vis rei adumbrantis virtutis in adumbrata repertae nil nisi
Symbolica quaedam Species, aut tam exilis gradus fuerit, ut pro umbra quadam
haberi possit. Outramus de Sacrif. l. 2. c. 18.
insomuch, that what was really, literally, and properly in the Antitype, and
of perfect Efficacy and Power, was generally, but Symbolically and
representatively in the Type, and figurative of something, which did in a more
noble, perfect, eminent, and efficacious manner belong to the Antitype, than it
did to it.

Thus the blood of the Legal Sacrifices were but Shadows, and Representations
of the Blood of Christ, and the purging and cleansing Virtue in their Blood,
serving to the purifying of the Flesh, was also but a faint and umbratical
resemblance of the more noble and efficacious cleansing Virtue of his Blood
which purges the Conscience from dead works. So the Brazen Serpent was but a
Shadow or Symbol of Christ upon the Cross, and the healing Virtue which,
belonged to it, was but a figure, or shadow of that more eminent, and
powerfully healing Virtue, which was in Jesus Christ. But the case is not so
betwixt Circumcision, and Baptism, because Circumcision has no Symbolical
likeness with Baptism, nor any thing belonging to it common with Baptism, which
does not as literally, properly, fully, and eminently belong unto it, as unto
Baptism it self.

For First, Is Baptism a Sacrament of initiation into the Covenant of Grace
under the Gospel? So was Circumcision before, and under the Law. Is Baptism now
a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith? So was Circumcision then. Does it
properly, and effectually confirm and establish the Covenant betwixt God and us
now? So did Circumcision then, as it is written, you shall Circumcise the Flesh
of your Foreskin, and it shall be a Token of the Covenant betwixt me and you.
Baptism does nothing under the Gospel, which Circumcision did not as properly,
and effectually under the Law. This was then as absolute and real a Sacrament,
as that now is. This did then as really initiate true Believers, as that now
does. It never was an Umbratical Sacrament, or shadow of another Sacrament, it
never did Umbratically initiate Believers, or Umbratically, and in show and
Similitude only confirm the Covenant betwixt God, and the Seed of Abraham; and
therefore could not be a Type of Baptism, no more than the Broad Seal of
England 300 Years ago was a Type of this.

Accordingly it is never mentioned in the New Testament as a Type of Baptism,
nor Baptism, as the Antitype of it; but on the contrary, the only Typical
Adumbrations which are found of it in the Gospel, are such things, which have
some Symbolical likeness with it, and were fitted upon that account to be Types
thereof.

The First, Is the Baptizing of the Israelites in the Mare autem illud
Sacramentum Baptismi fuisse declarat beatus Apostolus, Dicens, nolo enim vos
ignorare. -- Et addidit, dicens, haec autem omnia figurae nostrae sunt.
Cyprian. Ep. 69. Ed. Ox.
Red Sea, 1 Cor. 10. 2. Where the Red Sea is a Type of the Water of Baptism,
their passing through it, when they were delivered from Pharaoh and his Host, a
Type of our passing through that, and of our deliverance thereby from the
Devil, and his Angels; and their Captain and Deliverer Moses, a Type of our
Savior Christ.

The Second, Is the saving of Noah and his Family in the Ark, the like figure
whereunto, says the Apostle, even Baptism does also save us, Item Petrus ipse
quoque demonstrans, etc. Cyprian. Ep. 74. ad Pompeium contra Epist. Stephani,
and in Firmilian. Ep. contra eandem Epist. ad Cyprian. and in Ep. 69. Quod and
Petrus ostendens unam Ecclesiam esse, etc.
1 Pet. 3. 21. Here it is plain, that the Waters of the Flood were a shadow of
the Waters of Baptism, the Ark a Type of the Church, and that the passing of
the Ark through the Waters did prefigure our passing through the Waters of
Baptism in the Ark of the Church.

But as for Circumcision it has nothing in it Symbolical of Baptism, nor was
it an Umbratical, but a real Confignation of the Covenant of Grace, every way
as real, and substantial an Ordinance, as Baptism now is, and therefore
succeeded in the room of it, not as the Antitype did in the place of the Type,
but as one absolute Ordinance or positive Institution does in the place of
another, according to the Apostle, who says unto the Colossians. -- In whom
also ye are Circumcised, with the Circumcision made without hands, in putting
off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh by the Circumcision of Christ, having
been buried with him in Baptism, Col. 2. 11, 12.

But in the second place, if we consider the Original of Baptism, as a Jewish
Institution, we shall find it very improbable, that Circumcision should be a
Type of it, because a Type properly speaking is a Typus, quatenus vox ista
sensum habet Theologicum, ita definiri posse videtur, ut sit futuri alicujus
Symbolum quoddam, aut exemplum ita a Deo comparatum, ut ipsius plane instituto
futurum illud praefiguret. Quod autem ita praefiguratur illud Antitypus dici
solet. Outramus de Sacrificiis, l. 1. cap. 18.
Symbol of something future, or an Exemplar appointed under the Old Testament
to prefigure something under the New.

But, Baptism was it self of Jewish Institution under the Old Testament; and by
consequence could not be Typified, and prefigured by Circumcision, with which
it was coexistent, and used with it for many years together in the Jewish
Church.

The Jewish Church made it a Ceremony of initiating Proselytes unto the Law,
and our Savior liking the Institution, continued the use of it, and made it
the only Ceremony of Initiating Proselytes unto the Gospel, superadding unto it
the complete Nature of an Initiatory Sacrament, or the full force of
Circumcision as it was a Sign of the Covenant, and a Seal of the Righteousness
of Faith.

These things being premised, let us proceed to the stating of the former
Questions. And first of all,

Quest. I. Whether Infants are incapable of Baptism?
Which, considering what has already been said concerning the Spiritual and
Evangelical Nature of the Covenant, which God made with Abraham, and the
initiation of young Children into it by God's especial appointment, cannot
without rashness be affirmed. Nothing can reflect more dishonor upon the
Wisdom of God, and the practice of the Jewish Church than to assert Infants to
be incapable of the same privilege, which God, and the Jewish Church granted
unto them. For God commanded them to be Circumcised, and the Jewish Church
commanded them to be Baptized, as well adult Proselytes, and if they were then
capable both of Circumcision, and Baptism, surely they are capable of Baptism
now.

If they be not, from whence comes the difference? Not from the Nature of the
Covenants, for the Covenant, which God made with Abraham, and his Seed, was, as
I have showed, the same Covenant for substance, which he has since renewed
with us in Christ: Nor from the Signs and Seals of the Covenant; for
Circumcision was a Sign and Seal of the same Grace, or of the same
Righteousness of Faith under the Old Testament, that Baptism is now under the
New.

Wherefore, since the Covenants were for substance the same, both Spiritual and
Evangelical Covenants, and the Grace of those Covenants the very same, and only
the Rites and Ceremonies which were Signs of those Covenants, and Seals of that
Grace being different; what hinders in the nature of the thing, but that
Infants who were capable of the one, should not also be capable of the other?
Is Baptism a more Spiritual Ordinance than Circumcision? That cannot be,
because Circumcision is a Gospel-Ordinance; I mean, an Ordinance of the Gospel
which God preached before unto Abraham, and if the Spirituality of outward
Ordinances are to be measured from the ends of their institution, then
Circumcision was every way as Spiritual as Baptism, because it really signed
the same Covenant, and sealed the same Grace, and was a Ceremony of Initiation
to the same Spiritual Seed of Abraham, that Baptism now is.

Wherefore, if the relative nature of Circumcision, considered as a Sacrament,
was the same under the Law, that Baptism is under the Gospel, it must needs
follow, that Children under the Gospel, are as capable of this (supposing no
new Command to exclude them) as under the Law, they were of that; if Infant
Church Membership, or the Initiation of Infants was then no absurdity, surely
it can be none now: If God under the Old Testament vouchsafed it as a gracious
Privilege unto Children to be incorporated with actual Believers, and with
them to be made members of his Church; without a Prohibition to the contrary,
they must needs be capable of the same Privilege still. Nay, if Infants were
admitted into the Church, when the entrance into it was more grievous, and not
without blood, how unreasonable is it to assert, that they are now incapable of
admission into it, when the entrance into it is made more easy, and more
agreeable to the natural weakness of a young and tender Child? Certainly if the
Jewish Infants were Circumcised with the most painful and bloody Circumcision
made with hands, Christian Infants, without a Special Countermand from God,
must be deemed capable of the Circumcision made without hands, I mean of
Baptism, which is the Circumcision of Christ. What God has Sanctified, and
Adopted, and made a Member of his Church, let no Man presume to think it
incapable of Sanctification, Adoption, and Church Membership, but yet so rash
and extravagant have the professed Adversaries of Infant Baptism been, as to
pronounce little Infants as incapable of Baptism, as the young ones of
unreasonable Creatures, and that it is as vain to call upon God to send his
Holy Spirit upon them, as to pray him to illuminate a Stone or a Tree.

Nay, upon this very Presumption, that Infants are incapable of Baptism, they
assert Infant Baptism to be a Scandalous abuse of the Ordinance of Baptism, a
mere Nullity and insignificant performance, and scornfully call it
Baby-Baptism, forgetting all this while that Circumcision of Infants was no
scandalous abuse of the Ordinance of Circumcision, but a valid and significant
Performance, and that in their Phrase there was Baby-Circumcision, and
Baby-Baptism in the Jewish Church.

The reason why they conclude Infants incapable of Baptism, is taken from the
consideration of their incapacity, as to some ends and uses of Baptism, which
cannot be answered (say they) but by the Baptism of grown Persons, who are
capable of understanding the Gospel, and of professing their Faith, and
Repentance, and of submitting unto Baptism, and of having their Faith and Hope
further strengthened in the use of it; but Infants being utterly incapable of
understanding the Gospel, or of professing their Faith, and Repentance, and of
submitting unto Baptism in which they are merely passive, or of having their
Faith strengthened in the use of it, they ought to be deemed incapable of
Baptism, whose ends are so much frustrated, when it is applied unto them.

But this way of arguing, how plausible soever it may seem at first hearing, is
weak and fallacious, and highly reflecting upon the Council, and Wisdom of God.

First, It is weak and fallacious, because it makes no distinction betwixt a
strict institution, which is instituted by God for one, or a few ends, and
procisely for Persons of one sort, and an Institution of Latitude, which is
instituted by him for several ends, and for different sorts of Persons
differently qualified for those several ends. Of the first sort, was the
Ordinance of Fringes abovementioned, which could only concern grown Persons,
because they only were capable of answering the end, for which it was
instituted, viz. To look upon them and remember the Commandments of the Lord,
and of the latter sort is the Holy Ordinance of Marriage, which was appointed
by God for several ends, and for Persons differently qualified, and capacitated
for those several ends, in so much, that Persons, who are incapacitated as to
some ends of Marriage, may yet honestly Marry, because they are capable of the
rest. All the ends and uses, for which it was appointed can only be answered by
the Marrying of Persons who are capacitated for procreation of Children,
notwithstanding superannuated Persons, who are past that capacity, are not
incapable Subjects of Marriage, nor is the Marriage of such invalid, or an
abuse of the Holy Ordinance of Marriage, because they are capable of answering
one end, for which Marriage was ordained.

This shows how fallaciously the Anabaptists argue against Baptizing of
Infants, because of their incapacity as to some ends and uses for which Baptism
was ordained; they ought first to have proved, what they take for granted, that
it was a Divine Institution of the first sort, which I call a strict
Institution, and then their Argument had been good, but this they will never be
able to prove, because Baptism succeeded in the room of Circumcision, which was
a Divine Institution of the latter sort, and because our Savior was Baptized,
in whom there was a greater incapacity, as to the ends of Baptism, than
possibly can be in Infants, even as he was in a greater incapacity as to
answering the ends of Circumcision, than ordinary Jewish Infants were. John
verily did Baptize with the Baptism of Repentance, and thereby sealed unto the
People the Remission of their Sins, and therefore understanding very well that
our Lord was not capable of this, and other ends of his Baptism, he forbad him,
telling him, that he was fitter to be the Baptist, than to be Baptized of him;
but yet as soon as our Lord gave him one general reason why he ought to be
Baptized, viz. Because it became him to fulfill all Righteousness, he suffered
him, which shows that Baptism is a Divine Institution of Latitude, and that in
such an Institution the incapacity of a Person, as to some ends, does not
incapacitate him for it, when he is capable of the rest.

But Secondly, This way of arguing from the incapacity of Infants, as to some
ends of Baptism is highly reflecting upon the Wisdom of God; who commanded
young Babes to be Circumcised, although all the ends of Circumcision could not
be answered, but by the Circumcision of adult Persons, who only were capable of
understanding the nature of the Institution, and the nature of the Covenant,
into which they were to enter, of professing their Faith and Repentance, and of
submitting unto the bloody Sacrament, in which Children were merely Passive,
and of having their Faith and Hope further strengthened upon sealing unto them
the Remission of their Sins.

Wherefore, the full force of this Objection rises up against
Infant-Circumcision, as well as Infant Baptism, because Circumcision was
instituted for the same ends, that Baptism now is, and accordingly when Men
were initiated by Circumcision they were to profess their Faith, and
Repentance, and shortly after at their Baptism solemnly to renounce Idolatry,
and all idolatrous Manners and Worship, and their idolatrous Kindred and
Relations; and yet upon the desire of such Proselytes, their Children were
initiated both by Circumcision, and Baptism, though they were altogether
incapable of understanding, or doing those things which their Fathers did.

Wherefore, those Men who argue against Infant Baptism, because it does not
answer all the ends of Baptism, reproach the Divine Wisdom, and the Wisdom of
the Jewish Church, not considering, that Circumcision was, and Baptism is an
Institution of great Latitude and compass, designed on purpose by God for
Children, in whom there is a capacity for some, nay, for the Rem Praecipuam in
Baptismo non attendunt, hoc est restificationem divinae benevolentiae in foedus
and tutelam suam suscipientis and gratiam conferentis, etc. nam in Baptismo
praecipua res est divina gratia, quae consistit in remissione peccatorum,
regeneratione, adoptione, haereditate Vitae aeternae, cujus sane gratiae
Infantes and indigentes and capaces sunt. Cassand. de Bapt. Infant.
chief ends of Baptism, as well as for Men and Women, in whom there is a
capa,city for all.

They are capable of all the ends of it, as it is instituted for a Sign from
God toward us, to assure us of his Gracious favor, and to consign unto us the
benefits of the Covenant of Grace. For their Childhood does not hinder, but
that they may be made Members of the Church, as of a Family, Tribe, College,
or any other Society, nor does it incapacitate them any more from being adopted
the Children of God, than the Children of any other Person, nor of becoming
Heirs of Eternal Life by virtue of that Adoption, than by virtue of any other
civil Adoption, the Heirs to such a Temporal Estate. For Children are capable
of all acts of Favor and Honor from God and Men, and of being instated in all
the Privileges of any Society, though they cannot as yet perform the Duties of
it, nor understand any thing thereof. Since therefore, Children are as capable,
and stand as much in need of almost all the Benefits of the Covenant of Grace,
and the Privileges of Church Membership as Men, is it not as fit that the
Confirmatory Sign of those Benefits and Privileges should be applied unto them
as well as unto these? Should a Prince Adopt a Beggar's Child, and incorporate
him into the Royal Family, and settle a part of his Dominions upon him, and to
solemnize and confirm all this, should cut off a bit of his Flesh, or command
him to be washed with Water, who would count this an insignificant Solemnity,
or say, that the Child was not capable of the Sign, when he was capable of the
chief Things signified thereby? Or to make a Comparison, which has a nearer
semblance with the Case of Infant Baptism. Suppose a Prince should send for an
attainted Traytor's Child, and in the Presence of several Persons assembled for
that purpose, should say: You know the Blood of this Child is attainted by his
Fathers Treason, by Law he has forfeited all Right to his Ancestors Estate,
and Titles, and is quite undone, though he be not sensible of his wretched
Condition. My Bowels of Compassion yern upon him, and here I restore him to his
Blood and Inheritance, to which henceforward he shall have as much right, as if
the Family had never been attainted. I justify him freely, and declare my self
reconciled unto him, and that no spot or imputation may hereafter lay upon him,
I here before you all wash him with pure water, to signify that he is cleansed
from his Original Attaindure and Corruption of Blood, and that he is as fully
restored to his Birthright, as if he had never been Attaint.

Now suppose this were done for a poor attainted Infant, could any Man say that
the action was insignificant, and invalid, because the Child knew nothing of
it, or that he was incapable of the Sign, when he was capable of being washed
from the Attaindure, and of being thereby restored to his blood, and
Birthright, which was the chief thing signified thereby?

These things should be well considered by the Despisers of Infant Baptism,
against whom I may urge for Precedents the Circumcision, and Baptism of the
Jewish Church, both these, as I must often observe, were applied unto Infants
as well as adult, and actual Believers under the Old Testament, and
accordingly, though Abraham believed, and solemnly professed his Faith before he
was Circumcised, yet I hope they will not say that God acted foolishly, in
commanding Isaac, etc. to be Circumcised before he understood the ends of
Circumcision, or could believe, much less make profession of his Belief. He was
entered Sacramentally into Covenant with God before he was able to recontract,
or understand what the condition of the Covenant was, but yet I presume they
will not say he was Circumcised in vain, although he was under the very same
incapacity as to the ends of Circumcision, that Infants are of Baptism now.

The best way, that I know, they have of evading the force of this Argument, is
by saying, that Circumcision was more proper for Infants than Baptism, because
it left a significant Mark, and Character in their Flesh, whereas Baptism is a
transient Sign, and leaves no significant Impression behind it, whereby to
instruct Men and Women what was done unto them in their Infancy. But this is a
mere shift:

First, Because the Mark, and Character, which Circumcision left in the Flesh
of the Child, was as insignificant to him during the time of his Nonage, as
Baptism is to Christian Infants, neither afterward could he tell, but by the
instruction of others, what the meaning of that Character was, and for what
ends it was imprinted in his Flesh. And therefore, according to their way of
reasoning against Infant Baptism, it ought to have been deferred till the full
years of discretion, when the Circumcised Person might have understood the
Spiritual Signification thereof.

Furthermore, in answer to this Objection, I must remind them, that the Mark
and Character which Circumcision left behind it, was of no force, or
signification, unless it did appear from the Ezrah 2. 62. Nehem. 7. 5. 64.
Registers of the Tribes, that the Person circumcised was a Jew.

I say, the Character which Circumcision left behind it, was merely of it self
of no force nor signification without the Registers, or written Genealogies,
because without them neither the circumcised Person himself, nor the Church
could know in many Circumstances whether he were a true Son of Abraham, or an
Egyptian, Ismaelite, or Samaritan, who were all Circumcised as well as the
Jews. If Baptism then be a Transient, Circumcision was an Equivocal Sign, and
therefore these pretended circumstantial Differences signify nothing, nor make
any substantial difference betwixt Circumcision and Baptism, as to the capacity
of Infants unto both. They are capable of contracting a Spiritual Relation unto
God by this, as formerly they were by that; they are capable of having their
Spiritual attaindure removed; they are capable of receiving the Blessings of
the Covenant, though they cannot perform the duties of it, and God may solemnly
bind himself unto them, though they cannot as yet personally bind themselves unto
him.

But Secondly, Allowing that Circumcision was more proper for Infants, than
Baptism, yet this difference is wholly avoided by referring the Practice of
Infant Baptism not only unto Infant. Circumcision, but unto the Original
Practice of Infant Baptism in the Jewish Church; which understood very well,
that it was but a transient rite, and left no Character upon the person, who
was initiated thereby. Those therefore who take upon them to argue against
Infant Baptism from this or any other pretended reason, take upon them to
censure, and condemn the Jewish Church, which for many Ages Baptized Infants,
and Minor Proselytes into the Covenant, as well as actual Believers, and yet
were never censured, or reproved for it by any Prophet, which we may presume
they would have been, had Baptismal Initiation of Infants into the Covenant
been so absurd, insignificant, and abusive a practice, as the Professors
against Infant Baptism vainly pretend it is.

Having now, I hope, sufficiently proved, that Infants are not incapable
Subjects of Baptism. Let us proceed to state the next Question, which is this.

Quest. II. Whether Infants are excluded from Baptism by Christ?
Where, in the first place, I must observe, that the Question ought to be
proposed in these Terms, and not Whether Christ has commanded Infants to be
Baptized? For as a good Herodot. lib. 2.
Author observes of the River Nile, that we ought not to ask the reason, Why
Nile overflows so many days about the Summer-solstice? But rather Why it does
not overflow all the Year long? So in the Controversy about Infant Baptism,
the enquiry ought not to be, whether Christ has commanded Infants to be
Baptized? But whether he has excluded them from Baptism? Because, considering
the practice of the Jewish Church as to Infant-Circumcision and Infant Baptism
too, it must needs be granted, that a Command from Christ, to initiate
Proselytes out of all Nations into the Christian Religion, must without an
exception to the contrary, be understood to comprehend Infants, as well as Men.

As for Example, suppose our Savior had not changed the Seal of the Covenant,
but instead of Baptizing, had said unto the Apostles, Go, and make all Nations
my Disciples, Dr. Stillingfleets Vindication of the A. C. p. 100.
Circumcising them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. I appeal to any Impartial Man's judgment, whether the Apostles receiving
such a Commission to Circumcise Proselytes of all Nations, would not have
presumed without directions to the contrary, that it was Christ's Intention
that the Infants of adult Proselytes should be Circumcised as well as
Proselytes themselves, according to the Commandment of God under the Old
Testament, and the Practice of the Jewish Church.

And if a command to Proselyte and Circumcise all Nations would, without an
exception, have comprehended Infants, as well as Men, why should it be imagined
that the command to Proselyte and Baptize all Nations should not likewise
comprehend them, seeing that Infant Baptism, as well as Infant-Circumcision had
been the immemorial Practice of the Jewish Church.

This is so true, that supposing our Savior had intended the gathering of
Churches among the Gentiles according to the Old Testament, and the Custom of
the Jewish Church, he need not have expressed his meaning in any other manner,
than by saying unto the Apostles; Go Proselyte all Nations, Circumcising and
Baptising of them, etc. Nay he could scarce have expressed his Intentions in a
more emphatical or intelligible manner unto them, who being Jews must needs
have the same Apprehensions as to the Subjects of Initiation, and
Church Membership under the Gospel, that they had under the Law. They had lived
under a Dispensation, where Infants were initiated both by Circumcision and
Baptism into the Church, and without they had been instructed to the contrary,
they must naturally have understood their Commission of Baptizing to have
extended unto Infants, as well as actual Believers; as if, for instance, God
should now extraordinarily call twelve Men of any Christian Nation, where
Infant Baptism had been a constant and universal Practice, and bid them go, and
Proselyte the Indians, baptizing them, etc. None of these Men could possibly
imagine, that Infants were excepted out of their Commission; but common ^ense,
on the contrary, would oblige them to understand it according to the usage of
their own Church.

Besides, abstracting at present from the Controversy, Whether Christ did, or
did not exclude Infants from Baptism? What reason can any Man give, why he who
fetched so many of his Institutions from Jewish usages, should exclude them
from it, and recede in this Point from the Jewish Church.

They are every way as capable of the visible Signs of Gods invisible favor,
and of the Benefits of the Abrahamical Covenant under the New Testament, as
they were under the Old, they are as fit Subjects of Baptism now, as they were
of Circumcision and Baptism then, their initiation into both Churches seems to
be equally rational, because, though the sign of the Covenant be altered, yet
the Covenant still remains the same. In a word, there lay no Obligation upon
our Blessed Lord, to lay aside the practice of Infant Baptism, as being
inconsistent either with the Free, or the Manly, or Universal nature of the
Christian Church.

Thus much I have said to show, why the Question betwixt us and the Dissenters
upon the account of Infant Baptism should be, Whether Christ has excluded
Infants from Baptism? And not Whether he has commanded Infants to be Baptized?
And certainly, the Premises being considered, there is far more reason to
conclude, that Christ should have prohibited Infants from Baptism, if it had
been his intention not to have them Baptized, than that he should have
commanded them to be Baptized, if it had been his intention to continue the
practice of Infant Baptism. For he need not have commanded his Apostles to do
that, which they would naturally have done of themselves without a Prohibition,
and that he did not prohibit them to Baptize Infants, is now the thing to be
proved, in showing, that he did not exclude Infants from Baptism.

For if he excluded them from Baptism, he either excluded them from it directly
by an express Prohibition not to Baptize them, or consequentially by so
limiting, and determining the Subject of Baptism, as to make it unapplicable
unto them.

That he never excluded them by any express Prohibition, the Anabaptists
themselves do grant, because there is no such Prohibition to be found in the
New Testament; but then they pretend, that it was Christ's intention that grown
Persons should be the only Subjects of Baptism, because the Gospel requires,
that Persons to be Baptized should first be Taught, Believe, and Repent.

First, The Gospel requires, that they should be Taught, as in Matthew. 28. 29.
Go and teach all Nations, Baptizing them, etc.

Secondly, That they should believe, as in Mark 16. 15. Go ye into all the
World, and Preach the Gospel to every Creature, saying, He that Believes, and
is Baptized shall be saved.

Thirdly, Repentance, as in Acts 2. 38. Repent, and be Baptized every one of
you in the Name of Jesus.

But now, say they, these three Qualifications before Baptism, can belong to
none but grown Persons, to Men and Women, at years of discretion, and therefore
none but such ought to be Baptized. And accordingly, we find that Baptism was
practiced upon these terms throughout the History of the Acts, and in Heb. 6.
1, 2. Repentance and Faith are mentioned as prerequisite qualifications to
Baptism in these Words, Not laying again the Foundation of Repentance from
deadly works, and of Faith toward God, of the Doctrine of Baptisms.

These are the Arguments, by which the Adversaries of Infant Baptism endeavor
to prove, that Christ so limited the subject of Baptism, as to exclude Infants
from it. But in this they are grievously mistaken, because these, and the like
Texts do of themselves no more prove, that grown persons are the only Subjects
of Baptism, than the words of the Apostle, 2 These. 3. 10. prove that grown
Persons only are to eat. The Apostles words are these: When we were with you,
this we commanded you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat. From
whence in their Sophistical way it may be argued thus.

It belongs only to grown Persons to eat, because the Apostle requires, that
Persons who eat, should first Work; but now this Apostolical qualification of
working can belong to none but grown Persons, and therefore none but such ought
to eat.

I have made use of this Parallel instance to show how inconclusive the former
way of arguing against Infant Baptism is in it self, and how impossible it is
to prove from the Texts abovementioned, or any other like them, that Baptism
is restrained to grown Persons, because none but grown Persons can be Taught,
Believe, and Repent. And I will further discover the weakness and fallacy of
this Argument from a familiar Comparison, which any common Capacity may
understand.

Suppose then there were a great Plague in any Country, and God should
miraculously call eleven, or twelve Men, and Communicate unto them a certain
Medicine against this Plague, and say unto them: Go into such a Country, and
call the People of it together, and teach them the Virtues of this Medicine,
and assure them, that he that believes, and takes it from you, shall Live,
but he that believes not, shall Dye.

Upon this Supposition I demand of these Dissenters, if the words of such a
Commission would be sufficient for the Missioners that received it, or any
others to conclude, that it was God's intention, that they should administer
his revealed Medicine to none, but grown Persons, Because they only could be
called together, and taught the Virtues of it, and believe or disbelieve them
who brought it. No certainly, this way of arguing would not be admitted by any
rational Man, because the Children would be as capable of the Medicine, as the
Men, though they were ignorant of the benefits of it, and merely passive in the
Administration thereof.

Wherefore seeing Children, as I have showed, are capable of the benefits of
Baptism, and seeing the Apostles who received a Commission to go and Teach, and
Baptize all Nations, Or, as it is in the words of St. Mark, to Preach the
Gospel to every Creature, saying, He that believes and is Baptized shall be
saved. I say, seeing Children are capable of the benefits of Baptism, and the
Apostles, who received this Commission, knew them to be capable of it, and to
have had both Circumcision, and Baptism administered to them in the Jewish
Church, how should they, or any others imagine from the tenure of such a
Commission, which was given unto them, as Planters of Churches, but that it was
Christ's intention that Children, as well as grown Persons were to be Baptized?

Should God in the days of David, or Solomon, have called eleven or twelve
Prophets, and given them the same Commission, which [Mutatis Mutandis] Christ
gave to his Apostles, bidding them go and Teach all Nations the Law,
Circumcising, and Baptizing of them in the Name of the God of Abraham, and
teaching them to do whatsoever he had commanded them, I say, should he have
sent them out to Preach the Law to every Creature, saying, He that believes,
and is Circumcised, and baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not
shall be damned, would a Commission so worded have been of it self a sufficient
ground for them to think, that it was God's intention to restrain Circumcision
and Baptism to adult Persons, contrary to the practice of the Jewish Church?
Or, if in a short History of their Mission, and Undertaking, we should have
read, that they Circumcised, and Baptized as many Proselytes, as gladly
received their word, would this have been an Argument that they did not also
Circumcise and Baptize the Infants of those believing Proselytes, according to
the Laws, and Usages of their Mother Church? No certainly, such a Commission to
Proselyte Strangers to the Jewish Religion, could not in reason have been
strained to prejudice the customary right of Infants to Circumcision, and
Baptism, and therefore in parity of reason, neither could the Apostles so
understand their Commission without other Notices, as to exclude Infants from
Sacramental Initiation into the Church.

The plain truth is, their Commission was a direction how they should proselyte
Strangers to Christianity, according to the nature of propagating a new
Religion in strange Countries, as it is set forth by the Apostle, Romans 20. 14.
How then shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? And how shall
they believe in him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear
without a Preacher? And how shall they Preach unless they be sent? Accordingly
they were sent out to Preach, or to Disciple Men, and Women by Preaching, and
to Baptize as many of them, as should upon their Preaching Believe, and Repent.
But though the Order of Nature required that they should proceed in this Method
with grown Persons; as the Jews were wont to do with Proselytes to the Law, yet
it did not hinder, that they who had been born, and bred Jews, should initiate
the Infants of such Proselyted Persons, according to the usage of the Jewish
Church. What need Christ have said more unto them, when he sent them out, than
to bid them Go, and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, etc. Or, to Preach the Gospel to every Creature, and tell them, that he
that would believe the Gospel, and be Baptized, should be saved. But then the
respective sense of these words could only concern adult Persons, and their
qualification for Baptism, but could in no reason be construed by them, to
exclude Infants, but only unbelieving Men, and Women, whereof none were to be
admitted into the Church by Baptism, before they were taught Christianity, and
had confessed their Faith and Sins. Should God, as I said before, call twelve
Men of any Church, where Infant Baptism had been the constant and undoubted
practice, and bid them go, and Preach the Gospel in the Indies to every
creature, and to say, He that believes the Doctrine which we Preach, and is
Baptized with the Baptism which we Administer, shall be Saved: I appeal to any
Dissenter upon the account of Infant Baptism, whether he thinks that these Men,
bred up to the practice of Infant Baptism, could in probability so interpret
this Commission, as to think, that it was God's intention, that they should
exclude the Infants of believing Proselytes from Baptismal admission into the
Church.

The Professors against Infant Baptism, put the greatest stress upon these
words of our Savior: He that believes, and is baptized, shall be Saved: But
if they would well consider the next words, they would find, that Infants are
not at all concerned in them, because it follows, but he that believes not
shall be Damned. The same want of Faith, which here excludes from Baptism,
excludes also from Salvation, and therefore it cannot be understood of Infants,
unless they will say with the The Petrobusians. vid. Cassandri praefat. ad Duc.
Jul. Cli. and praefat. advers. Anabaptistas.
Original Anabaptists, that the same incapacity of believing which excludes
them from Baptism, excludes them from Salvation too. Wherefore, it is plain,
that the believing, and not believing in that Text, is only to be understood of
such as are in capacity of hearing, and believing the Gospel; that is, of grown
Persons, just as the words in Joh. 3. 36. He that believes on the Son of God
has Everlasting Life, and he that believes not shall not see Life, but the
Wrath of God abides on him.

Thus far have I proceeded to show, how inconclusively and absurdly the
Anabaptists go about to prove, that Infants ought to be excluded from Baptism
from the forementioned Texts, which speak of the Order of Proselyting grown
Persons, and their Qualifications for Baptism; and as little success have they
with some others, which they bring to show how unprofitable Baptism is for
Infants, as that in 1 Pet. 3. 21. Where the Apostle tells us, that external
Baptism of putting away the filth of the Flesh, of which Infants are only
capable, signifies nothing, but the answer of a good Conscience toward God, of
which, say they, Infants are altogether incapable; to which the answer is very
easy, that another Apostle tells us, that external Circumcision of which
Infants were only capable, profited nothing without keeping the Law, which
Infants could not keep, nay, that the outward Circumcision, of which Infants
were only capable, was nothing, but that the inward Circumcision of the heart,
and in the spirit was the true Circumcision, and yet Infants remaining Infants
were utterly incapable of that; so that their way of arguing from this and such
like Texts, proves nothing, because it proves too much, and stretches the words
of the Apostles unto undue consequences, beyond their just Meaning, which was
only to let both Jews and Christians know, that there was no resting in
external Circumcision, or Baptism, but not that their Infants were unprofitably
Circumcised, and Baptized.

So weak, and unconcluding are all the Arguments, by which the Anabaptists
endeavor from Scripture, to prove, that Christ has limited the Subject of
Baptism unto grown Persons; put them all together they do not amount to any
tolerable degree of probability, much less unto a presumption, especially if
they be put in the balance against the early and universal practice of the
Catholic Church. Had not the Church been always in possession of this
practice, or could any time be showed on this side the Apostles, when it began.
Nay, could it be proved, that any one Church in the World did not Baptize
Infants, or that any considerable number of Men otherwise Orthodox, did decline
the Baptizing of them upon the same Principles, that these Men do now, then I
should suspect that their Arguments are better than really they are, and that
Infant Baptism might possibly be a deviation from the rule of Christ. But since
it is so universal, and ancient a practice, that no body knows when, or where
it began, or how from not being it came to be the practice of the Church, since
there was never any Church Ancient or Modern, which did not practice it, it
must argue a strange partiality to think, that it could be any thing less, than
an Apostolical Practice, and Tradition, or the Original use of Baptism in its
full Latitude under the Gospel, which it had under the Law. Had the Ecquid
verisimise est tot ac tantae in unam fidem erraverint? Nullus inter multos
eventus unus est. Exitus variasse debue^at error doctrinae Ecclesiarum. Quod
autem apud multos unum invenitur, non est e^ratum, sed traditum. Tertull. de
praescriptione Haeret. c. 28.
Churches erred they would have varied (says Tertullian) but what is one and
the same amongst them all, proceeds not from error but Tradition. Or, as St. De
Baptismo contra Donat. l. 4. c. 24.
Augustine says upon this Subject, That which the Universal Church does hold,
and was never instituted by Councils, but was always retained in the Church, we
most rightly believe to have descended from nothing less than Apostolical
Tradition.

Cassand. advers. Anabapt. p. 675.
Menno, one of the most learned of the Anabaptists about the time of the
Reformation, was so pressed with this way of arguing, that he acknowledged
Infant Baptism to be as old, as the time of the Apostles, but then he said, it
proceeded from false-Apostles, and false-Teachers in the Apostles times. But if
it came first from false Apostles, and false-Teachers, in the time of the
Apostles, how came it to pass that we heard nothing of that Innovation in the
Writings of the Apostles or of their Companions and Contemporaries, such as St.
Clement, St. Ignatius, St. Polycarp, etc? How came St. John who survived unto
the latter end of the first Century to pass it over in silence, or how came the
Spirit in the Revelations, which by his Pen reproved so many abuses in the
Churches, not to censure this? It is very strange, that none of the Penmen of
the Holy Ghost, nor none of their Assistants, and Companions should animadvert
upon so scandalous an abuse of the Holy-Ordinance of Baptism, which in a short
time would fill the Church with sham Christians, and destroy the Essence
thereof. In like manner, if it came in by false Teachers, in the next Age to
the Apostles, how came it to pass that none of the famous Saints and Martyrs,
who flourished then, opposed it as a dangerous Innovation, nor gave us any
account thereof? They wrote against the Heresies of Simon, Menander, Saturnus,
Cerinthus, Ebion, Valentinus, Basilides, Marcion, etc. but we find nothing in
them against Infant Baptism, though we are sure from Omnes enim venit
[Christus] per semet ipsum salvare, omnes, inquam, qui per eum renascuntur ad
deum, infantes, and parvulos, and pueros, and juvenes, and seniores, i. e.
Christ came to save all by himself, all, I say, who by him are born again to
God, Infants, and little Ones, and Boys, and Young and Old. In the Ancient
Writers Baptism is called Regeneration, and Baptized Persons are said to be
Regenerate, or born again, according to the Scripture, which calls it, (...),
the washing of Regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. Hence says Just. Mart. Apol. 2. (...).
So has Phavorinus observed, (...), Holy Baptism is called Regeneration, and
those who would see more proofs of it, may consult Suicerus in the words (...)
and (...). Dr. Ham. on Matthew. 19. 28. John 3. 5. Seldom de jure l. 2. c. 4. But
if after all this evidence any Anabaptist will say, that renascuntur in this
place of Irenaeus, does not signify Baptized, or born again of Water, then it
must signify Regenerated, or born again of the Spirit; and if Infants, and
little Ones can be born again of the Spirit, then they are capable of being
born again of Water, or of being Baptized, as Vossius argues disp. de Baptismo,
p. 181.
Irenaeus, and De Baptisma. Where what he speaks about deferring the Baptism of
Infants, shows that it was the practice of the Christians in that Age, Pro
cujusque personae condition, ac dispositione, etiam aetate, cunctatio Baptismi
utilior est, praecipue tamen circa parvulos. Quid enim necesse est, si non tum
necesse, sponsores periculo ingeri? -- Quid festinat innocens aetas ad
remissionem peccatorum? But this Opinion of his, that it was more convenient to
defer the Baptism of Infants, was his own singular opinion, as much as that was
of deferring the Baptism of Virgins and Widows, till they were Married, which
follows in the next words. Non minore de causa innupti procrastinandi, etc. And
he shows the same cause why he would have the Baptism of Children, and
un-married Women deferred, for fear they should be tempted to renounce Christ
after Baptism. Siqui pondus intelligant Baptismi, magis timebunt consecutionem,
quam dilationem: fides integra secura est de salute. But then how absolutely
necessary he thought Baptism for Infants in case of extreme danger is evident
from other Passages, as Cap. 13. Quum vero praescribitur nomini sine Baptismo
competere salutem, and Cap. 17. Sufficiat scilicet in necessitatibus utaris,
sicubi, aut loci, aut temporis, aut personae conditio compellit. Tunc enim
constantia succurrentis excipitur, quoniam reus erit perditi hominis, si
supersederet praestare, quod libere potuit. So likewise in his Book de anima,
Cap. 39. Adeo nulla ferme Nativitas munda est Ethnicorum -- Alioquin meminerat
dominicae definitionis, nisi quis nascatur ex aqua and Spiritu, non ibit in
regnum Dei, i. e. Non erit Sanctus. Ita omnis anima eousque in Adam censetur,
donec in Christo recenseatur, tamdiu immunda, quamdiu recenseatur. --
Tertullian, that it was practiced in that Age.

Ignatius, Polycarp, Papias, who were all the Act. Mart. Ignat.
Scholars of St. John, as likewise Justin Martyr, Athenagoras, and Hegesippus,
were all contemporary with Irenaeus who was Ep. Irenaei ad Florinum. advers.
Haeres. l. 3. cap. 3. l. 5. cap. 33.
the Disciple of Polycarp, (and who as he tells us in several places of his
Works, conversed with several Ancient Epist. ad Florinum. advers. Haeres. lib.
2. cap. 39.
Presbyters, that had lived in the Apostles times, of whom he had enquired
after the Apostles practices) and yet this inquisitive Father says nothing
against Infant Baptism though we are sure from him and his contemporary
Tertullian, that it was then of general practice in the Church.

What meaned all these Men to let such a pestilent practice pass uncondemned,
which in a short time, would leave none in the Church but Mock Christians, and
so prevail against the Catholic Church, which our Lord promised the Gates of
Hell should not prevail against? What, would not the Holy Ghost preserve so
much as one Church among so many, from such a dangerous error, but suffer them
all to embrace it without Opposition? Nunc omnes Ecclesiae erraverint, deceptus
sit and Apostolus de Testimonio reddendo Nullam respexerit Spiritus Sanctus,
uti eam in veritatem deduceret, ad hoc missus a Christo, ad hoc postulatus de
patre, ut esset doctor veritatis. Neglexerit Officium Dei villicus, Christi
Vicarius, sinens Ecclesias aliter interim intelligere, aliter credere, quam
ipse per Apostolos praedicabat. Ecquid verisimile est tot ac tantae in unam
fidem erraverint? Tertul. de praescript. Haereticorum. c. 28.
Would he suffer them all so soon to Apostatize, and to practice, and believe
otherwise, than Christ had taught, and the Apostles preached No! It is
impossible, that they should all consent in such a dangerous error, or that
they should all peaceably, and tamely submit to it without opposition, or that
such an alteration should be made without Observation no body can tell how, or
when.

Wherefore these Dissenters are very unreasonable in charging the Church
universal with apostasy from Christ upon the account of Infant Baptism, and in
striving to throw her out of the possession of such an ancient, and general
practice merely by such indirect and consequential Arguments from the
Scriptures, as the Ancient Fathers never drew from them, nor we can admit
against their general practice and consent. Certainly those places of the Neque
vero ignota fuerunt Ecclesiae, and priscis Ecclesiae patribus Evangelicae and
Apostolicae Scripturae loca in quibus poenitentia, and fides una cum Baptismo
requiri videntur. Sciebant enim probe haec ad adultos -- Cassand. Praefat.
advers. Anabapt.
New Testament; which require a Profession of Faith, and Repentance, in grown
Persons before Baptism, were understood by the Ancient Fathers, they
undoubtedly had well read and considered the History of Baptism in the Acts of
the Apostles, but yet they never drew this absurd Consequence from them, that
because Faith and Repentance were to go before Baptism, which is an Institution
of Latitude, in Adult Persons, that therefore Baptism was not to go before
Faith, and Repentance in Children and Minors, as both Circumcision, and Baptism
in the like Case were wont to go before them in the Jewish Church. They knew
the difference betwixt the admission of actual and potential See Dr. Tailor of
Baptizing Infants, great Exemplar, Sect. 9. part 2.
Believers, and also knew it was a very great inconsequence to argue from the
Qualifications, which the Gospel requires in those, to the Exclusion of these.
I freely acknowledge to them, that no Arguments are equal to the Scriptures,
when the Interpretations of them are not doubtful, yet when they are so, I
appeal to any sober Dissenter of this, or any other Persuasion, whether the
harmonious practice of the Ancient Churches, and the undivided consent of
Apostolical Fathers be not the most sure and authentical Interpreters, that can
be betwixt Men, and Men. They thought Infant Baptism lawful, and valid, and no
abuse of the Ordinance of Baptism, and let any modest and moderate Man judge,
whether so many Famous Hanc desipuere praeterita saecula, ut tot millibus
parvulorum per mill, and eo amplius annos illusorium Baptisma tribuerent and a
Christi temporibus usque ad vos, non veros ei Christianos, sed Phantasticos
crearent? Siccine caecatus est orbis terrarum, tantaque huc usque caligine
involutus, ut ad aperiendos oculos suos, and ad tam diuturnam noctem
illustrandam post tot Patres, Martyrs, Pontifices, and universalem Ecclesiarum
Principes vos tamdiu expectarit? Petrus Abbas Cluniacens. apud Cassandr.
Saints and Martyrs, so near the Apostles times, should fall into such a
Delusion, as to conspire in the practice of Mock-Baptism, and of making so many
Millions of Mock-Christians, and Mock-Churches, or that a little Sect, which
must have separated from all the Ancient, as well as Modern Churches, that were
ever yet discovered, should be in a great, and grievous Error themselves.

Let them begin with the first Testimonies about the practice of
Infant Baptism, viz. at the latter end of the second, and beginning of the
third Century, and take the pains to consult the successive Writers of the
Church. St. Irenaeus, as I have observed, was the Disciple of St. Polycarp, who
was the Disciple of St. John, and Tertullian was contemporary with the last
days of St. Irenaeus, and the next Writer in whom we find Infant Baptism
mentioned as an In Ep. ad Romans l. 5. pro hoc and Ecclesia ab Apostolis
traditionem suscepit etiam parvulis Baptismum dare, quia essent in omnibus
genuinae sordes peccati, quae per aquam, and Spiritum ablui deberent. In Lucam
Homil. 14. Parvuli baptizantur in remissionem peccatorum -- and in lib. Homil.
8. quia per Baptismi Sacramentum nativitatis sordes deponuntur, propterea
baptizantur and parvuli.
Apostolical, and Universal Practice, I mean Origin, flourished within fifteen
years after Tertullian's Death. St. Cyprian was Contemporary with the latter
days of Origin, and his Epistle to Fidus the Presbyter is such an account of
Infant Baptism, that it alone is enough to Convince any Soul, where Prejudice
does not reign, that it always was the practice of the Church. Fidus had
written unto him to let him know, that he thought it was not lawful to Baptize
Children before the Eighth Day, according to the Law of Circumcision, to which
he returned this Answer. Quantum autem ad causam Infantum pertinet, quas
dixisti intra secundum, vel tertium diem, quo nati sunt, constitutos, Baptizari
non oportere, and considerandam esse legem Circumcisionis antiquae, ut infra
octavum diem eum, qui natus est, Baptizandum, and Sanctificandum non putares,
long aliud in Concilio nostro omnibus visum est. Ep. 58. p. 95. Ed. Rigalt.
That he, and the Council (which consisted of 66 Bishops) were of another
Opinion, having determined, that as God under the Gospel was no accepter of
Persons: So he was no accepter of Ages, but that Infants might be Baptized as
soon as they were born, to wash away their Original Sin. The African Church was
one of the most flourishing, strict, and pious of the Primitive Churches, and
this resolution of the Council (which as St. Augustine observed an 100 Years
after, was not novum decretum) supposes that Infant Baptism had been the
Original, and immemorial practice of that Church. This Council sat about the
middle of the third Century, 150 Years or thereabouts after the Death of the
last surviving Apostle; and about the middle of the fourth Century we find
Gregory Nazianzen speaking thus. Orat. 40. in Sanct. Baptisma. (...) --
Have thou a Child? Let not Sin get the advantage, but let him be sanctified
from his Infancy, and consecrated by the Spirit from his tender Years. But it
may be thou art afraid to have him consigned, because of the weakness of his
Nature, what a silly Mother art thou, and how weak in Faith? Anna promised
Samuel to God before he was born, and not fearing any thing of Humane Weakness,
but trusting in God, Consecrated the Child to the Priesthood, almost as soon
as he saw the Light. Thou will have no need of Superstitious Charms, and
Amulets for him, in which the Devil steals to himself from silly Souls, the
Honor which is due to God, but call upon him the name of the Holy Trinity,
which is the most safe, and excellent of Charms. And afterward, (...).
so far the Baptism of those, who desire Baptism, but what shall we say of
Infants, who are sensible neither of the gain, nor loss of it, shall we Baptize
them? Most certainly, if they be in danger, for it is better, that they be
Sanctified without the Sense of it, than that they dye uninitiated and
unconsigned; and my reason is taken from Circumcision, which was administered on
the Eighth Day unto Infants, that had no Reason, to which I may add, the saving
of the Firstborn in Goshen, by the sign of the Blood on the Lintel of the
Door, and the two Side-Posts.

The Brevity, which I design in this Treatise, will not permit me to recite
many more Authorities, which are very Vid. testim. Veter. Script. de Baptism.
apud Cassand. and Gerhard. Joh. Voss. disp. 14. de Baptismo.
numerous out of Chrysostom, Ambrose, Jerome, Augustine, etc. But I shall rather
superadd some Considerations, which confirm this Ancient Tradition of
Infant Baptism, and are sufficient to induce any considerate and impartial Man
to believe, that so Ancient, and universal a Practice was as old, as the
Planting of Churches by the Apostles, and originally derives its Authority from
them.

For first, if Infant Baptism was not the Practice of the Apostles, but an
Innovation, it is very hard to imagine, that God should suffer his Church to
fall into such a dangerous Practice, which would in time Un-Church it, while
Miracles were yet Extant in the Church. The same Holy Spirit, that was the
guide of the Apostles, into all Truth, was the Author of Miracles too, but the
first four Witnesses, which I have produced for Infant Baptism, to wit,
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, and Cyprian, do all likewise assure us, that
Miracles were then not extraordinary in the Church.

Adversus haereses, l. 2. cap. 56, 57. and Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. cap. 7.
Irenaeus tells us, that the true Disciples of Christ did then dispossess
Devils, and had the Gift of Tongues, and of Praescience, and Praediction, and
of healing the Sick, and that the whole Congregation meeting together did by
Fasting and Prayer, often raise the Dead, and that many so raised were then
alive in the Church. Nay, he tells us, that the number of Spiritual Gifts were
innumerable, which the Church all the World over then received from Christ, and
I truly confess it cannot enter into my heart to believe, that God should
suffer the Church to Embrace such a pernicious Error (as Infant Baptism was, if
it was not of Apostolical Tradition) and fill the Christian World with
Mock-Christians, while he bore them Witness with Signs and Wonders, and diverse
Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost.

Tertullian in his Et ad Scapulam, c. 2.
Apologetic tells us, that the Christians had then power to make the Gods of
the Heathen confess themselves to be Devils. Nay, he Challenges the Heathens to
bring any one of those, that were acted, and inspired with any one of their
Gods, and Goddesses, whom they worshipped, and if that Demon God, or Goddess,
not daring to tell a Lie before any Christian, should not confess it self to be
a Devil, then they should shed the Blood of that Christian upon the Place.

Origin in his Answer to Celsus, frequently appeals to the Miracles, which the
Christians wrought in his Days, particularly in the first Cambridge Edition, p.
34.
Book, he says, that they exorcised Demons, healed the Sick, and foresaw
Future Events. And in the p. 334. See also p. 62, 80, 124, 127, 376.
seventh Book, he proves, that Christians did not their Miracles by any curious
Magical Arts, because Idiots, or illiterate Men among them did by nothing but
by Prayers, and Adjurations in the Name of Jesus, banish Devils from the Bodies
and Souls of Men.

In Epist. ad Donatum; vid. and Epist. ad Magnum and ad Demetrianum, p. 202.
Ed. Rigalt.
St. Cyprian tells us, that the Christians in his days had power to hinder the
Operation of deadly Poisons, to restore Madmen to their Senses, to force
Devils to confess themselves to be so, and with invisible strokes and Torments
to make them cry, and howl, and forsake the Bodies, which they possessed. These
are the first four Witnesses, which I have produced for the Practice of
Infant Baptism, and let any man judge, whether the Church could yet run into a
Church-destroying Practice within such an Holy, and Miraculous Period, as this.

But secondly, If Infant Baptism was not an Apostolical Tradition, or were
derivable from any thing less than Apostolical Practice, how came the Vid.
Vossii hist. Pelag. l. 2. pars. 2 These. 4. and 13. disp. de Bapt. These. 18. and
disp. 14. These. 4. Cassand. praefat. ad Duc. Jul. p. 670. and Testim. veteru de
Bapt. parvulorum, p. 687.
Pelagians not to reject it for an Innovation, seeing the Orthodox used it, as
an Argument against them, that Infants were guilty of Original Sin It had been
easy for them, had there been any ground for it, to say that it was an
Innovation crept into Practice since the time of the Apostles, or that it was
brought up by False-Apostles, and False-Teachers in the Apostles Times, but
then they were so far from doing this, which they would have been glad to do
upon any colorable Pretense, that they practiced it themselves, and owned it
for an Apostolical Tradition, and as necessary for Childrens obtaining the
Kingdom of Heaven, tho they denied that they were Baptized for the Remission of
Original Sin.

But thirdly, If Infant Baptism were not in Practice, from the first Plantation
of Christian Churches, or were derivable from any other Cause than Apostolical
Tradition, let the Opposers of it tell us any other probable way how it came to
be the uniform practice of all Churches, not only of such as were Colonies of
the same Mother Church, or had Correspondence with one another by their
Bishops, and Presbyters, but of such as were Original Plantations, and betwixt
which there was likely none, or but very little Communication, by reason of the
vast distance, and want of intercourse betwixt the Countries where Brerewoods
Enquiries, c. 23 Cassand. exposit. de auctor. Consult. Bapt. Infant. p. 692.
they lived. Among these, of the latter sort are the Abassin-Church, in the
further Ethiopia, and the Osor. l. 3. de rebus gest. Eman. cit. a Vossio in
disp. 14. de Baptismo Brerewoods Enquiries, c. 20.
Indian Church in Coulan, and Crangonor, and about Maliapur, Planted by St.
Thomas, both which practice Infant Baptism, tho in all probability they never
had it one from the other, or both from any third Church. It is very
incredible, that God should suffer all Churches in all the Parts of the World
to fall into one and the same Practice, which certainly is a Church-destroying
Practice, if the Apostles and their Assistants did not Baptize Infants, but
only grown Persons.

One may easily imagine, that God might suffer all Churches to fall into such
an harmless Practice as that of Infant-Communion, or that the Fathers of the
Church might comply with the Religious fondness of the People, in bringing
their Children to the Sacrament, as we do with bringing them to Prayers, but
that God should let them all (not preserving any one for a Monument of
Apostolical Purity) fall into a Practice, which destroys the Being of the
Church, is at least a thousand times more Incredible, than that the Apostles,
without a Prohibition from Christ to the contrary, (and no such Prohibition is
Extant in the New Testament) should Baptize Infants according to the Practice
of the Jewish Church.

But in the fourth Place, what Account can rationally be given, why the Jewish
Christians, who were offended at the neglect of Circumcision, should not have
been much more offended, if the Apostles had refused to initiate Children under
the New Testament, which had always been initiated under the Old. Is it
reasonable to believe, that those, who complained so much merely because the
Apostles Taught the Jews, which lived among the Gentiles, that they should not
Circumcise their Children, would not have complained much more if they had not
Baptized them, but quite excluded them, like the Infants of Unbelievers from
Admission into the Church. It must in all probability have galled them very
much to see their Children Treated like the Children of mere Strangers, and to
have had no visible difference put between the Infants of those that Embraced,
and those that resisted the Faith. For they always looked upon Pagan Children,
as Common, and Unclean, but upon their own, as Separate, and Holy; and St. Paul
makes the same distinction between them, 1 Cor. 7. 14. But had the Apostles
taught, that the Children of those, who were in Covenant with God, had no more
right unto Baptismal Initiation, than the Children of Idolaters, who were out
of the Covenant, they had Taught a Doctrine, which certainly would have
offended them more, than all they Preached against Circumcision, and keeping
the Ceremonial Law. Wherefore, since we never read among their many Complaints
upon the alteration of the Jews Customs, that they complained of their
Childrens not being initiated by Baptism, it is a greater presumption that the
Apostles, and their Assistants Baptized their Children, then the want of an
Express Example of Infant Baptism in the New Testament, is that they Baptized
them not.

Having now showed, first, that Infants are not incapable of Baptism.

Secondly, That they are not excluded from it by Christ; but that on the
contrary, we have very convincing Reasons to presume, that the Baptism of
Infants, as well as of grown Persons, was intended by him. Let us now proceed
to make a fair and impartial enquiry upon the Third Question.

Quest. III. Whether it is lawful to separate from a Church, which appoints
Infants to be Baptized?
And this, considering what I have said upon the former Questions, must be
determined in the Negative, Whether we consider Infant Baptism only as a thing
lawful, and allowable, or, as a Thing highly requisite, or necessary to be done.

I know very well, that my Adversaries, in this Controversy, will be apt to
deny this distinction betwixt Lawful and Necessary; as acknowledging nothing in
Religious matters to be lawful, but what is necessary, according to that common
Principle imbibed by all sorts of Dissenters, That nothing is to be appointed
in Religious matters, but what is commanded by some Precept, or directed unto
by some special Example in the Word of God.

Hence they ordinarily say, Can you show us any Precept or Example for
Baptizing Infants in the New Testament, if you can, we will grant, that the
appointment of it is lawful, but if you cannot, we disallow it as unlawful,
nay, as an Usurpation, and will never be of a Church, which so Usurpeth it over
the Consciences of Men.

This way of Arguing is plausible to the Vulgar, and would be very good, were
there such a Principle in the Scripture, as this, from whence they Argue, viz.
That nothing is to be appointed in Religious matters, but what is warranted by
Precept, or Example in the Word of God. Wherefore, as the Men with whom I have
to deal in this Controversy, are generally Persons of good natural
Understandings:

So in the First place, I beg them to consider, that there is no such Rule in
the Scripture, as this, and therefore those, who teach it for a Scripture-rule,
or Precept, do themselves impose upon Men's Consciences, as bad as Papists, and,
like them and the Pharisees of old, teach the Traditions of Men for Doctrines
of God. On the contrary, the Gospel tells us, that Sin is the Transgression of
a Law, and that where there is no Law there is no Transgression; and according
to this plain, and intelligible Rule, though the Baptizing of Infants were not
commanded in the Scriptures, yet the Church would have Power and Authority to
appoint it; upon supposition that it is not forbid.

Secondly, I desire them to consider the absurdity of this pretended
Scripture-rule, in that it takes away the distinction betwixt barely lawful, or
allowable, and necessary, and leaves no Negative mean betwixt necessary and
sinful, but makes things forbidden, and things not commanded to be the very
same.

Thirdly, I desire them to consider, what a slavish Principle this is, and how
inconsistent it is with the free, and manly nature of the Christian Religion,
under which we should be in a far more servile, and Childish condition, then
the Jews were under the Law, which as it is evident from the Feast of Purim,
and from the Institution of Baptism among the Jews, allowed private Persons to
practice, and the Church to appoint things of a Religious nature, which God had
not commanded to be done.

Lastly, I entreat them to consider, how utterly impracticable this pretended
Principle is, as might be proved from the contrary Practice of all those, who
advance it against Ecclesiastical Authority, and particularly from their own
Practice, in Baptizing grown Persons, who were bred up from Infants in the
Christian Religion, and in admitting Women to the Lord's Supper, who were not
admitted to the Passover, nor Paschal-cup of Blessing, without any Precept, or
President for so doing in the Word of God.

This little well considered, is enough to obviate all Objections against my
first Assertion, viz. That it is not lawful to separate from a Church which
appoints Infants to be Baptized, upon supposition, that Infant Baptism is
barely lawful, and allowable; but if any man desire further satisfaction, as to
this point, he may have it abundantly in the case of indifferent things, to
which I refer him, it being more my business to show here that Infant Baptism
is at least, a lawful, and allowable thing.

To prove this, I need but desire the Reader to reflect upon the State of the
two first Questions: For if Infants be as capable of Baptism under the Gospel,
as they were of Circumcision under the Law, and if Christ have not excluded
them from it neither directly, nor consequentially: Otherwise, if Baptism be an
Institution of as great Latitude in its self, as Circumcision its Forerunner
was, and Christ has not determined the administration of it to one Age, more
than one Sex: Once more, if Children may be taken into the Covenant of Grace,
under the Gospel, as well as under the Law, and Christ never said, nor did any
thing which can in reason be interpreted to forbid them to be taken in: In a
word, If they are capable of all the Ends of Baptism now, that they were of
Circumcision then, and of having the Privileges of Church Membership, and the
Blessings of the Covenant consigned unto them, and Christ neither by himself,
nor by his Apostles did forbid the Church to satisfy and fulfill this their
capacity: Or last of all, If Christ has only appointed Baptism instead of
Circumcision, but said nothing to determine the Subject of it, then it must
needs follow, that Infant Baptism must at least be lawful, and allowable,
because it is an indifferent, and not a forbidden, or sinful thing. But upon
this supposition, that it were left undetermined, and indifferent by Christ, it
might like other indifferent things be lawfully appointed by any Church, from
which it would be a Sin to separate upon that account. For in this case,
Churches might safely differ in their practice about Infant Baptism, as they do
now in the Ceremonies of Baptism; and those who lived in a Church which did
practice it, ought no more to separate from her for appointing of it, then
those who lived in another Church, which did not practice it, ought to separate
from her, for not appointing thereof.

Thus much I have said, I hope with sufficient moderation, upon supposition,
that all I have written upon former Questions, does but satisfactorily prove,
that Infant Baptism is only lawful, and not highly requisite and necessary; but
then if it be not only lawful, but highly requisite and necessary, so that it
ought to be appointed, then it must needs be much more sinful to separate from
a Church, which appoints Infants to be Baptized.

Now, as to the requisite necessity of Infant Baptism, supposing that my Reader
bears in memory, that I have said upon the last Question, (to make it appear
with the highest degree of credibility, that Christ instituted Baptism for
Infants, as well as grown Persons, and that the Apostles, and their Companions
Practiced Infant Baptism) I must here entreat him further to observe, that
there is a twofold necessity in matters of Christian Faith and practice, one
which proceeds from plain dictates of natural reason, or from plain and express
words of the Gospel, where the sense is so obvious and clear, that no sober man
can mistake it, or doubt of it, and another which proceeds from the general
Scope and Tenor of the Gospel, or from doubtful places in it so, or so
understood and interpreted by the unanimous voice, and practice of the ancient
Catholic Church.

The first degree of necessity is founded on oftensive certainty, and
demonstration, wherein there is no room left for Objection.

And the Second is founded upon violent presumption, where the Objections on
one hand are insufficient to move, or at least to turn the Balance, if put in
the Scale against the other, which is weighed down [Mole universatis Ecclesiae]
with the authority of the Universal Church. And because this Rule, like others,
is not so intelligible without an Example, I will add some Instances of things,
which are necessary to be believed, and practiced by every good Christian under
both these Notions of necessity, that they may be better understood.

According to the First Notion of it, it is necessary to believe, that Jesus
Christ is the Messiah, and the Son of God, because it is delivered in express
words of Scripture.

And according to the Second Notion of it, it is necessary to believe, that he
is of the same substance with the Father, and equal unto him, and that there
are three distinct, and coequal Persons in the Godhead, which are all but one
God, because these Doctrines, though they are not to be found in express words
in the Gospel, yet they are to be collected from several places of it, which
were always so interpreted by that ancient Catholic Church.

Again, according to the First Notion of necessity, it is necessary for all Men
to believe the Word of God, whether spoken or written, because natural reason
teaches us so to do.

And according to the Second Notion of it, it is necessary to believe the Books
contained in the New Testament, to be the Word of God, and no other (how
Divine, and Orthodox, and Ancient soever they may be) because they, and they
only have been received for such by the ancient Catholic Church.

In like manner as to matter of Practice, by the First sort of Necessity, it is
necessary for Christians to assemble together to Worship God, because Reason,
and Scripture plainly teach them so to do.

And by the Second sort it is necessary, that they should assemble themselves
periodically to Worship God on every first day of the Week, because the
Observation of the Lords Day, appears to be a Duty from several places of the
New Testament, as tehy are interpreted to this sense by the universal Practice
of the ancient Catholic Church.

To proceed, according to the First Notion of Necessity, Church Government is
necessary, because it is enjoined by the Dictates of Common reason, and most
express places of Scripture.

And according to the Second Notion of it, it is necessary to believe the Books
contained in the New Testament, to be the Word of God, and no other, (how
Divine and Orthodox, and Ancient soever they may be) because they, and they
only have been received for such by the Ancient Catholic Church.

In like manner as to matter of Practice, by the First sort of Necessity, it is
necessary for Christians to assemble together to Worship God, because Reason,
and Scripture plainly teach them so to do.

And by the Second sort it is necessary, that they should assemble themselves
periodically to Worship God on every first day of the Week, because the
Observation of the Lords Day, appears to be a Duty from several places of the
New Testament, as they are interpreted to this sense by the universal Practice
of the Ancient Catholic Church.

To proceed, according to the First Notion of Necessity, Church-Governmenr is
necessary, because it is enjoined by the Dictates of Common reason, and most
express places of Scripture.

And according to the Second Notion of it, it is necessary, that the Church
should be governed by Bishops (where they can be had) distinct from, and
Superior to Presbyters, because this Government appears to be instituted by
Christ from several Passages of the New Testament, as they are explained by the
uniform Practice of the Primitive Catholic Church.

Furthermore, according to the first sort of necessity, it is necessary to
administer the Lords Supper, because our Savior has commanded it in express
words.

And accordlng to the Second, which is also an indispensable degree of
Necessity, it is necessary to administer it to Women, though they never were
admitted to the Passover, or Paschal Postcaenium, which answered unto it,
because we can prove from some probable places of the New Testament, that they
were admitted unto it, as those places are in equity to be interpreted by the
universal Practice of the Ancient Primitive Church.

To conclude, according to the former Notion of Necessity, it is necessary to
Baptize, because our Lord has commanded it in express words.

And according to the Second, It is in like manner necessary to Baptize
Infants, because we can prove their Baptism from the Scope, and Tenor of the
Gospel, and from many Passages of it, as they are interpreted according to the
Practice of the Ancient Primitive Church.

First, From the Scope and Tenor of the Gospel, which it is reasonable to
presume, would extend the Subject of Baptism, as far as the Jewish Church
extended the Subject both of Circumcision, and Baptism.

And Secondly, From many Passages in the Gospel, whereof I shall recite some.
Except a Man be Born again of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God. John 3. 5. Suffer the little Children to come unto me, and
forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God. Mark 10. 14. The three
noted places, which inform us, that the Apostles baptized whole Households, as
of Stephanas, 1 Cor. 1. 16. Lydia, Acts 16. 15. and the Jailer, Acts 16. 33.
The Unbelieving Husband is Sanctified by the [BELIEVING] Wife, and the
unbelieving Wife is Sanctified by the [BELIEVING] Husband; else, were your
Children [Common, or] Unclean, but now they are Holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. And were
all Baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea, 1 Cor. 10. 2.

The requisite necessity of Infant Baptism, may be fairly concluded from these
Texts.

For the First seems to make Purgation by Water, and * Alioquin meminerat
dominicae desinitionis nisi quis nascatur ex Aqua and Spiritu non introibit in
Regnum Dei, id est, non erit Sanctus, ita omnis anima usque eo in Adam
censetur, donec in Christo recenseatur, tamdiu immunda, quamdiu recenseatur.
Tertull. de Anima. cap. 39, 40. Pro hoc and Ecclesia traditionem suscepit ab
Apostolis etiam parvulis Baptismum dare -- quia essent in omnibus genuinae
sordes peccati, quae per aquam and spiritum ablui deberent. Orig. in Ep. ad
Romans l. 5. and in Luc. Hom. 14. Propterea Baptizantur and parvuli, nisi enim
quis renatus, etc. Omnes venit [Christus] per semetipsum salvare, omnes inquam,
qui per eum renascuntur in Deum Infantes parvulos and pueros, and juvenes, and
seniores. Irenae^s l. 2. c. 39.
the Spirit equally necessary for all: (...), unless one be born again, etc.

From the Tertullian de Bapt. ait quidem dominus, nolite prohibere illos ad me
venire. This he says by way of Objection, which shows, that this Text was in
his time understood for Infant Baptism, but then because it was his present
Opinion, that Cunctatio Baptismi praecipue circa parvulos was utilior, he
answers, Veniant dum adolescunt, veniant dum discunt, dum quo veniant docentur.
Second, it is reasonable to conclude, that little Children are capable of
Proselytism, or entering into the Covenant after the Jewish manner, when they
are brought unto it by others.

First, Because they are declared Cassandr. de Baptism. Infant. p, 730.
capable of the Kingdom of God.

And Secondly, Because Dr. Ham. of Infant Baptism. Sect. 22. 28.
the Original words (...), are the same with (...), from whence the Word
Proselyte does come.

From the Third, it is reasonable to conclude, That they Baptized the Children
upon the Conversion of the Parents, after the Custom of the Jewish Church.

Tertul. de anima c. 39. Hinc enim and Apostolus ex Sanctificato alterutro ^exu
Sanctos procreari ait, tam ex seminis praerogativa, quam ex institutionis
disciplina. Caterum, inquit, immundi nascerentur, quasi designatos tamen
sanctitatis, and per hoc etiam salutis intelligi volens fidelium filios, ut
hujus spei pignora, Matrimoniis, quae retinenda censuerat, patrocinaretur.
Alioqui meminerat. --
From the Fourth, it is reasonable to believe, That the Foederal Holiness of
Believers Children makes them Candidates for Baptism, and gives them a right
unto it.

And the Fifth makes it reasonable to conclude, from the Type to the Antitype,
that if the Jews with their Children were umbratically Baptized unto Moses in
the one, that Christians and their Infants should be really Baptized in the
other.

To all which may be added Romans 5. Psalm. 51. 5. Romans 3. 23, 24. Joh. 3. 5, 6. 2
Cor. 15. 21, 22. 2 Cor. 5 14, 15. Job 14 4. Vid Voss. hist. Pelag. l. 2. part 2.
other Texts, which have been alleged by the Ancients both Voss. hist. Pelag.
p. 1. These. 6.
before and after the Pelagian Controversy, to prove the Baptism of Infants
necessary, to wash away their Original Sin, which makes them obnoxious to
Eternal Death.

I say, the requisite necessity of Infant Baptism, might be fairly concluded
from these Texts, without the Tradition of the Ancient Church, though without
it, I confess, it could not be demonstrated from them, as the Doctrines of the
Trinity, and the Deity of the Holy Ghost may be fairly, and sufficiently proved
from those Texts which the Orthodox bring for them, without Ancient Tradition,
though without it, they could not be demonstrated from them, because they do
not assert it in express words.

But then, as those Texts in Conjunction with Tradition, do put those Doctrines
out of all reasonable doubt: So do the other, which I have cited in Conjunction
with the Practice of the Ancient Church, put the requisite necessity of
Infant Baptism out of Question, because the Church in the next Age unto the
Apostles, practiced Infant Baptism, as an Apostolical Tradition, and by
consequence, as an Institution of Christ.

In like manner, as the Intrinsecal Arguments taken from the Style, Sanctity,
Dignity, and Efficacy of the Holy Scriptures, and the perpetual Analogy, and
Conformity of the several Books contained in them, are by themselves but
probable, and no demonstrative reasons, that all the Books contained in the
Canon, and no other, are the Word of God, but in conjunction with the
Testimony, and Authority of the Ancient Catholic Church, amount to a
Demonstration: So, though the Texts which I have cited, are of themselves but
probable Arguments for the requisite necessity of Infant Baptism, yet in
concurrence with such a Comment upon them, as the Practice of the next Age unto
the Apostles, and all Ages since, from one Generation to another, they amount
to such a demonstration, as is called in Logic, Demonstratio ducens ad
absurdum, and are a violent Presumption, that Children ought to be Baptized. I
might run on the Parallel, as to the other Instances of Episcopal Government,
the admitting of Women to the Communion, and the Observation of the Lord's day;
and therefore let the Adversaries of Infant Baptism consider well with
themselves, Whether rejecting of it after a Concurrence of such Texts, and such
a Tradition to establish it, they do not teach others, especially Atheists;
pure Deists, and Sabbatizers; to which I may add Scepticks, Socinians, and
Quakers, a way to deny all the rest.

Thus much I have said concerning the requisite necessity of Infant Baptism, to
show that it is not lawful to separate from a Church for appointing of Infants
to be Baptized, when there are such cogent reasons arising from the concurrence
of Scripture, and Antiquity, to presume that Infant Baptism was an Apostolical
Tradition, and an Institution of Christ. And I have designedly called it a
requisite, to distinguish it from an absolute necessity, lest the Reader should
think I were of St. Augustin's Opinion, who thought Baptism indispensibly
necessary to the Salvation of Infants, so that a Child dying unbaptized,
through the carelessness, or Superstition of the Parents, or through their
mistaken Belief of the unlawfulness of Infant Baptism, were Potest proinde
recte dici parvulos sine Baptismo de corpore exeuntes in damnatione omnium
mitissima futuros. Multum autem fallit, and fallitur, qui eos in damnatione
praedicat non futuros, dicente Apostolo Judicium ex uno delicto -- August. de
peccat merit. and remiss. contra Pelag. l. 1. c. 16. Vid. and contra Julianum
Pelag. l. 5. c. 8.
infallibly damned.

No, I intended no such severe Conclusion, (because we ought not to tie God to
the same means, to which he has tied us) but only to show that the Baptism of
young Children is antecedently necessary, and Articles of Religion, Artic. 27.
in any wise to be retained in the Church, as being most agreeable with the
Holy Scripture, the Apostolical Practice, and the Institution of Christ. And to
set this way of arguing more home upon the Consciences of those, who Dissent
from the Church upon the account of Infant Baptism, I appeal unto them, Whether
Scripture, and Antiquity, standing against Infant Baptism in the same posture
of evidence, that they now stand for it, it would not be unjustifiable for any
sort of Men to separate from the Church, for not Baptizing Infants, as they do
now for Baptizing of them.

Let us suppose, for Example, That the Disciples of Christ, instead of rebuking
those, that brought little Children unto him, had brought them to him
themselves; and he had been much displeased at them for it, and said, I suffer
not little Children to come unto me; for the Kingdom of God is not of such: Let
us put the case, That two Evangelists had recorded this supposed Story, and
accordingly we had been assured, by the Writers of the two next Ages to the
Apostles, that then there was no Baptizing of Infants, and that the Apostles
Baptized them not, and that there never was any Church in after Ages which did
practice Infant Baptism: Upon this Supposition, I appeal unto them, Whether it
would not be highly unreasonable to separate from all the Churches in the
World, for not allowing of Infant Baptism against the Concurrence of such a
Text, to the contrary, and the sense and practice of the Catholic Church.

The case, which I suppose one way, is the real case the other, only with this
difference, that the supposed case would have but the benefit of one Text,
whereas the real has the benefit of many in Conjunction with Tradition; and
therefore, seeing there are so many Texts, and such a cloud of Witnesses for
Infant Baptism, Why should it not be looked upon as one of the common Notions
of Christianity, like the Parallel Doctrines abovementioned, though it be not
commanded (especially when, as I have showed there was no need of commanding of
it) in express Words.

I know the Dissenters of all sorts, and especially those, for whose sake I am
now writing, are bred up in great prejudice, and sinister Suspicions against
Tradition, declaiming against it, as very uncertain, and against the use of it
as very derogatory to the sufficiency of the Word of God. But as to the first
part of their Objection against the certainty of Tradition, I desire them to
take notice, that there is a certain, as well as an uncertain; an undoubted, as
well, as a pretended Tradition, as there are true, certain, and undoubted, as
well as pretended, and uncertain Scriptures, and that there are sure ways
whereby ingenious, and inquisitive Men, may satisfy themselves, which is one,
and which is the other.

The way then to find out true and undoubted Tradition, as Advers. Haeres. c. 3.
Vincentius Lirinensis teaches, is to try it by these three Tests.
Universality, Antiquity, and Consent.

First, By Universality, If all the Churches, wheresoever dispersed, or how
different soever in their Languages, and Customs, do believe or practice such a
Doctrine.

Secondly, Antiquity, If what all the Churches all the World over does so
believe or practice, was no innovation, but Believed, and Practiced in the Ages
next to the Apostles, when such Fathers governed the Churches, or such Famous
Men lived in them, as knew the Apostles, and conversed with them, or lived near
unto those, or with those Apostolical Men, who so knew them, or conversed with
them, or lived near unto them.

Thirdly, Consent, If it appear that such a Doctrine was the consentient belief
or practice of all the Fathers in those Ages, or of all except a very few, who
had no proportion to the rest.

To which I will add, First, That this Tradition must be written, and not Oral.
And

Secondly, That it must be proved in every Age from Books that were written in
it, and whose Authors, whether under their own, or under borrowed Names, had no
interest to write so.

And therefore, though the Testimonies for Infant Baptism in the Constitutions,
going under the name of L. 6. c. 19. (...) -- Baptize your Infants, and educate
them in the Discipline, and Admonition of God, for says our Lord, Suffer
little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not.
Clemens Romanus, and the Book of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, bearing the name of
C. 7. Where arguing for Infant Baptism, he says, Of this we say the same
things, which our Divine Ministers of Holy things instructed by Divine
Tradition brought down to us.
Dionysius the Areopagite, are of no authority as to the first Century, when
St. Clement, and St. Denis lived; yet they are most excellent authorities for
the third; and fourth Century, when they were written, because they had no
interest to write for Infant Baptism. The like, I may say, of the Testimony
which the Quaest. and respons. 56. Where, he says, That there is this
difference betwixt Baptized, and unbaptized Infants, that Baptized Infants
enjoy the good things of Baptism, which those, that are not Baptized do not
enjoy, and that they en^^^ them by the Faith of those, who offer them to
Baptism.
Ancient and Judicious Author of the Answers to the Orthodox concerning some
Questions, gives of Infant Baptism, it is of no authority as for the second
Century, when Justin Martyr, whose name it bears, flourished, but being a
disinteressed writer, it is of excellent authority for the third, when it was
written.

So much for the Test whereby to try certain, and undoubted from uncertain and
doubted Tradition, and happy had it been for the Church of God, if all Writers
at the beginning of the Reformation, had made this distinction, and not written
so, as many of them have done, against all Tradition without any
discrimination; whereas Tradition, as I have here stated it, is not only an
harmless thing, but in many cases very useful and necessary for the Church. It
was by Tradition in this sense, that the Catholics, or Orthodox defended
themselves in the fourth Century against the Arians, and the Church of Africa
against the Donatists, and the Protestants defend themselves, as to the
Scripture-Canon, and many other things against the Innovations of the Papists
And therefore, in answer to the Second part of their Objection against
Tradition, as detracting from the Sufficiency of the Scriptures, I must remind
them, that the Scriptures, whose sufficiency we admire, as well as they, cannot
be proved to be the Word of God without Tradition, and that though they are
sufficient, where they are understood to determine any Controversy, yet to the
right understanding, and interpretation of them in many points, Tradition is as
requisite, as the Lex currit cum praxi.
practice of the Courts is to understand the Books of the Law.

This is so true, that the Anabaptists themselves cannot defend the Baptizing
of such grown Persons, as were born, and bred in the Church merely from the
Scriptures, in which the very Institution of Baptism has a special regard unto
Proselytes, who from Judaism, or G^ntilism, would come over unto the Christian
Faith. Accordingly they cannot produce one Precept, or Example for Baptizing of
such as were born of Christian Parents in all the New Testament, but all the
Baptized Persons we read of in it, were Jews, or Gentiles; and therefore they
cannot defend themselves against the Quakers, [who for this, and other Reasons,
have quite laid aside Baptism] without the Tradition, and Practice of the
Church.

Quest. IV. Whether it be a Duty incumbent upon Christian Parents, to bring
their Children unto Baptism?
To state this Question aright, I must proceed in the same order, that I did
upon the last.

First, In arguing from the bare lawfulness, and allowableness of
Infant Baptism.

And Secondly, From the necessity thereof.

As to the lawfulness of it, I have already shown upon the last Question, That
there is no necessity of having a Command, or Example for to justify the
practice of Infant-Initiation; but it is sufficient, that it is not forbidden
to make it lawful, and allowable under the Gospel. Nay, I have showed upon the
Second Question, that of the two, there is more reason that Christians should
have had an express command to leave off, or lay down the practice of
Infant-Initiation, because it was commanded by God in Infant-Circumcision, and
approved by him in Infant Baptism (which the Jewish Church added to
Infant-Circumcision) under the Legal State. Commands are usually given for the
beginning of the practice of something, which was never in practice before; but
to justify the continuation of an anciently instituted, or anciently received
practice, it is sufficient, that the Power, which instituted, or approved it,
do not countermand, or forbid it: and this, as I have shown, being the case of
Infants-Initiation, the Initiation of them by Baptism under the Gospel, must at
least be lawful and allowable, and if it be so, then Parents, and Pro-parents
are bound in Conscience to bring them unto Baptism in Obedience unto the Orders
of the Church. For the Church is a Society of a People in Covenant with God,
and in this Society, as in all others there are Superiors, and in Inferiors,
some that must Order, and some that must observe Orders, some that must
Command, and some that must Obey; and therefore, if the Catholic Church, or
any Member of it commands her Children to observe any lawful thing, they are
bound by the Common-Laws of all Government, and by the Precepts in the Gospel,
which regard Ecclesiastical Order and Discipline, to observe her Commands. Obey
them (says the Heb. 13. 17.
Apostle) who have the Rule over you, and submit your selves unto them, for
they watch for your Souls Accordingly we read that St. Act. 16. 4.
Paul, as he went through the Grecian Cities delivered the Christians the
Decrees, which the Apostles had made at Jerusalem, to keep; but I think, I need
not spend more time in the Proof of a thing, which all Dissenters will grant
me, for though they differ from us, as to the Subject of pure Ecclesiastical
Power, yet they all agree, that there is such a Power, and that all lawful
Commands proceeding from it, ought to be Obeyed.

Wherefore, if Infants are not incapable of Baptismal Initiation, as is proved
under the first Question, nor excluded from it by Christ, as is proved under
the Second; but on the contrary, there are very good Reasons to presume, that
Christ at least allowed them the benefit and honor of Baptism, as well as
grown Persons: then the Ordinance of any Church to Baptize them must needs lay
an Obligation of Obedience upon the Consciences of Parents, and Pro-parents,
who live within the Pale of it, because the matter of that Ordinance is a thing
not forbidden, but at least, allowed by Jesus Christ.

But because People, when the are once satisfied with the lawfulness, are wont,
especially in Church Matters, to enquire into the expediency of their Superiors
Commands, and to obey them with most Cheerfulness, and Satisfaction, when they
know they have good reasons for what they ordain; therefore, least any one whom
perhaps I may have convinced of the bare lawfulness of Infant Baptism, should
doubt of the expediency of it, and upon that account be less ready to comply, I
will here proceed to justify the practice of the Church in this Particular; by
showing

First, That Baptismal-Initiation is very beneficial and profitable for Infants.

And Secondly, That the Baptizing of them conduces very much to the well-being
and edification of the Church.

First then, Baptismal-Initiation is very beneficial and profitable for
Infants, because they are capable of the Benefits, and Privileges of Baptism.

This I showed in general before, under the first Question, and now I will show
it in a more particular manner of Induction, by insisting upon the several
Ends, for which Baptism was ordained.

First then Baptism was ordained, That the Baptized Person might be thereby
solemnly consecrated unto God, and dedicated to his Service, and I hope I need
not prove, that Children are capable of this benefit; since Jewish Infants were
Consecrated to God by Circumcision; and the Scripture tells us, that Judges 13.
15.
Sampson was a Nazarite from the Womb, and that Samuel from the time of his
Weaning, was dedicated unto the Lord.

Secondly Baptism was ordained, That the Baptized Person might be made a Member
of Christ's Mystical Body, which is the Holy Catholic Church. This is a great,
and honorable Privilege, and no Man can deny, but Infants are as capable of
it under the New, as they were under the Old Testament. Nay, so far are they
from being under any Natural Incapacity, as to Church Membership, that they are
ordinarily born free of Kingdoms, Cities, and Companies; and therefore, why any
Man should think it not so proper for the Church-Christian to be as indulgent
to them, as the Jewish Church was, and Civil Societies usually are, I profess I
cannot tell.

Thirdly it was ordained, That the Baptized Person might by that Solemnity pass
from a State of Nature, wherein he was a Child of Wrath, into a State of
Adoption or Grace, wherein he becomes a Child of God.

For by our First Birth we are all Children of Wrath.

But by our Second Birth in Baptism, we are made Children of God: And why it
should be so improper for a Child to pass in this solemn manner from one
Spiritual, as well, as from one Temporal State to another, or be Solemnly
Adopted by God, as well as Man, or

Lastly, Why a Child may not be Adopted under the Gospel, as well, as under the
Law? I am confident, those who are willing to defer the Baptism of Infants,
would be puzzled to give any rational account.

In the Fourth place, Baptism was instituted for a Sign to Seal unto Baptized
Persons the pardon of their Sins, and to confer upon them a Right of
Inheritance unto Everlasting Life; but Baptism has this Effect upon Infants,
as well as upon adult Persons, for it washes them clean from De hoc etia^ David
dixisse credendus est illud, qui in peccato concepit me matter mea, pro hoc and
Ecclesia ab Apostolis traditionem suscepit, etiam parvulis Baptismum dare.
Sciebant enim illi, quibus mysteriorum secreta commissa sunt divinorum, quia
essent in omnibus genuinae sordes peccati, quae per aquam and spiritum ablui
deberent. Origin. in Ep. ad Lous. l. 5. (...). Contra Celsum l. 4. Quanto magis
prohiberi non debet Infans, qui recens natus nihil peccavit, nisi quod secundum
Adam carnaliter natus contagium mortis antiquae prima Nativitate contraxit.
Cyprian. in Ep. ad Fidum. Those that would see more Testimonies out of the
Ancients about Original Sin, before the time of the Pelagian Controversy, may
consult Irenaeus l. 4. cap. 5. l. 5. cap. 16. l. 3. cap. 20. l. 5. cap. 14. 17,
21. and many more cited out of Just. Mart. in Dial cum Tryph. Tatianus his
Scholar, Athanasius, etc. by Vossius in his Hist. Pelag. l. 2. part 1. Th. 6.
Vid. Can. Council. Carthag. 112.
Original, as it does Men, and Women both from Actual and Original Sin. I say,
it washes them clean from Original Sin, and seals the Pardon of it, and the
assurance of God's favor unto them, and being cleansed by the washing of
Regeneration from the guilt of that natural vitiosity which they derived from
Adam, and which made them obnoxious to the displeasure of God, they become
reconciled unto him, and acquire as certain a Right to Eternal Life, upon their
justification, as any actual Believer in the Word. I cannot deny, but they may
be saved without Baptism, by the extraordinary, and uncovenanted Mercies of
God, and so may actual Believers, who die unbaptized, if they did not contemn
Baptism; but then the hopes which we ought to have of Gods Mercy, in
extraordinary Cases, ought not to make us less regardful of his sure, ordinary,
and covenanted Mercies, and the appointed means, unto which they are annexed.

But in the Fifth place, Baptism was ordained, That being admitted into the
Covenant, and ingrafted into Christ's Body, we might acquire a present Right
unto all the Promises of the Gospel, and particularly unto te promises of the
Spirit, which is so ready to assist Initiated Persons, that it will descend in
its influences upon them at the time of their Initiation in such a manner, and
measure, as they are capable thereof.

This the Primitive Christians found by experience to be so true, that they
called Baptism, by the names of Heb. 6. 4. (...), Just. Mart. Apol. 2. 94.
(...). Gregor. Nazianz. Orat. 40. Vid. Cypriani Ep. 1. ad Donatum.
Illumination, Grace, and Unction; and we need not doubt, but they talked, as
they felt; and for this reason, they Baptized Infants, because they knew that
they acquired a Right unto the same Spirit by Baptism, who would be sure to
preside, and watch over them, and act upon their Souls according to the measure
of their capacity, and prevent them in their very first doings with his
gracious helps.

Wherefore, though it should be granted, that the Holy Ghost cannot be actually
conferred upon Infants in Baptism, by reason of their natural incapacity (as
Anabaptists rashly assert) yet the Baptizing of them is not frustraneous, as to
this great End of Baptism, because they thereby acquire an actual Antecedent
Right to the Assistances, and Illuminations of the Holy Spirit, which they
shall receive, as soon, and as fast, as their natural incapacity removes.

This distinction betwixt having the Spirit, and having a Right unto the
Spirit, holds not only in Infant Baptism, but in the Baptism of Hypocrites, and
secret Sinners, who by submitting unto the Ordinances of Baptism acquire an
actual Antecedent Right unto the Spirit, although they are in a moral
incapacity of receiving the Graces of it, till their Hypocrisy is removed.
Nevertheless, their Baptism is not ineffectual as to this End, but is a means
of conferring the Holy Ghost upon them without re-baptization, because though
they cannot receive it at the moment of their Baptism, by reason of their
Hypocrisy, as sincere Penitents do, in whom there is no such Moral Impediment;
yet by virtue of it, they will be sure to receive it afterward, as soon, as
they shall in any degree become capable thereof.

Those are the Blessings, and Benefits, consequent upon Baptism by God's
appointment, of which Infants are as capable, as actual Believers, and let any
Impartial Man judge, Whether it is more for their benefit, that this manifold
capacity in them should be actually answered by the timely Administration of
Baptism, or that it should lay void and unsatisfied, till they came to years of
Discretion? Which is best for a Child that has the Evil, to be Touched for it,
while he is a Child, or to wait till he is of sufficient Age to be sensible of
the Benefit? Or to make one Comparison more, which would be best for a Traitors
Child, to be presently restored to his Blood, and and Estate, and his Princes
Favor, or to be kept in a mere capacity of being restored till he was a Man?

But besides these Benefits which are consequent upon Baptism by God's
appointment, there is another no less profitable to young Children, which will
justify the practice of Infant-Initiation, and that is to have such an early
pre-engagement laid upon them, which without the highest Baseness can
Ingratitude, they cannot afterward retract. No Person of common Ingenuity, who
has any sense of honor, or any tolerable degree of Conscience within him, can
without shame and horror break those Sacred Bonds asunder, by which he was
bound to God, in his Infancy, when he comes to Years of understanding; but on
the contrary, will think himself in Honor, and Gratitude, bound to own, and
stand to the Obligation, which he then contracted, when he was graciously
admitted to so many Blessings and Privileges, before he could do any thing
himself toward the obtaining of them, or understand his own good. It would
argue a Person to be of a very ill nature, and untoward Disposition to break
such solemn Foederal Vows, and therefore, we see that Children generally do
readily take upon themselves their Baptismal Obligations, when they come to the
use of reason, whereas were they left alone, to their own Freedom, when they
would be Baptized, they would be apt to put it off from time to time, through
the aversness that the corrupt nature of Man has to such strict, and Spiritual
Engagements, and in such a State of Liberty, as this, Men would need, as many,
and as earnest Exhortations unto Baptism, as unto the Lord's Supper; and in
such an Age, as ours is at least, reluct as much to come unto that, as we see
by experience they do unto this. Wherefore, upon Supposition that Christ does
but allow Children to be brought unto him in Baptism, The Wisdom of the Church
is highly to be applauded for bringing them under such an early, and beneficial
pre-engagement, and not leaving them to their own liberty at such years, when
Flesh, and Blood, would be apt to find out so many Shifts, and Excuses, and
make them regret to be Baptized.

And therefore in the Second place, as the Baptism of Infants is very
Beneficial, and profitable unto them: So it conduces very much to the
well-being, and edification of the Church, in preventing those Scandalous and
Shameful delays of Baptism, which grown Persons otherwise would be apt to make,
putting of it off till the time of some great sickness, as many were wont to do
in the third and fourth Century, when being not Baptized in their Infancy, they
did ordinarily receive Baptism, as Papists now receive extreme Unction, when
they were ready to expire.

For, as it is usual now for Persons to defer the receiving of the Lord's
Supper, for fear of Damnation, mistaking the Apostle, where he says, He that
Eats and Drinks unworthily, Eats, and Drinks Damnation to himself: So
in those Ages it was usual for Persons to defer their own, and their Childrens
Baptism out of a Dr. Caves Prim. Christian. part 1. chapter 10. (...). -- Greg.
Nazianz. Orat. 40. p. 647 and 649. Sed mundus rursus delinquit, quo male
comparetur diluvio, itaque igni destinatur, sicut and homo, qui post Baptismum
delicta restaurat. Tertull. de Baptismo. (...). Greg. Nyssen de Baptismo.
kind of Novatian Principle, for fear that if they fell into Sin after Baptism
there would be no place for Repentance, mistaking that place of the Apostle,
where it is said, that if they, who were once enlightened [i. e. Baptized] fall
away, it is impossible to renew them again unto Repentance.

Now the Baptizing of Children being deferred by their Parents out of this
Superstitious fear, they, when they came to be Men and Women, put the doing of
it off for several Reasons, and Pretenses, which we learn out of the Writers of
those times.

Some deferred it out of Worldly Love, and a Carnal loathness to renounce their
sinful Pleasures, and take upon them the Yoke of Christ. Some put it off
pretending want of leisure through multitude of worldly business; others out of
laziness, and careless negligence. Others were wont to plead the insufficiency
of their knowledge, See Mr. Walker's Excellent Preface to his Treatise of
Infant Baptism.
others the inconveniency of the present time; others would not be Baptized,
but at such a time, or in such a place, as such a City, or such a River, or by
such a Person, or in such a Company. Some would put it off upon a pretense of
not having such, or such Relations present, others would decline it upon the
account of some small Expenses, that attended it; others because they relucted
to confess their Sins, others because they favored not the Doctrine of the
Holy Trinity, or to comply with the Arians; some because they would imitate the
Example of Christ, who was not Baptized till the 30th Year of his Age, and some
out of fear of Persecution.

This happened formerly to the great shame, and dishonor of the Christian
Religion, though the Gregor. Nazianz. Greg. Nyss. and St. Basil.
Fathers sharply and vehemently Wrote, and Preached against it; and therefore,
upon supposition of the bare lawfulness, or indifferency of Infant Baptism, I
cannot but approve the Wisdom, and Prudence of those Churches, which appoint
it, because the practice of it does prevent such shameful, and scandalous
Neglects of Baptism, which to the great prejudice of Christianity, as
Experience has taught us, would otherwise arise in the Church.

Thus much upon enquiry into the lawfulness, and expediency of Infant Baptism,
to show Christian Parents what an indispensable Obligation lies upon their
Consciences to bring their Children to be Baptized in Obedience to the Church,
which has appointed Infant Baptism; but then if Infant Baptism be not only
necessary because the Church has appointed it, but the Church has appointed
it because it is necessary, and in any wise to be retained, then this
Antecedent sort of necessity does yet lay a stronger Obligation upon the
Consciences of Parents to initiate their Children as being most agreeable to
the practice of the Apostles, and the Intention, and Will of Christ.

First, As being most agreeable to the practice of the Apostles, who it is
highly to be presumed, authorized the practice of Infant Baptism, because, it
was practiced in the next Age unto them.

And Secondly, As being most agreeable to the Intention, and Will of Christ,
who it is to be presumed would have forbidden, and countermanded the Jewish
practice of initiating Infants, if he had not had a mind they should be
Baptized.

Wherefore Nam quum paedo-Baptismus in Ecclesia Judaica in admissione
Proselytorum ita fuit notus, usitatus, and frequens, ut nihil fere notius,
usitatius, and frequentius, non opus erat, ut aliquo praecepto roboraretur. Nam
Christus Baptismum in manus suas atque in usum Evangelicum suscepit, qualem
invenit, hoc solum addito, quod ad digniorem finem atque largiorem usum
promoverit. Novit satis gens universa parvulos solitos Baptizari, Illud
praecepto opus non habuit, quod Communi usu semper invaluerat. Si prodiret jam
edictum regale in haec verba: Recipiat se unusquisque die dominico ad publicum
conventum in Ecclesia, insaniet certe ille, quicunque olim hinc argueret non
celebrandas esse die dominico in publicis conventibus preces, conciones,
Psalmodias, eo quod nulla in edicto de iis mentio. Nam cavit edictum de
celebratione diei dominicae in publicis conventibus in genere, de
particularibus autem divini cultus speciebus ibidem celebrandis non opus erat,
ut esset mentio, cum istae ante datum edictum, and cum daretur, semper, and
ubique notae essent, and in usu assiduo. Ipsissimo hoc modo res se habuit cum
Baptismo, Christus cum instituit in Sacramentum Evangelicum, quo in
professionem Evangelii omnes admitterentur, ut olim in Proselytismum ad
Religionem Judaicum. Particularis eo spectantia modus scilicet Baptizandi aetas
Baptizanda, sexus Baptizandus, etc. regula and definitione opus non habuerunt,
eo quod haec vel lippis and tensoribus nota erant ex communi usu. E contra ergo
plana and aperta prohibitione opus erat, ut Infantes and parvuli non
Baptizarentur, si eos Baptizandos nollet servator. -- Si aboleri istam
consuetudinem vellet Christus aperte prohibuisset. Silentium ergo ejus and
Scripturae paedo-baptismum firmat, and propagat. Lightfoot Horae Hebraicae in
Matthew. 3. 6.
his very not repealing of that practice, is a sufficient Demonstration, that
it was his pleasure it should be continued; it was the practice of the Jewish
Church before he came, and the practice of the Church Christian not long after
he departed, and we find the practice of it in the one, harmoniously answering
to the practice of it in the other; and therefore what was before, and what was
after this time, we may well presume, was continued in the interim during the
time of the Apostles, as his presumed Will and Intention, who never did, or
spoke any thing, that can reasonably be interpreted, that he would have the
Jewish custom of admitting Infants into the Church, laid aside; and therefore,
his silence, and the silence of the Scriptures, are so far from being Arguments
against Infant Baptism, that considering the Antecedent usage of it, they are
very strong Presumptions for it, as the Learned Author in the Margin foregoing
does excellently prove.

To this purpose also, have I discoursed above, upon the Second and Third
Questions; and therefore if Christ in the Reformation of the Church, from the
Law into the Gospel, did not repeal the Ancient practice of Infant Baptism, but
left Baptism to be administered in the same Latitude, as before his time, then
it must needs be concluded, that there lies the same Obligation upon Parents
(abstracting from the Commands of the Church) to desire Baptism for their
Children, as for grown Proselytes to desire it for themselves.

For what authority soever enacts any thing concerning Children, or Persons
under the years of discretion, does lay at least an implicit Obligation upon
Parents, and Proparents to see that act be performed. As if for Example, an Act
of Parliament should be made, that all Persons whatsoever, Men, Women, and
Children, should pay so much an Head unto the King, the Act, by the nature of
it, would oblige Parents, and Pro-parents, to pay for their Children, and the
Minors in their custody, as well as for themselves. Or, if in the time of a
general Contagion, the Supreme Power should command, that all Men, Women, and
Children, should every Morning take such an Antidote, that Command would oblige
Parents to give it unto their Children, as well, as to take it themselves. Just
so the Ordinance of Baptism being intended, or instituted by our Savior in its
ancient Latitude for Children, as well, as grown Persons, it must needs lay an
Obligation upon Parents, and Pro-parents to bring them to the Holy Sacrrament,
otherwise the Divine Institution would in part be made void, and frustrated of
the Ends for which it was instituted, as if it did not also lay an Obligation
upon Adult Persons to offer themselves unto the Holy Sacrament, it would be of
no force at all.

To sum up all in short. When our Lord first appointed Baptism, and afterward
said, Go, and Proselyte all Nations, Baptizing them, etc. either he intended
that Children should be Baptized, as well as Grown Proselytes, or he did not;
if he did not intend they should be Baptized, Why did he not plainly discover
that Intention? Nay, Why did he not plainly forbid them to be Baptized, as they
were wont to be, but if he intended they should be Baptized according to the
ancient custom in the Jewish Church, Parents are as much bound to offer them
unto Baptism, as Adult Believers, Men and Women, are bound to offer themselves.

What I have here said about the Obligation, which lies upon Parents to bring
their Children unto Baptism, concerns all Pro-parents to whose care Children
are committed, as Guardians, Tutors, and Churchwardens; and lest any should
ask, as some Sceptically do, at What time they are bound to bring them unto
Baptism? As soon, as they are born, or the next day after, or when? I answer,
by showing the impertinency of that Question, in reference to Grown Believers
thus: When must a Believing Man, or Woman be Baptized? As soon as he Believes,
or the next day after, or when? And truly the Answer is the same to both
Questions, at any time, the Gospel indulging a discretional Latitude in both
Cases, and only forbidding the wilful neglect of the Ordinance, and all
unreasonable, and needless delays thereof.

Quest. V. Whether it is lawful to Communicate with Believers, who were only
Baptized in their Infancy?
The stating of this, depends upon what I have said upon the Second, and Third
Questions, to prove, That Infants are capable Subjects of Baptism, and that it
is lawful to Baptize them; and if I have not erred, as I hope I have not, in
those two Determinations, then the Baptism of Infants is lawful, and valid, and
if the Baptism of them be lawful, and valid, then it cannot be unlawful to
Communicate with them, when they come to be Men, and Women.

Accordingly, it never entered into the Heart of any of the ancient Christians
to refuse Communion with grown Believers, who had been Baptized in their
Infancy, whether they were Baptized in perfect health, as Children most
commonly were, or only in dnager of Death, as the Children of those Novatian
kind of Parents above mentioned always were, who were so far from thinking
Infant Baptism a Nullity, or Corruption of Baptism, that they thought it
necessary for them in case of apparent danger, and durst not let them die un
baptized.

Some others deferred the Baptizing of their Children, because they thought
them too weak to endure the Severities of the Trine immersion; and others,
perhaps, according to the private Opinion of De Baptismo. c. 18. Ait quidem
dominus, nolite illos prohibere ad me venire, veniant ergo dum adolescunt,
veniant dum discunt, dum, quo veniant, docentur.
Tertullian and (...). Orat. 40.
Nazianzen, thought is more convenient to delay the Baptizing of them till they
were capable of being Catechized, between Three, and Four years old, but still
this delay of Baptism supposed their continuing in health, but in case of
danger they thought it (...).
necessary to Baptize them, and if they survived the danger, looked upon them
as lawfully, and validly Baptized.

These were all the Pleas we read of for deferring the Baptism of Infants among
the Ancients, who never urged this for one, that Infant Baptism was unlawful,
or invalid. No, They never argued against it from the want of those
pre-requisite Conditions in Children, which Christ, and the Apostles required
in Adult Proselytes, nor from the want of Precept, and Example for it in the
New Testament, but so understood the Scriptures, as to think it as lawful, and
warrantable as the Baptism of grown Believers, and necessary in case of danger;
and just so did those, who deferred their Baptism, for fear of sinning after
it, think the Baptism of Men and Women only necessary at the last extremity, in
apparent danger of Death.

But then if the ordinary practice of Infant Baptism be not only lawful, and
valid, but also necessary, as appearing most agreeable to the presumed Will of
Christ, who did not countermand the practice of it, and most conformable to the
practice of the Apostles, as can be proved from the practice of the very next
Age unto them; then it must not only be lawful to Communicate with Believers,
who were Baptized in their Infancy, but an exceeding great Sin, and Presumption
to refuse Communion with them upon that account.

In a word, If Infant Baptism be not only lawful, but necessary, what a
grievous, and provoking Sin, must it needs be, to disown those for Members of
Christ's Body, whom he owns to be such? But if it be neither, as Anabaptists
vainly pretend, then there has not been a true Church upon the Face of the
Earth, for Eleven hundred Years, nor a Church, for above Fifteen hundred, with
which a true Christian could Communicate without Sin.

This is a very absurd, and dreadful consequence, and inconsistent with the
purity of the Apostolical Ages, while the Church was so full of Saints,
Martyrs, and Miracles, and represented as See Dr. More's Apocalypsis Apoc.
Preface, p. 20. and on the 11. Chapter of the Rev. v. 1, 2.
Symmetral by the Spirit of God under the Symbol of Measuring the Temple of
God, and the Altar, Revel. 11. 1, 2.

THE CONCLUSION.
ALthough in the management of this Controversy against the Anabaptists, I
have endeavored so to state the Case of Infant Baptism, as to obviate, or
answer all the Considerable Pleas, and Material Objections, which they are wont
to make against it; yet there are two of their Objections, of which I have yet
taken no notice, thinking it better, that I might avoid tediousness, and
confusion in determining upon the preceding Questions, to Propose, and Answer
them a part by themselves.

The First of these two, is the ancient Custom of giving the Communion unto
Infants, which they endeavor with all their Art, and Skill to run Parallel
with the practice of Infant Baptism, although there is not the like Evidence,
nor the like Reason for the practice of that, as there is for the practice of
this.

First, There is not the like Evidence for the practice of it, St. Ac nequid de
esset ad criminis cumulum Infantes quoque parentum manibus vel impositi, vel
attracti: amiserunt parvuli, quod in primo statim Nativitatis Exordio fuerunt
consecuti. Nonne illi cum judicii dies venerit, dicent: Nos nihil fecimus, nec
derelicto cibo, ac poculo domini ad profana contagia sponte properavimus.
Afterward he tells a Story of a little Girl, who having been carried to the
Idol-Feasts, was afterward brought by her Mother who knew nothing of it, to
the Communion, when he administered it; and when the Deacon brought the Cup to
her, she turned away her Face from it, but the Deacon pouring some of the Wine
into her Mouth, she fell into Convulsions, and Vomitings, which the Holy Father
looking upon, as a Miracle, did thereupon discover, that she had been polluted
at the Idol-Feasts. Vid. and August. ad Bonifacium Episcop. Ep. 23. vol. 2.
Cyprian being the first Author which they can produce for it, and after him
the Cap. 7. Contemplat. 3. p. 360, 362.
Author of the Book of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and Catechesis 3.
isluminat. Hierosolym.
Cyril of Jerusalem are the next, who make mention of it toward the latter end
of the Fourth Century, and then St. De verbis domini in Evang. Johan. Epist.
23. 106, 107. Lib. 1. de peccatorum merit. and remiss. cap. 20. lib. 1. Contra
Julianum c. 11. Contra duas Epistolas Pelag. lib. 2. cap. 22. lib. 4. cap. 14.
Augustine in the Fifth, who indeed speaks frequently of it, as of the practice
of the Church in that Age.

These are all the Authorities for Infant-Communion, that I know of, till St.
Augustin's time; whereas besides the authority of St. Cyprian, which is the
first they have for Communicating Infants, we have the authority of a whole
Council of Fathers, in which he presided, and of Origin, Tertullian, and
Irenaeus, who was the Scholar of St. Polycarp, and the Grand-Scholar of St.
John.

And then, whereas among the Writers of the 4th Century, there are but the two
above cited, who make mention of Infant-Communion, we have St. See them all
cited at large in Walker's Plea for Infant Baptism, from p. 266. to p. 275.
Hierom, St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom, St. Athanasius, Gregory Nazianzen, and
the Third Council of Carthage, who all speak of Infant Baptism, as of a thing
generally practiced, and most of them, as of a thing, which ought to be
practiced in the Church.

Furthermore, none of the four Testimonies for Infant-Communion, speak of it,
as of an Apostolical Tradition, as Origin does of Infant Baptism, not to
mention that the Pelagians never owned the necessity of Infant-Communion, as
they did of Infant Baptism: All which things considered, show, that there is
nothing near the like Evidence in Antiquity for the practice of the one, as
there is for that of the other.

And as there is not the like evidence for the constant, successive, and
general practice of Infant-Communion, that there is for Infant Baptism: So
there is not the like Reason for the practice of it.

First, Because Baptism is the Sacrament, or Mystery of Initiation, of which
Persons of all Ages are capable; it being instituted chiefly for an initiatory
Sign to solemnize the admission of the Baptized Person into the Church, and to
Seal all the Blessings of the Gospel unto him, as a Member of Christ. This is
the Substance, or Chief end of Baptism; which, as I have showed upon the
Second, and Fourth Questions, is equally answered in the Baptism of Children,
as well as of professing Believers; Confession of Faith, as well as Confession
of Sins, being but accidental Circumstantials, which are necessary with respect
to the State of the Person to be Baptized, but not to Baptism it self. But on
the contrary, the Holy Eucharist, or Communion, is the Sacrament of Perfection,
and Consummation in the Christian Religion, being primarily, and chiefly
instituted for a Sacrificial Feast in remembrance of Christ's Death, and
Passion, which being an act of great Knowledge and Piety, Children are not
capable to perform.

But Secondly, There is not the like Reason for Baptizing, and Communicating
Infants, because that is grounded upon the Authority of many Texts of
Scripture, which without the Concurrence of Tradition are fairly, and genuinely
interpretable for it; but this is grounded only upon one Text [John 6. 53.
Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood ye have no life
in you] which it is doubtful whether it is to be understood of the Holy
Eucharist, or no, because it cannot be understood of it but in a proleptical
sense, the Lord's Supper having not been yet instituted by him; or if it be to
be so understood, yet the sense of it ought to be regulated by the Chief end of
its Institution contained in those words of our blessed Savior, do this in
remembrance of me, and this do ye, as often, as ye drink it in remembrance of me.
Wherefore though this Text were literally to be understood of the Holy
Eucharist, as St. Augustine first interprets it, yet it ought not to be
strained to Infant-Communion, because Infants cannot partake of the Holy
Banquet in remembrance of Christ. And therefore though the Custom of
Communicating Infants prevailed by Degrees in some Ages of the Church, yet the
Western Churches discerning the mistake upon which it was grounded, have long
since laid it aside, though they still continue the practice of Infant Baptism,
as fully answering the Chief end of Baptism, and as being founded upon more,
and clearer Texts of Scriptures, and a much more noble Tradition, than
Infant-Communion is.

But Thirdly, There is not the like reason for Baptizing, and Communicating
Infants, because the Correspondent practice of the Jewish Church in
Infant-Circumcision, and Infant Baptism, answered as a Pattern unto that under
the Law, but there was nothing of a Pattern under it, which answered so to
Infant-Communion, because a Child never partook of the Exodus 12. 26, 27.
Passover, before he was old enough to take his Father by the hand, and to go
up from the Gates of Jerusalem unto the Mount of the Temple, and to enquire
about the meaning of the Service, and was capable of understanding the nature
of it, as it was done in remembrance of their Deliverance out of Egypt.

And in like manner when the Children of Christians are old enough to be
instructed in the nature of the Holy Communion, and to understand that, then
they may partake of it, be it as soon, as it will, if they are Baptized and
Confirmed; though it is true, that Christian Children are usually much older,
than the Jewish were, before they Communicate, which is merely accidental,
because it requires a riper reason to understand the Mystery of the Holy
Eucharist, which is done in remembrance of our Spiritual Deliverance by the
Sacrifice of Christ, both God and Man, upon the Cross, than to understand the
plain and easy meaning of the Passover, which was annually kept in remembrance
of the Temporal Deliverance of the Jews.

But to speak yet more fully of Infant-Communion, the practice of it is so far
from prejudicing the Cause of Infant Baptism, that it mightily confirms it,
because none were, or could be admitted to partake of the Holy Communion, till
they were validly Theodoret. Therapeut. Sermon. 2. (...).
Baptized, and therefore the practice of Infant-Communion is a most emphatical
Declaration, that all the Churches, wherein it ever was, or As in the Greek,
Russian, and Abyssin Churches, and among the Christians of St. Thomas in the
Indies.
still is practiced, were of Opinion that the Baptism of Infants was as lawful,
and valid, as that of professing Believers can be.

As for the Original of this custom, it is not known when it began, probably it
came in by degrees from the ancient, and laudable custom of administering the
Lord's Supper to grown Persons presently after their Baptism; and if so many of
the ancient Churches were so tender toward Infants, as to bring them to the
Communion, rather than deprive them of the least shadow of right, what shall be
said in excuse of those uncharitable Men, who will rather destroy all the
Churches in the World, than bring their Children unto Baptism, of which they
are capable, and to which they have a Right so highly probable, if not certain,
and infallible, as I have proved above?

The Second Objection against Infant Baptism, which I took no notice of, but
reserved for this place, is taken from their incapacity to engage themselves in
Covenant unto God. For, say these Men, all who enter into Covenant, and receive
the Seal of the Covenant, must contract, and stipulate for their parts, as well
as God does for his, and therefore St. Peter says, That the Baptism which
saves us, must 1 Ep. 3. 21.
have the answer, or restipulation of a good Conscience toward God. But how
can Infants restipulate, or what Conscience can be in them, who have not the
use of reason, nor are capable of knowing what the Covenant means?

To this Objection, I answer as formerly, That it is as strong against
Infant-Circumcision, as Infant Baptism; for the Infants of the Jews were
admitted as effectually into the Covenant, and had it as really sealed unto
them, and were as strongly tied to perform the Conditions of it, when they came
to years of understanding, as if they had been Circumcised then, and at their
Circumcision had personally, and expressly indented with God.

Wherefore the same answer which will serve to justify Infant-Circumcision
will justify Infant Baptism, which succeeds in the place of it, and it is
this: That God of his goodness toward Infant's was pleased to seal the
Covenant of Grace unto Infants upon an implicit, and imputative sort of
Stipulation, which at years of understanding they were bound to own by openly
professing the Jewish Religion, or if they then renounced it, thereupon they
became Strangers to the Covenant, which in such cases was as void, as if it had
never been made. An implicit Stipulation was sufficient for the Children of
Believers, though an open Profession and Stipulation was required of Grown
Proselytes, which shows, that Circumcision was an institution of Latitude, and
that personal, and express Restipulation was not a general pre-requisite
condition to Circumcision, but only to some Persons to be Circumcised.

In like manner Baptism being an institution of Latitude, ordained for Persons
under, as well as at the years of discretion, perssonal and express Stipulation
is only required of the former; and therefore St. Peter in the Text above cited
likely had respect not to all Baptism, or Baptism in general, but only to the
Baptism of Adult Proselytes, whom the Minister used to Hence Tertullian de
Baptismo calls Baptism Sponsionem Salutis. And in St. Cyprian we often read of
the interrogation in Baptism.
interrogate at the time of Baptism, much after the same manner, as we
interrogate Adult Proselytes now.

Wherefore, this Objection like the rest which the Anabaptists make, runs upon
this presumption, that Baptism is a strict institution, and that personal and
express answering or Restipulation is a pre-requisite condition to all Baptism,
whereas it is only a personal qualification required of Majors, or Adult
Persons, when they come to be Baptized.

But as for Children, Baptism may be administered unto them upon an implicit,
and imputative sort of Restipulation, as Circumcision was to the Jewish, and
Baptism now is to agonizing Christian Infants, or else it may be administered
unto them as Baptism formerly was among the Jews to the Infants, and Minors of
Proselytes upon a vicarious Restipulation by their Sponsors, which seems to
have been translated together with the use of Baptism from the Jewish Church.
It is certain, that De Baptismo cap. 18. quid enim necesse est Sponsores etiam
periculo ingeri?
Tertullian makes mention of Sponsors, or Sureties for Children at Baptism, and
very probable, that the Apostles made Parents, and Major domos stipulate in the
name of their Praefecturae igitur juridicae quae Baptismo praeerat profitebatur
Proselytus ipse Majorennis (Masculus qui annum decimum tertium, foemina quae
duodecim superaverat) legem Mosaicam se servaturum. Minorum vero nomine idem
ipsum profitebatur praefectura ipsa, uti in Christianismo susceptores
minorennium, seu parvulorum, saltem si nec parents adessent, qui idem
praestare possent. Seldom de Synedriis, Lib. 1. c. 3. And what is here said of
the CONSISTORT among the Jews, concerning the Baptism of Infants, and Minors,
St. Augustine says of the Church among Christians, accommodat illis matter
Ecclesia aliorum pedes ut veniant, aliorum cor, ut credant, aliorum linguam ut
fateantur.
Minors, when they Baptized them, as the Jews were wont to do; and upon this
Supposition St. Peter in the Text above cited, might also probably allude to
all Baptism, because Grown Proselytes to the Christan Religion did answer for
their Children, as well as for themselves at Baptism, according to the Custom
of the Jewish Church.

Nay, there is little reason to doubt, but that the Jewish being the Pattern of
the Christian Baptism, the Apostles, and their Assistants who were Jews, or
Hellenists, did observe this Custom of Vicarious Stipulation at the Baptism of
Infants, and Minors, as well as all the other Particulars, in which they
resemble one another, as the Picture does the Face, whose Picture it is.

As for Example, the Jewish Baptism was administered to Women, as well as Men,
and so is the Christian.

Secondly, It was never reiterated nor repeated, no more is the Christian.

Thirdly, It was called Regeneration, and a New Birth, and Baptized Persons
were said to be born again and Regenerated, which also holds in Christian
Baptism.

Fourthly, Baptized Proselytes among the Jews were bound to leave their nearest
Relations, if it were necessary, and adhere to the Church, and so are Baptized
Christian Proselytes bound to do the same.

Fifthly, The Infants of Proselytes were Baptized among the Jews, as well as
the Proselytes themselves, and so have I proved, that Infants have been always
Baptized among the Christians.

And therefore in the last place, since the Jewish Church Baptized Infants upon
Vicarious Stipulation, why should not we think it sufficient for their entrance
into the Covenant, and that the Apostles did so too?

These things, and whatsoever else is written in this little Tract, I hope will
be fairly, and heartily confidered by the Dissenters among us upon the account
of Infant Baptism. I say, the truth in Christ, I lie not, my Conscience also
bearing me Witness in the Holy Ghost, who is the Searcher of Hearts, that I
have great heaviness, and almost continual sorrow in my heart for them, and
that to reconcile them to the Church. I could wish in the Apostles Sense, that
I my self were an Anathema from Christ. And because it is a Disease too common
among Dissenters, and more especially among those, with whom I have been a
dealing, to have minds full of Prejudice, Prepossession, and sinister
Suspicions against what we Speak, or Preach, or Write, I have here subjoined a
Letter of that Famous Martyr of Jesus Christ Mr. John Philpot, concerning
Infant Baptism, which I seriously recommend to their Impartial, and diligent
perusal, hoping that the same Arguments, which may perhaps have less effect
upon them as they come from me, may be better received, and make deeper
impression upon their Souls as they come from him, who like the Primitive
Martyrs, was Blessed with Heavenly Visions, and cheerfully suffered for his
Redeemer, who had suffered for him, and thanked God when the time was come,
that he was to seal the truth of the Protestant Religion with his Blood.

A Letter of Mr. PHILPOT, to a Friend of his, Prisoner the same time in
Newgate: Wherein is debated and discussed the matter or question of Infants to
be Baptized.
THE God of all Light and Understanding lighten Book of Martyrs, 3 Vol. p. 606.
Col. 2. London. 1641.
your Heart with all true Knowledge of his Word, and make you perfect to the
day of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereunto you are now called, through the mighty
operation of his Holy Spirit, Amen.

I received Yesternight from you, (Dear Brother S. and Fellow-Prisoner for the
truth for Christ's Gospel) a Letter, wherein you gently require my Judgment,
concerning the Baptism of Infants, which is the effect thereof. And before I do
show you what I have learned out of God's Word, and of his true Infallible
Church, touching the same, I think it not out of the matter, first to declare
what Vision I had the same Night whilst musing on your Letter I fell asleep,
knowing that God does not without cause reveal to his People who have their
Minds fixed on him, Special and Spiritual Revelations to their Comfort, as a
taste of their Joy and Kingdom to come, which Flesh and Blood cannot comprehend.

Being in the midst of my sweet rest, it seemed to me to see a great beautiful
City all of the color of Azure, and white, four square in a mavelous
beautiful composition in the midst of the Sky, the sight whereof so inwardly
comforted me, that I am not able to express the consolation I had thereof, yea,
the remembrance thereof causes my Heart as yet to leap for Joy: And as Charity
is no Churl, but would have others to be Partakers of his delight, some
thought I called to others (I cannot tell whom) and whilst they came and we
together beheld the same, by and by to my great Grief it vaded away.

This Dream I think not to have come of the illusion of the Senses, because it
brought with it so much Spiritual Joy, and I take it to be of the working of
God's Spirit for the contentation of your Request, as he wrought in Peter to
satisfy Cornelius. Therefore I Interpret this Beautiful City to be the
Glorious Church of Christ, and the appearance of it in the Sky, signifies the
Heavenly State thereof, whose Conversation is in Heaven, and that according to
the Primitive Church, which is now in Heaven, Men ought to measure and judge
the Church of Christ now in Earth; for as the Prophet David says, The
Foundations thereof be in the Holy Hills, and glorious things be spoken of the
City of God And the mavelous quadrature of the same, I take to signify the
universal agreement in the same, and that all the Church here Militant ought to
consent to the Primitive Church throughout the four Parts of the World, as the
Prophet affirms, saying; God makes us to dwell after one manner in one
House. And that I conceived so wonderful Joy at the Contemplation thereof, I
understand the unspeakable Joy which they have that be at Unity with Christ's
Primitive Church: For there is Joy in the Holy Ghost, and Peace, which passes
all Understanding, as it is written in the Psalms; As of Joyful Persons is the
dwelling of all them that be in thee. And that I called others to the fruition
of this Vision, and to behold this wonderful City, I construe it by the Will of
God this Vision to have come upon me, musing on your Letter, to the end, that
under this Figure I might have occasion to move you with many others, to behold
the Primitive Church in all your Opinions concerning Faith, and to conform your
self in all points to the same, which is the Pillar and Establishment of truth,
and teaches the true use of the Sacraments, and having with a greater fullness
than we have now, the first fruits of the Holy Ghost, did declare the true
Interpretation of the Scriptures according to all verity, even as our Savior
promised to send them another Comforter, which should teach them all truth.

And since all truth was taught and revealed to the Primitive Church, which is
our Mother, let us all that be obedient Children of God, submit our selves to
the judgment of the Church for the better understanding of the Articles of our
Faith, and of the doubtful Sentences of the Scripture. Let us not go about to
show in us, by following any private Man's Interpretation upon the Word,
another Spirit than they of the Primitive Church had, lest we deceive our
selves. For there is but one Faith and one Spirit, which is not contrary to
himself, neither otherwise now teaches us than he did them. Therefore let us
believe as they have taught us of the Scriptures, and be at peace with them,
according as the true Catholic Church is at this day: And the God of Peace
assuredly will be with us, and deliver us out of all our Worldly Troubles and
Miseries, and make us Partakers of their Joy and Bliss, through our Obedience
to Faith with them.

Therefore God commands us in Job, to ask of the Elder Generation, and to
search diligently the memory of the Fathers. For we are but Yesterdays
Children, and be Job 8.
ignorant, and our days are like a Shadow, and they shall teach thee (says the
Lord) and speak to thee, and shall utter words from their Hearts. And by
Solomon we are Prove. 6.
commanded, not to reject the direction of our Mother. The Lord grant you to
direct your steps in all things after her, and to abhor contention with her.
For as St. Paul writes; If any Man be contentious, neither we, neither the 1
Cor. 11.
Church of God has any such custom.

Hitherto I have showed you (good Brother S.) my Judgment generally of that you
stand in doubt and dissent from others, to the which I wish you as mine own
Heart to be comformable, and then doubtless you cannot err, but boldly may be
glad in your Troubles, and Triumph at the hour of your Death, that you shall
die in the Church of God a Faithful Martyr, and receive the Crown of Eternal
Glory. And thus much have I written upon the occasion of a Vision before God
unfeigned. But that you may not think that I go about to satisfy you with
uncertain Visions only, and not after God's Word, I will take the ground of
your Letter, and specially answer to the same by the Scriptures and by
infallible reasons deduced out of the same, and prove the Baptism of Infants to
be lawful, commendable, and necessary, whereof you seem to stand in doubt.

Indeed if you look upon the Papistical Synagogue only, which has corrupted
God's Word by false Interpretations, and has perverted the true use of
Christ's Sacraments, you might seem to have good handfast of your Opinion
against the Baptism of Infants. But forasmuch as it is of more Antiquity, and
has his beginning from God's Word, and from the use of the Primitive Church,
it must not in respect of the abuse in the Popish Church be neglected, or
thought not expedient to be used in Christ's Church. Auxentius one of the
Arrians Sect, with his Adherents, was one of the first that denied the Baptism
of Children, and next after him Pelagius the Heretic, and some other there
were in St. Bernard's time, as it does appear by his Writings, and in our days
the Anabaptists, and Inordinate kind of Men stirred up by the Devil, to the
destruction of the Gospel. But the Catholic truth delivered unto us by the
Scriptures, plainly determines, that all such are to be Baptized, as whom God
acknowledges for his People, and vouchsufeth them worthy of Sanctification or
Remission of their Sins. Therefore since that Infants be in the number or
scroll of God's People, and be Partakers of the Promise by their Purification
in Christ, it must needs follow thereby, that they ought to be Baptized as well
as those that can Profess their Faith. For we judge the People of God as well
by the free and liberal Promise of God, as by the Confession of Faith. For to
whomsoever God promises himself to be their God, and whom he acknowledges for
his, those no Man without great Impiety may exclude from the number of the
Faithful. But God promises, that he will not only be the God of such as do
profess him, but also of Infants, promising them his Grace and Remission of
Sins, as it appears by the words of the Covenant made unto Abraham. I will
set my Covenant between thee and me (says Genesis 17.
the Lord) and between thy Seed after thee in their Generations, with an
everlasting Covenant, to be thy God, and the God of thy Seed after thee. To the
which Covenant Circumcision was added to be a sign of Sanctification as well in
Children as in Men; and no Man may think that this Promise is abrogated with
Circumcision and other Ceremonial Laws. For Christ came to fulfill the Promises,
and Matthew. 5.
not to dissolve them. Therefore in the Gospel he says of Infants, that is, of
such as yet believed not; Let the little Matthew. 10.
Ones come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.
Again, It is not the Will of your Father which Matthew. 19.
is in Heaven, that any of these little Ones do perish. Also, He Matthew. 18.
that receives one such little Child in my Name, receives me. Take heed
therefore that ye despise not one of these Babes, for I tell you, their Angels
do continually see in Heaven my Father's Face. And what may be said more
plainer than this; It is not the Will of the Heavenly Father, that the Infants
should perish? Whereby we may gather that he receives them freely unto his
Grace, although as yet they confess not their Faith. Since then that the Word
of the Promise, which is contained in Baptism, pertains as well to Children
as Men, why should the sign of the Promise, which is Baptism in Water, be
withdrawn from Children, when Christ himself commands them to be received of
us, and promises the Reward of a Prophet to those that receive such a little
Infant, as he for an Example did put before his Disciples.

Now will I prove with manifest Arguments, that Children Matthew. 28.
ought to be Baptized, and that the Apostles of Christ did Baptize Children.
The Lord commanded his Apostles to Baptize all Nations; therefore also Children
ought to be Baptized, for they are comprehended under this Word, All Nations.

Further, whom God does account among the faithful, they are faithful, for it
was said to Peter, That thing which Acts 10.
God has purified, thou shall not say to be common or unclean: But GOD does
repute Children among the Faithful: Ergo, they be faithful, except we had
rather to resist God, and seem stronger and wiser than he.

And without all doubt the Apostles Baptized those 1 Cor. 1.
which Christ commanded: But he commanded the Faithful to be Baptized, among
the which Infants be reckoned: The Apostles then Baptized Infants.

The Gospel is more than Baptism, for Paul said; The 1 Cor. 1.
Lord sent me to Preach the Gospel, and not to Baptize: Not that he denied
absolutely that he was sent to Baptize, but that he preferred Doctrine before
Baptism, for the Lord commanded both to the Apostles: but Children be received
by the Doctrine of the Gospel of God, and not refused: Therefore what Person
being of reason may deny them Baptism, which is a thing lesser than the Gospel?
For in the Sacraments be two things to be considered, the thing signified, and
the Sign, and thing signified is greater than the Sign, and from the thing
signified in Baptism, Children are not excluded; who therefore may deny them
the Sign, which is Baptism in Water?

St. Peter could not deny them to be Baptized in Water, to whom he saw the Holy
Ghost given, which is the certain Sign of God's People: For he says in the
Acts, May Acts 10.
any body forbid them to be Baptized in Water, who have received the Holy Ghost
as well as we? Therefore St. Peter denied not Baptism to Infants, for he knew
certainly* both by the Doctrine of Christ, and by the Covenant which is
everlasting, that the Kingdom of Heaven pertained to Infants.

None be received into the Kingdom of Heaven, but Romans 8.
such as God loves, and which are endued with his Spirit: For whosoever has not
the Spirit of God, he is none of his. But Infants be beloved of God, and
therefore want not the Spirit of God: Wherefore if they have the Spirit of God
as well as Men, if they be numbered among the People of God as well as we that
be of Age, who (I pray you) may well withstand Children to be Baptized with
Water, in the Name of the Lord.

The Apostles in times past being yet not sufficiently instructed, did murmur
against those which brought their Children unto the Lord, but the Lord rebuked
them, and said; Let the Babes come unto me. Why then do not these Rebellious
Matthew. 10.
Anabaptists obey the Commandments of the Lord? For what do they now adays
else that bring their Children to Baptism, than that they did in times past,
which brought their Children to the Lord, and our Lord received them, and
putting his hands on them, Blessed them, and both by Words and by Gentle
Behavior toward them, declared manifestly that Children be the People of God,
and entirely beloved of GOD? But some will say, Why then did not Christ Baptize
them? Because it is Written, Jesus himself Baptized not, but his Disciples.

Moreover, Circumcision in the Old Law was ministered John 4.
to Infants; therefore Baptism ought to be ministered in the New Law unto
Children. For Baptism is come in the stead of Circumcision, as St. Paul
witnesses, saying to the Colossians; By Christ ye are Circumcised with a
Circumcision which is Colos. 2.
without hands, when ye put off the body of sin of the Flesh, by the
Circumcision of Christ, being buried together with him through Baptism. Behold,
Paul calls Baptism the Circumcision of a Christian Man, which is done without
hands, not that Water may be ministered without hands, but that with hands no
Man any longer ought to be Circumcised, albeit the Mystery of Circumcision do
still remain in Faithful People.

To this I may add, That the Servants of God were always ready to minister the
Sacraments to them, for whom they were instituted. As for an Example, we may
behold Joshua, who most diligently procured the People of Israel to Jos. 2.
be Circumcised before they entered into the Land of Promise; but since the
Apostles were the Preachers of the Word, and the very Faithful Servants of
Jesus Christ, who may hereafter doubt that they Baptized Infants, since Baptism
is in place of Circumcision?

Item, The Apostles did attemperate all their doings to the Shadows and Figures
of the Old Testament: Therefore it is certain that they did attemperate Baptism
accordingly to Circumcision, and Baptized Children because they were under the
Figure of Baptism; for the People of Israel passed through the Red Sea, and the
bottom of the Water of Jordan, with their Children. And although the Children
be not always expressed, neither the Women in the Holy Scriptures, yet they are
comprehended and understood in the same.

Also the Scripture evidently tells us, That the Apostles baptized whole
Families or Households: But the Children be comprehended in a Family or
Household, as the chiefest and dearest part thereof: Therefore we may conclude,
that the Apostles did Baptize Infants or Children, and not only Men of lawful
age. And that the House or Household is taken for Man, Woman, and Child, it is
manifest in the 17. of Genesis, and also in that Joseph does call Jacob with
all his House, to come out of the Land of Canaan into Egypt.

Finally, I can declare out of ancient Writers, that the Baptism of Infants
has continued from the Apostles time unto ours, neither that it was instituted
by any Councels, neither of the Pope, nor of other Men, but commended from the
Scripture by the Apostles themselves. Origin upon the Declaration of St. Paul's
Epistle to the Romans, expounding the 6. Chapter, says, That the Church of
Christ received the Baptism from the very Apostles. St. Hierome makes mention
of the Baptism of Infants, in the 3. Book against the Pelagians, and in his
Epistle to Leta. St. Augustine recites Heb. 11.
for this purpose, a place out of John, Bishop of Constantinople, in his 1.
Book aganst Julian, Chap. 2. and he again writing to St. Hierome Epist. 28.
says, That St. Cyprian not making any new Decree, but firmly observing the
Faith of the Church, judged with his fellow Bishops, that as soon as one was
born, he might be lawfully Baptized. The place of Cyprian is to be seen in his
Epistle to Fidus.

Also St. Augustine in writing against the Donatists in the 4. Book, Chap. 23.
and 24. says, That the Baptism of Infants was not derived from the authority
of Man, neither of Councels, but from the Tradition or Doctrine of the Apostles.

Cyril upon Leviticus, Chap. 8. approves the Baptism of Children, and
condemns the iteration of Baptism. These Authorities of Men I do allege, not
to tie the Baptism of Children unto the Testimonies of Men, but to show how
Men's Testimonies do agree with God's Word, and that the verity of Antiquity is
on our side, and that the Anabaptists have nothing but Lies for them, and new
Imaginations, which feign the Baptism of Children to be the Pope's Commandment.

After this will I answer to the sum of your Arguments for the contrary. The
first, which includes all the rest, is, It is Written, Go ye into all the
World, and Preach the glad Tidings to all Creatures. He that believes and is
Baptized, shall be Saved: But he that believes not shall be Damned, etc.

To this I answer, That nothing is added to God's Word by Baptism of Children,
as you pretend, but that is done which the same Word does require, for that
Children are accounted of Christ in the Gospel among the number of such as
believe, as it appears by these words; He that offends Matthew. 18.
one of these little Babes which believe in me, it were better for him to have
a Millstone tied about his Neck, and to be cast into the bottom of the Sea.
Where plainly Christ calls such as be not able to confess their Faith,
Believers; because of his mere Grace he reputeth them for Believers. And this
is no Wonder so to be taken, since God imputes Faith for Righteousness unto
Men that be of riper Age: For both in Men and Children, Righteousness,
Acceptance, or Sanctification is of mere Grace and by Imputation, that the
Glory of God's Grace might be praised.

And that the Children of Faithful Parents are Sanctified, and among such as do
believe, is apparent in the 1 Cor. 1 Cor. 7.
7. And whereas you do gather by the order of the words in the said Commandment
of Christ, that Children ought to be taught before they be Baptized, and to
this end you allege many places out of the Acts, proving that such as
Confessed their Faith first, were Baptized after: I answer, That if the order
of words might weigh any thing to this Cause, we have the Scripture that makes
as well for us. St. Mark we read, that John did Baptize in the Desert, Mark 1.
Preaching the Baptism of Repentance. In the which place we see Baptizing go
before, and Preaching to follow after.

And also I will declare this place of Matthew exactly considered, to make for
the use of Baptism in Children, for St. Matthew has it written in this wise;
All Power is Matthew. 28.
given me (says the Lord) in Heaven and in Earth, therefore going forth (...),
that is, Disciple ye, (as I may express the signification of the Word;) that
is, make or gather to me Disciples of all Nations. And following, he declares
the way how they should gather to him Disciples out of all Nations, baptizing
them and teaching; by baptizing and teaching ye shall procure a Church to me.
And both these aptly and briefly severally he sets forth, saying, Baptizing
them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and the Holy Ghost, teaching
them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. Now then Baptism
goes before Doctrine.

But hereby I do not gather; that the Gentiles which never heard any thing
before of God, and of the Son of God, and of the Holy Ghost, ought to be
Baptized, neither they would permit themselves to be Baptized before they knew
to what end. But this I have declared to show you upon how feeble Foundation
the Anabaptists be grounded. And plainly it is not true which they imagine of
this Text, that the Lord did only command such to be Baptized, whom the
Apostles had first of all taught. Neither here verily is signified who only be
to be Baptized, but he speaks of such as be of perfect age, and of the first
Foundations of Faith, and of the Church to be planted among the Gentiles, which
were as yet rude and ignorant of Religion.

Such as be of Age may hear, believe, and confess, that which is Preached and
taught, but so cannot Infants; therefore we may justly collect, that he
speaks here nothing of Infants or Children. But for all this they be not to
be excluded from Baptism.

It is a general rule; He that does not Labor, must not Eat. But who is so
barbarous that might think hereby, that Children should be Famished?

The Lord sent his Apostles at the beginning of the setting up his true
Religion unto all Nations, unto such as were both ignorant of God, and were out
of the Covenant of God; and truly such Persons it behoved not first to be
taught, and after baptized. If at this day we should go to the Turks to Convert
them to the Faith of Christ, verily first we ought to teach them, and afterward
Baptize such as would yield to be the Servants of Christ. Likewise the Lord
himself in times past did, when first he renewed the Covenant with Abraham, and
ordained Circumcision to be a Seal of the Covenant after that Abraham was
Circumcised. But he, when he perceived the Infants also to pertain to the
Covenant, and that Circumcision was the sealing up of the Covenant, did not
only Circumcise Ismael his Son that was 13 years of Age, but all other Infants
that were born in his House, among whom we reckon Isaac.

Even so Faithful People which were Converted from Heathen Idolatry by the
Preaching of the Gospel, and Confessing the Faith, were Baptized; when they
understood their Children to be counted among the People of GOD, and that
Baptism was the Token of the People of GOD, they procured also their Children
to be baptized. Therefore as it is written; Abraham Circumcised all the Male
Children of his House. Semblably we read in the Acts and Writings of the
Apostles, that after the Master of the House was turned to the Faith, all the
whole House was baptized. And as concerning those which of old time were
compelled to Confess their Faith before they received Baptism, which were
called Catechumeni, they were such as with our Forefathers came from the
Gentiles to the Church, who being yet rude of Faith, they did instruct in the
Principles of their Belief, and afterward they did Baptize them; but the same
Ancient Fathers notwithstanding did Baptize the Children of Faithful Men, as I
have already partly declared.

And because you do require a hasty answer of your Letter of one that is but a
dull Writer, I am here enforced to cease particularly to go through your Letter
in answering thereto, knowing that I have fully answered every part thereof, in
that I have already written, although not in such order as it had been meet,
and as I purposed. But forasmuch as I understand that you will be no
Contentious Man, neither in this matter, neither in any other, contrary to the
judgment of Christ's Primitive Church, which is the Body and fullness of Christ,
I desire you in the entire love of him, or rather Christ desires you by me
(that your joy may be perfect, whereto you are now called) to submit your
Judgment to that Church, and to be at Peace and Unity with the same; that the
Coat of Christ which ought to be without Seam, but now alas, most miserably is
torn in pieces by many dangerous Sects and Damnable Opinions, may appear by you
in no part to have been rent, neither that any giddy Head in these Dog Days,
might take an ensample by you to dissent from Christ's true Church: I beseech
thee, Dear Brother, in the Gospel, follow the steps of the Faith of the
Glorious Martyrs in the Primitive Church, and of such as at this day follow the
same; decline from them neither to the Right Hand nor to the Left. Then shall
Death, be it never so bitter, be more sweeter than this Life; then shall Christ
with all the Heavenly Jerusalem triumphantly embrace your Spirit with
unspeakable Gladness and Exaltation, who in this Earth was content to join your
Spirit with their Spirits, according as it is commanded by the Word, That the
Spirit of Prophets should be subject to the Prophets. One thing ask with David
ere you depart, and require the same, that you may dwell with a full accord in
his House, for there is Glory and Worship: And so with Simeon in the Temple
embracing Christ, depart in Peace: To the which 1 Cor. 14.
Peace Christ bring both you and me, and all our loving Brethren that love GOD
in the Unity of Faith, by such ways as shall please him, to his Glory. Let the
bitter Passion of Christ which he suffered for your sake, and the Horrible
Torments which the Godly Martyrs of Christ have endured before us, and also the
inestimable Reward of your Life to come, which is hidden yet a little while
from you with Christ, strengthen, comfort, and encourage you to the end of that
Glorious Race which you are in. Amen.

Your Yoke Fellow in Captivity for the Verity of Christ's Gospel, to live and
die with you in the Unity of Faith, JOHN PHILPOT.

FINIS.
THE CASE OF THE Cross in Baptism CONSIDERED. Wherein is Showed, That there is
nothing in it, as it is used in the Church of England, that can be any just
Reason of Separation from it.

Galat. VI. 14. God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ. LONDON, Printed for Fincham Gardener, at the White-Horse in
Ludgate Street. 1684.

THE CASE OF THE CROSS IN Baptism, etc.
THE Matters in Dispute betwixt Us and our Dissenting Brethren, may generally
seem to the unconcerned stander by, of so slight and Inconsiderable Moment,
that he must needs wonder how in the World the Controversy should come to have
arisen to that Deplorable height, which in this last Age it has done. And
although the Case which will fall under our present Debate, seems to have
admitted of the most specious scruples and given the best scope of reasoning,
of any other thing that has fallen under question amongst us since the
Reformation; yet even here also, the Immeasurable Bias of Prejudice, and
Fervency (...).
of Opposition, has too apparently managed the Argument. So that the Pleas
against it have not seemed so weighty as they have been numerous, as if the
Objectors had an Eye to that direction in Quintilian, they would L. 5. c. 20.
Infirmiora Argumenta Congreganda sunt, imbecilla enim natura, mutuo auxilio
sustinentur.
be sure to amass all the weaker Arguments, which though weak in themselves,
yet by standing together may lend a Mutual assistance to one another; like
Articles of Impeachment, none of which singly would perhaps affect the accused
Person, but all together may amount to accumulative Treason.

My business therefore in handling this Case, shall not be to follow every nice
Scruple, or trivial Objection (as where the Cross in Baptism has been charged
with the breach of every particular Precept in the Decalogue) not to concern my
self in any thing, which either by long Induction of consequences has been far
fetched, or with great difficulty drawn in, to make a show of Argument, but, as
briefly and plainly as may be to sum up all that has ever seemed of any Moment
in this matter, and that under this twofold Head.

1. That the Sign of the Cross has been so notoriously abused to the worst
purposes of Superstition and Idolatry in the Church of Rome; that the retaining
of it still amongst us, makes us partakers of the Superstitions and Idolatry of
that Church.

II. That it seems the introducing of a New Sacrament, which having not the
warranty of our Lord and Master Christ Jesus, must needs be a very Offensive
invasion of his Rights, whose Royal Prerogative alone it is to institute what
Sacraments he pleases in his Church.

Under these two Heads I think may be fairly comprehended all those Objections
our Brethren have offered against the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, at least
all those that are any thing Material. Insomuch that if the difficulty of these
could be removed, we might fairly hope, none of the Sober and Conscientious
Dissenters, but would think themselves obliged to submit to the use of it,
rather than maintain the Separation upon this account.

And this shall be endeavored with all the Candor and Clearness that becomes
the design of this, and the rest of those Discourses that have been Published of
this kind, viz. to Convince and not Reproach or Provoke any: to Effect (if
possible) the happy agreement, and consequently enlarge and strengthen the
interests of good Men. And for this purpose I have thought fit not to quote the
writings of particular Persons, but rather to represent the Objection, as what
is in general avowed and agreed upon by the whole Party.

And although it is not likely that any thing should be here offered, that has
not been already with great Learning and Integrity made use of, by the many
assertors of our Church; yet perhaps, the bringing this under one view, without
the Warmth or Salt of an Adversary may not prove altogether Vain and
Ineffectual.

I. I begin therefore, with the first Objection, viz. That the Sign of the
Cross has been so notoriously abused to the worst purposes of Superstition and
Idolatry in the Church of Rome, that the retaining of it still amongst us,
makes us Partakers of the Superstitions and Idolatry of that Church.

I must readily acknowledge that the Material Figure of the Cross has been
indeed abused to very Idolatrous purposes in the Church of Rome, and even the
aereal Sign of it to Purposes superstitious and ridiculous enough, and if what
we do in using this Sign in Baptism, were really chargeable with Popery, it
would be a sufficient reason to detest and Reject it. The Objection therefore
at the first view looks plausibly enough, when it thus charge this Ceremony
of the Cross; Paganism it self being hardly more Odious, nor in Truth (for some
very good Reasons amongst wise Men,) more Ridiculous and Intolerable. There is
scarce any part of Popery, properly so called, but is so plain a dpravation of
Christianity it self, such a contradiction to the Rules, such a defeat to the
great purposes and ends of our Holy Religion, that it deserves well enough the
good Man's Justest abhorrency, which he may reasonably express, when he finds
himself in any real danger of the Snare. But then, we must consider, how easy
and natural a thing it is for Persons (that otherwise mean honestly enough) to
humor a Just and Reasonable Offense against Popery, into groundless Suspicions
upon things which have no such Tendency at all in them: And upon these first
Suspicions not only to startle, and grow a little shy and nice, but to
determine themselves in resolved and unmovable Prejudices, that have had
Effects ill enough. For upon this, designing Men have made their advantage upon
every trifling occasion, giving out the word, and laying the charge of Popery,
upon what it has been their humor or interest to desire a change in. And this
probably we shall find to have happened in this Case in hand. The accusation
has been drawn against it that it is very Popish, and the Prejudices which
this Accusation has begot in some honest Minds, are so strong that they seem
invincible. How unreasonably therefore this charge is laid against our use of
the Sign of the Cross in Baptism may appear when we have considered these three
things.

I. That the use of this Sign was much more ancient, than the first Corruption
and Depravation of the Church of Rome.

II. That the use of it, as it is ordained and appointed in our Church, has
not the least affinity with the use of it, as it is in the Romish Rituals.

III. Last. Although it cannot be denied but the Church of Rome has greatly
abused this Ceremony to very ill purposes of Superstition, yet does not this
make it unlawful to continue the Reformed use of it still amongst us that have
professedly separated from the Corruptions of that Church.

I. Consider we that the use of this Sign of the Cross was much more ancient
than the first Corruption and Depravation of the Church of Rome. When I speak
of the first Corruption and Depravation of the Church of Rome, I would be
understood as to those things that have put that Church under the Imputation of
what we now call Popery. For that there were some depraved Customs crept into
the Church in general (and so that of Rome perhaps as well as any other) in
very early days, is Evident from what St. Paul Rebukes in the Church of
Corinth, and from what our Savior himself in his Revelations to St. John,
Condemns in the Seven Churches of Asia. So that, when I say the use of the
Cross was more ancient than the first Corruption and Depravation of the Church
of Rome, I mean, more ancient than any of those Corruptions in her by the
reason of which, we have justly esteemed her an Apostatized Church, more
ancient than either the Introduction of Images, their Multiplication of
Sacraments, their pretentions to Supremacy and Infallibility, or any of those
Superstitious Rites in Worship, by which we distinguish that Church as Popish,
and brand it as false and Antichristian.

As to this therefore, I know none of our Dissenting By which Phrase the
Apostle in Truth meant, the Secret workings of the Haereticks of that Age.
Brethren, however for a shift in Argument they may talk of the Mystery of
Iniquity beginning to work betimes; and in the first Ages of the Church *, that
yet do professedly charge any Signal Apostasy upon the Church of Rome, at least
for the first four hundred Years after Christ: not to the Age wherein St.
Austin Flourisht; but that it was a Church that might be Communicated with at
that time, notwithstanding that Father complained of the Superfaetation of
Ceremonies even then, which (at least for the Number of them) began to be very
burdensome. And yet, for an Hundred or two of Years before this, we find in the
Writings of Tertullian such mention of the use of this Sign, that makes it very
plain, it had been a Customary thing long before his time also, and probably,
even amongst those of the Apostolical Age it self. There are those indeed that
would make that Father the first that brought in the use of this Ceremony into
the Church, having received it from the Montanists of whom he seems to have
been particularly fond. But the frequent and familiar mention he makes of the
Sign of the Cross in many of his Books renders this Conjecture very improbable.
Tertullian tells us it was grown so much in use in his time, that upon every
motion of theirs, at their going out and coming in, when they put on their
Garments or Shoes, at the Bath, or at Meals when they lighted up their
Candles, or went to Bed, whatever almost they did in any part of their
Conversation, still they Frontem crucis signaculo terere. Tertul. de Coron. mil.
would even wear out their Forheads with the Sign of the Cross; which though he
confesses there was no express Law of Christ that had enjoined it, yet
Tradition had Introduced, Custom had Confirmed, and the Believers Faith had
observed and maintained it.

This does not look as if it had been a thing newly invented by Montanus, and
brought into the Church by Tertullian, as being himself too great a Favourer of
that Sect. Although, were it thus indeed, yet this shows that the Practice of
it was received among the Faithful, some Ages before the Depravation and
Apostasy of the Romish Church. But he is not our single Author in this matter:
for, Origin who Flourisht not much above CC Homil. 2. in Psalm. 38.
Years after Christ, and not XL Years after Tertullian, makes mention of those
who upon their Admission into the Church by Baptism, were Signed with this
Sign. And St. Basil not much above one Hundred Years after him, gives this
usage the Venerable Title of an Ecclesiastical Constitution, or fixed Law of the
Church, that had prevailed from the Apostles Days, that those who believed
Basil. de Spir. Sanct. cap. 27.
in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, should be Signed with the Sign of the
Cross.

But of all the Fathers, St. Cyprian, who was before St. Basil, and very near
if not contemporary with Tertullian himself, not only speaks most Familiarly of
the use of this Sign, but has some Expressions in this matter, that would seem
very harsh and unwarrantable now; and yet, the Authority of that Father, has
saved him hitherto from being brought under question about it. He tells us in
one place, that in front cruce signantur, qui Dominum promerentur, i. e. they
are Signed in the Forehead with the Cross who are thought worthy of the Lord,
and in another place, Omnia sacramenta peragit, it Compleats every Sacrament,
and per crucem baptisma sanctificatur, Baptism is Sanctified by the Cross. I
will not stand accountable for the Justifiableness of these passages, were they
to be allowed no kind of Latitude: but, as to the purpose for which they are
cited they seem pertinent enough: that is, to Argue the antiquity of this usage
(and that in the Sacrament of Baptism too) the Phrase so frequently occurring
in the writings of those ancient Fathers, that front signati, being signed in
the Forehead, seems a known and usual Periphrasis for being entered into the
Faith of Christ and the Body of his Church by Baptism.

After all which, what need I Instance in St. Cyril, St. Ambrose, or St.
Austin? Who sprinkle their writings with the Common mention of this Ceremony,
and oftentimes frame Arguments of the Obligation upon Christians to live as
becomes them, from this very badg they wear upon their Foreheads. St. Austin
wittily enough glorying in the Confidence of a Christian as to a Crucified
Savior, that he willingly imprints the Sign of it upon Nec nos pudet
Crucifixi, sed ubi pudoris signum est, crucis ejus signum habemus. August. in
Galat. 6. 14.
that part of himself which is the proper seat of Blushing.

I shall only add this remark further, that after the time wherein this Custom
had been so Universally received into the Christian Church, and some of the
Fathers had so liberally expressed themselves in it, we may observe that the
first Christian Emperor, Constantine the Great, had his Directions probably
from heaven it self to make this Sign, the great Banner in his Wars, with this
Additional encouragement, that by this he should overcome. That (...).
this Dream or Vision (call it which we will, for Histories mention it
differently) was from Heaven, and a thing of great reality, is Evident, from
the success of that Princes Arms under it.

The Authors of the Centuries allow a considerable Signification in that Sign
as given him from Heaven, as the future Standard he should fight under, viz,
that God had admonisht him by that Sign of the Cross, and the Motto added to
it, by this thou shall overcome, concerning the Cent. 4. cap. 13.
Knowledge and Worship of the true God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, in
Memorial of which he took care to have it Painted on his Banner, that it might
be as the Symbol of the Christian Religion.

Now we would not suppose that our Blessed Lord would by so immediate a
Revelation from Heaven, Countenance such a Rite as this, already received and
made use of in the Church, giving it to Constantine both as a Symbol of his
Profession, and Pledge of his future Victories, if he had resented it before as
Superstitious or any way unwarrantable. This kind of Standard the Roman
Emperors successively had born before them in their Wars: nay, it is recorded
that Julian himself (probably from what he had made some former Observations
Theodoret. Hist. l. 3. c. 3.
of,) could not forbear defending himself with this Sign, upon a mighty fright
he was seized with, while in the use of Magic Arts he went to have consulted
with the Devil. Orat. Cont. Julian.
This Nazianzen calls his craving aid and refuge of him whom he had Persecuted.
Which, (by the way) might give us the modestly and caution of showing our
selves too petulant against what it has pleased our Lord Jesus in a Revelation
from Heaven to give the Figure of, and the Holy Spirit also to signalize
sometimes by very renowned miracles, which those that consult Ecclesiastical
Histories of best Authority cannot but be convinced of.

So that, we find the use of it very ancient, and the Effects of it very
Memorable, Casaubon himself (no very fond Man of Rituals) calls it Primitivae
Ecclesiae Exercit. in Baronium.
Symbolum ejus fiduciae quam in Christo and cruce ipsius, and passione
ponebant: a Symbol the Primitive Church used to denote that Confidence they had
in Christ, his Cross, and Passion.

I confess it would be a fond thing to endeavor, with some of the Romish
Church, to trace up the Antiquity of the Cross, to the first Creation of Man,
and so all along downward to the Actual Death of our Blessed Lord. They can spy
out the Cross, in the Figure of a Man's Face, by the placing of the Nose
betwixt the two Eyes, and much more in the Position of the whole Body of the
Man with his Arms extended. They can discern it in the Sword in Paradise, See
the notes of Laur. le bar upon Tertul. advers. Marcion. l. 3. p. 178, 179.
and in the Cross stick that Noah's Dove brought back into the Ark, etc.

And indeed some of the Fathers bend their Imaginations something that way, and
would fancy the Figure of the Cross in Moses his stretching out his Arms whiles
the Israelites were fighting with Amalek, in the Paschal Lamb when the Spit
went through it, etc. which, however they were conceits too much suiting that
way of allegorizing that some of them were fond of, yet does it at least
confirm what I am now upon, I mean the ancient Reception of this Sign into the
Primitive Church. Nay, I may further add, that in some of the passages they
have of this kind, the hint they take may not deserve perhaps to be absolutely
exploded, as if there were no weight or moment at all in it. I will crave leave
to instance particularly in one thing which some of the Fathers do a little
insist upon, and that is, that Mark in Ezekiel. 9. 4. that was to be set upon the
Foreheads of the Men that sigh, etc.

This Mark in several of the ancient Versions is supposed to be the Hebrew Tau,
which St. Hierom tells us was, in the Samaritan Character, like our T, and so
made the figure of the Cross, from whence he Collects that this was signum
crucis quae in Christianorum frontibus pingitur, a token of that Cross that is
imprinted upon the Forehead of the Christian. If St. Hierom be not mistaken in
the Samaritan Character, his conjecture in the Application of it, is not very
unjustifiable; because, as all the promises are in Christ Jesus, yea, and in
him Amen: So, 2 Cor. 1. 20.
all the Prophesies of old, where they concerned any signal advantages or
deliverances to the Jewish Church had the assurance of them frequently
confirmed by some hint or Remembrance of the Messiah, that was afterward to be
revealed. Thus in that Confirmation that Isaiah was to give to Ahaz of his
present deliverance from the Invasions of Ephraim and Syria, he gives him this
Sign, behold Isai. 7. 4.
a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son. How could that great Event that was
not to come to pass of so many Ages after Ahaz his Death, affect him, who stood
in need of so immediate Deliverance, but that it was brought in as an instance,
(not only that as God could bring about such a wonder, as the Birth of a Child
from a Virgin, could as easily relieve Judah in its present streights: but
further,) he that had so gracious a design toward them, as to send the Messiah
amongst them, would in the Prospect he had to that, show now his particular
regards for the Church at this time. In Analogy to this, might this passage in
Ezekiel, look toward that mark which Christians in after Ages should wear upon
their Foreheads, as a present Symbol of the escape of those that should be
found sighing for the Abominations that were then done in Israel. And to this
probably, may that Seal of the living God have some Reference, which was to be
set upon the Foreheads of the Servants of God. Revel. 7. 2, 3. For, as they are
there reckoned up by the number of twelve times twelve, to signify that they
are the true and genuine offspring of the twelve Apostles; so, the Seal Vid.
Med. in loc.
of the Living God upon their Foreheads, may point at the Figure of the Cross,
to betoken them (though under the Prophetic Denomination of the Jewish Tribes)
to be of the Christian Church. This I would not be supposed to lay any great
stress of Argument upon, only offer the Conjecture to the Candor of the Reader.

And thus, having shown the Antiquity of this Sign, as it was received into
the Church long before the Corruptions of Popery appeared in the World; I know
but of one thing can be urged to take off the strength of what has been
hitherto said; and that is, that the Primitive Christians might probably take
up this Custom of thus signing themselves, because they lived wholly amongst
the Enemies of the Cross of Christ, the Jews making the Cross a
Stumbling Block, and the Greeks Foolishness. So that, their design of doing it,
was only to bear their Testimony to the Faces of both, that is, tho the Cross
was scandal to the one, and scorn and laughter to the other, yet they would not
be ashamed of this Cross but made it the Badg of their Profession. Whereas we
live in an Age and Nation, where (thanks be to God) there seems no such
occasion, because Christianity is the Religion we openly and universally
profess.

To this I answer, that this Objection being thus made, does at least suppose
the usage of the Cross not to be a thing that is in it self evil, because if
so, no good end or design in using it could hallow the Action; so that the
Ceremony is not Evil in its self, but that upon some weighty reasons, it might
be brought into the Church, if so, then we might reasonably think, that the
injunction of Authority in this Case, might Justify the Practice of it. But
much more, if the reason now alleged might be a just occasion for the Church
in its first Ages to take the usage up, God knows the occasion may be as urgent
still upon an Equally sad account: and that is, the Profane and Atheistical
Contempt that is thrown, not so much upon the Sign as the Doctrine of the
Cross, by the pretended Wits of our Age. He has a very slender concernment for
the interests of Religion, that is not sensibly touched with those Blasphemous
Railleries he may every where meet with, upon the whole Scheme of Christianity,
especially that which we make the great Foundation of our hopes and trust, viz.
the Merits of our Saviors Cross and Passion. That the use of this Sign, if
ever it was reasonable upon such a score as this, it is so now. And St.
Cyprians Caution is strong and pertinent enough at this time of the day against
all the Wit and Pride of the daring and haughty Atheist, Muniatur frons, etc.
Arm your Foreheads that the Seal of God may be kept Epist. 56. ad Thiberitanos.
safe. q. d. Remember the Badg you took upon you in Baptism, and so long as you
have that upon your Foreheads, never be ashamed or laughed out of Countenance,
as to the Memory of your Saviors Love, and the Foundation of your hopes laid
in his Death and Passion.

And now, since it is so evident how Ancient a practice this has been in the
Christian Church: I would not have this part of the Argument pretended further
than it was first designed, which was only to show that this Ceremony has
nothing owing in it to that which we call Popery, because it was established in
the Church so long before that Mystery of Iniquity had its being. And tho
through the Antiquity of it (if warrantable at the first) it becomes so much
the more Venerable, and might justly lay some restraints upon the modest
Christian in his Censures against it; yet does not this put it beyond the
degree of an indifferent Ceremony, without which, the Sacrament of Baptism is
declared by our Church as complete and perfected. Did the Antiquity of its
practice make it necessary, it might prove as necessary almost in every Action
of Life, as well as Baptism, because (as I have noted before) Tertullian tells
us, it was once so used. No, it only gives us the warrant of doing it, because
practiced in the most incorrupt Ages of Christianity; and the necessity of
keeping it still in use, lies not so much in that it was the Custom of some
Church, or Constitution of some Council in former days, as that it is the
Custom of our Church now, and the appointment of our Governors. But,

Secondly, It is further considerable, that the use of the Cross as it is
ordained and appointed in our Church, has not the least affinity with the use
of it, as it is in the Romish Rituals.

1. We do by no means allow any visible Images of a Crucified Jesus, so as to
have the least concern in any part of our Worship. There is no mention of them
in our Rubric; there is hardly in any writings of the Doctors of our Church
one passage to be found of that latitude, that Mr. Baxter amongst his calmest
thoughts has Christian direct. Ecclesiastical Cases qu. 113. p. 875. Ibid. p.
876.
not adventured to say, that is, that a Crucifix well befiteth the Imagination
and Mind of a Believer; nay further, that it is not unlawful to make an Image
(and gives the instance particularly of a Crucifix) to be the objectum vel
medium excitans ad cultum Dei, an Object or medium of our consideration,
exciting our minds to Worship God. The sense of our Church is truly expressed in
this matter by Mr. Hooker, who tells us that between the Cross which
Superstition honors as Christ, and that Ceremony of the Cross which serves
only for a sign of Remembrance, there is as plain and great a difference, as
between those brazen Images which Solomon made to bear up the Cistern of the
Temple, and that which the Israelites in the Wilderness did adore. Eccles. Pol.
l. 5. p. 348.
Or between those Altars which Josias destroyed, because they were Instruments
of mere Idolatry, and that which the tribe of Reuben with others erected near
the River Jordan to far other purposes. Ours is no other than a mere transient,
or (as others express it) aerial figure of the Cross, which comes not within
the widest notion of an Image; or if it were so, is so very transient, that it
abides not so long as to be capable of becoming any Object or medium of
Worship, any further than any words we use in Worship may do.

2. The use even of this transient sign, bears no kind of Conformity or
likeness with the use of it in the Church of Rome. They use it upon numberless
occasions beside Baptism. If they enter in, or go out of Church, or a Friends
House; when they say their Prayers, or are present at any Religious Solemnity.
If startled at Thunder, taken in a storm, frighted with a spectrum, or are
surpised with any kind of Fear or Astonishment, they bless themselves still,
and take refuge under this sign of the Cross, which they will make upon
themselves. If they visit the sick, administer the extreme Unction, or indeed
perform any of their other Sacraments (so called by them,) the transient sign
of the Cross must begin and close all. But then, in the Sacrament of Baptism,
the use of this sign is so exceedingly different, as well in the nauseous
Repetitions of it before and afterward, in the Forehead, in the Mouth, and upon
the Breast: as also, the Monstrous Significations according to the diverse places
whereon it is impressed, that nothing can be more. Beside that it is not used at
the time, nor with the form of words that we use it with. So that, there is not
the least agreement betwixt us and them, either in the use, or in the
significancy of this Ceremony; and so no reasonable offense can be taken at it,
upon any Symbolizing of ours with the Church of Rome in it. All this might be
further confirmed by giving a particular view of the Roman Ritual, as to what
respects their office for Baptism; but this is done by a better hand upon
another See Case about the Chapter of Engl. Symbol. with the Chapter of Rome, p. 10.
11. 12.
Case of this kind.

Lastly, Although it cannot be denied but the Church of Rome has greatly
abused this Ceremony to very ill purposes of Superstition, yet does not this
make it unlawful to continue the reformed use of it amongst us, that have
professedly separated from the Corruptions of that Church. It is a Principle
that some of our Brethren imagine they are very well fortified in, from some
instances in the Gld Testament, viz. that whatever has been abused to
Idolatrous or Superstitious purposes, should eo nomine be abolisht. But perhaps
they would find this much more a question than they have hitherto presumed, if
they would consider, that if this Principle were true, it would go nigh to
throw a scorn upon all or most so the Reformations that have been made from the
Church of Rome, for they do not seem to have governed themselves by this Rule.
Some of them in their public Confessions declaring, that they might lawfully
retain such Rites or Ceremonies as are of advantage to Faith, the Worship of
God, or Peace and Order in the Church, though they had Confess. Bohem. Art. 15.
been introduced by any Synod, or Bishop, or Pope, or any other.

It is a Principle that would render Christianity impracticable, because no
Circumstance, no Instrument, no Ministry in Worship, but may have been some way
or other abused and desecrated by Pagan or Romish Idolatries. It would make
every Garment of what shape, or of what color soever, unfit for use in our
Religious services: for, not only the White, but the Red, the Green, and the
Black, have been used (even for the significancy of their respective colors)
by the Gentile, or the Romanist to very superstitious purposes in divine
Worship. It would condemn the Practice of those very Persons that would pretend
this to be their Principle. For they have few of them carried it to that height
as to abolish Churches, Fonts, or other Vtensils, but have thought fit to make
use of them in the same services of Religion as formerly, though not in those
modes by which they were abused to Superstition and Idolatry. All which they
should not do, if either the Principle had any real Foundation in it self, or
they acted in any due consistency with the Principle they pretend.

That which our Dissenting Brethren urge, (as they think) of the greatest force
and pertinency in this matter, is the example of Hezekiah, who when he found
the brazen Serpent, which God himself had directed to be set up for the Healing
of those that had been stung with Fiery Serpents, abused to downright Idolatry:
He would not endeavor to recover it to the first design of its preservation,
that is, to keep it standing only as a memorial of Gods Power and goodness, who
had done such great and beneficial things amongst them by it: but without any
more ado, takes it away from all further view of the People, breaks it in
pieces, and calls it Nehushtan, i. e. let us the People see it was a thing of
Brass and 2 Kings XVI ^1. 4.
nothing else.

To this I answer, First, Although it is very natural to mankind to govern
themselves more by example than precept, yet, Arguments fetched from examples,
generally are not the truest way of reasoning; and that partly upon this very
account, namely, the proneness we have toward example, and Bias and Prejudice
we may the easilier be drawn away with, upon that account. But chiefly, because
in alleging examples, it is very rare that we can hit the Case perfectly
right. It may be said of Examples, as it is of Similitudes; they seldom do
Currere quatuor pedibus, they do not perfectly reach the thing intended to be
proved, but are so widely different, or defective in some one or other
Circumstance, that there is not that parity of Reason that ought to be; and the
varying of Circumstances may much alter the Case. Which very thing apparently
falls out in this very instance. For certainly, if the example be concerned in
any thing with respect to our practice, it may seem to prove nothing further
than the necessity of taking away (not what has been used only to Idolatrous
purposes, but) what it self has been, and at that instant is, a mere Idol.
This was the Circumstance of the brazen Serpent, it was by Custom become a real
Idol; it had been so for a long time, was so at that instant, when Hezekiah
brake it to pieces: to those days the Children of Israel did burn Incense unto
it. So that, thus far perhaps this instance might affect us, that, were there
any Crucifix, or material image of our Savior upon the Cross, now standing, to
which People for some Ages had given, and for the generality did still give
divine honor; it would then indeed concern the Government, in their
Reformation from the Idolatries of the Church of Rome, to take away and abolish
this and all other Images of this kind. This perhaps answers the pattern pretty
much, and copieth out Hezekiah's wise and good Action; and this accordingly is
entirely done in our Church; there being no such Image abiding now amongst us,
to which any adoration is publicly avowed, or that can be pretended to have
such snare in it, as to hazard any general Idolatry. What proportion does our
Aerial sign of the Cross (toward which there is no intention, nor indeed any
possibility of giving any divine Worship,) what proportion does this bear to
the material figure of the brazen Serpent, to which they had for a long time
actually burnt Incense, did it to those very days, and gave such Evidence of
their Inveteracy in Idolatry, that there seemed no moral likelihood of
preventing it by any other course than breaking the Idol to pieces, and letting
them see what a mere lump of Brass they had been Worshipping? But then,

2. If Example were a good way of Arguing, we find by Hezekiah's practice in
other things, he did not think it an indispensible Duty in him to abolish every
thing that had been made use of to Idolatry, if they did not prove an immediate
snare at that time; for, as to Temples which Solomon had erected for no other
end but the Worship of false Gods in them, 1 Kings 11. 7. Hezekiah did not make
it his business to destroy them, as being in his time forlorn and neglected
things, of which no bad use was then made. Although indeed King Josiah
afterward (probably upon the increase of Idolatry, and renewed use of those
places) foued it expedient to lay them wholly waste. 2 Kings 23. 13.

And thus much I have thought fit to say as to that first Head of Objection
against the sign of the Cross, as it is cried out against as a Relick of
Popery, and had been so depraved by the Superstitious use of it in the Church
of Rome. I cannot but acknowledge this to be the weakest part of their plea
against it; and probably our Brethren know it to be so too: yet, because it is
most affecting amongst common People, and seems to have made the deepest
impression upon those that are not so well fitted for profound and solid
reasoning, I have chosen to be the larger here, that even the meanest
capacities may see that the Sign of the Cross, as we use it, was not introduced
by the Church of Rome, but was of a much ancienter date: That the use we make
of it bears no Conformity at all with that Church in their using it: that by
our different usage we keep at a sufficient distance; nay, perhaps are in less
likelihood of falling into the Snare of their Communion, than if it had been
utterly abolisht: In a word, that that very Principle, upon which the charge of
Popery is laid as an Argument against the Cross, is it self weak and fallible;
nor are we bound by any Precept or Example in Holy Writ, to throw off the use
of any one thing merely because the Church of Rome has abused it. It has
proved a mighty inconvenience to the Church, that People have been thrown into
so precipitant a Zeal of removing themselves to the utmost extremes from the
Church of Rome, that they have been almost afraid to determine in any action or
circumstance of Divine Worship, lest it should some way or other, have been
Profaned and made unwarrantable by their practice. This is that gave rise to
the mischievous Enthusiasms in Germany, that ended in such bloody and barbarous
Practtises, as well as senseless and ridiculous Principles taken up and
maintained by the Anabaptists there. I am loath to mention the horrid confusions
of our own Age and Nation, which yet perhaps we were wrought up into by this
very humor; I mean, a restless fondness for some additional refinements still,
which our Church had not thought fit to make.

I cannot but inwardly reverence the Judgment, as well as love the Temper, of
our first Reformers, who in their first Separations from Rome, were not nice or
scrupulous beyond the just reasons of things. Doubtless they were in earnest
enough, as to all true Zeal against the Corruptions of that Church, when they
sealed the wellgrounded offense they took at them, with their warmest blood;
and cheerfully underwent all the hardships that Primitive Christians signalized
their Profession with, rather than they would intermix with Rome, in any usage
of Worship, or Article of Faith that had the least savor of Idolatry,
Superstition, or false Religion at all in it. And yet these Holy and Wise Men,
when they had the Power and Opportunity of Reforming, wholly in their Hands,
being equally jealous of Enthusiasm as they were of Superstition, would not
give themselves up to those fantastic Antipathies as to abolish this or that
Ceremony, merely because it had been in use amongst the Papists, if some other
very substantial Reason did not put in its claim against it. And verily, had
they not Governed themselves in these temperate and unbyast methods of
Reformation, they would not so easily have justified themselves to their
Adversaries, or the World; or have made it so evident (as by their wise
management they did) that what was done by them was from the mere urgencies of
Conscience and Reason, and not the wantonness of Change and Innovation. So
that, where any mean honestly (as I doubt not but many of those do, that
Dissent from us in this particular circumstance of the Cross in Baptism) they
ought to have their Reason very well awake, that the mere charge of Popery upon
any disputed point, may not so prejudice them in their enquiries into things as
to leave no Room for debate and mature Consideration.

Secondly, The other head of Objection against the sign of the Cross in Baptism
is, that it seems the introducing of a new Sacrament, which having not the
warranty of our Lord and Master Christ Jesus, must needs be a very offensive
invasion of his Rights, whose Royal Prerogative alone it is, to institute what
Sacraments he pleases in his Church.

This Objection seems to point at a twofold argument. The one, with respect in
Common to all those Circumstances in Worship, which for Decency and Order, are
appointed by the Governors of the Church, but not antecedently prescribed and
enjoined in the word of God. For, to do this, our Dissenting Brethren have
generally affirmed it a bold and unwarrantable intrusion upon our Lord and
Master, who was faithful to him that appointed him, as also Moses was faithful
in all his House, that is, in prescribing to the Jews all their modes and
usages in Worship, from which they were not to vary or deviate, to add or
diminish in any one Circumstance.

This I shall take no further notice of, than as it may necessarily intermix it
self with the question particularly in hand about the Cross in Baptism, partly
because I would keep as strictly as may be to this distinct Case, and
especially, because this Case [of doing nothing in or about the Worship of God,
but what is expressly prescribed and appointed by him in his word] has been
another's province; so that, I shall only say, the Customs of the Jewish Church
it self, (which our Brethren would make their main instance in this matter,) do
make directly against it. They did unquestionably take up some usages wherein
Moses had given no antecedent directions, which yet it is evident were not
unlawful upon that account, because our Blessed Lord did not only not blame or
accuse them of Encroachment or Superstition, but himself practiced and complied
with them; this, amongst many other things, has been cleared up in the
instance of their Synagogue Worship, and upon another occasion may be further
insisted on by and by. Besides, it is plain, this was no Rule amongst the
primitive Christians in the first ages of the Gospel, not to add, the
inexpediency and unfitness of this Rule to the very Economy and Dispensation
of Christianity, which was to diffuse it self amongst all Nations, and all
kinds of People, who did so infinitely differ from one another, both in their
Customs, and in the Significations of those Customs too, that it must have been
a vast and bulky digest of Laws indeed, that must have suited all Countries,
were every Circumstance and Punctilio in divine Worship to have been
antecedently prescribed. All this has been with so much clearness made out by
several Hands, that I am apt to think at this time of the day, our Brethren do
not expect or stand in need of further Conviction in this point, and seem in
some measure agreed that this Position of theirs will not hold water.

It is the other part of the Objection therefore, that will fall more directly
under our consideration at this present; and that is, that our using the sign
of the Cross in Baptism, does seem to run into the nature of a new Sacrament.
And this is that they mean, when they tell us, it is an outward Visible sign of
an inward invisible Grace, whereby a Person is dedicated to the Profession of,
and Subjection to the Redeemer. That it is a dedicating means to consecrate us
to God; that it signifies our covenanting engagement, and is as a Badg and
Symbol of the Christian Religion; that it represents Christ dying on the Cross,
and signifies our being listed under Christ; that it is an addition to Baptism;
that it adds another Sacrament to Baptism: And that it is used as an engaging
Sign, in our first and solemn covenanting with Christ, and the duties whereunto
we are really obliged by Baptism, are more expressly affixt to that aerie Sign
than to the Holy Sacrament. With many other Expressions of this kind, which we
may find interspersed in the several writings of the Nonconformists, where they
take occasion to dispute this Ceremony. This of the Crosses having at least the
semblance of a Sacrament, is indeed the only Objection the Presbyterian
Brethren insist upon in their exceptions against some passages in the present
Liturgy.

As to this therefore, first, I must needs say, I have sometimes wondered that
the word Sacrament it self, has been so well agreed upon amongst us. The
Fathers have used it so much at large in their writings that it would sometimes
be difficult to understand what they mean by it: and our Brethren, upon the
same reasons by which several other exceptions have been made, might have
disallowed and rejected it as a word by no means Scriptural, but Pagan and
Heathenish. However, since by a long reception of the word into the Church, it
seems agreed on all sides, what the Sense and Acceptance of it should be; my
business will be to show, 1. What we are agreed in as to the Notion of a
Sacrament, and then 2. to make it plain, that as our Church never did design or
intend, by the use of the cross in Baptism to make an new Sacrament of it; so,
in the nature of the thing, it has not any semblance of a Sacrament, according
to the Notion of a Sacrament that both sides are agreed in.

First, As to our being agreed in the Notion of a Sacrament, I must presume our
Church in her public catechism, has given that definition of it, which no
reformed Church, but approves and allows of. That is, that it is an outward and
Visible Sign of an inward and Spiritual Grace given to us, Ordained by Christ
himself, as a means whereby we receive the same, and a Pledge to assure us
thereof. It is true, the Assembly of Divines in their larger Catechism do in
that question of their's [what is a Sacrament?] put in an expression or two,
that point at some Opinions, wherein they may be no more agreed amongst
themselves, than they are with some of our Church. But then, in their next
question [what are the parts of a Sacrament] they give us the same account with
that of our Church-Catechism, only a little varied in the words, viz. The parts
of a Sacrament are two, the one, an outward sensible sign used according to
Christ's own appointment: the other, an inward and spiritual Grace thereby
signified. by all which it is evident, we are well enough agreed in the Common
acceptance of the word Sacrament. And therefore,

Secondly, I proceed to show, that as our Church never did design or intend, by
the use of the Cross in Baptism, to make any new Sacrament of it, so according
to the common Notion wherein we are agreed as to the word Sacrament, there is
not any semblance of a Sacrament it can justly be charged with.

And here I might, not without some reason, insist, that as we are agreed in
the Definition of a Sacrament, that both the outward Sign must signify an
inward Spiritual Grace, and also must have its express institution and
appointment from Christ, we, that never supposed the use of the Cross in
Baptism could confer Grace, nor have ever made the least pretext to any Divine
appointment for it, ought not to be charged as introducing a new Sacrament,
when it has no pretensions to any one thing that is of the Essence of a
Sacrament. But I am willing to follow the Argument as they have laid it. They
say therefore, that however, we do not call or account it an Holy Sacrament,
yet forasmuch as we bring a Ceremony into the Church, which in the
Significations of it seems tantamount to a Christian Sacrament, we do thereby
usurp the Prerogative of our great Lord and Master, setting up our Posts
against his Post, and our Threshold again his Threshold.

This they say we do partly, 1. as we make the Cross a sign betokening our
Faith, and Christian courage, when in applying it to the Baptized Person, we
say we do it in token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confess the
Faith of Christ Crucified, etc. And partly 2. when by an entire Representative
of our Church it is determined, that by the sign of the Cross, the Baptized
Person is dedicated to the service of him that died upon the Cross.

First, they say that by making the sign of the Cross in token that hereafter,
etc. we apply such Significations to it, that run it into the nature of a
Sacrament, using it as an outward Visible sign of an Inward Spiritual Grace. As
to this, we must ingeniously confess, that we make use of no Rite or Ceremony
in our Church, but it is with this design, that it should be Significant of
some thing or other. It would be an odd piece of pageantry indeed, to use this
or that gesture or action in our Religious services, that should have no
Signification at all in it, and to account it therefore Innocent, because it
were Impertinent. It is the Significancy of it, that makes it useful or proper,
and if there were nothing of that in it, it would be very disallowable. But
then, though our Ceremonies are significant, and any of them used as Memorative
Signs to put us in mind of any Duty or Obligation toward God, they are not
therefore an outward Visible sign of an inward Spiritual Grace; that is, they
are not in the nature of any seal or assurance from God of his Grace to us, but
hints and remembrances of some Obligation we are under with respect to God. And
that this kind of significant usages have been all along arbitrarily taken up,
without any Imputation of introducing a new Sacrament, may be made out, both
from the practice of the Jewish Church, notwithstanding the punctual
prescriptions delivered to them by Moses. From the practice of the Christian
Church, and that, both in the very first ages of it, and also in all the later
Reformations that have been made.

First, take we a view of the Jewish Church; and herein,

1. We may observe that in their very Passover, about which, both thing and
Circumstances, they had such express directions by Moses before they went out
of Egypt; yet did they in some ages following considerably vary, not only in
their time of keeping it, which having been originally appointed on the Tenth,
they changed it to the Fourteenth day of the Month: but in the gesture too. In
the first institution of it, they were to eat it with their loins girded, their
shoes on their feet, and staff in their hand, and all as a token of the haste
they were then in. This gesture of eating the Passover, it is not so certain
how long it continued in the Jewish Church after their coming out of Egypt, as
it is unquestionable it was changed into a discumbing posture (that is, a
posture wherein they took their ordinary meals) long before the days of our
Savior, and that so warrantably too, that our Savior himself used it. And
yet, this very posture they had taken up (if we will believe an Expositor that
was no great friend to the Ceremonies of our Church) had its Signification too;
for he tells us that they did it in sign of their rest and security otherwise
than V. Ainsw. in Exodus 12. 3.
they had in Egypt.

2. Another instance in the Jewish Church might be that of the Altar of
Witness, which Phineas, after he had made a jealous enquiry upon, approved of,
as a standing memorial Josh. 22.
that they on the other side Jordan professed the true God, had Relation to the
other tribes, and a Right to the Service of God in the Tabernacle of the
Congregation.

3. But that which seems to come nearest us is what the Jewish Authors do
frequently take notice of, and that is, that as to those whose Office entitled
them to the Anointing (which by all that does very evidently appear, were only
Kings and Priests) although the Anointing Oil, as to its confection and
ingredients, and the manner of doing it (as one would think) were particularly
enough prescribed by God; yet did the Jews amongst themselves bring in the use
of a Significative sign in doing it, which seems no where dissallow'd, or
charged as an invasion of Gods Holy Institutions: this was, to Anoint the Heads
of their Kings with the figure of a Crown, and their Priests with the figure of
an Hebrew] Maimon. II. Melachim.
or the Greek chapter Not to add, that the Synagogue Worship, the Rites of
Marriage, the form of taking Oaths, and the like, things that had great
Significations in them, had not the express Institution of God for their
warranty, and yet were well enough received in the purest times of the Jewish
Church, and complied with by our Savior himself.

Secondly, take we a view of the Christian Church, and that, both as to the
first ages of it, and all the later Reformations that have been made. 1. We may
observe even from the days of the Apostles themselves, the Church has taken
the Liberty of making use of one Rite or other that has signified things of
greatest weight and moment, to instance in a twofold Custom primitively used
amongst Christians, that looked much more Sacramentally than our use of the
Cross in Baptism, that is, the institution of them seemed Apostolical, being
frequently mentioned in their Holy writings; and they were immediately annexed to
the Holy Eucharist, and in their Signification bore some analogy with what that
Sacrament it self was in part the token and seal of, these were the Holy Kiss,
and the Agapae or Feasts of Charity.

The Holy Kiss was performed (as the best Writers generally conceive) after all
other preparations, immediately before they entered upon the Celebration of the
Dr. Caves prim. Christ. part 1 Chap. 11. p. 346. 352.
Lord's Supper, and at the close and upshot of the whole Solemnity; from whence
Tertullian gives it the term of signaculum orationis, the Seal of Prayer. This
the Apostle is supposed to direct to, when he enjoins the Corinthians 1 Cor.
16. 20.
to greet one another with an holy kiss. And this was kept Quae oration cum
divortio sancti osculi integra? Tert. de orat.
up with that Reverence in Tertullian's time, that he speaks as if the Service
of the Public Prayers were maimed and imperfect, if it concluded not with this
kiss. This was used in token of the mutual Communion and Fellowship that
Christians had with one another, and the unfeigned reconciliation of their
Minds, that they came with no inward heart-burnings against one another, being
that great Christian Grace and Virtue, so much insisted upon in our Savior's
Gospel, and after that, by his Apostles made one great Evidence of the
Professors having passed from Death to Life. And yet, that this custom had not
its Foundation in any Divine Appointment, but the voluntary use the Church made
of it, seems agreed to on all hands; because afterward, it is not only
prohibited by some Councils, but by an universal consent in all Churches,
wholly laid aside, and grown out of all use.

Again, we may observe, as to that custom of the Agapae or Feasts of Charity,
which in the Apostles days 1 Cor. 11. 20, 21.
probably were celebrated immediately before the Lords Supper, and in some Ages
afterward, not till the Holy Communion was finished. But, whether they had them
before, or after, it is certain they had great Significations in them, not only
of Christians mutual Love and Communion; but also, of the equal regards that
God and our Blessed Lord had, toward all sorts and conditions of Men; the poor
as well as the rich, those of meaner degree and quality, as well as the high
and noble, when they were all to eat freely together at one common meal. This
the Apostle seems to point at, in the remarks he makes upon the disorders in
the Church at Corinth, that in their Love Feasts, every one takes before other
his own Supper, and so did despise the Church of God. And those that had Houses
to Eat and Drink in, shamed those that had not. Now, though this custom was
hallowed by the practice of the Apostles, and had so great Significations in
it, and was from the first, so annexed to the Holy Eucharist that it always
either begun or concluded it, and consequently looked much more Sacramentally,
than our Sign of the Cross in Baptism can be supposed to do; yet is it plain,
by the universal disuse of it, in these later ages of the Church, that it self
never was esteemed any Sacrament.

I might further instance in the Ceremony of insufflation, or breathing upon
the Person that was to be Baptized, Aug. de nupt. and concup. lib. 2. 29.
called by one of the Fathers an ancient Tradition, which they used as a sign
of expelling the Evil Spirit, and breathing into them the good Spirit; this
seemed to signify more the Grace of God, than Duty of the Christian, and yet
not suspected as any Sacrament. Thus, the Baptized Persons stripping of his
Garment in token that he put off the Old Man which was corrupt according to his
deceitful Lusts, does it not look full as Sacramentally as our Cross in
Baptism? Yet we find it anciently practiced without any jealousy of invading
the prerogative of Christ, in instituting Holy Sacraments. To say no more, what
think we of the trine immersion once accounted a pious usage in the Church,
whereby the Person being thrice dipped or put under water, at the mention of each
Person of the Trinity, was supposed to be Baptized in the belief of that great
Article. So Tertullian expresses it, Nam nec semel, Advers. Praxeam. Again, in
lib de Coron. milit,
sed ter ad singula nomina, in Personas singulas tingimur. We are dipped not
once but three times, at each name, and so are Baptized into the three Persons.
And besides this Signification of the three Persons by this threefold
immersion, which Tertullian, and not only he, but St. Ambrose have mentioned;
there are others of the Fathers that have supposed, the Death, the Burial, and
the Resurrection of our Savior, together with his being in the Grave three
days, was signified by this custom. And yet, was this so far from being
accounted any Sacrament of it self, or a Sacrament within that of Baptism, that
the Church has thought fit to lay Immersion aside, for the generality; and the
threefold Immersion much sooner, particularly in Spain, and that upon a reason
that made the single dipping as significant as the Trine had been when it was
in use, viz, to distinguish themselves from the Arrians, who had taken occasion
from this threefold dipping in Baptism, to assert the three distinct
substances, pretending a Testimony from the Catholic Church by this usage.
Much such a reason (by the way) the Reformed Churches in Poland governed
themselves by, when in a general Synod they decreed against the Posture of
sitting at the Lords Supper, because that Custom had been brought in first by
the Arrians, who, as they irreverently treat Christ, so also his sacred
appointments. Which leads to a view of the Church in all Synod. Petricov. An.
1578.
its later Reformations.

2. Is it not very evident, that in none of our later Reformations, nay even in
those of our Dissenting Brethren themselves, but they do in their most
Religious Solemnities, some things that are very Symbolical; Actions that have
great significations in them?

1. There giving to every Baptized Infant a new Name. which both they and we do
call the Christian Name; this seems to betoken our being made new Creatures,
and entered into a new State or Condition of Life, which still they seem to aim
more expressly at, in their general care to give the Child some Scripture Name,
or some name that should signify, some excellent virtue or Grace, some
Religious duty owing to God, or some memorable benefit received from him. Here
we have an outward Visible sign, and this too sometimes of an inward Spiritual
Grace, and yet this no more accounted a new Sacrament, or a Sacrament within
that of Baptism, than we do our Sign of the Cross; and indeed there seems just
as much reason for the one as for the other, and no more.

2. Those Arguments which some of our Dissenting Brethren, have used in Plea
for the posture of sitting at the Lords Supper, do show, that besides what they
urge from the posture wherein our Savior himself celebrated it, they apprehend
some Significancy in the gesture, that renders it more accommodate to that
ordinance than any other; for, some of them plead for the posture of sitting;
as being most properly a Table Gesture and does best of all express our
fellowship with Christ, and the honor and privilege of Communion with him as
Coheirs. Now in this matter let us consider; our Lord has no where expressly
Commanded us to perform this Sacrament in a sitting posture; much less has he
told us that he ordained this gesture in token of our fellowship with him; so
that, we see this gesture of sitting (by the Tenor of their Argument) made an
outward Visible sign of an inward and Spiritual Grace; and this, not from any
antecedent express institution of Christ; which notwithstanding, this posture
of sitting is not accounted by those that frame the Argument, any new or
additional Sacrament to that of the Lords Supper.

3. Lastly, Those of the Congregational way have a formal Covenant, which they
insist upon, that whoever will be admitted into any of their Churches, must
engage themselves in; this is of that importance amongst them, that they call
it, the Constitutive Form of a Church, that which makes any particular Person
Member of a Church. Apol. for Church-coven.
Yea, and (as another expresses it) that wherein the Union of such a Church
does consist. We will suppose then, this Covenant administered in some form or
other, and the Person admitted by this Covenant into an Independent Church
declaring his consent by some Action or other, such as holding up his Hand, or
the like. Let me ask them, What must they of that Church think of this Rite, or
Ceremony of holding up the hand? will they not look upon it as a token of his
consent to be a Churchmember? Here then is an outward Visible sign, of What?
of no less (according to their apprehension of things) than a perfect new State
and Condition of Life; that is, of being embodied in Christ's Church, engaged
to all the Duties and enstated in all the privileges of it. Will they say that
this way of admission, either the form of words wherein their Covenant is
administered, or the Ceremony of holding up the hand, by which this Covenant is
taken and assented to, was originally ordained by Christ? or do they themselves
esteem this of the nature of a Sacrament? or did the Presbyterian-Brethren, in
all their Arguments against this way, charge them with introducing a new
Sacrament? So that, from all instances imaginable, both of the Jewish and
Christian Church, and that, both Primitive, and later Reformations; even from
the particular practices of our Dissenting Brethren, it is very Evident, how
unreasonable a thing it is, that though we sign the baptized person with the
Sign of the Cross in token, that hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confess
the Faith Christ of Crucifi*d, etc. We should be accused as introducing a new
Sacrament, or adding the Sacrament of the Cross to that of Baptism.

But then, they tell us secondly, we seem to own it our selves, when in an
entire Representative of our Church (such as we suppose a Convocation to be) it
is actually determined, that by the Sign of the Cross, the Person Baptized is
dedicated to the service of him that died upon the Cross; and what can be more
immediate (says one of our Brethren) than in the present dedicating act to use
the sign, and express the dedicating Signification? It is confessed that the
30th. Canon does say the Cross is an honorable badg, whereby the Infant is
dedicated, etc. And the stress of the Objection in this part of it lies in the
word dedicated that is, because the Sacrament of Baptism is it self a Seal of
Admission into Covenant, and Dedication to God, and the Christian Religion;
therefore, by using a Symbolical Ceremony of humane institution, whereby we
profess the Person Baptized, dedicated to the service of him that died upon the
Cross, we have made a new Sacrament, and added to that of Baptism, to dedicate
him in our own invented way as Christ has in that which he has instituted.

1. To this I answer, that surely the word dedication; is of a much larger
Signification, than that it should be confined merely to the Interpretation,
that our Brethren would put upon it. The meaning of dedication properly is, the
appropriating of any thing or Person to any peculiar service, such as a Church,
or Temple for the Worship of God: any Person to the profession the true
Religion, to the Ministry, or to any kind of attendance at the Holy Altars.
This is the strictest sense of dedication; but then, in a larger sense we may
suppose it applied to any strict or conscientious discharge of all the Duties,
and answering all the ends of the first dedication. Thus, suppose a Man
ordained to the Ministry, whereby he is properly dedicated to the work and
service of the Gospel; he may by some solemn act of his own, dedicate himself
to a zealous and faithful discharge of that Office; and this, after some time
that he may have apprehended himself hitherto not so diligent in the trust that
had been committed to him. This cannot be called in any sense a new ordination;
but it may with reason and sense enough be styled a dedicating of a Man's self
more particularly to the service of God, in the discharge of that Ministry he
was ordained to. And therefore,

2. In this sense the Convocation ought in all justice to be understood, when
they, in explaining the intention of the Cross, tell us, it is an honorable
badg whereby the Infant is dedicated to the service of him that died upon the
Cross, etc.

And yet, I must needs say, it seems hard measure upon the Church of England,
that if those in a Convocation should not have applied the word dedication, to
what might be most strictly the sense of it, that this should be so severely
expounded, that no other declarations of their meaning and intention must be
accepted of, than what merely the strict and critical sense of that word will
bear. Surely there are many expressions in the Fathers, that may seem more
distant from that sense we are willing to take them in; and we should be very
loath to yield them up as the Authors or Defenders of some dangerous Opinions in
the Church of Rome, because some phrases of theirs in the rigor of them, may
be pressed to a kind of meaning that may seem to favor them. There is a
necessary allowance to be given to some schemes of Speech, and meaning of
words, or else we should be in a perpetual wrangle and dispute about them.

However, there does not need even this sort of Charity for this word
dedicated, upon which such weight of Argument has been laid. For, as in all
Authors it has been variously used, so is it properly enough applied in this
Canon, for the design for which it was used; and the declaration is plain and
intelligible enough to the candid and unprejudiced mind. The word dedication
(as they use it) may properly enough signify a Confirmation of our first
dedication to God in Baptism, and a declaration of what the Church thinks of
the Person Baptized, what she does expect from him, and what Obligations he
lies under by his Baptism. And as a medium of this declaration, the sign of
the Cross is made, being as expressive as so many words, what the Infant by his
Baptism was designed to; the Apostle himself having comprehended the whole of
Christianity under that term and denomination of the Cross. Now that our Church
did design this declarative dedication (by the use of this sign) and none
other, is very evident, in that, though the word dedicated is used in the
explication of their sense in that Canon, yet, do they there refer to the words
used in the Book of Common Prayer. By comparing therefore the Canon and the
Office for Baptism together (the Canon directing to the Office, and the Rubric
belonging to the Office directing to the Canon) we may observe what stress is
to be laid upon the word Dedicated that is, how far they were from des^gning
the same sort of immediate dedication that is made by Baptism, and yet how by
the Cross, we may properly enough be said to be dedicated too.

As to the Sacrament of Baptism, we are all agreed that by that we are
dedicated to the Service of Christ, and the Profession of his Gospel; Now the
Church of England, both in the Rubric and Canon do affirm and own, that the
Baptism is complete, and the Child made a Member of Christ's Church, before the
Sign of the Cross is made use of; or if upon occasion it should not be made use
of at all. It is expressly said, We receive this Child into the Congregation of
Christ's Flock, and upon that, do sign it with the Cross. So that the Child is
declared within the Congregation of Christ's Flock, before the Sign of the
Cross be applied to it. Beside, that in the Office for private Baptism, where
the Sign of the Cross is to be omitted, we are directed not to doubt, but that
the Child so Baptized is lawfully and sufficiently Baptized; the Canon
confirming it, that the Infant Baptized is, by virtue of Baptism, before it be
signed with the sign of the Cross, received into the Congregation of Christ's
Flock, as a perfect Member thereof, and not by any power ascribed unto the sign
of the Cross.

If therefore, we be dedicated in Baptism, and the Baptism acknowledged
complete and perfect, before or without the use of this Sign, the Church cannot
be supposed ordaining so needless a repetition as this would be, to dedicate in
Baptism, and then to dedicate by the Cross again, but that which they express
by dedicated by the Cross, must be something very distinct from that dedication
which is in Baptism; that is, the one is a sign of dedication, the other is the
dedication it self, as distinct the one from the other, as the Sign of
Admission is from Admission it self, and a signification of a privilege, is
from an Instituted means of Grace. It seems a thing decent and seasonable
enough, that when it has pleased God to receive a person into his favor, and
given him the Seal of it, that the Church should give him the right hand of
fellowship, solemnly declaring and testifying he is received into her
Communion, by giving him the Badg of our Common Religion. So that, this is
plainly no other than a Declaration the Church makes of what the Person
Baptized is admitted to, what engagement he lies under when capable of making a
visible Profession. It expresses what has been done in Baptism, which is
indeed not a sign of Dedication but Dedication it self, (as I have already
said) as also the Cross is not dedication itself, but a sign of it. Which
Declaration is therefore made in the name of the Church in the plural number,
We Receive this Child into the Congregation of Christ's Flock, and do sign him
with the sign of the Cross, etc. Whereas, in Baptism, the Minister, as the
immediate agent of Christ, by whom he is Authorized and Commissionated, in the
singular number (as in his Name) pronounces it, I Baptize thee in the Name of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

As to what is urged above, that nothing can be more immediate, than in the
present dedicating act, to use the sign, and express the dedicating
signification; they must know, it might have been more immediate, either to
have placed this Sign before Baptism, or to have appointed some such form of
words, in applying it as the Church of Rome does; or if it had been pretended
to be of divine Institution, and necessary to make the Sacrament of Baptism
complete and perfect.

And thus, I presume, I have run through the main debate betwixt us and our
dissenting brethren as to this Case. Wherein, I hope, I have neither
misrepresented their objections, nor let pass any material strength in them,
nor in replying to them, used any one provoking or offensive word. Would they
but read and weigh this and the other Discourses of this kind, with the same
calmness of temper, and study of mutual agreement, wherewith (I dare say) they
have been written; I cannot think there would abide upon their Spirits so
vehement a desire for the removal of these things; but it might rather issue in
a peaceable and happy closure in the use of what has been made appear was so
innocently taken up, and might with so much advantage, under the encouragement
of serious and good Men, be still retained. I do not indeed think any of our
Church so fond of this Ceremony particularly, but that, if the laying it aside
might turn to as great Edification in the Church, as the serious use of it
might be improved to, our Governors would easily enough condescend to such an
overture. Instances of this have been given in our Age; and our
Presbyterian-Brethren in their Address to the Bishops do own, that diverse
Reverend Bishops, and Doctors, in a Paper in Print, Except. and Pap. of the
Presbyt. p. 31.
before these unhappy Wars began, yielded to the laying aside of the Cross, and
making many material alterations, etc. They have not those apprehensions of
these things, that they are unalterable, and obligatory upon all Christians, as
such; or that the laying them aside, for the bringing about some greater good
would be offensive to God. I would to God, our Brethren, at least would but
meet us thus far, as to throw off those Superstitious prejudices they may have
conceived against them, and think that as the laying them aside would not be
displeasing to God, so the use of them cannot be so neither. Forgive the
expression of Superstitious prejudices. For I must suppose we put too high a
value upon indifferent rites, when we think that either the use or rejection of
them will recommend us to God, unless there be other accidents of obedience or
disobedience to Authority, that will alter the Case. Otherwise the Imagination
we may have of pleasing or displeasing God in any of these things, must look
like what the Greeks express Superstition by, I mean, a causeless dread of God.
It is a passage (...)
in Calvin, that it is equally Superstitious, to condemn things indifferent as
unholy, and to command them as if they were holy. It is infinitely In 2
Praecept.
a nobler Conquest over our selves, a proper regaining that Christian liberty
to which we are redeemed, and would be of far happier consequence to the Church
of God, to possess our selves with such notions of God, and of indifferent
things, as to believe we cannot recommend our selves to him in the least
measure by scrupling what he has interposed no Command to make them either
Obligatory or Unlawful.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of the several Cases, etc.
1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England. 2. A Resolution of
some Cases of Conscience which respect Church Communion. 3. The case of
Indifferent things used in the Worship of God, proposed and Stated, by
considering these Questions, etc. 4. A Discourse about Edification. 5. The
Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of England's
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England? 6. A Letter to Anonymus, in Answer
to his three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about Church Communion. 7. Certain Cases
of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of joining with Forms of
Prayer in Public Worship. In two Parts. 8. The Case of mixed Communion: Whether
it be Lawful to Separate from a Church upon the account of promiscuous
Congregations and mixed Communions? 9. An Answer to the Dissenters Objections
against the Common Prayers, and some other parts of Divine Service prescribed
in the Liturgy of the Church of England. 10. The Case of Kneeling at the Holy
Sacrament stated and resolved, etc. The first Part. 11. Certain Cases of
Conscience, etc. The second Part. 12. A Discourse of Profiting by Sermons, and
of going to hear where men think they can profit most. 13. A serious
Exhortation, with some important Advices, relating to the late Cases about
Conformity, recommended to the present Dissenters from the Church of England.
14. An Argument for Union; taken from the true interest of those Dissenters in
England who profess and call themselves Protestants. 15. The Case of Kneeling
at the Holy Sacrament Stated and Resolved. The second Part. 16. The Case of
^ay-Communion with the Church of England considered. 17. A Persuasive to
frequent Communion, etc. 18. A Defense of the Resolution of this Case, viz.
Whether the Church of England 's Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church
of Rome, makes it unlawful to hold Communion with the Church of England. In
Answer to a Book entitled, A Modest Examination of that Resolution. 19. The
Case of compelling Men to the Holy Sacrament.
1. A Discourse about the charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther? 2. A Discourse about Tradition, showing what is meant by it, and
what Tradition is to be received, and what Tradition is to be rejected. 3. The
difference of the Case between the Separation of Protestants from the Church of
Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England. 4. The
Protestant Resolution of Faith, etc. 5. A Discourse concerning a Guide in
matters of Faith, etc. 6. A Discourse concerning Invocation of Saints. 7. A
Discourse concerning the Unity of the Catholic Church, maintained in the
Church of England.
A PERSUASIVE TO Frequent Communion IN THE HOLY SACRAMENT OF THE Lords Supper.
LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, and William Rogers at the Sun against
St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet, 1684.

A PERSUASIVE TO FREQUENT COMMUNION.
MY design in this Argument, is from the Consideration of the Nature of this
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and of the perpetual Use of it to the end of
the World, to awaken Men to a sense of their Duty, and the great Obligation
which lies upon them to the more frequent receiving of it. And there is the
greater need to make men sensible of their Duty in this particular, because in
this last Age by the unwary Discourses of some, concerning the Nature of this
Sacrament, and the danger of receiving it unworthily, such doubts and fears
have been raised in the minds of Men as utterly to deter many, and in a great
measure to discourage almost the generality of Christians from the use of it;
to the great prejudice and danger of Men's Souls, and the visible abatement of
Piety by the gross neglect of so excellent a means of our growth and
improvement in it; and to the mighty scandal of our Religion, by the general
disuse and contempt of so plain and solemn an Institution of our blessed Lord
and Savior.

Therefore I shall take occasion as briefly and clearly as I can to treat of
these four Points.

First, Of the Perpetuity of this Institution; this the Apostle signifies when
he says, that by eating this 1 Cor. 11. 26.
Bread, and drinking this Cup, we do show the Lord's Death till he come.

Secondly, Of the Obligation that lies upon all Christians to a frequent
observance of this Institution; this is signified in that Expression of the
Apostle, As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup: which Expression
considered and compared together with the practice of the Primitive Church,
does imply an Obligation upon Christians to the frequent receiving of this
Sacrament.

Thirdly, I shall endeavor to satisfy the Objections and Scruples which have
been raised in the Minds of Men, and particularly of many devout and sincere
Christians, to their great discouragement from their receiving this Sacrament,
at least so frequently as they ought: which Objections are chiefly grounded
upon what the Apostle says, Wherefore whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink
this Cup of the Lord unworthily, 1 Cor. 11. 27.
is guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord: and does eat Ver. 29.
and drink damnation to himself.

Fourthly, What Preparation of our selves is necessary in order to our worthy
receiving of this Sacrament: which will give me occasion to explain the
Apostle's meaning in those Words, But let a man examine himself, Ver. 28.
and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup.

I. For the Perpetuity of this Institution, employed in For as often as ye eat
this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show forth the Lord's Death till he come;
or the Words may be read imperatively and by way of Precept, show ye forth the
Lord's Death till he come. In the three verses immediately before, the Apostle
particularly declares the Institution of this Sacrament, with the manner and
circumstances of it, as he had received it not only by the hands of the
Apostles, but as the Words seem rather to intimate, by immediate Revelation
from our Lord himself, ver. 23. For I have received of the Lord that which I
also delivered unto you: that the Lord Jesus in the same night that he was
betrayed took Bread, and when he had given Thanks he brake it, and said, take,
eat, this is my Body which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of me.
After the same manner also he took the Cup when he had supped, saying, this Cup
is the New Testament in my Blood: this do as often as ye shall drink it in
remembrance of me. So that the Institution is in these Words, this do in
remembrance of me. In which words our Lord commands his Disciples after his
Death to repeat these actions of taking and breaking and eating the Bread, and
of drinking of the Cup, by way of solemn Commemoration of him. Now whether this
was to be done by them once only, or oftener; and whether by the Disciples
only, during their lives, or by all Christians afterward in all successive
Ages of the Church, is not so certain merely from the force of these Words, do
this in remembrance of me: but what the Apostle adds puts the matter out of all
doubt, that the Institution of this Sacrament was intended for all Ages of the
Christian Church; For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do
show the Lord's Death till he come: that is, until the time of his second
coming, which will be at the end of the World. So that this Sacrament was
designed to be a standing Commemoration of the Death and Passion of our Lord
till he should come to Judgment; and consequently the Obligation that lies upon
Christians to the observation of it is perpetual, and shall never cease to the
end of the World.

So that it is a vain conceit and more dream of the Enthusiasts concerning the
seculum Spiritus Sancti, the Age and dispensation of the Holy Ghost, when, as
they suppose, all humane Teaching shall cease, and all external Ordinances and
Institutions in Religion shall vanish, and there shall be no farther use of
them. Whereas it is very plain from the new Testament that Prayer, and outward
Teaching, and the Use of the two Sacraments, were intended to continue among
Christians in all Ages. As for Prayer, (besides our natural Obligation to this
duty, if there were no revealed Religion) we are by our Savior particularly
exhorted to watch and pray, with regard to the day of Judgment, and in
consideration of the uncertainty of the time when it shall be: And therefore
this will always be a Duty incumbent upon Christians till the day of Judgment,
because it is prescribed as one of the best ways of Preparation for it. That
outward Teaching likewise and Baptism were intended to be perpetual is no less
plain, because Christ has expressly promised to be with the Teachers of his
Church in the use of these Ordinances to the end of the World, Matthew. 28. 19,
20. Go and disciple all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: and lo I am with you always to the end of
the World. Not only to the end of that particular Age, but to the end of the
Gospel Age, and the consummation of all Ages, as the Phrase clearly imports.
And it is as plain from this Text, that the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was
intended for a perpetual Institution in the Christian Church, till the second
coming of Christ, viz. his coming to Judgment: Because St. Paul tells us, that
by these Sacramental Signs the Death of Christ is to be represented and
commemorated till he comes. Do this in remembrance of me: For as often as ye eat
this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lord's Death till he come.

And if this be the End and Use of this Sacrament, to be a solemn remembrance
of the Death and Sufferings of our Lord during his absence from us, that is,
till his coming to Judgment, then this Sacrament will never be out of date till
the second coming of our Lord. The consideration whereof should mightily
strengthen and encourage our Faith in the hope of Eternal Life so often as we
partake of this Sacrament: since our Lord has left it to us as a memorial of
himself till he come to translate his Church into Heaven, and as a sure pledge
that he will come again at the end of the World and invest us in that Glory
which he is now gone before to prepare for us. So that as often as we approach
the Table of the Lord, we should comfort our selves with the thoughts of that
blessed time when we shall eat and drink with him in his Kingdom, and shall be
admitted to the great Feast of the Lamb, and to eternal Communion with God the
Judge of all, and with our blessed and glorified Redeemer and the holy Angels
and the Spirits of just men made perfect.

And the same consideration should likewise make us afraid to receive this
Sacrament unworthily, without due Preparation for it, and without worthy
effects of it upon our Hearts and Lives. Because of that dreadful Sentence of
condemnation which at the second coming of our Lord shall be past upon those,
who by the profanation of this solemn Institution trample under foot the son of
God, and contemn the blood of the Covenant; that Covenant of Grace and Mercy
which God has ratified with Mankind by the Blood of his Son. The Apostle tells
us that he that eats and drinks unworthily is guilty of the Body and Blood
of the Lord, and eats and drinks damnation to himself. This indeed is
spoken of temporal Judgment (as I shall show in the latter part of this
Discourse,) but the Apostle likewise supposes, that if these temporal
Judgments had not their effect to bring men to Repentance, but they still
persisted in the Profanation of this holy Sacrament, they should at last be
condemned with the World. For as he that partaketh worthily of this Sacrament
confirms his interest in the promises of the Gospel, and his Title to eternal
Life; so he that receives this Sacrament unworthily, that is without due
Reverence, and without fruits meet for it; nay, on the contrary, continues to
live in sin whilst he commemorates the Death of Christ, who gave himself for us
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, this man aggravates and seals his
own Damnation, because he is guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ, not only
by the contempt of it, but by renewing in some sort the cause of his
sufferings, and as it were crucifying to himself afresh the Lord of life and
glory, and putting him to an open shame. And when the great Judge of the world
shall appear and pass final Sentence upon men, such obstinate and impenitent
wretches as could not be wrought upon by the remembrance of the dearest love of
their dying Lord, nor be engaged to leave their sins by all the ties and
obligations of this holy Sacrament, shall have their portion with Pilate and
Judas, with the chief Priests and Soldiers, who were the betrayers and
murderers of the Lord of life and glory; and shall be dealt withal as those
who are in some sort guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. Which severe
threatening ought not to discourage men from the Sacrament, but to deter all
those from their sins who think of engaging themselves to God by so solemn and
holy a Covenant. It is by no means a sufficient Reason to make men to fly from
the Sacrament, but certainly one of the most powerful Arguments in the world
to make men forsake their sins; as I shall show more fully under the third head
of this Discourse.

II. The Obligation that lies upon all Christians to as often as ye eat this
bread and drink this cup; yet if we compare these words of the Apostle with the
usage and practice of Christians at that Time, which was to communicate in this
holy Sacrament so often as they solemnly met together to worship God, they
plainly suppose and recommend to us the frequent use of this Sacrament, or
rather imply an obligation upon Christians to embrace all opportunities of
receiving it. For the sense and meaning of any Law or Institution is best
understood by the general practice which follows immediately upon it.

And to convince men of their obligation hereunto, and to engage them to a
suitable practice, I shall now endeavor with all the plainness and force of
persuasion I can: And so much the more, because the neglect of it among
Christians is grown so general, and a great many persons from a superstitious
awe and reverence of this Sacrament are by degrees fallen into a profane
neglect and contempt of it.

I shall briefly mention a threefold Obligation lying upon all Christians to
frequent Communion in this holy Sacrament; each of them sufficient of it self,
but all of them together of the greatest force imaginable to engage us hereunto.

1. We are obliged in point of indispensable duty, and in obedience to a plain
precept and most solemn institution of our blessed Savior that great Lawgiver,
who is able to save and to destroy, as St. James calls him: He has bid us do
this. And S. Paul, who declares nothing in this matter but what he tells us he
received from the Lord, admonishes us to do it often. Now for any man that
professes himself a Christian to live in the open and continued contempt or
neglect of a plain Law and Institution of Christ is utterly inconsistent with
such a profession. To such our Lord may say as he did to the Jews, Why call ye
me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? How far the Ignorance of
this institution, or the mistakes which men have been led into about it, may
extenuate this neglect is another consideration. But after we know our Lord's
will in this particular and have the Law plainly laid before us, there is no
cloak for our sin. For nothing can excuse the wilful neglect of a plain
Institution from a downright contempt of our Savior's Authority.

2. We are likewise obliged hereunto in point of Interest. The benefits which
we expect to be derived and assured to us by this Sacrament are all the
blessings of the new Covenant, the forgiveness of our sins, the grace and
assistence of God's holy Spirit to enable us to perform the conditions of this
Covenant required on our part; and the comforts of God's holy Spirit to
encourage us in well-doing, and to support us under sufferings; and the
glorious reward of eternal life. So that in neglecting this Sacrament we
neglect our own interest and happiness, we forsake our own mercies, and judge
our selves unworthy of all the blessings of the Gospel, and deprive our selves
of one of the best means and advantages of confirming and conveying these
blessings to us. So that if we had not a due sense of our duty, the
consideration of our own interest should oblige us not to neglect so excellent
and so effectual a means of promoting our own comfort and happiness.

3. We are likewise particularly obliged in point of gratitude to the careful
observance of this Institution. This was the particular thing our Lord gave in
charge when he was going to lay down his life for us, do this in remembrance
of me. Men use religiously to observe the charge of a dying friend, and, unless
it be very difficult and unreasonable, to do what he desires: But this is the
charge of our best friend (nay of the greatest friend and benefactour of all
mankind) when he was preparing himself to dye in our stead and to offer up
himself a sacrifice for us; to undergo the most grievous pains and sufferings
for our sakes, and to yield up himself to the worst of temporal deaths that he
might deliver us from the bitter pains of eternal death. And can we deny him
any thing he asks of us who was going to do all this for us? Can we deny him
this? so little grievous and burdensome in it self, so infinitely beneficial
to us? Had such a friend, and in such circumstances, bid us do some great
thing would we not have done it? how much more when he has only said, do
this in remembrance of me; when he has only commended to us one of the most
natural and delightful Actions, as a fit representation and memorial of his
wonderful love to us, and of his cruel sufferings for our sakes; when he has
only enjoined us, in a thankful commemoration of his goodness, to meet at his
Table and to remember what he has done for us; to look upon him whom we have
pierced, and to resolve to grieve and wound him no more? Can we without the
most horrible ingratitude neglect this dying charge of our Sovereign and our
Savior, the great friend and lover of souls? A command so reasonable, so
easy, so full of blessings and benefits to the faithful observers of it!

One would think it were no difficult matter to convince men of their duty in
this particular, and of the necessity of observing so plain an Institution of
our Lord; that it were no hard thing to persuade men to their interest, and to
be willing to partake of those great and manifold blessings which all
Christians believe to be promised and made good to the frequent and worthy
Receivers of this Sacrament. Where then lies the difficulty? what should be the
cause of all this backwardness which we see in men to so plain, so necessary,
and so beneficial a duty? The truth is, men have been greatly discouraged from
this Sacrament by the unwary pressing and inculcating of two great truths; the
danger of the unworthy receiving of this holy Sacrament, and the necessity of a
due preparation for it. Which brings me to the

III. Third Particular I proposed, which was to endeavor Objections and
Scruples which have been raised in the minds of men, and particularly of many
devout and sincere Christians, to their great discouragement from the receiving
of this Sacrament, at least so frequently as they ought. And these Objections,
I told you, are chiefly grounded upon what the Apostle says at the 27th. verse.
Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread and drink this cup of the Lord
unworthily, is guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. And again ver. 29. He
that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself.
Upon the mistake and misapplication of these Texts have been grounded two
Objections, of great force to discourage men from this Sacrament, which I shall
endeavor with all the tenderness and clearness I can to remove. First, That
the danger of unworthy receiving being so very great, it seems the safest way
not to receive at all. Secondly, That so much preparation and worthiness being
required in order to our worthy Receiving, the more timorous sort of devout
Christians can never think themselves duly enough qualified for so sacred an
Action.

1. That the danger of unworthy receiving being so the other hand, viz. in the
neglect of this Duty: And so though the danger of unworthy receiving be avoided
by not receiving, yet the danger of neglecting and contemning a plain
Institution of Christ is not thereby avoided. Surely they in the Parable that
refused to come to the marriage feast of the King's Son and made light of that
gracious invitation were at least as faulty as he who came without a wedding
garment. And we find in the conclusion of the Parable, that as he was severely
punished for his disrespect, so they were destroyed for their disobedience. Nay
of the two it is the greater sign of contempt wholly to neglect the Sacrament,
than to partake of it without some due qualification. The greatest
indisposition that can be for this holy Sacrament is one's being a bad man, and
he may be as bad, and is more likely to continue so, who wilfully neglects this
Sacrament, than he that comes to it with any degree of reverence and
preparation, though much less than he ought: And surely it is very hard for men
to come to so solemn an Ordinance without some kind of religious awe upon their
spirits, and without some good thoughts and resolutions, at least for the
present. If a man that lives in any known wickedness of life do before he
receive the Sacrament set himself seriously to be humbled for his sins, and to
repent of them, and to beg God's grace and assistence against them; and after
the receiving of it, does continue for some time in these good resolutions,
though after a while he may possibly relapse into the same sins again; this is
some kind of restraint to a wicked life; and these good moods and fits of
repentance and reformation are much better than a constant and uninterrupted
course of sin: Even this righteousness, which is but as the morning cloud and
the early dew which so soon passes away, is better than none.

And indeed scarce any man can think of coming to the Sacrament, but he will by
this consideration be excited to some good purposes, and put upon some sort of
endeavor to amend and reform his life: and though he be very much under the
bondage and power of evil habits, if he do with any competent degree of
sincerity (and it is his own fault if he do not) make use of this excellent
means and instrument for the mortifying and subduing of his lusts and for the
obtaining of God's grace and assistence, it may please God by the use of these
means so to abate the force and power of his lusts, and to imprint such
considerations upon his mind in the receiving of this holy Sacrament and
preparing himself for it, that he may at last break off his wicked course and
become a good man.

But, on the other hand, as to those who neglect this Sacrament, there is
hardly any thing left to restrain them from the greatest enormities of life,
and to give a check to them in their evil course: nothing but the penalty of
humane Laws, which men may avoid and yet be wicked enough. Heretofore men used
to be restrained from great and scandalous vices by shame and fear of disgrace,
and would abstain from many sins out of regard to their honor and reputation
among men: But men have hardened their faces in this degenerate Age, and those
gentle restraints of modesty which governed and kept men in order heretofore
signify nothing now adays. Blushing is out of fashion, and shame is ceased
from among the children of men.

But the Sacrament did always use to lay some kind of restraint upon the worst
of men: and if it did not wholly reform them, it would at least have some good
effect upon them for a time: If it did not make men good, yet it would make
them resolve to be so, and leave some good thoughts and impressions upon their
minds.

So that I doubt not but it has been a thing of very bad consequence, to
discourage men so much from the Sacrament, as the way has been of late years:
And that many men who were under some kind of check before, since they have
been driven away from the Sacrament have quite let loose the reins, and
prostituted themselves to all manner of impiety and vice. And among the many
ill effects of our past confusions, this is none of the least, That in many
Congregations of this Kingdom Christians were generally disused and deterred
from the Sacrament, upon a pretense that they were unfit for it; and being so,
they must necessarily incur the danger of unworthy receiving; and therefore
they had better wholly to abstain from it. By which it came to pass that in
very many Places this great and solemn Institution of the Christian Religion
was almost quite forgotten, as if it had been no part of it; and the
remembrance of Christ's death even lost among Christians: So that many
Congregations in England might justly have taken up the complaint of the Woman
at our Savior's Sepulcher, they have taken away our Lord, and we know not
where they have laid him.

But surely men did not well consider what they did, nor what the consequences
of it would be, when they did so earnestly dissuade men from the Sacrament.
It Is true indeed the danger of unworthy receiving is great; but the proper
inference and conclusion from hence is not that men should upon this
consideration be deterred from the Sacrament, but that they should be
affrighted from their sins, and from that wicked course of life which is an
habitual indisposition and unworthiness. St. Paul indeed (as I observed before)
truly represents, and very much aggravates the danger of the unworthy receiving
of this Sacrament; but he did not deter the Corinthians from it, because they
had sometimes come to it without due reverence, but exhorts them to amend what
had been amiss and to come better prepared and disposed for the future. And
therefore after that terrible declaration in the Text, Whosoever shall eat this
bread and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, is guilty of the body and
blood of the Lord, he does not add, therefore let Christians take heed of
coming to the Sacrament, but, let them come prepared and with due reverence,
not as to a common meal, but to a solemn participation of the body and blood of
Christ; but let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread and
drink of that cup.

For, if this be a good reason to abstain from the Sacrament, for fear of
performing so sacred an action in an undue manner, it were best for a bad man
to lay aside all Religion and to give over the exercise of all the duties of
Piety, of prayer, of reading and hearing the Word of God; because there is a
propo^^ionable danger in the unworthy and unprofitable use of any of these. The
prayer of the wicked (that is, of one that resolves to continue so) is an
abomination to the Lord. And our Savior gives us the same caution concerning
hearing the Word of God; take heed how ye hear. And St. Paul tells us, that
those who are not reformed by the Doctrine of the Gospel, it is the savor of
death, that is deadly and damnable, to such persons.

But now will any man from hence argue, that it is best for a wicked man not to
pray, not to hear or read the Word of God, lest by so doing he should endanger
and aggravate his condemnation? And yet there is as much reason from this
consideration to persuade men to give over praying and attending, to God's Word
as to lay aside the use of the Sacrament. And it is every whit as true that he
that prays unworthily and hears the Word of God unworthily, that is, without
fruit and benefit, is guilty of a great contempt of God and of our blessed
Savior; and by his indevout prayers and unfruitful hearing of God's Word does
further and aggravate his own damnation: I say, this is every whit as true, as
that he that eats and drinks the Sacrament unworthily is guilty of a high
contempt of Christ, and eats and drinks his own Judgment; so that the danger of
the unworthy performing this so sacred an action is no otherwise a reason to
any man to abstain from the Sacrament, than it is an Argument to him to cast
off all Religion. He that unworthily uses or performs any part of Religion is
in an evil and dangerous condition; but he that casts off all Religion plungeth
himself into a most desperate state, and does certainly damn himself to avoid
the danger of damnation: Because he that casts off all Religion throws off all
the means whereby he should be reclaimed and brought into a better state. I
cannot more fitly illustrate this matter than by this plain Similitude: He that
eats and drinks intemperately endangers his health and his life, but he that to
avoid this danger will not eat at all I need not tell you what will certainly
become of him in a very short space.

There are some conscientious persons who abstain from the Sacrament upon an
apprehension that the sins which they shall commit afterward are unpardonable.
But this is a great mistake; our Savior having so plainly declared that all
manner of sin shall be forgiven men except the blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost; such as was that of the Pharisees, who as our Savior tells us
blasphemed the Holy Ghost in ascribing those great miracles which they saw him
work, and which he really wrought by the Spirit of God, to the power of the
Devil. Indeed to sin deliberately after so solemn an engagement to the contrary
is a great aggravation of sin, but not such as to make it unpardonable. But the
neglect of the Sacrament is not the way to prevent these sins; but, on the
contrary, the constant receiving of it with the best preparation we can is one
of the most effectual means to prevent sin for the future, and to obtain the
assistence of God's grace to that end: And if we fall into sin afterward, we
may be renewed by repentance; for we have an advocate with the Father Jesus
Christ the righteous, who is the propitiation for our sins; and as such, is in
a very lively and affecting manner exhibited to us in this blessed Sacrament of
his body broken, and his blood shed for the remission of our sins. Can we think
that the primitive Christians, who so frequently received this holy Sacrament,
did never after the receiving of it fall into any deliberate sin? undoubtedly
many of them did; but far be it from us to think that such sins were
unpardonable, and that so many good men should because of their careful and
conscientious observance of our Lord's Institution unavoidably fall into
condemnation.

To draw to a conclusion: such groundless fears and jealousies as these may be
a sign of a good meaning, but they are certainly a sign of an injudicious mind.
For if we stand upon these Scruples, no man perhaps was ever so worthily
prepared to draw near to God in any duty of Religion, but there was still some
defect or other in the disposition of his mind, and the degree of his
preparation. But if we prepare our selves as well as we can, this is all God
expects. And for our fears of falling into sin afterward, there is this plain
answer to be given to it; that the danger of falling into sin is not prevented
by neglecting the Sacrament, but increased: because a powerful and probable
means of preserving men from sin is neglected. And why should not every sincere
Christian, by the receiving of this Sacrament and renewing his Covenant with
God, rather hope to be confirmed in goodness, and to receive farther
assistences of God's grace and holy Spirit to strengthen him against sin, and
to enable him to subdue it; than trouble himself with fears which are either
without ground, or if they are not, are no sufficient reason to keep any man
from the Sacrament? We cannot surely entertain so unworthy a thought of God and
our blessed Savior, as to imagine that he did institute the Sacrament not for
the furtherance of our Salvation, but as a snare, and an occasion of our ruin
and damnation. This were to pervert the gracious design of God, and turn the
cup of Salvation into a cup of deadly poison to the souls of men.

All then that can reasonably be inferred from the danger of unworthy receiving
is, that upon this consideration men should be quickened to come to the
Sacrament with a due preparation of mind, and so much the more to fortify
their resolutions of living sutably to that holy Covenant which they solemnly
renew every time they receive this holy Sacrament. This consideration ought to
convince us of the absolute necessity of a good life, but not to deter us from
the use of any means which may contribute to make us good. Therefore (as a
learned Divine says very well) this Sacrament can be neglected by none but
those that do not understand it, but those who are unwilling to be tied to
their duty and are afraid of being engaged to use their best diligence to keep
the commandments of Christ: And such persons have no reason to fear being in a
worse condition, since they are already in so bad a state. And thus much may
suffice for answer to the first Objection concerning the great danger of
unworthy receiving this holy Sacrament. I proceed to the

2. Second Objection, which was this; That so much

For a full Answer to this Objection, I shall endeavor briefly to clear these
three things. First, That every degree of Imperfection in our preparation for
this Sacrament is not a sufficient reason for men to refrain from it. Secondly,
That a total want of a due preparation, not only in the degree but in the main
and substance of it, though it render us unfit at present to receive this
Sacrament, yet it does by no means excuse our neglect of it. Thirdly, That the
proper Inference and conclusion from the total want of a due preparation is not
to cast off all thoughts of receiving the Sacrament, but immediately to set
upon the work of preparation that so we may be fit to receive it. And if I can
clearly make out these three things I hope this Objection is fully answered.

1. That every degree of Imperfection in our preparation for this Sacrament is
not a sufficient reason for men to abstain from it: For then no man should ever
receive it. For who is every way worthy and in all degrees and respects duly
qualified to approach the presence of God in any of the duties of his Worship
and Service? Who can wash his hands in innocence, that so he may be perfectly
fit to approach God's Altar? There is not a man on earth that lives and sins
not. The Graces of the best men are imperfect; and every imperfection in grace
and goodness is an imperfection in the disposition and preparation of our minds
for this holy Sacrament: But if we do heartily repent of our sins, and
sincerely resolve to obey and perform the terms of the Gospel and of that
Covenant which we entered into by Baptism and are going solemnly to renew and
confirm by our receiving of this Sacrament, we are at least in some degree and
in the main qualified to partake of this holy Sacrament; And the way for us to
be more fit is to receive this Sacrament frequently, that by this spiritual
food of God's appointing, by this living bread which comes down from heaven our
souls may be nourished in goodness, and new strength and virtue may be
continually derived to us for the purifying of our hearts and enabling us to
run the ways of God's commandments with more constancy and delight. For the way
to grow in grace and to be strengthened with all might in the inner man, and to
abound in all the fruits of righteousness which by Christ Jesus are to the
praise and glory of God, is with care and conscience to use those means which
God has appointed for this end: And if we will neglect the use of these means
it is to no purpose for us to pray to God for his grace and assistence. We may
tire our selves with our devotions and fill heaven with vain complaints, and
yet by all this importunity obtain nothing at God's hand: Like lazy beggars
that are always complaining and always asking, but will not work, will do
nothing to help themselves and better their condition; and therefore are never
like to move the pity and compassion of others. If we expect God's grace and
assistence, we must work out our own Salvation in the careful use of all those
means which God has appointed to that end. That excellent degree of goodness
which men would have to fit them for the Sacrament, is not to be had but by the
use of it. And therefore it is a preposterous thing for men to insist upon
having the end before they will use the means that may further them in the
obtaining of it.

2. The total want of a due preparation, not only in the degree but in the
main and substance of it, though it render us unfit at present to receive this
Sacrament, yet does it by no means excuse our neglect of it. One fault may draw
on another, but can never excuse it. It is our great fault that we are wholly
unprepared, and no man can claim any benefit by his fault, or plead it in
excuse or extenuation of it. A total want of preparation and an absolute
unworthiness is Impenitency in an evil course, a resolution to continue a bad
man, not to quit his lusts and to break off that wicked course he has lived
in: But is this any excuse for the neglect of our duty that we will not fit our
selves for the doing of it with benefit and advantage to our selves? A father
commands his son to ask him blessing every day, and is ready to give it him;
but so long as he is undutifull to him in his other actions, and lives in open
disobedience, forbids him to come in his sight. He excuses himself from asking
his father blessing because he is undutifull in other things, and resolves to
continue so. This is just the case of neglecting the duty God requires, and the
blessings he offers to us in the Sacrament, because we have made our selves
incapable of so performing the one as to receive the other; and are resolved to
continue so. We will not do our duty in other things, and then plead that we
are unfit and unworthy to do it in this particular of the Sacrament.

3. The proper Inference and conclusion from a total want of due preparation
for the Sacrament is not to cast off all thoughts of receiving it, but
immediately to set about the work of preparation, that so we may be fit to
receive it. For if this be true, that they who are absolutely unprepared ought
not to receive the Sacrament, nor can do it with any benefit; nay by doing it
in such a manner render their condition much worse, this is a most forcible
argument to repentance and amendment of life: There is nothing reasonable in
this case but immediately to resolve upon a better course that so we may be
meet partakers of those holy Mysteries, and may no longer provoke God's wrath
against us by the wilful neglect of so great and necessary a duty of the
Christian Religion. And we do wilfully neglect it, so long as we do wilfully
refuse to fit and qualify our selves for the due and worthy performance of it.
Let us view the thing in a like case; A Pardon is graciously offered to a
rebel, he declines to accept it, and modestly excuses himself because he is
not worthy of it. And why is he not worthy? because he resolves to be a rebel,
and then his pardon will do him no good, but be an aggravation of his crime.
Very true: and it will be no less an aggravation that he refuses it for such a
reason, and under a pretense of modesty does the impudentest thing in the
world. This is just the case; and in this case there is but one thing
reasonable to be done, and that is, for a man to make himself capable of the
benefit as soon as he can, and thankfully to accept of it: But to excuse
himself from accepting of the benefit offered, because he is not worthy of it
nor fit for it, nor ever intends to be so, is as if a man should desire to be
excused from being happy because he is resolved to play the fool and to be
miserable. So that whether our want of preparation be total, or only to some
degree, it is every way unreasonable: If it be in the degree only, it ought
not to hinder us from receiving the Sacrament; If it be total, it ought to put
us immediately upon removing the impediment, by making such preparation as is
necessary to the due and worthy receiving of it. And this brings me to the

IV. Fourth and last thing I proposed, viz. What preparation of our selves is
necessary in order to the worthy receiving of this Sacrament. Which I told you
would give me occasion to explain the Apostle's meaning in the last part of the
Text, But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread and drink
of that cup. I think it very clear from the occasion and circumstances of the
Apostle's discourse concerning the Sacrament that he does not intend the
examination of our state, whether we be Christians or not, and sincerely
resolved to continue so; and consequently that he does not here speak of our
habitual preparation by the resolution of a good life. This he takes for
granted, that they were Christians and resolved to continue and persevere in
their Christian profession: But he speaks of their actual fitness and
worthiness at that time when they came to receive the Lord's Supper. And for
the clearing of this matter, we must consider what it was that gave occasion to
this discourse. At the 20th. verse of this Chapter he sharply reproves their
irreverent and unsuitable carriage at the Lord's Supper. They came to it very
disorderly, one before another. It was the custom of Christians to meet at
their Feast of Charity, in which they did communicate with great sobriety and
temperance; and when that was ended they celebrated the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper. Now among the Corinthians this order was broken: The rich met and
excluded the poor from this common Feast. And after an irregular feast (one
before another eating his own supper as he came) they went to the Sacrament in
great disorder; one was hungry having eaten nothing at all, others were drunk,
having eaten intemperately, and the poor were despised and neglected. This the
Apostle condemns as a great profanation of that solemn Institution of the
Sacrament; at the participation whereof they behaved themselves with as little
reverence as if they had been met at a common supper or feast. And this he
calls not discerning the Lord's body, making no difference in their behavior
between the Sacrament and a common meal: which irreverent and contemptuous
carriage of theirs he calls eating and drinking unworthily: for which he
pronounces them guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, which were
represented and commemorated in their eating of that bread and drinking of that
cup. By which irreverent and contemptuous usage of the body and blood of our
Lord, he tells them that they did incur the judgment of God; which he calls
eating and drinking their own judgment. For that the word (...), which our
Transslatours render damnation, does not here signify eternal condemnation,
but a temporal judgment and chastisement in order to the prevention of eternal
condemnation, is evident from what follows; He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to himself: And then he says, For this
cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep: That is, for this
irreverence of theirs God had sent among them several diseases, of which many
had dyed. And then he adds, For if we would judge our selves, we should not be
judged. If we would judge our selves; whether this be meant of the public
Censures of the Church, or our private censuring of our selves in order to our
future amendment and reformation, is not certain. If of the latter, which I
think most probable, then judging here is much the same with examining our
selves, ver. 28. And then the Apostle's meaning is, that if we would censure
and examine our selves, so as to be more careful for the future, we should
escape the judgment of God in these temporal punishments. But when we are
judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the
world. But when we are judged; that is, when by neglecting thus to judge our
selves we provoke God to judge us; we are chastened of the Lord, that we should
not be condemned with the world; that is, he inflicts these temporal judgments
upon us to prevent our eternal condemnation. Which plainly shows, that the
judgment here spoken of is not eternal condemnation. And then he concludes,
Wherefore, my Brethren, when ye come together to eat tarry for one another. And
if any man hunger, let him eat at home, that ye come not together unto
judgment: where the Apostle plainly shows both what was the crime of unworthy
receiving, and the punishment of it. Their crime was, their irreverent and
disorderly participation of the Sacrament; and their punishment was, those
temporal judgments which God inflicted upon them for this their contempt of the
Sacrament.

Now this being, I think, very plain; we are proportionably to understand the
precept of examination of our selves before we eat of that bread and drink of
that cup. But let a man examine himself; that is, consider well with himself
what a sacred Action he is going about, and what behavior becomes him when he
is celebrating this Sacrament instituted by our Lord in memorial of his body
and blood, that is, of his death and passion: And if heretofore he have been
guilty of any disorder and irreverence (such as the Apostle here taxes them
withal) let him censure and judge himself for it, be sensible of and sorry for
his fault, and be careful to avoid it for the future; and having thus examined
himself, let him eat of that bread and drink of that cup. This, I think, is the
plain sense of the Apostle's Discourse; and that if we attend to the scope and
circumstances of it, it cannot well have any other meaning.

But some will say, Is this all the preparation that is required to our worthy
receiving of the Sacrament, that we take care not to come drunk to it, nor to
be guilty of any irreverence and disorder in the celebration of it? I answer in
short, this was the particular unworthiness with which the Apostle taxes the
Corinthians; and which he warns them to amend, as they desire to escape the
judgments of God, such as they had already felt for this irreverent carriage of
theirs, so unsuitable to the holy Sacrament: He finds no other fault with them
at present in this matter, though any other sort of irreverence will
proportionably expose men to the like punishment. He says nothing here of their
habitual preparation, by the sincere purpose and resolution of a good life
answerable to the rules of the Christian Religion: This we may suppose he took
for granted. However, it concerns the Sacrament no more than it does Prayer or
any other religious duty. Not but that it is very true that none but those who
do heartily embrace the Christian Religion and are sincerely resolved to frame
their lives according to the holy rules and precepts of it, are fit to
communicate in this solemn acknowledgment and profession of it. So that it is a
practice very much to be countenanced and encouraged, because it is of great
use, for Christians by way of preparation for the Sacrament to examine
themselves in a larger sense than in all probability the Apostle here intended:
I mean, to examine our past lives and the actions of them in order to a sincere
repentance of all our errors and miscarriages, and to fix us in the steady
purpose and resolution of a better life: particularly, when we expect to have
the forgiveness of our sins sealed to us, we should lay aside all enmity and
thoughts of revenge, and heartily forgive those that have offended us, and put
in practice that universal love and charity which is represented to us by this
holy Communion. And to this purpose we are earnestly exhorted in the public
Office of the Communion by way of due preparation and disposition for it, to
repent us truly of our sins past, to amend our lives and to be in perfect
charity with all men, that so we may be meet partakers of those holy mysteries.

And because this work of examining our selves concerning our state and
condition, and of exercising repentance toward God and charity toward men is
incumbent upon us as we are Christians, and can never be put in practice more
seasonably and with greater advantage than when we are meditating of this
Sacrament, therefore besides our habitual preparation by repentance and the
constant endeavors of a holy life, it is a very pious and commendable custom
in Christians before their coming to the Sacrament to set apart some particular
time for this work of examination. But how much time every person should allot
to this purpose, is matter of prudence; and as it need not, so neither indeed
can it be precisely determined. Some have greater reason to spend more time
upon this work, than others; I mean those whose accounts are heavier because
they have long run upon the score and neglected themselves: And some also have
more leisure and freedom for it, by reason of their easy condition and
circumstances in the world; and therefore are obliged to allow a greater
portion of time for the exercises of piety and devotion. In general, no man
ought to do a work of so great moment and concernment slightly and
perfunctorily. And in this, as in all other actions, the end is principally to
be regarded. Now the end of examining our selves is to understand our state and
condition, and to reform whatever we find amiss in our selves. And provided
this end be obtained, the circumstances of the means are less considerable:
whether more or less time be allowed to this work it matters not so much, as to
make sure that the work be thoroughly done.

And I do on purpose speak thus cautiously in this matter, because some pious
persons do perhaps err on the stricter hand, and are a little superstitious on
that side; insomuch that unless they can gain so much time to set apart for a
solemn preparation, they will refrain from the Sacrament at that time, though
otherwise they be habitually prepared. This I doubt not proceeds from a pious
mind; but as the Apostle says in another case about the Sacrament, shall I
praise them in this? I praise them not. For, provided there be no wilful
neglect of due preparation, it is much better to come so prepared as we can,
nay I think it is our duty so to do, rather than to abstain upon this
punctilio. For when all is done, the best preparation for the Sacrament is the
general care and endeavor of a good life: And he that is thus prepared may
receive at any time when opportunity is offered, though he had no particular
foresight of that opportunity. And I think in that case such a one shall do
much better to receive than to refrain; because he is habitually prepared for
the Sacrament, though he had no time to make such actual preparation as he
desired. And if this were not allowable how could Ministers communicate with
sick persons at all times, or persuade others to do it many times upon very
short and sudden warning?

And indeed we cannot imagine that the primitive Christians, who received the
Sacrament so frequently that for ought appears to the contrary they judged it
as essential and necessary a part of their public worship as any other part of
it whatsoever, even as their Hymns and Prayers, and reading and interpreting
the Word of God: I say, we cannot well conceive how they who celebrated it so
constantly, could allot any more time for a solemn preparation for it, than
they did for any other part of divine worship: And consequently, that the
Apostle when he bids the Corinthians examine themselves could mean no more than
that considering the nature and ends of this Institution they should come to it
with great reverence; and reflecting upon their former miscarriages in this
matter, should be careful upon this admonition to avoid them for the future
and to amend what had been amiss: which to do, requires rather resolution and
care than any long time of preparation.

I speak this, that devout persons may not be entangled in an apprehension of a
greater necessity than really there is of a long and solemn preparation every
time they receive the Sacrament. The great necessity that lies upon men is to
live as becomes Christians, and then they can never be absolutely unprepared.
Nay, I think this to be a very good preparation; and I see not why men should
not be very well satisfied with it, unless they intend to make the same use of
the Sacrament that many of the Papists do of Confession and Absolution, which
is to quit with God once or twice a year, that so they may begin to sin again
upon a new score.

But because the Examination of our selves is a thing so very useful, and the
time which men are wont to set apart for their preparation for the Sacrament is
so advantageous an opportunity for the practice of it; therefore I cannot but
very much commend those who take this occasion to search and try their ways,
and to call themselves to a more solemn account of their actions. Because this
ought to be done sometime, and I know no fitter time for it than this. And
perhaps some would never find time to recollect themselves and to take the
condition of their souls into serious consideration, were it not upon this
solemn occasion.

The sum of what I have said is this, that supposing a person to be habitually
prepared by a religious disposition of mind and the general course of a good
life, this more solemn actual preparation is not always necessary: And it is
better when there is an opportunity to receive without it, than not to receive
at all. But the greater our actual preparation is, the better. For no man can
examine himself too often, and understand the state of his soul too well, and
exercise repentance, and renew the resolutions of a good life too frequently.
And there is perhaps no fitter opportunity for the doing of all this, than when
we approach the Lord's table, there to commemorate his death and to renew our
Covenant with him to live as becomes the Gospel.

All the Reflection I shall now make upon this Discourse, shall be from the
consideration of what has been said earnestly to excite all that profess and
call themselves Christians to a due preparation of themselves for this holy
Sacrament, and a frequent participation of it according to the intention of our
Lord and Savior in the institution of it, and the undoubted practice of
Christians in the primitive and best times, when men had more devotion and
fewer scruples about their duty.

If we do in good earnest believe that this Sacrament was instituted by our
Lord in remembrance of his dying love, we cannot but have a very high value and
esteem for it upon that account. Methinks so often as we read in the
institution of it those words of our dear Lord, do this in remembrance of me,
and consider what he who said them did for us, this dying charge of our best
friend should stick with us and make a strong impression upon our minds;
Especially if we add to these, those other words of his not long before his
death, Greater love than this has no man, that a man lay down his life for his
friend; ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you. It is a
wonderful love which he has expressed to us, and worthy to be had in
perpetual remembrance. And all that he expects from us, by way of thankful
acknowledgment, is to celebrate the remembrance of it by the frequent
participation of this blessed Sacrament. And shall this charge, laid upon us by
him who laid down his life for us, lay no obligation upon us to the solemn
remembrance of that unparalled kindness which is the fountain of so many
blessings and benefits to us? It is a sign we have no great sense of the
benefit when we are so unmindfull of our benefactour as to forget him days
without number. The Obligation he has laid upon us is so vastly great, not
only beyond all requital but beyond all expression, that if he had commanded
us some very grievous thing we ought with all the readiness and cheerfulness in
the world to have done it; how much more when he has imposed upon us so easy
a commandment, a thing of no burden but of immense benefit? when he has only
said to us, Eat O friends, and drink O beloved? when he only invites us to his
table, to the best and most delicious Feast that we can partake of on this side
heaven?

If we seriously believe the great blessings which are there exhibited to us
and ready to be conferred upon us, we should be so far from neglecting them,
that we should heartily thank God for every opportunity he offers to us of
being made partakers of such benefits. When such a price is put into our hands,
shall we want hearts to make use of it? Methinks we should long with David (who
saw but the shadow of these blessings) to be satisfied with the good things of
God's house, and to draw near his altar; and should cry out with him, O when
shall I come and appear before thee! My soul longs, ye even faints for the
courts of the Lord, and my flesh cries out for the living God. And if we had a
just esteem of things, we should account it the greatest infelicity and
judgment in the world to be debarred of this privilege, which yet we do
deliberately and frequently deprive our selves of.

We exclaim against the Church of Rome with great impatience, and with a very
just indignation, for robbing the People of half of this blessed Sacrament, and
taking from them the cup of blessing, the cup of salvation; and yet we can
patiently endure for some months, nay years, to exclude our selves wholly from
it. If no such great benefits and blessings belong to it, why do we complain of
them for hindering us of any part of it? But if there do, why do we by our own
neglect deprive our selves of the whole?

In vain do we bemoan the decay of our graces and our slow progress and
improvement in Christianity, whilst we wilfully despise the best means of our
growth in goodness. Well do we deserve that God should send leanness into our
souls, and make them to consume and pine away in perpetual doubting and
trouble, if, when God himself does spread so bountiful a Table for us and set
before us the bread of life, we will not come and feed upon it with joy and
thankfulness.

THE END.
A Catalogue of Books and Sermons, Writ by the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, Dean of
Canterbury. Viz.
1 SErmons Preached upon several Occasions, in two Volumes in Octavo. 2. The
Rule of Faith, etc. 3. A Sermon Preached on the 5th. of November, 1678. at St.
Margarets Westminster, before the Honorable House of Commons, upon St. Luke 9.
55, 56. But he turned, and rebuked them, and said, ye know not what manner of
Spirit ye are of; For the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to
save them. 4. A Sermon Preached at the first General Meeting of the Gentlemen
and others in and near London, who were Born within the County of York. Upon
John 13. 34, 35. A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another,
etc. 5. A Sermon Preached before the King, at White Hall April 4th. 1679, upon
1 John 4. 1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether
they are of God, etc. 6. A Sermon Preached before the King, at White Hall April
2d. 1680, upon Joshua 24. 15. If it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose
ye this day whom ye will serve. 7. The Lawfulness, and Obligation of Oaths. A
Sermon Preached at the Assizes held at Kingstone upon Thames, July 21. 1681,
upon Heb. 6. 16. And an Oath for Confirmation is to them an end of all Strife.
8. Sermon Preached at the Funeral of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Gouge, November
4th. 1681, with an account of his Life upon Luke 20. 37, 38. Now that the Dead
are raised, even Moses showed at the bush, etc. 9. A Persuasive to Frequent
Communion in the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, Preached in two Sermons
upon 1 Cor. 11. 26, 27, 28. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this
Cup, ye do show the Lord's Death till he come, etc. 10. A Sermon Preached at
the Funeral of the Reverend Benjamin Whichcot, D. D. and Minister of St.
Lawrence Jewry, London May 24th. 1683, upon 2 Cor. v. 6. Wherefore we are
always confident, knowing that whilst we are at home in the body we are absent
from the Lord.
Sold by Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, and William Rogers, at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet.

Advertisement of Books.
THE Works of the Learned Dr. Isaac Barrow, late Master of Trinity College in
Cambridge; Published by the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury: in two
Volumes in Folio. The First containing Thirty two Sermons, preached upon
several Occasions, an Exposition of the Lord's Prayer and the Decalogue; a
Learned Treatise of the Pope's Supremacy, a Discourse concerning the Unity of
the Church: also some Account of the Life of the Author, with Alphabetical
Tables. The Second Volume containing Sermons and Expositions upon all the
Apostles Creed: with an Alphabetical Table; and to which may be also added the
Life of the Author.

Sermons preached upon several Occasions: by the Right Reverend Father in God,
John Wilkins, D. D. and late Lord Bishop of Chester. Never printed before.
Printed for William Rogers at the Sun against S. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet.

THE CASE OF KNEELING AT THE Holy Sacrament STATED and RESOLVED. PART I.
Wherein these QUERIES are considered:

I. Whether Kneeling at the Sacrament be contrary to any express Command of
Christ, obliging to the observance of a different Gesture? II. Whether Kneeling
be not a Deviation from that example which our Lord set us at the first
Institution? III. Whether Kneeling be not Unsuitable and Repugnant to the Nature
of the Lord's Supper, as being no Table Gesture?
The Second EDITION.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. and Freeman Collins, for Fincham Gardener at the
White-Horse in Ludgate Street. 1683.

THE CASE.
Whether it be Lawful to receive the Holy Sacrament Kneeling?
THe Resolution of the most weighty and considerable Doubts which may in point
of Conscience arise about this matter (and do at present much influence the
minds and practices of many honest and well-meaning Dissenters) will depend
upon the Resolution of these following Queries.

1. Whether Kneeling in the Act of Receiving the Holy Sacrament according to
the Law of the Land, be not contrary to some express Law of Christ obliging to
the observance of a different Posture?

2. Whether Kneeling be not a deviation from that example which our Lord set us
at the first Institution?

3. Whether Kneeling be not altogether Unsuitable and Repugnant to the nature of
the Sacrament, as being no Table Gesture?

4. Whether Kneeling Commanded in the Church of England be not contrary to the
general Practice of the Church of Christ in the first and purest Ages?

5. Whether it be Unlawful for us to receive Kneeling because this Gesture was
first introduced by Idolaters, and is still notoriously abused by the Papists
to Idolatrous ends and purposes.

1. Whether Kneeling in the Act of Receiving the Sacrament in Obedience to the
Law of the Land, be not a Transgression against some express Law of Christ
which obliges us to observe another Gesture?

For satisfaction in this Point, our only recourse must be to the Holy
Scriptures contained in the Books of the New Testament, wherein the whole body
of Divine Laws delivered and enacted by our Blessed Savior, are collected and
recorded by the Holy Ghost. And if there be any Command there extant concerning
the use of any particular Gesture in the Act of Receiving the Lord's Supper, we
shall upon a diligent enquiry be sure to find it. But before I give in my
Answer, I readily grant thus much by way of Preface. Whatsoever is enjoined and
appointed by God to be prepetually used by all Christians throughout all Ages
without any alteration, that can never be nullified or altered by any Earthly
Power or Authority whatsoever. When once the Supreme Lawgiver and Governor of
the World has any ways signified and declared that such and such positive Laws
shall be perpetually and unalterably observed, then those Laws (though in their
own nature and with respect to the subject matter of them they be changeable)
must remain in full Force, and can admit of no Change from the Laws of Men. It
would be a piece of intolerable Pride, and the most daring Presumption, for any
Earthly Prince, any Council, any Society of Men whatsoever, to oppose the
known Will of the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth. In this Case nothing can
take off the Force and Obligation of such Laws, but the same Divine Authority
which first passed them into Laws. Thus much being granted and premised, I
return this Answer to the Question proposed.

God has been so far from establishing the unalterable use of any particular
Gesture in the Act of Receiving, that among all the Sacred Records of his Will,
there is not any express Command to determine our practice one way or other. We
are left perfectly at our liberty by God to use what comely Gesture we please,
either Sitting, Kneeling, or Standing. And if the Law of the Sea the Case of
Indifferent things.
Land did not restrain our liberty, we might use any of the forementioned
Gestures, without the least violation of any Law of God. This perhaps at first
sight may seem very strange and false to many of our Dissenting Brethren who
have been taught to believe otherwise; and it may be (to judge Charitably)
their Teachers and Pastors have in this particular been imposed on themselves,
by the Writings and Assertions of other Men whose Persons they have had in
great admiration. But yet I am so secure of this Truth, that I challenge all
the World to produce the Chapter and Verse wherein any Command is given for the
use of any particular Gesture at the Celebration of the Lord's Supper. That
Popish Principle of believing as the Church believes, and swallowing all for
Gospel which she affirms to be so, though very mischievous in its consequence,
is not so Popish, that is, so ill, as to pin our Faith on the Sleeves of
particular Men, and relying barely on the word and credit of any one Man whom
we highly esteem, of what Party or Persuasion soever. For this is to create a
Pope to our selves; and make every Man whom we fancy infallible; this is to
make two more than six, and the Authority of one Man outweigh the Authority of
the Church, that is a Society of Men who are nothing near so liable to
deception. I don't desire therefore to be trusted by any means in the matter
under present consideration; and therefore I would have the Reader to observe
this Rule: Trust no Man's Eyes or Judgment where you are able to use your own,
but follow the example of the Bereans, so highly commended Acts. 17. 11.
by St. Paul upon this very account; that is, to make an ingenuous enquiry into
the Truth of things, to search the Scriptures whether these things be so as I
say and assert. If this course were generally followed, it would go a great way
toward the composing those differences, and curing those divisions that at
present are on foot amongst us, occasioned by several Tenets and Opinions about
matters of Religion. By this means, a great many which pass for Divine Oracles
and Doctrines, would appear to be no other than the whimsies and inventions of
Men. With this cautionary advice I might fairly dismiss this Question as being
fully Answered, and leave all my Readers to disprove me if they can.

But because some may pretend they have not Leisure, and others want of Skill,
and others are not enduced with Patience enough to search and examine this
matter thoroughly as it ought, I will yield all the Charitable assistance I am
able toward their relief, by doing the work to their hands. My Business then
at present is this, to Collect and Present to your view all those places which
relate to the Sacrament, and are most likely to inform us what our Lord by his
Institution and Appointment has obliged us to. And certainly if there be any
Command which ties us up to the use of any particular Gesture, Sitting suppose
or Standing, and not Kneeling, we shall find it in one or other of the
Evangelists, who give us a perfect Narrative of the whole Mind and Will of
Christ in all matters necessary to Faith and Salvation: Let us therefore bring
them under a strict examination. St. Matthew gives this account of Mat. 26. 26.
the whole matter: As they were eating, Jesus took Bread, and blessed it, and
brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my Body.
And he took the Ver. 27.
Cup, and gave Thanks, and gave it to them* saying* Drink ye all of it. For
this is my Blood of the New Testament, Ver. 28.
which is shed for many for the Remission of Sins. But I Ver. 29.
say unto you, I will not Drink henceforth of this Fruit of the Vine, until
that day when I Drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom. And when they had
Sung an Hymn, Ver. 30.
they went out into the Mount of Olives. Much to the same purpose is the
account which St. Mark gives of this matter.

And as they did eat, Jesus took Bread, and blessed, and Mar. 14. 22.
brake it, and gave to them, and said, Take, eat; this is my Body. And he took
the Cup, and when he had given Ver. 23.
Thanks, he gave it to them, and they all Drank of it. And he said unto them,
This is my Blood of the New Ver. 24. Ver. 25.
Testament, which is shed for many. Verily I say unto you, I will Drink no more
of the Fruit of the Vine, until that day that I Drink it new in the Kingdom of
God. And Ver. 26.
when they had Sung a Hymn, they went out into the Mount of Olives. And this is
the sum of what Saint Mark delivers concerning the Lord's Supper. Saint Luke
with very little variation thus describes the matter.

And he took Bread, and gave Thanks, and brake it, and Luke 22. 19.
gave unto them, saying, This is my Body which is given for you; this do in
Remembrance of me. Likewise also the Ver. 20.
Cup after Supper saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, which is
shed for you. This Evangelist indeed makes mention of another Cup which our
Lord took, and after he had blessed it, he said to his Disciples, Take this,
and divide it among your selves; and withal told them that he would not Drink
of the Fruit of the Vine until the Kingdom of God should come; which Cup
plainly refers to the Passover, as will appear to any one who will consult and
compare the 15, 16, 17, and 18. Verses of See Dr. Lightfoot on Mat. 26. 26.
Horae Heb. and Talmud.
the forementioned Chapter; and is supposed to be that Cup wherewith the Jews
were wont to begin the Paschal Feast, which they Blessed or Consecrated in this
Form of words: Blessed be God who Created the Fruit of the Vine. And whereas
our Lord says he will Drink no more of the Fruit of the Vine, his meaning is,
that he would never Celebrate the Feast of the Passover with them any more
after that time, but their next Festival Meeting should be in Heaven: and this
is very consistent with our Lord's Drinking another Cup after this, which he
Consecrated to another use and signification, in the Sacrament, Ver. 20. And
this is all the light this Divine Writer affords us concerning the outward
Rites and Ceremones which our Lord used himself at the Institution of the
Sacrament, and established for the use of all Christians in all succeeding Ages.

As for St. John, he makes no mention at all of the Institution of this Holy
Feast by our Lord. All that can be collected from his Writings relates to the
Passover, or, according to the Learned Dr. Lightfoot, to what past John 13.
from Ver. 1. to 31. vid. Hor. Heb. Tal. p. 300. and Mat. 26. 6.
between Christ and his Disciples at a common and ordinary meal in Bethany, and
that for this reason, among many others judiciously urged by him, because the
Disciples thought when our Lord had said to him, Ver. 27. That thou do do
quickly, that he had given order to Judas who kept the bag, to buy those things
that they had need of against the Feast, viz. the Passover; and therefore all
those passages, and that discourse related by St. John in the foregoing Verses
of that Chapter, were transacted at an ordinary and common Supper. And indeed
this seems to be the great end and design which St. John proposed to himself in
writing his Gospel, and which throughout he constantly pursues, viz. To add out
of his own Knowledge several remarkable passages (especially such as tend to
demonstrate the Divinity of our Savior) as had been omitted by the other
Evangelists in their History of the Birth, Life, Actions and Sufferings of our
Blessed Savior. There is another passage in St. John's Gospel, which in the
Judgment of John 5. 53.
many Learned Divines both Ancient and Modern, has respect to the Lord's
Supper, though not at that time instituted when those mysterious words were
uttered by our Savior.

Except ye Eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and Drink Ver. 54.
his Blood, ye have no life in you. Whosoever Eats my Flesh, and Drinks my
Blood, has Eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the last day. For my Flesh
is meat indeed, and Ver. 55.
my Blood is drink indeed. He that Eats my Flesh, and Ver. 56.
Drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him. Now all that can be inferred
from these words, as they relate to this Holy Feast, is only thus much: that
it is highly necessary for all Christians (who have an opportunity to do it) to
partake of the Lord's Supper, as they would partake in the merits of his
Sacrifice, and the Efficacy of his Death and his Sufferings; and that none but
such as do receive the tokens and signs of his Body broken, and Blood shed for
their Sins, shall be owned and rewarded by him as his Friends. These are all
the places that we meet with in the Gospel; let us now see what is delivered in
the Acts and other Writings of the Apostles and Divinely-inspired Authors.
Among all their Writings there is but one place which gives any account of the
History of the Sacrament, and Institution of it, and that is in the 1 Epist. to
the Corinthians, Chap. 11. where St. Paul declares, that what he delivered to
them, he received by immediate Revelation from Christ himself, viz. That the
Lord Jesus the same night in which Ver. 23. Ver. 24.
he was betrayed, took Bread; and when he had given Thanks, he brake it, and
said, Take, eat, this is my Body which is broken for you: this do in
Remembrance of me. After the Ver. 25.
same manner he took the Cup when he had Supped, saying, This Cup is the New
Testament in my Blood: this do, as often as ye Drink it, in Remembrance of me.
For as often as Ver. 26.
ye eat this Bread, and Drink this Cup, ye do show (or show ye) the Lord's
Death till he come. There are several other places wherein the Holy Sacrament
is mentioned, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 21. 1 Cor. 11. 20. Acts 2. 46. Acts 20. 7.
and described by several Names and Titles suitable to the nature and ends of
it, which for brevity sake I omit, and desire the Reader to consult at his
leisure; and I would not put him to that trouble, if they did contain any thing
that made against Kneeling, or that looked like a command for the use of any
other Gesture. Let us now look back a little upon the places forementioned, and
see what our Lord has ordained and appointed to be of perpetual use in his
Church.

The Apostles and Disciples of our Lord, at the Institution of the Sacrament,
were the Representatives of the whole Church; and are to be considered under a
double capacity. Either as Governors and Ministers entrusted by Christ with
the Power of dispensing and administering the Sacrament, or as ordinary and lay
Communicants.

If we consider them as Governors and Stewards of the Mysteries, their Duty to
which they are obliged by the express command of their Lord, is to take the
Bread into their Hands, to bless and consecrate it to that mysterious and
Divine use to which he designed it, to break it, to give it to the
Communicants, as he gave it them: And so in like manner to Take the Cup, to
bless it, to give it to their Fellow Christians.

That which they were obliged to do by the command of our Lord, considered as
private Men, and in common with all believers, was to take and receive the
Consecrated Elements of Bread and Wine, to eat and Drink, and to do all this in
Commemoration of his wonderful Love in giving his Body to be broken and his
Blood to be shed for the Sins of the World.

And what the least Syllable or Shadow of a Command is there here in all this
History, for the use of any Gesture in the Act of Receiving? Since then the
Holy Scripture is altogether silent as to this matter, its silence is a full
and clear demonstration that Kneeling is not repugnant to any express Command
of our Lord, because no Gesture was ever Commanded at all: And this has been
ingenuously Confessed in writing by a A Manuscript of an unknown Author, cited
by Mr. Paybody, p. 48.
great Enemy to Kneeling, and a great Advocate for Sitting, That the Gesture of
Sitting is but a matter of Circumstance, and not expressly Commanded.

But the Scotch Ministers Assembled at Perth, affirm etc. The Force of their
Argument lies in this, if it have any force at all: Our Savior Sat at the
Passover, as the Scriptures plainly inform Mat. 26. 20. Mar. 14. 18. Luke 22.
14.
us; and it is to be supposed he continued in the same posture when he
instituted and Administered the Sacrament, which was at the close of the
Passover: therefore Do this relates to, and includes the Gesture amongst other
things. But this is a miserable shift, which tends to Sink rather than Support
their Cause.

For first, If our Lord did Sit when he Administered Do this, to oblige us to
observe his Gesture only, and not several other Circumstances which he
observed at the same time. Since Christ has not restrained and interpreted
these words Do this so that they should only respect Sitting as he did, why
should we not think our selves obliged to do all that he did at the same time,
as well as this? For example, If these words may be interpreted thus, Do this,
that is, Sit as Christ did, why not thus also, Do this, that is, celebrate the
Sacrament in an upper Room, in a private House, late at night or the Evening,
after a full Supper, Mat. 26. 20.
in the Company of 11 or 12 at most, Mar. 14. 17. Luke 22. 14.
and they only Men, with their Heads Covered according to the custom of those
Countries, and with unleavened Bread? There lies as great an Obligation upon
all Christians to observe all these Circumstances in Imitation of our Lord by
virtue of these words, Do this, as there does to Sit. So that this Argument
violently recoils upon those that urge it, and proves a great deal more than
they are willing to have it. It concludes strongly against their own Practices,
and the liberty they take in omitting some things, and pressing the necessary
observance of others, upon a reason which equally obliges to all.

But I desire our Dissenting Brethren (who may be Scotch-men) to take this
further consideration along with them; which I think will turn the Scales, and
make deep impressions upon tender Consciences, and oblige them to observe most
of the other Circumstances which they omit, rather than this of Sitting, which
they so earnestly press and contend for. All those forementioned Circumstances
(except the two Last, which too are generally allowed among Learned Men on all
sides) are expressly mentioned in the Gospel, and were without dispute observed
by Christ at the Institution of the Sacrament: But the particular Gesture used
by him at that time, is not expressly mentioned; and what it was, is very
disputable and dubious, as I shall evince by and by under the second Query.

How then can any Man think himself obliged in Conscience, by the force of
these words, Do this, to do what Christ is no where expressly said to do, and
not obliged to do what the Scripture affirms he really did? Why that which is
dark and dubious should be made an infallible Rule of Conscience, and that
which is plainly and evidently set down in Scripture should have no force, nor
be esteemed any Rule at all: These are Questions, I confess, beyond my
capacity, and surpassing my skill to resolve.

It Is clear from St. Paul in the forecited place, that Do this, do respect
only the 1 Cor. 11. 23, 4, 5, 6, 27, 28. Verses.
Bread and Wine, which signify the Body and Blood of Christ, and those other
actions there specified by him, which are essential to the right and due
celebration of that Holy Feast. For when it is said, Do this in Remembrance of
me; and, This do ye as often as ye Drink it in Remembrance of me; and, As often as
ye Eat this Bread, and Drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords Death till he come;
it is plain that Do this must be restrained to the Sacramental Actions there
mentioned, and not extended to the Gesture, of which the Apostle speaks not a
word. Our Lord Instituted the Sacrament in Remembrance of his Death and
Passion, and not in Remembrance of his Gesture in Administering it: And
consequently, Do this is a general Command, obliging us only to such
particular Actions and Rites as he had Instituted, and made necessary to be
used in order to this great end, viz. to signify and represent his Death, and
that Bloody Sacrifice which he offered to his Father, on the Cross, for us
miserable Sinners. Upon the whole matter, I think, we may certainly conclude,
that there is not a tittle of a Command in the whole New Testament to oblige us
to receive the Lords Supper in any particular Posture; and if any be so
scrupulous, after all, as not to receive it in any other Gesture but what is
expressly Commanded, they must never receive it as long as they live: And then I
leave this to their serious consideration, How they will be ever able to excuse
their neglect of a known necessary duty (such as receiving the Sacrament is)
before God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who loved us so much as to send
his Son to be a propitiation for our Sins: How they will ever Answer to their
Crucified Savior their Living and Dying in the breach of an express Command of
his given a little before his Passion to Do this in Remembrance of him, merely
because the Gesture prescribed by Authority was cross to their private Wills
and Phansies, but not to the Mind and Will of God.

2. For the further proof and Confirmation of this Assertion, that there is no
express Command in Scripture for the use of any particular Gesture in the Act
of receiving the Sacrament, I will appeal to the Judgment and Practice of our
Dissenting Brethren, and all the Reformed Churches in Europe.

1. To begin with our Nonconforming Brethren. There are a great many Serious
and Sincere-Hearted persons among them, who profess that (were they left to
their liberty, and not tied up by the Law to Kneel at the Sacrament) they could
with a safe Conscience use that Gesture as well as any other. And they further
tell us, that they are willing and ready to Communicate with us, provided we
would Administer the Sacrament to them either Sitting or Standing, that is, any
way but that which is imposed by Law. For the Rule by which they conduct their
Consciences in this matter, is this: Things in their own nature indifferent,
which are no where Commanded or prohibited by God in Scripture, cannot, nor
ought not to be restrained and limited by any Power or Authority of Man: And
therefore all such things which God left free for us to do or not to do without
Sin, become sinful to us when imposed by humane Authority. It Is remote from my
business to show how weak and false a Principle this is, and of what
mischievous consequences to the Peace of the Church; and for that reason I will
pass it by. But thus much may be inferred from this Tenent to my purpose, that
they who hold and urge it as a reason why they cannot Receive Kneeling, which
otherwise they could safely do, plainly own, that as to the Gesture, in the Act
of receiving, it is in its own nature Indifferent, and left free by God for us
to use or refuse as we think fit, and by necessary consequence that there is no
express Command given by God for the use of any particular Gesture. It could
not be a matter of indifferency to our Dissenting Brethren, whose Principle
this is, if there were no Law of Man to Kneel at the Sacrament; and now there
is such a Law, it could not be Indifferent to them whether they received
Sitting or Standing, as they profess it is, if there were any Law of God
obliging to the use of any one Gesture whatsoever.

2. That there is no express Command in Scripture for any one Gesture in the
Act of Receiving, may be inferred from the Judgment and Practice of all the
Reformed Churches abroad: Whose Judgment and example will, I presume, sway much
with those who separate from the Church of England as not being sufficiently
purged from the Corruptions of the Church of Rome as other Neighbour-Churches
are, and who stood once engaged in a Solemn Covenant, to reform the Churches of
England and Ireland according to the Word of God and the Pattern of the best
Reformed Churches.

Let us now compare the practice of our Church with the example of the
Protestant Churches abroad, and see whether she ought to reform the Gesture
prescribed at the Sacrament.

The Reformed Churches of France, and those of Geneva and Helvetia Stand; the
Dutch generally Sit; but in some places (as in West-Friesland) they Stand. The
Churches of the Bohemian and Augustan Confession, which spread through the
large Kingdoms of Bohemia, Denmark, and Sweden, through Norway, the Dukedom of
Saxony, Lithuany, and the Ducal Prussia in Poland, the Marquisate of
Brandenburg in Germany, and several other places and free Cities in that
Empire, do for the most part, if not all of them, retain the Gesture of
Kneeling. The Bohemian Churches were reformed by John Husse and Jerome of
Prague, who suffered Martyrdom at Constance about the year 1416. long before
Luthers time; and those of the Augsburg or Augustan Confessions were founded
and reformed by Luther, and were the first Protestants properly so called. Both
these Churches, so early reformed, and of so large extent, did not only use the
same Gesture that our Church enjoins at the Sacrament, but they, together with
those of the Helvetick Confession, did in three general Synods unanimously
condemn the Sitting Gesture (though they esteemed it in it self Lawful) 1 At
Cracow, Anno. Dom. 1573. 2 Petricow or Peterkaw, 1578. 3 Wladislaw, 1583.
as being Scandalous, for this remarkable reason, viz. because it was used by
the Arrians (as their Synods call the Socinians) in contempt of our Saviors
Divinity; who therefore placed themselves as Fellows with their Lord at his
Table. And thereupon they entreat and exhort all Christians of their Communion
to change Sitting into Kneeling or Standing, both which Ceremonies we
Indifferently leave free according as the Custom of any Church has obtained,
and we approve of their use without Scandal and Blame. Moreover they affirm,
That these Socinians who deny Christ to be God, were the first that introduced
Sitting at the Sacrament into their Churches, contrary to the Practice of all
the Evangelical Churches in Europe. Among all these Foreign Churches of the
Reformation, there is but one that I can find which uses Sitting, and forbids
Kneeling, for fear of Bread-Worship: but yet in that Synod wherein they
condemned Kneeling, they left it to the choice of their Churches to use
Standing, Sitting, or an Ambulatory Gesture (as the French do) and at last
conclude thus: Harmon. 4 Synods of Holl.
These Articles are settled by mutual Consent, that if the good of the Churches
require it, they may and ought to be changed, augmented or diminished. What now
should be the ground and reason of this variety both in Opinion and Practice
touching the Gesture to be used at the Lords Supper? Is it to be supposed or
imagined that an Assembly of Learned and Pious Divines, met together on purpose
to consult how to Reform their Churches according to the pure Word of God,
should through weakness and inadvertency overlook an express Command of Christ
for the perpetual use of any particular Gesture, if any such there had been? Or
shall we be so uncharitable as to think that all these eminent Churches
wilfully past it by, and established what was most agreeable to their own
Phansies, contrary to the known Will of God Would they have given liberty to
all of their Communion to use several Gestures according to the custom of their
several Churches, if our Lord had tied them to observe but one? Would they
declare (as the Dutch Synod does) that what they enjoined might be altered, if
the good of the Church so required, if so be Sitting had been expressly
Commanded by our Lord, to be used by all Christians to the end of the World? No
undoubtedly, they would not, we cannot either in reason or Charity suppose it.

The true Principle upon which all these Reformed Churches built, and by which
they are able to reconcile all this seeming difference in this matter, is the
very same with that which the Church of England goes by in her Synods and
Convocations, viz. That as to Rites and Ceremonies of an indifferent nature,
every National Church has Authority to institute, change and abolish them, as
they in Prudence and Charity shall think most fit, and conducive to the
setting forth God's Glory, the Edification of their People, and the Decent and
Reverend Administration of the Holy Sacrament. Whosoever therefore refuses Vid.
Art. 34 observat. of the French and Dutch Divines on the Harmony of
Confessions, edit. Geneva 1681. sect. 14. p. 120. In hoc etiam ritu (speaking
of Kneeling at the Sacr.) suam cuique Ecclesiae libertatem salvam reliquendam
arbitramur.
to receive the Lord's Supper according to the Constitution of the Church of
England, purely because Kneeling is contrary to the express Command of Christ,
must condemn the Judgment and Practice of all the Reformed Churches beyond the
Seas, who all agree in this, that the Gesture in the Act of Receiving is to be
reckoned among things Indifferent; and that whether we Sit, or Kneel, or Stand,
or Receive Walking, we Transgress no Law of God; and consequently they prove my
assertion true, that Kneeling is not contrary to any express Command, no more
than any other, because they allow of all Lawful in themselves to be used;
which cannot consist with an express Command for the use of any one Gesture
whatsoever.

Query II. Whether Kneeling be not a Devotion from that Example which Christ
set us at the first Institution?
FOr a full and satisfactory resolution of this doubt, I shall propound the
four following particulars to the consideration of our Dissenting Brethren;
which I will endeavor with all Brevitie and Clearness to make good.

1. That it can never be proved, so as that the conscience may surely build
upon it, what Gesture Christ and his Apostles used at the Celebration of the
Sacrament.

2. Supposing that our Lord did Sit, yet his bare example does not oblige all
Christians to a like practice.

3. That they who urge the example of Christ for our Rule in this case, do not
follow it themselves.

4. That they who Kneel at the Lords Supper in compliance with the Custom and
Constitution of the Church, do manifestly follow the example of Christ.

First, The particular Gesture used by Christ and his Apostles at the
Institution and Celebration of the Sacrament, can never be demonstrated so as
that the conscience may surely build upon it. This I shall endeavor to make
good these two ways. First, we have no sure ground for it in Scripture.
Secondly, the Customs observed by the Jews render it very uncertain and
disputable.

1. All that can be gathered from Scripture amounts Mat. 26. 26. Mar. 14. 22.
to no more than this, that as they were eating, or as they did eat, as the
Phrase is rendered in St. Mark, Jesus took Bread and blessed, it and brake it,
and gave it to his Disciples; and he took the Cup (when he had Supped, says
St. Paul; after Supper, as St. Luke has 1 Cor. 11. 25. Luke 22. 20.
it) and gave Thanks; and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it. Now it is
very clear from this account which the Scripture gives, that our Lord did
Institute and Administer the Sacrament to his Disciples, and that they did
Receive it: But whether Sitting, Kneeling, or Standing, is no where mentioned,
nor plainly determined. It Is clear that he Instituted this Holy Feast at the
close of the Paschal Feast, for he took the Bread as they were Eating, and the
Cup when he had Supped; that he did Celebrate the Passover according to the
usual manner of the Jews in those times, which was in a Discumbing Luke 22. 14.
Mat. 26. 20. (...), in the Marg.
posture, on Beds placed about the Table, much after the manner of our lying or
leaning upon Couches. Yet whether, after all, the Apostles Received, or our
Lord Administered the Sacrament still Sitting, after the same manner as they did
at the Passover, is not expressed, nor can it be certainly concluded from the
Word of God. The utmost strength of their Argument who urge Sitting in
imitation of our Saviors example, can arise to no more than this: That it is
probable our Lord did not alter the Gesture he used at the Passover, when he
Instituted the Sacrament. But who sees not that a probability is far from a
certainty! A thing may be really false, though it seem likely to be true: And
that opinion which is speculatively probable, may when reduced to practice
become a great Sin and a great Error. Thus to refuse to Receive the Holy
Sacrament Kneeling, and thereby neglect a known necessary Duty, and not only
so, but to disturb the Peace, and break the Unity of the Church, upon a bare
probability that our Lord sat, which we are not, cannot be sure of, is a great
fault in all who are guilty of it. For they appeal to an uncertain example,
against a plain certain Command, viz. to receive the Tokens and Pledges of our
Saviors dying love, and to do this in Remembrance of him. They therefore who
urge the example of Christ for Sitting at the Sacrament, and as a Plea against
Kneeling, would do well first to make the example appear, and prove that he did
Sit, before they press a Conformity.

2. If we consult the Records of Jewish Antiquities, and the Writings of
Learned Men both Jews and Christians, concerning the Passover and the manner of
the Jews Celebrating it, we shall find that they did not keep to one and the
same Gesture throughout the Solemnity. For the Babylon and Jerusalem Talmud,
Maimonides and Buxtorf, do certify us that they did alter their posture at the
Passover, though the Lying or Leaning posture was generally and most
Religiously used and observed at this Feast above any other. And the Scripture
gives some hints and intimations of the Truth of what they deliver.

1. It was the ancient custom of the Jews and of those Genesis 18. 4. 19. c. 2.
24. 32. Mat. 15. 2. Mar. 7. 3. Luke 7. 44.
Eastern Countries at their ordinary Feasts and Entertainments to Wash their
Hands and their Feet, and especially at their Religious Feasts to Wash their
Hands often. At the Passover they Washed their Hands thrice at least, according
to the Talmudists and the Authors forecited Which Ceremony could not well, nor
was Tract. Berachoth. ^esachin. Maimon. in Chametz. Uma^sah. Buxtorf. Synag. c.
13.
not in all likelihood performed during their Lying or Leaning posture on their
left sides, as their manner was. For the reason of their Washing at all, and so
frequently, was, that no legal Impuritie or Uncleanness might cleave to them,
and to signify the great care they took to keep this Solemn Feast Holy to the
Lord. And as they were Nice and Curious in Purifying and Washing themselves, so
in keeping the Beds, Table, Dishes, and Vid. Buxt Synagoga, c. 12. p 286.
all other Utensils necessary for this Feast, clean and free from all pollution
too. To Wash so often more than the Law required, and the general custom of
those Eastern and hot Countries warranted, was a Pharisaical Invention, and
superstitiously abused by them; and, as such, it is certain our Lord did not use
it; but that he did Wash sometime before he Eat the Paschal Supper, and after
he had Sat down as the manner was, there is little reason to doubt: and all
that I infer from hence is, that when he Washed, be it once or twice, he
altered his posture, and in all probability either arose from his Bed and went
Vid. John 2. 6.
to the place where Water and Vessels were prepared and set for such uses, or
had Water brought to him in a Basin, wherein he Washed either Sitting upright,
or Standing; which are both different from that Gesture which was peculiar and
proper to the Passover. St. John, in Chap. 13. 2, 4, 5. Verses, will explain
and Confirm this Custom we are speaking of. There he tells us how that Supper
being ended (that is, in a manner or almost ended; for by comparing the 12 and
26 and 27 Verses together, we shall find plainly that they had not quite
finished their Supper) Jesus rises from Supper, and laid aside his Garments,
and took a Towel and girded himself; and after that pours Water into a Basin,
and began to Wash the Disciples Feet. There are Learned Men on both sides, who
think all this was Vid. Grot. in lo. Dr. Hamond on v. 26. Mark. 14. 12.
done at the Feast of the Passover, and that toward the close of it when he
Instituted the Lords Supper; but I shall wave this, and not infist upon it,
because, as I hinted before, I believe, as the Learned Dr. Lightfoot does, it
was no more then an ordinary or common meal; and therefore I only shall
conclude thus much from it, which I think is very probable: That it was usual
with the Jews to Wash at their Feasts, and that in Supper-time: And that our
Savior complied with th^s custom. To Wash the Feet of the Guests was the
Office of Servants, and it was altogether unusual for the Master of the Feast
to do; but our Lord, to set his Disciples an example of Humility and Charitable
condescension one to another, performs this servile Office himself Joh. 13. 14,
15.
toward them; which he might as well have done after Supper, if it had not
been usual to have Washed in Suppertime. Seeing then it appears partly from
Scripture, and partly from Ancient Monuments of Jewish customs, that the Jews
were wont both before and at their Civil and Religious Feasts to Wash, and
particularly at the Passover; then it is very probable our Lord did so too, and
altered his posture as they did; nay it is very probable that our Lord, to make
his Discipels understand what he was about to do, did at the Institution of
this new Feast, the Holy Sacrament of his Body and Blood, Wash before it; and
having changed the posture that he was in before at the Eating of the Paschal
Supper, did not resume it, but used a new posture at this new
Festival-Solemnity; but what that was, is not certain.

2. At the beginning of the Paschal Feast, the Jews did put themselves into
this Discumbing or Leaning posture, and used it while they Eat and Drank the
two first Cups of Wine (for every Guest was obliged to As the Talmudist and
forementioned Writers testify. Vid. Dr. Lightfoot Hor. Heb. 291.
Drink four Cups at this Feast) but at the third Cup, called the Cup of
blessing in their Language, and the fourth styled the Song or Psalm-Cup when
they Sung the Hymn, there was no necessity of lying along; and it is likely our
Lord took an opportunity when he took the third Cup, to change the use and
signification of it, and to Institute the Eucharistical Cup, called by St. Paul
the Cup of blessing, 1 Cor. 10. 16.

3. Before they Drank of the third Cup, the Master of the Feast took a piece of
Unleavened Bread and brake it, and after he had Eat some himself, he offers the
remainder See Mr. Ainsworth a Learned Nonconformist in Ex. 12. 8. 11.
to the rest of the Company, to do the like. After this he proceeds to take
some of the bitter Herbs, and to dip them in a thick Sauce called by them
Charoseth (which was formed in the shape of a Brick, to represent the hard
slavery undergone by their Forefathers in the Brick-Kilns of Egypt) and
commanded all the Society to follow his example. Now this was not done in an
inclining posture, as the Jewish Doctors Buxt. Syn. c. 13. p. 300.
teach us; and they give this reason for it, because this was to put them in
mind of the Egyptian Bondage, and therefore here they stood in all probability,
because to eat Standing was the manner of Slaves, whereas Lying along Pesachin,
fol. 37. 2. Hor. Heb. 291, 292.
after a Lordly manner, was in token of that ease and rest they enjoyed in the
Land of Canaan, and of their redemption from the House of Bondage. So often
therefore as they Eat the bitter Herbs, so often they changed their Gesture.

4. Though the Jews in their Solemn Feasts used Discumbing, yet in blessing and
giving thanks before those Feasts they were, as Philo relates, in a Standing
Gesture, In vita contemplat. p. 663 Col. Allobro. edit. 1613. p. 695.
with their Eyes and Hands lifted up to Heaven. And therefore it is no way
probable that Christ and his Apostles would continue in their Table Gesture at
the blessing of the Holy Supper, which is an higher Ordinance than the
Passover: Because this would be very unsuitable to so great a Solemnity;
Especially too, if Dr. Lightfoot's Opinion be true (and it may be so for any
thing that appears to the contrary,) viz. that Christ changed the third Cup at
the Passover, called the Cup of blessing, into the Sacramental Cup; because it
was the custom of the Jews then, to alter their Table Gesture that was peculiar
to the Passover; and it is highly Improbable that our Lord would continue in the
Table Gesture contrary to the General and Current Custom of the Jews. They that
don't think so as I do in this particular, will receive little advantage by
being cross. For if it may be supposed that our Lord Sat sometimes when the
Jews were wont to Stand, it may equally be supposed that he Stood sometimes
when the Jews were wont to Sit; and what becomes of their Argument for Sitting
at the Sacrament after the example of Christ? because that stands built upon
supposition that our Lord Sat at the Passover, as the Jews did, and continued
in the same Gesture when he Instituted the Sacrament, which was before the
Paschal-Solemnity was over. I will only observe this briefly by the way, and
then proceed to shut up all upon this Head.

That those Nonconformists who cry out so vehemently against the Church for
Imposing, and her Members for using a Kneeling Gesture, were very unfortunate
in their choice when they pitched upon Sitting, and urged it as the only
necessary Gesture to receive in, in Conformity to our Saviors Practice and
Example: Because the Standing Gesture may be much better maintained and
defended than Sitting, and has more and greater probabilities attending it.

If therefore variety of Gestures were used by the Jews at the Passover, and it
no where appears from Scripture that our Lord did not comply in this matter,
then we cannot know for certain what the particular Gesture was which Christ
used at the Institution of the Sacrament: it might be Lying along, and it might
be Sitting upright; it might be Standing in an adoring posture, with his hands
and eyes lifted up to Heaven; which is much more probable than either of the
former, for the reasons forementioned: we cannot certainly say which; and yet
we must be certain of one, before we can build upon it as an Infallible Rule of
Conscience. Let it be therefore granted to our Brethren who differ from us in
this point, that our Savior Sat at the Passover, that the Sacrament was
Instituted by him before the Paschal Feast was fully ended, that the Disciples
Eat the Sacramental Bread, and Drank the Sacramental Cup, in the same posture
as they Eat and Drank at the Passover: What of all this? how will the necessity
of a Sitting Gesture appear from these premises? Why, thus: Therefore our Lord
Instituted and Administered the Holy Sacrament Sitting, say they. How does this
follow of course, I ask? Since they Eat and Drank in several postures at the
Paschal Feast.

I confess the Argument had been strong, if they could make it appear, that
throughout the whole Solemnity of the Passover no other Gesture but Sitting was
used by our Lord. But this I am sure can never be done, and consequently their
conclusion can never be good. From the whole I conclude thus much: Since the
example of our Lord cannot be certainly known in this matter, our Church cannot
be charged for deviating from it: And consequently, to scruple Conformity to
the practice of our Church, because she does not Conform to the practice of
Christ which no body can certify us of, is very Unjust and Unreasonable.

2. Supposing our Lord did Sit as they will have it, yet his bare example does
not oblige all Christians to a like Practice.

1. Because naked examples without some Rule or Note added to them to signify
that it is the mind and will of God to have them constantly followed and
perpetually Imitated by us, have not the force of a Law perpetually obliging
the Conscience. Thus in our present Case, though our Lord did Sit at the
Sacrament, yet his example alone does not become an everlasting Rule for all
Ages to observe, because he has no where discovered his binding will and
pleasure in this particular. And consequently, since he has left us in the
Dark, we may act contrary to his will and intention, when we so zealously press
and follow his example, especially in this matter relating to Gesture. For even
under the Law, where all other Circumstances of Time, Place, Habits, and the
Ceremonies relating to Divine Worship, were with great particularity described,
this of Gesture was left free and undetermined. God never obliged them to use
any particular Gesture in any particular part of his Worship, but left it to
their choice, whether to Kneel, or Stand, or Bow down their Heads and Bodies,
or fall prostrate on the Earth; to use all, or any one of these, as Custom and
their own Pious Prudence should prompt and direct them. Seeing then that the
Gesture in the Worship of God was never determined under the Law: Since it was
and is in its own nature a Mutable Ceremony in the Service of God, it remains
so unto this day: Our Lord left it as he found it, unless it can be proved that
he has by some Command or Note of Immutability fixed and determined it to all
succeeding Ages. But because no such Command or Note is to be found, therefore
we are not tied in Conscience to a strict Imitation of his Example. A few
instances will clear this point. Our Lord was not Baptized till Luke 3. 23.
he was about thirty years of Age; but this example is not esteemed by the
generality of Dissenters a Law or Warrant for us to defer our Baptism so long.
So he Instituted the Sacrament a little before his Death: But is there no
obligation upon us to receive it but when we are near our Graves, and under a
Prospect of Death? He also Instituted and Administered the Sacrament after a
full Meal, in an upper Room, to Men only. Does his bare example oblige us to
observe punctually all these Circumstances, or no? If it does, why do our
Brethren of the Separation take the liberty to depart from his example in these
things? if his example lays no necessity upon us to follow it in these
particulars, how does Sitting become necessary barely upon the account of his
example? I desire them therefore Seriously and impartially to examine this
matter, and see if they can assign any reasons for this liberty they take of
following the example of our Savior in some things, and not in others, where
there is no other Rule to guide them. I believe they will be constrained to do
one of these two things; either to withdraw their Suit against Kneeling, and
quit their own Principle; or condemn their own practices, as shamefully
repugnant to it.

2. The bare example of Christ is no Warrant for us to act by, because the
great end and usefulness of that Glorious example he left us, consists in this,
viz. that it shows the possibility, and clears up the sense of his Laws, and
excites and encourages us to the Practice of them; it puts the Rule into
activity, and sets it forth to the life. It is to our lives, as Exhortation is
to Doctrine, it thrusts us forward to do that which we were obliged in
Conscience to do before. Whatsoever our Lord has Commanded us to do, in that
only we are necessarily bound to Imitate him: But where there is no Precept,
there is no Necessity. We may do it if we will, and if we can innocently (as in
the case of a single Life) but we are not under Constraint, and an
indispensable Obligation. He has Commanded us to be Meek and Lowly, to be Just
and Merciful, to be Patient under all our Troubles and Afflictions, to follow
Peace with all Men, to be ever contented and resigned to the Will of our
Heavenly Father in all States and Conditions of Life, and the life: And in all
these things he became an Example to us, that we might follow his Steps. He
Commands us to do what he performed himself; and that which we are concerned
in, if we would walk surely, is first to look for our Rule, and then for our
encouragement to look unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith. It Is
true indeed, we are Commanded in Scripture to follow the Examples of the
Apostles so far forth as they follow Christ, and the Example of our Lord is
made the Touchstone to try all others by; but then if we would know what is out
Duty, we must bring his Example to the Rule. For as to Preach Christ and to
Preach the Gospel, to Obey Christ and Obey the 1 Cor. 11. 1. Acts 5. 42. Acts
11. 20. Marc. 16. 15. Heb. 5. 9. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. Col. 2. 6.
Gospel, are Phrases of alike Import it Scripture; so in like manner, to follow
Christ, is all one with following the Gospel-Rule, or doing as Christ did in
obedience to his Commands. The Sum of all is this; An Example may help to
Interpret a Law, but of it self it is no Law: Against a Rule no Example is a
Competent Warrant; and if the Example be according to the Rule, it is not the
Example but the Rule that is the Measure of our Actions.

3. The bare Example of Christ is no Warrant for us to go by, because he was an
extraordinary Person, and did many things which we cannot, and many which we
must not do. He Fasted 40 Days and 40 Nights, and spent whole Nights in Prayer;
he wrought many Miracles, to prove the Truth of his Doctrine and his Divine
Authority by, that he was the Messiah, the Son of God, and Savior of Mankind;
he was a Prophetical Priest, by which Office he was obliged to teach us the
whole mind of God in all things necessary to Faith and Salvation, and to offer
up himself as a propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of the World. Nothing (we
should quickly experiment) would be more Vain and Foolish, than attempts of an
Imitation in some things: And nothing more Wicked, than to think and believe we
may and ought to follow his example in others. To dye to Sin, and Crucify the
Flesh with its Affections and Lusts, is a good way (as the Scripture Teaches
and Warrants) of Imitating our Lords Death in a Spiritual Sense. So, to Die
rather than deny the Faith and Dishonor our Savior, is great and
Praiseworthy; but to Die for Sin, either our own or other Men's, to propose a
Meritorious Death to our Selves, and by way of expiation, is a Sin of so deep a
Stain, that the Blood of Christ will not Wash out: For this in effect is
Trampling upon and Vilifying of the Precious Blood of our Savior, and to
detract from the Virtue and Merits of his Sacrifice, and thereby render it weak
and insufficient to save us. Blindly therefore to follow the Example of Christ,
is a certain way to run into Error and Mischief. We must then of necessity, if
we would follow him safely, seek out for a plain Rule in the Word of God, or
guide our Selves by the Dictates of Reason and Prudence; and either way is a
sufficent Demonstration that a bare Example is not to be trusted to. Those who
urge the example of Christ for Sitting, were somewhat ware of this, namely,
that his example, and those of his Apostles, are not to be Imitated by us in
all things; and therefore they lay down this Gillesp. against Cer. p. 339.
for their Maxim and Guide:

We are bound to Imitate Christ, and the commendable example of his Apostles,
in all things wherein it is not evident they had special reasons moving them
thereunto, which do not concern us. But I would willingly be informed how we
shall be ever able to know when they acted upon special reasons, and what they
were, that we may know our Duty, if a bare Example without any Rule obliges us:
And if we guide our selves by Scripture or Reason in this matter, then they are
the measures of the Example. Besides, if we are not to Imitate them in such
things which they were moved to do upon special reasons which did not concern
us, then we are obliged to Imitate their examples in such things as they did
upon general and common reasons which concern us as well as them, or we are not
obliged at all by any Example; and if so, then those reasons are our Rule, to
which we are to reduce their Examples. Without we find some general or common
Reason, we have no Warrant (according to their own Principle) to follow their
Examples; and when such Reasons do appear, then it is not the example alone that
obliges us, but Reason that approves the Example. To bring their own Rule to
the case in Hand: How do they know but our Lord was moved to Sit at the
Sacrament by Special reasons drawn from that Time and Place, from the Feast of
the Passover to which that Gesture was peculiar? How do they know but that our
Lord might have used another Gesture, if the Sacrament had been Instituted
apart from the Passover?

The necessity of the time, made the Jews Eat the Passover after one fashion in
Egypt, which afterward ceasing, gave occasion to alter it in Canaan; and how do
we know but that our Lord complied with the present necessity, and that his
Example (if he did Sit) was only temporary, and not designed for a Standing
Law perpetually obliging to a like practice? If Christ acted upon special
reasons, then we are not obliged, by their own Rule; and if he did not, let
them produce the reasons if they can, which make this Example of Christ of
general and perpetual use, and to oblige all Christians to follow it. When ever
they do this, I am sure they will expose their own Principle which they have
built so much upon, to the Scorn and Contempt of the World; which is this: That
the bare example of Christ and good Gillesp. 338. disp. against Ceremo.
Men in Scripture, are a complete Rule and Sufficient Warrant for our Actions,
in such things as we have no Precept or Prohibition for in the Word of God:
That a Christians Duty in a great measure flows purely from Examples Recorded
in the Word of God, and not from the express Laws of God, which he has
revealed to us.

4. It Is absurd to talk of Christ's Example apart from all Law and Rule, and to
make that alone a Principle of Duty distinct from the precepts of the Gospel;
because Christ himself, all the while the World enjoyed the benefit of his
example, governed his actions by a Law. For if we consider him as a Man, like
unto us in all things (Sin only excepted) he was Born under the obligation of
the Moral and Natural Law; as a Jew, under the Mosaic Law; as the Messiah,
sent of God into the World to compass the great Work of our Redemption which he
had freely undertaken, he still acted by Divine appointment, and was under the
Gospel-Law. He came to fulfill all Righteousness, and to teach us the whole Mind
and Will of God, and Exemplify to us what he taught and delivered. That which
made that bitter and deadly Cup which ended his Days relish with him, was this
consideration, that it was a Cup given him by John 18. 11.
his Father, and the Drinking it was agreeable to his will; and it was the
comfort and support of his Soul a little before his Death, that he had finished
the Work that his Father had given him. He frequently professed Joh. 17. 4. v.
Mat. 11. 27. Luke 2. 49. Joh. 4. 34. Joh. 5. 30. 8 c. 28, 29. Joh. 10. 25. Joh.
14. 24, 31. Joh. 15. 10, 15.
in his lifetime that he did as his Father gave him Commandment, and that it
was his great business and delight to do the will of his Father; and many such
expressions he used, which may be consulted at leisure. If therefore we only
look to his Example, without considering the various Capacities and Relations
he bare, both toward God and toward us, and the several Laws by which he
stood Bound, which were the measures of his Actions, we shall miserably mistake
our way, and bewilder our selves; we shall Act like Fools, when we do such
things as he did pursuant to infinite Wisdom. Thus (to give but one instance)
if we should Subject our selves to the Law of Moses as he did (for he fulfilled
the Ceremonial Law, which he came to abolish) we should thereby frustrate the
great Design of the Gospel, and of our Saviors coming into the World: And yet
even this we are obliged to do, if his Example alone, be a sufficient Warrant
for our Actions. I have staid the longer upon this Head, because so ill a use
has been made of Scripture-Examples, and to show how far forth we may safely
steer by them, I scarce know any one Doctrine so teeming and big with Error, so
Fatal to the Souls of private Persons, and the Peace of Public Societies both
Civil and Ecclesiastical, as that which teaches us to Learn and Derive our Duty
from, and to Judge of the Goodness and Badness of our Actions by the Examples
of Christ, and good Men, over and above what we are obliged to do by the
Precepts and Laws of the Gospel.

3. They who urge the Example of Christ against Kneeling at the Sacrament, as
our Rule to which we ought to Conform, do not follow it themselves. Because the
posture he Instituted the Sacrament in, which they say was a Passover-Gesture,
was (if so) very different from that which they so earnestly plead for and use
at this day. For that was a Discumbing or Leaning Gesture on the left side,
much after the manner that we lie upon Couches, with the upper part of the body
almost erect. It is agreed by all Learned Men, that this was the Ancient Custom
of the Jews in our Saviors time, and is so to this day at the Passover, by
which Gesture they distinguish this Festival Night from all others. Now if the
same Gesture were used by Christ at the Sacrament as was at the Passover, and
his example makes it necessary and obligatory to all Christians, for what
Reasons and by what Authority do our Dissenting Brethren change it into Sitting
upright, according to our Civil way and manner of Feasting? When they tell us
this, it will be very easy to justify Kneeling by the same Authority which they
shall allege for Sitting; and our changing the Gesture will be as warrantable
as theirs. Unless they will say, that they alone have the Power and Privilege
to recede from the Example of Christ when and how far they please, but our
Church has not, nor any other upon the face of the Earth. To say Sitting, as
they do, comes nearer to the Gesture used by our Lord at the Passover, and
consequently (as is supposed) at the Sacrament, then the Kneeling Gesture,
according to the Custom of our Church, will do them no service: For there is no
Room for this Question, Who comes nearest to the Example, they or we? when
they ought not at all to vary, if they keep to their own Rule. The Example of
Christ, as it is urged by them against Kneeling, equally Concludes against all
other Gestures besides what he himself used: And then the supposed Gesture
which he observed binds to Lying along. For where we have nothing to go by but
his Pattern, we must cut exactly by it, or else we take a liberty to do that of
our own heads for which we have no allowance: That is, we leave the Pattern
which we were obliged only to follow, and act at random upon our own heads;
and then the Pattern cannot be alleged for our Justification. Though our
Church therefore does not strictly follow the Example of Christ (as is
objected) by requiring all her Communicants to Kneel, yet they have no reason
to complain and to scruple Communicating with us, who do not follow it
themselves, but receive the Sacrament in their separate Congregations in a
Gesture different from what our Lord used at the first Institution of it. The
Presbyterians (if one may Argue from their Practices to their Principles) lay
very little stress on this Argument taken from the Example of Christ. For
though they generally choose to Sit, yet they do not Condemn Standing as
Sinful, or Unlawful in its self; and several are willing to Receive it in that
posture, in our Churches: which surely is every whit as wide from the Pattern
our Lord is supposed to have set us, (whether he Lay along or Sat upright) as
that which is Enjoined and Practiced by the Church of England. There is too a
Confessed variation allowed of and Practiced by the generality of Dissenters,
both Presbyterians and Independents, from the Institution and Practice of
Christ and his Apostles, in the other Sacrament of Baptism. For they have
changed Immersion or Dipping, into aspersion, or Sprinkling and Pouring Water
on the Face. Baptism Mat. 3. 16. Mat. 28. 19.
by Immersion or Dipping, is suitable to the Institution of our Lord, and the
Practice of his Apostles, and was by them ordained and used to represent our
Burial with Christ, a Death unto Sin, and a New Birth Romans 6. 4. 6. 11. Col. 2.
12.
unto Righteousness, as St. Paul explains that Rite. Now it is very strange that
Kneeling at the Lord's Supper (though a different Gesture from that which was
used at the first Institution) should become a Stumbling Block in the way of
Weak and Tender Consciences, that it is more unpassable than the Alps; and yet
they can with Ease and Cheerfulness pass by as great or a greater change in the
Sacrament of Baptism, and Christen as we do, without the least murmur or
complaint. Sitting, Kneeling, or Standing, were none of them Instituted or used
to signify and represent any thing Essential to the Lord's Supper, as Dipping
all over was; why cannot Kneeling then be without any wrong to the Conscience,
as Safely and Innocently used as Sprinkling? How comes a Gnat (to use our
Saviors Proverb) to be harder to swallow than a Camel? Or why should not the
Peace and Unity of the Church, and Charity to the Public, prevail with them to
Kneel at the Lord's Supper, as much (or rather more) as Mercy and Tenderness to
the Infants Body, to Sprinkle or pour Water on the Face, contrary to the first
Institution?

4. They who Kneel at the Sacrament in compliance with the Customs and
Constitutions of the Church whereof they are Members, do manifestly follow the
Example of Christ.

For our Savior complied with that Passover-Gesture which was at that time
commonly and generally observed by the Jews, but cannot be pretended to be
Altar. Dam. 745. 747.
the same that was used at the first Institution of that Feast in Egypt. For
thus the Command runs, Exodus 12. 11. And thus shall ye Eat it; with your Loins
Girded, your Shoes on your Feet, and your Staff in your Hand: And you shall Eat
it in haste; it is the Lord's Passover. This, say the Hebrew Doctors, was but a
temporary Law, suited to the necessity of that time, and served for that Night
only, and did not oblige the following Generations in the Land of Canaan. For
thus they comment upon it: Four things were contained in this Law, which did
not oblige but for that night at the Vid. Mr. Ainsworth Exodus 12. 6. 11.
Passover in Egypt. 1. Eating of the Lamb in their Houses dispersed in Egypt.
2. Taking up of the Lamb from the tenth Day. 3. Striking the Blood on their
Door-Posts. 4. Eating in Haste. Here the Gesture in all probability was
Standing, though it be not expressly mentioned: Howsoever, it was different from
that used by the Jews in our Saviors time, which was a Gesture denoting Ease
and Rest, and their deliverance from Egyptian Bondage. And our Lord's
Compliance with this Custom may teach us thus much, That we should not be
scrupulous about Gestures, but conform to the Innocent and prevailing Customs
of the Church wheresoever we live. To this Practice St. Paul's Rule well suits;
Not Phil. 4. 8.
only, Whatsoever things are True, and Just, and Lovely, and Pure, and Honest,
but, whatsoever things are of good report, (i. e. well spoken of, or laudable:)
Not (...).
only, If there be any virtue, but if there be any praise, (...).
(if any thing be much approved of in Common esteem, or is made commendable by
Custom) we are to think (...).
(or make account of these things,) and conform our practice to them. And if
Christians in the several places of their abode did walk according to this
Rule, they would greatly promote the Peace and Welfare of the Church of Christ,
and in so doing procure quiet and Peace to themselves, with unspeakable Comfort
and Satisfaction. Whosoever would be esteemed and rewarded as a Peacemaker, and
avoid the ill reputation and Mat. 5. 9.
guilt of a Turbulent Person, ought among other things carefully to observe
this, viz. to Submit to, and Comply with the Innocent Customs of the Church
whereof he is a Member. For thus the same Divine Writer (after he had Argued
against Women's being Uncovered in the public Assemblies) concludes all after
this manner: 1 Cor. 11. 6
If any Man seem to be Contentious, we have no such Customs, nor the Churches
of God. Pray by the way let this be observed from this place, That we may
Lawfully do some things in the Worship and Service of God, for which we have no
Command or Example in Scripture, or else St. Paul's Argument from Custom is of
no force.

To sum up all upon this second Query: Seeing that we can never be certain of
the particular Gesture used by Christ at the Institution of the Holy Sacrament:
Seeing his bare Example (supposing he did Sit) does not oblige us in Conscience
to Imitate it: Seeing they who urge his Example do not follow it themselves,
even in that particular they urge it for: Seeing Conformity to the Gesture
prescribed by Law, is a plain Conformity to the Example and Practice of Christ,
considered as to the Equity, Reason, and Spiritual Meaning and Instruction of
it. I think no Man can reasonably object against Kneeling, and scruple in
Conscience a Conformity to it, as being repugnant to the Example of our Lord.

Query III. Whether Kneeling be not altogether Unsuitable and Repugnant to the
Nature of the Lord's Supper, as being no Table Gesture?
BEfore I proceed to the Case it self, it will be requisite to premise
something which may explain the true sense of it; and Discover upon what
Grounds and Reasons our Dissenting Brethren build their scruples against
Kneeling, as being no Table Gesture. By a Table Gesture we are to understand
thus much; That at the Lord's Supper we ought in their Judgment to use the same
Gesture as we do at our ordinary Meals and Tables, at our Civil Feasts and
Entertainments: And because diverse Gestures are used at Meals, according to the
different Modes and Customs of several Nations, therefore we are obliged to use
that at the Sacrament, which the Custom of our Country has prescribed at our
Ordinary and Civil Meals. Thus (says the Author of Altar Damascenum, a Stout
and Learned Champion for a Table Gesture, Sitting cross-legged Altar. Dam. p.
762.
as the Turks do at their Meals, would be amongst them (if they were Converted)
a Comely fashion of Receiving the Lord's Supper. The Sacrament is a Supper, a
Feast, Disput. against Kneeling, p. 2. p. 56. arg. 4.
a Banquet, and therefore requires a Supper, a Feast, a Banquet-Gesture. And
such a Gesture must be used as Stands with the Custom of the Country. In no
Nation was it ever held Comely to Kneel at their Banquets, or Abridgment p. 61.
reply to Bp. Morton 3 Innoc. Cer. p. 37. set forth in K. James's Reign.
to Receive their food Kneeling. So that according to the sense of their own
Writers, and great Patrons of Sitting, this is the reason why they question the
Lawfulness of Kneeling: That the Gesture at the Lord's Table ought to be the
same with that which we use and observe at our Ordinary Tables, according to
the Custom and Fashion of our Native Country wherein we live.

And then the full Import and meaning of the Query is this: Whether the nature
of the Sacrament, considered as a Feast, does not require and oblige us to Sit
and not Kneel, because Sitting and not Kneeling is the Ordinary Table Gesture,
according to the Mode and Fashion of England.

Here the Reader may observe, that this Argument for Sitting, drawn from the
nature of this Holy Feast, quite overthrows the two former Arguments drawn from
the express Command and Example of our Savior, and renders them useless and
unserviceable to their cause.

1. For they don't say we are obliged to use the same Gesture with our Lord,
but only a Table Gesture, though never so different from that which he used,
according to the Custom of our Country where we live. Various Gestures,
according to the Variety of Fashions and Usages of several Nations at their
Common Feasts, may be all Comely and Suitable to the Nature of this Holy Feast.
According to this Argument, therefore, we are not obliged to Sit, because
Christ did at the Sacrament; and then his bare Example is no Rule to us in this
matter. His Example was Governed and Guided by the Nature of the Sacrament, and
the Custom of the Jews.

Our Lord Instituted the Sacrament before the Paschal Feast was over, and he
continued in the same posture which he used at the Passover, say they, and that
was Sitting. Suppose this, what follows? Why therefore we are bound to Sit too,
after his Example. No, by no means, say I, unless it be the Custom of our
Country to Sit at our Meals, and Sitting be our Common Table Gesture: Which is
the strength of this Argument drawn from the Nature of the thing, if we may
believe what they say themselves.

2. Again, if the Nature of the Sacrament require a Table Gesture, and we are
obliged to use that in particular which stands with the Custom of our
Country, and the Gestures may be different according as their Customs differ,
then God has no where Commanded the use of any particular Gesture, nor obliged
all Christians in all places to observe one and the same.

3. And then Thirdly, we may Lawfully observe some things in the Worship of
God, for which we have no Command or Example in the Holy Scriptures, if this
Argument of the Table Gesture be good. And this principle, viz. that we ought
not to do any thing in the Worship of God, but what we have some Command or
Example for in Scripture, is the great battering Engine which has been
constantly employed against the Ceremonies enjoined by our Church; and it is a
Principle wherein the Mystery of Puritanisme does Preface to his Sermon. last
Edit. 1681.
consist, as Bishop Sanderson Notes. Therefore it behooves our Brethren not to
be fond of this Table Gesture, as they love the Life of their Cause. I am sure
no greater Argument can be afforded of a routed baffled Cause in the matter of
Sitting at the Sacrament, than to see the Patrons of it running up and down in
Confusion, and flying for Refuge sometime to the Command of Christ, then to his
Example; when driven out there, then to the Nature of the thing and Civil
Customs, and about again to the Example. For thus the Authors of the
forementioned Tracts do. Thus much being premised, I proceed to Consider the
Question proposed; for the Resolution whereof, I shall

1. Enquire into the Nature of the Holy Sacrament, that so we may truly
understand what Gesture is agreeable or repugnant to it.

2. Show that the Nature of the Lord's Supper does not absolutely require and
necessarily oblige us to observe a Common Table Gesture, in order to our worthy
Receiving.

3. That Kneeling is very Comely, and agreeable to the Nature of the Lord's
Supper, though no Table Gesture.

4. That the Primitive Church and Ancient Fathers had no such notion of the
necessity of a Table Gesture as is maintained and urged by Dissenters.

1. As to the Nature of the Sacrament, I shall endeavor to discover it under
these following Heads.

First, the Sacrament in the Holy Scripture is called the Lord's Table, and the
Lord's Supper, and and Banquet, by the Ancient Greek Fathers, because of that
Provision and Entertainment which our Lord has made for all worthy Receivers.
It is styled a Supper and a Feast, either because it was Instituted by Christ
at Supper-time, at night; or because it represents a Supper and a Feast: And so
it is not of the same Nature with a Civil and Ordinary Supper and Feast, though
it bear the same name. There is some resemblance between this Holy Feast and
Civil Feasts; and the showing wherein it lies, will in part explain its Nature.
There are three things Essential and Necessary to a Feast, and included in the
notion of it: Plenty, good Company, and Mirth. And upon the account of these,
the Sacrament is (considered in its own Nature) properly a Banquet, a Feast;
but then it is a Heavenly and Spiritual one, consisting of Spiritual Graces and
benefits, Communion with Christ and with all true believers, signified by, and
tendered under the outward Elements of Bread and Wine: and even in these three
particulars which are Essential to it, considered as a Feast, and are necessary
ingredients into all Feasts whatsoever, it very much differs from Civil and
Ordinary Feasts. For though there be Plenty, yet it does not consist of Variety
of Dishes, to gratify our Palats, or satisfy our Hunger, as other Feasts do,
and particularly the Passover did, where the Body was filled and Feasted as
well as the mind. The provision wherewith our Lord has Furnished out his
Table, is not of an Earthly and perishing, but of an Heavenly and Immortal
Nature, even the Body and Blood of Christ, which we Spiritually Feast upon.

Alas, if we only fix our Eyes and Thoughts upon what is placed on the Table,
and those small portions of Bread and Wine allotted us to Eat and Drink,
without lifting up our Hearts (as So St. Cypr. St. Chrysostom. and St. Aug.
expound this Exhort. of the Minister at the Communion. Cyp. de orat. Dom.
Chrysostom. Hom. de Encaeniis, Aug. de ver. Relig. c. 3.
our Church exhorts us to do, by the Minister, in her Communion-Office) to
those Heavenly and Invisible good things, couched under, and signified by the
outward Elements of Bread and Wine, what is there in all that we see that
deserves the name of a Feast, or can by the help of any figure (but an Irony)
be called by that name? Did ever any Man esteem that a Feast, where there was
not Meat enough to fill his Mouth, nor Drink enough to quench his thirst? It is
upon the account therefore of those Invisible and Spiritual good things,
wherewith the Souls, not the Bodies of worthy Communicants are Strengthened and
Refreshed (of which the Bread and Wine are but the Types and Shadows) that the
Sacrament is, and may truly be called a Feast or Banquet. And for this reason
St. Chrysostom. in Ps. 90. Greg. Naz. orat. 40. Athanasius, St. Cyril. Hierosol.
Catech. and others.
the Greek Fathers called it a Spiritual Feast, and the Table a Mystical Table;
and the Cup, the Cup of Mysteries: and the Sacrament, take it all together, was
by them Styled the Mystical Supper, the Mystery, and Mysteries, as Presenting
one thing to the Eye, and another to the Mind.

2. As Plenty is one necessary ingredient into the Nature of a Feast, so also
is Choice and Select Company. Feasts are made in expectation of Friends and
Acquaintance. A Man may Dine alone, but in Proper and Ordinary Speech, no Man
is said to Feast alone. Now though the Sacrament does resemble our Common
Feasts in this Particular (and therefore has obtained the name of Communion,
and the Guests Communicants, which Phrases do naturally import Number or
Society:) yet if we consider what the persons are that constitute this Society,
and with whom Communion is held, the Nature of this Spiritual Feast will
further appear.

And truly our Communion is with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the three
Divine Persons of the Holy Trinity; though principally our Lord Jesus, the
Master of this Feast, in and through whom we all have Ephesians. 2. 18.
access by one Spirit to the Father, as St. Paul speaks. This high and
inestimable privilege and Honor of being admitted into the Presence of God,
and holding a friendly Correspondence and Converse with him at his Table, is
founded on the Blood of Christ, which we thankfully Commemorate at this
Solemnity, by which we who were afar off are made nigh, as the same Ephesians. 2. 13.
Divine Writer has it. Moreoever, by Eating and Drinking at the Lord's Table,
we are United to, and hold Communion with all Faithful Christians and worthy
Communicants, the Members of his Mystical Body the Church, whom he has
redeemed and cleansed by his most precious Blood. And that which qualifies a
Man for such Communion, does not Consist in External Garbs or Ornaments of the
Body, but in Holy and Virtuous Dispositions of Soul, in a Penitent, Humble,
Charitable, Thankful, and Obedient Heart.

3. Another thing necessary to a Feast is Mirth and Joy, (which implies also
good discourse) and in this too the Sacrament resembles our Common Feasts. But
then the Joy is of a Spiritual Nature, and flows from different Causes.

Not from what we Taste and See, not from our Appetites and Phansies pleased and
tickled with the richness and Variety of Dishes which adorn the Table, nor from
our Blood and Spirits raised and fermented by generous Wines; but from Divine
and Heavenly Considerations. From the Boundless and Unaccountable Love of God
in sending his only Begotten and Beloved Son into the World, to lay down his
Life and shed his Blood as a propitiation for our Sins; from the wonderful
Condescension of our Dear Lord and Master, in undertaking this hard Task, in
appearing Clothed with our Flesh in the form of a Servant, and at last Humbling
himself to the Death of the Cross for our Sakes; from the Victory he has
gained for us over Death and Hell, and all the Spirits of Darkness; from the
miraculous Redemption he has wrought, and the Right and Title to Eternal Life,
which he has purchased for us Sinful Dust and Ashes, by his own most Precious
Blood. This is the secret Language and Discourse of every Devout Christian at
this Holy Feast, and with these kind of Meditations he refreshes and delights
himself. So that from the whole we may conclude, that the Lord's Supper is in
its own Nature truly and properly a Feast, though vastly different from Common
and Ordinary Feasts throughout, even in those things wherein it seems to be
like them. As to the several Names and Phrases by which the Nature of it is
described, they are figurative, and borrowed from Civil Entertainments: but
although it has received the same names, and is represented by Phrases that
properly suit to Ordinary Feasts, yet the Lord's Supper differs in its Nature
from Civil Banquets, as much as Heaven and Earth, Body and Spirit, differ in
theirs. As to the Bread and Wine which we see and taste, they are only Signs and
Types of the true Spiritual Feast, and serve to raise our minds to, and whet
the Appetites of our Souls after Celestial and Heavenly Enjoyments.

Thus much may suffice to inform us what the Nature of the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper is, considered barely as a Feast.

2. For a further Discovery of its Nature, we are to be minded that it is a
Feast upon a Sacrifice for Sin, wherein we are particularly to Commemorate the
1 Cor. 11. 26.
Death of Christ by way of expiation for the Sins of the World.

3. It was Instituted in Honor of our Lord, our great Benefactor and Redeemer;
where we meet to preserve an Eternal memory of his Wondrous Works, to bless and
praise him, and speak good of his Name. And thus partaking of the Lord's Supper
is a proper Act of Christian Worship performed to our Savior. It Is the Worship
of God manifested in our Flesh, and of our Crucified Lord, who submitted
himself to a Vile and Tormenting Death for the sake of us Vile and Miserable
Sinners.

4. The Lord's Supper is a Mysterious Rite of Religious Worship, which as it
respects God the Father, has the Virtue and Efficacy of a Thanksgiving and a
Prayer, as the Sacrifices under the Law had. For our desires and affections may
be signified by Actions as well as Words, and by Ceremonies as well as Speech:
And with respect to this Notion and End of the Lord's Supper, it was Anciently
Styled the Liturgy and the Eucharist; which last name, as it was given to it in
the most Ignat. Ep. ad Ephesians. Justin. Mar. in Dial. eum Tryph.
early Ages of the Church, so it still retains the same among all the Christian
Churches to this day.

5. The Lord's Supper was Instituted to be a Foederal or Covenanting Rite
between God and all worthy Communicants: Where, by permitting us to Eat and
Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 24.
Drink at his Table, he signifies that we are in a State of Peace and
Friendship, and in a Covenant Relation with him; and we by coming to his Table,
and Eating and Drinking in his presence, do own him to be our God and Savior,
and in effect plight our troth to him, and Swear Fidelity and Allegiance to
him: we take the Sacrament upon it (as we ordinarily say) that we will not
henceforth live unto our selves, but to him alone that Dyed for us, and gave
himself for us an Offering and a Sacrifice to God, for a Sweet Smelling Savor.

6. The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was Instituted for this further end,
viz. to be a means to Convey and Apply to us the Merits of that Sacrifice which
Christ offered for Sinners on the Cross; and as a Pledge to assure us thereof.

7. It was instituted to be a Sacred Bond of Unity and Concord among all
Christians, to engage and dispose us to Love one another, as our Lord Loved us,
who thought not his Life too dear, nor his Blood too much to part with, for our
Sakes.

This is a short, and, so far as it serves my present design, a full account of
the Nature of the Lord's Supper. If the Reader desire to see these things
(which I have but touched upon) more largely proved and explained, let him for
his satisfaction consult those two excellent Discourses (among many others)
that pass under these names, viz. 1. The Christian Sacrifice. 2. Discourse of
Religious Set forth by 1. Dr. Patri^ 2. Dr. Sherlock.
Assemblies.

Howsoever, by what has been said it appears, that the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper is of a complicated Nature, and Instituted for various ends; that it is
vastly different both in its nature and ends from Civil and Ordinary Feasts:
And therefore I conclude that we are not at this Religious Feast to guide our
Selves by the Rules of Common Table-Fellowship, but by more Religious and
Spiritual Considerations. Which leads me to the second thing proposed for the
Resolution of the present Case.

2. That the Nature of the Lord's Supper does not absolutely require and
necessarily oblige us to observe a Table Gesture, in order to a right and
worthy Receiving of it. The Reasons that I shall offer for the Proof of this,
are these:

1. If the Nature of the Sacrament considered as a Feast necessarily requires a
Table Gesture, then the Nature of the Sacrament considered as a Feast equally
concludes for all other Formalities which are either Essential to all Civil
Feasts whatsoever, or to all Feasts as they obtain among us. For if Sitting be
necessary, purely because the Nature of a Feast requires it, then all other
Circumstances which the Nature of a Feast requires, will be equally necessary
too. But our Dissenting Brethren will by no means allow of this, nor think
themselves obliged to observe all other formalities, though equally suitable and
agreeable to the Nature of a Feast as Sitting is: Though for what good reason,
I am perfectly in the dark.

For 1. As they omit many things at the Sacrament that are as agreeable to the
Nature of a Feast as the Table Gesture is; So they observe several Modes and
Circumstances which are not agreeable to the nature of a Feast, as the Custom
of our Country stands. For instance, at our Common and Ordinary Feasts it is
very suitable and agreeable to Laugh, to Talk, and Discourse together; to
Congratulate one another welfare, to enquire of the State of absent Friends
and Acquaintance, to Sit with the Head Covered, to Eat plentifully and Drink
Frequently, to Carve and Drink to one another. It is further necessary and
convenient, that at such Feasts the Guests should be well attended with
Servants and Waiters, who are not allowed to Sit down at the Table with those
who are Invited. It Is agreeable that the Guests should, if they please, help
themselves and their Friends where they like. And yet these (and many other
things of this Nature) though very suitable to, and commonly practiced at our
Ordinary Feasts, are not allowed of, nor practiced by, nor urged as necessary
to be observed at the Sacrament by our Dissenting Brethren. But why they should
plead for and urge the necessity of a Common Table Gesture as being agreeable
to the Nature of a Feast or a Banquet, and at the same time think there lies no
necessity at all upon them to observe other Formalities equally agreeable to
the Nature of Civil Feasts, and warranted by custom as much as Sitting, is the
great knot of the Question, and that which puzzles me, I confess, to unty.

2. They observe several Modes and Circumstances at the Sacrament, which are
not agreeable to the Nature of a Feast or Supper, nor to the customary way of
Feasting among us. For example: The Sacrament (say they) is a Feast, a Supper,
and requires a Feast, a Supper-Gesture; and then too (say I) it requires a
Supper-time. It is called in Scripture the Lord's Supper, and it was Instituted
the same night in which he was betrayed; and it is clear that our Lord
Administered it at Even, and that late, at the close of the Paschal Feast. Now
the Nature of a Supper, according to Common use and acception, requires the
Evening or Night, as the proper and peculiar season for it; and yet our
Dissenting Brethren make no scruple of Communicating at Noon.

It Is not agreeable to the Nature of a Feast, that one of the Guests, and the
Principal one too, should fill out the Wine, and break the Bread, and
distribute it to the rest of the Society; but this the Dissenters generally
allow of and practice at the Holy Communion. It Is not agreeable to the Nature
of a Feast, to Sit from the Table, dispersed up and down the Room. In all
public Feasts there are several Tables provided, when one is not big enough to
receive the Guests; and yet the Dissenters generally receive in their Pews,
scattered up and down the Church; and think one Table is sufficient, though not
capable of receiving the twentieth part of the Communicants, in some large
Parishes and numerous Assemblies: And where they are few in number, that they
may come up to and Sit at the Table, they generally are against it (especially
the Presbyterians) and think they are not obliged to observe that formality,
though constantly practiced at Common and Civil Entertainments. It Is by no
means agreeable to the nature of a Feast to be Sorrowful. To Mourn and Grieve
at a Feast, is as Indecent and Unsuitable, as to Laugh at a Funeral. But sure
our Dissenting Brethren will not say, that to come to the Sacrament with a
Penitent and a broken Spirit, to come with a hearty Sorrow for all our Sins,
which caused much Pain and Torment to our Dearest and Greatest Friend, our
ever-Blessed Redeemer: To reflect upon the Agonies of his Soul in the Garden,
the Bitterness of his deadly Cup, the Torture he endured on the Cross, with a
deep Sympathy and Trouble for the occasion, they will not surely, I say, affirm
that such a disposition of Heart and Mind is improper and unsuitable to the
Nature of this Holy Feast which we Solemnize in Commemoration of his Death for
our sakes. I make no doubt but all Pious Dissenters bring along with them to
the Sacrament such a temper; but this they ought not to do, if their Rule hold
good, viz. That at this Feast we ought to be guided by the Rules of Common
Table-Fellowship.

2. The Nature of the Lord's Supper does not necessarily require a Common
Table Gesture, because it is not of the same Nature with Common and Ordinary
Feasts. It is very ill Logic, as well as ill Divinity to argue from Natural
and Civil things to Spiritual; to conclude that because they agree in their
names, they are of the same Nature, For example: When any Man, who has led a
loose, sensual, wicked Life, is awakened and excited by the Grace of God to
consider and take up, to mind Heavenly things, and to breath after God, and
Christ, and Eternity; to alter his mind and his manners, and lead quite another
Life from what he did before, this Person is in Scripture Phrase said to be
Regenerate and Born again. But if we would go about to judge of the true Nature
of Regeneration and the new Birth purely by the Correspondency it holds with
the Natural Birth, and argue from the Natural to the Spiritual, we should
Entertain very gross and silly Conceptions of Regeneration, and greatly mistake
the Nature of it. How ridiculous would it be to prescribe the same Rules to be
observed by a New Convert, or a Newborn Babe in a Spiritual Sense, in Order to
his Spiritual nourishment and growth in Grace, as are prescribed and practiced
toward Infants and Newborn Babes in a Natural Sense for the maintenance and
preservation of their Natural Life, and Strength; as, that they should be
Swathed, and enter into a Milk-Dyet! And yet this is every way as reasonable,
as to prescribe Sitting as necessary to the worthy Receiving of the Sacrament,
which is a Spiritual Feast, because it is agreeable to the Nature of Civil
Feasts: Or (which amounts to the same thing) because it is called a Feast,
therefore it is of the same Nature with Ordinary and Common Feasts; and
Consequently, such a Gesture and Behavior as is necessary and requisite to
these, is also requisite and necessary to the Lord's Supper.

3. The Nature of the Lord's Supper, considered as a Feast, does not
necessarily require and oblige us to use a Common Tale-Gesture, in order to
right and worthy Receiving, because, in the Judgment and Practice of numerous
Dissenters, it may be worthily Received Standing. Thus the Presbyterians (and
all their Writers who have engaged against Kneeling) do not condemn Standing as
Sinful and Unlawful, nor esteem such as use it unworthy Receivers on that
account; and yet Standing is no Common Table Gesture.

If any should yet urge the necessity of Sitting as the

I offer this to be considered as a good Answer, That Exodus 12. 14.
Instituted it, and yet he Commanded the Children of Israel to Celebrate it in
Egypt after this manner; with Ver. 11.
their Loins Girt, their Shoes on their Feet, and their Staff in their Hands:
All Signs of have indeed, but no Feast or Table-Gestures either among the Jews
or the Egyptians. To say that God enjoined Gestures unsuitable to the Nature of
that Ordinance, is to call in Question the Wisdom, and the Knowledge, and the
Truth of God, as not Acting upon a right understanding of, and in Conformity to
the true Nature of things: it is all one as to suppose, that God, after he had
Created a reasonable Creature, would enjoin him to do something that was
disagreeable to his Nature and Reason. On the other hand, to say that the Feast
of the Passover did in its Nature admit of several Gestures, is to yield all
that I desire; for then the Sacrament, considered as a Feast, will admit of
several too, and Consequently does not oblige us to observe only a
Feast-Gesture for the due Celebration of it.

3. Kneeling is very Comely, and Agreeable to the Nature of the Lord's Supper,
though no Table Gesture. Which I hope will be made evident to every Honest and
Unbyassed Mind (which Impartially seeks after Truth) by these following
considerations:

1. Kneeling is allowed on all Hands to be a very fit and suitable Gesture for
Prayer and Praise, and very apt to express our Reverence, Humility, and
Gratitude by, and Consequently very fit to be used at the Holy Sacrament, and
agreeable to its Nature. This will appear, if we reflect upon what has been
delivered concerning the Nature and Ends of the Lord's Supper. For at the
Sacrament we express that by Actions (as I hinted before) which at other times
we do by Words; and the Lord's Supper is a Solemn Rite of Christian Worship,
which implies Prayer and Praise. It includes all the Parts of Prayer. By
partaking of the Signs of his Body broken, and Blood shed for our Sins, we do
Commemorate, Represent, and Show forth to God the Father, the Sacrifice which
his Dearly Beloved Son made upon the Cross; we Feast upon the memorials of the
great Sin-Offering: And in so doing, we make an open Confession and
Acknowledgment of our Guilt and Unworthiness to God, and we plead with him in
the Virtue of his Sons Blood which was shed for us, for the Pardon and
Remission of all our Sins. We further Humbly entreat him to be Propitious and
Favorable to us, and to bestow upon us all those benefits which our Lord
purchased with his most Precious Blood.

We Intercede with him too at the Communion for the whole Church, that all our
Fellow Christians and true Members of his Body may Receive Remission of their
Sins, and all other benefits of his Passion. And as Eating and Drinking at his
Table, is a Visible and Powerful Prayer in the sight of God; so it is a Visible
Act of Praise and Thanksgiving, whereby we let our Heavenly Father see that we
retain a deep and lively sense of his Unexpressible Love, in sending his only
begotten Son into the World to Dye for us that we might Live through him. And
that which enlivens our Faith, and emboldens our hopes of finding Favor and
Acceptance at his Hands at this time above others, is this, viz. Our Prayers
and Praises are not only put up in the Name of Christ, but presented, and as
it were Writ in his Blood, and offered to God over the great Propitiatory
Sacrifice. All this our Actions signify and speak, when we Eat the Consecrated
Bread, and Drink the Cup of Blessing at the Lord's Table. If therefore these
things be True (and I think no body who understands what he does when he
partakes of the Lord's Supper will gainsay it) then Kneeling must be judged as
fitting and convenient to be used at such a time, when we signify our desires
and affections by external Rites and Ceremonies of Gods appointment, as when we
do it by Words, that is, when we say our Prayers.

2. Our Dissenting Brethren (and all good Christians) will Grant, that our
Blessed Savior ought to be Worshipped and Adored by all worthy Communicants,
inwardly in their Hearts and Souls, when they Receive the Tokens and Pledges of
his tender and exceeding great Love in laying down his Life for the Sins of the
whole World. And if so, then whatsoever is very apt and meet to express the
inward esteem and veneration of our minds by, cannot be thought Unsuitable and
Repugnant to the Nature of the Lord's Supper: Because that is a Religious Feast
Instituted in Honor of our Lord, and is a Solemn Act of Christian Worship
performed to our Crucified Savior. Our meeting together at th^s Holy Feast in
Obedience to his Commands, to Commemorate his Death, and tell of all his
wondrous Works; perpetuate the fame of our great Benefactor (as much as in us
lies) throughout all Ages, is an External mark of the Honor and respect we
bear toward him in our minds, and is, properly speaking, that which we call
Public Worship. Since to Bow our Knees then, is allowed to be a proper mode of
public Worship, and an External Sign of Reverence; why should an adoring
posture be thought Unmeet and Unsuitable to the Sacrament, which in its nature
imports Worship and Adoration?

3. No good Christian, of what Party or Persuasion soever, will deny, but that
to lift our Hands and Eyes to Heaven, and to Employ our Tongues in Uttering the
Praises of our Blessed Redeemer, even in the Act of Receiving, is very
agreeable to the Nature of the Sacrament; why then should Kneeling be thought
Unsuitable, which is no more but only Glorifying God and our Blessed Savior
with another part of our Body? Why should the Gesture be scrupled at more than
the Voice, or the Bowing of my Knees be esteemed incongruous and unfitting, any
more than moving my Tongue, or raising my Hands and Eyes to Heaven? Especially
if we consider, that the high degree of Honor and Glory to which our Lord is
advanced in the Heavens by God the Father, as the reward of his Humble and
Submissive Obedience here on Earth, challenges from us all manner of Respect
and Reverence both of Soul and Body, He Humbled himself, and became Obedient
unto Death, even the Death of the Cross* Wherefore God has highly exalted him,
and given him a Name which is above every Name, that at the Name of Jesus Phil.
2. 8, 9, 10, 11.
every Knee should Bow, etc. and that every Tongue should Confess that Jesus
Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father.

4. The Holy Sacrament was Instituted in Remembrance of our Blessed Saviors
Death and Sufferings: And therefore I request all our Dissenting Brethren to
Consult one place of Scripture concerning our Saviors Bodily Gesture or
Deportment in the Heat and Extremity of his Passion, wherein he presented
himself before his Father in his Agony and Bloody Sweat in the Garden. Being in
an Agony, he offered up this Prayer to his Father: If thou be willing, remove
this Cup from Luke 22. 42, 44.
me: Nevertheless, not my Will, but thine be done. But after what manner, or in
what Gesture of Body did his perplexed Soul utter these earnest Supplications?
Why, Kneeling, or fixing his Knees upon the Earth. Now though (...). Ver. 41.
we may remember and meditate on our Saviors Sufferings in the Garden, when
his Soul was so exceeding Sorrowful, when he was reduced to such a Weak and low
Estate as to stand in need of Comfort and Support from an Angel; though, I say,
this may be done Sitting, Ver. 43.
yet sure no Sober and Considering Mind will say, that to Celebrate the Memory
of these Sufferings with bended Knees (as his were) on the Earth, is an
Improper and Unsuitable behavior to be used at the Sacrament, where our proper
work is to Commemorate the Death and Sufferings of our Savior, and
particularly these among the rest.

5. The Sacrament was Instituted to be a means of Receiving the benefits of his
Death and Passion, and a Pledge to assure us thereof. If we do but Consider
what invaluable Blessings we expect to receive by our worthy partaking of the
Consecrated Bread and Wine at the Table of our Lord, (such as the forgiveness
of all our Sins, the plentiful Communications of his Grace and Spirit, and a
Right and Title to Eternal Life) we cannot think Kneeling an Unmeet and
Unbecoming Gesture in the Act of Receiving the Outward Signs and Pledges of
this Inward and Invisible Grace. If a Graceful Hearty sense of Gods infinite
mercy through the Merits and Sufferings of his Son, and of the manifold rich
benefits which our Lord has purchased with his most Precious Blood; if a mind
deeply Humbled under the sense of our own Guilt, and Unworthiness to Receive
any mercy at all from the Hands of our Creator and Sovereign Lord, whom we have
by numberless and Heinous Crimes so highly provoked and incensed against us; If
such an inward temper and disposition of Soul becomes us at this Holy Feast,
(which I think no Man will deny) then surely the most Humble and reverential
Gesture of our Body will become us too. Why should not a Submissive Lowly
deportment of Body suit with this Solemnity, as well as a Humble Lowly Mind?
And this is that which our Church Declares See the Declaration at the end of
the Communion-Service, in the Book of Common Prayer.
to be the end and design of her Injunction, in requiring all her Communicants
to Kneel, viz. for a Signification of an Humble and Grateful acknowledgment of
the Benefits of Christ therein given to all worthy Receivers.

6. They who urge Sitting as necessary, and the only agreeable Gesture to the
Nature of the Lord's Supper, because it is the Common Table Gesture, must make
the Sacrament either the same with an Ordinary and Common Feast, or only like
it in some respects, and unlike it in others; as every like is not the same. To
make it the same, is directly to unhallow and profane the Ordinance; it is to
Eat and Drink unworthily, not discerning 1 Cor 11, 29.
the Lord's Body, as St. Paul charges the Corinthians. For it is clear from that
Discourse of the Apostle, that their not distinguishing between the Lord's
Supper, and a Common Meal or Supper, was their great fault; which he sharply
reproves them for, as that which rendered them unworthy Communicants. Which
will appear to any that will take the pains to examine Vid. 20, 21, 22. and
compare them with 33, 34.
the matter.

If the Lord's Supper be not the same with an Ordinary Feast, how comes it to
pass that the same Gesture must be necessarily used at both? If they differ in
their whole nature, then that which is agreeable to the nature of the one, must
be Repugnant to the nature of the other. If they agree in some respects only,
and differ in others, but not in their whole nature, then Kneeling may be as
proper and suitable in some respects, as Sitting is in others. For though the
Civil Custom of a Table Gesture be allowed to strike some stroke in a Spiritual
Ordinance, where there is Eating and Drinking; yet other respects in the Lord's
Supper have a stroke too, and that the greatest, if we duly weigh and consider
the ends of its Institution, which I have already described. And if upon such
Examination it appear, that Kneeling, or an adoring Gesture, holds fitting
Correspondence with the principal respects and ends of the Lord's Supper, then
the Banqueting Gesture, though Lawful and Suitable in some less respects, must
and ought in reason to give place; at least, it ought not to be Insisted on as
the only agreeable and necessary Gesture, without which we cannot worthily
Communicate.

Whatsoever Gesture answers the principal respects and ends of this Holy Feast,
best Suits to its Nature, and consequently ought in reason to be best esteemed
of, and sway more with us than any other, if we will wholly guide our selves by
the Nature of the thing. And that Kneeling or an adoring posture does best
answer the Nature and Ends of the Sacrament, I think is clear and undeniable,
if the account I have given of the Sacrament be good. I am sure, howsoever,
that there is no reason why Sitting should justle out Kneeling as Sinful, and
Unsuitable to the Nature of this Holy Ordinance. Let Mr. Cartwright, a Learned
Advocate Annot. in Luke 22. 14.
for Nonconformists, be heard in this matter, and determine it: A Man must not
(says he) refuse to Receive the Sacrament Kneeling, when he cannot have it
otherwise.

4. The Primitive Church and Ancient Fathers had no such notion of the
necessity of a Table Gesture, as is maintained and urged by Dissenters at
present; which will appear from those Names and Titles they gave to this Holy
Feast. And First, I observe from the Learned Mr. Mede, that for the space of
200 years after Christ, there is not the least mention made of the name Table
in any of their Writings. They call the place on which Can. Apost. 2. St.
Ignat. in 3 Epistles and Philad. Trallen. Ephesians. Justin Mart. Irenaeus.
the Consecrated Elements stood, the Altar; and the Eucharist, An Oblation and
a Sacrifice, because at this Solemnity they did Commemorate and Represent that
Sacrifice which Christ once offered on the Cross for the Sins of the World. Now
the Eucharist conceived under the Notion of a Sacrifice, and the place on which
it was offered of an Altar, does not necessarily require a Table Gesture; there
is not that strict Connection and Relation between an Altar or a Sacrifice, and
a Common Table Gesture, as is conceived to be between a Feast or Table, and a
Feast or Table Gesture.

2. The Primitive Christians and Ancient Fathers of the Church did not
entertain any such conceits about the necessity of a Common Table Gesture, as
our Dissenters do. As, that Kneeling or an adoring Gesture is against Dispute
against Kneeling, Arg. 1. p. 6. p. 26, 27, 28, 31, 37.
the Dignity of Guests, and Debarrs us the Privileges and Prerogatives of the
Lord's Table, such as Social admittance and Social Entertainment; that it is
against the purpose of Christ, whose intention was to Dignify us by Setting us
at his Table; and much more of this Nature, and to this effect. Now the
Primitive Church little dreamt of this Dignity and Privilege of Communicants,
of this purpose of Christ, and of this kind of Fellowship and Familiarity with
him; as the Phrases they use, and the August and Venerable Titles they give the
Holy Sacrament, even when they consider it as a Feast and Supper, and speak of
the Table on which it was Celebrated, plainly demonstrate. They call it, as St.
Paul does, the Lord's Supper, the Kingly, Royal, and most Divine Supper; which
Import Deference, Distance, and Respect, on our Parts; the Dreadful Sacrifice,
the Venerable and Unbloody Sacrifice, the Wonderful and Terrible Mysteries; the
Royal, Spiritual, Holy, Formidable, Tremendous Table. The Bread and Wine after
Consecration, are in their Language called the most Mysterious, most Holy Food
and Nutriment, the most Holy things; and the place where the Table stood, the
most Holy part of the Temple, in allusion to that of the Jewish Temple, to
which the Jews paid the highest Reverence. The Bread in particular they Styled
the Bread of God; the Cup, the Holy and Mysterious, the Royal and Dreadful Cup.

The Primitive Bishops and Holy Fathers advise the Communicants to Reverence
these Holy Mysteries, to come with Fear and Trembling, with Sorrow and Shame,
with silence and downcast Eyes, to keep their Joy within, and to approach the
Table with all the Signs and Expressions of Reverence and Humility imaginable.
How can these Speeches consist with that Social, Familiar carriage at the
Sacrament, which the Patrons of the Table Gesture contend for, as the
Privilege of Guests and the Prerogative of the Lord's Table? For a conclusion
of this whole matter, I desire our Nonconforming Brethren seriously to consider
two or three Questions which I shall propound to them, and endeavor to frame
an Honest and Impartial Answer, as in the Presence of God, who searches our
Hearts, and tries our Reins. They are not of a Captious Nature, started to
puzzle the Cause, or for the sake of Contention (God knows my Heart, I have no
such designs through this whole Discourse) but they are plain, and easy to be
resolved almost at first sight.

Qu. I. Whether of two or three Gestures which are all agreeable to the Nature
of the Sacrament, any one is not to be chosen and used by us, when we cannot use
another without breaking the Peace and Unity of that Church wherein we live?

Qu. II. Whether it can consist with Piety or Prudence, to Expose your Selves
and Families to Danger, and the lash of the Law, when nothing is Commanded but
what is consistent with the Law of God, and agreeable to the Nature of the
Sacrament, though not to your Phansies and desires?

Qu. III. Whether we are not, as Christians, obliged by the Law of God, and the
example of our Savior, to deny our Selves many things, that are otherwise
Lawful for us Romans 15. 2. 3, 8.
to do and use, and are highly pleasing and grateful to us, for the Good and
Edification of our Neighbor? If so, How much more, when the public good and
welfare of both Church and State depends upon such self-denial?

Qu. IV. Whether it be Piously done of you to choose never to Receive the
Sacrament and so deprieve your Selves of the Spiritual Benefit of that Heavenly
Feast, rather then part with a Civil Circumstance, such as a Table Gesture is?

It is the Custom of our Country to Sit at Feasts; but few men are so mad as to
refuse to Eat Standing, and go Hungry away when they have no room to Sit down.
Why should we not be as Prudent at this Spiritual Feast, in the Concerns of our
Souls, as we are in those of our Bodies.

Put the case we were strictly prohibited by the Law of the Land the use of a
Table or a Table-cloth at this Holy Feast, and we could not receive with that
Convenience as now we may; would you end your days in a continual refusal, and
never receive the Sacrament? I don't know how far Passion and Prejudice, and
the heat of Disputation may blind and transport Men; but if they will calmly
consider this matter, and hearken to Reason, they will find nothing to justify
the total neglect of this Ordinance by. I am very apt to think they will be of
my mind: for I declare to all the World, rather than not Receive at all the
Comfortable Sacrament of our Blessed Saviors Body and Blood, I will Receive it
on a Tombstone, on the ground, in a Church, or in a Field, if all other things
that are Essential to it be rightly observed and performed. If any of our
Dissenting Brethren shall upon this Question think as I do, viz. that there is
no absolute necessity of a Table in this case, which the Custom of our Country
requires at Ordinary Feasts; He will also at the same time see there is no
absolute necessity of a Table Gesture, and that we may Receive worthily without
either the one or the other.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for FINCHAM GARDENER.
1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England. 2. A Resolution of
some Cases of Conscience which respect Church Communion. 3. The Case of
Indifferent things used in the Worship of God, proposed and Stated, by
considering these Questions, etc. 4. A Discourse about Edification. 5. The
Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of Englands
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England? 6. A Letter to Anonymus, in answer
to his three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about Church Communion. 7. Certain Cases
of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of joining with Forms of
Prayer in Public Worship. In two Parts. 8. The Case of mixed Communion: Whether
it be Lawful to Separate from a Church upon the account of promiscuous
Congregations and mixed Communions? 9. An Answer to the Dissenters Objections
against the Common Prayers, and some other parts of Divine Service prescribed
in the Liturgy of the Church of England. 10. The Case of Kneeling at the Holy
Sacrament stated and resolved, etc. In two Parts. 11. A Discourse of Profiting
by Sermons, and of going to hear where men think they can profit most. 12. A
serious Exhortation, with some important Advices, relating to the late Cases
about Conformity, recommended to the present Dissenters from the Church of
England. 13. An Argument for Union; taken from the true interest of those
Dissenters in England who profess and call themselves Protestants. 14. Some
Considerations about the Case of Scandal, or giving Offense to Weak Brethren.
15. The Case of Infant Baptism, in Five Questions, etc. 16. The Charge of
Scandal, and giving Offense by Conformity, Refelled, and Reflected back upon
Separation, etc.
1. A Discourse about the charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther? 2. A Discourse about Tradition, showing what is meant by it, and
what Tradition is to be received and what Tradition is to be rejected. 3. The
difference of the Case between the Separation of Protestants from the Church of
Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England. 4. The
Protestant Resolution of Faith, etc.
Some Seasonable Reflections on the Discovery of the late Plot, being a Sermon
preached on that occasion, by W. Sherlock, D. D. Rector of St. George
Buttolph-lane, London.

King David's Deliverance: or, the Conspiracy of Absolon and Achitophel
defeated, in a Sermon Preached on the day of Thanksgiving appointed for the
Discovery of the late Fanatical Plot. By Thomas Long, B. D. one of the
Prebendaries of Exon.

THE CASE OF KNEELING AT THE Holy Sacrament STATED and RESOLVED. PART II.
Wherein these QUERIES are considered.

IV. Whether Kneeling commanded in the Church of England be not contrary to the
general Practice of the Church of Christ in the first and purest Ages? V.
Whether it be unlawful for us to Receive Kneeling, because this Gesture was
first introduced by Idolaters, and is still notoriously abused by the Papists
to Idolatrous ends and purposes.
LONDON: Printed for T. Basset, at the George in Fleet Street; and B. Took, at
the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1685.

Query IV. Whether Kneeling, commanded in the Church of England, be not
contrary to the general Practice of the Church of Christ in the first and
purest Ages?
THe only way for any man to give or receive satisfaction in this point, is
diligently to consult the Records of ancient Times, and from them make a
faithful report of the Customs and Usages of the ancient Catholic Church: For
when once these are made manifest, it will be very easy, by comparing things
together, to discern whether they are consistent, or contrary one to another:
Whether the Practice of the Church of England (as to Kneeling at the Sacrament)
be agreeable or repugnant to that of the Primitive Christians. In Answer
therefore to this Question, my business is to give a plain Historical Account
of the practice of the Church in those early Ages of Christianity; from whence
it may evidently appear, that the Church of England, by obliging her
Communicants to Kneel, does not oblige them to practice any thing but what is
agreeable to the Customs and Practice of pure Antiquity. And this I will
endeavor to do under these Two general Heads.

(1.) It Is highly probable that the Primitive Church used to Kneel in the act
of receiving the Holy Sacrament, as our Custom at present is. (2.) It Is most
certain they used an Adoring Posture.
But before I enter upon this undertaking, I will crave leave to premise
somewhat concerning this Query in general, and somewhat for explication of a
Term contained in it, viz. What we are to understand by The first and purest
Ages.

As to the Case it self in general, it is of such a nature, and requires such
an Answer, that not one among Twenty thousand of the ordinary and common sort
of people is duly qualified to understand it, and pass a true judgment upon
it: the merits of the Cause are quite out of their reach; and whether we are in
the right or the wrong they know not, but believe as they are taught, and upon
the credit of others who they suppose are able to inform them about such
matters. For in order to estimate the present Case aright and as it ought, it
is necessary that a man have some competent knowledge of and insight into the
Customs and Constitutions of the ancient Church, the Decrees of Councils, the
Works of the Fathers, and the Original Languages wherein they wrote; which, I
am sure, few or none of the Vulgar have attained to.

And truly upon this very consideration I should have passed this Query by
without taking the least notice of it, had I not in my converse with several
Dissenting Laymen, heard it started and pleaded in justification of their
Nonconformity to the Custom and Constitution of the Church of England.

I confess, I did a little wonder to find men make that a Rule of Conscience,
(and boldly rely and practice upon it) which they do not at all understand; to
find this Weapon put into the hands of ordinary and illiterate persons, not
only to defend themselves against the Commands of their lawful Superiors, and
those who are set over them by God to be their Rulers and Guides, (in all such
cases especially where they are not able to guide and direct themselves) but
also to wound and murder the Reputation of the National Church, as degenerate
from all Antiquity, as introducing and imposing novel Customs and Ceremonies
repugnant to the Principles and Practices of the first and purest Ages.

Whether it be well done in Nonconforming Ministers to furnish the common
people with such kind of Arguments as these, so much out of their way, and
above their pitch and capacity, I leave the honest part of the world to judge.

The (2) thing I would premise is this: Supposing Kneeling at the Sacrament was
never used by the ancient Church, yet such an Objection is a wretched Plea in
the mouth of a Dissenter to justify his Nonconformity by as to this particular
Gesture.

For if Kneeling be a crime and unlawful because it was not used in Primitive
times, Sitting at the Sacrament is a much greater; for that was condemned as an
irreverend Posture, as will appear by and by. Besides, they themselves have a
very little value for Antiquity, and in all things almost run counter to it.

And one would think that they should be very willing to receive Kneeling, for
that very reason which they produce against it; that is, because it is contrary
to the current practice of all Antiquity, as they would make their Party to
believe. This might be expected from them, because they will not be persuaded
by any means or entreaties to comply with such Customs and Ceremonies of our
Church as were undoubtedly used by the ancient Christians: (such as Godfathers
and Godmothers, the Cross in Baptism, the Ring in Marriage, the Feasts or
Holydays of Christmas, Easter, etc.) but instead of Conformity to these things,
they raise an Hue and Cry upon the Church as Popish and Antichristian for
enjoining such Ceremonies, and pretend they had much rather endure any
extremity, than submit their Necks to such an intolerable Yoke. But how hard is
the Government put to it to please such humoursome persons! When our Governors
tread in the very steps of the Primitive Bishops and blessed Martyrs, then they
are Popish and Antichristian, and the Consciences of our dissenting Brethren
will not suffer them to conform; and at other times they cannot conform,
because they require them to do what was never required nor practiced in the
Church of Christ throughout all preceding Generations, till Transubstantiation
was established in the World. So that to follow Antiquity is a great Objection
against Conformity at some times, and not to follow it, as great at others:
When ever they please to make it so, it is so, say or do what one can to the
contrary. Thus much concerning the Case in general: Let us now see the meaning
of that Phrase, The first and purest Ages.

This, I think, may be easily made out, from the Writings of those men who have
stoutly defended Sitting, or a common Table Gesture; who have delivered their
minds with as much clearness, and as roundly as one would wish, concerning this
matter. For thus the Author of a Book formerly cited affirms, That Antiquity is
wholly against us, and the Primitive Churches never Dispute upon Quest. of
Kneel. etc. to the Reader. id. p. 67.
so much as heard of Kneeling, and the Churches succeeding excluded it out of
their Congregations, and gave it no Entertainment for the space of 1200 years.
That Kneeling to receive the Sacrament, was not used at the Institution of the
Lords Supper, nor after in any Age of the Church, before the time of Honorius
the Third, about the year 1220. So also another great Champion for sitting
writes. Didoclavius maintains (says he) that which none of our opposites
Gillesp. Disp. against Eng. Pop. Cer. p. 191. Altar. Damascen. 784. lib. 1. c.
1.
are able to infringe, viz. That no Testimony can be produced which may evince
that ever Kneeling was used before the time of Honorius the Third. He further
observes from the History of the Waldenses, That bowing of the Knees before the
Host was then only enjoined, when the opinion of Transubstantiation got place.
By the Practice of the Church in the first and purest Ages, I conceive they
mean thus much: That from the Age wherein the holy Apostles lived, down to that
wherein Transubstantiation was set on foot, or that wherein Honorius the Third
enjoined the Adoration of the Host, Kneeling in the act of Receiving the Lords
Supper was never heard of nor used; or as one Author expressly asserts it, till
the year 1220. Howsoever, for sureness sake, and in order to the clearing of
this matter under our present Consideration, I think it will be requisite to
fix the time wherein Transubstantiation was first broacht, as well as when it
was established, or imposed as an Article of Faith; and so too wherein the
Adoration of the Host was enjoined: whereby the just bounds and limits will be
known, beyond which we are not to pass to fetch in Evidence; and consequently
all extravagancy will be prevented on our part, and all cavilling (if possible)
on theirs.

As for the Time then, which we enquire after, I think we may safely rely on
the judgment of a very Learned Prelate of our own, which he delivers after this
manner. The word Transubstantiation Histori. Transub. Papal. Josian. Ep.
Dunelm. Edit. 1675. p. 53, 54.
is so far from being found in the sacred Scriptures, or the Writings of the
ancient Fathers, that the great Patrons of it do themselves acknowledge, it was
not so much as heard of before the twelfth Century. Nay, that the Thing it self
without the Word, that the Doctrine without the Expression cannot be proved
from Scripture, is ingenuously acknowledged by the most Learned Schoolmen, who
endeavor by other Arguments Scotus, Durandus, Biel, Cameracen, Cajetan, etc.
therefore to defend it, and allow it to be brought in by the Authority of the
Pope, and not received in the Church of Rome till 1200 years after Christ. The
first Authors who mention this new-coyn'd word Transubstantiation, are Petrus
Blesensis, who lived under Pope Alexander the Third, (about the year 1159) and
Stephanus Eduensis, a Bishop whose Age and Writings are very doubtful. The Pope
who first established this An. Dom. 1215. An. Dom. 1217, or thereabouts.
monstrous Doctrine by his own Arbitrary power, as an Article of Faith, was
Innocent the Third. And his Successor Honorius was the man who decreed
Adoration to the Host. The first Council which took notice and approved of the
Papal Decree for Transubstantiation, was that assembled at Constance, which
condemned A: D. 1415.
Wiclif for an Heretic, because among other truths he had asserted this: That
the substance of the Bread and Wine remains materially in the Sacrament of the
Altar; and that in the same Sacrament no accidents of Bread ant Wine remain
without a Substance: and for this Opinion they ordered his Body to be taken out
of his Grave, and burnt to ashes. Thus things stood till the year 1551. when
the Council of Trent published it to the world for an infallible Truth, and
imposed the belief of it upon all, under the pain of an Anathema.

As for the Doctrine of Consubstantiation, and the Corporal presence of Christ
at, with, and in the Sacrament, it was started long before that of
Transubstantiation, and was much disputed among learned men. He who first
broacht it in the East, was John Damascen, in the days of Gregory the Third.
And about About the year 740.
an hundred years afterward it was set a-foot in the West, by the means of
Paschasius Radbertus a Monk of Corbie, and one Amalarius a Who wrote de
Ecclesias. Officiis de ord. Antiphon, etc. contemporary with Amalarius
Fortunatus Ar. bp. of Triers, who wrote de Sac. Baptis. ad Carol. M.
Deacon of Metz. The former taught that Christ was Consubstantiated, or rather
enclosed in the Bread, and Corporally united to it in the Sacrament; for as yet
there was no thoughts of the Transubstantiation of Bread. The latter gives
Amalar. de Ecclesi. Offic. lib. 3. c. 24. vid. lib. 3. c. 35.
it as part of his Belief, That the simple nature of the Bread and Wine mixed,
is turned into a reasonable nature, viz. of the Body and Blood of Christ.
Moreover, he in another place confesses, that it was past his skill to
determine what became of his Body after it was eaten. When the Body of Christ
is taken with a good intention, it is not for me to dispute (says he) whether
it Amalar. Epist. ad Guitardum MS in Biblioth. Coll. S. Benedic. Cantabri. Cod.
55. cited by A. Bp. Usher, Ans. Jesuits Chall. p. 75. Rabanus Maurus, John
Erigena Wala. Strabo, Ratramus or Bertramus.
be invisibly taken up into Heaven, or kept in our Body until the day of our
burial, or exhaled into the Air, or whether it go out of the Body with the
Blood, or be sent out by the mouth, etc. For this, and another Foolery of the
three parts or kinds of Christ's Body, he was censured by a Synod held at
Cressy, wherein it was declared by the Bishops of France, That the Bread and
Wine are spiritually made the Body of Christ; which being a meat of the Mind,
and not of the Belly, is not corrupted, but remains unto everlasting life.
From whence we may learn (as also from the Writings of several Learned men of
that Age who opposed these Dotages of the Corporal presence) that the Western
Church had not then adulterated the Doctrine of the Sacrament, but followed the
pure and sound sense of the Ancient Fathers, and condemned these Whimseys and
gross conceits of the carnal or Oral eating of Christ in the Sacrament. Nay, in
the year 1079. when Hildebrand called Gregory the 7th came to the Papal Chair,
the Bishops and Doctors were divided in their Opinions concerning the Corporal
Presence; some maintaining Berengarius his opinion who denied it, and some
following that of Paschasius, as appears from the Acts of that Council (writ by
those of the Popes Faction) which was called on purpose to condemn Berengarius.
Moreover, it is recorded that Hildebrand himself doubted whether what we receive
at the Lords Table be indeed the Body of Christ by a substantial conversion.
For three months space was granted to Berengarius to consider in; and a Fast
appointed to the Cardinals, That God would show by some sign from Heaven who
was in the right, the Pope or Berengarius. It seems the Doctrine of the Popes
B^nno Card. in vita Hild. Epis. Dunelm. Hist. Trans. p. 135.
Infallibility was not known to that Age; and that of the Corporal presence
much doubted. But however, thus much we may conclude upon, That from the dark
and mysterious Writings of those men, Paschasius and Amalarius, did that
monstrous Error of Transubstantiation spring, which afterward came to be
established as an Article of Faith in the Church of Rome.

As to the time then wherein we are to contain this Discourse, it shall be the
first 700 years after Christ; and to Authors only that lived within that
compass, I will appeal for evidence in the matter under dispute: and surely our
Dissenting Brethren will allow that they lived in the first and purest Ages,
because they were dead before the Doctrines either of Consubstantiation or
Transubstantiation were hatched, much less received or established in the World.

If I would take all the advantage that our Adversaries give us, I need not
confine my self within so narrow a compass. For they challenge us to produce
one instance for Kneeling before the days of Honorius the Third, who lived 1220
or thereabouts; and confidently affirm Kneeling was never heard of nor used for
1200 years after Christ. I hope therefore they will not complain of foul
dealing, or that I strain the point, since I give away 500 years, wherein the
pure ancient Catholic Faith touching the Holy Sacrament began to decline, and
was by various arts and tricks at last foully corrupted. Which piece of
liberality I need not have exercised, but that I design purely to convince, not
to contend. Let us therefore bring this matter under examination, and see what
the practice of the Church was within the compass of 700 years after Christ;
or, which is all one, in the first and purest Ages. And what I shall produce
out of Antiquity, may be conveniently placed under these two general Heads,
according to the method proposed in the beginning of this Discourse.

(1) That notwithstanding several Nonconformists, well esteemed of for
Learning, have in their Writings boldly asserted Kneeling to be contrary to all
Antiquity; it is highly probable the Primitive Christians did Kneel in the act
of Receiving, as the Custom is in the Church of England.

(2) It Is certain they used an Adoring posture.

As to the first, I hope I shall be able to make it good by this following
Account which I shall give with all possible plainness and sincerity. And I
declare beforehand to all the World, that I will offer nothing for satisfaction
to others, which I do not think in my Conscience to be true; and that I would
not use a Fallacy to serve the Cause, though I were sure it could never be
detected by any of our Separating Brethren. In the first place, for the first
Century or 100 years wherein our Lord and his Apostles lived, the Scripture
has left us in the dark, and under great uncertainty what the particular
Gesture was which they used at the Institution and Celebration of the Holy
Sacrament; which I think I have sufficiently evinced in my Answers Part 1. p.
17.
to the first and second Query.

In the next place, I desire those who urge a common Table Gesture, and
particularly Sitting (which was a usual posture at Meals among those Eastern
Nations as well as among us now) to observe, that Sitting was esteemed a very
irreverend Posture to be used in the Worship and Service of God by the
Primitive Church; of which I shall give a few instances. The ancient Loadicean
Which met under Pope Sylvester 1. between the Neocaesarian Synod and the first
general Council of Nice; that is, between the years 314 and 325, as some
learned men think; or Anno Dom. 365. after the first general Nicaene Council,
as others.
Synod finding great inconveniences to arise from the Love Feasts which were
kept at the same time with the Lords Supper, prohibited absolutely the said
Feasts, and the lying upon Couches in the Church; as their manner was of
Solemnizing those Feasts. The words of the Canon are these: The Feasts of
Charity ought Can. 28.
not to be kept in the Lords House or in the Church, neither may ye eat or make
Couches in the House of God. This was afterward forbidden by the Council of
Carthage; and the Decrees of both these Provincial or National Councils were
ratified by the 6th Trullan Council, and that under the pain of
Excommunication: Can. 74.
upon which in some time the Custom dwindled to nothing.

Now the Reasons which induced these holy Bishops and ancient Fathers to
prohibit these Feasts of Charity, and the use of a discumbing posture upon Beds
or Couches in the House of God, (which was too, an ordinary Table Gesture
according to the custom of those times) were in all probability taken from the
Disorder and Irreverence, the Animosities and Excess that accompanied these
Feasts, and which both poor and rich were guilty of: They did not distinguish
between their spiritual and corporal Food, between the Lords Supper and an
ordinary Meal; they did not discern the Lords Body, as St. Paul speaks: and I
am apt to think that the same abuses which had crept in so early into the
Church of Corinth, and which St. Paul took notice of and reproved, continued
and spread till the Church by her Censures and Decrees opposed the growing
evil, and rooted up the causes of such mischievous effects.

To these Canons of Councils, if we add the Testimony of particular Bishops,
who lived in those first Ages, and who speak not their own private sense and
Opinions, but Customs and Usages of the Church in their time; we shall plainly
discern that Sitting was accounted an irreverent posture in the Worship of God,
while they were engaged in Prayer or Praise, or receiving the Holy Sacrament.

Justin Martyr, who lived in the second Century, which immediately Flor. Ann.
D. 155.
succeeded that of the Apostles, seems to hint that the people sat at the
Sermon, and while the Lessons were reading, when he informs us concerning the
Christian Assemblies in his Apol. 2.
time, and the place where he lived: After the reading of the Lessons and the
exhortatory Sermon of the Bishop, we rise up (says he) all together, and send
up our Prayers. He does not indeed signify what the particular Gesture was
which they used at their Prayers, but it is clear enough they did not Sit; and
they might Kneel, for any thing he says to the contrary. For it is customary
among us to sit at the Sermon, and during the reading of the Lessons; and after
they are ended, we may be truly said to rise up all together, and send up our
Prayers: But if any one should hence infer that we stood and not kneeled, he
would conclude against the Law of the Land, and the common practice of the
Church: Rising up does not necessarily imply that a man stands or kneels
afterward, but somewhat previous to both; for we generally rise before we do
either. But however sitting at the Sermon and Lessons was usual in those
Assemblies which this holy Father and Martyr frequented; yet in most other
places the people were not permitted to sit at all, not so much as at the
Lessons, or in Sermon-time; as appears partly from what Philostorgius an
ancient Ecclesiastical Historian observes Hist. Eccles. l. 3. n. 5. p. 29.
Flor. A. D. 425
of Theophilus an Indian Bishop; That among several irregularities which he
corrected in those Churches, he particularly reformed this, that the people
were wont to sit when the Lessons out of the Gospel were read unto them: And
partly from Sozomens History, wherein he notes it as a very unusual thing in
the Bishop of Alexandria, that he did not rise up when the Gospels were read.

But the fullest evidence Optatus Bishop of Milevis affords us, Eccles. Hist.
l. 7. c. 19. p. 734. Flor. A. D. 440
by what he writes against Parmenianus the Donatist. For after he had taxed him
with Pride and Innovation, with a censorious uncharitable spirit which animated
all his Tractates or Sermons to the people, he cites a passage out of the
Psalms, and applies it home to him, after this manner: Thou sit and
speak against thy Brother, etc. in which place God reproves him Psalm. 49. in
our Transl. 50. 20. Lib. 4. de Schis. Donat. p. 78. Par. Edit. An. D. 365. Vid.
Albasp. not. in 4 lib. O^tat.
who fits and defames his Brother: and therefore such evil Teachers as you
(says he) are more particularly pointed at in this Text; For the people are not
licensed to sit in the Church. This Text chiefly respects the Bishops and
Presbyters, who had only a right and privilege to sit in the Public and
Religious Assemblies; but does not concern the people, who stood all the time.
Now if it had not been a general and prevailing custom among the Christians of
those times, as well Heretical as Orthodox, to stand the whole time of Divine
Service, and particularly at the Lessons and Sermons, Parmenianus might have
easily retorted this Argument upon Optatus, as being weak, and concluding
nothing against him in particular, but what might be charged in common upon all
private Christians who sat in the Church as well as he.

Again, that Sitting was esteemed irreverent in the Worship Floruit An. D. 198.
Tertul. de Orat. c. 12. Tom. 2. p. 130. edit. Collon. Agrip. 1617. item quod
adsignata oratione assidendi mos, est quibusdam, etc.
of God, will further be manifested from a passage or two in Tertullian, who
lived in the same Century with Justin Martyr before cited: and I think nothing
can be spoken more plain and home to the purpose than what he delivers
concerning this Gesture, which is so much contended for by our Dissenting
Brethren. For among other vanities and ill customs taken notice of and reproved
by this ancient Father, this was one, That they were wont (some of them) to fit
at Prayer. A little further in the same Chapter, Tertullian has these words:
Add hereunto the sin of Eo apponitur and irreverentiae crimen etiam ipsis
nationibus si quid saperent intelligendum. Si quidem irreverens est assidere
sub conspectu contraque conspectum ejus quem cum maxim reverearis ac
venereris; quanto magis sub conspectu Dei vivi, Angelo adhuc orationis
adstante, factum illud irreligiosissimum est? nisi exprobramus Deo quod oration
fatigaverit. Tertull. de Oratione, c. 12.
Irreverence, which the very Heathen, if they did perceive well and understand
what we did, would take notice of. For if it be irreverent to sit in the
presence of, and to confront one whom you have a high respect and veneration
for, How much more irreligious is this Gesture in the sight of the living God,
the Angel of Prayer yet standing by! unless we think fit to upbraid God that
Prayer has tired us. Add to all this that saying of Constantine the great,
Eusebius. de vit. Constable. mag. lib. 4 p. 400. Col. Allob. 1612.
recorded by Eusebius as an indication of the Piety of that Christian Emperor,
with which I will conclude this point. It was upon occasion of a Panegyric
concerning the Sepulcher of our Savior, delivered by Eusebius, not in the
Church, but in the Palace of the Emperor; and the Historian observes, to the
praise of this excellent Prince, that though it was a long and tedious Oration,
and though the Emperor was earnestly solicited to fit down on his Throne
which was hard by, yet he refused, and stood attentively all the time, as the
rest of the Auditory did; affirming it to be unfit to attend upon any Discourse
concerning God with ease and softness; and that it was very consonant to Piety
and Religion, that Discourses about Divine things should be heard standing.

Thus much may suffice for satisfaction, that the ancient Church did by no
means approve of Sitting, or a common Table Gesture, as fitting to be used in
time of Divine Service, except at the reading of the Lessons, and hearing of
the Sermon; which too was only practiced in some places; for in others the
people were not allowed to sit at all in their religious Assemblies. Which
Custom is still observed in most, if not all the Eastern Churches at this day,
wherein there are no Seats erected or allowed for the use of the people.

Now upon what has been said, I shall only make this brief Reflection, and so
proceed. If the Apostles of our Lord had (in pursuance of their Commission to
teach all Nations) in their Travels throughout the World, every where taught
and established sitting or discumbing, (which were the common Table-gestures
according to the customs of those Eastern Countries) not only as convenient,
but as necessary to be used in order to worthy receiving the Lords Supper; it
is a most strange and unaccountable thing how there should be (1) Such an early
and universal Revolt of the Primitive Church from the Doctrine and the
Constitutions of the holy Apostles; and then (2) Considering what a high value
and esteem the Primitive Christians had for the Apostles, the first founders of
their Faith, and for all that passed under their names, it seems to me not
only highly improbable, but morally impossible, that so many Churches,
together with their respective Bishops and Pastors dwelling in remote and
distant Countries, (not biased by Faction, nor swayed by a superior
Authority, being perfectly free and independent one upon another) should
unanimously consent and conspire together to introduce a novel Custom into the
Church of Christ, contrary to Apostolical Practice and Order; and not only so,
but (3) to Censure the practice and injunctions of divinely-inspired men, as
indecent and unfit to be followed and observed in the public Worship of God:
and all this without the least notice taken by, without any complaint or
opposition from any particular person either in the then present or succeeding
generation.

(3) The Primitive Church esteemed the Holy Sacrament to be the most solemn
part of Christian Worship, as that which deservedly challenged from them the
utmost pitch of Devotion, and the highest degree of Reverence that they could
possibly pay and express either with their Souls or Bodies. This is clear,
partly from those Honorary Titles they bestowed upon this Ordinance and adorned
it with, which import the greatest deference and the most awful regard
imaginable; partly from that tedious See part 1. p. 58.
and severe Discipline which she exercised the Catechumens and Penitents with,
before she admitted them into the Communion of the Faithful, and approved of
them as fit to partake of the Holy Mysteries. To be admitted to the Sacrament
so only as to behold it, and to be present at those Prayers which were put up
by worthy Communicants over the great Propitiatory Sacrifice, was heretofore
accounted a high honor and privilege: But to make one at this heavenly Feast,
and to receive the pledges of our Lords love, was esteemed the top and
perfection of Christianity, and the extremity of honor and happiness that a
Christian is capable of in this life. Heretofore (with shame and reproach be it
spoken to our stupidly wicked and degenerate Age) to be excluded from the Holy
Communion, was looked upon as the greatest curse and punishment that could be
inflicted: and on the other hand, to be a Communicant, to have a freedom of
access to the Lords Table, as the greatest blessing and most ample reward that
could be propounded; the sum of a Christians hopes, the center of all his
wishes during his abode here.

(4.) For standing in time of Divine Service, both at their Prayers and at the
Sacrament, there are so many and so clear testimonies extant in pure Antiquity,
that a man must take a great deal of pains not to see this truth, who is never
so little conversant in the Records of those times: and in such a man it must
be height of folly or impudence to deny it. The bare asserting of it shall be
sufficient; because to insist upon the proof of it by an enumeration of
particulars, would swell this Discourse beyond measure; and besides, it would
be a needless labor, since the great Patrons of sitting, or the common
Tablegesture, Gillesp. Disp. against En. Po. Cer. point. 1660. p. 190, 191.
do frankly own and acknowledge that Standing was a posture generally used by
the ancient Church in her religious Assemblies, both at their ordinary Prayers,
and at the Communion-service. Howsoever, I shall be forced to say something
concerning this matter under the following particular.

(5) Which is this: That the Primitive Christians (though on the Lords days,
and for the space of 50 days between Easter and Whitsunday they observed
Standing, yet at other times) used the gesture of Kneeling at their public
Devotions. Which will appear from a Decree passed in the first general Council
assembled at Nice, in words to this effect: Because there are some Can 20 about
the year 325.
which Kneel on the Lords day, and in the days of Pentecost, (that is, between
Easter and Whitsunday) it is therefore ordained by this holy Synod, that when
we pay our Vows unto the Lord in Prayer, we observe a Standing gesture, to the
end that a uniform and agreeable Custom may be maintained or secured through
all Churches. By which Canon provision was made against Kneeling, not as if it
were an inconvenient and unbecoming gesture to be used at all in the public
Worship of God, but only as being an irregular and unfit posture to be used at
such particular times and occasions as is there specified, viz. on the Lords
days, and the Feast of Pentecost; when for any Christian to stand, was to cross
the general Custom and Practice of the Church at that time: For this Council
did not (you must note) introduce and establish any new thing in the Church,
but only endeavored by its authority to keep alive and in credit an ancient
Custom, which they saw began to be neglected by some Christians. And from that
clause in the Canon, Because there are some which Kneel on the Lords day and in
the days of Pentecost, etc. we may with good reason infer, that Kneeling was
the posture that was generally used at other times in their religious
Assemblies. For if Standing had been generally observed by all Churches in time
of Divine Service at all other times as well as those mentioned in the Decree,
what occasion or necessity had there been for such an Injunction, whereby all
Christians were obliged to do that which they constantly and universally did
before? There is a passage in the Author of the Questions and Answers in Justin
Martyr, which will put this matter out of doubt, and give us the reason why
they altered their posture on the Lords day: It is Respons. ad quest. 115. p.
468.
(says he) that by this means we may be put in mind both of our Fall by Sin,
and our Resurrection and Restitution by the Grace of Christ: that for six days
we pray upon our Knees, is in token of our Fall by Sin; but that on the Lords
day we do not bow the Knee, does symbolically represent our Resurrection, etc.
This he there tells us was a Custom derived from the very times of the
Apostles; for which he cites Irenaeus in his Book concerning Easter. That it
was ancient, appears from Tertullian, who lived in the same Age with Irenaeus,
and speaks of it as if it had been established An. Dom. 198.
by Apostolical Authority, or at least by Custom had obtained the force of a
Law; for these are his words: We esteem Die dominico jejunium nefas ducimus,
vel de geniculis adorare. Tert. de Cor. mil. c. 3. 206. Col. Agrip. edit. 1617.
Epiph. exposit. Fid. Cathol. p. 1105. edit. Par. Flor. An. Dom. 390. (...). St.
Hieronym. prolog. Comment. in Ep. ad Ephesians.
it a great act of wickedness or villainy, either to Fast or Kneel on the Lords
day. Which intimates too, that Fasting and Kneeling in their public Worship,
were both lawful and customary at other times. To whose Testimony if we join
that of another Father who lived some time after the first general Nicene
Council, we need not produce any more witnesses to clear the matter. It is that
of Epiphanius in his Exposition of the Catholic Faith; where he certifies,
that the weekly stated Fasts (of Wednesday and Friday) were diligently kept by
the Catholic Church the whole year round, excepting the fifty days of
Pentecost, on which they do not Kneel, nor is there any Fast appointed. The
reason of which Custom was (as both St. Jerome and St. Augustine attest) because
all that space between Easter and Whitsunday was a time of joy and triumph,
viz. over Death and the Grave; and therefore on these days we neither Fast nor
bend our Knees, nor incline and bow down our Bodies, but with our Lord are
lifted up to Heaven. We pray standing (all that time) which is a sign of the
Resurrection. St. August. Ep. 119. ad Jan. c. 15.
By which posture, that is, we signify our belief of that Article. From whence
we may conclude, that as the Christians of those first Ages did at other times
certainly Fast, so they did also certainly Kneel at their Prayers in their
public and religious Assemblies.

(6) Another thing I would have observed in order to my present design, is
this; That the Primitive Christians were wont to receive the Holy Sacrament
every day, as often as they came together for public Worship: which Custom as it
was introduced Acts 2. 42, 46. Acts 20. 7. compared with 1 Cor. 10. 16.
and practiced by the Apostles themselves (according to the judgment of very
Learned men, and that not without good grounds from the Holy Scripture) so it
continued a considerable time in the Church, even down to

St. Austin, who flourisht in the beginning Ann. Dom. 410. St. Aug: Epist. 118.
ad Januarium, c. 2, 3. p. 556. 7. Basil. edit. a Froben. 1541. St. Ambr. cap.
ult. lib. 5. c. 4. de Sacram. p. 449. Paris. St. Hier. adver. Jovinian. p 37.
Paris. id. in Epist. ad Lucinium Baeticum, p. 71. edit.
of the fifth Century; and seems clearly to intimate to us in his Writings,
that it was customary in his days as St. Ambrose and St. Hierome had hinted
before him concerning the Churches of Millan and Rome in their times. From St.
Cyprian we are fully Vid. Dr. Cave, Prim. Christ. p. 339. St. Cypr. de Orat.
Dom. p. 147. Oxon. edit. 1682. Can. 9. Apost. and Antiochen. Council. Can. 2.
Basil Ep. 289. ad Caesariam Patriciam, To. 3. p. 279.
assured that it was so in his days, viz. about the year 250. For in his
explication of that Petition in the Lords Prayer, Give us this day our daily
bread, he expressly tells us, that they did receive the Eucharist every day, as
the food that nourisht them to Salvation. St. Basil Bishop of Caesaria, who
lived about 370 years after Christ, affirms, that in his Church they
communicated four times a Week; on the Lords day, Wednesday, Friday, and
Saturday; two of which were station-days, or set days of Fasting which were
punctually observed by the generality of Christians in those times. And this I
the rather note, because in all probability, since they did receive the
Sacrament on these days, they did not alter the Posture of the day, but
received Kneeling: For if Kneeling was adjudged by the Catholic Church an
unsuitable and improper posture for times of mirth and joy, such as the Lords
days and those of Pentecost were; and if they were thought guilty of a great
irregularity, who used that posture on those Festivals; then we may reasonably
conclude, that Standing, which was the Festival Posture, was not used by the
Catholic Church on days of Fasting and Humiliation; and that they who stood at
their public Devotions on Fasting days, were as irregular as they who kneeled
on a Festival. And that this was really so, may, I think, be clearly collected
from a passage in Tertullian to this purpose; Tertull. de Orat. c. 3. p. 206.
Edit. Col. Agrip. 1617.
We judge it an unlawful and impious thing (says he) either to Fast or Kneel at
our Devotions on the Lords day. We rejoice in the same freedom or immunity from
Easter to Whitsontide. To be freed and exempted from Fasting and Kneeling, not
only on the Lords day, but all the days of Pentecost, was esteemed a great
privilege, and matter of much joy to this Holy Father, and the Christians who
lived in his days. And from hence I infer, that at other times, when they met
together for public Worship, (especially on days of Fasting) they generally
used Kneeling, and that at the Lords Supper, which was administered every day in
the African So St. Cyprian before cited.
Church, whereof Tertullian was a Presbyter. For if they had generally stood at
all other times of the year in their religious Assemblies, as well at their
Prayers as at the Lords Supper, where is the privilege and immunity they
boasted so much of, and rejoiced in, viz. that they were freed from Kneeling on
such days and at such certain times? Not to Fast on the Lords day was a
Privilege, because they did Fast on the Weekdays; and so say I of Standing:
To Stand on the Lords days, and all the time between Easter and Whitsunday,
could not be thought a special act of favor and the Prerogative of those
seasons, if Kneeling had not been the ordinary and common Gesture at all other
times throughout the year. And if Kneeling was the Didoclavius his own argument
retorted. Si stabant inter orandum (viz. Die Dominico and toto temporis
intervallo inter Pascha and Pentecosten) non est probabile de geniculis
adorasse cum perciperent Eucharistiam, sed potius contrarium, nempe stetisse.
Altar. Damasc. p. 784.
Gesture which the Christians did then commonly use at their Prayers on the
Weekdays; then in all probability, when they received the Sacrament on those
days, they received in the ordinary posture.

The (7th) and last particular which I would observe relating to this business,
is this: That the Primitive Christians received the Holy Sacrament Praying. The
whole Communion Service was performed with Prayer and Praise. It was begun with
a general Prayer, wherein the Minister and the whole Congregation jointly
prayed for the Universal Tert. Apol. c. 39. p. 47. St. Aug. Ep. 118. Constable.
Apost. l. 2. c. 57. p. 881. St. Chrysostom. Hom. 1. in 2. cap. Epist. 1. Tim.
Peace and Welfare of the Church, for the Tranquillity and the quietness of the
World, for the Prosperity of the Age, for wholesome Weather and fruitful
Seasons, for Kings and Emperors, and all in Authority, etc. The Elements were
sanctified by a solemn Benediction, the form whereof is set down by St.
Ambrose; and De Sacr. lib. 4. c 5. p. 439. See Dr. Cave's Primitive
Christianity c. 11. p. 347.
the whole action was concluded with Prayer and Thanksgiving. But that which
more particularly affects the matter in hand, is, that the Minister used a
Prayer at the delivery of the Sacrament to each Communicant, to which every one
at their receiving said Amen.

The Apostolical Constitutions, though in some things much corrupted and
adulterated, yet in many things are very sound, and in this particular seem to
express the most Ancient Practice of the Church. For there we find this Account.

The Apostolical Constitutions (confessed by all hands to be very Mr. Daille
sets them at the latter end of the 5 Century. Constable. Apost. lib. 8. c. 13. p.
483.
Ancient, though not altogether so much as is pretended in some things) give us
this plain account in these words: Let the Bishop give the (...).
Sacrifice (by which name the Holy Sacrament was called in Primitive times)
saying, The Body of Christ: and let him that receives say Amen. Then let the
Deacon take the Cup, and at the delivery say, The Blood of Christ, the Cup of
Life; and let him that drinks say Amen.

Now although it cannot be denied but that these Constitutions are in many
things adulterated, yet it is allowed on the other hand, that in many things
they are very sincere, and convey to us the pure Practice of the most ancient
times. That they give a true and sound account in this matter relating to the
Sacrament, we may rest fully satisfied, from the concuring Evidence of other
ancient Writers who lived in the fourth Century: For both St. Ambrose and St.
Cyril of Jerusalem Ambr. de Sacr. lib 4. c. 5. p. 440. To. 4. St. Cyril Hiero.
Catech. Mystag. 5. Universa Ecclesia accepto Christi Sanguine dicit Amen. Resp.
ad Orosi. quest. 49. To. 4. p. 691. Basil. 1541.
make express mention of the peoples saying Amen when the Minister said The
Body of Christ. So also St. Austin speaks of it as universally practiced by the
Church of Christ when the Cup was delivered. And there is a very remarkable
passage recorded by Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History, which being very
apposite to our purpose, I will set down for the close of all.

Novatius a Presbyter of the Church of Rome, having renounced the Communion of
the Church and the Authority of his rightful Bishop Cornelius, set up for
himself, and became the head Epist. Cornel. ad Fab. apud Eusebius. Eccles. Hist.
lib. 6. c. 35. de Novato.
of an unreasonable and unnatural Schism; and the better to secure to him the
Proselytes he had gained, he altered the usual form of Prayer at the Sacrament,
and in the room thereof, substituted a newfangled Oath which he obliged every
Communicant to take at the time of their receiving; which (among other wicked
actions) is particulary taken notice of and charged upon him by Cornelius, as
the worst of all, and the most villainous Innovation. When he (...).
came (says he) to offer Sacrafices (i. e. to celebrate the Lords Supper) and
to distribute to every one his part, at the delivery of it he constrained those
persons who unhappily sided with him to take an Oath, instead of offering up
Prayers and Praises according to custom; and instead of saying Amen, he forced
every Communicant when he received the Bread, to say, I will never return to
Cornelius as long as I live.

From these plain instances we may see how closely our Church follows the steps
of pure antiquity in the Form of Prayer appointed to be used by the Minister at
the giving of the Bread and the Cup to the people; which runs thus: The Body of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve thy Body
and Soul to everlasting life, etc. which last Clause was added by latter times,
by way of explication, to that short Form which the Primitive Church used: and
surely it is every Christians interest, as well as his duty, to join with the
Minister in such a Prayer, and return a hearty Amen to it.

I will now briefly sum up the Evidence that has been produced out of
Antiquity in justification of Kneeling at the Holy Communion, according to the
custom and practice of our Church; and observe where it directs us to fix, and
what to resolve upon. And in this order it lies: Sitting was adjudged by the
ancient Catholic Church a very unfit and irreverent posture to be used in time
of Divine Service, when they were solemnly engaged in the Worship of God; the
Holy Sacrament was esteemed the most solemn Act or Branch of Christian Worship;
The Primitive Christians generally used standing at their public Devotions,
only on the Lords days, and all that space of time that falls between Easter
and Whitsunday; At all other times in their religious Assemblies Kneeling was
their Worshipping posture; and they were wont to meet and receive the Lords
Supper every day, and particularly on their stated Weekly Fasts, which they
kept every Wednesday and Friday, when to stand was thought as great an
irregularity, as to kneel was on the Lords day: And lastly, the Holy Sacrament
was delivered and received with a Form of Prayer, and that on those days when
they constantly prayed Kneeling. All these things therefore being considered, I
think the least that can be concluded from them, is what I asserted and
designed, viz. that in all likelihood the Primitive Christians did kneel at the
Holy Communion, as the Custom is in the Church of England: For sitting was
generally condemned as an indecent and irreverent Gesture by the Primitive
Church; and no man in his wits will say that prostration or lying flat upon the
ground was ever used in the act of receiving, or ever fit to be so: it must be
therefore one of these two; either Standing or Kneeling.

As for Standing all the time of public Worship which was used only on the
Lords day and in Pentecost, the reason thereof was drawn not from the
Sacrament, but from the day and festival season, when they did more
particularly Communicate the Resurrection of our blessed Savior, openly
testified their belief of that great Article; at such times therefore they
chose standing, as being a gesture suitable to the present occasion, and as an
Emblem and sign of the Resurrection.

And from hence I gather, that on their common and ordinary days (when there
was no peculiar reason to invite or oblige them to stand at the Sacrament) in
all likelihood they used Kneeling, that is, the ordinary posture. They used one
and the same posture (viz. Standing) both at their Prayers and at the Sacrament
on the Lords day, and for fifty days after Easter, contrary to what was usual
at other times; and why then should any man think they did not observe one and
the same posture at all other times? viz. that as at such times they did
constantly Kneel at their Prayers, so they did also constantly Kneel at the
Sacrament, which was given and received in a Prayer.

From the strength of these Premises, I may howsoever promise my self thus much
success: That whosoever shall carefully weigh and peruse them with a teachable
and unprejudiced mind, shall find himself much more inclined to believe the
Primitive Church used at some times to Kneel (as we do) at the Holy Communion,
than that they never did Kneel at all, or that such a posture was never used
nor heard of, but excluded from their Congregations, as some great advocates
for Sitting have confidently proclaimed it to the World.

(2.) But secondly, Suppose they never did Kneel as we do, yet this is most
certain, that they received the Lords Supper in an adoring posture; which is
the same thing, and will sufficiently justify the present practice of our
Church, as being agreeable to that of pure Antiquity. For the proof of this,
numerous testimonies both of Greek and Latin Fathers might be alleged, but I
will content my self (and I hope the Reader too) with a few of each sort, which
are so plain and express, that he who will except against them, will also with
the same face and assurance except against the Whiteness of Snow, and the Light
of the Sun at Noonday.

And first for the Greek Fathers, let the testimony of St. Cyril St. Cyril,
Hierosol. Mystag. Catech. 5. versus finem. Paris. edit. p. 244.
be heard, than which nothing can be more plain and express to our purpose:
This holy Father in a place before cited, gives instructions to Communicants
how to behave themselves when they approach the Lords Table, and that in the
act of receiving both the Bread and the Wine. At the receiving of the Cup he
advises thus: Approach (says he) not rudely stretching forth thy (...). p. 245.
A.
hands, but bowing thy self, and in a posture of Worship and Adoration, saying
Amen. To the same purpose St. Chrysostom speaks in his 14th Homily on the
first Epistle to the Corinthians; Where he provokes and excites the Christians
of his time, to an awful and reverential deportment at the Holy Communion, by
the example of the Wise men who adored our Savior in his Infancy, after Matthew.
2. 1, 11.
this manner: This Body the Wise men reverenced even when it lay in the Manger,
and approaching thereunto, worshipped it with fear and great trembling. Let
(...). 24 Hom. Ep. ad. Cor. p. 538. To. 9. Paris.
us therefore who are Citizens of Heaven, imitate at least these Barbarians.
But thou see this Body, not in a Manger, but on the Altar; not held by a
Woman, but by the Priest, etc. Let us therefore stir up our selves, and be
horribly afraid, and manifest a much greater Reverence than those Barbarians,
lest coming lightly and at a venture, we heap fire on our heads. In another
place the same Father expressly bids them to fall down and communicate, (...).
St. Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in Ep. ad Ephesians. in moral. p. 1151.
when the Table was prepared, and the King himself present: and in order to
beget in their minds great and awful thoughts concerning that Holy and
Mysterious Feast, he further advises them, that when they saw the Chancel doors
opened, then they should suppose Heaven it self was unfolded from above, and
that the Angels descended, to be spectators I suppose he means of their
carriage and behavior at the Lords Table, and by giving their attendance to
grace the solemnity. With the Testimony of these ancient Writers Theodoret
concurs, who in a Dialogue between an Orthodox Flor. A. D. 440.
Christian and an Heretic, introduces Orthodoxus thus discoursing concerning
the Lords Supper. The mysterious Symbols or signs in the Sacrament (viz. Bread
and Wine) depart not from their proper nature, for they abide in their former
Essence, and retain their former shape and form; and approve themselves both to
our sight and touch to be what they were before: but they are considered (...).
Dialog. 2. To. 4. p. 85. Paris. edit.
for such as they are made, (that is, with respect to their Spiritual
signification, and that Divine use to which they were consecrated) and are
believed and adored as those very things which they are believed to be. Which
words clearly import thus much, that the consecrated Elements were received
with a Gesture of Adoration, and withal assure us, that such a carriage at the
Sacrament was not built upon the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. For there is
not a clearer instance in all Antiquity against that absurd Doctrine which the
Church of Rome so obstinately believes at this day, than what Theodoret
furnishes us with in the words above mentioned. Lastly, (to produce no more
out of the Greek Fathers) that story which Gregory Nazianzen Gregor. Naz. Orat.
in laud. Gorg. p. 187. Paris. edit. Gregor. Flor. Ann. Dom. 370.
relates concerning his Sister Gorgonia, will serve to corroborate what has
been said, viz. That being sick, and having made use of several Remedies to no
purpose, at last she resolved upon this course: In the stilness of the night
she repaired to the public Church, and being provided with some of the
consecrated Elements which she had reserved at home, she fell down on her Knees
before the Altar, and with a loud voice supplicated him whom she adored, and in
conclusion was made hole. I am not much concerned whether the Reader shall
think fit to believe or censure the Miracle; but it is certain, that this famous
Bishop has put it upon Record, and applauds his Sister for the method she used
for her recovery, and which speaks home to my purpose; it is clearly intimated
that this pious Woman did Kneel, or use an adoring posture at least when she
eat the Sacramental Bread. And there is no doubt to be made but Gorgonia in
Communicating observed the same posture that others generally did in public:
She did that in her sickness, which all others were wont to do in their health
when they came to the Lords Table; i. e. fall down and Kneel. For it is not to
be imagined that at such a time as this, when she came to beg so great a
Blessing at Gods hands in the public Church at the Altar, styled by the
Ancients the Place of Prayer, she would be guilty of any irregularity, and used
a singular Posture different from what was generally used by Christians when
they came to the same place to Communicate and Pray over the great Propitiatory
Sacrifice; which they esteemed the most powerful and effectual way of Praying,
the most likely to render God propitious, and to prevail with him above all
other Prayers which they offered at any other time, or in any other place. So
much for the testimonies of the Greek Fathers, who were men famous for Learning
and Piety in their generations, and great Lights and Ornaments in the Ancient
Church. With these the Latin Fathers perfectly agree in their judgments
concerning our present subject. And of these I will only mention two (though
more might be produced) for brevity sake, and they very eminent and illustrious
persons, held in great esteem by the then present Age wherein they flourished,
and by all succeeding Generations. The first is St. Ambrose Bishop of Millain,
in a Flor. A. D. 370. Psalm. 98. Ps. 99. 5. in our Translation. Ambros. de Sp.
Sto. l. 3. c. 12.
Book he wrote concerning the Holy Spirit, where inquiring after the meaning of
the Psalmist when he exhorts men to exalt the Lord and to worship his
Footstool, he gives us the sense in these words: That it seems to belong unto
the mystery of our Lords Incarnation; and then proceeds to show for what reason
it may be accommodated to that Mystery: and at last concludes thus: By the
Footstool therefore is the earth Itaque per Scabellum terra intelligitur, per
terram autem caro Christi, quam hodie quoque in mysteriis adoramus, and quam
Apostoli in Dom. Jesu adorarunt.
to be understood, and by the earth the Body of Christ, which at this day too
we adore in the Sacrament, and which the Apostles worshipped in the Lord Jesus,
etc. On the very same words St. Austin (Bishop of Hippo) comments, and to the
same purpose. For thus he resolves that Question, how or in what sense the
earth his Footstool may be worshipped without Impiety? Because he took earth of
the earth, for flesh is of the earth; and he took flesh of the flesh of Mary.
And because he conversed here in the flesh, and gave us his very flesh to eat
unto Salvation. Now there is none who eats that Nemo carnem illam manducat,
nisi prius adoraverit.
flesh, but first worshippeth. We have found then how this Footstool may be
adored; so that we are so far from sinning by adoring, that we really sin if we
do not Adore. In the judgment therefore of these Primitive Bishops, we may
lawfully adore at the Mysteries, though not the Mysteries themselves; at the
Sacraments, not the Sacraments themselves; the Creator in the Creature which is
sanctified, not the Creature it self: as a late Protestant Writer of Phil.
Mornay du Plessis de Missa, l 4. c. 7. p. 732.
prime Quality and Learning among the French, distinguishes upon the forecited
words of St. Ambrose.

From these few Instances I think it appears evident, that the Primitive
Christians used an adoring posture at the Sacrament in the act of receiving. It
were easy to heap together many other Witnesses, if it were necessary so to
do, either to prove or clear the Cause in hand: but since there is no need, to
pester the Discourse with numerous references and appeals to Antiquity, would
but puzzle and obscure the Argument, and tend in all likelihood rather to
confound and disgust, than convince and gratify the Reader.

By what has been alleged, the practice of our Church in Kneeling at the
Sacrament is sufficiently justified, as agreeable to the Customs and Practice
of pure Antiquity. For if the Ancients did at the Sacrament use a posture of
Worship and Adoration, (which that they did, is very plain) then Kneeling is
not repugnant to the practice of the Church in the first and purest Ages; no,
though we should suppose that Kneeling was never practiced among them: which
will appear, if we cast our eyes a little upon that heavy Charge which some of
the fiercest but less prudent Adversaries of Kneeling have drawn up against it.
They object against Kneeling, as being an Adoring gesture; For they affirm,
That to kneel in the act of Receiving, before the consecrated Gillesp. p. 166.
172 Altar Damas. p. 801. Rutherf. Divine Right of Chapter Gov. c. 1. Qu. 5. Sec. 1.
3.
Bread and Wine, is formal Idolatry. So also to kneel before any Creature as a
memorative object of God, though there be no intention of giving divine
Adoration to that Creature, is Idolatry. Now if the Primitive Christians may be
supposed to prostrate themselves before the Altar upon their first approach
thither in order to receive, or immediately after they had received the Bread
and the Cup from the hand of the Minister; or if they bowed their Heads and
Bodies after a lowly manner, in the act of Receiving; or if they received
standing upright, and eat and drank at the Lords Table with their Hands and
Eyes lifted up to Heaven; then they were guilty of Idolatry, as well as we who
kneel at the Sacrament, in the judgment of those Scotch Casuists; and
consequently, Kneeling at the Holy Communion, according to the Custom of our
Church, is not contrary to the practice of the Church of Christ in the first
and purest Ages. For all those postures before mentioned were postures of
Worship and Adoration, and used as such by the Primitive Christians: especially
standing, which is allowed by Gillesp. Disp. against E. Po. Cer. p. 191. Disp.
of kneel. p. 93.
the Patrons of Sitting to be anciently and most generally used in time of
Divine Worship, and particularly in the act of Receiving.

I will conclude all with an Instance in their own Case about a common
Table Gesture. Suppose the Primitive Christians did in some places receive the
Holy Sacrament Sitting, or lying along upon Beds, as the ancient Custom was in
those Eastern Countries, at their common and ordinary Tables: Put the Case that
in other places they sat cross-legg'd on Carpets at the Lords Supper, as the
Turks and Persians eat at this day; or that they received Standing in other
places, according to the common mode of Feasting; which we will suppose only
at present. Could any man now reasonably object against the lawfulness of
Sitting upright at the Sacrament upon a Form or Chair (according to the Custom
of England) as being contrary to the practice of all Antiquity, who never sat
at all? Certainly no. For though they differ from the Ancients as to the Site
of their Bodies, and the particular mode of Receiving, yet they all agree in
this, that they receive in a common Table Gesture: They all use the same
Gesture at the Sacrament, that they constantly used at their civil Feasts and
ordinary Entertainments in the several places of their abode. And so say I in
the present Case; What though the Primitive Christians stood upright some of
them at the Sacrament, and others bowed their Heads and Bodies in the Act of
Receiving, and none of them ever used Kneeling? Yet they and we do very well
agree for all that, because we all receive in an Adoring or Worshipping
Posture. It is one and the same thing variously expressed, according to the modes
of different Countries.

Query V. Whether it be unlawful to Receive Kneeling, because this Gesture was
first introduced by Idolaters, and is still notoriously abused by the Papists
to idolatrous ends and purposes.
ALl that is needful to be said for satisfaction in this Case, may be comprised
under these two Propositions, which I will endeavor to make good.

(1) It can never be proved that Kneeling in the Act of Receiving was first
brought in by Idolaters, as is pretended and supposed in the Question. (2) That
it is not sinful to use such Things and Rites as either have been or are
notoriously abused to Idolatry.
As to the first of these Propositions, I have in my Answer to the fourth Query
made it (I think) appear very probable, That the Church of Christ in the first
and purest Ages did Kneel, as we do at this day, in the Act of Receiving. And
if this be allowed, then they who oppose Kneeling will be unavoidably driven
upon one of these two things: Either they must pronounce the Primitive
Christians guilty of Idolatry, or not guilty. If they say they were Idolaters,
then the former Objection against Kneeling contained in the fourth Query is
void of all sense, and falls to the ground; viz. That Kneeling is contrary to
the general practice of pure Antiquity. If they were clear from Idolatry, then
the present Objection comes to nothing; viz. That Kneeling is unlawful, as
being first introduced by Idolaters.

But secondly, to come close to the Question, let us try if we can find the
time when, and the idolatrous persons by whom Kneeling was first brought into
practice. And surely there are none so likely to inform us, as they who raise
the Objection; for if they do not make out these particulars, they talk at
random, and say nothing to the purpose. And what are the clear and undeniable
Proofs (for such I am sure they ought to be in this case) which they produce to
make good this Charge against Kneeling? No other than these, that I can find by
my best search into the Writings of the most learned Advocates for Sitting:
Kneeling in the Act of Receiving the Eucharist was not known to the Altar.
Damascen. p. 542. c. 9. de Adiaph.
Church for a thousand years, etc. It was never known to the Church and Fathers
before that monstrous Doctrine of Transubstantiation sprung up and grew strong
in the world. It was instituted by Antichrist, and that in honor of the
Breaden God, and to confirm the Id. c. 10. p. 780. 782.
Doctrine of Transubstantiation and the carnal presence. Nay the same Author
affirms, that this Gesture was never used before the time of Honorius; and
challenges all the world to produce one Testimony before that Age for the use
of it; and withal acknowledges at the same time, that Honorius did not
institute Kneeling in the Act of Receiving. 784.


This is Didoclave alias Calderwood his Account; which is so blind and
confused, and inconsistent with it self, that it proves nothing, but that the
Author had a great mind to say somewhat to the purpose, but knew not what or
how. It was unknown, he says, to the Church for a thousand years; and again,
not known till Transubstantiation sprung up and grew to Maturity; and again,
never used till the time of Pope Honorius, who lived about the beginning of the
Thirteenth Century, and came to the Papacy in the year 1216. Now it is strange
to me how Kneeling at the Sacrament should be known about a thousand years
after Christ, and yet never used till the year 1216, or thereabouts: This is
all one with saying, Playing upon Organs was never heard of nor known till the
Reign of King Henry the Seventh, but then Organs were never played upon till
King James came to the Crown. And then again, though Kneeling was brought in by
Antichrist, it was not brought in by Honorius, but in his time only. All the
light therefore that this Author (who has taken as much pains, and showed as
much Learning as any man whatsoever in defense of Sitting) affords us, is only
this: That Kneeling was brought in at some time or other, but he could not well
tell when; and by somebody or other, what do ye call him; but it is uncivil to
name names.

The other Adversaries of Kneeling are very bold in their general Charge as any
men can be, but very shie of coming Disp. against Kneel. p. 99. Abridg. p. 30,
31. Disp. p. 99.
to Particulars. The man of sin was the Author and (to make all sure) the
Mother of it, says one. It grew first from the persuasion of the real presence,
and this when Antichrist was at his full height, says another. And in the
grossest time of Idolatry that p. 94.
the eye of the Christian World has seen. If when Honorius (as the Disputer
proceeds) made his Decree for Adoring the Sacrament, Kneeling were not in use,
what follows from hence? Why then in all probability Kneeling at the Communion
was not received into practice in any Age preceding the days of Honorius. But
when Honorius made his Decree for Adoring the Sacrament, Keeling was not in
use: that is, If Kneeling were not in use when Honorius made his Decree, then
it never was in use before. What shifts are men put to, when they undertake to
defend an ill Cause! Who is there so ignorant, as not to know that things may
grow out of fashion and use? What for some ages was a general and prevailing
Custom, may in tract of time wear off, and dwindle to nothing. I need say no
more to expose the weakness of this Argument, than to put it thus: Sitting was
not in use in the time of Honorius, therefore in all probability it was never
in use in any preceding Age.

After all too, it is strange that Kneeling at the Sacrament should spring (as
these Writers affirm) from that monstrous Doctrine of Transubstantiation and a
Conceit of the corporal presence of Christ, and not be in use in the days of
Honorius when he made the Decree of Adoration. Because that Doctrine had been
disputed many years before among learned men, and was established by Papal
authority in the year 1215, before Honorius was elected Pope. But to pass by
this, it appears from the Writings of these men, that they unanimously agree in
this: Kneeling was brought in by the man of sin, by Antichrist, after
Transubstantiation sprung up, and in the time of Honorius the Third. They all
agree too, in talking confidently and at large concerning this matter, without
all Reason or Proof to make out their Assertion, but It is so, and It must
needs be so, right or wrong: and the common People swallow all for Gospel, and
have got Honorius his name by the end, and so the matter is determined.

However, thus much I think is gained in favor of Kneeling, from what these
our great Adversaries say against it; That it was not introduced by any Pope of
Rome. For when they say the man of sin was the Mother of Kneeling, and
Antichrist brought it in; if they mean by those Phrases (as they generally in
their other Writings do) the Pope or the Bishop of Rome, then the matter is out
of doubt, they themselves being Judges. Because they expressly affirm, that
Kneeling was never practiced before Pope Honorius Disp. p. 81.
his time; and even then it was not instituted by him, but by somebody else.
But if by the man of sin and Antichrist, they mean any number or Society of
men, as the Conclave of Cardinals, Altar. Dam. p. 784. c. 10.
suppose, or some prevailing Faction in a Provincial or General Council,
spurred on by Avarice and Ambition to enlarge and support the Popes Authority;
then it is very strange, and unaccountable, that their Constitutions and Decrees
for Kneeling should nowhere be found, nor the least mention made in any
Records or Histories concerning such a matter. That there are none such to be
met with any where, I will appeal to Mr. Prynne, as good a Terrier as ever
lived, and no Friend to Kneeling. There is not one Canon to be found (says he)
made by any General, National, Provincial Council or Mr. Prynne Apol. for lib.
to tender Con. p. 75. printed 1662.
Synod, from Christ's institution of the Lords Supper, till above 1460 years
after his Ascension: Nor any one Rubric in all the Liturgies, Writings of the
Fathers, or Missals, Breviaries, Offices, Pontificals, Ceremonials of the
Church of Rome it self, that I could either find upon my best search, or any
other yet produced, enjoining Communicants to Kneel in the Act of Receiving.
Thus that inquisitive Gentleman assure us; and in the same place backs his
Report with the authority of the Reverend Dr. Burgess, whom he styles the best
and eminentest Champion for this Gesture of Bneeling of all others. The sum of
what Dr. Burgess delivers concerning this matter, is Dr. Burg. Ans. rejoy. to
the Reply to Dr. Mort. genesis Defense, p. 478, 478.
this: That Kneeling in the Act of Receiving was never any instituted Ceremony
of the Church of Rome, nor is at this day. For this he cites Bellarmine and
Durantus, who make no mention of Kneeling in the Act of Receiving; though they
treat particularly of the Mass, and the Ceremonies of the Roman Church. Instead
of this, Durantus affirms, That the Sacrament ought to be taken Standing; and
proves it also. And so does the Pope himself receive it, Missal. Romans in the
Rubr. set out by Pius V.
when he celebrates; and every Priest by order of the Mass Book, is to partake
standing reverently at the Altar, and not Kneeling there. The people which
receive not, as well as they that do receive, are reverently to bow themselves
to the Sacrament, not when they receive it, but when the Priest does elevate
the Patin or Chalice for Adoration, or when the Host is carried to any sick
person, or in Procession. And this is that Adoration which was first brought in
by Pope Honorius the Third, and not any Kneeling or Adoration in the Act of
Receiving. For these are the very words of the Decree: That the Priests should
frequently instruct their People to bow themselves reverently at the Elevation
of the Host, when Mass was Celebrated, and Ut Sacerdotes frequenter doceant
Plebem suam, ut cum Elevatur Hostia Salutaris, quisque se reverenter inclinet.
Idem faciens quum eam deferat Praesbyter ad infirmum. Decret. Greg. l. 3. tit.
41. c. 10.
in like manner when the Priest carried it abroad to the sick. At the last the
Doctor thus resolves upon the Question: That Kneeling in the Act of Receiving
was never any instituted Ceremony of the Church of Rome, nor ever used, when it
was used by them, for Adoration to the Sacrament, as is falsely believed and
talked of by many. And with him a learned Papist agrees, who in a Book
purposely written for the Adoration of the Sacrament, declares, Espencaeus de
Adorat. Euch. lib. 2. c. 16.
That it is not much material in what Gesture it is performed, whether Sitting,
Standing, Lying, or Kneeling: And in the same place further informs us, That
the Kneeling Gesture had not obtained in the Church of Lions in the year 1555;
and when some endeavored to obtrude it upon that Metropolis, a stop was put to
their proceeding by the Royal Authority.

Nothing needs more be said to give satisfaction in this matter, and fix us,
when we have added what a very great man of our own Church now living has
delivered in writing, viz. Although Dean of St. Paul's Unreasonableness of
Separation, p. 15.
Kneeling at the Elevation of the Host be strictly required by the Roman
Church, yet in the Act of Rec^iving it is not; as manifestly appears by the
Popes manner of Receiving, which is not Kneeling, but either Sitting, as it was
in Bonaventure 's time; or after the fashion of sitting, or a little leaning
upon his Throne, as he does ot this day.

And now the matter is brought to a fine pass! How outrageous have the
Adversaries of Kneeling been in their Clamours against the Church of England
for appointing a Gesture that was first introduced and used by Antichrist and
Idolaters; and when the matter comes to be sifted, not the least proof is
produced to make good the Accusation; but, on the other side, it appears that
those two Postures which are so earnestly contended for by our Dissenting
Brethren, are the very Postures which the man of sin uses at this day himself
in the Act of Receiving the Holy Sacrament! When he celebrates Mass himself,
and upon some other Vid. Dr. Falk. lib. Ecles. p. 484, 485.
particular and solemn occasions, he stands; but generally and ordinarily he
receives sitting, or in a posture very like it. And this Dr. Burg. lawful of
Kneel. p. 67.
I desire may be remembered, against we come to discourse on the second Head,
viz. that Kneeling is not therefore sinful, because it is used by Idolaters.

If any should after all put the Question thus to me: When is it, say you, that
Kneeling first commenced in the World; by whose means, and upon what reasons?
my plain Answer is, I cannot cerntainly tell; nor can I find any account
thereof among the ancient Records. But this is no Argument against, but rather
for the ancient and universal use of this Gesture: Novel Customs are easily
traced to their Originals, but generally the most ancient Usages of every
Country are without Father and Mother; and we cannot tell from what source they
are derived.

(2.) I am so far from thinking (as our Dissenting Brethren do) that Kneeling
owes its birth to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, that I verily believe the
contrary: viz. Kneeling, or an adoring posture used by the ancient Christians
in the Act of Receiving, did very much (among other things) conduce to beget
and nurse up in the minds of Superstitious and Phanciful men, a Conceit, that
Christ was really and corporally present at the Sacrament; which Notion, by
subtle and inquisitive heads, was in a little time improved and explained after
this manner: That after the Elements of Bread and Wine were consecrated, they
were thereby changed into the substance of Christ's natural Body and Blood. This
I am sure of, that the Patrons of Transubstantiation did very early make use of
this very Argument, to prove that they taught and believed no more than what
the Primitive Bishops and Christians did. For what else could they intend or
mean (say they) by that extraordinary Reverence and Devotion which they
manifested when they received the dreadful Mysteries (as they called the Bread
and Wine) if they were bare and empty signs only, and not changed into the
very Body and Blood of Christ? which is in effect the very Argument used by
Cassa enim videtur tot hominum huic Sacramento ministrantium vel adorantium
veneranda sedulitas, nisi ipsius Sacramenti long major crederetur, quam
videretur veritas and utilitas; cum ergo exterius, quasi nulla sint quibus
tanta impenduntur venerationis obsequia, aut insensati sumus, aut ad intima
mittimus magna salutis mysteria. Alger. de Sacramentis, lib. 2. c. 3.
A Monk of Corbie, who wrote against Berengar, and lived about the year 1074.
Algerus, a stout Champion for Transubstantiation. And Coster. Enchirid p. 353.
edit. 1590.
Coster, another Popish Writer, is so far from saying the Pope introduced it,
and that after Transubstantiation took place, that he resolves it into an
ancient Custom continued from the Apostles times.

Seeing then upon the whole matter it appears by the confession of some who
oppose Kneeling that Honorius did not institute or ordain that Gesture in the
Act of Receiving; seeing the Decree which he made, and which others appeal to,
does not at all relate to this matter, but only to the Adoration of the Host
at the Priests elevation of it; seeing no other Pope is alleged as the Author
of this Custom; seeing Kneeling was never any instituted Ceremony in the Church
of Rome, nor is there any Canon or Decree or Rubric extant which requires the
use of that Gesture; seeing the Pope himself, and the Priests who celebrate,
use another Gesture in the Act of Receiving; seeing their own Writers look on
it as an ancient Usage derived to them from the first and purest Ages: it
follows, that what is pretended and supposed in the Question, is without all
Warrant and Proof, viz. that Kneeling in the Act of Receiving was first brought
in by Idolaters.

And now to close up all, I will appeal to any man of sense and understanding,
whether this be not a very silly and extravagant way of Arguing? Kneeling in
the Act of Receiving is sinful, because it was first introduced by Antichrist
and the man of sin, and that after the Doctrine of Transubstantiation was
started and took place in the world; and yet after all (when you come up close
to them, and enquire into particulars) they are not able to date the original
of it, nor name the Authors who first invented it and set it up. At this rate
of talking, it were the easiest matter imaginable to evince that Sitting and
Standing were equally unlawful with Kneeling. For it is but affirming boldly
that they were first brought in and used by Idolaters, and then the work is
done effectually. And if such slender Objections must drive us away from the
Lords Supper, we shall never communicate as long as we live.

But besides the folly of such Arguments, I think it is a very wicked thing for
men to invent and urge them, as the Case stands with us at present: For what is
there more desired and wished for by all good Christians, than Brotherly Love
and Concord? than that we may all meet together with one accord, in one place,
and with one mind and one mouth glorify God in the public Churches? What more
talked of now adays then Peace and Union? Whosoever therefore shall any ways
obstruct so blessed and desirable a Work, must be concluded every ill man. And
such a one (most certainly) is he (whatsoever we may think of it) who withdraws
himself from the Holy Communion upon groundless jealousies and unreasonable
fears of incurring the divine displeasure, if he receive Kneeling; and shall go
about by the Bugbear-words of Idolaters, Antichrist, the man of sin, to scare
weak and honest men from Receiving the Holy Sacrament in our Churches. Because
the Lords Supper was instituted for this peculiar end, among others, viz. to be
an uniting Ordinance, to bind Christians together in the strictest bonds of
Love and Friendship, to dispose and engage them to put on Bowels of Mercy, to
exercise the most kind and tender affections, and the most fervent Charity one
toward another that is possible for men to do. Those Nonconforming Ministers
therefore who possess the people with these Arguments (which they themselves
know, unless they be grossly ignorant, to be false and senceless) to render them
averse from the Lords Supper as it is administered in our Churches, are in plain
English the Authors and Fomenters of our Divisions, and the Disturbers of our
Peace.

In the second place (to proceed) it is not unlawful to use such Things and
Rites as either have been or are notoriously abused to Idolatry.

Before I produce my Reasons for the proof of this Proposition, I think it will
not be amiss to inform the Reader with those Arguments which Dissenters use to
overthrow it: and they are these two in general.

(1.) All Things and Rites which have been notoriously abused to Gillesp. Eng.
Pop. Cer. c. 2. par. 3. p. 130.
Idolatry, if they were such as were devised by man, and not by God and Nature
made to be of necessary use, should be utterly abolished, and purged away from
divine Worship. But Kneeling in the Act of Receiving is one of these Rites:
therefore it should utterly be Abridgment of Linc. Min. p. 17. Vid. Mr. Hook.
Eccles. Pol. lib. 4. p. 160.
abolished.

(2.) To imitate, and agree with Idolaters, by using such Rites and Ceremonies
as they do, though in themselves indifferent, and though they contain nothing
which is not agreeable to the Word of God, is sinful. So that not to abolish
utterly whatsoever we know to have been abused heretofore to Idolatry; to take
up any old Heathenish and Idolatrous Customs and Rites, though at present
disused by Idolaters, is sinful: and then to use the same Rites Gillesp. p.
141. c. 3.
with Idolaters at present, to sort our selves and communicate with them in
their Rites, is to partake of their sins, and to become Altar. Dam. p. 536, 549.
guilty of Idolatry too.

With these Arguments they make a great noise, and endeavor to confirm them by
Scripture and Reason. I shall not offer at a Confutation of these Proofs, which
stand built upon a weak and sandy Foundation, upon trifling and sorry Reasons,
upon Scripture-Precepts whose sense is horribly wrested, and Scripture-Examples
falsely applied and nothing to the purpose. There is a Case of Conscience lately
published, wherein the Author has done this Work to my hands: For he clearly
shows, That a Vid Case resolved; whether the Chapter of Eng. Symbolizing, etc. p.
24. to p. 47. p. 38.
Churches agreeing in some things with the Church of Rome, is no Warrant for
Separation from the Church so agreeing: and particularly instanceth in our
Churches agreement with the Church of Rome by Kneeling at the Sacrament. There
you will find the most considerable Texts and Examples which they drag from
Scripture and urge for themselves, rendered utterly unserviceable to their
Cause, and rescued from their Tortures.

All that I shall do therefore at present, is only this, briefly to propound
my Reasons for the proof of my Assertion; by which I hope to make it evidently
appear, that our Dissenting Brethren lie under a great error and mistake, by
thinking that all those Rites and Ceremonies which are in themselves
indifferent, and of man's devising, ought to be utterly abolished; and become
sinful for us to use, purely because they either have been, or are notoriously
abused to Idolatry. But here a few things must be premised, to prevent Cavils
and Mistakes.

(1.) I take it for granted, that indifferent things may be lawfully See the
Case of Indifferent Things.
used in the Worship of God. This is supposed in the present Question; for
otherwise it would be sinful in us to Kneel, whether that Gesture had been ever
used or abused by Idolaters or no.

(2.) I grant that the Worship of God is to be preserved pure See Dr. Fall. lib.
Eccles. p. 443.
from all sinful Mixtures and Defilements whatsoever, whether of Idolatry or
Superstition; and that things otherwise indifferent, which either in the design
of them that use them, or in their own present tendency, do directly promote or
propagate such Corruptions, do in that case become things unlawful. To follow
Idolaters in what they think or do amiss, to follow them generally in what they
do, without other reason than only the liking we have to the Pattern of their
Example, which liking does intimate a more universal approbation than is
allowable; in these cases I think, with the Reverend Mr. Hooker, Conformity
Hook. Ecles. Pol. l. 4. p. 165.
with Idolaters is evil, and blameworthy in any Christian Church.

But excepting these Cases, it is not sinful or blameworthy in any Society of
Christians to agree with Idolaters in Opinion or Practice, and to use the same
Rites which they abuse. And consequently, our Church is not to be blamed or
charged with Idolatry, for her Agreement with the Church of Rome in using the
same Ceremonies, unless it can be proved that the Church of England does abuse
the said Ceremonies to sinful ends; or that the Ceremonies used and appointed
by our Church, naturally tend to promote the Corruptions practiced in the
Church of Rome, and were ill designed; or that she did not follow the general
Rules of Gods Word, the Directions of the Holy Ghost in appointing and
enjoining the use of Ceremonies, as being godly, comely, profitable; but
overlooking all this, had an eye purely to the Example of Idolatrous Papists in
what they did amiss.

Now this I am sure can never be made good against our Church, who has
sufficiently vindicated her self, by the open declarations she has printed to
the World, from all accusations of this nature. Let but any man consult the
Articles of Religion, Art. 20. Art. 34. Canon. 18.
the Preface to the Book of Common Prayer just after the Act of Uniformity, the
two excellent Discourses that follow it concening the Service of the Church and
Ceremonies, and the Reasons she has published at the end of the
Communion-service for enjoining her Communicants to receive Kneeling; I say,
let any man peruse these, and he will receive ample satisfaction, that our
Governors in Church and State in appointing the use of Ceremonies did not
steer by the Example of Idolaters, nor enjoin them out of any ill design, or to
any ill ends; but were conducted by the light of Gods Word, the Rules of
Prudence and Charity, the Example of the holy Apostles, and the Practice of
pure Antiquity.

These things being premised, I proceed to prove this Assertion: That it is not
sinful to use such Things and Rites as either have been or are notoriously
abused to Idolatry: Or, which is all one, That to Kneel in the Act of Receiving
according to the custom of the Church of England, is not therefore sinful,
because it has been and is notoriously abused to Idolatry, for these Reasons.

(1.) In general: No abuse of any Gesture, though it be in the most manifest
Idolatry, does render that Gesture simply evil, and for ever after unlawful to
be used in the Worship of God upon that account. For the abuse of a thing
supposes the lawful use of it; and if any thing otherwise lawful becomes sinful
by an abuse of it, then it is plain that it is not in its own nature sinful, but
by accident, and with respect to somewhat else. This is clear from Scripture:
for if Rites and Ceremonies, after they have been abused by Idolaters, become
absolutely evil, and unlawful to be used at all, then the Jews sinned in
offering Sacrifice, erecting Altars, burning Incense to the God of Heaven,
bowing down themselves before him, wearing a Linen Garment in the time of
Divine Worship, and observing other Things and Rites which the Heathens
observed in the Worship of their false Gods.

No (say the Dissenters) we except all such Rites as were commanded or approved
of by God, and such are all those forementioned. But, say I, it is a silly
Exception, and avails nothing. For if the abuse of a thing to Idolatry makes it
absolutely sinful, and unlawful to be used at all, then it is impossible to
destroy that Relation; and what has been once abused, must ever remain so:
that is, an infinite power cannot undo what has been done, and clear it from
ever having been abused. And therefore I conclude from the Command and
Approbation of God, that a bare Conformity with Idolaters in using those Rites
in the Worship of the true God, which they practice in the Worship of Idols, is
not simply sinful, or formal Idolatry; for if it had, God had obliged the
Children of Israel by his express Command to commit sin, and to do what he
strictly and severely prohibited in other places. In truth, such a Position
would plainly make God the Author of sin.

(2.) This Position, That the Idolatrous abuse of any thing, renders the use of
it sinful to all that know it, is attended with very mischievous consequences
and effects.

First, It intrenches greatly upon Christian liberty, as dear to our Dissenting
Brethren as the Apple of their Eyes: and I wonder they are not sensible of it.
At other times they affirm that no earthly power can rightly restrain the use
of those things which God has left free and indifferent; and that those things
which otherwise are lawful, become sinful when imposed and enjoined by lawful
Authority: and yet these very men give that power to Strangers, both Heathens
and Papists, which they take away from their own rightful Princes and lawful
Superiors. An Idolater may yoke them, when a Protestant Prince must not touch
them. And what more heavy and intolerable Yoke can be clapped on our necks than
this, That another man's abuse of any thing to Idolatry, though in its own
nature indifferent, and left free by God, renders the use of it sinful? Whether
this be not a violation of Christian Liberty, let St. Paul determine; who tells
us, that to the pure all things are pure; and affirms it lawful to eat of such
things as had been offered to Idols, and to eat whatsoever was 1 Cor. 10. 25,
27, 28, 29.
sold in the shambles. And what reason is there why a Gesture should be more
defiled by Idolaters, than Meat which they had offered up in Sacrifice to
Idols? and why should one be sinful and idolatrous to use, and not the other?
Certainly St. Paul would never have granted them such a privilege, if he
judged it idolatrous to use what Idolaters had abused; especially considering
that he in the same Chapter exhorts them earnestly to flee from Idolatry. Verse.
14.


Secondly, This Position subjects the minds of Christians to infinite Scruples
and Perplexities, and naturally tends to reduce us to such a state and
condition in which both the Jews and Gentiles were, before the glorious light
of the Gospel broke out upon the World: that is, it tends to beget and
propagate a base servile temper and disposition toward God, and to fill us
with fears and tremblings when we are engaged in his Worship and Service.
Whereas the true and great design of the Gospel, is to breed in men a filial
cheerful frame of heart, the spirit of Love, and of a sound or quiet Romans 8.
15. 2 Timothy 1. 7.
mind; to give us a free, easy, comfortable access to God as to our Father,
and to encourage every good man to a diligent, constant, frequent attendance
upon the duties of his Worship, by the pleasure and delight that follows them.
But now if nothing may be used by us without highly offending God, that either
has been or is abused to Idolatry; who sees not what trouble and distraction
will arise in our minds hereupon, when we meet together to worship God? It Is
well known that most of our Churches were erected by Idolatrous Papists, and as
much defiled by Idolatry as any Gesture can be; they are dedicated to several
Saints and Angels, whose Images were once set up and adored. Our Bells, Pews,
Fonts, Desks, Churchyards, have been consecrated after a superstitious manner;
many Cups, Flagons, Dishes, Communion-Tables, have been given and used by
Idolaters. What now is to be done? If Kneeling at the Sacrament be sinful,
because it has been abused by Idolaters notoriously; so also it is sinful to
use any other Thing or Rite that has, if it be of man's divising, as the
aforementioned Writers limit the Question. If Sitting were allowed by
Authority, we could not come to the public Churches, nor to the Sacrament, nor
christen our Children for all that, if we know the Font and other Utensils of
the Church were once abused to Idolatry by Papists: We must first make a
diligent search, and if certain information cannot be had, we cannot Worship God
in public without panick fears and great disquiet of mind.

But Thirdly, Such a Position as this will destroy all Public Worship. For if
nothing must be used which has been or is abused by Idolaters, it will be in
the power of Idolaters, by engrossing all the outward marks and signs of that
inward veneration and esteem which we owe to God, to smother our Devotions, so
as they shall never appear in the World; and by that means frustrate the very
end and design of Religious Assemblies. And truly this work is already, by the
strength of this Principle, very well effected. For Kneeling at Prayers, and
Standing and Sitting, and lifting up the hands and eyes to Heaven, and bowing
of the body, together with Prayer and Praise, and Singing, have been all
notoriously abused to Idolatry, and are so at this day.

I know how it will be replied, that they except such things as

To this I answer, That this is cunningly, but not honestly and See Gillesp. p.
128.
Ceremonies which are or have been abused to Idolatry, become sinful in these
by respects, and for these reasons, viz. Because they 1. Reductive, 2.
Participative:
put us in mind of Idolatry, and preserve the memory of Idols: and secondly,
Because they move us to turn back to Idolatry, and sort us with Idolaters: then
it will be ever sinful for us to use them. Quia Monent, Quia Movent. 134. 149.
For these Reasons will hold good in things that are of necessary use in the
Church, as well as in things that are not necessary: that is, nothing can
hinder and destroy these effects; they will ever mind us of, and move us to
Idolatry. And from hence I conclude that this Principle is a very false one,
and ought to be laid aside. For it is attended with this absurdity: It obliges
us utterly to abolish, and forbids the use of all such Rites as have been
notoriously abused to Idolatry in some cases, for reasons which eternally hold
in all. So that at last it drives us into such streights, that we must sin one
way or other. For either we must not worship God in public, or we must be
guilty of Idolatry Gillesp. c. 3. p. 149.
if we do: And though of two Evils or Calamities the least is to be chosen, yet
of two Sins neither is. Christian Religion flows from infinite Wisdom; and the
Laws of God do not cross one another, but are even and consistent. We are never
cast by God under a necessity of sinning, of transgressing one Law by the
observance of another; but thus it must be, if we take up and stick to this
Principle.

(3.) Our Dissenting Brethren condemn themselves in what they allow and
practice, by the same Rule by which they condemn Kneeling at the Sacrament, and
other Rites of our Church. For they themselves did use, without Scruple, such
Places and Things and Postures as had been defiled and abused by Idolaters.
They were wont to be bare-headed in time of Divine Worship, at Prayer, and at
the Sacrament: and so do Idolatrous Papists: they never affirmed that it was
sinful to Kneel at our Prayers both public and private; yet this Gesture the
Papists use in their Prayers to the Virgin Mary, to the Cross, to Saints and
Angels. They used our Churches, Churchyards, and Bells, and never thought they
sinned against God by so doing, though they knew Direct. of the day and place
of Worship.
they had been abused. Nay, the Directory declares, That such places are not
subject to any such Pollution by any Superstition formerly used and now laid
aside, as may render them unlawful and inconvenient. Rutherf. of Scandal, Q. 5,
6.
Mr. Rutherford says of Bells grossly abused in time of Popery, That it is
unreasonable and groundless, that thereupon they should be disused. Upon which
the Reverend Dr. Faulkner has this judicious Remark: The pretense of their
convenient usefulness would be no better Excuse on their behalf, than was that
Plea for sparing the best of the Antalekites Cattle that they might be a
Sacrifice, when God had devoted them to Destruction. For if God (as they say)
has commanded that all such Things and Rites should be utterly abolished as
were of man's devising, and had been abused to Idolatry; then the convenient
usefulness of such Places and Things will never bear them out.

(4) If it be sinful to Kneel at the Sacrament because that Cesture has been
and is notoriously abused by Papists to idolatrous ends, so also is Sitting,
which is contended for with so much show of Zeal. For the Pope himself sits in
the Act of Receiving, as was before noted; and (if any credit be to be given to
a Doctor of the Church of Rome) for the same reason which our Dissenters urge
for Sitting, viz. because the Apostles sat at the first Institution and
Celebration of the Sacrament. If any enquire why the Si quaeratur quare Dominus
Papa Sedendo Communicate, potest dici, quod hoc sit in recordationem, quod
Beatus Petrus and alii Apostoli sedendo Corpus Domini in Coena ultima
acceperunt. Alex. Hales, Tract. de Missa, par. 2. Quest. 10. par. 4.
Pope Receives Sitting, it may be rereplied, that he uses that Gesture in
remembrance of St. Peter and the o-other Apostles, who Received the Body of our
Lord at the last Supper Sitting.

To conclude; If Kneeling be unlawful because it has been abused to Idolatry,
then we must never Receive the Holy Sacrament. For we must Receive in some
convenient Posture, such as Kneeling, Sitting, Discumbing, Standing; and yet
every one of these either have been or is notoriously abused by Heathens and
Papists to Idolatrous ends.

I have now finished what I undertook; and endeavored, all that in me lies, to
satisfy all honest and peaceable Dissenters that they may lawfully and
innocently Kneel in the Act of Receiving the Holy Sacrament. What Success this
Discourse will have, I know not; but this I am sure of, it is well meant; and
if it be read with the same Charity as it was written, with an honest teachable
mind, a mind not pleased with its Scruples, I hope by Gods blessing it will do
some good in the World. And really if any of our Dissenting Brethren shall
Receive thus much satisfaction from what I have written, That by Kneeling in
the Act of Receiving, they transgress no known Law of God, nor act contrary to
our blessed Saviors Example; That they do nothing but what becomes them, and
is very suitable to the nature of the Lords Supper, nothing but what is
agreeable to the practice of the universal Church in the first and purest Ages;
I don't see what other Scruples about Kneeling should block up their way to the
Lords Table, and hinder them from communicating with us. There are a sort of
men, I confess, who separate from our Church, upon whom I despair of doing good
by any attempts of this nature; and they are such whose Scruples arise from a
vicious Principle, not from the weakness of their understandings, but the
obstinacy of their wills; not from a great fear of offending God which keeps
pace with all their actions (for such I have as tender a compassion as any man)
but from Humor, Self-Conceit, Affectation of popular Applause and the being
thought the wiser and better men, for finding fault with every thing enjoined
by lawful Authority, and every thing that is written in defense of it: Nor upon
men whose Scruples against Government by Bishops, the Liturgy and Rites of the
Church, arise, not from their Consciences but their Stomachs from Pride and
Ambition, from private piques and disappointments in the State, from Hypocrisy
and Interest, when the more they rail and except against Ceremonies, the better
Trade they drive in the World. From such as these I expect nothing but Contempt
and Derision, and that the Medicine will be turned into Poison. For as a great
man observes on Prove. 14. 6. He Lord Bacon Advan. of Learn. fol. p 230.
that comes to seek after Knowledge with a mind to scorn and censure, shall be
sure to find matter enough for his Humor, but no matter for his Instruction.

FINIS.
For Kneeling, I never yet heard any thing yet to prove it unlawful. If there
be any thing, it must be either some Word of God, or the nature of the
Ordinance which is supposed to be contradicted. But (1) there is no Word of God
for any Gesture, nor against any. Christ's Example can never be proved to
oblige us more in this than in many other circumstances, that are confessed not
obligatory. As, that he delivered but to Ministers, and but to a Family, to
Twelve, and after Supper, and on a Thursday-night, and in an upper Room, etc.
and his Gesture was not such a Sitting as ours. And (2) for the nature of the
Ordinance, it is mixed: and if it be lawful to take a Pardon from the King upon
our Knees, I know not what can make it unlawful to take a sealed Pardon from
Christ (by his Ambassador) upon our Knees. Mr. Baxter 's Christian Directory,
par. 2. p. 111. Quest. 3.. 40. A DISCOURSE ABOUT Edification: IN ANSWER TO A
QUESTION, Whether it is Lawful for any Man to forsake the Communion of the
Church of England, and go to the Separate Meetings, because he can better
Edify there? The Second EDITION.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. and Freeman Collins, for Fincham Gardener at the
White-Horse in Ludgate Street. 1684.

A DISCOURSE About EDIFICATION: In Answer to a Question,
WHether it is lawful for any Man to forsake the Communion of the Church of
England, and go to the separate Meetings, because he can better Edify there?

Answer, It is Unlawful.

To make this plain, two things must be considered:

First, What sort of Person this is, who asks this Question.

Secondly, What he means by Edification.

As to the Person, he is supposed to be one, that is fully satisfied, that he
may lawfully Communicate with the Church of England; That there are no Terms of
Communion put upon him, but which he can comply withal with a good Conscience;
That there is nothing in it contrary to the Word of God, natural Reason, or
plain Consequences fetched from both or either. And therefore he who thinks,
that there are some things unlawful in the Communion of the Church of England,
is not concerned in the Question; for he separates upon the Account of
Unlawfulness, and not Edification only, as is supposed in the Question.

Secondly, By Edification is meant, an Improvement of his Spiritual Condition
in the full latitude, whereinsoever it may truly consist; whether in the
Articles of his Faith, which in the separate Congregations are better taught,
more clearly proved, more fitly applied to his practice, and to support his
hopes of Heaven; or whether in the Rules of Life, which are there more exactly
laid down, and more strongly enforced upon his Mind; or in Prayers, which among
them are better composed, and more fervently sent up unto God; and in all other
parts of Devotion, which there are better framed and ordered to affect his
Soul, and make a truly Christian man.

These two things being explained, and premised, the Answer to the Question
will be found true, if we consider these following Reasons:

1. That the Ground upon which the Question stands is false, viz. There is not
better Edification to be had in the Separate Meetings, than in the Communion of
the Church of England.

This will appear, if we consider,

1. How apt and fit the whole Constitution of the Church of England is to
Edify Men's Souls. 2. That this Constitution is well used and managed, by the
Pastors of our Church, for Edification.
The first will be manifest by Induction, if we consider the several parts of
her Constitution, reducible to these following Heads:

1. Her Creeds or Articles of Faith are those which our Dissenters themselves
allow; which are full and plain, containing all Necessaries and Fundamentals in
Religion; nothing defective in Vitals or Integrals, to make up the Body of a
true Christian Church. Christ that founded his Church, best knew what was
absolutely necessary to her being; and there is nothing that he has declared
to be so, but is contained in her Creeds. Whatever is fundamental for us to
know of the Nature of God, is to be found there, or by easy Consequences
deduced from them. Would we know what we ought to believe of the Nature of
Christ or his Offices, the Designs of his coming upon Earth, the Constitution
of his Reign and Government, the Rewards and Punishments of his Laws, the Times
of Account and Retribution, the mighty Miracles and extraordinary Acts of
Providence to confirm these; we may read them at large in Holy Writ, and find
wisely summed up in our Creeds. Whose Articles, to help the Memories of Men,
are short and few; and to assist the dullness of their Understandings, are
manifest and plain; they containing no more, than what was some way or other,
either supposed before, or included in, or following from that brief Creed, the
Character of a true Christian, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God. 1 John
4. 15. 5. 5.
Whatever is any way revealed by God as necessary, is an Article of our Faith:
nothing that is nice and obscure, fit only for dispute and wrangling, is
brought into our Creed; all whose Articles are Primitive, and of Divine right;
none of them purely speculative or curious, but plain and useful in order to
practice, naturally leading to an Holy Life, the end of all Religion. We love
every thing that is truly ancient and Apostolical, but we cannot call that an
eternal truth, which was but yesterday; and we are ready to embrace all truth,
but we cannot call that the High Priest, which is but the Fringe of his
Garment. We believe all that the early Christians in the first 300 Years
thought sufficient for them to know (and they were very secure that this would
save them.) And if any truth be disguised or defaced by the iniquity of the
descending Ages, we are ready to receive it, whenever it is made clear, and
restored to its former shape and complexion; we casting out obstinacy and
perverseness out of our Practice, as well as niceness out of our Creed. That
Creed that Christ and his Apostles taught, the Saints, Martyrs, and Confessors,
the Wise and Good Men in the first and purest days of Christianity believed,
and were secure of Heaven by it, and therefore added no more; that Faith this
Church maintains, which will sufficiently and effectually Edify the Souls of
Men.

2. The Necessity she lays upon a Good Life and Works. For this is the solemn
intention of all Religion, our Creed, our Prayers, our Sacraments, and
Discipline, and all Devotion. Her Creed is such, that all its Articles so
directly, or by natural consequence, lead unto Virtue and Holiness, that no man
can firmly believe them, but they must ordinarily influence his Manners, and
better his Conversation; and if by virtue of his Creed his Life is not mended,
he either ignorantly and grossly mistakes their Consequences, or is wilfully
desperate. Our Church publicly declares, that without preparatory Virtues, no
Acts of Devotion, however set off with Zeal and Passion, are pleasing unto God;
and if obedience be wanting afterward, are but scene and show. Such a Faith
she lays down as fundamental to salvation, which rests not in the brain and
story, in magnifying and praising, in sighing and repeating, but in the
production of Mercy, Charity, and Justice, and such excellent Virtues. She
makes no debates between Faith and Good Works, nor argues nicely about the
preference, nor disputes critically the Mode how jointly they become the
condition of Salvation; but plainly determines, that without Faith and Good
Works, no Man shall see God. She not only keeps to a Form of sound Words, but
to a Conversation of equal Firmness and Solidity. Her Festivals are to
commemorate the Virtues of Excellent Men, and to recommend them as Presidents
for imitation. Her Ceremonies, which were principally designed for Decency, may
also remind us of those Virtues which become the Worshippers of God. Her
Collects and Petitions are for Grace to subdue our Follies, and to fortify our
resolutions for Holiness. Her discipline is to lash the sturdy into Sobriety
and Goodness: And her Homilies are plainly and smartly to declare against the
gross Acts of Impiety, and to persuade a true Christian Deportment in Word and
Deed; and her whole Constitution aims at the Design of the Gospel, to teach Men
to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly. She flatters and lulls no man asleep
in Vice, but tells all secure sinners plainly, that they do not pray nor
receive aright, that they are not absolved, that their persons are not
justified, nor can have any true hopes of Heaven, except they purify
themselves, and be really just and good. She neither uses nor allows any nice
distinctions in plain Duties, to baffle our Obedience; nor suffers a cunning
head to serve the designs of a wicked heart, and teach Men learnedly to sin;
but urges plain Virtues laid down distinctly in Holy Writ, and taught by
Natural Reason and Conscience (without calling them mean Duties, or ordinary
Morality) to be the great Ornament of our Religion, and the Soul of our Faith.
She sets no abstruse and fantastic Characters, nor any Marks, whose truth
must be fetched in by long deductions and consequences, for Men to judge by,
whether they shall be saved or no; but Faith and good Works, which the
Philosopher and meanest Christian can easily judge of. The civil interest of a
Nation is Edifi'd by such a Church, pressing the necessity of good Works; not
only thereby enforcing Peace and Justice, Pity and Tenderness, Humility and
Kindness, one toward another; but she makes Kings safer, and Subjects more
secure, condemning both Tyranny and Disobedience; Parents more obeyed, and
Subjects more loved, commanding equally Bowels and Affections, and Duty and
Honor; Masters and Servants, Husbands and Wives, and all Relations, are kept
in their just Bounds and Privileges. With other Churches, we make good Works
necessary to Salvation, but think our selves more modest and secure in taking
away Arrogance and Merit, and advancing the Grace of Christ: With other Men, we
cry up Faith, but not an hungry and a starved one, but what is fruitful of good
Works; and so have all that others contend for, with greater modesty and
security.

3. How fitly this Church is constituted to excite true Devotion. When we make
our Addresses unto God, we ought to have worthy and reverend Conceptions of his
Nature, a true sense and plain knowledge of the Duty, and of the Wants and
Necessities for which we pray to be supplied. All which our Church, to help our
Devotion, plainly sets down, describing God by all his Attributes of just,
wise, and laying forth the Vices and Infirmities of Humane Nature, and that
none else but God can cure our needs. When her Sons are to pray, the matter of
her Petitions are not nice and controverted, trivial, or words of a Party; but
plain and substantial, wherein all agree. Her Words in Prayer are neither
rustic nor gay, the whole Composure neither too tedious nor too short;
decently ordered to help our Memories and wandering Thoughts. Responsals and
short Collects in Public Devotion are so far from being her fault, that they
are her beauty and prudence. There are few Cases and Conditions of Humane Life,
whether of a Civil or Spiritual Nature, which have not their proper Prayers and
particular Petitions for them, at least as is proper for public Devotions.
When we return our Thanks, we have proper Offices to inflame our Passions, to
quicken our Resentment, to excite our Love, and to confirm our future
Obedience, the best instance of gratitude. When we Commemorate the Passion of
Christ, we have a Service fit to move our Affections, to assist our Faith, to
enlarge our Charity, to show forth and exhibit Christ and all his bloody
Sufferings, every way to qualify us to discharge that great Duty. She has
indeed nothing to kindle an Enthusiastic heat, nor any thing that savours of
Raptures and Ecstasies, which commonly flow from temper or fraud; but that which
makes us manly devout, our Judgment still guiding our Affections. When we enter
first into Religion, and go out of the World, we have two proper Offices,
Baptism, and Burial, full of Devotion, to attend those purposes. So that if any
does not pray, and give thanks, communicate, and live like a Christian, it is
not because the Services to promote these are too plain, and hungry, beggarly
and mean, but their own mind is not fitly qualified before they use them: bring
but an honest mind to these parts of Devotion, a true sense of God, sober and
good purposes, and affections well disposed, that which is plain will prove
Seraphical, improve our Judgment, heighten our Passions, and make the Church a
Quire of Angels. Without which good disposition, our Devotion is but
Constitution, or melancholy Peevishness, Sullenness, or Devotion to a Party, a
Sacrifice that God will not acccept.

4. Her Order and Discipline. Such are the Capacities and Manners of Men, not
to be taught only by naked Virtue, a natural Judgment, or an immediate
Teaching of God; but by Ministry and Discipline, decent Ceremonies and
Constitutions, and other external Methods: these are the outward Pales and
Guards, the Supplies and Helps for the Weakness of Humane Nature. Our Church
has fitted and ordered these so well, as neither to want or to abound; not to
make Religion too gay, nor leave her slovingly; neither rude nor fantastic,
but is clothed in Dresses proper to a manly Religion; not to please or gratify
our senses, so as to fix there, but to serve the reason and judgment of our
Mind. There are none of our Ceremonies, which good Men, and wise Men, have not
judged decent, and serviceable to the great ends of Religion; and none of them
but derive themselves from a very ancient Family, being used in most Ages, and
most of the Churches of God; and have decency, antiquity, and usefulness, to
plead for them; to help our Memories, to excite our Affections, to render our
Services orderly and comely. Were we indeed all Soul, and such Seraphical
Saints, and grown Men, as we make our selves, we might then plead against such
external helps; but when we have Natures of weakness and passion, these outward
helps may be called very convenient, if not generally necessary: and as our
Nature is mixed of Soul and Body, so must always our Devotion be here; and such
God expects, and is pleased with. Our Church is neither defective in Power and
Discipline (had she her just dues; and others would do well to join with her in
her wishes, that they might be restored) which would turn all into Confusion;
nor yet tyrannical, want of Authority breeding as many, if not more Miseries
than Tyranny, or too much Power; both of them severe Curses of a Nation. But
her Government, like her Clime, is so well tempered together, that the Members
of this Christian Society may not be dissolute or rude with her, nor her Rulers
insolent; being constituted in the Church with their different Names and
Titles, not for luster and greatness, and Secular purposes, but for suppression
of Vice, the maintaining of Faith, Peace, Order, and all Virtues, the true
Edification of Men's Souls. And if those Vices are not reproved and chastized,
which fall under her Cognizance, it is not the fault of her Power, but because
by other ways ill restrained; unnecessary Divisions from her, hindering her
Discipline upon Offenders, and so they hinder that Edification which thy
contend for. This Government is not Modern, Particular, or purely Humane, but
Apostolical, Primitive, and Universal, to time as well as place: till some
private Persons, for Number, Learning, or Piety, not to be equaled to the good
Men of old, who defended it, and obeyed it, and suffered for it, out of some
mistakes of Humane frailty and passion, or born down with the iniquities of the
times, began to change it, and declaim against it, though so very fit and
proper to promote Christianity in the World. This is a general account of that
Edification that is to be had in that Church in which we live; a more
particular one would be too long for this Discourse: but thus much must be
said, that examine all her particular Parts, and Offices, you will find none of
them light, or superstitious, novel, or too numerous, ill disposed, or uncouth,
improper or burdensome, no just cause for any to revolt from her Communion:
but considering the present circumstances of Christianity, and Men, the best
constituted Church in the World. If therefore Edification be going on to
Perfection, Heb. 6. 1. 2 Pet. 3. 18. Romans 15. 2. 1 Cor. 14. 3.
or growing in Grace; if it is doing good to the Souls of Men; if it be to make
plain the great things in Religion to the understandings of Men; or whatever
the import of it is, in relation to Faith or Virtue, which is the condition of
our Salvation, it is to be found in this Church; whose Constitution is apt and
fit to do all this: And St. Jude seems to tell us, that true Edification was a
stranger to those who separated from the common building; but those who kept to
the Verse. 19.
Communion of the Church, built up themselves in their most holy Faith, and
prayed in the Holy Ghost. And the honest Christian, with greater assurance, may
expect the Grace and Blessings of Christ, and the Divine Spirit, whose Promises
are made to them, who continue in the Communion of the Church, and not to them
who divide from the Body, and have greater hopes of Edification from their
Teacher, than the Grace of God, from Apollos, that waters, than from Christ,
the chief Husbandman, who gives the increase.

2. This Constitution is used and managed in the best way, by the Pastors of
our Church, to Edify the Souls of Men. This will appear, if we consider these
two things:

1. That there are strict Commands under great Penalties laid upon the Pastors
of our Church to do this; who are not left to their own freedom, and private
judgment, or the force only of common Christianity upon them, thus to improve
Men's Souls committed to their charge; but have Temporal Mulcts and
Ecclesiastical Censures held over them, to keep them to their Duty. That when
they do inform or direct their Flocks about their Belief, they should keep to
the Analogy of Faith, or Form of sound Words. Or when they persuade to
practice, their Rules and Propositions must be according to Godliness. That
whenever they Exhort or Rebuke, Preach or Pray; whenever they Direct, or Answer
the Scruples of Men's Minds, in the whole Exercise and Compass of their
Ministry, they are to have an Eye to the Creed; to regard Mercy and Justice,
the Standard of good Manners; in short, to preserve Faith and a good Conscience
with substantial Devotion; which will to the purpose Edify Men's Souls, and
effectually save them.

2. That these Commands are obeyed by the Pastors of our Church, and they do
all things in it to Edification. For the truth of this, we appeal to good Men,
and wise Men, in the Communion of our Church, who have Honesty and Judgment to
confess this truth, and with gratitude acknowledge, that the Pastors of the
Church of England have led them into the ways of Truth and Righteousness, cured
their Ignorance, and reformed their Lives, and upon good grounds given them an
assurance of Heaven. To say such as these are prejudiced, and want sincerity
and knowledge to pass a judgment, is only to prove, what we justly suspect,
that they want true Edification among themselves, and should be better taught
the Doctrine of Charity. Our Protestant Neighbors, impartial Judges, will give
their Testimony to this Truth, who have owned and commended the Government of
this Church, condemned the Separation, magnified the Prudence, Piety, and Works
of her Governors and Pastors, and wished, that they and their charge were
under such a Discipline; and translated many of their Pious and Learned Works,
to Edify and Save their People. Our The Unreasonableness of Separation, p. 117.
dissenting Brethren themselves (at least in the good Mood, and out of the heat
of Dispute) give their consent to this, that the Instructions and Discourses of
our Pastors from their Pulpits, are Solid, Learned, Affectionate, and Pious;
and their only Crime was, that sometimes they were too well studied, and too
good. If in the great number of the English Clergy, some few may be lazy, one
particular person may clothe his Doctrine in too gay a dress, another talks
Scholastically above the capacity of his hearers, a third too dully, a fourth
too nicely, and opinionatively, and here and there a Pastor answers not the
true design of Preaching, to inform men's Minds, to guide their Consciences, and
move their Affections; what is this to the general Charge, That no Edification
so good is to be had, as in the separate Meetings, the pretended Cause of their
Separation? For it is no more a true Cause, than want of Accommodation or Room
in Churches, for some to separate, where good Edification and Convenience too
may be easily had. And since they compel our Pastors to speak well of
themselves, by their detraction and speaking ill of them, they must gladly
suffer them as fools, boldly to say, 2 Cor. 11. 19.
That since the Reformation, and many hundred years before, there has not been
a Clergy, so Learned and Pious, so Prudent and Painful, and every way
industrious to Edify and save the Souls of Men, as now is in the English
Church.

The Second Argument to confirm the Answer, is, That those that usually make
this pretense for Separation, do commonly mistake better Edification. We have
proved already, that good and sufficient Edification, to save the Souls of Men,
is to be had in the English Church. For if teaching plainly the Articles of
Faith, and laying down clearly Rules of Manners, using well-composed Prayers,
and proper Administration of Sacraments, be not good, and sufficient
Edification, I know not what Edification means: it may be heating of fancy,
stirring up of humors, this, or that; and Men may as well define the thing
they call Wit, as what Edification means. And therefore to desert the plain and
great Duty of our Church Communion, for disputable, doubtful, or truly mistaken
Edification, is to be guilty of the sin of Schism. In most cases, to judge what
is better or best, is very hard, and requires a sincere and considering head;
and so it is in the business of better Edification, which is so easily
mistaken, especially by the generality of the People, who are usually ignorant
of such nice things, and prejudiced by their Parties and Affections, and are
mutable and various, according to their fancies. For better Edification, purer
Administrations and Churches, and things that are more excellent, absolute
Perfection, and a less defective Way of Worship, are hard to understand,
perplex men's minds, and fill them with innumerable doubts and scruples, and put
them upon refining and purging so long, till they weaken and destroy the Spirit
of Religion. And so they run themselves into a known sin, for dark and
disp^^able advantages; which indeed are only mistakes, and principally are
these three that follow:

1. In taking nice and speculative Notions, for great and Edifying Truths. When
Doctrines have been raised, only to please the temper of the curious and
inquisitive; yet have made many think, their hearts were warmed, when their
heads and fancies were gratified. And dark and obscure Discourses about Angels,
the state of separated Souls, and things of the like nature, have made Colos.
2. 18
some call the Preacher high and mysterious; while others, teaching the way of
Salvation plainly, by Faith and a good Conversation, have been lessened, with
the character of dull, honest, and moral Men, fit only for Catechists, and
Christians of the lowest Form. Tickle but their imaginations with conjectural
Discourses about the Situation of Paradise of old, or Hell now, and you are a
sounder Divine, than he, that only draws wholesome Conclusions from Adam's
prevarication, to caution you against sin of the like nature, or how to avoid
those dismal flames where ever they are. And others have been silly and
fantastic in admiring those who have pratled about the length of the Sword
that guarded Paradise, or how the Spirits above pass Eternity away, and scorned
him, who in plain methods chalkt them out the way that will lead them to
Heaven. The ancient Gnostics, because they 1 Timothy 1. 4.
made a mixture of the Jewish Fables and Genealogies, of their Lilith and
Behemoth, and fetched in the Stories of the Gods, out of Orpheus and Philistion,
(two great Divines in the Pagan Religion) into plain Christianity, thought
themselves the most knowing Men, of the Secrets of God and Heaven; and wondered
how only Faith upon Jesus, and keeping of the Commands, could be knowing of
God, or Wisdom from above. The wranglings of the Schools, with their fine
distinctions and barbarous terms, fitter for Magic than Christianity, by their
Disciples have been prized for great and precious Truths. And Enthusiastic
Raptures, and slights, making once the Brain to swim, have snatched the hearers
beyond themselves, and then thought them the Dictates of the Spirit, and the
Teachings of God; and the more dark and obscure the Doctrine has been, the
greater illumination it was esteemed, and called a noonday Thought, which was
a midnight Dream. Such things as these pass with too many, for saving Truths;
a great part of Mankind, being ignorant in their Heads, and corrupt in their
Practice, espoused to Parties and Interests, having Constitutions and Passions
fit for these, they readily swallow them down. The Apostle confirms the truth
of this, telling 2 Timothy 4. 3.
us, the time will come, when they will not endure sound Doctrine, but after
their own lusts, shall they heap to themselves Teachers, having itching Ears,
caused by some disease of Vice within, which is not to be cured by good
Physic, but only scratched and gratified; and if the Food, though wholesome and
good, be not to their Palate and Fancy, they complain of hunger and starving.
These and many more are the Instances of a weak and sickly nature, craving
only nice and curious things for Spiritual Meat, and kecking at the sincere
Milk of the Word, plain and substantial Truths, that it may grow thereby. To
give therefore a liberty to every Man to run from an established Church, upon
the account of better Edification, which is so often and easily mistaken, is to
direct Men into temptation and a snare, and is dangerous and sinful; and when
once the gap is open, where will, especially the Vulgar, stop? May we not add,
that this pretense of better Edification is very fit to disguise and color
other Vices? When Controversies have unhappily risen, from an unjust denial of
the Ministers Rights and Dues, or the accidents of civil conversation, they
make the Ministry, that was spiritual and good before, to be called dull and
mean, and better must be sought elsewhere; while only Revenge or Covetousness
is at the bottom. Wandering Reports, or their own lavish Tongue, and censorious
Temper, have called some Pastors, Covetous, or Intemperate, or branded them
with other Vices, and then cry out, they cannot Edify in such a Church; and so
make one fault help out another, and Defamation must excuse their Schism.

2. In taking the Opinions of Parties for undoubted Truths essential to
salvation. When men have once wedded a Party, and the Opinions peculiar to it,
they magnify and propagate them, grow furious for their defense, and call them
the best part of Religion: and if these be not abetted and cried up by the
Pastors of our Church, or they differ from them in explications and
distinctions of them, the way of salvation is not taught, they do not improve
their Spiritual condition, and therefore is a just cause of their Separation.
Because the Notion or Explication of Faith, and Spirit, Church, and Grace,
Justification, Regeneration, Conversion, Adoption, and other things of the like
nature, are generally different in our Church from those of the Separation,
they therefore cry we destroy the saving Truths of the Gospel; and instead of
being Edifi'd, they find themselves weakened in their Christian Faith. Though
it is plain to all impartial judgments, that their sense and interpretation of
them, by natural consequences lessen the Grace of the Gospel, and give security
to lazy Sinners; a strange sort of Edification! For though our Charity is not
so narrow, as to think every man a vicious person, who is thus mistaken in his
conclusions; yet however, this alters not the nature of these Opinions, and
their consequences; and who knows how far men of ill Principles do improve
them? Such is the perverse and angry temper of many about their own Opinions,
no way necessary to salvation, wherein wise men and good men may differ, which
are not stated by Authority, and may not be determined till Elias come; yet if
these be not insisted on, and pressed with vehemence, the great things of the
Gospel are omitted, and truths are wanting to their perfection. And if once the
People are possessed with Opinions and Notions, they grow fierce about them,
and call them salvation-truths, and run headlong into a Sea of disorder; and
tumult, for their defense. The Disciples of the fifth Monarchy, the Pretenders
to the Spirit, the Enemies of Childrens Baptism, think themselves wronged, and
the Gospel hidden, if casually they hear you making Interpretations of the
Kingdom of Jesus, the Operations of the Spirit, and that divine Institution,
different from their lewd sense. And many Questions, when determined, after a
great deal of labor, and passion, and expense of time, may improve our
Knowledge, but not Faith and a good Life, the only Edification. The early and
best Christians thought themselves mighty Saints, and secure of Heaven, if they
only knew Jesus and the Resurrection in their full extent; and the World being
such ill Judges about any other Edification, it would be well if they returned
to this good old way, and rest satisfied there, lest they take the Inventions
of Men, Rhetoric or subtlety, secular interest, or conjectures, for the
Pillars of the Temple, to support their Faith; and so upon the score of
Edification, break the Peace and Unity of the Church, and Obedience to our
Governors, the great things of Religion.

3. In taking sudden heats and warmth for true Edification. When melting tones,
affectionate expressions, solemn looks and behavior, passion and vehemence,
and other Arts, have played upon the fancy, and put their constitutions into
different motions, some have though themselves so strangely Edifi'd, as though
it was the impulse and powerful acting of the Divine Spirit; which many times
is no more than a bright or a lowering day can do, acting upon the Animal
Spirits; and a Dose of Physic will do the same. And if they carry the men no
further, improve no virtue in them, they are nothing else but downright flesh
and blood. And they are hot and cold, high and low, very changeable and
uncertain, according as the humors flow, and as is the bodily temper of the
men. Upon this account some are melted into Tears, and others are fired into
Rage and Zeal; their Spirits, like Tinder, easily catching the flame: and these
have happened in the worst of Men, serving only the Designs of Fury and
Hypocrisy; and can no more be called Edification, than the Fire from the
Altar, that may consume the Temple, Zeal. Yet such mistakes as these have been
too common; Anger and Revenge have been called Zeal for God; Trade and Interest
have been Baptized Christianity; Fury and Fumes of the Stomach have been
thought the Divine Spirit; ridiculous Looks and unmanly Postures have been
fancied true Acts of Devotion; and when they themselves were pleased, and in
the good humor, God was reconciled; and when they were dull and heavy, the
Spirit was withdrawn: and according as these heats and bodily passions were
stirred, so the Ministry was Edifying or unprofitable; pale Cheeks and hollow
Looks have been Matthew. 6. 16.
counted signs of Grace, and the Diseases of their body passed for the Virtue
of their mind. And when a Doctrine has been so insinuated, as to hit and
favor these, they were strangely improved, and had obtained a good degree in
Religion. Many of these may be beginnings, or occasions, leading unto Religion,
and may serve some good purposes in men that can manage them well; but to cry
up these for Edification, and going on unto perfection, is to betray their
People into the power of every Cheat and Impostor, who has the knack to raise
these heats, which pass for reason and conviction of mind; and most commonly
are great hindrances to solid and sound reasoning, plain discourses, the true
way to Edification, to make firm and lasting impressions upon the mind; while
the silly and the weak, who are most subject to these heats and colds, the
uncertain motions of their Spirits, are fickle and inconstant, turning round in
all Religions; such men being all Sail, are more easily tossed about with every
wind of Doctrine.

3. Argument to confirm the Answer, is; That pretense of better Edification
will cause endless Divisions in the Church. This Question does suppose, that
every man must judge; and so great a part of the World being ignorant and
vicious, partial and prejudiced, false and insincere to themselves and others,
they may run from Teacher to Teacher, from Presbyterian to Independent, from
Independent to Anabaptist, or Quaker, and never stop till they come at their
Grave, to find out better Edification; ever learning, and never coming to the
knowledge of the truth; ever seeking, and 2 Timothy 3. 7.
never satisfied, till they find the Pattern upon the Mount, or the new
Jerusalem be come down from above; till they meet with such a perfect Church,
as perhaps will never be here upon earth, till her great Master comes. The
ignorant will easily mistake, and who can know the heart and intention of the
false and the Hypocrite? And the Governor has nothing to do here to retrench
this liberty, which, as they pretend, is either born with them, or given them
by God. At this rate, may not every single person be a Church, leaving all
other Christian Societies, fancying that he can better Edify at home with the
workings of his own mind, and some pretended infusions of the Spirit, that he
shall better meet with in his privacies and retirements, than in an external
and carnal Ministry and Crowd? When once they have torn the Unity of the Church
in pieces, and set up their more Edifying Meetings, in comes whole shoals of
Vices; Envy and Detraction, Strife and Emulation, Murmurings and Complainings,
Fierceness and Wrath, and a great number of things more, prejudicial to the
State of the Kingdom, the interest of Families, the good of Friendship and all
civil Conversation; a wonderful Edification, destroying the very Soul of
Christianity! The same Principles that divide them from this Church, will
crumble them into endless Parties; and every little Chip may call it self a
Building, and so destroy all good Government and Discipline, so necessary to
propagate and preserve Christianity in the World. And should I live to see that
fatal day, when the Government in our Church should be dissolved, and liberty
given to every man, upon pretense of better Edification, to choose his Pastor
and his Church; so many Mischiefs and Confusions would follow from it, that if
there was any regard to common Christianity, or sense of temporal happiness
left within their Breast, they would too late repent their Schism, (as once in
a great degree many of them did) and beg upon their Knees, that the Pale of
this Government in Church might be set up again, and they would receive it with
all its pretended load of Impositions. This will certainly follow from dividing
from the Church; to the laughter of Rome, and joy of all the Enemies of our
Christian Religion. All this would be avoided, if men were sensible of the
heinous nature of Schism, which the Apostles and all the ancient Christians
have painted forth in such black colors, though others think our Divisions in
the Church are no more, than variety of Companies and Liveries in a City.

4. What great discouragement this is to an honest and truly Christian
Ministry. When a Pastor of our Church shall diligently and faithfully, plainly
and devoutly unfold the Articles of Faith, and lay down Rules for Practice,
which will certainly bring him to Heaven; yet his Flock or Charge, one after
another, upon pretense of greener Pastures, greater Knowledge, better
Elocution, Delivery, Tone, or the like, to be had elsewhere, shall run from
him; will it not cool his Zeal, check his Labors, and affront his Person and
Office? This may be done to the painful, as well as idle; to the judicious and
learned, as well as imprudent and Ignorant Pastor, where the People shall have
liberty of Separation for the sake of Edification. The ill effects of this,
have turned upon their own Ministers, and new Government; and the most
judicious among them have sadly complained of it. Formerly they Petitioned, for
a painful and preaching Ministry, but this pretense of better Edification gives
denial to their own request; such Discouragements as these happening severely
sometimes to the best of Pastors, as well as the worst. And they have no cure
for this, having put a power into the Peoples hands which they cannot recall;
for neither King, Parliament, Bishop, or Pastor, can tell them what is
Edification so well as themselves. And are the Pastors of the Church to be so
treated and trifled with, who derive their Offices and Authority from God to
Command and Persuade, to Rebuke and Exhort, and have the Charge of Souls
committed to them, for fancies, peevishness and humor, to be scorned and
discountenanced, and have their Ministry rendered useless, and the Sheep to
govern the Shepherd? But what if our Pastor be idle or remiss in his Duty, or
corrupt in his Faith, and teaches Error instead of sound Doctrine, and we
have no means of Edification? what must we do? must we take in Poison for Food?
or not be fed at all? To be sure, you must not run into Schismatical
Separation; it is more tolerable to go to other Congregations of our Communion;
that may be irregular, but it is not Schismatical: but thanks be to God, we have
a Government, which upon a just and modest Complaint, will quicken the lazy and
negligent, correct the Heretical Pastor, and restore to you true Edification.

That this Discourse may prevail upon such who make this Question, I desire to
recommend these two following things, which are very reasonable, to their
consideration.

1. That if they fancy any Defects in our Government, they should not hence
conclude, that they have not sufficient Edification in the Church to save their
Souls. If upon a nice search and critical enquiry, they think they have found
some little Flaws and Defects, improper Phrases, doubtful Senses, and some
small Omissions in the matter of our Prayers and Discipline, yet let them not
conclude, that these can weigh in the balance against the black sin of Schism
and Separation, and all its sad Consequences, which is excused by nothing else
but terms of Communion plainly sinful. Have not Divine Services been accepted,
which were less perfect, and came not up to their rule? as is plain in
Hezekiah's Passover, which was not to the Purification of the Sanctuary, yet
the good King's 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19, 20.
Prayer, and the necessity of the time, prevailed with God to heal the People,
that is, to repute them clean and well prepared, and their Sacrifice and
Devotion good. Is there no Reverence to be paid to the Pious Authors of our
Service and Reformation, but to tell them, they must divide from them, were
they now living? for they cannot Edify under that Religion and Government for
which they died. Is there, or will there ever be any Government in the Church,
so well framed and built, but some curious Surveyor can spy out some
disproportion or ill shape, especially if assisted by ill Nature, Emulation,
the Spirit of Pride and Contention, which is ever quick-sighted abroad, and
blind at home? the difficulty of knowing what is utmost perfection, and
absolute purity of Administrations, (which, till attained, these Men think they
are not to rest in any Church) should make them judge heartily, interpret
fairly, and comply with every thing, that is not sinful, to preserve Peace and
Love. When Men in the English Church are plainly taught to believe well, to
live well, and to dye well, and have good and proper Offices to serve these
great purposes, in order to their Salvation, what can they desire more? To be
better, or more saved, we know not what it means. To leave such a Communion,
upon such an account, proceeds from peevishness, uncharitableness, or some ill
Principle; and is downright Schism, if ever there was Schism in the World.
Bring but an honest, sincere and teachable mind, and it will find improvement
and advantage in Offices and Administrations fuller of spots and blemishes far
than they can pretend to find in the English Church; but if the mind be biased
by a Party, or corrupted by Designs, if its Palate be vitiated, the best Food
is coarse and insipid to it.

2. Let Edification be placed in the substantial things of Religion. Some
revolt from our Church for things wherein the Pastor is solely concerned, and
others for things of decency, and indifferency; but these things do not concern
the Case of Edification. That a right Faith, and an honest Conversation, are
not taught in our Church, is only a scandal cast upon her, to plead for their
unjust Separation. For after she has plainly and distinctly taught the
Articles of Faith, (as was proved before) with the same Spirit and Zeal she
commands and presses Justice, Humility, Mercy, and every Virtue that is
necessary to a true Christian Life, and both under the Penalty of Eternal
Damnation: these, and these alone, do truly Edify the Souls of Men; as is
plain, if we consider, that our Prayers and Sacraments, our Churches Ceremonies
and Discipline, and all other parts in Religion, are in order to, and minister
unto Faith their head, that works by love: and the nearer these approach unto,
and the greater service they do to this design, the greater degree they have in
Religion, and more value is set upon them. This is that Religion which our
first Parent was of in his Paradise and innocence; Noah and his Posterity in
their Precepts; and Pious Men in different Countries before the Law of Moses
thus served God. And the scope and aim of the Jewish Law, with its Temple and
Utensils, its Figures and Ceremonies, was to discipline and teach Men thus to
be good, with allowance to the Nature of that People, and the Times they lived
in. And the best and most knowing Pagans thought such a Religion as this would
most please God; who therefore in some measure did accept it, and reward it
with greater Discoveries, as is plain Acts 8. 27. Acts 10. 4.
in Cornelius, the Queen of Candaces Treasurer, and others, who having not the
Law, were a Law unto themselves. In such things as these, the Kingdom of our
Messiah was to consist; not in Meat Romans 14. 17.
and Drink, but Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Such a
Religion as this, Edifies in so great a degree, that it is the only Condition
and Qualification for the upper World; where (though other great Parts of
Religion shall dye with us) Righteousness, Gratitude, Love of God, and
glorified Beings, and such like Virtues, are of an Eternal Nature, shall be
Ingredients of our Happiness, and shall live with us for ever. What can be
justly required in Religion, to improve Men's Souls, that is not found in this?
Is it to recover the Nature of Man now defaced? Righteousness and Goodness,
proceeding from Faith, their root, will make us truly good. Is it to give us a
clearer Knowledge and worthy Conceptions of God? such a practical Religion as
this, best prepares for greater knowledge, and in Scripture-sence is knowing of
him. Is it Religion 1 John 2. 4.
to love God? the love of God consists in obedience to his Precepts, submission
to his Will, and resignation to his Providence; otherwise it is flattery and
fondness. Is it the design of Religion to bless Mankind here, and edify them
in their different relations? such a Religion as this in our Church will do all
that, and make the World a Paradise once more. This will give us the best
character to judge by, whether we shall be saved or no, being the perfection of
all other marks and signs of our assurance of Life and Glory. When we are so
Edifi'd and Religious, we are certain, that we are justified and adopted,
accepted and treated like the Sons of God; that we are in Christ, and have our
wedding-Garments on, our proper qualifications for the state of Heaven. Such an
honest Principle as this, makes our Prayers to be heard, our Devotions to be
regarded, our Hopes to be strengthened. This is the great intention of
Christianity, the Holy of Holys of our Temple, and all Religion. Such a
Religion as this being so strongly enjoined and zealously taught in our Church,
no ways disguised by a dress of Phrases, or corrupted into soft and lushious
senses, we need not complain for want of the means of Grace and Edification; we
need not cross the Seas, or run into private corners for it; it is nigh us, even
at our Doors, in the established Government of the Church of England. Some use
to say, that brown Bread and the Gospel was very good Fare; but now they are
grown as nice and delicate about Religion and Edification, as about Sawces and
Dresses. Thanks be to God, it is a knowing Age, I wish it was as good. The
Corruption of it does not arise for want of Knowledge and Information; if it
does, the Cure is near, let them value that Church and Government that has all
things in it sufficient to Men's Salvation. Let them not think so light of
Schism, and speaking evil of the Rule and Discipline in our Church, so fit and
necessary to the preservation of Christianity; let them not cry up other Paul's
and Apollos's; any other Teachers making Divisions among us, than this Church
has allowed for their Edification; which is so far from Spiritual Edification,
that it calls such Men Carnal. For the desire 1 Cor. 3. 4.
of any other Nourishment, beside such plain Food, is Spiritual Pride and
Wantonness; and they pamper their Fancies, while they starve their Judgments.
Let us therefore stick to such a manly Religion, one great part of which is, to
preserve Obedience, Peace, and Order; and say of our Church, that teaches it,
as the Disciples of its Author; Thou art he, and we seek for no other: whither
shall we go? thou have the Words of Eternal Life. She has all things in her
that are necessary for the perfecting of Ephesians. 4. 12, 13.
the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the Body; till
we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God,
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.
That such a Religion as this in our Church is pleasing both to God and Man, we
have the Testimony of an Apostle: He that Romans 14. 18.
in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of Men.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for FINCHAM GARDENER.
A Continuation and Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's
Unreasonableness of Separation, in Answer to Mr. Baxter and Mr. Lob, etc.

Considerations of present use, considering the Danger resulting from the
change of our Church Government.

1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England. 2. A Resolution of
some Cases of Conscience which respect Church Communion. 3. The Case of
Indifferent things used in the Worship of God, proposed and Stated, by
considering these Questions, etc. 4. A Discourse about Edification. 5. The
Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of Englands
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England? 6. A Letter to Anonymus, in answer
to his three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about Church Communion. 7. Certain Cases
of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of joining with Forms of
Prayer in Public Worship. In two Parts. 8. The Case of mixed Communion: Whether
it be Lawful to Separate from a Church upon the account of promiscuous
Congregations and mixed Communions? 9. An Answer to the Dissenters Objections
against the Common Prayers, and some other parts of Divine Service prescribed
in the Liturgy of the Church of England. 10. The Case of Kneeling at the Holy
Sacrament stated and resolved, etc. The first Part. 11. Certain Cases of
Conscience, etc. The second Part. 12. A Discourse of Profiting by Sermons, and
of going to hear where men think they can profit most. 13. A serious
Exhortation, with some important Advices, relating to the late Cases about
Conformity, recommended to the present Dissenters from the Church of England.
14. An Argument for Union; taken from the true interest of those Dissenters in
England who profess and call themselves Protestants. 15. The Case of Kneeling,
etc. The Second Part. 16. Some Considerations about the Case of Scandal, or
giving Offense to Weak Brethren. 17. The Case of Infant Baptism, in Five
Questions, etc.
1. A Discourse about the charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther? 2. A Discourse about Tradition, showing what is meant by it, and
what Tradition is to be received, and what Tradition is to be rejected. 3. The
difference of the Case between the Separation of Protestants from the Church of
Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England. 4. The
Protestant Resolution of Faith, etc.
A Discourse OF PROFITING BY SERMONS, AND Of going to HEAR, where men think
they can PROFIT most.

LONDON, Printed for T. Basset, at the George in Fleet Street, B. Took, at the
Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, and F. Gardener, at the White-Horse in
Ludgate Street. 1684.

A Discourse Of PROFITING by SERMONS.
AS there is nothing that all good Men more desire, nothing that they more
heartily seek and endeavor, than a Happy reunion of all those with us, who
have Rent themselves from us (which we should reckon to be one of the highest
blessings that God can now bestow upon us) so there is little hope of seeing
those desires and endeavors satisfied, while the smallest Scruples seem a
sufficient cause to hinder many People from joining with us.

But among all the Reasons that I have heard alleged for leaving our Churches,
this seems to me to be the weakest and most ungrounded, That our Ministers are
unedifying Preachers; for they cannot profit by their Sermons. Which, I am
informed, is so commonly objected, and some lay such weight upon it, and it
carries with it such a show of Piety (it being a very commendable thing to
desire to be the better for every Sermon one hears) that it is thought to be
worth some body's pains, to try to remove this unjust Prejudice which too many
have entertained against the most instructive and useful Sermons, that,
perhaps, are preached any where in the Christian World,

This may seem too high a commendation; but it is the Judgment of more
indifferent persons then we are, on either side; of strangers I mean, who have
seen the World; and having learnt our language and heard and read the Sermons
that are commonly preached and printed in this great City, affirm there are not
the like to be found in any Church whatsoever. God grant we be not deprived of
such singular helps by our contempt of them; and that our Candlestick be not
removed out of its place, because we withdraw our selves from the light which
it holds forth to us.

Of which we are in very great danger, if not knowing what it is truly to
profit by Sermons, we make no progress at all in the state of Christianity: but
deceive our own Souls in a vain opinion of our acquaintance with God, and our
blessed Savior, and the Mysteries of the Gospel, which have little or no
effect upon our hearts and lives.

I do not pronounce this to be the case of those who object to us, that we have
an unprofitable Ministry: but I doubt not to demonstrate, that the Sermons
which are generally preached by the Ministry in this City (to whose Inhabitants
I principally write) are such that they may profit by them, if it be not their
own fault: and then leave them to Judge of themselves as they see cause.

I suppose we are all agreed, or may easily agree, what it is to profit by
Sermons: for we agree that the Holy Scriptures contain all things necessary to
our Salvation; and therefore when they are rightly opened, and duly applied in
a Sermon, so that the Hearers improve either in Christian knowledge, or in
Faith, or in well-doing, then they profit by that Sermon. Now if any Man do not
improve in these, by the help of the Sermons, which he may hear in our
Churches, and the Fault lie in the Sermon; it must be either in the matter of
it, or in the manner: for none, I presume, will be so bold as to affirm, that
Gods Spirit does not accompany a Sermon, which wants nothing belonging to
either of these, the Preacher also being duly qualified. And, thanks be to
God, there are none that dare now complain of an Idle, Scandalous, Insufficient
Ministry about this City: but instead of that, they, that were wont to have
those words in their mouths, have taken up the complaint of an Vnedifying.
Whereby we have gained this great Point, That they have no color to pretend
the Person who preaches is unsanctified, and therefore God does not bless his
Ministry: but the fault must lie (if there be any) in the Sermon it self; and
that in the matter of which it consists, or in the manner of its delivery.

I.
And as for the former of these, I can scarce think that any Dissenter, when he
seriously considers, will except against our Sermons upon that account; they
being taken out of the Holy Scriptures (which are the foundation of our
Religion) and with such care to find out their true sense and proper meaning,
that perhaps they were never more clearly opened, and rightly applied, then
they are now adays in our Churches. I am sure, All that heavenly Truth which
was delivered to our first Parents, when they were about to be expelled out of
Paradise; which God repeated in his Promises to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob;
which he shadowed and confirmed in the Law of Moses; illustrated by the Oracles
of the Prophets; and finally fulfilled in the Incarnation, Birth, Life, Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension of the Son of God; and diffused by the Preaching of
the Apostles and the Power of the Holy Ghost, all over the World; is there so
fully and distinctly taught, that we may safely say, the whole Counsel of Gods
Will is at one time or other faithfully declared among us.

And as that is declared completely, so little else is meddled withal: matters
of controversy being as rarely handled in our Pulpits, I believe, as in any
place of the World: unless it be those which the present State of things,
sometimes makes absolutely Necessary, to fortify the People against Popery,
and against Separation: yet even these are not so often treated of, as matters
of general concernment to all Parties of Christians whatsoever. For the great
drift of our Preachers seems to be, to instruct the People in the Truth, and to
make them good (particularly to give them right notions of God, which are the
very bottom of all Religion) knowing that Errors and Superstitions will fall of
themselves, without a particular confutation. For they are supported by nothing
but ignorance and naughty affections; which will uphold them against all the
Arguments whereby they can be assaulted, unless men's minds be informed and
possessed with such a right sense of things, as alters their Wills and
Affections, and turns them to an unfeigned love of God and Goodness.

Which seems to me to be the aim and scope of the Sermons which are generally
preached by our Ministers: and which is so well performed, that we need not
fear to affirm, there is nothing necessary either to make men truly knowing in
the things of God; or to work belief in them; or to confirm them in the Faith;
or to direct them in their practice of what they know and believe; or to excite
them to follow those directions, and to live according to the Laws of the
Gospel; or to satisfy material Scruples; to resolve doubts and cases of
Conscience; to comfort disconsolate penitents, and awaken drowsy sinners, or
any thing of like Nature: but may be met withal in our Churches, so fully,
solidly, and judiciously handled, that men need go no whither else for
Edification; if that be the thing they truly desire, and sincerely seek and
endeavor.

For what truth can they learn any where else, which is not to be learnt, if
they will attend upon Gods service there, in our Churches? what Motives to
believe, or what Arguments to convince men of their Duty, which are not there
represented, and pressed? What Vice is there, which does not there receive just
Correction? What Virtue that is not there most strongly recommended? which of
the promises are not there applied to the Hearts of the faithful? and where can
men have better means of knowing the terror of the Lord, as the Apostle speaks,
against all the impenitent and disobedient? And if men cannot profit where such
things as these are constantly managed, to as much advantage, as the skill of
the Preacher will enable him, I am sure the fault must lie somewhere else, than
in the matter of the Sermons.

II.
Yes, will some say, we allow the matter of them to be good enough: but the
manner of them is such, that we cannot reap the like benefit by them, that we
do by other men's preaching, who cannot conform to the Church of England. Which
if it be a just Exception, the fault must lie either in the Composition of
them; or in their delivery after they are composed.

1. Now if the composition of them be faulty, it is because their Method is not
clear and perspicuous; or the Language not plain enough to convey the Sense of
them to the mind of the Hearers. Neither of which, I am confident can be truly
charged upon them. For never did men more endeavor orderly discourse, and aim
at plain, unaffected Speech, than they do now in the Church of England: where
good Sense, in the most easy and familiar Words, is now looked upon as the
principal Commendation of Sermons.

Some indeed, I have heard, find fault with our Sermons for not keeping the old
method (as they call it) of Doctrine, Reason, and Use: which is altogether
unjust as well as frivolous. For there is no man that baulks that Method when
it is natural; but rather chooses it, because it has been common, and is easy
and useful. As for example, if any man among us, were to preach upon this text,
Corinth. XIII. 13. And now abides Faith, Hope and Charity; these three; but
the greatest of these is Charity; He would, without doubt, not only observe
among other Doctrines, the pre-eminence of Charity: but also give the best
Reasons, he could think of, why it ought to be highest in our Esteem, and our
Affections too; because it is the very end of Faith and Hope; and because it
makes us like unto God, which Faith and Hope do not. And after such like
things, he would likewise make that Use of this Doctrine, which the Apostle
himself does Immediately in the very next words (Verse 1. Chapter XIV.)
pressing every one to follow after the Love of God, and of their Neighbor: to
follow it earnestly and vigorously, and never cease their pursuit till they
feel their Hearts possessed with it: not contenting themselves merely with
believing, but being so affected with it, that they attain the end of their
Faith, which ought to work by Love. Nay, he would wish them to examine and
prove their Faith by this, whether it be likely to save them or no. For if it
leave them short of this Charity, it will leave them short of Heaven: for it is
Charity alone that has any place there. And who would forbear most pathetical
entreaties here, to be very serious in this search: there being so much
Pretense to Faith in the World, and so little Charity to be found there. To one
sort of Faith especially, which is the apprehension of Christ's Merits, and
application of them to themselves, which every Body makes bold withal, whilst
very few have any thing of that Charity which St. Paul describes in the Chapter
before named, of that long suffering and kind Charity; which envieth not, which
vaunteth not it self, (or is not rash) is not puffed up, does not behave it
self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no Evil;
(but takes things in the best Sense, and puts the fairest Construction upon
them;) in one Word, makes a Man inoffensive not only toward God but toward
Men of all sorts, high and low, rich and poor; that is, to the whole Church of
God.

The like I might say of all other Subjects of the same nature, which lead him
that handles them into this Method. But sometime the matter to be treated of is
such, that there is no other Reason to be given of it but only the divine
Revelation, upon whose Testimony we receive it; as we do, that Jesus Christ is
the Eternal Son of God, begotten of his Father before all Worlds. The Uses of
which I never heard any Preacher amougst us fail to make, both for the
begetting Reverence toward him, Faith in him, and Obedience unto him.

But what need is there of so many Words about this method of Sermons, when the
ancient Doctors of Religion, it is manifest, did not mind it, nor any other?
But spoke to the Business before them, without observing any constant Rule at
all in their Discourses: and then it is apparent People profited by Sermons
much more than they do now, when they are most artificially contrived. And it
would be an inexcusable Sin in those that should leave our Church, did the
Ministers of it only open the Sense of the Epistle or the Gospel for the day
(or any other portion of Holy Scripture, as St. Chrysostom was wont to do)
without making particular Observations, or concluding all with distinct Uses
(as the manner now is) but only with a general Application, pressing what they
thought most material, or what the necessities of their People most required.

By which way of preaching if Men can receive no profit, they must lay the
Blame somewhere else than upon the Composition of the Sermon, or the manner of
its Delivery either, which is the next thing to be considered.

2. Now here two things are found fault withal: first, That our Preachers are
not vehement enough in the Delivery of their Sermons; secondly, That they read
them.

For the former of these, it is not true: where the matter in hand is of great
concernment, and requ^res more than ordinary earnestness. Which ought in
reason, to be reserved for some certain Occasions, and not be spent upon all
things alike: for then it loses its effect at that time, when it would be most
seasonably and usefully employed.

But there is a great mistake in that which men call vehemence: which oft-times
consists only in the strength of the voice: which neither all your Preachers,
nor all ours are endowed withal. And if they were, would be but noise; without
good Sense, which will move attentive minds as much as a loud sound affects
Men's Ears.

Add to this, that there is a natural heat also in some Men's tempers, which
makes them speak vehemently; with such a warmth as has the appearance of much
Zeal: when they are nothing near so deeply affected with what they say, as some
Men of more sedate and cool tempers are, whose Judgment operates more strongly
than their Passions. And these Men surely may be very serviceable for
Illumination of the Mind; with such force of Argument as will certainly move
the affections vehemently by the help of serious Consideration: without which
if any affections be raised, they are little worth; and will not last, but
vanish as soon as that blast is over which stirred them up.

And this difference of temper is observable in your Men, as well as in ours:
and therefore this can be no hindrance to Edification among us, no more than
among you.

As for reading of Sermons, it is not universally used: but there are those
among us whom God has blessed with such strength of Memory or readiness of
Conception that they need not the help of any Notes at all in the Pulpit. And
others do not tie themselves to them, so as never to look off the Book; but
only assist their Memory by them sometimes. Whereby the Auditory is assured
that they hear nothing but what has been beforehand considered and digested:
and the Preacher himself also is secured that he shall not forget any thing of
Moment which he has prepared; and that no Expression slip from him on a sudden
which may prove indecent or imprudent. As for those whose weakness of Memory,
or their great Modesty and Fear of being out (as we speak) compells them to
keep their Eye constantly upon their Notes; as they and others have the
forenamed advantages by it, so no Man can be in the least prejudiced by it, who
will but turn his Eyes another way and not look upon the Preacher. Then the
Sermon will sound as well as if it were all pronounced without Book: or if this
make it unprofitable, by the same reason the Holy Scriptures become
unprofitable, when they are read out of the Bible; and they also must be got
without Book, to make them edifying. Nay, this exception will lie also against
some of your own Preachers of great note, who read every word. I am sure they
did so heretofore, and this was then thought no hindrance to your profiting by
them: or if it were, you heard them when you could not profit by them, so as
you could by those that did not read. And so you may do now by our Preachers of
this kind, nay so you ought to do: when you have nothing to say against them,
but what they are equally chargeable withal whom you highly commend.

III.
But after all, I have some reason to fear that when men complain they cannot
profit by our Sermons, they mean nothing by profiting, but that their
affections are not moved in the hearing of them, so as they are by the Sermons
of Nonconformists. Unto which I have many things to say if this Paper would
contain them: but it will be sufficient to touch only upon these three.

1. That Men have several Talents, both among you and among us: which are all
very profitable. Some for informing the Judgment; others for moving the
Affections; and others (which is most desirable) for both: you are not able to
say that all yours move you so as some do: and yet you make such account of
all, that it has ever been looked upon as a very disorderly thing among your
selves (and worse than that I shall prove by and by) for People to run from
their own Minister to hear some other (though of the same way) merely to have
the affections more moved. Because,

2. This alone is so far from profiting by Sermons, that it is very great
unprofitableness, to be moved by a Sermon, and do nothing thereupon, but only
commend it. That is, to be tickled and pleased a while, but not altered nor
changed a whit: or to be warmed perhaps a little for the present, and then left
as cold as a stone, without any spiritual life, or endeavor to be the better.

3. But the great thing of all is this, that affections raised merely by the
earnestness of the Preacher, at present in the hearing of a Sermon (and it is
well if the affections which some People speak of, be not Motions which they
feel merely from the tone of the voice, as from a taking phrase, a similitude
or some such trifle) are nothing comparable to those, which we raise by Gods
blessing upon our own serious consideration, when we reflect upon what we have
heard, which sort of most excellent affections, the Sermons that are preached
in our Churches, cannot fail to produce, if you please but to attend to the
matter of them and press them upon your Hearts: Nay, your Judgments being well
informed, it would not be hard for you (if you would but take a little pains
with your selves) to excite such affections unto that which you know to be your
Duty as would abide and remain; when the others that were excited in the
hearing of a Sermon, are gone, and quite vanished, and can never be recalled,
but by your own serious Meditation upon those Divine Truths, which entered into
your Mind, and would have touched, nay peirced your Hearts, if you would have
brought them thither, and held them close to your Consciences.

Which ought to be every Christians care more than I doubt it is, in order to
their profiting by Sermons; and that they may not be barren and unfruitful in
the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

IV.
And now it is time for all those who are concerned in what has been said, to
apply it to the present case, and going down into themselves to enquire where
the fault must necessarily lie, if the Sermons preached by our Ministers have
proved unprofitable to them; which supposes, that they who object this against
coming to Church, have come heretofore, at least to the Sermon; but went away,
and came no more, because they reaped no benefit thereby. Else, how can they
pretend that our Sermons are unprofitable if they never heard them? Now I have
demonstrated, that the blame cannot be justly cast upon the Sermons, which in
themselves are every way fitted to do Men good: and therefore we must seek for
the cause of this Unprofitableness some where else; and where are we so likely
to find it as in those that heard the Sermons? Whom I beseech, in the fear of
God, by whose Word we must one day be all judged, to consider with themselves
impartially, and to ask their Consciences such Questions as these.

1. Quest. Had you not some Prejudice in your Mind against the Person of the
Minister whom you came to hear, either upon the score of his Conformity, or of
his strictness in it, or some other account? If you had, and carried it along
with you, there is great Reason to think this made his Pains unprofitable to
you; because you could not hear him with that indifference which you would have
heared another man withal. But looking upon him perhaps as a Time-server, (as
the Language of some has been) a Formalist, or one who you presumed
beforehand had little or nothing of the Spirit in him, you minded not so much
what was said, as who said it; and disliked those things which out of another
Mouth you would have accepted. For if such Prejudices as these be not laid
aside, they bar the Heart so strongly against the most excellent Instructions,
that though an Angel from Heaven should deliver to us the most Important
Truths, yet, we taking him for a Minister of Satan, it would stop our Ears
against him, and make his Message ineffectual.

2. Quest. Or might not this be the reason of your reaping no benefit, that you
came to Church but once or twice, and concluded too hastily there was no Good
to be got there; being willing also perhaps, to have this excuse for absenting
your self wholly from it: whereas if you had constantly attended our Ministry,
you might have found your selves so much improved thereby, as never to have
thought of leaving the Church upon this account, that you could not profit in
it. Make a Trial now (for it is not too late, I hope, if you can shake off all
Prejudices) and for some time continue diligent Auditors of the Minister of
your Parish; and that which at first may seem to you dull, or hard, or obscure,
will, after you are used to it, be clear, easy, and awakning: when you are
acquainted, that is, with his Method, his Style, his way of Reasoning and
Discourse, (as well as accustomed to his Voice) which you cannot be in an
instant, or at the first hearing. For the Scriptures themselves are obscure and
difficult, to the best of us, in abundance of places, till by Conversation with
them, we grow acquainted with their Phrase, manner of Speaking, Arguing and
Connection. And if God's Word had been generally used, as some among us have
treated his Ministers (rejecting them, I mean, because they did not presently
apprehend them) it had been thrown out of all men's hands long ago as an
unprofitable piece.

3. Quest. I desire such further, to examine seriously and recollect
themselves, Whether the thing that made them first forsake our Ministry, as
unprofitable, was not, That when they came to Church the Preacher happened to
treat on some Subject cross to their Opinion? Which hasty Persons (who consider
not what different Apprehensions men may have in many matters, and yet agree
well enough together) cannot brook; but presently fling away from those that
contradict them, as if they contradicted God himself. Whereas, if they would
have had Patience, they might have profited even by such Discourses; either by
being convinced of their Error, or more confirmed in that which they took for
truth; being able to answer the Arguments brought against it.

4. Quest. But (that which is worse than this) the Minister was perhaps upon
some distastful Subject when you chanced to go to Church, and happened to treat
of such matters as you love not to hear of, though more necessary, it may be,
than many others, for this very Reason, that because of their Ungratefulness
they are seldom handled. Will you not be angry nor lay aside this Paper and
read no further, if I give an Instance or two? Which I mentioned for no other
Reason, but because I know some have taken offense (as they call it at such
Doctrines, and ought, if it be possible, to be better taught. Was he not
preaching, I mean, about Schism, or Disobedience to Governors? It is certain
there are such Sins, which are very heinous and dangerous every way; and
therefore, no faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, can, with a good Conscience,
balk the treating of them some time or other. And suppose he that treated of
them when you was at Church extended the Duties of Unity and of Obedience
further than you desire, might not you, for all that, have profited very much
by what was said upon those Subjects?

I believe sober Men among you have heard some of your own Ministers speak
harder Words of Conformity and Conformists than you would have had them, and
yet you did not for that Reason leave them, but still fancied you could profit
by them; even by what they said on that Subject of Conformity. And therefore
you would do well to search and try what account you can give of taking such
distaste at the established Ministry, as to forsake it upon their pressing some
things, which are most certainly Christian Duties, with greater strictness than
agreed with your present Inclinations.

And I the rather beseech you to consider such things as these; because it is a
common thing to hear Men and Women of your way to complain of their
Vnprofitableness under Ordinances, of the Deadness of their Heart in Duty, and
their Barrenness under the most powerful means of Grace: which arises perhaps
in those minds that are well inclined merely from a natural Dullness or
Indisposition, which makes them unable to attend, or to remember, and keep in
mind, as they desire, what they have heard; and therefore moral Indispositions
(such as Prejudice, Passion, Disaffection to the way of Worship, or to any
Christian Doctrine) will much more make men unapt to receive any Impressions
from what is said to them; though in it self never so good, and fitted
powerfully to affect the Heart, were it but entertained with an honest Mind.

So that if you complain of Deadness and Unprofitableness under the Ministry of
our Church, it is no more than a great many of you do of the like Barrenness
under your own; but proceeding, it is to be feared, from a worse Cause; of
which in Reason you should suspect your selves to be guilty, rather than
conclude so suddenly as you do, our Ministry to be unedifying.

V.
The very same may be said to those who fancy, that though they can profit
something by our Ministry, yet they can profit more by others. They ought in
Conscience to examine whence this Conceit arises; whether it do not proceed
from Prejudice, from Disaffection, from Disgust at some Doctrine which they
love not should be touched, from their seldom attendance upon the established
Ministry, from their careless hearing when they were there, or from the hasty
Sentence they pronounced against it before a sufficient Trial. And withal, they
should consider what they mean by profiting; whether really and truly they are
not more earnestly pressed in our Congregations to be thoroughly good and
virtuous, to take a strict care to please God in Thought, Word, and Dred, than
they are in those where they imagine they profit more; because they are
entertained there, perchance, with more pleasing Subjects, than this of their
whole Christian Duty.

I only suggest this as a thing to be most deeply pondered, and do not accuse
you to be guilty of such Falseness to your own Souls: but this I must say, That
if you do not grow more holy, harmless, and unreproveable in your common
Conversation, if your Passions be not better governed, if your Tongues be not
more strictly bridled, if you grow not more humble, less conceited of your
selves, less confident of your own Understandings, more fearful to offend God
by censuring, rash Judging, disrespectful Behavior to your Betters and
Superiors, and such like things, you do but deceive your selves with an
Opinion of profiting more by the Nonconforming Ministry than by ours. Upon
which if you would attend with a Mind to improve in these great things, I am
well assured your profiting might appear to all men as well as to your selves;
who might be convinced, in a little time, there is no need to go any whither
else for such Edification. And if you go for any other, there will be no end of
seeking still for better entertainment of your Fancies, and Itching Ears; which
will desire to be gratified with infinite variety.

The mischief of which, they of your own way have felt and complained of as
much as we; and the better any of them have been, the more careful have they
appeared in giving Cautions against this wanton humor, though pretending never
so much to Religion, and to growth in Grace, or Soul-saving knowledge. In the
days of your Forefathers, I am sure, they who could not in all things conform
to the Church of England, looked upon this as a dangerous principle, that men
must go where they can profit most. And because it is likely that the Opinion
of a grave and serious person, highly esteemed by all your Party formerly, may
prevail with you more than any of ours, give me leave to mind you what Mr.
Hildersham has resolved in several cases like to ours, particularly about
this, of Men's leaving their own Pastors to hear others.

VI.
1. And first, he resolves this, That it is the Ordinance of God every Pastor
should have his own Flock to attend, and every one of Gods People should have a
Pastor of his own to depend upon. From whence he concludes, that none of those
People may ordinarily and usually leave that Pastor, because then he does not
depend upon his Ministry; which he proves every one of them is bound to do.

2. And that you may not imagine he means any other Pastor than such as ours,
his second Resolution is this, that they who dwell next together should be of
the same Congregation: whence the name of Paroichia, and Parish, first came.

3. Now thirdly, if it happen that he who is the settled Pastor of the place
where you dwell is a man whose Gifts are far inferior to some others; his
Resolution in this case is, That (he being a Man whose Gift is approved by Gods
Church, and who is conscionable in his Place, and of an unblameable Life) you
ought not to leave him at any time, with contempt of his Ministry. And then you
contemn his Ministry, when you speak, or think thus in your heart. Alas! he is
no Body; a good honest Man, but he has no Gifts; I cannot profit by him. (Mind
I beseech you these Words, which are none of mine, but Mr. Hildersham's, and I
doubt too common Language now among you) and mark the Reasons he gives (which I
shall contract) why you may not do this. First, A Man may be a true Minister
though his Gifts be far inferior to many others: and consequently, secondly,
You are bound to love him, and reverence him, and thank God for him: and
thirdly, Doubtless you may profit by him, if the Fault be not in your selves.
The best Christian that is may profit by the meanest of Christ's Servants. And I
am persuaded, says he, There is never a Minister that is of the most excellent
Gifts, (if he have a godly Heart) but he can truly say he never heard any
faithful Minister in his Life that was so mean, but he could discern some Gift
in him that was wanting in himself, and could receive some profit by him.

Which is a thing worthy your consideration now; for there is none of your
Ministers dare say, that they cannot profit by the Sermons that are commonly
preached in our Churches; and therefore so may you, if you please to be
impartial, how meanly soever you may think of any of our Ministers; especially
if you observe this fourth thing, which the same Mr. Hildersham judiciously
adds, That.

4. The Fruit and Profit which is to be received from the Ministry, depends not
only nor chifely upon the Gifts of the Man that preaches, but upon the Blessing
that God is pleased to give unto his own Ordinance, To which he applies those
Words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 5, 6, 7, 8. Who is Paul? and who is Apollo? but
Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every Man. I have
planted, Apollo watered, but God gave the Increase. So then, neither is he that
planted any thing, nor he that waters, but God that gives the Increase, etc.
And God does often give a greater Blessing to weak than to stronger means: and
therefoer consider, says he, the Fault may be rather in thy self than in the
Preacher, that thou can not profit. And indeed, how should thou profit by
his Ministry, if thou come with Prejudice, without any Reverence or Delight
unto it, and do scarce acknowledge God's Ordinance in it, nor ever seek to God
for his Blessing upon it; but look wholly at the Man who preaches?

To conclude this, he observes the great want of Judgment that appears in this
sort of Christians, in the choice they make of their Teachers, and the applause
they give unto them; which shows how necessary it is they should be confined
commonly to their own. For as some admire and follow another rather than their
own Pastor, because he can make more ostentation of Eloquence, Reading,
Learning, and such like humane Gifts than their own Pastor does, (upon which
account the Corinthians preferred sundry Teachers before St. Paul himself) so
there are those who leave their own Pastor and go to others, only for Varieties
sake. Though their own have never such excellent Gifts, yet can they not like
any one Man long; but having itching Ears, must have an heap of Teachers. And
some also prefer others before their own Pastor, only because they show more
Zeal (mark this) in their Voice and Gesture, and Phrase of Speech, and manner
of Delivery; though happily the Doctrine it self be nothing so wholesome, or
powerful, or fit to edify their Consciences, as the Doctrine of their own
Pastor is. Any though these be the best of the three sorts now mentioned, and
pretend much Love and Zeal, yet we may wish them more Knowledge and Judgment.

I omit other things upon this Subject, which you may find in his 58th. Lecture
upon the 4th. of St. John. Where he admits indeed that a man may some time go
from his own Parish Church to hear another whose gifts he more admires: But
then (like a judicious Divine) adds this notable observation, to correct and
regulate this liberty; that it may not prove an evil Humor; viz. He only makes
right use of the benefit of hearing such as have more excellent Gifts than his
own Pastor, as learns thereby to like his own Pastor the better, and to profit
more by him.

Mark it, I most earnestly entreat you, together with his Illustration of it,
by this Example; The excellent Gifts God has bestowed on others, in this case
may be fitly resembled unto Physic: which they use well, whose appitite is
thereby amended; and are made able to relish and like their ordinary food the
better. If after men have heard one of excellent Gifts, they begin to distaste
the Ministry of their ordinary Pastors, and can like of none, profit by none,
unless they have rare Gifts: they become at length like to those, who by
accustoming themselves to drink hot and strong Waters, bring their Stomachs to
that pass, that they can find no Relish or Virtue in any Drink or Water, be it
never so hot or strong. Believe it; they receive no true profit from the most
admired Preacher, who learn not by hearing him, to profit by any one that
delivers to them the wholesome Words of our Lord Jesus, and the Doctrine that
is according unto Godliness: though in the plainest manner imaginable, both for
Method and Language.

This I have chosen to write in his Words, because, there are some, I fear,
that would scarce endure such Doctrine from us: which may, at least, be more
reverently received, and duly considered (proceeding from a Person of such note
heretofore among Nonconformists) and beget so much Sobriety in you all, as to
make you think what manner of Spirit you are now of? How you come to differ so
much, from the best of your own way in former days? This is worth your serious
study, that you may not offend, as many hearers do, in a partial and factious
estimation they have the Ministers of the Gospel in.

They are his Words again, in another place. Lecture LXVI. Where he observes
this partiality arises from two Grounds. First, the respect they have to
difference of Judgment, that is among us, in smaller matters, which makes them
affect such only as are of their own Mind in every thing; with the dislike of
all others that are of a contrary persuasion. And secondly, from the respect
they have to the difference of Gifts which is among Preachers (of which I spoke
before) which moves them to admire some, whom they judge to be of excellent
gifts (though alas, their judgment is very small) but to despise and contemn
all others. And he has there these two remarkable reflections upon this Humor
which I beg of you to observe and remember.

First, that this factious Disposition of the Hearers of Gods Word, has in all
ages been the cause of much Confusion in the Church of God and greatly hindered
the fruit of the Gospel of Christ.

Note here. This way which you are in is not the means of profiting in
Religion, but of hindering the growth and increase of it.

The second is, that whereas they in whom this humor reigns are wont to glory
as if they had more Judgment, and could discern better of Gifts than other men
(saying, alas! poor People who esteem so highly of such a man's Gifts; If they
had any Judgment or understanding, they would count him no body) The Apostle
tells us, it is quite contrary, and that this argues rather they have very
little Judgment or Grace in them: yea, this makes them incapable of profiting
by the Word. 1 Cor. 3. 1.

O that there were an Heart in you, to ponder such Profitable Instructions as
these! which were said on purpose to check that evil Disposition which began
then to appear among People inclinable to Nonconformity; and is since grown
the prevailing humor: insomuch, that some can settle no where, but ramble from
one Preacher to another, as their uncertain Fancy guides them, without becoming
one whit the better for any.

Yes, will some say; We might be persuaded to come and hear your Preachers, and
hear them constantly, but we ought not to be compelled to it; that is a thing
you can never justify. To which so much has been answered by others, that I
shall only tell you what that good Man before named says to it, in one of
those Lectures which was preached in Parliament-time, May 8. 1610. where he
takes occasion to stir up the People to pray earnestly for the States of the
Realm then assembled; that their principal care might be to take order about
two things; first, That an able and conscionable Ministry may be placed every
where; and secondly, that ALL People may be compelled to hear. For it is
certain (says he upon this second head) that where there is a good Ministry
established, the Magistrate may and ought to compel ALL Subjects to come and
hear; notwithstanding all pretense of their Consciences to the contrary.

VII.
To sum up all then that has been said in this Business. Be pleased to
consider, What makes a Sermon profitable; and, What must be done by the People
to profit by the Sermon.

A Sermon is then profitable when it informs the Mind and Judgment aright in
Divine Truth; when it instructs you in any part of the Christian Duty; when it
tends to strengthen or awaken your Faith, that you may more steadfastly adhere,
and earnestly apply your selves to what you know and believe certainly to be
Gods Mind and Will; when it works upon the Will and the Affections to submit
entirely to Gods Will, that you may bring forth the fruit of a holy Life; when
it corrects any of your Errors; stirs up your Sloth; incourages you to
Diligence, Cheerfulness, and Perseverance, and such like things.

But the best contrived Sermon in the World for all these ends, though it were
indicted by the Spirit of God it self; would have no efficacy at all in it, if
they that heard it, did not attend to it; and attend without Prejudice, without
Passion, without Partiality, without rash and hasty Judgment, without Pride and
conceit of themselves, and their own Knowledge and Righteousness: that is,
unless they consider and weigh what is delivered, though contrary to their
present sense, unless they will impartially give every thing that is offered to
their mind a due regard; and allot some time for its further Consideration,
when it is not to their liking, etc. For want of which, multitudes did not
Profit by our Savior's Sermons, but were rather more exasperated by them: and
at last finally hardened against him, and against the Holy Ghost, when it came
down from Heaven to convince them.

I doubt not they were ready enough then to lay the blame upon his Sermons,
which pressed them to many things, unto which they had no mind; being against
their Interest, or against some Opinion, or Affection, to which they were
deeply engaged: so that they did not Profit by them. But for all this, you
believe the fault was wholly in themselves, who ought to have come better
prepared; with honest and good Hearts to hear his Word. And therefore have
reason to consider in your present case, that since the most Profitable Sermons
that ever were made, can do no good, unless Men be disposed to Profit by them:
whether the unprofitableness you complain of under our Ministry, do not arise
rather for want of what you ought to do to make the most excellent Sermon
profitable, then from any defect in their Ministry.

Judge now I say, upon the whole: if you cannot profit by the public Ministry;
where is it most reasonable to think the cause of this unprofitableness lies?
whether to suspect the cause may lie in your selves; or to impute it to their
Sermons, and conclude them to be unedyfying. Pronounce, I beseech you,
righteous Judgment, after you have well weighed the matter: and give such
things as I have here laid before you, a just and deliberate Consideration: so
as hereafter to resolve to lay aside all prejudice, and to be perfectly free to
hear with Patience and Candor, what can be said by any body; though against
your present persuasion. Let not your Passions rise at it; or if they do,
immediately suppress them, and require them not to meddle in this matter: but
to sumbit unto what shall appear to be reason, after you have weighed the
matter impartially.

If you cannot do this, you ought to think that you have not profited much, by
all the Sermons you have heard: and consequently suspect, you are in a wrong
way of growing wiser and better. And after you have brought your self to much
liberty, I doubt not you will find that you are in a wrong way; and therefore
resolve to alter it, and come into the way of the Church. Where if you do not
meet presently with such advantages for your Spiritual growth, as you are told
you may receive, you have reason to conclude, as the forenamed Mr. Hildersham
does to those, that said they could not find such Lights, such Power, such
Comfort in the Word, as was spoken of. First, either you have not sought it
aright, not with earnestness, or not with a good Heart: or Secundly, if you
have and do not find it at first; yet you shall hereafter, if you seek it here
with an honest heart.

VIII.
And the preaching of Gods holy Word among us, would be of greater efficacy
upon your Hearts; if when you come to partake of it, you would remember and
observe some Rules (delivered by the same Author in another place, Lecture
XXVI.) about the Public Worship of God, which now, alas, are generally
neglected; and therefore had need to be pressed, for the disposing all Men's
Hearts to profit by their attendance on it.

1. One is, that at your coming into the Congregation, and during the whole
time of your abode there, you would behave your selves reverently. For we may
not come into the place of Gods Worship, as we would into a dancing-School, or
Playhouse, laughing or toying, etc. neither may we go out of it, as we would
out of such a one: but in our very coming in, and going out, and whole outward
carriage there, we ought to give some signification of the reverence that we
bear to this Place; and that we do indeed account it the House of God.

Which serious temper of Mind, and awful sense of Gods Presence, possessing the
Mind, would, no doubt, be an excellent preparation to receive benefit by the
whole Service of God as well as by the Sermon. For which end,

2. Another Rule is, that we must all come to the beginning of Gods public
worship, and carry till all be done. Yea, it is the Duty of Gods People, says
he, to be in Gods House before the beginning: For it becomes them to wait for
the Minister of God, and not to let him wait for them. The Reasons he gives for
this are two. First, there is Nothing done in our Assemblies, but all may
receive profit by it. For example, by the confession of Sins (and Absolution, I
may add) and all other Prayers used in the Congregation, a man may receive more
profit and comfort, than by any other. Which is the reason why the Apostles
(even after Christ's Ascension, when the typical Honor of the Temple was
abolished, etc.) were so delighted to go to the Temple to pray, at the times of
public Prayer. 1. Act. 3. etc.

And so he goes on to show how by hearing the Word read all may profit: and by
hearing it preached, even by the meanest Minister of Christ, if the fault be
not in themselves. How the singing of Psalms also furthers the fruit of the
Word in the Hearts of Believers: and much more benefit may the faithful receive
by the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Nay, by being present at the
Administration of Baptism, all may receive profit: being put in mind there-by
of the Covenant God made with them in Baptism, etc. Lastly, by the blessing
pronounced by Gods Minister all may receive good; and therefore none ought to
absent himself from any part of the public Service of God.

For which his second Reason is very remarkable, that though we could receive
no profit by the Exercises used in our Assemblies, yet we must be present at
them all, to do our homage unto God; and show the reverent respect we have to
his Ordinances. For there is nothing done in Gods public Worship among us
(observe this) but it is done by the Instruction and Ordinance and Commandment
of the Lord. As he shows particularly, that it is his ordinance there should be
all sorts and kinds of Prayers used; yea, this is the chief duty to be
performed in our assemblies, 1 K. 11. 1, 2. that in our public assemblies the
Word of God should be read as well as preached, the Holy Communion administered,
etc. that is, all things should be done as they are now in our Common Prayer,
to which it is plain he has respect. And this he repeats again, Lecture XXVIII.

If thou wast sure thou could not profit, yet must thou come to do thy Homage
to God, and to show thy reverence to his Ordinance.

3. Another of his general Rules is, that when we are present we ought to join
with the Congregation in all the parts of Gods Worship, and do as the
Congregation does. For it makes much for the come liness and reverence of Gods
Worship, that all things be done in good order, without confusion. And it is a
principle part of this good order that should be in the Congregation; when they
all come together, and go together, pray together, sing together, kneel
together: in a word, when every part of Gods Worship is to be performed by the
Congregation, as if the whole Congregation were but one Man.

And in several places he reproves with a great deal of Zeal, men's great
carelessness in this; particularly their neglect of kneeling in the Prayers:
having observed that men who will kneel at their own private prayers can never
be seen to kneel at the common and public Prayer.

His last general Rule is, that we ought to teach our Children and Servants to
show Reverence to the Sanctuary and public Worship of God. For God cannot
endure profaneness and contempt of Religion, no not in Children. And it stands
us all upon to use the utmost Authority we have to maintain the Reverence of
Gods Sanctuary: for the open contempt done by any, may bring Gods curse on us
all. And certainly, says he, among other causes of the Plauge, and other
Judgments of God upon the Land, this is not the least, that Gods public
Worship is performed among us with so little Reverence and Devotion as it is.

I am tempted to transcribe a great deal more of these Lectures: because by
them you may see that if I had moved all that has been said about our Sermons,
I might (according to the Judgment of this devout and learned man) have
maintained that there wants not sufficient means of profiting in our
Congregations, if there were none: as long as the word of God is there read, by
which (together with the other holy duties) all may receive the greatest profit
and comfort, if they please. For it is of far greater excellence, authority and
certainty, than the Sermons of any Preacher in the World. First, because it
comes more immediately from God: and though it be translated by men, yet is
there in it far less mixture of humane Ignorance and Infirmity than in Sermons.
While the Word is read we are sure we hear God speaking to us, and that it is
the truth that we hear, but not always so, when men preach: for the best man is
subject to Error. (which by the way shows the great ignorance and profaneness
of this Age; wherein men make nothing of the reading of Gods Word, but take the
liberty to discourse and chat all the time while the first and second Lessons
are read to them.)

And secondly, the Word that is read, is the Foundation of all Sermons; and the
very touchstone whereby they are to be tried. To that which we hear read
simple and absolute Obedience is due, without any question made of the truth
and certainty of it: but so it is not to that which we hear preached, farther
than we find it agreeable to the written Word; for they of Beraea were
commended for examining by this even that which the Apostles themselves did
preach.

IX.
But I say no more of this: and shall only crave leave, with some earnestness,
to desire two things of every one who says he cannot profit by our Sermons.

1. The First is, that he would examine himself strictly upon this Question;
whether he thinks he could profit by such a Sermon as this; did he hear it
preached by one of your Ministers? Search to the very bottom of your Hearts and
be not satisfied till you feel how they stand affected, and how they would
receive a discourse upon these Subjects; should you come occasionally (as you
now speak) into one of our Churches, and there find the Preacher pressing these
things upon the Peoples Consciences? Especially if you heard him add to these
Rules, that for the reverence of Gods public worship, care should be taken
that the place where the Congregation assembleth, may be decent and comely. And
he should call this place, a Temple; and affirm that Gods public worship, is
no where so well performed as in this Temple: and that it is a foul sin and
contempt done to Gods worship, that Parishioners either will not be at the
chrage to maintain such as may keep the Church decently, or are altogether
careless to see it done: and that the true cause why now adays Men will be at
no cost with Gods House, is, because they have no delight in it; and that this
is a piece of irreligiousness, which is a just cause of grief to every godly
man, etc. Reflect, I say, upon your selves, and resolve, what you really think
you would judge of such a Sermon? How would it be accepted by you?

Would be apt to look upon it as altogether unprofitable? or at least, as
needless discourse; which might as well, nay better, be spared, than preached
to the People?

If this be your mind, then consider with your selves, why such things out of
one man's mouth should relish well enough, or go down without disgust; which
coming out of another you presently dislike? Is it not manifest that you are
partial and disaffected; and that this is the reason you cannot profit by our
Sermons? Or if you could not like such discourses, either from Nonconformists,
or from our Ministers; then consider, whether you have not reason to think you
are very much mistaken in this business of profitable Sermons: when you imagine
such discourses as these to be unprofitable and superfluous, which in the
judgment of sober men of all sides, are not only very useful, but so necessary
to be taught the People; that for want of a sense of such things, they are in
danger to lose their Religion? For, as that good man said long ago (and I doubt
we are much improved in such impiety since that time, as Superstition made the
Papists too careful, and too bountiful: so Profaneness and Atheism has made us
too void of all care, in beautifying the House of God.

2. But if you think that you should count such a Sermon profitable, then I
desire you, Secondly, to examine your selves and consider; whether you have
learnt so much out of the Holy Scriptures, as to observe all the foregoing
Rules duly and carefully? or so much, as to make them your study, and to think
how to bring your Heart into conformity with them? Do you, for instance,
reverence God's Sanctuary? and when you come into it, and while you are there,
give open significations of it? Do you come at the beginning of Divine Service,
or only to some part of it, at the latter end, or the Sermon only? Do you stand
up, and do you kneel when the rest of the Congregation does? etc.

If you cannot say that you are so well acquainted with these, and the rest of
the foregoing Rules, as to endeavor to live by them; then in reason, you ought
to conclude, that the fault is some where else, and not in our Sermons, if you
cannot profit by them: For you do not profit by the Holy Scriptures themselves.

Where these things are so plainly taught, that a Man ought to think very
meanly of himself, and to look upon himself as a poor proficient in Religion;
who is not advanced thus far in his regard to the Duties, and the Solemnities
of God's Worship and Service.

And, if being admonished of these things, he do not humble himself; nay,
become vile in his own Eyes, for having thus long entertained an high opinion
of himself, though so deficient in the very rudiments and beginnings of
Religion; he is not likely to be much the better for any Sermon whatsoever:
because he will relish none but those only, which feed his vain conceit of
himself; and of his high seize, and intimate acquaintance with God, and
communion with him in his Ordinances; while he has not a due esteem of them,
nor makes a right improvement by them.

X.
But I hope these short Admonitions may put better inclinations, into those
Men's minds; who will seriously think of them: and particularly beget in them a
greater regard, than is usually given to the Holy Word of God, read in our
Churches. Which will dispose ever one to profit better by all Sermons (which
are but the Interpretation and Application of that Word) especially, if, with
due devotion of heart, they will join in the whole Service foregoing. By which
they may profit (I have shown) as much, if not more, as by Sermons; if they be
religiously disposed, and will come at the beginning of the Prayers, and with
all humble reverence attend upon every part of God's Worship.

For as he that is away from any part of the Sermon (says the same Person
again) shall profit the less by that which he does hear; so he that is away
from any part of the Divine Service, gets the less good by that at which he is
present. For there is no part of God's Service (not the Confession, not the
Prayers, not the Psalms, not the Blessing) but it concerns every one; and every
one may receive edification by it; and will lose much of the Benefit he might
have had, if he absent himself from it. A thing in which it seems, many of
them, who had most knowledge and were the forwardest Professors in those days,
did offend: which moved him to set out the sins of those Men in several
Respects and Considerations. Which it would be too long for me to mention; nor
is it needful, if this that I have discoursed already be laid to Heart. And if
Men will lay nothing close to their Consciences; all that can be said, or
wrote, or preached, will do them no good: but they will be only hearers, or
readers, not doers of the Word, deceiving their own Souls.

Wherefore laying aside (as St. Peter speaks, I. II. 1. 2.) all malice, and all
guile (or deceit) and hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil speakings, as new
born babes, desire the sincere milk of the Word (or that rational sincere milk;
the pure food of your mind and understanding, and not of your fancy) that you
may grow thereby. As certainly you will, when you become of the same
disposition, with little Children: void of hatred, of guile, of wraths of
dissimulation, and such like evil affections: and are of an humble, teachable,
and submissive Spirit. For if every one had but such an increase of grace, as
to hear meekly Gods Word, and to receive it with pure affection, they could not
easily fail, to bring forth the fruit of the Spirit.

So we pray in our Litany. And may it please God, as it there follows; to bring
into the way of truth, all such as have erred, and are deceived: for Jesus
Christ his sake.

Amen.
FINIS.
AN ARGUMENT FOR UNION, Taken from the True Interest OF THOSE DISSENTERS in
ENGLAND, Who Profess, and call themselves PROTESTANTS.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Basset, at the George in Fleet Street; Benj. Took,
at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard; and F. Gardener, at the White-Horse in
Ludgate Street, 1683.

THE CONTENTS.
DIssentions are dangerous to the Church. Page 1. If the Church should be
dissettled by such means, our Dissenters would not obtain their Ends. p. 2.
Their First, or Subordinate End, is the Establishing of themselves. p. 3. The
first Branch of it is the Establishing themselves as a National Church, which
cannot be hoped for, either, First by all of them; p. 4. Or, Secondly, by the
Prevalent Party amongst them. p. 5. This is proved First, from several Reasons.
p. 5, 6. Secondly, from the History of our late Revolutions. p. 6. to 10. After
which it is showed, That if they could not then gain their point, they can,
much less, do it now. p. 10 etc. The second Branch of their Subordinate End, is
the settling of themselves by mutual Sufferance. p. 12. This is proved still
more improbable. p. 12, 13. Also, it is showed that Parties tolerate each other
no longer than one gets Power to suppress the rest, with public safety. p. 14.
to 18. The Second End of the Dissenters is more Principal, and the first part
of it is the keeping out of Popery. p. 18. That this End cannot be obtained by
Dissenting from our Church, is showed From Reason. p. 18. to p. 25. From the
History of the late Times. p. 25, etc. From the Judgment and Methods of the
Papists themselves. p. 28, 29. The second part of the more Principal End of the
Dissenters, is the advancing of Pure Religion. p. 30. But, there are Reasons to
persuade us that upon the Dissettlement of this Church, Religion would not be
advanced, but embased. p. 30, 34. to 37. And the History of the late Troubles
shows this to have been so in Fact. p. 33, 34, 38, 39. By virtue of the
Premises, Dissenters are persuaded to consider seriously the state of things
in this time of Prosecution, and to hold constant Communion with our Church,
with which the wisest and best of them hold occasional Communion; that the
blessed Ends of Truth, Holiness, and Peace, may be obtained. p. 40, 41, 42, 43.
AN ARGUMENT FOR UNION, etc.
I Take it for granted (seeing a Truth so very plain The Introduction.
needs no formal Proof) that the ready way to overthrow a Church, is, first to
divide it. It is, also, too manifest, that our Dissentions are Divisions,
properly so called, or Public Ruptures. It is true, notwithstanding these
Ruptures, the Church still lives, and, in some good measure, prospers: But how
Mortal these Breaches may, at last, prove, through their Continuance and
Increase, a Man, who has but a Competency of Judgment, may easily fortel. It
is, therefore, the business of every Good Man, as far as in him lies, to
dissuade, with Prudent Zeal, from these Divisions; which are, in their Nature
so uncharitable, and so perilous in their Consequence.

Now, one way of moving Men to desist from their Undertakings, is, the showing
of them, with calmness of Temper, and plainness of Reasoning, that their Ends
are not likely to be obtained: As also, that by the Means they use, they will
bring upon themselves those very Evils which they fear, and of the removal of
which they have Expectation.

Wherefore, I have chosen an Argument of this Nature, in order to the
persuading of Dissenters to join in the Exercise of Constant Communion with the
Church of England. And I have here endeavored to make it evident to them;
that, in attempting to pull down this Established Church, they, unwarily, turn
their own force against themselves, and prepare Materials for the Tombs of
their own Parties.

This Argument is here offered to them in the Spirit of Christian Charity, and
without any design of exposing or exasperating any person who differs, in his
Notions, from the sense of the Writer. For he had rather lie at the Feet of the
meanest Man who is overtaken with an error, than spurn insolently against him.

Now, in the managing of this Argument, it is necessary The Argument itself.
Its Partition and Method.
to show two things.

First, What those Ends are which are proposed by the Dissenters? I mean, those
which seem, with any tolerable color of Reason, fit to be proposed; and which
are designed by the better and wiser of that number.

Secondly, What Reasons may make it manifest, that the Ends which they propose,
can never be procured by the Diss^ttlement of the Church of England.

These things being showed, there shall follow such a Conclusion, as is
suitable to the Premises.

First, For the Ends proposed by the more Prudent The Ends of the Dissenters.
Dissenters, they are of two kinds.

The First End is Subordinate.

The Second is Principal: Or the End to which the former serves in the quality
of the Means.

The Subordinate End is, the Establishing of themselves. And it has two
Branches.

Either, the settling themselves (First) as a National Church:

Or, (Secondly) as several distinct Churches, giving undisturbed Toleration to
one another.

For I am not willing to believe all of them to be given up to such a degree of
Infatuation, as to be intent only upon beating down, without considering what
is fit to be set up. That is the way of Tempests, and not of Builders.

The Principal is, the further Advancement of the Reformed Religion. This also,
has two parts.

1. The Removal of Popery. 2. The Introduction of the Protestant Religion in
greater Purity and Perfection, than the Church of England is (in their Opinion)
as yet, arrived at, or can probably attain to by virtue of its present
Constitution.
If there be amongst them, Men disturbed in their Understandings, by the heat
of Enthusiasm; if there be amongst them, any Men whose Wisdom is sensual and
worldly; who presumptuously make Heaven stoop to Earth, and conceal their
private and secular Designs under the venerable name of Pure Religion; I do not
concern my self with them in this Persuasive to Union. The former cannot, and
the later will not be convinced: For there is no Ear so deaf, as that which
Interest has stopped. And there is a great deal of earnest Truth suggested in
the Jocular Speech of James the fifth of Scotland; who, when his Treasurer
desired liberty to be plain with him, Melvil 's Memoirs p. 2.
drew out his Sword, and said merrily to him, I shall slay thee, if thou speak
against my profit.

The First Branch of the first, or Subordinate End of The first Branch of the
first End of the Dissenters: viz. Union in a National Church.
the Dissenters is, the Establishing of themselves as a National Church.

This is either designed by All of them, or by a Party which believes it self
to be most sober, and must numerous, and most likely to prevail over the rest;
so far at least as to become the State-Party.

For All of them to expect to be united in one Uniform Body, is to hope, not
only against the Grounds of Hope, but of Possibility.

For the Parties are very many, and very differing, (or rather very contrary)
and they cannot frame amongst them, any common Scheme in which their Assents
can be united.

What Communion (for Example sake) can the Presbyterians have with Arians,
Socinians, Anabaptists, Fifth-Monarchy-Men, Sensual Millenaries, Behmenists,
Familists, Seekers, Antinomians, Ranters, Sabbatarians, Quakers, Muggletonians,
Sweet-Singers. These may associate in a Caravan, but cannot join in the
Communion of a Church. Such a Church would be like the Family of Error and her
Daughters, described in Mr. Spencer's Fairy-Queen, of which none were alike,
unless in this, that they were all deformed: And how shall the Christians of
this present Church be disposed of to their just satisfaction? They will never
Incorporate with such a Medly of Religions; and they are such, both for their
Quality and their number, as not to be beneath a very serious Consideration.

For the Prevalent Party, there seems to be both Reason, and Experience,
against their hopes of Establishing themselves as a National Church.

These Reasons, amongst others, have moved me to entertain this Persuasion
concerning them.

First, Such a Party not maintaining Episcopal Government, which has obtained
here from the Times of the Britains (who in the Apostolical Age, received the
Christian Religion) and which is so agreeable to the Scheme of the Monarchy; It
is not probable that they shall easily procure an exchange of it for a newer
Model, by the general consent of Church or State. I may add, the Body of the
People of England, whose Genius renders them tenacious of their Ancient Customs.

Again, All the Parties amongst us, have of late declared, for Mutual
Forbearance. They cannot, therefore, be consistent with themselves, if they
frame such a National Constitution, by which any Man, who Dissents from it,
shall be otherwise dealt with, than by personal Conference; which, also, he
must have liberty not to admit, if he be persuaded it is not fit or safe for
him. And such a Body without any other nerves for its strength and motion; for
the Encouragement of those who are Members of it, and the Discouragement of
those who refuse its Communion, will not long hold together: Nor has it means
in it, sufficient for the Ends to which it is designed. And indeed by this
means, the Spiritual Power of Excommunication will be rendered of none Effect.
For, what Punishment, what Shame, what Check, will it be to Cross and Perverse
Men, if being shut out of the National Church, they may with open Arms and with
Applause due to real Converts, be received into this or the other particular
Congregation, as it best suiteth with their good likeing?

Furthermore, it is commonly said, that since the Presbyterians have gathered
Churches out of Churches, there are not many true and proper Disciplinarians in
England.

If it be so, then Independency is amongst Dissenters, the prevalent side; and
I know not how a National Church can be made up of Separate Independent
Churches; for each Congregation is a Church by it self, and has, besides the
general Covenant of Baptism, a particular Church Covenant; and therefore, it is
difficult to imagine how all of them can be, by any Coherence of the Parts,
united into one entire Society.

But, be it supposed, that the Disciplinarians are of all Parties, the most
numerous and prevalent; yet Experience shows how hard a Work it is for all of
them to form themselves into a Church of England, In the late times of Public
disquiet, they had great Power; they had in humane appearance, fair and
promising Opportunities; and yet there grew up at their Roots another Party,
which in conclusion, over-dropped them, and brought their Interest into a
sensible decay; it being the nature of every Faction, upon Victory obtained
over their Common Adversary, to subdivide. In the Year 1640, July 17. 1640.
Whitelock's Memorials p. 45.
The Commons had a debate about a new form of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: And
they agreed that every Shire should be a several Diocese. That there should be
constituted, in each Shire, a Presbytery of Twelve Divines, with a President as
a Bishop over them. That this President with the Assistance of some of the
Presbyters, should Ordain, Suspend, Deprive, Degrade, Excommunicate. That there
should be a Diocesan Synod once a Year; and each third Year, a National Synod.
A while after, A. 1644. Id. ibid. p. 117.
it was voted by them, that, to have a Presbytery in the Church, was according
to the Word of God.

Many other Steps were made in favor of the Discipline. The Common Prayer Book
was removed; an Assembly of Divines was Established: Their Directory was
introduced; they were united in the Bond of a solemn League and Covenant. There
was sent up I^ Sept. 15. 1646. Diurnal. p. 1313.
from the County of Lancaster, a Petition signed with 12000 Hands for the
settling of Classes in those parts. A Petition of the like importance was
framed by diverse of the Common Council of London. They seemed Whitlock's
Memoirs. p. 187.
nigh the gaining of their Point; yet they widely missed of it. There was in
the Assembly it self, a ferment of Dissension. Mr. Sympson, and some others,
favored an Independent; Mr. Seldom and some of his Admirers, an Erastian
Interest. There was a Party in the Nation who were then called Dissenting
Brethren; and to these the Directory was as offensive, as the Canons and
Liturgy had been to those of the Discipline. They drew up Reasons Id. ib. p.
116. A. 44.
against the Directory of Church Government by Presbyters.

They afterward Printed an open Remonstrance against Presbytery, of which the
Assembly complained to Ib. A. 45. p. 189.
the House, as of a Scandalous Libel. And there were those who Reproached the
Presbyterians, in the same Phrases in which they had given vent to their
displeasure against the Liturgy of the Church of England. The Ministers of
Lancashire Harm. Consent. p. 20.
complained concerning them, That they had compared the Covenant to the Alcoran
of the Turks, and Mass of the Papists, and Service Book of the Prelates. As
likewise, that they said, it was a Brazen-Serpent fit to be broken in pieces
and ground to Powder, rather than that Men should fall down and Worship it.

Amongst the Disciplinarians, some were confident of Success. One of them Mr.
S. Symp. in Sermon. of Reform. A. 1643. p. 29.
(for he was not then gone over to the Part of the Independents) expressed his
assurance in these most unbecoming Words, before the Commons. It will (said he)
bring such a Blot on God as He shall never wipe out, if your poor Prayers
should be turned into your own bosoms; that Prayer for Reformation. A Speech
not fit to have been repeated, if it were not necessary to learn Sobriety of
Wisdom from the Remembrances of Extravagance in former Times.

Others accknowledg'd their hopes, but did not dissemble their Fears. Six years
ago (said a person eminent D. John Arr. in Ser. called, The Great Wonder, etc.
before the Commons. A. 1646. p. 36.
amongst them) after this Parliament had sat a while, it was generally
believed that [the Woman, the Church] was fallen into her Travel -- but she
continues still in pain. Insomuch, as they begin to think she has not gone her
full time, and earnestly desire she may; because they fear nothing more than an
abortive Reformation.

Others did openly confess that their hopes were not answered, and that the
State of Religion was much declined. The Ministers of the Province of London
Testim. to Truth of Jesus Christ subscribed Dec. 14. 1647. p 31.
, used upon this occasion, these passionate words. Instead of a Reformation, we
may say with Sighs, what our Enemies said of us heretofore with scorn, we have
a Deformation in Religion.

Those Independents who adhered to that part of the House which joined with the
Army, prevailed for a Season, but they also were disturbed by those who went
under the Names of Lilburnists, Levellers, Agitators. See Hist. of Indep. 2
part. p 168.
Then likewise, Gerard Wynstanly In Mystof Godlin, etc. Anno. 1649. Wynst. in
Saints Paradise C. 5. p. 54. etc.
published the Principles of Quakerism, discoursing (or rather, repeating the
Dreams of his Imagination) in such Expressions as these. If you look for the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, you must know that the Spirit within the Flesh is
the Jesus Christ. -- Every Man has the light of the Father within himself,
which is, the Mighty Man Christ Jesus. Then Enthusiasm, excited in part by the
common pretense of an extraordinary Light, revealed (as of a sudden) in those
days in England, brake forth into open distraction. Then Joseph Salmon, a
present Member of the Army, published his Blasphemies, and defended his
Immoralities. He justified himself, and those of his way, saying Whitl.
Memoirs. A 1649. p. 430.
That it was God who did Swear in them, and that it was their Liberty to keep
Company with Women for their Lust. Wyke, his Disciple Id. ibid.
kissed a Soldier three times, and said, I breath the Spirit of God into thee.
Salmon himself printed a Pamphlet called, a Rout, in which he set forth his
villainous self as the Christ of God, saying, Salmon 's Rout. in Pref. and p.
10, 11, etc.
I am willing to become Sin for you, though the Lord in me knows no Sin. We
love to sweat drops of Blood under all men's offenses. -- We shall see of the
Travel of our Souls. Enthusiasm, though not in this rankness of it, was now
openly favored by Cromwell himself; who, together with six Soldiers, prayed
and preached at Whitehal. On Sund. after East. day. Ann. 1649. H. of Indep.
part 2. p. 153.
His own temper was warmed with fits of Enthusiasm See View of the late
Troubles. p. 366.
. And he confessed it to a Person of Condition E. M. I. C.
(from whom I received it, as did others, yet living) that he prayed according
to extraordinary Impulse. And that, not feeling such Impulse (which he called
Supernatural) he did forbear to pray, oftentimes, for several days together.

In Process of time, his House of Commons and he himself were publicly
disturbed by that wild Spirit, in the rasing of which they had been so
unhappily instrumental. A Quaker came to the door of the House Whitl. Memoirs.
A. 1654* p. 592.
, and drew his Sword, and cut those nigh him, and said, He was inspired by the
Holy Spirit to kill every Man who sat in that Convention. And he himself was
not only conspired against by those who called themselves, the Free and
Well-affected People of England See their Declar. in A. 1655. in Whilt. Me. p.
606.
, but openly bespattered by the Ink of the Quakers in several Pamphlets, See
Ed. Buroughs Trumpet of the Lord sounded. p. 2. A. 56.
and by their Clamours, affronted in his own Chapel; where before his face,
they gave bold interruption to his Preachers. Whilt. Memoirs. p. 62. 4.


Other Historical Memorials might be here produced, relating to the hopeful
Rise, and mighty Progress, and equal Declension of the Disciplinarian Party.
But, in such cases, I choose rather to take off my Pen than to lean too heard
upon it. Yet the nature of my Argument did necessarily lead me to the former
Remarks; and if useful Truth smarts, let Guilt suffer a Cure, and not kick
against the Charitable Reporter.

In Sum, the longer the Church of England was dissettled, the greater daily
grew the confusion; and the division of Sects was multiplied, not unlike to
that of Winds in the Mariners Compass, in which Artists have increased the
Partitions, from four to two and thirty. Insomuch, that the very Distractions
which were among us did in some measure, prepare the way for the return of the
King, and the Restitution of the Church: men finding no other common Bottom on
which the Interests of Religion and civil Peace might be established.

Now, if the Dissenters could not then, when so fair Opportunities were in
their hands, carry on their cause to any tolerable Settlement; much less may
they now hope to do it. For there are now many hindrances which did not then
lie cross their way.

First, The Platform of Discipline, so highly applauded, so earnestly contended
for, during the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James, has now been in part
tried; and the presence of it (to omit other Reasons) has abated the Reverence
some had for it.

Secondly, There is not at this time, such an Union amongst Dissenters, as
appeared at the beginning of our late Troubles. The number of those Dissenters
who were not for the Discipline, was then very inconsiderable. But in a few
years, they brake, as it were, into Fractions of Fractions. Insomuch, that the
Ministers of the Province of London, expressed the Estate of things in the Year
47, on this manner. Testim. to the Truth of J. Chr. p. 30.
Instead of Unity and Uniformity, in Matters of Religion, we are torn in pieces
with Distractions, Schisms, Separations, Divisions, ano Subdivisions.

Thirdly, Those who then favored the Discipline, are much departed from their
former Scheme of Government, inclining to Independency, which they once denied
to be God's Ordinance Mr. Herl. etc.
, and pleading for Toleration, which they once called, The last and strongest
hold of Satan. * The Title of Mr. Edwards 's book 1647. See Testim. of Min. p.
20.


Fourthly, At the beginning of our Disturbances, many Men of Quality, and such
who had a Zeal of God, favored the Settlement of the Discipline in the
simplicity of their hearts. They had not then seen any Revolutions; they had
not discovered the secret Springs of public Motions; nor the vile Interests of
many men which lay concealed under the disguise of Pure Religion. They saw
(what all Men may see in all times) abuses in Church and State; and the very
name of Reformation was sweet to them.

Now, notwithstanding the sincere zeal and the power of these Men, the
Discipline could not long be carried on; much less could it be perfected by
them.

There is therefore at this time, a much greater Improbability of Success in
the like design. For many consiberable men, Piously inclined, have seen their
error; and will not be a second time engaged: And they will not say of our late
changes, as the Protector did, Oliver 's Speech in the Painted Chamb^r. Jan.
22. 54 at the Dissolv. of the Parl. p. 29. 33.
That they were the Revolutions of God, and not humane designs; That they were
the Revolutions of Christ upon whose Shoulders the Government was stayed. They
are not of the same mind with him who told the Commons, Mr. Caryl in Ep. Ded.
bef. Ser. called the Arraign, of Unbelief. A. 45.
That if they acted Faith, then the Records of those Times on their side,
should bear thus to all Posterity, the Book of the Wars and Counsels of God.

Also, since those days, through the luxation of Discipline during the license
of the War, the discovery of great and black Hypocrisies, the multiplication of
Parties and Opinions, the publishing of many lewd and irreligious books from
Unlicens'd Presses, Atheism has made very formidable Advances. And they say,
that some undisguised Skeptics and Atheists have, some times since the King's
Return, been much used in the Cause of our Dissenters. Now, if well meaning
zeal could not establish the Discipline, it is not likely to be promoted, much
less settled, by the help of such hands of which the outsides are not washed by
so much as an External form of Godliness.

The Second Branch of the first End of Dissenters, The second Branch of the 1st
End of the Dissenters. viz. Union by mutual forbearance.
seems more improbable than the first, viz. The settling themselves as several
distinct Parties, giving undisturbed Toleration to each other.

This seems not probable upon many accounts.

First, Some Dissenters believe some of the Parties to be incapable of
Forbearance, as maintaining Principles destructive of Christian Faith and
Piety. This Opinion they still have (for instance sake) of Antinomians,
Quakers, and Muggletonians.

And they formerly declamed against the Toleration of diverse others. They
published here (by Authority so called) an Act of the Assembly at Edinburgh, A
1647. Act of Assemb. p. 2.
Against Erastians, Independents, and Liberty of Conscience, bearing (as they
speak) their public Testimony against them, not only as contrary to sound
Doctrine, but as more special Letts and Hindrances, as well to the Scottish
received Doctrine, Discipline, and Government, as to the Work of Reformation
and Uniformity in England and Ireland.

The Ministers of the Province within the County Palatine of Lancaster, in
their Harmonions Consent Harmon. Consent. A. 1648. p. 12.
with the Ministers of the Province of London, published their Judgments in
these zealous Words. A Toleration would be a putting of a Sword into a Mad
man's hand -- An appointing a City of Refuge in Men's Consciences, for the Devil
to fly to -- A proclaiming Liberty to the Wolves to come into Christ's Fold to
pray upon his Lambs -- A Toleration of Soul-murther (the greatest murder of
all others) and for the establishing whereof, damned Souls in Hell would
accurse Men on Earth. Neither would it be to provide for tender Consciences,
but to take away all Conscience. -- If error be not forcibily kept under, it
will be Superior.

It seems, they were not then of the later Persuasion of the Protector, who
said, Protect. Speech. Jan. 22. 54. p. 28.
concerning the People of several Judgments in this Land, That they were All
the Flock of Christ, and the Lambs of Christ, though perhaps under many unruly
Passions and Troubles of Spirit, whereby they gave disquiet to themselves and
others: And that they were not so to God as to us.

Again, There is no firmness or social influence in the nature of this Union.
It is the Union of a multitude who meet and disperse at pleasure. And he who
proposes this way as the means to knit Men into Christian Communion, is like a
Projecter who should design the keeping of the stones together in the strength
of a firm and lasting House, by forbearing the use of Cement. The Union that
lasts, is that of the Concord of Members in an Uniform Body.

Moreover, It is to be considered, that there are no Parties in this or any
other Nation, so exactly poised, that they have equal Numbers and Interests.
There is always one of them which over-ballanceth the rest. And one of the
several ways must always be favored as the Religion of the State. And it is
natural for the strongest side to attempt the subduing of the weaker. And
though this be not soon effected; yet 'till one side gets the mastery, the
Parties remain, not as distinct Bodies settled in peace within themselves, and
toward each other, but as Convulsions in the common body of the State.

Some think this Inclination to the swallowing up of all other Parties to be
found almost only in the Romish Church.

But here is something of it to be discerned (I will not say in all Churches,
seeing I well understand the good Being of our own) which suffered Bonner
himself to live, yet in all Factions and Parties; though the inequality of
Power makes it not seem to be alike in all of them.

The Catt has the same inward Parts with the Lion, though they differ much in
size: And some such likewise they will find who dissect humane nature, and
Bodies civil.

There is this Disposition in Men, whether they be the politic, or the
Conscientious.

The External practice of all Parties is answerable to this inward Disposition.

There is this inward Disposition in men who espouse any Faction, whether their
Ends be designs of State, or of Religion.

Parties who are not (otherwise than in show) concerned for Religion, will
perpetually covet Power after Power. And Parties who are serious and
Conscientious in their way, whatsoever it is; will not remain in an
indifference of terms toward those who tread in contrary Paths, and with whom
they do not maintain Communion. For therefore they withdraw from them, because
they believe Communion with them to be unlawful. Otherwise they have no
Judgment in the price of Peace and Unity, if they willingly part with it, when
they may, without sin, enjoy it: and if they esteem their way sinful, and
believe those persons who remain without their pale, to be so gone astray, as
without Repentance, to be eternally lost; Charity it self will urge them to use
all means probable toward the reducing of them. And they will be apt to think,
that the suffering of them in their Wanderings, declares them to be contented
with their condition.

External Practice of all Parties does show plainly what is their inward
Disposition.

All would do what is good in their own eyes; but I do not perceive that any
are willing to let others do so. Where there is Power, their is little
Forbearance: And the same men as their Conditions alter, speak of Mercy or
Justice.

Amongst those of the Party of Donatus whose Schism opened so dangerous a Wound
in the Churches of Africa; all pleaded earnestly for Forbearance, whilst their
Power was in its Minority. Yet, S. Austin remindeth one of them Petil. ap. S.
Aug. cont Petil. l. 2. Absit, Absit a nostra Conscientia ut ad nostram fidem
aliquem compellamus, etc.
of a Practice contrary to their Profession, whilst they turned against the
Maximianists, the edge of the Theodosian Laws; and abused the Power which they
had gotten under Julian, in oppressing as far as in them lay the Catholic
Christians.

Amongst those of the Protestant Persuasion; the Heads of the Discipline, were
plainly unwilling that any should have leave to make a separation from their
body. And one of them Mr. Calamy in Ser. called, The great danger of Covenant
refusing. A. 46. p 3.
, with a mixture of Grief and Expostulation, thus discoursed before the Commons.

The Famous City of London is become an Amsterdam; Separation from Our Churches
is countenanced; Toleration is cried up; Authority lies asleep. Every one
would have Power to rowse up it self, and maintain his Cause. And indeed it is,
and has been too often in Religion, as it is and was in Philosophy, Where the
diverse Sects do not contend merely for the enlarging the bounds of
Philosophical Arts in a sincere and solid inquiry, Lord Bacon's Pref. to Adv.
of Learn.
but for the Translating the Empire of Opinion, and settling it upon
themselves. The same men who pleaded for Forbearance in this Church, and
removed themselves into New England (as by themselves was said) for the Liberty
of their Conscience or Persuasion; when once they arrived there, and made a
figure in that Government, they refused Indulgence to the Anabaptists and
Quakers, and used them (as to this day they do) with great severity. Those
Commons who in the Year 47 Whitlock's Memoires. p. 276.
, made an Order, For the giving of Indulgence to tender Consciences; did at the
same time make another Order, That this Indulgence should not extend to
tolerate such who used the Common Prayer.

Some who do not well understand the Policy of the Dutch, do believe it to be
otherwise in those Netherlands. But, by their Constitution, none have liberty
to speak against any public Error or Corruption, on which the States shall
stamp their Authority. And Episcopius Episc. Exam. These. Cap. Op. vol. 1. par.
2. p. 185.
complained that the Calvinists would tolerate none whom they had power to
punish. There are now great numbers of his own Remonstrant Party, who, when any
juncture of Affairs gives them encouragment, are apt to contend for
Superiority. The Parties in their Sermons and Writings, speak with bitter Zeal
against each other: And where the ordinary Conversation of Men of different
Judgments is peaceable amongst them; diverse who mind Traffic more than
Religion, seem rather to be an Heterogeneous body frozen together by a cold
indifference, than a Society united by Christian Love.

In the Church of Rome, the several Orders, who at present mortally hate one
another, if they were not restrained by the force of the common Polity, they
would soon devour one another. We are not without a remarkable Instance in this
kind, published by a Dominican Bishop, and a Capuchin Friar. Certain Dominicans
See Lettres Sinceres. Trois party. Sixieme Lettre. p. 111.
had seated themselves nigh the River of Plate in Paraguay, where there are
Gold Mines in the Earth, and Gold Sands in the Rivers. Of this the Jesuits, who
have long ears, had good intelligence. They desired to go thither in order to
the further instruction of the American-people, and the education of Youth.
They obtained leave, procured Letters of Credence, were furnished with Money
for the Voyage. After having gotten sure footing, they soon removed the
Dominicans and Spanish Laity, and established themselves.

Among the Socinians, the great Asserters of Liberty in Religion, both in
thinking and speaking; though they cannot impose, because they have not yet
been any-where (that I know of) the prevailing Party; yet they show sometimes
what Spirit they are of.

Gittichius was, beyond all good manners, troublesome to a Socinian of better
temper (I mean Ruarus *) because Ruari. Epist. par. 1. p 415, 416.
he had chosen to fast one day in a week, and had taken Friday for the day,
though without any fixed purpose.

Among the Quakers themselves, whose Principle seems to be the Guidance of each
man by his personal persuasion, there want not signs of that fierce heat with
which their Light is accompanied. When some had formed them into a Society, and
gotten the Governance into their hands, they Excommunicated others; they
suffered them not to Marry or Bury in their manner who would not be guided by
what they called the Light of the Body, and the Light of Ancient Friends. See
Spirit of the Heart. p. 12, 13, etc.
George Fox declared he had Power to bind and loose whom he pleased, p ^7.
and said in a great Assembly p. 41.
that he never liked the Word Liberty of Conscience, and would have no Liberty
given to Presbyterians, Papists, Independents, and Baptists.

From the Subordinate End of the Dissenters, I pass The Principal End of the
Dissenters the first part of it.
to the Principal; and begin with the first part of it, the removal of Popery.
A very good and commendable end. And I heartily pray to God to prosper all
Christians who pursue it by fit and lawful ways.

But the Methods of Dissenters do not so well lead to it as those of the
established Church.

Bare Reason makes this manifest. It may be also proved to us by Historical
Inference.

This likewise, is the Judgment of the Papists themselves, who take their
measures from this Principle, that they shall enter in through the Breaches of
the Church of England.

First, Common Reason shows, that the Interruption which, may by Dissension,
be given to this Church, will rather weaken, than improve the Protestants
Interest, both at home and abroad.

Abroad, the Protestant Interest will suffer much, in the overthrow of this
Church. For, by such means, a principal Wheel is taken out of the Frame of the
Reformation. Nay, Signior Diodati Florentissima An^lia Ocellus ille Ecclesiarum
Peculium Christi singular, etc.
was wont to praise it in a more excellent Metaphor, and to call it the Eye of
the Reformed Churches; and it is plain to considering Men, that the Church of
England, which had greater regard to the Primitive Pattern than some others of
the Reformation, can give a more full and unperplexed answer to all the
Objections of the Romanists, than some other Churches, who are cramped in a few
points unwarily admitted. If therefore Dissentions put out this eye of the
Protestant Churches, the dark Doctrines and Traditions of Popery will the
sooner spread themselves over Reformed Christendom.

At Home, the Dissettlement of the Church of England will sooner introduce than
root out Popery. I am constrained thus to judge by the following Considerations.

First, the design of keeping out Popery by the Ruin of this Church, is like
the preposterous way, of securing the Vineyard by pulling up of the Fence; or
of keeping out the Enemy by the removal of our Bullwark. Under that name this
Church is commonly spoken of, and they do not flatter it who give it that
Title. ^ts Constitution is Christian, and it is strong in its Nature; and if
such a Church has not ability (with God's assistance) to resist the assaults
of Romish Power, much less have they who dissent from it. And it is Fanaticism
properly so called, or Religious Frenzy, to lay aside a more probable means,
and to trust that God will give, to means which are much less probable,
supernatural aid and success.

God supporteth a good Cause by weak means (if they are the only means he has
put into our power) against a bad Cause, though externally potent. But he, who
in cases of emergence assisteth honest Impotence and Infirmity, will never work
Miracles in favor of Men's Presumptions and Indiscretions.

The Romanists are a mighty body of Men; and, though there are Intestine Fewds
betwixt the Secular and Regular Clergy, as likewise betwixt the several Orders,
yet they are all united into one common Polity, and grafted, into that one
stock of the Papal Headship. They are favored in many places by great Men;
they have variety of Learning; they pretend to great Antiquity, to Miracles, to
Martyrs without number, to extraordinary Charity and Mortification; they have
the Nerves of worldly Power, that is, banks of Money, and a large Revenue: They
have a Scheme of Policy always in readiness; there are great numbers of
Emissaries posted in all places for the conveying of Intelligence, and the
gaining of Proselytes; they take upon them all shapes, and are bred to all the
wordly Arts of Insinuation. There is given to their way, in the Jargon of Mr.
Coleman Coll. of Let. p. 8. etc.
, a very fit name of Trade, Traffic, Merchandise.

Against all this Craft and Strength, what (under God) can Protestants oppose
which is equal to the Power of the Church of England? A Church Primitive,
learned, pure, and nor embased with the mixtures of Enthusiasm or Superstition.

A Church, which is able to detect the Forgeries and Impostures of Rome; which
has not given advantage to her by running from her into any extreme; which is
a National Body already formed; a Body both Christian and Legal; a Body which
commends it self to the Civil Powers by the Loyalty of its Constitution; a
body which has in it great numbers of People judiciously devout, and who are
judged only to be few See L. de Moulin's Advances, etc. p. 26.
, because they are not noysie, but prudent, though truly exemplary, in their
Religion.

And, there is in the Church of England, something more considerable than
number; for Union is stronger than Multitude. Take the Character of this Church
from Monsieur Daille De Confess Advers H. Hammond. c. 1. p. 97. 98.
, a Man whose Circumstances where not likely to lead him, in this matter, into
any partiality of judgment; and who, at that time, was engaged in a learned.
Controversy with one of our Divines. The Character is this. As to the Church of
England, purged from Foreign wicked Superstitious Worships and Errors, either
Impious or dangerous, by the Rule of the Divine Scriptures; approved by so many
and such illustrious Martyrs; abounding with Piety toward God, and Charity
toward Men, and with most frequent examples of good works; flourishing with an
increase of most learned and wise men from the beginning of the Reformation to
this time; I have always had it in just esteem, and till I die, I shall
continue in the same due Veneration of it. And indeed it is to me a matter of
astonishment, that any men who have been beyond the Seas, and made Observations
upon other Churches and States, should be displeased at Ours which so much
excel them.

Now, is it probable that such a Church as this is, should have less strength
in it for the resisting of Popery, than an inferior number of divided Parties,
of which the most Sober and most Accomplished, is neither so Primitive, nor so
learned, nor so united, nor so numerous, nor so legal: And against which it
will be objected by the Romans, that it is of Yesterday?

Amongst these Parties, there are some who have not fully declared themselves.
And who knows whether they have not a Reserve for the Romish Religion, against
a favorable Opportunity, though sometimes they speak of Rome as of Babylon? I
mean those People who are called Quakers, who speak in general of their Light;
and in such doubtful manner, that Inquisitive Men cannot yet understand from
what quarter of the Heavens it shines. The Men of design amongst them may
embrace any Religion, and the melancholy will make a tolerable Order amongst
the Romans; and the Priests will find for them a second St. Bruno.

Again, There are some who though they have declared themselves against Popery,
yet they have scarce any formed way of keeping it out. For what hinders a
crafty Jesuit from gathering a particular Congregation out of many others, and
modelling of it by degrees according to his pleasure? and what a gap do they
leave open for Seducers, who take out of the way all Legal Tests, and admit Men
who are Strangers to them to officiate amongst them upon bare pretense of
Spiritual Illumination?

Furthermore, the Romanists have more powerful ways of drawing Men from the
Parties of the Dissenters, than they have of enticing them from the Church of
England; for such Men (too frequently) go out from us through weakness of
imagination, for which the Church of Rome has variety of Gratifications.

They will offer, to the Severe, such strictnesses as are not consistent with
the general Laws of a National Church, which being framed for Men of such
various Conditions, must have some Scope and Latitude, though no license in it;
and many of those who now join themselves to the Dissenting Parties, would then
choose to be admitted as Members of this or the other Superstitious Fraternity:
And it is (at least) my private Conjecture, that if the Revenue of the
Religious Houses which were dissolved, had been judiciously applied to the
service of Men, either weak in mind, or indisposed by temper, or singular in
their Inclinations, amongst the Reformed; there might have been a Diversity
here (I mean such as there is in our present Colleges) without a Schism.

Likewise, they have Mental Prayer, and (as they call them) Spiritual
Eructations, for those who contemn or scruple forms. See Rational Discourse of
Prayer chiefly of Mystic Contemplation. chap. 14. page 74.


They have mystical Phrases for such who think they have a new Notion when they
darken understanding with Words. And accordingly, the third part of the Rule of
Perfection, (a very mystical Book, written by Father Benet a Capuchin) was in
the Year 46, reprinted in London A Bright Star centring in Christ our
perfection. Printed for H. Overton in Pope's Head Alley 1646.
, with a new Title, and without the Name of the Author; and it passed, amongst
some of the Parties, for a Book containing very sublime Evangelical Truths. And
it pleased some Enthusiasts when they read in it, That Christ's Passion was to
be practiced and beheld as it was in our selves, rather than that which is
considered at Jerusalem. Chapter 18. p. 189.


Also, they use much gesture, and great show of Zeal in preaching, and have
singular ways of moving the zealous temper of the English, from whence some of
them, in Rome it self, had the Name of Knock-breasts, Picchia-Petti Inglesi. S.
R. C. P^sth. p. 125.
given to them. A Romish Preacher comes forth out of an obscure Cloister into
the Pulpit, and appears all heavenly in the Exercise: And having excited a
warmth in their affection, he retires again, and does not mix with
Conversation, and is not observed (as other Ministers) by many eyes; and the
People never seeing him but in this Divine Figure, look upon him as an Angel
coming to them out of Heaven, and then ascending thither again.

It may be observed, also, that the Romanists have greater shows of self-denial
for the moving of English Piety, than the Dissenters. They have rough Cords
mean Garments, bare Feet, Disciplines, Whips, Pretenses of not touching Money,
or enjoying Property; though some of these are often no other than Arts used by
ordinary Beggars.

Again, they have ways, not only of humouring the infirmity, but even the
Foppishness of Humane Nature. Processions and other Rites of the Romish
Religion are so ordered as to be Games for Diversion; and the Mass with Scenes
pleases, though it be not understood.

Dissenters do now think, that Popery may be very easily subdued by their Arms:
But if Recluses were once crept out of their dark Cells (as Serpents from under
the deadly nightshade) they would have cause to alter their Opinions, and not
to think too highly of themselves, after a wilful removal of the Church of
England which is sufficient (under God) for this Encounter. This Church designs
to make Men good by making them first Judicious, as far as means can do it. But
some others desire to bring them to their side by catching of their
Imaginations; and by that way they can neither reform nor fix them. Some new
Device shall, in time, bring them over to a new Party.

Dissension it self amongst Protestants weakneth their Interest; and that which
weakens one side, strengthens another.

And many men, entangled in Controversy, and wearied with endless wrangling,
are too apt, for mere ease and quiet sake, to cast themselves, in servile
manner, into the Arms of pretended Infallibility.

Our Dissentions have already introduced too much of that which is the very
spirit of Jesuitism, the doing of Evil that pretended Good may come of it; the
serving of a Cause by any means, whether they be just or unjust.

Some Dissenters do accidentally prepare the way for Romish Religion by running
into an other extreme upon pretense of avoiding Popery; by decrying the Church
of England as Antichristian and Popish; and by condemning that as Popish which
is Christian and decent. [As Episcopacy, Liturgy, Observations of the Nativity
of Christ, and other Festivals, Reverence of bodily Gesture, particularly in
receiving the Holy Communion, Preservation of places and things set apart for
Holy uses, with reverend care.] By this means they bring Popery into
Reputation. Men will be apt to say, if such a Body as the Church of England be
Popish, it is sit we sit down and consider of it; for surely they are not so
inclined without weighty Reasons. If the Clergy of it be inclined to that
Religion, the Introduction of which, together with great numbers of the
Popish-Clergy, will diminish their preferment; it must be the Power of the
Truth which moves them against their worldly Interest. They will continue
their Argument and say further; If such good things as these abovementioned be
Romish, and it be lawful to judge of the whole by the parts of it which are
before us, surely that which is Popish is also Primitive and Evangelical. That
which we have examined is good, and that which we have not, may probably be of
the same kind,

Secondly, the History of our late Revolutions shows that Popery will not be
smothered in the Ruins of the Church of England, but rather be advanced upon
them.

It made great Progress in the late Times; insomuch, that the Dissenters do
remove the Odium of the late King's execrable Murder from themselves, and lay
it upon the Jesuits; thereby tacitly acknowledging that they had so great a
power over some of them, as to make them to become their Instruments for the
cutting off the Lord's Anointed. For if they will not allow Cromwell and Ireton
and some others of that Order, to have been Dissenters, properly so called; yet
certainly they must not deny that Name to Mr. Peter's, Mr. John Goodwin and many
like to them, who appeared publicly in that very black and insolent
wickedness. How far it is true that the Jesuits influenced those Counsels, I do
not now examine, nor does my Talent lie in Mysteries of State. But that in the
late Revolutions, Popery was not routed out, no Man can remain ignorant who is
of competent Age, and had not perfectly lost the use of his memory, though he
has made the most negligent Observations.

Robert Mentit de Salmonet Hist. des tro^bles de la grand Bret. a Par^^ 1661.
lib. 3. p. 165 See sport view of the late Troubl. p. 564.
a Scotchman, and a Secular Priest in actual exercise of Communion with the
Church of Rome, has publicly taken notice of the many Priests slain at
Edgehill, and of two Companies of Walloons and other Catholics (as he is
pleased to style them) in the Service of the States.

It has been commonly said Arbitr. Government p. 28.
that Gifford the Jesuit appeared openly in the Year 47 amongst the Agitators,
and that his Pen was used in the Paper drawn up at a Committee in the Army, and
called the Agreement of the People. See Whitl. Memoirs. p. 279, 280 282.
K. Charles the Martyr speaks of such things as notorious, in one of his
printed Declarations Exact Col. p. 647.
, All Men know (said he) the great number of Papists which serve in their Army,
Commanders, and others.

In the Year 49, Id. ibid. p. 405.
Those in the House were acquainted with diverse Papers, taken in a French Man's
Trunk at Rye, discovering a Popish Design to be set on foot in England, with
Commissions from the Bishop of Chalcedon, by Authority of the Church of Rome,
to Popish Priests and others, for settling the Discipline of the Romish Church
in England and Scotland.

Mr. Edwards Gangrena p. 1^. p. r. 2
reports, from Mr. Mills a Common-Council-man, who was so informed by a knowing
Papist, that the Romanists did generally shelter themselves under the Vizor of
Independency. It is certain, that a College of Jesuits was established at Come
Narr. sent up to the Lords from the Bishop of He^eford p. 7.
in the Year 52. And in a Paper found there, mention was made of 155 reconciled
that year to the Church of Rome. Oliver himself used these words in a
Declaration published by the Advice of his Council. Prot. Declaration October.
31. 1655.
It is not only Commonly observed, but there remains with Us, somewhat of
Proof, that Jesuits have been found among some discontented Parties in this
Nation, who are observed to quarrel and fall out with every Form or
Administration in the Church or State. Dr. Bailey In the Life of Bish. Fisher.
p. 260, 161.
the Romanist openly courted Oliver as the present hopes of Rome, and with a
Flattery as gross as the Jingle was ridiculous, called him Oliva Vera: And one
of his Physicians V. Elench Mot. par. 2. p. 341.
has said of him, that he was once negotiating with the Romanists for
Toleration, but brake off the Bargain, partly because they came not up to his
price, and partly because he feared it would b^ offensive to the People. It is
also publicly told us, H. Indep. part 2. p. 245, etc.
that an Agreement was made in 49, even with Owen o Neal, that bloody Romanist;
and that he, in pursuance of the Interest of the State, so called, raised the
Siege of Londonderry.

A great door was opened to Romish Emissaries when the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy were, by public Order, taken away: For they were Tests of Romamism.
Likewise, the Doctrine of the unlawfulness of an Oath, revived in those days,
by Roger Williams, See Mr. Cotton's Lr. Exam. A. 44. p. 4, 5 Simplicit.
defense. A. 1646. p. 22. Min. of Prove. of Land. Testim. p. 18.
Samuel Gorton, and others, helped equivocating Papists to an evasion, as (I
fear) it may do, at this day, among the Quakers. So we may be induced to
believe, by comparing present with former Transactions. For we are informed
that in the Reign of King James, Gee's Foot out of the Snare. p. 58, 59. A.
1621.
Thomas Newton, pretended to have had a Vision of the Virgin Mary, who said to
him, Newton, See thou do not take the Oath of Allegiance: And being of this
publicly examined at the Commission-Table, and asked, how he knew it to be the
Virgin Mary which appeared? He answered, I know it was she, for she appeared
unto me in the form of her Assumption.

It was the Church of England, which, in our late Troubles, principally
fortified and entrenched the true Protestant Religion against the Assaults of
Rome.

This Church was still in being, though in Adversity. She had strong Vitals and
did not die, notwithstanding there was some Distemper in her Estate. There was
still a Constitution where Primitive order and decency might be found, and in
which Men of Sobriety might be fixed. And great numbers of the Churchmen, by
their constant adherence to their Principles, under public contempt and heavy
pressure, gained daily on the People, and convinced the World that they were
not so Popish and Earthly-minded as popular clamor had represented them. Also,
their learned Books and Conferences reduced some, and established many, and we
owe a part of the stablity of Men in those times to God's blessing on the
Writings of Archbishop Laud, Mr. Chillingworth, Dr. Bromhall, Dr. Cosins, Dr.
Hammond, and others.

Last of all, It is the Opinion of the Papists themselves, that their Cause is
promoted by our Dissensions; and, according to these measures of Judgment, they
govern their Councils.

This was the Opinion of the Jesuit Campanella in his D^scourse touching the
Spanish Monarchy, written about the Year 1600; and, in 54, published at London
in our Language. Campan. Disc. of Span. Mon. c. 25. p. 157
Concerning the weakening of the English (says that Jesuit) there can no better
way possibly be found out, than by causing Divisions and Dissentions among
themselves. -- And as for their Religion, -- it cannot be so easily
extinguished and rooted out here, unless there were some certain Schools set up
in Flanders, -- by means of which there should be scattered abroad the Seeds of
Schism, etc.

And whether these kinds of Seeds have not come from hence to us, as well as
those better ones of the Brabant Husbandry, remains not now any longer a
question.

It was the Advice of the Jesuit Contzens, Contz. Polit. l. 2. chap. 18. Sect.
9.
To make as much use of the Divisions of Enemies, as of the agreement of
Friends.

After this manner it is that they manage themselves; they endeavor to widen
the Breach, in order to the introducing of Popery into a divided Nation. They
will have hopes, as long as we have Divisions. They will believe, whilst they
see the humors are in conflict, that the Body will be at last dissolved. If
they will hope for Resettlement, as they declare they do, upon such
inconsiderable grounds, as the Printing of a Monasticon Journal des Scavans de
l' Ann. 1665. p. 140.
or the Provincial Journ. etc de l' An. 1666. p. 2^0, 233. etc.
of Lynwood amongst us, though in the Quality of History rather than of Title
or Law; what will they not expect from our un christian Distempers, and from
our forbearing of Communion with the established Church, as if it were the
Synagogue of Satan?

By this Artifice it is that they gain Proselytes. They expose the Protestants
as a dis-unit^d People. They demand of injudicious Men how they can, in
Prudence, join with those who are at variance among themselves? Though at this
time, in the Church of England it self, there is much more agreement than in
the Church of Rome, in which (they say) there are great numbers of more private
Deists, V. Polit. of France.
and Socinians, and some (we are certain) who publish it to the World Moyens
Surs. etc. pour la conversian dtous les Heretics.
that the Primacy is Antichristian; in which there are Solemn and Public
Assemblies who declare openly against one another in the great point of the
Papal Supremacy; and show, by so doing, that (in their Opinion) their common
head cannot certainly tell the nature of his Head-ship.

There remains to be considered, the second more The second part of the
second or more Principal End of the Dissenters.
principal End, the advancing Christian Religion, in these Kingdoms, to greater
Purity and Perfection.

But neither in this is their expectation likely to be answered.

For First, The means toward the settling of themselves is the Dissettlement
of that which is well fixed. And this is the way, not to a greater purity in
Religion, but to the corruption of it.

For, it removes Charity which is the Spirit of the Chirstian Religion. It
lets loose great numbers who cannot govern themselves; it moves men to live
Atheists and Idolaters, to pour Contempt upon the Church of Christ; and
confirms them in their evil course. It exposes the Church as a Prey to the
Common Enemy. Thus the Divisions in Africa gave encouragement to the Arms of
the barbarous Nations; and those, in the Egyptian Churches, made way for the
Saracens. And the Proposal of the maintenance of Charity and pure Religion by
the overthrow of a tolerable Ecclesiastical Constitution, is as improbable a
Project as that of Flammock; who, in Henry the 7th's time, L. Bac. H. 7. p 164.
proposed a Rebellion without a breach of the Peace.

And it is here to be considered, that those who dissent from a National
Church, do generally make use of such Junctures, as are apter to debase, than
refine Religion. They often move for Alterations in the Church when there is a
great heat and ferment in the State: And in such Seasons, the Form of a Church
may be pulled in sunder, but there is not temper enough and coolness of
unbiased consideration to set it together to advantage. Such times are the
Junctures of State Dissenters, and amongst them Revolutions generally begin,
though without the pretense of reforming Religion, they are not carried on
amongst the People. For it will not serve their purpose to say plainly, they
are against the Government, because the Government is against their Interests.
Now, when well meaning Dissenters are in the hands of such worldly Power, they
will not be able to establish what they think is surest, but that which
pleases their secular Leaders. A change in the Church naturally produces some
change in the State; and in such changes who can secure the Event for the
better? The words of Bishop Andrews Ser. 6. on Nov. 5. 1614.
, about the midst of the Reign of K. James, touch this Point, and they
doubtless are worth our observation. When (said he) they have made the State
present naught, no Remedy; we must have a better for it, and so a change needs:
What change? Why! Religion, or the Church Government, or somewhat (they know
not what well) stand a while, ye shall change your Religion (said they of this
day [the Gun-powder-Traytors]) and have one for it wherein, to your comfort,
you shall not understand a word (not you of the People) what you either sing or
pray; and for variety, you shall change a whole Communion for an half. Now, a
blessed exchange, were it not? What say some others? You shall change for a
fine new Church Government; a Presbytery would do this better for you than an
Hierarchy, and (perhaps) not long after, a Government of States, than a
Monarchy. Meddle not with these Changers.

Now when a State is either disturbed or dissolved, men cannot foresee all the
ill Consequences of it. When the Vessel is stirred, the Lees come up, which lay
before undiscerned in the Mass of the Liquor; and so it is in Religion; it is
not fined, but rather rendered less pure, by motions in the Body Spiritual or
Civil. Then Politicians use conscientious Instruments no further than they
serve a present purpose, and for new Purposes they find new Instruments. One of
the Assembly of Divines D. J. L. on Psalm. 4* 4. Feb. 24. A. 1647.
discoursed, on this manner, at a public Fast. Have not these Trumpets and
these poor Pitchers had their share, and a good share too, in bringing down the
Walls of Jericho, and the Camp of Midian? and have not they (like the Story in
Ezekiel) if I may so express it, Prophesied you up an Army? The Witness of
these things is in the whole Kingdom, and a Witness of them is in your own
Bosoms. Yet the Preacher was very sensible at the same time, that those whom
they had helped to Power, were turning it against them, and breaking them to
pieces by dashing Independency against them. Aspiring Men make fair Promises,
till they have gained their point; but when that is once secured, they take
other Measures. They say Melvil's Mem. p. 33.
that Maximilian, for the gaining of Votes in order to the Empire, used secret
Preachings to please the Protestant Princes [the Elector Palatine, the Dukes of
Saxony and Brandenburgh]; and went openly to Mass to please the Popish Bishops
of Mentzs, Triers, and Collein. Also, the claims of the worldly increase with
their Power: And (for illustration-sake) when the House, being garbell'd had
much less right but more force (the Army as yet agreeing with them and the good
King being in their hands) than they gave to the Declarations of their Pleasure
the Title, not as before of Ordinances, but of Acts of Parliament. Whill.
Memoirs. p. 363.


Oliver, likewise declared plainly, That there was as much need to keep the
Cause by Power, as to get it. And being potent, he entered the House, and mocked
at his Masters, and commanded, with insolent disdain, that That Bawble Speech
at the Dissol. of the House. Jan. 22. 1654. p. 22
(meaning the Mace of the Speaker) should be taken away. Men may intend well,
but using the help of the illegal secular Arm, they can never secure Id. ibid.
^ 529.
what they propose, but frequently render that which was well settled, much
worse by their unhinging of it.

But such means it comes to pass, that the Civil State is embroiled, and
Religion sensibly decays, in stead of growing toward perfection, where public
order is interrupted, and Men gain a Liberty which they know not how to use.

Secondly, It appears, by the History of our late Revolutions, which began
with pretense of a more pure Religion, that our Dissentions occasioned great
Corruptions both in Faith and manners.

Then the War was Preached up as the Christian Cause. And one of the
City-Soldiers, mortally wounded at Newberry-fight, was applauded (in an Epistle
Hill 's Ser. called Temple work. A. 1644.
to the Houses) as one whose Voice was more than humane when he cried out, O
that I had another Life to lose for Jesus Christ. Then this Doctrine (so very
immoral and unchristian) was by some D. Crisp in Ser. called. Our sins are
already laid on Christ. p 274, 275.
Preached, and by great numbers embraced. The Lord has no more to lay to the
charge of an Elect Person, yet in the height of Iniquity and the excess of
Riot, and committing all the Abominations that can be committed -- than he has
to lay to the charge of a Saint Triumphant in Glory. Then certain Soldiers H.
of Indep. part. 2. p 152, 153.
entered a Church with five Lights, as Emblems of five things thought fit to be
extinguished, viz. The Lord's Day, Tithes, Ministers, Magistrates, the Bible.
Then by a public Intelligencer, who called himself Mercurius Britanicus Merc.
Brit. N 13. Nov. A. 43 p. 97.
, the Lord Primate Usher himself was reproached as an Old Doting Apostating
Bishop. Instances are endless; but, what need have we of further Witnesses than
the Lords and Commons, and the Ministers of the Province of London, whose
Complaints and Acknowledgments are here subjoyned.

The Lords and Commons, in one of their Ordinances Die Jov^z. Febr. 4 1646.
, use these words. We -- have thought fit (lest we partake in other Men's sins,
and thereby be in danger to receive of their Plagues) to set forth this our
deep sense of the great dishonor of God, and perilous condition that this
Kingdom is in, through the abominable Blasphemies, and damnable Heresies vented
and spread abroad therein, tending to the Subversion of the Faith, contempt of
the Ministry and Ordinance of Jesus Christ.

The Ministers made a like acknowledgment, saying, Instead Testim. to Truth of
J. Chr. p. 31.
of extirpating Heresy, Schism, Profaness; we have such an impudent and
general inundation of all these evils, that Multitudes are not ashamed, to
press and plead for public, formal, and universal Toleration.

And again, We the Ministers of Jesus Christ, do hereby testify to all our
Flocks, to all the Kingdom, and to all the Reformed Churches, as our great
dislike of Pilacy, Erastianism, Brownism, and Independency; so our utter
abhorrence of Anti-Scripturism, Popery, Arianism, Socinianism, Arminianism,
Antimonianism, Anabaptism, Libertinism, and Familism; with all such like, now
too rife among us.

Thirdly, some Dissenters, by the Purity of Religion, mean agreeableness of
Doctrine, Discipline, and Life, to the dispensation of the New Testament, and a
removal of humane Inventions: and thus far the Notion is true; but, with
reference to our Church, it is an unwarrantable Reflection. For it has but one
Principal Rule, and that is the Holy Scripture, and Subordinate rules in
pursuance of the general Canons, in Holy Writ, are not to be called in our
Church, any more than in the pure and Primitive Christian Church, whose Pattern
it follows, humane Imaginations, but rules of Ecclesiastical Wisdom and
Discretion.

But there are others among the Dissenters, who, by the Purity of Religion,
mean a simplicity as opposed to composition, and not to such mixtures as
corrupt the Circumstances, or parts of Worship which in themselves are pure.
Quakers and some others believe their way the purer, because they have taken
out of it Sacraments and External Forms of Worship, and endeavored (as they
phrase it G. Fox in. J. Perrot's Hidden things brought to light. p. 11.
) to bring the Peoples minds out of all Visibles. By equal reason the Papists
may say their Eucharist is more pure than that of the Protestants, because they
have taken the Cup from it. But that which makes a pure Church, is like that
which makes a pure Medicine; not the fewness of the Ingredients, but the good
quality of them how many soever they be; and the aptness of their Nature for
the procuring of Health.

Men, who have this false Notion of the purity of Religion, distill it till it
evaporates; and all that is left is a dead and corrupt Sediment. And here I
have judged the following words of Sir Walter Rawleigh not unfit to be by me
transcribed, and considered by all. Hist. of the World: l. 2. 1. part c. 5. p.
249.
The Reverend Care which Moses had in all that belonged even to the outward and
least parts of the Tabernacle, Ark, and Sanctury -- is now so forgotten and
cast away in this Superfine Age, by those of the Family, by the Anabaptist,
Brownist, and other Sectaries, as all cost and care bestowed and had of the
Church, wherein God is to be served and worshipped, is accounted a kind of
Popery, and as proceeding from an Idolatrous Disposition: Insomuch, as time
would soon bring to pass (if it were not resisted) that God would be turned out
of Churches into Barns, and from thence again into the Fields and Mountains,
and under the Hedges; and the Officers of the Ministry (robbed of all Dignity
and Respect) be as contemptible as these places; all Order, Discipline, and
Church Government left to newness of Opinion, and Men's Fancies: Yea, and soon
after, as many kinds of Religions would spring up as there are Parish Churches
within England: Every Contentious and ignorant person clothing his Fancy with
the Spirit of God, and his Imagination with the gift of Revelation; insomuch,
as when the truth, which is but One, shall appear to the simple multitude, no
less variable than contrary to it self, the Faith of Men will soon after dye
away by degrees, and all Religion be held inscorn and contempt

Fourthly, If several contrary Parties be established by way of sufferance; no
progress is likely to be made toward the perfecting of Religion. For the
suffering of diverse Errors is not the way to the reforming of them. One
Principle only can be true; and the blending of such as are contrary with it,
creates the greatest of Impurities; a mixture of that which is profane, with
that which is sacred.

Fifthly, Many Dissenters are not likely to erect a Model by which Christianity
may be improved amongst us, because they lay aside Rules of discretion, and
rely not on God's assistance in the use of good means, but depend wholly upon
immediate illumination, without the aids of Prudence: And some of the more
sober amongst them, have inclined too much toward this extreme.

In Reformation (said one Mr. S. Sympson in A. 1643. Reform. Preservat. p. 126,
27.
in his Sermon before the Commons) do not make reason your Rule nor Line you go
by. It is the line of all the Papists. -- The second Covenant does forbid, not
only Reason, but all Divine Reason that is not contained by Institution in the
Worship of God. -- God's Worship has no ground in any reason but God's Will.

Sixthly, There are already provided in this Church, more probable means for
the promoting of pure Religion, than those which have been proposed by all, or
any of the Dissenting Parties. It is true, each Church is capable of
improvement, by the change of obsolete Words, Phrases, and Customs; by the
addition of Forms upon new Occasions; by adjusting discreetly some
Circumstantials of External Order. But, to change the Present Model for any
other that has yet been offered to public consideration, is to make a very
injudicious bargain. There are in it, all the necessaries to Faith and
Godliness; there is preserved Primitive Discipline, Decency, and Order: And,
under the means of it, there are great numbers grown up into such an
improvement of Judicious Knowledge and useful, prudent, serious Piety; that it
requires a Laborious Scrutiny to find Parallels to them in any Nations under
the Heavens.

I do not take pleasure in distastful Comparisons. Yet I ought not (sure) to
pass by with unthankful negligence, that excellent Spirit which God has raised
up among the Writers and Preachers of this Church; their labors being so
instrumental toward the right information of the Judgment, and the amendment
of the Lives of unprejudiced Hearers.

It must be confessed, that there is some trifling on all sides: And it will be
so whilst Men are Men. But there is now (blessed be God) as little of it in the
Church of England as in any Age. And the very few who do it, appear plainly to
be what they are, Phantasticks, and Actors, rather than Preachers. But, amongst
the Parties, the folly and weakness puts on a more venerable pretense, and they
give vent to it with studied shows of mighty seriousness, and deliver it
solemnly as the immediate dictate of God's Holy Spirit. And I cannot but call
to mind one Minister in this Church, who would (for instance sake) have
deliberately used these words of Mr. Rutherford, in a solemn audience, Ruth. on
Dan. 6. 26. p. 8. A. 1643. bef. the Commons.
and after this manner. God permits Sins, and such solemn Sins, that there may
be room in the Play for pardoning Grace.

It seems also, not unfit for me to take notice, that the Changes formerly
made in Church Matters in England by Dissenters, were not so conducive in their
nature, to the edifying of the Body of Christ, as the things illegally removed.
The Doctrine of God's Secret decrees taught in their Catechisms, was a stronger
and more improper kind of meat than that with which the Church of England had
fed her Children. Ordination by a Bishop, accompanied with Presbyters, was more
certain and satisfactory than that by Presbyters without a Bishop.

There was not that sobriety in many of the present and unstudied Effusions,
which appeared in every of those public Forms which were considered and fixed.
And it sounded more decently (for example sake) to pray in the Churches words,
and say, from Fornication Good Lord deliver us, than to use those of an eminent
Dissenter, Prayers at the end of Farewell Sermons. Mr, U's Prayer bef. Sermon. p.
31.
Lord un-lust us. Nor did the long continued Prayers help Men so much against
Distraction as those shorter ones, with breaks and Pauses in the Liturgy, and
the great and continued length of them introduced, by consent, sitting at
Prayer.

Neither did it tend less to edification, to repeat the Creed standing, than to
leave it quite out of the Directory for public Worship. Neither was it an
advantage to Christian Piety to change the gesture of kneeling in the Eucharist
when the Sacred Elements were given together with Prayer, for that less
reverend one of sitting: Of sitting especially with the Ha^t on, as the most
uncomely practice of some was; the People being taught to cover the Head,
Edward's Gangrena. part 1 Error 112. p. 25.
whilst the Minister was to remain bare amongst them. Nor was the civil Pledge
of the Ring in Marriage, bettered by the invention of some Pastors, who (as is
storied of them) took a Ring See Edw. Grangr. 2 part p. 13.
of some Women-converts, upon their admittance into their Church.

Neither was the Alteration of the Form of giving the Holy Elements, an
amendment. For the Minister was directed to the use of these words. Directory
for public Worship. p. 27.
Tak ye, eat ye; this is the Body of Christ which is broken for you. -- This
Cup is the New Testament in the blood of Christ, which is shed for the
Remission of the Sins of many. -- The words denoting Christ's present Crucifix,
and (either actually or in the future certainty of it) give countenance to the
Romish Sacrifice of the Mass; though I verily believe they were not so intended.

Nor did the forbidding the Observation of Christ's Nativity and other
Holy Days, add one Hairs breadth to the Piety of the Nation; but, on the other
hand, it took away, at least from the common People, one ready means of fixing
in their Memories the most useful History of the Christian Religion.

It is easy enough, even for Men who are Dwarfs in the Politics, in such sort
to alter a constitution as to make it more pleasing for a time to themselves
during their Passion, and the novelty of the Model in their Fancy not yet
disturbed by some unforeseen Mischief or inconveniencie; but it is extreme
difficult upon the whole matter, to make a true and lasting Improvement, there
being so many parts in the frame to be mutually fitted, and such variety of
Cases in Humane Affairs.

I pray from my Heart for the bettering, but I dread the tinkering of
Government.

The Conclusion.
IF then, Dissenters are not likely to obtain their Ends, of Establishing
themselves, of rooting out of Popery, and promoting pure Religion, by
overthrowing the Church of England; the Inference is natural, they ought, both
in Prudence and Christianity, to endeavor after Union with it.

They will (it may be) say to me, Can Men be persuaded two contrary ways? Can
they both Assent and Dissent? And whilst they secretly Dissent, would you force
them into an Hypocritical Compliance? I Answer thus.

First, Though a Man cannot at the same time wholly Assent and Dissent; yet
there are means for the rectifying of a false persuasion; and he may, upon good
Grounds, change his Mind.

Secondly, No Man's Mind can beforced; for it is beyond the reach of Humane
Power.

Thirdly, Good Governors do not use Severity to force Men to dissemble their
Minds, and to make them Hypocrites, but to move them, after a Trial of fair
means, to greater consideration.

I am not concerned in the Emblem of the Persian Dervi Tavern. Pers. Trav. l.
4. c. 6. p. 155, 156.
who, whilst they go about their Office of teaching the Law to the People,
carry a great Club in their hands. But neither do I think that the best way to
remove pernicious error from Men, is never to give them any disturbance in it.

I have two things only to recommend, first to the consideration, and then to
the practice of such as Dissent.

First, This is a time of Prosecution; and a time of Adversity is a proper time
for Consideration, and Consideration is a means to make us hold fast that which
is good, and reject that which is evil. I beseech you, make such advantage of
this Juncture. Sit down, and think once more of the Nature of this Church.
Confer with the Guids of the National Religion; read without prejudice, the
Books commended by them to you. Peruse seriously the Books which Authority has
set forth. Some who have spoken against them, have by their own confession,
never read them. Examine, and Judge. Many of your Scruples have arisen from
what you have heard, and read; they would not have otherwise been engendered in
your Minds. Hear and Read for your Information, as well as your entanglement.

Secondly, Do as much as you can do. Do as much as the Dissenters, who are most
eminent for Learning, Piety, Preaching, Writing, Experience, and Fame;
sometimes actually do. They have owned our Communion to be lawful. See Lawf. of
hearing the public Ministry, etc. by Mr. Nigh, Mr. Robinson, etc. and Mr.
Corbet's Non-Conformists P^ea for Lay-Communion.
They have received the Communion kneeling. They have bred up Children to the
Ministry of this Church. They have joined in the Liturgy. They have been
Married according to the Form of it. Nay, one who assisted in making the
Directory, would have his own Daughter (in those times) be Married in the way
of the Book of Common Prayer. Mr. Marshall in Hist of Indep. 1 part p. 80.
Do as the ancient Non-conformists did, who would not separate, though they
feared to Subscribe: Who wrote with such Zeal against those of the Separation,
that Mr. Hildersham was called, See Dr. Willit's Epistle Dedicatory before his
Harm. on 1 Samuel Schismaticorum (Qui vulgo Brownistae) malleum
The Maul of the Brownists.

Do more for the Peace of God's Church, than for a Vote, or Office, or Fear of
Legal Penalty. Come as Christians to the Sacrament, and not as Politicians.
Those who have so done, yet break the unity of the Church, are said to use the
Arts of Jesuits, and to be without all excuse, by a Dissenter Vox. Clam. Sect.
6. p. 49, 50, etc.
who writes with commendable temper.

Do constantly what you do upon occasion. No Preaching, or Praying, which is
better liked, can balance the evil of Separation from a Church, which imposes
no terms of Communion which are sinful.

For Peace sake, let that be more constant, in which your Conscience allows
occasional exercise. A Member who joins himself to any established Church, and
also to any Churches which are set up, not as legal Supplements of it, but as
Forts against it, seems to be a kind of Wooden Leg; if I may represent so
grave a matter by so light a Similitude. He is tied on, and taken off, at
pleasure; he is not as, by natural Ligaments and Nerves, knit to such
Ecclesiasticrl Bodies. If all would do constantly what they can in Conscience
do sometimes, they would create a better Opinion of themselves, in the
Governors, and move them to all due favor, and hinder all the destructive
breaches amongst us. For the remain of other Dissenters would be so
inconsiderable, as to abide in the Body of the Nation, as ill humors thrown off
the extreme parts, from which there may arise some little pain, but no mortal
danger.

Now, the God of Peace grant Peace to us always, by all fit means.

The END.
A SERIOUS EXHORTATION, With some Important Advices, Relating to the late Cases
about CONFORMITY, Recommended to the Present Dissenters From the CHVRCH of
ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed for T. Basset, at the George in Fleet Street; B. Took, at the
Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard; and F. Gardener, at the White Horse in
Ludgate Street, 1684.

Books Printed for FINCHAM GARDENER.
A Continuation and Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stilling fleet's.
Unreasonableness of Separation, in Answer to Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Lob, etc.

Considerations of present use, considering the Danger Resulting from the
Change of our Church Government.

1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England. 2. A Resolution of
some Cases of Conscience, which respect Church Communion. 3. The Case of
Indifferent things, used in the Worship of God, Proposed and Stated, by
considering these Questions, etc. 4. A Discourse about Edification. 5. The
Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of England's
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England? 6. A Letter to Anonymus, in Answer
to his Three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about Church Communion. 7. Certain Cases
of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of joining with Forms of
Prayer in Public Worship. In two Parts. 8. The Case of mixed Communion. Whether
it be Lawful to separate from a Church upon the Account of promiscuous
Congregations, and Mixed Communions? 9. An Answer to the Dissenters Objections
against the Common Prayers, and some other Parts of Divine Service Prescribed
in the Liturgy of the Church of England. 10. The Case of Kneeling at the Holy
Sacrament, Stated and Resolved, etc. The first Part. 11. Certain Cases of
Conscience, etc. The Second Part. 12. A Discourse of Profiting by Sermons, and
of going to hear where Men think they can profit most. 13. A serious
Exhortation, with some Important Advices, Relating to the late Cases about
Conformity, Recommended to the Present Dissenters from the Church of England.
1. A Discourse about the charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther? 2. A Discourse about Tradition, showing what is meant by it, and
what Tradition is to be Received, and what Tradition is to be Rejected.
A Serious EXHORTATION, With some Important Advices, etc. Recommended to the
Dissenters from the Church of England.
THE offering friendly Advice and Counsel, especially in great and important
Cases, is, tho often, a Thankless, yet a very Charitable Office: a thing
agreeable to the best Inclinations of Humane Nature, and highly conducive to
the Necessities of Men, and consequently needs no Apology to introduce it. We
live, it is true, in an ill-Natured and Censorious Age, wherein it is rare to
find any one, who will not take with the Left Hand, what is offered to them with
the Right. But I am not discouraged from this Attempt, by the Peevishness and
Frowardness of many that differ from us, Remembering that all Honest
Undertakings (and such I am sure this is) are under the more peculiar Conduct
and Blessing of the Divine Providence, which can and will succeed and prosper
them to an happy Issue, if Men's own Obstinacy and Perverseness do not put a Bar
in the way to hinder it. I do therefore beseech our Dissenting Brethren, with
all the earnestness that becomes a matter of so much Importance, and with all
the Kindness and Tenderness that becomes a Christian, that they would suffer
the Word of Exhortation, and duly weigh and consider the Requests and Advices
that are here plainly laid before them, which I hope will be found such, as
carry their own Light and Evidence along with them.

I.
And First, We beg of them to believe, That they may be mistaken about those
matters, which are alleged as the Causes of their Separation. This, one would
think, were as needless, as it is a modest and reasonable Request. For did ever
any Man (the Bishop of Rome excepted) lay claim to Infallibility? Do not the
woeful Infirmities of Humane Nature, the Weakness and Short-sightedness of our
Understandings, the daily Experience of our selves, and the lamentable Failures
we observe in others, sufficiently convince us, how prone we are to Error and
Mistake? But tho this be granted and owned on all hands, yet in Practice, we
frequently find Men acting by other Measures. For, how many are there, that in
the most Controverted Cases bear up themselves with as much Confidence and
Assurance, censure others with as Magisterial a Boldness, condemn the things
enjoined by our Church, with as positive and peremptory a Determination, as if
they were infallibly sure, that they are in the Right, and all others in the
Wrong that differ from them. The early Prepossession of a contrary Opinion, the
powerful Prejudices of Education, an implicit and unexamined Belief of what
their Guides and Leaders teach them, have a strange force upon the Minds of
Men, so that in effect, they no more doubt of the Truth and Goodness of the
Cause they are engaged in, than they question the Articles of their Creed.
Wherefore, I do once and again entreat them, that laying aside all Pride,
Partiality, and Self-conceit, they would not think more highly of themselves,
and of their own way, than they ought to think; especially remembering, that
the Matters contended about are confessedly Disputable, and that they cannot be
ignorant, that the Case seems otherwise to others, who may at least be allowed
to be as wise Men, and as competent Judges as themselves. Truth makes the
easiest Entrance into modest and humble Minds; The Meek will he guide in
Judgment, the Meek will he teach his way; The Spirit of God never rests upon a
Proud Man.

II.
Secondly, We beg of them, that they would seriously and impartially weigh and
consider, as well what is said on the one side, as on the other. This is a
piece of Justice that every one owes to Truth, and which indeed every Man owes
to himself, that is not willing to be deceived. To take up with Prejudices,
which Education or long Custom have instilled into him, or wherein any other
Arts or Methods have engaged him, without strictly enquiring whether those
Prejudices stand upon a firm Foundation, is to see only on one side: to bind up
ones self in the Judgment or Opinion of any Man, that is not Divinely-inspired
and Infallible, or pertinaciously to adhere to any Party of Men; how plausible
and specious soever their Pretenses may be, without examining their Grounds,
and endeavoring to know what is said against them, is to choose a Persuasion
at a peradventure; and it is great odds whether such a one be in the right. In
all Enquiries after Truth, we ought to keep an Ear open for one side of the
Controversy, as well as the other, and not to think we have done enough, till
without Favor or Prejudice, and to the best of our Understandings, we have
heard, tried, and judged, the Reasons brought, as well for, as against it. And
till this be done, I see not with what pretense of Reason, Men can talk so much
of their Scruples, or plead for Favor on the account of their
Dissatisfactions. Consciences truly tender, are willing and desirous to embrace
all opportunities of Resolution, and are ready to kiss the Hand that would
bring them better information, and are not wont to neglect, much less thrust
from them the means that might ease them of their Doubts and Scruples. We
justly blame it in them of the Church of Rome, that in a manner they resign up
their Understandings to their Guides and Confessors, and are not suffered to be
truly acquained with the Protestant Principles, and the Grounds and Reasons of
the Reformation; nor to Read any of the Books, that are written for their
Conviction, without a special and peculiar License. Whether our Brethren of the
Separation be under any such Spiritual Discipline, I know not; sure I am it
looks very odly, that so many of them are no more concerned to understand the
true State of the Church of England, and the Nature and Reasons of her
Constitutions, that so few of them care to Confer with those that are able to
Instruct them, but Cry out, They are satisfied already; nay, some of them, to
my knowledge, when desired to propose their Scruples, in order to the giving
them satisfaction, have plainly and absolutely refused to do it. Little reason
there is to believe, that such Persons have ever Read and Examined what the
Church of England has to say for her self. Are there not many, that not only
Scruple, but Rail at the Book of Common Prayer, that yet never heard it, nor
perhaps, ever read it, in all their Lives? And if this be not to speak Evil of
what they know not, I cannot tell what is. How many incomparable Books have
been heretofore written in defense of our Church, her Rites and Usages, that
yet generally lie by the Walls, little known, and less read, by those that so
much Cry out against her. And at this time how many excellent Discourses have
been Published, for the satisfaction of Dissenters, written with the greatest
Temper and Moderation; with the utmost plainness and perspicuity, with all
imaginable evidence and strength of Reasoning; so short, as not to require any
considerable portion, either of Time or Cost, so suited to present
Circumstances, as to obviate every material Objection, that is made against
Communion with us; and yet there is just cause to fear, that the far greatest
part of our Dissenters are mere strangers to them, and are not so just to
themselves, or us, as to give them the reading: And that those few that do look
into them, do it rather out of a design to pick quarrels against them, and to
expose them in scurrilous or cavilling Pamphlets, than to receive satisfaction
by them. I do heartily, and from my Soul, wish an end of these Contentions, and
that there were no further occasion for them; but if our Dissenting Brethren
will still proceed in this way, we desire, (and hope it is but what is
reasonable) that the things in difference may be debated in the most quiet,
peaceable, and amicable manner, that they may be gravely and substantially
managed, and only the Merits of the Cause attended to, and that the
Controversy may not be turned off to mean and trifling Persons, whose highest
Attainment perhaps it is, to write an idle and senseless Pamphlet, and which
can serve no other use, but only that the People may be borne in hand, that
such and such Books are Answered. Which is so unmanly and disingenious a way,
and so like the shifting Artifices of them of the Church of Rome, that I am apt
to persuade my self, the wiser Heads of the Dissenting Party cannot but be
ashamed of it. If they be not, it is plain to all the World, they are willing to
serve an ill Design by the most unwarrantable Means. But however that be, we
think we have great Reason to expect from them, that they should hear our
Church before they condemn Her, and consider what has been said for the
removing of their Doubts, before they tell us any more of Scruples,
Tender-Consciences, and the hard measure that they meet withal. I confess,
could I meet with a Person that had brought himself to some kind of
Unbyas'dness and indifferency of Temper, and that designed nothing more than to
seek and find the right way of Serving God, without respect to the Intrigues
and Interests of this or that particular Party; and in order thereunto, had
with a sincere and honest Mind read whatever might probably conduce to his
Satisfaction, fairly proposed his Scruples, and modestly consulted with those
that were most proper to advise him, and humbly begged the Guidance and
Direction of the Divine Grace and Blessing; and yet after all, should still
labor under his old Dissatisfactions; I should heartily pity and pray for such
a Man, and think my self obliged to improve all my Interest for Favor and
Forbearance toward him. But such Persons as these, I am afraid, are but thin
sowed; and, without Breach of Charity, it may be supposed, there is not One of
a Thousand.

III.
Thirdly, We desire, that before they go on to accuse our Church with driving
them into Separation, they would directly charge her with imposing sinful terms
of Communion. And unless they do this, and when they have done it, make it
good, (for barely to accuse, I hope, is not sufficient,) I see not which way
they can possibly justify their Separation from us. It Is upon this account
that the whole Protestant Reformation defends their Departure from the Church
of Rome. They found the Doctrine of that Church infinitely corrupt in several
of the main Principles of Religion, New Articles of Faith introduced, and bound
upon the Consciences of Men under pain of Damnation, its Worship overgrown with
very gross Idolatry and Superstition; its Rites and Ceremonies not only
over-numerous, but many of them advanced into proper and direct Acts of
Worship, and the use of them made necessary to Salvation; and besides, its
Members required to join and communicate in these Corruptions and Depravations,
nay, and all Proposals and Attempts toward a Reformation obstinately rejected
and thrown out; in which Case, they did with great Reason and Justice depart
from her: which we may be confident they would not have done, had no more been
required of them, than instead of Worshipping Images, to use the Sign of the
Cross in Baptism, or instead of the Adoration of the Host, to kneel at the
Receiving of the Sacrament. A Learned Amyrald. de Secess. ab Eccles. Romans page
233.
Protestant Divine, of great Name and Note, has expressly told us; That had
there been no other Faults in the Church of Rome, besides their useless
Ceremonies in Baptism, and some other things that are beyond the measure and
genius of the Christian Religion, they had still continued in the Communion of
that Church. Indeed did the Church of England command any thing which Christ
has prohibited, or prohibit any thing which Christ has commanded, then come ye
out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, were good Warrant and
Authority. But where do we meet with these prohibitions? not in the word of
God, not in the nature and reason of the things themselves? nor indeed do we
find our Dissenting Brethren of late very forward to fasten this charge, and
much less to prove it; whatever unwary sayings may fall from any of them in the
heat and warmth of Disputation, or be suggested by indirect consequences, and
artificial insinuations. And if our Church commands nothing that renders her
Communion sinful, then certainly Separation from her must be unlawful, because
the Peace and Unity of the Church, and obedience to the commands of lawful
Authority, are express and indispensable duties; and a few private suspicions
of the unlawfulness of the thing are not sufficient to sway against plain,
public, and necessary Duties: nor can it be safe to reject Communicating with
those, with whom Christ himself does not refuse Communion. This I am sure was
once thought good Doctrine by the chiefest of our Dissenters, who when time
was, reasoned thus against those that subdivided from them; If we be a Church
of Christ, and Christ hold Communion with A Vindication of the Presbyterial
Government. 1649. p. 130.
us, why do you Separate from us? If we be the Body of Christ, do not they that
Separate from the Body, Separate from the Head also? we are loath to speak any
thing that may offend you, yet we entreat you to consider, that if the Apostle
call those Divisions of the Church of Corinth (wherein Christians did not
separate into diverse formed Congregations in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper,) Schisms, (1 Cor. 1. 10.) may not your Secession from us, and
professing you cannot join with us as Members, and setting up Congregations of
another Communion, be more properly called Schism? -- You gather Churches out
of your Churches, and set up Churches in an opposite way to our Churches, and
all this you do voluntarily and unwarrantably, not having any sufficient cause
for it.

And in the same Book they tell us of a Twofold Schism, Negative and Positive;
Negative, when Men do peaceably and quietly withdraw from Communion with a
Church, not making a Head against that Church, from which they are departed:
the other is, when Persons so withdrawing do consociate and withdraw themselves
into a distinct and opposite Body, setting up a Church against a Church, which
(say they) Camero calls a Schism by way of Eminency; and further tells us,
There are Four Causes, that make a Separation from a Church lawful; 1. When
they that Separate are grievously and intollerably Persecuted; 2. When the
Church they Separate from is Heretical; 3. When it is Idolatrous; 4. When it is
the Seat of Antichrist. And where none of these four are found, there the
Separation is insufficient, and Schism. Now we are fully assured, that none of
these Four Causes can be justly charged upon our Congregations; therefore you
must not be displeased with us, but with your selves, if we blame you as guilty
of positive Schism. All which is as true now, as it was then, and as applicable
to us and them as it was to them and their Dissenters.

Admit then, there were some things in our Constitution that might be contrived
to better purposes, and that needed Amendment and Alteration; yet I hope every
Defect, or supposed Corruption in a Church, is not a sufficient ground for
Separation, or warrant enough to rend and tear the Church in pieces. Let Mr.
Calvin judge between us in this matter, Institut. lib. 4. Sect. 10, 11, 12.
fol. 349.
who says, That wherever the Word of God is duly Preached, and reverently
attended to, and the true use of the Sacraments kept up, there is the plain
Appearance of a true Church, whose Authority no Man may safely despise, or
reject its Admonitions, or resist its Counsels, or set at naught its
Discipline, much less Separate from it, and Violate its Unity; for that our
Lord has so great regard to the Communion of his Church, that he accounts him
an Apostate from his Religion who obstinately Separates from any Christian
Society, which keeps up the true Ministry of the Word and Sacraments: that such
a Separation is a denial of God and Christ, and that it is a dangerous and
pernicious Temptation, so much as to think of Separating from such a Church;
the Communion whereof is never to be rejected, so long as it continues in the
true use of the Word and Sacraments, though otherwise it be overrun with many
Blemishes and Corrupons. Which is as plain and full a Determination of the
Case, as if he had particularly designed it against the Doctrine and Practice
of the Modern Dissenters from our Church.

IV.
Fourthly, We entreat them to Consider, Whether it be pure Conscience, and mere
Zeal for the Honor of Religion, and not very often Discontent, or Trade and
Interest, that has the main stroke in keeping them from Communion with our
Church. Far be it from me to judge the Secrets of Men's Hearts, or to fasten
such a Charge on the whole Body of Dissenters, yea, I accuse not any particular
Person; but only desire, they would lay their Hand upon their Hearts, and deal
impartially with themselves, and say, whether they stand clear before God in
this matter. And there is the more Reason to put Men upon this Enquiry, not
only because Secular Ends are very apt to mix with, and shelter themselves
under the shadow of Religion; but because this has been an old Artifice, made
use of to promote Separation. Thus the Donatists in the Primitive Times upheld
their Separation from the Catholic Church, and kept their Party fast together,
by Trading only within themselves, by employing none to Till their Grounds, or
be their Stewards, but those that would be of their side; nay, and sometimes
hiring Persons by large Sums of Money to be Baptized into their Party, as
Crispin did the People of Mappalia. And how evident the same Policy is among
our Modern Vid. Aug. Epist. 173. (ad Crisp.)
Quakers, is too notorious to need either Proof or Observation. Time was, when
it was made an Argument to prove Independency to be a Faction, and not Edward's
further Discovery. p. 185.
matter of Conscience, because Needy, broken decayed Men, who knew not how to
live, and hoped to get something, turned Independents, and became Sticklers for
it; that some who had businesses, Causes, and Matters depending, struck in with
them, and pleaded for them, that so they might find Friends, be sooner
dispatched, and fare better in their Causes; that Ambitious, Proud, Covetous
Men, who had a mind to Offices, places of profit about the Army, Excise, etc.
turned about to the Independents, and were great Zealots for them. Thus it was
then, and whether the same Leaven do not still spread and ferment, and perhaps
as much as ever, there is just cause to suspect? Whoever looks into the Trading
part of this City, and indeed of the whole Nation, must needs be a very
heedless and indiligent Observer, if he do not take notice, how Interests are
formed, and by what Methods Parties and Factions are kept up, how many
Thousands of the Poorer sort of Dissenters depend on this or that Man for their
Work, and consequently for their Livelihood and Subsistence; how many depend
upon others for their Trade and Custom, whom accordingly these Men can readily
Command, and do produce to give Votes, and increase Parties on all Public
Occasions; and what little Encouragement any Man finds from them, that once
deserts them, and comes over to the Church of England. There is another thing
that contributes not a little to this Jealousy and Suspicion, that many of the
Chiefest, and most Stiff and Zealous of the Dissenting Party, are they, at
least the immediate Descendants of those, who in the late Evil-Times, by Rapine
and Violence shared among themselves the Revenues of the Church, and the
Patrimony of the Crown, and are said still privately to keep on foot their
Titles to them. And if so, what wonder if such Men look on themselves, as
obliged in point of Interest, to widen Breaches, foment Differences, increase
Factions; and all this to Subvert and over-turn the Church of England; being
well assured, they can never hope, but over the Ruins of this Church, to make
way to their once sweet Possessions? Let Men therefore impartially examine
themselves, and search, whether a Worldly Spirit be not at the bottom of their
Zeal and Stiffness. These I confess are Designs too Base and Sordid, to be
owned above Board: but be not Deceived, God is not Mocked; Man looks to the
outward Appearance, but God looks to the Heart.

V.
Fifthly, We desire them to Consider, Whether it be not a Just Prejudice to
their Cause, and that which ought to prevail with Men Modest and Peaceable,
that in those things, wherein they differ from us, they are Condemned by the
Practice of the whole Catholic Church for Fifteen Hundred Years together.
This, were I minded, might afford a large Field for Discourse, but I shall
instance only, and that very briefly, in a few Particulars.

And First, We desire them to produce any settled part of the Christian Church,
that ever was without Episcopal Government, till the time of Calvin: it being
then as hard to find any part of the Christian World without a Church, as to
find a Church without a Bishop. This is so evident in the most early
Antiquities of the Church, that I believe our Dissenters begin to grow sick of
the Controversy. And if Blondell, Salmasius and Daille, (whose great Parts,
Learning, and indefatigable Industry, could, if any thing, have made out the
contrary) have been forced to grant, That Episcopacy obtained in the Church
within a few Years after the Apostolic Age; We are sure we can carry it
higher, even up to the Apostles themselves. There are but two passages, that I
know of, in all Antiquity, of any Note, and both of them not till the latter
end of the Fourth Century, that may seem to question Episcopal Authority: The
One, That famous and well known passage of St. Jerome, which yet when improved
to the Idem Presbyter, qui Episcopus, and antequam diaboli instinctu studia in
religione fierent, etc. Hier. in Epist. ad Tit. c. 1.
utmost that it is capable of, only intimates Episcopacy not to be of
Apostolical Institution. And very clear it is to those that are acquainted with
St. Jeroms Writings, that he often Wrote in haste, and did not always weigh
things at the Beam, and forgot at one time, what he had said at another; that
many expressions fell from him in the heat of Disputation, according to the
warmth and the eagerness of his Temper, and that he was particularly chased
into this Assertion by the fierce opposition of the Deacons at Rome, who began
to Usurp upon, and overtop the Presbyters, which tempted him to Magnify and
Extol their Place and Dignity, as anciently equal to the Episcopal Office, and
as containing in it the common Rights and Privileges of Priesthood. For at
other times, when he Wrote with cooler Thoughts about him, he does plainly and
frequently enough assert the Authority of Bishops over Presbyters, and did
himself constantly live in Communion with, and Subjection to Bishops. The other
passage is that of Aerius, who held indeed that a Bishop and a Presbyter
differed nothing in Order, Dignity, or Power. But he was led into this Error
merely through Envy and Emulation, being vexed to see that his Companion
Eustathius had gotten the Bishopric of Sebastia, which himself had aimed at.
This made him start aside, and talk extravagantly; but the Church immediately
branded him for an Heretic, and drove him and his followers out of all
Churches, and from all Cities and Villages. And Epiphanius, Cont. Aer. haeret.
75.
who was his Contemporary, represents him as very little better than a Madman;
and adds, that all Heresies that ever were from the beginning of the World, had
been hatched either by Pride, or Vain Glory, or Covetousness, or Emulation, or
some such Evil Inclination. But his Heresy, it seems, was not long-lived, for
we hear no more concerning this matter, till the Reformation at Geneva.

Secondly, We desire them to show any Christian Church that did not constantly
use Liturgies, and Forms of Prayer, in their Public Offices and
Administrations of Divine Worship: I take it for granted, that there were Forms
of Public Prayer in the Jewish Church; and I make no doubt, but that the use
of such Forms, was, together with many other Synagogue-rites and Usages,
transferred into the Practice of the Christian Church, and did actually obtain,
in the most early Ages in all Churches, where there were not Miraculous Gifts,
and every where as soon as those Miraculous Gifts ceased, it being very fit and
proper, and agreeable to Order and Decency, that the Peoples Devotions should
be thus Conducted and Governed in their Public Ministrations. Not to insist
upon the Carmen, or Hymn, which even the Proconsul Pliny, says, the Christians
upon a set Day were wont, one among another, to say to Christ, as to their God;
Apparent footsteps of some Passages of their Ancient Liturgies, are yet extant
in the Writings of Origin and St. Cyprian: And when Eusebius gives us an
account, how Religiously Constantine Devit. Constant. lib. 4. c. 17.
the Great ordered his Court, That he was wont to take the Holy Bible into his
Hands, and carefully to Meditate upon it, and afterward to offer up Set or
Composed Prayers, together with his whole Royal Family; he adds, He did this
after the manner, or in imitation of the Church of God. Nazianzen tells us of
St. Basil, That he composed Orders and Forms of In Sanctum Basilium Orat. 20.
Bas. Ep. 63.
Prayer, and appointed decent Ornaments for the Altar. And St. Basil himself
reciting the manner of the Public Service, that was used in the Monastical
Oratories of his Institution; says, That nothing was done therein but what was
Consonant and Agreeable to all the Churches of God. And the Council of
Laodicea, holden much about the Year 365, expressly provides, that the same
Liturgy, or Form of Prayers, Can. 18. conf. Conc. Milev. can. 12. Conc. Carth.
3. c. 23.
should be always used both Morning and Evening: That so it might not be lawful
for every one that would, to compose Prayers of his own Head, and to repeat
them in the Public Assemblies; as both Zonaras and Balsamon give the reason of
that Canon. Further than this we need not go, the Case being henceforward
evident beyond all Contradiction.

Thirdly, Let them show us any Church, that did not always set apart and
observe Festival Commemorations of the Saints: besides the more solemn times
for Celebrating the great Blessings of our Redeemer, his Birthday and
Epiphany, Easter in Memory of his Resurrection, Pentecost or Witsuntide for the
Mission of the Holy Ghost, they had Annual days for solemnizing the Memories of
the Blessed Apostles; they had their Memoriae and Natalitia Martyrum, whereon
they assembled every year, to offer up to God their Praises and Common
Devotions, and by Public Panegyricks to do honor to the memory of those
Saints and Martyrs who had suffered for, or Sealed Religion with their Blood.
Not to mention their Lent Fast and their Stationary Fasts on Wednesdays and
Fridays, which Epiphanius more than once expressly S^rm comp^nd de Expos. fid.
p. 466. ^dv. Aer. Haeres. 75.
says, were a Constitution of the Apostles. But the less need be said on this
head, because few that have any Reverence for Antiquity, will have the
hardiness to oppose it.

Fourthly, We desire them to produce any Church since the Apostles Times, that
had not its Rites and Ceremonies, as many (if not more) in number, and as
liable to exception, as those that are used in our Church at this Day; nay,
there are few things, if any at all, required by our Constitution, which were
not in use in the best Ages of Christianity. This, were it my design, I might
demonstrate by an Induction of particulars, but it is fully done by other
Hands. I shall therefore, only as a Specimen, instance in One, and the rather,
because it is so much boggled at, (viz.) The Sign of the Cross in Baptism, which
we are sure was a Common and Customary Rite in the time of Tertullian and St.
Cyprian, the latter whereof says often enough, that being Regenerated, Cypr. adv.
Demetr. p. 203. de Unit. Eccl. p. 185. vid. de Laps. p. 169. Bas. de Spir. S.
c. 27. Tert. de Coron. mil. c. 3.
that is, Baptized, they were Signed with the Sign of Christ; that they were
Signed on their Foreheads, wbo were thought worthy to be admitted into the
fellowship of our Lords Religion. And St. Basil plainly puts it amongst those
Ancient Customs of the Church, which had been derived from the Apostles: Nay,
Tertullian assures us, that they used it in the most common Actions of Life;
that upon every motion, at their going out, and coming in, at their going to
Bath, or to Bed, or to Meals, or whatever their Occasions called them to, they
were wont to make the Sign of the Cross on their Foreheads; and therefore it is
no wonder, that they should never omit it in the most Solemn Act of their being
initiated into the Christian Faith. And now let our Dissenting-Brethren
seriously reflect, whether the Constant and Uniform Practice of the Church in
all times, be not a mighty Testimony against their Separating from us, upon the
account of those things, which were used in the wisest, best and happiest Ages
of the Gospel; and when their Separation upon this account, can in point of
Example, pretend not to much more than a Hundred Years Countenance and
Authority to Support and Shelter it. And yet it has not that neither; for I
could easily show, that most, if not all, the Usages of our Church, are either
practiced in Foreign See Durels view of the Government and public worship of
God, 1662.
Churches, or at least, allowed of by the most Learned and Eminent Divines of
the Reformation, whose Testimonies, to this purpose, are particularly
enumerated, and ranked under their proper Heads, by Mr. Sprint, in his p. 123,
124, etc.
Cassander Anglicanus, which they that are curious may Consult.

VI.
Sixthly, We beg that those, who by their Conformity have declared, that they
can close with our Communion, would still continue in the Communi^n of our
Church. This is a Request so reasonable, that I hope it cannot fairly be
denied. Whatever Dissa^tsfactions others may allege, to keep them at a
distance from us, these Men can have nothing to pretend, having actually showed
that they can do it For I am not willing to think, that herein such Men acted
against their Consciences, or did it merely to secure a gainful Office, or a
place of Trust, or to escape the Lash and Penalty of the Law. These are Ends so
very Vile and Sordid, so Horrible a prostitution of the Holy Sacrament, the
most Venerable Mystery of our Religion, so deliberate a way of Sinning, even in
the most Solemn Acts of Worship, that I can hardly suspect any should be guilty
of it, but Men of Profl^gate and Atheistical Mind^, who have put off all Sense
of God, and Banished all Reverence of Religion. I would fain bel^eve, that when
any of our Brethren receive the Sacrament with us, they are fully persuaded of
the lawfulness of it, and that the Principle that brings them thither, is the
Conscience of their Duty. But then I know not how to Answer it, why the same
Principle that brings them thither at one time, should not bring them also at
another, and that we should never have their company at that Solemn and Sacred
Ordinance, but when the fear of some Temporal Punishment, or the prospect of
some Secular Advantage prompts them to it. It Is commonly blamed in those of the
Romish Church, that they can dispense with Oaths, and receive Sacraments to
serve a turn, and to advance the Interest of their Cause: But God forbid, that
so heavy a Charge should ever lie at the Doors of Protestants, and especially
those, who would be thought most to abhor Popish Practices, and who would take
it ill to be accounted not to make as much, if not more, Conscience of their
ways than other Men. Now I beseech our Dissenting, or rather Inconstant
Brethren, to reason a little; if our Communion be sinful, why did they enter
into it? if it be lawful, why do they forsake it? is it not that, which the
Commands of Authority have tied upon us, and whose Commands we are bound to
submit to, not only for Wrath, but for Conscience sake? Are not the Peace and
Unity of the Church, things, that ought greatly to sway with all Sober, Humble,
and Considering Christians? Does not the Apostle say, that if it be possible,
and as mu^^ as in us lies, we are to live Peaceably with all Men? And shall
Peace be broken only in the Church, where it ought to be kept most entire? And
that by those, who acknowledge it to be possible, and within their power? Are
they satisfied in their Consciences, to join in Communion with us, and will
they not do it for the sake of the Church of God? Or will they refuse to do
what is lawful, and as the Case stands necessary, in order to Peace, only
because Authority Commands it, and has made it their Duty? Oh Sirs, I beseech
you by all that is Dear and Sacred, to assist and help us, and not strengthen
the Hands of those, who by a Causeless and Unjustifiable Separation, endeavor
to rend and destroy the best Church in the whole Christian World.

VII.
Seventhly, We beg of them that they would Consider, what Sad and Deplorable
Mischiefs have ensued, upon bearing down the Constitution of the Church of
England. This is matter of Fact, and whereof many yet alive were made sensible
by Woeful Experience. Omitting what may seem of a little more remote
Consideration, the Blood and Treasure, the Spoils and Ravages of the late War,
the Enslaving and Oppressing all Ranks of Men, and what is above all, the
Murder of an excellent and incomparable Prince; I shall instance in a few
particulars, which were the more immediate Effects of it,

And First, No sooner was the Church of England thrown down, but what Monstrous
Swarms of Errors and Heresies broke in upon us, both for Number, and Impiety,
beyond whatever had been heard ^f in the Church of God: And here I need go no
further, than the sad account, which Mr. Edwards has given us in the several
parts of his Gangraena. He was an eminent Minister of the Presbyterian Party,
Epist. Dedicat. to Gangraen. print. 1646.
One, who as he tells the Parliament, had out of Choice and Judgment, from the
very beginning, Embarked himself, with Wife, Children and Estate, and all that
was dear to him, in the same Ship with them, to sink and perish, or to come
safe to Land with them, and that in the most doubtful and difficult Times, not
only in the beginning of the War and Troubles, in a Malignant place among
Courtiers, where he had Pleaded their Cause, justified their Wars, and
Satisfied many that Scrupled, but when their Affairs were at lowest, had been
most Zealous for them, Preaching, Praying, stirring up the People to stand for
them, and had both gone out in Person, and lent Money to them: He held
Correspondence with considerable Persons in all parts of the Nation, and was
careful to have the best Intelligence from all Quarters, and professes to lay
down the Opinion and Errors which he mentions in terminis, and in their own
Words and Phrases, Syllabically, and as near as might be. Now amongst infinite
other things, he tells us Catal. and discov. of Errors. p. 15, etc. vid. 2 d.
Part. p. 5. 22. 24, 27. 105. 110. fresh discov. p. 115. 16^. and alibi passim.
'twas then commonly maintained, That the Scriptures cannot be said to be the
Word of God, and are no more to be Credited, than the Writings of men, being
not a divine, but Humane Tradition; that God has a Hand in, and is the Author
of the Sinfulness of his People, not of the Actions alone, but of the very
Pravity which is in them; that all Lies come forth out of his Mouth, that the
Prince of the Air that Rules in the Children of Disobedience is God; that in
the Unity of the Godhead there is not a Trinity of Persons, but that it is a
Popish Tradition; that the Doctrine of Repentance is a Soul-destroying
Doctrine, and that Children are not bound to Obey their Parents at all, if they
be Ungodly; that the Soul of Man is Mortal, as the Soul of a Beast; that there
is no Resurrection at all of the Bodies of Men, nor Heaven nor Hell after this
Life. I instance only in these as a Taste, not that they are all, or the Hundred
part, no nor the worst, there being other Blasphemies and Impieties, which my
Pen trembles to Relate.

Secondly, The Liturgy of our Church being discharged and thrown out, and every
one left to his own liberty, it is scarce possible to believe, what wild and
prodigious Extravagancies were upon all occasions used in holy things, not in
Preaching only, but especially in Prayer, the most immediate Act of Worship and
Address to God: It is an affront to the Majesty of Religious Worship, that
there should be any thing in it Childish and Trivial, Absurd and Frivolous,
that its Sacred Mysteries should be exposed to Contempt and Scandal by that
Levity and distraction, that heat and Boldness, those weaknesses and
Indiscretions, those Loose, Raw, and Incongruous Effusions, which in most
Congregations of those Times, did too commonly attend it: But the things I
intend to Instance in, are of a far worse color and complexion; for whose Ears
would it not make to tingle, to hear men in the Pulpit telling God, That if he
did not finish the good Work which he had begun View of the late troubles in
Eng. cap. 43. p. 567, etc. See also Edwards Gang 3 d. Part, a little before.
in the Reformation of the Church, he would show himself to be the God of
Confusion, and such a One, as by cunning Stratagems had contrived the
Destruction of his own Children; That God would bless the King, and Mollify
his hard Heart, that delights in Blood, for that he was fallen from Faith in
God, and become an Enemy to his Church; let thine Hand, we pray thee, O Lord,
our God, be upon him, and upon his Fathers p. 17.
House, but not upon thy people, that they should be Plagued: O God, O God,
many are the Hands lift up against us, but there is one God; it is thou thy
self, O Father, who do us more Mischief, than they all: We know, O Lord, that
Abraham made a Covenant, Moses and David made a Covenant, and our Savior made
a Covenant, but thy Parliaments Covenant is the greatest of all Covenants. I
presume, the Devout and Serious Reader desires no more of such intolerable
Profane and Lewd Stuff as this is; They that are curious of more, may find it,
besides others, in The short view of the late Troubles in England, where Times,
Places and Persons, are Particularly named.

Thirdly The Fences of Order and Discipline in the Church of England being
broken down, what a horrid Inundation of all manner of Vice and Wickedness did
immediately overflow the Land? The Assembly at Westminster Petitioned the
Parliament, That July 19. 1644.
some Severe Course might be taken against Fornication, Adultery and Incest,
which, sry they, do greatly abound, especially of late, by reason of Impunity
Further discov. p. 187. 3 d. Part p. 185, etc.
And Mr. Edwards speaking of the whole Tribe of Sectaries, tells us, He was
confident, that for this many Hundred Years, there had not been a Party that
has pretended to so much Holiness, Strictness, power of Godliness, tenderness
of Conscience, above all other Men, as this Party has ^lone, that has been
guilty of so great Sins, horrible wickedness, provoking Abominations, as they
are; with much more, both there and elsewhere, to the same purpose, and the
Charge very often made good by particular Instances. So that indeed Hell seemed
to have broke loose, and to have Invaded all Quarters, in despite of their
Covenant, and all the little Schemes of their so much Magnified Reformation:
The Covenant Cries (God grant not against you) for Reformation of the Kingdom,
the Extirpation of Heresies, Schisms, Profaneness, etc. and these Impieties
abound, as if we had taken a Covenant to maintain them; and since it was taken
these Sins which we have Covenanted against, have more abounded, than in the
space of Ten Times so many Years before, as Mr. Jenkin tells the Lords in
Parliament. And that all East Sermon, Jan. 27. 1646. p. 29.
that I have mentioned (which yet is ^nfinitely short of what might be said)
was the effect of the Ruin of the Church of England, and let in by the Method
they took for Reformation, we have from their own confessions. We, says Mr.
Edwards, in these Four Cat. and discov. p. 73, 74, 76.
last Years, have over-passed the Deeds of the Prelates, and justified the
Bishops, in whose time never so many, nor so great Errors were heard of, much
less such Blasphemies or Confusions; we have worse things among us, than ever
were in all the Bishops Days; more corrupt Doctrines and unheard of Practices,
than in Eighty Years before. -- I am persuaded, if Seven Years ago, the Bishops
and their Chaplains had but Preached Printed, Licensed, dispersed up and down
in City and Country openly, a Quarter of these Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies,
which have been all these ways vented by the Sectaries, the People would have
risen up, and stoned them, and pulled down their Houses, and forced them to
forbear such Doctrines: O how is the Scene changed within these few Years! and
not long after, he tells us, that These are Risen, Increased, Reign and
Prevail, so far under a Parliament Sitting, not under the Bishops,
Corrupt-Clergy, Court-party, but under a Parliament. And in his Epistle to the
Lords and Commons, before the first part of his Gangraena, he tells them, That
the Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies and Practices, of the Sectaries of this
Time, had been Broached and Acted within these Four last Years in England, and
that in Your Quarters, and in the places under your Government and power, for
which I tremble to think, least the whole Kingdom should be in Gods Black Bill;
that together with their Reformation, come in a Deformation, and worse things
were come upon them, than ever they had before: they had put down the Book of
Common Prayer, but there were many amongst them, that had put down the
Scriptures, slighting, yea, Blaspheming them: he tells them, they had cast out
the Bishops, and their Officers, and they had many that had cast down to the
ground all Ministers in all the Reformed Churches; they had cast out Ceremonies
in the Sacraments, and they had many that had cast out the Sacraments
themselves; with many more sad complaints which he there makes. To sum up all
in the words of my Author; Vbi supra. p. 73.
In this Catalogue the Reader may see great Errors, and yet may turn himself
again and behold greater, namely damnable Heresies, and yet turn himself again
and read Horrid Blasphemies; and a third time, and read Horrible Disorders,
Confusions, strange and unheard of Practices, not only against the Light of
Scripture, but Nature, as in Women's Preaching, in Stealing away Men's Wives
and Children from Husbands and Parents, in Baptizing Women Naked, in the
Presence and Sight of Men, etc. And thus we see by what means it was, that the
Nation came to be Pestred with Opinions and Practices, Impious beyond the
Example of former Ages, and such as were not once named among the Gentiles, to
the A Letter from a Noble Venetian to Card Barbarino, translated and Printed
1648. p. 19.
Infinite Prejudice and dishonor both of our Religion and our Nation. It being
the Observation which an Ingenious Foreigner, who resided at London in those
times, made upon this occasion; one of the Fruits, says He, of this Blessed
Parliament, and of these two Sectaries (Presbyterians and Independents) is,
that they have made more Jews and Atheists, than I think there is in all Europe
besides.

I doubt not but that the greatest part of our Dissenters do from their Souls
detest the Heresies, Blasphemies, and Wickednesses that have been mentioned;
but then the Consideration ought to oblige them to double their diligence to
prevent the like dismal Effects for the time to come, and not to open the Gap
again, at which they must necessarily flow in upon us. By what has been done
they may see, what a Blessed Reformation they may expect by the Ruin of this
Church; for the thing that has been, is that which shall be; the same causes
set on foot by the same Principles will Eternally produce the same Effects; and
though Men at first may mean never so well, yet Temptations will insensibly
grow upon them, and Accidents happen, which in the Progress will carry them
infinitely beyond the Line of their first Intentions, and engage them in
Courses, out of which, when they come to discern their Error, it may be too
late for them to Retire. In the beginning of the long Parliament, I make no
question, but the far greatest part of them met together with very honest and
good Intentions, and designed no more than to Correct some little
Irregularities, which they apprehended to be in Church or State: But we see
how these very Persons where cariied from one passage to another; and in time
transported to those very things which at first they had so vehemently
protested and declared against, till at length Horrid Enormities came to be
acted by and under them, which no age can Parallel: which ought to be a
Sufficient Caution to all, how they shake the least Stone, that belongs to the
Foundation, least by picking out one after another, the whole House tumble
about their Ears, when it is beyond their own Power to support it. I shall shut
up this Head with a brief Recapitulation of some of those Inferencs, which Mr.
Edwards makes from the State of those Loose and Licentious times, we have been
speaking of, and then leave the Reader to judge, whether they be not as
Applicable to present Circumstances, under which we are: He infers thus, First,
we may hence see how dangerous it is to Cat. and Discov. Part 3 d. p. 52, 53,
57, 70. Further Discov. p. 195, 203.
despise and let alone a small Party. Secondly, That it is more than time fully
and Effectually to settle the Government and Discipline of the Church; Thirdly,
What the Mischief, Evil, and Danger of a Toleration, and pretended Liberty of
Conscience would be to this Kingdom, and what it would Prove and Produce.
Fourthly, That it sufficiently Justifies in the Sight of the World, those
Ministers and People who are Zealous for settling Religion, and cry out for
Government, who Preach, Petition, speak often one to another of these things.
Fifthly, what a great Evil and Sin Separation is from the Communion of the
Reformed Churches, and how highly displeasing to God for Men to make a Rent and
Schism in the Church of God. Sixthly, That all such who have been deceived and
drawn away, under pretense of greater Purity, Holiness, etc. and have any Fear
and Awe of God and his Word, be Exhorted to leave and forsake them, and return
to the Public Assemblies and Communion of this and other Reformed Churches.
And God grant we may hearken to this Counsel, and may seriously lay these
things to heart.

VIII.
Eighthly, We desire it may be considered, what plain and apparent Advantages
Separation gives to the Common Enemy of the Protestant Religion in these
Nations: The Church of England is notoriously known to have been the most
strong and standing Bulwark of Protestancy, ever since the Reformation; for
being Founded on Scripture-grounds, and the Practice of True, Genuine,
Primitive Antiquity, and having been reformed, by the most wise, regular, and
justifiable Methods; it stands like a Rock impregnable against all the
Assaults, which the Church of Rome makes upon it. This has engaged them to
Plant all their Batteries to beat it down, as being the only Church
considerable enough to stand in their way: and when not able to effect it by
any other Arts, they have betaken themselves to the old Artifice of Ruining us,
by dividing us. In Order hereunto they have upon all occasions strenuously
promoted the Separation, mixed themselves with our Dissenters, put on every
shape, that they might the better follow the Common outcry against our Church,
as Popish and Antichristian, spurring on the people to call for a more pure and
spiritual way of worship, and to Clamor for liberty and Toleration, as wherein
they well knew they themselves were like to have the greatest share; and that
having subverted all Order, and beaten people out of all sober Principles, they
foresaw they must be necessitated at last to center in the Communion of the
Romish Church. This was a Trade they began betimes, almost in the very Infancy
of the Reformation. Witness the Story of Faithful Commin, a Dominican Friar,
who passed under the notion of a Zealous Puritan, and was much admired and
followed by the People for his seeming Piety, spiritual Gifts, and Zeal against
Popery. But being apprehended, Anno 1567. and accused for an Impostor, was
examined at large before the Queen and her Council, and put under Bail: when
finding the Climat was like to be too hot for him, and having by a cheat
brought off his Bail, and told his deluded followers, that he was acquitted by
her Majesty and the Council, and warned of God to go beyond the Seas, to
instruct the Protestants there, and that he would come again; and having
assured them that Spiritual Prayer was the chief Testimony of a true
Protestant, and that the set Form of Prayer in England was but the Mass
Translated, and having, with abundance of extempore-Prayers and Tears squeezed
out of them a Collection of a Hundred and Thirty Pounds for his Journey,
besides private Gifts; away he goes for Rome, and acquaints Pope Pius Quintus
with what he had done, and by what Methods, and how odious he had made the
Church of England to the Puritans, and that it would be a stumbling block to
that Church while it was a Church. Upon which the Pope commended and rewarded
him with Two Thousand Ducates for his good Service. All which particulars are
Foxes and Firebrand^, Print. 1680. p. 7. etc.
more fully made out from Secretary Cecil's Papers, whose Memorials were lately
brought to light. Witness also that other passage concerning Thomas Heath a
Jesuit, who much about the same time was sent over into England to Act the
same Part, which he did, not only by Preaching, but by crying up Spiritual
Prayers, and running down all set Forms, as being without any warrant from
Scripture, by Laboring to refine the Protestants, as he called it, and to take
off all smacks of Ceremonies, that in the least tended to the Romish Faith. For
all which he was mightily flocked after, and admired every day more and more.
But Anno. 1568. he was discovered by a Letter, that casually dropped out of his
Pocket as he was Preaching in the Pulpit at Rochester, importing, that the
Council of their Fraternity had sent him Collections, and Instructions for
carrying on the Work, and that this way of dividing Protestants was the only
way for the recalling Men back again to the Mother Church. Hereupon he was
examined by the Bishop of Rochester, and did not much deny the main of the
charge, and upon the searching of his Lodgings, there were found several Books
fitted for his purpose, as against Infant Baptism, etc. and in one of his
Boots, a License from the Fraternity of the Jesuits, and a Bull of Pius
Quintus, giving him leave to preach what Doctrine that Society pleased, for the
dividing of the English Protestants, or as he called them, Heretics; The issue
was, that Heath was close Imprisoned, set in the Pillory at the High Cross; his
Ears cut off, his Nose slit, his Forehead branded, and he condemned to
perpetual Imprisonment, but soon after he dyed suddenly, being suspected to
have poisoned himself: The whole account hereof being published from the
Authentic Register of the Church of Rochester.

The same Course we need not doubt, the Papists held on in the succeeding
times, these being some of the main Directions, which Contzen the Jesuit gives
Polit. l. 2. c. 18. Sect. 6.
for the reducing Popery into a Country, that it be done under pretense of ease
to tender Consciences, and that Liberty be granted to that end, and that as
much use be made of the division of Enemies, as of the agreement of Friends.
What a stroke they had in fomenting the differences and distractions, that
brought on the late Civil Wars, and how active they were both in the Counsels
and Proceedings of the Parliament Party, the World needs not to be told at this
time of day; great numbers of them, both Commanders and others, serving in
their Armies, great industry was used to corrupt the Loyalty and Affection of
those of that Religion, and private promises and undertakings were made to
them, that if they would assist them against the King, all the Laws made in
October. 23. 1642. vid. Collect. of the Kings Works. Part. 2. fol. 213. L'
History des troubles, etc. p. 165. see the short view of the late troubles in
England, c. 43. p. 564.
their prejudice should be Repealed; as the late King of blessed Memory tells
the World in one of his public Declarations, after the Victory at Edgehil;
Adding, that tho some few of Eminent Abilities for Command and Conduct, and of
moderate and unfactious dispositions were employed in his Service; yet, we are
confident, that a far greater number of that Religion, is in the Army of the
Rebels, than in our own. And the King it seems had good reason to say so. For
as de Salmonet, a Secular Priest, who wrote in French a History of our late
Civil Wars, informs us, in that very Fight at Edgehill, besides two Companies
of Walloons, and other Roman Catholics that served there, that (says he) which
did most surprise every Body was, that several Popish Priests were found
amongst the Dead that were slain on the Parliament side. So plain is it, that
they served in their Armies, were present at their Councils, and upon all
occasions mixed with their Parties, that they might widen the Breach beyond all
recovery. Thus was it then. And about the Sea Dr. Stilling-fleet's Preface to
the unreasonableness of Separation. p. 20. etc.
time of the King's coming in, a Letter of Advice was written by Seignior
Ballarini concerning the best way of Managing the Popish Interest in England,
upon his Majesty's Restoration; wherein it was advised, especially to
obstruct the Settlement of the Fundamental Constitutions of the Kingdom, to set
up the prosperous way of Fears and Jealousies of the King and Bishops, to
asperse the Bishops and Ministers of the Church of England, and to represent
its Doctrine and Worship as coming too near to the Church of Rome, to second
the Factious in promoting an Indulgence, and to endeavor, that the Trade and
Treasure of the Nation might be engrossed between themselves, and other
discontented Parties. And Mr. Coleman himself owned it at his Condemnation,
that perhaps he thought, Colemans Trial, p. 101. Def. of his Answ. to the
Admonit. p. 349.
that Popery might come in, if Liberty of Conscience had been granted. And this
is that, which wise Archbishop Whitgift long ago foresaw would come to pass,
when he told the Dissenters of those Days, I am persuaded that Antichrist
works effectually at this Day, by our Stirs and Contentions, whereby he has,
and will more prevail against this Church of England, then by any other means
whatsoever. And now upon the whole matter, I desire our Dissenting Brethren to
consider, whether the orderly and truly Primitive Constitution of the Church of
England, or Innovation, Schism and Separation, be the likelier way to keep out
Popery; and do therefore Conjure them, by all the Kindness which they pretend
for the Protestant Religion, heartily to join in Communion with us, as which I
believe, humanely speaking, to be, if not the only, at least the only safe and
durable means of shutting Popery for ever out of Doors.

IX.
Ninthly, We desire of them, that if neither these nor any other Advices and
Considerations can prevail with them, they would at least cease to Reproach the
Government, for Reviving the Execution of the Laws, about these matters? I know
it is very natural to Men to complain, when any thing pinches them, but then
they ought to be so just, as to consider, whose fault it is that has brought it
upon them. The Laws in this case were framed with great Advice, and upon dear
bought Experience, and every Nation in the World thinks it self obliged, when
no other ways will do it, by Penalties to secure the Public Peace, Safety, and
Tranquillity of the State, though it may sometimes press hard in some particular
Cases, when Men through Fancy, Humor, Mistake or Design, (especially about
little, and as themselves confess, indifferent matters,) shall endanger the
Public Welfare, and by an ill Example expose the Reverence and Majesty of the
Laws. And yet notwithstanding all this, and a great deal more that might be
said, we find them at every turn charging the Government, for using them
Cruelly, and with the hardest Measure, censuring their Superiors, and speaking
Evil of Dignities; and this not only the Cry of the mean and common Sort, but
of their chiefest Leaders, even to this Hour: It being no hard matter (but that
I love not to exasperate) to instance in several things, that are no very good
Arguments of that Obedient Patience, which some of them so much pretend to. It
is far from my Temper to delight in Cruelty, much more to plead for Severity to
be used toward Dissenting Brethren, and therefore should have said nothing in
this Argument, were it not necessary to Vindicate the Government, which upon
these occasions, I have so often heard Blamed and Censured. I would these
Persons who complain so much, would consider a while, how their Predecessors
were dealt with in the times of the good Queen Elizabeth; which will appear,
either from the Laws then made, or from the Proceedings then had against them.
The Laws then made against them, were chiefly these; In the First of the Queen,
An Act for the Uniformity of Common Prayer, etc. wherein, among other Clauses
and Penalties, it is provided, That if any Person, shall in any Plays, Songs,
Rhimes, or by other open Words, declare or speak any thing in the derogation,
depraving, or despising the Book of Common Prayer, or any thing therein
contained, being thereof lawfully convicted, he shall forfeit for the first
Offense an hundred, for the second four hundred Marks, for the Third, all his
Goods and Chattels, and shall suffer Imprisonment during Life. A Clause, which
had it been kept up in its due Life and Power, our Liturgy and Divine Offices,
had been Treated with much more Respect and Reverence, then I am sure they have
met with, especially of late. In Her Fifth Year, an Act was passed for the due
Execution of the Writ de Excommunicato capiendo; amongst others, particularly
levelled against such as refuse to receive the Holy Communion, or to come to
Divine Service, as now commonly used in the Church of England, with severe
Penalties upon those, that shall not yield up themselves to the same Writ.
Anno. 13. passed an Act of general Pardon, but it was with an Exception of all
those, that had committed any Offense against the Act for the Uniformity of
Common Prayer, or were Publishers of Seditious Books, or Disturbers of Divine
Service. Anno 23. By an Act to retain the Queen's Majesty's Subjects in their
due Obedience it is provided, That every Person above the Age of Sixteen Years,
which shall not repair to some Church or usual place of Common Prayer, but
forbear the same by the space of a Month; shall for every such Moth forfeit
Twenty Pounds: Which Act was again Confirmed and Ratified by another in the
29th. Year of Her Reign, with many Clauses and Provisions for the better
Execution of it. And by the Act of the 35th of Her Reign, If any Person so
forbearing, shall willingly join in, or be present at any Assemblies,
Conventicles and Meetings, under color or pretense of any Exercise of
Religion, contrary to the Laws of the Realm, such Person being lawfully
Convicted, shall be Imprisoned without Bail or Mainprize, until he Conform,
and if he do not that within Three Months, he shall be obliged to Abjure the
Realm, and if refusing to Abjure, or returning without License, he shall be
Adjudged a Felon, and suffer as in case of Felony, without benefit of Clergy.

Such were Her Laws, and such also were Her Proceedings, against those who
faultered in their Conformity, or began to Innovate in the Discipline of the
Church; and these Proceedings as quick and smart, as any can be said to be
against the Dissenters of this time. Do they complain of their Ministers being
Silenced now? so they were then, being deprived of their Benefices and
Church-Preferments, for their Inconformity. Thus Sampson was turned out of his
Deanery o^ Christ-Church, for refusing to Conform to the Orders and Ceremonies
of the Church. Cartwright, the very Head of them, Expelled the College, and
deprived of the Lady Margarets Lecture. Travers, turned out from Preaching at
the Temple; with many more, Suspended from the Ministry by the Queens
Authority, and the Approbation of the Bishops; for not Subscribing to some new
Rites and Ceremonies imposed upon them, as appears from Beza's Letter to Bez.
Epist. 8.
Bishop Grindal, Anno 1566. Are any in Prison? so they were then, Benson,
Button, Hallingham, Cartwright, Knewstubbs, and many others; some in the
Marshalsey, others in the White-Lion; some in the Gatehouse, others in the
Counter, or in the Clink, or in Bridewel, or in Newgate: Poor Men miserably
handled with Revilings, Deprivations, Imprisonments, Banishments; if we may
believe what themselves tell us, both in the First and Second Admonition. And
what is yet far beyond any thing, which God be thanked, our Dissenters can
pretend to complain of, several of them lost their Lives; Barrow and Greenwood
were Executed for their Scandalous and Seditious Writings; Penry and Vdal
Indicted and Arraigned, for Defaming the Queens Government in a Scandalous
Book, Written against the supposed Governors, as they called them, of the
Church of England; for which they were both Cast and Condemned, to be Executed
as Felons, but Archbishop Whitgift interposing, they were Reprieved, and Vdal
suffered to Die, as he did soon after, in his Bed. The truth is, the wise and
wary Queen beheld Schism growing on apace, and needed not to be told what ill
Influence it was like to have, both upon Church, and State, and therefore
Resolved to carry a Straight Hand, as well over Puritanism on the one side, as
Popery on the other; and in order hereunto, She charged Archbishop Whitg^ft
Sir G. Paul, Life of A. B. Whitgift, Numb. 53. p. 29.
to be Vigilant and Careful, to Reduce Ministers by their Subscription and
Conformity to the settled Orders and Government, Adding, That She would have the
Discipline of the Church of England formerly Established, of all Men duly to be
Observed, without alteration of the least Ceremony. But nothing more fully
discovers her Judgment and Resolution in this matter, then what She gave in
Command to the Lord-Keeper-Puckering, to tell the Parliament: part of his Dr.
Pierce New Discov. against Mr. Baxt. 1659. Chapter 5. Sect. 12. p. 109.
Speech (Transcribed and Published some Years since, from the Original Copy,
under his own Hand Writing, by an Eminent Divine of this Church,) was as
follows, -- And especially, you are Commanded by Her Majesty to take heed,
that no Ear be given, or Time afforded, to the wearisome Solicitations of
those that commonly be called Puritanes, wherewithal the late Parliaments have
been exceedingly Importuned. Which sort of Men, whilst in the Giddiness of
their Spirits, they labor and strive to advance a new Eldership, they do
nothing else but disturb the good Repose of the Church and Commonwealth: which
is as well grounded for the Body of Religion it self, and as well guided for
the Discipline, as any Realm that professes the Truth. And the same thing is
already made good to the World, by many of the Writings of Learned and Godly
Men, neither Answered, nor Answerable, by any of these new fangled Refiners.
And as the present Case stands, it may be doubted, Whethey they, or the
Jesuits, do offer more Danger, or be more speedily to be repressed. For albeit
the Jesuits do impoison the Hearts of Her Majesty's Subjects, under a Pretext
of Conscience, to withdraw them from their Obedience due to her Majesty, yet do
the same but closely, and only in privy Corners, but these Men do both Publish
in their Printed Books, and Teach in all their Conventicles sundry Opinions,
not only dangerous to the wellsetled Estate and Policy of the Realm, but also
much derogatory to Her Sacred Majesty, and Her Crown, as well by, etc. In all
which Things (however in many other Points, they pretend to be at War with the
Popish Jesuits, yet by the Separation of themselves from the Unity of their
Fellow Subjects, and by abusing the Sacred Authority and Majesty of their
Prince, they do both join and concur with the Jesuits in opening the Door, and
preparing the way to the Spanish Invasion, that is Threatened against the Realm.
Thus far he, by her Majesty's most Royal Pleasure, and Wise Direction, as he
there speaks. To which let me add, That the Speech took such effect, that the
Parliament passed the Act of 35th of Eliz. the Severest Act against Dissenters
in the whole Body of our Laws. And indeed, so Jealous was the Queen of the
least appearances of Innovation, that Archbishop Grindall, only for giving too
much encouragement to Prophesyings (which were beheld as likely to prove
Nurseries of Schism and Faction, as indeed they did) fell under Her
Displeasure, and was Sequestered from his Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction, and
though great intercession was made in his behalf, yet could he never be
restored to his Dying Day.

This was the State of things then, and yet these were the Proceedings of those
Days, which our Dissenters at another time, are wont so much to Magnify and
Extol; nothing of late having been so much in their Mouth, as the Wisdom and
Prudence, the Care and Diligence, the Zeal and Piety of Good Queen Elizabeth. I
speak not this to cast any reflection upon the Memory of that incomparable
Princess, whom we have all the reason in the World to own to have been the
Glorious Instrument of Perfecting and Settling the Reformation in this Kingdom;
and whose Memory will be dear and precious, as long as the Protestant Name has
a Being in England. But I only take notice, how extremely partial People are,
and how apt to be prejudiced against the present Government under which they
live, and to be always Crying out, That the former Days were better then these?
whereas, supposing their Circumstances were really harder than they are, and
harder then those of the Puritans in former times, yet they have no reason to
accuse the Government of Rigor and Severity toward them, if three Things be
farther taken into Consideration.

First, That the Dissenters of old, especially the first Race of them, were
generally much more Modest and Peaceable then those of latter times, more
Conformable to the Laws, less Turbulent and Offensive to the Government: when
they could not Conform as Ministers, they yet did as private Christians, and
quietly acquiesced in their Suspension, or Deprivation, and as one truly says
of them, When they could not be Active without Sinning, [as they judged] they
could be passive without Murmuring. They meddled not with things without their
Line, nor mixed themselves with matters of State; Declared, that Kings have See
a Book called, The Protestation of the Kings Supremacy. 1605. Numb. 8, 9. 11.
power by the Law of God, to make such Ecclesiastical Laws as tend to the good
Ordering of the Churches in their Dominions, that the Churches ought not to be
Disobedient to any of their Laws, that if any thing were Commanded contrary to
the Word, they ought not to resist the King therein, but peaceably to forbear
Disobedience, and sue to him for Grace and Mercy, and where that cannot be
obtained, meekly to submit themselves to the punishment. They generally came to
Church, and did not run into Separate Congregations, nay, writ stoutly and
smartly against those who began then to attempt a Separation. But whether our
Modern Dissenters have observed the same Course, and be of this Spirit and
Temper, let the World judge, yea, let themselves be Judges in the Case.

Secondly, Sad Experience of the Evil Consequences of Schism and Separation,
have made it necessary for the Government to take all just and lawful ways for
preventing the like for the time to come. Men first began to be dissatisfied
with the Rites and Orders of the Church, then discontented that they were not
presently gratified with an Alteration, Discontent brought on Sedition,
Sedition Rebellion, and Rebellion the Ruin of Church and State. And what
wonder, if the Laws bear a little hard there, where there are the same
Appearances, and where there seem to be the same Tendencies and Inclinations to
the same Dismal State of Things? Whoever considers by what Ways the most
flourishing Kingdom in the World, and the best Church that ever was since the
Primitive Times, were miserably Harrassed and Destroyed, cannot think, that
those who sit at the Helm should be content to have them Ruined again by the
same means; especially, after the King, for several Years together, has in vain
tried, by all the Methods of Favor and Indulgence, to win upon them.

Thirdly, Let those who now complain so much, consider, How little Favor
themselves showed to others when they were in Power; How the Loyal and
Episcopal Party were Plundered, Sequestered, Decimated, Dungeoned, Starved, and
often stunk to Death: What Oaths and Covenants were Rigorously Imposed upon
them; what Restraints laid upon their Liberties, both Civil and Ecclesiastical;
though all this while they had Law and Right standing for An Ordinance for
putting in Execution the Directory, August 11. 1645.
them. In the Year 1645, an Ordinance of Parliament was published, That if any
Person hereafter shall at any Time use, or cause to be used, the Book of
Common Prayer in any Church or public place of Worship, or in any private
Place or Family within the Kingdom; every Person so offending, should for the
first Offense pay the Sum of Five, for the second ten Pounds, and for the
third, should suffer one whole Years Imprisonment, without Bail or Mainprize.
This one would think was very hard, but there is something harder yet behind;
For Cromwell being got into the Throne, Published a Delaration, 24 November,
1655.
at that time Equivalent to a Law, That no Person who had been sequestered for
delinquency, or had been in Arms against the Parliament, or adhered unto, or
had abetted or assisted the Forces raised against them, should keep in their
Houses or Families, as Chaplains or Schoolmasters for the Education of their
Children, any sequestered or ejected Minister, Fellow of a College or
Schoolmaster, nor permit any of their Children to be taught by such, upon pain
of being proceeded against as was directed, and that no Person who had been
sequestered or ejected for delinquency or scandal, shall hereafter keep any
School, either public or private, nor preach in any public place, or at any
private Meeting of any other Persons then those of his own Family, nor
Administer Baptism, or the Lords Supper, or marry any Persons, or use the Book
of Common Prayer, or the Forms of Prayer therein contained, upon Pain that
every Person so Offending in any of the Premises, shall be proceeded against
as by the said Order is provided and directed. There needs no Comment upon
these Proceedings, they do not only Whisper, but speak aloud to the present
Generation of Dissenters, to tell them how little reason they have to complain.

X.
Lastly, We beg of them, that before they pull down any further Trouble or
Suffering upon themselves, they would Consider, Whether the Cause they engage
in, be such, as will bear them out with Comfort before God another Day. it is
not Suffering or refusing to comply with the External Circumstances of our
Religion, that can be said to be a Persecution for Righteousness sake, it not
being the Suffering, but the Cause that makes the Martyr. Then I suffer as a
Christian, when the Honor of Christ, or something that offers Violence to my
Religion, and Christianity is concerned in it, when I suffer for that which I
cannot avoid, without disowning my self to be a Christian, and making Shipwreck
of Faith and a good Conscience. But where the Case is not evidently this, a Man
may draw Miseries upon himself, and yet not suffer as a Christian, because it
may proceed from Humor, or Interest, or the Conduct of a misinformed Judgment,
mistaking things for what they are not: Men very often place Religion in doing,
or not doing, what is no part of it, and then think they may safely Suffer upon
that account, when there is more, it may be, of Passion or Prejudice, of Fancy
or Opinion, of Humor or Mistake, then of the real Concerns of Piety or
Religion. I am very sure, neither the Ancient Christians, would have passed
through the Fiery-Tryal every Day, nor the Holy Martyrs in Queen Mary's Days,
have thought themselves obliged to Forfeit their Estates, much less their
Lives, had no more been required of them then there is of us, to come to
Khurch, or to Kneel at the Sacrament; but would rather have Blessed God, and
thankfully owned the Favor of the Governors, under which they lived, might
they have enjoyed both upon the same Terms as we do. In Cases that only concern
indifferent things, and mere Circumstances of Worship, stiffly and obstinately
to stand out, is, rather for a Man to be a Martyr to his own Humor and
Opinion, then to the Cause of Christ. Whether this be not the Case of our
Dissenting-Brethren, they themselves might quickly see, would they but lay
aside the unreasonableness of their Prejudices, and lay no more stress upon
things than they Obed. Patience p. 79.
ought to bear. Let us hear what Mr. Baxter, in a late Book, says to this
matter, I am One that have been first in all the Storms that have befallen the
Ministry, these Twenty Years past, (to look no farther back,) and yet my
Conscience commands me to say, as I have often done, that many through mistake,
I am persuaded, now Suffer as Evildoers for a Cause that is not Good and
Justifiable. I shall leave with them the Wise and Excellent R. Bernard's
Christian Advert. and Counsels of Peace. 1608.
Counsel which was given by one in the time of the Elder Puritans, Follow true
Antiquity, and the general Practice of the Church of God in all Ages, where
they have not Erred from the evident Truth of God. If thou Suffer, let it be
for known Truth, and against known Wickedness; for which thou have Example in
Gods Word, or of the Holy Martyrs in Church-Story. But beware of far-fetched
Consequences, or for Suffering for new Devices, and for things, formerly, unto
all Ages unknown, seem they never so Holy and Just unto Man.

All that now remains, is, to call upon our Dissenting-Brethren, by all the
Considerations of Love and Kindness to themselves, of Tenderness for the Honor
of Religion, the Edification of their Brethren, and the Peace, Security, and
Welfare of the Church and State wherein they live, that they would duly and
impartially Weigh and Consider things, put a stop to the Separation wherein
they are engaged, return to, and hold Communion with us, and keep the Unity of
the Spirit in the Bond of Peace.

Let them bethink themselves what a mighty Evil Schism is, and will be so found
before God at the last Day, and whether any thing can be meet to be put in the
Balance with the Peace and Unity of the Church, and those vastly-important
Consequences, that depend upon it. Let us consider a little, what a deep Sense
the best and most pious Christians that ever were, had of it: It Is better to
Suffer any thing, than that the Church of God should be Rent asunder; it is
every whit as Glorious, and, in my Opinion, a far greater Martyrdom, to dye for
not Dividing the Church, than for refusing to Sacrifice to Idols, says
Dionysius, the good Bishop of Alexandria, in his Letter to Novatian. Ap. Eusebius.
lib. 6. c. 45. Epist. 52. (ad Antonian.) de Unit. Eccles. fol. 181, 184. etc.
And St. Cyprian speaks very severe things to this purpose, That a Person going
from the Church to Schismatics, tho in that Capacity he should dye for Christ,
yet can he not receive the Crown of Martyrdom. And how often elsewhere does he
tell us, That such a one has no part in the Law of God, or the Faith of Christ,
or in Life and Salvation; that without this Unity and Charity, a Man cannot
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and that although he should deliver up
himself to the Flames, or cast his Body to wild Beasts, yet this would not be
the Crown of his Faith, but the Punishment of his Falsehood, not the Glorious
Exit of a Religious Courage, but the Issue of Despair; such a One may be
Killed, but he cannot be Crowned. He rents the Unity of the Church, destroys
the Faith, disturbs the Peace, dissolves Charity, and Profanes the Holy
Sacrament. And were it necessary, I could show, that the Ancient Fathers
generally say the same thing. And can we now be such degenerate Christians, (if
we can be said to be Christians at all) as to make nothing at all of Schism and
Separation? Are not the Glory of God, the Peace of the Church, and the Good of
Souls, things as considerable, as necessary, and indispensable now, as they
were of old? I beseech you, Brethren, return from whence you are fallen, and
let us all with one Shoulder set our selves to Support that Church, with whose
Ruin we are all likely to sink and fall. Let us lay aside Envying and Strife,
Confusion and every Evil Work, and let us follow after the things which make
for Peace, and things wherewith one may Edify another.

FINIS.

