LEGAL and other REASONS (With all Humility) Presented to His Most Excellent
Majesty, King Charles II.

AND TO Both His Honorable Houses OF PARLIAMENT, WHY THE SUBJECTS of ENGLAND,
Should not be Imprisoned FOR Debt or Damages, Or any thing thereunto relating.

LONDON, Printed in the year MDCLXXV.

Legal and other Reasons, (with all humility) presented to His Most Excellent
Majesty, King Charles the Second, and to both His Honorable Houses of
Parliament, why the Subjects of England, should not be Imprisoned for Debt or
Damages, or any thing thereunto relating.
IT is evidently and undeniably plain, that (by the Ancient Common Law of the
Land) the Bodies of any of the people of England, could not, at the Suit of any
Subject, be Arrested, Imprisonned, or any of them Outlawed, for Debt or
Damages, (or any thing thereunto relating) as clearly appears, not only by our
Ancient Laws, but by the Authority of these two great Sages of the Law, the
Lord Chief Justice Coke, in his Third Report, fol. 11 and 12. and the Lord
Dyer, An. 23 Eliz. 305. b. the which also by Magna Charta, Chap. 29. (that
great Expositor of our Ancient Laws) was (in affirmation of the Ancient Common
Law (with great and (...) circumspection) provided against, and not only (not
as much as thought on before the Conq^est) but was abhorred (in the least) to
be practiced, from that time, and the time of the birth of that explanatory
Law, (which was in the Ninth year of the Reign of King Henry the Third) until
many Ages after, there being variety of great, weighty, and pregnant Reasons,
for the preservation of that greatest Liberty, and Privilege of the Subject
(the freedom of their Persons from Imprisonment) and as well those Ancient
Laws before the Conquest, as the Laws until the making of the great Charter,
(and threescore years after) were, in that particular, (with all studious and
sedulous care) inviolably observed, as an eminent and signal Badge of the
immunitie and heroic freedom of the English Nation, who were then deservedly
called (libera gens) and lived so, (and in so great an happy Splendour, (to the
envious admiration of the rest of the Christian World, (and to the eternal
honor of our Ancestors) without being subject to any such Imprisonment, not
only all the time of William the Conquerors Reign, (which was above Twenty
years) but one hundred fourscore and forteen years after his death, and until
the Statute of Westminster the second, Chapter the 11. (made in the Thirteenth
year of King Edward the First, invented a Capias, and a new Process of
Outlawry, (which from that time) was full so many years, the Statute of the two
and fiftieth of Henry the Third, Chap. 23. (although the first that ever made
any English (Man's person subject to such Arrest^ yet it being only against
Baylifs of particular Lords) I lay no great stress on, but that breach and
inroad being once made into, and upon the Common Law, (by the Statute of
Westminster the Second) gave encouragement, to the unhappy production of
another Statute, made in the twenty fifth year of the Reign of King Edward the
Third, Chap. 17. by which it was Enacted, that such Process should be made in
Debt, and detinue of Chattels, and by process of Exigent, as was then used in
in Writs of Account; which were two such keen Laws, that they not only Invaded,
but cut in sunder, the choycest Liberty of the Subject, by submitting the
persons of the then free people of England, to the cruelty of Imprisonment for
Debt and Damages; but the same wise King Edward the Third, of whom the Lord
Chief Justice Coke, (in the second part of his Institutes, fol. 29) gives this
Character, That King Henry the Second, Edward the First, and Edward the Third,
were (all of them) Princes of great Fortitude, Wisdom, and Justice, that
governed by their Laws, but that (in the Reign of King Edward the Third) the
Laws did principally flourish, who (says he) was a Noble, Wise, and Wa(...)
Prince. This prudent Prince (I say) looking deliberately into the Wounds those
Statutes had given, to the honor and happiness of the Kingdom, and to that
ancient and most venerable part of the Common Law, (which preserved his
Subjects persons from Imprisonment) and the very many Kings Reigns and Ages,
(without any the least interruption) which that glorious, and famous Liberty,
had prosperously continued, and (as it were) repenting of the making of the
said bitter Statute, of the twenty fifth year of his own Reign, and he and his
Parliament, finding the mischievous inconveniences and dishonor, that it had
put upon the people, and resolving, to file those Shakles, from off the
Subjects feet, and to reinvest them into the Liberty and freedom of their
persons, from imprisonment, according to the common Law of the Land, by that
gracious healing Statute, made in the two and fortieth year of the Reign of the
same King Edward the Third, Chap. 1. those two Raizor metled cutting rigorous
Laws were (as to such Imprisonment as aforesaid) by the opinion of many, and by
the general construction of Law, and the true intendment hereof) Repealed,
which declared, that the Great Charter should be holden, and kept in all
points; and (if any Statute be made to the contrary) that it should be holden
for none, which said last mentioned Statute, was (according to common
construction) intended fully to restore the brightness and luster, of the
ancient Common Law, and to support and maintain the strength and vigor of that
Standard, of Law and Justice (the Great Charter) which not only asserts His
Majesty's just Rights and Prerogative Royal, but defends and preserves the
Freedom and just Liberties of the people, which (as the same Author in his
Preface to his second Institute) tells us, has been confirmed, by two and
thirty Acts of Parliament, and not only so, but (by the Statute of the twenty
fifth of Edward the First) the same is to be taken, as the Common Law. But the
seting up, and creation of the great numbers of Offices and Officers, and the
herds of persons, which those most severe Laws Westminster the Second, and the
Statute of the twenty fifth of Edward the Third) had most advantageously
preferred, almost in every City, Town, and Village of the Kingdom, had so
fixed, fastened, and rivited such Multitudes of persons (many of them of very
great and eminent quality and interest) in places of great and tempting gain,
which had made so deep an impression, upon the minds of that prevalent and
powerful part of the Kingdom, (who had thereby plentifully enricht themselves)
that notwithstanding the said Statute, of the two and foroftieth Edw. the
Third, so intentionally composed as aforesaid, for the manumitting of the
people of England, (as (...) from the thraldom of a Prison, as otherwise to
preserve their Liberty) they went on to Imprison the Bodies of the Subject,
which has ever since been practiced, not only (by virtue of those two Laws,
Westminster the Second, and the twenty fifth of Edward the Third) but that of
Acton Burnell, and the Statute de mercatoribus, touching Arrests upon Statutes,
Staple, and Merchant, and by other Laws built upon them, which (contrary to the
ancient Common Law, (as is very plain) does continue the invassilation of
Imprisonment against, and upon, all the free born Subjects of England, except
the Lords, and they themselves (in some case) as the Law by some is holden to
be) are not exempted neither: for if a Nobleman be Outlawed (as it is holden)
he may be arrested and Imprisoned, and (until the Outlawry be reverst, is not
only incapable to sit in the House of Peers, but all his personal Estate is
forfeited, and his Lands in the same condition, with any other Subject. So that
it is indisputably clear, how great an Intrenchment the Imprisonment of Men's
persons, is, upon the honor of the ancient Common Law, of which, as the Lord
Chief Justice Coke says, the Great Charter, is but declaratory, and as a late
Writer, (from good authority) tells us, did not grant any thing de Novo, but
that thereby our ancient Laws and Liberties, were only repeated and confirmed,
and indeed all those our Ancestors maintai^ed, not only with indefatigable
prudential care and industry, but with the vast expense of Blood and Treasure,
witness the more then twenty years intestine Bloody Civil War, in the Reign of
King John, and in the end, the confirmation of those Laws, and Liberties (by
the same King) in the face of the Nobility, and other the great Men of the
Kingdom, and of an infinite multitude of other the free people of England, as
says Britain, fol. 219. So that there wants nothing to make it fully
demonstrable, that by our Ancestors magnanimity, and resolved courage, (in
maintaining the ancient Common Law) they and their Posterity were not only
established in their just Rights, but were preserved from such Imprisonment for
Debt or Damages (or any thing thereunto relating) two hundred and fourteen
years after the Norman Conquest, which now is inflicted, upon many thousands of
His Majesty's Good, Loyal, and Faithful Subjects, to the utter ruin of them,
their Families, and Relations, whilst those (who have lined their Iron
Consciences, with nothing but their profit, and their Chests throughout, with
the Wealth of the Kingdom, (which they have gotten by the late unhappy
differences and troubles) smile to see those, who have sacrificed their Bloods,
nay themselves, and theirs, in and to His Majesty's faithful Services) (...) up
(by many of them) in disconsolate and loathsome Prisons, and thereby made
useless nothings, to the World and themselves. Whereas, (if we cast our eyes
back, into the Reigns of the Saxon Kings, we shall find, that (those Martial,
Wise, and Wary Princes) King Ina, King Echelston, and after them, all the Saxon
Kings, (according to the ancient British Laws) were so very tender of the
Imprisonment of Men's persons, that they did not punish their very Bondmen with
it. And King Alfrede, displaced and Imprisoned one of his Judges, for daring so
to do, and (when the Government devolved, and came to the Normans) William the
Conqueror, William Rufus, and Henry the First, took such exact care to preserve
this liberty, un-infringed, that (in their Reigns) not any person was
Imprisoned, (although for mortal crime it self) unless he were first attainted,
upon the Verdict of twelve Men. And (additional to all this) many ages after
the Conquest (by the ancient Common Law) the Writ de Odio and Atia, was given
to a Man that was Imprisoned, although for an heinous Crime, (for the death, of
a Man) yet the Law (in that golden age) in favor, and out of an high esteem it
had of the Liberty of a Man, and that his Body should not be detained in
Prison, until the Justices in Air should come) he might sue out this Writ,
directed to the Sheriff; and although the offense (for which he was committed)
was not baylable by Law) yet the ancient Common Law, did so highly hate and
abominate, the long Imprisonments of Men, that it gave him this Writ for his
relief, which appears by Bracton, in his third Book, fol. 121. and by Fleta, in
his first Book, Chap. 14. And with whom also Glanvell agrees, in his forteenth
Book, Chap. 3. And the Myrror of Justice (a Book of great Antiquity and
Estimation in the Law, as well as the Books before cited) Chap. 5. Sect. 1.
complains of the Imprisonment of Men's Persons, as an abuse, although it had
been for breaking of a Goal. Now, for that it is clear as the light, how highly
valuable, and dearly precious, the Liberties of Men's persons were (by the
Common Law of the Land) it is (in most humble and submissive manner) proposed,
that (as well for the general good of all His Majesty's Subjects, as for
Prisoners) the ancient Common Law may be restored, and that great Liberty of
the Freedom of all the Subjects of England and Wales, from Imprisonment (for
Debt or Damages) may (by the Grace and Favor of His Majesty, and of both His
Honorable Houses of Parliament) be again retreived, and brought back with
Honor, to the people of this Kingdom; and that the ancient forms and ways for
recovery of Debts, may be (as for several hundred of years it was) by Original
Writ, distress infinite, Fieri facias, and Levari facias; and as (by the
ancient Common Law) it continued (with great and happy peace and tranquillity)
for such great length of time as aforesaid. And certainly great reason it is,
that it should be so, all Debts and Damages being to be properly had out of the
Estate of the Debtor, and not his Person. It is said, by the Lord Chief Justice
Coke, in his third Report, fol. 11, 12. that the Common Law has, and had its
foundation laid and built, upon the true grounds of Reason, and that being
granted, (as of necessity it must) then it will consequentially follow, that it
were an Act of as much Honor, as Justice, to restore to the people of England,
the possession of the Inheritance and birth rights, which they all have in, and
to the ancient Common Laws of England, and of which they have so long and
unhappily been diseised, who indeed have too long already groaned under the
very miserable alteration thereof, by such the Imprisonment of Men as
aforesaid. And indeed, the very large, vast, and sufficiently known great
Prudence, truly wise Apprehensions, and Princely compassion of His late
Majesty, (of ever precious and glorious memory (now in Heaven) toward his
Subjects) were such, that it is eminently known, (that had not the unhappy
eruption, of the late Civil War, prevented it) the bent of his full resolutions
were, to have intimated his recommends to the Parliament, for the discharge of
all Prisoners for Debt or Damages, and the absolute taking away of all Arrests
and Outlawries, upon some reasonable compensation, to be made for the
emoluments that thereby came to his Crown, which was then hoped would have gone
under no great difficulty, to have been done, and is now (with as great
facility and ease, (as is conceived) by the Wisdom of the Parliament) to
receive a full and perfect consummation; and as his said late Royal Majesty was
pleased to say, (in the Court of the Highest Injustice, the Christian World
ever knew) that he thought he understood the Laws of England, as well as any
Gentleman of his Kingdom, (whose profession it was not) so (by this
intentional Act of his (had it succeeded) he had made it fully and clearly
evident, to all his people, that (by restoring the ancient known Law of the
Land herein) to its pristine and original just strength, and virtue) he would
thereby, as well have compelled their ignorance to understand, with how great
and profound knowledge, (in the very ancient Laws of the Kingdom, as the more
modern) he was largely and plentifully furnished, as by his un-enthrawling, new
and fresh enfranchising his Subjects herein, and by calling them, (and his and
their ancient Laws) out of the dark Caves and Dens of Prisons, (where for so
great length of time) they had lain Sepulchred together. And truly it is a
Solicisme, that may be justly thought on, that the Law which is so kind and
merciful to my Horse, as to take provisional care for a Replevin to enlarge
him,, and yet that I my self, should be retained indurance, under a perishing
condition, nay and without as much as any difinitive time (by Law) set for my
releasement, and for years, that may tell steps, to the last stand of my life,
there to melt and burn out my time, by a kind of every days death. And I can
(in no sort) doubt, but that Wise and Prudent Men, will seriously, and
deliberately perpend and consider (as elsewhere I have said) that this is the
case of almost every English Subject, for (let him be crammed with never so
much Wealth, (yet he knows not, (nor is it possible for him to know or foresee)
how soon he may be in a Prison himself, or if not himself, yet his Widow,
Child, or Children, near and dear Relations, Kindred, or intimate Friends. And
notwithstanding all this, if it shall be thought too great a boon, that all
Imprisonments for Debt or Damages, should (now and for ever hereafter) be taken
totally away, and the blessed ancient Laws of England, be thereby fully and
happily restored, to all persons in general (as is hoped and desired it may be)
it is then humbly recommended, to a serious and deliberate digestion, that
(taking into due consideration, the late direful miseries, which (like raging
and tempestuous Waves) have (one in the neck of another) rolled in upon those
that are now in Prison, and their Estates, by the several great and calamitous
Judgments of the late Civil War, Plague, Fire, and Dutch War) if it may not
come within a just and conscientious commiseration, to free and discharge all
such as are now Prisoners, in the several Prisons of England and Wales, from
their Imprisonments; and yet notwithstanding (such their discharge) that their
Creditors may have their just and ancient Remedies, such as by the ancient
Common Law, they might have had, for recovery of their Debts, out of such
Prisoners real and personal Estates, by such way and means, as the same ancient
Law prescribes, and as (herein before is set forth and declared; which most
modest Proposal, being only on the behalf of such, as are now Prisoners; and
being not proposed as a standing Act to continue, and discharge Prisoners in
future) is hoped, will find a gentle and smooth passage, to its desired end.
But if this must be also thought an Act of Grace, too large, yet certainly it
cannot be apprehended, less than a perfectly honest, and truly conscientious
offer (in lieu of their being dischardged from their Imprisonments) to be ready
and willing to part with all their Estates, both real and personal, for the
satisfaction of all their Creditors; and not only to submit themselves, but any
Witness or Witnesses, to be examined upon Oath, for the true discovery thereof,
and that (for such only) as are now Prisoners, and no other as aforesaid, which
if it be not) an equal, purely fair, and just proposal) I leave any impartial
and unbyast person to judge. For the perfecting of which, a Bill, preparatory
to an Act of Parliament is drawn, and humbly desired (by many thousands of
Prisoners that the same may pass, or some such other, (for their Relief and
Releasement, as to the Wisdom of the Parliament, shall seem more apposite and
convenient. And if the meanest sort of Prisoners, (that could not pay any thing
at all, toward the satisfaction of their Creditors (did by Virtue of the ten
pound Act) come so far under the just and merciful consideration of the
Parliament, as to be freed from their Imprisonments) certainly such Prisoners
as can pay some part of their Debts, and are ready and willing, to part with
all their Estates, both Real and Personal, that so a proportionable Divident
may be made thereof, to and amongst all their Creditors) do hope they may (with
much more reason) have leave to think themselves, as well obliged to believe,
as to desire) that they may (by His Majesty, and both His Houses of Parliament)
be freed from their Imprisonments, before the remainder of their Estates be
totally swallowed up, by the Fees, and other the inevitable great charges of a
Prison, and they thereby be put into the same low and deplorable condition,
together with those who took the benefit of that Act; by means of which, their
Creditors will inevitably loose their Debts, and such Prisoner, and his, be
reduced to extremity of want, and the Kingdom unfurnisht and deprived of very
many persons, whose endowments are sublimed, and heightened with so great
natural and acquired parts, as may speak them as advantageously useful to their
King and Country, as any other of their fellow Subjects, (very few excepted)
many of whose liberal and ingenious useful Excellencies, deserve much rather to
be cherisht and encouraged, then deprest; And shall our great and gracious
Monarch, and his greatest Council, think it too much, that (after all the
before mentioned Judgments, which have been so iterated, and repeated upon such
Prisoners, and which have merged and sunk their (sometime flourishing Estates)
that they should (now at length) be discharged from their Imprisonments, but
that they should for ever remain so buried, without a resurrection, from the
Dead, Death, and Grave, they are in, and under, whilst their deprest parts, are
even starved and stifled in a Prison, and yet (in the condition they now stand)
are left fit only to have the remainder of what is theirs, plucked and rent from
them, and not in the least capacity to help themselves nor their Creditors? and
all this, not only to satisfy the appetites of their obstinately resolved
Creditors, whose Money such Prisoners (out of pure necessity) are compelled to
spend, but to suffer under, be wyre-drawn, squeezed, and run down, by the
subtilties and variety of Frauds, even of such who have been intimately, and
beneficially acquainted with their often repeated kindnesses, in the light and
shine of their prosperities; and truly, since thousands of known great, and
grievous Offenders, (by His Majesty, and His happy Parliaments Mercy, made a
large and plentiful Meal, on the Viands of His and their gracious compassion,
whose Carcases otherwise, must (by the known rule of Justice) have fed the Fire
and Birds of prey) it goes under, not only more than probable hopes, but a
becoming confidence, That all His Majesty's good Subjects, that are now
indurance, in any Prison of England and Wales, for Debt or Damages, or any
thing thereunto relating, or at least all such as will, so as aforesaid, part
with all their Estates, both real and personal, for the satisfaction of their
Creditors, and such as are so in Prison, and have not Estates of the value of
ten pounds) may be participants of His Majesty's, and His Parliaments gracious
and serene compassion, according to the said Bill so drawn as aforesaid, for
that purpose, or by such other Act, Way, or Means, as may best suit and agree
with their great Wisdoms, which is, by very great numbers of Prisoners for
Debt (now fastened (...) to the several Prisons of England, in diminution,
lessening, and even degrading of the Ancient, Famous, and Renowned Laws
thereof) with all Humility, Duty, and Obedience, not only Recommended, and
Presented, but (at their feet) most humbly submitted, prostrated, and laid down,

And with the same most Humble and Dutiful Obedience, of a truly Loyal and
Faithful Subject WILLIAM COLE.

A SVMMARY or COMPENDIVM OF The ACT beforementioned, FOR PRISONERS That will
part with all their ESTATES, both Real and Personal, for the Satisfaction of
their CREDITORS.
THat it may be lawful for the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper for the time
being (upon Request to him by such Prisoner to be made) to issue out
Commissions, to be directed to such Persons as shall be thought fit,
authorizing them, (or any three or more of them) in their respective Counties)
to Summon and send for the Creditors of all such person and persons, as now is,
or are in prison (or at any time during this Session of Parliament) shall be in
Prison in any of the Prisons in England, and Wales, upon any Action or Actions
upon Measne Process for Debt, Accounts or Trespass; which actions by a
prosecution of Law, may come to be Judgments for Debts or Damages; or that
have Judgments entered of Record against them, or charged in Execution, or
imprisoned upon Attachments for Debts or upon Outlawries before or after
Judgments for Debt; or upon Statutes, Recognizances, Extents, or upon any
other Action, or any other Process whatsoever, issuing out of any Court of Law,
or Equity, for the cause of Debt or Damages or Costs, or for Money ordered or
decreed in any Court of Equity, at the suit of any person or persons
whatsoever, or upon or by reason of any Process issuing upon them, any or
either of them respectively; as well those persons, for whose Debt and Debts
the said Prisoner and Prisoners is, and are imprisoned; as all other person and
persons, to whom such Prisoner and Prisoners is, or stands indebted: As also to
send for such Prisoner or Prisoners, by Summons, to come before them; which
Summons the Prison-Keepers are to obey, upon the penalty of 100 l. And (at the
same time) to certify the Cause and Causes of such Prisoners imprisonment. And
the Commissioners (after the examination of such Prisoner) are to Remand him to
Prison.

That if such Creditor be dead, an Infant, or of Non-sane memory, then to
summon the Executors, Administrators, or Guardian of such Creditor; Requiring
also such Prison-keeper, to bring such Prisoner to such place as the
Commissioners shall appoint, where the said Commissioners shall Treat with such
Creditors, touching their Debts; that so a proportionable distribution may be
to them made, of the said Prisoners Estate (the Apparel of such Prisoner, and
also necessaries for his Trade excepted out of his personal Estate.)

That if any of the Creditors shall refuse or neglect to come before the said
Commissioners (or some for them,) having had twenty days notice inclusive and
Oath made thereof) the said Commissioners to be empowered to finish such
alottment, such Creditors absence notwithstanding.

That the said Commissioners be empowered to examine the said Prisoner upon
Oath, for the discovery of his Estate, and to send for such Books, Evidences,
and Writings, as they think fit, and to examine Witnesses upon Oath, to the
end, that they may make a true discovery of the Prisoners Estate, which is so
to be done, within six Calendar months after their first sitting, or sooner if
it may be.

That the said Commissioners be authorized to apportion all such Estate amongst
the Creditors proportionably, by sale of the Estate, or otherwise; which sale,
or other disposition shall be good against the Prisoner's Heirs, Executors,
etc. and to be divided within three months after the end of the said six months
(or sooner if it can be done) And that the said Commissioners be empowered to
assign the Debts and Estate of such Prisoner to such Persons as they shall
think fit, for the use of the Creditors, a twentieth part (so to be sold) to be
allotted to the Prisoner, for present maintenance, and for some small
foundation for future living.

That Mortgages shall be first paid by the Estate so Mortgaged.

That (after the apportioning of such Prisoners Estate) the Prisoner shall be
discharged; and that such part of the Prisoners Estate as shall be allotted to
the Creditors shall be in full satisfaction of such Creditors Debt.

That such Creditors as shall not appear before the said Commissioners (or some
for them) before such Divident be made (having had such notice as aforesaid,
and Oath made thereof) shall be utterly, and for ever, precluded from the
recovering of his said Debt, against the said Prisoner his Executors, etc.

That a Writing under the Hands and Seals of the Commissioners (expressing the
discharge of such Prisoner) shall be a full Discharge to him against his
Creditors, and another Writing, (signifying such Prisoners Discharge) directed
to the Prison-keeper shall be a sufficient Warrant for him to discharge such
Prisoner; which he is to do within two days, without payment of any Fees; but
the Prisoners Chamber-rent is to be paid out of the Estate so to be sold, or so
much thereof as the Commissioners shall think fit.

That if any Action of Escape shall be brought against the Prison-keeper (for
the discharging of such Prisoner) he may plead the general Issue, and give this
Act in Evidence; and if the Plaintiff shall be Non-suted, or a Verdict shall
pass against him, he is to pay the Defendant double Costs to be Taxed by the
Court, where the Action shall be brought.

That for the expediting the sale, and other the disposition of such Prisoners
Estate (in order to the satisfaction of his Creditors) without whose personal
aid and assistance, it will be of far the greater difficulty for the
Commissioners to expedite and execute the same) it be lawful for the Lord
Chancellor or Lord Keeper (for the time being) from, and immediately after the
remanding of such Prisoner to Prison by the said Commissioners) to grant unto
such Prisoner a Habeas Corpus, or Habeas Corpus's for such length of time, as
he shall think necessary and conveneint in that behalf; to the end that such
Prisoner may be in a condition personally to attend the said Commissioners; and
to be otherwise instrumental in giving of a speedy dispatch to the Sale, and
Disposal of his Estate, as aforesaid.

Provided, That if any Prisoner shall set forth to the said Commissioners, or
to any three, or more of them, as aforesaid, the Debt of any Creditor of his
that is beyond the Seas, to be less than in truth the same is, such Prisoner
shall thereby forfeit and lose the benefit of this Act, (as to such Creditor,
and every such Creditor, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, making his
Debt to appear to be more than such Prisoner shall have declared the same to be
before the said Commissioners, such Creditor is hereby empowered and authorized
again to proceed and take the said Prisoner in Execution, and thereupon to
imprison him, or otherwise to prosecute him at Law, or in Equity, as to him
shall seem best; or to indict and prosecute him at the Common Law, for breach
of his Oath, or upon any Statute or Statutes made against Perjury: This Act, or
any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Objection.
To these Heads of a Bill, perhaps there may be several Objections: As first,
That (in what is here proposed for a Bill) there is no provision, that (in case
the Prisoner happen to have an Estate after he is discharged) that such Estate
shall be Subject to his Debts.

Answer.
To which is answered, That the Prisoner (parting with all his Estate
voluntarily, it will seem very severe, that he should not be capable of a
Legacy, or other Gift from any Friend and Relation, but that it must (of
necessity be (upon the matter) devised or given to his Cerditors. Or that he,
(who by remaining in prison) could never (in the least) have advantaged his
Creditors, yet (being discharged and at liberty) all his labors should be
exposed to his Creditors mercy.

Objection.
Secondly, (And which is a very great objection) That by the heads of this Bill
(although Mortgages are to be paid first) yet Judgments, Statutes, and
Recognizances are thereby but in the same degree with Bonds, and to be paid
equally, although the Law gives them a priority in payment.

Answer.
To which it is answered, That (in this case) if a Judgment, Statute or
Recognizance, should (according to the rule of Law) be paid before Bonds, then
(as this Case is) there cannot be (as it may fall out) a proportionable
Divident of the Estate, nor indeed any Divident at all; for one Judgment,
Statute or Recognizance may swallow up the whole Estate; besides, it is plain,
that (by the Statute made against Bankrupts) Judgments, Statutes, and
Recognizances, are equally, and proportionably paid with Bonds, and no
otherwise; so that (in that case) they are ( in pari gradu) with Bonds and
other Debts; and may much rather so be in this case than in the Statute of
Banckrupt, especially considering, that this is not a standing Act, but for the
discharge of such only, as are now in Prison, begotten out of the several fatal
accidents which have happened in this age more than in any former; by means
whereof, many thousands (more then formerly) are now clasped, and shut up in
prisons.

Objection.
Thirdly* That the Proviso, that the Prisoners shall have a twentieth part of
his Estate, for his present maintenance, may seem unequal, in regard (as has
been urged) That then a Tradesman (or any other in credit) may get twenty
thousand pounds into his hands, and then go into a Prison, and be sure of One
thousand pounds. Next, That (in regard his whole Estate will not pay his debts,
without abatement) it is not reasonable that he should have a twentieth part.

Answer.
To which it is answered, That if there shall be any one such person as would,
or could designedly, (to gain 1000 l.) get twenty thousand pounds into his
hands, the which (upon a due and deliberate consideration of the thing) is not
easily to be imagined, ever will or can be done) yet the villainy of one Man (it
is hoped) shall not be put into the Balance, with the good of many hundreds.
Next (it is true) it may seem hard that the Prisoner should have any thing out
of his Estate, when all will not pay his debts; and it is equally as hard, and
harder, that (after he has spontaneousl^ ^evested himself of hi^ Estate) he
should be turned naked into the World, without any thing at all to give him a
present support, or some small foundation for future living.

That if due consideration be had of this intended Act or (if not of this) if
care be taken for passing such another Act, as may effectually operate to the
same purpose, it will be found to be a great good, and weighty work, although
some persons (of whom better things might justly be expected) little regard or
consider it; for it is of such consequence, to relieve the oppressed, to study,
and effect such works of Piety and Charity, as concerns all the Prisoners and
Prisons of England and Wales, that it will (as is hoped) deserve some of the
oleum and opera, of every good Patriot that loves his Country to whom it is
seriously recommended, by this (or some such other Act) to perfect a work
(although with difficulty and pains) so incumbent upon all person of spacious
and public Souls; especialy weighing, that not any former age has left a
trace, or memory, suitable to the great variety of sufferings as in this.

FINIS.

