Novum Lumen Chirurgicum Vindicatum: OR, THE NEW LIGHT OF SURGERY VINDICATED

From the many unjust Aspersions of some unknown Calumniators.

With the Addition of some few Experiments made this Winter in England.

By Jo. Colbatch, Physician.

LONDON: Printed for D. Brown, at the Bible and Swan without Temple Bar. 1695.

BOOKS Sold by Daniel Brown, at the Bible and Swan without Temple Bar.
NOvae Hypotheseos ad explicanda Febrium intermittentium symptomata and typos
excogitatae Hypotyposis. Una cum Aetiologio Remediorum; speciatim vero de
Curatione per Corticem peruvianum. Accessit dissertatiuncula de intestinorum
motu Peristaltico, a Guilielmo Cole. M. D.

A Physico-Medical Essay; concerncerning the late frequency of Apoplexies, with
a general Method of their Prevention and Cure, in a Letter to a Physician, by
W. Cole, M. D.

Epistolae Medicinales variis Occasionibus conscriptae. Autore Richardo Carr,
M.D. and Col. Reg. Med. Land. Socio.

TO THE HONORABLE William Blathwayt, Esquire Secretary of War.
SIR,
MY Adversaries having Dedicated a Piece to You, wherein they desire Your
Patronage of Truth, which they pretend to be on their Sides; I also being
sufficiently satisfied, that the greatness of Your Soul is such, as not to be
amused with Specious Pretensions; have presumed, also, to Dedicate this Piece
to You; which although I have not had time to put into any order, yet it contains
most indisputable Truths.

I beg not any other Favor of You, than if Truth inclines to my side, that You
will afford me Your Patronage, which my own Experience is sufficient to assure
me, that my Request will be as readily granted as desired. I am,

SIR, Your most Obliged and Obedient Servant to Command, JO. COLBATCH.

TO THE READER.
ON the 18th day of this Instant April, there came to my Hands a little Libel
set forth by my old Friends the Surgeons. At first I thought it would not be
worth my spending any time in Writing an Answer to it; Till at last I
concluded, That if I should be altogether Silent till the end of the Campaign,
they might in my Absence triumph amongst themselves, and make the Vnthinking
Part of the World believe, that I had given up my Cause, and yielded all for
lost. To prevent which, I have (in the midst of my Multiplicity of Business)
spent a few Hours in composing the following little Tract. The which I must own
to be full of many Imperfections, yet contains nothing but truth; and therefore
for Truths sake, I doubt not but the Candid Reader will pass over those other
Failings that he may meet with.

The Charges laid against me are very numerous; and were they but as true, I
must of consequence be the most vile Creature alive. But I having been used so
much to the Scurrility of some of that Fraternity, there is nothing but I can
bear from them; and indeed I should be to blame if I should not be content to
give Losers leave to speak. And so much the more, by reason that their Diana (I
mean their ill Practices being detected, the World will be so wary, as to have
a Care of them) is falling into Disgrace; to keep up whose Reputation, (tho to
the great Prejudice of Mankind) they will not fail to make their utmost
Efforts. A drowning Man will lay hold on every Twig. To be sure, if making a
Noise, and using ill Language, will do any thing toward the Preservation of
their sinking Credit, that shall not be wanting.

As I have before said, so I repeat it again, That both the City of London, and
the English Army, afford a great many Surgeons, who are Men of extraordinary
Worth, from whom I have received many Civilities; and instead of being
discouraged by them, I have been to the utmost of their Powers assisted, in
carrying on my Designs.

I have had an occasion once to mention Mr. Bernard's Name, the which I could
not possibly avoid. But I am so far from charging him with any thing that is
unfair, that there is nothing more. For I cannot hear of any one who has at
any time heard him say, That the Man at the Hospital bled again after my Powder
was applied, and had stopped the Flux of Blood. Nay, I have been informed, That
he was altogether against the Publishing of that Scandalous Libel, telling the
Authors, that it was in vain to write against Matter of Fact. Whether this
Relation be true, or not, I am not certain. But this I am sure of, that he is a
very great Man, and the Honor of his Profession. And I verily believe he
scorns a mean Action. I heartily wish I could say the same of Mr. Cooper, and
others, from whom I never deserved ill.

There was scarce an Experiment I made last Year in Flanders, but there were
several Officers Spectators; so that if I had not performed what I pretended
to, I must quickly have been detected. But I thank God my Success was such,
that I have gained the good Will of most Officers of the Army, whose Words will
(I suppose) go further, with all considerate Men, than the Scandalous,
Malicious Reports of some interested Surgeons.

From my House in St. Ann' s Court in Dean-street, April 22. 95.
Novum Lumen Chyrurgicum Vindicat: OR, A VINDICATION of the New Light of
Chyrurgery.
THERE having lately stolen out into the World, a Scandalous Libel, Entitled,
Novum Lumen Chyrurgicum Extinctum, wherein the Author, or rather Authors, (I
being very well assured, that it was composed by a Club or Cabal of Surgeons)
pretend to ridicule notorious and known Matter of Fact. He or they pretend to
detect Imposture, and to vindicate the Cause of Truth. If so, I leave it to the
impartial Judgment of any rational sober Person, whether the Author or Authors
had any reason to have concealed their Names. I confess there are the two
initial Letters of a Person's Name prefixed to the Title Page, which if they
answer to the Person, whom I have some reason to suspect, if his Name had been
written at length, his Life and Conversation is so very Scandalous (he having,
last Year, been cashiered the Regiment to which he belonged, for his Scandalous
way of Living, as I have been credibly informed by some of the Officers of the
said Regiment) that it had been sufficient to have deterred any one from
reading any more than the Title Page alone.

The Authors have taken care to send this Libel into the World at a time, when
I am full of business in making my Preparation for Flanders, and just upon the
point of going away, and so not capable of writing so full an Answer as
otherwise I would have done, and which may be expected at the end of the
Campaign; and also when the Officers of the Army, who would have been my
Compurgators, are gone out of Town.

Mr. Hall, Surgeon to the Honorable Colonel Fitz-Patrick's Regiment of
Fusileers, who had a considerable Hand in writing this Piece, brings in the
Major, and two Captains of the said Regiment to justify a most notorious
untruth. The which, when it shall come to their knowledge, I suppose, he will
have sufficient cause to repent of.

As for what is said by them concerning the Dogs wounded before the Right
Honorable the Lord Cuts, and the Soldier that was wounded upon Tower Hill; if
I had time, I could sufficiently make appear the Truth of every tittle I have
said in my Preface upon that Subject; and whoever will give himself the trouble
of going to Mr. Sterkey, Surgeon, upon Little Tower Hill, he will satisfy them
that the man's case was most deplorable, and quite contrary to what they relate.

They say I have deserved ill of most Surgeons; which is no otherwise true than
if to be Civil, and show Respect in the highest degree, be to deserve ill. For
I defy any one of that Fraternity to say, that I ever once denied them to show
what Experiments they desired, and to let them see my Patients dressed upon all
occasions. And since Mr. Cooper is by them trumped up in relation to the
Experiments made at St. Batholomew's Hospital; I shall represent that whole
Business to the World, and then leave it to any impartial Person to judge,
whether I was fairly dealt with, or not.

Having made some Experiments before Mr. Cooper, etc. upon a Dog first of all,
making an Aperture in his Abdomen, then taking out one of his Small Guts, and
wounding it, of which he was in three or four days well. Then we cut off one of
his hinder Legs as close as possibly we could to his Body, and immediately
stopped the Flux of Blood, without any hard Bandage, to the great satisfaction
of all the Bystanders. I was then desired by one of the Master-Surgeons of the
Hospital, to try my Medicines upon two Persons, who were to have the one a Leg,
and the other an Arm cut off, which I readily granted. The Day before these
Operations were to be performed, I received a Letter from the said
Master-Surgeon of the Hospital, requesting me that I would come alone, and
bring no one with me, that a Crowd might be avoided, and his Brethren not
displeased (which I leave to any ones Judgment, whether it did not look as if
there were some design, and as the Sequel will demonstrate). Accordingly I went
to the Hospital, with no one with me but my Boy, of about Fourteen years of
Age. But (to my great surprise) when I came there, I found at least Twenty of
their Fraternity. However knowing the justice of my Cause, I staid to perform
the Business I came about. I confess my Powder was two or three times applied,
before the Fluxes of Blood were stopped, which was occasioned only by the
irregular Application of it by one of themselves. But after the Fluxes were
stopped, there was no other than mere retentive Bandage used, which is more
than what any of them can pretend to, with any of their most celebrated
Medicines* After our Patients were dressed up, and laid to Bed, we went all to
the Tavern, where every one seemed to express very great satisfaction in what
had been done. On the Morrow Morning, being at Tom's Coffee-house in St.
Martins Lane, with one Mr. Clarke, I met with a certain Physician, who told me
that all was undone, for that one of the People had Bled afresh, and if Mr.
Bernard had not been at hand to have taken off mine, and applied his own
Medicines, he had Bled to Death. The truth of which I had no reason to believe,
having sent one the Night before, and another that Morning, to make strict
enquiry how they both did, who brought me word, that they were very well, but
mentioned nothing of any such Accident. However, that I might be satisfied
exactly in the truth of the said Report, I immediately went to the said
Hospital, taking Mr. Clarke with me. In our way we met Mr. Blackstone,
Apothecary to the Hospital, who told me the same Story the Physician had done.
When we came to the Bed where the Man lay, whom they said had Bled again;
before I was capable of speaking to him, he rose up in his Bed, and prayed for
me most heartily, telling me that he believed that no Man whoever had an Arm
cut off, was so well as he was; upon which I asked him, whether he had not Bled
again after I left him: He reaching out his Stump to me, did solemnly protest,
that those very dressings were the same that had been put on in my presence,
and that they had never in the least been touched from the time I saw him. I
likewise asked him how he had been for Pain: To which he replied, That for four
or five Hours after the Amputation, he had some Pains occasioned by an
Inflammation just above the Stump; but that he had slept very well all Night,
and was then perfectly at ease. We afterward went up to the Boy, who told us
the same that the Man had done, saying, he was perfectly at ease, and had slept
well all Night. Some other Surgeons having said the same thing in relation to
the Man's bleeding; I desired Mr. Colbatch, a Stationer in Cornhill; and Mr.
Fisher, a Surgeon in Aldersgate Street, to go to the Hospital, and they being
Strangers, the People would relate the whole truth to them; but instead of
either of them owning that they had Bled, they declared they were infinitely
obliged to the Person who made the new Experiment upon them, for that they were
well to admiration. These Operations were performed (to the best of my
remembrance) on a Tuesday; and the Friday following I was desired to be again
at the same place to perform the same Operation upon another Person; but
finding this ill usuage, I sent Mr. Baker, a Surgeon in Suffolk-street, who was
wont to make my Experiments for me, with some other Friends, to be as
Witnesses, and desired by Letter, that Mr. Baker might make the Application of
my Medicines; but there being so many (about six Persons) witnesses of what
might be done, they refused to let Mr. Baker do it, and deferred it to another
time. I likewise in the same Letter, requested that I might have notice given
me, when the two before mentioned should be opened, that I might be present, to
see how the Stumps looked, which every body will own, was but fair: But to be
short, I was put off from time to time, and never was admitted to see them at
all. Now, if what I have said upon this Subject, does not argue a Combination,
I do not know what can; and for the truth of all, when I have leisure, I will
have it sufficiently attested before a Magistrate; nay, the Man and Boy (tho
reported to be Dead) will both assist me in the confirming the truth of this my
Relation.

As for the Case of poor Capt. Rogers, I know nothing of it, but was told by
one Capt. (...), of Sir James Lesley's Regiment, at Mr. Man's Coffee-house,
before Mr. Baker and others, that Capt. Rogers being opened after he was Dead,
his Heart was found to be pierced. Whether he saw this himself, or had it
related to him by some body else, I am not certain; but he declared that to his
certain knowledge my 7th Experiment was true to a tittle, it being made upon a
Soldier of the Regiment to which he belonged.

As for Mr. Dun, I know nothing more than this, That he being in a Public
Coffee-house, where there were at least twelve People, he complained of two or
three Wounds he had received by a Cock's Spur, and that there had been
something applied by another Surgeon; his Hand was much swelled and inflamed,
and he in great Pain, and in great fear of some further ill Consequence* so he
requested me to apply my external Medicine, which I did, and gave him some of
the Tincture in Ale; and in about a quarter of an hours time he declared before
all the Company, that his Pain was altogether abated. On the Morrow he came to
me again, and desired me to make a fresh dressing, which I finding his Hand in
a good way of being well, refused; telling him that one dressing was
sufficient. Now he being unaccustomed to such sorts of Methods, thought I had
slighted him, so he applied himself to Mr. Johnson; who every body will allow
advised him to take off my dressings, and make use of his; so what became of
him after, I know not.

My time will not permit me at present, to make Remarks upon the whole, which
however I shall take a convenient time for. And the World may expect a full
Vindication of my self. For it is Truth and its Cause I am contending for, and
therefore am not ashamed to fix my Name to it. I confess (using the Words of
the Famous Dr. Lock) the Imputation of Novelty is a terrible Charge amongst
those who judge of men's Heads, as they do of their Perukes, by the fashion; and
can allow none to be right but the received Doctrines. Truth scarce ever
carried it by Vote any where at its first appearance: New Opinions are always
suspected, and usually opposed, without any other reason, but because they are
not already common. But Truth, like Gold, is not the less so, for being newly
brought out of the Mine. It Is Trial and Examination must give it price, and not
any Antic Fashion: And tho it be not yet Current by the Public Stamp, yet it
may for all that be as old as Nature, and is certainly not the less Genuine.

I did expect my Hypothesis would have been overthrown, and a better erected in
its place, for which I should have thanked them; but instead of that, I find
they have neither overthrown mine, nor erected a new one of their own, but have
stood at a distance and barked at me, showed their Teeth, but either durst not
or could not come near enough to bite me in that place where I lay open to
them. For in laying down an Hypothesis, it is as in building a House, no Man
can be certain, that he which comes after, cannot erect a better Fabric.

But for my Experiments, I relating them as Matter of Fact, am obliged to stand
by them, and I defy all their united Force in the least to overthrow.

To the number of my Experiments, I shall add two or three made in England; the
one made whilst I was in Flanders, and the other since I came home.

Experiment I.
A Servant belonging to one Mr. Norris, a Member of Parliament for Leverpole in
Lanchashire, driving a Cart, by Accident fell down before the Wheel; the Wheel
running over his Head, divided the Scalp from off all the hinder part of it,
and in the Words of the said Mr. Norris, the Scull was altogether as bare as if
scraped with a Razor, for the breadth of three or four Inches; his Lower Lip
(by a Splinter, or some such thing) was divided the length of an Inch or more.
The Man was presently brought into the said Mr. Norris's House, who says, That
he was the most miserable Spectacle that he ever saw; but having some of my
Medicines by him, he gave a Maidservant of his Directions how to use it. She
made a Solution of my Powder in Water, and with the said Solution she washed
the Scalp and Scull, to free them from Dirt and Sand that were lodged upon
them. Then she laid the divided Scalp upon its proper place, and bound it up.
Then she stitched up the Lip, and made an Application. Mr. Norris has several
times publicly declared in the Grecian Coffee-house, in Essex-Buildings that
in four days time, both the Man's Head and Lip were perfectly well. He has
likewise declared, That the Flux of Blood was so great, that he believes he
could not have lived, whilst they had sent three Miles for a Surgeon, unless my
Medicines had been applied. He says, That the great Curiosity of the thing was
such, and the Cure so speedy, that it drew a great many Surgeons of the Country
thereabouts to see the Man, and to be informed exactly of the Wounds, and the
manner of Cure, who all declared, That they did not believe there had been any
such thing in nature; and that if they had been sent for, they could not have
told what to have done. If Mr. Norris be gone out of Town, there are a great
many Gentlemen who frequent the Grecian Coffee-house, that have heard him
relate this thing. I must beg Mr. Norris's pardon for taking the liberty to use
his Name without first asking his leave; but since I have been obliged to it,
to vindicate truth, I hope it will be the more easily excused.

Experiment II.
Performed by Mr. Baker, by my Order, which compared with the 13 th Experiment
in my Novum Lumen, is (I suppose) a Confirmation of the truth of what I there
say.

ON the 8th of March, in the Evening, I was sent for to one Roger (...), a
Corporal, in the Company of Capt. Armstrong, in the Regiment of Coll. Tiffany.
There was one Mr. M. a Surgeon in Bloomsbury with him at the same time, who had
dressed him from the first time the Wound had been received, which was about
eleven Days before, it being given with a large Bagonetsword. It entered about
the middle of the Leg, between both Focils, glancing upon the Tibia, and so
passed on, that it went almost through: For the Point of the Sword made a sort
of a Tumor in the Calf; it wounded the Artery, but the Artery lying very deep,
the Flux of Blood was not very violent. He dressed it that time, and so on for
about five Days, it bleeding now and then, but not much, in which time the
Wound was much enlarged, for at first he could not have put in above four or
five Dosils; but then twenty perhaps or more, as both Mr. Armstrong, and all
the Family, told me. On the fifth Day it bled with that impetuosity, that it
frighted the whole Family: He stopped, or rather pent in the Blood with good
store of Dosils and tite Bandage. It continued bleeding thus at times for many
Days; in which time (as the Family told me) he lost about twelve or fourteen
Pints of Blood, even so much that he looked like a perfect Cadaver; his Hands
were shrivelled, and as yellow as a Hawk's foot. But on the eleventh Day after
the Wound was inflicted, he Bled again with the greatest Violence imaginable,
which was the reason I was sent for. When I came, Mr. M. asked me, whether or
no I thought I could stop the Flux of Blood. I answered, I hope I can: For he
had declared before, that nothing but Amputation could save his Life. He then
opened the Wound, pulling out most of his Dressings, the Wound was so big, that
four or five Fingers would easily have gone into it. The Dressings were not all
pulled away with Mr. M's Forceps, but the Blood rose in a most violent manner.
I can liken it to nothing, but to a hole dug in the Ground (of about two foot
Diameter) over a Water-pipe, in which, if you bore a large Hole, after the
Ditch is full to the Brims, and runs over, the Water boils up in the middle
somewhat high; just so did the Blood. I put my Forefinger into the Wound,
could feel both Bones very plain (but not the bottom of the Wound) with the
violent pulsation of the Artery; I really believe that the Artery was almost,
if not totally divided. The Leg was swelled to the highest degree, the Blood
being extravasated, and filling up the Interstices of the Muscles, (having been
so often, both by too tite Bandage and Dossels pent in, as it were, by main
force, till the greater force overpowred, and made its way through all;) so
that besides the often Bleeding, nothing less than a Mortification was to be
feared But having made my Application ready, I injected some of the Solution of
the Powder into the Wound, but it was washed away before by the impetuosity of
the Flux, before it could arrive to the wounded Artery: However, with soft
Pledgets dipped in the Solution, I dressed it up for that time, and the Flux seemed
to be stopped; yet it bled somewhat that Night, but with no great violence, and
soon stopped again. It did so twice or thrice, so that I was satisfied, that
unless I could empty the Wound of the Blood, and come to apply the Medicine to
the Artery it self (the case being quite different from what it had been, had
the Wound been a fresh one, the Parts being all perfectly Rotten, as will
appear by the Sequel) I had little hopes of staying the Flux; upon which I made
use of the Turnicat, compressing the Vessels in the Ham, which retarded the
Impetuous course of the Blood; so I emptied the Wound as much as I could, and
applied the Solution with a Pledget to the very Artery, and filling the rest
with soft Tow, using no Compress, only retentive Bandage. He had little or no
Pain from the first time these Medicines were applied, except a little Tensive,
Pulsifick Pain, before the Flux was totally stopped. After this Application,
not one drop of Blood appeared, nor did it ever Bleed afterward, tho I dressed
him not in five or six Days; but in the mean time the Swelling abated, and from
the Wound was discharged a quantity of coagulated, corrupted Blood. I continued
dressing him with the same Solution only, four or five times, in which time he
was removed from his Master's House in Southampton-street, Bloomsbury, to a
Nurses near So-ho-Square. The day after his removal I dressed him, and with the
Cloth that was applied over the Wound, there came away a large Core, made up
of the contused, rotten Fibers, coagulated Blood, and some Dosils which Mr. M.
had left in the Wound. This was about three Weeks after I had first seen it.
The Wound within looked very ruddy and well, but the side of the Tibia, or thin
Bone (by which the Musculus Anticus lies) was bare, without any Periostium,
about two Fingers in length. There was an extraordinary Cavity after the Core
was discharged, and much Matter of a very ill smell, which obliged me to dress
him oftener than usual; this Matter was the extravasated Blood, pent up long
between the Muscles, that in this time had formed for it self some Chambers.
Yet in three days the whole contained Matter was all come away, the Leg fallen
to its wonted Bigness, so that you might press every Part without any pain; all
this while I never put in a Pledget, only squeezed in the Solution, and spread
the Pledget over, covering it with a clean Linen Rag, and the former retentive
Bandage only. All this while I never used any thing else but the said Solution
to the discovered Bone, which were it a Caustic, what pretty work would it
have made? Afterward I dressed him not above once in five, six, or seven days;
he daily recovered Strength, so that he rose, and by degrees walked with a
Stick. The great Cavity very fast, full of Flesh, the Bone hid, and by the 20th
of April he was quite well. But this is very remarkable, that in the beginning
of the Cure by me, he took every day the Tincture in White Wind or Claret, a
Quart or Three Pints a day, yet never was in the least Feverrish, although at the
same time he never had a Stool for eleven Days, but always slept well, and
gained Strength.

I mention nothing here to derogate from the former Surgeon, whom every one
will allow deserves well in sending for Assistance, when he was put to a
Nonplus.

ROBERT BAKER.

Experiment III.
ON the 14th of January, 1694/5, David Hunter, Waiter at the Roe-buck Tavern in
Great Suffolk-street; in a Scuffle received a large Wound, quite cross the
Carpus, or Wrist, in which the Artery was wounded, and two of the Tendons of
the Flexores Digitorum, or Muscles which move the Fingers, quite divided. Their
Extremities were actually seen by all Bystanders. Within an hour after the
Wound was given, I was sent for, it had bled much, but what with Napkins kept
close on, together with the coagulated Blood, the great Flux was in some
measure checked. When I came in, I found a Dutch Physician there, who when I
proposed to stitch up the Wound, would by no means have it done; so I dressed
it only with the Medicines commonly used by us Surgeons, and bound it up: But
at Midnight I was alarmed, that he was bleeding to Death. I made all the haste
I could to him; when I came, I found him fainting, and having great
Convulsions. I found two Chamber-pots of Blood that he had lost, before I could
come to him, besides what was lost on the Ground, Sheets, etc. I presently put
my Thumb on the Artery, which beat and bled with that Violence, that it almost
threw off my Thumb. And although I made made several Applications of the best
common Restringents, I could not in the least stop the Flux, so I sent the
Man's Wife for some of Dr. Colbatch's Powder I had by me at my House, I having
forgotten to take it with me. When she came, I having no Water by me, mixed it
with the White of an Egg, and with a Pledget of Lint, applied it to the
bleeding Artery, and another the whole length of the Wound, using only such
moderate Bandage, as was just enough to keep on the Applications. In a moment
the Flux of Blood was entirely stopped, and he slept well all Night; but on the
next day he was a little in pain: so I took off the Rouler, and just lifted up
one of the Pledgets, from under which came away about half a Spoonful of
extravasated Blood, which had been pent up by the glutinous Quality of the
White of the Egg. After the discharge of which, he was presently at ease. I
opened it not again, till four days after, at which time there was by the same
Dutch Physician, and two English Surgeons, my Friends; when to the great
Amazement of us all, the Artery was quite hid, the Extremities of the divided
Tendons not to be seen, and the whole Wound incarned, so that only
Cicatrization was wanting. In fifteen days time he was well, and had the use of
his Hand, as well as ever in his Life; and the Powder was never but twice
applied.

ROBERT BAKER.

FINIS.

