AN ANSWER TO THE QUERY of a DEIST, Concerning the Necessity of Faith.
SIR,
IN the Discourse we had when last we met, you demanded of me, Whether it was
not a shocking Sentence, and hardly consistent with the Justice and Clemency of
God, to affirm, That a Person born and bred in a Pagan Country, where
Christianity is either not at all known, or at least so represented, as to
render it incredible and absurd; yet this Person living up to the dictates of
a good Conscience in Morality, that is, To the Prescript of the Law of Nature,
in regard to God, and his Neighbor, to the best of his knowledge; Or in case of
frailty and failure, becoming Repentant of his fault, should nevertheless be
Damned for want of a Belief, (though contrary to his Reason) of the Articles and
Mysteries of the Christian Faith? And what you thus said of an Unbeliever, you
proportionably (and with Truth) adapted to an erroneous Believer.

To this (as I may term it) Antichristian Query, I, as a Christian, return by
way of Answer, this opposite Assertion (viz.) Salvation, as it imports either
Remission of Sin, or Fruition of God, is not due to Man, nor attainable by him,
otherwise than by a right Faith in one Mediator between God and Man Christ
Jesus. And therefore there actually is such a Mediator, and such a Faith. This
general Assertion contains several distinct Parts, or Positions, each of which
I shall endeavor briefly to explain, and render rational to an impartial
Reader.

My first Position is, That Remission of Sin, and Justification of a Sinner,
though Repentant, is not, by Virtue of such Repentance alone, due to the Sinner,
nor attainable by him: To evince the Truth of this Position: I lay down this
Principle engrafted in Man's Natural Reason: (viz.) That an Injury, or
Injustice done to another, requires a condign satisfaction, or reparation to be
made to the Party injured, before the Party injureing can justly challenge a
Remission, or quitting of Scores for the injury done; and herein, the greater
the injury, the greater still is the satisfaction due: Nor is it to the
purpose, That the Party injured is not in necessity, or want of satisfaction
equivalent to the damage sustained by the injury, for satisfaction obligatory
arises not from want or indigency in the Party injured, but from the just
Propriety and Right he retains to what is his own. Neither is it material in
the strictness and exigency of Justice, That the party injureing repents him of
the injury done; for Repentance is no recompense to the damnify'd person, and
therefore notwithstanding such Repentance, the obligation of satisfaction, or
indemnification remains due to the party injured. I also lay down this other
Principle acknowledged by all, That an injury, or injustice, being an
usurpation of another good and right, takes its species and degree of
Malignity from the worth and value of the good and right usurped; and when the
worth is Infinite, the injustice is so too. Now Sin, as it includes a
disobedience and repugnance to the known Will and Law of God an Infinite good,
carries along with it an infinite degree of Injustice, and on its part despoils
the Almighty of his Soveraignity and Right of being the first Original on which
all things depend, and last end to which all things ought to be referred: For
which infinite Injustice done to God by Sin, Man a finite and limited thing
can make no condign satisfaction. From these undeniable Principles, is
necessarily concluded my first Position. (viz.) That Remission of Sin, and
Justification of a Sinner, though Repentant, is not by Virtue of such Repentance
alone due to the Sinner, nor attainable by him.

My second Position is, The Fruition of God in regard to Man, though of himself
innocent, and free from Sin, is not by force or efficacy of such innocence due
to Man. Before I undertake to prove this Position, it is fitting I first
advertise; your Query, as to this part of it, is bottomed on a false
supposition (viz.) That there is extant a Person arrived to the use and
maturity of Reason, wholly ignorant, or mislead in the Principles of
Christianity; yet without any malignity of Will, spotless and inculpable in the
observance of the Law of Nature; for in reallity there is no such Person. To
make out this, I need only to appeal to the experience of your self, and all
Mankind, whether it be not true, That there is in Man's Nature, from his very
Conception and Birth, propagated in him, and inherent to him, a strong
Propension to Vice and Wickedness; and as strong an Aversion from Virtue and
Goodness, which Corruption of human Nature is termed original Concupiscence,
and Injustice. And though this depravation does not discover it self in Infants,
by reason of the Organs of the Body, on which the use and exercise of the
rational Faculties of the Soul depend, are not qualified and disposed in
Infants for such exercises. Yet so soon as these Impediments in the Organs ore
removed, and Man by degrees arrives to the use and liberty of his Will and
Reason in discerning Good and Evil, we manifestly and daily see, infected and
vitiated Nature, hurried by the corrupt Inclinations radicated in it, without
any new addition or change made in the Soul it self, or its inclinations,
wilfully, and not by force or compulsion, breaks forth like an Ulcer into all
Abominations, and when let loose and complied with vents it self in Murders
Rapines Brutalities, etc. Overturns the Laws of God and Nature, and unhindges
the whole frame of human Life and Conversation. Can this Malignity of Will,
this rooted Concupiscence and Injustice, be otherwise than odious to God, the
Just, the Good, the Perfect? Is it not reasonable, That as vitiated Man is
averse from Righteousness, so the Righteous God should be averse from him? Is
this then that spotless Innocence, and Integrity supposed in the Person
represented in the Query, such as may challenge the Frution of God in Glory?
Surely no. But waving this groundless and delusive Supposition, I still assert;
The Frution of God in Glory, in regard to Man even of himself innocent and free
from Sin, is not by Force or Efficacy of such Innocence, due to Man, nor
attainable by him; to evince this Truth, I form this Argument; Nothing is due
to nothing, or attainable by nothing; For from nothing comes nothing; And Worth
or Merit is poportioned to Being. But Man is of himself nothing. Seeing all he
is, all he has, and all he does, or can do, is by the free Gift and
Participation of God his Creator, on the Influence of whose mere Bounty his
whole Existence entirely depends. Consequently though Man should have, and retain
the pretended Innocence and Integrity wherein he was Created, and should fully
discharge his Duty in observance of the Law of Nature imprinted in him,
nevertheless, God the whole and sole Owner both of Man and his Operations, may
if he so please, without any Resemblance of Injustice, terminate his Bounty;
And either annihilate Man by subtracting from him a further influence of
Being, and so reduceing him to what he was at first, Nothing; or continue him,
as without Guilt, so without Punishment in the same State wherein he Created
him, without any new addition of Perfection or Happiness; For an Enteity or
Being by mere Bounty and Participation, such implies (as I may term it,) a
nullity of Self-Right to any farther Augmentation. Furthermore, God is an
infinite and unlimitted good, and the fruition of him in Glory is of infinite
and unlimitted value, but it involves a contradiction, that a finite and
limited thing, as Man and his Operations are, should by any proper worth or
merit, purchase or claim as due an infinite and unlimitted good, as the
fruition of God is; for a finite merit, and an infinite reward bear no
proportion. It follows then, the fruition of God in Glory is not due to Man by
force or virtue of any whatsoever self Innocence or merit in him. If it be
objected, Man's Soul is naturally Immortal, and its rational Faculties, (viz.)
Understanding and Will tend to the Fruition of God as their immortal specific
object and end. The Understanding tends to God as the Origin of Truth: The Will
tends to God, as the Origin of Goodness; there seems then due to the
Immortality of Man's Soul the fruition of God, the Immortal Fountain of truth
and goodness, due not by merit, but by the prescript of Nature, and right of
Creation. It is Answered, Man's Soul is said to be naturally immortal in this
Sense; that abstracting from the Body, it has not intrinsic to it any
Principles of corruption, that is, any material humors or qualities repugnant
and destructive to each other, and thereby producing Mortality; but it is not
immortal in such a construction, as if it had of it self, and from its own
nature some stability or immortality of existence independent on the Will and
influence of its Creator, on account of which alone Man might claim as his due,
the fruition of God by any right derived from his Nature; such an immortality
the Soul of Man has not; his very being a Creature excludes him from it; and
there is nothing more con-natural to a Being by Participation, than a
Non-self-right to any thing. If it be asked, Why did God Create Man; yet render
his end and happiness neither due to him, nor attainable by him? It is
Answered, Though the end and happiness of Man being the fruition of God, an
infinite good be neither due to Man, nor attainable by any self merit innocence
or industry in Man: Nevertheless, this end and happiness of Man is attainable
by ways and means agreeable to the Wisdom of God, and commensurate to his end.

Wherefore my third Position is, Salvation as it imports Remission of Sin, and
fruition of God, is not absolutely unattainable by Man. To prove this, I Argue;
There is nothing whereby to render the benefit of Man's Salvation unatainable,
but either some limit or deficiency of power and goodness on God's part in
conferring this benefit, or want of capacity on Man's part in receiving the
benefit; not the first, seeing all the Attributes of God are, as his Essence,
of infinite Perfection, and accordingly his power and goodness unlimitted and
indificient; Nor the second; seeing Man is susceptable of any grace or favor
whatsoever may conduce to the well Being of his Nature. Therefore Man's
Salvation is not absolutely unattainable.

My fourth Position is; It is most expedient, that remission of Sin, and
fruition of God should be attainable by the interposition of one Mediator
between God, and Man Jesus Christ, true God and Man. To explain and render
rational this Position, Note, It is Man did, and does commit Sin, and it is Man
stands liable to satisfaction for the injury done to God by Sin; (as has been
shown in the first Position) And because the injury done to God an infinite
good, by Sin, is infinite, the satisfaction ought also to be so; but Man, a
Creature, can make no such satisfaction, (as has been likewise shown in the
same Position.) That therefore there might be one who was Man, and could make
an infinite satisfaction for the Sin of Man, it was expedient, God should
become Man, and thus be a fit Mediator between God and Man. Again, It is
acknowledged, the end and happiness of Man is the Fruition of God, an infinite
God (as is intimated in the Objection to the second Position) It is likewise
acknowledged, no Merits, Innocence, or Industry in Man can suffice, as means to
attain to this end (as is also intimated in the same Position.) That therefore
Man might not be destitute, and frustrated of the end and happiness for which
he was Created; It was expedient the Divine Wisdom and Goodness should provide
means whereby Man might attain to his end, means commensurate, and proportioned
to the end; these means are the infinite merits of Christ Jesus our Mediator,
God and Man. Notwithstanding all which, I do not say, That because neither
Remission of Sin, nor Fruition of God is due to Man, or attainable, either
Remission by sole Repentance in a Sinner, or Fruition by proper merit in an
Innocent; therefore it was of absolute necessity to the Salvation of Man, God
should become Man, and thereby mediate between God and Man; for God as Suprem
Lord, unaccountable to any for the dispensations of his bounty, or
determinations of his Will, might, if he had so pleased, Gratis, without regard
to any purchase or merit, both have remitted the Sin of Man, and bestowed the
Fruition of himself upon Man, as an effect of his sole Benignity and Goodness:
But, I say, it was most expedient and congruous to the manifestation of the
plenitude both of God's Mercy and Justice, that the Remission of Sin, and the
Fruition of God, two infinite Benefits, should be conferred on Man by the
infinite merits of Christ Jesus our Mediator.

Now my fifth Position is, There is de facto a Mediator between God and Man,
Christ Jesus, who being God, became Man, Died upon the Cross, etc. And thereby
Merited and Purchased for Man a Right and Title to the Remission of Sin, and
Frution of God. I shall prove this important, Position, by such Rational
Evidences and Motives of Credibility, as may be convincing to an impartial
Understanding. The first Evidence or Motive, is taken from the Plenitude of the
Mercy and Justice of God, (so often inculcated and now repeated.) Man by Sin
had committed an infinite Injury, and by that Injury was obnoxious to infinite
Misery: This Misery rendered him the Object of no less then an infinite
Compassion and Mercy, the sole Property of God an infinite Good, This infinite
Compassion and Mercy could be in nothing extended and manifested more
effectually than for God to become Man; and for the redress of Man's irreparable
Misery, to render himself miserable. Again, God as he is Merciful, so is he
Just; The Justice of God called for Satisfaction, condign Satisfaction for Man's
injustice done by Sin, But (alas) worthless Man could (as is said before) make
no such Satisfaction, therefore God becoming Man, and Dying for Man, made
Satisfaction in the utmost rigor of Justice for the Sin of Man. Moreover the
End and Happiness of Man (as has been often said) is the Fruition of God an
infinite Good; but Man was destitute of proper Self Merit, and means whereby to
attain to this inestimable End, (as has been likewise said and proved)
therefore God becoming Man, merited and purchased, for Man, what before so
infinitely transcended his Reach. The second Evidence or Motive of Credibility,
is taken from the Stupendous Miracles done by Christ whilst on Earth, to prove
himself to be God, and his Doctrine or Gospel Suprem and Divine; Miracles
infinitely above the compass of any created Strength or Industry, and only
Commensurate to a Divine Power; As are raising the Dead to Life, healing the
Lame, giving Sight to the Blind, curing the Sick of naturally incurable
Distempers, and all these suddenly, and by his sole Touch, Word, or Command; As
likewise are, Casting out of Devils Asswaging Tempests, Walking upon the Sea,
as upon Dry Land, Feeding to Overplus Five Thousand Persons, with Five Loaves
of Bread, etc. As also are Manifestations of the Secret of Men's Hearts; a
Knowledge of all things both present and distant, both past and to come.
Miracles done in the Presence, some of Thousands, some of Hundreds, and all of
a sufficient Number of Eyewitnesses; Miracles undeniable by his then extent
most malicious Adversaries; Miracles universally attested, and the Memory of
them perpetuated by the unanimous harmony of Persons and Records of all Ages.
These Miracles, I say, are superabundant Evidences and Motives of Credibility,
that Christ our Savior is God, and his Doctrine or Gospel Divine. The Third
rational evidence of motive or Credubility, is taken from the wonderful
Propagation of the Gospel of Christ. None who judge by Reason, or even common
Sense, can imagine, That a few in number, and those poor illeterate and
despicable Persons, (as were all the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, sent and
Commissioned by him to Preach his Gospel) delivering a Doctrine not only above
the reach of natural Science, or Knowledge, but repugnant and destructive to the
Maxims of the World, and Blandishments of the Flesh, should nevertheless
contrary to all Temporal or Carnal Interest, superior to all Human
difficulties, and invincible to all Oppositions, spread and dilate this Doctrine
throughout the World, and transmit it indelible to all future Ages. None, I
say, of common Reason or Sense, can imagine such a Doctrine, so delivered and
propagated, could have any other than God for the Author. The fourth and last
rational evidence or motive of Credibility, is taken from the Purity, Sanctity,
and Rectitude of manners contained in the Principles, and relucent in the
Practice of the true Christian Religion, and remonstrating the same to be no
less than Divine. We find Man's contaminated Nature transported and hurried
with a strange deluge, and impetuosity to Vice and Sin, to Pride and
Self-conceit, to Avarice, to Lust, to Intemperance, to Rage, to Fraud, to
Malice, to Injustice, and all kind of Immorality: Which contamination of Nature
receives no small addition from the Temptations and Allurements of the World.
It was therefore highly necessary, there should be an Antidot to the Poison,
healing Remedies to the Distempers, and a Medicinal Law to repress the
Misdemeanors, and rectify the Disorders of depraved Nature: It was necessary, I
say, there should be applied to our Pride and Self-conceit, Humility and
Submission; to our Avarice, Poverty of Spirit; to our Lust, Continency and
Chastity; to our Intemperance, Fasting and Abstinence; to our Rage and Passion,
Meekness and Patience; to our Fraud, Sincerity; to our Malice, Charity; to our
Injustice, Righteousness; and to the Temptation of the World, a Contempt and
Disregard of it in what it Alienates the Heart from God its Creator: That thus
Man from Vicious, might become Virtuous; his Soul adorned and perfected with
Holiness of Life; his corrupt Nature reclaimed, and himself led, as it were, by
Manuduction to his last end. These are the blessed fruits and effects,
springing from Gospel Dictates, which if impartially considered, give a Moral
assurance they flow from a Divine Fountain and Original. It may be Objected,
There are Multitudes of Persons believing and professing Christianity, upon
whose Lives and Manners these Gospel dictates, work no such effects, as are
here mentioned. It is answered; there are indeed too too many Professiors of
Christianity, whose wicked Practices are little answerable to the Purity and
Sanctity taught and known in the Gospel Dictates; however this Wickedness of
Manners proceeds not from any deficiency in the Dictates, but from a
delinquency in the Professors, which Professors therefore may fitly be styled,
as to point of Practice, no Christians.

My last conclusive Position is, There is necessary to Salvation, as it imports
Remission of Sin and Fruition of God, a Faith in Christ, as the indispensable
Condition, or means introductive and Applicative of his Merits and Mercies to
Man. To prove my position, I argue thus; Upon the Reception of a Benefit
Gratis, and by Benevolence bestowed on a Rational Creature; the very Law of
Nature dictates there is required and due, an Owning or Acknowledgment to be
made of the Benefit; Yes, and a Love to be rendered by the Receiver to the
Benefactor. But it is impossible, such an Acknowledgment should be made, or
Love rendered, without a previous Knowledge of the Benefit received; For no Man
can either Acknowledge, or Love he knows not what, consequently seeing the
Remission of Sin and Fruition of God, are, (as has been proved in the first
and second position) Benefits purely Gratis, and by Benevolence bestowed by God
on Man, there is indispensably required and due to God, from Man, a reciprocal
and grateful Acknowledgment of, and love for these precious Benefits. But this
Acknowledgement can never be made, nor love rendered without a Knowledge of the
Truths and Mysteries including the Benefits. And this Knowledge can never be
attained by natural Science, but only by Faith. For Faith is defined to be a
Knowledge of certain Truths or Mysteries divinely revealed, relating to Man's
Salvation, and assented to because so revealed, though not demonstrable by
deduction, from natural Causes and Effects. Thus then Faith is indispensably
necessary to Salvation. Hence this main Article, concerning the necessity of
Faith, has been constantly Preached, Divulged, and received in all Ages and
Places, when, or where soever the name of Christian has gained admittance. And
all the Arguments and Motives of Credibility brought in the fifth Position, to
prove the Doctrine or Gospel of Christ to be True and Divine, prove also this
Article of the necessity of Faith to be True and Divine, as being an Essential
Part of the same Doctrine or Gospel.

Having thus given a distinct Proof to each particular Clause, or matter
contained in the general Assertion (viz.) That Salvation, as it imports
Remission of Sin, and fruition of God is not due to Man, nor attainable by him,
otherwise than by a Faith in one Mediator Christ Jesus; and that therefore
there actually is such a Mediator, and such a Faith: I shall now make a
distinct Answer to diverse particular Objections implicitly included in your
general Query. And first it is Objected, God has indu'd Man with Reason, on
account of which, Man is said to be a rational Creature, and therefore it is
contradictory to his very Nature, to give an Assent, or Belief to the truth of
any Proposition (such as is every Article of Faith) transcendant to his Reason;
for this would be for Man to divest himself of his Nature. It is Answered, If
by the word Reason be meant that rational Power or Faculty in the Soul, termed
the Understanding, by which Man comprehends the truth or falsity of a thing: It
is indeed contradictory to Man's Nature to give an assent without such a
faculty, to any Proposition; For this would be to understand without an
understanding. But if by the word Reason, be meant a rational Evidence, Cause
or Motive of Credibility, why a Man gives an assent to the truth of any
Proposition; It is not contradictory, but most agreeable and consonant to Man's
Nature, to give an assent upon such rational Motives to any Proposition.

Secondly, It is Objected, When God Created Man, he gave him a faculty of
Reason, whereby to arrive to the knowledge of his Creator, by the footsteps of
Nature, and imprinted in his Soul a Law of Morality, whereby to distinguish
Good from Evil. Now it seems proposterous, and destructive to the established
order and frame of Nature, That God should institute a new Law, and require
from Man a belief of it, and submission to it, The truth of which nevertheless
transcends the ability of human Reason, traceing the footsteps of Nature to
comprehend. It is answered, Man may arrive to the knowledge of a truth by two
ways. The one is by an intrinsic demonstration from Natural causes to their
effects; and this knowledge is termed natural Science: The other is by an
extrinsick Manifestation, or Revelation of a Proponent, or Attestant, and
herein the assurance of such a knowledge of truth, is proportioned to the
Credit and Authority of the Proponent; And in short, if God, who is truth it
self, manifests and reveals a truth, the knowledge and assurance of such a
truth, is superior to all human or natural Science: This knowledge is what we
term Faith. Nor is this knowledge of God, and his Law, arriving to Man by
Revelation, any wise proposterous or destructive to the knowledge we have of
him, and his Law, drawn from the footsteps and impressions of Nature; but
rather a supply to the deficiency of such natural knowledge; for God is immense,
and his ways inscrutable, and none can by inferences and consequences drawn
from the Principles of Nature, comprehend the total, either of what God is, or
what he may require of us: Indeed, seeing the bounties and benefits conferred by
God on his Creatures, are the mere effects of his own freewill, the very
freedom and liberty of his Will in conferring, or not conferring these bounties
and benefits, implies an impossibility of attaining to the knowledge of them,
before, or otherwise, then as he freely pleases to reveal and manifest them;
And as it is the height of Blasphemy to say, God within the verge of Nature has
done so much, he cannot do more; so is it the height of Arrogance (after he
has revealed and manifested the effects of his Will above the verge of Nature)
to affirm he has not done more. Thirdly, It is Objected, That the rational
dences and Motives of Credibility, specified in the fifth Position, though they
afford a Moral certainty of the truths revealed by Christ, yet not amounting to
a scientifical Demonstration, they seem disproportionable, and insufficient to
cause or produce that assurance of assent challenged by Faith: It is Answered,
The specified Motives of Credibility, are only the instrumental causes
productive of Faith, (as tools in the hands of the Artificer) But the effecient
cause producing an assurance of Assent to Divine Revelations or matters of
Faith, is the veracity of God the Revealer, into which veracity, Faith (as the
effect into its adequat cause) is finally resolved and terminated. Fourthly, It
is Objected, An exclusion of an Innocent from the Fruition of God, his final
end and happiness, is a Punishment inflicted without a fault, and a cruelty
incompatible with Divine Justice. It is Answered, An Exclusion of Man however
innocent and inculpable from the Fruition of God, an happiness which neither by
the right of Nature was due to him, nor which by any merit of his he could ever
deserve, cannot be termed or esteemed a Punishment at all, either for, or
without a fault, much less a cruelty incompatible with Divine Justice; for
every Punishment is properly a subtraction of a benefit or happiness from a
culpable or guilty person; to which happiness the guilty person before his
guilt had some just propriety and right, and which right he justly forfeited by
his guilt. Now an Exclusion of Man from the Fruition of God, is no such thing,
but only a pure Negation, or Non-conferring of a free gift or benovolence, to
which Man however supposed innocent, neither has, nor ever could, have, any
just propriety or right; (as has been more at large already proved in the
second Position) wherefore God may without any pre-supposition of Fault on Man's
part, or imputation of cruelty and injustice on God's part, exclude Man from
the fruition of himself, as a benefit or happiness to which Man has no
imaginable just Title or Claim; Nevertheless it may be granted, that a Person
Innocent and free from Sin (if any such had been) would not be liable to the
horrid tortures, torments and flames, inflicted by the Judgment and Vengeance
of God, on willful and malicious Sinners, for those alone are justly Condemned
to the utmost Extremity, of an unhappy and miserable Being, who to Sin have
abandoned God, the sole Fountain of well-Beeing. And in this sense, it is most
true, that regarding the above named Torments and their Cause, there is none
punishable who is not culpable. Fifthly, it is objected, to what purpose, and
with what appearance of Justice, has God in so many Ages, Created and fixed in
the World so many Persons, who yet he knew neither would nor could ever attain
to their natural End, and final Happiness? Were it not better such Persons
never had been? It is answered, (over and above what has been already
sufficiently said, and proved concerning this matter) A Being even in a
condemned Sinner, is preferable to no Being, as far as his Being is the work
of his Creator, for it is simply better to be something than nothing; but the
dismal Miseries and Torments attending the Sinner and annexed to his Crime are
no positive Being, but a privation of well-Beeing, The sole effect and product
of Malice and Sin. And as to the purpose or design God has in the Creation of
Man, whether Good or Evil; It is for the Manifestation of his Soveraignity and
Glory of his Attributes; He bestows upon some, Blessings Temporal and Eternal,
for the Manifestation of his Mercy; He inflicts upon others Punishments
Temporal and Eternal for the Manifestation of his Justice; He grants to some,
the Fruition of himself, a Benefit above what they deserve; He excludes others
from the same Fruition, a Benefit they do not deserve; Thus, he is Good to all,
but unjust to none; he extends or limits the effects of his mercy and goodness,
according to the measure of his own Will, but still without injustice to any:
To illustrate this point, God might, if he would; have Created thousands of
Worlds besides this, and in each World millions of Men; but he has not done it;
must we then say, This possible Mass of Worlds and Men, may justly accuse God
of Partiality and Injustice, in giving to this single World an actual Being,
and leaving all the rest in the Abiss of their own Nothing? Certainly No. And
as God the Sovereign Lord has amongst his Works on Earth, made some irrational
Creatures, as Stones, Plants, Brutes, without dignifying of them (as he has
Man) with the noble faculties of Will and Reason; because it so pleased him;
yet without any injustice to the irrational Creatures themselves; so the same
Sovereign Lord has amongst the number of Mankind, in all Ages, destined and
elected, some to the everlasting fruition of himself, an happiness they could
not justly demand; And excluded others from the same fruition an happiness they
could not justly require; And this God, the Just, the Good, Will, because he
Will; and to conclude, It is true, God cannot Will, but what is Just and Good;
but it is likewise true, what he Will is therefore Just and Good, because he
Will; for the Will of God is the Supreme and Unaccountable Rule both of Justice
and Goodness.

You add in the close of your Query, That what you said of an Unbeliever may
proportionably be adapted to an erroneous Believer; and you are in the right;
for no Faith, and a false Faith, are equally Pernicious; the reason is, because
Faith applicative of Christ's Merits to Man's Justification, takes not its
virtue and efficacy from the force or strength of Persuasion in the Believer,
but from the worth and value of the Mysteries believed; so that when Faith is
not uniform, and correlative to the integrity of its Object, being all, and
every revealed Mystery, each of which is influential to Justification, such a
Faith loses its applicative Property, and becomes abortive, fruitless, and
delusory.

Thus, I hope, I have given you satisfaction to each particular Clause
contained in your general Query: Now I wish the effect may correspond to the
good Intention herein of

SIR, Your well-meaning Friend and Servant, J. C.


