Several PROPOSALS HUMBLY TENDERED To the CONSIDERATION Of those that are in
Authority, For the Ease, Security, and Prosperity of this Commonwealth.

By WILLIAM COLE, a Constant Asserter of the Rights and Privileges of the
People, and Opposer of the late Tyranny and Apostasy.

Nehemiah chapter 5. verse. 14, 15. etc. I and my Brethren have not eaten the bread
of the Governor.

But the former Governors that had been before me, were chargeable unto the
People, and had taken of them bread and wine, besides forty shekels of silver:
Yea, even their Servants bare rule over the people: but so did not I, because
of the fear of God, etc.

LONDON: Printed MDCLIX.

Several Proposals humbly tendered to the Consideration of those that are in
Authority.
1. THat it would be very much for the Security of the Nation, and Satisfaction
of the honest party, to have a review of all the Officers in the Commonwealth;
That so all those that have been put in Employments chiefly to serve the Lusts
and Ends of the late Single Person, and in their respective places to be
Informers, Pimps, and Trapans, both to entrap, and ensnare, those that were
Assertors of the Native Rights, may be expunged; And that the Fawnings and
Flatteries of Time-serving men (who are Terrae Filii, sons of the Earth, and
will serve the worst of Tyrants in the worst of wickedness, to satisfy their
Covetous and Ambitious spirits) may not be Credited.

2. That men may be employed not on Principles of favor, but from principles
of Ability and Integrity; And that plurality of Offices, either Civil or
Military, may be laid aside: That so those men that are brought low, either by
sufferings for their Constancy, or by loss of Trade in these sad Times, may
find in some measure, a way open, to procure a livelihood for their Families.

3. That in Collection of Customs and Excise, it is convenient, that men of
Ability, and Affability, may be employed, who may also be able to inform the
Merchants and others, Why this present Parliament is yet enforced to continue
these great burdens? and who was the occasion thereof; which will much cool
and qualify the heat, that at present has much exasperated the people of this
Nation against it, by the imperious carriage of insulting Spirits; especially
if they may have assurance, that the Excise (which is the bane of all Trade and
Commerce) may in short time cease.

4. That in regard of the Poverty of the Nation, there may be care taken, to
collect all public Monyes at as cheap a rate as may be, and that whereas some
men have vast sums given for Sallaries heretofore, it was more from a principle
of Design than Necessity, that so their Mercenary spirits might be obliged to
destroy their Countries rights, and keep a strict hand and eye over the
constant honest party: If there be care taken in this business, there will be
many thousand pounds yearly added to the public Treasury.

5. That some men of ability and activity may be employed, Superintendents or
Overseers of the Navies stores in Chattam, Porsmouth, and Plymouth, who may:
If they are able and honest, save the State above 40000 l. per annum, it being
a practice in most of the Officers to comply and connive at one another
Offenses; whereby Timber, Cables, Sayls, Powder, Cordage, Provisions, etc. are
usually sold by Officers in great quantities.

6. That the Number of Officers, especially of the Custom and Excise, and
value of their Salaries may be regulated and lessened; For that in many places
the Salaries of the Custome-Officers exceeds the Receipts.

7. That the Farming of the Custom and Excise may forthwith cease; which is so
cruelly executed, that there is a general Outcry against it throughout the
three Nations, which much endangereth the Peace of the Commonwealth.

8. That there are 150 Sail of English Ships employed the less yearly by the
means of Martin Noel's Farming the Custom of Coals, which very much lesseneth
the Number of Shipping, and prejudiceth the increase of Mariners, which is of a
very ill Consequence; For that the Shipping are England's Walls; and Saylors,
the Garrison to defend them.

9. That it is of Considerable Importance, to employ an able publique-spirited
Person to be Governor of the Isle of Barbados, which at present is, and so
like to be, a Trade of great advantage for the expense of the Manufactures of
this Commonwealth, if the said Governor shall wisely und uprightly, according
to the Act of Trade made by this present Parliament, prevent the Importation of
the Manufactures of Holland and other Countries, at which there has been of
late (as is generally reported) a great connivance either through Bribery, or
Neglect.

10. That it will be of very great Consequence to the increase of Shipping and
Navigation, (in some speedy time) to make some free Ports in England, whereby
we shall be able to Equal and Match the Dutch in the Trade of the Zound and
Baltique-Seas, and Equal them with Magazines of Goods to furnish all Parts at
as cheap a rate, as the aforesaid Dutch or Hamburgers shall be able to do.

11. That there may be a Survey of all the penal Statute Laws of the Land, and
a brief Collection of them that are profitable and necessary, for the well and
peaceable Government of this Commonwealth, owned by this supreme Authory, and
all those that are grounded on principles of Tyrranny and Oppression; and
repugnant to the Laws of God and reason, and unnecessary or vexatious may be
exploded: And that they that are owned may be Printed in one Volume, that so
the people may know what is their duty, and not be punished by Trapps and
Snares of absolete Laws, through the malice or Subtilty of corrupt Judges or
Justices, it being a desperate and cruel principle for the Rulers to require
obedience to Laws that the People are not capable to understand, and a known
Maxim that a Multitude of Laws are a multitude of Fetters to inslave the
Ignorant, and destroy the Simple hearted.

12. That seeing the whole Commonwealth is in a Lamentable condition of
poverty, Trade almost utterly lost, and Thousands of Poor ready to starve, Let
Piety, Pity, and desire of true renown persuade those that have Thousands and
Hundreds yearly means, to forbear Sallaryes for some years, that so the People
may have food, and the Commonwealth by their examples be encouraged and invited
to Charity and Pity. This noble and true Christian practice and example was
acted by Nehemiah, whose pattern I earnestly beseech our present Lawmakers to
imitate, in freeing this Commonwealth from Bondage, Slavery, and Tyranny; God
forbid they should follow Jehu, who destroyed Ahab's House, only to seat
himself and his posterity in the Throne.

FINIS.

