THE DOCTRINE of ACIDS IN THE Cure of DISEASES Farther Asserted: Being an
Answer to some Objections raised against it by Dr. F. TUTHILL of Dorchester in
Dorsetshire. In which are contained some things relating to the History of
Blood: As also an Attempt to prove what Life is, and that it is principally
supported by an Acid and Sulphur. To which is added an exact Account of the
Case of Edmund Turner Esquire; deceased; as also the Case of another Gentleman now
living, exactly parallel to Mr. Turner's. By JOHN COLBATCH, a Member of the
College of Physicians, London.

LONDON, Printed for Dan. Brown, at the Black Swan and Bible without Temple
Bar; and Abel Roper at the Black-Boy in Fleet Street. 1689.

TO THE READER.
THE Hypothesis I have advanced being new and contrary to the common received
Opinions of other Physicians, a very few excepted, I am every day pestered with
Objections of one kind or other; and therefore to save my self the labor of
writing Pacquets of Letters every Post-day, I have thought fit to answer those
Objections that are worth taking notice of in this public manner. The
Gentleman whose Letter I have answered here, seems to be a Man of wonderful
Candor and Ingenuity; and were it but for the satisfaction of him only, I
should not think my time misspent: but however, hoping to do service to the
Public by it, I have suffered these Papers to come abroad, as they are. I
confess they are not sufficiently polished for public View; and at the same
time the pains I have been at in composing of them is too great to have them
confined to the private use of one person: and for the deficiences, I shall
endeavor to supply them in some other Papers that shall be got ready for the
Press as soon as possibly I can.

He that would pass the Course of his Life without Envy, must believe what is
generally believed, and speak as others do; and whoever takes upon him to do
otherwise, let the Success of his Undertaking be what it will, the Reward he is
like to meet with from the generality of Mankind, is to be reproached. The
enquiry after Truth is an Undertaking in which little Assistance is to be
hoped; and there are so many Guards on all the ways that lead to it, that it is
a very hard task to break through. It Is an ancient Proverb, that, Non omnibus
licet adire Corinthum. Whoever intends to overcome so many Difficulties, cannot
hope to succeed, but by his Diligence, Eagerness, and Earnestness; which
Methods I have pursued as much as the hurry of my Affairs would permit me.

When I consider the great Number and the Potency of my Adversaries, I am
sometimes under the greatest Discouragements imaginable; and wish that I had
either gone on in the common Road, or else that I had never appeared in
public, but have kept my own Notions within the Confines of my own Breast, and
so I might have jogged on without Molestation. But when I call to my
remembrance the Guilt which that Person lay under, who made no Improvement of
his one Talent, but hid it in a Napkin, it dispels the former Considerations,
and withal animates me to go on in the Work I have begun; which although it may
create me many Enemies, Truth at its first appearance never wanting Opposers,
yet the thoughts of having endeavored to serve my Generation to the utmost of
my Power, gives me that Peace and Satisfaction of Mind, that all the united
Force of my Enemies is not able to deprive me of.

I never yet pretended to make People Immortal, my Endeavors having all
terminated in this, viz. to be serviceable to my fellow Creatures in distress
as much as I was able. The wise Man says, That no Man has Power in the Day of
Death, and that there is no discharge in that War: The Issues of Life and Death
being only in the hands of the Almighty. But I am that unfortunate Man, that if
I have any Patient die once in three or four Months, tho perhaps I scarce ever
prescribed any thing for them, it is immediately spread abroad with all the
Industry that Malice is capable of, that I have been their Murderer; by the
means of which Reports I have sustained no small Damage: but however, in spite
of all this, Thanks to God, I every day gain ground, and don't in the least
doubt, but in a very little time to get out of the reach of my Enemies Malice.

I must confess that I am deficient in so many things in respect to the
ornamentive part of Learning, which is scarce to be obtained out of the
Universities, that I am altogether unfit to be a Champion in so great a Cause;
but I have so much reason to be positive that the Hypothesis I have advanced is
true, that from the Hints I have given I dare almost be confident, that even in
my own time the Cudgels will be taken up, and the Hypothesis maintained and
asserted by one who is able to go through-stitch with it better than I can. In
the manifestation of the greatest Truths to the World, Men of very mean parts
are frequently made use of to be the first Broachers of them, but the farther
clearing of them is left to Men of the most subtle and refined parts; and were
my Hypothesis but rightly handled, I don't doubt but it would prove the most
Glorious of the kind that ever appeared upon the Stage of the World. However,
till the thing is undertaken by some better Hand, I shall not be wanting to
prosecute it as far as I am able.

I have one thing to beg of those who shall give themselves the trouble of
reading these Papers, and that is, that they would not pass a rash Judgment
upon me, but that they will be pleased to examine well what I have offered both
in this and my former Tracts, laying aside Partiality and Prejudice; and if
they find that I have not made things sufficiently clear, if they will but
inform me of it, and lay their Doubts before me, I will spare no Pains to make
things yet more clear.

Villers-street in York Buildings, October the 8th, 1697.
BOOKS sold by Daniel Brown.
FOur Treatises of Physic and Chirurrurgery: Viz.

1. A Physico-Medical Essay concerning Alkaly and Acid. 2. Farther
Considerations by way of Appendix to the said Essay. 3. Novum Lumen
Chirurgicum, or a New Light of Surgery. 4. Novum Lumen Chirurgicum
Vindicatum, or the New Light of Surgery vindicated from many unjust
Aspersions.
The Second Edition corrected and enlarged.

A Treatise of the Gout, wherein both its Causes and Cure are demonstrably made
appear; to which are added some Medicinal Observations concerning the Cure of
Fevers, etc. by the means of Acids.

All by John Colbatch, M. D.

Dorchester in Com. Dors. Aug. 9. 97. SIR,
I have perused your ingenious Treatise of the Gout; in which you seem to
accuse Alkalies as the Original of all Distempers: Before I subscribe to this
Opinion, I desire to be satisfied in a few Points. The Grand Argument on which
you build your Hypothesis, is taken from the green Color of the Serum which
arises from its mixture with Syrup of Violets. It must be confessed, that
Alkalies usually give it this Tincture, and there may be something of an
Alkaly, or at least analagous to it, in the Serum: But notwithstanding this,
the many Inferences which you are pleased to draw from this Phenomenon, in my
Opinion will hardly hold good. For, 1. If this Alkalizated Serum is the
Original of Distempers, then it must follow that wheresoever we find this
Serum, there must be likewise a Distemper: Now I appeal to your self if the
Blood of a healthy Person will not give Syrup of Violets a green Tincture, does
not then the Argument labor? may we not impute this Phenomenon to arise
rather from a due mixture of the Principles, than from any vitiated Habit of
Blood? But, secondly, there is another way of discovering an Alkaly besides
that of its Appearance, and that is by its effects, to wit, its Fermentation
with Spirit of Vitriol. Now I aver this green Serum will not ferment with the
aforesaid Spirit: Wherefore if it be an Alkaly, it is an Alkaly of a particular
nature. It must be granted that we oftentimes find in the Blood some Particles
of a very warm nature predominant, in which cases I have found Acids to be of
great use: but whether they are of an Alkaline nature or not, I leave the
Learned to determine. If they are Alkalies, then either fixed or Volatile; if
fixed, how comes it to pass, that on the Dissolution of the Texture of the
Blood, they claim the highest Place, and nothing will serve their turn, but
they must needs swim in the Serum? If volatile, how is it that we many times
find this warm Serum to be little better than insipid? Volatile Salts you know
are aculeated, and affect the Palate strongly. May they not rather be of a
sulphurous Nature, since it is the Nature of such Substances to sit uppermost
on the Dissolution of Bodies? But thirdly, if Alkalies are the Original of all
Distempers, whence is it that in Dropsies, Catarrhs, some Gouts and other
Distempers, we find the Texture of the Blood so thin? It Is observable that
those Particles you term Alkalies, the more the Blood is saturated with them,
of the more thick consistence it is, as we see in Pleurisies, Rheumatisms, and
other inflammatory Cases (in which Distempers, if in any, these Alkalies
abound) is not then its Tenuity rather to be imputed to Acids? Do not Acids
immediately put the Blood in a Fusion, and render it thin? Besides, if Alkalies
did always offend and cause Pain, it must follow that Acids must give ease: But
I assure you I have often experienced the contrary; for upon the exhibition of
Rhenish, White Wind, and other Acids, I have found the Pains immediately
exasperated, and many times it has been a long while e're they went off. Again,
if the Gout proceed from an Alkaly, what is the reason you use so much
Sassafras in its Cure? Is Sassafras an Acid, and so proper to subdue this
Alkaly? I have only a word or two to speak concerning the green Color of Syrup
of Violets, and so I have done. I believe it may be turned green without an
Alkaly: On the exhibition of it to Infants it comes away green very often, and
brings away a great deal of green Matter by stool; and yet I believe they do
not abound with Alkalies. You may read in a late Author of undoubted Credit,
that upon an Infant's swallowing of a Dose of Testaceous Powder, an
extraordinary Ferment was raised in the Stomach of the Child: Now how could
this Ferment be raised, if it had not an Acid to work upon? Besides, does not
Experience show that nothing is so proper in Infants Distempers as Alkalies? I
have some more things to offer; but I desire you would be pleased to satisfy me
as to these. I should be glad to close with your Opinion, and embrace any thing
that is new; for I believe Medicine, tho it has met with great Improvements of
late, to be capable of far greater. I Will give you no farther trouble, only
after Thanks to you for your indefatigable Labor in searching out the Truth of
things, subscribe

Your Humble Servant, F. TUTHILL.

The Doctrine of ACIDS in the Cure of DISEASES farther asserted, etc.
Worthy Sir,
I Have read your Letter with all the Pleasure and Satisfaction imaginable, the
Objections you have raised against my Hypothesis being the most solid and
substantial I have ever yet met with: And you may assure your self that I have
so great a Value and Esteem for Truth, that I would not dare to contend for any
thing which is the Product of my shallow Understanding, that in the least
stands in opposition to it. But as I would not by any means in the World oppose
Truth, so at the same time I would not be guilty of so much Cowardice, as to
quit its Interest, because I meet with a multitude of Opposers. Although your
Objections do carry the fairest show along with them of any thing I have met
with of this kind; yet I don't at all doubt, but very easily to clear my self
from them, the which I shall endeavor to do with as much Candor and Friendship
as you propose them.

Letter. I have perused your ingenious Treatise of the Gout, in which you seem
to accuse Alkalies as the Original of all Distempers: Before I subscribe to
this Opinion, I desire to be satisfied in a few Points. The Grand Argument on
which you build your Hypothesis, is taken from the green Color of the Serum,
which arises from its mixture with Syrup of Violets. It must be confessed, that
Alkalies usually give it this Tincture, and there may be something of an
Alkaly, or at least analagous to it, in the Serum: But notwithstanding this,
the many Inferences which you are pleased to draw from this Phenomenon, in my
opinion will hardly hold good.

Answer. As for my accusing Alkalies as the Cause of all or most Distempers, I
must confess it was a very bold Undertaking, especially when by so doing, I
opposed such Multitudes of Great and Learned Men, who by very strenuous and
learned Arguments asserted the quite contrary; whom I could not suppose but
that I should greatly displease, by disturbing them in the quiet possession of
an Opinion that had long been embraced by all sorts of people. I my self, as I
elsewhere acknowledge, was formerly as great a Stickler for the Use of Alkalies
in the Cure of Diseases, and did as little believe that they were the Causes of
them, as any one of my hottest Opposers now does. The Methods by which I came
to change my Sentiments I shall here faithfully relate to you.

Whilst I was fairly jogging on in the ordinary Method of Practice, a certain
Gentleman recommended to me a powerful Acid, which he told me I might rely upon
in the Cure of some sorts of Fevers. When I considered the thing as an Exalted
Acid, I could scarce give the least Credit to what he said, tho at the same
time I knew he had no design to impose upon me: however considering the fatal
Success that frequently attended the Use of Alkalies and Alexipharmicks, (which
however at that time I durst not attribute to the Medicines, but the Malignity
of the Distempers) I was resolved, upon the first poor Patient I had in a
Fever, to try what the forementioned Acid would do; and after a Multitude of
Trials, both upon Poor and Rich, I found I could by the means of my Acid cure
most sorts of Fevers much more effectually and certainly than ever I before
could by the means of Alkalies and Alexipharmicks. The Effects of this
Medicine, (which is a very cheap one, and known to every body) backed with some
other Observations, put me upon thinking that Fevers and other Distempers did
not proceed from the Blood's abounding with Acid Particles, but on the contrary
with Alkalious ones: for if it had abounded with Acids, the giving of more
Acids must have aggravated the Symptoms, whereas on the contrary, I found by
the means of my simple Acid (which however was communicated to me as the
greatest Secret) I could take off the most dreadful Symptoms attending most
Fevers with all the Ease imaginable. Upon which being greatly in love with
Chemistry and Chemical Operations; and having a convenient Laboratory, and all
Necessaries at hand, I was resolved to examine the Blood of Persons in all
Distempers as fast as I could conveniently procure it, to see what Substances
abounded; and after a multitude of Experiments in most Cases, I could never
find any reason to charge Acids in any one. And that I may not be defective in
my Duty to so friendly and ingenious an Objector, I shall here trouble you with
some of my first Experiments.

Experiment I.
JUly the fifteenth I committed to Distillation the Blood of a corpulent Lady
of a sanguine Complexion, who eats and drinks highly, and who had formerly had
for some Years together an inveterate Leprosy, which I cured by Cinnabarine
Medicines, etc. But at that time she had a severe Fit of a Rheumatism,
occasioned by Cold taking. This Blood and Serum, as it came out of the Veins,
weighed two Ounces, one Dram: I obtained from it nine Drams of a clear Phlegmy
Liquor a little impregnated with Volatile Alkalious Salt, which although it was
scarce manifest to the Taste, yet it might readily be discerned by pouring a
little of it upon some good Syrup of Violets, which it presently would turn
green. Besides which Phlegmy Liquor, I obtained five Drams ten Grains of a
strong Volatile Alkalious Spirit, as strong as the Spirit of Hartshorn usually
sold in the Shops; sixty five Grains of fetid Oil; and in the bottom of the
Retort there remained seventy Grains of a light Caput Mortuum.

Experiment II.
JUly the thirtieth I committed to Distillation seven Ounces three Drams of the
Blood of a Woman, who had for about three Weeks labored under great
Obstructions of her Nerves; she had a Lassitude and Faintness upon her, and in
this time from Fatness she became very lean, and so weak as not to be able to
go about the House; she likewise complained of a wonderful Coldness and
Numbness in her Head, and was so deaf as not to hear any thing unless People
spoke very loud to her. She had always before this Illness been used to eat and
drink well, and was of a Constitution somewhat Phlegmatic. This seven Ounces
three Drams of Blood, Serum, and all together, such as it came out of the Veins
without standing to putrefy, afforded four Ounces five Drams of Phlegm, and in
the Neck of the Receiver that caught the Phlegm a few Grains of Volatile Salt
in a dry form, with which the Phlegm was so impregnated, that it would readily
turn Syrup of Violets green. One Ounce five Drams and 15 Grains of a strong
Volatile Alkaline Spirit, two Drams six Grains of fetid Oil, and in the bottom
of the Retort there remained two Drams two Scruples of a very light Caput
Mortuum.

Experiment III.
AUgust the first I committed to Distillation two Ounces and a half of the
Blood of a Person in a deep Consumption, who had a constant Hectic, and
coughed much, bringing up by Coughing a great quantity of purulent Matter: He
was worn away to a mere Skeleton, his Appetite quite gone, and so
short-breathed, that he was not able to walk at all: He sweat much for the
first part of the Night, and when the Sweats left him, he burnt prodigiously.
It produced one Ounce six Drams of Phlegm, three Drams and a half of a strong
Alkaline Spirit, thirty five Grains of fetid Oil, and sixty two Grains of Caput
Mortuum as light as a Feather.

Experiment IV.
AUgust the fourth I committed to Distillation the Blood of a Gentleman, who
had scrophulous, cancerous Tumors in two parts of his Body, which at some
times would be ulcerated, and at other times after the use of a certain Remedy,
the Ulcers would be healed, but the Tumors still remained. This Blood weighed
three Ounces six Drams, and a Scruple: It produced two Ounces one Dram of
insipid Phlegm, seven Drams and a half of Volatile Alkalious Spirit; of fetid
Oil forty Grains, and of Caput Mortuum one Dram eighteen Grains.

Experiment V.
AT the same time I committed to Distillation the Blood of a Gentlewoman, who
had for many Years been afflicted with the Stone in the Kidneys, and at that
time labored under the most terrible Fit of the Gout that ever I saw: It
weighed two Ounces seven Drams, two Scruples and seven Grains. It afforded two
Drams of a most volatile Alkalious Spirit before the Phlegm, one Ounce four
Drams of Phlegm, and six Drams twelve Grains of Volatile Alkalious Spirit of
the common sort; two Drams of fetid Oil, and one Dram and half of Caput
Mortuum. The Volatile Alkalious Spirit that came over before the Phlegm in this
Experiment, was what I never saw before; but her Fit of the Gout was also the
most extraordinary that ever I met with, there being scarce a Joint of any of
the extreme Parts that was not at one and the same time affected.

Experiment VI.
AUgust the tenth I committed to Distillation four Ounces two Drams of the
Blood of a young Man of a sanguine Complexion, and in a state of Health: It
afforded two Ounces six Drams of Phlegm that was perfectly insipid, and so
destitute of Volatile Alkaly, that an Ounce of it would but just discolor a
very small quantity of Syrup of Violets. It afforded also five Drams of an
Alkalious Spirit, three Drams of heavy Oil, and two Drams four Grains of Caput
Mortuum; which being broke into small Atoms, each Atom appeared in my
Microscope to be so many little Bodies of Fire. This Phenomenon very rarely
appears, but when it does so, it is for the most part in the Caput mortuum of
the Blood of people in a state of Health.

Experiment VII.
THe same day I committed to Distillation the Blood of a Gentlewoman, who for
many Years had had a short convulsive Cough, and always subject to an
Obstruction of her Menses; she was then big with Child, and besides her Cough,
she then complained of a Sickness in her Stomach, and a loss of Appetite, with
a lurking Fever, and an Inflammation in her Face. It weighed seven Ounces six
Drams, and afforded four Ounces four Drams and a half of Phlegm, impregnated
with a highly Volatile Alkalious Gas, that would readily turn Syrup of Violets
green, and in quantity would effervesce with Spirit of Niter, Sea Salt,
Vitriol, etc. It afforded also one Ounce four Drams of highly exalted Alkalious
Spirit, one Drop of which would turn a considerable quantity of a strong
Solution of Syrup of Violets as green as Grass; about ten Grains of light Oil
that swam upon the Spirit, and three Drams of a heavy fetid Oil, that sunk to
the bottom of it, and two Drams two Scruples of Caput mortuum.

Experiment VIII.
AUgust the eleventh I committed to Distillation three Ounces two Drams of the
Blood of a Man of a black swarthy Complexion, and of a highly scorbutical habit
of Body. It afforded one Ounce three Drams and ten Grains of Phlegm, with a
little volatile Alkalious Gas mixed with it; one Ounce fifteen Grains of a
highly strong Alkalious Spirit, two Drams of fetid Oil, which all sunk to the
bottom, and two Drams of Caput mortuum.

Experiment IX.
AUgust the twelfth I committed to Distillation the Blood of a Maid of a pale
Complexion, who had what we call the Green Sickness: It weighed three Ounces
six Drams, and afforded one Ounce seven Drams of Phlegm, unmixt with Gas, one
Ounce two Drams and a half of a strong Alkalious Spirit, one Dram two Scruples
and a half of fetid Oil, which all sunk to the bottom, and one Dram and a half
of Caput mortuum.

Experiment X.
I Committed to Distillation three Ounces two Drams of the Blood of a very
worthy Gentleman, who was very Hypocondriacal, and had had a very great Pain in
his Back and Hips of many Years, and once a month had violent distending Pains
in his left Side, and at that time was much troubled with Wind. It afforded me
of an insipid Phlegm one Ounce six Drams; of a highly impregnated Alkalious
Spirit one Ounce two Drams and a half; of fetid Oil, which all sunk to the
bottom, one Dram seventeen Grains; of Volatile Alkalious Salt, which stuck in
the Neck of the Retort in a dry form, seventeen Grains; and of Caput mortuum
one Dram five Grains.

Experiment XI.
SEptember the ninth I committed to Distillation three Ounces of the Blood of
an Honorable Lady, who had had for two Years a scrophulous Tumor in one of her
Breasts, and of a very scorbutic habit of body, and subject to wandering Pains
and nervous Obstructions: It afforded one Ounce six Drams of Phlegm, six Drams
of strong Alkalious Spirit, one Dram seven Grains of fetid Oil, and one Dram
ten Grains of Caput mortuum.

I could add a multitude of Experiments of this kind, but they belonging to
another Piece, I have thought fit to trouble you with no more; and in relation
to these few, I think it necessary to premise a few things, that I may make
things as clear as may be.

To avoid the grand Objection, that by exposing things to violent Fires there
are new Substances produced, which were not existent in the Concrete before,
(which Objection I shall take occasion to make appear to be but a very trifling
one) I took the following Method, as the only one by which I could most clearly
satisfy my self, being the most plain and easy one imaginable.

I first of all put the Blood as it came out of the Veins, Serum, and all
together, into a glass Retort with a very wide Mouth, to which I had a Receiver
adapted as fit as possibly I could. I afterward put my Retort into a sand
Furnace, under which I made a very gentle Fire, which I increased by degrees,
till the Drops began to fall at about a Second's distance one from another; in
which state I continued it, till the Phlegm was all come over, and unless in
one or two very extraordinary Cases I have always found the Phlegm come over
first, which perhaps to some may appear a Paradox, that what we commonly call
Volatile Spirit and Salt should not rise before the Phlegm; but upon trial, I
am sure whoever will give themselves so much trouble, will find it true. When
it had dropped so long that one Drop being dropped upon two Drams of a strong
Solution of Syrup of Violets would turn it green, I then changed my Receiver,
and continued my Fire till nothing more would come over; and this last I call
Spirit, having always a proportion more or less of a fetid Oil mixed with it.
Now what we call Spirit of this kind, is only a proportion of Volatile
Alkalious Salt mixed with so much Phlegm as will well dissolve it: Therefore I
confess the most nice way of making these Experiments, is to separate the
Volatile Alkalious Salt by it self, without any mixture of Phlegm; but every
Experiment requiring a fresh Vessel, and the Vessels themselves being very
chargable, it would be almost impossible for any private Man to make a
sufficient number of Experiments without the assistance of the Public, which
occasioned me in the Preface to my Tract of the Gout, to propose a Public
Stock to carry on this Work, to bring things to an absolute certainty, if
possible.

However, although these Experiments are not the most accurate that might be made,
yet they are plain and easy, and are capable of being made by those who want
the common Apparatus for a Laboratory. An Iron Pot set up in the Corner of a
Chimny, with a few Retorts and Receivers, are all that are necessary for the
making of these Experiments; whereas for the other sort there are required long
bolt- Heads, each of which will serve but for one Experiment, with nice
Furnaces, and so much other charge and trouble, that few private Men are either
capable or willing to be at, to make such a number of Experiments that are
requisite. But by the way I have set down, a Man may make a vast number of
Experiments for a small charge; it is but going by one Rule in the making of
them: and I don't see, but a Man may act with as much certainty as in the
other, only I must confess it is more liable to the Objections of Cavillers;
but for such I have no value, it being only for such candid ingenious Persons
as your self, for whom I am willing to take pains.

Let a Man but nicely observe to change the Receiver, when one Drop will turn
the Syrup of Violets green, and that Blood that affords the greatest quantity
of such Spirit afterward that abounds with such Particles, may reasonably be
supposed, nay I think does certainly appear to abound most with Volatile
Alkaly, or at least what by all Mankind is taken to be such, it answering all
the Phenomenon that Spirit of Hartshorn and Salt Armoniack will do; affecting
the Palate in the same manner, and making an Effervescence with all sorts of
Acid Spirits, such as Spirit and Oil of Vitriol, Sulphur, Sea Salt, Nitre,
Vinegar, etc. Now if such a Substance as this be not to be called an Alkaly, I
should be glad to be informed what is; but it is what I at present call so for
want of a better Name: and that Blood that by this simple easy way of
Distillation affords the greatest quantity of Spirit of equal Strength, I
cannot forbear to charge with abounding with a greater quantity of Alkaly than
that which affords less. And in examining the foregoing Experiments, it plainly
appears that the Blood of People laboring under the Distempers there
mentioned, does afford a much greater quantity than that of the healthy Person;
that of the Person in a Consumption affording the least of any of those in a
morbid state, for which a very good reason may be given: the great quantity of
luxuriant Alkaly being thrown upon the Lungs, which causes the Ulceration
there, and the discharge of such a quantity of Pus or Matter afterward as
emaciates the Body even to a Skeleton.

As for the Fire's producing new Substances, which were not existent in Bodies
before, or which is more pertinent to the point in hand, making Acids Alkalies
or Alkalies Acids, or producing Alkalies or Acids from Bodies in which they did
not exist before, I think there is not the least weight in it: I am sure it is
contrary to my Experience, and I believe to the Experience of all inquisitive
Chemists that have ever gone before me; tho I confess there have been some
superficial ones that have dreamt such things; but to the best of my
apprehension, without the least reason for so doing. I never could find, but
manage Vitriol in what manner, or with what degree of Fire you please, and it
will always produce an Acid Spirit; do the same by Hartshorn, Blood, etc. and
it will always produce an Alkalious one, or at least what we call so: for if
people will cavil about Words, we shall never have an end of Controversies; and
indeed most of the great Controversies we have had in the World have been more
about Words than Things; Men have contended more earnestly for the Shadow than
the Substance. But my present Controversy with my Worthy Brethren is not such;
our Difference is whether Diseases proceed from the Blood's abounding with
Alkalious or Acid Substances, things which differ much more than in Name, their
Natures being directly opposite one to the other. I confess there are some who
have complained both of me and others that have written concerning Alkaly and
Acid, that we have not sufficiently explained our selves what we mean by those
Names: This I take to be a Dispute about Words only, since there are few People
in this day, who upon the first view of any of those things of either Tribe,
especially of the manifest ones, cannot readily give their Judgments to which
they belong, and this even amongst those who are not Physicians: and therefore
although we may not be able perhaps to give an exact Definition of the Words; yet
since by these Words all people know we mean such and such Substances whose
Natures are directly contrary, that ought to breed no difference. And for my
part, I know no other use of Words, than by the means of them to impart my Mind
to others; and if that Intention be once answered, I care for no more, but
shall leave the Philologists to squabble as long as they please. But as for the
producing either Alkalies or Acids by the means of Fire out of those Bodies in
which they did not exist before, or the changing of an Acid into an Alkaly, or
producing either out of the other that was simply one of them before; if any
one will show me such an Experiment, or demonstrate such a thing without
Fallacy, I shall own my self his humble Servant.

As for the Inferences I draw from the Serum of the Blood turning a Solution of
Syrup of Violets from a blue Color to that of Greenness, being what all
manifest Alkalies will do, all manifest Acids changing the same blue Color
into Redness; I see no reason at all that I have to recede from what I have
said concerning that matter: For if it be true that all manifest Acids do
change a Solution of Syrup of Violets from a blue Color to that of Redness,
and all manifest Alkalies do change the said blue Color into a green one; if
the Serum of the Blood does so change the Color, a Man may, to the best of my
Apprehension, without Presumption conclude, that that Serum which does change a
Solution of Syrup of Violets from blue to green, does abound with Alkalious
Particles: And I am sure if it did abound with Acids, it would not fail of
changing the blue Color of the said Solution into a red one: Which is a thing
any Man may easily try; let but a sufficient quantity of any Acid Spirit be
mixed with the Serum of a sick Man's Blood that will before in a small quantity
turn a very large quantity of Solution of Syrup of Violets from blue to
Greenness; if the Acid be so much as will overpower the Alkaly in the Serum,
instead of turning a Solution of Syrup of Violets green, it will immediately
upon the mixing of it become red.

But that you may see I am not the only Person who has made use of this
Experiment to distinguish between Alkalies and Acids, I shall produce an
Authority or two for my so doing. Dr. Fran. Andre of Caen, in his Discourse
concerning Acid and Alkaly, page the 65th, English Translation, tells us, That
the principal Cause of permanent Colors comes only from the different nature
and different mixture of Acid Salts with Alkaly Salts, which we may observe by
diverse Experiments.

Experiment I.
All Acids destroy blue Colors, and all Alkalies make them reappear.

Experiment II.
Syrup of Violets, which is a composition of Acid and Alkaly, becomes of the
fairest green in the World when it is mingled with some Alkaly, as with Oil of
Tartar made per deliquium, and reddish when some Acid is mingled therewith.

Swalve in his Tract of Alkali and Acidum, page 141. has it much to the same
purpose: Syrupum Violarum prae oculis habeto, quia suspectam habes Solutionem
plumbeam per Acetum in Saccharum redactam. Syrupus ille ab Acido quovis
rufescit, ab Alkali virescit; hinc inservit aptissime dignotioni utriusque.
Quodvis Acidum eum sistit rubrum, sicut quodvis Alkali viridem, fixa and
volatilia uniusmodi sunt, etc.

But my Hypothesis does not altogether hang upon so slender a Thread as the
change of Color, tho that be a better Foundation than a great many Hypotheses
are built upon. You may very well remember that I brought this Experiment upon
the Stage, only to satisfy Gentlemen who have not the convenience of making
more elaborate ones: And all Mankind having imbibed the Notion that if any
thing ailed them, they immediately concluded that it proceeded from an Acidity
of their Blood; I therefore thought it my Duty to convince them of the contrary
in the most familiar manner I could; but I never expected that Physicians
should take up with it, I referring them to a more certain Method, viz. to
analize the Blood of their sick Patients, and to compare the Substances
produced from it, with the Substances produced from the Blood of People in a
state of Health: And if once they will but take that Method, I am morally
certain that the number of my Enemies will every day decrease. But let People
continue to say what they will of me, I shall endeavor to satisfy my self, and
to act for my Patients with as clear a Conscience as possibly I can: And if
after all I am reproached by my Brethren, I must bear it as well as I can. It
never will be in any Physician's power to make people Immortal; but at the same
time I am absolutely certain that peoples Lives are frequently prolonged by the
use of proper Remedies; and I doubt not but that they are also shortened by the
use of improper ones: And if we are mistaken as to the Cause of Diseases, I
don't see how we can readily find out proper Medicines.

Letter. For first if this Alkalisated Serum is the Original of Distempers,
then it must follow that wheresoever we find this Serum, there must be likewise
a Distemper: now I appeal to your self if the Blood of a healthy Person will
not give Syrup of Violets a green Tincture, does not then the Argument labor?
may we not then impute this Phenomenon to arise rather from a due mixture of
the Principles than from any vitiated Habit of Blood?

Answer. I confess this is close arguing, and much to the purpose: But you may
remember that I no where say that the Serum of well Persons Blood will not turn
a Solution of Syrup of Violets from a blue Color to that of Greenness. But on
the other hand, I have asserted that the Blood of those laboring under any
Distemper I have met with will do it, in order to prove that the said
Distempers did not proceed from Acids; because if it had abounded with Acids,
instead of turning it from blue to green, it would, as is before observed, have
turned it from blue to red. Well, but still the Serum of the Blood of a well
Person will cause the same change in the Solution of Syrup of Violets as that
of a sick one; and therefore to rid my self of that Difficulty is the great
thing I have now to do.

First, I all along throughout my Tract of the Gout, the Piece you refer to,
and elsewhere, do endeavor to prove that the Blood of Persons in a morbid
state does more abound with Alkalious Particles than that of well Persons, but
no where say that the Blood of well Persons has no Alkaly in it: And that the
Blood of sick People in all or most Distempers does abound with such Particles
more than that of those that are in a state of Health, is to be demonstrated
several Ways: First, If you take an equal Proportion of the Serum of the Blood
of a healthy Person, and of that of a Person in a Fever, Pleurisy, etc. and
pour them into the same Quantities of Solution of Syrup of Violets of equal
Strength, you will find that wherein the Serum of the sick Person's Blood was
poured, to be much greener than the other. Secondly, If you take two Ounces of
the Blood of a healthy Person as it comes out of the Veins, Serum, and all
together, and two Ounces of the Blood of a Person in a Fever, Pleurisy, a Fit
of the Gout, etc. and commit them to Distillation in the same degree of Heat,
you will find that the Blood of the sick Person will produce a much greater
quantity of Alkaly than that of the Person in a state of Health.

Secondly, What shall I do with this Alkaly that is to be found in the Blood of
healthy Persons? Because every Body has some Alkaly in their Blood, must every
Body therefore labor under some Distemper? Why truly I cannot say that I ever
yet met with that Person, who upon strict Enquiry had not some Complaint or
other to make. Mankind since the Fall is subject to Death every moment; there
being since that time a Principle of Death, in opposition to that of Life,
implanted in our Natures; and not only in our Natures, but in the Natures of
every thing else for our sakes: And God said to Adam (upon his Fall) Cursed be
the Ground for thy sake, etc. I confess there are many in our Age, who will
laugh at and ridicule me for having recourse to Sacred Writ, especially to the
Writings of Moses, which they look upon as a kind of Romance; but let them
laugh on. If there were not a Principle of Death within us, how is it possible
for a Man one Hour to be in a good state of Health, and the very next to be
expiring? How this may be I shall endeavor to demonstrate as clearly as
possibly I can.

All the Alkaly that there is to be found in the Blood is most certainly an
Excrement, and in a way of being carried off by some of the Emunctories; and if
any of the Emunctories chance to be stopped, that this excrementitious Alkaly
has not room to pass out by them, why then there is a Distemper of some kind
or other caused, the Blood being overcharged with this excrementitious Matter.
How many Distempers are occasioned by what we call taking of Cold, which is
nothing else but a Constipation of the Pores? What is the Occasion of the
Jaundice, but an Obstruction of those Vessels in the Liver, which separate the
bilious Particles from the Blood? and what dreadful Distempers does the
Jaundice frequently cause? How are Mortals tormented by the Stone in the
Kidneys and Bladder? and what is the original Cause of them, but an Obstruction
in the Kidneys, whereby the excrementitious Alkaly, which should be carried off
that way, by its over long stay in those Parts is converted into that Substance
we call a Stone? And whoever will give themselves the trouble of distilling
Stones either from the Kidneys or Bladder, will find that they are composed of
Alkalious Particles. I could expatiate, and I doubt not give an Account of the
Cause of all or most of the Distempers attending Human Bodies, from the
excrementitious Alkaly being hindered from being carried off by the proper
Emunctories. And I appeal to all Candid Ingenious Persons, even those who are
my greatest Enemies, whether all the Excrements of our Bodies are not Alkalies.
When I speak of Excrements, I don't mean that which is carried off by Stool, I
having told you in another Place, that my squeamish Stomach would never yet
give me leave to make Experiments upon that, to know what Parts it contained,
but every Body knows that the Bile is the greatest part, if not all of it,
carried off that way; and that the Bile is an Alkaly I suppose no Body doubts.

I know there are a great many who will reply, That we will allow you that the
Matter, or at least the Saline Substance that is discharged by the Glands of
the Skin, by Urine, the Bile, Tears, etc. are Alkalious; but there is another
Excrement, the which you take no notice of, which is a very considerable one,
and that is the Matter discharged from the Glands of the Mouth, called Spittle,
which in all respects seems to be an Acid. To which I answer,

That the Saliva or Spittle is so far from being an Excrement, that it is one
of the most noble Juices that our Body affords; it being the only Menstruum
that Nature has furnished us with for the dissolving of the solid Food we eat,
and turning it into a nutritious Juice: For by chewing of our Meat we compress
the Salival Glands, and cause them to throw out a sufficient quantity of the
Juice contained in them; which being mixed with the Food, is along with it
carried into the Stomach, where the Office of Digestion is performed. But those
People, who swallow their Meat without chewing, seldom or never digest it, and
are always lean. Now when I speak of Saliva or Spittle, I don't mean that
inviscated, coagulated Substance that People hauk up in a Morning, or discharge
when they have a Cold as they call it, that being a degenerate Saliva; but I
mean that thin, Limpid Substance that some great Tobacco-Takers lavishly let
run from them: which is the only reason that the smoking of Tobacco takes away
most Men's Appetites; for would they smoke Tobacco as a great and worthy Prelate
and my self do, and as all the Turkish Nation do, which is to swallow their
Spittle, they would rarely want an Appetite.

But that I may return to my proper Business, which is to prove that all the
Alkaly we have in our Blood is an Excrement, and in a way of being carried off
as such, or for want of being carried off, would cause a Distemper of some kind
or other. And here give me leave to acquaint you, that according to the best of
my Apprehension, the Matter of all our Distempers is the same; but according to
the difference of the Part immediately affected, the Distemper differs: And
indeed when I consider the wonderful Structure of our Bodies, of what
Multitudes of minute Parts it is composed, instead of being surprised at our
being sick and out of order so often as we are, I am almost amazed to think we
are ever well. All Alkalies that I know of will presently cause Rottenness and
Putrefaction in Animal Substances, as may be seen in making of Glovers Leather,
an Instance of which I have given in my Tract of the Gout, from a very good
hand. Nay it is a thing very easily to be experimented by any one, for let but
a Piece of Flesh of any kind be put into a Liquor well impregnated with Alkaly,
and in a small time (tho in the Winter, when things are not subject to putrefy)
it will turn to a mere Putrilago, a Mass of Rottenness and Corruption. Whereas
let a Piece of the same Flesh be put into Liquor impregnated equally strong
with any Acid, and it will preserve it from Putrefaction. Alkalies, whether
Volatile or fixed, being applied to the Skin, will either cause a Mortification,
or destroy the Tone of the Part; whereas Acids of equal Strength will prevent
Mortifications, where they are actually beginning, and frequently restore the
Parts to their Tone, where it is lost.

But it may very reasonably be asked, where is the Acid in the Blood that does
us all that Service you speak of, or what becomes of all the Acid we take in,
you owning Bread to be an Acid, and several other things that are every day
used by all Mankind, when in your Analysis of the Blood you mention no such
thing, and seem to intimate, that although People take them in never so great
quantities, yet they never abound so as to cause a Distemper? This is what may
reasonably be offered, and is very necessary that I should clear as well as I
can.

The Life of Man I take to be a Fire or Flame, and all we eat and drink,
together with the Air we draw in, to be as Fuel for this Flame; and that which
is not proper Fuel for it is cast off as Excrement. Now I appeal to all Mankind
conversant in Chemistry, whether the Excrements of Fire, or of the Fuel of
which it is made, viz. Ashes and Soot, be not Alkalies; and that our Lives are
nothing else but a Flame or Fire of the same Nature with that commonly used, or
very analogous to it, I think is plain.

It is the Nature of all common Fire to consume whatever is a proper Pabulum or
Fuel for it, and to leave its Excrements behind it, which, as is before
observed, are Ashes and Soot; in the Ashes is contained a fixed Alkaly, and in
the Soot a Volatile one. It is very plain that the Body of Man would soon be
consumed, unless supplied with proper Food; and how could this be, unless there
were something to consume it?

Common Fire cannot subsist where there is not a due Access of Air to it: Is it
not the very same thing with the Life of Man? let him be but enclosed in a
Place where the Air is not capable of coming at him, and immediately he
expires. It is well known that it is the common Practice of Miners, and those
who have occasion to go into subterraneous Vaults or Passages, to carry
Candles, Torches, or some such things along with them, not more for the
convenience of the Light they afford them in such dark Places, than for the
Security they are to them against the most imminent Danger, viz. the Loss of
their Lives: for as soon as they once perceive their Lights begin to grow dim,
common Prudence and Experience teaches them to retreat; and whoever has chanced
to be so foolhardy as to advance after the Light has been extinguished, has
scarce ever returned either to repent, or give an account of his Folly. A fatal
Accident of this kind happened to two Men in a great Vault in a Yard belonging
to my Father's House, into which Vault, if we put a large Pan of Charcoal well
lighted, they would be extinguished in a moment; and the two Men before
mentioned, as near as we could guess, lost their Lives in as small a time.

Heat and Warmth are the constant Concomitants of Fire: And that there is both
Heat and Warmth in the Body of Man, none that is Master of his Senses will
deny: But why should I make a Distinction between Heat and Warmth, when they
only differ in degree? But not to stand any longer about that matter: How is it
possible for the Heat of our Bodies to be sustained, unless there were a Fire
within us to do it? We are generally as hot, if not hotter in Bed, although we use
no Exercise to excite the Motion of our Blood and Juices, than when we are up
and in motion. Nay, mere Motion, let the great Des Carts and his Followers say
what they will, will never cause any Heat in fluid Bodies, although excited never
so much: I confess in solid ones, upon violent Friction or the like, there will
a Heat arise; but what relation has that to us, when we are asleep?

There is a received Maxim, that there is no Smoke but there is some Fire:
Every Body must be sensible what vast quantities of Steams there are
continually discharged from all Parts of our Bodies; and how that comes to be,
unless occasioned from some Fire within us, I cannot understand.

I confess I have the Concurrence of some of the greatest Men perhaps the World
has afforded, that the Life of Man is a Flame; but at present I have not
leisure to peruse their Writings to see what they have said upon this Subject.

If any Man shall ask me, how this Flame came to be first kindled? I shall make
no other reply, but desire him to inform me how the Ovum came to be impregnated
with the Masculine Seed, so as to make it capable of producing a Human Body?
and when he has done that, I will quickly tell him how this Flame came to be
first kindled.

The next thing I have to do, is to confider what is the proper Pabulum or Fuel
for Fire, and this every body knows must be something that is sulphurous: Now
there is scarce a Sulphur we know of that is not combined with an Acid;
Sulphurs seeming to be the genuine Vehicles for Acids, with which they are
generally united, few Sulphurs being devoid of Acids, and few Acids devoid of
Sulphurs; and as the one or the other predominates, so they are denominated
either Acido-Sulphurea or Sulphureo-Acida. As Sulphurs are the Vehicles of
Acids, so Acids seem to be a sort of Vinculum to Sulphurs, by the means of
which they are hindered from Dissipation. Whenever a Sulphur is devoid of Acid,
it is of so Volatile a Nature, that it is scarcely to be preserved from
Dissipation: Not that I suppose any Sulphurs to be perfectly destitute of an
Acid; but the less Acid they have mixed with them, the more Volatile they are;
such are Rectified Spirit of Wine, Camphire, etc. And Mr. Godfry assures me
that he can make Spirit of Wine so Volatile, that a Drop of it will not fall to
the Ground, but disappear almost as soon as it is disingaged from the Mouth of
the Bottle in which it is contained. Now the purer the Pabulum is, the less
Excrement is produced; Spirit of Wine and Camphire produce little or no
Excrement at all; whereas Oil Olive, Beeswax, Tallow, etc. afford a great deal
of Soot, in which is contained the Volatile Alkaly. Most Vegetables commonly in
use for burning, afford a great quantity both of Ashes and Soot, some more of
one, and less of the other; as Oak a great quantity of Ashes in which is
contained the fixed Alkaly, and but a little Soot, in which the Volatile Salt is
contained. Beech on the other hand produces but a small quantity of Ashes, but
a large quantity of Soot: this is what I have been informed of by those who
burn quantities of Wood. The Substances we live upon, and are nourished with,
are not to be reckoned amongst the number of those which afford no Excrement
upon burning: and by the way I cannot understand what should become of all we
eat and drink, unless, as is before observed, there were a Fire or Flame within
us to consume it; and the Consumption is so great, that we are not able to live
without a constant and frequent Supply. And which to me is none of the least
Arguments to prove that our Life is a Flame, is what is manifest by every day's
Experience, viz. Let a very fat Man be seized with a Fever, or any such
Distemper, attended with a total loss of Appetite; and the Fat, which is the
proper Fuel for Fire, will first be consumed: and in such Distempers it is
frequently seen that very corpulent Persons will in a small time be wasted to a
Skeleton; when at the same time the sensible Evacuations of Urine and Stool are
less than in a time of Health; which thing could not be, unless there were a
Flame to cause that Consumption: And wherever there is a Fire or Flame,
especially when supplied with gross Matter, there must be a throwing off of
Excrements; which is the reason that the Blood in Fevers, and other Distempers
of that nature, abounds more with Volatile Alkaly than that of well People,
because the Flame is more excited at that time, and the secretory Vessels
designed for that purpose being some way or other obstructed, cannot carry off
the Excrements so fast as they are produced.

Let us consider what all the Alkalious Salts, whether Volatile or fixed, are. I
suppose no one can produce me a fixed Alkaly, which is the bare Product of
Nature: The very Name it self being derived from the Salt of the Ashes of the
Herb Kaly, as I have observed in the Appendix to my Essay of Alkaly and Acid,
in concurrence with several Authors, who have written upon the same Subject;
tho none that I know of have ever written upon it with the same design that I
have done. But that you may see I am not singular, I shall produce two or three
Authorities. Swalve in his Treatise of Alkaly and Acid, page 48. does thus
define it. Originem Nominis Alkali ab incinerata Herba AEgyptiaca Kali
desumptam haud ignoras: Salibus illud fixis and lixivialibus abhinc applicatum;
illudque primario judicatum Alkali, quod Gensin suam e cinere and lixivio
traxerat. Tachenius in his Hippocrates Chymicus defines it much after the same
manner. Fit itaque Sal Kali ex Herba Kali, magna copia in Aegypto proveniente,
quae ibidem viridis exuritur, and ad nos transfertur; a quibusdam vocatur etiam
Soda, Alumen catmum, and vero nomine Sal Kali appellatur; non reperitur tamen
Sal Kali in Natura, nec in omnibus tribus Regnis, nisi ab Artifice ignis open
producatur. For my own part, I could never yet see any such thing as a fixed
Alkaly to be obtained any other way than from the Ashes of Plants, which are
that part of them that is altogether unfit for Fuel for common Fire, they
plainly appearing to me to be an Excrement, and as such will rot and destroy
all Bodies, especially Animal ones, that they are mixed with. In Animal Bodies
there is no such thing to be found unless in the Bile, which is an Excrement,
and seems to be as genuine an Excrement of Fire as any thing whatsoever, both
from its burn Taste, Color, etc. and I am sure if it be detained in the Body,
will play the Devil.

As for Volatile Alkalies, they are to be found in Soot, in Plants after
Putrefaction, in Urine, in Horns and Hoofs of Animals, and in Blood; and although
Sweat abound with a great quantity of it, yet that is not to be obtained in
quantities sufficient to draw Volatile Salt from it. Soot is the Volatile
Excrement of Fire, or of the Matter of which Fire is made. Urine is an
Excrement of our Bodies, and the Volatile Salt in it the Excrement of Animal
Fire, or of that which is its Pabulum or Fuel. The Horns and Hoofs of Beasts
are generally allowed to be excrementitious Parts of their Bodies, and they
afford the greatest quantity of Volatile Salt of any thing besides. As for
Blood, the Volatile Alkaly to be obtained from it, is only the excrementitious
part of it, or rather of the vital Flame, or the Pabulum of it, in a way of
being carried off by some of the Emunctories, which, if it chance to be
obstructed in its Passage, affects the Body with some Distemper or other. As
for the Volatile Salt to be obtained from Plants after Putrefaction, I shall
give you a particular account of it, by reason that some Men have made a great
stir about it, and spent a great deal of time in quest after it, supposing it
to be one of the grand Medicines of Nature. Most, if not all Vegetables do
principally consist of a Volatile Acid and a Sulphur, which make them a proper
Fuel for Fire: Now let any of the Aromatic Plants, such as Rosemary, Sage,
Lavender, Mint, etc. be well dried, and afterward be put into a Hole in a
moist Cellar, and rammed down very hard; let them lie without a Cover till they
grow hot; after they have done so some time, and the Acido-sulphureous parts
are exhaled (which is much the same, as if they had been burnt) they will then
contract a stinking ill Smell; when they are in this state, put them into a
tall glass Bottle, with a glass Head, and in gentle Heat of Sand you will
obtain a Volatile Alkalious Spirit and Salt, good for nothing else that I know
of, but to bring other Bodies into the same state of Corruption that the Plants
from which it was extracted were before it was drawn from them. Thus I have let
you see what is my Judgment concerning Alkalies, and how they are produced.

But as for the Acid that we take in as Food and otherwise, that, together with
the Sulphur, are made use of as a Pabulum or Fuel for the vital Flame; and were
not the sulphurous Particles in some measure suppressed and detained by the
means of an Acid, the Thread of our Lives would be but very short. Dr. Andre of
Caen in Normandy in his Discourse of Alkaly and Acid; speaking of Acid, page
21. Engl. Translation, he says, There is nothing in this World which owes not
its birth to an Acid Salt: Nothing can live nor be multiplied without it: It is
that Soul of the World, of which the Ancients have so often told us. Tachenius
in his Clavis Hippocratis Medicinae, from page 3, to page 11. gives strange
Encomiums of it, some of which I shall here transcribe. Speaking of Acid, he
brings in Lullius. Nos and multi alii, inquit, vocamus illum Filium Solis: nam
primo per Solis influentiam fuit generatus per naturam sine adjutorio scientiae
vel artis; and ideo Aristoteles vocavit Solemn patrem and Terram matrem omnium
vegetabilium, etc. He afterward says, Acidum itaque est and pingue
antiquissimum principium, and omnium rerum vita and fons, quod variis nominibus
nominarunt Scriptores, ut ignem, solemn, aurum, spiritum, sulphur, forma, and
sexcentis aliis nominibus, quae omnia synonima sunt, estque eadem res, cui
tamen diverso respectu diversa nomina imponuntur; nobis tamen eam hic and
ubique commodiore opportunitate Acidum vocare libet. Again, A Sole itaque ut a
font defluunt Acidum natural and lumen vitale, quae reipsa sunt idem, sed
officio distinguuntur: Acidi enim munus est ad interiora Naturae penetrare;
luminis vero exteriora patefacere, utcumque solis radii operentur; adeoque Sol
est primum natural organum, cujus accessu and recessu omnes naturae
operationes variae reguntur, intenduntur ac remittuntur. Hinc Cosmopolita
ingeniosissimus; si non esset vis vegetabilis sulphuris (id est Acidum pingue
and filius solis) non coagularetur aqua in herbas: si itaque Acidum a sole
fluens infunditur in materiam ex gr. mineralem statim recipit determinationem
naturae, and virtutis mineralis, and sic de caeteris animalibus, and de
Vegetabilibus rebus dixit Luilius; and propterea quod haec aciditas naturalis
omnibus mundi Materiis copulatur, Mercurii nomen a sapientibus adepta est: Et
licet oculus vulgi quotidie videat Acidi naturalis multiplicationem, nec non
incorporationem, attamen illud non cognoscit: exempli loco sit minera salis
petrae Patavii jam evacuata, quae quinque vel septem annorum decursu rursus
repletur, est enim terra ejus nutrix, Hermete test, unde hic spiritus in illa
corpus assumit, atque fit inflammabile nitrum.

Acids are without doubt the most perfect Bodies in Nature, since they cannot
undergo a Putrefaction; and what we take in by our Mouths is so far from being
too much for us, that besides it we are not able to live without drawing in
fresh Supplies from the Air every moment; and that the Air is filled with Acid
Salts, a Multitude of common and obvious Experiments do evince: as for
instance, Let Vitriol be distilled with the most violent Fire imaginable, so
that it will not yield the least drop of Acid Spirit more; do but take out the
Caput mortuum or Colcathar, and expose it to the open Air under a Shed, where
it may not be rained upon, and in a few months time it will become good Vitriol
again, and yield as much Acid Spirit as it did at first time, and this it will
do ad infinitum: The same thing may be done by the Caput mortuum of Seasalt,
Nitre, etc. Now if the Air did not abound with Acid Particles, from whence came
those insipid Bodies that were totally deprived of the Acid they had in them by
the first Distillation, to regain the same quantity of Acid that they had
before they were distilled? If you expose the Caput mortuum of those things
that by Distillation had afforded an Alkalious Spirit or Salt, that Caput
mortuum will never regain its Alkaly again, let it lie never so long; which
argues plainly that the Particles of the Air are not Alkalious: And therefore
were Acids so injurious to Men's Bodies as some would have us believe they are,
every Draught of Air we take in must poison us, since the Air is full of Acid
Particles; and I believe no body doubts but that the Air has a free
Communication with the Blood, if not by the Lungs, at least by the receptory
Pores of Skin: But I think it is plain that there is a Communication with it
both ways.

By all the ways I could yet contrive, I have not been able to procure one
Grain of pure Acid from the Blood of either healthy or sick People: But in the
before recited Experiments you find there is always a proportion of fetid Oil,
with which Oil the Acid is imbodied to make it a proper Pabulum for the vital
Flame; and when once Acid and Oleaginous Bodies are well united, which they
will very readily do, it is no very easy matter to cause a Separation of them.
Now the reason that this Oil has such a very ill Savor is from its coming
over the Helm along with the Volatile Alkaly; all Alkalies, whether Volatile or
fixed, giving a very ill Smell to sulphurous oleaginous Bodies, especially if
together they are exposed to a great degree of Heat; and the Heat that is
required to bring them over the Helm is much greater than that of our Bodies,
tho in a burning Fever: Yet from the Action of the Volatile excrementitious
Alkaly upon the sulphurous parts of the Blood, may I think a very good reason
be given for the Symptoms that attend most, if not all Fevers; for all Alkalies
destroy Sulphurs, as may be seen in the making of Soap, Hepar Sulphuris, etc.
Sulphurs are the active Principle in both Animal and Vegetable Juices; Alkalies
by breaking and dividing the Particles of the Sulphurs excite Fermentations,
and by degrees cause a total Dissipation of them. Acids are a sort of Vinculum
to Sulphurs, and therefore they suppress Fermentations, and keep the Sulphur
from Dissipation: From whence I infer that a true Oleosum must be the great
Medicine; but it must not be such a one as commonly goes under that Name, which
is only a Combination of Volatile Alkaly with Spirit of Wine and Aromatic Oils
or Spices, instead of which it must be an Acido-oleosum, an exalted Acid,
combined after the foresaid manner: The Life of Man it self being principally
supported by an Acido-oleosum.

If any one asks me what I mean by Sulphur? My Answer is, whatsoever is
inflammable. And with such kind of Substances the World is almost every where
filled: For without them neither the Lives of Men nor Beasts could be any way
supported; and therefore those places that are best supplied with them, are
best stockt with Animals of all kinds; whereas those that are deficient in
them, such as the Deserts of Arabia, etc. are almost wholly destitute of all
kinds of living Creatures.

Letter. But secondly, there is another way of discovering an Alkaly besides
that of its Appearance, and that is by its effects, to wit, its Fermentation
with Spirit of Vitriol. Now I aver this green Serum will not ferment with the
foresaid Spirit: Wherefore if it be an Alkaly, it is an Alkaly of a particular
nature. It must be granted that we oftentimes find in the Blood some Particles
of a very warm nature predominant, in which cases I have found Acids to be of
great use: but whether they are of an Alkaline Nature or not, I leave to the
Learned to determine. If they are Alkalies, then either fixed or Volatile; if
fixed, how comes it to pass, that on the Dissolution of the Texture of the Blood
they claim the highest place, and nothing will serve their turn, but they must
needs swim in the Serum? if Volatile, how is it that we many times find this
warm Serum to be little better than insipid? Volatile Salts you know are
aculeated, and affect the Palate strongly. May they not rather be of a
sulphurous nature, since it is the Nature of such Substances to sit uppermost
on the Dissolution of Bodies?

Answer. I own it is one of the genuine and constant Effects of an Alkaly to
cause an Effervescency, when mixed with Spirit of Vitriol or any other Acid
Spirit; but whether this Effervescency be to be accounted a Fermentation, I
greatly question: Tho Alkalies will excite Fermentation in fermentible Liquors,
as is well known to many Mechanics, and I fear too well by the Brewers about
this City. As for what you mean by the green Serum, which you say will not
ferment or effervesce with Spirit of Vitriol, I cannot tell: But sure I am,
that if you put a little Spirit or Oil of Vitriol into a small Bottle, and upon
that pour some Serum of Blood that will turn Syrup of Violets green, it will
immediately become intensly hot, and a great many Bubbles will immediately
rise, which looks very like a Fermentation, if it be not one: therefore when
you made this Experiment, upon which you are so confident, there must needs be
some Error committed; for upon your urging this thing, the first Opportunity I
had I made the Experiment afresh, and it succeeded the very first time; and I
doubt not, but if you will give your self the trouble of making this Experiment
again, it will not fail of succeeding.

As for those warm Particles that you say are often predominant in the Blood, I
must confess I don't understand what you mean by them; the Blood, whilst we are
in a state of Health, is always warm, the reason of which I have before given
you. If we have a Fever upon us, the Blood exceeds its natural Temper,
according as the Fever is more or less violent: Now the Cause of this Excess of
Heat in a febrile state I take to be as follows; in most Fevers, especially in
the beginning of them, there is a Constipation of some of the Emunctories; so
that the excrementitious Alkaly, which should be carried off by them, is
detained in the Blood, which by breaking of its Globules, and dividing of the
sulphurous Particles, which are the Pabulum of the vital Flame, does either
excite what we call a Fermentation, or rather by dividing the sulphurous
Particles, and subduing the Acid that held them together, does increase the
Flame to an intense degree. An Instance of which we have in common Fire, as I
have elsewhere taken notice of, and shall here again repeat, viz. let the
Matter of which Fire is made be laid close together, and then kindled, and it
will consume leisurely and by degrees; whereas let it be laid at some little
distances one from another, and it will consume with a rapid and intense Flame.
Saltpeter also and Brimstone being mixed together, will burn with a gentle and
easy Flame; but by adding a Proportion of Charcoal-Dust (as is the Method in
making Gunpowder) wherein is contained the fixed Alkaly of the Wood, the said
Alkaly by causing a Division of the Particles of the Nitre and Sulphur, does so
alter the Property of it, that instead of burning placidly and easily, the
least Spark of Fire falling into it, will cause an Explosion, viz. make it take
Fire all at once, and so be consumed as 'twere in an instant. Are not the
Attacques of some Fevers and other acute Distempers much like to this
Explosion, wherein Nature seems to be overthrown, and the whole Course of it
put out of order almost in an instant? This is all at present I think necessary
to take notice of in relation to the warm Particles you speak of; and that
Acids are the only Medicines to suppress this unnatural Heat, I think I have
already made appear. As for the Inferences you are pleased to draw from them, I
think I have nothing more to do with them, but slightly to touch at them, they
having already fallen under my Consideration. And I have sufficiently
demonstrated that Alkalies are the Causes of all preternatural Heats in our
Bodies.

But supposing that preternatural Heats are occasioned by the superabundance of
Alkalies in the Blood, you still seem to be dissatisfied about them also: For,
say you, if they are fixed ones, how comes it to pass that on the Dissolution of
the Texture of the Blood, they claim the highest Place, and nothing will serve
their turn, but they must needs swim in the Serum? if Volatile, how is it that
we oftentimes find this warm Serum little better than insipid? Volatile Salts
you know are aculeated, and affect the Palate strongly. May they not rather be
of a sulphurous Nature, since it is the Nature of such Substances to sit
uppermost on the Dissolution of Bodies?

First, I don't remember that I have any where said that fixed Alkalies do claim
the highest Place in the Dissolution of Bodies, and that they swim uppermost in
the Liquors, in which they are dissolved: But this I believe you infer from my
Experiment with the Serum, which is the lightest part of the Blood, and
therefore is uppermost in the Poringer, after it has stood some time, and that
a Separation is made in the Parts thereof. Now I did not make use of the
Experiment with the Serum and Syrup of Violets, thereby to intimate that Serum
only was over impregnated with Alkalious Particles; but that being the most
colorless part of the Blood, was therefore most proper for such an Experiment:
For should I have made such an Experiment with the fibrous and globulous Parts
of the Blood, which are combined together in one Mass, they are so imbued with
a scarlet Dye, that a small quantity of it would tinge a great quantity of
Solution of Syrup of Violets with the same Color, although at the same time it
were greatly overcharged with Alkalious Particles. Therefore in my plain and
easy way of analizing the Blood, I have made use of it altogether, as it came
out of the Veins. But if a Man considers with what Rapidity the Blood moves
along the Vessels, it is impossible but all the Parts must be so mixed together,
that if the Serum be overcharged with Alkalious Particles, the other parts must
be so also; or if the other parts be overcharged, the Serum must be in like
manner so. But however, as for sixth Alkalies, the Blood is very rarely
overcharged with them, the Substances we take in for our Nourishment affording
very little of them after burning; and therefore Nature has provided but one
Emunctory for the carrying them off, viz. the Ductus Biliaris, which empties it
self into the Duodenum, and is conveyed off along with the Excrement of our
Food by stool: Whereas there are Millions of Emunctories, besides that great
Discharge that is made by Urine, to carry off the Volatile Alkaly. But if at
any time the Glands of the Liver are obstructed, that the fixed Alkaly cannot be
separated from the Blood, what fatal Effects does it produce?

I have scarce ever known a true Ascites (which is that kind of Dropsy that is
scarcely ever to be cured) which has not had its Origin from an Obstruction
of those Vessels in the Liver, which separate the Bile from the Blood. Nay
frequently they have a Jaundice upon them through the whole Course of the
Distemper. But if not so, I never yet knew an Ascites that had not a Jaundice
preceded it; and in what manner the whole Economy of the Body is destroyed in
this Distemper, is but too well known. But this is not the only Distemper that
has its Origin from the Obstruction of these Vessels, tho it be one of the
most dangerous.

Secondly, As for what you say concerning the Insipidness of the Taste of the
warm Serum, I suppose you mean that Serum which is overheated in Fevers, etc.
the Serum being always warm, whilst People are alive. I can assure you it is
contrary to my long Experience; for of many Years, it has been my Custom to
taste the Serum of the Blood not only in Fevers, but all other Distempers,
where I have had occasion to prescribe Blood-letting; and in some Fevers I have
found the Volatile Salt to bite my Tongue very severely, but never once could
find the Serum insipid: and by this way of tasting I can better judge of the
Condition of my Patient than from the Color of the Blood. But in those Cases
where the Serum is much inviscated, as in most Pleurisies, Rheumatisms, and
many Fevers, the Volatile Alkaly is so involved, that it does not very strongly
affect the Taste, tho it is never insipid that I could ever yet find. As for
Volatile Salts being aculeated, and affecting the Palate strongly, I am very
glad you take notice of it, since the general Notion that most people have of
all Alkalies is, that they are of such a sweet, soft, mild Nature, that they
carry a sanative Virtue along with them wherever they go.

Thirdly, I own that sulphurous Substances are wont to sit uppermost in the
Dissolution of Bodies; and that the Blood is impregnated with such Substances,
I am far from denying; but they appear in all respects to be equally
distributed through all its parts: but suppose they should sit uppermost here,
and the Serum more impregnated with them than the globulous and fibrous parts
of the Blood, Sulphurous Substances will not change Syrup of Violets from blue to
green; and the Serum abounding with those Particles that will do so, which are
Alkalies, these Alkalious Particles by breaking and dividing the Particles of
the Sulphur will increase and excite the Flame, I have before taken notice of,
to a more intense degree: For the Serum would not be the more hot, supposing it
did abound with sulphurous Particles, unless the said Particles were some way
or other enkindled.

Letter. But thirdly, if Alkalies are the Original of all Distempers, whence is
it that in Dropsies, Catarrhs, some Gouts, and other Distempers, we find the
Texture of the Blood so thin? It Is observable that those Particles you term
Alkalies, the more the Blood is saturated with them, the more thick consistence
it is of, as we see in Pleurisies, Rheumatisms, and other inflammatory Cases
(in which Distempers, if in any, these Alkalies abound) is not then its Tenuity
rather to be imputed to Acids? Do not Acids immediately put the Blood in a
Fusion, and render it thin?

Answ. In most inflammatory Cases, where the Blood is immediately affected,
there the Serum is viscous and sizy, being overcharged with Alkalious
Particles; but in those Cases you mention, and in some others, where the Blood
is over thin, it is not the over Thinness of the Blood which is the only Cause
of those Diseases, but a Destruction of the Tone of the Parts; and where the
Tone of any Part is once spoiled, the great quantity of excrementitious Matter
is soon thrown thence, and so the Violence of the Malady is increased: Besides,
in Dropsies the Quantity of fluid taken in, they being always thirsty, is so
very disproportionate to what is carried off, they always making Water but in
very small quantities in proportion to what they drink, that it is no marvel
that their Blood is over thin. I have frequently in Dropsies known People drink
three Quarts in a day, when they have not pissed a Pint: And that Acids should
occasion the Thirst that attends Hydropical People, is ridiculous to imagine,
when they are the only things in the World that will quench Thirst. Besides, do
but consider the Nature of the Medicines that are most effectual to bring the
Blood to a Consistence, when it is over thin. I have scarcely ever met with any
thing equal to Calibeats, and that Steel is an Acid I have elsewhere
endeavored to prove: And as a farther Proof of it I shall produce the
Testimony of Beckerus (no contemptible Man) in his Minera Arenaria, page the
88th. Non recensebo jam qualiter ille spiritus esurinus in aquis subterraneis
latitans, varia sibi Salium, Aluminum, Vitriolorum, Sulphurum, Realgarium
mineralium compositionum species producat; nec demonstrabo, qua ratione supra
terram in Aeris regione tractus quidam hujus Acidi spiritus de uno Polo ad
alterum, and perillum acus Magnetica feratur. Hoc tantum hic loci allegabo,
omne Acidum substantiae martialis esse, in quocunque oleo, pinguedine,
fuligine, limo, silice and arena; imo etiam ipsa flamma reperibile, ac ad
oculum demonstrari posse: quaecunque ergo naturae Acidae and martialis sunt,
illa potestatem habent Alkali tanquam substantiam metallorum mercurialem
alterandi and transmutandi. Now if this Thinness of the Blood be to be taken
off, and the Blood brought to its due Consistence by the means of Acids, it is
not reasonable to suppose that Acids should be the cause of its fusion. But
then I confess here lies a great Difficulty, viz. how is it possible for Acids
to make the Blood thin, when it is too thick and viscous, and to bring it to a
due consistence, when it is over fluid? To which I answer, That should I
pretend to give an account what Acids taken in the proper Latitude would do, I
should be guilty of the greatest Arrogance imaginable; for that would be to
pretend to as much Knowledge as Solomon had, who knew the Virtues of Plants even
from the Cedar of Lebanon to the Hysop which grows upon the Wall. And Divine
Providence had determined him to be the wisest of Men that had ever been before
him, or that should come after him. All Plants from the greatest to the
smallest are principally composed of Acido-sulphureous. Particles; for what
Comparison is there to be made between the small quantity of fixed Alkaly that
is to be found in the Ashes after burning, and of Volatile Alkaly in the Soot,
in relation to the great quantity of Acido sulphurous matter that is spent in
Flame? Or to come nearer to the matter, let a Pound of any Vegetable, which
affords the greatest quantity of fixed Alkaly, viz. Broom, or any such Plant, be
sufficiently dried, so that the superfluous Humidity may be evaporated; after
that is done, let it be committed to Distillation per se, and it will afford
between two and three Ounces of an Acid Spirit, with a good quantity of Oil,
when all the Art of Man is not able to procure from the Caput Mortuum above two
Drams of fixed Alkaly, and, as is before observed, Broom is one of those Plants
that affords the largest quantity of fixed Alkaly. Now the Acid Spirit and Oil
are those Substances, which in burning serve to supply the Flame: and from the
Caput Mortuum, unless it be afterward burnt, there is no fixed Alkaly to be
obtained. But here again to obviate the Objection before taken notice of, viz.
that the Fire may produce new Substances, which were not existent in Bodies
before, or that for instance, the fixed Alkaly to be produced out of the Ashes
of the Caput Mortuum of the Broom, is only the Product of the Fire: If this
were so, why then the Ashes after all the Salt has been once extracted, being
again committed to a Violent Fire must produce more Salt; whereas on the
contrary let it be committed to the Fire in the most violent degree of heat,
and continued there for never so long a time, yet it will never after afford
the least quantity of Salt of any kind. But that I may return to answer the
former Objection, viz. how Acids are capable of making the Blood thin when over
viscous, and also to reduce it to its consistency when it is over thin: All the
Bodies in Nature are differently specificated by the all-wise Author of Nature,
and at the same time are all animated by one Universal Acid Spirit, which is
what the Ancients were wont to call the Soul of the World, and I think not
improperly. Now the more any Bodies are impregnated with this universal Acid
Spirit, and its beloved Sister Sulphur, the more perfect they are; and Gold,
which is one of the most perfect and durable Bodies in Nature, seems to be
composed of nothing else but a pure Acidum and Sulphur, as I think has been
sufficiently made appear by some of the most strict Enquirers into Nature's
Secrets. Now the more perfect any Bodies are, the more Acidum and Sulphur they
contain, and afford the least quantity of Excrement, viz. Alkaly, that being
the only Destroyer of all Bodies, and is what brings them to a state of
Putrefaction and Corruption. Well, but what is all this to the answering of the
Objection twice started? Why it is only to make my way clear. But I shall now
apply my self to it. There are two general sorts of Acids, viz. manifest, and
inveloped ones: the manifest ones are such as immediately appear to the Taste;
and these, although originally the same, proceeding from the same universal
Fountain, yet have different Operations upon Human Bodies. The inveloped ones
are such as do not immediately appear to the Taste, but by taking of the Bodies
asunder appear to be such. There is an Axiom that, Unumquodque in id
dissolvitur unde compactum est: Every thing is dissolved into that whereof it
is made. Now if this Axiom be true, as I think it is an infallible one, a Man
may reasonably conclude that those Bodies, which upon their Dissolution are
reduced into Acid Substances, are Acids, tho before their Dissolution they did
not appear to be so. Most Vegetables upon the Dissolution of them, or analyzing
by the Fire, appear principally to be composed of Acid Substances; and
therefore I think are to be accounted Acids, although they are so differently
specificated, and have such different Operations upon Human Bodies, that a Man
who has not nicely examined them, would be tempted to believe that the original
constituent Parts of them were much more different than they are. Now the more
perfect and durable any Vegetable is, the greater quantity of Acidum and
Sulphur it affords, and less of excrementitious Alkaly. And from the different
Combinations of the two Sisters Acidum and Sulphur, I believe it possible to
give a very probable Account of all the differences in Plants as to Color,
Taste, etc. And as these two perfect (if it be lawful to call any natural thing
perfect) Principles are more or less clogged with excrementitious Allkaly, so
they are more or less durable as to themselves, and more or less friendly to
Human Bodies, for whose use they were principally created; so that here you may
see, that when I preach up Acids, it is not only Vinegar, Lemons, Oil of
Vitriol, Oil of Sulphur, etc. that I recommend, but all the perfect Parts of
the Creation, and decry the use of those things that are the Principles of
Death and Destruction in Bodies, viz. Alkalies. From what I have before said I
think I may without Presumption, reckon Oak-bark amongst the number of Acids;
and yet Oak-bark being given in Substance, or a Decoction of it, is so far from
making the Juices over fluid or thin, that it will reduce them to a
Consistence, when they are so: the same may be said of Bistort, Tormentil, and
abundance of things of that Tribe: the same thing will Comfry Roots do, and all
the things of that Tribe; the same I could say of many more, but here I have
not room to expatiate. Asparagus, Parsley, etc. will make the Juices fluid when
they are over thick and viscous, and so will a multitude of things more of that
Tribe. I could range my self out into the mineral Kingdom, but the different
Operations of them are so well known to every body, that I think it needless to
take any particular notice of them: yet this much I will presume to say, although
it be foreign to my present Design, that after having made all the Enquiry into
the Nature of Metals that Human Industry is capable of, I am perfectly
satisfied that they differ one from another only in degrees of Purity; and
therefore for ought I know the Business of Transmutation is not so ridiculous a
thing as some People would make it. As to those Acids that are manifestly so,
they greatly differ in their Operations upon Human Bodies. I have before
observed that there are those which may properly be called Acido-sulphurea, and
others Sulphureo-Acida: but in Nature I don't know a simple Acid or a simple
Sulphur, there being such an indestructible Bond of Union and Friendship
between them, that they are never one without the other. Now those Acids that
have most Sulphur united with them are Aperitives, Openers of Obstructions, and
keep the Blood and Juices in a proper state of Fluidity: Those that have little
Sulphur mixed with them are Stipticks, and bring the Blood and Juices to a
Consistence, when they are over fluid. What I have said upon this Subject is
not the effect of Fancy, but of a Series of several Years strict and nice
Observations.

Letter. Besides, if Alkalies did always offend and cause Pain, it must follow
that Acids must give ease: But I assure you I have often experienced the
contrary; for upon the exhibition of Rhenish, White Wind, and other Acids, I
have found the Pains immediately exasperated, and many times it has been a long
while e're they went off.

Answer. If Alkalies cause Pain, I do agree with you, that Acids of consequence
must give ease; but I don't suppose that an ill habit of Body, that has been
perhaps some Months or Years a contracting, is to be altered with a few Doses
of the most exalted Medicine in the World, let it be Acid, or what you please.
But supposing Acids to be the most proper Medicines in the World to ease Pain,
as I believe they are; yet it is not improbable, but upon the giving a small
quantity of Acid in such cases where there is a large quantity of Alkaly lodged
upon any Part, so as to cause Pain, it may only in part dissolve the Alkaly,
which was before more fixed, and so by accident may exasperate the Pain; whereas
by continuing the use of the Acid, the Alkaly would be perfectly dissolved and
extirpated, and so the Pain would altogether vanish: But Pain being sometimes
exasperated upon the first giving of them in too small quantities, has, I doubt
not, been one great Cause of deterring people from proceeding in the use of
them, and also of attributing to them the Cause of Pain: But in great Pains it
is my constant Practice to apply Acids externally to the Part affected, as well
as give them inwardly; and there are but very few Pains, especially Gouty and
Rheumatick ones, that I am not able to overcome in a small time. And for the
Pain you say you have often found to be excited upon the giving of Rhenish and
White Wine, I have assigned a Reason for that, if they are drunk in too large
quantities, both in my Essay of Alkaly and Acid, and in my Tract of the Gout;
and therefore shall not again repeat it, but refer you thither.

Letter. Again, if the Gout proceed from an Alkaly, what is the reason you use
so much Sassafras in its Cure? Is Sassafras an Acid, and so proper to subdue
this Alkaly?

Answer. I can cure the Gout, if there were no such thing as Sassafras; I only
use Sassafras in Apozems, as a proper Vehicle to dilute other Medicines in the
Stomach. But however Sassafras is no contemptible Medicine; and if you will but
give your self the trouble of Distilling a Pound or two of it in a Retort per
se, if you afterward reckon Sassafras amongst the number of Alkalies, I am
mistaken; and if I am so, I shall willingly own it.

Letter. I have only a word or two to speak concerning the green Color of
Syrup of Violets, and so I have done. I believe it may be turned green without
an Alkaly: On the exhibition of it to Infants it comes away green very often,
and brings away a great deal of green Matter by stool; and yet I believe they
do not abound with Alkalies.

Answ. I own that upon the exhibition of Syrup of Violets to Infants it will
frequently occasion green Stools: But from whence does that proceed, but from
its Mixture with the Bile in the small Guts? and that the Bile is an Alkaly I
know not any one that doubts.

Letter. You may read in a late Author of undoubted Credit, that upon an
Infant's swallowing of a Dose of Testaceous Powder, an extraordinary Ferment
was raised in the Stomach of the Child: Now how could this Ferment be raised,
if it had not an Acid to work upon? Besides, does not Experience show that
nothing is so proper in Infants Distempers as Alkalies?

Answer. The Author you speak of is my singular good Friend, and a Man for whom
I have a very great Value and Esteem; and as to the Truth of the Relation you
mention, I can readily assent to it: But if you have read the Appendix to my
Essay of Alkaly and Acid, you cannot but remember, that I there acknowledge that
Acids may sometimes abound in the Stomach, and cause a Disorder, but in no
other part of the Body; which thing I have so fully handled in that place, that
should I recite what I have there said upon this Subject, my Enemies would
accuse me of Tautology, and therefore thither I shall refer you: and if what I
have there said be not satisfactory to you, I shall endeavor to give you what
further Satisfaction I am able. As for the Cure of Infants Diseases, I don't
see but that they require the same Methods to be taken with them, as with grown
People, only the Medicines given them must be more mild and gentle, and in less
quantities, considering the wonderful Tenderness of their Natures.

Letter. I have some more things to offer; but I desire you would be pleased to
satisfy me as to these. I should be glad to close with your Opinion, and
embrace any thing that is new; for I believe Medicine, tho it has met with
great Improvements of late, to be capable of far greater. I Will give you no
farther trouble, only after thanks to you for your indefatigable Labor in
searching out the Truth of things, subscribe

Your humble Servant, F. T

Answer. I have endeavored to give you what satisfaction I am able as to the
Objections you have already raised, and shall think no labor too much to
answer any farther Objections you have to offer. I don't desire of you, or any
else, to take up with any thing that comes from me, without examining it in the
Balances of Reason and Experience; and if after such Examination you find what
I have advanced to be Truth, I don't doubt but to find you a zealous Champion
in my Cause: But if otherwise, I beg of you that you will convince me of my
Errors, and I shall be very ready to write a Recantation. As for the
Improvements that have been made of late, they have principally belonged to
Anatomy, and indeed they have been very considerable; and of all the Physicians
of Europe, those of our own Nation have had the greatest hand in them. But as
for the Improvements in the practical Part of Physic (setting aside the
Discovery of the use of the Peruvian Bark in the Cure of Agues) they are very
inconsiderable: The most that has been done of that kind, was done by the
indefatigably Industrious Dr. Sydenham, and I heartily wish that we had more
Dr. Sydenhams at this day.

Sir, there are abundance of Imperfections that you will meet with; but if you
did but know the great hurry I have been in, and how little time I have had to
sit composedly in my Study, you would readily pardon a great many of them: But
this I can assure you, that had I not had an earnest desire to serve you with
some other such Candid, Ingenuous Persons as your self, I would not have
deprived my self of so many Hours Sleep (having little other time to command)
as I have been forced to do, to put things in that Order they are: At present I
have nothing more to add, but that I am

Yours to Command, JOHN COLBATCH.

The CASE of EDMUND TURNER Esquire
ON Monday Night about twelve a Clock, being August the thirtieth, Madam Turner
came to my House, and told me that Mr. Turner was very ill at my Lord Wharton's
at Winchington, and withal desired me, that I would immediately get my self
ready, and go down to him to take care of him, which accordingly I did, and got
to Winchington the next day by one a Clock. When I came there, I found Dr. Fry
of Oxford had been there some time, and was then at Dinner; so I went up to Mr.
Turner to inform my self as nicely as possibly I could of his Case; after I had
done which, I came down to Dinner, and as soon as Dinner was over, I desired
the Doctor that we might consult together what was proper to be done for the
distressed Gentleman. But before I take notice of what passed between the
Doctor and my self, I shall exactly relate the Case, with the Occasion of his
Illness.

On the Saturday Night before, Mr. Turner, with two other Gentlemen sat down
to drink, and continued at it till seven or eight next Morning, but I cannot
learn that the Quantities they drank were extraordinary: At which time they all
went to bed, the other two Gentlemen lay in Bed the whole day, and eat nothing
but Water-Grewel; but Mr. Turner got up in the Afternoon, and eat boiled
Mutton, with a great deal of strong. Broth with Mushrooms in it, and drank
plentifully both of Wine and prodigious strong Beer, and then went to bed
again, and presently fell asleep; but early next Morning he awaked in the most
dreadful condition imaginable. When I came to him his Circumstances were as
follow.

He had a violent Pleurisy, and Peripneumony upon him, as was plainly to be
perceived by a most sharp Pain in his left side, which he greatly complained
of, and a prodigious Shortness of Breath. He also complained of a wonderful
Nausea and Sickness at his Stomach, and had a Fever upon him to the most
intense degree, with a great Stupor and Dullness in his Head.

Dr. Fry had some Hours before I came sent a Prescription to Mr. Williams an
Apothecary at Ailesbury, of which I have here inserted an exact Copy.

For Mr. Turner, August 31. 1697.
Ol. sem. Lin. rec. (sine igne) extract. lib. semis.

Sig. The Oil.

Sir. Balsam. Tolat. Unc. quatuor.

Sig. the Balsamic Syrup.

Antimonii Diaphoret.

Corallii Rub. pp

Margarit. pp ana Dracm. duas.

M. f. pull. in Chart. 12 equal. reponend.

Sig. the Pearl Pouders.

Aq. Hissopi.

Cichorei ana, unc. sex

Limacum Mag.

Lumbricor. Mag. ana Unc. unam sem.

Cinnamom. Hord. Unc. unam

Sir. Capillor. Ven.

Violar. ana Dracm. sex

M. f. Julap.

Sig. the Julap.

Emp. de Cicut. cum Ammon. Uncduas.

Sem. Cumin. pull. Unc. semis.

Dr. Fry.

He had also about an hour before I came taken away about seven Ounces of
Blood, the same quantity having been taken away (as I am informed) the Day
before by the Order of Dr. Wilson a Physician of the Neighborhood. I told Dr.
Fry that I could not in conscience agree to the use of the Medicines he
prescribed. The Nausea at his Stomach was so great, that I feared the Linseed
Oil would increase it to such a degree, that it would be of ill consequence;
and for the testaceous Pouders, etc. they would excite the Hurry and Disorder
in his Blood to a greater degree, and increase the Inflammation of his Lungs,
and I feared inevitably ruin him. He asked me what Method I would propose? To
which I replied, that in my Opinion according to the laudable Custom of the
Great Dr. Cole, he ought to lose at least twenty Ounces of Blood more, which
would empty the Vessels, and make room for the Blood to circulate through the
Lungs: That at due Intervals he should take a moderate quantity of Tartarum
Vitriolatum and Cremor Tartari in a Spoonful of Syrup of Vinegar, drinking
afterward a large Draught of Pectoral Decoction, which would take off the
Nausea at his Stomach, and promote Expectoration, and perhaps gently carry off
the undigested Matter, which lay in his Stomach by Stool: That he should be
allowed moderately cooling Liquors as often as he desired them, in every Draught
of which he might take about ten Drops of dulcified Spirit of Nitre, which
might help to take off the Inflammation of his Lungs, and calm his Blood: That
he should take a Spoonful of a Mixture of Pectoral Syrups often, in which was
contained a convenient quantity of Oximel of Squills, which is a great Promoter
of Expectoration. To take off the Stupor and Dullness in his Head, I proposed a
Cataplasm of Mustard, Horse-Raddish Roots, Rhue, and Castor, to be applied to
the Bottoms of his Feet.

To none of these things would the Doctor comply, neither could I comply with
his Methods; so after many long Debates, we at last agreed to go up separately
to Mr. Turner, and acquaint him, that we could not agree, and that he must
discharge one of us. Dr. Fry went up first, and when he came down I went up;
but for fear that things might be misrepresented, I would not go up unless Mr.
Wats (a Man eminently known in this City) would go with me to hear what I said.
Mr. Wats at first was unwilling, but at last consented. When I came up to Mr.
Turner, I told him Dr. Fry and my self could not agree, and therefore one of us
must be discharged; I likewise told him that I had sufficient reason to believe
that the Method I had proposed for him might retrieve him, but that Dr. Fry was
more positive as to the success of his than I would be of any Method I could
use in a much less dangerous Case than his was, and therefore I thought it was
his most prudent Method to continue him: To which he made me no other Answer,
but desired me to go down again, and see if we could not find a Method of
Reconciliation, or Words to that purpose: Upon which I went down, and told the
Doctor what he said: After a farther Debate without any compliance on either
side, we agreed at last to get Mr. Wats to go up and know who must be
discharged: when Mr. Watts came down, he brought us word that Mr. Turner
desired to speak with us both together; accordingly we went up, and when he saw
us, he desired we would not stand upon any little Punctilios, and begged of us
that we would give him a Vomit, for that after any Surfeit he was wont to take
a Vomit, which always relieved him. I readily consented to give him a Vomit,
and proposed Oximel of Squills with large quantities of Posset Drink (as Mr.
Wats may well remember) and if that did not work, to excite it with Salt of
Vitriol: But to this neither would Dr. Fry agree, but closely urged the use of
the Medicines he had prescribed, upon which Mr. Turner assented to take them. I
staid all that Afternoon and the Night following, but had no hand in any thing
that was done. I went up with Dr. Fry about six a Clock to see how he did, and
at that time his Pulse seemed to be somewhat mended, it having been extremely
bad before. About ten (just before I went to bed) I went up again with the
Doctor to see how he was, but then I found a most lamentable Pulse, there being
nothing but a little trembling Motion to be felt; upon which I desired the
Doctor to walk out of the Room a little, when I told him that things looked very
ill, for that his Fever was extremely high, his Breath very short, and his
Pulse as is before related, and that if he did not mend that Pulse he would
drop his Patient; his answer was, that all was well enough: upon which I had
nothing more to say, he not being my Patient. Next Morning about seven a Clock
I went again to see him, and found him much after the same manner he had been
the Night before, but the Doctor told me he hoped all would be well; so I went
to Breakfast, and whilst I was at Breakfast, I told one of my Lord Wharton's
Servants (to the best of my remembrance it was the Butler) what my
Apprehensions of Mr. Turner were, and that I did not see any hopes of his
Recovery: But Mr. Turner being solely under Dr. Fry's Care, I did not think fit
to stay any longer to neglect my Patients in London, and do him no other
Service than to go up now and then, and look at him: so away I came without
taking my leave of him; but before I went, I wished the forementioned Servant,
if Mr. Turner should enquire after me, and know I was gone, that he would
acquaint him that I was unwilling to take my leave for fear of disturbing him.
Of all that passed between the Servant and me, Mr. Turner's own Son was a
Witness, and was much concerned that his Father was not under my Care. As I was
coming home, about six Miles on this side Ailesbury I met Col. Cornwel going to
see Mr. Turner, who sent his Man to me to enquire how he was; I made answer,
that I hoped he was somewhat better, fearing that if I had told him my real
Sentiments he would have pressed me to have gone back with him; and as things
stood I did not care to return. By that time I had come about six Miles
farther, I met Madam Turner, to whom when she asked me how Mr. Turner did, upon
the same considerations I made the same reply I had done to Col. Cornwel. After
I was gone Dr. Fry prescribed more Linseed Oil, and a Pearl Cordial.

About eight a Clock at Night, being Wedensday, I came home, and after I had
made two or three Visits, and eat my Supper, I went to bed; I had not been in
Bed half an Hour, but Col. Cornwel's Man knocked at the Door, and desired to
speak with me; When he came to me, he told me Mr. Turner was much worse than
when I left him, that Dr. Fry was discharged, and he begged me that I would
come down again to him; for that he would take nothing more from any one, but
what I should direct. Upon which I got a Calash and four Horses as soon as
possibly I could, and went down again. I got to Winchington on Thursday about
twelve a Clock, and when I came there, I found the poor Gentleman in the most
profuse Sweat imaginable, his Breath short to the last degree, and almost no
Pulse at all: But the Pain in his Side was gone, which his Lady (who was then
with him) and those about him took for a good Sign: But I told them that his
Shortness of Breath continuing, and his Pulse being so very low, it was rather
a bad one, and that he was in a most deplorable condition; and I appeal to
every one of my Lord Wharton's Family, who asked me how he did, whether I once
gave them the least Encouragement to believe that he would recover. His Shirt
that he had upon him was as wet as if it had been dipped in a River, and as cold
as Ice, and so were both the Sheets; therefore the first thing I did was to
free him from this cold wet Linen; in order to which I got as large a Fire made
in the next Room as the Chimney would bear; I then set a Shirt and a pair of
Sheets that had been before used, to be well aired and heated: in the mean time
his Lady and her Maid with hot Napkins rubbed him, and made him as dry as they
could; after which with all the Caution imaginable, we put on a hot dry Shirt,
and took away the cold wet Sheets, and put those that we had well heated and
aired in their room. This matter just as I have related it I can have
sufficiently attested, although it be positively said about the Town, that I took
him out of the Sweat, and put him on clean Linen, without airing it at the Fire
at all. He being prodigiously thirsty, begged of me that I would give him
something that might allay it; upon which I ordered them to make him a Mixture
of four Parts small Beer, one Part VVhite-wine, some Juice of Lemons to make it
grateful, and to sweeten it with Loaf-sugar; and he being a great Lover of
Nutmeg, desired that a little of it might be grated into it, which, considering
the Stupidness in his Head, I agreed to. Of this Liquor I allowed him to drink
as plentifully as he pleased; considering the Profuseness of the Sweats he had,
had, I durst not then venture to bleed him, although his Fever was as violent as
ever. But to the Apothecaries I prescribed as follows.

For Mr. Turner Sept. 2d, 1697.
Oximel simp. Unc. quatuor

Aq. Lactis Unc. sex

Cinnamomi fort. Dracm. sex

M. f. Mixtura, cap. Cochleare unum frequenter.

Oximel. squillit. Unc. duas

Sig. Oximel of Squills.

Crem. Tart. Unc. sem.

Tart. Vitriolat. Dracm. unam

Sach. Alb. unc. sem.

M. f. pull. in sex Chart. distribuend. ex quibus cap. unam tertia quaque hora
in Cochlear. Sir. Aceti superbibendo haust. Apozematis sequentis.

Fol. Hederae terrest.

Flor. Hypericon, ana M. unum

Rad. Altheae unc. duas

Bals. tolutani Dracm. unam

Aq. Font. lib. tres

bulliantur ad tertiae partis consumption. and coletur, colaturae add

Oximel. simp. unc. duas

sp. Nitri dull. gut 30. M.

Sp. Nitri dull. Dracm. duas

Sig. dulcified Spirit of Nitre.

I afterward sent a second Prescription, which was as follows.

Sem. Psillii

Cydoniorum ana unc. sem.

ponantur in Chart. separatim.

Electuarii Lenitivi unc. duas

Crem. Tart. unc. sem. M. f.

Elect.

This last Electuary was for Mr. Turner's Man, who had sat up several Nights,
and complained of a great inward Heat and Costiveness; but however, because it
was inserted in a Bill with Mr. Turner's Name to it, I thought it convenient to
take notice of it; tho it is no Poison, and if Mr. Turner had taken it himself,
it would not have murdered him.

The forementioned things with Directions were taken as directed; and as to
those, for the use of which there was no Direction given, I shall here give an
account how they were taken.

Once in about two Hours I mixed half a Spoonful of the Oximel of Squils in a
small quantity of the Apozem, and gave it him. Of the dulcified Spirit of Nitre
I gave him ten Drops in almost every Draught of Liquor he drank. As for the
Flea Bean and Quince seeds, I had one half of them boiled in two Quarts of
Water to the Consumption of one half; and of this mulaginous Decoction I now
and then gave him a good Draught, it being a great Promoter of Expectoration.
In the House I got made up a Lambative of fine salad Oil and Syrup of Vinegar,
and of this I sometimes gave him a Spoonful. But all I could do availed
nothing; I could by no artifice make him expectorate in any quantity, only
sometimes he would discharge a green putrid Matter. He continued to be short
breathed to extremity, his Fever no whit abated, his Pulse low and irregular,
and sometimes would totally intermit for two or three seconds, with a
Stupidness in his Head.

About nine a Clock he again broke out into a most profuse Sweat, which I did
by no means like, at which time I laid me down upon a Field Bed that was in the
Room to sleep, choosing rather to lie so than go to bed, that I might be the
more ready to be called upon occasion; but having traveled near sixscore Miles
in three days, and been two Nights upon the Road, I was very sleepy. About
eleven a Clock my Lord Wharton called Madam Turner into the next Room to
consult about sending for Dr. Babo; she left his Man sitting upon the Bed by
him, I being fast asleep upon the Field Bed. Whilst Madam Turner was in the
next Room with my Lord Wharton, Mr. Turner in the midst of this profuse Sweat
leaps out of the Bed, and walked round it to the Close-stool without any thing
but his Shirt upon him: Madam Turner hearing some body walk in the Room
barefoot, run in to see what was the mattter, and found him in this posture;
she was immediately followed by my Lord Wharton and some others: as soon as
Madam Turner came in I awaked, and got up to help her to get him into the Bed.
When he was put into Bed he laid himself into a Posture, out of which he never
moved till he died, which was within a very few Hours. Whether this last
getting out of the Bed was a shortning of his Lise, I cannot be positive, but
it is very probable it might. It is to be observed that the Night before about
eleven a Clock, he was in such extreme Agonies, that every body thought he
would have died then, at which time his Nails turned bluish; but upon his
recovering himself (which I believe was principally occasioned by the sight of
his Lady, who just then came into him) his Nails never recovered their Color,
but continued bluish till he died. Now the Nails not returning to their Color
was as fatal a Symptom as could be.

I am sorry I have been forced to rake up the Ashes of the Dead; but I having
so often been charged with no less than the Murder of this Gentleman, I have
been forced to write the Case in my own vindication. I am sure it was as much
my Interest to preserve Mr. Turner as any one Man in England, there not being
one to whom I am more obliged than I was to him, he having done me a great many
singular pieces of Service; and I am sure I would have gone as far, and done as
much to have saved his Life, as any Man could have done for his Friend.

Before I conclude upon this Subject I shall presume to take notice of a thing,
which happened, which was a kind of Preludium to his Death; and for ought I
know the Thoughts of it might deject his Spirits, and have a fatal Influence
upon him.

About April last Mr. Gadbury came to him, and told him, Mr. Turner, you will
die in the Country this Summer, of a Surfeit of Drinking. He received it with
a Smile, and said, I die with Drinking, who am the soberest Man in England?
that is impossible. In May he went to the Bath, but before he went there, he
made his Will, and was observed to be more melancholy than usual. He came back
from the Bath very well, and told some of his Friends that Mr. Gadbury was
deceived: Some time after he went to VVinchington, and just as he was going,
one of his Friends bid him remember what Mr. Gadbury had said, and beware of
drinking: he said he would. As soon as he was taken ill (I suppose remembering
Mr. Gadbury's Words) he told his Son that he should not recover.

CASE II.
JUly the eleventh I was sent for to Mr. Davis, a Gentleman of a very
considerable Estate near Lynn in Norfolk, who then lodged at Chelsey. He had a
little before had the Small Pox, and after that a malignant Fever, having been
under the care of another Physician, who had treated him after the common
Method with Alkalies and Alexipharmicks; but his Case was now so deplorable,
that his Friends despaired of his Recovery, so the former Physician was
discharged, and I was sent for; when I came to him, I found his Case as
follows. He had a violent Peripneumony or Inflammation of his Lungs, his Breath
being constantly very short; but at some times he was so extraordinary short
breathed, that his Friends were afraid he would be strangled. He had a Fever
upon him to a most intense degree, a great Stupor and Dullness in his Head, a
Nausea at his Stomach, and his Pulse very low and irregular, with a great
Depression and Lowness of his Spirits. I prescribed for him to Mr. Baxter an
Apothecary in St. Martins-lane as follows.

For Esquire; Davis, July the 11th 97.

Cremor. Tartari Dracm. tres

Salis Prunellae Dracm. duas

Ol. Cinnamomi gut. duas

Cons. Cynosbati Un. unam

Sir. e Rubro Idaeo q. s. f. elect.

cap. quant. Nucis Moscatae largae tertia quaque hora superbibendo haust.
parvum Julap. sequentis.

Aq. Cinnamoni Hord.

Lactis Alex. ana Unc. sex

Vini rub. Gal. un. quatuor

Sir. e rubro idaeo Unc. tres

Ol. sulphur. per camp. gut. xx

M. f. Julap.

Syrup. Aceti Unc. tres

de Rosis sic. Unc. unam

M. f. Mixtura, cap. Cochleare unum in omni difficultate respirationis.

Aq. Cinnamomi Hord. Unc. quatuor

Mirabilis Unc. unam semis

Sir. Garrioph. Unc. semis

Conf. Alkermes Scrup. duos

M. f. Card. cap. cochlearia quatuor vel quinque quando spiritus languent.

Besides the foremeneioned things, I ordered him to eat Lemon and Sugar very
often, and to drink Lemonade in as plentiful quantities as he pleased.

The next day I visited him again, and found him much after the same manner he
was the day before, only his difficulty of breathing seemed to be somewhat
abated; the Water he made in the Night was of a perfect Lead Color, and his
Pulse was very low and irregular, and would sometimes totally intermit. The
Blackness of his Water and Irregularity of his Pulse made me very doubtful of
his Recovery. I then prescribed the following Medicines.

Cons. Flor. Calendulae

Lujulae, ana Dracm. sex

Conf. Alkermes Dracm. unam

Ol. Cinnamomi gut. tres

Ol. Sulphur. per Campan. gut. xv

Sir. Lujulae q. s. f. elect.

cap. quant. Nucis Moscatae largae quarta quaque hora superbibendo haust.
Julap. seq.

Aq. Lactis Alex.

Cinnam. Hord. ana Unc. december

Theriacalis Unc. duas

Sir. Lujulae Unc. tres

Ol. sulp. per Camp. gut xv

M. f. Julap.

Aq. Cinnamomi Hord. Unc. sex

Mirabilis

Epidem. ana Unc. unam

Sir. Garrioph. Dracm. sex

M. f. Cardiacum, cap. Cochlearia sex in languoribus.

The thirteenth I visited him again, his Pulse continued low and irregular, his
Urine very black, his Fever nothing abated, but he began to expectorate a
little, at which I was well pleased. In the Night he was taken with a
Looseness, which considering his long Illness before, he was not well able to
bear. I prescribed as follows.

Aq. Cinnamomi Hord.

Germ. querc. ana Unc. quatuor

Epidem Unc. tres

Mirabilis Unc. unam

Theriacalis Dracm. sex

Conf. de Hyacyn. Drac. unam sem.

Sir. Garrioph. Dracm. sex

M. f. Julap. Cap. Cochlearia quatuor vel quinque frequenter.

Lupulor. man. unum

Passular Corinth.

Salis Marini, ana Unc. quatuor

Aceti Acer. q. s. f. Cataplasma

Carpis applicand.

Rad. Petasitidis Unc. tres

Angelicae Hispan. Unc. sem.

Fol. Rutae pug. duos

Aq. Font. lib. duas

Aceti Acerrimi Unc. sex

Infunde clause and calide in Vase terreo vitreato per horas quatuor, and
coletur, cap. Unc. quatuor quarta quaque hora.

The fourteenth I visited him again; his Looseness was quite stopped, he spit
prodigiously, upon which his Shortness of Breath was almost totally gone; his
Fever was greatly abated, and his Pulse extremely mended, and his Urine of a
good Color, and well digested. I prescribed as follows, and also ordered him
to take liberally of his Mixture with Syrup of Vinegar to promote his Spitting.

Aq. Lactis Alex.

Cinnamomi Hord. ana Unc. december

Vini Rubri Unc. sex

Sir. Lujulae Unc. tres

Ol. Sulphuris gut. xvi

M. f. Julap. cap. haust. larg. ad libitum.

The fifteenth, sixteenth and seventeenth he continued to take the
forementioned things, during which time he spit like one in a Salivation; but
he continued very weak, and having something of his Fever lurking within him,
the eighteenth I prescribed the following Medicines.

Cons. Calendulae

Lujulae ana Unc. semis

Conf. de Hyacyntho Dracm. duas

Crem. Tart. Dracm. tres

Ol. Cinnamomi gut. duas

Ol. sulp. per Camp. gut. xv

Sir. Lujulae q. s. f. elect.

Cap. quant. Nucis Castan. tertia quaque hora superbibendo haust. Apozematis
sequentis.

Rad. Eringii Unc. duas

Aq. Hordei lib. tres

bulliatur ad tertiae partis consumptionem, and coletur, colaturae lib. unam
sem. add

Aq. Cinnamomi Hord.

Vini Rubri ana Unc. quatuor

Sir. Lujulae Unc. tres

Ol. Sulphur per Camp. gut xx. M.

Ol. Vitriol. dull. per digest. fact.

Dracm. duas cap. gut. octo in omni haust. potus.

He continued the use of these things, and in a week's time his Fever was
perfectly gone, he recovered Strength, and was perfectly free from his
Shortness of Breath, and all the other Symptoms that he complained of. I then
prescribed the following Purge, which was repeated two or three times at due
distances, and he is now as hale and hearty a Man as any in England.

Rerinae Julap. gr. december

Antimonii Diaphoret. gr. xii

Crem. Tart. scrup. unum

Sir. Bals. q. s. f. bolus

cap. primo mane cum regimine.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
JUst as the last Sheet was going to the Press, I me with a Book called Alkali
vindicatum, written by Dr. Coward, being Reflections on several things in the
first part of my Essay of Alkaly and Acid. How far he has overthrown my
Hypothesis I leave to all impartial Judges. For my part I don't think the Book
worth a Reply: He has taken a great deal of Pains to show his Learning and
Gentleman-like Education in his scurrilous Reflections upon me; but considering
the service his Book will do me, I think I have no reason to be angry with him.


