THE CHARACTER OF A Turbulent, Pragmatical JESUIT AND FACTIOUS Romish Priest.

Licensed, October 15. 1678.

LONDON* Printed for Langley Curtis, in Goat-Court on Ludgate Hill. 1678.

The Character of a Turbulent Pragmatical Jesuit.
A Turbulent Pragmatical JESUIT, is the Bell-weather of the Roman Shepherds
Flock; a most trusty Janizary to the Triple-Crown. A zealous Hector for Popery,
that wherever he comes, plays the Devil for Gods-sake. An Ecclesiastical
Granadier to scatter the Wild^fire of Contention; or, a Religious Flambeau to
put Kingdoms into a Combustion; so through-pac'd a Catholic, that he has left
off to be a Christian, and instead of the Evangelical Duties, Peace, Obedience,
and Love, recommends Rebellion, Treason and Murder, as the best expedients to
promote Holy Church. The distinguishing Badge of other Papists is Superstition,
but of him Sedition and Subtlety, not Ignorance the Mother of his Devotion.

He usurps the Title of JESUIT, just as their Popes are observed to have
chosen Sirnames, exactly contrary to their Tempers; as, the most Hatchet-fac'd
Formosus, the most profane Pius, the most cruel Clemens, etc. For certainly,
never did any more interfere with the steps of the Blessed Jesus, than those
that blasphemously call themselves his Companions or SOCIETY. He disclaimed his
Kingdom to be of this World; but their whole endeavors aim no farther. Riches,
Dominion, Pomp and Glory, are the Butts they shoot at; and if ever they appear
Heavenly, by tampering with Affairs of State, they mix Heaven and Earth
together, to bring all into Confusion. Let them magnify the Travels of their
Saint Xaverius, and boast the Multitude of Heathens they have converted; look
narrowly into that intrigue, and you will find it only an Hucksterly Charity of
mercenary Pedlars, rather than a free offer of glad tidings. They did but
Traffic to the Indies, to Barter Religion for Gold; never cared for Preaching
to Beggarly Nations, but always carried the sound of Christianity to Regions
that had rich Mines or precious Quarries, to make advantageous Returns. Not to
mention their Cruelties, in Baptizing far greater numbers in Blood than Water,
and making the Gospel odious to those dark Souls, by their perfidious and
Traitorous Practices; for which, the King of Japan long ago, and the Emperor of
China since, banished them their Territories, choosing rather to relapse into
honest Paganism, than entertain Truth sullied by such Knavish Impostors.

He owes his Original to Ignatius Loyala a Spanish Soldier, about the year
1540. and though found out long since the invention of the Cannon, has not done
less mischief than that Butchering Engine. Luther had now broke the Ice, and
the Dawn of revived Learning having opened men's Eyes to see through the grosser
Cheats of Ignorant Monks; the Pope had no other play, but to cherish this
Society, who having devoted themselves by a particular Vow to his Interests,
employed all their excellent parts and skill in the Sciences, (wherein their
diligence soon rendered them famous) to bolster up his tottering Usurpations.
The better to effect this, laughing at the Nasty Austerities of their more
Melancholy Religionists, they applied themselves to the Politics, and a
sociable kind of life; to understand not only Languages and Arts, but Passions,
Humors, Prejudices, and (as they speak in Courts) Blind-sides, in one word,
Persons. Thus they became false Keys, to open Princes Cabinets, and pry into
their Councels, by their oily Tongues, and pliable Behavior; insinuating
themselves into the affections of the unwary, as gently, as malevolent Stars
dart their influence, or blasting Mildews slide into the bosom of a flower. In
his Seminary, he acts the part of a Fox; abroad, a Spaniel; but in the
Inquisition, a Lion Rampant. The Mask which in Spain or Italy he wears on his
Heart, in Countries he calls Heretical he puts upon his Face; varying shapes
oftener, than a Strumpet shifts her Lodgings; now a Courtier, to morrow a
Soldier, then a Cobbler, by and by a Weaver; a Gallant amongst the Ladies, an
Atheist with the Wits, and a Quaker when he assembles with Friends at the
Bulland-Mouth.

He regards the other duller Litters of Cloistered Cubbs, with an eye of
Contempt, and devours or eats them out of Credit (if planted near them) as fast
as a Pike does the smaller fry in a Fish Pond. Indeed his College is always
furnished with some one Professor in every Faculty, excellently accomplished; and
the whole Society consists of select persons, either of extraordinary natural
and acquired parts, great Birth, Alliance, and Interests abroad, or Heirs to
large Fortunes; and the former, ever govern the two latter, well knowing how to
make use of such Tools for their main designs, which are Aggrandizing the Court
of Rome, spreading Popish Doctrines, wheadling in of Proselytes, destroying,
weakening, or dividing Protestants, and heaping up wealth to their own
Seminaries. Hence not only the Reformed, but the Dominicans, Franciscans, and
other Catholic Brotherhoods, apprehending the growing greatness of this
Leviathan-Order; nay, his Holiness himself, in the traverse of the business, is
but their Vassal, and apt (like Conjurers) to dread these busy Imps, which
himself first raised to Mischief others. Nor has it been the least skill and
prudence of the Conclave, for the last Age, to keep out any of this Fraternity
from mounting the Infallible Chair, left they should Intail the Popedom on its
Members, and rifle the Nests of the Monks, to enrich their own Hives. And if
their own Tribe be thus jealous of them, what sentiments others ought to have
for them, will not be difficult to determine by any that has read their
detestable Writings and Positions, of Deposing and Murdering Excommunicated
Princes, absolving Subjects from their Allegiance, Faith not to be kept with
Heretics, etc.

As for the common Popish Priest, though often he has not so much Learning, yet
he puts in hard for an equal share of Malignity, being a Ghostly Factor to
Retail out his Holiness's braided Wares; a kind of Spiritual Kidnapper for
Souls: One might take him for a Conjurer; for he uses an unknown Tongue,
transacts most of his Business in Hugger-mugger, comes in secretly, and crawls
up and down in Corners like a Serpent, and with a few frightful words, as
Heresy, Purgatory, Catholic Cause, Infallibility, and the like, Transforms
people as he lists, and Jilts them first of their Wits, and next of their
Money: For though he pretends it is in pure kindness to your Soul, yet still the
Plot is upon your Purse; and therefore where he meets with a fat Convert, he
sticks to him as close as Ivy to the Oak; and for the same reason too, viz. to
suck out Sap for his own Support and Maintenance. Thus he switches and spurs
an honest Gentleman, or devout Lady, through thick and thin, till the poor Soul
look as lean and wretchedly, as if ridden Seven years by a Nightmare. The
Reins he manages them with, are Confession and Absolution, whereby he becomes
Master of their Secrets; and if they will not pace as he would have them, on
goes the Snaffle of a severe Penance, to make them more easily ruled.

He makes a perpetual Din of true Religion, and the Catholic Faith; but it is
Restitution of all the old Abbeylands that his fingers itch for; and if ever he
get into the Saddle, it is will if his quondam Patrons may be admitted to hold
the stirrup. In the mean time he sometimes makes use of them, as blind men of
their staves, to thrust them into Plashes and Sloughs, before they will tread
themselves; and run them against Posts, to save knocking their own heads. When
any Combustible matter is to be fired; these cunning Petardiers ram it into the
hollow Cranium of some zealous or desperate Votary, and having enflamed the
Fuzee of his Tongue, shoot him against Government, not caring though he breaks
himself into a Thousand pieces: For though the Jesuit has outdone them in the
Theory of Rebellion and Treason, the Monks preceded him long in the Practical
part. Was it not a Monk that Poisoned our King John? was it not Bernardinus a
Friar Mendicant, that Anno 1313. poisoned the Emperor H. the 7th with the
Consecrated Host? A Crime that might seem to dispute a shape of Guilt with that
of the Proto-Rebels, the fallen Angels: For surely for a Priest* to poison his
God (as they hold it to be) thereby to murder his Prince, was such an exquisite
piece of wickedness, that all the Wit of Hell could never scrue any to an
higher pitch. Was it not Clement a Jacobin Friar, that murdered Henry the Third
of France with a Sanctified Knife, to whose praise Pope Sextus Quintus
dedicated a Panegytical Oraration? And for us nearer home, hear what a Reverend
Prelate asserts -- This we may observe (says he) That no Treason was ever
attempted, Dr. Carlton, Bishop of Chichester, in his Book I^ itu^ed, A Thankful
Remembrance of Gods Mercy. Printed Anno 1630. page 246.
without a Romish Priest. The Treasons attempted in England, have that proper
and peculiar Mark, to have a Priest in the Practice.

Yet no doubt such kind of Romish Emissaries will still tell us they quit their
Seminaries, and come hither, hazarding their lives merely for our Souls health:
That they love us entirely, and desire nothing but our Salvation: and a
thousand other endearing Expressions. -- But Good words butter no Parsueps. All
these sugared Complements will but put discreet men in mind of that Fable of
the Birds and Fowler: The Fowler in a cold morning caught good store of them,
and still nipt them on the head and put them up: His eyes in the mean time
watering with the sharpness of the Air; See, said one of the Fowls, how the
good man pities us, he weeps to see us taken. Ah, said the other, look not to
his Eyes, but to his Hands, there you shall see what pity we find from him. Or
at least may remember us of St. Chrysostomes sure Rule, to discern a Wolf from
a Sheep: It Is possible (says he) for the Wolf to clothe himself with the Sheeps
Skin, so as that cannot descry him; and to imitate the Sheeps Voice, so as that
shall not betray him, but look to his Chaps, and they cannot deceive you: For
you shall not find either Grass in the Wolfs mouth, nor Blood in the Sheeps.
Let us never be so rash, or fondly credulous, as to mistake one for the other.

FINIS.

