A COLLECTION Of Curious Pictures, Viz. Paintings and Limnings By the Best
MASTERS.

Will be sold by AUCTION on Wednesday the 30th, as also on Thursday the First
of May, and Friday the 2d, etc. following, 1690. at the Barbados Coffee-House
in Exchange-Alley, over against the Royal Exchange, Cornhil.

The Sale beginning precisely at Four of the Clock every Afternoon.

By Edward Millington.

Catalogues of which are distributed by Mr. Gilliflower in Westminster Hall:
Mr. Not in the Pall Mall: Mr. Bently in Russel Street, Covent Garden: Mr.
Wilkinson in Fleet Street: Mr. Hargrave, at the King's Head, over against
Furnivals-Inn in Holborn: Mr. Miller, at the Acorn, in St. Paul's Churchyard:
And Mr Crouch over against the Royal Exchange, in Cornhil, Bookseller, and at
most Coffee-Houses in London, etc.

PAINTINGS, etc.
1 OLiver Cromwell 2 A Head of Old Simmons 3 Virgin Mary and our Savior 4 A
small piece of flowers 5 A Rhenish-Wine-Glass and Oysters 6 Two small Landskips
7 A Woman's Head 8 A piece of flowers 9 A Snow-piece 10 -- another, Ditto 11
King James's Picture, in small 12 A Parrot with Grapes 13 A Dog well done 14 A
Hanch of Venison 15 Two Landskips with Fountainss 16 A head finely painted 17
King Charles II. 18 K. William and Q. Mary in Oval frames 19 Two Landskips with
fine Buildings 20 A Parrot 21 A piece of Q. Mary, in small 22 Ben Johnsons
Head, after Dobson 23 A piece of Prospective, with Peter and James curing the
Lam* 24 A large Susanna and two Elders, of Powell 25 Democritus by a good hand
26 Heraclitus by the same hand 27 A Fools Picture, by the same hand 28 A small
Church-piece 29 -- another of the same 30 Sheep, and other Beasts, after
Bercham 31 A piece with Cows, by the same hand 32 A Flower-pot 33 A
Winter-piece 34 Three small Landskips 35 A Moon-light-piece finely painted on
board 36 Sir Tho. Gresham on board, by a great master 37 A Seaport well
painted, supposed of Van Cable 38 Two small Landskips 39 A fine Landscape by an
Italian master, on board 40 A Pheasant and Pomegranate, finely painted 41 King
William by a good hand 42 an Head curiously done by Rubens 43 an Dead Head
finely painted by Porbus 44 a Man Mowing, by Mustard 45 a Snow-piece, finely
done by a Dutch master 46 a-Droll of Teniers on copper 47 a Frost-piece finely
done by a Dutch master 48 an Head by Abraham Blomaert 49 a Frost-piece with an
House, by a Dutch master 50 A fine piece of a Clown, with Fruit, Fowl and Eggs
51 a delicate Sea-piece, by Vander Velden 52 The Duchess of York 53 Venus and
Adonis on copper 54 A fine piece with Cows 55 A Basin with flowers, by a good
hand 56 Julius Caesar by a good master 57 A large Sea-piece, with the Prospect
of Argiers, by a Dutch master 58 A Landscape with Diana a Hunting, finely
painted 59 A fine Landscape with Boors, curiously painted by a good hand 60 a
Seaport, neatly painted by a good hand 61 A Story-piece of the Beheading of
St. John Baptist, finely done 62 A Head finely painted by a great master 63 A
piece of a Friar, neatly painted by Old Haemskirk 64 A fine piece of Lucrece,
four foot and a half high, neatly painted 65 A large piece of the five Senses,
curiously painted by a Dutch master 66 A large piece of Still-life, with a Gold
Cup, well done 67 A Landsdip with Cupids, finely painted by a great master 68 a
Seaport, neatly painted by a great master 69 A large giece of Still-life, with
a Book, by a great master 70 A Confession-piece, finely painted by Haemskirk 71
A large piece of Daniel in the Lions Den, neatly painted 72 A piece of St.
Antonys Temptation, by Haemskirk 73 King Charles the Second, after Kneller 74 A
piece of flowers, on board, by a Disciple of Buckdan 75 -- another by the same
hand, on board 76 A piece of a Ruin of Griffere 77 A piece of History on
board, after the Italian way 78 A piece of Drunkards, after Haemskirk 79 A
Landscape, with a Water-fall, on board, of Van Dyck 80 Our Savior on the Cross,
after Van Dyck 81 Janus, delicately painted by an Italian master 82 a Droll, by
Haemskirk 83 a Noble Woman curiously painted 84 Haemskirks own Picture, with an
other in his hand 85 King Charles the Second, well done after Mr. Ryly 86 A
Surgeon in his Surgery, finely painted 87 A Sea piece, painted by a Dutch
master 88 A Dutch Landscape 89 Our Savior Riding to Jerusalem on an Ass 90
Joseph letting down the Pit, by the same hand 91 Martha and Mary finely done 92
Smirna curiously done by Griffere 93 An Old man's Head well done 94 A Sea Fight,
by a Dutch master 95 Two Landskips neatly, done 96 A Flower-piece finely done
97 King Charles II. well done. 98 Two fine Landskips in Limning 99 A Landscape
and Ruin, by a great master. 100 A Prospect of Lin Regis, finely done 101 St.
Barbary finely painted on copper 102 a small Landscape neatly painted 103 a
piece of Birds well painted by a great master 104 Our Savior and St. John, by
a great master 105 Mary Magdalen by a great master 106 a Sea-piece, neatly
painted by a Dutch master 107 a Man a Dying, by a good hand 108 Joseph and Mary
going into Egypt, well painted 109 a Night-piece of an Usurer finely painted
110 a Man's Head by a great master 111 Twelve Emperors Heads 112 Mr. Van Brook,
by a great master 113 a Head by a great master 114 a fruit-piece of Marcellis
115 a Head well done 116 King Ahassuerus and Queen Hester 117 Ascension of the
B. Virgin, by a great master 118 Mordecai and Queen Hester 119 The Duchess of
Cleaveland after Lilly 120 a piece of Ruins, and the Temple of Mercury 121 a
Landscape by a Dutch master, with men fishing 122 a Mule carrying of Hogs 123 a
Ruin of the Amphitheatre at Rome of Streeter 124 a fine Sea-piece, by a great
master 125 a Hunting of Wild Cats finely painted 126 King William well painted
after Wissing 127 Queen Mary by the same hand 128 King Charles the First well
painted 129 King Charles the Second 130 King of Poland 131 Oliver Cromwell 132
General Monk 133 A little Naked Venus after Titian 134 Titian and his Mistress
135 A little Fruit-piece 136 A little Cupid after Housman 137 David with the
Head of Goliath 138 Dun Scotus, on a three quarter cloth 140 a fine Landscape of
Van Deest 141 a Dog finely painted 142 a Landscape of Griffere 143 a fine
Landscape of a Fort at a distance 144 Six Empresses after Titian, in black and
white 145 a Quaker finely painted 146 a man saying Grace, with a piece of Roast
Beef before him 147 a Consort of Singers, well painted by a Dutch master 148 a
man groping of a Woman, finely painted by a Dutch master 149 Our Savior on
copper, by a great master 150 a Piper with a Jugg. 151 a Conversation-piece.
152 Galatea after an Italian hand 153 St. Margaret finely painted. 154 a Nun at
her Devotion. 155 a Droll by a Dutch master 156 a Fire-piece finely painted, by
Van Helen 157 Arcules a Spinning, finely painted, supposed by Spranger 158 Two
Satyrs, with Children, of young Queline 159 a Water-fall, finely painted by
young Peter's 160 a Landscape after Spranger 161 a Piece of Still-life, with
Sparowgrass, by an Italian 162 a Nun finely painted by Mustard 163 -- a Sower
of seed, by the same hand 164 a fine Dutch Landscape neatly painted on board, by
a Dutch master 165 Our Savior and the Virgin Mary, and Joseph, finely painted
on board 166 Tarquin and Lucrece, rarely painted by the same 167 a head of H. 8
th 168 a head of the Lady Jane Semour, one of H. 8ths Queens 169 a head of Anna
Bullen his Queen, by the same 170 Katherine of Spain his Queen, by the same 171
Ann of Cleve his Queen, by the same 172 a Ladies head neatly painted on board
173 H. 7ths head neatly painted by a great master 174 Venus and Cupid finely
painted by a Dutch master 175 A bunch of Grapes and a Peach, finely done 176
Two Devils behind an Old Wall 177 A curious piece of an Ox and a Dog 178 A
curious piece of Ruins 179 Bacchus finely painted, supposed of Rubens 180 The
Licians Transformed into Frogs 181 a Landscape finely done by Heybright 182 A
man putting a Stove under a Woman's Coats 183 Perseus and Andromeda after Titian
184 King William after Wissing, in small 185 -- Queen Mary by the same hand 186
A Winter, on board, by Van Dyck 187 A High Priests head, in an Oval gilt frame,
on copper, by Haemskirk 188 A Jesuits head, in an Oval gilt frame, on copper,
by Haemskirk 189 A Friars head, in an Oval gilt frame, on copper, by Haemskirk
190 A Nuns head, in an Oval gilt frame, on copper, by Haemskirk 191 A piece of
flowers on board, by a Disciple of Buckdan 192 --. another piece on board, by
the same hand 193 A Winter, on board, by Van Dyck 194 A piece of Men playing at
Cards, on board, by Haemskirk 195 Mr. Lee, as he Acted in the Spanish Friar,
supposed to be by Haemskirk 196 A piece of Haemskirk, done on copper 197 Our
Virgin Mary and our Savior Reading, by a good hand 198 A piece of flowers, on
board, by Van Breughen 199 -- another by the same hand, on board 200 Venus and
Adonis well painted. 201 A head curiously painted by a great master 202 A Man
with an Helmet. 203 A Buck-hunting, finely painted by a great master 204 A
Country Dinner, by Teniers. 205 A head by Rubens, finely painted 206 A
Fire-piece, by Mustard, finely painted. 207 A Cat-a-Mount, finely done 208 A
piece of Sheep and Goats, well done. 109 Prince Maurices head, painted on board
210 Two Pictures of a Boy and a Girl, done by the life. 211 A piece of Cupids
212 A Painters head 213 A flower-pot 214 An old man's head with a Cap 215 A
naked man, with Cards and Dice, by the life 216 The V. Mary, with our Savior
in her arms 217 A piece of Dutch Boys and Girls 218 A gray and brown Horse
finely painted 219 General Monks head in black and white 220 Neptune and Venus
221 A sketeh of a Roman Senator 222 A Cobbler and his Mistress in two Pictures
223 A Hanch of Venison well painted 224 Harry and Doll in two Pictures 225
Bentamito in the Archipelago, by an Italian 226 A Landscape of Grifferes, of
Cows and Sheep 227 A large piece of fish, by Robisson 228 A Friar whipping a
Lady, well painted 229 A large piece of flowers, finely painted 230 A small
piece of Fish by Robisson 231 A Man's Head, supposed of Van Dyck 232 A piece of
Still-life, well painted 233 An Italian Drawing, by a great master 234 A Boy
with Puppies, well painted 235 A Dressing-Box finely painted 236 A Friar and a
Lady Naked, by a French master 237 A small piece of Boys 238 The Countess of
Litchfield 239 A Naked Woman in two colors 240 A piece of the Seasons, by a
great master 241 A piece of singing, of Haemskirk 242 A curious head on copper,
by a great master 243 A Landscape by a great master 244 A Horse curiously done
by Vander Mulin 245 Bacchus well done 246 A piece of Severely well done 247 A
curious Roman Ruin 248 Alexander the Great and Appelles, rarely done 249 A
Sea Fight by Vander Velden 250 Two Landskips neatly painted 251 A curious
Landscape 252 A Landscape and Ruin finely done 253 A piece of flowers by a Dutch
master 254 Diana and her Nymphs by a great master 255 Two Landskips neatly
painted 256 -- Two more of the same 257 Count Teckly curiously done 258 A fine
Sea-piece by Vander Velden 559 -- another by the same hand 260 King Charles the
First 261 A curious stone of Ruins, natural 262 Hagar and Ishmael, by a great
master 263 Lions, etc. rarely done 264 A Sea-storm, by a Dutch master 265 A
Bacchanalian piece curiously done 266 A Blackamoors head by a great master 267
A Flower-piece well done 268 A Landscape by a Dutch master 269 A Fruit-piece
finely done 270 A fine Landscape of Van Deest 271 A piece of Cards and Dice,
neatly painted 272 A piece of Vanity, done by a great master 273 A Fruit-piece,
finely done by Guilman 274 A Night-piece, finely done by Van Hatten 275 A
Woman's head, by a great master 276 A Dutch piece of a Tobacco-cutter, finely
painted by the life, by a Dutch master 277 A large piece of the Prospect of a
Palace, neatly done 278 A fine piece of Still-life, curiously painted by a
great master 279 A small head finely painted 280 A large piece of Vanity by
Gaysborough 281 Our Savior in the Garden, by a great master 282 Mary Magdalen
neatly painted, by a Dutch master 283 Mr. Baxters Head, by a great master 284 A
Sea fight by a Dutch master 285 A Conjurer neatly painted 286 A Night-piece,
with a man Reading, finely painted 287 A large piece of the burning of Troy, by
a great master 288 A Roman Wedding, by Albert Durer 289 A Landscape neatly
painted 290 A large piece of Fowls, by a good hand 291 A large piece of England
in distress, finely painted 292 -- another piece of Englands Restoration,
Ditto 293 A large piece of our Savior and the Centurion 294 A piece of Honor
*295 A small Landscape 295 a Sea-piece with the prospect of Rhodes 296 A
Hunting-piece by Humphry 297 Two small Fruit-pieces well painted 298 Mary
Magdalen by a Dutch master 299 Venus and Cupid well painted, on board 300 A
Crucifix by a great Master 301 An Italian Landscape by Pagero 302 A Flower-pot
well painted, by a Dutch master 303 The Assumption of the B. Virgin, with
figures, on board 304 An Italian Landscape of 7 foot 305 A small piece of
flowers in Water colors, with glass 306 St. Paul in a Gold Oval frame 307 A
Flower piece in Water colors 308 Joseph's Brethren bringing his Coat to Jacob,
by De Voss, on copper 309 a Gally in the Dardinello, by a good hand 310 A very
fine Landscape, by Hemelrod 311 Mars and Venus by a great master 312 A Man
playing on a Violin, by Van Harp 313 St. Katherine meditating upon a book,
neatly done 314 King William and Queen Mary 315 The Dutch School 316 The
Husbands revenge upon his insatiable and scolding Wife 317 Posture Clark, with
his foot upon his Head 318 Posture Clark Mimicking the Quaker 319 The
Chimny-sweeper cooling the Cook-maid 320 The Cook-maids revenge upon the
Chimny-sweeper 321 A small piece of Fruit 322 A small piece by Jean Lundens 323
A fine piece of Fruit by Stevens 324 A Devout Woman's Head, curiously done 325
Mars and Pallas well painted 326 The Emblem of Virtue painted by Pallas, large
327 St. Peter in black and white, in small 328 A small Landscape in Indian Ink
329 Two pieces, of a Frog and Dog 330 A Droll-piece by Old Haemskirk 331 The
Bible Cuts by several great masters, finely done 332 The Visitation of the
Virgin Mary to Elizabeth 333 A large Crucifix finely painted 334 For une, by a
great master 335 A Sketch by Jordaens, in Water colors. 336 A curious piece of
Diepenbeck 337 A Senators head, by the hand of Titian. 338 A Battel-piece,
finely done by Meulner 339 A Barbary Horse, by a good hand. 340 A
Kitchen-piece, done by a good hand 341 an Old man's head, by a good master 342
Paris and 3 Goddesses, of Griffere 343 A Woman at Confession, by Haemskirk 344
A man smoking, by Haemskirk 345 A very good Landscape in a large frame 346 A
large piece, with Geese and other fowls 347 Venus and Cupid 348 A Mathematical
Study 349 An Old man kissing his Maid 350 A Naked Woman and Satyrs 351 A small
Landscape 352 A three quarter Landscape 353 Jean Shore 354 A Child's Picture
finely painted 355 A large piece of a Ship, Sail-maker 356 A Dutchwoman and
Girl making Sausages 357 Prometheus 358 a prospect of Hampton-Count, by a great
master 359 a fine piece on board, with a pickled Herring turned into a Swan, of
Vario 360 a Fellow with a Rhenish-Wine-Glass, by Brower 361 The Virgins going
to offer at the Temple of Mercury, by a Disciple of Rubens 362 Titians
Mistress, with a good prospect 363 A Fool embracing a Dutch Maid 364 Isaac and
Rebecca 365 Lot and his two Daughters 366 A man musing or thinking 367 a Woman
with a Looking-glass, neatly done 368 a pleasant Landscape with figures, very
finely painted 369 a Fruit-piece, by Guilman, finely done 370 a Night-piece of
a Friar Reading, finely done by old Haemskirk 371 A head well painted by a
great master 372 A Storm finely painted by a Dutch master 373 A small
Fruit-piece with a China Basin, curiously done by Guilman 374 Anointing of
Saul, finely cast in Lead 375 a Hunting-piece, finely done in the same 376 a
Carpet by Jo. Mars 377 a Landscape well done 378 a piece of Fowls 379 Don Scotus
380 a Battle of Wike 381 King Charles full length 382 King James II. full
length 383 a good head 384 St. John and our Savior, and Virgin Mary 385 A head
of a great master 386 A setting-dog 387 A piece of fruit, in an ebony frame 388
A Coat of Arms of the Earl of Carlisle 389 A Rat-catcher, by a great master 390
A Prospective of Castro 391 an Emperors head 392 A head of a great master 393
A head of a great master 394 -- another of the same 395 -- another of the same
396 A piece of Castro 397 A head of Sir George Villers 398 Moses in the
Bull-rushes 399 Two Screens 400 Four Children 401 A Soldier and his Wife 402 A
piece of Slaves finely painted 403 A piece of flowers on board, by a Disciple
of Buckdan 404 another piece of flowers, on board, by the same hand 405 K.
William, well done after Wissing 406 -- Queen Mary, by the same hand 407 A
piece of Ruin, on board, of Griffere 408 A Boy with a Snake, by a good hand 409
A piece of Drunkards, on board, of old Haemskirk 410 A piece of flowers, on
board, done by Van Breughen 411 -- another piece by the same hand 412 A piece
of Ruin, on board, by Griffere 413 A Landscape, on board, by the same hand 414 A
very fine head of Rembrant 415 The Duchess of Cleaveland, by a good hand 416 A
piece of Vanity finely painted 417 A very fine Shepherd, by a good hand 418 --
another, Ditto 419 K. William, in an Oval frame, after Knoller 420 a Landslip
by a good hand 421 --. another finely painted by Uligher 422 Colonel Walker,
by a Dutch master 423 a Landscape done by Uligher 424 King William and Q. Mary,
in Oval frames 425 The D. of Monmouths Head, by a Dutch master 426 a curious
Landscape by Uligher 427 A large frame most curiously carved with birds,
supposed by Guibbons 428 a Naked Lady, with a Comical Dutch Boor 429 A small
frame, finely carved by the same 430 A Landscape finely painted 431 A Landscape
by Van Hagen 432 A Cardinals Palace, finely done 433 A Bating piece by Young
Dow 434 A Carman finely painted after Teniers 435 A piece of Beasts, by a good
hand 436 A piece of and finely done by Martin 437 A Landscape finely painted by
Van Noeck 438 A fine Battle by a great master 439 A Landscape finely painted by
De Voss 440 A Fruit-piece neatly done by Berghem 441 A fine piece of Boors
Dancing, by a great master 442 A Bating piece finely painted 343 A Winter piece
finely painted by Breughell 444 A Fruit-piece finely painted 445 An Hermit done
by Breda 446 A piece of Fruit finely painted by Bond 457 A great Fruit-piece
finely painted 448 A Man's head smiling, in an Oval gilt frame, on copper, by
Haemskirk 449 A man smoking, in an Oval gilt frame, on copper, by Haemskirk
450 A man's head in an Oval gilt frame, on copper, by Haemskirk 451 A man
hugging of a Bottel, in an Oval gilt frame, on copper, by Haemskirk 452 A boy
in his Shirt paring of an Appel 453 A Turks head on board, by a Dutch master
454 A piece of flowers by a Disciple of Buckdan 455 -- another by the same
hand, on board 456 A Shepherd and Shepherdess by Haemskirk 457 A Landscape of
Venus and a Soldier, painted on board 458 A Jesuits Head neatly painted 459
a-piece of Still-life with a silver bowl, by a great mast. 460 A Naked Venus
and Satyr, by Vario 461 A piece of the Nativity, curiously painted on board 462
a head of St. Ignatius Loyola finely painted 463 A prospect of Amsterdam, by
Vander Velder 464 The raising of Lazarus, by Spranger 465 A Landscape of Lucas
Vanuden 466 A Dutch Landscape with Figures 467 -- another, Ditto 468 Our Savior
after Meredolchia, a great Italian 469 A Landscape of a Ruin 470 King William
Head after Wissing 471 A Partridge and fruit, after the life 472 Van Dycks Head
rarely done 473 Fortune upon the Seas, well done 474 The proud Pharisee, and
the poor Publican 475 A Droll after a Dutch master 476 A Landscape of Moonshine
477 An old head after Bassan 478 The King and Queen after Wissing 479 Diana and
her Nymphs 480 Daphnis and Apollo 481 Susanna and the two Elders 482 A little
piece with a Dog 483 A Parrot and two Guinea-Pigs 484 A Droll 485 K. James II.
by a good hand, in small 486 Queen Mary, by the same hand 487 A piece of
Haemskirk, on board 488 A piece of flowers of Van Breughen, on board 489 A
piece of flowers on board, by the same hand 490 -- another by the same hand, on
board 491 A piece of Haemskirk on copper 492 King Charles I. after Sir Anthony
Van Dyck 493 a Country Fellow confessing his sins to a Priest, by a Dutch
master 494 an Old Woman, with a Monky chucking her under the Chin 495 a Woman
keeping Shrovetide, by a Dutch master 496 The Duke of Albemarles Head finely
painted 497 A curious piece by Teniers 498 A Boys head well done 499 A Landscape
with a Church, well painted 500 A curious Landscape with a Palace 501 A large
Ruin in Water colors 502 A piece of Horses well done 503 A small piece of
Tulips and other flowers 504 A Sea-piece, with the burning of Ships 505 A
Comb-case, well done, by Varelst 506 Emperor of Germanys head 507 A large
Landscape well painted on board 508 An Bacchanal by Paul de Voss 509 A Woman's
head, supposed by Sir Peter Lilly 510 Queen Dowager curiously painted 511 Two
Philosophers, by a Dutch master 511 A fine head of Queline. 513 A Sea-piecs of
Knife 514 A Landscape fit for a Chimny. 515 A Landscape of Loten 516 A Shepherd
517 A Garland of flowers 518 A Landscape of a Garden 519 -- another of the same
520 A Prospective of Castro 521 A Landscape 522 A Festoon of flowers 523 A good
head 524 A Landscape 525 Bacchus 526 A Head of General Lambert 527 Two Dogs
snarling at each other 528 The Virgin Mary finely painted 529 A large Landscape
painted in Flanders 530 The old Countess of Sommerset 531 An old man's head well
done 532 Mrs. Broom the famous Paintress 533 A fine Battle by Jacob Dewit 534
K. William and Q Mary, in carved leaved rich frames 535 Cignus turned into a
Swan 536 A very fine Boor-piece of David Teniers 537 A curious Vanity of Van
Hatten 538 A very fine Original of books 539 A Landscape and Seaport, by a
Dutch master 540 Two Droll-pieces well done 541 A Piper on board, well done 542
Our Savior carrying his Cross, on copper 543 A Droll-piece 544 A piece of
Still-life, by Robisson 545 A Half-length of Fruit, by Robisson 546 A piece of
still-life, by Robisson 547 A piece with a Cord, by Robisson 548 A piece of
still-life and Woodcock, by the same 549 A piece of Fish, with a Jack, by
Robisson 550 A Cock well painted 551 A piece of Fruit 552 -- another, Ditto 553
The V. Mary, our Savior and St. John 554 Two Philosophers well painted 455 A
Droll well painted 556 A delicate Fruit-piece 557 Cupid and Psyche by an
Italian hand 458 A Night-piece 559 A Lunatic by Carravagio 560 A piece of
Still-life, well done 561 A Winter-piece by a Dutch master 562 The Temple of
Diana by Knife 563 Argus and Mercury 564 A History of St. John Baptist and
Herodias, in an ebony frame 565 A Head by an Italian master 566 -- another, by
the same 567 A Head by a Dutch master 568 An old man's head by an Italian master
569 An old Woman's Head by a Dutch master 570 A Head after Carats 571 A man
smoking of Tobacco 572 A piece of Stone-work, with a Landscape and figures 573
Joseph and Potiphors Wife 574 King William a whole length, in little 575 --
another by the same hand 576 A piece of Still-life, by a Dutch master 577 --
another of Still-life, by the same hand 578 A large piece of Bacchus, Mars,
Venus, Cupid, of Hondius 579 A small Landscape 580 Oliver Cromwells head, by a
good hand 581 A piece of Still-life, by a Dutch master 582 -- another by the
same hand 583 A small piece of an Italian master of Dorimboss 584 A large
Shepherd and Shepherdess 585 A small Landscape after Loten 586 A Battle finely
painted by Rubens 587 A Tiger and Lion, by a great Italian master 588 A Fox by
Boele 589 A head finely painted 590 -- another, Ditto 591 Abraham and his Son,
finely painted in Watercolors 592 Venus and Adonis, of Megancke 593 Susanna
and the two Elders, finely painted 594 A Sea-piece of Vander Velden 595 A man
smoking of Tobacco, by a Dutch master 596 A Sea-piece by Vander Velden 597 A
Ceiling-piece finely painted 598 A Sea-piece by Vander Velden 599 A
Flower-piece well painted 600 Tarquin and Lucrece 601 A Fruit-piece by Van
Noeck 602 A Landscape finely painted by du Bois 603 A Fruit-piece by Burginion
604 a Fruit-piece by the same hand 605 Two Drolls well painted by a Dutch
master 606 a Woman with Carrets curiously done 607 a Droll by a Dutch master,
finely done 608 a Droll by the same hand 609 Sampson and Dallila, by Van
Bezeler 610 a piece of Cows, by Ver Hagen 611 a Baiting-piece by a Dutch
master, well done 612 Six Empress after Titian, in black and white 613 Two
small Landskips finely done 614 a fine Sea-piece, neatly done 615 an Old man
blowing his Nose 616 a fine Landscape with a Water-fall 617 Mars and Venus, by a
fine master 618 Limbrick Castle by Vander Velden 619 Lyn well done 620 a fine
Landscape 621 a Flower-piece by a Dutch master 622 Charles the second 623
Alexander the Great finely done 624 a Flower-piece well done 625 A fight finely
painted by a Dutch master 626 A large Battle *626 Count Teckly, well done 627 A
Landscape with figures. *627 Constantinople by Griffere 628 -- another *628 A
Moon-piece, by Snellor 629 A Shepherdess *629 A fine Ruin 630 A Fiddler 631 A
man admiring his Mistress Picture 632 A Man with a Parrot 633 The senses of
seeing, hearing and smelling, 3 paintings 634 a large piece of Piramus and
Thisbe, by a good hand 635 a Landscape, with a man shooting, well done 636 a
piece of Still-life, with a China-pot, neatly painted 637 a Festoon of flowers,
by a great master 638 a Landscape, neatly painted by a great master 639 a Hen
and Lemon finely done 640 a pleasant Landscape well painted 641 a Story-piece
finely done 642 a Frost-piece by a great master 643 a Seaport curiously
painted 644 a man's head by a great master 645 King William, an half length,
rarely painted 646 -- his Queen, by the same 647 a Fruit-piece by Guilman 648
K. William and Q. Mary finely painted by a Dutch master 649 King Charles the
Second very well done 650 A curious large Horse and Blackamoor, by a great
master 651 K. William and Q. Mary in Oval frames, finely painted 652 Ditto, in
Oval frames with two Angels holding up the Crown 653 a Landscape, with Tobias
and the Angel 654 a fine piece with Horsemen, in a gold frame 655 a fine piece
of Beast, after Bercham 656 Two small Landskips 657 St. John finely done by
Goulslows 658 Q. Elizabeth, and Edward the 4th, by a good hand. 659 an
Sea-piece finely done 660 Lady Jane Gray 661 Sir Anthony Mores head, painted by
himself 662 a Woman with an Eagle, finely done 663 -- his Lady, by the same
664 Socrates Head, by a good master 665 K. Solomon worshipping an Idol 666 a
Landscape finely done on board 667 a Banquet in an ebony frame 668 a Dish of
flowers finely done 669 a Landscape on board neatly done 670 a Dish of fruit by
a good hand 671 a Nuns Head finely painted 672 Altar-piece curiously painted
673 Fair Rosamond finely done 674 Bishop Cranmers head finely done 675
Gondamores head finely done 676 an old man's head well done 677 A large piece of
Venus asleep, finely done 678 a Sea-storm well painted 679 a large battle, by a
great master 680 a pleasant Seaport by a great master 681 -- another by the
same hand 682 a Sea-storm very finely painted 683 a Sea-calm by the same hand
684 St. Peter's leading out of Prison by Angels, in an Ebony frame 685 The
burning of Troy by the Greeks 686 The Siege of Rome by the Goths and Vandals,
well painted 687 The Birth of our Savior, by a Dutch master 688 a Fisherman by
a Dutch master 689 a Woman holding fish, by a Dutch master 690 a piece of
Hollebin 691 a Faulkner by a great master 692 The Woman of Samaria 693 a
curious piece of Castro 694 Our Savior 695 a Battle by Mr. Wycke 696 a good
head 697 a Sea-piece 698 an head 699 another head 700 a Landscape by a great
master 701 a Fruit piece 702 Venus and Cupid 703 a piece of Horses 704 a man
and woman singing, painted on board by Haemskirk 705 Jupiter and Leda 706 The
seven Bishops well done 707 The Cully well flogged 708 St. John Baptists Head
painted on board 709 Christ in the blessed Virgins Arms, well done 710 a piece
of Still-life finely painted 711 a fine piece of Hawks 712 a piece of
Still-life with fruit 713 a piece of Fish with a Cod 714 a piece of Trouts and
Place 715 a piece of Still-life with a Woodcock 716 a piece of Fish with a
Jack, finely done 717 a small piece of Fish and Partridge 718 a small piece of
Fish curiously done 719 Joseph's head in two colors 720 a fine piece of Salmon
721 a piece of Cock and Hens 722 a Winter-piece well done 723 a Battle between
the Germans and the Turks 724 Soldiers playing at Tables, well painted 725 a
half length of an young Lady 726 Some Romans Fighting for a standard 727 a
piece of Dogs with a Duck, well done 728 a Fruit-piece very finely painted 729
a Sea-piece after Vander Velden
FINIS.

