A COLLECTION Of Curious PICTURES, VIZ. Paintings and Limnings.

By the Best MASTERS.

Will be sold by AUCTION on Wednesday the 8th, and Thursday and Friday the 9th
and 10th of this instant October 1690. at the Barbados Coffe-House in
Exchange-Alley. over against the Royal Exchange, in Cornhil.

The Sale beginning precisely at Four of the Clock every Afternoon.

By Edward Millington.

Catalogues of which are distributed by Mr. Gilliflower in Westminster Hall:
Mr. Not in the Pall Mall: Mr. Bently in Russel Street, Covent Garden: Mr.
Wilkinon in Fleet Street: Mr. Hargrave, at the King's Head, over against
Furnivals-Inn in Holborn: Mr; Miller, at the Acorn, in St. Paul's Church yard:
And Mr. Crouch over against the Royal Exchange, in Cornhil, Booksellers.

Conditions of Sale.
I. THat he who bids most is the Buyer, and if any Difference arise which the
Company cannot Decide, then the Paintings, etc. shall be Exposed to Sale again.
II. That the Money for the Paintings etc. so bought is To be paid at the place
of Sale within three Days after the Sale is ended, but for the Convenience of
such as desire them sooner, constant Attendance for delivery will be given
every Day at the said Place. III. That all Gentlemen, Ladies, etc. after the
buying any Painting, will be pleased to give in their Names and Lodgings, at
the Sale, otherwise to pay the third part of the Price, or the whole Money
presently for them, where upon payment of the remainder within the time
limited, the Paintings, Limnings, etc. shall be delivered to them or their
Order. IV. That no Person is to bid less than sixpence a time, for any Lot
exposed to Sale. V. That the Paintings, etc. may be viewed by any Persons that
please to repair to the place of Sale; Where Catalogues are given to those that
require them.
PAINTINGS, LIMNINGS, etc.
1 A Piece of Oliver Cromwell, in a gold frame 2 A Man smoking, in a gilt
frame 3 -- another, ditto 4 a piece of Fruit in a gilt frame 5 a piece of
Buck-Hunting 6 a King and Queen, in oval frames 7 a Head in a gilded frame 8
The Virgin Marys head 9 a Man saying Grace 10 a Moon piece, painted on board 11
a Droll piece of Men smoking, by Haemskirk 12 Two pieces of Winter and Summer
13 a Landscape with Beast 14 a Landscape with Sun rising 15 a Battle by a great
master 16 a fine Landscape 17 a Bunch of Grapes 18 Two Men at Back-gammon, by a
Dutch master 19 a piece of Soldiers Murdring, by a Dutch master 20 a Landscape
by Loten 21 a curious Head done by Roustraten 22 a Sea piece with a Windmill
23 St. Jerome finely painted 24 a Blackamoors Head 25 The story of Pharaohs
Daughter, and Moses taken out of the Bull-rushes 26 a large piece of Still-life
with a Carpet 27 a curious Italian piece of an Angel, etc. 28 a neat
Fruit-piece with a China Basin 29 a Stagg-hunting 30 a Landscape four foot high
31 a curious piece of a Venetian Palace 32 a large Landscape of Loten, 6 foot
high, 5 foot broad 33 an Europa delicately painted by Lemence, 6 foot long 34
Ceres meeting Mercury at the Temple 35 The Host of Julius Caesar and Brutus 36
a fine Landscape of Streeter 37 a delicate Landscape of Knife 38 a delicate
Carpet, with a Violin, Book and Trumpet 39 a Shock Dog, by a Dutch Master 40 a
Landscape in small, by a good master 41 a Sketch of Naked Women, finely done 42
a Flower piece of Bogdan 43 a Landscape with a Grove 44 Diana and her Nymphs in
a Landscape 45 a Landscape with Figures 46 Queen Mary after Wissen 47 a large
Landscape, by a good hand 48 Daniel in the Lions Den 49 an Head curiously
painted 50 Mary Magdalen rarely painted on board 51 a Morning Landscape with
Figures, finely done on board 52 a Night piece, and Blazing-Star, curiously
done on board 53 a Dutch Landscape with a Mule, very finely painted 54 Venus
neatly painted by a Dutch master 55 a Turky-work'd Carpet and Flute, curiously
done 56 a Sketch of Naked Women, finely done 57 a Landscape, curiously painted
on board 58 a Fruit-piece, with a Gold Cup, curiously done 59 a Man and a Woman
with a Red Herring, by old Boon 60 a piece of the French Queen, finely painted
61 a Woman looking upwards, strongly painted by de Ryek 62 a Sea piece on
board, finely painted 63 a Cupid of Streeter finely painted 64 a piece with
Birds, by Young Boul 65 a Sea piece by Peter's 66 a large Landscape by Cantelino
of Rome 67 The fair Helena by an Italian hand 68 Oliver Cromwell 69 a piece of
Architecture by Knife 70 Moses trampling upon Pharaoh's Crown, by ditto 71
Hagar and Ishmael 72 a curious Seaport, delicately painted, and full of
Figures, by Castro 73 a Fruit piece finely painted 74 a delicate Kitchen piece,
finely painted by an Italian 75 Venus and Cupid, by an Italian hand 76 a fine
Landscape, by a Dutch master 77 a Country Wake, with a great many Figures 78 a
Conversation piece 79 a delicate small Landscape, with a Ruin, on board 80 a
Boys head 81 Monkies smoking 82 a delicate small Landscape, on copper 83 a Sea
piece well done 84 a Landscape by a Dutch master 85 a Sea piece, ditto 86 --
another by ditto 87 a piece of still-life well done 88 a small Fruit piece
finely done 89 a Woman's head, incomparably painted on board 90 a Py'd Horse
delicately painted 91 an Italian piece of Cain and Abel neatly done 92 a piece
of Still-life, in an Ebony frame 93 a Night piece with Men at Cards, finely
done on board 94 a Sea storm* curiously painted 95 a Moon piece curiously
painted, by a Dutch master 96 a Night piece with beggars, neatly done 97 The
Emperor of Russia rarely done 98 a large Landscape of Christian 99 a large
Flower pot 100 The Offering of Hannibal neatly done, by a Dutch master 101 a
Landscape neatly painted 102 a Night piece incomparably painted 103 a curious
piece of K. Solomon and the Q. of Sheba 104 a Fruit piece neatly painted 105 a
large Landscape, delicately painted by Ocear 106 The Virgin Mary in Water
colors 107 St. John in the same 108 a Droll-piece after Teneirs 109 The Church
of Rotterdam, curiously painted by a Dutch master 110 a curious large piece of
a Turkish Mosque, curiously painted with Figures 111 The Strangling of the
Grand Vizier, incomparably done 112 a piece of Architecture, by Knife 113
Galatea, curiously painted after an Italian master 114 The Goddess Pallas, by
Lemence 115 Jupiter and Danae, or the Power of Gold, neatly done by an Italian
master 116 a Fruit piece well painted 117 K. Charles I. after Van Dyck, by
Stone 118 a Landscape by an Italian, curiously painted 119 a piece of Acteon and
Diana 120 Jacobs Dream, by an Italian master 121 a Comical Fellow smoking, by
a Dutch master 122 a Supernaculum finely painted 123 an Usurer telling his
Money 124 a view of a Barbados Plantation, done from the Place 125 a Fame,
with Trophies of War, by a Dutch master 126 Apollo playing to the Muses, by a
good hand 127 a Man playing on Bagg-pipes 128 Cupid with Flowers, by a Dutch
master 129 a Landscape well done 130 Our Savior with the Woman of Samaria,
neatly done 131 a Landscape 132 a Philosophers Head 133 Haemskirks own head,
neatly painted 134 a Comical Presbyterian after Haemskirk 135 a Man at
Confession after Haemskirk 136 a piece of Drunkards after Haemskirk 137 an
Usurer, in small, finely painted 138 a Supper finely painted 138 a Fool finely
painted, in little 139 a delicate large piece of Flowers 140 Two Ballad singers
141 a Leopard and Dogs 142 a Landscape with Figures 143 a Buck-hunting piece, by
a good hand 144 a delicate piece of Beasts of Van Bercham 145 a smiling Head,
by France Halst 147 an Head on board 148 a Boys head 149 a Sketch of a Man at
Cards and Dice 150 a Landscape with a House 151 an Hanch of Venison 152 St. John
Baptist finely painted 153 a Sketch finely painted 154 a Flower piece well done
155 a Head, by a great master 156 Cupid and Venus 157 a piece of Still-life,
after Roustraten 158 a piece of Loten 159 a small Landscape 160 -- another by a
good hand 161 a Landscape curiously painted on board 162 a Landscape with a Ruin
163 a Prospect of a House curiously painted 164 a Hunting piece rarely painted
165 a Shepherd and Shepherdess 166 a Sea storm finely painted 167 a Sea storm
with a Castle 168 Our Savior driving the Buyers out of the Temple 169 Posture
Clark finely painted 170 a Mallard finely done by a great master 171 a delicate
Flower-piece of Varelst 172 a Landscape neatly painted 173 a small piece of the
Journying of the Israelites, by Dorenboos 174 a Child's Picture, very finely
painted 175 a Mathematical Study neatly done 176 Jacobs going into Egypt, by
Long Frank 177 Jacobs Wrestling with the Angel, rarely done 178 a Sea storm
very finely painted 179 a Sea fight between the Turks and Venetians 180 an old
Man kissing his Maid 181 a large Landscape very finely painted 182 a rare piece
of fruit flowers, by Van Evanbrock 183 a small Landscape after Westerman 184 St.
Jerome. a half length, by a good hand 185 King William and Queen Mary, after
Wissen 186 a p^ospect of a Garden, finely done 187 The Bantam Ambassador, by
Castro 188 a Sea piece of Sailmakers 189 an Italian piece of a Fowl, curiously
done 190 a Ruin, incomparably painted by old Pierce 191 an Italian Flower
piece, curiously done on board 192 a piece of Piety, neatly painted by a good
hand 193 an incomparable fine Landscape, with a Water-Mill, rarely done 194 a
three quarter Turky-work'd Carpet, with a Watch, neatly done 195 a large
Italian storm neatly done 196 a large Italian Landscape with Cattle 197 The Rape
of Proserpine curiously painted 198 Narcissus, or the fond Self-Admirer, by an
Italian hand 199 Neptune by a good master 200 a Ladies Picture done by the life
201 Prudence by an Italian hand 202 a Landscape 203 a Magdalen, or the great
Penitent, well painted 204 a fine piece of Still-life in a burnished gold frame
205 a Comical piece, by a Dutch master 206 K. Williams Mother, the Princess
Royal 207 King William, by a Dutch master 208 a large Sea piece with the view
of Argiers, finely done by Agust 209 a large Italian piece of Angels appearing
to Abraham before the burning of Sodom, delicately painted 210 St. Katherine
neatly done 211 a curious piece of Sylenus, delicately painted by an Italian
212 Susannah and the two Elders, finely painted by Derryck 213 Perseus and
Andromeda, curiously painted on board 214 Dianas head finely painted 215 a
Birds Nest with Eggs in it, rarely painted 216 a small Landscape with a Vineyard
217 a piece of Ruins on the River of Rhine 218 a little Sea piece with Ruins
and Galley in it 219 a Deaths Head curiously painted 220 a small Landscape,
supposed to be of Rubens 221 a Conjurer, delicately painted by a Dutch master
222 a large Battle curiously painted, by a great master 223 a delicate
Seaport, curiously painted 224 a curious piece of Still-life, by a great hand
225 a Fruit piece, finely done by Guilman 226 a Storm, neatly painted by a
Dutch master 227 a Sea piece, incomparably painted by Peter's 228 an Italian
piece of Jacob going into Egypt, full of figures 229 a large Palace, done by
Lemence 230 a piece of Fortune, in a gilded frame 231 a curious piece of
Flowers 232 a fine piece of Card players on copper 233 a Winter-piece 234 a
delicate piece of a Dutch Breakfast 235 a small head on copper, by Wovers 236
-- another head on copper, by the same 237 a Sea-storm, curiously done on
copper 238 a Winter-piece 239 a Fish piece, by a good hand 240 an Old Woman,
and Monky chucking her under the chin 241 a Moonlight finely painted 242 a
curious piece of the Burning of London, cutting off K. Charles I. Head, etc.
243 a large Sea piece, with the view of Tangier, finely done 244 a large
Turky-work'd Carpet, with a Book 245 a Fruit-piece, with a Lobster, neatly done
246 Our Savior, incomparably painted on board 247 -- Idem, and Virgin Mary by
the same hand 248 The Resurrection of our Savior, finely painted on board 249
a large Vanity by Gaysborough, incomparably painted 250 Susannah and the two
Elders, rarely painted on board 251 King William in an oval frame, well done
252 The Duchess of Grafton well done 253 Dun-Scotus, or the Subtle Doctor 254
The Countess of Litchfield 255 an Emblem, with a Boy, painted by Streeter 256 a
fine Sea piece by Zeman, on board 257 a Comical piece of Old Boon 258 Jacobs
Dream, by a good master 259 an Italian piece of St. John Baptizing our Savior,
neatly done 260 a Fruit piece neatly done by Guilman 261 a Night piece with
Robers, curiously done on board 262 a large Landscape, curiously done by
Christian 263 a Dutch Storm with a Castle, neatly done 264 a Fruit piece
curiously painted by Guilman 265 a Roman Story, curiously painted by a Dutch
master 266 a large Gardening piece finely painted, and full of Figures, 8 foot
long, 4 high 267 a Fruit-piece, finely done by Guilman 268 an Italian piece of
a Piper, rarely painted by an Italian 269 a curious large piece of Abraham
Treating of Angels under the Tree 270 a Landscape with a Shepherd and Sheep,
rarely painted on board 271 a Noble Woman, finely painted by Ant. More 272
Susannah and the two Elders, rarely painted 273 a Madona incomparably painted
on board, by an Italian 274 a large piece of the Holy Family, by an Italian
master 275 a delicate large piece of an Horse and Blackamoor 276 King William
and Queen Mary, by a good hand 277 a Conjurer curiously painted 278 a Landscape
of a Water-fall, by Christian 279 a Prospect of a Garden neatly done 280 a
Night piece with the Arminian Merchants 281 a piece of Pillaging finely done
282 a Man's Head, by a great master 283 Joseph and his Mistress, on board 284 a
Young man's Head 285 a Droll piece, with a Man smoking 286 a Flower piece on
board 287 a Dog after Van Dyck 288 a Landscape on board 289 a Head after Rubens

