A LETTER Written from the TOWER by Mr. Stephen College (the
Protestant-Joyner) To Dick Janeways Wife.
Dear Jane,
MY Commitment was the more surprising to me in that it broke those measures we
had taken for a Rendezvous that Evening, where we were to repeat those
satisfactions Thee and I have often mntually tasted from the solaces of Venus
abroad, while Dick Janeway toiled contentedly upon his Mercury at home; I wish
him better reward of his Labor, then I am like to reap by mine.

This place affords little pleasure, besides the sweet thoughts of thy Dear
self; and my Confinement is the more uneasy to me, by the supercilious
behavior of my Warder: yet with the help of some yellow-boys, and a few Tools,
(both which I desire Thee to send me) I hope to set up to that Trade I so long
neglected, and to become Scaffold, Block, and Nine-pin-maker to the Tower.

Encourage thy Dick to go on, though I can no longer assist, in the True
Protestant Cause, yet he is hard enough for all their Observators, Heraclitus,
and other Tantivy-Scriblers; and (as I often told Thee) our best Friends are
still behind the Curtain, Men whose Talent is declaiming, and that can out-bark
all their Towzers, and outdo that She-Tory Joa -- Br -- with all her Guns and
Crack-farts.

Had not this Commitment prevented me, I Will swear I was about a piece that
would have gone nigh to do their Job; I had Chalked out my Design, and had
Plained my Materials, and should have Glew'd them well together, and fitted it
for Dick's never-fading Paint.

Return my thanks in the lowest and most prostitute manner to Sh -- B -- l,
(whom next to Alg. Syd. I esteem as the chief Patron of our Cause) for his True
Protestant Ignoramus-Jury, which so honestly discharged their Conscience, and
gave Verdict against those seven Tory-Evidence. Thou know, it is in the mouth
of two or three Witnesses a Truth shall be established; does it follow then,
that six or seven shall do ihe same? And thou know who teaches when he
holds forth, That for a few to be Perjured for the benefit of the Nation, and
True Protestancy, is not only Venial, but a piece of Service becoming the Godly
Party, and the favorers of the Good Old Cause.

But I find that an Ignoramus in Middlesex, is no Dimittimus out of this Limbo;
and I fear those at Oxford may speak other Latin, and that the Jury there may
be, at this time, as Toryish as their Terre-filius: if so, adieu College! who
promised my self last March to survive all my Name-sakes there, and to have
seen them crumbled down with my Axes and Hammers.

Be sure to convey away all Papers, Cuts, Draughts, etc. specially that of
Mac-Cvt-throat, that represents the Oxford-Gownmen, and all the Bishops too,
crouding with Father Patch to kiss the Popes Toe, lest Goodman Hog seize them,
as others did the Sack-full in the Hay-mow, and lest the Original of those
Tories and Abhorrers fall into such hands as will open some mouths wider
against me at my Trial. Which let it come when it will, I hope to make a better
bargain then that Goose-brain'd Mac Fitz-Harys; though his Jury came short of
what was promised him, mine shall do more then I can desire, and may help me
out with another Ignoramus. I Will never trust Mongrel-Solicitor, nor
shatter-brain'd Whitaker, who thought his Law-quirks as much Treason-proof, as
I did my Mail and Blunderbusses, but will as fairly bring himself to Bed, as he
did his Client Fitz-Harys: I could play with other edged Tools then mine own,
and this Upholsterer can Hang himself, though not his Room.

I Will have no other Solicitors then those True Protestants, that pass like
Popes for Infallible, J -- s, Win -- n, T -- y, W -- p, Poll -- n, and Smith,
who are the Pillars that must support the Cause, and help me their Champion at
a dead lift. If three of them couid sway five hundred, they may easily cajole
two or three Judges, whose Places they stand fair for next Parliament. These,
dear Jane, must do the Job, and must not only talk down the Bishops-Court, but
balder the World out of its Reason, and must deny the King any Money, that they
may have the more themselves: and it is not a few Millions that are yearly
swallowed up by our Lawyers, Attorneys, and other half-starv'd Green-bags and
Pettyfoggers; 'twas these that cowed our Country-Gentry the last Parliaments,
and with a splay-mouth'd little Fanatical Hypocrisy, and a cramp Law-term,
appeared as formidable as Gorgon's Heads, and by their tickling and noise
became the Bell-weathers of the Flock, while the rest were content to bleat
Amen to their Arbitrary Nonsense: But this to our selves. Above all, retain our
Friend Win -- ton, who with a Good my Lord! and a peal of Liberty and Property,
Our All is at stake, can silence even Sir George, or any other such Gigantick
Abhorrer, and will make more noise for a grain of Popularity, then another for
5 l. and let him be Col. Pury's Cloak-boy, a bag full of Nonsense, nay a dull
man in Ignoramus; yet give me one that will talk for my money, though I lose my
Cause; And though Judge Jenkins (who knew them best) gives it as his Advice, and
bids us (p. 138) avoid the Lawyers of the House of Commons, yet I must shortly
put my self into their Clutches, as to a point of Law or two I intend to start
at my Trial; and let all True Protrstants pray for my good Deliverance. My next
shall be (if this Air, or that of Tyburn, choaks not my Muse in the mean time)
in such a strain as pleased when thee and I used to meet at the Swan; and so
Adieu.

To the Cause and Thee most True I Will prove,
Till Ketch and Cord shall end our Love.
From my Lodgings in Lobs-Pound, near the Duke or Exeter's Daughter.
LONDON: Printed for R. J. 1681.


