A Collection of Papers Relating to the Present Juncture of Affairs in England.

VIZ.
1. The Humble Petition of Seven Bishops to his Majesty. 2. Articles
recommended by the Archbishop of Canterbury, to all the Bishops and Clergy
within his Jurisdiction. 3. Proposals of the Archbishop, with some orher
Bishops, to his Majesty. 4. Petition of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, for
Calling a Free Parliament: With his Majesty's gracious Answer. 5. Vindication
of the aforesaid Petition. 6. Extract of the States General their Resolution.
7. The Prince of Orange his Letter to the English Army. 8. Account of a Design
to poison the Prince of Orange before he came out of Holland. 9. A Relation of
a strange Meteor, representing a Crown of Light, seen in the Air near the City
of Orange. 10. Lord Delamere's Speech to his Tenants. 11. The Prince of
Denmark's Letter to the King. 12. The Lord Churchil's Letter to the King. 13.
Princess Anne's Letter to the Queen. 14. A Memorial of the Protestants of
England, to the Prince and Princess of Orange. 15. Prince of Orange his
Declaration of November. 28. 1688. from Sherborn-Castle.
The Third Edition.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

London printed, and are to be sold by Richard Janeway in Queen's-head-Court in
Paternoster Row, 1689.

To the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
The Humble Petition of William Archbishop of Canterbury, and diverse of the
Suffragan Bishops of that Province, (now present with him) in behalf of
themselves, and others of their absent Brethren, and of the Clergy of their
respective Diocesses.
Humbly shows,
THAT the great averseness they find in themselves to the distributing and
publishing in all their Churches your Majesty's late Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience, proceeds neither from any want of Duty and Obedience to your
Majesty, (our Holy Mother the Church of England, being both in her Principles
and in her constant Practice unquestionably Loyal; and having, to her great
Honor, been more than once publicly acknowledged to be so by your Gracious
Majesty;) Nor yet from any want of due tenderness to Dissenters, in relation to
whom they are willing to come to such a Temper as shall be thought sit, when
that Matter shall be considered and settled in Parliament and Convocation. But
among many other Considerations, from this especially, because that Declaration
is founded upon such a Dispensing Power as has been often declared Illegal in
Parliament, and particularly in the Years 1662, and 1672, and in the beginning
of your Majesty's Reign; and is a matter of so great Moment and Consequence to
the whole Nation, both in Church and State, that your Petitioners cannot in
Prudence, Honor, or Conscience, so far make themselves Parties to it, as the
distribution of it all over the Nation, and the solemn publication of it once
and again, even in God's House, and in the Time of his Divine Service, must
amount to in common and reasonable Construction.

Your Petitioners therefore most humbly and earnestly beseech your Majesty,
that you will be graciously pleased, not to insist upon their distributing and
reading your Majesty's said Declaration.

And Your Petitioners, as in Duty bound, shall ever pray. Will. Cant. Will.
Asaph. Fr. Ely. Jo. Cicestr. Tho. Bathon. and Wellen. Tho. Peterburgen. Jonath.
Bristol.


His Majesty's Answer was to this effect.
I Have heard of this before, but did not believe it. I did not expect this
from the Church of England, especially from some of you. If I change my Mind,
you shall hear from me; if not, I expect my Command shall be obeyed.

THE ARTICLES Recommended by the ARCHBISHOP of CANTERBVRY To all the Bishops
within his Metropolitan Jurisdiction, the 16th of July, 1688.
SIR,
YEsterday the Archbishop of Canterbury delivered the Articles which I send
you enclosed, to those Bishops who are at present in this place; and ordered
Copies of them to be likewise sent in his Name to the absent Bishops. By the
Contents of them you will see that the Storm in which he is, does not frighten
him from doing his Duty; but rather awakens him to do it with so much the more
vigor: and indeed, the Zeal that he expresses in these Articles, both against
the Corruptions of the Church of Rome on the one hand, and the unhappy
Differences that are among Protestants on the other, are such Apostolical
Things, that all good Men rejoice to see so great a Prelate at the Head of our
Church, who in this Critical Time has had the Courage to do his Duty in so
signal a manner. I am,

Sir, Yours.
London, July 27. 1688.
Some Heads of Things to be more fully insisted upon by the Bishops in their
Addresses to the Clergy and People of their respective Diocesses.
I. THat the Clergy often read over the Forms of their Ordination; and
seriously consider, what Solemn Vows and Professions they made therein to God
and his Church, together with the several Oaths and Subscriptions they have
taken and made upon diverse occasions.

II. That in Compliance with those and other Obligations, they be active and
zealous in all the Parts and Instances of their Duty, and especially strict and
exact in all holy Conversation, that so they may become Examples to the Flock.

III. To this end, that they be constantly Resident upon their Cures in their
incumbent Houses; and keep sober Hospitality there according to their Ability.

IV. That they diligently Catechize the Children and Youth of their Parishes
(as the Rubric of the Common Prayer Book, and the 59th Canon enjoin) and so
prepare them to be brought in due time to Confirmation, when there shall be
Opportunity; and that they also at the same time expound the Grounds of
Religion and the common Christianity, in the Method of the Catechism, for the
Instruction and Benefit of the whole Parish, teaching them what they are to
believe, and what to do, and what to pray for; and particularly often and
earnestly inculcating upon the Importance and Obligation of their Baptismal
Vows.

V. That they perform the daily Office publicly (with all Decency, Affection
and Gravity) in all Market and other Great Towns, and even in Villages, and
less populous Places, bring People to public Prayers as frequently as may be;
especially on such Days and at such Times as the Rubric and Ca^^ns appointed
on Holy Days, and their Eves, on Ember and Rogation Days, on Wednesdays and
Fridays in each Week, and especially in Advent and Lent.

VI. That they use their utmost Endeavor, both in their Sermons and by private
Applications, to prevail with such of their Flock as are of competent Age, to
receive frequently the Holy Communion; and to this end, that they administer it
in the greater Towns once in every Month, and even in the lesser too, if
Communicants may be procured, or how-ever as often as they may: and that they
take all due Care, both by Preaching and otherwise, to prepare all for the
worthy receiving of it.

VII. That in their Sermons they teach and inform their People (four times a
Year at the least, as what the Canons require) that all Usurped and Foreign
Jurisdiction is for most Just Causes taken away and abolished in this Realm,
and no manner of Obedience or Subjection due to the same, or to any that
pretend to act by virtue of it: but that the King's Power being in his
Dominions highest under God, they upon all Occasions persuade the People to
Loyalty and Obedience to his Majesty in all things Lawful, and to patient
Submission in the rest; promoting (as far as in them lies) the public Peace
and Quiet of the World.

VIII. That they maintain fair Correspondence (full of the kindest Respects of
all sorts) with the Gentry and Persons of Quality in their Neighborhood, as
being deeply sensible what reasonable Assistance and Countenance this poor
Church has received from them in her Necessities.

IX. That they often exhort all those of our Communion, to continue steadfast to
the end in their most Holy Faith, and constant to their Profession; and to that
end, to take heed of all Seducers, and especially of Popish Emissaries, who are
now in great numbers gone forth amongst them, and more busy and active than
ever. And that they take all occasions to convince our own Flock, that it is not
enough for them to be Members of an Excellent Church, rightly and duly
Reformed, both in Faith and Worship, unless they also do reform and amend their
own Lives, and so order their Conversation in all things as becomes the Gospel
of Christ.

X. And forasmuch as those Romish Emissaries, like the Old Serpent, Insidiantur
Calcaneo, are wont to be most busy and troublesome to our People at the end of
their Lives, laboring to unsettle and perplex them in time of Sickness, and at
the hour of Death; that therefore all who have the Cure of Souls, be more
especially vigilant over them at that dangerous Season; that they stay not till
they be sent for, but enquire out the Sick in their respective Parishes, and
visit them frequently: that they examine them particularly concerning the state
of their Souls, and instruct them in their Duties, and settle them in their
Doubts, and comfort them in their Sorrows and Sufferings, and pray often with
them and for them; and by all the Methods which our Church prescribes, prepare
them for the due and worthy receiving of the Holy Eucharist, the Pledge of their
happy Resurrection: thus with their utmost diligence, watching over every Sheep
within their Fold (especially in that critical Moment) lest those Evening
Wolves devour them.

XI. That they also walk in Wisdom toward those that are not of Our Communion:
and if there be in their Parishes any such, that they neglect not frequently to
confer with them in the Spirit of Meekness, seeking by all good Ways and Means
to gain and win them over to our Communion: More especially that they have a
very tender regard to our Brethren the Protestant Dissenters; that upon
occasion offered, they visit them at their Houses, and receive them kindly at
their own, and treat them fairly wherever they meet them, discoursing calmly
and civilly with them; persuading them (if it may be) to a full Compliance with
our Church, or at least, that whereto we have already attained, we may all walk
by the same Rule, and mind the same thing. And in order hereunto that they take
all opportunities of assuring and convincing them, that the Bishops of this
Church are really and sincerely irreconcilable Enemies to the Errors,
Superstitions, Idolatries and Tyrannies of the Church of Rome; and that the
very unkind Jealousies which some have had of us to the contrary were
altogether groundless.

And in the last place, that they warmly and most affectionately exhort them to
join with us in daily fervent Prayer to the God of Peace, for an Universal
Blessed Uuion of all Reformed Churches, both at Home and Abroad, against our
common Enemies, and that all they who do confess the Holy Name of our dear
Lord, and do agree in the Truth of his Holy Word, may also meet in one Holy
Communion, and live in perfect Unity and Godly Love.

An Account of the late PROPOSALS of the Archbishop of Canterbury, with some
other Bishops, to his Majesty: In a LETTER to M. B. Esquire;
SIR,
I Am much surprised at the ill Constructions some People make of the Actions
of those Bishops who have lately waited upon the King; especially considering
that most of them are the very Men, who not many Months ago appeared so
publicly and so courageously, even to the hazard of all the Interests they had
in this World, in defense of our Protestant Religion, and the Laws of the Land.

In order to the removing all groundless Jealousies, and unreasonable Surmises,
in an Affair of so great Consequence, which our Popish Enemies will, I am sure,
be very ready to foment and keep up, I have here sent you the Heads of those
Matters which were proposed by them to the King.

They waited upon him, not as a Party separate either from the Nobility or
Gentry, whom they could (I believe) have wished his Majesty would rather have
called for at this Juncture; or from the rest of the Bishops or Clergy of
England; but as Persons whom the King was pleased, upon Reasons known only to
his Royal Breast, to command to attend upon him.

The Heads which I send you are not taken from any Copy of the Paper which my
Lords the Bishops presented to the King. I understand that all their Lordships
have been extremely careful to prevent the publishing of any Copies, and that
they still refuse to communicate any, tho they now lie under no Obligations to
the contrary. However I do assure you with all faithfulness, that these Heads
which I am now sending you, are true Contents, obtained by another Method,
which in prudence you will imagine not sit for me to disclose.

You have already been told from me, that every one of these Bishops were sent
for up out of their Diocesses by Expresses from his Majesty, whom they first
waited on in a Body, on Friday the 28th of September. I cannot, upon the
strictest inquiry, find that any thing passed betwixt the King and them, at
that first attendance upon him, besides general Expressions of Favor and
Protection from his Majesty, and general returns of Duty and Loyalty from the
Bishops. This was matter of Admiration to us all here, who could not believe
but that the King had other Intentions of a nearer and more particular Concern,
when he first resolved to send so far for some of these Bishops: but these
Alterations in Councils are Things not fit for you or I to meddle with.

Hour, my Lords the Bishops were not satisfied herewith, concluding (as I
suppose) that his Majesty would not have sent for them so far, if he had not
intended to have advised with them in this Juncture, and to give them the
liberty of offering him such Counsels as they thought necessary at this time:
And therefore when his Grace my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury waited on the
King alone the first time, on Sunday morning, Sept. 30. being indisposed when
the other Bishops attended on Friday, their Lordships did, by my Lord of
Canterbury, intimate their Thoughts about that Affair, and their readiness to
the King, who was pleased not only to permit them to give him the best and most
particular Advices, but to encourage them to do it with all the freedom that
was necessary for the present occasion.

Upon this Royal Invitation their Lordships assembled together the next day at
my Lord of Canterbury's Palace, and prepared, upon the most mature
deliberation, such Matters as they judged necessary for his Majesty's Knowledge
and Consideration: And on the Wednesday after waited on the King in a Body,
when his Grace in his own, and in the name of the rest of the Bishops then
present, did, in a most excellent Speech, represent to his Majesty such things
as were thought by them absolutely necessary to the Settlement of the Nation,
amidst the present Distractions, and to the public Interest of Church and
State.

I am assured that his Grace delivered himself upon this Critical Occasion, as
with all dutifulness to his Majesty, so with all the readiness and the courage
that did become such an Apostolical Archbishop as God has blessed our Church of
England with at this Time.

You must not expect here his excellent Words, but an Abridgment of them,
according to my Talent, in a meaner Style.

I. First, the Bishops thought fit to represent in general to his Majesty, That
it was necessary for Him to restore all things to the state in which He found
them when He came to the Crown, by committing all Offices and Places of Trust
in the Government, to such of the Nobility and Gentry as were qualified for
them according to the Laws of this Kingdom; and by Redressing and Removing such
Grievances as were generally complained of.

II. Particularly, That his Majesty would Dissolve the Ecclesiastical
Commission, and promise to His People never to Erect any such Court for the
future.

III. That He would not only put an effectual stop to the issuing forth of any
Dispensations, but would Call in, and Cancel all those which had since his
coming to the Crown been obtained from Him.

IV. That he would Restore the Universities to their Legal State, and to their
Statutes and Customs, and would particularly Restore the Master of Magdalen
College in Cambridge, to the Profits of his Mastership, which he had been so
long Deprived of, by an Illegal Suspension; and the Ejected President and
Fellows of Magdalen College in Oxford, to their Properties in that College:
And, that He would not permit any Persons to enjoy any of the Preferments in
either University, but such as are qualisied by the Statutes of the
Universities, the particular Statutes of their several Foundations, and the
Laws of the Land.

V. That He would suppress the Jesuits Schools opened in this City, or
elsewhere, and grant no more Licenses for such Schools as are apparently
against the Laws of this Nation, and His Majesty's True Interest.

VI. That He would send Inhibitions after those Four Romish Bishops, who under
the Title of Apostolic Vicars, did presume to Exercise within this Kingdom
such Jurisdictions as are by the Laws of the Land Invested in the Bishops of
the Church of England, and ought not to be Violated or Attempted by them.

VII. That He would suffer no more Quo Warranto's to be issued out against any
Corporations, but would restore to those Corporations which had been already
disturbed, their ancient Charters, Privileges, Grants, and Immunities, and
Condemn all those late Illegal Regulations of Corporations, by putting them
into their late Flourishing Condition, and Legal Establishment.

VIII. That He would fill up all the Vacant Bishoprics in England and Ireland,
with Persons duly qualified according to the Laws: and would especially take
into His Consideration the Sea of York, whose want of an Archbishop is very
prejudicial to that whole Province.

IX. That He would Act. no more upon a Dispensing Power, nor insist upon it;
but permit that Affair at the first Session of a Parliament to be fairly Stated
and Debated, and Settled by Act of Parliament.

X. That upon the Restoration of Corporations to their Ancient Charters, and
Buroughs to their Prescriptive Rights, He would Order Writs to be issued out
for a fair and free Parliament, and suffer it to Sit to Redress all Grievances,
to Settle Matters in Church and State upon just and solid Foundations, and to
Establish a due Liberty of Conscience.

XI. Lastly, and above all, That His Majesty would permit some of His Bishops,
to lay such Motives and Arguments before him, as might by the Blessing of GOD,
bring back His Majesty unto the Communion of Our Holy Church of England, into
whose Catholic Faith He had been Baptized, in which He had been Educated, and
to which it was their earnest and daily Prayer to Almighty GOD, that His
Majesty might be Reunited.

All these Counsels were concluded with a Prayer to GOD, in whose Hands the
Hearts of Kings are, for a good Effect upon them; especially the last, about
bringing the King back to the Protestant Religion.

And now, Sir, I cannot but ask you, What grounds there are for any Men's
Jealousies of the Bishops Proceedings? Pray show this Letter to all your
Friends, that some may lay down their Fears, and others may have this Antidote
against taking any up. I do assure you, and I am certain I have the best
grounds in the World for my assurance, That the Bishops will never stir one lot
from their PETITION; but that they will, whenever that happy Opportunity shall
offer itself, let the Protestant Dissenters find that they will be better than
their Word given in their Famous PETITION.

In the mean time let You and I, Commend the Prudence of these Excellent
Bishops, Admire their Courage, and Cel^brate their just Praises, and never
forget to offer up most fervent Thanks to GOD, for his Adorning the Church of
England, at this Juncture, with such Eminent Apostolical Bishops. I am with all
Respect.

Yours, N. N.

The PETITION of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal for the Calling of a Free
Parliament: Together with his Majesty's Gracious Answer to their Lordships.
To the KING's most Excellent Majesty, The Humble Petition of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, Whose Names are Subscribed.
May it please your Majesty,
WE your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, in a deep Sense of the Miseries of a
War now breaking forth in the Bowels of this your Kingdom, and of the Danger to
which your Majesty's Sacred Person is thereby like to be Exposed, and also of
the Distractions of your People, by reason of their present Grievances, do
think our selves bound in Conscience of the Duty we owe to God, and our Holy
Religion, to your Majesty, and our Country, most humbly to offer to your
Majesty, That in our Opinion, the only visible Way to preserve your Majesty,
and this your Kingdom, would be the Calling of a Parliament, Regular and Free
in all its Circumstances.

We therefore do most earnestly beseech your Majesty, That you would be
graciously pleased, with all speed, to Call such a Parliament, wherein we shall
be most ready to promote such Counsels and Resolutions of Peace and Settlement
in Church and State, as may conduce to your Majesty's Honor and Safety, and to
the quieting the Minds of your People.

We do likelise humbly beseech your Majesty, in the mean time, to use such
means for the preventing the Effusion of Christian Blood, as to your Majesty
shall seem most meet.

And Your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc. W. Cant. Grafton. Ormond. Dorset.
Clare. Clarendon. Burlington. Anglesey. Rochester. Newport. Nom. Ebor. W.
Asaph. Fran. Ely. Tho. Roffen. Tho. Petriburg. Tho. Oxon. Paget. Chandois.
Osulston.

Presented by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Archbishop of York Elect, the
Bishop of Ely, and the Bishop of Rochester, the 17th of November, 1688.
His Majesty's most Gracious Answer.
My LORDS,
WHAT You ask of Me, I most passionately desire: And I promise You, upon the
Faith of a King, That I will have a Parliament, and such an One as You ask for,
as soon as ever the Prince of Orange has quitted this Realm: For, How is it
possible a Parliament should be Free in all its Circumstances, as You Petition
for, whilst an Enemy is in the Kingdom, and can make a Return of near an
Hundred Voices?

The Lords Petition, with the King's Answer, may be printed, November. 20. 1688.

A Modest Vindication of the Petition of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal for
the Calling of a Free Parliament.
THIS Defense is grounded upon three Fundamental Principles:

I. The Right of Petitioning. II. The Necessity. III. The Duty.
I. It is the undoubted Right of the Subjects to Petition, being founded upon
an Act of Parliament, and the highest Reason in the World; for that is a very
monstrous Government, where the People must not approach their King, and
acquaint him with their Grievances. The People have the greatest Property in
the Land, and therefore the most concerned when a Foreign Enemy is upon it;
their Welfare is the Supreme Law, and yet they must not desire to meet in order
to consult their own Preservation. The Jesuits (the sworn Enemies to the
English Nation) will take care of us, and our Posterity; therefore why should
we trouble our selves at this Juncture? They can levy Money with a Proclamation,
they can dispense with all Laws, and what should we do with a Parliament, when
the whole Statute-Book serves for no other End but to wipe the Tails of these
Reverend Satyrs, who fly into their Dens and Thickets, at the very sound of a
House of Commons?

II. The Necessity, and that an indispensible one: The Government turned
Topsy-Turvy, no Law, no Rule, all in a state of War; all Treaties broken, all
Obligations ceased; and yet the People must not come together to know why or
wherefore they Fight, or how they may avoid destroying one another; they must
hack and cut one another to pieces blindfold, and to no other End, but to save
the Jesuits, and the Knaves, and to ruin themselves: But the most Reverend
Bishops are told, that they shall have a Free Parliament as soon as ever the
Prince of Orange has quitted this Realm; that is, such a Free Parliament as
they were like to have had before the Prince came hither, shufft'd, cut, and
packed, by Mr. Brent and his Missionaries; or perhaps ten times worse, or
rather none at all: for the Church of Rome is grown such an infamous Bankrupt,
that no Body will trust her further than they can command her: She may be
compared to the Tiger, which fawns, sneaks, and lurks, as long as the Hunter is
armed with his Spear and his Gun; but when once the Weapons are laid down, the
Beast flies upon the unwary Forester, tears and devours him.

III. The Duty: For what better Office could those pious Prelates and Patriots
of their Country do for the Publick-Good, than to make all People Friends, to
save the Lives of many Thousands, and to heal all our Wounds and Sores, which
they of the Roman Faith have inslicted upon a People too kind and good natured
for such ravenous Monsters, who go about seeking whom they may devour. France,
Ireland, Hungary, and the Valleys of Piedmont are still reeking with the Blood
of their poor innocent Preys, and ecchoing with the Lamentations of a People
ruined, by trusting these Crocodiles too much; and if God in his infinite Mercy
had not watched over these Kingdoms, and sent a Gabriel to guard them, they had
certainly fallen a Victim to the intolerable Pride, the lawless Fury, and
untractable Barbariety of a sort of Animals, called Catholics, subtle and
treacherous by Custom and Discipline, not to be chained by any Law, either of
God or Man; and therefore every Body knows how far we may rely upon them, when
the Archangel leaves us.

Exeter, Nov. 21. 1688.
Extract of the States General their Resolution.
Thursday, 28th October, 1688.
UPon mature Deliberation, it is found fit, and resolved, that notice be given
to all their Ministers abroad, of all the Reasons which induce their H. and M.
to assist the Prince of Orange, going over to England in Person with Ships and
Forces, with Orders to the said Ministers to make use thereof in the several
Courts where they reside, as they shall think most convenient; and that it be
also writ to the said Ministers, that it is known to all the World that the
English Nation has a good while very much murmured and complained, that the
King (no doubt with the Evil Counsel, and Inducement of his Ministers) had
gained upon their Fundamental Laws, and labored through the violation thereof;
and by the bringing in the Roman Catholic Religion, to oppress their Liberty,
and to ruin the Protestant Religion, and to bring all under an Arbitrary
Government: That as this inverted and unjust Conduct was carried on more and
more, and the Apprehensions thereupon were still greater, and that thereby such
Diffidence and Aversion was stirred up against the King, that nothing was to be
expected in that Kingdom but general Disorder and Confusion. His Highness the
Prince of Orange, upon the manifold Representations, and the reiterated and
earnest Desire which was made to His Highness by several Lords, and other
Persons of great Consideration in that Kingdom; as also upon the account that
Her Royal Highness, and His Highness Himself, are so highly concerned in the
Welfare of that Kingdom, could not well endure that through Strife and Disunion
they should run the danger, however it went, of being excluded from the Crown,
held himself obliged to watch over the Welfare of that Kingdom, and to take
care thereof; and also had the thoughts of assisting the Nation, and giving
them a helping-hand, upon so many just and good Grounds, against the Government
that oppressed them in all manner of ways that lay in his Highness's Power, for
that His Highness was persuaded that the Welfare of this State (the Care
whereof is also entrusted to him) was in the highest manner concerned, that the
said Kingdom might continue in Tranquillity, and that all misunderstanding
between the King and the Nation might be taken away. That His Highness well
knowing, that to succeed in so Important and Laudable a Cause, and not to be
hindered and prevented by those that were evil inclined toward it, it was
necessary to pass over into that Kingdom accompanied with some Military Forces,
has thereupon made known his Intentions to their Highnesses, and desired
Assistance from their Highnesses, that their Highnesses having maturely weighed
all things, and considered that the King of France and Great Britain stood in
very good Correspondence and Friendship one with the other, which their
Highnesses have been frequently very well assured of, and in a strict and
particular Alliance; and that their Highnesses were informed and advertised,
that their Majesty's had labored upon a Concert, to divide and separate this
State from its Alliances; and that the King of France has, upon several
occasions, showed himself dissatisfied with this State, which gave cause to
fear and apprehend that in case the King of Great Britain should happen to
compass his Aim within his Kingdom, and obtain an absolute Power over his
People, that then both Kings, out of Interest of State, and Hatred and Zeal
against the Protestant Religion, would endeavor to bring this State to
Confusion, and if possible, quite to subject it, have resolved to commend His
Highness in his undertaking of the abovesaid Designs, and to grant to him for
his Assistance, some Ships and Militia, as Auxil aries; that in pursuance
thereof, His Highness has declared to their Highnesses, that he is resolved,
with God's Grace and Favor; to go over into England, not with the least
insight or intention to invade or subdue that Kingdom, or to remove the King
from his Throne, much less to make himself Master thereof, or to invert or
prejudice the Lawful Succession, as also not to drive thence, or persecute the
Roman Catholics, but only and solely to help that Nation, in re-establishing
the Laws and Privileges that have been broken, as also in maintaining their
Religion and Liberty; and to that end, to further and bring it about, that a
free and lawful Parliament may be Called in such manner, and of such persons,
as are regulated and qualified by the Laws and Form of that Government; and
that the said Parliament may deliberate upon, and establish all such Matters as
shall be judged necessary to assure and secure the Lords, the Clergy, Gentry,
and People, that their Rights, Laws and Privileges, shall be no more violated
or broken, that their High and Mightinesses hope and trust, that with God's
Blessing, the Repose and Unity of that Kingdom shall be re-established, and the
same be thereby brought into a condition to be able, powerfully to concur to
the common benefit of Christendom, and to the restoring and maintaining of
Peace and Tranquillity in Europe. That Copies hereof be delivered to all their
Foreign Ministers residing here to be used by them as they shall see occasion.

The P. O's Letter to the English Army.
Gentlemen and Friends.
WE have given you so full, and so true an Account of Our Intentions, in this
Expedition in Our Declaration, that as We can add nothing to it, so We are sure
you can desire nothing more of Us. We are come to preserve your Religion, and
to restore and establish your Liberties and properties; and therefore We cannot
suffer Our selves to doubt but that all true Englishmen will come and coneur
with Us, in Our desire to secure these Nations from POPERY and SLAVERY. You
must all plainly see, that you are only made use of as Instruments to enslave
the Nation, and ruin the Protestant Religion, and when that is done, you may
judge what ye your selves ought to expect, both from the cashiering of all the
Protestant and English Officers and Soldiers in Ireland, and by the Irish
Soldiers being brought over to be put in your places; and of which you have
seen so fresh an Instance, that we need not put you in mind of it. You know how
many of your fellow-Officers have been used for their standing firm to the
Protestant Religion, and to the Laws of England, and you cannot slatter your
selves so far as to expect to be better used, if those who have broke their
word so often, should by your means be brought out of those Straits to which
they are reduced at present. We hope likewise, that you will not suffer your
selves to be abused by a false Notion of Honor, but that you will in the first
place consider, what you owe to Almighty God and your Religion, to your
Country, to your Selves, and to your Posterity, which you, as Men of Honor,
ought to prefer to all private Considerations and Engagements whatsoever. We do
therefore expect, that you will consider the Honor that is now set before you,
of being the Instruments of serving your Country, and securing your Religion,
and We will ever remember the Service you shall do Us upon this Occasion; and
will promise unto you, that We shall place such particular Marks of our Favor
on every one of you, as your Behavior at this time shall deserve of Us, and
the Nation; in which we will make a great Distinction of those that shall come
seasonably to join their Arms with Ours, and you shall find us to be

Your Well-wishing, and Assured Friend, W. H. P. O.

An Account of a wicked design of Poisoning the Prince of Orange before he came
out of Holland. ALSO, A Relation from the City of Orange of a strange METEOR,
representing a Crown of Light, that was there seen in the Air, May the 6th,
1688.
In a Letter from a Gentleman in Amsterdam, to his Friend in London, October. 1.
1688.
SIR,
THE two enclosed Relations are sent me from an Eminent Divine, now at the
Hague, you will do well to make them public: The Poisoning Business I doubt
not but was contrived by a sort of Men that in all Ages stick at nothing to
carry on their Bloody Religion.

An Account of a Design of Poisoning the PRINCE of ORANGE.
THere is a Man of Lunenburg Wolfenbuttel, who being fallen in Debt in
Amsterdam, upon his Fathers Death, his Brother taking no Care of him, was put
in Prison and brought extreme low; yet he was brought out by the means of a
Friend: And soon after, a man who pretended to know him, and to have seen him
before, (though the German believes he never saw him) seemed to take pity on
him, seeing him in a Coffee-House, and gave him a Ducatoon, and promised he
should never want; so he entered into a great familiarity with him, but would
never let him know where he lodged, only he gave him Appointments in
Coffee-Houses, and Taverns, and fed him from time to time with Money: At last,
after some weeks, he drew him into a secret Walk in the Grounds that are not
yet built, and asked him if he had a Heart to do a bold Thing? The German said
he had, if it were not such a Thing as might bring him to a Scaffold. The other
said, There was no Danger, only it would require a little hardiness. Then he
asked an Oath of the German, That he would either do that which he was to
propose to him, or presently go out of the Country. The German said, He could
not go out of the Country for he had no Money: And then he gave him eight Ducats
in Gold, and then he swore the Oath: So the other proposed to him the poisoning
the Prince of Orange: that startled him, but apprehending he should be killed
if he refused it, he undertook it. The other told him, That in the last Age men
had tried Stabbing or shooting, but these were dangerous Things, Poisoning was
a safe and sure way: He added, That he should have 3000 Pistols in hand, and a
Fortune besides. The German asked, From whom? The other, who called himself
Corn, and spoke French like a Stranger, but the German cannot judge what
Nation he was of; the other I say, said to him, That if he had the Money, he
was not concerned to know from whence it came. In short, he made a proposition
to the German, giving him a Quill with a Water in it, carefully stopped, and
told him, that he (the German) lodged in the House of an inconsiderable Man, of
whom no regard would be had; and if he would cut the Quill, so that one drop of
the Liquor fell into any thing that his Landlord was to drink, he would be
certainly dead before to morrow; and if he would begin with him, one should
come to him to such a place to morrow, having a white Feather in his Hat, who
should deliver him 1500 Pistols, and instruct him how to manage the Poisoning
the Prince, which he should find would be easy and safe; then upon his going on
he should have the rest of the Money. The German went Home, but was struck with
Horror, and so resolved to keep that part of his Oath of going out of the
Country; yet he showed another his Gold, and told him of his going Home; But
from Osnaburgh he writ to one about the Prince; this happned in the beginning
of March last. So he was desired to come back, which he did, and the Matter
being brought into the Court of Holland, upon an Oath of Secresy, Mr. Halewyn
Deputy of Dort, and another, were sent with him to Amsterdam; they found many
collatoral Confirmations of part of his Story, but no such Man could be seen in
all the places where he had met with him formerly; the German came to the
Hague, and being in the Fair, seeing one of the Shows, and a Dane with him, as
they came out in a huge Crowd, the German complained that one struck him on the
Breast with a Battoon: But this was not minded till they were quite out, and he
found one had struck at him, as it seems, with a Stillet to under the left Pap,
his Cloak and Coat were cut, and the Wound proved but a slight scratch: The
Quill with the Poison in it sealed, is in the Court. It seems, a German was
thought a fit Tool, being of a Nation that would not be easily suspected; and
the putting it on a Lutheran would have been thought a Masterpiece. I give you
this Account, which I will answer for, to satisfy some of your Friends, both
here and in England, who will perhaps desire to know the certainty of this
Matter.

A Relation from the City of Orange, of a Crown of LIGHT that was there seen in
the Air, the 6th of May, 1688.
ON the 6th of May, 1665, when his Royal Highness, the Prince of Orange, took
possession of that Principality, and whilst his Deputy Mr. Ziulechem was taking
the Oath of Allegiance of all the people in the Prince's Name; which was done
in the Fields, in the Enclosure of the old Roman Cirque that yet remains; over
the Chair of State that was set there for the Prince, a Crown of Light appeared
in the Air, and hovered over the Chair above an hour: And now this Year, 1688,
the same day of the Month, in the same place, the like Crown appeared and
continued there three Hours, all the people of Orange looking on; all the
difference between this Years Crown, and that of 1665, being, that this had an
Edge of Red about it.

This is written from Orange by an Old professor of Physic, that is past
sixty, and not apt to take Things upon Trust; he writes that he himself, as
well as all the Town, looked on it for above two Hours with great admiration of
that strange Meteor.

An Account of that strange Meteor in 1665, is related by Aitrema in his 5 th
Tome, fol. 595. well attested, and he is a good Author.

Lord Del -- r's Speech.
THE occasion of this, is to give you my Thoughts upon the present Conjuncture,
which concerns not only you, but every Protestant, and Freeborn Man of
England, I am confident, that wishes well to the Protestant Religion and his
Country; and I am persuaded that every Man of you thinks both in danger, and
now to lie at stake. I am also persuaded, that every Man of you will rejoice to
see Religion and Property settled; if so, then I am not mistaken in my
Conjectures concerning you. Can you ever hope for a better Occasion to root out
POPERY and SLAVERY, than by joining with the P. of O. whose Proposals contain
and speak the Desires of every Man that loves his Religion and Liberty? And in
saying this, I will invite you to nothing but what I will do my self; and I
will not desire any of you to go any further than I will move my self; neither
will I put you upon any Danger where I will not take share in it. I propose
this to you, not as you are my Tenants, but as my Friends, and as you are
Englishmen. No Man can love fighting for its own sake, nor find any pleasure in
danger. And you may imagine, I would be very glad to spend the rest of my days
in peace, I having had so great a share in Troubles; but I see all lies at
stake, I am to choose whether I will be a Slave and a Papist, or a Protestant
and a Freeman; and therefore the Case being thus, I shall think my self false
to my Country, if I sit still at this time. I am of Opinion, that when the
Nation is delivered, it must be by Force or by Miracle: It would be too great a
presumption to expect the latter, and therefore our Deliverance must be by
Force, and I hope this is the Time for it; a Price is now put into our Hands,
and if it miscarry for want of Assistance, our Blood is upon our own Heads; and
he that is passive at this Time, may very well expect that God will mock when
the Fear of Affliction comes upon him, which he thought to avoid by being
indifferent.

If the K. prevails, farewell Liberty of Conscience, which has hitherto been
allowed, not for the sake of the Protestants, but in order to settle Popery.
You may see what to expect if he get the better; and he has lately given you,
of this Town, a taste of the Method, whereby he will maintain his Army. And you
may see of what sort of people he intends his Army to consist; and if you have
not a mind to serve such Masters, then stand not by and see your Countrymen
perish, when they are endeavoring to defend you.

I promise this on my Word and Honor, to every Tenant that goes along with me,
That if he fall, I will make his Lease as good to his Family, as it was when he
went from home. The thing then which I desire, and your Country does expect
from you, is this, That every Man that has a tolerable Horse, or can procure
one, will meet me on Boden-Downs to morrow where I Rendezvouze: But if any of
you is rendered unable by reason of Age, or any other just Excuse, then that he
would mount a fitter person, and put five pounds in his pocket. Those that have
not, nor cannot procure Horse, let them stay at home and assist with their
purses, and send it to me with a particular of every Man's Contribution. I
impose on no Man, but let him lay his Hand on his Heart, and consider what he
is willing to give to recover his Religion and Liberty; and to such I promise,
and to all that go along with me, that if we prevail, I will be as industrious
to have him recompensed for his Charge and Hazard, as I will be to seek it for
my self. This Advice I give to all that stay behind, That when you hear the
Papists have committed any Outrage, or any Rising, that you will get together;
for it is better to meet your danger than expect it. I have no more to say, but
that I am willing to lose my Life in the Cause, if God see it good, for I was
never unwilling to die for my Religion and Country.

Prince GEORGE'S LETTER TO THE KING.
SIR,
WITH a Heart full of Grief am I forced to Write, that prudence will not permit
me to say to your Face. And may I ever find Credit with your Majesty, and
protection from Heaven, as what I now do, is free from Passion, Vanity or
Design, with which Actions of this Nature are too often accompanied. I am not
ignorant of the frequent Mischiefs wrought in the World by factious pretenses
of Religion; but were not Religion the most justifiable Cause, it would not be
made the most specious pretense. And your Majesty has always shown too
uninterested a Sense of Religion, to doubt the just Effects of it in one whose
Practices have, I hope, never given the World cause to censure his real
conviction of it, or his backwardness to perform what his Honor and Conscience
prompt him to: How then can I longer disguise my just Concern for that Religion
in which I have been so happily Educated, which my Judgment thoroughly convinces
me to be best; and for the Support of which I am so highly interested in my
Native Country? And is not England now by the most endearing Tie become so?

Whilst the restless Spirits of the Enemies of the REFORMED RELIGION, backed by
the cruel Zeal and prevailing power of France, justly alarm and unite all the
Protestant Princes of Christendom, and engage them in so vast an Expense for
the support of it, can I act so degenerous and mean a part, as to deny my
Concurrence to such worthy Endeavors for disabusing of your Majesty by the
Reinforcement of those Laws, and Establishment of that Government, on which
alone depends the well-being of your Majesty, and of the PROTEST ANT RELIGION
in Europe. This, Sir, is that irresistible and only Cause that could come in
Competition with my Duty and Obligations to your Majesty, and be able to tear
me from You, whilst the same Affectionate Desire of serving You continues in
me. Could I secure your Person by the Hazard of my Life, I should think it
could not be better Employed: And would to God these Your distracted Kingdoms
might yet receive that satisfactory Compliance from your Majesty in all their
justifiable pretensions, as might upon the only sure Foundation, that of the
Love and Interest of your Subjects, establish your Government, and as strongly
Unite the Hearts of all your Subjects to You, as is that of,

SIR, Your Majesty's most Humble, and most Obedient Son and Servant.

The Lord CHURCHIL's LETTER to the KING.
SIR,
SInce men are seldom suspected of Sincerity, when they act contrary to their
Interests; and though my dutiful Behavior to your Majesty in the worst of
Times, (for which I acknowledge my poor Services much overpaid) may not be
sufficient to incline You to a charitable Interpretation of my Actions, yet I
hope, the great Advantage I enjoy under Your Majesty, which I can never expect
in any other Change of Government, may reasonably convince Your Majesty and the
World, that I am acted by a higher Principle, when I offer that violence to my
inclination and interest, as to desert Your Majesty at a time when your Affairs
seem to challenge the strictest Obedience from all your Subjects, much more
from one who lies under the greatest personal Obligations imaginable to Your
Majesty. This Sir, could proceed from nothing but the inviolable Dictates of my
CONSCIENCE, and a necessary concern for my RELIGION (which no good man can
oppose) and with which I am instructed nothing ought to come in Competition;
Heaven knows with what partiality my dutiful Opinion of Your Majesty has
hitherto represented those unhappy Designs, which inconsiderate and
self-interested men have framed against Your Majesty's true Interest and the
Protestant Religion. But as I can no longer join with such to give a pretense
by Conquest to bring them to effect, so will I always with the hazard of my
Life and Fortune (so much Your Majesty's due) endeavor to preserve Your Royal
person and Lawful Rights, with all the tender Concern and dutiful Respect that
becomes,

SIR, Your Majesty's most Dutiful and most Obliged Subject and Servant.

The Princess ANNE of Denmark's LETTER to the QVEEN.
MADAM,
I Beg your pardon if I am so deeply affected with the surprising News of the
Princes being gone, as not to be able to see You, but to leave this Paper to
Express my humble Duty to the King and your Self; and to let You know that I am
gone to absent my self to avoid the King's displeasure, which I am not able to
bear, either against the Prince or my Self: And I shall stay at so great a
distance, as not to return before I hear the happy News of a Reconcilement: And
as I am confident the Prince did not leave the King with any other design, than
to use all possible means for His preservation; so I hope You will do me the
Justice to believe that I am incapable of following Him for any other End.
Never was any one in such an unhappy Condition, so divided between Duty and
Affection, to a Father, and a Husband; and therefore I know not what to do, but
to follow one to preserve the other. I seo the general falling off of the
Nobility and Gentry, who a vow to have no other end, than to prevail with the
King to secure their Religion, which they saw so much in danger by the Violent
Gounsels of the Priests; who to promote their own Religion, did not care to
what dangers they exposed the King: I am fully persuaded that the Prince of
Orange designs the King's safety and preservation, and hope all things may be
composed without more Bloodshed, by the Calling a Parliament. God grant a
happy End to these Troubles, that the King's Reign may be prosperous, and that
I may shortly meet You in perfect peace and safety; till when, let me beg You
to continue the same favorable Opinion that You have hither to bad of;

Your most Obedient Daughter and Servant, ANNE.

A MEMORIAL OF THE Protestants of the Church of England Presented to their
Royal Highnesses the Prince and Princess of ORANGE.
YOur Royal Highnesses cannot be ignorant that the Protestants of England, who
continue true to their Religion, and the Government Established by Law, have
been many ways troubled and vexed by restless contrivances and designs of the
Papists, under pretense of the Royal Authority, and things required of them
unaccountable before God and Man; Ecclesiastical Benefices and Preferments
taken from them, without any other Reason but the King's Pleasure; that they
have been summoned and sentenced by Ecclesiastical Commissioners, contrary to
Law, deprived of their Birthright in the free Choice of their Magistrates and
Representatives; diverse Corporations dissolved; the Legal Security of our
Religion and Liberty, established and ratified by King and Parliament, annulled
and overthrown by a pretended Dispensing Power; new and unheard of Maxims have
been preached, as if Subjects had no Right but what depends on the King's Will
and Pleasure. The Militia put into the Hands of person; not qualified by Law;
and a Popish Mercenary Army maintained in the Kingdom in time of peace,
absolutely contrary to Law: The Execution of the Law against several high
Crimes and Misdemeanors superceded and prohibited; the Statutes against
Correspondence with the Court of Rome, Papal Jurisdiction, and Popish Priests,
suspended; that in Courts of Justice those Judges are displaced who dare acquit
them whom the K. would have condemned, as happened to Judge Powel and Holloway
for acquitting the seven Bishops: Liberty of choosing Members of parliament
(notwithstanding all the Care taken, and provision made by Law on that behalf)
wholly taken away by Quo Warranto's served against Corporations, and the three
known Questions. All things carried on in open view for the propagation and
Growth of popery; for which the Courts of England and France have so long
jointly labored with so much Application and Earnestness. Endeavors used to
persuade your Royal Highnesses to consent to Liberty of Conscience, and
abrogating the penal Laws and Tests, wherein they fell short of their aim.

That they most humbly implore the protection of your Royal Highnesses, as to
the suspending and encroachments made upon the Law for maintenance of the
Protestant Religion, our Civil and Fundamental Rights and privilege; and that
Your Royal Highnesses would be pleased to insist, that the Free parliament of
England, according to Law, may be restored, the Laws against Papists, priests,
Papal Jurisdiction, etc. put in Execution, and the Suspending and Dispensing
power declared null and void; the Rights and privileges of the City of London,
the free Choice of their Magistrates, and the Libertics as well of that as
other Corporations restored, and all things returned to their ancient Channel,
etc.

THE PRINCE Of ORANGE HIS DECLARATION of November. 28. 1688.
WE have in the course of Our whole Life, and more particularly by the apparent
Hazards both by Sea and Land, to which We have so lately exposed Our Person,
given to the whole World so high and undoubted proofs of Our fervent Zeal for
the Protestant Religion, that We are fully consident no true Englishman, and
good Protestant, can entertain the least Suspicion of Our firm Resolution,
rather to spend Our dearest Blood, and perish in the Attempt, than not carry on
the Blessed and Glorious Design, which by the Favor of Heaven We have so
Successfully begun, to rescue England, Scotland, and Ireland from Slavery and
Popery, and in a Free Parliament to Establish the Religion, the Laws and the
Liberties of those Kingdoms, upon such a sure and lasting Foundation, that it
shall not be in the Power of any Prince for the future to introduce Popery and
Tyranny.

Toward the more easy Composing of this great Design, We have not been
hitherto deceived in the just expectation We had of the Concurrence of the
Nobility, Gentry, and People of England with Us, for the Security of their
Religion, the Restitution of the Laws, and Re-establishment of their Liberties
and Properties: Great Numbers of all Ranks and Qualities having joined
themselves to Us; and others at great distances from Us, have taken up Arms and
declared for Us. And which we cannot but particularly mention, in that Army
which was raised to be the Instrument of Slavery and Popery, many (by the
special Providence of God) both Officers and Common Soldiers, have been
touched with such a feeling Sense of Religion and Honor, and of true Affection
for their Native Country, that they have already deserted the illegal Service
they were engaged in, and have come over to Us; and have given Us full
Assurance, from the rest of the Army, that they will certainly follow this
Example, as soon as with Our Army we shall approach near enough to receive
them, without the Hazard of being prevented and betrayed. To which End, and
that We may the sooner execute this just and necessary Design We are engaged in
for the public Safety and Deliverance of these Nations, We are resolved, with
all possible Diligence, to advance forward, that a Free Parliament may be
forthwith called, and such Preliminaries adjusted with the King, and all Things
first settled upon such a Foot according to Law, as may give Us and the whole
Nation just Reason to believe the King is disposed to make such necessary
Condescentions on His part, as will give entire Satisfaction and Security to
all, and make both King and People once more Happy.

And that We may effect all this, in the way most agreeable to Our Desires, if
it be possible, without the Effusion of any Blood, except of those execrable
Criminals who have justly forfeited their Lives for betraying the Religion, and
Subverting the Laws of their Native Country, We do think fit to declare, that
as We will offer no violence to any but in Our own necessary Defense; so We
will not suffer any injury to be done to the person even of a Papist, provided
he be found in such place, and in such condition and circumstances as the Laws
require. So We are resolved and do declare that all Papists, who shall be found
in open Arms, or with Arms in their Houses, or about their Persons, or in any
Office or Employment Civil or Military, upon any pretenfe whatsoever, contrary
to the known Laws of the Land, shall be treated by Us and Our Forces not as
Soldiers and Gentlemen, but as Robbers, Free-Booters and Banditti; they shall
be incapable of Quarter, and entirely delivered up to the discretion of Our
Soldiers. And We do further declare, that all persons who shall be found any
ways aiding and assisting to them, or shall march under their Command, or shall
join with or submit to them in the Discharge or Execution of their Illegal
Commissions or Authority, shall be looked upon as Partakers of their Crimes,
Enemies to the Laws, and to their Country.

And whereas we are certainly informed that great Numbers of Armed Papists have
of late resorted to London and Westminster, and parts adjacent, where they
remain, as we have reason to suspect, not so much for their own Security, as
out of a wicked and barbarous Design to make some desperate Attempt upon the
said Cities, and their Inhabitants, by Fire, or a sudden Massacre, or both; or
else to be the more ready to join themselves to a Body of French Troops
designed, if it be possible, to land in England, procured of the French King,
by the Interest and Power of the Jesuits in pursuance of the Engagements, which
at the Instigation of that pestilent Society, his most Christian Majesty, with
one of his Neighboring Princes of the same Communion, has entered into for the
utter Extirpation of the Protestant Religion out of Europe. Though we hope we
have taken such effectual care to prevent the one, and secure the other, that
by God's Assistance, we cannot doubt but we shall defeat all their wicked
Enterprises and Designs.

We cannot however forbear, out of the great and tender Concern we have to
preserve the People of England, and particularly those great and populous
Cities, from the cruel Rage and bloody Revenge of the Papists, to require and
expect from all the Lord-Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, and Justices of
Peace, Lord-Mayors, Mayors, Sheriffs, and all other Magistrates, and Officers
Civil and Military, of all Counties, Cities, Towns of England, especially of
the County of Middlesex, and Cities of London and Westminster, and Parts
adjacent, that they do immediately Disarm and Secure, as by Law they may and
ought, within their respective Counties, Cities and Jurisdictions, all Papists
whatsoever, as Persons at all Times, but now especially most dangerous to the
Peace and Safety of the Government, that so not only all power of doing
Mischief may be taken from them, but that the Laws, which are the greatest and
best Security, may resume their Force, and be strictly Executed.

And We do hereby likewise declare, that We will protect and defend all those
who shall not be afraid to do their Duty in Obedience to these Laws. And that
for those Magistrates and others, of what condition soever they be, who shall
refuse to assist Us, and in Obedience to the Laws, to execute vigorously what
We have required of them, and suffer themselves at this Juncture to be cajoled
or terrified out of their Duty, We will esteem them the most Criminal and
Infamous of all Men, Betrayers of their Religion, the Laws, and their Native
Country, and shall not fail to treat them accordingly; resolving to expect and
require at their Hands the Life of every single Protestant that shall perish,
and every House that shall be burnt or destroyed by their Treachery and
Cowardice.

William Henry, Prince of Orange.
By his Highness special Command, C. HUYGENS.
Given under our Hand and Seal, at our Headquarters at Sherburn-Castle, the
28th day of November, 1688.
FINIS.

