A Brief Essay concerning the INDEPENDENCY OF Church Power.
THAT the non-complying Bishops and Clergy were at the Revolution duly
authorized in their respective Charges, is by none denied; that they have not
as yet been deprived by a Synod of Bishops, or had any Ecclesiastical Censure
passed against them, is equally evident. For though there were some Bishops in
the Upper House, when the Act of Deprivation passed against their Brethren; yet
their Votes (supposing them Legal) were Foreign to their Character; and given
in virtue of a merely Civil Capacity; they voted not as Bishops, but as Lords
of Parliament: And since the Right by which they sit is a Lay-privilege, The
Acts which they do, in consequence of such a Privilege, must be of the same
Secular Nature; the Case standing thus, the Question is, Whether an Act of
Parliament, supposing it legally Constituted; can void an Ecclesiastical
Authority, and unmake the Governors of the Church?

I shall briefly undertake to maintain the Negative, by showing the Churches
Power to be distinct from, and independent of the State.

But, to prevent mis-construction, I desire to be understood, that by Church
Power, I mean only that which is purely Spiritual: And that Ecclesiastics, as
such, can make no direct or indirect claim to any other, And therefore,

First, They are no less the Subjects of Princes than the Laity.

Secondly, Their merely Secular Estates, their Civil Privileges and
Jurisdictions, are all under the Cognizance of the State; of which they may be
legally (though not always equitably) disseized, whenever the Legislative
Authority of a Kingdom shall think fit to do it: Having premised this, I shall
endeavor to prove their Independency in things purely relating to their
Function.

1. From the Original of Ecclesiastical Authority. 2. From the End and Design
of it. 3. From the Practice of the Primitive Church.
1. From the Original of Ecclesiastical Authority. The Power of Governing the
Church, and performing the Offices of Religion, is neither any Gift of the
People, nor held by Commission from Kings and Princes; It springs from a
greater Original, and derives no lower than Heaven it self. Our Blessed
Savior, who Redeemed the Church, was pleased to settle the Administration of
it by his own Appointment: From Him the Apostles received Authority to teach
and govern such as were Converted by them; the Words of their Commission are
plain, and expressed with all imaginable Advantage. As my Father has sent me,
even so send I you; whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted, etc. St. John
20. 21* 23. Upon this Account the Apostles are called the Ambassadors and
Ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. 4. 1. And the People are commanded to obey and
submit themselves to those who have this Spiritual Authority, Heb. 13. 17.
Neither was this Power to expire with the Apostles, but be conveyed by
Succession through all Ages of the World; there being the same cause for its
Continuance, as for its first Institution: And accordingly we find from St.
Paul, that one reason of his giving Titus the Super-intendency of Crete, was to
Ordain Elders in every City, Tit. 1. 5. Thus Clemens Romanus (1. Ep. ad Cor.)
tells us, the Apostles in their Travels used to Ordain Bishops, etc. for the
advantage of such as were only Christians in prospect, as well as for those who
were already converted. And thus the Sacred Order has been continued without
interruption for near 1700 Years: Now our Savior, we know, was no Temporal
Prince. He refused to interpose in a case of Property; and declared expressly,
that his Kingdom was not of this World, St. Luke 12. 14. St. John 18. 36. From
whence it is plain, that the Authority which our Savior gave the Church, can
have no dependence upon the State, because it was never derived from thence.
It Is true, all Power, both Sacred and Civil, came originally from God; yet
under the Jewish, and especially under the Christian Institution, the Crown and
Mitre have been divided: And though the same Persons are capable of both; yet the
Claim must be made upon a different Account, and conveyed by Titles perfectly
distinct. And since the Ecclesiastical Authority does not hold of the Civil
Magistrate, it cannot be forfeited to Him: As the State cannot Consecrate
Bishops and Priests, so neither can they recall their Character, or restrain
them in the Exercise of their Function; there being no reason a Privilege
should be either extinguished, or limited by those who were never Masters of
the Grant: For what a Man has no Power to give, he can have no Right to take
away. This will further appear, if we consider the Means by which the
Advantages of Christianity are conveyed to us. Now that the Sacraments are
necessary for this purpose is evident from Scripture: For concerning Baptism
it is said, That except a Man be born of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God, St. John 3. 5. And the Lord's Supper is styled
by St. Paul (1 Cor. 10. 6.) The Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ; that
is the Means by which the Benefits of Christ's Death are applied to us. So that
without being partakers of the Sacraments, we can have no pretense to the
Covenant of Grace, no Title to the Assistance of God's Spirit; nor any
Assurance of a Blessed Immortality.

Now, I suppose, none of the Laity will pretend to an Authority to Administer
the Sacraments: They will not challenge a Right to Seal Covenants in God's
Name; or to represent Him in Acts of Solemn Blessing and Absolution. No Man,
(as the Apostle argues) ought to take this Honor to himself, but he that is
called of God as was Aaron, Heb. 5. 4. The Fate of Corah and Uzziah, (Numb. 16.
2. Chron. 26.) are sufficient to deter all Secular Persons from an Encroachment
of this Nature; which if made, God would both punish the Usurpation, and null
the Act: As a Prince would be obliged to do in point of Government, if any
Person should forge a Commission in his Name. Now since the Sacraments, which
are both necessary to make us Members of the Church, and to convey the
Advantages of Christianity to us; are by our Saviors special Appointment
entrusted with the Clergy, and the Administration of them is lodged in their
Hands; from hence it follows, that those who have the sole Right of Admitting
into a Society, or Excluding from it; and of dispensing the Rewards and
Punishments, are the proper and only Governors of that Society; and can have no
Dependence upon any other.

Secondly, The Independency of Ecclesiastical Authority may be proved from the
End and Design of it.

I suppose I need not prove that the Christian Religion, as contained in the
New Testament, is the last Revelation which God intends to make to the World.
Now this being granted, we must suppose that our Blessed Savior Founded his
Church upon such Laws, and gave it such lasting Principles of Government, as
should best maintain its Continuance, and secure those important Truths He had
entrusted it with. Least of all can we imagine He would build it upon a Sandy
Foundation, and make it depend upon the Arbitrary Power of its Enemies. Our
Savior foresaw that all the Princes of the World would disbelieve, and many of
them Persecute his Doctrine for several Ages together; and therefore would be
very improper Persons to have been trusted with the Sovereign Administration of
Ecclesiastical Affairs. Had the Government of the Church been derived from
them, or depended upon their Allowance; Christianity had been a very short
lived Religion, and never out-grown its Infancy. In this Case, the Public
Assemblies, Ordinations, Sacraments, and Discipline, must have lain at the
Mercy of Unbelievers; and the Clergy ought not to have executed their Function,
nor taken care of their Flock, unless the Civil Magistrate would have given
them leave. For if the Spiritual Supremacy were the Right of Princes, though they
might possibly abuse the Management of this Prerogative; yet it ought to lie
absolutely at their Disposal, and under their Regulation: And for any Person to
meddle in Ecclesiastical Matters without a Commission from them, but especially
against their Commands, would be an open Violation of their Right; which no Man
ought to be guilty of, though for the support of the best Religion; because we
ought not to do Ill that Good may come of it. And since no Society can subsist
without Government and Discipline; if the Bishops could Exercise no Spiritual
Authority without a Lay-permission, it would be in the Civil Magistrates Power
to make the Perpetuity of the Church impracticable; and the Christian Religion
would depend upon the pleasure of the Prince. But besides the Absurdity of this
way of Reasoning, we have in the

Third Place, The Practice of the Apostles, and of the whole Primitive Church,
to prove, that the Ecclesiastical Authority was perfectly sui juris, and never
under the Control of the Secular Magistrate. Thus when the Sanhedrim of the
Jews, who acted by the Authority of the Romans, and had the Assistance of the
Captain of the Temple; when they Imprisoned the Apostles, and commanded them
not to speak at all, nor teach in the Name of Jesus, Act. 4. 19. to this their
Answer is plain and positive; whether it be right in the sight of God to
hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye, verse 20. that is to say, they
had a Commission from Heaven to preach the Gospel, which they were bound to
execure; and which no Temporal Jurisdiction had any Authority to revoke.
Whereas had the Church been under the Check of the State in Matters purely
Spiritual, St. Peter and St. John were much to blame for ^efusing to obey their
Superiors; they ought to have acquie^ced in the Sanhedrims Prohibition, and not
to have pur^ued their Function after they were so solemnly silenced; and tha^
by those whom themselves owned to be Rulers of the People, Act. 4. 8. Either
therefore the Church must be Constituted Independent of the State; or the
Apostles can never be cleared of the Charge of Sedition.

The same Imputation will, upon the Modern Principles, affect the Bishops of
the Universal Church for the first 300 Years; who held public Assemblies,
Governed their Clergy, and their People, and performed all parts of their
Office, not only without any Authority from their respective Princes, but often
contrary to their express Commands; which matter of Fact is so well known, that
it would be superfluous to enlarge upon the proof of it.

If it be said, that these were Heathen Princes, but when the Emperors became
part of the Church, the Case was otherwise.

To this I answer, That the change of the Emperor's Religion could not gain
them any such new Jurisdiction as is pretended. For as Magistracy in general
does not imply a Right to Spiritual Authority; so neither does the denomination
of Christian give it any such Advantage. For, I suppose, Spiritual Dominion is
no more founded in Grace, than Temporal. In short, if Princes receive any such
Authority by virtue of their Christianity, it must be conveyed either by
Revelation, or implied in the notion of Baptism.

As to the Point of Revelation; The Scripture no where teaches us, that
Princes, upon their turning Christian, should have their Commission enlarged
with the addition of Episcopal, or Priestly Power. I grant, it was foretold,
that Kings should be nursing Fathers to the Church, Isa. 49. 23. but then it is
added, that they shall bow down to Her with their Faces toward the Earth; and
elsewhere, that they shall Minister to Her, or serve Her, Isa. 60. 10. We see
therefore, we must not strain upon the Letter in these Expressions; nor press
the Metaphor too far, unless we will conclude Contradictions: Therefore the
Character of their being Nursing Fathers, is sufficiently fulfilled by their
affording Christians Protection and Encouragement under their Government, and
by finishing the Contempt of Religion. But that the Magistrates Conversion
should alter the Seat of Ecclesiastical Government, put a Period to the
Apostolical Succession, and dissolve the Church into the State, is not so much
as the least hinted.

And as for Baptism, there is no Authority of any kind implied in the Receiving
that Sacrament; If there were, every Christian would have an equal share in
this Privilege; which would make the Constitution of the Church monstrous, in
which all its Members would be Governors, and so none under an Obligation of
being governed.

If it is objected, that the Oxford Greek Manuscript, published the last Year,
has proved by a Collection of several Instances, that Bishops, though unjustly
deprived, have for the sake of Peace, laid down their Function, and not
contested their Right with their Successors, provided they were not Heretics:
And that the People made no scruple to Communicate with the New Bishops.

To this it may be returned, that this Manuscript has been lately undertaken,
and shown to be altogether unserviceable to the Publisher's Design. (Vid. A
Vindication of the Deprived Bishops, etc.) where the Learned Vindicator has
proved.

First, that though the Instances alleged in the Manuscript were applicable to
the present Dispute, they would fall far short of gaining the Cause. I shall
just mention some of his Reasons.

He has shown the Author of the Manuscript to be defective in point of
Antiquity, and little more than 400 Years Old; and that none of the Instances
rise higher than the fourth Century; that they are not universal in respect of
Place, all of them being confined to the Greek Church; and most to the single
See of Constantinople. Farther, the Learned Vindicator observes, that the
Precedents cited by the Manuscript are nakedly represented, without showing,
whether the People, who deserted the Deprived Bishops, believed them unjustly
Deprived. If they did not, it is no wonder they withdrew their Obedience:
Neither do his Instances prove, that the People thought them tried by an
incompetent Authority, as well as unjustly deprived. Now this ought to have
been proved, to have made the Manuscript serviceable to the Publishers purpose.
For, though an unjust Sentence ought to be submitted to, when pronounced by a
proper Judge; yet when the Cause does not lie within the Cognizance of the
Court, all the Proceedings are null and void.

It should have been made out, that the Bishops insisted on their Right, and
challenged Submission from their People; for if they acquiesced, the Case does
not come up to the Matter in Hand. But here the Manuscript fails, as it does
also in clearing, whether the Behavior of the Bishops and People was founded
upon Principles at that time owned. For, if want of due Information, or Fear,
or Interest made them act as they did; we have no reason to be governed by
their Examples.

The Vindicator p^^^eeds to give in Counter-evidence, and proves from St.
Cyprian, who disputes the Case of Sehism at large, and lived in an Age very
valuable for Antiquity and Integrity; That the Catholic Church maintained the
Right of Canonical Bishops, both against Secular Magistrates, and Schismatical
Intruders. As appeared in the Case of Cornelius Bishop of Rome, who was owned
by the whole Church; notwithstanding the Opposition made by Decius the Emperor,
and Novarian the Anti-bishop. And Martian Bishop of Arles was refused the
Communion of his Brethren, for owning that of Schismatics. He observes, that
the Principles insisted on by St. Cyprian, were not peculiar to his own Age,
but maintained likewise by St. Augustine, and Optatus, in their Disputes against
the Donatists.

The Vindicator pursues the Argument, and proves, the Anti-bishops and their
Adherents guilty of Heresy; for the avoiding of which, the Author of the
Manuscript himself allows separation to be justifiable and necessary: this
charge he presses upon them, not only because they defend their Novelties by
Principles, but by such Principles, as strike at the Root of Ecclesiastical
Government. For, their being Bishops supposes all Spiritual, as well as Civil
Authority derived from the State; which Doctrines make it impossible for the
Church to subsist in a time of Persecution. And since no Society, whether
Spiritual or Secular, can stand without an intrinsic Power of Government; and
the Advantages of Society cannot be had any longer than the Society whence they
arise continues. From hence it follows, that those Opinions which destroy any
Society, must destroy all those Advantages, which were designed in the
Constitution, and guarded by it. Such Tenants, when they relate to the Church,
may, with propriety enough be called Fundamental Errors; which brings them
under the Modern, and received notion of Heresy.

The Learned Vindicator, in the second part of his Book, goes on, and shows,
that though the Oxford Manuscript (how favorable soever) would have been a
very slender Defense for the Anti-bishops, and their Party; yet they have not
so much as the Countenance of this Record; the Instances produced being Foreign
to the present Controversy. For in all the Cases mentioned in this Manuscript
(excepting that of Callinicus, which is dubious, and not to their purpose;)
either the Deprivations were passed in an Ecclesiastical Synod; or were
grounded upon Resignation; or Heresy; or else the Deprived Bishops insisted
upon their Right; and with their People formed distinct Communions from their
Intruders. And thus in the Course of 900 Years, which is the length of the
Manuscript; they have not one Instance to prove, that a Lay-Deprivation had any
Force against the Spiritual Authority of the Church. So singular, as well as
destructive are the Principles our Adversaries establish themselves upon.

Lastly, The Learned Vindicator subjoins a Collection of Canons drawn from
those called the Apostles, from the Council of Gangra, Antioch, Carthage, and
Constantinople, which in all rational Conjecture were added by the Author of
the Manuscript, though omitted by the Publisher. In these Canons it is solemnly
Decreed,

That if any Deacon, or Priest, should despise their Bishop, and hold separate
Meetings from him, unless he were deprived by a Synod, they were to be
degraded: This Fault in the Laity was punished with Excommunication. And if a
Bishop withdrew Communion from his Metropolitan (unless Synodically deprived)
he was to be deposed. By all which we may understand, how far these Councils
were from supposing that the Civil Magistrate had any Power to deprive
Ecclesiastics of their Spiritual Authority.

These are some of the Heads upon which the Learned Vindicator proceeds; and
which he maintains with admi^able strength of Reason and Authority. If the
Reader is inclined to see the Argument pursued at Length, and with its just
Advantages, he may please to consult his excellent Discourse.

From the Independency of the Church thus proved, these Conclusions naturally
follow.

First, That it is no more in the Power of the State to deprive the Church
Governors of their purely Spiritual Authority, than it is in the Power of the
Church to remove the Magistracy, or disincorporate the State. For all
Punishment and Censure supposes Jurisdiction in the Person who inflicts it. But
this Supposition is inconsistent with the Notion of Independency: Those who are
Independent being in this sense equal, so far as their Independency reaches;
and have no Privileges to Command, or Duties to Obey on either side. From
whence it follows,

Secondly, That the Bishops, notwithstanding the Lay-Deprivation, have the same
Spiritual Authority they formerly had; and their People the same Obligation to
remain in their Communion. The Consequence of which is,

Thirdly, That the Anti-bishops who are possessed of their Sees, have no
Authority to Govern. These the People are bound to avoid upon the Score of
Intrusion and Schism. I say, upon the Score of Schism. For since they have
subjected the Power of the Keys to the Civil Supremacy; given up, as much as in
them lies, the Fundamental Rights of the Church, and made the Being of Religion
precarious, and dependent on the Pleasure of the Magistrate: Since they have
either Usurped the Authority of Lawful and Canonical Bishops, or owned those
who are guilty of such Invasions; the Charge of Schism and Separation must lie
at their own Doors. Such dangerous Innovations as these, as long as they are
maintained, must cut off all Religious Correspondence, and make Communion
impracticable. Insomuch that those who join with the Intruders, will justly
fall under the same Imputation of Schism, for revolting from their Lawful
Bishops, and making themselves One with those who are divided from the Church.

Fourthly, This Privilege of Independency, in Matters purely Spiritual, will
reach the Inferior Clergy. For their Authority being derived from the Bishops,
and of the same Nature with theirs, it can be subordinate, or related, to no
other Head of Jurisdiction: And therefore these can be no more discharged the
Exercise of their Function by a Lay Power than the Bishops.

Thus we see Communion with the pretended Church of England must be Unlawful,
even supposing the Law-Authority unexceptionable, and that the Church Service
remain unaltered.

However, let us put the Case (for we may suppose any thing,) that the
depriving Authority was it self defective, and illegal, and no less a Breach of
the Constitution, than an Encroachment upon the Church: Suppose farther, that
the Public Prayers are stuffed with Immoral Petitions; that God is made a
Party to Injustice; and invoked to prosper that which He has threatened to
punish: Such singular Mixtures as these must give the Service a very ill
Complexion, and make Devotion look like a solemn Iniquity.

To say, we don't join in the exceptionable Petitions is no answer.

First, Because the Notion of Communion, the Prayers in their Form and Rubric,
suppose the contrary.

Secondly, If we may join in Communion where some part of the Worship is
sinful; then, by Parity of Reason, we may Communicate with all Sorts of
Christians; and not only so, but with Jews and Mahometans; because all these
Divisions of Religion acknowledge the same God, and have many things which are
pious and commendable in their Worship. But this part of the Argument, having
received Satisfaction from a good Hand already, needs not be pursued any
farther.

I shall therefore make two or three Remarks, and so conclude.

First, This Spiritual Independency of the Church can give no just grounds of
Jealousy to the State. Princes need not to be awakened into any Suspicions of
being disturbed in their Administrations, or having any part of their
Prerogative wrested from them; this Privilege pretends to no Temporal
Jurisdiction, but leaves all the Branches of Justice and Property to the Civil
Magistrate. It never offers to support it self by violence, but gives up
Seditious Churchmen to the Correction of the State, as well as others: It
allows no Liberty to Dethrone Princes for misfortunes of Belief; It teaches no
Man to be False and Treacherous for the sake of Religion, nor founds any Merit
upon Ingratitude and Rebellion. In short, this Authority relates only to
Conscience: And though it may challenge Obedience within a proper compass; and
the contempt of it will be deeply revenged hereafter; yet since there is no
Force claimed for the Execution of its Censures, it must be perfectly
inoffensive here.

Secondly, Since even the Inferior Clergy are, with respect to their Spiritual
Authority, Independent of Princes; certainly private Persons, though never so
considerable, should allow them the same Advantage. Churchmen, we see, have
their Authority from God; and are therefore his Ministers, not the Peoples; the
Branches of their Office, such as Instruction, Absolution, and Blessing, imply
Super-intendency, and Power, and ought not to come under a servile Character.
For, as on the one side, it is a fault to grow vain upon their Relation, to
neglect the meanest Christian, or, as the Apostle speaks, to be have themselves
as Lords over God's Heritage, 1 S. Pet. 5. 3. So it is no less on the other, to
prostitute their Function to Greatness; and make themselves Servants to
Ceremony and State. And without doubt they may find other ways of paying a due
Regard to Persons, without making themselves and Religion ridiculous. Neither
will the Consideration of Money, or Entertainment degrade their Character, and
make them BELONG to those of whom they receive it. For Money is given to
Parents, to Princes, and to God himself; and therefore does not always suppose
Subjection in the Receiver. When Micah contracted with the Levite to perform
the Offices of Religion in his Family; he was far from thinking he entertained
a Servant; as we may see, Judges 17. 10. Dwell with me, and be unto me a
Father, and a Priest, and I will give thee ten Shekels of Silver, etc. And as
for the Obligation, St. Paul thought there was a fair Equivalent returned; as
we may perceive by his Question. If we have sow^ unto you spiritual things, is
it a great thing, if we shall reap your carnal things? 1 Cor. 9. 11. Indeed the
notion of a Priest supposes a peculiar, and incommunicable Relation to God
Almighty: And in this sense, Natural, as well as Revealed Religion has
understood it; the Roman Emperors, though they were vain enough, yet never
pretended to have Priests BELONG to them till they were dead, and Deified. And
if any are so extravagant as to exceed the Pride of a Heathen Emperor, though in
Charity we ought to pray for them; yet I am afraid it is to little purpose to
pray with them.

Thirdly, The Clergy ought to form Assemblies for the Service of God: Since our
late Brethren have dispossessed us of our own Churches, and made it
Impracticable to come to theirs. Since Violence has removed us from the one,
and Schism from the other: Since we are banished the Holy Ground, and driven
from the Place where God's Honor used to dwell. Since we cannot perform his
Worship with those Circumstances of Advantage, with that Magnificence and
Solemnity which were to be wished; let us carry the Opportunity as far as it
will reach; and do our Duty in the best manner we can. God, as the Scripture
speaks, is not confined to Temples made with Hands. In a state of Hardship,
Necessity and Devotion may Consecrate; and the Primitive Upper-Room will not be
unacceptable. Above all things, let us take Care not to neglect the Service of
God; least we grow indifferent to all Religion, and by avoiding Schism, sink
into Profaneness; it is not the danger of Suffering will excuse us: For it was
in a time of Persecution, when the Apostle charged the Hebrews, not to forsake
the assembling themselves together, Heb. 10. 25.

Many are the Advantages of Public Worship above that which is performed in
Private.

By the former we pay a more solemn Homage to God, and make a more open
Acknowledgement of our Dependency. In our joint and uniform Petitions we
declare the Harmony of our Judgments, and the Extent of our Charity; and that
we are willing to assist each other at the Throne of Grace. Besides, the
Occasion of coming, and the Example of those that come, are not without their
Advantage. These Circumstances are apt to keep up Attention, and improve good
Dispositions, and make us more affected with the Impressions of Religion.
Farther, by our united Prayers, we may hope for a greater Support from Heaven,
than from single and solitary Devotions. It was upon Assemblies that the
miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost were bestowed, as we may learn from several
Places of Scripture, Acts 2. 2. 4. 31. 10. 44. And though, since our Religion
has been fully Confirmed, these extraordinary Assistances have been withdrawn:
Yet when we meet in Obedience to God's Command, when we serve him with the
greatest Reverence and Resolution, we may reasonably expect a proportionable
Blessing. And as the Public Services are more beneficial, so the use of them
can never be more necessary, than when the Church lies under Disorder and
Distress. When Atheism grows upon us; when Virtue seems ready to expire, and
the Faithful fall from among the Children of Men; when Temptations have the
greatest Weight, and Perseverance is pressed, and we cannot maintain our
Innocence without more than ordinary Difficulty; then is the proper Time to
call in all the Aids of Religion, and to put our Devotions in the b^st posture
of Advantage. Upon such a melancholy Occasion, we have need, if ever, to unite
our Prayers, and frequent the Sacrament, and fortify our Minds with all the
Supports of mutual and supernatural Assistance. To stand off from danger, and
confine our selves to the numbers of Security; and be frighted from Public
Communion; looks like the Conduct of an Army that disbands at the Approach of
an Enemy. The Honor of God, and the Good of the Church, are (without doubt)
best promoted by an open Profession, by Resolution, and Religious Bravery.
Those who thus distinguish themselves carry Light and Heat in their Examples.
They awaken Inquiry, and encourage Imitation, and transfuse a Spirit of
G^eatness into others. Now the Interest of another World, all Christians grant
to be incomparably the greatest, and where there is no proportion in the Value,
one would think there should be no difficulty in the Choice.

Let nothing therefore discourage us in our Duty; for whatever wordly
Inconveniences may happen, we may be assured of the Divine Protection: And,
besides the future Rewards of Constancy and Patience, we shall have the present
Satisfaction of Suffering for the best Cause, and the best Communion.

Printed in the Year, 1692.


