THE HISTORY OF THE Damnable Popish Plot, In its various Branches and Progress.
Published, For the satisfaction of the present and future Ages, BY The AUTHORS
OF The Weekly Packet of Advice from Rome.

Nil erit ulterius quod vestris moribus addat
Posteritas. --
LONDON: Printed for B.R. L.W. H.C. and are to be sold by Langley Curtiss, on
Ludgate Hill. 1680.

TO Both Houses OF THE PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND.
Right Honorable! Honorable! and Worthy Patriots!
AFter the Gospel, in its freedom and restored Purity, had for above a hundred
years gloriously shone in our Meridian, sealed with the Blood of Martyrs,
watered with the painful Industry of many thousands of learned pious Divines,
asserted by the Pens of some, and Power of several Illustrious Princes, firmly
established by so many Laws passed within those venerable Walls, whose signal
Preservation from the Gunpowder Devastation, is enough to inspire every Breast
that enters them with just Indignation against the barbarous Treacheries of
Rome. After the Popish Errors, destructive of all Christianity, have been so
unanswerably confuted, their vile Practices so notoriously displayed, their
horrid Treasons so clearly and miraculously detected, who could have thought it
possible, that these Kingdoms should again have been in danger from the
so-oft-defeated Popelings! That ever that loathsome baffled Cause should dare
lift up its bruised Head to disturb our Tranquillity! That those grovelling
Serpents should presume one more to Hiss and spit their Venom to such a
perilous degree; or that there should be found amongst us any such indifferent
Protestants, of so absurd irregular Appetites, as loathing the Celestial Manna,
to long for the Onions and Garlic of Egypt; or that could be content not only
to submit unto, but with their own hands endeavor to put about their own Necks
that accursed York, which our Noble Ancestors with so much Zeal and generous
Disdain had shaken off!

But too plain it is, that our own overgreat Security, the restless
Conspiracies of those sworn Enemies of our Peace, and the Connivance and base
Practices of a too prevalent Faction, have within some years past, by dark
Intrigues and silent Steps, so far advanced their Hellish Designs, as justly
to awaken our most serious Apprehensions. Their late discovered and still
growing Plots are such, and so effrontedly carried on, that we stand in need of
the most prudent Councils, and the greatest Zeal, and the most active Courage,
to prevent the accomplishment of their Contrivements, viz. the Murder of our
King, the Extirpation of our true Religion, the Violation of our Liberties and
Properties, and the final Confusion and Destruction of these once-happy
Kingdoms.

The main Policy of these Engineers of Hell is, to conceal their Stratagems,
outbrazen their Villainies, and create a Disbelief, or at least raise
Misrepresentations of their detestable Designs. To obviate which, and possess
all good Subjects with a true sense of Affairs at one entire view, and for a
small Charge, we have in the following Leaves set forth a punctual Summary of
their Actings, and all Proceedings that have hitherto been had for bringing
some of the Conspirators to Justice, and to prevent the Mischiefs threatened by
the Rest.

It Is true, my Lords! and Gentlemen! some Prints have already pretended to give
the world such an Account; but we conceive, upon impartial perusal, they will
be found not to answer that End. The several TRIALS of the Malefactors
carefully taken, and published by Authority, are ('it is acknowledged) very
satisfactory, as to the Judicial proceedings; but besides that many other
Collateral passages are most requisite to a true understanding of this
voluminous Plot, the said Trials (for we know not whose private advantages) are
swelled to such a price, that every honest man can neither spare money to buy,
nor time to peruse them.

With pretense to remedy the latter, there was some time since emitted an
Abridgment of those Trials, under the Title of THE HISTORY OF THE PLOT, though
many cannot apprehend how it should deserve that Name, since it mentions not
one word of the Original Contrivance, the Preparatives, manner of Discovery,
and other Remarkables essential to an History; but only epitomizes the Trials,
and even of them, omits Staley's and Reading's which yet sure had some relation
to the Plot. Besides, the witty Epistle prefixed, seems to drown the Popish Plot
with Suggestions of an Imaginary one of the Protestants, no less (forsooth) to
be dreaded; and yet even the amusing people with such Stories, is notoriously a
Part of the grand Popish Design. And whereas it tells us, That not one
material point is omitted, most Readers cannot find the substantial part of
Mr. Bedloe's Evidence against Wakeman (p. 46. of the Trial) so much as hinted
at; not to mention the gross Shuffles and Omissions in p. 77. and elsewhere. So
that had not the Ingenious Mr. Roger L'Estrange in a late Pamphlet, entitled,
The FREEBORN SUBJECT, been pleased to own himself Compiler of that petite
History, its Author might have lain under Ill Suspicions. And yet even there he
happens to give but an unhappy Reason for his undertaking that pains, viz.
Because he found in the printed Trials MANY gross Incoherences, and VERY
MATERIAL MISTAKES (yet instances but One, and corrected too, as an Erratum at
the end of the next Trial printed.) Now though the Gentleman, being so well a
known Protestant, meant, no doubt, very honestly, yet it is not impossible a
scurvy mischief may thence happen: For when our Posterity shall urge these
Trials for proof against Papists (which certainly was the design of taking
them so curiously, and not a little paltry profit) how easily may the subtle
Villains stop their mouths, by alleging from this Author, That no heed is to
be given to the said Trials, being so publicly owned by a person of his Note
and late Qualification, to be guilty of so many and such very MATERIAL
MISTAKES? But the Gentleman that discovers so many Errors, may be allowed to
make some, especially since he was so perplexed in the mighty business, that he
assures us, That reflecting upon the Errors of the printed Trials, together
with the almost-inextricable difficulty of retriving the Truth out of such a
confusion of Tautologies and Forms, the Collection being so bulkie too, and the
Particulars lying so scattered, it was next to the Work of a RESVRRECTION, to
set every part in its right place. -- Freeborn Subject, p. 15.

The POPISH COMPENDIUM was the next that attempted any thing of this kind;
whose Author in the Preface scandalizes the last-mentioned, by saying, That he
jumpt with him in the same Design; and adds, That he has past by, or
slubber'd over several things which the Parties concerned may justly insist
upon to be of great force in their business. This we are sure of; The Design
of this Compendium is to vilisie the King's Evidence, slubber over the Plot,
and make people as stupid in Politics as they would have them in Divinity,
even to believe contrary both to their Reason and their Senses.

What we have here performed, or how far useful it may be, is left to impartial
Censure, and the Issue of Time: Such as it is, it humbly casts itself at the
feet of this Illustrious Great Council for Pardon and Protection; for it may
have need of both; though the Errors being all involuntary, may better hope
for Excuse, and the End being honest, does not much dread the Snarlings of
malicious Slanderers, nor the Frowns of mighty Criminals.

We acknowledge your Lordships, and most of you the Honorable Gentlemen of the
House of Commons, cannot but already know these matters much better than they
are here related, having taken the Examinations, and had the view of many
Papers and Informations before the Secret Committee and elsewhere, which to us
were inaccessible. However, the main matters being thus couched in so small a
Volume, may not be unserviceable to the Common People, who in their degree are
not unconcerned to be faithfully informed of the Progress of this Hellish Plot:
And so much the more grateful we know will the Book be to them, in that it is
Dedicated to this August Senate, for whose Session they have throughout the
Nation expressed such hearty Desires, and on whose sage Proceedings they so
much depend.

Whenever it shall please our Gracious Sovereign, and be necessary for the
weighty Affairs of the Public to Assemble You, (in the midst of whom, Majesty
is in its brightest Splendor, and from that lofty Orb darts Rays as Absolute
and Formidable, as any Monarch under Heaven) may Omnipotent Wisdom mercifully
direct all your Counsels: We wait for you as for the Rain, and our Mouths are
opened wide as for the latter Rain; The Blessing of her that is ready to perish
waits to descend upon you. Suffer not the Ruin of the Protestant Religion to
bear date under, or expire with the best of Princes: Let not the Reformed
Churches throughout the World charge their Destruction on the Imprudencies or
Neglects of the most Enlightened Nation of the Earth. May the Spirit of
Prudence, Courage, Loyalty, and Unity rule in your Debates; May there ever be a
sweet Harmony between these Two Houses, and a dutiful Deportment of both
toward his Majesty; that our present Fears may be removed, Grievances redrest,
and the Child yet unborn finding his best Inheritance (the Protestant Religion
and Liberties of an Englishman) secured to him by your Endeavors, may rise up
in Aftertimes and call you Blessed.

Amen.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THat deposing and murdering of Kings, Plots, Treasons, Massacres,
etc. are countenanced, and allowed by the Romish Church, and suitable to the
Practices of their Popes and People, in former Ages, as well as the present.
Page 1 CHAP. II. A brief Account of the many Popish Treasons against Queen
Elizabeth. 15 CHAP. III. Of Popish Treasons against King James; and a
remarkable Speech of Archbishop Abbot. 48 CHAP. IV. The Loyalty of Papists to
King Charles the First, inquired into. Their Plot to murder him in the year
1640. Their Rebellion in Ireland, and Behavior afterward; Evincing that they
were mainly instrumental in stirring up the late Civil Wars, and Cutting off
that Prince. 50 CHAP. V. The preparatory Circumstances at home and abroad,
encouraging the Papists to this present Plot, and facilitating their Design.
80 CHAP. VI. An Account of Dr. Dates, how he came engaged amongst the
Romanists: The prudent Course he took to make his first Discovery to the King,
and the Difficulties he met with therein. 93 CHAP. VII. The nature and scope of
the Plot in general, laid open. 104 CHAP. VIII. Some Proceedings immediately
following the Discovery, and the true manner and Circumstances of the Murder of
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey. CHAP. IX. The Proceedings against William Staley, and
his Execution for speaking Treasonable words. 130 CHAP. X. The Proceedings
against Mr. Coleman, his Execution, and a kind of Popish Prayer made to him
afterward as a Saint. 133 CHAP. XI. The Proceedings against Ireland,
Pickering, and Grove. 135 CHAP. XII. The manner of Mr. Prance's coming in to
give Evidence: The Objection concerning his recanting his Information,
answered. An Account of Mr. Everard's Discovery, and four years Imprisonment in
the Tower: With other subsequent Proceedings. 168 CHAP. XIII. A Design of the
Papists to suborn Captain Bury and Alderman Brooks to swear falsely against Dr.
Oats and Mr. Bedloe. 180 CHAP. XIV. The Proceedings against Green, Hill, and
Berry, with Hill's pretended Speech at Execution. 186 CHAP. XV. The Parliament
declare the Plot: The King's Evidence affronted: Mr. Reading's ill Practice to
stifle Mr. Bedloc's Evidence, and the Proceedings against him. 198 CHAP. XVI.
The design of Gifford, a Popish Priest, to fire the City and Suburbs, happily
discovered. The Council new-model'd. The Bill against the D. of York. 208 CHAP.
XVII. The Proceedings against the Popish Lords in the Tower, and Narrative of
the Transactions between the two Houses. 225 CHAP. XVIII. The Proceedings
against Whitebread and the other four Jesuits. A remarkable Letter concerning
the said Whitebread. 255 CHAP. XIX. The Proceedings against Langhorne. 272
CHAP. XX. Mr. Jennison's first coming in, and a Letter from Caryl, alias
Blunden, a supposed Priest, taken in Southwark; the form of words prescribed by
Whitebread to other Jesuits for denial of the Plot. 279 CHAP. XXI. The
Proceedings (such as they were) against Wakeman, Marshal, Corker, and Rumley.
292 CHAP. XXII. The Names of the four Ruffians that were to kill the King, set
forth by Mr. Jennison; and some Discovery made by Mr. John Smith, a Priest. 310
CHAP. XXIII. The Endeavors to cast the Plot on the Presbyterians. The
Rebellion in Scotland. The Design against Mr. Dugdale. The Attempt upon
Colonel Mansel. The Meal-tub-discovery. Mr. Dangerfield's Confession. The
Proceedings against Osborne and Lane, for scandalizing Dr. Oats and Mr.
Bedloe. 345 CHAP. XXIV. Some Reflections on Popish Libels, as the Compendium,
etc. 329 CHAP. XXV. The Conclusion, in a warm Address to both Protestants and
Papists. 350 An Appendix: Reciting diverse notable Politic Artifices for
restoring of Popery; discovered in print in the year 1663, and ever since
punctually pursued. With an Account of some latter Occurrences, as the
Commitment of Sir R. Peyton, the Condemnation of six Popish Priests, etc. 366
THE HISTORY Of the late Horrid POPISH PLOT.
CHAP. I
That Deposing and Murdering of Kings, Plots, Treasons, Massacres, etc. are
countenanced and allowed by the Romish Church, and suitable to the Practices of
their Popes and People, in former Ages, as well as the present.

THE scope of this Undertaking being to give the World an Entire Account of the
late detestable Popish Plot, (as far as yet has been brought to light,) it
will not be unnecessary to premise something of the Principles and Practices of
that Party; that the Vulgar Reader may not be startled in his Belief of this
most impious and bloody Design, when he shall see and consider, that the same
is but what the pernicious Doctrines of their Church not only allow, but
invite, or indeed enjoin them unto; and what (by reason thereof) has so often
been perpetrated, or at least attempted heretofore by the Votaries of that
Communion.

SECT. 1.
As for Principles of the Church of Rome relating to Government, and the
Obedience to be paid to Secular Princes, where shall we look for them, but in
the Canons of her Councils, the Decretals of her Popes, and the public
Writings of her approved and most eminent Doctors?

In their great and (by them acknowledged) general, Lateran Council, held under
Pope Innocent the Third, in the year of our Lord 1215, it is expressly and
Synodically concluded, Can. 3. de Haereticis, That the Pope may Depose Kings,
Absolve their Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, Et Terram exponere
Catholicis occupandam, and give away their Kingdoms to Catholics. And this is
received into the Body of the Canon Law by Pope Gregory the Ninth, cap.
Excommunicamus, 13 Extrav. de Haeret.

The most famous of their Schoolmen, Thomas Aquinas, l. 22. q. 12. Art. 2.
affirms, That any man sinning by Infidelity, may be adjudged to lose all right
of Dominion: and therefore so soon as anyone shall, for disowning the Faith, be
judicially denounced Excommunicate, ipso facto, his Subjects are Absolved from
his Government, and from any Oath of Allegiance whereby they were bound to him.
Nay, another of their Doctors, Dominicus Bannes, is yet more hasty; for he will
have the Subjects discharged from all Obedience, even before their Prince is so
solemnly pronounced an heretic. His words are these: Number. 22. page 590. Where
there is evident knowledge of the Crime, [Heresie he means; that is, whatever
the Pope and his Priests please to call so,] the Subjects may lawfully, if they
have strength sufficient, [pray mark!] exempt themselves from the power of
their Prince, even before the Sentence Declaratory. And this Conclusion (says
he) is followed by Cajetan, and is the more common opinion of the Thomists, who
generally approve thereof.

If Kings become Heretics, forthwith their Subjects are freed from their
Government, says Simancha in his Catholic Institutions, (a Book printed with
great Approbation of Superiors,) Titul. 23. N. 11. Nay, less than downright
Heresy will serve turn to out them: for, Tit. 45. Number. 25. he tells us, If a
Prince be unprofitable, (a Crime capable of a large extension) or make unjust
Laws against Religion or good manners, or do any thing to the detriment of
Spirituals, the Pope may apply a fit Remedy, even by depriving such a King of
his Government and Jurisdiction.

Their great Oracle, Cardinal Bellarmine, de Romans Pontif. lib. 5. cap. 6.
avers, That the Pope, as chief Spiritual Prince, may change Kingdoms, and take
them away from one to give to another, if it be necessary for the salvation of
Souls. And in the seventh Chapter, he advances a little further: for speaking
of Heretical Princes (as we know all Protestants are in their sense) he says,
Omnium Consensu possunt ac debent privari suo Dominio: It is agreed by all,
(all Roman Catholics he means) That such Princes may, nay ought to be deprived
of their Dominions. So that it seems it is the Popes duty (as well as in his
power) to do it; and of all Roman Catholics, not only to approve thereof, but
to be assisting therein.

Upon this ground, Suarez, a First-rate Jesuit, and one that was thought fit by
his Party to Du^l the learnedest Monarch in the world, in his Book against King
James, entitled, De Fide Catholic^ adv. Angl. lib. 6. cap. 16. number. 14. speaks
out more fully their Doctrine: We must know (says he) that after the Sentence
Condemnatory is given against a King, by lawful [he means Papal] Authority, to
deprive him of his Kingdom, or (which is all one) when by Sentence he is
declared to be guilty of such a Crime as by the Law has such a Penalty
imposed; [as whatever they list to count Heresy has by their Canon-Law] then
he that pronounced that Sentence, or he to whom it is committed, may deprive
such King of his Kingdoms, even by Killing him, if he cannot otherwise do it.
But then mark! how scrupulous and provident they are, that the Traiterous
Murder be done methodically, and that none but Roman Catholics be concerned
in the sacred Butchery: For thus he goes on; If the Pope depose a King, yet he
may not be killed or expelled, save only by those to whom He shall commit the
doing thereof. But if he commit the doing thereof to nobody, then it belongs
to him that is next lawful [that is, Catholick] Successor to the Kingdom; or if
there be no such Successor, or he neglect to do it, then the Community of the
Kindom (provided always it be Roman Catholic) succeed in that Right, viz. to
Expel or Kill such Excommunicated Prince.

Creswel, alias Philopater, sect. 2. number. 160. declares, Omnium Catholicorum
Sententia, etc. That it is the opinion of all Catholics, That Subjects are
obliged to Depose an Heretical King. Nay, to drive the Nail home, he there
adds, Number. 162. Praecepto Divino, and arctissimo Conscientiae vinculo, ac
extremo Animarum suarum Periculo, Haereticos Principes debent Deturbare: That
by the Law of God, by the most strict Bond of Conscience, and at the utmost
peril of their Souls, they are bound to dethrone and drive out such Heretical
Princes.

Pursuant to this Doctrine of their Teachers, it appears, Papists may lawfully,
nay are bound under pain of Damnation, to Renounce, Resist, and Murder their
Kings, whenever Excommunicated or Deposed by the Pope; and are not to account
it any Treason to kill such a King after such Deposition: For neither is He
then a King, nor are his people (being absolved from their Oaths of Fidelity)
any longer his Subjects. Nor is it Murder: for their Supreme and Infallible
Judge, Pope Urban the Second, has clearly resolved and determined it, and made
it Law, Non esse Homicidas, qui adversus Excommunicatos, Zelo Matris Ecclesiae
Armantur, cos^^, trucidant. Gratian, Lemma ad 47 cap. Excommunicatorum, Cause.
47. Quest. 5. That they are not Murderers or Manslayers, who being stirred up
with Zeal toward holy Mother Church, against persons Excommunicated, do any way
destroy them.

Now Simanea tells us, Heretici omnes ipso Jure sunt Excommunicati, de Excom.
tit. 27. sect. 1. fol. 116. Every Heretic stands, and is to be reputed, as
Excommunicated, if not de Facto, yet de Jure, in Law and Right: and therefore
may be deposed, proscribed, and murdered. And that we may know who they mean
by an Heretic, Father Creswell, in his said Book called Philopater, thus
resolves the Case: Regnandi Jus amittit, qui Religionem Romanam deserit:
Whoever forsakes or does not hold the Religion of the Church of Rome, is that
Heretic we speak of, who is accursed, and loses all Right of Dominion.

Furthermore, by a Bull of Pope Paul the Fifth, dated Anno 1558, and now
inserted in the body of their Law, lib. 7. Decret. tit. 3. de Haereticis and
Schism. cap. 9. All Protestant Kings, Princes, and Subjects, and Quicunque
bactenus a fide deviarunt, seu in Posterum deviabunt, seu in Haeresin incident,
etc. Not only all that at that time had swerved from the Roman faith, but all
such also as should, at any time afterward, deviate from the same, and sall
into Heresy, are declared Excommunicated, and solemnly Cursed: and if they be
Kings or Emperors, they are thereby totally and for ever deprived of their
Kingdoms and Empires, and rendered incapable ever to enjoy them. So run the
words expressly, Regnis and Imperio penitus and in tetum perpetuo sint privati,
and ad illa de caetero inhabiles and incapaces. Hence it appears, that by the
Tenor of this Babylonish Bull, our gracious King and his Protestant Subjects
now, are as much under the cursed Cursing Sentence as Queen Elizabeth and her
people were when it was first denounced; and consequently deposed, deprived,
and lawfully to be Killed, etc. But to make sure work, the Curse is solemnly
renewed every year on Maunday-Thursday, by reading the Bulla Coenae Domini; the
words whereof are, Excommunicamus and Anathematizamus, ex part Dei, etc. We
do, on the behalf of God, and by the Authority of Peter and Paul, and also by
our own, Excommunicate and Anathematize all Hussites, Wicklissists, Lutherans,
Zwinglians, Calvinists, Hugonots, etc. (under which Nicknames they comprehend
all Protestants) and whoever shall receive, defend, or favor them. So that if
any Papist shall assist or defend his Prince, being Protestant, it appears he
is by this Sentence Excommunicated and Cursed by the Pope, whom he verily
believes (if he be a true Roman Catholic, and understands his Religion) has
right and power to do it.

A thousand other the like abominable Assertions, tending directly to Sedition
and Rebellion, might be produced out of their Canon Law, and the Works of
Bellarmine, Suarez, Parsons, Allen, Creswell, Ros^aeus (a Book Canonized by the
Pope in Consistory) and others; but these are sufficient. Nor can the subtlest
Jesuit ever avoid this Evidence with any color of Reason or Modesty: for here
is the determination of one of their Infallible Councils, and that, confirmed
by an Infallible Pope, and the concurrent Testimonies of several the most
eminent Fathers of their Church agreeable thereunto; all printed with
Approbation, and never judicially condemned, nor such their Opinions censured:
for though so many Indices Expurgatorii have stifled, or at least maimed and
dismembered better Books, yet these pass openly abroad untoucht, and are allowed
to be read, though the Bible be prohibited. And therefore, notwithstanding all
their idle and impudent Evasions (that these are but the Sentiments of
particular private men) it is evident that their Church holds, encourages, and
is justly chargeable with maintaining these Tenets destructive to Civil
Government, and enjoining them to be believed, and (as opportunities shall
serve) put in practice by her Children.

SECT. 2.
This will yet be more undeniable, if we consider the ill uses and applications
of these Doctrines, and how frequently in many Ages they have actually been put
in execution, to the great disturbance of Christendom, and embroiling Kingdoms
in Blood and Confusion: for never did savage Bear or Tygre fill his Den with
the Bones of men and beasts, as this Romish Wolf has his Church with the
Spoils of Princes; there being scarce any Age since his Teeth were grown,
wherein he has not, to the utmost of his power, made havoc of their Lives and
Estates. Take a few Examples.

Anno 729, Pope Gregory the Second Excommunicated Leo Isaurus the Emperor,
because he would not admit of Images in Churches: and for that Crime of
opposing Idolatry, forbad the payment of his Tribute, and gave away his
Territories to the Lombards; whereby he and his Successors lost all the Western
Empire, which the Pope and the French-King afterward shared between them. [And
so they would do others Kingdoms now too, if they could master them.] This
glorious Act of Rebellion in Gregory against his Sovereign Lord, Cardinal
Baronius applauds, saying, Exemplum Posteris dignum reliquit, ne in Ecclesia
Christi regnare sinerentur Haeretici Principles: He left a worthy Example to
Posterity, that Heretical Princes should not be suffered to Reign.

Soon after, Pope Zachary Deposed Chilperick King of France, and gave his
Kingdom to Pepin, one of his Subjects and Servants, not so much (as we find the
reason rendered in Gratian) for any Iniquity Chilperick was guilty of, as for
that his Holiness esteemed him, Tantae potestati inutilem, unfit, or
unprofitable for so great a power; that is, Pepin was like (as he had reason,
after such a kindness) to gratify his Holiness more, and serve him better.

How lamentably and shamelesly was the Emperor Henry the Fourth vexed by three
Popes successively? first, Hildebrand picks a causeless quarrel with him,
(Confictis Criminibus, with alleging false and feigned Crimes, say the
Historians of that Age) Excommunicates him, absolves his Subjects from their
Obedience, and sets up against him Rodulph Duke of Swaben and Burgundy, a
Feudatary Subject to the Empire; sending him a Crown, with this verse engraven:

Petra dedit Petro, Petrus Diadema Rodolpho.
The Rock to Peter gave this Crown and Power,
And with it Peter Crowns thee Emperor.
But for all the Popes Gift and Blessing, Rodolph miserably perished in his
Treason. However, Hildebrand's Successor, Pope Urban, carried on the
implacable quarrel, and unnaturally stirred up Conradus the said Emperors own
Son, to make War against his Father; who dying in that Rebellion, another Son
(who succeeded) was armed against him, who took him Prisoner, and forced him to
resign the Empire. The Indignities offered to this Noble Prince, by the Romish
Lucifers, have swelled diverse Volumes. Amongst many other Insolences, this was
one, That Hildebrand would not Release him from his Excommunication, till on a
time, in the midst of winter, he came Barefooted to Camisium, where the Pope
lay, and in that posture waited three days before the Gates of his Palace: nor
had he scarce at last got Absolution, but for the intercession of a certain
Duchess, for whom his Holiness had a kindness.

Henry the Fifth his Son, for maintaining the Privileges of the Empire, and
Rights of his Predecessors touching the Investiture of Bishops, was
Excommunicated by Pope Paschal the Second. and by him and his Successors
miserably vexed till his death.

The Emperor Frederick the First was scarce ever free from the Treasons of the
Pope and his Clergy; and at last to purchase his peace, was fain to cast
himself grovelling upon the Floor, whilst the Pope set his foot on his Neck,
profaning that saying of the Psalmist -- Thou shall walk upon the Lion, and the
Asp; the young Lion and the Dragon shall thou tread under thy feet. And when
the Bigoted Prince, to excuse that shameful servile submission, was heard to
mutter, Non tibi, sed Petro, I do not pay this Homage to you, but to Peter; the
haughty Prelate sternly replied, Et mihi and Petro; Sir, you shall do it both
to Peter and me too.

The Emperor Henry the Seventh, after the Pope and his Cardinals had long
opposed his Coronation, and instigated many Enemies against him, was at last
poisoned by a Monk, (one of their Creatures) in the Sacrament. And certainly,
all the wit and malice of Hell and Rome clubbed together, could never have
screwed villainy to an higher pitch, than these Miscreants did, by empoisoning
their God, (as they pretend to believe it) on purpose therewith to destroy and
Murder their lawful Sovereign.

Joan Queen of Naples was deprived of her Kingdom by Pope Urban, who consented
to her Murder. It Is well known how our King John was intolerably vexed and
deprived by the Pope and his Agents, and at last poisoned by a Monk: as also
our Henry the Second, about the death of that turbulent Traitor Becket, who had
occasioned so many uproars in the State, was by Popish appointment enforced to
submit his Royal Back to the cruel Lashes of the Insolent Monks of Canterbury.

When our King Hen. 8. denied, and by Law in the 24th and 25th years of his
Reign, had taken away the Popes Usurped Supremacy, though he and the Nation in
general still continued in the Communion of the Church of Rome; Pope Paul the
Third presently Curses and Damns him and all his good Subjects: for so is the
Title of his Bull: -- Damnatio and Excommunicatio He^* 8. ejusque Fautorum and
Complicum. The Dannation and Excommunication of King Henry the Eighth, and all
his Adherents and Favorers. And so it might properly be Entitled; for therein
he not only deprives him of his Kingdom and Territories, forbids him and all
that should take part with him Christian Burial; but also declares him and them
Eternally Damned. He likewise deprives all the Kings Children, born or to be
born of Queen Anne, and all the Children of his Adherents, of their Rights,
Privileges, and Goods; annuls all Oaths and Treaties made with the King, and
commands all Christian Princes to make War upon him and his people: and if they
should take any of his Subjects, (who obey the said King, and disobey these his
Holinesses Commands) then all and every such persons so taken, to be Slaves for
ever to those that take them; with several other horrid Impieties, which you
may see in Bullario Romano, Printed at Lions, 1655. Tom. 1. p. 704.

Since this, Henry the Third of France, after various Treasons and Conspiracies
of the Sorbonists against him, was at last, An. 1589. Murdered by Jaques
Clement, a zealous young Friar; on which Assassination, Pope Sixtus the Fifth
made a Panegyrical Oration in the Consistory, and commended the same as a most
Heroic and Religious Exploit; and the Traitorous Assassinate being killed on
the Attempt, a Statue of Brass was made for him, by the Command of the chief of
the League; his Picture set up in Churches, and he was sometimes prayed to by
the Title of Saint Jaques Clement. And to note the just Judgment of God, it is
affirmed, that this ^urther was committed in the self-same Chamber a St Clou,
where a Council had been held, Anno 1572. wherein the horrid Massacre of the
Protestans at Paris was resolved upon; this King, then Duke of Anjou, being one
of the chiefest of that Bloody Cabal. See Thuanus, l. 51. and Serres, p. 789.

His Successor, the Great Henry the Fourth, (Grandfather to our present
Gracious Sovereign) after by a desperate Rebellion, and Catholic League
against him merely on the account of his Religion, he found himself obliged to
declare himself a Roman Catholic; was, notwithstanding all that, first
desperately wounded, by John Chastel, a Disciple of the Jesuits, and by them
suborned thereunto; in memory whereof, a Pillar was erected in Paris, to the
Infamy of the Jesuits, and they banished the Realm, though not long after, by
their subtilty and Interest they got in again, where their mischievous
Influence has not a little contributed toward Enkindling and Fomenting those
fatal Flames which for diverse years bypast have raged through so great a part
of Christendom; and particularly, that kindness of their Readmission did not
at all abate their malice, or secure the Life of that great Prince; for
afterward, in the year 1610. he was Murdered outright by Ravilliac, formerly
a Monk, but at that time a Solicitor; who was instigated to that divellish act
by the Jesuits, as it is violently presumed, as well by the manner of the thing,
as the constancy of his carriage at death, and Confession that he made, that he
did it only because the King favored Heretics, and was preparing to make War
against the Pope, which was to fight against God, etc. as also, for that he
farther acknowledged, that he had informed Father d'Aubigny, a Jesuit; of his
intended Murder, and showed him the Knife: but it was in Confession, and so by
their Doctrine not to be revealed: and the said d'Aubigny being taken into
examination, denied that he knew any thing of it or could have discovered it if
it were revealed to him in Confession, though he had never so much a mind to
it: For he protested, that God had given him the Grace, that as soon as any
thing was reveale^ to him in Confession, the presently forgot it. It Is pity
Father Garnet had not had such an excuse for his knowledge of the
Powder Treason, pretended to be communicated to him the same way.

CHAP. II.
A brief Account of the many Popish Treasons from time to time against Queen
Elizabeth.

SECT. 1.
THE Insolences of Popes, and Treasons of Papists, re-counted in the
foregoing Chapter, were all against Emperors, Kings, and Princes, that
generally owned the Church of Rome; whence it is abundantly apparent, to all
that are not wilfully blind, That Papists of themselves, and as such, even
before the Society of Jesuits was hatched, were a sort of very dangerous
Subjects, always ready, nay obliged to Rebel against their Princes, though of
the same Faith and Religion with themselves, when ever the Pope out of Interest
or humor should put them upon it; being obliged by the principles of their
Religion so to do. And can it then reasonably be expected, that they will ever
be Faithful and Loyal to Protestant (in their account Heretical) Princes;
especially, now the Jesuits have so vastly improved and advanced Maxims of
Treason, Murder, Equivocation, etc. as if they intended to banish, not only
all Obedience to Kings, but together therewith, all kind of sincere Religion,
Truth, and Moral Honesty between Man and Man, out of the World? Concerning the
good Affection of this Society to Protestant Princes, we may take our measures
from their own expressions. Father Campian a Jesuit, and, though Hanged at
Tyburn, about the year 1581. for High Treason, yet at Rome reputed a famous
Martyr, and styled by Ribadeneira, (in Catalogo Scriptorum societatis Jesu, p.
377. in Indice Martyrum) Martyr Christi inclytus, sui seculi Clarissimus; A
most renowned and famous Martyr of Christ; This holy man was not ashamed to
declare in print, in the year 1583. (as is attested by Hospinian) That all
Jesuits in the world had entered into an holy Vow and Covenant, any way to
destroy all Heretical Kings; nor did they despair of doing it effectually, so
long as any one Jesuit should remain in the World. And Father Creswel (a bird
of the same feather) in his Philopater, lays down this sweet Lesson; Ita
informandos quoscunque Catholicos, ut oblata caedis occasion nullo impedimento
se dimoveri patiantur: That all Catholics are to be taught and instructed,
that when they have an opportunity to kill Heretics, (Kings or others, it is no
matter) they should not spare them, nor suffer any impediment to hinder them
from the slaughter.

SECT. 2.
This is their Doctrine; now let us see their Practices here in England ever
since the Reformation.

The Reign of our good King Edward the Sixth was but short, (whether not
shortened by Popish Arts, is deservedly questioned) and he himself a minor; yet
during his time there were Rebellions and Commotions in Somersetshire and
Lincolnshire, for which many were Executed; then in Cornwall and Devonshire,
where above 4000 were slain and taken Prisoners by John Lord Russel, Lord
Privy Seal: then they Rebelled in Norfolk and Suffolk; against whom the Earl of
Warwick advanced with an Army, and slew above 5000. About the same time there
was a great Rising in the North and East-Ridings of Yorkshire, but suppressed
by the Lord President. All these Insurrections were owned to be on the behalf
of their R^^^gion, and fomented and abetted by Popish Priests, of whom diverse
were taken amongst the Rebels, and deservedly punished.

SECT. 3.
To set forth all the Popish Plots, Designs, and Conspiracies against the Life
and Crown of Queen Elizabeth of glorious memory, it would be necessary to
Transcribe a great part of the History of her Illustrious Reign; and therefore
we shall take notice (...) of some of the most remarkable occurrences of that
kind, and the true Principles upon, and by which they were promoted.

1. As to the Original of Recusancy, and occasions which rendered the Law
against Papists absolutely necessary, it must be remembered, that from the First
to the Eleventh year of the Reign of that Queen, Papists generally repaired to
our Churches; see the proceedings against the Powder-Traitors. p. 109. I my
self, says Sir Edward Coke, have seen Cornwallis, Beddingfield, and others,
(notorious and zealous Papists) at Church, making no doubt of Conscience to
join with us in Prayer. But about the year 1569, Pope Pius the Fifth was no
sooner seated in the Pontificial Chair, but he began practice to justle her out
of her Royal Throne: to this purpose he employed one Bidolph a Florentine to
raise a Faction here, and afterward sent over Doctor Nicholas Morton to
promote it; engaged the Spaniard to assist the Conspirators; and Chapinus
Vitellius came privately over on other pretenses, to observe the success, and
head the Spanish Troops when they should arrive. Pursuant to these Counsels,
the Earls of Northumberland and Westmoreland, with 4000 Foot and 600 Horse,
appear in open Rebellion, and declare for the Restitution of the Roman
Religion; but were soon put to slight; and Sanders, de Schismate Angl. tells us
the reason, viz. For that the rest of the Catholics, because the Pope had not
yet publicly denounced sentence of Excommunication against the Queen, so as
they did not seem fairly absolved from her Obedience, declined to join with
them; by which means they were easily chased by the Queens Forces into
Scotland, where afterward, Northumberland being taken, was brought back to
York, and there, faith he, happily ended his days by a glorious Martyrdom. So
usual a thing it is, with these Popish Doctors, first to excite people to the
blackest Treasons, and then guild over the deserved punishments which they
suffer for the same, with that specious Title. His crafty Holiness was not
insensible of the reason of this miscarriage; and therefore, to prevent the
like failure, and the better to encourage all his Catholic Vassals to join in
such pious Rebellion against the Queen, he early the next Spring sends forth
his Roaring Bull, or Sentence of Anathema; wherein he first magnifies his own
Office and Authority in these Rhodomontado's: He that Reigns on high, to whom
is given all power in Heaven and Earth, has committed the One, Holy Catholic
and Apostolic Church, (out of which there is no Salvation) to One alone on
Earth, viz. to the Prince of the Apostles, Peter, and to Peter's Successor the
Bishop of Rome, to be governed in plenitude of power, etc. Sanders 3. de
Schism. Angl. p. 368. Then having railed a while most Apostolically, and called
that incomparable Princess Flagitiorum serva, the slave of wickedness and
villainies, he proceeds to Curse her in these words: Therefore supported with
his Authority who was pleased to place us (though unable for so great a
burden) in this Supreme Throne of Justice, out of the plenitude of Our
Apostolic power, We do declare the aforesaid Elizabeth, (being an Heretic and
favourer of Heretics) and all her Adherents, to have incurred the Sentence of
Anathema, and to be cut off from the unity of Christ's Body; and by the
Authority of these Presents, We do deprive the said Elizabeth of her pretended
Right to the Kingdom, and of all Dominion, Dignity, and Privilege whatsoever:
And We do Absolve all the Nobles, Subjects and People of the said Kingdoms, and
all others who have in any sort sworn unto her, from such Oath or Oaths; and
all manner of Duty, Fidelity, and Obedience; and do forbid and command them,
and every of them, that they presume not to obey her, (...) her Commands and
Laws: those that shall do otherwise, to be liable to the some Curse. Id. Ibid.
This Bull toward the end of May 1570. was brought over, and fixed on the Gates
of the Bishop of Londons Palace, by one John Felton; and Copies of the same
sent to the aforesaid Bidolph, to be dispersed throughout England. Then, and
not till then it was, that those inclinable to the Romish Superstitions, did
presently refrain our Churches, would no longer hear the established Divine
Service, nor have any more Society with us in Prayer; so that Reeusancy (so
called from their refusing to come to Church, which as the word was scarce
known till this time, so was it not specially or particularly punished by any
Law, till afterward in the Twenty third year of the Queen) was not in them at
first, nor can be now, for Religion, but for acknowledging of, and stickling
for the Popes usurping power. They absent themselves from our Churches, not
because there is any thing there transacted in it self unlawful, or prohibited
by the Word of God, for then they ought always to have kept away, but because
the Pope, (in opposition to the Law of God, enjoining both Obedience to our
Governors, and Charity and Brotherly Communion amongst each other) has
forbidden them so to do: and this unrighteous siding with the Pope, against
their lawful Sovereign, has been the main foundation of all their Treasonable
and Rebellious practices, that have ensued from thence to this very day

2. Soon after this Anathema, Bidolph by the Popes Order having distributed
amongst the Confederates, one hundred and fifty thousand Crowns, (as we are
informed by Catena, who wrote that Popes Life, and was Secretary to his Nephew
Cardina^ Alexandrino) returned to give his Holiness an account how far all
things were ready, and by him is sent away to engage the King of Spain;
offering, if need should be, to expose all the Treasures of the Apostolic See,
and even pawn the Chalices Crucifixes, and Sacred Vestments, to carry on so
holy an Enterprise. But whilst Spain was preparing for the Invasion, it pleased
God to discover the whole Plot, by a Messengers being intercepted with Letters
to the Queen of Scots, the Spanish Ambassador, the Duke of Norfolk, (who was
drawn into the Conspiracy by some underhand promises, or hopes of Marrying the
said Scottish Queen) and others, whereby all their Project was blasted, Norfolk
seized, Tried, found guilty, and some time after Beheaded.

Pope Pius Quintus, (whom Queen Elizabeth was wont to call Impius intus) died
about the year 1572. Gregory the Thirteenth succeeded him, as in his Popedom,
so in his endeavors to disturb Englands Tranquillity; which he was first for
giving away to Don John of Austria, base Brother to the King of Spain, and by
him substituted Governor of the Low Countries; but he being snatched away by
Death, another intrigue is carried on between the Pope and that King himself,
the one providing Men, the other Money: England and Ireland are both to be
Invaded at once, the latter by Forces under the Command of Tho. Stukeley an
English Fugitive, whom the Pope had made Marquess, Earl, Viscount, and Baron,
(so prodigal he was of his Honors) of several eminent places in that Kingdom.
But Stukely in his Voyage from Italy, diverting to assist Sebastian King of
Portugal in his Expedition in Africa against the Moors, was with most of his
men slain, in that memorable Battle, where Three Kings were cut off in one day,
Anno 1578.

But notwithstanding this discouragement, next year one James Fitz-Morice was
sent into Ireland, with some Troops from Spain; and from the Pope, our
late-cited Author Saunders, in the quality of his Legate, and with a
Consecrated Banner; which were reinforced in the year 1580. with 700 Italian
and Spanish Soldiers, under one San Joseph, who likewise brought some Money
and Arms for 5000 Irish; on whom, the better to encourage them in Rebellion,
his Holiness bestowed his Apostolical Benediction, and sent them a Bull,
reciting, That whereas he had of late years by his Letters, exhorted them to
the recovery of their Liberty, and Defense of it against the Heretics, etc.
and that they might more cheerfully do it, had granted to all such as should be
any ways assisting therein, a plenary Pardon and Forgiveness of all their sins:
He now furthermore grants to all such, whom he exhorts, requires, and urges in
the Lord, to assist against the said Heretics, the same plenary Indulgence and
Remission of their sins, which those who fight against Turks and Infidels do
obtain. [Vide Histor. Cathol. Hibern.] Though how much greater or more
effectual that is, or can be, than a plenary Pardon of all sins, which he had
promised them before, we do not readily apprehend; but it seems his
Infallibility-ship did imagine that expression would be more taking amongst the
Irish: nor did he only egg them on with such fair words, but promised a
Crusado, and to bestow, rather then fail, a Million of Crowns in the
Expedition: but still all was blasted; for these Italians with their Irish
Confederates, and whole Party, were happily routed by the Queens Troops, at the
very instant when diverse Ships were at Sea to bring them more Forces and
Assistance; and Sanders the Popes Legate miserably perished for hunger in the
Woods, and (as some say) distracted and raving mad, upon the ill success of
this hopeful Rebellion.

SECT. 4.
Besides these open Secular Forces of Spain and Rome, the Pope about this time
employed another Spiritual sort of Militia to promote his designs, viz. the
Seminaries, who now began to swarm in great numbers, thereby laying then such a
groundwork for future disturbances, not only to Queen Elizabeth, but even to
all her Successors, and to this Nation, and the Protestant Religion in
general, that hitherto it has wrought, and is still working by undermining
restless Policies and Projects; the dangerous effects whereof we feel at this
day, in this late discovered Plot, and so are like to continue, to all
successive Generations, as long as the Seminaries and Jesuitism remain in the
World, whose Trade and Business it is, to encourage themselves and others in
Mischiefs; or, (in the phrase of the Psalmist) To commune amongst themselves,
how they may privily lay snares. The first of these Nests of Treason, or
Randesvouzes of Rebellion, was erected at Doway, in the year 1568. the English
Fugitive Priests assembling themselves there by the design of William Allen,
(the most learned amongst them) and living together in a common Colledge-like
Discipline, the Pope allowing them an Annual Pension. Soon after, another like
Seminary was established at Rheims, by the bloody Guises, the Queen of Scots
Kinsmen; a third at Rome by Pope Gregory the Thirteenth; and afterward a
fourth at Valledolid in Spain. That there might never want a successive
Generation of men of corrupt minds, heady, highminded, despisers of Dominion,
Idolatrous and Traitorous Priests, to poison England with their false Doctrines
and pernicious Principles.

And because the beforementioned Bull of Pius the Fifth had not yet
sufficiently produced its intended effects, even with many Papists themselves,
who seeing the Neighbor Popish Princes and States not to forbear their wonted
Negotiations with the Queen, continued still in their Obedience to her, and
were displeased at the said Bull, as a mischievous Snare, putting them upon
this miserable Dilemma, either to be Executed for Treason against the Queen if
they did resist, or be accursed by their Holy Father if they did obey her;
therefore, for their satisfaction, and to extricate them out of that Labyrinth
wherein they were thus involved, an Expedient was found out, and afterward
reinforced by Pope Gregory the Thirteenth, viz. A Decree, or Explanation, That
the Bull aforesaid should always oblige Elizabeth and the Heretics, but not
the Catholics, Rebus sic stantibus, whilst affairs remained in that posture,
but that they might render their outward obedience to her, Ad redimendam
vexationem, and ad ostendendam externam obedientiam, donec publica Bullae
Execretio fieri possit: To prevent their being troubled, for so long only,
until they might get into strength sufficient to put the said Bull publicly
into execution. See Thuan. l. 74. and Camden, An. 1580.

And to the end that the same might in due time be effectually executed,
Missions are daily made of the beforementioned Seminarists, in disguised
Habits, into England, to dispose Popish Subjects to Rebellion, and prepare a
Party to join the Spaniard at his designed Invasion: and these Emissaries were
to deal with people in their secret Confessions, and Absolve them particularly
in private, from their Allegiance and Obedience to the Queen, so clandestinely,
that one should not know of the others Engagements, which that Bull had done
too openly and in general. The Doctrines spread, and every where inculcated by
these Agents in those days, are specified by that judicious pair of Historians,
the Learned Camden, in Anno 1581. and the noble Thuanus, l. 74. to be as
follow, viz. That all Princes not professing the Roman Catholic Faith, have
lost their Title and Royal Authority; and when once Excommunicated, are not to
be obeyed, but ejected out of their Kingdoms; which to do, was a work of Duty
and Merit. That the Clergy were exempt from the Jurisdiction of Secular
Princes, not bound by their Laws. That the Pope had the chief and full Power
and Authority over all throughout the World, even in Civil matters, in order
unto Spirituals, and as far as might be conducive to the good of the Church.
That the Magistracy of England was unlawful, and consequently Null. And that
whatever since the Bull of Pius the Fifth published, had by the Queens
Authority been transacted, was by the Law of God to be reputed altogether void,
etc. When these pernicious Principles, industriously sown and cultivated, had
taken Root in prejudiced minds, there soon followed rank fruits of Treason and
Rebellion, in desperate Attempts and Resolutions to Kill the Queen. As first by
Somervil, in the year 1583. who being Condemned with Hall a Priest, and others
his Accomplices by him detected, was three days after found strangled in the
Prison; for fear, as was rationally conjectured, le^t he should have discovered
more of the gang. Then William Parry, a Doctor of Law, undertook it the next
year, encouraged by Palmius a Jesuit, Ragazonius the Popes Nuncio in France,
Cardinal Como, and the Pope himself; who sent him his Blessing and Pardon of
all his Sins, as appears in Thuanus, lib. 79. All which the said Parry
confessed, producing the Letter from the Pope, written by Cardinal Como, and
was for such his Traitorous Attempt Executed in March, 158^.

Soon after, John Savage, being persuaded by several Priests that it was
meritorious to cut off Excommunicated Princes, and Martyrdom to die in such an
Adventure, made a Vow to Assassinate the Queen. And anno 1586, (as if every
year must be guilty of a new bloody Treason) Mr. Anthony Babington, a very
personable young Gentleman, and well-descended, espouses the like Resolve on
the same Principles, re-enforc'd with other Collateral hopes, if he escaped the
danger, suggested by Father Ballard a Jesuit; who not only urged the
lawfulness and merit of the Action, and a Crown of Glory, and everlasting Fame
thereby to be acquired; but also not obscurely insinuated, that he might
thereby render himself not unworthy a Royal Match with the Queen of Scots, by
so advantageous a piece of service: A most tempting Charm to a youthful
ambitious mind. Which business the same Thuanus (a Catholic Author of
unquestionable Veracity) tells us, was transacted with Mendoza the Spanish
Ambassador, promising to second it with a Foreign Army; for obtaining which,
Paget, a Gentleman of an Honorable Family, was sent on a Negotiation into
Spain; whereby all things being provided, both at home and abroad, St.
Bartholomews day, as luckily ominous for the succesful Massacre at Paris, was
agreed upon for giving the fatal blow; and a Project framed of making an
Association, under pretense of fear of the Puritans, who were to bear the odiu^
of the Murder: but before that Festival, the Conspiracy had taken Air, and
both Ballard, Babington, and others, being apprehended, on their own
Confessions were Convicted, and Executed on the Twentieth of September: yet so
eagerly were they set upon designs of Blood, that but in January following,
L'Aubaspinaeus the French Lieger Ambassador here, a person entirely devoted to
the Guistan Faction, did by his Secretary tempt William Stafford, a Gentleman
likewise of a Noble Family, with mighty promises, to undertake the same Murder;
but he declining so horrid a villainy himself, recommended one Moody as a fit
instrument, who in Consultation about the manner of doing it, proposed the
laying a Bag of Gunpowder under the Queens Bedchamber, and secretly to give
fire to it: (whence we may observe, that the famous Fifth of November was not
the first Popish Treason of that kind;) but this being divulged by Stafford,
the said Ambassadors Secretary, endeavoring to fly home to France, was taken,
and upon strict examination confessed the whole Intrigue; the indulgent
Protection of Heaven still miraculously bringing to light all their dark and
cruel Machinations against the Life of this Pious and unparalled Princess.

SECT. 5.
The common excuse which Papists make for all the beforementioned Treasons
against Queen Elizabeth, is, to pretend her Illegitimate; and that what they
did, was to advance the juster Title of Mary Queen of Scots, great Grandmother
to our present Sovereign. Thus in their Apology published soon after their
Burning of London, speaking of these pranks, they say: It was a question harder
than that of York and Lancaster, who had most right, Queen Elizabeth or Mary
Stuart: for since the whole Kingdom had Crowned and sworn Allegiance to Queen
Mary, they had owned her Lagitimate Daughter to Henry the Eighth; and therefore
it was thought necessarily to follow by many, That if Mary was the true Child,
Elizabeth was the Natural; which must then give way to the thrice-Noble Queen
of Scots. And a little after, 'Twas for the Royal House of Scotland that we
suffered in those days, and it is for the same Illustrious Family we are ready
to hazard all, etc. But this is a most false, though subtle insinuating
pretense; and were not impudence a necessary virtue in any, that undertake to
be Advocates for Treason, we should wonder with what face they can make this
Allegation. For first, The Archbishop of York though a Papist, in his Speech at
the publishing Queen Mary's Death, declared, That no man could doubt of the
justness of the Lady Elizabeth's Title to succeed. Secondly, The whole Kingdom
received and owned her more freely and generally than ever they did Queen Mary.
Thirdly, Foreign Princes and States owned her, the greatest Monarchs in Europe
offering Marriage to her, in certain expectation of gaining the Crown by her;
as Philip the Second of Spain, and Henry the Second of France, respectively for
themselves; and the Emperor Maximilian, for his Brother Charles. Fourthly, the
Queen of Scots herself did acknowledge her, and claimed nothing more than to be
Heir to her; and so did King James that was her Successor. The first that ever
questioned her Title, was Pope Paul the Fourth, who would not acknowledge her,
nor hear Sir Edward Kerne her Ambassador, for several causes; of which the
prime was, because (forsooth) The Kingdom of England is a Fee of the Papacy,
and it was audaciously done of her to assume it without his leave: [See the
History of the Council of Trent, l. 5.] And then in the next place, he started
her being Illegitimate, which indeed only he had reason to do; for if her
Fathers Marriage were good, the Popes power of Dispensation (one of the fairest
flowers in the Triple Crown) must be naught. Fifthly, yet again, after all
this, his Successor Pope Pius the Fourth, in his Letter by Parpaglia, dated
the fifth of May 1560, did own her, and would have done any thing for her, so
she would but have owned him; which she refusing, the next Pope, merely for the
same, Anathematized and Deposed her, as you have heard; there not being the
least mention in that Bull of Bastardy, but only for Heresy, that is, for
being a Protestant, and refusing to truckle to the Romish See. Lastly, the
Roman Catholics of England in general, in a large Petition to Queen Elizabeth,
in the Twenty seventh year of her Reign, by them afterward published in Print,
in a Book with this Jesuitical Title: Protestants Plea and Petition for Priests
and Papists, p. 39. do say and swear the words following: We do protest before
the living God, that all and every Priest or Priests, who have at any time
conversed with us, have recognized your Majesty their undoubted and lawful
Queen, Tam de Jure quam de Facto, as well in Right as Fact.

Wherefore it is evident, that their Conspiracies against her were not for any
defect in her Title, but on the score of her Religion. And no less plain, that
their boasted services for the Queen of Scots, were only bottomed on
self-interest, not affection to her Person; and indeed, so far from being of
any advantage to her, that they caused the untimely ruin of that gallant
Princess. Illegitimacy, and the right of the Queen of Scots, was so little
regarded at Rome, that his Holiness Pope Gregory the Thirteenth, having a
Bastard of his own, James Buoncompagno, to provide for, and another of the
Emperors, viz. Don John; to the first he gave the Kingdom of Ireland, and
equipped Stukely, as aforefaid, to win it for him: to the last he gave the
Kingdom of England, and gave him leave to win it for himself; and what then
would have become of the Title of the Queen of Scots? They indeed made the
House of Scotland their Cloak, and covered their Treasons, for some time, with
pretenses of gaining that Queens Liberty, and advancing her Interest: but being
at last out of hopes of restoring their Religion by her, or her Son, (whom they
already perceived not to be for their turn) began to set up a feigned Title for
the King of Spain, and employed one of their Society into England, (as is
discovered by Pasquier a French Author) to draw off the Gentry from fiding with
her, and to close with the Spaniard; and closely endeavored to precipitate her
into those fatal Counsels which hastened her end: for she being discovered to be
privy to most of the former Conspiracies, and found guilty of that of
Babington, was thereupon Condemned. And afterward, a fresh provocation being
given by the said Attempt of Moody, which was found to have been designed on
the same pretense, Queen Elizabeth by the repeated importunities of the
Parliament, (who had Ratified the Judgment) was over-perswaded to sign the
Warrant for Execution; whereupon, she was Beheaded the eighth of February
following. The Jesuits, that none of her Kindred might give her any assistance,
haing at the same time engaged the G^ises in new Enterprises against the King
of Navar and Prince of Conde. And their juggling Treachery toward her is
abundantly apparent from the manner of the Discovery of what she was Condemned
for; the same being done by one Gilbert Gifford a Priest, sent into England to
put Savage in mind of his Vow to Assassinate Queen Elizabeth, and to be a
Messenger between the Queen of Scots and the Conspirators; who presently goes
and offers his service to Walsingham, Secretary of State, to discover all their
Transactions; so that by his perfidious practice, their Letters were opened,
transcribed, neatly sealed up, and returned to the said Gifford, who then
conveyed them to the Queen of Scots, or who else they were directed unto. And
this Discovery by him made, must be supposed to be done out of pure love
(forsooth) to his Queen and Country; although but a little before, he was one
of those very men, who instigated Savage to his Vow to Murder her. The whole
conduct whereof, shows it to be a prosecution of their late-hatcht Spanish
Design, by removing the true Heir apparent, and excluding the Scottish Race, to
make way for the forged Title which they had started for some of the Austrian
Family.

Which is farther demonstrated by their subsequent carriage; for after her
Death, whatever zeal they before pretended to her Title and Family, there were
not the least effects, thereof showed to her Son King James, to whom her Right
devolved; but rather they used all Arts to put him by the Succession, as we
shall show in the next Chapter.

In the mean time we must observe, that still their Plots against Queen
Elizabeth went on abroad, by the Pope and King of Spain, in Warlick
preparations both for Land and Sea-service; and at home by the Jesuits and
other Emissaries, in providing for their reception. To amuse the English
Council, they publish a Book, wherein their Brethren are very gravely
admonished, not to attempt any thing against their Prince, but only to make
use of the old Christian Weapons, Prayers and Tears, humble petitions, and
patient sufferings, etc. And a Treaty of Peace desired and kept on foot by the
Duke of Parma, by the King of Spains order, till in the memorable year 88, all
things being completed for execution; the Pope begins the Invasion with a
Bull, by which, once again, The Queen is Cursed and proscribed, her Royalty and
Right to the Kingdoms of England and Ireland taken away; her Subjects not only
absolved from their Oaths and Allegiance to her, but threatened under danger of
the wrath of God, not to assist her in any wise, but to use all their power to
bring her to wort by punishment. And therefore commands all Inhabitants of
these Realms to join with the Spaniards, and be obedient to the Duke of Parma
their General. And finally, out of the Treasury of the Church committed to his
trust, draws out his liberality, and grants a full Pardon of all their sins, to
all those that should engage in this Expedition: Which was to be look upon as
an Apostolic Mission against the Incorrigible Heretics, to reduce them to the
Obedience of the Church, and execute his Holinesses, Sentence of
Excommunication against that cursed Anathematized Woman. After which, it was
privately agreed between them, That King Philip should hold these Kingdoms of
the Pope in Fee, as of the Holy See, with the Title of Defender of the Faith.
For the accomplishing this work, the Spaniard had Equipped the greatest Navy
that ever before that time swam upon the Sea: for though there have been Fleets
far more numerous, yet for Bulk and Building of the Ships, with the Furniture
of great Ordnance and Provisions, never the like; consisting, in all, of 130
Vessels, (says the Lord Ba^on in his Considerations touching a War with Spain,
p. 41.) whereof seventy two mighty Galiasses and Gallions, like floating
Castles. But Cicarella in vita Sexti V^reckons them 150 Ships of vast burden,
besides an infinite number (says he) of small Vessels. Amongst these; to let
the world know it was an Holy War, as the Pope had bestowed his Benediction on
the whole Fleet, so Twelve of the largest Ships were called by the Names of the
Twelve Apostles. This Invincible Armado, (for so the Spanish Pride had
Entitled it) was manned with Thirty Thousand Soldiers and Mariners, and
furnished with all sorts of Provision for six Months. And whilst this should (as
they did not doubt) ride Master of the Seas, they had a vast Army (Fifty
Thousand veterane Soldiers says Bucon) in Flanders, under the Duke of Parma,
ready to be Transported in Flat-bottom'd Boats into England, under the wing and
protection of that great Navy.

But we are assured by Authority Divine, That the Curse causeless shall not
come; the Popes Anatheina, and Spains mighty Armade, proved equally ineffectual
and contemptible. Though his Pseudo-Holiness had made Philip a grant of
England, he was not able to give him Livery and Seizin thereof. His boasted
Navy by a few of the Queens Ships is baffled, battered, and dispersed, and
almost totally ruined; God himself (whose Cause indeed it was) fighting against
them by Fire and Seas, and Winds, and Rocks, and Tempests, scattering and
destroying most of them: for, Offenso Creatore offenditur omnis Creatura: The
Creator being offended (as he cannot but be at such unjust, ambitious, and
cruel Attempts) every Creature is ready Armed to revenge his Quarrel. In which
respect, he is ^^^^ed The Lord of (...), so that the saying of Holy Scripture
was here verified, They came forth against us one way, and fled before us seven
ways, being chased by the English Fleer, till they were forced to give them
over for lack of Powder. And having not so much as fired a Cottage of ours at
land, nor taken a Cock-b^^^ of ours at Sea, wandered through the Wilderness of
the North-Seas, about all Britain, the Oreades, and Ireland, grievously
afflicted with all kind of Disasters and Miseries; scarce Forty ships returning
to their own Harbors, of all that prodigious Fleet, which had been at least
five whole years in preparing, through Spain, Italy, Sicily, Flanders, etc. and
had cost, as Thuanus heard the Spanish Ambassador tell the French King, above
Twelve Millions of Growns. A loss so fatal to the Spanish Monarchy, that some
think it languishes under ill-Influences thereof to this very day; and amongst
the prime causes of its declension since, may reckon that disaster.

SECT. 6.
Yet had not this signal Providence any Impression on Popish Councils, but
still they go on in their cruel designs, with an indefatigable, as well as
implacable and most impious malice; only finding by this Enterprise the
difficulty of Invading England by open Force, waved the prosecution thereof,
and applied themselves to close and insidious Arts, and pitiful, base,
unworthy, and unmanly practices, to trouble the Estate, and take away the Life
of this Triumphant Queen. Thus in 1593, Hesket endeavors to persuade the Earl
of Darby to assume the Crown, as descended from Mary Daughter of Henry the
Seventh, promising large assistance of Men and Money from the Spaniard; and
withal, threatening him with sudden destruction, if he did not do it, and
conceal the business; which he honestly revealing, was accordingly, it is
thought, not long after taken off by Poison, according to their Menaces.

About the same time diverse persons were suborned and sent into this Realm,
some English, some Irish, corrupted by Money and Promises, and Resolved and
Conjured by Priests in Confession to Murder the Queen; of whom several were
taken, as Patrick Cullen an Irish Fencer, Richard Williams, and Edmond York;
which two last were engaged by Holt a Jesuit, by Oath upon the Sacrament to
perform it, and he himself kissing the Consecrated Host, swore, That as soon as
she was dispatched, they should be paid Forty thousand Crowns. But amongst all
these Execrable undertakings, they relied most upon Doctor Lopez, sworn
Physician of her Majesty's Household, who was practiced with by one Andrada, on
the behalf of the King of Spain to Poison her, for which he was to have Fifty
thousand Crowns; but the Letters from Count de Fuentes, and Secretary Juara,
assuring the payment of the Money, being fortunately intercepted, The great
service whereby should arise an universal benefit to the whole world, (for so
those Letters expressed this intended Hellish Murder) was prevented, and Lopez
(having not so good luck as some of his Quality since) was found guilty, and
hanged at Tyburn. As was likewise afterward, in the year 1598, one Edward
Squire, suborned to poison her by Walpoole and other Jesuits at Vallodolid,
encouraged thereunto by those Fathers, on the score of Merit, and promises of
Eternal Salvation.

Thus we see, that for the last three and thirty years of her Reign, this good
Queen was never free from one kind of Treason and Conspiracy or other; and in
all of them, the Pope and Jesuits, or some Priests or others of the Popish
Party, evermore principally concerned as the Instruments; and the advancing the
Roman Catholic Religion, always the end of their wicked undertakings. But
neither the Popes Curses, nor the Spanish Arms, nor the Italian Arts could
prevail; for this glorious Princess, victorious over all her Foreign and
Domestic Enemies, having outlived Philip of Spain her bitter Antagonist, Four
French Kings; and Eight Popes, and having in spite of all the powers of Hell,
the Plots of Rome, and wicked Machinations of men of most Traitorous,
Turbulent, and Ancichristian Spirits, defended the Purity of Religion at home,
and succored oppressed Protestants abroad, after an Illustrious Reign of Forty
four years complete, most happy in the love of her Subjects, and terrible to
her Enemies, laden with Honors and the Applauses of good men, in peace and a
good old Age, exchanged this Temporal for an Eternal unmolestable Crown.

CHAP. III.
Of Popish Treasons against King James.

SECT. 1.
AS for Popish Loyalty to King James, we may consider it, either before his
coming to the English Crown, or afterward.

1. Whilst yet he was in Scotland, and Queen Elizabeth living, besides what has
been already said, we may observe, That the Papists having by various
Instruments sounded his inclinations, and finding his Resolution firm to
maintain the Protestant Religion, they (not regarding his undoubted right, nor
at all respecting him for the merits of his Incomparable Mother, whom their
violent Councels had been instrumental to precipitate to Ruin as aforesaid)
consult and use all Arts to exclude him from the Succession. To this purpose,
Father Parsons, Cardinal Allen, and others, contrive a mischievous Book, under
the counterfeit Name of Doleman: wherein diverse Titles are started, and it is
laid down as a Fundamental Maxim, That none but a Roman Catholic, how near
soever in Blood, ought to be admitted King; and therefore therein, by forged
devices, the Title of the Infanta Isabella of Spain, is preferred before the
indubitable Right of the said King James; and all the English in the Spanish
Seminaries, were compelled to Swear to maintain the same. And Tho. Winter, and
Tesmond a Jesuit, were sent over, Anno 1601. into Spain, to manage this Design
in that Court, by the Assistance of Father Croswel, Legier-Jesuit there.

2. In Farther pursuance of this, Pope Clement the Eighth sent privately over
to Father Garnet, the then Pro^incial of the Jesuits, two Bulls, one to the
^aiety, directed to the Nobles and Gentlemen of England that were Catholics;
the other to his Beloved Sons the Archpriest, and the rest of the English
Catholic Clergy^: the effect of both was, That whoever after the death of
Queen Elizabeth whether by course of nature, or otherwise, should claim the
Crown of England, though never so directly and nearly interessed therein, by
Descent and Blood Royal, yet unless he were such an one, as would not only
Tolerate the Catholic [meaning Romish] Religion, but would likewise take an
Oath to promote it with all (...) might and endeavors, they should not admit
or receive him for their King, but oppose his Entry and Claim with all their
power. Which in plain English was merely designed, and directly tended to
obstruct King James, (though not particularly named) and Exclude him and his
Family from the Crown. And was not this a sufficient taste of the Popes
goodwill, a notable earnest of the Papists Loyalty to him? It Is true, when the
Conspirators saw him so unanimously Proclaimed, the State settled, and a Peace
with Spain so far advanced, that that generous Monarch began to refuse them the
expected Assistances; then, and not till then, Garnet, as himself alleged,
burnt the said Bulls, and quitted the Project; but why? only because they
despaired of effecting it.

3. The more to prepossess the minds of the English against the said King
James, that they might keep him out; or at least that themselves might have
some color for their future intended Conspiracies, if he should come in,
Watson a Priest, (having some time heretofore got access once or twice to His
Majesty at Edinburgh) did, with the Arch-Traitor Piercy, and others of the
Popish Crew, most falsely devise and divulge a scandalous Report, as if His
Majesty had promised, that whenever he should come to the Crown of England, He
would Establish, or at least Tolerate the Popish Religion. Than which, nothing
was ever more remote from, or contrary to his Royal Thoughts. And Watson
himself, but two days before his death, confessed it to be a Lie of their own
forging, spread abroad merely that they might kill two Birds with one stone,
viz. bring an odium upon him from the Protestants for making such a promise,
and the like from the Papists on pretense of breaking it. In which latter
respect it took effect, though not in the former; for Sir Everard Digby at his
death, and other Gunpowder Traitors made use thereof; alleging, that they
were exasperated to that horrid Attempt, because the King had not kept his
promise with Catholics.

SECT. 2.
These were the good Officer of the Pope, these the dutiful respects of the
Priests and Papists paid to King James, before he was actually Estated in the
English Throne. Whence we may judge, how little welcome they were like to
afford him at his Entry; and of this, the worthy Author of a Treatise
published in the beginning of King James's Reign, (before the
Gun-powder-Treason) Entitled, -- A Consideration of the Papists Supplication,
gives us a notable instance from his own Experience and Observation, in these
words, p. 3. My self can testify, that here in Oxford, at what time His
Majesty was proclaimed King of England, etc. a man might easily have traced and
culled out every Papist within this City, by his extraordinary howling and
sobbing for grief, that their hopes were frustrated, and their expectation all
in vain; some of the simpler sort crying out in express terms, Alas! alas! How
shall the poor Catholics do now! we are all undone! we are undone! whereas all
the rest of His Majesty's Liege (and Loyal) Subjects, by manifold Tokens,
declared their extraordinary rejoicing.

Their demeanor afterward, was suitable to these beginnings; for soon after
his arrival at London, the said Watson and Clark, two Secular Italianated
Priests, wheadled in several of the Nobility and Gentry, as the Lords Cobbam
and Gray, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Sir Griffin Markham, George Brook, and others,
into a dangerous Conspiracy, to have surprised the Kings Person, and his Son
Prince Henry, and to keep them Prisoners in the Tower or Dover Castle, till by
Duress they had obtained their ends, viz. A Toleration of Religion, and some
other Projects; and then having obtained their Pardons, they were to share
amongst them the grand Offices of the Realm, (just as their Successors,
Whitebread, Coleman, etc. had lately designed) viz. Watson was to be Lord
Chancelour, the Lord Gray Earl Marshal of England, George Brook Lord
Treasurer, Sir Griffin Markham Secretary of State etc. But though several were
found guilty, only Watson, Clark, and Brook were then Executed, and Sir
Walter Rawleigh on the same Conviction many years after. It Is observable, that
Watson, though a Secular Priest, had yet learned the art of Equivocation, as
well as the Jesuits; For he insisted, that this Conspiracy was no Treason
against the King; and being at last put to explain himself, gave this doughty
reason, That a King was no King before he was Anointed, and the Crown solemnly
set on his head: and King James being not yet crowned, therefore they might
lawfully conspire against him, without commitring any Treason.

Amongst other things which Watson Confessed, one was, that he had endeavored
to draw in several of the Society of Jesuits into this Plot, but they declined
it; saying, They had another of their own then on foot, and that they would not
mingle Designs with him, for fear of hindering one the other. [Vide Watsons
Confession.] What such their Design was, though he could not, yet time in few
years after did discover: for in the next place appears that horrid
never-to-be-forgotten Popish Powder Plot, a Treason that as it exceeded all
that had ever been before in the World, so it was believed, it would have
surpassed in its mischievous Design, Extent, and Cruelty, all that teeming Hell
and Rome could have bred at any time afterward, had not this last Internal
Conspiracy, of the same Blo^^y Tribe, against our present Gracious King Charles
the Second, and the Established Religion and Government of England, vut-gone it
in several Circumstances, as may (God willing) be showed in the ensuing
Discovery and History thereof.

This detestable Treason is generally esteemed the Contrivance of Catesby, and
of no antienter Original, than their despair of Assistance, upon their last
Negotiation with Spain; but that the same was of longer standing, and proceeded
from other heads, and designed by the Jesuits even in the Queens days, but on
further consideration of her Age, (unlikely by course of nature to trouble them
long) defer^ed till the arrival of King James, is by a most rational
probability made appear, as well by Watsons said words, and the odd hints
thereof before given by Delrio the Jesuit, as other circumstances, mentioned in
a solid and ingenious Treatise, Entitled, A Discourse concerning the Original
of the Powder Plot, published 1674. which are sufficient to satisfy any
impartial Reader in that point; however, we shall not here insist thereupon,
nor stand to give any long Account of the horrid nature, close progress, and
happy Discovery of that Hellish Conspiracy, the same being generally well known
from our common Historians, but especially by that Authentic Narrative,
Entitled, The Gunpowder Treason, with a Discourse of the manner of its
Discovery, lately Reprinted, with an excellent Preface, by the Right Reverend
(and of the Protestant Religion most highly deserving) Father in God, Thomas
Lord Bishop of Lincoln; to which most useful and satisfactory Discourse, we
refer the Reader. Only shall note here, that whereas Papists of late years
have endeavored to whiffle off that cursed Attempt, as a contrivance of
Secretary Cecils, or some other Politicians, that had, to make the Romanists
odious, cunningly drawn in only a few desperado's; and that but a very small
number of the Romish Party, and those inconsiderable, were engaged therein; and
so it ought not to be charged on their Church in general.

As to the first, the same is a most false and groundless Evasion, coined some
scores of years after the thing Transacted; none of those that suffered for it,
alleging or suspecting one syllable, either at their Trials or Deaths, of
their being so wheadled into the Conspiracy; who yet were most like to know
how, and by whom they were (if at all they had been) so drawn in, whom
undoubtedly they would have discovered. Besides, supposing it to be Truth, yet
their guilt was never the less, for they acted on Popish Principles, proprio
motu, and with a Traitorous Resolution to accomplish the Destruction of King,
Parliament, and Kingdom.

As to the second, neither was the number even of those that after all their
Oaths of Secrecy, and close contrivances were discovered, so small, nor their
Qualities so inconsiderable, as is now impudently suggested: for first, for
Religious men there were many actually concerned in it, and persons of the
greatest account, three or four of them especially being Legiers and
Statesmen; as Henry Garnet, the Superior or Provincial of the Jesuits, [the
same place that Father Whitebread lately had, who succeeded him as therein, so
in his bloody Treasonable Attempts, and deserved punishment] Father Creswel
Legier-Jesuite in Spain, Father Baldwin Legler in Flanders, and the notorious
Father Parsons at Rome. These are known to have dealt in the matter, and it is
most probable were the first Contrivers, Designers, and Directors of the whole
Plot, though they would not be seen in it, lest it might bring a scandal on
their Order if it should miscarry, and they be discovered; and therefore Laymen
must be put upon doing the Drudgery, (or rather Butchery) whilst the wily
Priests stand aloof and give alm. So of late the Benedictines and others gave
their Votes against employing Pickering in the horrid Attempt of Murdering the
King: not that they disliked the thing, but because he waited at the Altar; and
if prevented and found out, it might be the greater disgrace to their Party,
(though they assigned another very bad reason for it.) Thus it is plain, they
study to avoid the discredit, not the villainy; the scandal, not the wickedness.
But besides these Mal-intelligences of an higher Jesuitical Orb, there were
diverse other inferior Instruments, and Cursory Agents of the same Society,
employed in this detestable Treason, as Gerard, Oswald, Tesmond alias Greenway,
Hamond, Hall, and others. Then as for the Lay-Conspirators, they were most of
them Gentlemen of considerable Descent, and excellent parts, though most
perniciously perverted, seduced, and corrupted, by the private instigations of
the said Jesuits: for of those that were first engaged, and actually labored
in the Mine, there were Robert Catesby, and Robert Winter. Esquires, Thomas
Piercy, of the Noble House of Northumberland, Thomas Winter, John Wright,
Christopher Wright, and Guido Fawkes, all Gentlemen, with Thomas Bates Yeoman,
Servant to Squire Catesby, who being somewhat scrupulous and doubting in
Conscience, concerning so barbarous a Design, was resolved and assured of the
lawfulness thereof by Tesmond the Jesuit. Then of those that were acquainted
with it, though not personally laboring in the Mine or Cellar, there were Sir
Everard Digby Knight, Ambrose Rookwood, and Francis Tresham Esquires, John
Grant Gent, and Robert Keys; besides Sir William Stanley, who principally
employed Fawks into Spain, and John Talbot of Grifton, both within misprision
of the Treason, and both of great and Honorable Families. Then Sir Edmand
Baynam was appointed; to carry a Message from Garnet, and acquaint his Holiness
with the said Plot; but not forsooth as Pope, but as he was a Temporal Prince.
This Baynam was a man grievously debauched, and used to call himself, The
Prince of the Damned Grew; a person fit for such an Errand, to be sent
Ambassador between the Pope and tho Devil. There was likewise an Association to
be made of Foreign Princes of the Popish Religion, by a Solemn Oath, like that
of the holy League in France, to have assured the business. These are the very
words in the Letters of Sir Everard Digby, (Executed for this Treason) which
Papers were never discovered till September, 1675. and are since Printed as an
Appendix to the Reprinted Discovery and Narrative of the said Gunpowder Plot,
under an Authentic Testimonial.

Thus evident it is, and not to be denied, but by an effronted ^awling
Impudence, that the same was in effect a general Conspiracy of the Papists,
actually carried on by a considerable number, and which would have been
approved by the rest had it succeeded. And though its happy Discovery, and the
deserved odium thereby cast upon their Party, disabled and hindered them from
making any other public Attempt of that kind here in England, during the rest
of the Reign of King James, (for concerning his death we shall say nothing) yet
it is notorious, that abroad they plied their business vigorously, and gave both
him and the Protestant Religion a considerable Wound, in the Affair of the
Palatinate, unhappily, (to say no worse of so bad (...) matter) lost for want
of timely assistance, to prevent and divert which, we were wheadled with fair
promises, (...) cajoul'd into a tedious mischievous Treaty for a Popish Match
with Spain, which some corrupt Statesmen were so ^^nd of, that, to facilitate
the same, they not only hazarded the Princes Person, in a perilous voyage to
Madrid, but endeavored to grant a Toleration to Papists in England, which,
with a truly Christian Courage, was opposed by Archbishop Abbot, whose worthy
Speech on this occasion, speaks him so sound a Divine, and so rule an
Englishman, that it deserves here to be inserted, either to encourage or
upbraid such as since in like Exigencies have bravely appeared for, or
treacherously betrayed the Protestant Religion, and their Countries Liberty; or
endeavor to destroy both by a kind of refined Popery, and Arbitrary
Government, against both which this good man was so zealous an Advocate.

A SPEECH of his Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury to King James, 1623.
whilst the Prince was in Spain.
May it please it your Majesty!
I Have been too long silent, and I am afraid by my silence I have neglected
the Duty it has pleased God to call me unto, and your Majesty to place me in.
But now I humbly crave leave I may discharge my Conscience toward God, and my
Duty toward your Majesty. And therefore I beseech you to give me leave freely
to deliver my self; and then let your Majesty do with me as you please. Your
Majesty has propounded a Toleration of Religion; I beseech you Sir, take into
consideration what your Act is, and what the consequences may be. By your Act
you labor to set up that most Damnable and Heretical Doctrine of the Church of
Rome, The Whare of Babylon. How hateful will it be to God, and grievous to your
good Subjects, the true professors of the Gospel, that your Majesty, who has
so often disputed, and learnedly written against those wicked Herefies, should
now show your self as a Patron of those Doctrines, which your pen has told the
World, and your Conscience tells your self, are Superstitious, Idolatrous, and
detestable? Add hereunto, Sir, what you have done in sending the Prince into
Spain, without the consent of your Council, the privity or approbation of your
people; a great one as the Son of the flesh, yet a greater as the Son of the
Kingdom; upon whom, next after your Majesty, are their Eyes and Hearts fixed,
and their Welfare depends; and so tenderly is his going apprehended, as,
believe it, Sir, howsoever his return may be safe, yet the drawers of him into
that action, so dangerous to himself, so desperate to the Kingdom, will not
pass unquestioned, unpunished. Besides, this Toleration which you endeavor to
set up by Proclamation, cannot be done without a Parliament, unless your
Majesty will let your Subjects see, that you will take unto your self a liberty
to throw down the Laws of the Land at your pleasure. What dreadful
consequences, Sir, these things may draw after them, I beseech your Majesty to
consider; and above all, lest by this Toleration, and discouentenancing of the
true profession of the Gospel, (wherewith God has blessed us, and under which
this Kingdom has many years flourished) your Majesty do not draw upon the
Kingdom in general, and particularly upon your self, Gods heavy wrath and
indignation. Thus in discharge of my Duty toward God, to your Majesty, and the
place of my calling, I have taken humble boldness to deliver my Conscience. And
now, Sir, do with me what you please.

From these passages it appears, that their Powder-Plots being defeated had not
so far discouraged them, but that they went forwards with the grand work of
advancing their Superstitions, and undermining the Protestant Religion; and
it is not to be doubted, but in all that silence afterward, during King James's
Reign, the Jesuits and their Agents were still like Moles, busy at work
underhand, and preparing matter for those dismal Confusions and Calamities
which happened to his most excellent, though unfortunate Successor.

CHHP. IV.
The Loyalty of Papists to King Charles the First enquired into. Their Plot to
Murder him in the year 1640. Their Rebellion in Ireland, and Behavior
afterward; evincing, that they were mainly instrumental in stirring up the
late Civil Wars in England, and cutting off that Pious Prince.

THere is nothing that our Modern Papists are wont more to boast of, than their
Loyalty to King Charles the First; but with how little Truth and Reason, will
partly appear by these following Transactions.

SECT. 1.
Before ever the fatal disturbances and Rebellion broke out amongst us, the
Popish Conspiracies were industriously prosecuted in the said King Charles the
First's, as well as in his Fathers days. He began his Reign 27 March, 1625. the
times were cloudy and distempered; two Parliaments had been called and
Dissolved with dissatisfaction, and a third was ordered to be Summoned on the
17th of March, 1627. Some short time before which day, the following Letter,
addressed to the Rector of Brussels, was found amongst the Papers of some
Jesuits taken in London, which will give us no small light, not only how
active and busy that Faction was in those times, for hatching mischievous
Intrigues, and embroiling Affairs, for advancing their cause; but also points
out some of the means they made use of; and therefore we think fit here to
Re-print it entire, the rather, for that the same has been most imperfectly
Published.

The words from an ancient Copy carefully taken in those times, are as follow.
Father Rector!
LEt not the damp of Astonishment seize upon your ardent and zealous Soul, in
apprehending the sudden and unexpected calling of this Parliament; we have not
opposed, but rather furthered it, for that we hope as much in this Parliament,
as ever we feared one in Queen Elizabeth's days. You must know the Council is
engaged to assist the King by way of Prerogative, in case the Parliamentary way
fail. You shall see this Parliament will resemble the Pelican, which takes a
pleasure to dig out with her own beak her own Bowels.

The Election of the Knights and Burgesses has been in such confusion, and in
such apparent Faction, as that which we were wont to work heretofore with much
Art and Industry (when the Spanish Match was in Treaty) now breaks forth
naturally, as a Botch or Bile, and spits and spites out its own rankor and
venom.

You must remember how that famous and Immortal Statesman, the Count of
Gundamar, fed King James' s fancy, and rocked him asleep with the soft and
sweet sounds of Peace, to keep up the Spanish Treaty. Likewise we were much
bound to some eminent Statesmen of our own Country, to gain time in procuring
those advantageous Cessations of Arms in the Palatinate, and in admiring the
Worth and Honor of the Spanish Nation, and vilifying the Hollanders;
remonstrating to King James, That that State was most ungrateful, both to his
Predecessor Queen Elizabeth, and his Sacred Majesty: That the States were more
abnoxious than the Turk, and perpetually injured His Majesty's loving Subjects
in the East Indies: And likewise, That they had usurped from His Majesty the
Regality of the Narrow-Seas, in fishing upon the English Coast. Had the Spanish
Match taken effect, which was broken off by the heat and violence of our
furious Enemy the Duke of Buckingham, certainly King James had deserted the
Hollanders.

This great Statesman had but one principal means to further their great and
good Designs; which was, to season King James, That none but the Puritan
Faction (which Plotted nothing but Anarchy, and his Confusion) were adverse to
this most happy Union. We steer on the same course, and have made great use of
this Anarchical Election; but have prejudicated and anticipated the Great one,
that none but the Kings Enemies, and his, are chosen for the Parliament. And
that the Parliament vows to begin where they left, and will never give over
until they have extirpated him and his Posterity. On the other side, the same
Parties, who are to be admired for their indefatigable Industry, incessantly
foment Revenge and Jealousy in the most of the Parliament Men; and especially
they work upon the pride and vainglory of such who have been Imprisoned,
possessing them, They are the only Martyrs and Worthies of their Country.
London is as much distempered, as ever Florence was: for the Companies are at
odds, and the Common Council have opposed the Magistrates against their own
Customs, in the Election of the Knights, which has bred a great heart-burning
in the City; so that twice a day we could divulge what we list in Paul's, and
upon the Exchange. And we have already rendered our irreconcilable Enemy the
Duke of Buckingham as odious as a Toad. For the people are apt to believe any
thing against him; we hope to be revenged of that Ball of Wildfire, and quench
his fury. You shall see the same Swords that have wounded us, (being drawn upon
the Wounds, with an oil we have) shall make us whole. And thus it shall be
done: The Parliament as a great Ship has dashed twice against the same Rock,
and we have so wrought upon the several Complexions of Parliament Men, in
charming the most Temperate and Wisest, that the best way to overthrow the
Duke, is by way of humble Petition to His Majesty: But with the violenter sort
we have taken a contrary course, by working upon their passions, and
inebriating their fancies with probabilities and Presidents that were never
heard of, That Favorites have not been Parliamentproof; they may wrestle a
while, but at last the Parliament have overthrown them upon their backs. We
encourage them with all the wit we have to fall upon the Duke, and persuade
them now is the time or never, the King being in such necessity; insomuch, as
we assure our selves, God has so forsaken them, that they shall not only
strike and dash upon the same Rock again, but sink and wrack in the bottomless
sea of destruction.

We have now many strings to our bow, and have strongly fortified our Faction,
having added two Bulworks more. For when King James lived, you know he was very
violent against Arminianism, and interrupted with his pestilent Wit, and deep
Learning, our strong designs in Holland; and was a great friend to the old
Rebel and Heretic the Prince of Orange. But now we have planted that Sovereign
drug Arminianism, which we hope will purge the Protestants from their Heresy,
and it flourishes, and bears fruit in due season. The materials which build up
our other Bull-work, are the Projectors and Beggars of all Ranks and qualities
whatsoever. Both these Factions cooperate to destroy the Parliament, and
introduce a new Species and Form of Government, which is Oligarchy; and serve
as direct Mediums and Instruments to our end, which is, the Universal Catholic
Monarchy. Our Foundation must be Mutation, this Mutation will cause a
Reluctation, which will serve as so many violent diseases (as the Stone, the
Gout, etc.) to the speedy destruction of our perpetual and insufferable anguish
of Body, which is worse than death it self.

We proceed by Counsel and mature Deliberation, when and how to work upon the
Dukes jealousy and revenge; and in this we give the honor to those who merit
it, who are the Church-Catholicks.

There is another matter of consequence, which we take much into our
consideration and tender cares, which is, to stave off the Puritans, that they
hang not in the Dukes ears; they are impudent subtle people, and it is to be
feared lest they should negotiate a reconcilement between the Duke and the
Parliament. It Is certain the Duke would have gladly reconciled himself to the
Parliament at Oxford and Westminster; but now we assure our selves, we have so
handled these matters, that both Duke and Parliament are irreconcilable. For
the better prevention of the Puritans, the Arminians have already blockt up the
Dukes ears, and we have those of our Religion which stand continually at the
Dukes Chamber, to see who comes in and out; and we cannot be too circumspect in
this regard. I cannot choose but laugh to see some of our Coat, how they have
accoutred themselves; you would scarce know them if you saw them; and it is
admirable how in speech and gesture they act the Puritans.

The Cambridge- Scholars, to their woeful experience, shall see we can act the
Puritan a little better than they have done the Jesuit: They abused our Sacred
Patron Ignatius in jest, but we will make them smart for it in earnest. I hope
you will excuse my merry digression; for I confess unto you, I am at this time
transported with joy, to see how happily all instruments and means, as well
great as less, cooperate to our purposes. But to return to the main Fabric,
our Foundation is Arminianism; the Arminians and Projectors, as it appears in
the premises, affect Mutation; this we second and enforce by probable Arguments.

In the first place we take into consideration the Kings Honor and present
necessity; and we show how the King may free himself of his Wardship, (as Lewis
the Eleventh did) and for his greater splendor and luster, he may raise a vast
Revenue, and not be bebeholding to his Subjects, which is by way of Imposition
and Excise. We instance the Low Countries, and show what a mass of money they
raise to pay their Forces by Sea and Land merely out of Excise. Then our
Church-Catholicks proceed to show the means how to settle the Excise, which
must be by a mercenary Army of Horse and Foot. For the Horse, we have made it
sure, they shall be Foraigners and Germans, who will eat out the Kings Revenue,
and spoil the Country wheresoever they come, though they should be well paid;
what Havoc then will they make, when they get no pay, or are not duly paid
every Month! surely they will do much more mischief than we hope the Catholic
Army will do. We are provident and careful that this mercenary Army of 2000
Horse, and 20000 Foot, shall be taken in, and in pay before the Excise be
settled; and in forcing the Excise the Country is most like to rise. If the
mercenary Army subjugate the Country, then the Soldiers and Projectors shall
be paid out of the Confiscations. If the Country be too hard for the
Soldiers, then they must consequently Mutiny; which is equally advantageous
for us. Our Superlative Design, is to work the Protestants as well as the
Catholics, to welcome in a Conqueror, and that is by this means: we hope
instantly to dissolve all Trade, and hinder the Building of Ships, by devising
probable Designs, and put the State upon Expeditions, (as that of Cadiz) in
taking away the Merchants Ships, and putting them in hopes of taking the
West India Fleet, (which is to seek a needle in a bottle of hay.) His Catholic
Majesty shall not want our best Intelligences; besides, he has Pinaces and
Advice-Boats, which are still abroad to discover; so that you cannot be
surprised in any Harbor.

When Trade is ruined, and Shipping decayed, what will become of Excise? nay,
what will become of Noblemens and Gentlemen's Revenues? the poor Yeomen and
Farmers, in which consists the Infantry and glory of the Kingdom, they will
turn Rogues, and resemble the Abject Peasants in France, who are little better
than Slaves. Trade and Shipping is so much decayed already, that London is as
it were Besieged for want of Fuel; for Sea-coals are at 3 l. the Chaldron.
When things are brought to this perfection, (which we hope will be by the time
his Sacred Majesty has settled his Affairs in Germany) all the people in
general will linger for a Conqueror, missing other means and Revenues which
should maintain them according to their several Ranks and Qualities.

Then we assure our selves, that the Lands which were rent and torn from the
Church, by that ravenous Monster Henry the Eighth, shall be re-sumed and
restored by our mighty Protector his Catholic Majesty, to the re-calling those
who are Exiled, and delivering thousands of Souls which suffer Persecution at
home, for the Testimony of a good Conscience. Join your Prayers with ours, in
importuning the Blessed Virgin, and all the Hosts of Angels, Saints, and holy
Martyrs, to intercede for us; and no question but God will have to help us.
Thus hoping to see Count de Tilly and Marquess Spinola here about July come
Twelve month, I rest: In the mean time we pray for their happy success in
Germany and the Low Countries.


In this Letter we may behold the Cursed Designs of the Jesuits and Romish
Party, portray'd ad vivum by one of their own Pencils, in a private familiar
Correspondence with one of their Foreign Confederates: their end (here, as in
all other their attempts) is to Subvert the Government of these Nations, let in
a Foreign Enemy to Conquer us, Re-establish Popery, and destroy the Protestant
Religion. The Mediums projected and pursued therein, were the same, (mutatis
mutandis, reading France instead of Spain) as they have prosecuted since, viz.
Fomenting mis-understandings between the King and his Parliaments, promoting
and exasperating Factions, destroying Trade, advancing Arminianism and other
divisions in the Church; and Arbitrary Government, a standing Army, and illegal
Impositions in the State; thereby bringing all into confusion at home, and
opening a door for an Invasion from abroad. And can it be imagined that a sort
of people so principled and affectionated, and so eagerly set on such
Traitorous Designs against King Charles the First, in 1627, should ever become
such Innocent, Faithful, and Loyal Subjects to him, as they would be taken for
in 1642? Let us trace their practices a little, and see if we can ever gather
Grapes of Thorns, or Fig's of Thistles.

SECT. 2.
We shall silently pass by their clandestine Machinations in several subsequent
years. The frequent invasions of Propriety and Liberty, the violent urging of
indifferent and unnecessary Ceremonies on one side, and peevish opposition
thereof on the other, the stirs in Scotland, and the Seditious murmurs in
England, was not the hand of Joab in all this? But we hasten to a more evident
demonstration. A Plot of theirs, striking at no less than the Sacred Life of
that Glorious Prince, before ever they had sufficiently prepared the Factious
Rabble here to attempt any such wickedness; whence it may most rationally be
collected and concluded, that what afterward was villanously perpetrated, was
by these Romish Bloodhounds originally contrived and promoted.

In the Month of September 1640. (two Months before the fatal Parliament began)
Sir William Boswel, being His Majesty's Ambassador in Holland, at that time
Resident at the Hague, received intimation of a desperate Popish Plot, from a
person of good Quality, at first at the second-hand, but soon after avowed by
the principal Party, and the general scope delivered to him in Writing, in a
Letter in Latin, directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury; taking an Oath of
the said Ambassador not to discover any thing thereof to any but the
Archbishop and His Majesty. Accordingly, Sir William in a Letter by an
Express, dated the 9th of September New style, 1640. transmitted the same to
his Grace, who sent it to the King then at York, in a Letter; which His Majesty
sent back Apostyled with Instructions how to proceed therein: whereupon, October.
15. there was sent over a more large and particular Discovery in Latin from
the Party, being one Andreas ab Habernfeld, a Doctor in Physic, and Physician
(as many affirm) to the Queen of Bohemia.

The general Contents whereof were:

1. That there was then on foot a Plot laid by the Jesuits and Papists, for
Subverting the Realm and State of England, and the destroying and Murdering
his most Excellent Majesty, p. 13.

2. That the Original Author of this Discovery, was born, bred up, and had for
many years been Dignified in the Romish Church, and appointed by Cardinal
Barberino to assist Con the Popes Legate in managing the said Conspiracy; the
cruelty and wickedness whereof so terrified his Conscience, that he abandoned
that Communion, and embraced the Orthodox Religion.

3. That the said Con was the chief Patron and Director of the business, and
had his Residence at London, where he had endeavored by various Arts to
corrupt diverse great men of the Kingdom; and particularly sought to practice on
the Archbishop, by the offer of a Cardinals Cap; but finding no good to be
done upon him, resolved to cut off both the King and him, Art. 6, 7.

4. That in order thereunto, they made it their business to inflame the
Puritans in England, and stir up the people in Scotland to Commotions, Art. 9.

5. That having thus embroiled the Kings Affairs, and reduced him to want of
Money, they would order things so, that he should not obtain any, but on
condition to grant a general Liberty to Exercise the Popish Religion; which if
he should refuse, then the King was to be dispatched; for an Indian Nut stuffed
with most sharp poison, was reserved by the Society, (which Con at that time
frequently in a boasting manner had showed to the Informant) wherein a Dose was
prepared for the King, after the example of his Father, Artic. 10.

6. That the Chaplain of the Marquess of Hamilton, (who often was employed
without effect by the King, to appease the Scottish Tumults) held Correspondence
with Con, who being once asked in joque by the Informant, Whether the Jews also
agreed with the Samaritans? the said Con answered with a wish, That all
Ministers were but such as he.

7. That one Tho. Chamberlain was sent over from Cardinal Richlieu, and for
four Months held Consultations with the Society, how to exasperate these
Northern heats to the best advantage.

8. He discovers several of the Conspirators by name, as Sir Toby Matthews a
Jesuit, whom he represents as a most indefatigable and dangerous Traitor; one
Captain Read a Scotchman, dwelling near the Angel-Tavern in Long-Acre, in whose
House the Conspirators met usually once a day, and there received and read
their Letters from Rome, and elsewhere, and returned Answers; where he says
the Gang might be surprised commonly every Friday. He likewise names Porter,
Windebank, Montague the younger, and several others, with diverse circumstances
corroborating his Information; and particularly advises to intercept (when the
Post goes out weekly) a Packet directed to Monsieur Strario Archdeacon of
Cambray, and another coming weekly from Rome, which is brought under this
Superscription; To the most Illustrions Count Rosetti Legate for the time,
written in Characters, but interpretable by the said Read; whence farther light
would be obtained.

All this was discovered to the Ambassador under an Oath of Secrecy, and the
most importunate Requests to the King and Archbishop to keep it close till the
business might be ripe, and to conceal whence they had these Advertisements;
for otherwise, the Discoverer would certainly be in danger of his life, from
the Confederates and their Associates. And it appears by the Papers, that both
Sir William Boswel and the Archbishop were fully satisfied, That it was real,
and of great importance; care being ordered to be taken privately for the
sounding the depth and further circumstances of the Design; but the
Disturbances in Scotland, and afterward in Ireland and England, coming on
apace, branches of the same Treason, being all assisted and fomented, if not,
as most of them, originally contrived by those Popish Incendiaries, though
disguised in other Factions, it is probable they might divert or forbear that
part of the Poisoning the King and Bishop, to attend the event of the other
more general Plot of ruining these Nations, which they saw then so hopefully
advanced, that they might conclude without ha^arding themselves in the odium,
there were enough other Ill-spirits which they had conjured up, ^eady to do
that execrable work for them another way. However, the Original Papers of the
Discovery, and Letters relating thereto, being kept by the Archbishop, were,
when his Study was ransackt ^ound amongst his Writings, and then Published, and
now lately Reprinted by Authority, under the Title of The grand Designs of the
Papists in the time of King Charles the First, worthy the perusal of such as
would be farther satisfied.

SECT. 3.
Next followed the horrid Butcheries in Ireland, beginning 23 Oct. 1641.
concerning which, (however some of the spawn of the barbarous Actors in that
cursed Tragedy, or others their Relations or Accomplices of the Roman brood,
would now palliate and excuse it, yet) nothing is more known to all the world,
than that it was an open, direct, and most Traitorous Rebellion, on the score
of their cursed bloody Religion, against their lawful and most gracious Prince;
designing to usurp the whole Government into their own hands, root out the
English Nation, and the Protestant Name, and (which was the main end of all)
establish Popery in that Kingdom; as is testified upon Oath by several persons
examined, and their Depositions published by the Kings Warrant; all this begun
and continued by Papists Only, (not one Protestant amongst them.) But the Pope
himself, the Head of their Church, in the person of his Nuncio Rinuceini,
Generalissimo of all their Forces by Land and Sea, and all the Tribes of his
Ecclesiastics, contributing all Assistance and Encouragement imaginable
thereunto; proceeding with that Inhumanity, that above one hundred thousand
innocent Protestants were by them basely, in cool blood and with exquisite
Torments, and un-heard (...) Cruelties, Murdered and otherwise destroyed. And,
which was even yet worse than that, to show their malice as well as
disobodience to his said Majesty, with equal impudence and falsehood, they
pretended that it was done by his Commission, and vouched the Broad Seal for
their Authority, purposely to enrage his Protestant Subjects in England and
elsewhere against him. The Popes Nuncio assuming nevertheless, and exercising
there the Temporal as well as Spiritual power, granting out Commissions in his
own name, breaking the Treaties of Peace between the King, and, as they then
styled themselves, the Confederate Catholics; heading two Armies against the
then Marquess, (now Duke) of Ormond, then Lord Lieutenant, and forcing him at
last to quit the Kingdom; all which ended in the Ruin of His Majesty's
Government and Person; which, but upon occasion of that Rebellion, could never
have happened. And was not all this a prodigious demonstration of their
Obedience and Loyalty to King Charles the First, and the Crown of England?

It was constantly observed, that the lower and more unfortunate the King was
in his Successes in England, the higher were the demands of the Irish; so that
they used all their Treaties as Stratagems to trepan, not to serve His Majesty.
In the year 1643. when a Cessation was concluded with them by the Kings
Authority, and both English and Irish engaged by Articles to transport their
Armies to England for His Majesty's Service, the Irish only pretended they
would do it when the English were gone, and then treacherously ^yet according
to one of their old rules, Nulla fi^^es servanda cum Haereticis) they plotted
and attempted the ruin of the small remnant of English ^eft behind in Munster,
where the Lord Inchiquin Commanding by the Kings Commission, and the English
with him, were necessitated to stand on their own defense against the Popish
Army. In 45. the said Confederate Catholics having engaged their public Faith
to send 10000 men to serve His Majesty, delayed, neglected, and failed ^herein,
to the great dis-service of His Majesty. Did they not in 46. after a Peace
concluded with them, treacherously attempt to cut off the Lord Lieutenant and
his Army, who marched out of Dublin on security and confidence of that Peace?
did they not in 47 employ Commissioners to Rome, France, and Spain, to invite a
Foreign power into Ireland? in the 9th Article of whose Instructions, [to be
seen in my Lord Orrerey's Answer to P. W.] they were ordered to make
Application to his Holiness, for his being Lord Protector of Ireland, [so that
they were beforehand with the Phanaticks in England with the Title] and if he
should refuse, then to offer the same to either of the Kings of France or
Spain; nay, to any Popish Prince, from whom (to use their own words) they might
have most considerable Aids. Faithful and Meritorious Subjects still! if they
may be their own Judges, though they desired and designed to submit to the
Pope; nay, any King or Prince, rather than to the King of England, whose
natural Subjects they were.

Nay more, the Rump, that infamous Rump, the fag-end of the Parliament, which
Murdered the King, was much more beholding to these Irish Rebels than His
Majesty was, for to them they made Petitions and Supplications, as unto the
Supreme Authority of the Nation, Entitling them, The Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England; wherein they did readily subject, and put their
Consciences, Lives and Fortunes, as in a secure Sanctuary, under the protection
thereof: (these are their own words) and boasted, That several of them were
able to make appear their constant good affection and adherence to them. See
the Petitions of Sir Ra. Talbot Baronet, and Garret Moor Esquire, (who were not
herein private, but public persons, and so owned in the Title of their
Petitions, being on the behalf of themselves and others, as Sollicitors,
Agitators, or Trustees for the Irish Papists;) which were Condescentions far
greater than ever they would pay to King Charles the First, or His present
Majesty. For with them, they always Treated upon the Swords point, upon as
great terms of Defiance, Caution, and Reservedness, as if they had to do with
the great Turk, and not with their lawful Sovereign. Vide Orrerey, fol. 14, 15.
and Articles of Treaty.

If therefore to rise in Arms without the Kings Command or Privity, Murder so
many thousands of his good Subjects, seize on his Towns and Forts, fight with
and kill those that were Commissionated by him, hold Correspondence with, and
receive Supplies from Foreign Princes, cast off all Allegiance, and petition a
Foreign Prince to be their Protector; and last of all, if to court his avowed
Enemies and Murderers, own their Uusurp'd Authority, and submit Consciences,
Fortunes, Lives, and all to their pleasure, be Arguments of Faithfulness and
Obedience, then may we allow the Irish Papists to have been His Majesty's most
Loyal Subjects; but till then, all the word shall justly detest them, as the
most barbarous and bloody Rebels.

SECT. 4.
But whatever they were in Ireland, the Roman Catholics in England will swear
they were all most punctually true to King Charles the First, and ventured
their Lives and Estates in his Service. To determine how far this is true, and
what merit we are to allow them on that account, we must consider,

1. That it cannot reasonably be expected, that we should so clearly discover
the affections and more secret designs of the Papists in this English
Rebellion, as in that of Ireland, for that here were not Papists fighting under
the Popes Countenance and Encouragement, against Protestants, but Protestants
(though in that point Jesuitically principled) against a Protestant King and
his true Subjects that were more Loyally minded. So that as the Papists Loyalty
was not then so far tried, as to see whether they would have taken part with
the King, a Protestant, had the Pope forbidden them, or employed them against
him, (which is the great thing in question, when we speak of their Loyalty as
Papists:) so likewise were they never embodied apart by themselves, and
therefore could never assemble together in Battle to fight, or in full and open
Council to Design and Plot; but what they did was covertly and in the dark, by
fomenting Dissentions and Intestine Wars; which was long since their
Campanella's Design, De Monarch. Hisp. cap. 24. p. 204. Jam vero ad enervandos
Anglos nibil tam conducit quam dissentio and discordia inter illos excitata
perpetuoque nutrita, quod cito meliores occasiones suppeditabit, si Angliam in
formam Roipublice reducant, in imitationem Hollandorum. That nothing could more
conduce to weaken the English, than Dissension and Discord stirred up, and
perpetually nourisht amongst them; which would soon administer better occasions
to introduce the Roman Catholic Religion, if England were reduced into a
Republic in imitation of the Hollanders.

2. It may well be said, That it was not pure Loyalty, but self-interest, that
attracted so many ominent Papists in unto his late. Majesty's Standard. The
violence of the people forced them to that side; they did not go, but were
driven; the Parlimentarians were to make use of the cry against Papists, for
one of their most taking pretenses, so that the open Roman Catholics could
expect no acceptance from them; and though they did well, and but according to
their Duty in serving His Majesty, yet accidentally they not a little
prejudiced his cause: for the other party thence took such occasions to raise
lies and clamours, that we may say, for every Papist employed in His Majesty's
Arms, (...) the hearts of half a dozen, seduced, though otherwise Loyal
Protestants. -- However, to discharge their duty in serving their King, against
a Protestant, not a Popish P^^ty, and at a time when their own safety and
private Interest obliged them so to do, was surely little matter of merit: but
rather, if we may guess at the Body of Hercules by his Foot, we may then by
tracing some of the footsteps of our English Catholics as have casually come
to light, discover their main design, especially of their Clergy, to have been
wholly for the ruin of that King of happy memory, and thereby of the
Protestant Religion: for,

3. The disloyal Principles on which the Phanatick Rebels proceeded, they
wholly learnt from the Jesuits: for example, did they say the Sovereign Power
was lodged in the people, and that they may alter the Government of a State?
Bellarmine taught it them, whose words in his Treatise De Laicis, l. 3. cap. 6.
are these: Potestas immediate est tanquam in subjecto, in tota multitudine,
etc. The Supreme power is in the whole multitude, as in its Subject; and if
there be cause for it, they may alter a Monarchy into an Aristocracle, or
Democracie, etc. Did they affirm, that the People made the King, and may unmake
him, and retain still the habit of power? they are the same Bellarmines own
words. In Regnis bominum potestas Regis est a populo, quia populus facit Regem:
In the Kingdoms of men, the Kings power is from the people, for the people make
the King, Bell. de Council. l. 2. cap. 19. And again, In Rebuspublicis
temporalibus, si Rex degeneret in Tyrannum, licet caput sit Regni, tamen a
populo potest deponi, and eligi alius: In Temporal States, if a King degenerate
into a Tyrant, though he be the head of the Kingdom, yet the people may Depose
him, and choose another. Idem Ibid. cap. 10. Did our Rebels hold they might
take up Defensive Arms against the King, and expel him? 'twas your Jesuit
Suarez taught them that Doctrine: Si Rex legitimus tyrannice gubernat, and
Regno nullum aliud sit remedium nisi Regem expellere and deponere, poterit
Respublica toto publico and communi consensu Civitatum and Procerum Regem
deponere: If a lawful King govern as a Tyrant, and the Kingdom can be no other
way relieved its grievances, the whole Commonwealth, by common consent of the
Cities and Peers, may Depose such a King. Suarez Defens. Fid. l. 6. cap. 19.
Sect. 15. Did they Levy a formal War, and were the first Aggressors against the
King? the Jesuit Mariana chalkt them out the way, lib. 6. de Rege, cap. 6. p.
59. and 60. Expedita maxim and tuta via est, etc. The readiest and safest way,
(says he) is, if the people can meet in a public Assembly, to deliberate by
common consent what is to be done, and then inviolably to observe what is
agreed on by common consent; the Prince must first be admonisht to amend, which
if he refuse, it will be lawful for the Commonwealth to refuse to obey him:
and because a War must necessarily follow, counsel must be taken how to carry
it on; Arms must be provided, and Taxes laid upon the people to bear the
Expenses thereof: and if it be requisite, and the Public cannot otherwise
preserve it self, it will be lawful, both by the right of self-defence, and the
proper Authority inherent in the people, to proclaim such a King to be a
public enemy, and then to cut off his Head. Nay, their infamous Court of
Injustice, was but erected by the Jesuits Model; for so the same Mariana there
goes on: Certe a Rep. unde ortum habet Regia potestas, etc. It Is certain, the
Commonwealth from which the Royal power has its Original, may, when the case
requires, (which we know is whenever they have a mind to it, and power to
effect it,) bring the King to Judgment, and deprive him of his Soveraignity:
for the Commonwealth has not so transferred the Right of power unto the
Prince, but it has reserved a power paramount unto it self.

The very Parricide and Execrable Murder acted on the Kings Sacred Person, is
allowed, and the manner directed by another Jesuit, Lessius, l. 2. de Justitia
and Jure, cap. 9. dubio 4. Principem qui Tyrannus est ratione Administrationis,
non posse a privatis interimi quamdin manet Princeps; sed primum a Republica,
vel Comitiis Regni vel alio habente Authoritatem, esse deponendum, and hostem
declarandum, ut in ipsius personam liceat quicquam attentare: A rightful Prince
who becomes a Tyrant by Maladministration, ought not to be killed by a
private person: (so far you see Gawen the Jesuit lately Executed, in his dying
Speech was right) as long as he remains a Prince. But what then is to be done
with him? why, he must first (says this Popish Doctor) be Deposed, and
declared an Enemy by the Commonwealth, or the Parliament of the Kingdom, or
some other [the Pope no doubt] having Authority, and then afterward it will be
lawful to attempt what you please upon his person. Thus you see the Phanaticks
drew all those Arrows which they shot at Royalty, out of the Popes Quiver; and
if it be truly said, that the Presbyterians brought that good Prince to the
Block, and the Independants cut off his Head; it may as truly be added, That
the Papists lent them the Ax. And are these men after all this to boast their
Loyalty? are these to be relied upon by any Prince, to make himself an Absolute
Monarch? who, not only by their Religion are bound to esteem the Pope his
Superior in his own Dominions, but likewise by so many of their chief Doctors
avowed and uncondemned Judgments published in Print, are taught to place the
people above him; and that he may lawfully by them be questioned, Deposed,
Judged, Condemned, and Murdered.

4. For a more clear and positive proof, if it be true, that many known and
professed Roman Catholic Gentlemen sided with the King; it is no less true,
that not a few of the Jesuits, and other disguised Romanists, mingled
themselves amongst the Rebellious Troops; there they were Levellers, Agitators,
etc. and the prime Authors of those damnable Councils which took away his
precious Life. And that this may not seem to be spoken gratis, we shall produce
two or three witnesses for it.

1. The first, a Treatise, Entitled, (...): Or, a brief Narration of the
Mysteries of State carried on by the Spanish Faction in England, etc. Printed
by Samuel Brown at the Hague, 1651. who handles this matter gradatim,
throughout all our late Civil Wars, and particularly p. 59. observes, That
about and after the Treaty in the Isle of Wight, 1648. when the bringing the
King to a Mock-Tryal was in agitation, those of the Spanish Faction and
notorious Papists who fled away at the very beginning of the troubles, did now
again appear (to the admiration of all that knew them) openly in London and at
Westminster; as Sir Kenelm Digby, Sir John Winter, Walter Montague, Endymion
Porter: [These very names we met with before, in the Treason against the Kings
Life, discovered by Habernfeld in 1640. which much confirms the matter] and Sir
Edward F. (who was Commissary-General Iretons Bedfellow:) these who were
Proclaimed Traitors by the Parliament, and some of them of the blood of the old
Gun-powder-Traitors, these were now become the familiar Friends of the great
men in the Army.

Again, p. 73. and 74. He has these words, That the Jesuits and Spanish
Faction did in Oxford, (immediately after the Kings going thence to the Scots)
conspire together to ruin and destroy the King, I have it from a Jesuits own
Confession in Print; Bernard, the only Intelligencer at Court in those days,
is the man that affirms it, in his Book called Polemo-mutatus. Which assertion,
and many more circumstances, made me credit that Relation; which told me for
certain, that Walter Montague, Endymion Porter, and the rest of those Papists
who came at that time over into England, were they that were the designed men
sent on purpose, (from Rome some of them) to manage the business in the Kings
Trial; and if the King had pleaded, they were to have come as Witnesses against
him. This was laid particularly to Endymion Porters charge by some English
Gentlemen, as also to Sir John Winters.

It is thought, that after Endymion Porter san his loving Master cut off,
calling to mind the favors he had received from him, and his most unkind
requital of them, his Conscience so smote him, that he went to his House in the
Country, and there poisoned himself, falling down dead on a sudden as he sat
in his Parlour. And hereupon also, (after the death of the King) Sir John
Winter was so generally cried out of as a Trayer and Conspirator in the
business, that for fear of his life, (left some of the Loyal English Gentry
should kill him) and to palliate the design, he had the favor to take up
Lodgings in the Tower, which (by all means) went under the name of Imprisoning
him. On the same score, Montague, Digby, and the rest of that designed Party,
perceiving their Treason was openly known, and fearing their just reward from
some enraged hand, desired a Pass to return (since the work of killing the King
was done) beyond the Seas; which that they might with less suspicion and more
security pass, they pretended to Banish them.

A Noble person of this Kingdom, (of Sir K. acquaintance) told me, That he
observed him in public to exclaim against the Hereditary Rights of Kings, as a
most pernicious thing to a Kingdom; saying, That oft-times thereby, the Kingdom
was Governed by Children, Fools, and Women. And hereupon, took occasion to
traduce the then Prince of Wales, (now King) saying, etc. [The Expressions are
so base and foul-mouthed, that we dare not out of Reverence to Majesty, go on
to repeat them from our Author.] At the same time highly commending Cromwell, as
one of the ablest men in Europe, and Bradshaw (that sat as the Kings Judge)
for a gallant man.

Thus far that Treatise; concerning the credit of which, we shall only say,
that the Author appears by the Work to have been a man of no vulgar
Intelligence or Conversation in those times, and all along expresses much
Loyalty and Affection to his present Majesty.

2. The Reverend and Learned Doctor Peter du Moulin has long since declared in
Print, That the Roman Priest is known, who when he saw the ^atal stroke given
to our Holy King and Martyr, flourished with his Sword and said, Now the
greatest Enemy that we have in the World is gone. And that the year before the
Kings Murder, a select number of Jesuits out of England, had a Consult with
their Confederates at Paris, where this question in writing was by them put to
the Faculty of Sorbon, then altogether Jesuited, That seeing the State of
England was in a likelihood to change Government, whether it were lawful for
the Catholics to work that change, for the advancing and securing of the
Catholic Cause in England, by making away the King, whom there was no hope to
turn from this Heresy? Which was answered affirmatively. And afterward the
same question being transmitted to Rome, the said Resolution was likewise
approved and confirmed by the Pope and his Council, That it was both lawful and
expedient for Catholics, by such means to promote that alteration of State.
But afterward, when the Regicide was so universally cried down and detested,
his Holiness consulting his credit, commanded all Papers about that question to
be burnt; in obedience to which order, a Roman Catholic in Parts was demanded
a Copy which he had of those papers, but having had time to consider and abhor
the wickedness of that Project, refused to deliver it up; but showed it to a
Protestant friend of his, relating the whole carriage of this Negotiation. This
passage the^ Reverend du Moulin aforesaid, now Canon (...) Christ-Church,
Canterbury, and one of His Majestie^ Chaplains, did seventeen years ago set
forth (...) print, in his answer to a scurrilous Popish pamphle^ Entitled
Philanax Anglicus; and there publicly offered to justify the truth of it, if
any should (...) him to an account for it before Authority; but That in all
this time they have been afraid or ashamed to do; only soon after the coming
forth of his Book, the Gentlemen of Somerset House, who were netled, and one
eminent person of them it seems not a little concerned actually in the story,
instead of having the truth thereof examined, privately by interest obtained a
Command from the King to the said Doctor, that he should write no more Books;
which Prohibition the Doctor go^ taken off, Anno 1668. -- See the last Edition
of the Doctors Answer, p. 60. where likewise, p. 64 we have the Testimony of
that worthy judicious Gentleman Sir William Morris, late Secretary of State,
who in a Letter to the said Doctor du Moulin concerning this matter, has these
words. -- This I may say safely, and will do it confidently, That many
arguments did create a violent suspicion, very near convincing Evidences, That
the Irreligion of the Papists was chiefly guilty of the Murder of that
excellent Prince; the odium whereof they would now file to the account of the
Protestant Religion.

5. It Is notorious, that no sort of men truckled more servilely to the late
Rebellious Powers; they adressed their Petitions to them, with the Style of the
Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, -- First Moderator, fol. 59. They affirmed, That they had generally
taken, and punctually kept the Engagement. Second Moderator, fol. 41. They
promised that (...) they might enjoy their Religion. They would (...) the most
quiet and useful Subjects of England. First Moderator, fol. 31. which they
proved in these words, viz. That the Roman Catholics of England would be bound
by their own interest, (the strong^^^ obligation amongst wise men) to live
peaceably and ^hankfully in private Exercise of their Consciences; and becoming
gainers by such compassions, they could not (...) reasonably be distrusted as
the Prelatick Par^y that were loosers. First Moderator, fol. 36.

6. It Is observable, That Tho. White a Popish ^riest, in the height of Olivers
Tyranny, set out (...) Book, Entitled, The grounds of Obedience and
Government, purposely to confirm his usurpation, another His Majesty's just
Tale, and persuade people that they were not obliged to assist or re^^ore him:
Who was it (as Doctor Oats says in his Epistle to the King before his
Narrative of the Plot, printed by Order of the House of Lords) that broke off
the Uxbridge Treaty, but the Romish Interest and Policy? with what zeal and
Interest did they persuade the Scots in 1650. to impose that upon your Majesty,
which your Royal Law had forbidden others? for the effecting whereof, some
Thousands of pounds were spent and given by them. Where he likewise sets forth,
how they endeavored to Betray and Sacrifice His Majesty, after his miraculous
escape as Worcester. And that those who were to pay the 1000 l. promised for
his Discovery, were no other but Father Joseph Simmonds, and Father Carleton
Compton, both Jesuits: and (...) whereas Mr. John Huddleston a Priest, having
(...) instrumental in His Majesty's Escape, (for which good Service he has been
always excepted out (...) His Majesty's Proclamations against Priests and
Jesuits) several of the Jesuited Crew have often called him FOOL for his
labor; and said, that the same was the worst days work that ever he did in his
life.

That there is a Popish Lord, not forgotten or unknown, who brought a Petition
to the late Regicide and Usurpers, signed by above 500 of the principal Popists
in England, wherein was promised, upon condition of a Toleration here by a Law,
they would jointly resolve to Abjure and Exclude the Family of the Stuarts for
ever from the Crown.

That a whole Convent of Benedictine Monks were Olivers Pensioners, to betray
His Majesty's Secrets and Counsels. That the Traitor Manning, taken (...)
discovering such His Majesty's Affairs, was a Roman Catholic, and had Masses
sung for him after his (...) Execution: and that it was by their instigation
and interest, that the French King was prevailed with (...) banish His Majesty
out of France, etc.

From all which, the pretended Loyalty of the Papists to his late Majesty, and
our present Sovereign during his Exile, is most evidently detected; and by
these brief Historical touches that we have given, (the matter whereof would
have swelled to a vast Volume, had it been worthily dilated upon, as hereafter,
if God send leave and opportunity may be done) it sufficiently appears how
dangerous and insufferable the Principles of the Roman Church, and practices of
Papists have been, and must always be to Princes in general, but Protestants
especially. So that we may fitly shut up these Observations, with that
Oraculous conclusion of judicious King James, in his Speech to both Houses of
Parliament, Nov. 1605. That as it is not impossible but many honest man seduced
with some Errors of Popery, may yet remain good and faithful Subjects; so on
the other part, none that know and believe the grounds and School-conclusions
of their Doctrine, can ever prove good Christians or faithful Subjects.

CHAP. V.
The Preparatory Circumstances at home and abroad, encouraging the Papists to
this Plot, and facilitating their Design.

SECT. 1.
WE have hitherto seen the restless and implacable malice of the Romish Priests
and Emissaries, continually conspiring and endeavoring by all kind of Arts,
ever since the Reformation, to subvert the Protestant Religion, and therewith
the Government in these Nations; so that we may reckon the Raigns of our late
Princes, by a Succession of Popish Treasons. In displaying whereof we have been
the larger, as well that the World may take notice that their late damnable
Plot was nothing strange or incredible; (for what wonder is it to hear an Horse
neigh, to find a Fox crafty, or a Tiger cruel, or see those concerned in
Traiterous and bloody practices, whose Doctrines recommend the same as Duty or
Merit, and who have for so many Ages been inured thereunto?) as also to
satisfy the Reader, that the Conspiracy which now threatened us, is all of a
piece with those under which our Ancestors labored, that it is still the same
Tragedy, though the Scenes have been often shifted, and the Actors varied
according to the different posture of Affairs; a continued stream of Treason
flowing from the Sea of Rome, which though sometimes interrupted, diverted, or
(like the River Arethusa) hid under ground, yet it perpetually, sometimes
swifter, sometimes slower, kept on its course: but how and by what accessional
Springs, Foreign Tides, or Domestic Land-floods, it came now to swell to so
great and extraordinary an Head, just ready to ore-whelm us, may be worth
inquiry. To give an exact account of all Circumstances at home and abroad, that
contributed to the ripening and facilitating of this Plot, and which favoring
the Design, encouraged the Conspirators to push forwards the same at this,
rather then another time, requires more conversation in Court-Intrigues, than
we dare pretend to. But most obvious it is, to an ordinary Eye, that there were
not a few advantages which might much flush their hopes at this Conjuncture,
and rendered their Design more probable and feizable, than at any other moment
since the Reformation.

SECT. 2.
For as this Plot aimed not solely at these Kingdoms of Great Britain and
Ireland, but was truly Catholic, [general or universal] to root out the
Protestant Religion from the face of the earth; so no man that considers the
present State of Christendom, can be ignorant what a vast progress within few
years last past they have made, in order thereunto. The French Kings Arms no
doubt are employed chiefly for Conquest and Glory; yet it is as unquestionable,
that the Jesuits and Court of Rome know how to improve them likewise to their
advantage. For if we reflect on the late proceedings of the French, and their
modern Irruption which they made into Holland few years since, the manner of
the Attempt, and Management before and after; we may see that haughty Monarch
has plainly taken off his Mask, and is to be regarded in this Conjuncture, not
only in the same Character as Conquerors of former Ages, toward all Estates
who had the unhappiness to be adjacent to their Frontiers; but that he ought
also to be formally looked upon, as the declared Protector of the Tyrannick
Designs of the Papacy; and consequently, the pre-meditated and positive Enemy
and destroyer of all the States and People whose Faith is opposite to that
Tyranny. And though in his Declaration of War against the States General, 27
March 1672. he was pleased to assign no reason but his Glory, yet it is averred
in print, that by his Ambassador to the Pope, he gave afterward a more clear
Account, viz. That he had not undertaken this War, but for the Extirpation of
Heresy: and to the Emperor declared, That the Hollanders were a people, who
having forsaken God, and being Heretics, all good Christians were in duty
bound to associate for their Extirpation, and ought to pray to God for a
blessing upon so pious an Enterprise. And to other Popish Princes, That it was
a War of Religion, and in order to the propagation of the Catholic Faith.
Pursuant to which, in the Second Article of his Demands afterward to the Dutch
at Vtrecht, it is in express words contained: That thenceforth there shall be,
not only an entire Liberty, but a public Exercise of the Catholic Apostolic
Roman Religion, throughout all the United Provinces, etc. And as he has been
thus active to promote Popery abroad, so he has been no less busy to destroy
Protestants at home; having suppressed so many of their Churches, contrary to
Solemn Edicts, put down their Academies, made them incapable of any Office or
Preferment, and by all kind of discouragements and pressures, endeavored to
ruin them. The Conspirators therefore having such a powerful friend to Abet
and Assist them, who besides the glorious Rattle of propagating Catholic
Religion, a specious motive in public, is also obliged by reason of State, (a
more Sacred Tie amongst such Princes) to embroil England and Holland by all
Arts, that in the mean time he may sweep away the Trade of the World, (chiefly
managed by these two) and put them both in a condition to be made absolutely
his Slaves, wherever he should think fit to extend his yoke. It Is no wonder
then, I say, if the Conspirators venture bard, with such encouragement, to
accomplish their Designs, in the drudging Secular Butchering part whereof, he
has already made so fair (or rather monstrously foul) an advance.

Long since have the Jesuits learnt how to shroud themselves under the
ambitious wings of the most potent active Princes, and by pretense of promoting
their interests, to set up their own. When in the last Century the Austrian
Family was in its ruffling grandeur grasping at Universal Monarchy, how
entirely did they seem devoted to that House? But as soon as it declined, and
the French Monarch, by the revolution of humane Affairs, grew more formidable,
these subtle Steers-men, (who know how to catch every wind) presently shifted
their Sails, varied their Course, though still bound for the same Port, (viz.
The advancing of the Roman Churches power) and abandoning those old useless
Patrons, embark their hopes in the Designs of France; thinking (though we trust
in vain) that King may ere long give Laws to all these parts of the World. Thus
are we threatened with a double Intertwisted Tyranny; by the one in Temporals,
by the other in Spirituals; and at the same time, a Cursed Design by their
Confederate Councils is carried on, to enslave both the Bodies and Souls of all
the Christians in Europe.

SECT. 3.
England and Holland having with fierce and tedious Wars, (on what grounds, and
by what Counsels occasioned, is not unknown) profusely wasted each others Blood
and Treasures; and the latter being reduced to so low an Ebb, that had not
providence strangely put an hook into the nostrils of Leviathan at Vtrecht,
that Republic had been quite subjugated and overrun: The same French and
Jesuitical Incendiaries, in the next place, engage the three grand Protestant
Princes of the North, Sweden, Denmark, and Brandenburgh likewise in bloody Wars
with each other, that the Protestant Religion may every where be plucked down
with their own hands, and owe its ruin as much to the indiscretion of its
Professors, as the malice of its Enemies; whilst in the mean time the
disturbances in Hungary are secretly fomented on one hand, and the Emperor
exasperated against them on the other: so that the poor Souls of the Reformed
Religion in those parts, lamentably suffer under a twofold Injustice; the
ignominy of Rebellion, and Cruelty of Persecution.

Thus was there not a Protestant Kingdom, State, or Interest in the World,
(besides Geneva, and a few Cantons of Switzer-land, who likewise have felt not
a few drops of the storm) but had since the year 70. been most considerably
weakened; whilst France, the present Hector of the Papacy, has so mightily
increased in strength and reputation. So that in this respect, if ever Rome
would re-gain its lost grandeur, and entirely Extirpate Heresy, (as they call
it) now was the time.

SECT. 4.
But then besides these Foreign advantages, if we consider the several points
they had gained at home in England, we shall find them much facilitating the
work: The countenance of two Roman Catholic Queens for diverse years, and an
opinion of the Papists Loyalty, Services, and Sufferings for King Charles the
First; which they were never wanting to commemorate, and represent through
false Optics, to render them more great and obliging, (though in themselves
little, or nothing, or worse than nothing, as before we have proved) gave them
free Access and welcome at Court, as their plausible behavior, and fair
pretenses, large Estates, and insinuating Arts, gave them reputation in the
Country, and drew over great numbers of their Dependants, Tenants, and
Relations, swayed by Interest, to their Communion, and many more to a kind of
Neutrality and indifference, by a too general debauching of the younger Gentry
with Principles of Atheism, no small part of their Policy; for those that were
really of no Religion, were very fit to comply with theirs. To carry on the
Intrigue, multitudes of Jesuits, Secular Priests and Monks of several Orders
daily came over without any let or punishment, and appeared almost publicly,
as if in Contempt of Law, they cared not who knew them to be such; they said
Mass up and down, and had their Sermous in English frequently at their
pleasure; and the Popish Court-Merry-Andrew, that Buffoon-Priest Father
Patrick, (who seemed to affect Father Junipers Title of Joculator Christi,
Christ's Jester, as their Book of Conformities, p. 106. most prosanely calls
him) did not a little contribute to the mischief, by the great interest he had
obtained amongst persons of very high quality, by whose influence they
afterward screwed many of their Party into considerable Offices and places of
Trust Civil and Military, at Land and Sea, being allowed Dispensations to go to
Church, receive the Sacrament, or take any Test, the better to color the
matter; and on the contrary, who ever they thought was of a spirit to oppose
their Designs, they procured to be turned out, and disgraced with the Title of
a Fanatic, a Rumper, or disaffected to the Government.

This formidable increase of Popery, and Insolence of that Party, was not
unregarded by judicious men, but looked upon as a thing very ominous, and of
dangerous consequence; insomuch, that the then Parliament (though oft-times
thought remiss enough on such occasions) could not but take notice of it: for
on Monday the 29th of April, 1678. these following Reasons were agreed to be
used at a Conference with the Lords, concerning the dangers the Nation is in by
the growth of Popery.

THe House of Commons taking into serious consideration the dangers arising to
this Kingdom from the restless endeavors of Priests and Jesuits, and other
Popish Recusants, to subvert the true Religion planted amongst us, and to
reduce us again under the Bondage of Roman Superstition and Idolatry; and
finding how great boldness they have assumed to themselves, from the great
remisness and connivance of His Majesty's Officers and Ministers of Justice,
both Civil and Ecclesiastical, whereby so many good and necessary Laws,
heretofore made against them, have not of late times been put in any effectual
execution:

They do therefore think it requisite to apply same remedy to this growing
Evil; especially at this time, wherein the unity of Affections, and the mutual
confidence between His Majesty and his People, dath so much conduce to the
preservation of the whole Kingdom. And because they have found by experience,
that all those applications they have sormerly made upon this Subject, have not
produced any effects answerable to their expectations, they have endeavored to
discover the Causes and Grounds thereof, which they conceive are principally
these.

1. The difficulty of convicting a Romish Priest by proving their Ordinations
by Authority derived from the Sea of Rome; which makes them more confidently to
appear in public, and perform their Offices and Functions without fear of
punishment.

II. That Justices of the Peace are discouraged, because those that have been
forward in executing the Laws against Papists, in such Countries where they do
most abound, have been turned out of Commission, without any apparent cause,
whilst others who have been Popishly inclined, have been continued in
Commission, or put in de novo.

III. That in several Countries many Protestant Dissenters have been Indicted
under the notion of Popish Recusants, and the penalties of the Act levied upon
such Protestant Dissenters, when the Papists there have been either totally, or
for the most part discharged.

IV. That the Papists do evade the penalties of the Laws, by making over their
Estates, by secret Trusts, and fraudulent Conveyances, yet receiving the
profits of them to their own use and benefit; whereas in former times,
considerable Sums of money were raised by the Forfeitures of Popish Recusants.
That now, by the remisness of some, and discouragements of others of His
Majesty's Officers and Ministers of Justice, little or nothing is levied upon
them, or likely to be levied hereafter, unless the care thereof be committed to
persons Commissionated in the several Countries for the advancement of the
Protestant Religion, which may encourage persons to see it executed.

V. That persons are not discouraged to bring up their Children, or suffer them
to be bred up in the Popish Religion, because they are as capable of inheriting
the Estates of their Parents, or Relations, as any other of His Majesty's
Subjects.

The Commons do therefore most earnestly desire your Lordships to consider the
danger and sad consequences that may befall this Kingdom by the spreading of
that Religion amongst us, and seriously and cordially to join with them in
removing these and all other impediments, which obstruct the course of Justice,
and the due execution of the Laws, either by expediting those Remedies which
have been offered by them to your Lordships, or by proposing such others as may
be more effectual; and that this may be done with all Expedition, because the
Commons cannot think it suitable to their Trust, for them to consent to lay any
further charge upon the people, how urgent soever the occasions may be that
require it, till their minds be satisfied, that all care and diligence is used
to secure the Kingdom, and prevent the dangers that may arise from the
prevalency and countenance that is given to that Party, by some more effectual
course than has been provided.

But the Parliament being soon after by the ill influences of unhappy Councils
Prorogued, nothing was done, so that the Conspirators went on with their Game
more vigorously than ever; they had gained the Heir Presumptive of England to
own their Religion; whence they assumed no small confidence; they had made sure
of the French King for their Friend, and he made as sure of several English
Courtiers for his Pensioners: they had formed their design, engaged great
persons in it at home, and settled Correspondencies abroad: an Army was on foot
so Officer'd, as might give them hopes to debauch it; or if that failed, they
had got Commissions from the Pope to raise one of their own; and to Crown the
work, his Holiness had provided an English Cardinal [Howard] like a second
Pool, to reconcile and receive us again into the bosom of Mother Church. --
Thus all things were prepared; Behold the fire and the wood, but where is the
Lamb? We cannot say here, Deus providebit; but we must say, these bloody
Traitors had designed one for Sacrifice, even our gracious King; (whom God long
preserve) as knowing they could never destroy our Religion, till they had first
destroyed him, who is (and long may he live to be) the Defender of it.

And certainly whatever Papists may suggest, who because the Conspiracy did not
take, would fain persuade us there never was any, that next time they may do
their business more effectually: and how loud soever some very indifferent
Protestants, and men of droll, may laugh at the mention of a Massacre, and the
general destruction of all that should not conform to the Romish Church in
these Nations, as a thing more extravagant to be attempted, more impossible to
be effected, than any Romance-Adventure; yet considerate men will acknowledge,
that as things stood, and had not this Plot been discovered, nothing to an
humane eye could be more feazable: for when the King had been destroyed, and a
Popish Successor so established, that all had been Traitors who should offer to
oppose his pleasure; when all Offices of Trust should have been in the hands of
Papists, who had got not a few of them already; as Hull was then of the Lord
Bellasis, and P. of another, etc. when the Commonalty of England, on pre^ence
of executing the Statute for preserving the Game, were generally disarmed, and
not left so much as a Musket or pocket-Pistol, for fear (as one pleasantly
expresses it) of killing a Popish Bird: When we had a mercenary Army on foot,
^eady raised, and filled with Popish Officers, to have joined that Party at an
hours warning: when the French were ready to have assisted them with Men,
Money, and Ammunition, being through their contrivance at peace with all the
rest of the World, that they might be at better leisure to attend their
Motions: When at the same time the Spaniards, (under the name of Pilgrims) had
designed to land amongst us 12 or 1400 men, (which is not only attested by Mr.
Bedloe, but confirmed by a Master of a Ship, who was aboard their Fleet before
they were dispersed by ill-wea^^ ^ther) when our own Ships had been bestowed
upon Popish Commanders, and our strongest Forts and Militia under the like
Conduct: When at the same time our great City had been fired, and every man
taking care of his own particular concerns, and none left to mind the Public:
When you might have searched twenty good Houses, before you met with one that
had more Arms in it than some old rusty Gun or Pistol, and that perhaps without
either Flint, Powder, or Bullet: when all these things should concur together,
you must needs confess they would have it in their power to act Massacres, or
any other villainies they pleased; and as nothing but Providence did, so nothing
else could hinder them.

CHAP. VI.
An Account and Vindication of Doctor Oats, the first Discoverer of the Plot;
how he became Engaged amongst the Romanists: the prudent course he took for the
said Discovery, and the difficulties he met with therein.

SECT. 1.
AS Hell and Rome had improved all their skill and force to manage this hideous
Plot, and bring it to perfection; so Almighty God (notwithstanding all the
provocations of our manifold sins) was graciously pleased to appear for our
deliverance, by blasting all their long-studyed endeavors and Designs with a
Miscarriage, just when they were ready for the Birth. The Instrument made use
of by Providence, for this great work, was Mr Titus Oats, a Name which
(notwithstanding all the Slanders and Calumnies of his, because our Religions
and Nations Enemies) will be dear and honorable in after-Ages, as well as the
present, to all true Protestants, especially of these Kingdoms, whom he has
been so eminently serviceable to preserve; and therefore it will be requisite
here to give some brief account of him.

As for his Education, it was Liberal, in the course of Learning, being bred a
Student in St. John College in Cambridge, where he took his Degree: and that
as Heaven had endued him with good Natural parts, an inquisitive Genius, quick
Apprehension, wary Judgment, and tenacious Memory; so he had not been wanting
in improving those Talents, and cultivating those happy seeds by pains and
industry. For acquired Abilities, appears, by his proceeding Doctor in Divinity
at Salamanca in Spain, no contemptible University, where he performed all his
Exercises, said by experienced persons to be more difficult than those that are
commonly exacted elsewhere. He was formerly Vicar at Bobbing in Kent, to which
he came in the year 1672. but the Air not being good, left it, and was sometime
Minister near Chichester in Sussex, and afterward came to be Chaplain to the
Duke of Norfolk, with an ample testimony of his Life and Conversation. In all
these stations he was a person of a sober Life, and never charged with
Debauchery: whence it is plain, that all those scandalous Aspersions since
spread abroad by the Romanists, are false, and raised by malice, since they
were never heard of before he was engaged in this Discovery. Nor can it be
imagined, that the Jesuits would have esteemed him so much, or trusted him so
far as they did, had they not found him a person, as of good parts, so of a
discreet, sober deportment, fit to be employed in affairs of Moment.

The manner and occasion how he came engaged amongst them, is thus related.
Whilst he was the Duke of Norfolk's Chaplain, he overheard some whisperings
amongst the Priests, (with whom that Family was sufficiently haunted) That
there was some grand Design on foot, but could not learn what it was in
particular. He had heard from his Protestant Friends, and read in Sir Hamond
L'Estrange's History of King Charles the First, and other judicious Authors,
That the Papists had for many years carried on a Design to introduce Popery
again into these Nations; which created in him a longing desire to sound the
depth of it, and, if it were possible, to Countermine it. To this end, he
entered more freely into Conversation with some of that Tribe concerning
Religion; who greedy of gaining such a Proselyte, failed not to press him with
variety of Arguments: insomuch that at last he seemed as if he were
dissatisfyed in some things concerning our Church, and desired an opportunity
to discourse with some of their Jesuits, as being vogued the most Learned and
able Men of that Party. This on some preliminary cautions was procured; and
after sundry Conferences with them, in which he suffered himself to be
overcome, he was formally reconciled to the Church of Rome.

Shortly after this, seeming to aspire to the highest degree of perfection,
(which to be sure the Jesuits place in their Society, to which they have
blasphemously arrogated the Sacred Name of Jesus) he requested some of those
Fathers that he might be admitted to their Order; which after three days
consideration they were willing to consent to. And as a particular favor,
because he was a man of years, (being then about eight and twenty) they told
him, they would not employ him as usually they did Novices, (for so they call
their young Students) in drudgery for the first two years, but he should spend
that time in being a Messenger for their Society.

This exactly fitted his Design; and so, soon after, he was sent with Letters
to Valladolid in Spain, which by the way he dexterously opened, and thereby
began to smell something more of their Hellish Designs: he dispatched this and
some other affairs so much to their satisfaction, that after a little time, he
was taken into their Consults, as they call them, as a very confiding
instrument, and thereby had an opportunity to see all that was on the Wheel at
present, and liberty without suspicion to enquire how any thing past had been
carried on. More particularly, he made it his business to inform himself of the
beginning, progress, and conclusion of our late Wars; in all which he found the
Jesuits and Popish Party had a great hand. The Rebellion that led to it, being
began in Scotland, where it was first laid by Cardinal Richelieu, His Majesty's
irreconcilable Enemy: then it broke out in Ireland, where it was blessed with
his Holinesses Letters, and assisted by his Nuncio, whom he sent purposely to
tend the fire there, as aforesaid: afterward they played their parts in
disguise in England, to unsettle the people, start new Phanatical opinions,
furnish the Rabble with Arguments for Treason, raise needless occasions of
jealousy, push on Rebellion, frustrate all endeavors of Accommodation, etc.
till they had destroyed the King, the Government, the Church, and brought us
all into confusion. By this means also he understood that the City of London in
the year 66. was fixed by their contrivance, and was told how that Plot was
laid, and who were the Actors in the several Scenes; Richard Strange,
heretofore Provincial of the Jesuits, being Director in Chief thereof, and how
their Society got 14000 l. by the said Fire, etc.

He kept (but very privately) short Notes of all things of moment, that
occurred from the time he was admitted amongst their Society, with an intent to
produce them when they might be of use; by which means he was enabled to give
an Account of so many hundred Particulars, which are confirmed by other
Circumstances and Collaterate Evidence, and have not in the least Interfer'd
with one another, nor with those Papers which have been found elsewhere; or
with the Informations which have been given in by other Persons (though wholly
Strangers to him) whom God has since raised up further to clear and unmask
this detestable and Bloody Conspiracy.

SECT. 2.
Doctor Oats being thus qualified, and resolved, though with the great hazard
of his Life, to prevent, if possible, the Ruin of these Nations, by a Discovery
of the Plot, which was now so far advanced, that his Majesty's Life was daily
in danger; all their other Contrivances being ripe, and only wanting that Fatal
Blow to bring them into Act: He therefore saw the greatest necessity of
expedition, lest the notice should come too late.

And whereas Father Whitebread, the Jesuits Provincial, having before his last
return into England, engaged him to Assassinate Israel Tongue, Doctor of
Divinty (because he had Translated a Book Entitled, The Jesuits Morals, into
English, which severely reflected on the Society) and promised him 50 l. Reward
for the fame. He, after his coming over, having acquaintance with the said
Doctor Tongue, and knowing him to be a person of Trust and Integrity, did
Communicate to him, as well the said intended Assassination, as also some Heads
of the general Plot; and they both having seriously consulted of the best
method for managing of the Discovery, wherein they were sure to meet with
mighty Opposition, and run no small hazards, concluded to acquaint one Mr.
Christopher Kirby with the business; as one, who for his firm Fidelity, Zeal,
and Courage for the Protestant Religion, and his Majesty's safety, and the
Interest he had at Court, was the most capable and likely Person they could
think of, to assist them, and therefore on Monday the 12th. of August, the said
Dr. Tongue, See Mr. Kirbies Narrative of the manner of the Discovery.
showing him 43. Articles drawn up in writing; requested that (without
acquainting any other person there with he would make the same known to the
King; which Mr. Kirby generously undertook, but could not get any opportunity
of seeing his Majesty (except in Company of the Duke of York) till the next
Morning: Then in the Park he acquainted his Majesty that his Enemies had a
design against his Life, and humbly prayed him to use all caution, for he did
not know but he might be in danger in that very Walk. Tyrants are always
haunted with suspicions and fears: But his Majesty armed with his Native
Goodness and Innocence, seemed more surpised with the strangeness of the news,
than any apprehension of the danger; and only asked how that could be? To which
Mr. Kirby answered, that it might be by being Shot at; but to give a particular
account, required more privacy. His Majesty ordered him to attend his return
out of the Park; and then taking him aside, laid his Commands on him, to tell
him what he knew; who acquainted him that there were two Men, by Name, Grove
and Pickering, that watched an opportunity to Shoot his Majesty; and that Sir
G. W. was hired to Polsoh him, as he had been the day before acquainted by a
Friend, who had a more full account thereof in writing, and was near at hand,
ready to appear when commanded, which his Majesty was pleased should be about
Eight that Evening: Accordingly Mr. Kirby and Doctor Tongue did at that hour
attend his Majesty; and in the Red Room at White Hall, delivered unto him the
said 43 Articles, Copyed out by the Doctor (keeping the Original for his own
security) and both of them humbly begged that those Papers might be kept safe
and secret, lest the full Discovery should otherwise be prevented, and their
own lives endangered. His Majesty was pleased graciously to answer, That being
to go next Morning to Windsor, he would safely deposite the said Pap^is in the
hands of one whom he could Entrust, and with whom he would answer for their
safety; ordering them to wait upon the Earl of Danby, then Lord Treasurer, the
next Morning, which accordingly they did, but it was Afternoon before they
could be admitted to speak with him. When being brought to his Closet, they
found him with the Papers in his hand, saying he had received them from his
Majesty Sealed up, and that they were of the greatest concern in the World: But
after some few questions, very civilly for the present dismissed Mr. Kirby and
the Doctor, who two or three days after, carried more Informations, but could
hardly come to speak with him; only one of his Gentlemen was appointed to
receive the Papers Sealed.

And about the 20th. of Aug. Doctor Tongue offered to bring the said Pickering
and Grove into St. James's Park, that they might be taken with their Guns about
them, his Informant having assured them he could do it at any time, if the King
would please to be walking there; but this was not accepted, or neglected.
However, shortly after, Mr. Kirby showed Pickering, as he attended the Priests
at Mass in Sommerset-House, to one of the Lord Treasurers Gentlemen.

The 26th. of Aug. Dr. Tongue told Mr. Kirby that he had Informed the Lord
Treasurer how he might Intercept Letters that come to Grove (which if it had
been honestly done, must of necessity have very much laid open their Traitorous
practices, the Jesuits Letters being generally directed to him.) But having
heard nothing of it, and the Treasurer being gone out of Town, he was resolved
to know if any thing had been taken, or no: Accordingly, on the 31th. of Aug.
he made an Interest in a certain Letter Carrier belonging to the Post Office,
who on the 3. of Sept. informed him, that the said Grove had usually Letters
every week amounting to three or four pound; and that the very day before he
had as many Foreign Letters as came to 4 s. and some Inland Letters, but how
many he could not positively tell, nor could give account of any offered to be
intercepted.

Doctor Oats on the second of September. first discovered himself to Mr. Kirby,
Lodging at Fox-Hall, who all the time before had never seen his face, nor heard
his name; but from thenceforth they met together, and on the 4th. of September.
he acquainted the said Mr. Kirkby, that Whitebread. the Jesuits Provincial was
come to Town, and having got intelligence that there was some Discovery made,
had Beaten him, and charged him with having been with the King, with a
Minister, and that he had Betrayed them. The means and occasion whereby they
came to have this notice and suspicion, is thus set forth: One Bedingfield, a
Jesuit, deeply conecrn'd in the Plot, and who had got (as is said) to be
Confessor to the Duke of York, had related in a Letter to Blundel, another of
the Gang, that his Royal Highness had intimated some such thing to him, viz.
That a Gentleman in such-colour'd Habit, and a Minister had been with the King
and made some Discovery: Now it happened that Mr. Kirkby, when he waited on his
Majesty, as aforesaid, had on a Suit much of the same color, with what Dr.
Oats then usually wore, which created such their jealousy: However Dr. Oats
denying it (for in truth he had then never been with the King) the Provincial
at last seemed Reconciled to him, and only ordered him speedily to prepare to
go beyond the Sea, pretending he had some Business there for him to Negoriate.
Upon this discourse of Dr. Oats, Mr. Kirkby finding him partly discovered, and
in danger, resolved to go next day to Windsor, desiring Dr. Tongue in the mean
time to get his Information Sworn before some Justice of the Peace, which on
the 6th. of September. was done before Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey, yet without
permitting him to read the particulars; only assuring him in general, that it
contained matter of Treason, and other high Crimes, and that his Majesty had a
Copy of it. In the mean time, on the 5th. Mr. Kirkby presented himself before
his Majesty at Windsor; but there having been some prepossessions to take away
all belief of the Plot, used by Bedingfield, etc. he could not that day, or the
next obtain Audience; and therefore on the 7th. repaired to the Treasurers
Lodgings, and acquainted his Man, that the Original Informant was discovered
and beaten, therefore desired his Lordships directions; who sent out word that
he would hear him. But although Mr. Kirkby waited all that day, was in his
presence, and offered to speak, yet the said Treasurer declined it; and on the
9th. went away to Wimbleton. Mr. Kirkby receiving this discouragement, returned
home: In the mean time Dr. Oats holding on his Correspondence with the
Jesuits, on the 6th. of Sept. at night coming to the Provincials Lodgings, and
attending at his Chamber door, overheard him and some others discourse
concerning the disposing of a person, saying, This man has Betrayed us; we will
give 20 l. to a See Dr. Oate's Narrative, p. 55.
Coachman to take him up, who by By-ways shall carry him to Dover; and when we
have got him beyond Sea, we will force him by Tortures to Confess who had been
with the King, and informed him of the Business. Whereupon conjecturing, as
well he might, that they meant himself, he privately got away with speed, and
absented himself from his Lodging in Drury-Lan^ that night; and returning
thither next night, for some necessaries, was like to have been Assassinated by
one Stratford. On the 9th. at Night, he met Mr. Kirkby and Dr. Tongue at the
Flying-Horse in Kings-Street Westminser, whither for the present he had
retired; and then for his security went over with Mr. Kirkby to Fox-Hall, where
he and Dr. Tongue continued.

During this time, Dr. Oats wrote fair Copies of his Informations; and Dr.
Tongue in vain sought to give in farther Informations to the Treasurer, but were
both (and Mr. Kirkby also) much perplexed with apprehensions of the danger they
were in, and discouragements they had met with: Till on the 27th. at Night, one
of the Treasurers Servants meeting Mr. Kirkby, acquainted him he was come for
Dr. Tongue to go to the Council, who with Mr. Kirkby immediately went, but the
Council was risen before they came, and order given them to attend next day:
Whereupon they resolved next Morning to get two more Copies Sworn unto, that
each man might have an Authentic Copy, which accordingly they did (being 28th.
of Sept.) before Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey, who would needs keep one of them,
having never before perused the said Informations: Then first Dr. Tongue and Mr.
Kirkby, and afterward Dr. Oats being sent for, attended the Council, who upon
Examination of Dr. Oats, were pleased to order both him and Dr. Tongue,
Lodgings in White Hall for their Security; and proceeded to examine and enquire
further into the matter. Post varios Casus, post tot Discrimina Rerum,
Tendimus adversus Latium --


CHAP. VII.
The nature and scope of the Plot in general, laid open.

SECT. 1.
THE design in general was by Fire and Sword, when all other means failed, to
subvert the Established Government and Religion of these Kingdoms, and to reduce
the same to Popery, so as no Toleration should be given to any Protestant, but
all to be Extirpated, Root and Branch.

The chief Conspirators that designed, and were to carry on this, were

1. The present Pope, Innocent the Eleventh, who in the Congregation, de
propaganda fide (consisting of about 350 persons) held about December, 1677.
Declared all his Majesty's Dominions to be part of St. Peter's Patrimony, as
forfeited to the Holy See for the Meresie of the Prince and People, and so to
be disposed of as he should think fit.

2. Our English Cardinal Howard, whom in pursuance of such Declaration, his
Holiness appointed as his Legate, to take Possession of England in his Name; he
likewise made him Archbishop of Canterbury, with an augmentation of
Forty-thousand Crowns a year, for the maintenance of his Legantine Authority:
He had also Constituted Bishops and Dignitaries for all or most of the Sees and
Ecclesiastical promotions in England: As Perrot, Superior of the Secular
Priests, to be Archbishop of York; Corker, Bishop of London; Whitebread of
Winchester; Strange, of Durham; Dr. Godden of Salisbury; Napper, a Franciscan
Friar, of Norwich, etc. Removing all the Bishops in possession from their
present Dignities.

3. Johannes Paulus de Oliva, Father-General of the Jesuits Society, residing
at Rome, who was to give directions to the Provincial of the Jesuits in London,
how to proceed in this affair.

4. Pedro Jeronymo de Corduba, Provincial of the Jesuits in New Castile, who
was to assist with Counsel and Money, and to mis-represent the Actions and
Intentions of his Majesty of Great Britain in the Spanish Court, to create
Jealousies and Feuds between the two Crowns; which likewise was to be done by a
Jesuit that is Confessor to the Emperor, in Relation to England and that Court.

5. Le Chese, a Jesuit, Confessor to the French King, with whom Coleman holding
Correspondence, discovered to him all the Secrets of State he could, and by his
means endeavored to obtain a Pension from the French King for his good
Services in betraying his Native Country.

6. The Provincial of the Jesuits for the time being in England, which of late
was first Strange, and then Whitebread.

7. The Benedictine Monks at the Savoy', where they had erected them a
College; to such a degree of Confidence were they arrived.

8. Jesuits and Seminary-Priests, of whom there were about that time in
England, the number of Eighteen-hundred, and were generally privy to the main
design, though perhaps not all acquainted with particulars.

9. Several Lay-persons of Quality drawn in, out of Zeal, Ambition,
Covetousness, Revenge, etc. to join with them, to Command the Forces they were
to raise, and execute the great Offices of the Realm: As the Lord Arundel of
Warder, to be Lord Chancellor of England: The Lord Powis, Lord Treasurer: Sir
William Godolphin, Lord-Privy-Seal: Edward Coleman, Secretary of State: Lord
Bellasis, General: Lord Peter's, Lieutenant General: Sir Francis Ratcliff, Major
General: John Lambert, Adjutant-General: Langhorn, Advocate-General, etc. who
had Commissions sent them, Sealed by Paulus d' Oliva, from Rome.

The work was so great, and in their apprehension so glorious, that the most
Eminent of the Popish Clergy in Europe were engaged in it; so that it cannot be
said to be an Act or Contrivance of any few particular persons, but an
Unanimous undertaking of their whole Church, and so it must be Recorded to
Posterity, to their everlasting shame.

SECT. 2.
The means whereby they resolved to accomplish it, were,

1. By Killing the King, finding they could not work him to their purpose, and
therefore to remove him, they laid several distinct Plots, and all to be kept
unknown to each other: As 1. Grove and Pickering to Shoot him: 2. Conyers and
Anderton Benedictine Monks, and four Irish Russians, to Stab him. 3. To Poison
him; for which purpose 5000 l. was entered in their Books as paid to Sir George
Wakeman in part of 15000 l. Reward, which he was to have for that Horrid work,
by virtue of a Contract made with him, in the presence of Coleman and Dr.
Fogarthy. As for the Duke of York, they concluded to make use of his Name and
Interest, if he would comply with them. 1. To accept of the Three Kingdoms as a
gift from the Pope, and hold them in Fee of him. 2ly. If he would Confirm their
Settlement of the Church and State. 3dly. If he would Exterminate all
Protestants. 4thly. If he would Pardon the Murderers of his Brother, the
Murderers of the People, and those who should Fire the remaining part of the
City and Suburbs.

2. For that was the second particular of their work, to Fire London and
Westminster, and places adjoining thereunto; as also other the chief Cities and
Towns of England, immediately on the Killing of his Majesty; and lay the whole
load, both of the Murder and Firing on the Presbyterians and Fanatics,
thereby provoking the Episcopal men to join with them to cut them off; that so
Protestants being weakened by their own Feuds, they might have the better
opportunities, and easier task to subdue them All.

3. By a general Massacre, to which purpose they had formed an Army, which was
to consist of Fifty-thousand to be Listed about London: The Officers all
resolute Papists, and for the most part French and Irish. These they gave out
were enough to Cut the Throats of One-hundred-thousand Protestants, especially
being taken upon a Surprise, when the Militia of London was unprovided and
Undisciplined, and the Country generally Disarmed as aforesaid. And besides,
the Conspirators had the French, and also many thousands of Pilgrims and
Lay-Brothers daily expected from Spain, to assist them.

4. The Prince of Orange was also Condemned, Scandalized, and designed against
by Name, and 12. Jesuits sent into Holland, on purpose to use means to put that
People in a Mutiny against his Person and Government; by buzzing amongst them,
that his Uncle of England, and himself had a design to make the said Prince
Absolute, with the Title of a King over them, and so to bring them to a Slavery
for ever, worse than they suffered heretofore under the Spaniard.

5. As for Ireland, the Pope had made Talbot the Titular Archbishop of Dublin,
his Legate, to take possession for him of that Kingdom; whose Brother Talbot
was to be General of all the Forces there, which were to consist of 20000.
Catholick-Foot, and 5000. Horse, besides the French Auxiliaries. It was there
to be carried on by a general Rebellion and Massacre of the Protestants, as in
41. which they call, Demonstrating their Zeal for the Catholic Faith. In the
first place the Duke of Ormond was to be Assassinated, which four Jesuits had
undertook to dispatch: And the better to encourage this Rebellion, the Pope was
to Contribute Eight-hundred-thousand Crowns, and the French had privately sent
over some supplies of Men and Arms, and was to furnish them with more as soon
as they should be in Action; Le Chese having a great Influence in promoting all
these Transactions.

6. In Scotland likewise particular care was taken to foment Discontents, and
raise a Rebellion, to which end they diverse times sent over several Jesuits, to
mingle themselves if they could with the Dessenters, so as they might Preach in
their Fieldmeetings, and inflame them to take Arms to Vindicate their Religion
and Liberty against those Pressures they complained of, and which they were to
aggravate; and also against Bishops. And for their encouragement, the Papists
there were to raise Eight-thousand Men to join with such Dissenters, lest they
should be too weak to oppose the Government; by which they would kill two Birds
with one stone, make a difference and hatred between Protestants, and cast the
Odium of Rebellion on the Presbyterians, if it should not succeed, or destroy
the Government, if it should; nor have their Policies in this kind, been wholly
ineffectual, as appears by the late Rebellion in Scotland, principally
occasioned by these Romish Incendiaries, though happily suppressed without
doing that general mischief which they expected.

Toward the necessary Charge.

1. The Society of Jesus in England, are Credibly said to have above
Threescore-thousand Pounds per Annum Estate in Land, managed by Trustees; in
the securing and settling whereof, Mr. Langhorn the Councellor, was principally
concerned.

2. They have One-hundred-thousand Pounds Stock in ready Money, employed at
Interest by Scriveners, and used in Trade by Persons of several occupations.

3. Eleven-thousand Crowns Paulus de Oliva was to send them from Rome. Ten
thousand Pounds more from Pedro Jeronymo de Corduba, from Spain. Le Chese, the
French King's Confessor, advanced Ten thousand Pounds more; and Six thousand
pounds the Benedictines: Besides considerable sums of Money transmitted to
Coleman by Foreign Ministers of State; and the Benevolencies of Catholic
Grandees at home, for promoting so meritorious a work.

This is the general Scheme of this Bloody, Hellish Plot, which in the quality
and number of the Conspirators; the long time it has been contriving and
carried on; the Cruelties designed; the vastness of the undertaking; the
multitudes that would thereby have been destroyed, and other circumstances, is
not to be paralleled in any History; and all this Treason, Bloodshed, and
Villainy, without any provocation, to be perpetrated under the color of
Religion.

SECT. 3.
As for particulars, and the several Letters and Negotiations, we refer the
Reader that is so curious to Dr. Oats his Narrative Printed, as aforesaid,
last Spring, by Order of the House of Lords, whereby it appears, that in April
77. he was employed by Strange, the then Provincial; Fenwick, Hartcourt, and
other Jesuits in London, to carry their Letters to one Father Suinam, an Irish
Jesuit, at Madrid in Spain: That in his Journey he broke open the said Letters,
and found therein an account given what Jesuits they had sent into Scotland to
stir up Tumults, and that they feared not success in their design, having got
an Interest in his Royal Highness, etc. That he saw several Students sent out
of England to Valladolyd, who were obliged by the Jesuits of the College, to
Renounce their Allegiance to his Majesty of Great Britain; and that one
Armstrong, in a Sermon to the Students there, did with most false and
black-mouthed Scandals represent his said Majesty, using such Irreverent base
expressions, as no good Subject can here repeat without horror; with several
other Traitorous words and Correspondencies which he there discovered: from
whence he returned in November.

That about the beginning of December, he was sent with another Treasonable
Letter to St. Omers, wherein was expressly mentioned their design to Stab; or if
that could not be done, to Poison the King; and that they had received Ten
thousand Pounds from Le Chese, which was in the hands of one Worsley of London,
Goldsmith. There was likewise Enclosed a Letter of thanks to Le Chese, which he
carried from St. Omers to him at Paris. During this his Journey, and being
abroad, he saw and read many other of their Letters, all tending to one effect,
viz. Of cutting off the King, Subverting the Government, and Restoning the
Romish Religion; and were so confident as in some of them, to say, That his
Majesty of England was so possessed of their Fidelity, that if any Malecontent
amongst them should not prove true, but offer to discover, he would never
belie^ them.

That in April, 1678. he came over with others to the grand Consult which was
held the 24th. of that month, by about 50 Jesuits, at the White-horse Tavern
in the Strand, where they met successively in small Companies, and thence
dispersed into distinct little Colloquies or Clubs, where they Signed a Resolve
for the Death of the King, which Dr. Oats, as Messenger, carried from one
Company to another to be Signed; and very shortly after returned to St. Omers,
from whence he came again, (being the last time of his being abroad) the 23. of
June for England; where in July, he became privy to the Treaty with Wakeman and
the terms; as also heard John Keins a Jesuit, Preach a Sermon on the 13th. of
August, to 12 persons in disguise, supposed to be of eminent quality; wherein
he asserted, That Protestants and other Heretical Princes, were ipso facto,
deposed because, such; and that it was as lawful to destroy them, as an Oliver
Cromwell, or any other Usurper; with several other Traitorous words and
discourses from diverse of the Conspintors at several times and places therein
specified, till the time of his making the Discovery, as aforesaid.

CHAP. VIII.
Some proceedings immediately following the Discovery, and the true manner and
circumstances of the Murder of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey.

SECT. 1.
THE Discovery was made to the Council on Saturday the 28th of September. (being
Michaelmas Eve) as aforesaid, in the Morning, where Dr. Oats was a long time
under Examination. In the Afternoon the Council sat again, and Dr. Oats was
employed with a Guard, that Night, to search after some Jesuits, whom he took.
On Sunday, in the Afternoon, the Council sat again very long, and then he was
Re-examin'd; and when they rose, he was sent abroad all that Night to Search
the Lodgings of several Priests, and find out their Papers, which he did seize
upon. On the said Sunday Sir George Wakeman (the Queens Physician) before
mentioned, was summoned to attend the Council, but was dismissed; being told by
Sir Ph. Lloyd, that his Majesty would have the hearing of his business next day
himself. On Monday Morning the Council sat again, and Dr. Oats was further
Examined; and by reason of so long watching, and running up and down for two
days and nights together, continually without any respit, and in bad rainy
weather, he was reduced to such extreme weakness and disorder of body, that he
could hardly stand or speak: Then it was that Sir George Wakeman again
appeared, and behaved himself so strangely, that the whole Council were amazed
at the manner of it, for he did not seem to deny what he was charged with so
positively, as one that was Innocent would have done, but used many boasting
expressions of his great fidelity and Loyalty to the King, and required
Satisfaction and Reparation for the Injury done to his Honor. Dr. Oats did
then set forth that he had seen a Letter from Whitebread to Fenwick, mentioning
that Sir George had undertaken the Poisoning of the King for 15000 l. of which
5000 l. had been paid him by Coleman: But a question arose afterward, at his
Trial, Whether he then mentioned another Letter, which afterward he insisted
upon, written from Sir George himself to Father Ashby; Sir George denying that
he then said any thing of it; but on the contrary, declared he had not any
thing further to charge him with, and then endeavored to Invalidate his
after-Evidence; whereas Dr. Oats alleged, the Council did not press him to
his knowledge; and that the Omission of mentioning that Letter, if he did omit
it, as to the best of his memory he did not, was to be attributed to his
Weakness at that time; which the King and Council were so sensible of, that his
Majesty himself had like to have sent him away once or twice before, because he
found him so Ill. [See Wakemans Trial, p. 55, 56, and 59.] It not being
improbable that a man under such Circumstances might forget to mention that,
which at another time he might well know and remember. However it was, things
were so managed, that Sir George was not Committed at that time, nor till above
three weeks afterward. When Dr. Oats acquainting the House of Commons with
that Letter under Sir Georges hand, they thereupon sent a Message to the House
of Lords, wondering why he was not Confined: Whereupon their Lordships upon
Examination of the matter, Committed him.

As for Priests, Jesuits, and Conspirators about this time secured, there were

On the 30th. of September, Committed to Newgate by Order of the Privy Council,
for High Treason,

Dr. William Fogarthy, Since dead in Goal. William Ireland, John Fenwick,
Thomas Pickering,
All since Executed. John Grove. John Smith, Tho. Johnson.
Still in Newgate Untried.
On Sunday the 30th. of September. Mr. Colemans House was Searched, and some of
his Papers seized: On Monday the first of October. he voluntarily rendered himself
to Sir Joseph Williamson, then Secretary of State, hearing there was a Warrant
out against him: But there were so many other Prisoners under Examination, that
he was not call d till Afternoon, where he seemed to hear these lewd things
charged upon him, with Scorn and Indignation; insomuch, that though a blank
Warrant was filled up, to send him to Newgate, he was only for the present
Committed to a Messenger, and a special Warrant granted to the Messenger to
secure him against the said first Order.

On Tuesday the 2d. of October. his Majesty went out of Town to New Market; and a
Committee being appointed to Examine several Papers, and Mr. Colemans amongst
others, there were found in a Deal-box some, of such dangerous Consequence, as
moved the Lords forthwith to Sign a Warrant for his Commitment to Newgate,
dated the 4th. of October.

On the 7th. Mr. Richard Langhorn the Elder, a Councellor of the Temple; and on
the 10th. Mr. Edward Peter's, lately living at Sir Charles Shellies in Sussex
(who Married the Lady Abergaveny) were both Committed to Newgate by the Council.

Hitherto the weight of this mighty work lay wholly upon Dr. Oats's shoulders
and Reputation, and the design he mentioned, was in it self, and its tendency
so Horrid and Bloody, that good men (who are always Charitable) could scarce
persuade themselves of its reality: The fashionable men of the Town, that
pretend to wit and humor, did but make a Jest of it, having long since learned
to turn all things, though never so serious and sacred, into Drol and Ridicule;
and on the other side, the Conspirators with Impudence, lies, noise, number,
and the powerful Interest they had, did not doubt but to over-bear and crush
his testimony; and upon this Confidence no doubt it was, and consideration that
at worst he being but a single Evidence, they could not by our Law be Convicted
of Treason for any thing he could say; that so many of them stood so long by it
without flying, that at last they fell into the hands of Justice; which
Indiscretion, these men who are excellent at turning Objections into Arguments,
would afterward have made an advantage of, as a sign of their Innocence, when
in truth it was only a symtom of their Presumption.

SECT. 2.
But now the adorable Providence of God was pleased to take the Crafty in their
own Net, and so far Infatuate these Romish Achitophels, that themselves
mortally wounded their own Cause, and became Accessory to promote a further
Discovery and Confirmation, by venturing upon a Bloody Enterprise, which
immediately Alarmed the whole Nation, and left no room any longer for doubt,
whether or no there were a Plot. This was the Murder of that worthy
Magistrate, Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey, whose memory shall be dear to Posterity,
as a Martyr for our Church, and a Ransom for the State: And though the manner
of his death was not discovered till a considerable time afterward; yet not to
interrupt the Series of time, we shall relate it here.

Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, as is before related, took Dr. Oat's Depositions,
which was no more than every Gentleman in the Commission of the Peace, was
bound to do; yet for this necessary discharge of his duty, the Conspirators
were so enraged, that they resolved to cut him off; the rather (as may
reasonably be supposed) to deter all other Magistrates from inter-medling with
any affairs relating to the Plot: How many there were in all, that Conspired
his death, is not yet certainly discovered; for it appears, they accounted the
Murdering of him so necessary, that they had employed several Parties to do
it, which knew nothing of each others designs. But those who are known to have
been in it, were these, Father Girald and Father Felly, two Irish Priests,
Robert Green, Cushion-man to the Queens Chapel; Laurence Hill, Doctor Godden's
Man (which Doctor is Treasurer of the said Chapel) Henry Berry, who was Porter
of Sommerset-House, and Mr. Miles Prance, a Goldsmith in Covent Garden, who
workt to the Queen: These were actually present at the Murder; and besides,
they knew there were two more that were Privy to it, and should have been
there, but were not, viz. one Father Lewson, a Priest, and one Phillip
Vernatti, who belonged to the Lord Bellasis (who since fled.) Then of the other
Gang, who were to have done it, but did not, there were Pritchard, Le Fair,
Welsh, Kains, and another (five Jesuits) and Mr. William Bedloe.

Of that Company that effected it, it is believed that Vernatti, and the Priests
first undertook it, and drew in Green, Hill, and Berry first; and afterward
engaged Mr. Prance, which they did at the Plough-Alehouse by the Watergate, by
Sommerset-House, on a Sunday, after they came from Chapel; telling him that
Sir Edmundbury was a better Persecutor of Catholics, and a particular Enemy to
her Majesty's Servants (whereof Mr. Prance counted himself one, as aforesaid)
and that he had very lately Examined people against them, and got Depositions
to fix base Crimes and Scandals on their Religion; and that Catholics would be
ruined, unless he were taken off; and therefore it was necessary for the Glory
of God, and good of the Church, that it should be done; and that besides, they
should have a good Reward from the Lord Bellasis; and when Mr. Prance scrupled
it, the two Priests, Girald See Prance, Narrative. page 10. and the Trials of
Green, etc. p. 14.
and Kelly told him, It was no sin, but a work of Charity; so far from being a
Murder, that it was a Meritorious work, and he ought to assist in it.

Having thus fixed him, they had several Consultations how to accomplish the
work: At last, on Saturday the 12th. of October, Hill went to Sir Edmundbury
Godfreys House in the Morning, and spoke with him; but what he said, is not
known: Then taking his leave, he went to Girald and Green, and with them staid
hard by, waiting Sir Edmundbury Godfreys coming forth, which about 10 or 11. a
Clock he did, as he used to do all alone; they dogged him up and down (as they
said) all that Day, till about six or seven a Clock in the Evening, and then
Green came to Prances House, and told him that they had Set him, but did not
name where, any further than by saying near St. Clements; and that Prance must
make all have down to Sommerset-House, to the Watergate (that is the
furthermost Gate, or passage West ward, in the Strand, that goes into
Sommerset-House, down to the Waterside) and there he should find Kelly and
Berry, which he did, and they three waited there till about Nine a Clock at
Night; then Hill came in have, and told them he was coming, and that they must
pretend a quarrel, and he would fetch him in; Kelly and Berry did begin a
seeming quarrel; and just as Sir Edmundbury was passing by the Watergate, Hill
(who was acquainted with Sir Edmundbury, and Sir Edmundbury with him, as having
dealt with him formerly) steps out in a great deal of have, and entreated him
for Gods sake to come in, for there were two men a quarrelling, and he was
afraid there would be Bloodshed; whereas his presence, being a Magistrate,
would presently quiet them: He refused at first; but the other was so
importunate, that at last he consented, and Hill entered the Gate first; after
him, Sir Edmund-bury; and just behind him followed Girald and Green: As soon as
they were in, Prance went up to the Watergate, to watch that no body should
come in that way; and Berry was to secure the Stairs and passage by the
Chapel; but first he and Kelly, the pretended Quarrellers, stood about the end
of the Rail by the Queens Stables; and as Sir Edmundbury went down toward
them, Green suddenly threw a twisted Handkerchief about his neck, and forthwith
all four of them pulled him down and Throttled him, so as he could make no
noise; then they threw him behind the Rail, and gave him many violent punches
on the Breast with their Knees; and Green wrung his neck almost round, with all
his force: Prance and Berry being come to them, when he was quite dead, they
all helped to carry the Body into Dr. Goddins Lodgings, where the said Hill
lived, who went before and opened the door: When they were in, they carried him
up five or six steps, into a little Room on the right hand, and there left him
that night, and Sunday all day and night.

On Monday night, Hill and some others of them removed him into a Room in the
upper Court; and Prance having a mind to see where they had laid him, they all
went with a dark Lanthorn thither, and looked on the body; at which time Mr.
Bedloe saw Mr. Prance, and knew him again, long afterward, as in due place
shall be mentioned.

On Tuesday night they carried him to another Room in the said long Entry, over
against Dr. Goddins Lodgings: And on Wednesday night, being removing it from
thence to the Room where it was at first; Prance happening to come upon them at
that instant, they all run away and left the Body in the Entry, till he called
to them; and then they came back and laid it, as at first, in the little Room.

Then that they might Murder his Reputation, as they had his Person; the two
wicked Pciests, Girald and Kelly, advised to carry him out into the Fields, and
leave him run through with his own Sword, in some obscure place, that he might
be supposed to have Murdered himself, and therefore his Money, Rings, etc.
were all to be left with him. This being agreed, they resolv*d to carry him out
at Night; and in order thereunto, Hill procured a Sedan, into which, about 12.
a Clock, they put him; Prance and Girald carried him out at the great Gate,
Berry the Porter opening the door, who to avoid the Soldiers taking any notice,
had invited them into his House with Drink and Tobacco: Thus sometimes Girald
and Prance, and sometimes Kelly and Green carried him up toward So-ho Fields,
hard by the Grecians Church, and there Hill attended with an Horse, and they
set the body up before him, and clapped the Sedan into an House that was Building
there, but unfinished, till they came back; and then Girald the Priest said, I
wish we had an hundred such Rogues as secure as we have this: Then Prance,
because he was a Housekeeper returned home, and the other four went away with
him, one leading the Horse, Hill riding and holding the Body, and the other two
walking by.

They carried him into an obscure place, about two miles out of Town, toward
Hampstead, near a place called Prim-rose Hill, and there in a Ditch they left
his Body, Girald having run Sir Edmonds own Sword through him, and left it in,
but the Scabbard and his Gloves they laid on the Bank, at a small distance.

In the mean time Sir Edmund-burys Servants first, and then his Friends, and at
last the whole Town were not a little concerned for his abscence; and there was
once a Proclamation ordered to discover him, but Countermanded by reason of
false Information given by some Papists, that he was living and well; and there
were several persons that went up and down to Coffee. Houses to spread false
Reports, that he was gone into the Country to be Married to such a Lady, whom
they took upon them to name; that they saw him at such or such a place, etc.

That Saturday the 12th. of October, the very Evening that Sir Edmund-bury
Godfrey was so Murdered, did Father Harcourt the Jesuit, lately Executed, send
away a Letter to Father Ewers, a Priest, at the Lord Astons in Staffordshire,
wherein were these words, This night is Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey dispatched: This
Letter was received there on the Monday, and shown to Mr. Dugdale, as he has
since made See the Trial of Whitebread, etc. p. 26.
Oath at several Trials, which is further confirmed by Mr. Chetwin, a worthy
Gentleman, who being then in that Country, heard a report of it there, by
means of that Letter, on the Tuesday, which was before ever there was any
discovery of it at London.

For here was no tidings to be heard what was become of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey,
till on the Thursday following, being the 17th. of October. and then two men
passing over the Fi^^ls by chance, spied the Gloves and Scabbard; and as they
came back, going to the place, discovered the Body in the Ditch.

The 20th. of October. the King Issued his Proclamation, Commanding all his
Officers and Subjects to use their utmost diligence to find out and discover
the Murderers of the said Sir Edmund-bury, Graciously promising 500 l. Reward,
to any that should make such discovery; and if any one of the Murderers should
discover the rest, he should not only be pardoned, but likewise have the said
Reward.

But this Royal offer could not prevail with any of them to come in, for the
present, but they seemed more hardened in their wickedness by its success; for
about a Fortnight afterward, there was by them a Narrative of See Pran.
Narrative, p. 18.
this Heroic fact drawn up in Writing, which Vernatti read in a Triumphing
manner, at a meeting they had at the Queens-Head at Bow; and said that the same
was drawn up to be showed to the Lord Bellasis, and some other great persons
that were the original Designers and Promoters of the business, for their
satisfaction; and possibly it may since be sent to Rome, and there finds as
great approbation, and causes as great Joy as the News of the Murder of King
Henry the Third of France did, upon which Pope Sixtus the Fifth made a
Panegyrical Oration, calling it the Work of God, and preferring the Virtue,
Courage, and Zeal of the Friar that did it, before that of Eleazer in the
Macchabees, or of Judith killing of Holofernes.

The 21th. of October. the Parliament met, to whom his Majesty in his Speech took
notice of the Plot in these words: I now intend to acquaint you (as I shall
always do with any thing that concerns me) that I have been informed of a
design against my Person, by the Jesuits, of which I shall forbear any Opinion,
lest I may seem to say too much or too little; but I will leave the matter to
the Law, and in the mean time will take as much care as I can to prevent all
manner of practices by that sort of men, and others too, who have been
tampering, in a high degree with Foreigners, and contriving how to Introduce
Popery amongst us.

October the 24th. 1678. Mr. Oats was Examined in the House of Commons six or
seven hours; and about Nine a Clock at Night, the House sent for the Lord Chief
Justice Scroggs, and he took Mr. Oates's Examination upon Oath, and in the
House Sealed 26 Warrants against several Lords, and others that Mr. Oats had
Sworn against; whereupon the five Lords, viz. The Lord Powis, the Lord
Stafford, the Lord Arundel of Wardour, the Lord Petre, and the Lord Bellasis,
and Sir Henry Tichburn, Baronet, were taken into Custody, and shortly after
Committed to the Tower, and about the 30th. of November. the Lords were Impeached
of High Treason.

The same day James Corker was Committed to Newgate by Sir Charles Harbord, and
Sir Thomas Stringer for a suspected Priest; who afterward appeared to be one
charged with the Plot: And the 26th. Matthew Medburn (formerly a Player) was
likewise sent thither by the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, for High Treason, who
died in Custody the 19th. of March following.

The 30th. of October, the Parliament having by an Address desired that Papists
might be Banished the Town, his Majesty set forth a Proclamation, declaring
that there was a Bloody Traitorous design of Popish Recusants against his
Majesty's Sacred Person and Government, and the Protestant Religion; commanding
them all, except settled Housekeepers that would take the Oath of Allegiance
and Supremacy (which the Justices should be Empowered by Special Commission to
Administer) to depart the Cities of London and Westminster, and all places
within 10 Miles distance of the same. In pursuance of this Proclamation, many
Papists pretending they could not in Conscience take the said Oaths, did go out
of Town with great Lamentation, leaving their Trades and Dwellings; But within
a Week or two, their Ghostly Fathers had fitted them with Dispensations, as
appears by the sequel, and then they generally returned again, and freely,
without any Keckings of Conscience, offered to swallow the said Oaths, or
indeed any other Test that could be tendered them.

October. the 31th. Upon the further perusal of Mr. Colemans Papers, and the
Examination of Mr. Oats taken upon Oath, it was Resolved by the House of
Commons, Nemine Contradicente.

That there has been and is a Damnable and Hellish Plot contrived and carried
on by the Popish Recusants, for Assassinating and Murdering the King, and for
Subverting the Government, and destroying the Protestant Religion by Law
Established.

The same day the Body of Sir Edmund. bury Godfrey was Honorably Buried, being
carried from Old Bridewel, attended with a vast number of Persons of Quality,
Ministers, and substantial Citizens, to the Parish Church of St. Martin in the
Fields, wherein he dwelt, and there Enterr'd.

November. 2. A Proclamation promising 20 l. Reward to any that should discover
any Officer or Soldier of his Majesty's Guards, who after taking the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, was perverted to the Romish Religion, or should hear
Mass.

On Saturday the 9th. of November. his Majesty made a Speech to both Houses of
Parliament, purposely to give them thanks for the care they took for the safety
of his Person in these times of danger; assuring them he would join with them
in all the ways and means that might Establish a firm Security of the
Protestant Religion, as their own hearts could wish, and this not only during
his time, but in all future Ages to the end of the World.

Nov. 10. was a Proclamation to confine all Popish Recusants within five Miles
of their respective dwellings. About this time to Corroborate and confirm Dr.
Oats his Testimony, it pleased God to work upon the heart of Mr. William
Bedloe, to come in and make a further discovery. He had formerly been (as it is
said) a Servant to the Lord Bellasis, afterward an Alpherez [or Ensign] in
Flanders; and about Michaelmass, 1674. was sent for over by Harcourt,
recommended by the English Abbess at Dunkirk, and so by degrees became
acquainted with the Jesuits, and was at last generally employed as an Agent for
them, and sent frequently with Letters into Foreign parts, whereby he became
privy unto several of their Traitorous designs; and after the Plot discovered
by Dr. Oats, he continued amongst them, who being somewhat jealous of his
revolting, did, the better to keep him in awe, make him constantly twice every
week take the Sea the Trial of Green, etc. p. 33.
Sacrament, and thereupon swear Secrecy, and to conceal his knowledge of the
Plot. Before the Murder of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey, Le Fair, Pritchard, Kains,
and other Jesuits and Priests, treated with him about Killing a Gentleman, and
said he should have a good Reward, but would not discover who it was:
Afterward they employed him to Insinuate himself into the Acquaintance of Sir
Edmund-bury Godfrey, which he accordingly did, pretending to take out Warrants
for the good Behavior against persons that were not in being, but what use
they designed to make of such his Acquaintance, he knew not: But being with
them the day before Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey was Murdered, at the Gray-hound
Tavern, the said Mr. Bedloe sent his Boy to his House to desire him to come to
them; but he happened not to be at home, else it is probable they had Poisoned,
or otherwise Killed him then: Next day they told him it was to be done that
night, and that there was to be 4000 l. Reward for doing of it, given by the
Lord Bellasis, which Mr. Coleman had order to pay; therefore they engaged him
to meet them that night in the Cloisters at Sommerset-House, but he failed in
coming, for which Le Fair was angry, but told him on the Monday, that the
business was done without him, and then endeavored to engage him to help carry
off the Body; and at this request some Priests showed him the Body, who then,
and not before, knew it to be Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey: When they talked of
carrying him out, Mr. Bedloe told him it was yet too early, and about 12. would
be a better time, at which time he would come to them, which Le Fair made him
promise to do upon the Sacrament which he last took; but being much troubled to
see their Cruelty, he returned no more to them, but went to Bristol very
restless and disturbed in his mind; and at last being convinced it was his
duty, he could no longer forbear discovery, but wrote to one of the Secretaries
of State, and was sent for up; and though he had no acquaintance with, or to
his knowledge ever saw Dr. Oats before; and that for a considerable time they
were kept with Guards apart, and not suffered to have any Correspondence, yet
he most exactly agreed in the Account he gave of the Plot, with what Dr. Oats
had set forth, both as to things and persons. He also gave an account that Sir
Edmund-bury Godfrey was Murdered at Somerset House by the Contrivance of the
Jesuits, but the particulars he could not fully set forth.

The 17th. of November. upon this new Information received, his Majesty set forth
a Proclamation for the Apprehension. of George Coniers, Le Phaire, Prichard,
Symonds, Charles Walsh, and Biston, alias Beeston, late Servant of the Lady
Bellasis, who were thereby required to render themselves, and that if they did
not so do before the 10th. day of December. next, a Bill should be presented to
the House of Peers for Attainting them of High Treason; and further promising
100 l. Reward to any Person that should Discover or Apprehend any of the said
Offenders. The same Proclamation directs the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance
to be tendered to all Popish Recusants or Persons so reputed; and if they
refuse, to bind them over to appear the next Sessions; and in case they cannot,
or will not find Securities, then to Commit them: And all such Refusers to be
Disarmed, and 10 l. Reward promised to any that should discover any
considerable quantity of Arms in any Popish Recusants House.

The 20th. of Novem. was another Proclamation, promising 20 l. Reward to any
person that should Discover and Apprehend any Popish Priest and Jesuit, (except
John Huddleston, signally Instrumental in his Majesty's escape after the Fight
at Worcester, Priests belonging to the Queen, whose names shall be Enrolled in
the King's Bench, and those that attend upon Foreign Ambassadors) the said 20 l.
to be immediately, paid upon such Discovery and Apprehension, and due proof
thereof.

CHAP. IX.
The Proceedings against William Staley, Goldsmith, and his Execution for
speaking Treasonable words.

THE late Discovery had so unexpectedly frustrated the designs of the Papists,
that being therewith enraged, they could hardly contain themselves within any
bound of patience or moderation, but the Traitorous Poison which had long
rankled in their hearts, began now to blister out at their tongues; and since
they were prevented from Acting, they descended with a kind of Female malice,
to vent their Resentments in talking and uttering lewd Expressions and Menaces.
Of this kind of Traitors was William Staley, a Goldsmith in Covent Garden, a
Strict and Zealous Papist, bred beyond the Seas at one of the English
Seminaries, intended for a Priest; in order to which, he took the degrees of a
Deacon, as is related by those that well knew him, but afterward altered his
resolutions, and began to study Physic, in which Art he took his Degree in
Italy; but coming home, and his other Brother being unhappily Killed by an
Accident, he staid at home as an Assistant to his Father in the Shop, who had a
great Trade, being much Entrusted with the Cash of the Roman Catholic Nobility
and Gentry, who upon this notice taken of the Plot, calling in their money on a
sudden, and he (as it is said) not being able readily to make up his Accounts to
his Father, and finding their Trade hereby like to be ruined, grew so far
disturbed, that on the 14th. of November. in the Forenoon, being in the Company
of one Fromante, a Foreigner, at a Cooks Shop in Kings-Street, by Long-Acre,
discoursing together about the Plot, etc. in French, the said Fromante said
that the King of England was a great Tormenter of the People of God (meaning
the Papists) To which the said Staley Answered, The King of England, the King
of England (repeating the words twice as in a great fury) is a grand Heretic,
and the greatest Rogue (Bouger the word was in French) in the world: There Is
the heart (striking his hand on his Breast) and here is the hand that will Kill
him, my self: And then he said further, The King and Parliament think all is
over, but the Rogues are deceived or mistaken. When he spoke these words, he
was in a Room with the door open, and just over against him in another Room on
the same Floor, were three Scotch Gentlemen, of whom two understood French, who
not only plainly heard, but as plainly saw him speak them; and being mightily
concerned to hear such desperate expressions, when he was going, enquired who
he was, having never seen him before, and set one to watch him to his Fathers,
where next day they apprehended him. And because there were a sort of men that
endeavored to cry down the Discovery as f^ictitious; alleging, that although
Roman Catholics in England might endeavor to promote their Religion; yet it
was nothing probable that they should have any design against the Kings Person:
Therefore it was thought fit to bring this Man to Trial first, before any of
the others in Custody, thereby to convince those people, that there was such a
design; seeing the Prisoner even since the discovery of this Devilish Plot, and
after so many had been Imprisoned for it, did persist in a Treasonable mind,
and a Traitorous attempt against the Kings Person; a clear Evidence of which,
was his speaking such words.

Accordingly for the same, on the 20th. of November. he was Arraigned at the
King's Bench Bar, and the 21th. brought to his Trial, where a Jury was
Impannell'd; and the Prisoner not making any Challenge, they were Sworn, being
all Persons of good quality, viz.

Sir Philip Matthews, Sir Reginald Foster, Sir John Kirk, Sir John Cutler, Sir
Richard Blake, John Bifield, Esquire Simon Middleton, Esquire Thomas Cross Esquire Henry
Johnson, Esquire Charles Vmfrevile, Esquire Tho. Eaglesfield, Esquire William Bohee, Esquire
The Witnesses, William Corstairs and Alexander Sutherland, did both positively
Swear the words before-cited, for they both understood French very well, having
been Officers abroad, and just then returned into England: And the third
Witness, though he did not understand French, Swore he heard the Prisoner speak
something with great earnestness, and that Capt. Corstairs at that instant told
him it was in English, That he would Kill the King; and was so filled with
Indignation, that he said he would not endure to hear him use such Language,
and therefore would have drawn his Sword and run upon him presently, but that
Mr. Sutherland prevented him. They also proved that they writ down the words in
French, as they were spoken and now sworn to, before they came out of the said
Cooks. The Prisoner owned that he was at that time with Fromante at that Cooks,
but denied that he spoke the words, and said they only spoke of the French
King, and that the words Sworn by the Witness in French, must signify, I will
Kill my self, rather than I will Kill him my self. But as to this the Court
observed, First, that the Witnesses Swore directly that it was the King of
England he spoke of, and named him twice; nor did he sure count the French King
an Heretic: And as for the Second, that evasion could not be allowed; for what
sense would it be to say, the King of England is a great Heretic, and the
greatest Villain in the World, and therefore here is the hand, and here is the
heart, I will Kill my self. The Prisoner had little more to say for himself,
besides general Protestations of his Loyal Intentions. And therefore the Lord
Chief Justice having repeated the proof to the Jury, they without going from
the Bar, brought him in Guilty of Treason; and Sentence was pronounced on him
to be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered.

On Tuesday the 26. of November. he was Executed, behaving himself in his passage
to Tyburn in a very sober penitent manner: His Quarters upon the humble
Petition of his Relations, to his Majesty, were delivered to See an account of
digging up his Quarters, Published by Order of the Lord Chief Justice Scrogs.
them privately to be Buried, and not to be set upon the Gates of the City: But
to the great Indignity and Affront of such his Majesty's mercy and favor, the
Friends of the said Staley caused several Masses to be said over his said
Quarters, and used other Ceremonies according to the manner of the Church of
Rome, and Solemnly appointed a time for his Interment, from his Fathers House
in Covent Garden; at which time there was made a Pompuous Funeral, many People
following the Corpse to the Church of St. Paul Covent Garden, where he was
Buried; which his Majesty hearing of, was justly displeased, and Commanded the
Coroner of Westminster to take up the Body of the said Staley, and deliver it
to the Sheriff of Middlesex to be set upon the Gates. Accordingly it was taken
up, and brought back to Newgate, and then the Quarters exposed on the Gates of
the City, and the Head on London Bridge, as the Limbs of Traitors usually are.

November the 27th. his Majesty emitted a Proclamation for the further
discovery of the late horrid design against his Person and Government; whereby
he declared, That if any person before the 25th. of December. then next, should
make any further Discovery to one of his Majesty's Principal Secretaries of
State, he or they should not only have and receive 200 l. immediately paid, but
also his gracious Pardon, if a Principal or any way concern^d in the Treason.

CHAP. X.
The substance of the Proceedings against Mr. Coleman, and manner of his
Execution; with a kind of Popish Prayer made to him afterward as a Saint.

MR. Staley being thus Executed, Mr. Edward Coleman, two days after, was
brought to his Trial. He was the Son of a Reverend worthy Minister in Suffolk,
brought up in the Protestant Religion, and an Academick Education; but whether
by reason of any Disgust taken for missing a Preferment, for which he stood
Candidate at the University, as some report; or whether drawn in upon his
Marriage, as others allege, or to gratify a Rich Uncle of that Persuasion, as
a third sort relate it, on which, or whether on some other occasion different
from all these he revolted, is not much material; but revolt he did to the
Roman Church, and became a mighty Bigot to advance the same, and gain
Proselytes: He was a Person of rare natural and acquired parts, and so well
conceited of himself, that he once undertook to be one that should manage a
Conference concerning Religion, against the Learned Doctor Stillingfleet, and
another Divine of the Church of England; which discourse is extant in Print:
But his Talent lay more in News and Policy than Divinity, being for some time
Secretary to her Royal Highness the Duchess of York, he was a Leading-man in
this Horrid Conspiracy, and a prime Promoter thereof by his great
Correspondency abroad, both at Rome and in the French Court. Concerning the
manner of his Commitment an Account is given before Chapt. the 8th.

On Saturday the 23 of November, he was Arraigned at the King's Bench Bar, the
Indictment being very Expressive and Significant, we shall for Example sake See
Colemans Trial. p. 2.
recite part of it, viz. That as a false Traitor against our most Illustrious,
Serene, and most excellent Prince, Charles by the Grace of God, etc. his
natural Lord, having not the fear of God in his heart, nor duly weighing his
Allegiance; but being moved and seduced by the Instigation of the Devil, his
cordial Love, and true Duty and natural Obedience (which true and lawful
Subjects of our said Lord the King ought to bear toward him, and by Law ought
to have) altogether withdrawing, and devising, and with all his strength
intending the Peace and common Tranquillity of this Kingdom of England to
disturb, and the true Worship of God within the Kingdom of England practiced,
and by Law Established, to overthrow; and Sedition and Rebellion within this
Realm of England to move, stir up, and procure; and the cordial Love and true
Duty and Allegiance which true and lawful Subjects of our Sovereign Lord the
King, toward their Sovereign bear, and by Law ought to have, altogether to
withdraw, forsake, and extinguish, and our said Sovereign Lord the King to
Death and final Destruction to bring and put. The 29th. of September. in the
27th. year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, etc. at
the Parish of St. Margarets Westminster, Falsely, Maliciously, and Traitorously
proposed, compassed, imagined, and intended to stir up, and raise Sedition and
Rebellion within the Kingdom of England, and to procure and cause a miserable
Destruction amongst the Subjects of our said Lord the King, and wholly to
Deprive, Depose, Deject, and Disinherit our said Sovereign of his Royal State,
Title, Power, and Rule of his Kingdom of England; and to bring and put our said
Sovereign Lord the King to final Death and Destruction, and to overthrow and
change the Government, and alter the sincere and true Religion of God, in this
Kingdom by Law established, and wholly to subvert and destroy the State of the
Kingdom, and to Levy War against our said Sovereign Lord the King, within his
Realm of England: And that to accomplish these his Traitorous designs and
imaginations, on the 29th. of September. in the 27th. year of the King, he
Traitorously composed two Letters to one Monsieur Le Chese, then Servant and
Confessor of Lewis the French King, to desire, procure, and obtain for the said
Edw. Coleman, and other false Traitors, the Aid, Assistance, and Adherence of
the said French King, to alter the true Religion in this Kingdom Established to
the Superstition of the Church of Rome, and Subvert the Government of this
Kingdom of England, etc. Reciting his receiving an Answer from Le Chese, his
Correspondence with Monsieur Rovigni, Envoy Extraordinary from the French King;
and Letters to Sir William Throckmorton, in France: Concluding in usual form,
That all this was done against his true Allegiance, and against the Peace of
the King, his Crown and Dignity.

To this Indictment he pleaded Not Guilty; and on Wednesday the 27th. of
November. 1678. was brought to his Trial. To the Jury Empannel'd he made no
Challenges: Their Names were,

Sir Reginald Foster, Baronet. Sir Charles Lee. Edward Wilford, Esquire John
Bathurst, Esquire Joshua Galliard, Esquire John Bifield, Esquire Simon Middleton, Esquire Henry
Johnson, Esquire Charles Vmfrevile, Esquire Thomas Johnson, Esquire Thomas Eaglesfield, Esquire
William Bohee, Esquire
His Trial, as it held very long, so it was managed with all Integrity and
Moderation by the Court: The Charge against him was made out two ways, partly
by Witnesses, Viva voce; and partly by Letters and Papers found at his House,
which he could not deny to be his own hand writing.

Dr. Oats was the first Witness produced; to whom the Lord Chief Justice gave
this grave Caution. That he See Colemans Trial. p. 17.
should speak nothing but the truth, not to add the least tittle that was
false, for any advantage whatsoever, mind him of the Sacredness of the Oath he
had taken; declaring that since the Prisoners Blood and Life was at stake, he
should, stand or fall, be justified or Condemned by truth.

The substance of Mr. Oates's Evidence, was

1. That in November. 1677. being brought acquainted with Mr. Coleman, by one
John Keins, then Dr. Oates's Confessor, who Lodged at Colemans House, he
carried some Letters for him to St. Omers, in which were Treasonable
Expressions of the King, calling him Tyrant; and a Letter in Latin, enclosed
to Monsieur Le Chese, to whom Dr. Oats carried it from St. Omers to Paris, in
which there were thanks returned for the Ten thousand pounds by him remitted
into England, for the Propagation of the Catholic Religion; and promising that
it should be Employed for no other purpose, but that for which it was sent,
which was to cut off the King of England, as appeared by the Letter of Le
Chese, to which this was an Answer, and which Dr. Oats saw and read.

2. That Coleman was concerned in the design of taking away the Sacred Life of
the King; for that when at the Jesuits Consult at the page 2.
Whitehorse-Tavern in the Strand, in April Old Style, and May New Style; and
afterward adjourned into several Companies, It was resolved that Pickering and
Grove should Assassinate his Majesty by Shooting, or other means; for which the
latter should have 1500 l. and the former Thirty thousand Masses, which at 12
d. a Mass, amounted much what to the same sum: This resolve was in his hearing
Communicated to Mr. Coleman at Wild-House, who did approve thereof, and said it
was well contrived.

3. That in August, 78. Mr. Coleman was present at a Consult with the Jesuits
and Benedictine Monks in the Savoy, for raising a page 23.
Rebellion in Ireland, and was very forward to have Dr. Fogarthy sent thither
to dispatch the Duke of Ormond by Poison: And at another time, did say to
Fenwick, at the said Fenwicks Chamber, in Dr. Oates's hearing, that he had
found a way to Transmit 200000 l. to carry on the Rebellion in Ireland.

4. That in the same month of August, Mr. Coleman knew of the four Irish
Ruffians sent to Windsor to Kill the King; and in his page 24.
hearing, asked Father Harcourt at Wild-House, what care was taken for those
four Gentlemen that went lastnight to Windsor; who replied that there was 80 l.
ordered to be sent them, which he saw there on the Table, most of it in
Guinies, and that Mr. Coleman was so Zealous to promote the work, that he gave
a Guinny to the Messenger who was to carry this Reward, to expedite the
business.

5. That in July 78. Mr. Coleman was privy to the Instructions brought by
Ashby, sometimes Rector of St. Omers, from Father page 25.
Whitebread, to Empower the Consulters to propose 10000 l. to Sir G. Wakeman to
Poison the King, provided Pickering and Grove failed to do the work: That he
read and Copied these Instructions, and transmitted them to several others of
the Conspirators, who were gathering Contributions about the Kingdom, and would
thereby be the more enco^rag'd to give largely, both because hereby they were
assured the business would be soon dispa^cht, and that they might see they had
assistance from beyond the Seas; and that Mr. Coleman was so far from
disapproving this Treason, that he said it was too little, and advised to add
5000 l. more to it, that they might be sure to have it done.

6. That in May New Style, April Old Style, 78, he saw Mr. Colemans Patent or
Commission to be Secretary of State, from page 27.
Paulus de Oliva, General of the Society of Jesus, by Virtue of a Brief from
the Pope; and that in Mr. Fenwicks Chamber in Drury Lane, he saw Mr. Coleman
open it, and heard him say, it was a good exchange [meaning, to come from being
the Dutchesses Secretary, to be Secretary of State.]

This was the substance of Dr. Oates's Testimony; but by our merciful English
Laws, no man can be Condemned by a single Evidence: But here was sufficient
proof, for in the next place Mr. Bedloe Witnessed

1. That Sir Henry Tichbourn told him, he brought a Commission for Mr. Coleman
to be principal Secretary of State, when he brought page 27.
over the rest of the Commissions for the Lords and others, from the principal
Jesuits at Rome, by Order of the Pope.

2. That in April 75. he carried over a large Packet of Letters from Mr.
Coleman to Monsieur Le Chese, about carrying on the Plot, and brought back an
Answer: And May 24. or 25. 77. he received another Packet of Colemans, to carry
to Paris to the English Monks.

3. That upon his return with Answers to the last Letters which were delivered
to Coleman by Harcourt, he heard Mr. Coleman at page 39.
his House behind Westminster-Abbey, at the foot of the Staircase, say, That
if he had an hundred lives, and a Sea of blood to swim through, to carry on the
cause of the Church of Rome, and to establish that Church in England, he would
venture it all; and if there were an hundred Heretical Kings to be Deposed, he
would see them all destroyed.

This was the Oral Testimony; in confirmation whereof, in the next place, were
produced several of Mr. Colemans Papers, taken at his House by Mr. Bradley the
Messenger, by virtue of a Warrant from the Council, the 29th. of September. at
which time he was not to be found, but surrendered himself next day, as
aforesaid. The Messenger Swore he seized them there, and Sealed them up, and
brought them to the Clerks of the Council, who Swore these were the same
Papers, and they were (all that were made use of) proved to be his own
Handwriting by Mr. Boatman his Servant, and Mr. Cattaway, a Sub-secretary,
that used to write many things for him, and were both well acquainted with his
hand, and also by his own Confession; so that it was impossible there could be
any firmer proof: And if there had been no other Evidence in the Cause, his own
Papers were as good as an hundred Witnesses to Condemn him: Where also note by
the way, that one of these Servants acknowledged upon his Oath, that a Packet
of Letters from beyond the Seas, was directed to Mr. Coleman two or three days
after he was made Prisoner; and that his Master kept a large Book of Entries
for his Letters and News, which he saw on Saturday the 28th of September. but not
since nor knew what was become of it; by which it appears, both that he still
maintained a Correspondence beyond the Seas, even to the time of his
Commitment; and that he had made away with most of his dangerous Papers;
however through have or inadvertency, he had left these behind, which probably
being old, and long since laid by, he might forget.

The first Paper read, was the draught of a long Letter to Monsieur Le Chese,
dated the 29th. of of September. 1675. Subscribed thus, Your most humble and most
obedient Servant, but no name. This did contain a deduction of a three years
History, of his former Traitorous Negotiations (for the most part with Father
Ferrier, the Predecessor of Le Chese) by means of Sir William Throckmorton; and
has many insolent and dangerous exprssions, as [pag. 44. of the Trial, in which
it is inserted Verbatim.]

The fatal Revocation of the Kings Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, to
which we owe all our miseries and hazards, p. 45. I pressed all I could to
persuade his most Christian Majesty to use His utmost endeavors to prevent
that Session of our Parliament, and proposed Expedients how to do it, page 46.
That it was his Royal Highnesses opinion, that if his most Christian Majesty
would make the same proffer to his Majesty of England, of his Purse to dissolve
this Parliament, which he had made to his R. H. to call another, he did believe
it very possible for him to Succeed, with the Assistance we should be able to
give him here. p. 47. Logic in our Court, built upon Money, has more powerful
Charms than any other sort of Reasoning again; speaking of the 300000 l. that
he would have had of the French King, he says, Thereby the Condition of his R.
H. and of the Catholic Religion (which depends very much upon the Success of
his most Christian Majesty) would thereby have been delivered from a great many
frights and real hazards. p. 53. he says, He would willingly be in everlasting
disgrace with all the World, if by the assistance of 20000 l. to be obtained
from the French King, he did not regain to the Duke his Master, his former
Offices, and especially that of being Admiral of the Fleet. p. 54. If we can
Advance the Dukes Interest one step forward, we shall put him out of the reach
of Chance for ever; then would Catholics be at rest, and his most Christian
Majesty's Interest secured with us in England, beyond all apprehensions
whatsoever. We have two great designs this Sessio^^ to put the Fleet in his R.
H's. Care, and to get an Act for general Liberty of Conscience: If we carry on
these two, or either of them, we shall in effect do what we list afterward:
And if his most Christian Majesty would but help us with 20000 l. I would be
content to be Sacrificed to the utmost Malice of my Enemies if I did not
succeed: And then he speaks out presently afterward, for what end this design
is, and why he presses it so earnestly; Because, says he in the same place,
our prevailing in these things, would give the greatest Blow to the Protestant
Religion here, that ever it received since its Birt^. He draws to a Conclusion
with these words, p. 55. I have shown you the present State of the Case, which
may (by Gods Providence and good Conduct) by made of such advantage to Goods
Church, that I can searce believe my self awake, or the thing real, when I
think on a Prince in such an Age as we live in, Converted to such a Degree of
Zeal, as not to regard any thing in the World, in comparison of God Almighty's
glory, the Salvation of his own Soul, and the Conversion of our poor Kingdom,
which has been a long time oppressed, and miserably harrast with Heresic and
Schism.

These passages need no Comment to show what he would be at in all these urgent
Solicitations for Foreign Assistance, viz. To Dissolve or Influence our
Parliaments at his pleasure, so as may most make for the French Interest, and
that of Popery, to Convert our Nation from its present Heresy; that is, to
give the fatal Blow to Protestantism.

An Answer to this Letter from Le Chese was read next, dated the 23. of October.
1675. wherein he promises Mr. Coleman to assist in seconding his good
intentions. etc.

Then was read a Declaration, which Mr. Coleman looking, it seems, upon himself
already as established in his Office of Secretariship, had drawn up in the Name
of the King; for as he would have the Parliament Dissolved, so this was to
satisfy the People, and give Reasons for its Dissolution, promising to call
another; charging all persons to forbear talking Irreverently of the
proceedings of his Majesty there, and offering 20 l. to the discoverer of any
Seditious Talker against it, unto a principal Secretary, whereof he counted
himself one as aforesaid.

There was likewise produced and read a Letter, written in the Name and Style
of the Duke of Y. to Monsieur Le Chese; declaring that the Interest of the
French King, and those of his Royal H. were so clearly linkt together, that
those that opposed the one, should be looked upon as Enemies to the other: That
Propositions had been made to the French King, that had regard to the Catholic
Religion, and to the use of his Purse, and refers a further Account to be had
from Throckmorton and Coleman, who, he says, are firm to his Interest, and may
be treated with, without any apprehension.

It Is true upon a Committee of Lords going to Newgate, and Examining Mr.
Coleman touching this Letter, he confessed, That it was prepared without the
Order or Privity of the Duke; and that when he was so bold as to show it to
him, the Duke was very angry and rejected it. But it seems his displeasure did
not long continue, for Coleman remained still a Favorite; and certainly, had
he not made some extraordinary Apology for such an Insolence; as Counterfeiting
a Letter in his Masters Name, he must have lost his Royal Highnesses favor for
ever.

But that which gave the most clear Light to his designs, was a Letter to Le
Chese, without date; but appearing to be written soon after his long Letter of
the 29th. of September. wherein after his apprehensions of the approaching
Session of Parliament, and care taken for a Cipher, and secret writing besides
with juice of Lemon, because their Correspondence would be of things not fit to
be trusted, even to a Cipher alone: He has these words, We have here a mighty
work upon our hands, no less than the Conversion of three Kingdoms, p. 69.
and by that perhaps the utter subduing a Pestilent Heresy, which has
domineered a long time over great part of this Northern World: There were never
such hopes of success since the death of our Queen Mary, as now in our days;
when God has given us a Prince, who is become (may I say a Miracle) Zealous of
being the Author and Instrument of so Glorious a work. But the opposition we
are sure to meet with, is also like to be great, so that it imports us to get
all the aid and assistance we can, For the Herbest is great, and the Laborers
but few: That which we rely upon most, next to God Almighty's Providence, and
the favor of my Master the Duke, is the mighty mind of his most Christian
Majesty, whose generous soul inclines him to great undertakings; so as I hope
you will pardon me, if I be very troublesome to you upon this occasion, from
whom I expect the greatest help we can hope for. I must confess I think his
Christian Majesty's Temporal Interest is so much attracted to that of his R. H.
(which can never be considerable, but upon the growth and advancement of the
Catholic Religion) That his Ministers cannot give him better Advice, even in a
politic sense, abstracting from the considerations of the next world, than
that of our Blessed Lord, To seek first the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
Righteousness thereof, that all other things may be added unto him. Yet I know
his most Christian Majesty has more powerful motives suggested to him by his
own Devotion, and your Reverences Zeal for Gods Glory, to engage him to afford
us the best help he can in our present Circumstances, etc.

Scarce could any words more significantly express the whole Intrigue of the
Plot: For

1. Here is the immediate End they aim at, The Conversion of these three
Kingdoms; that is, destroying the Religion Established, and introducing Popery.

2. Here is their main and ultimate scope; that by thus reducing these Nations,
they may root out Protestant Religion throughout the world, and by that perhaps
the utter Subduing, etc.

3. Their Malice is shown, by calling the Protestant Religion, A Pestilent
Heresy.

4. The favorable Conjuncture for them, Never such hopes of success since
Queen Mary's days; whom for her good Bloody Services for the Roman Church, he
cannot mention without an endearing and appropriating title, Our Queen Mary.

5. The reason for such their confident hopes, because they have Seduced his R.
H. and made him Zealous for doing their drudgery.

6. That they expect great Opposition, but resolve to meet it, so that of
necessity here must War, Bloodshed, and Desolation ensue, before they could
accomplish this their mighty work.

7. The means whereby they hope to over-bear this opposition, and that is by
the aid and power of the French King, whom next to God (who might as well have
been left out) and the Duke, they rely on, and expect the greatest help they
can hope for from; and this to be obtained by the Interest of Le Chese his
Confessor, inspiring him with the glory and piety of the business.

There were also read diverse other Letters, written by the Prisoner; and one
especially of Aug. 21. 1674. to the Popes Internuncio at Brussels, where in so
many words, he owns his design to be the utter Ruin of the Protestant party in
general: But these were never thought fit to pass the Press; and indeed the
others which are published, are sufficient alone to satisfy any rational man;
nay, I durst almost say a Papist himself, not only that Coleman was Guilty of
the Treason in the Indictment, for endeavoring to Subvert the Government and
Established Religion of England, but also to convince him of the truth of the
Plot in general; and that what Dr. Oats testifies, is real; for had he seigned
or guessed at things, how was it possible, that he should tell the Council
before hand; that if Mr. Colemans Papers were searched, there would be found
that in them which would cost him his Neck; as Sir Robert Southwell positively
Swears he did, [p. 36. of the Trial.] And indeed it was digitus dei, a most
signal Providence, that these few Papers were left behind to be produced. If we
consider what grounds and opportunities Mr. Coleman had to abscond all his
Papers (as it is plain he did the most of them, none of his Letters of this
Subject since 1675 being to be found.) For being a man of that Interest and
Intelligence as he was, and being expressly Charged by Name in Dr. Oates's
Informations, which were delivered to the King, and transmitted to the
Treasurers perusal, and had lain in his hands almost 50 days before this
seizure of Colemans Papers, as aforesaid; and since it appears, Bedingfield,
his R. H s. Confessor, had notice of the Discovery of the Plot, almost as soon
as ever it was made to his Majesty. We cannot, after all this, reasonably
imagine Mr. Coleman could so long be Ignorant of it; at least, he must needs
have some Inkling of the business on the Saturday-night, when almost all the
Town knew of it, which was time enough for him to have removed all, as well as
some of his dangerous Papers, had not Providence Infatuated him, that his own
Handwriting, and which he could not, nor did deny to be so, might be brought
in Evidence against him, and undeniably justify both his Treasons and the
Witnesses Integrity.

The defense he made for himself, consisted in these Particulars,

1. That Dr. Oats, who now pretended such Acquaintance with him, declared
before the King and Council, That he never saw him before, or did not know him.

To this the Dr. Answered; That it being by Candlelight, and his sight weak,
and Coleman altered in Habit and Wig, he did indeed at first say, That he would
not Swear that was the Man, or that he had ever seen him before; but as soon as
he heard him speak, he knew him well, and could then have Sworn it, had he been
demanded.

2. That had the things Dr. Oats now alleged, been true, he would have
Charged the same before the Council: But then he charged him only with a Letter
which he thought was his hand; and such slender matters, that the Council was
ready to let him go at large; and therefore all the rest must be Invented since.

To this the Dr. replied, That he was then so weak and weary, that he cannot
tell particularly all he then said, and possibly in that condition might forget
something; besides, his design then, was to lay no more to his Charge than
might serve for Information; for Prisoners may supplant Evidence when they know
it; and when he saw Mr. Coleman was secured, he had no need to give a further
Account, for he never apprehended the Council inclined to let him go at large;
if he had, he should certainly have charged him home: And so in truth it
appears he did, as weak as he was; for in full Answer to this Objection, Sir
Robert Southwell Swears, that Dr. Oats did then page 38.
declare, that Coleman paid Wakeman 5000 l. of money, which he was to have for
Poisoning the King.

3. Whereas Dr. Oats charged him with consenting to Wakemans Poisoning the
King; and that it was consulted by him in August, and as he remembered, about
the 21th. day, Mr. Coleman alleged that he was then in Warwickshire, and one
of his Men and he, was all August there, (as he thought) but was not sure of
it; and after Conviction, he talked of a Book that would show he was out of Town
from the 15th. to the 31. of August: But as this was no Evidence in it self,
and offered too late, so it did not contradict Dr. Oats, for he was not
positive to the day, but only to the month, and it might as well be before the
15th. day.

And this was all he had to object against Dr. Oates's Testimony. Against Mr.
Bedloe he had nothing to say, but that he never saw him in his life: To which
Mr. Bedloe replied; Yes, you saw me in the Stone-Gallery in Somerset House,
page 40.
when you came from a Consult, where were great Persons, whom I am not to name
here, that would make the very bottom of your Plot tremble; then you saw me.

Then as to his Papers; he would excuse himself by alleging there was no
Treason in them, though very extravagant Expressions; and that his design
thereby was so far from Killing the King, that it was only to make the King and
Duke as great as could be. But to Answer to this; It was observed, that it is
apparent he was Guilty of Contriving and Conspiring the Destruction of the
Protestant Religion; and how could this be done without the Death of the King?
He that will Subvert the Protestant Religion, and would bring in Popery; that
is, a Foreign Authority, does an act in Derogation of the Crown, and in
Diminution of the Kings Title and Sovereign Power, and endeavors to bring a
Foreign Dominion both over our Consciences and Estates, which in it self, is
no less than Treason.

Lastly; He pleaded the Act of General Pardon, but in vain, because his Papers
were written since the last Act of that kind passed.

Then the Jury going together, after some time, returned, and brought him in
Guilty: The next day he was again brought to the Bar, and there received
Sentence; the Lord chief Justice advising him to Confess the whole Truth, and
not to be deluded with the sond hopes of having his Sentence respited; to which
purpose, amongst others, he used this Expression, Trust not to it Mr. Coleman,
you may be flattered to stop page 99.
your mouth, till they have stopped your breath; and I doubt you will find that
to be the event.

However he did not think ^^t to take this advice, but remained in an obstinate
sullen manner till Thursday the 3d. of December. and then was drawn on a Sledge
to Tyburn. where he declared that he had been a Roman Catholic for many years,
and thanked God he died in that Religion, which he did not think at all
prejudicial to the King and Government: And being asked if he knew any thing of
the Murder of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey, declared that he did not, for that he
was a Prisoner at that time: Then after some private Prayers, he was Hanged and
Quartered, but his Quarters granted to his Friends to be Buried. It was the
opinion of most that beheld him as he was drawn along, or whilst he was
speaking or praying at Tyburn, that he was somewhat disturbed in his mind, or
under some expectations of a Reprieve: and it was confidently reported, that he
should say that day, with great Passion, There is no Faith in Man. But as to
this last, Enquiry has been made, and no Credible persons have yet appeared to
testify that they heard the words spoken; so that it must be left only as a
probable rumbur.

But that the world may take notice of the Insolence of the Popish Crew, and
what a strange Veneration they pay to the most notorious Traitors of their
Party; it may (we hope) be no inexcusable offense, to add here the true Copy of
a certain Poetical Prayer addressed to this Saint.

About a Fortnight after Colemans Execution, one Nevil, alias Pain (a reputed
Papist) being Apprehended for speaking some dangerous words, one Mr. Gill, a
Constable in King Street, Westminster; searching him, found in his Pocket the
following Lines, fair written, this Copy being faithfully compared with the
Original in the said Constables hands.

To that Glorious Saint and Martyr, Mr. EDWARD COLEMAN.
HAil Glorious Soul! To whom the Crown is given;
All-hail, thou mighty Favorite of Heaven.
Triumphant Martyr! From that endless Throne,
Where thou may reign with Christ, disturbed by none:
Look down a while, and view upon his Knee,
An undeserving Friend to Truth and Thee.
Pardon the boasted Title, since that Love,
Which gave it here, must needs Confirm't above:
For it was a Flaming Charity, which sure,
Since boundless here, must endless there endure.
But ah alas! Great Saint, I own with shame,
That Ill I then, worse now deserve that Name:
Whilst here on Earth, my Troubles kept me still,
From Friendships Laws, as now my senses will.
But what you pardoned then on Fortunes score,
Be pleased on Passions now to pity more:
And for that Good which here you did design,
Without Reward, or least desert of mine,
Obtain me more from our Great Lord and Thine.
Not that I hope to equal Thee in place;
Though I could Wish it, with the like Disgrace.
I only hope to view that Holy Ring,
Where Crowned Souls do Hallelujahs sing.
Prepare me some low place in that bright Quire,
Where though I may not sing, I may Admire.
Such stuff needs no descant to render it odious to all true Christians and
good Subjects; since it is not only a gross Affront to Government, and the
proceedings of public Justice, and a kind of abetting Treason against the
Magistrate on Earth, but even against the Majesty of Heaven too, by slighting
the invaluable Mediation of the Blessed Jesus, to Invocatr such a wretched
Impostor with glorious Titles, and expect to obtain a place in those Holy
Mansions (where no unclean thing can enter) for the Merit or Intercession of so
Flagitious and (as it is justly to be feared) Impenitent at Malefactor.

CHAP. XI.
An Account of the Proceedings against William Ireland, Tho. Pickering, and
John Grove, for Conspiring to Murder the King.

THE sixth of December. his Majesty taking notice of the bold and open Repair of
his Subjects to her Majesty's Chapel, and the Houses of Foreign Ministers,
for hearing of Mass, and oftentimes Sermons Preached in English there, by
English, Scottish, and Irish Priests, thought fit to Issue out an Order of
Council, strictly Prohibiting the same.

And now on the 17th. of December, we come to the Trial of William Ireland and
Thomas Pickering, both Priests, and John Grove, a Lay-Brother, at the Sessions
House in the Old Bailey: There were at the same time Arraigned with them Thomas
White, alias Whitebread, and John Fenwick, two Jesuits, but in the course of
the Evidence, it not for the present appearing to the Court that there was
sufficient Proof against the two last, by two Witnesses, as our English Laws
require: The Jury was discharged of them, and they returned back to Newgate.

The other three were Indicted for High Treason, and that of the highest nature
imaginable, as being actively concerned in carrying on the general Plot for
Subversion of the Government, but more especially for the horrid design to
Murder his Majesty's Person; Ireland for contriving and consenting to it; and
Pickering and Grove for having undertaken and attempted actually to effect it.

The Jury consisted of Persons of very good Quality, viz.
Sir William Roberts, Baronet. Sir Philip Matthews, Baronet. Sir Charles Lee,
Knight. Edward Wilford, Esquire John Foster, Esquire Joshua Galliard, Esquire John Byfield,
Esquire Tho. Eaglesfield, Esquire Tho. Johnson, Esquire John Pulford, Esquire Tho. Earnesby,
Esquire Rich. Wheeler, Gent.
The sum of the Evidence (waving Generalities which were here necessarily
repeated, and have for the most part been already set forth in this History)
was as follows:

Dr. Oats Swears, that at a Consult of 40 or 50 Jesuits, begun at the
White-horse, Tavern in the Strand, and prosecuted See the Trial of Ireland,
etc. p. 19.
at^ several Colloquies, or lesser meetings at several Chambers (whereof Mr.
Irelands was one) to which they Adjourned themselves: It was resolved that
Pickering and Grove should go on (for they had formerly been engaged) in their
design and attempt to Murder the King; and that Grove being a Layman, should
have 1500 l. for his Reward; and Pickering (being a Priest) Thirty-thousand
Masses for his (which at 12 d. per Mass, as they usually value them, comes to
the same sum.)

2. That this Resolve was the same day drawn up in writing by one Mico, that
was Secretary to the Society, and Socius or Companion to Whitebread the
Provincial, at the said Whitehreads Chamber, who having Signed it, it was
carried by the Witness (Dr. Oats) as being Messenger to the Consult, to the
rest of the Colloquies to be Signed; and that Ireland at his own Chamber did
Sign it in his presence.

3. That Pickering and Grove consented to such Resolve, accepted the Terms, and
also Signed it the same day, at the said Whitebreads page 23.
Chamber, at Mrs. Sanders's at Wild-House, where in a little Chapel, they and
about 40 or 50 of the Consulters heard Mass, received the Sacrament,
administered by one Barton, a Jesuit, and thereupon took page 28.
an Oath of Secrecy upon a Mass Book which Mico held, whilst Whitebread
pronounced the words.

4. That in pursuance of this resolve and undertaking to Murder the King, he
did several times see Pickering and Grove page 23.
walking in the Park together with their screwed Pistols, which were longer
than ordinary Pistols, and shorter than some Carbines: That they had Silver
Bullets to shoot with, and that Grove would have had the Bullet champt, to
render the wound Incurable; and that he saw Grove's Bullets in May, and
Pickering's in August.

5. That in the Month of March, 1677/8. (for these persons followed the King
to mischief him, before the said Consult and Resolve, which was made only to
encourage them as well by so general an Approbation as by the certainty of
Reward settled) Pickering had a fair opportunity to have shot the King, but the
Flint of his Pistol happened to be loose, and he durst not venture to give
fire; and because by their negligence this opportunity was missed, Pickering
underwent page 24.
Penance, and had 20 or 30 strokes of Discipline, and Grove was chidden for his
carelessness, as Whitebread had written in his Letters, which the Witness had
read, and well knew his hand.

6. That Grove did go about with one Smith to gather Peter Pence, which was
either to carry on the design, or to send them to Rome: That he saw the Book
wherein it was entered, and heard the said Grove say he had been gathering it.

The second Witness was Mr. Bedloe, who Swears

1. That he was employed for the space of near five years as a Messenger, p.
37, 38.
by these Conspirators, for the carrying their Letters to their Confederates
beyond the Seas, and bringing others back, all or the most relating to this
Plot, for he Swears he had a way to open and read them, whereby he fully
informed himself of matters: And for the nature of the Plot, he Swears he heard
some of the Conspirators say, That they would not leave any Member of an
Heretic in England, that should survive to tell hereafter, that there ever was
any such Religion there as the Protestant: And to confirm his Intimacy with
them, he Swears the manner of his coming first to be employed by them: By means
of the Lady Abbess of the English Nunnery, at Dunkirk, who having kept him six
weeks in her Convent, recommended him to Sir John Warner, as a proper
Instrument, who afterward sent him to Harcourt to be instructed; and then he
brings his Brother James Bedloe, who knew nothing of the Plot, but Swears he
has heard the Prisoners often named, as being of his Brothers Acquaintance;
and that he has on his Brothers behalf, received several sums of money from
Priests and Jesuits, sometimes 50 or 60 l. a^ a time; from all which it appears
that he must be very well acquainted amongst them, and knowing in the design,
having been employed under them so long in it.

2. Mr. Bedloe Swears, That about the latter end of August, 78. (the very day,
he Confesses, he cannot Swear to) at Mr. Harcourts page 41.
Chamber (one of the Conspirators) he met Ireland, Pickering, and Grove the
Prisoners, with some others, where he heard them discourse that the 4 Irish
Russians missing of Killing of the King at Windsor, therefore Pickering and
Grove should go on in their design; and that one Conyers (a Benedictine Monk)
was to be joined with them, and that they should endeavor to Assassinate his
Majesty in his Morning walk at New Market; and they had taken it so strongly
upon them, that they were eager upon it, and Mr. Grove more forward than the
rest, insomuch that he said, Since it could not be done Clandestinely, it
should be attempted Openly, and that those that should fall therein, had the
Glory to die in a good Cause; but if it should be discovered, the discovery
could never reach to that height, but their Party would be strong enough to
accomplish the work.

3. He Swears that Harcourt told him, Grove was to have 1500 l. and Pickering
as many Masses as at 12 d. a piece came to the like sum.

4. That at the same time, when the discourse was at Harcourts Chamber about
Killing the King at New Market, there was likewise a discourse amongst them of
a design to Kill several Noble Persons, and the particular parts assigned to
every one; Knight was to Kill the Earl of Shaftsbury; Prichard the Duke of
Buckingham; Oneile, the Earl of Ossory; Obrian, the Duke of Ormond, etc.

And here it is to be noted, That though Dr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe do not speak
to one and the same Consultation, nor to one and the same time, yet they are in
Law two Witnesses to one and the same Crime; for thus several Witnesses to
several Overt Acts, are so many Witnesses to the Treason; and the several Overt
Acts which declare the Intention, are but as so many Evidences of the Treason;
and this has often heretofore, as in the case of Sir Henry Vane, and else
where, as well as now, been declared to be Law; and there seems good reason
that it should be so, for otherwise scarce ever any Treason could be proved;
for men that run the hazard of their lives in such Consultations, will hardly
suffer two persons to hear them, or meet twice together, but so dispose them,
that they may meet severally at several times, and in different places, as Dr.
Oats and Mr. Bedloe did.

To Corroborate Dr. Oates's Testimony, concerning the Consult of the 24th. of
April, there was a Letter produced and read, taken in Harcourts Chamber when
they Searched for him, dated Feb. 23. 77. written by one Peter's, a Jesuit, now
in Newgate, on the score of the Plot, to one Tonstall, of the same Society, to
summon him to meet at the general Consult to be held at London, April the 24th.
[the same day Dr. Oats set forth] wherein there is special Caution given in
these words; Every one is also to be minded, not to hasten to London long
before the time appointed, nor to appear much about Town till the meeting be
over, lest occasion should be given to suspect the Design; finally, Secrecy,
as to the time and place is much recommended to all those that receive Summons,
as it will appear of its own nature necessary.

Now Dr. Oats had given in his Testimony of the Consult, on April the 24th.
long before this Letter was found, so that he was right in that: And by the
words, Suspect the Design, and the unusual Caution and Secrecy prescribed as
necessary there, is a strong presumption that the design intended, was indeed
no other than what he has set forth.

The Prisoners Defense for themselves, against all this, was

1. A naked peremptory denial of the whole, but that without Witnesses or good
Circumstances to prove it, signifies very little, being the common Allegation
of every Malefactor, much more to be expected from these men, who having the
Conscience to venture on such Devilish Crimes; and who by their Religion could
have, or grant a Dispensation for the breaking of an Oath, were not like to
Boggle at telling a Lie to save their Lives, and to keep off so great a Scandal
from their Party.

2. They would seem not to know Mr. Oats, or to have had scarce any
acquaintance with him.

In answer to this, he Swears to several Circumstances which they were forced
to acknowledge; As, that Grove in December page 31.
last, lent him 8 s. to hire a Coach to Dover, being then to go for St. Omers;
that Fenwick was his Confessor; that the said Grove drank twice in his Company
at the Red posts in Wild-Street, and once more, by a good token, when he owned
that he Fired Southwark, assisted by three Irish men; and that they had a
Thousand pounds given them for it, whereof he had 400 l. and the other 200 l. a
piece.

And here as a Digression, not altogether impertinent, I cannot but inform the
Reader, that when Dr. Oats gave in his Informations to Sir Edmund-bury
Godfrey, when he read them, and came to this passage concerning Grove Firing of
Southwark, being Article the 49th. The said Sir Edmund-bury having, it seems,
some knowledge of the said Grove, said, That he had been informed that the said
Grove wrought so hard at the said Southwark-Fire, and so overheated himself,
that it was thought it would have cost him his life, or words to that effect;
which hard working, the said Sir Edmund-bury did before judge to have been in
helping to quench the said Fire; but, as appears, was indeed in promoting and
carrying on the same; which Circumstance unknown before to Dr. Oats, does
exactly correspond with, and confirm his Testimony in that point.

3. Ireland endeavored to oppose Mr. Bedloes Evidence, who Swore that he was
at the Consult at Harcourts Chamber in August: Now he brings two or three to
prove that he was not in London all the month of August; and two of them (but
they are his Mother and his Sister) say he went out of Town the 3d. of August,
and returned not till a Fortnight before Michaelmas:. And a Coachman speaks of
being with him from the 5th. of August to the 16th. and afterward at
Westehester.

But against these Peoples sayings, whereof two were so related, there was not
only Mr. Bedloes positive Oath, but likewise Dr. Oates's, though he knew
nothing of the particular Consult at Harcourts Chamber mentioned by Mr Bedloe;
yet he Swears directly that Mr. Ireland was in London the beginning of September.
by a remarkable Token; that on the first or second of that month he had 20 s.
of him: And furthermore, Sarah Pain, formerly Grove's Servant, and page 57.
who knew Ireland very well, of which knowledge she gives the reason, because
he came often to Grove's House, and was the man that still broke open the
Pacquets of Letters that her Master Grove carried about afterward, and Sealed
all the Pacquets that went beyond the Seas; and she Swears positively, and by
most certain Circumstances, that she saw Mr. Ireland at a Scriveners door in
Fetter-Lane, where he Lodged about the 12th. or 13th. of August; so that here
were three clear Testimonies upon Oath, to disprove this Allegation of
Irelands, which yet he insisted on at his Death with Solemn Protestations:
Whereas since it has pleased God further to manifest the falsi^y thereof, by
Mr. Jennison, a Kinsman of his, and then a Catholic, as in due place shall be
set forth; whence we may take our measures what Credit is to be given to the
dying Asseverations of such men.

4. Mr. Ireland objected, that Dr. Oats was all the month of May at Saint
Omers, when he Swears he was here at the Consult; and to prove that he was so
there then, offered to bring a Certificate from St. Omers, under the Seal of
the College; for it seems the Youths either were not then come over, or had
not sufficiently Conn'd their Lesson.

But to this it was Answered, that such a Certificate was not by the Law of
England any Evidence, in any case whatsoever, much less to be allowed to them
in this case; for what Certificate could they not get from the College at St.
Omers, if it might serve their purposes?

Lastly, They essai'd to blast Dr. Oates's Credit with an Imputation of
Perjury; because they alleged that there was once an Indictment against him
for that Crime; but upon Examination, this appeared to be extremely frivolous:
For

1. The pretended Perjury was only thus, That Mr. Oats Swearing the Peace
against a certain man, did at the taking of his Oath, say, that there were some
Witnesses that would evidence such a point of Fact, which when they were
produced, would not testify so much: Now suppose this were true, (though it
were never proved) yet how could this be corrupt or wilful Perjury?

2. There was no Record produced, only a pretended Copy.

3. It appeared, if every any such Indictment was Exhibited, it could not be
made good, for there was never any Conviction or Prosecution there-upon; and if
barely to Accuse, would make a man Guilty; who could be Innocent?

4. Sir Denny Ashburnham, who was called by the Prisoners to Discredit Dr.
Oats, was able to say nothing against him, but this, That he had known Mr.
Oats in his Youth, and that then he (...) (...) Person of that Credit as to be
depended on for what he should say; and that had the discovery of the Plot come
only from his Testimony, he might have had, same little daubt of it. [These are
his very words, p. 66.] But then the very same Gentleman declares,] That as it
is Corroborated with other Circumstances, it has (says he, ibidem) convinced
me, so that I am satisfied in the truth of the thing; and I do think truly,
that nothing can be said against Mr. Oats, to take off his Credibility.

This being all they had to offer in their own defense, the full substance
whereof we have impartially repeated, with the Answers thereunto. The Lord
Chief Justice proceeded to sum up the Evidence, and in his Speech to the Jury,
amongst many others, had these excellent Expressions, speaking of the Popish
Priests and their Religion, If they had not Murdered Kings p. 73, 74.
(says he) I would not say they would have done Ours: But when it has been
their practice so to do, when they have Debauch*d men's Understandings,
Over-turn'd all Morals, and Destroyed all Divinity: What shall I say of them?
When their Humility is such, that they tread upon the necks of Emperors; their
Charity such, as to kill Princes; and their Vow of Poverty such as to Covet
Kingdoms: What shall I judge of them? When they have Licenses to Lie, and
Indulgences for Falsehoods; nay, when they can make him a Saint that dies in
one, and then pray to him; as the Carpenter first makes an Image, and after
Worships it, and can then think to bring in that Wooden Religion of theirs
amongst us in this Nation: What shall I think of them? What shall I say to
them? What shall I do with them? They Eat their God; they Kill their King, and
Saint the Murderer; they Indulge all sorts of Sins, and no humane Bonds can
hold them.

After a short Recess, the Jury brought them in all three Guilty; and in the
Afternoon, Sir George Jeffries, Recorder of London, pronounced Sentence of
Death upon them.

But there being a delay of their Execution, on the 26th. of December. the House
of Commons Ordered the said Recorder to attend, and give the House an Account
why he did not Issue out his Warrant to Execute them: On which being called in
the next day, he informed the House, that he had not yet received any Orders
from the King for their Execution; which Answer, to some Members, seemed
Unsatisfactory, but the Debate was Adjourned: And on the 24th. of January, the
Prisoners, William Ireland and John Grove suffered according to Sentence. And
on the same day was Published a Proclamation for Dissolving the Parliament, and
calling a New one, to be Assembled the 6th. of March. But Tho. Pickering,
whether to induce him to a Confession, or for what other reasons, I know not,
was kept a considerable time afterward, but at last likewise Executed on the
9th. of May, persisting in denials, as the rest had done before him, and scarce
behaving himself as a dying man at the place of Execution.

CHAP. XII.
The manner of Mr. Prances coming in to give Evidence: The Objection concerning
his Recanting his Information Answered. An account of Mr. Everards Discovery
and Imprisonment; with other subsequent proceedings.

SECT. I.
THough Mr. Bedloe had given some general Account of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey's
Murder, sufficient to fix it on the Jesuits and Popish Priests, and their
Confederates, and that the same was transacted at Somerset House; yet not being
actually present, he could not exactly set forth the Particulars: But now it
pleased God to give a more full Discovery thereof, and by means so strange and
unexpected, that we must needs acknowledge it to be the act of a singular
Providence.

The Murderers (as you have heard Chapt. the 8th.) had so closely carried that
Bloody Villainy, that now they had for ten Weeks slept in Security, and
imagining Heaven as well as their Priests had approved so black a deed by this
success, they had, no doubt, so far stifled all Convictions and Alarms of their
Consciences, as not to dream of giving any account for the same; when on a
sudden all is wonderfully brought to light: The occasion thus,

There happening some mis-understandings between Mr. Prance and a Neighbor of
his, the latter knowing the former to be a Zealous Papist, and having
understood by some of his Servants, that one time, about Michaelmas, he had
absented himself two or three Nights from home; an Imagination came into his
head, that he might be concerned in Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey's Murder; though in
truth such his Absenting was a Fortnight before Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey's
death, on the first noise of the Plot, when Penwick, Ireland, etc. were taken,
whom he was so Zealous to defend in a public. Coffee-House, that for some
words then spoken, he was threatened to be Prosecuted, and on that score, only
lay from home the said three Nights, as he could prove by Credible Witnesses,
till the Business might be composed: However this Neighbor, on the bare
suspicion aforesaid, took out a Warrant against him to appear before the
Council, which France readily obeyed, as knowing him not to be able to prove
any thing of that nature upon him. But being taken by Virtue of that Warrant,
on the 21th. of December, and being first carried into See Mr. Prances
Narrative p. 20, 21.
the Lobby, by the House of Commons, Mr. Bedloe (whom he did not know, having
but once been seen him before, viz. upon the view of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey's
Body in Somerset House beforementioned, at which time, Prance did not much
observe him, yet) knew his face again, and Charged him with that Murder;
whereupon, after Examination, he was Committed to Newgate.

Next day, being the 22th. of December, he made a Discovery, and Charged the
before named Girald, Dominick Kelly, Robert Green, Henry Berry, and Laurence
Hill, of whom the three last were Apprehended, but the two first escaped; the
subtle Priests shifting for themselves, and leaving those whom they had drawn
in, to Answer for it; though Kelly was afterward taken up in Surry, by the
name of Daniel Edmonds, as a Recusant; but understanding Prances being taken,
got out upon hired Bail, before he was known to be Kelly, though afterward the
same was discovered, as shall hereafter in its proper place be set forth.

The 24th. of December, Prance was Examined before the King and Council, and
having given the particular Circumstances of the Murder, and in what
respective Rooms and places the Body was kept, as aforesaid, several Lords were
ordered to go with him, to see if there were such Rooms as he described, and
whether he could readily go to them, which he did to their Honors full
satisfaction.

But sometime after, remaining in Prison, without any assurance of his Pardon,
he was so far prevailed with, to retract by word of mouth what he had truly
Confessed upon Oath; as once to say before the King and Council, That he was
Innocent, and they All were Innocent. But as to the Temptations he was under,
and the Circumstances that swayed him to that Ill Action, he has since set
them forth so ingeniously, as may satisfy any Impartial man, and take off that
Calumny wherewith the Papists load him, and in vain endeavor to Invalidate his
Testimony on that account. In Answer to which, he offers these Considerations
in his Book, page 23. which cannot be better expressed than in his own words,
viz.

That what he before declared concerning the Murder in manner herein before
set forth, was Solemnly upon Oath. This supposed Retraction was suddenly done
under consternation and fear, and not upon Oath.

2. That he was at that time under certain danger of his Life, if he persisted
in that Confession, for he had no Pardon granted, nor any certainty of
obtaining the same.

3. That if he should obtain his Pardon, he considered, that yet his Life would
be still in danger, from the Revengeful and Bloody Priests and Jesuits.

4. That his mind was sorely troubled, as with all these dangers; so with this
further Apprehension, that if he should escape with his Life, yet by this
Discovery he should lose his Livelihood, and in all humane probability, both he
and all his Family, be utterly undone: For as he was the Queens Servant, and
that his Trade and Subsistence chiefly, or indeed wholly depended on her
Majesty's Custom (which was certain and considerable) and that of other Roman
Catholics; so it was not to be doubted but the most crafty and implacable
Priests would soon use means by false Representations and Scandal, to deprive
him thereof, if he proceeded in this detection.

5. That he retained still a certain respect to the Popist^ Religion, in which
he had so long been Educated; for he had not yet entirely got his Soul out of
that Snare; and therefore he did then conceive, being swayed by such powerful
Inducements, That he might Lawfully say, he Note,
was Innocent, and so they were all; which in Popish construction, is not to
deny that they Killed Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey; for that, according to their
Divinity, and what the said Priests had Solemnly declared, was no Sin or Crime,
and consequently they might All, in such their Catholic sense, still be
Innocent: Yet this he must acknowledge, he somewhat doubted, because he had
never been at Confession, and received Absolution, since the Fact Committed,
which all the rest (as some of themselves had declared) had done, and so might
more peremptorily persist (as they did) in averring themselves to be Innocent;
and he does ingeniously declare, That had he received Absolution, it is his fear
he he should never, or not without extreme difficulty have been brought to any
acknowledgment.

These Circumstances, together with a great distemper of Body, contracted by
the incommodities of Consinement, want of Air, etc. occasioned that sudden
revolt of his Reason and duty, under that perplexity of Spirit; but as soon as
he had done it, Conscience flew in his face, and would no longer be laid asleep
with any delusive Popish Charms: When he began to recollect himself, the power
of truth dispersed all those Temptations of Interest, Fear, and Superstition.
If it were true that he might hazard his Life, and lose his Trade, if he did
persist in the Confession of the Murder; it was as true, and he found it by
experience, that he should never have peace of Conscience, if he denied it.

And therefore he was no sooner returned from the King and Council to Newgate
(which comeing in a Coach, it is certain, was not half an hour) but he most
earnestly requested Capt. Richardson (who had been with him, and heard what he
had said that Morning) for God's sake, to go back, and assure the King, and
that Honorable Board from him, That the first Confession which he had made on
Oath, was true in all Circumstances; and that whatsoever he had said before
them that Morning, to the contrary, was occasioned only by the Consternation,
Fear, and Perplexity of mind he was under; which the Capt. immediately did, and
has since declared the same upon Oath.

Thus far the words of Mr. Prances own Narrative, well worthy the Readers
perusal, not only for his satisfaction in this behalf, but also for the several
notorious Villainies of a great number of Popish Priests therein by name
exposed: To which, as a very confirming Circumstance, we may add, that falling
very dangerously Ill. soon after; he then, when he had nothing but a certain
prospect of approaching Death before his eyes, he declared and asserted to
diverse, his first Confession to be true in all points; and also afterward, as
soon as he recovered his Health, he repeated the same with all stedfastness
before the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords of the Council:
Whereupon, his Majesty was most graciously pleased to grant him his Pardon.

From all which, it is most plain, that all this Dust which the Priests and
Jesuits have raised about this matter, is fairly blown away, and Truth is
become perspicuous to any ingenious man that will but Impartially look into
these Transactions, and consider them as they are, and not as they are
represented by their false perspectives.

SECT. II.
On the 21th. of December, 1678. there was some Discovery relating to this
Plot, given into a Committee of the House of Lords, by one Mr. Edmund Everard
(a Scottish Gentleman) who had been kept four years Prisoner in the Tower; the
effect of which, and the occasions and manner of such his Confinement, was as
follows.

This Mr. Everard having been concerned with the English Forces in France, and
there having the Honor to be acquainted with his Grace, the Illustrious Duke
of Monmouth, was employed as Agent for the concerns of the English Militia at
the French Court, where he became acquainted with the Lady Ann Gourdon (Sister
to the Marquess of Huntly in Scotland) living in a Popish Convent in Paris, who
being a Lady very Zealous for Popery, of excellent Accomplishments, and great
Correspondence, did in the month of November. 1673. acquaint him,

That there was a grand design on foot in England, for settling Popery there;
and a project either to dissolve the then Parliament, or sow mis-understandings
between his Majesty and it; and that there was a considerable Party laboring
to make the Duke of York King; and that his Majesty would be made away, and
shortly would not be in a case to hurt any body.

After this he was entertained to Introduce Peter Talbot, Popish Archbishop of
Dublin, to the Marshal Bellefond and the French King, into whose presence he
was admitted, and allowed half an hours Conference, presenting that King with a
Letter, and other Papers.

That the said Talbot then told Mr. Everard, that the business he had to
negotiate with that King, mightily concerned the welfare of all the Catholics
in England, but those of Ireland more especially, being to propose ways to the
French King to relieve them of their present Persecutions, and undertake their
Protection; some of which Expedients he declared, were to Arm some of the
Irish, and secure a Seaport Town in Ireland for the French; for which
Negotiation, he said he had good Warrant and Commission from some of the
greatest persons in England.

Mr. Everard immediately discovered all this to one Sir Robert Welsh, hoping
for his Assistance to Communicate it to his Majesty of Great Britain; but it
seems Sir Robert re-acquainted Colonel Talbot the said Bishops Brother, both
what Everard had said of his Brother, and of the Lady Huntly, and that he was
designing for England, to make known such their Correspondencies, who thereupon
threatened him, That if he offered to do any such thing, they would infallibly
procure that he should forthwith be Committed to the Tower of London, or the
Gatehouse: That notwithstanding Mr. Everard privately getting away, not without
great danger, being desperately sought after and pursued in France, came over
into England; but within three or four days, and before he could get to speak
with the Duke of Monmouth, whom he intended to have Addressed himself unto, he
was suddenly sent for to one of the Secretaries of State, and without any
Examination or Crime proved, Committed to the Tower, where after some months,
he was Examined by the then Lieutenant, to whom he declared all the said
particulars of the Traitorous Conspiracy, whereof he seemed to take little
knowledge, but threatened to Rack him next day, and afterward Hang him, if he
would not Confess some design he had against the Duke of Monmouth; and several
other Examinations he had before other persons to that purpose, but was
continued Prisoner on this false and malicious suggestion, occasioned by the
Malice and Interest of the said Traitors beyond the Seas, and thereby their
Conspiracy lay Concealed for the space of four years, till after the Plot was
discovered by Dr. Oats, and then he gave in this Information first to the
House of Lords, and afterward to the Commons upon Oath, as by the Narrative
thereof, Printed by it self, more at large appears.

It may here be noted, That afterward, viz. but in August last, the
beforementioned Sir Robert Walsh, taking advantage of the Liberty of the
times, adventured to Print some Papers, which he pretended to be an Answer to
this Narrative; but it being found to consist of nothing material, but only
certain Scurrilous and causeless. Reflections on Mr. Everards Person, the same
upon Complaint was Ordered by Authority to be suppressed.

As for other Occurrences, the most material were as follows, December. 30th. --
The Parliament was Prorogued till the 4th. of February, and before that time,
viz. Jan. 24th. Dissolved by Proclamation, as aforesaid.

January the Third, was an Order of Council made to Reinforce the Proclamation,
of the 30th. of October, To keep Papists out of London, and 10 Miles distance.

January the Eigth, A Proclamation Commanding the immediate Return of all his
Majesty's Subjects, who were in any Foreign Seminarles, and forbidding any
Releif to be sent to them.

About this time, Come in Herefordshire was discovered to be a College of
Jesuits; and Mr. Stephen Dugdale formerly Servant to the Lord Aston in
Staffordshire, came in and made a considerable Discovery, whereupon on the
15th. of January, a Proclamation was set forth against Francis Evers, alias
Eurie, alias Ireland, of Tixal in the County of Stafford. John Gaven, late of
Wolverhampton in the same County. Vavasor, alias Gifford, late of Boscobel,
Edward Levison, late of Wilnot in the same County, All Jesuits, and
Broadstreet, late of Hore-Cross in the same County, a Popish Priest, being
charged upon Oath, to be guilty of the Plot, and a promise of 100 l. to any
that should Apprehend Evers, and 50 l. for each of the rest. Of these, Gaven
was soon after taken into Custody, and since Executed, but the rest absconded.

January, 17th.

The Judges gave their Opinions in the Points following, relating to Recusants.

May it please your Majesty,

We have met, and considered of the Questions proposed to us, and do hereby
humbly return our Opinions.

To the First, We are of Opinion,

That Foreigners (being Popish Recusants) and exercising ordinary Trades, (but
not Merchants) are not excused from taking the Oaths, or finding Securities.

To the Second, That Foreigners, though certified by Ambassadors to be their
Servants, except they are menial Servants, are not excused.

To the Third, That Foreigners, though settled Housekeepers, being no
Travelers, or Foreign Ministers Servants, are not excused.

To the Fourth, That the King's Native Subjects, are not excused form taking
the Oaths, by being menial Servants to Foreign Ministers.

To the Fifth, We find no Law that excuses a Feme-Covert, being a Papist, from
taking the Oaths, though her Husband be a Protestant.

To the Sixth, That a Popish Recusant, having taken the Oaths, is not bound to
find new Sureties, unless upon a new tender of the Oaths, he shall refuse to
take them.

All which, with great Humility we submit to your Majesty's judgment.

Will. Scroggs. Fran. North. W. Mountagu. W. Wild. Tim. Littleton. Hugh
Wyndham. Robert Atkyns. V. Bertie. Fr. Bramston. Tho. Jones. W. Dolben.
At the Sessions in the Old-bailey, the 16th. and 17th. of January, One John
Ayleworth, alias Adland, Committed to Newgate as a Priest, on the 23th. of
November. before, was Indicted of High Treason, upon the Stat. of 27 Eliz. cap.
2. And upon full Evidence of his having frequently said Mass, received
Confessions, given Absolutions, and performed all other Priestly Functions, and
that he had often appeared in her Majesty's Chapel in Priestly Vestments,
amongst the rest of the Priests, he was found guilty, and Condemned. But his
Majesty treading the merciful steps of his Ancestors, being most unwilling, to
punish any for their Religion, or that any Priest, though even upon this odious
provocation of their Parties plotting against his Life, should suffer purely
for being a Priest, or merely for their presumption and disobedience, for
coming into his Dominions contrary to that Law; was graciously pleased to grant
him a Repreive.

CHAP. XIII.
A Design of the Papists to suborn Witnesses, to oppose and vilify the
Evidence of Dr. Oats, and Mr. Bedloe.

THE Papists finding all their Plot was like to be unravel'd, unless some
speedy Course were taken to overthrow the Evidence, resolved to spare no Charge
for so necessary a work; and to this purpose, one James Nettervile an Irish
Papish, Prisoner in the Marshalscy, Tutored by Dominick Kelly, (one of the
Priests that Murdered Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, being for some time his
Fellow-prisoner) and holding some Correspondence with the Lords in the Tower,
attempted to corrupt and suborn two Gentlemen for great Sums of money, to Swear
what should be dictated and prescribed unto them, to oppose the Testimony of
Dr. Oats, and Mr. Bedloe, and to scandalize them with odious Crimes, and charge
the Plot on dissenting Protestants, as wholly contrived and pretended by them,
to cut off the Papists, that they might the more easily accomplish some ill
intentions they had against the King, and Government.

But the Persons they happened to tamper with, were of greater worth and
integrity, than to engage in, or conceal so base a Business. The one of them
was Captain Bury, dwelling in Ireland, and Son of Sir William Bury of Grantham
in Lincolnshire. The other, Mr. William Brooks, one of the Aldermen of Dublin,
who being in London for the prosecution of their private concerns, they were
often times with this Nettervile, who had been formerly a Clerk in the Court of
Claims at Dublin, and did now pretend he could be serviceable to them, and
knowing that their attendance here had been very chargeable, was so far
infatuated, as to think them profligate enough to entertain such a wicked
proposal for money, and so broke the matter to them severally, the one not
knowing of the others being concerned, till after they had both discovered it.

For about the 13th. of January, See the Narrative of this design. P. 1, and 2.
Nettervile having sent for Captain Bury to the Marshalsey, told him in private
after some preparatory discourses, That there was a Design on foot, to amuse
those that had Impeached the Lords, and those concerned about the Plot, and to
turn the Game an other way, as he expressed it; and that the said Captain might
do himself a kindness if he pleased, and that if he would prove some certain
things against Mr. Oats, and Mr. Bedloe, and that they held such and such
Correspondencies, and particularly with Mr. Blood, etc. he should have 4 or 500
l. The Captain seemed to adhere to his discourse, and learned of him, that one
Russel a rank Papist, and an Irish man, who Married Madam Rowse, the Duchess
of Portsmouth's Gentlewoman, was appointed to manage the affair, and pay the
money; and after two or three meetings, it was concluded, That the money should
be put into a third persons hand, and that a paper should be drawn up, and
delivered to him, containing the particulars, that he should swear. And
promised him no small Interest amongst the Papists, for this good Service,
besides the money. For, says Nettervile to to him, If we can but turn off this
Plot, there is no danger of effecting our Business. For, said he, most
impudently, The King will believe nothing of it. Ibidem P. 4.
But in the mean time, Captain Bury first acquainted Colonel Blood, and
afterward the Secretary of State, from time to time, of these proceedings.

Nettervile also told the Captain, They had got one in that Prison, (which was
one Brewer, a desperate indigent Papist) that would swear, that the very
morning the Proclamation came out concerning Sr. Edmundbury Godfrey, Mr. Bedloe
came to his Chamber and asked him, If he had ever seen Sr. Edmundbury Godfrey,
for said he, If I knew what a like man he was, I could easily get 500 l. and
however, I am resolved to hazard my Neck but I will have it; As also that he
would have had this Brewer gone with him to Somerset House, to view the Rooms,
that he might make his Story probable, With much more false stuff, to the same
purpose.

The manner of Alderman Brooks being dealt with, was more remarkable, for going
to see this Nettervile about 23th. December. at the Marshelseys, he desired him to
carry a Note for a Fellow-Prisoner of his, to one Pierce Butler, that lived in
Jermainstreet; this Prisoner was Kelly the Priest, who had been taken up in
Surry, only as a Recusant, they then knowing nothing more of him, who was so
strangely infatuated, though under such desperate Circumstances, as guilty of
Sr. Edmundbury Godfrey's Murder, yet to send it unsealed; however the Alderman
for the present did not read it, but carrying it to the place, found Butler
gone out of Town upon the Proclamation against Papists, and about two days
after, having occasion for wast Paper, happened to read it, and found it to
this effect,

That being Committed thither, by the name of Daniel Edmonds, as a Recusant, he
desired him to come to him, and in so doing, he would, oblige him Friend,
Subscribed, Dominick Kelly.

Soon after this, the Alderman happening on a Paper at a Coffee-house, wherein
it was said, that Mr. France had named one Kelly a Priest, for one of the
Murderers of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, he suspected this might be the man,
whereupon he went over to Nettervile, and by the by, inquired after him, who
told him, he was a Priest, but had got Bail, whom he hired for 10 s. apeice,
and was got out, and then the said Nettervile told the Alderman, that if he
would but assist to villifie the Evidence of Oats and Bedloe, he should have
money enough, etc.

But afterward Alderman Brooks meeting Captain Bury, they discovered to each
other in discourse some of these transactious, and then the Alderman went
likewise to the Secretary, Captain Bury still holding on his Correspondence
with Nettervile, endeavoring to have the money, paid in, to see the
Depositions he must swear, seize Russel, etc.

But all this was prevented by an unhappy Accident, for Mr. Brooks being to
meet with Mr. Loman, and Mr. Glover, (the Keeper and Clerk of the Marshalsey,)
to consider some way for the discovering those that had been Bail for Kelly,
happned to give some hints of the Captain's Information, whereby Dr. Oats
coming to have some notice thereof, and knowing nothing of what progress had
been made toward discovery, did with Mr. Bedloe, and Sir William Waller, go to
Nettervile, and with some threatenings, mixed with a promise of pardon, made him
confess the discourses he had had with Captain Bury, he intruth imagining the
said Captain had sent them. Thus by an untimely process the proceedings were
spoiled, which otherwise in short time might have produced a more notable
discovery; and Russel having notice, absconded himself.

Conformable to this wicked design of charging this horrid Plot upon the Ibidem
P. 16.
Protestants, about the same time there were several Popish Emissaries
employed, to go to the Houses of some Nonconformists well known in the City of
London, to pray their charitable Contributions toward the maintenance of Mr.
Oats, and Mr. Bedloe, upon this specious but most false suggestion, That his
Majestics Allowance was not sufficient for their Encouragement. But the Parties
to whom they thus Addressed themselves (supposing their Intentions were to
abuse their King and Country, and get money for themselves, or some worse
Design;) rejected them, and checked them for their Insolence. And happy it was,
that they did so, for other wise who knows what advantage they might have made
thereof, in order to the promoting their wicked Enterprise. Which as Originally
it was to lay the Odium of their Treason on the Dissenters, if they could have
effected it; so ever since the discovery, they have endeavored by all Arts to
play the same Game, and would have been glad of such a pretense as this, to
render it more probable.

CHAP. XIV.
The Proceedings against Robert Green, Henry Berry, and Lawrence Hill, for the
Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; with Hill's pretended Speech at Execution.

ON the 28th. of December, it was Ordered by the House of Commons, That Sir
John Earnly do immediately carry an Address of that House, to his Majesty,
That his Majesty would be pleased to issue out a Commission of Oyer and
Terminer, for the Trial of the three Persons last taken, for the Murder of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey. Which being done, the said Sir John Reports, That he had
waited upon his Majesty, and that his Majesty was pleased to Answer, That he
would immediately issue out his Commission for their Trial.

Accordingly on Wednesday the 5th of February, 1678/9. The said three Persons,
viz. Robert Green, Henry Berry, and Lawrence Hill, were Arraigned, and pleaded
Not Guilty, at the Kings-Bench-Bar, Westminster, and a Rule of Court entered,
for their being brought to Trial on the Friday following, being the 10th. of
the same Month; at which time the Jury sworn, was as follows,

Sir William Roberts, Bar. Sir Richard Fisher, Bar. Sir Michael Heneage, Knight.
Sir Thomas Bridges, Knight. William Avery, Esquire Charles Vmphrevile, Esquire John
Bathurst, Esquire Richard Gowre, Esquire Thomas Henslow, Esquire John Sharp, Esquire John
Haynes, Esquire William Moyle, Esquire
Dominick Kelly, and Girald, the two Priests, and Philip Vernatti, stood
charged in the same Indictment for the Murder, but they were fled, and could
never yet be taken; the Evidence was managed in this Order,

1. Dr. Oats Swore, That after he had sworn his Depositions before Sir
Edmundbury, Sir Edmundbury did tell him, He had received affronts from great
Persons, for being so Zealous in that Business of the discovery of the Plot,
and that the Week before his Death, he again complained, that several Popish
Lords, (some of them since in the Tower) had threatened him, and asked him what
he had to do with it, and seeming to be much concerned, did declare, He went in
fear of his Life by the Popish Party, and that he had been dogged several days,
and the Witness advising him to take his man always with him, he said, No, --
He did not fear them, if they did but come fairly.

2. Thomas Robinson, Esquire Testified, That on the 7th. of October, See the Trials
of Green, etc. P. 13.
discoursing of the Plot, Sir Edmundbury said these words to him -- Upon my
Conscience, I believe I shall be the first Martyr; but I do not fear them, if
they come fairly, I shall not part with my Life tamely.

3. Then Mr. Prance set forth the whole matter, how the two Priests drew him
into it, and how they Murdered and disposed of the Body, and afterward met at
Bow, and read over a Paper there, of the particulars of the Murder, etc.
exactly for substance, as is before set forth, Chapter the 8th. To which, for
avoiding Repetition, the Reader is referred. He also swears, That he never had
any Conference with Mr. Bedloe in his life, before he was committed to Prison.

4. Mr. Bedloe Swears, That about the beginning of October, Le Fair, and
Prichard, and Keins, and some others, all Priests, discoursed him about Killing
a certain Gentleman, whom they would not name, and told him he should have a
considerable Reward, and then they set him to insinuate himself into Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey's acquaintance, which he did do on several pretenses.

5. That the very day Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was Murdered, Le Fair at the
Palsgraves-head Tavern, told him there Ibidem P. 30.
was a Gentleman to be put out of the way [for so they call Murder,] that
Night, and would have him to assist, and that there would be 4000 l. Reward
from the Lord Bellasis; for if this Gentleman were not cut off, things would de
discovered to that degree, that they should not be able to bring this design to
pass, but must wait another Age to effect it, and therefore desired him to meet
in the Cloisters at Somerset House that Evening, for thereabouts it was to be
done, which he promised to do, but wilfully faild them, because he would not
have his hands in Blood. He all this while not knowing upon whom their design
was.

6. That on Monday Le Fair meeting him, charged him with breach of Promise, and
appointed him to come to Somerset House at Nine a'Clock, where he told the
Witness that he had done ill, that he did not help in this business, but if he
would assist to carry him off, he should still have part of the Reward. Why,
says the Witness, is he Murdered? yes, says the said Le Fair; whereupon the
Witness asked if he might not see him? which was granted, and Le Fair led him
through a dark Entry into a Room where were several People, that had no light
but a dark Lanthorn, and were consulting how to carry him off; one of the
Company throwing off the Cloth wherewith he was covered, the Witness saw the
Face, and presently knew it to be Sir Ed. Godfrey; with whom by the Priests
instigation, he had of late been much Conversant. The Witness advised, to tie
weights to his head Page 32.
and feet, and throw him into the River, but they did not think fit to do so,
but said, They would put it upon himself, and carry him out in a Chair, and
that the Porter [Berry,] was to sit up to let them out; the hour appointed was
12 that Night; and the Witness promised on the Sacrament, which he had took the
Thursday before, then to come again to help them. But being got from them,
never came at them more.

7. The Constable that viewed the Body in the Ditch, gave an account that the
Sword was sticking through him, but no blood appeared on the ground, and he
found a great deal of Gold and Silver in his Pockets. And two Chyrurgeons
swore, That they verily believed, the Sword was run through him after he was
dead, and cold, but that he died by reason of Suffocation, and breaking of his
Neck, and bruis^s on the Breast.

8. In Confirmation of Mr. Prances Evidence, That they had been several times
at his House inquiring for him, and that Hill (as he and the rest told Prance)
was there in the Morning of that Day, on which he was Murdered. There was
produced one Elizabeth Curtis, that at the same time dwelt with Sir Edmundbury
as Servant in the House; she swore directly, That Green had been at her Masters
about a Fortnight before her Master was killed, and talked to him a quarter of
an hour, in French; and that Hill was there that very Saturday Morning, on
which he was killed, and spoke to him before he went out, and was there a good
while in the Parlour with him, but cannot tell what his business was; and that
overnight, there was a strange man brought a Note to her Master, which she gave
to him, and the man staying for an answer, prithee, says Sir Edmund. Godfrey,
tell him I don't know what to make of it. But this was none of the three
Persons at the Bar, but supposed to be one of the same Tribe. But as for Hill,
she was sure he was there on the said Saturday Morning, by the same token, he
had then on the same Clothes as he had now at the Bar; now though he denied he
was there, yet he acknowledged he had not changed his Clothes, but wore the
same Suit ever since before that time.

9. The man at the Plow-Alehouse, (where Mr. Prance swore, That the Murder was
Consulted,) and his Servant Page 41.
said, That Prance used to come thither with Hill, and Girald, and Kelly,
several times, and this within 5 Weeks before the Murder.

10. The Relation Prance gave of the meeting, at the Queens-Head at Bow, is
confirmed by a Messenger they Page 43.
employed there, to go to call Mr. Dethwick of Poplar to them; and the Servant
of the House swears positively, That they pulled out a Paper and read it, and
named Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey' s name, and whilst he stood without the door,
one of them threatened to kick him down stairs.

11. Sir Robert Southwell Deposes, That Prance having related these things to
the Council, and being sent with the Duke of Monmouth, and the Earl of Ossory,
to show the places he mentioned, did readily go to them all, and they appeared
to be all such, as he had described them, only as to the Room in the upper
Court where the Body was laid one Night, having never been there but once, and
that in the dark, he said he could not positively assign it, but pointed to
some Rooms, and said, He was sure it was thereabouts. And this doubtfulness the
Court observed, did give more credit to the rest of his Testimony, for a man
that will swear any thing, would stick at nothing.

Lastly, It was proved, That Berry the Porter, on his Examination before the
Lords of the Committee, did say, He had Order from the Queen, or in the name of
the Queen, That he should suffer no strangers, nor any persons of Quality to
come into Somerset House on the 12th. 13th. and 14th. days of October, that is,
the day Sir Edmund. was Murdered, and the two days following, and
particularly, that Prince Rupert did come in that time, and he did refuse him,
and sent him back again.

Now as to the defenses they offered for themselves.

1. They all denied the Fact very stoutly, but that is of no value against
plain Evidence, and do; but aggravate their Crime.

2. Hill would have invalidated Mr. Prance's Testimony, because he had once
denied it, and said, They were innocent. But that the Court vindicated for the
Reasons before reci^ed, that it could no ways legally take off his Evidence,
for he was no ways perju^'d, but rather excusable, under the Circumstances
aforesaid.

3. The said Hill, to evade the Charge, brings several Witnesses all of his own
Religion, to aver, he was never from his Lodgings, after Nine a Clock at Night,
but these did it so mineingly and generally, that no stress could be laid upon
them; it being proved that they had several Keys to the door, and that Hill
might go in and out without their knowledge, and one of his Witnesses makes a
palpable mistake of an whole Month, P. 55. and two of Greens Witnesses, a whole
Week, P. 66. So ill had they calculated the time, which they were brought to
speak to.

4. On the behalf of Berry, The Soldiers who were placed at the Gate, Sentin^l,
say, They saw a Sedan come in, so far they agree with the King's Evidence; but
then they confidently aver, That they saw none go out all night. But what was
this to the matter of Fact, and to the Murder committed, sworn in all
Circumstances so punctually? The Sentinel might be from his Post, and Mr.
Prance who best knew the contrivance, tells us, that Berry had inveigled the
Sentinel in, to drink, and so he might not see the Sedan go out; and then the
Sentinel knowing he had committed a dangerous fault by so doing, might be so
wise, though not very honest, to conceal it, and say there was no Sedan went
out.

This was all the defense they could make, which in every part appeared so
weak, that as well the Jury, as all other impartial Auditors, were fully
satisfied, to bring them in guilty of the Murder. On Tuesday the 11th. of
February, they were brought again to the Bar, in order to receive their
Sentence, which after a grave speech was pronounced, by Mr. Justice Wild, to
whom it apperrained, as being second Judge in the Court.

In pursuance of which Sentence, Robert Green, and Lawrence Hill, were Executed
at Tybu^ne, on the 21th. of February, and Henrry Berry on the 28th. of the said
Month. They all three did at their deaths deny the Crime, and used that
Expression, That they were as Innocent as the Child new born. But we may justly
fear, they were under an horrid delusion, and so charmed and bound up by so
many Oaths, and Sacraments, by their Gostly Fathers the Jesuits, and Priests,
that they durst not acknowledge the Truth, but on the contrary, thought by
concealing and denying the same, they should do great Service to the Romish
Church, by keeping it from scandal, and be Sainted for it in Heaven. That there
was some such Artifice used to seal up their Lips, is plain, by this notable
Circumstance. When Hill and Green were hanged, and dead, Captain Richardson
Keeper of Newgate, and many others present, saw the Executioner (amongst other
things) take a Paper out of Hill's Pocket, purporting to be the form of speech
that he should use to the People at the Gallows; which being very remarkably
Penned, I shall here insert the same verbatim, as follows,

I now come to the Fatal Place, where I must end my Life, and I hope, with that
Courage that may become my Innocence: I must now appear before the great Judge,
who knows all things, and judges rightly; and I hope it will be happy for me a
Sinner, that I am thus wrongfully put to death. I call God, Angels, and Men, to
Witness, that I am wholly ignorant of the Manner, Cause, or Time, of the Death
of Justice Godfrey, although on that account, by the malice of wicked men
brought to this shameful Death, which I hope, will give me a speedy passage to
Eternal Life. In this hope, I die cheerfully, because of my Innocence, and the
benefit of the precious Wounds of my Blessed Savior, by whose Merits I hope
for Salvation. I die a Roman Catholic, desiring all such to Pray for me: And I
beseech God in his Justice, to discover this Horrid Murder, with the
Contrivers thereof, that my Innocence may appear: And though from my heart I
forgive my Accusers, yet I Cite all such as have had a hand in this Bloody
Contrivance, before the gre^ Tribunal of Gods Justice, to answer for the wrong
they have done the Innocent; and particularly the Lord Chief Justice, and the
Brothers of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, with Jury, Witnesses, and all their
Partakers. Oh Lord bless and preserve his Majesty, and be merciful to this poor
Nation, and lay not Innocent Blood to its Charge: So I bid you all Farewell in
Jesus Christ, into whose hands I commit my Spirit.

This Paper is no small Evidence of the ill Arts used by the Jesui^s and Popish
Priests, to make their People persist in denial of their Crimes at their Death,
and keep up the Credit of their Church, though with never so certain an hazard
of their own Souls. For it is certain, these were not Hill's own words, but
prepared by some other, for See the Animadversions Printed thereon. P. 2.
him to say, and what need was there of so much skill, in a matter where only
Truth and not Art was necessary? For if Hill knew himself guiltless, he could
have told the people so, which would have been more Credible out of his mouth,
from his heart, then out of this Paper, from his memory. But they were afraid,
he would either confess the whole matter, or that the power of Truth would
over-bear his Tongue in some Circumstance, or at least that he would not deny
it so resolutely, and in such a taking manner, as might fix a suspicion and
odium upon the Witnesses, Judge, and Jury, in the minds of the people, which was
the great thing they aimed at, and therefore some Priest drew up this form, of
what he should say, that every word might be according to their mind, how
remote soever it was from his Thoughts, or the Truth. Nor is it any wonder,
that they should teach their Proselytes to make Speeches, just as they do
Prayers, Opere Operate,^ without any understanding, or attention, or consent of
the mind, to the words they use. For that the words were framed by another for
him to Con by heart, is most evident; for that he never had Pen, Ink, nor
Paper, all the while he was in Newgate; and his Wise Testified that it was not
of his hand writing, nor did she ever see it before, or know how he came by it;
yet he began his Speech with these very words, and repeated as much thereof as
he had got without book; but certainly a man under his Circumstances, would
never have troubled his mind with a parcel of formal words, if the Awe of the
Priest, or some Absolution on that Condition, had not been more prevalent with
him, than Truth or Conscience; the strain of it showing a malicious Spirit in
the Inditer, toward the Evidence and Court, as it does his uncharitableness
toward the Prisoner, to impose thus on a poor ignorant dying man.

And whereas the Papists do general^y report, That Berry was always, or at
least died a Protestant. The same is no toriously false, for he had many Years
been a Papist, chiefly led thereunto for Lucre, and to get an Employment, as he
acknowledged to Mr. Ordinary; to whom, it is true, he declared a little before
his Execution, That he did not believe many things, which the Doctors of the
Romish Church teach as necessary to be embraced for Articles of Faith; which is
no more than what many other Papists will affirm. But the said Berry neither in
Prison, nor at the Gallows, would ever disown the Romish Church, nor in the
least declare himself a Protestant.

CHAP. XV.
The Proceedings in Parliament touching the Plot, with the discovery of Mr.
Reading's ill practice, and the substance of the Proceedings against him, for
attempting to stifle the King' s Evidence, relating thereunto.

AT the beginning of March, his Majesty sent his Royal Highness the Duke of
York a Letter, Ordering him to withdraw for some time, who thereupon set
forwards on the third of March toward Flanders, and on the sixth of the same,
the new Parliament met, whom the King entertained with a Speech, setting forth
what had been done in prosecution of the Plot, disbanding the Army, etc. during
the interval; and concerning the Duke of York's being so withdrawn beyond the
Seas, his Majesty was pleased to take notice thereof, in these words, -- And
above all, I have Commanded my Brother to absent himself from me, because I
would not leave the most Malicious Men room to say, I had not removed all
Causes which could be pretended to influence Me toward Popish Counsels. But
some unhappy Traverses happened, about settling a Speaker, which stumbling at
the Threshold, was even then looked upon by observing men as an Ominous
Presage, That little good would be attained or effected by that Assembly,
though undoubtedly it was composed as of men of the best Estates, so generally
of the most able Understandings, and most publick-spirited Gentlemen, that over
served their Country in that Capacity; To allay and compose these Animosities
which were unhappily started by the Treasurer and his Interest, purposely to
render this Parliament ineffectual, which he knew would otherwise prove Fatal
to him. There was a short Prorogation, and then they fell to Business, and on
the 24th. of March, 1678.

Resolved, Nemine Contradicente,

That this House does declare, That they are fully satisfied by the proofs they
have heard, that there now is, and for diverse Years last past, has been an
Horrid and Treasonable Plot and Conspiracy contrived and carried on by those of
the Popish Religion, for the Murdering of his Majesty's Sacred Person, and
for Subverting the Protestant Religion, and the Ancient, and well-Establisht
Government of this Kingdom.

And the Concurrence of the House of Lords being desired herein, the next day
their Lordships sent a Message to the Commons, That their Lordships did
immediately and unanimously Concur with the House of Commons in the Declaration
as to the Plot. Thus have we the Judgment of Two Parliaments in the Case
solemnly and publicly declared.

The same 25th. of March, One Mr. Sackvile a Member of the House of Commons,
and Burgess for East Greenstead in Sussex, being charged by Dr. Oats to have
said, -- That they were Sons of Whores, who said there was a Plot, and that he
was a lying Rogue that said it, the matter was examined, and Resolved, That the
said Mr. Edw. Sackvile be sent to the Tower, and that he be Expelled the House,
and made incapable of bearing any Office; and though the next day on his Knees
at the Bar of that House, he desired to have the last part of this Sentence
remitted, yet the House would not Retract what they had done.

About the same time, Mr. Bedloe made a complaint of harsh usage, and
discouragements, to the House of Commons, and upon Oath set forth, That going
to the Lord Treasurer for some money, by virtue of an Order from the Council,
my Lord took him into his Closet, and asked him, Whether the Duke of
Buckingham, or Lord Shaftsbury, or any of the Members of the House of Commons,
had desired him to say any thing against him, and to tell him who they were,
and he would well Reward him, and to know if he would desist from giving
Evidence against the -- and the Lords in the Tower, etc. To which he answered,
That he had once been an ill man, and desired to be so no more: To which the
Treasurer replied, You may have a great sum of money, and live in another
Country, as Geneva, Su^den, or New England, and should have what money he
would ask, to maintain him there; But Mr. Bedloc refusing such Temptations, his
Lordship began to threaten him, saying, There was a Boat and a Yatch ready to
carry him far enough for telling of Tales, and after this, Guards were as Spies
upon him, and he very ill used, till by an Address to the King, the same was
remedied, and better Care taken. And at the same time, Dr. Oats declared to the
House, That one day he being in the Privy Garden, the said Lord Treasurer
passing by, and reflecting on him, said, -- There goes one of the Saviors of
England, but I hope to see him hanged within a Month; all which Complaints as
to the Earl of Danby, were referred to the Consideration of the Committee of
Secrecy.

We have before Chapter the 13th set forth a kind of Counter-plot, laid for
opposing and vilifying the Evidence of Dr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe, but now we must
give an account of another kind of Design, still aiming at the same end, but
managed more privately, to mollify aad sweeten Mr. Bedloe in his Evidence, and
stifle his Testimony by his own consent, that it might not fall too heavy upon
the Lords in the Tower, but this too proved Abortive, for though they had
chosen a notable Agent for the Work, viz. One Mr. Reading a Council at Law,
(famous for his Adventures in the Isle of Axolme) yet Mr. Bedloe outwitted
him, and brought him to deserved Infamy for that corrupt practice; for after he
had long held him in hand, got several sums of money of him, procured by a
stratagem sufficient Witnesses to prove it out of his own mouth, and under his
hand, and made the Business full ripe. Then on the third of April, the
Committee of Secrecy (to whom Mr. Bedloe had from time to time communicated
this Intrigue, and from them took his measures of proceeding in it) informed
the House of Commons, that they had something of moment lately come to their
knowledge, wherein they desired the Assistance of the House; hereupon it was
immediately Ordered, That all Persons who were not Members, should be put out
of the Speakers Chamber, and that no Person should be suffered to go out of the
House, and that the Keys be brought in and laid upon the Table, which being
done, and the business discovered and debated, it was Ordered, That Mr. Speaker
immediately issue out his Warrant against Nathaniel Reading Esquire, who being
then walking in the Lobby, (for he had much Practice in Soliciting Causes in
Parliament, and commonly attended there,) was taken into Custody, and the
Secret Committee Ordered to take his Examination; which being dispatched and
Reported, the House on the 8th. of April, made the following Address to the
King for bringing him to his Trial.

May it please your Majesty,
WE your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Commons in Parliament
Assembled, having according to our Duty made equiry into the Damnable and
Hellish Plot against your Majesty's Sacred Person and Government; and for the
Extirpation of the Protestant Religion, have upon examination discovered that
Nathaniel Reading Esquire has Industriously and against the Duty of a Loyal
Subject held frequent Correspondencies with several Lords and other Persons
that stand Committed for High Treason, and also used his utmost endeavors to
prevent and suppress your Majesty's evidence, and as much as in him lay to
stifle the discovery of the said Plot, and thereby to render the same
Fallacious and of no reality, and by such undue means to prevent the
Malefactors from coming to Justice; Therefore We your said Commons do most
humbly beseech your Majesty that you will be Graciously pleased to command,
That a Commission of Oyer and Terminer do immediately Issue forth for the Trial
of the said Nathaniel Reading for the said Offense, that he may be brought to
public Justice.

Accordingly a Commission was granted, and on Thursday the 24th. of April, Mr.
Reading was brought to his Trial, before Sir Francis North, Lord Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas, and most of the other Judges, (except the Lord Chief
Justice of the King's Bench, who was in the Country) and several other Persons
of Quality in the Commission named, at the Kings-Bench-Bar at Westminster.

When the Jury came to be Sworn, Mr. Reading desired the Liberty of a
Peremptory Challenge, which the Court could not allow, he standing Indicted
only for a Misdemeanour, not Treason, then he replied with a great deal of
Submission, and Eloquence, seeming to urge that the nature of the Crime as it
was laid, was Treason, and thence descended to crave the Opinion of the Court,
whether he might not be Indicted again for Treason for the same matter, but in
this, the Court refused to gratify him, only telling him, that the laying of
it but as a Misdemeanour was a favor, and ought so to be by him accounted; and
so proceeded to Swear the Jury as follows, Sir John Cutler, Knight. Joshuah
Galliard, Esquire Edw. Wilford, Esquire Thomas Henslow, Esquire Thomas Earsby, Esquire John
Serle, Esquire Thomas Cass, Esquire Rainsford Waterhouse, Esquire Matthew Bateman, Esquire
Walter Moyle. Esquire Richard Pagett, Esquire John Haynes, Esquire


The Effect of the Evidence.

1. Mr. Bedloe set forth how he came acquainted with Mr. Reading, whom he
employed in some Concerns: See Reading's Trial, P. 15.
That he never went about to have him stifle the whole Plot, but only to make
him easy toward some particular People, that he Solicited for, to which
purpose he would tell him it was not for his safety to run at the whole Herd,
and if he could do a kindness he should be well gratified.

2. That the chief Persons he Solicited for, were the Lord Petre, the Lord
Powis, the Lord Stafford, and Sir Henry Titchborn, in whose name he promised
great Rewards, both in money and Estate, for shortning the Evidence, and
bringing them off from the charge of High Treason; and particularly that he
made him easy toward Whitebread and Fenwick, when they were first Arraigned,
which was to be an Assurance that he would accomplish what he promised, and an
example what kindness might be done, wherein the Witness was willing to comply,
to carry on the Intreigue with the Lords, till it might properly be discovered,
he esteeming that of greater Consequence, then two old Priests, whom he might
charge further another time.

3. He did not know but Reading had laid a Trap for him, and therefore
discovered these Conferences to Prince Rupert, the Earl of Essex, Mr. Kirkby,
and others; and Mr. Reading being to give him a meeting at his Lodgings on the
26th. of March, he had planted one Mr. Speak a Gentleman of good Quality behind
the hangings, and making an hollow place in the Bed, laid his man there,
covered over smooth with a Rugg, as if it had been new made, that they might
over-hear what passed, and not be descryed. There he agreed to bring the Final
Answer of the Lords, and told him, That he had Authority to draw blank Deeds,
both for Sums, and Estates, which they would settle on him; and that the Lord
Stafford was Felling of Timber to sell, to raise money for him, etc.

4. That the Monday following, the Witness and the Prisoner drew up a Paper of
what the Witness had to charge the aforesaid Lords with, which was carried to
the Lords, and then returned by Reading in his own hand writing, but minced so,
as not to signify any thing material against them. This paper Mr. Reading
owned, and it was read in Court.

5. Mr. Speak sets forth the Conference between Mr. Bedloe and Mr. Reading,
which he overheard, and that Mr. Ibidem P. 28.
Reading said, The Lord Stafford would settle an Estate in Glocestershire on
Mr. Bedloe, and Sign and Seal a Deed thereof within ten days after he should be
discharged, and several other discourses plainly proving the matter of the
Indictment, too long here to be recited. And the same was sworn by Henry
Wiggins, Mr. Bedloes man.

6. Mr. Bedloe swore positively, That Mr. Reading had given him several Sums of
money, amounting in all to 56l. or upwards, and all to dispose him to this
matter.

To all this Mr. Reading had very little to say in his own defense, that was
pertinent or material, but only endeavored with a multitude of fine words to
cloud the matter, and asperse the Evidence, yet in the process of his discourse
he did in effect own the whole matter of Fact, he stood charged with, but would
have had it believed that Mr. Bedloe first proposed it to him, and that all
that he did; was not in the least to shorten, lessen or stifle any thing of
Truth, which Mr. Bedloe had to say; but only to prevent him from the guilt of
Perjury and Innocent Blood, etc.

All which, being sufficiently disproved by the Evidence, and most improbable
in it self, the Jury going together, soon returned, and brought Mr. Reading in
guilty of the Misdemeanour whereof he stood Indicted.

And then the Lord Chief Justice North after a grave Speech respecting the
heinousness of the Crime, and the Quality of the Person, as being of the long
Robe, whose knowledge should keep them from so foolish, and their Integrity from
so wicked an Attempt, Pronounced the Judgment of the Court, viz. That be be
Fined 1000 l. Imprisoned for one Year, and stand one hour in the Pillory, in
the Pallace-Yard in Westminster on Monday then next, between the hours of
Eleven and Twelve. Accordingly he did at the same time publicly stand in the
Pillory, and the People generally appeared so Enraged against his Crimes, that
if an extraordinary Guard had not been provided to secure him, it is thought,
some Fatal Mischief might have been done to his Person, by the Fury of the
incensed Rabble.

CHAP. XVI.
The Cursed Design of Morris Gifford a Popish Priest, and others of the
Conspirators, to Fire the Cities and Suburbs of London and Westminster, happily
discovered, with other Subsequent Transactions, as the Model and Names of the
New Council, etc.

WE have told you before in the Seventh Chapter, That one part of this Damnable
Popish Plot consisted in Firing, and Mr. Bedloe in a particular Narrative (sold
by Mr. Boulter, and other Booksellers in Cornhil) has acquainted the World how
far he was concerned therein, as a Member of their Committee appointed for
carrying on that Villainy, how he was engaged by the Benedictine Monks at Paris,
in the Year 1676. to that purpose, and afterward joined with one Father
Gifford and others, to Fire Westminster, Limehouse, and other places; and he
there names several particular Streets, and the very Houses where he hired
Cellars and laid in Wood, Coals, and other combustible Matter, to effect this
Business, as on the backside of the Palsegraves-Head Tavern, without
Temple Bar, Brewers Yard in the Strand, a Cellar at Mr. Withers's at the Plough
in Seething-Lane, another in White-Friars, others in Red-Cross-Street,
White-Cross-Street, Bishopsgate-Street, Queen-hive, etc. And in his Epistle he
names Twelve several distinct ways they have to cause and promote Fires, one of
which is by Bribing Servants to fire the Houses of their Masters. Of this kind
we had about this time a notorious Instance, and wherein the very same Father
Gifford was concerned. For the discovery of the Plot hitherto had only enraged,
not daunted the Conspirators, and therefore they still resolved to go on with
their Work, and amongst others, they had drawn in one Elizabeth Oxley, a
Servant Maid to one Mr. Bird, (an eminent Attorney in Fetter-Lane) who having
dwelt there about 6 weeks, took the opportunity on the 10th. of April, 1679.
when all the Family was in Bed, to fire a large Press in her Master' s Closet,
wherein were kept Papers and Writings, and when she thought it was not to be
Quenched, waked her Master and Mistress with outcries, that the House was on
Fire, and ran down to let in the Watch, who had took notice of it, and by the
great Mercy of God, and ready help, the Fire was put out, and the House
preserved, though the Gentleman suffered considerable damage by it. Now as
there was no probability how this Fire should come by any Accident, so it was
observed, that this Elizabeth had pack't up her Clothes, and several other
Circumstances of suspicion, whereupon she was taxt with it, and at last
confessed it, declaring on her Examination, That about Michaelmas, 1678. she
became acquainted with one Nicholas Stubbs a Papist (formerly Butler to a
Popish Lady) who had used mnay persuasions to turn her to his Religion, and
after her showing a liking to it, and that he supposed she had embraced that
persuasion, in his discourse to her at several times told her, That she should
set all the Protestants destroyed that were in England, before the Eighth and
Twentieth of June next, and that all that would turn to the Roman Catholic
Religion should live far better than now they did, that as for Heretics, it
were a Meritorius Act to kill them. And that all such as were Papists should
have marks upon their Hats, whereby to distinguish them from Protestants, that
they might not be destroyed amongst them. That the Duke of York was the bravest
Prince living, and was gone out of the Kingdom, lest the Heretics should cut
off his head, and he would not return, till they were destroyed; that not one
of the Lords in the Tower would Suffer, for they would come off well enough,
being to be Tried by the Lords, etc. She likewise did avouch, That she telling
the said Stubbs, that she was hired to live with Mr. Bird aforesaid, and naming
to him the place, he used persuasions to her at several times to set Fire on
her said Master' s House, telling her, That if she would do it, he would give
her 5 l; and gave her once half-a-Crown in earnest of such Reward, and said,
That he would have other Houses in Holborn Fired at the same time by others.
That on the Sunday before this Fire happened, she was with the said Stubbs, and
did then promise that she would certainly fire her Master' s House on Thursday
or Friday Night following, and that accordingly she did on Thursday Night take
a Candle, and set fire to her Master' s papers in his Study, which were in a
kind of Press, and then being on a light Fire, she shut the door, and went up
stairs into her own Chamber at the top of the House, where she packt up her own
things, and undressed her self, lest her Master should suspect her, and there
stayed till a great Knocking was at the door, and the Watchmen crying out,
Fire; whereupon she went and let them in, but she declared, That she did not do
this out of any Spleen or Malice toward her Master, nor with any attempt to
Rob him, but merely to carry on the Design which Stubbs had proposed to her,
out of hopes of the Reward he had promised.

Hereupon a Warrant was issued forth to apprehend Nicholas Stubbs, who was
shortly after taken, and though at first he out-brazen'd the Truth with the
usual Popish Impudence, yet when he came to be confronted with the Wench, who
offered so many Circumstances to convince him, he could no longer stand it out,
but did confess and own, That he had used such discourses to the said
Elizabeth, as she had set forth in her Examination, and that he did persuade
her to fire her Master' s House, and was to give her 5 Guinnies for doing it,
besides half-a-Crown in hand.

He did likewise declare upon Oath, That Father Gifford his Confessor, had put
him upon this Business, and told him it was no Sin to fire all the Houses of
Heretics and Huguenots.

That Derby Molrayne alias Flower, a Barber in Jermanstreet; and one Roger
Clinton that lodged at the Coach and Horses in the same Street, both Irish men,
were Engaged in the same Design; that Father Gifford promised this Examinate
One Hundred Pounds for to carry on the Work, and told him, He was to have the
money from the Church. That the said Gifford, Clinton, Flower, and He, did use
to meet in St. James' Feilds in the dark of the Evening, and there to discourse
of these matters, and that the several Informations that he had given to the
said Elizabeth Oxley, he had from the said Father Gifford. He further said,
That the said Flower and Clinton told him the said Stubbs, That they would
carry on the said Fire, and that they had Fireballs for that purpose, and that
they would fire other Houses in Holborn at the same time. He confessed he was
at the Fire in the Temple, but was not Engaged to do any thing in it.

That Gifford told him that there were English, French, and Irish Roman
Catholics enough in London, to make a very good Army, and that the French King
was coming with 60 Thousand men, under a pretense of a Progress to show the
Dauphin his Dominions, but it was to plant them along the Coasts at Diep,
Bulloign, Calais, and Dunkirk, to be presently ready to be Landed in England
when there was an opportunity, which he doubted not but might be by the middle
of June, for by that time all the Roman Catholics here would be ready, who
were all to rise, and with the Assistance of the French Forces to cut off, and
utterly destroy the Heretics, that then the Papists were to be distinguished
by marks in their Hats, and that the said Father Gifford doubted not but he
should be an Abbot or a Bishop, when the work was over, for the good Service he
had done; who frequently told this Examinate, and the said Flower and Clinton,
That it was no more Sin to Kill an Heretic, than to knock a Dog o'th head, and
that they did God good Service in doing what mischief they could by Firing
their Houses. That it was well, Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was Murdered, for he
was their devilish Enemy. That Coleman was a Saint in Heaven, for what he had
done, etc.

That the Examinate was fearful he should be Murdered for this Confession, the
said Father Gifford having sworn him to Secrecy, and told him he should be
damned if he made any discovery, and should be sure to be Killed, but gave him
leave to take the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, because he was an
Housekeeper, and it was necessary that he should stay in Town to help to
promote the work of Burning, therefore the taking of such Oaths to him should
be no sin.

April the 15th. That worthy Patriot Sir Thomas Player, giving the House of
Commons information concerning this matter of Oxley and Stubbs, the
Examinations were transmitted to the Lords, and the Lords sent them to the
secret Committee to make a further inspection and progress therein, but they
had their hands so full of Business, that it was thought fit to appoint a
Special Committee for this very purpose, before whom the Parties were again
Examined, and gave them such satisfaction, that the House became Suitors to his
Majesty, that they might both have his gracious Pardon, which was granted, and
a Proclamation (but not till the 4th. of May) set forth -- Reciting -- That
whereas due Information has been given, that Morris Gifford a Popish Priest,
Roger Clinton, Derby Molraine alias Flower, and several other Persons of the
Romish Religion, have (out of their detestable and barbarous Malice) conspired
and agreed together, to set on Fire the City of London, the Suburbs thereof,
and the places thereunto Adjacent, and have in prosecution of such their
devilish and wicked Design, procured diverse Mansion Houses within the said
City, Suburbs, and parts adjacent, at sundry times, and in diverse places to be
set on Fire and Burnt. The King's most Excellent Majesty (at the humble desire
of the Commons in Parliament Assembled) does Command the said Gifford, Clinton,
and Flower, (who are fled from Justice) to render themselves by the 10th. of
May instant, and is pleased to promise 50 l. Reward to any that should
apprehend any of them, or if any of themselves should come in and discover his
Accomplices, so as any of them may be taken and Convicted, he shall not only
have his Pardon, but the 50 l. also, for each Incendiary.

As this ingenious Confession of Oxley and Stubbs was a grand Confirmation, and
undeniable proof of the restless Malice of these bloody Priests, so it is a
notable Corroboration of the Truth and sincerity of Mr. Bedloes Evidence; for
how was it possible, if what he says were not certain Truth, but only contrived
Stories, as Papists calumniat, How is it probable, I say, That Stubbs should
happen so exactly to accuse the very same man which Mr. Bedloe had done, for
the Instigator to these barbarous Attempts of Firing; for at that time Mr.
Bedloe, though he had given in such his Informations to the Committee of
Secrecy, yet had not published the same abroad, so that Stubbs could not then
have any notice thereof.

On the 20th. of April happened an extraordinary Change at Court, no less
unexpected, than grateful to the people, who by such alteration of Ministers
did hope to find considerable improvements in the management of the public
Affairs; for his Majesty having caused his Privy Council to be extraordinarily
summoned, was pleased by the Lord Chancellor to dissolve them; and to declare
his Pleasure, That for the future, their constant Number should be limited to
that of Thirty, whereof Fifteen to be of his chief Officers, who shall be Privy
Counselors by their Places, Ten others of the Nobility, and Five Commons of
the Realm, whose known Abilities, Interest, and Esteem, in the Nation, shall
render them without all suspicion of either mistaking or betraying the true
Interest of the Kingdom. These Fifteen Officers, to which the Quality of a
Privy Councellor was hereby annexed, are

The Archbishop of Canterbury. The Bishop of London. The Lord Chancellor. One
of the Lord Chief Justices. The Admiral. The Master of the Ordnance. The
Treasurer and Chancellor or First Comissioner of the Exchequer. The Lord
Privy Seal. The Master of the Horse. The Lord Steward. The Lord Chamberlain of
the Household. The Groom of the Stole. Two Secretaries of State.
And that there shall be a President of the Council, when necessary, and room
for the Secretary of Scotland, when any such shall be here.

The Names of the New Privy Council then Established, were as follows,

His Highness Prince Rupert. William Lord Arch Bishop of Canterbury. Heneage
Lord Finch, Lord Chancellor of England. Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury, Lord
President of the Council. Arthur Earl of Anglesey, Lord Privy Seal. Christopher
Duke of Albemarle. James Duke of Monmouth, Master of the Horse. Henry Duke of
New Castle. John Duke of Lauderdaile, Secretary of State for Scotland. James
Duke of Ormond, Lord Steward of the Household. Charles Lord Marquess of
Winchester. Henry Lord Marquess of Worcester. Henry Earl of Arlington, Lord
Chamberlain of the Household. James Earl of Salisbury. John Earl of Bridgewater.
Robert Earl of Sunderland, one of his Majesty's principal Secretaries of State,
[lately made in the room of Sir Joseph Williamson.] Arthur Earl of Essex, first
Lord Commissioner of the Treasury. John Earl of Bath, Groom of the Stole.
Thomas Lord Viscount Faulconberg. George Lord Viscount Hallifax. Henry Lord
Bishop of London. John Lord Roberts. Denzil Lord Holles. William Lord Russel.
William Lord Cavendish. Henry Coventry, Esquire one of his Majesty's principle
Secretaries of State. Sir Francis North, Knight. Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas. Sir Henry Capel, Knight. of the Bath, first Commissioner of the
Admiralty. Sir John Earnley, Knight. Chancellor of the Exchequer. Sir Thomas
Chicheley, Knight. Master of the Ordnance. Sir William Temple, Baronet. Edward
Seymour, Esquire Henry Powle, Esquire
The 30th. of April, His Majesty made a Speech to both Houses of Parliament,
wherein he recommended three things to them, The prosecution of the Plot, The
disbanding of the Army, and the providing a Fleet, which was followed by a
larger signification of his Majesty's mind, by the Lord Chancellor,

That His Majesty had considered with himself, That it is not enough that his
Peoples Religion and Liberty be secure, during his own Reign, but thinks he ows
it to his People to do all that in him lies, that these Blessings may be
transmitted to Posterity. And to the end that it may never be in the power of
any Papist, if the Crown descend upon him, to make any change in Church or
State, his Majesty would consent to limit such Successor, in these points. 1.
That no such Popish Successor shall present to Ecclesiastical Benefices. 2.
That during the Reign of such Popish Successor, no Privy Counselors, or
Judges, Lord Leiutenant, or Deputy Leiutenant, or Officer of the Navy, shall be
put in, or removed but by Authority of Parliament. 3. That as it is already
provided, That no Papist can sit in either House of Parliament, so there shall
never want a Parliament when the King shall happen to die, but that the
Parliament then in Being may continue Indissoluble for a competent time, or the
last Parliament Re-assemble, etc.

But it seems all these Provisions were not thought a sufficient Fence for such
dear and precious things as Religion and Liberty, and that in the progress of
their Debates upon this most important Subject, they could not resolve upon any
certain Expedient of safety, less than the Exclusion of his Royal Higness.

For on Sunday April the 27th. 1679. It was Resolved by the House of Commons,
Nemine Contradicente, That the Duke of York being a Papist, and the hopes of
his coming such to the Crown, has given the greatest Encouragement and
Countenance to the present Conspiracies and Designs of the Papists, against the
King and Protestant Religion.

And on Sunday May the 11th. (the better Day the better Deed we use to say, but
whether it will hold here, will be the Question,) they Ordered, That a Bill
should be brought in to disable the Duke of York to Inherit the Imperial Crown
of this Realm; which was brought in accordingly, and twice read in the House;
the preamble thereof being to this effect,

That forasmuch as these Kingdoms of England and Ireland by the wonderful
Providence of God many Years since, have been delivered from the Slavery and
Superstition of Popery, which had despoiled the King of his Sovereign Power,
for that it did and does advance the Pope of Rome to a Power over Sovereign
Princes, and makes him Monarch of the Universe, and does withdraw the Subjects
from their Allegiance by pretended Absolutions from all former Daths and
Obligations to their lawful Sovereign, and by many Superstitions and
Immoralities, has quite subverted the Ends of the Christian Religion. But
notwithstanding, That Popery has been long since Condemned by the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, for the detestable Doctrine, and Traitorous Attempts of
its Adherents, against the Lives of their lawful Sovereigns, Kings and Queens
of these Realms. Yet the Emissaries, Priests, and Agents, for the Pope of Rome,
resorting into this Kingdom of England in great numbers, contrary to the known
Laws thereof, have for several Years last past, as well by their own Devilish
Acts and Policies, as by Counsel and Assistance of Foreign Princes and
Prelates, known Enemies to these Nations, contrived and carried on a most
Horrid and Execrable Conspiracy, To destroy and Murder the Person of his
Sacred Majesty, and to Subvert the ancient Government of these Realms, and to
Extirpate the Protestant Religion, and Massacre the true Professors thereof.
And for the better effecting their wicked Designs, and encouraging their
Uilainous Accomplices, they have Traterously Seduced James Duke of York,
Presumptive Heir of these Crowns, to the Communion of the Church of Rome, and
have induced him to Enter into several Negotiations with the Pope, his
Cardinals, and Nuntio's, for promoting the Romish Church, and Interest, and by
his means and procurement have advanced the Power and Greatness of the French
King, to the manifest hazard of these Kingdoms, That by the descent of these
Crowns upon a Papist, and by Foreign Alliances and Assistance, they may be able
to succeed in their Wicked and Uillainons Designs.

And forasmuch as the Parliaments of England, according to the Laws and
Statutes thereof, have heretofore, for great and weighty Reasons of State, and
for the public Good and common Interest at this Kingdom, directed and limited
the Succession of the Crown in other manner than of Course it would otherwise
have gone, but never had such important and urgent Reasons, as at this Time
press and require their using of their said Extraordinary Power in that behalf.
Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and the Commons in this
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, And it is hereby
Enacted accordingly, That James Duke of York, Albany, and Ulster, (having
departed openly from the Church of England, and having publicly professed and
owned the Popish Religion, which has notoriously given Birth and Life to the
most Damnable and Hellish Plot, by the most gracious Providence of God lately
brought to light) shall be Excluded, and is hereby Excluded and Disabled, etc.

On the 19th. of May the House of Commons attended his Majesty with this
following Address.

Most Dread Sovereign,
WE your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Commons in Parliament
Assembled, do with all humble gratitude acknowledge the most gracious
assurances your Majesty has been pleased to give us, of your constant Care to
do every thing that may preserve the Protestant Religion, of your firm
resolution to defend the same to the utmost, and your Royal endeavors that the
security of that blessing may be transmitted to posterity. And we do humbly
represent to your Majesty, That being deeply sensible, that the greatest hopes
of Success against our Religion in the Enemies thereof, the Papists, are
founded in the execrable Designs, which they have laid against the Sacred
Person and Life of your Majesty, which it is not only our Duty, but our
Interest with the greatest hazards to preserve and defend. We have applied our
selves to the making such provision by Law as may defeat these Popish
Adversaries, their Abettors and Adherents, of their hopes of gaining an
advantage by any violent attempts against your Majesty, and may utterly
frustrate their expectation of Subverting the Protestant Religion thereby in
time to come. And further to obviate by the best means we can all wicked
practices against your Majesty, whilst any such Laws are in preparation and
bringing to perfection, It is our resolution, and we do Declare, That in
defense of your Majesty's Person and the Protestant Religion, we will stand by
your Majesty with our Lives and Fortunes, and shall be ready to Revenge upon
the Papists any violence offered by them to your Sacred Majesty, in which we
have your Majesty will graciously please to be the more assured, as We our
Selves are the more encouraged, in that the Hearts of all your Majesty's
Protestant Subjects, with the most sincere affection and zeal join with us
herein.

But this Zeal of the House of Commons running to so high a pitch touching the
Succession, together with some unhappy misunderstandings arising between them
and the House of Lords, concerning the Trial of the Popish Lords, and Earl of
Danby, as shall be related in the next Chapter. His Majesty to allay the same,
was pleased first to Prorogue, and then to put a period to them by a
Dissolution of that Parliament, by a Proclamation dated at Windsor the 12th. of
July, 1679. But therein graciously declaring that a New one should be called to
begin, and be holden on Tuesday the 7th. (which was afwards altered to Friday
the 17th.) of October.

CHAP. XVII.
The Proceedings against the Popish Lords in the Tower.

WE have before related the Commitment of these Lords to the Tower for High
Treason; after which followed this Vote in the House of Commons, in the old
Parliament.

December. 5th. 1678.

Resolved, That the House do proceed by way of Impeachment of High Treason, and
other High Crimes and Misdemeanors, against the Lord Arundel of Warder, Lord
Powis, Lord Petre, Lord Bellasis, and Viscount Stafford, and a Committee
appointed to draw up Articles of Impeachment against them.

Which Vote was Communicated to the House of Lords, and the several Lords
Charged by several Members in these words.

The Commons in Parliament having received Information of diverse Traitorous
Practices and Designs of a great Peer of this House, Henry Lord Arundel of
Warder, have Commanded me to Impeach the said Henry Lord Arundel of Warder of
High Treason, and other high Crimes and Misdemeanors. They have further
Commanded me to acquaint your Lordships, that they will within a convenient
time, exhibit to your Lordships particular Articles of the Charge against him.

Thus standing Impeached, they continued in the Tower all the Interval of
Parliament, and as soon as the next Parliament was settled to Business, they
forgot not their Lordships. For March 20th. 1678. it was Ordered, That a
Committee of Secrecy be appointed to take further Evidence, and prepare
Articles against the Lords in the Tower who stand Impeached of High Treason,
and take such further Informations as they shall receive, touching the Plot in
general, and the Death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and that this Committee have
power to send for Persons, Papers, and Records, and that they sit de die in
diem, and the Quorum to be Three.

The Articles at last Exhibited, were as follows.

Articles of Impeachment of High Treason, and other high Crimes and Offenses,
against William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford, Henry Lord Arundel of
Warder, William Lord Petre, and John Lord Bellasis, now Prisoners in the Tower.
THat for many Years now last past, there has been contrived and carried on a
Traitorous and Execrable Conspiracy and Plot within this Kingdom of England,
and other places, to alter, change, or subvert the Ancient Government and Laws
of this Kingdom and Nation, and to suppress the true Religion therein
established, and to Extirpate and destroy the Professors thereof; which said
Plot and Conspiracy was contrived and carried on in diverse places, and by
several ways and means, and by a great number of Persons of several Qualities
and Degrees, who acted therein, and intended to execute and accomplish the
aforesaid Wicked and Traitorous Designs and Purposes.

That the said William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford, Henry Lord
Arundel of Warder, William Lord Petre, and John Lord Bellasis, together with
Philip Howard, commonly called Cardinal of Norfolk, Thomas White alias
Whitebread, commonly called Provincial of the Jesuits in England, Richard
Strange, late Provincial of the Jesuits in England, Vincent, commonly called
Provincial of the Dominicans in England, James Corker commonly called President
of the Benedictines, Sir John Warner alias Clare, Baronet, William Harcourt,
John Keines, Nicholas Blundel, Pole Edward Mico, Thomas Beddingfield, Bazil
Langworth, Charles Peter's, Richard Peter's, John Conyers, Sir George Wakeman,
John Fenwick, Dominick Kelly, Fitz Gerald, Evers, Sir Thomas Preston, William
Lovel, Jesuits, Lord Beltamore, John Carrel, John Townely, Richard Langhorn,
William Foggarty, Thomas Penny, Matthew Medbourn, Edward Coleman, William
Ireland, John Grove, Thomas Pickering, John Smith, and diverse others, Jesuits,
Priests, and Friars, and other persons, as false Traitors to his Majesty and
this Kingdom, within the time aforesaid, have Traitorously consulted, contrived
and acted to, and for the accomplishing of the said wicked pernicious and
Traitorous Designs, and for that end did most wickedly and Traitorously agree,
conspire and resolve, to Imprison, Depose, and Murder his Sacred Majesty, and
to deprive him of his Royal State, Crown, and Dignity, and by malicious and
advised speaking, writing, and otherwise, declared such their Purposes and
Intentions, and also to subject this Kingdom and Nation to the Pope and his
Tyrannical Government.

And to seize, and share amongst themselves the Estates and Inheritances of his
Majesty's Protestant Subjects, and to Erect and Restore Abbeys, Monasteries,
and other Convents and Societies, which have been long since by the Laws of
this Kingdom suppressed, for their Superstition and Idolatry, and to deliver up
and restore to them the Lands and Possessions now Invested in his Majesty and
his Subjects, by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm.

And also to Found and Erect new Monasteries and Convents, and to remove and
deprive all Protestant Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Persons from their
Offices, Benefices and Preferments, and by this means to destroy his Majesty's
Person, extirpate the Protestant Religion, overthrow the Rights, Liberties, and
Properties of his Majesty's good Subjects, Subvert the Lawful Government of
this Kingdom, and subject the same to the Tyranny of the Sea of Rome.

That the said Conspirators and their Accomplices and Confederates, Traitorously
had and held several Meetings, Assemblies, and Consultations, wherein it was
Contrived and Designed amongst them, what means should be used, and what
Persons and Instruments should be employed to Murder his Majesty, and did then
and there resolve to effect it by Poisoning, Shooting, Stabing, or some such
like ways or means; and offered Rewards, and promises of Advantage to several
Persons to Execute the same, and hired and employed several Wicked Persons to
go to Windsor and other places, where his Majesty did reside, to Murder and
destroy his Majesty; which said Persons, or some of them, accepted some
Rewards, and undertook the Perpetrating thereof, and did actually go to the
said places for that end and purpose.

That the said Conspirators, the better to compass their Traitorous Designs,
have consulted to Raise, and have procured and raised Men, Money, Horses, Arms,
and Ammunition; and also have made Application to, and Treated and Corresponded
with the Pope, his Cardinals, Nuncio's, and Agents, and with other Foraign
Ministers and Persons, to raise Tumults within this Kingdom, and to Invade the
same with Foraign Forces, and to surprise, seize and destroy his Majesty's
Navy, Forts, Magazines, and places of Strength within this Kingdom: Whereupon
the Calamities of War, Murders of innocent Subjects, Men, Women, and Children;
Burnings, Rapines, Devastations, and other Dreadful Miseries and Mischiefs must
inevitably have ensued, to the Ruin and Destruction of this Nation.

That the said Conspirators have procured, accepted, and delivered out several
Instruments, Commissions, and Powers made and granted by, or under the Pope, or
other unlawful and usurping Authority, to raise and dispose of Men, Money,
Arms, and other things necessary for their wicked and Traitorous Designs, and
namely a Commission to the said Henry Lord Arundel of Warder, to be Lord High
Chancellor of England, and to the said William Earl of Powis, to be Lord
Treasurer of England; another Commission to the said John Lord Bellasis, to be
General of the Army to be raised, and the said William Lord Petre, to be
Lieutenant General of the said Army, and a Power to the said William Viscount
Stafford, to be Paymaster of the Army: That in order to encourage themselves in
prosecuting their said wicked Plots, Conspiracies, and Treasons, and to hide
and hinder the discovery of the same; and to secure themselves from Justice and
Punishment, the Conspirators aforesaid, and Confederates, have used many wicked
and Diabolical Practices, (viz.) They did cause their Priests to Administer to
the said Conspirators an Oath of Secrecy, together with their Sacrament, and
also did cause their said Priests upon Confession to give their Absolutions,
upon condition that they should conceal the said Conspiracy. And when about the
Month of September last, Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, a Justice of Peace, had
according to the Duty of his Oath and Office, taken several Examinations and
Informations concerning the said Conspiracy and Plot, the said Conspirators or
some of them, by Advice, Assistance, Council, and Instigation of the rest, did
incite and procure diverse Persons to lie in wait and pursue the said Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey several days, with intent to Murder him, which at last was
perpetrated and effected by them, for which said horrid Crimes and Offenses,
Robert Green, Henry Berry, and Lawrence Hill, have since been Attainted, and
Dominick Kelly, and Gerald, are fled for the same.

After which Murder, and before the Body was found, or the Murder known to
any but Accomplices therein, the said Persons falsely gave out, That he was
alive, and privately Married; and after the Body was found, dispersed a false
and malicious Report, that he had Murdered himself.

Which said Murder was Committed with design to stifle and suppress the
Evidence he had taken, and had knowledge of, and to discourage and deter
Magistrates, and others, from acting in the further discovery of the said Plot
and Conspiracy, for which end also the said Sir Edmundbury Godfrey while he was
alive, was by them. their Accomplices and Favorites, threatened and discouraged
in his Proceedings about the same.

And of their further Malice, they have wickedly contrived by many false
Suggestions, to lay the imputation and guilt of the aforesaid horrid and
detestable Crimes upon the Protestants, that so thereby they might escape the
Punishments they have justly deserved, and expose Protestants to great Scandal,
and subject them to Persecution and Oppression in all Kingdoms and Countries
where the Roman Religion is received and professed.

All which Treasons, Crimes, and Offenses, above mentioned, were Contrived,
Committed, Perpetrated, Acted, and done by the said William Earl of Powis,
William Lord Viscount Stafford, Henry Lord Arundel of Warder, William Lord
Petre, and John Lord Bellasis, every of them, and others the Conspirators
aforesaid, against our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity, and
against the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom.

Of all which Treasons, Crimes, and Offenses, the Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses, in Parliament Assembled, do in the name of themselves, and of the
Commons of England, Impeach the said William Earl of Powis, William Viscount
Stafford, Henry Lord Arundel of Warder, William Lord Petre, and John Lord
Bellasis, and every of them.

And the said Commons by Protestation, saving to themselves that liberty of
exhibiting at any time hereafter any other Accusations or Impeachments against
the said William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford, Henry Lord Arundel
of Warder, William Lord Petre, and John Lord Bellasis, and every of them, and
also of replying to the Answers which they and every of them make to the
Premises, or any of them, or to any other Accusation or Impeachment which shall
be by them exhibited, (as the Cause according to course, and proceedings of
Parliament shall require,) do pray, that the said William Earl of Powis,
William Viscount Stafford, Henry Lord Arundel of Warder, William Lord Petre,
and John Lord Bellasis, and every of them, may be put to Answer all and every
of the Premises, and that such Proceedings, Examinations, Trials, and
Judgments, may be upon them, and every of them had and used, as shall be
agreeable to Law and Justice, and Course of Parliament.

To these Articles of Impeachment, the said Lords soon after put in their
several Answers, as follows,

The several Answers of William Lord Petre now Prisoner in the Tower, to the
Articles of Impeachment of High Treason, and other Crimes, and Offenses,
exhibited to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled. Whereas
the Lord above named stands Impeached by the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses,
in Parliament Assembled, in the name of themselves, and all the Commons in
England.
THE said Lord in the first place, and above all other, protesting his
Innocence.

The said Lord does with all humility submit himself, desiring above all things
the Trial of his Cause by this Honorable House; so that he may be provided to
make his just Defense for clearing of his Innocence, from the great and heinous
Crimes charged against him by the said Impeachment, this being prayed, as also
liberty to correct, amend, and explain, any thing in the said Plea contained,
which may any way give this Honorable House any occasion of Offense, which he
hopes will be granted.

The said Lord as to that part of the Impeachment that contains the matter
following, Namely, That for diverse Years last past, there has been contrived
and carried on by the Papists, a most Traitorous and Execrable Conspiracy and
Plot within this Kingdom of England, and other places, to alter, change, and
subvert the Ancient Government and Laws of this Kingdom and Nation, and to
suppress the true Religion therein Established, and to extirpate and destroy
the Professors thereof, and that the said Plot and Conspiracy was contrived and
carried on in diverse places, and by several ways and means, by a great number
of Persons of several Qualities and Degrees who acted therein, and intended
thereby to execute and accomplish their aforesaid Wicked and Traitorous Designs
and Purposes.

That the said William Lord Petre, and other Lords therein named, together with
several other Persons threin likewise named and mentioned as false Traitors to
his Majesty and this Kingdom, within the time aforesaid, have Traitorously
acted and consulted to, and for the accomplishing the said Wicked, Pernicious,
and Traitorous Designs, and for that end did most wickedly and Traitorously
Agree, Consult, Conspire, and Resolve to Imprison, Depose, and Murder his
Sacred Majesty, and to deprive him of his Royal Estate, Crown and Dignity, and
by malicious and advised speaking, and otherwise declaring such their purposes
and intentions, as also to Subject this Kingdom and Nation to the Pope and his
Tyrannical Government, and to seize and share among themselves the Estates and
Inheritances of his Majesty's Protestant Subjects, and to erect and restore
Abbeys, Monasteries, and other Convents and Societies, which have been long
since by the Laws of this Kingdom suppressed for their Superstition and
Idolatry, and to deliver up, and restore to them the Lands and Possessions now
Vested in his Majesty and his Subjects, by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm,
and also to Found and Erect new Monasteries and Convents, and remove and
deprive all Protestant Bishops and other Ecclesiastical Persons from their
Livings, Benefices, and Preferments, and by this means to destroy his Majesty's
Person, extirpate the Protestant Religion, overthrow the Rights, Liberties, and
Properties of all his Majesty's good Subjects, Subvert the lawful Government of
this Kingdom, and Subject the same to the Tyranny of the Sea of Rome. And the
said Conspirators and their Accomplices, and Confederates, Traitorously had and
held several Meetings, Assemblies, and Consultations, wherein 'twas contrived
and designed amongst them, what means should be used, and the Persons and
Instruments which should be employed to Murder his Majesty, and did then and
there resolve to effect it by Poisoning, Shooting, Stabbing, or some such like
ways or means.

And to that part of the Impeachment, named, The better to compass their
Traitorous Designs, have consulted to raise Money, Men, Horses, Arms, and
Ammunition.

The said Lord saving to himself (and which he humbly prays, may be reserved to
him) the liberty of Answering over, and denying all and singular the said
Crimes and Offenses charged on him, Says, And humbly offers to this
Honorable House, that the charge of those Crimes and Offenses so imposed on
him by the said Impeachment, are so general and uncertain, that he cannot
possibly give any direct Answer thereto, or make any just or lawful defense
upon his Trial, for that the said Charge had no manner of certainty in point of
time, it being laid only for many Years now last past, which may be for 5, 10,
20, 30, or more Years, whereby though the said Lord knows himself to be
altogether innocent of any such horrid and detestable Crimes, as by the said
Impeachment are objected against him.

Yet it is impossible for him on any Trial thereof, to be prepared with his just
and lawful defense by Witnesses, to prove himself absent, or in any other
place, at the time of such Meetings or Consultations to, or for any of the
wicked Designs and Purposes in the said Impeachment mentioned, as on his Trial
may be suddenly objected against him, when he cannot by any care or foresight
whatever, have such Witnesses ready, as would speak thereunto, if they were
certainly charged for any Traitorous Design, Act, or Crime, at any time
certainly alleged in the said Impeachment.

Nor is the said Charge in the said Impeachment more certain, as to the place
of any such Traitorous Meeting or Consultation laid down in the said
Impeachment, it being only alleged to be at diverse places in this Realm of
England, and elsewhere, which for the Cause aforesaid, is so utterly uncertain,
that it deprives the said Lord of his defense on his Trial. Likewise the
uncertainties of the number of Meetings or Consultations to the wicked purposes
in the Impeachment, and the not showing how many times the Lords met and
consulted, and with whom in particular, does likewise deprive him of all
possibility of making his defense, in producing Witnesses; for the said Lord
being wholly innocent, cannot suppose or imagine what Meeting or Consultation
either to raise Money, or Men, for carrying on of a Traitorous Design, or to
any other wicked intent or purpose in the said Impeachment mentioned, shall or
may be objected against him on his Trial, and it is as impossible for him to
bring Witnesses to prove all the Meetings he has had with others in his life
time, as it is for him to foresee, on this general Charge, what Meetings or
Consultations may on his Trial be objected against him as Traitorous
Consultations.

And whereas it is in the said Impeachment charged on the said Lord, That he
has uttered Treason by malicious and advised speaking, and otherwise declaring
the same.

The said Lord says, That never any Traitorous Thoughts entered into his
Heart, and therefore cannot possibly know what words or writings he ever spoke,
uttered, revealed, or declared, which are now charged on him as Treason; their
being no words or writings at all specified in the Impeachment, whereby the
said Lord might know how to prepare his defense against them. So as this
Honorable Court may or might judge, whether the same words or writings are in
truth Treasonable or not.

ALL WHICH incertainties, and eminent and apparent Dangers of the said Lord,
being there-upon surprised in a Cause of this Consequence, wherein his Life and
Honor (more dear to him than his Life) and all else that is dear to him in
this World, are immediately concerned being seriously weighed and considered by
your Lordships, he humbly prays, (as by his Council he is advised,) that your
Lordships will not put him to Answer the said Impeachment herein above recited,
till the same be reduced to such complete certainty, that the said Lord may
know how to Answer thereunto, and may thereby be enabled to make his just
defense accordingly.

ALL WHICH notwithstanding, he humbly submits to whatsoever your Lordships
in Justice shall order and think fit, and as to all other Treasons, Crimes, and
Offenses, contained, mentioned, or specified in the said Impeachment, the said
Lord protesting his Innocence, In the great Wisdom and Sentence of this
Honorable Court, shall always Acquiesce.

So the Rest, Mutatis Mutandis.

But these Pleas being Judged unsatisfactory and illegal, they were afterward
forced to plead the general Issue.

And now there were daily expectations of their being brought to Trial, and
Scaffolds erected in Westminster Hall for that purpose, but in the mean time,
the Earl of Danby late Lord Treasurer, whom the Commons had likewise Impeached
for Treason, and who had for some time absconded himself, did on the 15th. of
April unexspectedly surrender himself, and insisted on his Pardon, which the
Commons Voted Illegal, and thereupon prayed Judgment against him on the
Impeachment. About this matter, and also upon the Question, whether the Bishops
had a right to sit upon the Lords, when they should be brought to Trial, some
misunderstandings happened between the two Houses, for removing of which, and
settling a good Correspondence, the House of Commons used several Endeavors,
as by the following Paper may appear.

THE Reasons and Narrative OF Proceedings, BETWIXT THE Two Houses: WHICH Were
delivered by the House of COMMONS TO THE LORDS: At the Conference touching the
Lords in the Tower, On Monday 26th. of May, 1679.
THE Commons have always desired, that a good Correspondence may be preserved
between the two Houses.

There is now depending between your Lordships and the Commons a matter of the
greatest weight: In the Transactions of which, your Lordships seem to apprehend
some difficulty in the matters proposed by the Commons.

To clear this, the Commons have desired this Conference; and by it they hope
to manifest to your* Lordships, that the Propositions of the House, made by
their Committee, in relation to the Trial of the Lords in the Tower, have been
only such as are well warranted by the Laws of the Parliament, and
Constitutions of the Government, and in no sort entrench upon the Judicature of
the Peers; but are most necessary to be insisted upon, that the Ancient Rights
of Judicature in Parliament may be maintained.

The Commons readily acknowledge, that the Crimes charged upon the Earl of
Powis, Viscount Stafford, Lord Petre, Lord Arundel of Warder, and Lord
Bellasis, are of deep Guilt, and call for speedy Justice: But withal, they
hold, That any change in Judicature in Parliament, made without consent in full
Parliament, to be of pernicious Consequence, both to his Majesty, and his
Subjects; and conceive themselves obliged to transmit to their Posterity, all
the Rights which of this kind they have received from their Ancestors, by
putting your Lordships in mind of the progress that has already been between
the two Houses, in relation to the Propositions made by the Commons, and the
Reasonableness of the Propositions themselves: They doubt not but to make it
appear, that their aim has been no other, than to avoid such Consequences, and
preserve that Right; and that there is no delay of Justice on their part. And
to that end, do offer to your Lordships the ensuing Reasons and Narrative:

That the Commons in bringing the Earl of Danby to Justice, and in discovery of
that Execrable and Traitorous Conspiracy, (of which the Five Popish Lords now
stand Impeached; and for which some of their wicked Accomplices have already
undergone the Sentence of the Law, as Traitors, and Murderers,) have labored
under many great Difficulties, is not unknown to your Lordships.

Nor is it less known to your Lordships, That upon the Impeachment of the House
of Commons against the Earl of Danby for High Treason, and other High Crimes,
Misdemenours, and Offenses, even the Common Justice of Sequestring him from
Parliament, and forthwith Committing him to safe Custody, was then required by
the Commons, and denied by the House of Peers, though he then Sat in their
House: Of which your Lordships have been so sensible, that at a free Conference
the Tenth of April last, your Lordships declared, That it was the Right of the
Commons, and well Warranted by Precedents of former Ages, That upon an
Impeachment of the Commons, a Peer so Impeached, ought of Right to be Ordered
to withdraw, and then to be committed. And had not that Justice been denied to
the Commons, great part of this Session of Parliament, which has been spent in
framing and adjusting a Bill, for causing the Earl of Danby to appear, and
Answer that Justice, from which he was fled; had been saved, and had been
employed for the Preservation of his Majesty's Person, and the security of the
Nation, and in Prosecution of the other Five Lords. Neither had he had the
Opportunity for procuring for himself that illegal Pardon, which bears date the
First of March last past, and which he has now pleaded in Bar of his
Impeachment. Nor of wasting so great a proportion of the Treasure of the
Kingdom, as he has done, since the Commons exhibited their Articles of
Impeachment against him.

After which time thus lost, by reason of the denial of that Justice which of
Right belonged to the Commons upon their Impeachment, the said Bill being ready
for the Royal Assent, the said Earl then rendered himself; and by your Lordships
Order of the Sixteenth of April last, was Committed to the Tower. After which,
he pleads the said Pardon; and being pressed, did at length declare, He would
rely upon, and abide by that Plea, which Pardon pleaded, being illegal and
void, and so ought not to Bar or Preclude the Commons from having Justice upon
the Impeachment. They did thereupon with their Speaker on the Fifth of May
instant, in the name of themselves, and all the Commons of England, Demand
Judgment against the said Earl, upon their Impeachment: Not doubting, but that
your Lordships did intend in all your Proceedings upon the Impeachment, to
follow the usual Course and Method of Parliament.

But the Commons were not a little surprised by the Message from your
Lordships, delivered them on the Seventh of May; thereby acquainting them, That
as well the Lords Spiritual as Temporal, had Ordered, that the Tenth of May
instant, should be the day for hearing the Earl of Danby, to make good his Plea
of Pardon. And that on the Thirteenth of May, the other Five Lords Impeached,
should be brought to their Trial: And that your Lordships had Addressed to his
Majesty, for naming a Lord High Steward, as well in the Case of the Earl of
Danby, as the other Five Lords.

Upon consideration of this Message, the Commons found, that the admitting the
Lords Spiritual to exercise Jurisdiction in these Cases, was an alteration of
the Judicature in Parliament; and which extended as well to the Proceeding
against the other Five Lords, as the Earl of Danby. And if a Lord High-Steward
should be necessary upon Trial on Impeachments of the Commons, the Power of
Judicature in Parliament upon Impeachments, might be Defeated, by suspending or
denying a Commission to constitute a Lord High-Steward.

And that the said days of Trial, appointed by your Lordships, were so near to
the time of your said Message, that these Matters, and the Method of Proceeding
upon the Trial, could not be Adjusted by Conference betwixt the two Houses,
before the Day so nominated. And consequently the Commons could not then
Proceed to Trial, unless the Zeal which they have for speedy Judgment against
the Earl of Danby, (that so they might proceed to Trial of the other Five
Lords) should induce them at this Juncture, both to admit the enlargement of
your Lordships Jurisdiction, and to sit down under these or any hardships,
though with the hazard of all the Commons Power of Impeaching for time to come)
rather than the Trial of the said Five Lords should be deferred for some short
time, whilst these Matters might be agreed on and settled.

For Reconciling Differences in these great and weighty Matters, and for saving
that time, which would necessarily have been spent in Debates and Conferences
betwixt the two Houses, and so expediting the Trial, without giving up the
Power of Impeachment, or rendering them ineffectual.

The Commons thought fit to propose to your Lordships, that a Committee of both
Houses might be appointed for this purpose. At which Committee (when agreed to,
by your Lordships) it was first proposed, That the time of Trial of the Lords
in the Tower should be put off till the other Matters were Adjusted, and it was
then agreed, That the Propositions as to the time of the Trial, should be the
last thing considered. And the effect of this Agreement stands reported upon
your Lordships Books.

After which, The Commons communicated to your Lordships, by your Committee, a
Vote of theirs, (viz.) That the Committee of the Commons should insist upon
their former Vote of their House, That the Lords Spiritual ought not to have
any Vote in any Proceedings against the Lords in the Tower, and that when that
Matter should be settled, and the Method of Proceedings Adjusted, the Commons
would then be ready to proceed upon the Trial of the Pardon of the Earl of
Danby, against whom they had before Demanded Judgment, and afterward to the
Trial of the other Five Lords in the Tower. Which Vote extended as well to the
Earl of Danby, as the other Five Lords; but the Commons as yet received nothing
from your Lordships toward an Answer of that Vote, save that your Lordships
have acquainted them, that the Bishops have asked leave of the House of Peers,
that they might withdraw themselves from the Trial of the said Five Lords, with
liberty of entering their usual protestation.

And though the Commons Committee have almost daily Declared to your Lordships
Committee, that that was a necessary point of Right to be settled before the
Trial, and offered to debate the same, your Committee always answered, That
they had not any Power from your Lordships, either to conser upon, or to give
any Answer concerning that Matter.

And yet your Lordships, without having given the Commons any satisfactory
Answer to the said Vote, or permitting any Conference or Debate thereupon, and
contrary to the said Agreement, did on Thursday the Twenty Second of May, send
a Message to the Commons, Declaring, That the Lords Spiritual as well as
Temporal, had Ordered that the Twenty Seventh of this instant May, be appointed
for the Trial of the Five Lords. So that the Commons cannot but apprehend, that
your Lordships have not only departed from what was agreed on, and in effect
laid aside that Committee which was Constituted for preserving a good
understanding betwixt the two Houses, and better dispatch of the weighty
Affairs now depending in Parliament: But must also needs conclude from the
Message, and the Votes of your Lordships on the Fourteenth of May, That the
Lords Spiritual have a Right to stay and sit in Court, till the Court proceeds
to the Vote of Guilty or not Guilty. And from the Bishops asking leave (as
appears by your Lordships Books two days after your said Vote) that they might
withdraw themselves from the Trial of the said Lords, with liberty of entering
their usual Protestation, and by their persisting still to go on, and give
their Votes, Proceedings upon the Impeachment, that their desire of leave to
withdraw at the said Trial, is only an Evasive Answer to the before mentioned
Vote of the Commons, and chiefly intended as an Argument for a Right of
Judicature in Proceedings upon Impeachments, and as a Reserve to judge upon the
Earl of Danby's Plea of Pardon, and upon these and other like Impeachments,
although no such Power was ever claimed by their Predecessors, but is utterly
denied by the Commons, and the Commons are the rather to believe it so
intended, because the very asking leave to withdraw seems to employ a Right to
be be there, and that they cannot be absent without it.

And because by this way, they would have it in their Power, whether or no for
the future, either in the Earl of Danby's Case, or any other, they will ever
ask leave to be absent; and the Temporal Lords a like Power of denying leave,
if that should once be admitted necessary.

The Commons therefore are obliged not to proceed to the Trial of the Lords on
the Twenty Seventh of this instant May, but to Adhere to their aforesaid Vote:
And for so doing, besides what has been now and formerly by them said to your
Lordships, do offer you these Reasons following.

Reasons.
I. Because your Lordships have received the Earl of Danby's Plea of Pardon,
with a very long and usual Protestation; wherein he has Aspersed his Majesty
by false Suggestions, as if his Majesty had Commanded or Countenanced the
Crimes he stands charged with, and particularly suppressing and discouraging
the Discovery of the Plot, and endeavoring to Introduce an Arbitrary and
Tyrannical way of Government: Which remains as a Scandal upon Record against
his Majesty, tending to render his Person and Government odious to his People;
against which, it ought to be the first and principal care of both Houses to
Vindicate his Majesty, by doing Justice upon the said Earl. II. The Setting up
a Pardon to be a Bar of an Impeachment, defeats the whole use and effect of
Impeachments; and should this point be admitted, or stand doubted, it would
totally discourage the exhibiting any for the future: whereby the chief
Institution for the Preservation of the Government, (and consequently the
Government it self) would be destroyed. And therefore the Case of the said Earl
(which in consequence concerns all Impeachments whatsoever) ought to be
determined before that of the said Five Lords, which is but their particular
Case. III. And without resorting to many Authorities of greater Antiquity: The
Commons desire your Lordships to take notice, (with the same regard they do) of
the Declaration which that Excellent Prince, King Charles the First of blessed
Memory, made in this behalf, in his Answer to the Nineteen Propositions of both
Houses of Parliament: Wherein, Stating the several parts of this regulated
Monarchy, he says; The King, the House of Lords, and the House of Commons, have
each particular Privileges: And among those which belong to the King, he
reckons Power of Pardoning. After the enumerateing of which, and other his
Prerogatives, His said Majesty adds thus: Again, That the Prince may not make
use of this high and perpetual Power, to the hurt of those for whose good he
has it, and make use of the name of public necessity, for the gain of his
private Favorites and Followers, to the detriment of his People; The House of
Commons, (an excellent Conserver of Liberty, etc.) is solely entrusted with the
first Propositions concerning the Levies of Money, and the Impeaching of those,
who, for their own ends, though countenanced by any surreptitiously-gotten
Command of the King, have violated that Law, which he is bound (when he knows
it) to protect, and to the protection of which, they were bound to advise him,
at least not to serve him in the contrary. And the Lords being Trusted with a
Judicatory Power, are an excellent Screen and Bank between the Prince and
People, to assist each against any encroachments of the other, and by just
Judgments to preserve that Law, which ought to be the Rule of every one of the
three, etc. Therefore the Power legally placed in both Houses, is more then
sufficient to prevent and restrain the power of Tyranny, etc. IV. Until the
Commons of England have Right done them against this Plea of Pardon, they may
justly apprehend, that the whole Justice of the Kingdom, in the Case of the
Five Lords, may be obstructed and defeated by Pardons of like nature. V. An
Impeachment is virtually the Voice of every particular Subject of this Kingdom
crying out against an Oppression, by which every Member of that Body is equally
wounded: And it will prove a Matter of ill Consequence, that the universality
of the People should have occasion ministered and continued to them, to be
apprehensive of utmost danger from the Crown, from whence they of right expect
Protection. VI. The Commons Exhibited Articles of Impeachment against the said
Earl, before any against the Five other Lords, and demanded Judgment upon those
Articles: Whereupon, your Lordships having appointed the Trial of the said Earl
before that of the other Five Lords; now your Lordships having since inverted
that Order, gives a great cause of doubt to the House of Commons, and raises a
Jealousy in the Hearts of all the Commons of England, that if they should
proceed to the Trial of the said Five Lords in the first place, not only
Justice will be obstructed in the Case of those Lords, but that they shall
never have right done them in the matter of this Plea of Pardon; which is of so
fatal Consequence to the whole Kingdom, and a new device to frustrate public
Justice in Parliament.
Which Reasons and Matters being duly weighed by your Lordships, the Commons
doubt not but your Lordships will receive satisfaction concerning their
Propositions and Proceedings: And will agree, That the Commons ought not, nor
can, without deserting their Trust, depart from their former Vote communicated
to your Lordships; That the Lords Spiritual ought not to have any Vote in any
Proceedings against the Lords in the Tower; and when that Matter shall be
settled, and the Methods of Proceedings adjusted, the Commons shall then be
ready to proceed upon the Trial of the Earl of Danby, (against whom they have
already demanded Judgment) and afterward to the Trial of the other Five Lords
in the Tower.

May, 27th. 1679.
The Narrative and Reasons delivered at the Conference Yesterday with the House
of Commons, were again read, and after a long Debate, the Vote of this House
dated the 13th. of May instant, and the explanation thereupon, dated the 14th.
instant, were read; and the Question was put, Whether to insist upon these
Votes concerning the Lords Spiritual, and it was resolved in the Affirmative.
But there were present -- These Dissenters.

Buckingham. Huntington. Kent. Shaftsbury. PR. Bedford. Winchester. Rochester.
North and Gray. Suffolk. J. Lovelace. Townsend. Herbert. Gray. Stamford.
Newport. Say and Seal. L. Wharton. Leicester. Scarsdale. Stafford. Derby.
Delamer. Howard. Paget. Clare. Salisbury. Falconberg. Windsor.
CHAP. XVIII.
The Proceedings against Whitebread, and the other Four Jesuits.

ON Friday the 13th. of June, 1679, was the grand Trial of Five notorious
Jesuits, viz. Thomas White alias Whitebread, Provincial, or chief of the
Jesuits in England, a comely ancient man, of a very grave deportment, both at
his Trial and Execution; William Harcourt pretended Rector of London, who it is
thought, after the first discovery of the Plot had been beyond the Seas, and
had the confidence to return hither again, where being apprehended in his
Lodging near long Acre, he was by the Lords and Commons Committed to Newgate on
the 8th. of May last.

John Fenwick Procurator of the Jesuits in England.

John Gavan alias Gawen, and Anthony Turner, Committed first to the Gate House,
and thence brought to Newgate.

There was at the same time Arraigned one James Corker a Benedictine Monk, but
he pretending he had not his Witnesses ready, was put off, and happy it was for
him, who since was acquitted with Wakeman; whereas if he had then been tried,
it is most probable, it would have proved as Fatal to him as the rest.

Whitebread and Fenwick pleaded that they were tried before for the same Fact,
but the Court answered, That though they were indeed once Arraigned, yet the
Jury was discharged of them, and they not then in any Jeopardy of their Lives,
and therefore must plead to this Indictment.

Then the Prisoner made a general Challenge, That none should be of their Jury,
that were of any of the former Juries concerning the Plot; Those now sworn were

Thomas Harriot. William Gulston. Allen Garraway. Richard Cheney. John Roberts.
Thomas Cash. Rainsford Waterhouse. Matthew Bateman. John Kaine. Richard White.
Richard Bull. Thomas Cox.
The Proofs were long, and consisting in diverse particulars. As

1. Dr. Oats Swears, That the Consult of the 24th. of April, was by the Order
of Whitebread the Prisoner at the Sea the Trial of Whitebread, etc. P. 12.
Bar as Provincial, and that then the said Whitebread, and Fenwick, and
Harcourt, and Turner, did all in his presence Sign the Resolve for the King's
death.

2. That Whitebread after his return back again to St. Omers, did say, That he
hoped to see the King's Head laid fast enough, only he had not the manners to
give him the Title of King, but showed his spite by calling his Majesty
opprobriously -- [These are those that speak evil of Dignities.]

3. That in July, Ashby, alias Timbleby, brought over Instructions from
Whitebread P. 13.
to offer Sir George Wakeman 10000 l. to poison the King; and also a Commission
to Sir John Gage to be an Officer in the Army which they designed to raise;
which the Witness himself delivered to him the said Sir John.

4. That Turner was at the Consult; and at Fenwick's Chamber he saw him sign
the Resolve for the King's Death.

5. That as for Gavan, alias Gawen, though he could not positively say he saw
him at the Consult, yet he saw his hand subscribed to it; and makes it out how
he knows it to be his hand. And that he in July 78. gave P. 15.
them in London an account how prosperous their affairs were in Staffordshire
and Shropshire; that the Lord Stafford was very diligent, and that there was
two or three Thousand Pound ready there, to carry on the Design: And that some
time in July homet the said Gawen at Ireland's Chamber, where in his presence
he gave Father Ireland the same account, as before he had written.

The next Witness was Mr. Dugdale, that never gave Evidence before at any of
their Trials, who had no knowledge of either Mr. Oats or Mr. (...) when he
first came in and so could not conspire with them to charge the very same
persons as they had done. He swears.

1. Against Whitebread, That he saw a Letter under his hand (and tells you how
he knew it to be his,) to Father Ewers a Jesuit, and the said Mr. Dugdale's
Confessor, in which he ordered him to be sure to choose men that were hardy and
trusty, no matter whether they were Gentlemen, p. 22. and p. 29. he swears it
again, and what they were to do; that the words under his hand were in express
terms, -- For Killing the King.

2. Against Gawen he swears directly, that he entertained him the said Mr.
Dugdale to be of the Conspiracy to Murder the King, as one of those resolute
Fellows prescribed by Whitebread; and that they had several Consultations in
the Country, at several places which he names, for Murdering of the King, and
bringing in Popery; as at Boscobel, and at Tixal, in Sept. 1678. And that he
heard them discourse at one of these Consults, that it was the opinion of the
Monks at Paris, who were concerned in the Conspiracy, and were to assist, That
as soon as the Deed was done, that is, the Killing of the King, they should lay
it on the Presbyterians, thereby to provoke the other Protestants to cut their
P. 25.
Throats, and then they might the more easily cut theirs. And p. 26. That he
has intercepted and read (for all their Letters in those Parts came under his
Cover) above 100 Letters to the same purpose, all tending to the Introducing of
Popery, and Killing the King; which being without any Names, only directed to
Mr. Dugdale, and to be delivered by marks known to Father Ewers, if they had
been intercepted by the way, only Dugdale could have been called in question
for it.

3. That himself was so zealous in the Cause; that he had given them 400 l. for
carrying on this Design, which Gavan had made him believe was not only lawful,
but meritorious; and that he was to be sent up to London by Harcourt, there to
be instructed for Killing the P. 23.
King.

4. That the same Harcourt, whose hand the Witness well knows, did write word
of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's being Murdered, that very Night it was done, to
Father Ewers; so that they knew of it in Staffordshire several days before any
(except those privy to the Murder) at London knew, what was become of him. And
to confirm his Testimony herein, he produces Mr. Chetwin, a Person of Quality,
who swears, That he did hear it then reported as from Dugdale; and that he was
not in Town when the Murderers of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey were Tried, or else he
would then have witnessed the same.

5. Against Turner he positively swears, That he saw him with others at Ewers's
Chamber, where they consulted together to carry on this Design; and that he
agreed to the Plot, that is, bringing in of Popery by Killing the King.

Then Mr. Prance gave Evidence,

1. Against Harcourt, That such a day, when he paid him for an Image of the P.
30.
Virgin Mary to send into Maryland, he told the Witness that there was a Design
of Killing the King.

2. Against Fenwick, That he told him in Ireland's Chamber, Ireland and Grove
being by, that there should be 50000 Men P. 31.
in Arms in a readiness to settle their Religion, and that they should be
commanded by the Lords Beliasts, Powis, and Arundel.

Lastly, Mr. Bedloe was sworn, who first gives a satisfactory account why he
did not before give in his Evidence against Whitebread and Fenwick, because he
was then finding out the Bribery and Subornation of Reading, in behalf of the
Lords in the Tower; but now he positively swears,

1. That he has seen both Whitebread and Fenwick at several Consults about
this Plot, and that he heard Whitebread at Harcourt's Chamber tell Coleman the
manner of the sending the four Russians to Windsor to kill the King.

2. That he saw Harcourt take out of a Cabinet about 80 or 100 l. and give it
to a Messenger, to be carried to the said Russians, P. 32.
with a Guiney to drink Mr. Coleman's health.

3. That Whitebread told him, That Pickering was to have a great number of
Masses, and Grove 1500 l. for killing the King. P. 33.


4. That Harcourt employed him several times to carry their Consults beyond the
Seas, and that he received in Harcourt's presence Mr. Coleman's thanks for his
Fidelity; and P. 35.
that Harcourt recommended him to the Lord Arundel, who promised him great
favor when the times were turned: Also that he saw Harcourt give Wakeman a
Bill to receive 2000 l. in part of a greater sum; and heard Sir George say,
15000 l. was a small Reward for the settling Religion, and preserving three
Kingdoms from Ruin.

Thus we see, there is the positive Testimony of three, viz. Dr. Oats, Mr.
Dugdale, and Mr. Bedloe, against Whitebread: Of three quite blank against
Fenwick; viz. Oats, Bedloe, and Prance. And against Harcourt, four very fully;
Oats, Dugdale, Bedloe and Prance. Against Gavan there is positively Dugdale's
and Oates's; and the same directly against Turner. Whereby the matter of Fact
is plainly proved, and the Evidence full and legal against them all.

There was also the beforementioned Letter read, found amongst Harcourt's
Papers, which did much fortify the Evidence as to the certainty and nature of
the Consult of the 24th of April. It was written from one Petre a Jesuit, to
another of their Society, to let him know there was to be a Consult on the said
24th of April, in which were these words: Every one is minded also not to
hasten to London long before the time appointed, nor to appear much about the
Town till the meeting be over, lest occasion should be given to suspect the
Design. Finally, Secrecy as to the Time and Place, is much recommended to all
those that receive Summons, as it will appear of its own nature necessary.

Now as to what the Prisoners had to say against all this, it was well observed
by the Lord Chief Justice, p. 89. That they defend their Lives as they do their
Religion with weak Arguments, and fallacious Reasons. For to omit their
Aspersions, which they did not so much as offer to prove upon the Witnesses,
and therefore signified little, the main part of their Defense consisted in a
Regiment of Lads of their own tutoring, brought from St. Omers, on purpose to
prove Mr. Oats to have been all April and May 1678. and till the latter end of
June, at St. Omers, and consequently that he could not be at the Consult at
London 24 April, nor truly know any of the particulars which he swears to,
depending there-upon: and indeed they all said, and offered to swear it very
confidently, that they saw him every day, Conversed and Dined with him; and
that he was never out of the College, except two Days and one Night he was
absent at Watton, and two or three days that he was in the Infirmary, etc.

But still to make good Dr. Oates's Testimony, it is observable, that these
Witnesses were at great variance amongst themselves; some of them said, That
Mr. Oats left their College some time in June, some say the tenth, some the
latter end. But p. 53. one of them mistakes his Month, and avers he is sure it
was in July that Mr. Oats went away; and being told that he differed from all
the rest, he cried, He was sure he was there till after the Consult at London;
which gave a great light to what point of time these Novices were instructed to
speak to, and caused the People to laugh to see the Youngman out in his part.

But secondly, Mr. Oats brought no less than seven substantial Witnesses, who
swear P. 79.
his being in London in April and May, 1678. the time that they aver him to
have constantly been at St. Omers. 1. A Minister swears he saw him, (which is
confirmed by a Gentlewoman to whom he then told it) that he had the day before
seen Titus Oats in St. Martins-lane, disguised in a Serge Coat, and gray Hat.
Mrs. Mayo, (p. 81.) swears more punctually as to point of time; That about a
week before Whitsontide, which was in May, she saw Mr. Oats twice in Sir
Richard Barkers Courtyard in London, and that one of Sir Richards men told her
it was Mr. Oats, and that he was either turned Quaker or Jesuit; but she
replied he was no Quaker, because he then wore a Perriwig; and swears this
Doctor Oats in Court was the same man which then she saw there. And then one
Page swears, that he saw this Mr. Oats in a gray or light-coloured Campaign
Coat, and discoursed with him at Sir Rich. Barkers, in May 78. and tells a
circumstance to prove his knowledge that it was in May. Sir Richards Coachman
swears, that he was well acquainted with Mr. Oats, and that he was at their
House in Barbican the beginning of May 78. with his Hair cut close to his Ears,
in gray clothes, and inquired for Doctor Tongue. Sir Richard Barker himself
swears that he being then in the Country, when he came home his Servants told
him that Titus Oats had been there in such a strange Habit, and they thought
he was turned either Quaker or Papist. Mr. Smith Schoolmaster at Islington,
(p. 84.) swears, That in the beginning of May 78. Mr. Oats dined with him at
his House at Islington; and as he remembers, it was the first Monday in May;
and that he knew him well, for he had been his Scholar at Merchant-Tailors
School, when the Witness was Usher there; and that he stayed with him three or
four hours after Dinner, discoursing of his Travels. Lastly, one Mr. Clay, who
owned himself a Roman Catholic, (and is supposed to be a Priest; nay, affirmed
since by Blunden's Letter to be so, and of the Dominican Order) swears, (p. 84,
and 85.) That he met Mr. Oats in April, and afterward in May, 78. at Mr.
Howards, at Arundel-House; and that this was the same man he saw there. So that
they are not all Protestants that he brings to annul their Evidence, but one of
their own Religion too, that durst speak truth. And now let all the world
judge, whether the Jury had any reason to think Doctor Oates's Evidence was any
way weakened by all that those Novices had averred, knowing that though they
might have Dispensations for telling of Lies, to serve a turn, yet the
Protestant Religion does in no case allow it, much less of Swearing falsely.
And that these young men spoke only as they were directed, is more than
probable, from the nature of the thing, their own circumstances, and the manner
of their Behavior. And it is credibly reported, that as for one of them,
Palmer by name, (p. 51.) who says positively that he saw Mr. Oats at St. Omers
the first of May New Style, and the second, and the fifth, and the eleventh
days, and gives particular circumstances for each; yet it is since said to be
discovered, and offered to be sworn by two worthy Gentlemen, that the said
Palmer was at the same time at Rome, and in those Gentlemen's company, the said
first week in May, when he tells all these, stories as of his own knowledge at
St. Omers. And by this we may judge what regard to give to their Witnesses, to
prove that Sir. John Warner and Sir Tho. Preston did not come over with Doctor
Oats, or that Mr. Gavan was in April, June, and July; for indeed these last
speak so timerously, and give such weak reasons, that though what they say
should be true, yet Mr. Gavan might step up to London and sign this Consult in
few days, without their knowledge.

Lastly, p. 69. Whitebread insisted, that Mr. Oats had sworn falsely that Mr.
Ireland was in London the middle of August, and beginning of September, whereas
he could prove the contrary. But it had been better for his Party if he had let
it alone for though he did produce some. Popish witnesses to say something to
that purpose, yet the same was not only disproved then by the Oaths of Doctor
Oats and Sarah, Pain, formerly Groves's Servanr, but also occasioned the happy
Discovery afterward by Mr. Robert Jenison, of which we shall give an account
in another Chapter.

This was the whole effect of their Defense, abating some vain flourishes of
Gavan's Rhetoric, his offering to maintain his Innocence by the old obsolete
Trial of Ordeal, (or walking barefoot on Red-hot Plow-shares, p. 68.) and his
starting a point of Law, p. 87. That Mr. Oats swears to a Treason in London,
Mr. Dugdale to one in Staffordshire, therefore there were not two Witnesses to
one Fact: which the Court overruled, showing that the Treason in both places
was the same, viz. killing the King, raising an Army, subverting the
Government, and bringing in of Popery, though the Overt acts demonstrating the
same be several, or in different Counties.

Then the Lord Chief Justice summed up the Evidence, and took particular notice
of the proof made that Harcourt was privy to the Murder of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey; which he declared he could never be more or better satisfied in, than
by what he heard that day; and thereupon speaking to the Prisoners, he said, P.
93.
-- This will stick I assure you, Sirs! upon all your Party -- We have therein
a Testimony, that for promoting your Cause, you would not stick at the
Protestants blood; you began with Sir Edmundbury, but who knows where you would
have made an end? It was this one man you killed in his person, but in Effigy
the whole Nation. It was in one man's Blood your hands were embrewed, but your
Souls were dipped in the Blood of us all; this was an hansel only of what was to
follow; And so long as we are convine'd you killed him, we cannot but believe
you would also kill the King; we cannot but believe you would make all of us
away, that stand in the way of your Religion; a Religion, which according to
what it is you would bring in upon us, by a Conversion of us with Blood, and by
a Baptism with Fire; God keep our Land from the one, and our City from the
other.

The Jury after about a quarter of an hours consideration returned into Court,
and brought in all the Five Prisoners Guilty of High Treason; who the next day
with Mr. Langhorn received Sentence, and on the twentieth of June following,
were drawn to Tyburn, Whitebread and Harcourt in one Sled, Gavan and Turner in
another, and Fenwick by himself in a third. At the Gallows they made every one
a particular Speech, which seemed to be not only premeditated, but the
substance and matter thereof to have been prescribed, or at least agreed on
before amongst them; the big protestations of Innocence and expressions being
so near alike. These Speeches, as there were Copies of them spread up and down
that very morning by their own Party, which shows them to have been prepared
out of design; so they were afterward printed, and answered very solidly,
showing the nature of their Principles, and the impious fraud of such their
solemn Appeals, etc. See An Impartial Consideration on the Five Jesuits
Speeches; as also Animadversions on their Speeches; whereunto we refer the
Reader for full satisfaction in this point.

Indeed, what credit is there to be given to the words of those men dying,
whose whole Lives have been but continued Lies? it being not unknown, that the
said Whitebread had for several years heretofore, made it his business to
Masquerade it in the various Fanatical Mock-Religions of the late times. In
confirmation of which general Report, soon after his Execution, there was the
following Letter published, said to be written by a very Reverend Minister, and
communicated to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor of London. And though we
are far from giving credit to every Pamphlet, in an Age that swarms with
printed Lies and Fictions, and detest that redoubled baseness to abuse the
Living by scandalizing the Dead, yet to the end that if it be true, villainy may
not be concealed, but the next Age warned to avoid their wyles, by reflecting
on what they have practiced in this; and for that upon inquiry we find very
probable grounds to believe the sincerity of this account (though for some
Reasons the Author declined exposing his name to it in Print) we shall here
insert it in his own words; that such as shall think fit, may farther satisfy
themselves concerning the Contents.

A Letter from a Minister of the Church of England, communicated to the Right
Honorable the Lord Mayor, relating to Thomas White, alias Whitebread, who was
lately Executed for High Treason.
Sir.
IN Answer to your request in two Letters of yours to your Brother, these are
to assure you, that the Gentleman you mentioned, viz. White, alias Whitebread
(more than twenty years ago) came to Oxford, under pretense of a Jew converted
by some eminent Divine of the Presbyterian way in London. But in Oxford he
pretended a farther light, by joining with, and hearing at the several Churches
and Sermons of Doctor Thomas Goodwin, Doctor Owen, and some others of the
Independent or Congregational way. But not steadfast there long, (pretending the
Apostles rule to try all things) he fell to the Anabaptists, and then to the
Quakers; amongst whom he challenges Doctor Owen, and several others for their
Principles, in a Letter written in several Languages, so learnedly, that it was
thought worthy of consideration of the Learned Convocation there; by whom he
was censured as a Jesuit, or some other Popish Seminarist, and thereupon
Imprisoned in the Castle-Prison there, where he pretended a Distraction, and
personated the Madman so exactly, that in few days some friends of his
procured his liberty. I saw him several times running up and down the streets,
with his Hat under his arm full of stones, throwing at every small Bird he saw.
But e're long I met him at a Papist-house, where I heard him discourse very
gravely, learnedly, and discreetly; where I got not only acquaintance with him,
but familiarity, insomuch, that several times in change of Habit he came to
visit me, and several other young Scholars in Magdalen College. But at length
being again suspected, and like to be apprehended, he got privately away for
London. I brought him five miles of his way, and so left him to his designs.

In six Months after, business called me to London, where after a day or two I
heard a Report of a famous Preacher amongst the Quakers near Charingcross, and
the same day met the same Gentleman (then so much famed) going to speak, in an
old-fashioned pinked Fustian Jerkin, and clouted shoes, and Breeches faced
with Leather, and a Carters Whip in his hand, altogether disguised from my
knowledge of him; but he knew me, and spoke with me, and renewed our
acquaintance. At present he went about his intended work, and the next day came
to my Quarters, in the neat Habit of a London- Minister, and carried me to his
Lodgings within the Precincts of the Middle Temple, where I had a good
entertainment, and a view of several strange Habits, in which he disguised
himself to the several sorts of people he insinuated himself into. I saw also
his Orders from the Roman Court, and an Instrument wherein he was assured of,
and ordered to receive of certain Merchants an Hundred pounds per Annum,
besides an yearly Pension of Eighty pound per Annum from his Father. I am sure
he pretended he was born at Wittenberg, his Fathers Name John White; and in his
Writing, he himself was styled Johannes de Albo, by the Court of Rome. He was
both Jesuit, and Priest in Orders. I went with him by water, and visited some
Ships; and in one House in Southwark he Celebrated the Mass in the Popish Mode
to more than forty. The same day we visited several Presbyterians and others;
and I continued in his company by the space of a Month, when he was
apprehended, and by a special Order from the then Protector, Imprisoned in the
Tower of London; where I endeavored, but was not admitted to visit him. Two
years after I understood by a friend of mine and his, that he was freed from
his durance within the space of six Months. And within these four or five years
(as far as my friend and I could judge) tampering much with Independents in and
about London, was seen several times by a friend of mine at Doctor Mantons
private Lectures, in or near the Lord Whartons House, still known by the name
of John White. He spoke as good English as any Native, and knew all Cities,
Towns, Villages, Hamlets, (in a manner) in all or most part of England.

Sir! This is the sum of the Relation I made to your Friend. I bless God I was
never noosed in his snare, but rather confirmed in our true Christian
Principles; in which I pray God continue steadfast both you and Your loving
Friend.


CHAP. XIX.
The Procedings against Richard Langhorn, Esquire

THis Gentleman was a Counselor at Law of the Temple, and Transacted much
business for the Jesuits, being well skilled in Conveyancing: He was often
employed by diverse of the Catholic Gentry, and almost his whole practice lay
between Papists and Quakers; for of the latter, many of the most eminent
frequently resorted to him for Advice and Direction. He was Committed to
Newgate by the Lords of the Privy Council, by a Warrant dated the seventh of
October, 78. for High Treason; and on the first of Nov. he had a Son, named
likewise Richard Langhorn, sent to the same Goal, under the same Charge, who
there still remains, having not yet been brought to his Trial.

The Father came on at the Sessions in the Old-Bailey, on Saturday the 14th of
June, 1679. being next day after the Conviction of Whitebread and his
Associates.

The Jury consisted of able Citizens of London, viz.
Arthur Young, Edward Beeker, Robert Twyford, Tho. Barnes, Francis Neeve, John
Hall, William Yapp, John Kirkham, Peter Pickering, George Sitwell, James Wood,
Richard Cauthorn.
As for the Proofs against this Prisoner, they were as home and positive as
against the rest.

1. Dr. Oats declares how he came acquainted with him, by bringing him See the
Trial, P. 9.
Letters from his Sons from a Seminary in Spain; and then swears, That Langhorn
did hold Correspondence with Le Chese and others, and that the Witnesses
carried several Letters to persons beyond the Seas; in one of which he saw
under his own hand, words to this purpose, That now they had a fair opportunity
to begin, or give the blow; with other expressions plain enough concerning the
Plot: and these he saw signed Richard Langhorn, and that the Prisoner himself
delivered them to him.

2. That he had order from the Provincial to give Mr. Langhorn an Account P. 10.
of the Resolve of the Jesuits Consult for Killing the King, and that he did
acquaint him therewith; and that the said Langhorn thereupon lift up his Hands
and Eyes, and prayed to God to give it a good success.

3. That he saw at his Chamber certain Commissions, which they call Patents; P.
11.
and that on his desire he permitted the Witness to peruse several of them; and
that there as one Commission to the Lord Arundel of Wardour, and another to the
Lord Powis, for the one to be Lord Chancellor; and the other Lord Treasurer of
England; and one to Mr. Langhorn himself, to be Advocate of the Army; and that
they were signed Johannes Paulus d'Oliva, by Virtue of a Brief from the Pope:
and Mr. Langhorn also told him, that he had sent one of these Commissions by
his Son, to be delivered to the Lord Arundel of Wardours Son.

4. That Mr. Langhorn, being employed as Solicitor for several of the Fathers
of P. 13.
the Society, did prevail with the Benedictine Monks to raise six thousand
pounds for carrying on the Cause; and did say in the hearing of the witness,
That he would do his utmost for procuring the said Money.

5. That Mr. Langhorn was disgusted that Sir G. Wakeman was not content with
ten thousand pound to poison the King, and called him narrow-spirited,
narrow-soul'd Physician: for being a public concern, and to carry on the
Cause, it was no matter if he did it for nothing.

6. An Instrument was produced in Court, signed by Paulus d'Oliva, found in Mr.
Langhorns Chamber, long after Mr. Oats had given in his Testimony. Now Mr.
Oats swore, that the beforementioned Commissions were signed by the same
hand, and had the same mark; but they were all conveyed away; and this being
only concerning an Ecclesiastic business, wherein they thought there was no
danger, was left. However, this much confirmed Mr. Oates's Evidence, by showing
that Mr. Langhorn did use to receive Patents from, and had Commerce with the
Superior of the Jesuits at Rome.

In the next place comes Mr. Bedloe, and he swears that he went with Mr.
Coleman P. 19.
to Mr. Langhorns Chamber, and there Mr. Coleman gave him his Letters to le
Chese, and the Popes Nuncio and others, open, to read and Register in a Book by
him kept for that purpose; and that he saw him read these Letters, which were
concerning these designs in hand; and that he Registered them in a Book in his
Closet, whilst he and Mr. Coleman walked in the outer room; and that afterward
Coleman sealed up these Letters, and delivered them to the Witness, who carried
them to le Chese; and that some of the expressions in those Letters were, That
all things were now in readiness, and they only wanted Money: That the
Catholics were now in safety; that Places and Offices had been disposed to
them, and that all the Garrisons either were, or suddenly would be in their
hands; and that now they had a fair opportunity, having a King so easy to
believe what was dictated to him by their Party; and that if they missed this
advantage, they might despair of ever introducing Popery into England. These
were the very Expressions of some of them.

2. That he brought other Letters from Harcourt to Langhorn to be Registered,
and Langhorn writ back, that he had received and would Register them; of which
Letters one was from the Rector of the Irish College at Salamanca, which
specified, That the Lord Bellasis and the rest concerned, should be in
readiness, for that they had sent some Irish cashiered Soldiers, with many
other Lay-Brothers, under the notion of Pilgrims for St. Jago, who were to take
shipping at the Groin, and to land at Milford-Haven in Wales, and there to meet
and join with the Lord Powis.

The only defense Mr. Langhorn could maket was like that of the rest of his
Party, by stoudenyals, and endeavoring to invalidate the credit of the
Witnesses, by intrapping or confronting them in point of time or place.

1. He would make Doctor Oats an Approver, as having been pardoned for the P.
27.
same Crime; and alleged, that the Witnesses had received Rewards and
gratifications for swearing against them. But to this the Court answered, That
it could not be supposed the King would Bribe his Witnesses; and unless he
could prove any reward to be given by Contract, or subornation, it was no
Objection, for that allowance of sustenance was usually given of old to
Approvers, etc.

2. He mustered up again their baffled Evidence from St. Omers, of whom one P.
33.
being asked how he came to take notice of Mr. Oats being at St. Omers all
April and May, and not in June and July as well, plainly answered, (being not
well instructed, or more simple than the rest) -- It was -- Because the
Question he came for did not fall upon that time: Which gives more light to the
suspicion that they came with their Lessons in their Mouths, to save these men's
lives, and their Churches sinking Credit; not to speak truth, but only right or
wrong confront the Kings Evidence: but in vain, for Dr. Oats sufficiently
asserted his Testimony by seven Witnesses, who now again proved, as they had
done the day before, his being in London at the time controverted.

3. Then Mr. Langhorn produced the Woman at the White-horse Tavern, where P. 46.
Mr. Oats had said the Consult was held; and she boldly averred, that there
was never a room in her House would hold above a dozen people, and therefore
there could not meet 50, or 18 or 20 persons at a time. This was an Objection
Doctor Oats could not foresee, not thinking any body would have had the
confidence to allege it, and so was not provided with any Witnesses to
confute it: but as Providence ordered it, no less than three several strangers
stood up in Court, that knew the House well, and being sworn, Attested, The
first, that he had known sixteen to dine often in one Room of that House; the
second, that he knew two Rooms, one backwards and the other forward, where
Thirty might Dine at a time; and the third, that at a Wedding he knew of above
Twenty that Dined together in one Room next the street. Nay farther, there was
a Gentleman of good Quality in Court, who declared there have been fifty in a
Room there; so that this Evidence, by such a peremptory falsehood, did but add
to the suspicion already too apparent on the rest of his Witnesses.

The matter being thus plain, the Jury did not find any difficulty that might
require a tedious Consultation, and therefore returning after a short
retirement, into Court, pronounced the prisoner Guilty; and then Whitebread,
and the other Four Convicted the day before, being brought to him to the Bar,
Mr. Recorder proceeded to pass Sentence of Death upon them all Six. But Mr.
Langhorn, either in consideration of the affairs of others in relation to his
Practice, which it might be convenient to adjust; or rather in hopes he might
have been wrught upon to make some ingenuous Confession, was Reprieved for a
Month, and then Executed on Monday the Fourteenth of June, persisting in the
most solemn and studied expressions of his Innocence; which, that they might be
home and full, and consequently the more taking with the people, he had written
down in a paper, whether of his own penning, or prescribed unto him by some
Priest, is uncertain; and this he delivered to the Sheriff, referring himself
thereunto, as the last Expressions of his mind; and desiring it might be seen.

CHAP. XX.
The Occasion and manner of Mr. Robert Jennison's first Discovery; and the
Apprehension of one Caryl, alias Blunden; and his Letter beyond the Seas
concerning the Execution of Whitebread, etc.

WE have before related how Mr. Ireland insisted that he was in Staffordshire,
when Dr. Oats, Mr. Bedloe, and one Sarah Pain attest upon their Oaths that
they saw him in London. And this he not only alleged at his Trial, and
brought Witnesses to prove it, but made solemn Asseverations at his death. That
he never was in London from the 5th of August to the 14th of September. And
knowing that such a failure in circumstance of time and place, if they could
get it believed, would much depretiate the Evidence, they not content with what
had passed, revive it again at Whitebread's Trial, as you have heard, offering
fresh people to confirm it: And though the contrary was sufficiently attested
by three Witnesses on Oath, enough to convince an impartial Jury, or any body
else that considers the nature of a Papists Religion, and how far he may
lawfully, nay is bound to stretch his private Conscience, when it may be for
the public Emolument of their Church; yet it pleased Providence, as well for
the Vindication and further Illustration of Truth, as to shame these false
Dissemblers, and expose their fallacious dealings, soon after to make a further
Discovery, and detect their Lies in this behalf, by one that had been no small
Zealot of their Party.

For presently after that Trial, Charles Chetwind Esquire upon some discourse
concerning the same, was accidentally informed, That one Mr. Robert Jennison of
Grays-Inne, a person of good Quality, and formerly a strict Romanist, had
affirmed, That he was with the said Ireland about the middle of August in
Russel Street in Covent Garden: whereupon Mr. Chetwind resolved to enquire
further after it, being thereunto encouraged by the Earl of Shaftsbury, to whom
he had communicated what he had heard. Then tracing the business, he went to
Robert Bows Esquire who owned, that Mr. Jennison had signified so much to him
formerly in a Letter from Reading, dated the 19th of December. Hereupon several
of these Gentlemen repaired to Mr. Jennison, who after some unwilling Evasions,
ingenuously owned the same, and testified it upon Oath before Edmund Warcup Esquire
one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, viz.
That coming up from Windsor on the 19th of August, he went to visit the said
William Ireland (with whom for some time he had been well acquainted, as being
Related unto him) and found him at his Lodging in Russel Street, who told him
he was then newly arrived by Post from Wolverhampton in Staffordshire; and in
discourse enquired how his Majesty and the Court were diverted: To which Mr.
Jennison replied, That he heard his Majesty took much delight in Hawking and
Fishing, but chiefly in the latter; which his Majesty followed early in the
mornings, accompanied only with two or three Lords: Whereupon Ireland replied,
He wondered his Majesty should be so thin guarded; he were easily taken off or
removed; or words to that effect. At which Mr. Jennison saying God forbid,
Ireland began to qualify it, saying, I do not say it is lawful; and some such
Expressions, which made him take little notice of it at that time; but
afterward hearing of the Plot, and that the King was to have been killed at
Windsor, he began to reflect upon the former words more seriously, and related
them to his Father, and one Mr. Smith his Fathers Confessor, being then at
Wallworth his Fathers Mansion House, in the Bishopric of Durham.

This, and some other Depositions confirming the same, with the true Copy of
the said Letter, have since been published in print, and Mr. Jennison publicly
attested the same at Wakeman's Trial; the horror and detestation of this
hellish Plot carried on by the Romanists, having induced him to quit their
communion.

Three days after the Execution of Whitebread and the other four Jesuits, viz.
23 June, was Apprehended by Captain Rich, one of his Majesty's Justices of
Peace for Surry, one Caryl, alias Blunden, supposed to be a Popish Priest, at
Lambeth-Marsh, at the House of one Mr. Woodinbrook formerly an Haberdasher of
Small Wares in the Borough of Southwark; in whose Chamber was found the
following Letter, prepared to give an Account thereof to their Correspondents
beyond the Seas; wherein it is observable, what liberty they take to scandalize
the proceedings of Justice, and invent so many palpable notorious Lies; as that
of the Reprieve being brought to the Gallows, etc. to keep up their Reputation
with their Party. The words of the Letter were as follow; only in the Margent
we have added some necessary Observations.

IHS. MR.
23 June, 1679. My Dr. C.
ON the Thirteenth of June, being Friday, Mr. Whitebread, Mr. Harcourt, Mr.
Turner, Fenwick and Gaven of the Society, and Mr. Corker, were brought to the
Bar in the Old Bailey: Mr. Corker moved the Court for a longer time, being only
warned the night before, whereas the other Prisoners had eight days warning to
prepare themselves; whereupon he was re-manded to prison till the next day:
Then was the Indictment read against the Five abovenamed Jesuits, for
conspiring the Kings Death, subversion of Government and, Protestant Religion.
Then Mr. Oats swore, that on the Twenty fourth of April, there was a Consult
held in London, where the Kings Death was Conspired; and that he carried this
Resolve from one to the other, for their subscribing; and swore particular
Circumstances against each. To Corroborate this Testimony, other Witnesses,
Bedloe, Prance, Dugdale, and Chetwind, came in with A pretty way of expressing
plain positive Evidence of several Overt Acts of Treason.
Overtures to the matter sworn by Oats. Then did the Prisoners (after a most
solemn and It might be solemn, but could not be counted Religious by any but
you, whose Religion consists in Lies and Blasphemous Hypocrisy.
Religious Protestation of their Innocence and ignorance of any Conspiracy
against His Majesty) desire that their Witnesses might be heard, which could
demonstrate that Mr. Oats was actually at St. Omers in all April and May, and
most of June, when he swears he was in London at the Consult. To prove this,
about twenty Witnesses were produced, who did show evidently, by several
remarkable passages, how Oats was at St. Omers all the whole time. But the
Judge Scroggs asked each Witness as he did appear, of what Religion he was of;
and upon answer that he was a Catholic, the whole Court gave a shout of
laughter. Then the Judge would say to them, All absolutely false, though it
might have been the most proper way of Examining such bold young Villains; for
'twas apparent they did not speak their knowledge, but their Masters dictates.
Well, what have you then been taught to say? and by many scoffing Questions
(which moved the Court to frequent laughter) he did endeavor to take off the
Credibility of their Witnesses. Then the Butler, Tailor, and Gardener of St.
Omers offered to swear that they saw Mr. Oats all that time at St. Omers, when
he swore he was in London. After this, the Prisoners at the Bar produced
Sixteen Witnesses more, that proved Oats Another impudent Lie; and sure the
Jesuits themselves and the Staffordshire Vouchers, if they have any shame left,
will now blush at the story.
forsworn in Mr. Irelands Trial, because he was in Shropshire, when he attested
he was in London. Then did Gaven, one of the Prisoners, with a great deal of
clearness and Eloquence, and with a cheerful countenance, draw up their
justification, showing the force of their Evidences, and how fully their
Witnesses had proved Mr. Oats Not the least pretense for this old baffled
Scandal.
perjured: then he did lay open the improbabilities of such a Plot, and how
unlikely that Mr. Oats should be entrusted in delivering Commissions to
Persons of Honor and Estates, whom he never (as he acknowledges) had seen
before or since. This was delivered by Mr. Gaven, O brave Orator! sure this
Recommendation of such brave service don the Church, will hasten Gavens
Canonization, at least one score or two of years.
with a Countenance wholly unconcered, and in a voice very audible, and largely
and pertinently expressed. The Judge was incensed at this Speech, in which he
often interrupted him: but Gaven still urged, My Lord, I plead now for my Life,
and for that which is dearer to me than life, Ay, and Soul to boot.
the honor of my Religion, and therefore I beseech you have a little patience
with me! After this Plea of Mr. Gaven' s, the Judge made his Harangue to the
Jury, telling them, that what the Prisoners had brought, was only the bare
assertions of Boys, who were taught it as a point of their Religion, to lie for
the honor of their Religion; whereas Mr. Oats, Bedloe, and others, were upon
their Oaths; and if Oaths were not to be taken, no Courts could subsist.

Then Mr. Oats brought forth four These four were no less than seven.
Witnesses which he had kept in reserve; an old Parson in his Canonical Gown,
an old Dominican Priest Is he so? The honester man he, to speak the truth and
shame the Devil and the Jesuits. -- But Proh dolor! Alas! how this grieves you,
that any one of your Religion should speak Truth when it makes against you.
Proh Pudor and Dolor! and two old women, that swore they saw Mr. Oats in the
beginning of May 1678. At this the whole Court gave a shout of And who could
forbear, to hear how undeniably your Novices were proved to be like their
Masters, most egregious LIARS? Nor yet did the Court laugh, but the crowd of
people, whom the Court took order to silence.
laughter and hollow, that for almost a quarter the Gryers could not still
them: Never was Bear-baiting more rude and boisterous than this Trial. Upon
this the Judge dismissed the Jury, to consider and bring in their Verdict; who
(after half an hours absence) brought in the Five Prisoners at the But all
guilty of High Treason. Thereupon the whole Court clapped Better so, than that
you clap your hands at the murder of the King, as some of your Tribe did at
that of your Enemy, his blessed Father.
their hands, and gave a great hollow. It being now eight at night, the Court
adjourned till next day at seven of the clock, which was Saturday: I was
present from five in the morning, till the Court broke up. The Prisoners
comported themselves Bravely said! Who would confess now? To be thus
Apostolified, would make one venture Purgatory.
most Apostolically at the Bar; not the least passion or alteration appeared in
them at the Invectives of the Judge, or at the Clamours of the People; but made
a clear and candid defense, with a cheerful and unconcerned countenance; and
(as Dear Sir, tell us his name; he was a Wit undoubtedly, unless it were your
self. A Jury of Turks have done strange things, and may acquit any body; but
these were a Jury of honest Christians, and therefore they found them guilty.
a Stander-by said) if they had had a Jury of Turks, they had been quitted. I
was with them both before and after their Trial, and had the honor of being in
my Function it is pity you had not been caught giving the Knaves that Absolution.
serviceable to them; which I look upon, as that God favored me in, I hope for
my future good.

Next day Mr. Langhorne a Lawyer, Sir George Wakeman, Mr. Corker, Mr. March,
Mr. Rumbly, the three last Benedictines, were brought to the Bar; where the
Indictment being read against them for conspiring the Kings death, etc. they
pleaded all Not guilty. Then was Langhorne first tried, whose Trial held so
long, that they had not time to try the other four; and the Commission by which
they sat expiring that day, the Judge adjourned the Trial of the other four
till the 14th of July, and then the Judge commanded the Keeper to bring the
five Jesuits; whom with Langhorne Poor Langhorne! not one word of praise for
thee! methoughts thou lookedst as Apostolically as the best of them: but this
it is to be a Layman, and confess Jesuits Lands.
were sentenced to be hanged, drawn, and quartered. Mr. Corker and Mr. March
are close Prisoners, and have been so this eight months, with whom I have been;
God has fitted, and is still fitting them as Sacrifices for himself: They are
very well disposed, and resigned to Gods holy will. Mr. Rumbly has the liberty
of the Prison, with whom is Mr. Heskett; all cheerful, and expect the good hour.

On Thursday, the day before the five Jesuits were executed, my Lord Shaftsbury
was with Turner and Gaven, promising them the Kings Pardon, if they would
acknowledge the Conspiracy. Mr. Gaven answered, He would not murder his Soul,
to save his Body; for he must acknowledge what he knew not, and what he did
believe was not. On Friday the 20th of June, Mr. Whitebread on one Sled with
Mr. Harcourt, Mr. Turner and Mr. Gaven upon another Sled, and Mr. Fenwick in a
Sled by himself, were drawn from Newgate to Tyburn. Mr. Langhorne is for a time
reprieved, and promised Pardon, if he will (as it is reported) discover the
Estates of the Jesuits: he was their Lawyer. It Is certain my Lord Shaftsbury
has been often with him. In the way they comported themselves seriously and
cheerfully; Mr. Gaven had smug'd himself up as if he had been going to a
Wedding. When they arrived at Tyburn, they each made a Speech: 1. Assevering
their ignorance of any Plot against his Majesty. 2. Pardoning their Accusers.
3. And heartily praying for them. Mr. Gaven in his Speech made an Act of
Contrition, Perhaps that whisking Lie, That never any Jesuits have allowed of
Kingkilling.
which was much liked by all; for he was an excellent Preacher. Then they all
betook themselves to Meditation for more than a good quarter. The Multitude was
great, and yet there was a profound silence; and their most Religious
Comportment has wonderfully allayed the fury of the People. When they had ended
their Prayer, and the Ropes were about their necks, there came a Horseman in
full speed from Whitehal, and cried as be rode, You may measure the truth of
the rest by this most groundless and notorious Lie, coined to amuse the people
beyond the Seas; there being no such Pardon, nor any thing in the world like
it, that might occasion such a Fable: so that it must needs be purposely
invented to deceive.
A Pardon, a Pardon! so with much difficulty he made through the press to the
Sheriff, who was under the Gallows to see Execution performed: Then was the
Pardon read, which expressed how the King most graciously, and out of his great
inclination to Clemency, granted them their lives, which by Treason they had
forfeited, upon condition they would acknowledge the Conspiracy, and lay open
what they knew thereof: but they all thanked his Majesty for his inclination of
Mercy toward them; but as to any Conspiracy, they knew of none, much less were
guilty of any: so they could not accept of any Pardon upon those Conditions.
After a little recollection, the Cart was driven away. After they were dead,
they were quartered, but their Quarters were given to their Friends. Non poena,
sed Causa, facit Martyrem: Did any one of these die for Religion, or any thing
relating thereunto? Or is Treason and killing of Kings, part of your Religion?
Sanguis Martyrum sit semen Ecclesiae.

I sent to you an account of Mr. Pickering's death, and will tell you what may
happen, but I know not if they come to you. You may cover your Letter to me for
Mrs. Ploydon at my Lady Drummonds in Queen Street, London.

Superscribed, A Madame, Madame Catherine Hall a Cambray, aux Refuge de Isemy.
Cambray.

This Letter was found upon a Table under the Carpet, on which was a parcel of
Money laid when the Justice came into the Room; and though Mr. Carul was
pleased to deny it to be his handwriting, yet the Steel-dust wherewith it was
dried, appeared by comparison to be the very same with that which was in his
Dust-box. And when they came to search him, in his Pocketbook, amongst other
things, there were upon one of the leaves these words written.

9ber the 9th. [The Figure of the day in the Original is somewhat blotted, but
supposed to be a 9; but [9ber] for the month of November, is very plain.]

Upon my Salvation, and as I hope to see the face of God, I know no more of any
Plot or Conspiracy, of which I am accused, directly or indirectly, than the
Child that is newborn.

Tho. Whitebread.


This will be proved to be the handwriting of Father Whitebread the Jesuits
Provincial, lately executed; and there is good reason to believe that this was
the very form whereby he generally directed and allowed all Jesuits to deny the
Plot; and which when they had his command to do it, could not be (according to
their Doctrine) any sin: for he being their Superior, is to be obeyed without
scruple, in all things; nor can there be any other reasonable construction made
thereof.

There were several other notable Circumstances attending the Apprehension of
this person, which may possibly in time give further light to the Plot. In the
mean time the said Caryl is kept close in the Marshalsea.

CHAP. XXI.
The Proceedings against Sir George Wakeman Baronet, William Marshal, James
Corker, and William Rumley.

SIR George Wakeman Her Majesty's Physician, was Committed, as is before
related, first to the Gate House, on the thirteenth of June, and on Friday the
18th of July he was Arraigned at the Sessions House in the Old-Bailey; together
with Marshal a Benedictine Monk, and Rumley a Lay-Brother of that Order, upon
an Indictment of High Treason, for Conspiring the Death of the King, and the
Subversion of the Government, and Protestant Religion: and at the same time
Corker another Benedictine, Arraigned last Sessions, was Tried for the like
offenses.

The Names of the Jury that passed upon them, (none of the Prisoners offering
to make any Challenges) were as follows.
Ralph Hawtrey of Rislip Esquire Henry Hawley of New-Brantford Esquire Henry Hodges of
Hanwell Esquire Richard Downton of Isleworth Esquire John Bathurst of Edmunton Esquire
Robert Hampton of Greenford Esquire William Heydon of Greenford Esquire John Baldwyn of
Hillingdon Esquire Richard Dobbins of Harvile Esquire William Avery of Enfeild Esquire
Richard White of Cripple-gate Gent. William Wait of St. Clement Danes Gent.
The Trial was long and tedious, too large to be here repeated; and being out
in Print exactly taken, we thereunto refer those that would be satisfied in all
Circumstances: but the substance of the Evidence was as follows.

1. Mr. Dugdale, Mr. Prance, and Mr. Jennison, were examined to prove the Plot
in general, which they did in such variety of instances and Circumstances, as
satisfied all unbiassed men: and particularly Mr. Jenisnn, Deposed, That
discoursing with Father Ireland (lately Executed) at his Chamber in
Russel Street in the Month of June, 1678. the said Ireland did say, There was
only one in the way that stopped the gap, and hindered the Catholic Religion
from flourishing in England again; and then said -- It was an easile matter to
Poison the King.

2. As to Wakeman in particular, Doctor Oats swears,

1. That Sir George Wakeman, in the Month of July, 78. sending a Letter to P.
25.
Ashby the Jesuit, of Instructions how he should order himself before he went
to, and at the Bath, whither he was going, did afterward in the same Letter
write, That the Queen would assist him to poison the King. And knows it to be
his hand by this means, because within a day or two after, Sir George being at
Ashby's Lodging, he saw Sir George sit in a writing posture, and then lay by
his pen, rise up; and going away, left behind him a written Paper, purporting
to be an Apothecaries Bill, the Ink whereof was not dry; and no body by but a
Gentleman that was lame of both hands, and so could not write it: and the hand
or Character of this paper so left then by Sir George, was the same with that
of the beforementioned Letter to Ashby, wherein were the Treasonable words
aforesaid.

2. That at the same time Mr. Ashby did give Sir George some Instructions
concerning the Patent or Commission; he had received of being Physician to the
Army; and that the Witness did see the said Commission in Sir George's hand.

3. That a few days after, Father Harcourt and four other Jesuits did go to
attend P. 26.
the Queen at Somerset House, being sent for, and the Witness waited upon them;
and they went into a Chamber, whilst he waited without, and did hear a Woman's
voice which did say, -- That she would not endure those violations of her Bed
any longer, and that she would assist Sir George Wakeman in poisoning the King;
and that he was afterward admitted in, and that he saw no other Woman there
but, etc. and heard whilst he was within, the same voice ask Father Harcourt if
he had received the last 1000 l.

4. That in the same Month 10000 l. was proposed by Ashby, at his Lodgings in
Wild-house, in the presence, of Father Harcourt, and Father Ireland, and the
Witness, to Sir George Wakeman to poison the King; and that he at that time
refused it, saying, it was too little for so great a work.

5. That he has heard that afterward 5000 l. more was offered and accepted;
and swears positively, that himself has seen in the Jesuits Entry-book, an
Entry thereof in these words; or to this purpose:

Memorand. Such a day of August, 15000 l. was proposed to Sir George Wakeman,
which he accepted. And this was Harcourts hand. And that then under it was a
Receipt to this effect: Received 5000 l. in part of this 15000 l. of Father
Harcourt, by order of Edw. Coleman.

George Wakeman.

Which last words were the same hand and Character with that Letter P. 29.
to Ashby, and Bill to the Apothecary, which the Witness had seen before.

Then, as to him, Mr. Bedloe swears,

That about the beginning of Aug. P. 46.
78. being at Harcourts Chamber, Sir George Wakeman came in discontented, and
asked why he was drilled on in a concern of that importance, and sighted; and
said he knew not whether he should go on or no: but Harcourt asked him what he
would have, they were ready for him; and then ^^tcht a Bill and gave him, which
he said he received that day by the Queens Order; and that it was on such a
Goldsmith for 2000 l. and then said, Sir George, -- It Is well some body gives
me encouragement; I have more encouragement from my good Lady and Mistress,
than from any of you: Nay, replied Harcourt to Sir George, for encouragement,
that you shall not want, for the rest shall be paid in due time; but, Sir
George, continued he, this must be well followed, and closely observed, because
so much depends upon it: For if we should miss to kill him at Windsor, or you
miss in your way, we will do it at New Market. -- Which words Mr. Bedloe twice
repeated; and thereupon, Sir George said privately to his Fellow Prisoners,
There is my business done.

The sum of Sir George's defense was thus:

1. As to Doctor Oates's Evidence concerning the Letter to Ashby, he brought an
Apothecary that produced a piece of a Letter of directions to Ashby, sent from
Sir George, and said he had read it all, and that there was no mention in it of
King or Queen.

But suppose this were true, and not coined to serve a turn, Doctor Oats swore
this was none of that Letter he spoke of, for it was neither the same hand, nor
the name subscribed, nor the same Contents with the other, nor writ at or about
the same time, for that was writ to Ashby ten days before he went out of Town;
and Mr. Oats saw it before he went, and swears positively (p. 26.) that he saw
Wakeman with Ashby two or three days after that; whereas this Letter the
Apothecary speaks of, was, as Sir George says, writ by his man late in the
night, and Ashby went away next morning. And whereas Wakeman (p. 51.) desires
the Jury to take notice, how improbable it was he should write two Letters
about the same thing; it is false that it was about the same thing: for besides
the Treason which possibly might be the main business, as to the Physical
directions that Doctor Oats mentions, was, how he should drink Milk in Town,
and only general instructions by the by touching the Bath: but when he was
just a going, then he might cause more particular instructions to be writ by
his man: Or, which is most probable, knowing what stuff he had intermint with
his former directions, unfit to be showed to any Apothecary, he therefore was
obliged on that very score, to repeat his directions of the number of strokes
at the Pump, what Pills he should take, etc. So that in all this, there is
nothing worth the Juries taking notice of, but only to observe that it was
nothing to the purpose.

2. Sir George's next Exception to Mr. Oates's Testimony, is, That before the
House of Lords he should say, that he thought that beforementioned Letter to
be of Wakemans writing, only because it was subscribed George Wakeman. But
this the Knight was not able to prove; and Doctor Oats gives another account
of his words there to the best of his remembrance, and refers to the Record, So
that this ca^il too signifies nothing.

3. But then was started an Objection, which though very little in it self, yet
was made very much of by good management and that was; That Doctor Oats did
not charge Sir George so fully before the King and Council, but rather denied
that he knew any thing against him, but what he had seen in other peoples
Letters: And to this purpose Sir Philip Lloyd did say, (p. 55.) (but not upon
Oath, being produced by the Prisoner) That Mr. Oats did their say, he had seen
a Letter from Whitebread to Fenwick, that Sir George was to poison the King,
and to have 15000 l. for it, whereof 5000 l. had been paid by Coleman: and Sir
Philip farther added, That Sir George did then carry himself, as if he were not
concerned at the Accusation; and that Mr. Oats being called in again, and asked
whether he knew any more against him, did lift up his hands, and said, No, God
forbid that I should say any thing against Sir George Wakeman, for I know
nothing more against him.

In Answer to this:

1. Doctor Oats did now upon his Oath deny that he to his remembrance spoke
any such words, but believed Sir Philip was mistaken.

2. That he was then so weak and weary, with watching and hurrying up and down,
that he was not in a condition to make Answer.

Sir Thomas Doleman upon Oath says of Sir George's behavior then before the
P. 59.
Council, that in his opinion, and in the opinion of others, he did not deny
the Crime so positively, as one that was Innocent would have done; which is
somewhat contrary to Sir Philips opinion.

4. The same Sir Thomas confirms Dr. Oates's Apology, and swears, he seemed at
that time to be in such great weakness and disorder, that he believes he was
scarce able to give a good Answer.

Now suppose Doctor Oats through weakness, forgetfulness, or some other good
reason, did not at that time charge Sir George so home, it being enough then to
give a general Charge, does it follow that he was now tied up in his Evidence,
and may not afterward charge him farther? Was not Whitebread and Fenwicks Jury
withdrawn one time, because one of the Witnesses did not swear home, and yet
afterward that Witness admitted to enlarge, and thereupon the Prisoners
Convicted and Executed? Besides, in Mr. Oates's Depositions at that time
exhibited to the King in writing, Article the 37. it is more than probably
intimated, that Doctor Oats could Charge Sir George Wakeman further, but
prudentially, for some reasons, perhaps that he might not all at once stir too
many and mighty Enemies, forbore to do it. -- For speaking there of the 15000
l. proposed to Sir George, he adds, -- But whether Sir George has been treated
with about that concern, the Deponent cannot inform here in this Article. --
And so much touching his Evidence against Wakeman.

Against Mr. Bedloes Testimony, Sir George objected only,

1. That it was not likely he should let P. 40.
him be privy to so so great a secret, being but a stranger.

To which Mr. Bedloe answers, That Harcourt had told Sir George who he was, and
that after he knew he was his Confident, and engaged in their grand design, he
might well be free before him.

2. He solemnly swears, he never saw Mr. Bedloe before in his life. Ibidem.


But this Mr. Bedloe does also confute, making it out by Circumstances, that he
had taken Physic of him at the Bath three years ago; and that acquaintance
Wakeman could not deny, only calls him Rogue, etc. And thus, as to any thing
material, stood Sir George Wakemans Case.

Then as for Corker and Marshal,

Doctor Oats swears positively, that they P. 31.
both knew of the design of killing the King, for that they did both of them in
his hearing express their dislike (not of the Treason, but) of one of the
persons chosen to do it, saying that Pickering was no fit person for that
service, because being commonly attendant on the Altar, he might thereby miss
of an opportunity; and therefore they declared their opinion, that a mere
Layman would be more proper. He farther says, (p. 35.) That Marshal went half
with Conyers, who laid a wager. That the King should eat no more
Christmas-pies; and that both of them were privy and consenting to the Consult
of the Benedictines, for raising 6000 l. for carrying on the design, Marshal
being actually present at the Consult, at the Benedictine Convent in the Sauoy;
either the day before or after the Feast of the Assumption, which is the
fifteenth of August; and Corker, though he were not there, but gone as he said
to Lamspring in Germany, yet he sent a Letter dated the latter end of August,
to signify his consent; which was necessary, because he was their President;
and this Letter Doctor Oats, by comparison of hands, proved to be his Writing;
and farther, that he had a Patent from the Sea of Rome to be Bishop of London,
which Doctor Oats saw in his hands, and was told by him, (p. 34.) That he
hoped it would not be long ere he exercised his Episcopal Function. And lastly,
That Marshal was present at another Consult, 21 of Aug. where he agreed to the
sending of Commissions into Ireland, to raise Forces there, and to the
poisoning of the Duke of Ormond.

Then Mr. Bedloe, as to these two, swears, P. 38.
That though he never heard any thing from Corker that did positively relate to
the Murder of the King, yet he has heard him talk much of the Design, and
carrying it on, about raising an Army, what Interest he had in the people, what
Letters they had received from beyond the seas, and how forward they were in
their proceedings here. And as to Marshal, that he used to carry Letters to and
fro concerning the Plot, amongst the Plotters; and that he knew what was the
effect of such Letters, and the Answers, being one of the Club and Consult that
saw all; and particularly, that whereas Mr. Bedloe carried a Letter from the
English Monks to le Chese at Paris, wherein they acquainted him that all things
were in readiness within a year or two, to put the design in practice, and
subvert the oppression and Tyranny which the Catholics were under in England,
etc. when he brought back an Answer thereunto, Mr. Marshal carried a Copy of it
to Sir Francis Ratcliffe.

1. As for the Defense made by these two, Marshal, with a long starcht Oration,
would undertake to persuade the people there was no Plot, and that Whitebread
and the rest dyed Innocent, and all because they did not confess it at their
death.

2. Corker denied his being at Lamspring; but that was nothing to the purpose,
for Mr. Oats swore only that he said he would go thither, and that it was
usual with them to give out they go to one place, and go clear another way; and
the Letter he mentioned was not dated from any place.

3. He alleged that he was not President of the Benedictines, so that Mr.
Oats was mistaken therein, and consequently his consent not necessary to the
Consult for raising the 6000 l.

To prove this, though p. 65. he says he could bring no body, yet at last, a
good while after, he called three women that all said, that not he, but one Mr.
Stapleton was President of the Benedictines.

But as to this it is to be noted, That Doctor Oats being taken very ill, was
gone out of the Court, and did not hear this Objection; and though he was
called for by Mr. Recorder, yet when he came, by I know not whose negligence,
he was not acquainted with it, nor Examined about it, who otherwise might
probably have cleared the point. But however, it is not at all impossible, that
the Prisoners might find three Women in this Town, kind enough to tell so small
a Lie for them; which, considering they were under such Circumstances, might by
their Votaries be counted not only venial, but exceeding meritorious.

4. They both urged, that when Pickering was taken at the Savoy, they were
there in Bed, and yet Doctor Oats and his Company did not apprehend them, but
rather said they had nothing to do with them; and to prove this, they produce a
woman that was the Monks Housekeeper, or Bed-maker, Nell Rigby, who you might
be sure would speak a good word for her Masters.

But Doctor Oats at that time came purposely for Pickering; and it is possible
in the night and hurry, and such disguises as they might have, might not know
them; but indeed we may conclude he did not see them: for the Prisoners offer
no proof of that, no, not Nelly Rigby her self, who only says she named them
all to them when they asked who else was in the house.

5. This Nell Rigby starts another Objection against Dr. Oats, and says, That
in the Summer 78, she saw him come a begging to Mr. Pickering for Charity, and
that Pickering bid her shut the door, and never let that man come in again.
Whence Marshal observes, how unlikely it was they should suffer him to be in
such want, and use him in that manner, in the very heat of the Plot, when they
most employed him, and when he could gain such advantages by discovering them,
if indeed there had been any such Conspiracy as he pretends.

But as to this, we are not obliged to take all that Nell Rigby the Monks
Bed-maker (to say no worse) tells us for an Oracle, and prefer it to positive
proof upon Oath: for undoubtedly this begging story was a mere flam; for if
true, why was it not offered before? why was it not set up at Pickerings Trial?
whom it as much concerned, or more than these; and who could never have been so
careless, as to omit so material an Evidence, if he had known any such thing.

Besides, it is plain, Mrs. Nelly is a common Voucher, and says she knows nor
cares what, if she think it will make for her beloved Masters; for she
positively avers; (p. 73.) That Mr. Bedloe was with Mr. Oats at the taking of
Pickering, which was on Michaelmass Eve, upon the very first public notice of
the Plot; whereas that must needs be a notorious Lie, for all the world knows
that Bedloe was then wholly amongst the Jesuits, and did not come in till many
weeks after. And had this been well enough observed, this scandalous Objection
would have left no impressions.

Lastly, Marshal made a great stir about Bedloe's not knowing him, but was
confuted, though not at all ashamed in his Lies, by Sir Will. Waller upon Oath,
and afterward with an impudence that none but a Monk could own, said -- That
he would be content to be hanged, if Mr. Bedloe could prove, That he, (viz. Mr.
Bedloe himself) was ever in the Savoy in his life. And though it happened Bedloe
had none ready by him to prove that, for who should dream of such a question
being asked? yet by a sufficient circumstance, he proved not only that he had
been in the Savoy, but also that he was well acquainted with their Convent and
Affairs there, in that he gave Sir Will. Waller directions where to search in
the most material places, describing them; and in particular, he desired him to
look under such a Bench in P. 45.
Irelands Apartment, where he should find the Gun that was to kill the King;
which was there found accordingly: all which was confirmed by the said Sir
William Waller, now present in Court.

These were all their Objections that seemed to have any color of weight or
argument in them; the rest of their tedious talk being nothing but either
railing at the Witnesses, certain flashes of Rhetoric, and some long
set-speeches, ad faciendum Populum, to amuse the People; or else downright
Impertinence, as Marshal's trifling that he had Witnesses here, to prove that
he had Witnesses in the Country but sixty miles off, that could say something
for him, when he had had a months notice to get them ready for this time of
trial.

As for Rumley, Dr. Oats testified that he was privy to the Consult of the
Monks wherein the 6000 l. was agreed on, and he judged did consent to it: for
he did pray God it might have good success, and that the Catholic Cause might
once again flourish in England. But he being but a single Evidence, and Mr.
Bedloe not being able to speak any thing material as to that Prisoner, he came
off on course.

Thus, after a tedious, full, and most favorable hearing of all that the
Prisoners or their Witnesses had to offer, the Lord Chief Justice Sir William
Scroggs came to sum up the Evidence to the Jury; which he performed in a long
Speech; (See the Trial, p. 77. to which we refer the Reader) some material
heads whereof, as his Lordship was then pleased to observe them, were as
follows.

1. That as to Rumley, there was but one Witness, which not being sufficient
Evidence according to Law to condemn him, therefore they ought to acquit him.

2. That as to Sir George Wakeman, Corker, and Marshal, there had two sorts of
Evidence been given; General and Particular: the General, by Mr. Dugdale, Mr.
Prance, and Mr. Jennison. It Is true, neither of them so much as name any of the
Prisoners, but they prove the Plot, That there was a Conspiracy to bring in
Popery by killing the King. This his Lordship observed was a circumstantial
Evidence against the Prisoners, and might answer their Objection, when they
said the Jury were not to credit positive Oaths without probable Circumstances,
or something else to guide them by. And especially his Lordship noted to the
Jury Mr. Jennison's Testimony concerning Ireland, and how clear it was made
appear that the said Ireland died with a Lie in his mouth.

3. Then as to the particular Evidence, first against Wakeman, That Mr. Oats
had sworn he saw a Letter to Ashby, subscribed George Wakeman, in which were
the Treasonable words beforementioned, but says, he had never seen his hand
before, but afterward saw him writing, (as he thinks writing) and looking on
that Paper when he was gone, while it was wet, the Character to the Witnesses
thinking was the same with the Letter. Now his Lordship observed, that
supposing this to be true, it is something hard for one having never been
acquainted with a man's hand before, by seeing it afterward thus to recollect
backwards, and know that what he saw before was the same handwriting.

2. That in Harcourts Chamber he saw a Book kept by the Jesuits, wherein was
written, This day (specifying a certain day) agreed with Sir George Wakeman for
15000 l. to which he consented; and under it a Receipt for 5000 l. part of
15000 l. by order of Mr. Coleman, subscribed George Wakeman; which Receipt Mr.
Oats, by comparison of hands, believes to be the same hand which he had so
seen twice before; and that he did not charge Sir George with any positive
thing farther, to the best of his Lordships memory.

Here Sir Robert Sawyer interposed, saying, Yes, my Lord, he says he saw his
Commission.

Whereupon his Lordship proceeded, That indeed he does say, he saw a Commission
in his hands to be Physician-General to the Popish Army, and that he denied ten
thousand, and would have fifteen thousand pounds; the truth his Lordship would
leave with the Jury: and then expressing a just tenderness of shedding Innocent
Blood, and that probabilities of things were truly to be weighed, proceeded to
Mr. Bedloe's, Testimony, which having shortly repeated, he declared, that if
the Jury believed what was sworn by him, then there were two Witnesses against
Wakeman; but his Lordship would leave it with them, hoping his Brothers, if
they remembered any thing farther, would observe it to them.

4. As to Corker, his Lordship observed, That Oats says he saw a Letter under
his hand, (that is, his Name, as his Lordship supposes, was to it) wherein he
consented to raise 6000 l. for carrying on the Plot; but his Lordship does not
find that he proves he knew Corkers hand. And whereas Oats swears Corker was
President of the Benedictines, and therefore his consent necessary, his
Lordship takes notice, That Corker contradicts him therein by two or three
Witnesses, that he was not President, but one Stapleton. And for Oats saying
that Corker excepted against Pickerings killing the King, and that they had
better have chosen another; He did not prove that he was at the Consultation,
but only that he knew of it, and proves no fact but these words: and for what
Bedloe says, it is less than what Oats says, etc.

5. That against Marshal there was rather less than against Corker; That Oats
only says that he consented to raise the 6000 l. and excepted (as Corker did)
against Pickerings being employed to kill the King: and Bedloe says, That he
knew he carried Letters concerning the Plot, and was present at the Consults,
where they were read and answered.

6. Then as to the Prisoners defense, his Lordship summed it up particularly;
as, why Oats did not take them before? why he did not accuse Wakeman further
at the Council, etc. adding, That if it were possible, they had almost undone
themselves in their Defenses, by insisting upon trivial things: but his
Lordship declared he would discharge his Conscience to the Jury, telling them
plainly, That it lay upon the Oaths of those two men, (meaning Dr. Oats and
Mr. Bedloe.) And so having descanted once more upon Mr. Oates's weakness before
the Council, and declared, that what had been proved of that nature by Sir Tho.
Doleman, was to his Lordship no answer; and also that it was well observed,
that Oats was a begging at the Savoy, and how strange it was they should use
him so, when he knew of so great a design on foot; his Lordship concluded.

Upon which Mr. Bedloe said, -- My Lord! my Evidence is not right summed up;
but it appears by the Printed Trial, that there was no farther notice taken
thereof, than by this Answer from his Lordship, -- I know not by what Authority
this man speaks. -- And immediately the Jury withdrew; who after about an
hour's in Consultation, returned into Court, desiring to know if they might not
find the Prisoners guilty of Misprision of Treason; and being told by Mr.
Recorder, (the Judges being gone off) That they must either Convict them of
High Treason, or acquit them, they immediately gave in their Verdict Not
Guilty, of all the Four Prisoners. And the same evening Sir George Wakeman and
Rumley were discharged out of Newgate; but Corker and Marshal, being Priests,
and so liable to another Indictment on that account, were continued in custody.
And Sir George Wakeman, whether conscious of guilt, or apprehending prosecution
for some new matter, we cannot say, did shortly after think fit to get out of
the Land, being furnished (as it is set forth by Mr. Dangerfield; See Colonel
Mansels Narrative, p. 43.) with 500 l. by a very great person, for his
Transportation; and by a Chaloup ordered from Calice, was taken in about six
miles from Dover, and so escaped, and landed at Newport, being ('it is said)
splendidly entertained and caressed by the Papists, especially the Jesuits, and
those under their influence, in all places that he comes to.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the farther Discovery made by Mr. Robert Jennison, and Mr. John Smith a
quondam Priest.

AS this unexpected Acquittal of Sir George Wakeman, and the rest tried with
him, seemed some discouragement to the Kings Evidence; so Protestants in
general were much surprised thereat, and not a few odd rumors and surmises
spread abroad on that occasion: some thought it strange, that the veracity of
Doctor Oats and Mr. Bedloe should be more questioned, or their Testimony less
regarded, now, than heretofore at the many precedent Trials, since no
contradiction, or other sufficient matter, was thought to have been assigned
that might so invalidate their Credit. Others fancyed it an Excess of
goodnature, that when Sir George could not but give himself up as a lost man,
in his own apprehension, from the strength of the proofs against him, that yet
he should meet with so favorable a Verdict. And most people looked upon it as a
riddle, That Coleman should be Hanged for the payment of 5000 l. upon the
account of Treason, and Sir George be acquitted for receiving of him the same
5000 l. for the same Treason. Such were the popular discourses at that time;
for the reason or justice whereof, we shall not engage, but leave them floating
on the surface of opinion, till Time with his discriminating wings shall either
disperse them into oblivion, or hatch them into a better shape of Truth, than
yet they have been made appear in.

This is certain, That the Papists took from hence occasion to insult, to
scatter many insolent Pamphlets up and down, to persuade the world that there
was no Popish Plot, to scandalize the Evidence, and magnify the Innocence of
Whitebread and his Companions; intending it should seem to over-bear so many of
His Majesty's Declarations, the solemn Votes of two Parliaments, the Judgments
of all the Judges of England, and the Oaths of so many Juries of most
substantial Gentlemen and Citizens, with a few flashes of Rhetoric, and the
only Logic of noise and impudence. But in this Career of their Jollity, and
Revival of their hopes, it pleased Providence again to quail and dash their
confidence, by the new and more full discovery made by Mr. Robert Jennison,
beforementioned.

This Gentleman, as he had been bred up a Papist, and zealous in that
persuasion, so he had always approved himself of a devout temper, and regular
Conversation; and was not only descended of an ancient worthy Family, but
within the prospect of a fair Estate; so that he could not be imagined to have
any temptations of malice, envy, or interest, to prompt him to this Discovery,
as will more evidently appear by his generous Conduct in this affair toward
his Elder Brother, but only out of pure unbiassed Conscience, and sense of
Loyalty, he came in a Votary to Truth; being first scandalized at the
unaccountable confidence of his Cosen Ireland, insisting not only at his
Trial, but also at his death, on that which this Gentleman knew to be
absolutely false. Yet on the inducements specified in his Narrative, as the
respect to his Relations, (an own Brother and Kinsman being concerned) and
regard to the credit of the Religion he had been Educated in, and was not yet
weaned from, and some particular reflections on his own safety, he at first
proceeded no farther, (either in his Depositions, or Oath viva voce at Wakemans
Trial, against whom he then was persuaded there would be other sufficient
Evidence) than to disprove such the said Irelands false Allegations of his not
being in Town; yet afterward the stings of Conscience still pricking him to a
farther manifestation of Truth, on the second of August, 1679. before Edmond
Warcupp Esquire, one of His Majesty's Justices of Middlesex, and (to his
immortal Honor) a very vigilant and active Magistrate, in tracing and
detesting this horrid Popish Plot, he made Affidavit of some other particulars:
As, that Ireland, in June 1678. did say in his presence, That it was an easy
matter to poison the King, and that Sir George Wakeman might opportunely do it,
being the Queens Doctor: and that on the nineteenth of August following, the
said Ireland offered to forgive him twenty pound which he had borrowed of him,
(of the St. Omerians money) if he would be assisting to the taking off the
King: which he absolutely refusing to be concerned in, Ireland, inquired if he
did know any Irish Gentlemen that were Papists, and stout and courageous for
that purpose: whereupon, he named Mr. Levallyn, Mr. Tho. Brahall, Mr. Karney,
three Irishmen, and Mr. Wilson an English Papist, all of Gray's Inn, or
harboring thereabouts, (who for some time before this Discovery, for want of
knowledge of their true Names, had been Impeached by others of the Kings
Witnesses, by the general term of the Four Irish Russians hired to Assassinate
his Sacred Majesty at Windsor,) and in a subsequent Affidavit of August 6. he
sets forth, That Ireland desired him to go down with these Four persons to
Windsor, to be assisting in the Murder, the said Ireland approving of them as
fit persons for such an Exploit, being before acquainted with two of them: And
that his Brother Tho. Jennison, at Harcourts Chamber, once told him, That if C.
R. would not be R. C. he should not long be C. R. etc.

This Mr. Jennison likewise in such his Narrative (well worthy of perusal) sets
forth the passionate Letters from his Brother and other Relations, whereby they
endeavored to deter or inveigle him from declaring the Truth in these matters;
for the better understanding whereof, the Reader is to be informed, that Thomas
Jennison his elder Brother was a Jesuit, and upon Mr. Oates's information, at
the first Discovery, secured in Newgate. But so far was this his generous
Brother from having any by-ends of advantage, as to the Inheritance of his
Fathers Estate, which is considerable, and to which he was next Heir after his
Brother, who had so incapacitated himself, That he would not deliver in such
his Information, till he had obtained a promise from the Lords of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council, of a Pardon to be extended to his said Brother,
(though continuing obstinate) thereby setting him again Rectus in Curia, As
also for his other Relations. By which he has for ever silenced and stopped the
mouths of Popish slanderers, who would calumniate him, as designing to defeat
his Brother of the Inheritance, and advancing his own Interest. Though true it
is, by the Providence of God his said Brother is since deceased of a natural
death in Prison, and thereby the Right justly devolved to him.

This Discovery of young Mr. Jennison, had not only a blessed effect on his
aged Father, who thereby, and by several other previous discourses he had
heard, was convinced of the Traitorous Popish Design, and consequently induced
to abandon such a bloody vile Religion; but also influenced one Mr. John Smith,
heretofore a Secular Priest retaining to that Family; if rather we ought not to
say, that by some relation he had heard from the said young Mr. Jennison, of
discourses that had passed between Ireland and him, the said Mr. Smith were not
first alarmed, and grown apprehensive of the Hellish Plot; and thereupon, as a
local Subject, was not a little instrumental to incline him the said young Mr.
Jennison to a candid delaration of the truth of what he knew thereof. For the
said Mr. Smith has since published an excellent Treatise, (dedicated to the
Kings most Excellent Majesty) giving an account of the Inconsistency of the
Popish Principles with the Peace of all States, especially their
destructiveness to Protestant Kingdoms, the encouragements of this Popish
Design at this time against England, the progress they had made in it, the
reasons of their endeavoring the death of His Majesty, and a vindication of
the justice on those Traitors already Executed.

Particularly, by an Affidavit taken the eighth of September, 1679. before the
pre-named Justice Warcup, he corroborates the Testimony of the said Mr.
Jennison junior, as to his seeing Ireland in London at the time
beforementioned; for that soon after, viz. in September, he going into the
North, young Mr. Jennison did relate the same, and acquainted them therewith at
his Fathers house; and likewise of so much of the said Irelands discourses to
him, touching taking off the King, etc. as gave them cause to believe, that
there was a Jesuitical Plot, the apprehension whereof, put Loyal old Mr.
Jennison at that time into a great passion, etc.

He likewise in his Narrative, p. 23. sets forth, That he being not long since
at Rome, heard the Jesuits affirm, That the Pope had power to depose Kings; and
that it was lawful, nay meritorious to kill any Prince or person
Excommunicated, and declared an Heretic; and that he, (being then to return to
England) ought not to pay Obedience to any Heretical or Excommunicated Prince;
and that Father Anderton, Father Campian, and Father Green, did then and there
(as likewise Abbot Montague at Paris) assure him there would suddenly be great
alterations in Church and State in England; and that there was but one man in
the way (meaning the King) who might soon be removed; and that they were
assured from the most eminent persons of this Nation, That their Religion
should be Established again here, in as great glory as at any time heretofore;
and whoever opposed it, should be removed. And that particularly they bottomed
their hopes on the Duke of York's being a Papist; who they declared was brought
over by the Jesuits, and that they had the greatest influence over him.

And p. 30. as a pregnant Circumstantial Evidence of the Plot, he sets forth an
universal collection of Money made to his knowledge, though he discouraged it,
amongst the Papists, under pretense of repairing Doway College, but so
general, and in such large sums, (as twenty pound, and ten pound a man) that it
was apparent to be for the carrying on some greater design, etc.

Furthermore, as Mr. Jennison in his Narrative has answered all Objections, as
why he did not come in sooner, etc. so it thereby appears, that he has
reserved some farther particularities to be yet discovered in time convenient.
In the interim, upon such his information, his Majesty was graciously pleased
to issue forth his Royal Proclamation, commanding the before-named Four Irish
Gentlemen (or rather Russians) to render themselves, and proposing rewards to
any that shall seize them or any of them; but they are fled, or abscond; a
shrewd Argument of their guilt, and the truth of his information; so that at
the time of writing hereof, there was none of them come in or apprehended.

CHAP. XXIII.
The endeavors of the Papists to cast the Guilt of their Plot on the
Protestants; and the Providential Discovery of such their Design in several
Particulars. An Account of the Rebellion in Scotland; The Attempt on Colonel
Mansel, etc.

THat it was part of the Original Popish Plot, when they had Murdered the King,
to cast the odium thereof on the Dissenters from the Church of England, thereby
at once to have shifted off the scandal of the horrid Treason from their own
Party, and heated the Episcopists with a colorable pretense to have fallen
upon, and with their help to have destroyed all that they should think fit to
call Presbyterians or Fanatics, (under which ignominious Titles the soundest
Protestants and most regular Sons of the Established Church should at last have
suffered) is apparent from what we have recited of Doctor Oates's Depositions
and Master Dugdale's Testimony. Which is no more than what their Predecessors
intended: For even their Gunpowder-Plot, if it had succeeded, was to have been
charged on the then Puritans, as the famous Thuanus in his History testifies.
Now in order to plaining the way for this suggestion, in the present Case, it
must be noted, that some time before the first Discovery of the Plot (which was
about August 1678, as aforesaid) the Conspirators had fixed a groundless
Accusation on one Mr. Claypool, who though a Gentleman of a most innocent
peaceable Deportment, and far enough from intermeddliug with Intrigues of
State, having for many years wound himself up in a private Recess, devoted to
Books and Study, yet he having formerly been Married to a Daughter of the
quondam Protector Cromwell, they fancied from the prejudice of that Alliance, he
might be a person fit for them to design upon, and make him a property for
Suspicions. Having therefore Charged him with high Crimes in general against
the Government, they caused him to be clapped up in the Tower; And had not the
Hand of Heaven soon after confounded their measures, would no doubt have
prosecuted him by suborned Witnesses: But being so happily intercepted, after a
long Durance, and no particular Crime chargeable, he obtained his Liberty.

About the same time also they endeavored to Trepan an eminent worthy Citizen
of London, under pretense of doing a kindness for an unknown Gentleman, viz. To
convey certain Letters to be left with him, to a place beyond the Seas; but he
discreetly, mistrusting the Project, opened one of them in presence of
substantial Witnesses; and finding therein Expressions of a dangerous nature,
communicated the same to a Magistrate, and thereby frustrated their devilish
Design. Nor is it to be forgot, that near the same time there were certain
riotous persons, who with Horse and Arms were said to come out of Scotland,
(represented for Presbyterians flying from the Justice of that Kingdom)
committing some Violences in the Marches of England, of whom a dreadful Account
was published in the Gazette; but no more Tidings heard either of the Men, or
the matter.

These were some of their specious Preparatives, that whenever they should
strike the Accursed Blow, their Clamours against the Fanatics might appear
credible. And though their Plot in general was soon after so Miraculously
discovered, and the reality thereof confirmed, as well by their Murder of Sir
Edmund-bury Godfrey, as by several fresh Evidence that came in; yet they
resolved still to push on the same Contrivance. Nor had they indeed any way to
amuse the People, startle Authority, and divert just Prosecution against
themselves, other than by starting a fresh scent, and raising imaginary
Jealousies.

But such was the peaceable Loyal temper of people in general in England, that
they could not yet hope to brand them with any such Imputation. Toward the
North therefore they must plant their Engines, Scotland must be made the Scene
to begin the Tragedy. And this too Doctor Oats (if you remember) had before
set forth, and told us, what and how many Jesuitical Instruments (those common
Boutefeus and Nursers of Rebellion) had thither been delegated and fet on work.

Under what Circumstances that Kingdom had lain for some years, is too well
known to need here a Repetition: that Oppression may make wise men mad, is
attested by the wisest of Princes; yet far be it from us to patronize or
palliate Rebellion on any pretext.

The first Overt act was the Murder of Doctor Sharp Archbishop of St. Andrews
in his Coach on the Road, May 3. 1679. by about a dozen Assassinates, attended
with such extraordinary horrid and barbarous Circumstances, that seemed to
intimate something of a further Improvement, as well as present Malice; or as
if there had been a Design to eclipse the Villainy of the Popish Assassination
on Sir Edmondb. Godfrey, by this more inhumane one committed by supposed
Protestants. It Is certain the blame was laid upon the Whiggs or Nonconformists
there, for which there wanted not specious Reasons: But Relations no less
credible have given an Account, that the principal Murderer acted merely on
private Revenge for personal Injuries; and it is not impossible, that a person
of such bad Principles might be egged on to so villainous a Barbarity by
insinuating Jesuits, who like their Father the Devil take the advantage of men's
Passions, and by Temptations improve their Animosities to the perpetration of
the blackest Crimes.

The next News was of an Insurrection in the West of Scotland, May 29, 1679.
attended with a Declaration and other Insolences of those Rebels, equally
extravagant and detestable. To quell which, his Grace the Gallant Duke of
Monmouth, June the 15th, sets forward toward Scotland, and with great
Expedition Joining and Heading the Royal Plost, soon discomfited the Rebels at
Bothwel-bridge, and returned Victorious. victorious.] That the Papists or some
of their well-willers, at least by their Counsel and contrivances, had an hand
in fomenting these disturbances, is more than probable, as well for the
preparations they had made for it, as aforesaid, as for that nothing at this
juncture could make more for their Interest, to which they do not use to be
wanting; for hereby they startled the Government, diverted the general odium
from themselves, and notably colored their clamours against the Presbyterians.
Besides, it is not unlikely, that some who were justly apprehensive of being
called in question about that time, for their Maladministration of Affairs in
that Kingdom, might hope to bury the memory of their past severities, or
justify them as necessary Policies, by ostentation of this Rebellion; the more
liable to be suspected for a Contrivance, for that it was not only not joined
in, but generally dis-own'd and detested by the Dissenters both in Scotland;
and England; and for that their Horse, when the Duke came to engage them, so
soon betook them to flight; as if they had only designed to cajole in these
miserable desperado's of the Infantry into destruction. However, since his
Grace the Duke of Monmouth behaved himself with so much Zeal, Conduct, and
Courage in that Action, it is hard to measure the Confidence of the Popish
Conspirators, that they should hope, so soon after, to set him up for a General
of Rebellion in England, over a like pretended Faction, as he had but now
routed and dissipated in Scotland; and whereof several inferior promoters, and
active instruments therein, have since suffered Death, Banishment, and other
punishments, according to the Laws of that Kingdom.

And now Affairs sleeping as it were for a while, the old Enemy takes advantage
of that opportunity, industriously to sow his Tares, by spreading swarms of
virulent Libels, (of which we shall give you a more particular account in the
next Chapter, against the Protestant Interest, and the Reputation of the Kings
Evidence; who had they not been wonderfully supported by the hand of God, the
prayers of good men, and their own natural courage, must certainly have sunk,
and been overwhelmed with the various discouragements and mountains of Lies
and slanders daily cast upon them. But at last, the Conspirators finding that
all the Interest they had made for carrying Elections for their Tooth of
Members to serve in the new Parliament summoned to sit the seventeenth of
October, could not prevail, but that generally throughout the Nation, men of
approved Loyalty and Integrity to the Protestant Religion, and weal of the
Public, had (notwithanding all their stickling, and the vain efforts of a
multitude of Laodicean Chemarims) been chosen for that weighty Trust; and
particularly reflecting how shamefully they had been baffled in the Choice for
the City of London, October. the 7th, they were now for stifling that Child,
which before they would have mis-begot; and improved all their endeavors, by a
certain White-Powder, that makes no noise, (probably some new French Invention)
to blow up the approaching Parliament, which yet it is hoped, by the blessing of
God and His Majesty's Favor, will continue sitting so long, as may enable it,
to Countermine all their Plots, and bring the Traitors, as well Cedars as
Shrubs, to condign punishment, so as to secure His Majesty's Life from their
villainous attempts for the future, and settle the Protestant Religion and
Property on a firm and durable Basis.

In the mean time, viz. on the second of September, (the Anniversary Fast for
the never-to-beforgotten Burning of London by Popish Treachery) and (as it is
said) about Two of the clock in the morning, his Royal Highness the Duke of
York arrived here from Flanders, and forthwith went to the King, who then, to
the great grief and affliction of all his good Subjects, was very Ill at
Windsor. The Dukes coming, (as was then published by Authority in the Gazet)
was contrary to expectation, and therefore he acquainted His Majesty, That
hearing of His Majesty's Indisposition, he thought he could do no less than to
come to wait on him, and see how he did; adding, That he was ready as soon as
His Majesty pleased, to depart for Flanders, or any other part of the world
that His Majesty should appoint.

And now the Popish Conspirators, those Rooks in policy, resolving to put the
great Game upon us, began notably to shuffle the Cards; a Proclamation was
published, signifying, That the Parliament which was to Convene on the
seventeenth of October, should thence be Prorogued till the thirtieth of the
same Month. Outcries and Alarums from Pulpit, and Press, and Coffee-houses,
were every where heard against the Presbyterians, etc the dangers the
Government was in from a Fanatical Faction; the grounds and broachers whereof,
we shall soon acquaint you with: though it is possible some innocent zealous
Protestants might be inveigled in so far, as to believe the thing real, and
might, far from any ill design, join in, and promote the common clamor.

And now, to the great surprise and grief of the people, his Grace the Duke of
Monmouth fell under the Kings disfavour, and was commanded to withdraw himself
out of His Majesty's Dominions; the occasion whereof was variously reported:
nor dare we presume to pry into the Cabinet of State so far, as to conjecture
the reasons; though some subsequent Discoveries of Transactions at that instant
on the wheel, persuaded many, That the cloud which Eclipsed this beloved
Prince, and averted for the present the kind Rays of His most gracious Majesty
from him, proceeded originally from putrid Exhalations, and the venomous breath
of Calumny whispered abroad by his Enemies, thereby to remove him; hoping that
by shaking his Interest thus in the Royal favor, they might the better utterly
ruin him, by getting credit to those false and horrid suggestions which they
were shortly after to advance against him, as Generalissimo of a Protestant
Rebellion, etc. However, his Grace most obediently departed, and about the
twenty fourth of September went over into Holland.

His Royal Highness the Duke of York immediately after returned to Flanders,
and obtained leave to go from thence and reside in Scotland: in order to which,
he arrived here again, on Sunday the twelfth of October, (a day the last year
notorious, whence some superstitious people would needs make a noise of it;
though far be it from any man of sense, to countenance any such ridiculous, as
well as bold and unbecoming observations.) On the twenty first of October, his
Royal Highness was invited to Dine at the Annual Feast of the Artillery-Company
at Merchant-Tailors Hall; most of the Stewards being persons of Honor, or
great at Court. His Highness came attended with his Guards, and there did
appear above an hundred Artillery-men, (the number belonging to that Society
being said to be in all between five and six hundred) besides such as on this
occasion came in with Tickets bought at underrates, or given gratis; the Right
Honorable the then Lord Mayor was there likewise present.

Some days before this, the Right Honorable the Earl of Shaftesbury was
removed from his place of President of the Council; and on Friday the
seventeenth of October, a competent number of the Members of Parliament being
met, they were by a Commission Prorogued, (not to the thirtieth of the same
Month, according to the beforementioned Proclamation, but) to the twenty sixth
day of January next.

The Conspirators had now many Irons in the fire; they were come to the fifth
Act; and as their Scenes were varions, so they required Expedition too. And
indeed, they made more have than good speed; for just when they were ready to
discharge all their devices in order upon us, they one after another untimely
took fire, and went off like so many Squibs and Crackers (blessed be God)
without doing any Execution, except detecting more evidently their villainous
cruelties and Treasons, and warning us the better against them for the future.

1. They had for some time carried on an Intrigue to corrupt Mr. Stephen
Dugdale, (one of the Kings material Witnesses) that he might for large Sums of
Money, which they offered him, retract and disown the Testimony he had already
given, and desist from appearing against any of them for the future. One Mrs.
Price, with whom Mr. Dugdale had been long acquainted, and one Mr. Tasbrough,
were the Instruments employed to work him about; who seemed to hearken to their
Overtures, that he might fadom the bottom of their drift; which was, That the
said Mr. Dugdale should sign and seal such a Paper of Recantation as they had
dictated or drawn, being (as it has been published) of the tenor or purport
following, viz.

Being touched with a true remorse of Conscience, and an hearty sorrow for the
great evil I have done, in appearing as a Witness against the Catholics, and
there speaking that which in my own Conscience I know to be far from the Truth;
I think my self bound in duty to God, to Men, and for the safety of my own
Soul, to make true acknowledgment how I was drawn into these wicked actions:
but being well satisfied, that I shall create my self many powerful Enemies
upon that account, I have retired my self to a place of safety, where I will
with my own hand discover the great wrong that has been done the Catholics,
and I hope it may gain belief. I do likewise protest before Almighty God, that
I have no motive to induce me to this Confession, but a true Repentance for the
mischiefs that I have done, and do hope that God Almighty will forgive me. But
for all this Protestation, they were to give him a great sum of money in hand,
and so he was to go beyond the Seas till the noise was over, and then they
promised him he should have his Pardon, further reward, etc. And when he
questioned how he should be sure of the Money upon Sealing, they proposed an
Ambassador for Security. But that being not approved of, but he still delaying
them with studied Exceptions and Evasions, they began to suspect that he never
intended to close with them, but rather, as Mr. Bedloe had served Reading,
discover them. Hereupon, they make a complaint first against Mr. Dugdale, and
what wrongs Catholics suffered by the Evidence of such Witnesses as for a sum
of Money would deny all that they had sworn, and run away. But Mr. Dugdale, to
prevent this snare, had all along communicated the passages that had been
between them, to several worthy persons, Justices and others whom he could
confide in, who attested the same, and that he proceeded therein not without
their directions, to discover the foul practices and designs of these Popish
Tamperers: So that on a fair hearing before the Council, he was not only
acquitted with credit, but the said Price and Tasborough sent to Goal, whom he
did endeavor to bring to Trial the last Michaelmass Term, for the said grand
misdemeanour, (if it be no worse) but could not effect the same, so that at
last they were Bailed out; but will, it is hoped, the next Term be brought to
Justice.

This Discovery, though not a little scandalous to the Popish Faction, was
immediately followed with another much more considerable. Such a long Web of
Treason, Murder, Perjury, and Cruelty toward many thousands of innocent
Protestants, as scarce any History can parallel, for it exceeded both the
Parisian and Irish Massacres; for in those, men might make some kind of
defense, at least were only killed, and left to the pity of posterity; but
this Plot was to blast the Fame, taint the Blood, and render the Innocent for
ever odious, by a charge of black Treasons, and designed Rebellion, which they
never so much as dreamed of, to be carried on by false accusations and suborned
Witnesses; no cruelty being so intolerable, as that which is acted under
pretense of Justice, and accompanied with the abused Formalities of the Law.

The first accident that brought this Hellish Conspiracy to light, was one Mr.
Tho. Dangerfields being discovered to have planted several forged Treasonable
Letters, with Catalogues of Names, etc. in the Lodgings of Colonel Roderigo
Mansel, in Ax-yard Westminster; concerning which, and the preparatory
circumstances of the whole Intrigue, there being two large and satisfactory
Narratives already published, the one by the said Colonel, the other written by
the said Mr. Dangerfield himself; we shall only extract from thence some of
the most material passages, such as will be necessary for completing this our
Compendious History, and giving the Reader a general Scheme of the horrid
Contrivance, referring the more curious to those Relations at large.

1. The sum of the Intrigue was, That seeing their former Popish Plot against
His Majesty's Person and Government, and the Protestant Religion, was
notoriously detected, and all their attempts to baffle or stifle the Kings
Evidence frustrated, they resolved upon coining a new pretended Plot, which
should be charged on the Presbyterians by name, but in truth involve the most
zealous and active Protestant Nobility, Gentry, etc. throughout the Nation;
which being fortified with bold Perjuries, and specious pretenses, might gain
credit; and thereby they being destroyed, as a sacrifice to Justice, it might
seem probable that the last years Plot was only their malicious contrivance
against the Catholics, who would then appear the Kings best Subjects; and
having so crushed their Enemies, might with safety, and almost without
opposition, proceed in their former Plot to subvert the Government, etc. See
Col. Man's. Narrative, fol. 2.

2. Amongst other Instruments for this purpose, they made choice of this Mr.
Dangerfield, as one professing the Roman Catholic Religion, and whose
extravagant courses, and desperate condition, (being a Prisoner in Newgate) had
rendered him fit to serve them therein.

3. To him Mistress Celier, Wife of a French Merchant (a great crony of the
Lady Powis, and at whose House the beforementioned Witnesses from St. Omers
had been harbored) repairs, and after some petty Trials of his parts, procured
his Liberty, and paid his Fees. But being clapped up immediately after for Debt,
removed him into the King's Bench, and there for a considerable time allowed him
Twenty shillings a week. Mr. Dang. Narrative, fol. 2 and 3.

4. There he was employed to Trepan one Stroud, and get something out of him
against Mr. Bedloe. And to that purpose, was to drink him hard, and allowed by
two Priests to be drunk on the same day he had received the Sacrament, since it
was for the good of the Cause. He also gave Stroud Opium to lay him to sleep,
by advice of Mrs. Celier, the Priests, Nevil, etc. but without any great
advantage. Idem, fol. 5. And now Mrs. Celier sends for the time of his
Nativity, which he sent her.

5. Having compounded his Debts, (which amounted to near seven hundred pound)
Mrs. Celier furnished him with money to discharge them; so he left the Kings
Bench, is brought acquainted with the Lady Powis, who promises to make him a
Fortune, and takes a Lodging for him in Drury Lane, employs him to get Priests
out of Prison, sends him to the Lord Castlemain, who likes him well, etc. fol.
7, 8.

6. He is sent with a Packet to one Mrs. Jean, at Peterley in Buckinghamshire,
whom he finds indeed to be a Priest, and from him brings up Papers to the Lady
Powis, being the groundwork of the New-Plot; That Pamphlets must be writ, and
persons employed at Coffee-houses to rail against the Presbyterians, etc. p. 10.

7. He is employed to Tutor the St. Omer-youths under the Lord Castlemain, who
was their grand Instructor. He takes Notes at the Five Jesuits Trials, carries
them to the Lords in the Tower, who encourage him to write Pamphlets, and
promise to reward him; and thenceforth he was allowed three pound a week,
besides Diet, fol. 12.

8. Castlemain employs him to get Knox and Lane out of the Gate House, who were
to swear against Oats; and having obtained Lane's liberty, he was kept
privately at Powis-house. Here they contrive to Iudict Mr. Oats, first of
Perjury, and then of Buggery.

9. The Lords order him to go to Coffee-houses, particularly Farrs, Man's,
Garraways, Jonathans, etc. and disperse Pamphlets, as the Reflections on the
Earl of Danby, written by Nevil, etc. [This is that Nevil whom we mentioned
before in this History for his Poetical Prayer to the Ghost of St. Coleman.] At
Wakemans Trial, Dangerfield takes Notes, and received from Nevil diverse Papers
and Letters to transcribe; amongst which were forty Lists of Names, each
containing above 800 Names. These were privately to be left by their Agents
throughout England in the Houses of Nonformists or other Protestants; and then
search being made on other pretenses, when these dangerous Papers were found,
the persons mentioned would be seized for Treason. Another time he Transcribed
twenty seven such Letters, and sent them to the Tower. And one Mr. Holder, his
R. H. Auditor at Brussels, was ordered to get diverse Coats of Arms cut there on
Seals, the Impressions having been taken off the Wax of Gentlemen's Letters;
which was to make the Treasonable forged Letters more authentic.

10. About the beginning of August, lodging at Mrs. Celiers house, he is sent
for to the Tower, where the Lord Arundel, in the presence of the Lord Powis,
after other discourses, asked him, if for a good reward he would venture to kill
the King, mentioning 2000 l. But Dangerfield blushing at such a horrid motion,
Powis put it off, and then proposed 500 l. if he would kill the Lord
Shaftesbury; which he promised to undertake: whereupon they told him of one
Rigaut a Virginia-Merchant, that should advise with him about it, and secure
the 500 l. And the next day waiting on the Lord Castlemain, who was then
writing the Compendium, he appeared much enraged, saying, Why were you so
unwilling to do what you were taken out of Prison for? Whereupon, Dangerfield
made have away; but Celier excused my Lords passion to him. And Sharp a Priest,
after Confession and the Sacrament, justified to him, That he might kill his
King, if he were first Excommunicated and Condemned by the Church, fol. 23.

11. That the Countess of Powis ordered him to acquaint the Lord Peterborough,
that Sir Robert Peyton would meet him at Gadburies (the Astrologers) house;
which he did, and also Gadbury, who then seemed very angry, and gave the
reason, because the said Dangerfield refused to kill the King; adding, that he
had Calculated his Nativity, and found him a person fit for that Enterprise,
and that he might come off with safety, fol. 25, 26. In pursuance of this
Assignation, the the L. P. and Sir R. P. met, and (as the Lady Powis told
Dangerfield) agreed well; and Sir R. declared he would come into the Kings
Service to all purposes, and afterward met the Duke once or twice, and engaged
to employ all his Interest for his Highnesses service.

12. That the Countess of Powis dictated to him Remarks of four Clubs in the
Town, and the Names of several persons; which Paper was afterward found in the
Meal-tub, (of which we shall by and by give a farther account.) And by the
means of the Lord Peterborough, he was introduced to the Duke of York, and
acquainted him with this Presbyterian Plot; who afterward giving him Twenty
Guineys with his own hand, brought him to the King, having received
Instructions what to say from the Lady Powis, as to charging the Lord Gray,
Lord Howard of Escrick, Duke of Monmouth, Duke of Buckingham, Sir Will. Waller,
etc. which he did so well, that he thought then His Majesty believed him, being
pleased to order him forty pound; which he received, fol. 35. And the more to
possess his Majesty, he sent him a Letter to New Market, signifying he had
discovered a great Correspondence between the Presbyterians and the Dutch, fol.
36.

13. That pursuant to his undertaking with the Lords, he went twice to Murder
the Earl of Shaftesbury, armed with a short French Dagger given him by Mrs.
Celier, (who said there had been three of them left her by Rigaut) pretending
business, as directed by Celier and the Lady Powis; but was both times
prevented by peoples coming, and his own guilty fears; for which the Countess
called him Coward, and Mrs. Celier said, I will go, and let the world know,
that some of our Sex are brave and more daring than the men; whereupon she
went, pretending business, but was prevented of an opportunity.

14. Now the Countess put him on enquiring out Col. Mansels Lodgings, delivered
him Papers to plant there; which, under pretense of taking Lodgings in the same
House, and seeing all the Rooms, he pined behind the Beds-head; and then having
informed two Officers of theCustom-house to come there to search for Prohibited
Goods of Two thousand pound value, on Wednesday the twenty second of October,
in the Colonels absence they came; and he and one Bedford that lay with him the
night before, went in with them, who finding nothing, he directed them to
remove the Bed, and at last going himself behind it, discovered the Papers; and
(as the Devil would have it, or rather the providence of Almighty God to detect
the villainy) before they had well looked into any of them, cried out, -- Here is
Treason. The Officers carried the Papers to the Custom-house, which were
ordered to be returned; but the Colonel in the mean time having notice, and
that such a man (who then, and for some time before, had gone sometimes by the
name of Thomas, and sometimes Willoughby) had been concerned in the matter,
strictly enquiring after him, found he lay at Mrs. Celiers House, and there
apprehended him; and on the twenty third of October brought him before the
Council, where accidentally he met with and abused one Mr. d'Oiley o^ the
Tower, that had formerly prosecuted him (...) uttering false Guineys; who much
helped to give an account of his former ill conversation; yet he persisted
stiffly in charging Mansel, and justifying his own innocence: but on hearing all
circumstances, attested by the Searchers and other Witnesses produced by
Colonel Mansel, it apppearing that the Papers were laid by Dangerfield in the
Colonels Chamber, out of a malicious design, he was committed to a Messenger;
whereupon he writ a Note to acquaint the Lady Powis therewith, to be sent by
his boy: but the Messenger would needs see it, and thereby the Correspondence
between them was discovered.

15. The twenty seventh of October, Dangerfield was committed to Newgate by the
Council, on a full hearing, though he had endeavored all he could to defend
himself, by certain notable instructions received from the Lady Powis in the
Stone-gallery in Whitehall, which he particularly sets forth, fol. 49.

16. On the twenty ninth of October, Sir William Waller (to whose indefatigable
pains and courage this Nation and the Protestant Religion in general, under
God, in an high measure, owes its preservation) searching Celiers House, most
providentially found hid in a Meal-tub the Paperbook tied with red ribbons,
containing the Model of this designed Plot against the Protestants, the matter
whereof was dictated by the Lady Powis, (the grand Solliciness from the Lords
in the Tower) as aforesaid, and proved by her maid to be hid there by her
order. It purported to be only Remarks or chief Heads of things and persons to
be charged. As (amongst the rest there were named) the Lords Hallifax,
Shaftsbury, Radnor, (now President of his Majesty's Privy-Councel) Essex,
Wharton, the Duke of Buckingham, and others, to be of Counsel in this pretended
Conspiracy; the Duke of Monmouth General; the Lord Gray, Lord Gerard and his
Son, and Sir Tho. Armstrong, Lieutenant Generals in this Rebellious Army; Sir
William Waller and others Major-Generals, Colonel Mansel
Quarter-Master-General. To which was added Lists of particular, persons usually
meeting at four principal Clubs about the Town, too tedious here to repeat.

17. In the Papers foisted into Col. Mansels Chamber, there were likewise long
Lists of Names that were to be rendered obnoxious, to this present Plot; but no
particular Copy or Account can thereof be given; the Original Papers being so
lodged, that the same are not easily procurable, till Authority shall think fit
to divulge them. -- See Col. Mansels Nar. fol. 104.

18. Mr. Dangerfield, by this last Discovery at Mrs. Celiers, finding himself
trapt, had not the confidence to stand out longer, but on the last of October
made application to the Right Honorable Sir Robert Clayton Lord Mayor; before
whom, and other persons of Quality, he made a candid Confession on Oath,
transmitted the next day to His Majesty and the Council. Whereupon, and on
farther Examination of the several persons concerned, the Earl of Castlemain
was Committed to the Tower, (whence he had not long since been Bayled, as
having been charged by Doctor Oats on the former Popish Plot) Mrs. Celier and
Mr. Rigaut to Newgate, and Mr. Gadbury the Almanack-maker, (who though bred a
Tailor, has for some years written himself Physician to the Queens most
Excellent Majesty; and formerly published a Figure, which he called his
Majesty's Nativity, in Print, and constantly of late in his Calendar has left
out the Gunpowder-Treason-day) to the Gate House. And on the fourth of
November, the Lady Powis being farther Examined, and diverse notable
Circumstances which she had denied, being proved against her by other persons,
(besides Mr. Dangerfield) she was by order of the Board, committed to the Tower
for High Treason in conspiring the death of the King. And the said Dormer,
formerly Committed on suspicion of being a Priest, and Bailed, being found
discoursing with her in the Lobby, was upon other new matter charged on him by
Doctor Oats, taken into custody. The Lord Castlemain twice in Michaelmass-Term
brought his Habeas Corpus, to be Bayled in the Kings Bench; but was told by the
Judges of that Court, that though formerly when there was but one witness
against him, they had afforded it him, yet having made such ill use of his
Liberty, and being now charged directly by two Witnesses for High Treason, they
could not allow it; and so was re-manded to the Tower.

By this whole contrivance, it most evidently appears, that though the Popish
outcries and clamours ran only upon the Presbyterians and Fanatics, yet
their aim was to ruin all that were true Protestants, or honest Assertors of
the Liberties and Property of the Subject. As their naming his Grace the Duke
of Monmouth, the Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Essex, the Earl of Radnor,
(late Lord Roberts) the Lord Hallifax, etc. all persons of untainted Loyalty,
and far from Presbyterian or Fanatical Principles; and yet these they had
designed for destruction, as the Chiefs of this new pretended Conspiracy. Nor
indeed can there be assigned above two or three in all their long forged List,
that can with any color of reason, or usual acceptance of the word, be called
Presbyterians.

SECT. 2.
But Abyssus Abyssum invocat, one Popish villainy treads on the heels of
another. There happened now likewise, a yet farther detection of their
desperate wickedness, that would violate all rules of Morality and Laws both
Humane or Divine, to wreck their implacable malice on Dr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe,
and render them odious, if it were possible, to the people, and thereby
depreciate their Evidence. Of this kind was their horrid Conspiracy to charge
them both with a malicious Contrivance against the Earl of Danby the late
Treasurer, and particularly Mr. Oats with an attempt of Sodomy. To which
purpose Will. Osborne and John Lane, formerly Servants to Dr. Oats, were
suborned and managed by Tho. Knox (late Servant to the Lord Dumblain, Son to
the said Earl of Danby) but the Design laid and directed from time to time by
wiser heads; concerning which there has already a perfect Account been emitted
into the world by the appointment of Dr. Oats. And also the Trials of the said
Knox and Lane at the King's Bench Bar, November. 25. 1679. (where they were
Convicted) are published by Authority, where the Curious may receive further
satisfaction: and therefore we shall only very briefly Epitomize some material
matters of Fact; which to perform intelligibly, we must look back for some
time. For this hopeful Project had been long a brewing, and had been once
mortified before' though now crawling toward a Resurrection; it was Doomed to
the second Death, which in the language of Divines is to say, That it was
damned, as the malicious Contrivers are like to be, without sincere Repentance.

1. About April, 1679. Osborne and Lane being for several Misdemeanors turned
out of Dr. Oates's Service, Knox (so qualified as you have heard) insinuates
into their acquaintance, and working upon their necessities, engages them in
the Design; which to render more plausible, he dictates four several Letters
from them to himself, (as if they first moved him to it) wherein pretending
great trouble of mind for being privy to certain ill Designs the Dr. and Mr.
Bedloe had against the Earl of Danby, etc. they desire him to put them into a
way to discharge forsooth their Consciences by a Discovery. These Letters were
by one of them wrote from Knox's mouth, and then very formally sent to him. See
the Narrative, p. 5, and 6.

2. Knox hereupon, after several meetings with them, prepares an Information,
setting forth how he came by this Intelligence, and what they had declared to
him. Another Information is likewise drawn in the names of Osborne and Lane,
setting forth several horrid expressions that Dr. Oats should use against his
Sacred Majesty and other Persons of Quality (thereby to render him odious to
the Court) so offensive to Christian ears, and abominably scandalous, as not
fit here to be unnecessarily recited. A third Information they had ready, under
Osborne's hand, attesting a supposed Discourse that he heard between Dr. Oats
and Mr. Bedloe, contriving how to destroy the Earl of Danby; that Mr. Bedloe
should say, he had invented a way, viz. To swear that the Earl offered him
Money to go beyond the Seas, and thereby quash his Evidence; which Dr. Oats
should approve of, saying, It was the only or most dexterous course, etc. Other
several Informations from Lane and Osborne, That Dr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe
should persuade them to carry on an Intrigue with some of the Lord Treasurers
Servants, and get Money of them, by telling them Lies, wherein the said Dr.
Oats and Mr. Bedloe would instruct them, and make such use thereof as should
destroy the said Lord. And yet another Information of Lane's, deposing, That
about the 24th or 25th of March last, Dr. Oats having sent all the rest of his
Servants to the Chapel, did make an attempt to commit Sodomy with him: And
this Information was some time after Sworn before Sir James Butler. But though
somewhat subtlely contrived, to cast an Odium on the Doctor, and yet save the
Informant from the Gallows, he alleging that it was only an attempt, and the
perpetration thereof prevented by the noise of a Woman sweeping the next
Chamber: yet there are in it so many incredible Circumstances, that had the
Witness been of some Credit, and the Doctor of none, yet no man of sense could
have entertained such a villainous nonsensical Story. But not only the Law has
since vindicated that worthy person from this odious Scandal, but the Informer
himself has voluntarily confessed both the utter falsity thereof, and the
Instigations that tempted him to allege it. -- The true Copies of all these
Informations which they had cut out in readiness, when ever they should think
fit to make use of them, see in the before-recited Narrative, p. 7, 8, 9, etc.

3. Their Tackling being thus prepared, the Earl of Danby depended so much on
the success, that (if we may believe the Oaths of the Conspirators) it was
chiefly on that Confidence, that he surrendered himself to the Usher of the
bla-Rod, after he had for a considerable time absconded: And the very same day,
Knox made Osborne and Lane swear again to stand to what he had taught them. But
Dr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe having some notice of the contrivance against them,
all three of the said Instruments were soon after taken into Custody: And being
Examined before a Committee of Lords, they at first would acknowledge very
little; but after some time, Lane voluntarily set forth upon his Oath, how Knox
had tampered both with him and Osborne; instructed them what they should Swear
against Oats and Bedloe, and for the Lord Treasurer promised them Rewards;
dropped a Guinney which Osborne took up, because they should not be able to say,
if questioned, he had given them any Money: How he paid Reckonings and provided
Lodgings for them, where he paid all charges for Diet, etc. And swore them to
secrecy; assuring them, if either of them made a Discovery, they should be
killed. And that since he was in Prison, a Gentlewoman (who by Mr.
Dangerfield's Depositions seems to be Mrs. ^elier) came to the Prison, and sent
him word that he should stick to Mr. Knox; and whatever Money he required, he
should have it, though it were a Thousand Pounds.

About the same time, viz. 29 April, 1679. Osborne by Order of the said
Committee being Examined, did upon his Oath deny he ever heard any such
discourse between Mr. Oats and Bedloe about destroying the Treasurer; nor any
undecent words from Mr. Oats touching his Majesty, the Queen, or Mr.
Chessinch, etc. but Deposes, that Knox promised him, If he would swear such
things, he should have enough to maintain him with his Footboy: and sets forth
the dictating of the said intended Depositions or Informations by Knox, and
that they are of the Examinants writing from his mouth; and the dropping of the
Guinny, the taking of Lodgings for them, etc. The Copies of these Depositions
justifying likewise Dr. Oates's sober pious Life, and modest Christian
Behavior toward his Servants, by giving them good Counsel, etc. See in the
Narrative, p. 15, and sequentibus.

4. This was in the beginning of May last; and who would have imagined, that
after such a plain Discovery and full Confession on Oath of their former
Villainies, the same persons should have the face to attempt playing over again
the same Game? But what will not Popish Impudence suggest, or desperate Varlets
for Money undertake? After these acknowledgments, they continuing in Prison,
Mr. Dangerfield (who was now come into the Service, as you have heard) is
employed by the Lady Powis, the Lord Castlemain, and the rest, to keep them
still in heart, feed them with Money, and endeavor to get them out; and at
last he procured Lane's Liberty, and Nevil and his Friend, Knox's. Then Lane
was harbored for a while at Powis-house, by the name of Johnson, and 10 s. per
week allowed by that Countess, for Diet; and thither also Knox repaired, to
consult how to new-charge Dr. Oats; and then the Papers beforementioned were
handed to the Lords in the Tower, the Lord Castlemain, and Nevil in the
King's Bench, to be altered and corrected, so as to make them most serviceable
for their devilish purpose. -- See Mr Dangerfields Narrative, p. 12, 13, and 14.

5. After much charge and pains in this kind, having as they imagined brought
their Design to some perfection, and seeing some of their Intrigues miscarry,
they resolved to push forwards This, hoping it might at least slur and
scandalize, if not ruin the King's Evidence; and therefore on the 19th of
November. last, the said Lane is prevailed with (notwithstanding all such his
Confessions on Oath) to prefer an Indictment against Dr. Oats, for attempting
to commit upon him the horrid and detestable sin of Sodomy; but the Grand Jury,
by reason of the incoherence and slightness of his Evidence, did not think fit
to find it, but returned an Ignoramus.

6. Hereupon the Dr. to vindicate his Credit, and justly to punish such wicked
Insolence, brought an Indictment of Conspiracy and Misdemeanour against the
said Lane and Knox, (for Osborne absconded, and could not then be found) which
on the 25th of November. 1679. came to be Tried at the Kingsbench-Bar; where,
upon a full hearing, the several matters before-related being evidently proved
against them and their Abettors, to the entire satisfaction of all the numerous
Audience, diverse Peers of the Realm and Persons of Quality being come thither
on purpose to hear the same; The Jury found the said Knox and Lane Guilty, who
immediately were secured; but by reason it was so near the end of the Term,
Sentence (according to the practice of that Court in such Cases) was deferred
till the next Term, they in the mean time being kept in Custody. And since, the
said Osborne has been taken in the Country, and being brought up and
Examined, has voluntarily confessed all the beforementioned Ill Practices,
and several other notorious Circumstances.

CHAP. XXIV.
Some necessary Reflections on several late Popish Libels; as the Address to
both Houses of Parliament. The Cloak in its Colors. The new Plot of the
Papists to transform Traitors into Martyrs. The Compendium of the Plot, etc.

WE conceive we cannot sufficiently discharge this undertaking of giving a
satisfactory account of this Popish Plot, branched out into so many various
sorts of villainies, without taking some particular notice of several of their
most effronted Pamphlets, wherewith they endeavored to poison the minds, and
dazzle the eyes, and divide the affections of his Majesty's good Protestant
Subjects.

This you have heard was one of their principal projects, contrived by the
Tower-cabal, and Consults of their Priests; which most industriously they
pursued. We shall not waste time in a tedious confutation of all the lies and
slanders therein contained, for that most of them have already particular
Answers; but shall offer some brief Remarques, which may sufficiently antidote
the people against their infection.

1. Consider the Authors. They are written either by desperate Bigots, deeply
and principally concerned in the Plot, or else by debauched mercenary villains,
kept in pension by the great ones, for that purpose. Thus Mr. Dangerfield
proves the Compendium to be the work of the venomous Pen of the Lord C. The
New-plot, to be written by Dormer a supposed Priest; several others by Nevil,
who haunting the Play Houses too much, and thereby neglecting to scribble so
fast as they would have him when he was at liberty, some of their Lordships
advised that he should be clapped up again, and thereby be made more industrious
in doing their drudgery. Now what credit is there to be given to what such
people shall write? Can it be imagined that they will make any conscience of
venting the most impudent Lies and Scandals, who have already plunged
themselves into the most detestable Treasons; and whose writings are no more
but their own Neck-verses, having no way to save their heads, but by that
ingenuity of their fingers?

2. The main scope of all these Libels, is to persuade the world, that there
neither is, nor was any such thing as a Popish Plot. Now it is left to all
considerate men, in foreign parts, which they will choose to believe, the King,
and the two several Parliaments, and all the Judges of the Land, who upon
notorious evidence of matter of fact, have solemnly declared that there is such
a damnable Hellish Popish Plot, both against his Majesty's Life and Government,
as well as against the Protestant Religion; or these wretched Traitors, who by
fantastic flourishes, impudent denials, shameful falsehoods and surmises, would
suggest there is none.

3. The Mediums they proceed upon, which are loading the Kings Evidence with
opprobrious language and calumnies, (and in this Billingsgate-rhetorick, the
Author of the Compendium has not his Peer) yet have they not at any time been
able to prove any of the Crimes with which they charge them; but on the
contrary, their slanders have most fully and satisfactorily been refuted by the
several answers and proofs that have been made in justification of the
Witnesses integrity and innocence.

4. The sly manner and subtle titles whereby they publish these mischievous
Libels, to insinuate as if they were written by loyal Protestants. In many of
them pretending a great veneration for the Church of England, railing at
Presbyterians, and suggesting fears and jealousies of ill designs hatched by
them against the Government; on purpose to amuse people, and cause rancour and
divisions amongst Protestants. But blessed be God, providence has now laid
that part of their villainous malice so bare and naked to the eyes of all the
world, that we hope no well-meaning men will hereafter be inveigled with such
pretenses.

5. To take off all credit or respect for these odious Pamphlets, it is enough
to consider the apparent notorious Lies they are stuffed with; as for example,
their Address to the Parliament blushes not most scandalously to affirm, that
his Majesty does not believe there is any such Plot, and does but laugh at it.
Now what good subject can with any patience read such an horrid affront and
calumny cast upon his Sovereign, who by so many reiterated Royal Proclamations,
Declarations, etc. has declared the contrary, and expressed his zeal and
diligence to prevent and punish the same? So the Compendium (as if the Author
had been infatuated, to show us in the Porch what we must expect in the rest of
the edifice) begins in the very first line with a most notorious Lie, asserting
that Coleman was tried at the Old-Bailey, whereas all the world knows he
received his Trial at the Kings-bench-bar in Westminster Hall. What shall we
say of his impudence, p. 69. where he avers, that the worthy Sir Edm. Godfrey,
whom they so barbarously butchered, was an extraordinary and particular friend
to the Papists? Or of that other, p. 85. That there are not fifty thousand men,
women, and children, of the Roman Catholic Religion in England? Is not that a
most pleasant Certificate from St. Omers, at the tail of his Libel, that
vouches for those pests of all society, the Jesuits, That they have given a
rare example of obedience in general, to all civil Magistrates and Governors;
a thing which makes their whole Society highly respected and esteemed by most
of the Christian Princes of the world? What will not they certify, after such
an extravagant falsehood? Or what may not those believe, who can suffer
themselves to be gulled with such gross Lies and Impostures?

But what need we rake further into this common shore of Popish filth and
venom? The whole Nation, we trust, is by this time thoroughly awake, and have
their eyes so well opened, as not to suffer themselves to be cheated of their
Religion, their Lives and Liberties, by the wheadles of a little Popish
Rhetoric. The Serpents now may hiss, but have lost their stings; so that they
cannot endanger any, but such as are willing to be deceived, and court their
own ruin; and therefore we shall put a period to this Chapter, only
remarqing, that many or most of these Traitorous and Seditious Pamphlets were
either Printed for, or sold and dispersed by one Turner a Popish Bookseller in
Holborn, as appears as well by Mr. Dangerfields Narrative, as by matters of
fact, great numbers of such trash having been seized there; for which he has
more than once been in Jail, but still finds friends to get him out; and we
know not how it happens, whether by any bodies connivance, or his own peculiar
good luck, but so it is, that we cannot understand that there is that effectual
prosecution as might be expected, for such insolent offenses.

CHAP. XXV.
The Conclusion, in an Address resulting from the premises, to both Protestants
and Papists respectively.

THus have we, with what convenient Brevity we could, given you a true, and (we
hope) satisfactory Account of the Original and Progress of this Hellish Plot;
its horrid Nature, miraculous Discovery, and what Proceedings have hitherto
been made for the Punishment of some of the Conspirators, to preserve our
Government and Religion from their mischievous Fury. As for whatever false
Reports and calumniating Stories this ungodly Brood may either whisper at home,
or proclaim abroad beyond the Seas, of their being cruelly or unjustly
persecuted; all sober unbyuss'd men must on the contrary admire the Clemency of
our King, and the Moderation of English Protestants in general, that have so
generously bridled their Passions, that notwithstanding so many barbarous
Provocations, there yet has not been heard of one Roman Catholic that has
received prejudice in his Person or Estate in a tumultuous manner; but the
whole Prosecution carried on with the most equal Hearing, and full Proofs,
according to Law and Justice; or if any partiality has been shown, it has
been in favor of the Criminals.

We shall now draw to Conclusion, with a short Address to several sorts of
people, in some useful Considerations, naturally resulting from the Premises.

1. And first we Appeal to all Christians in General, whether they be not
obliged, for the Honor and reputation of our holy Profession, to declare
against this Romish faction, and their unchristian, or rather Antichristian and
abominable scandalous Principles and Practices? When this Blood-thirsty Tribe
goes about with force and fraud, with false and blasphemous Doctrines, and
Traitorous attempts, to subvert all true Christianity, and sacrifice the peace
of humane Society to their own pride and covetousness, can it be less than the
duty of all National Churches and Universities publicly by solemn Decrees and
Protestations, if not by Excommunication, to condemn, renounce and detest them;
and of all private Christians, by abstaining from their Communion, and coming
out of that Babylon, to take care that they be not partakers of her sins, and
consequently receive of her deserved Plagues? -- Quid facit (says St. Cyprian)
in pectore Christiano Luporum feritas, and Canum rabies? and venenum Serpentum,
and cruenta saevitia Bestiarum? Gratulandum est tum tales deEcclesia
separantur, ne Columbas ne oves Christi saeva sua and venenata contagione
praedentur. What has the fierceness of Wolves, the rage of Dogs, the venom of
Dragons, and the bloody cruelty of wild beasts to do in a Christian Breast?
There Is joy and gladness amongst all good men, when such are separated from the
Church, lest the gentle and innocent Doves and Sheep of Christ be made a prey
to their cruel jaws, and infected with their poisonous contagion.

2. To those who are not of that Communion, but have hitherto escaped those
delusions: How highly will it concern them, that they suffer not themselves to
be therewith entangled! for better had it been for them never to have known the
way of Righteousness, than afterward to apostatize therefrom, and defile
themselves with such gross idolatries and impieties. And therefore it behooves
them, that they be careful not to hold the truth in unrighteousness, but walk
worthy of their vocation, even worthy of God, who has called them out of
darkness, into his mavelous Light: for Atrocius sub sancti nominis
professione peccatur: It Is a sad agravation of sin, when it is committed against
plentiful measures of Grace, and under the profession of so Holy a Name: let us
therefore beware, above all things, that whilst we separate from the scandals
of others, we do not our selves administer occasion of scandal to others.

3. To all who are in Authority, whether in Church or State, that they be
vigilant, both by their example and authority, to discourage and suppress all
manner of vice and debauchery, and to encourage and promote all kind of Virtue,
and particularly solid piety and devotion in Religion. The lamentable increase
of Atheism and profaneness which of late years, more than ever, has like a
deluge overwhelmed so many thousands, especially of the young Gentry in these
Kingdoms, must be looked upon as one of the preparatives to this Plot, and a
forerunner of Popery: for as Vice and Debauchery, nay even coldness and
indifferency in matters of Religon, in any man, makes him the more obnoxious to
the Delusions of the Papists, whose Mock-religion is accommodated to the
sensual desires and Lusts of mankind. So they well knowing this by experience,
do endeavor first the debauching of the Nation, that the people being thereby
the more disposed to receive their impressions, they may by that means the more
easily compass their design; as Physicians, who cannot immediately master the
present distemper of their Patient, are forced many times to divert it by art
into some other disease, which they hope more easily to cure; sink people into
voluptuousness, and then tell them of Indulgences, Pardons, etc. whereby they
may both keep their Dalilahs, retain their sins, and yet gain Heaven; and the
news shall be exceeding welcome to their corrupted Nature. And then the
downright Atheist, he is at least taken off from being an Enemy, if he be not
a Friend; for why should he trouble himself to preserve any Religion, that
laughs at all? But the strict adherence to the Gospel-precepts of Holiness, as
it is a means naturally efficacious to obviate and obstruct the endeavors of
the Papists, so it is of all others most likely to be effectual, by the blessing
of God, which we may groundedly hope will attend it: nor need Governors to
fear that their people will prove less obedient and ruleable, by their being
more devoted to Religion; but may well hope the contrary, provided they will
require nothing of them contrary to Religion; which certainly they need not,
the Statutes of the blessed Jesus containing nothing inconsistent with any
solid principle of Policy; the best Christian is always the best Subject, and
for that very reason, the Papist is the worst. And since a main part of these
Romish Traitors hopes is built on the division of the Protestants, how much
does it concern all the reformed Princes and States to fortify their Interest
by most strict Alliances, and a Cordial espousing of the common Cause, wherein
all their safeties and very subsistence is so nearly concerned; but especially
in their respective Dominions, if they will regard either the Adviso's of
Christanity, or true Reason of State, those that are of Authority in the
Church, may find cause to be very cautious of administering unnecessary
occasions of Separation, to the weakness of their brethren; which may be, and
frequently is done by these two means especially.

1. By too strict an imposition of things in their own Nature indifferent. For
though these things be left to the prudent ordering of each particular National
Church, yet when through the weakness of many, they are become matter of
Offense and Scandal, and so occasions of Separation, it seems that they then
cease to be indifferent; and it would be no less contrary to Prudence than to
Charity, to impose, or longer strictly to require them; And repugnant to the
Apostolical Doctrine, Romans 8. 8. and 9. But meat (and so of indifferent
Ceremonies) commends us not to God: for neither if we eat, are we the better,
neither if we eat not, are we the worse. Whose practice was suitable, Cap. 9.
19. etc. Though I be free from all men, yet have I made my self servant unto
all, that I might gain the more: to the weak became I as weak, that I might
gain the weak; I am made all things to all men, (that is, I yield to them in
all Iawful and indifferent things) that by all means I might save some.
Therefore in so dangerous a circumstance as we are under, when it gives so
great an advantage to such an Adversary, who so studiously and industriously
endeavors our divisions, as a peevish and obstinate Supercilious or
Pharisaical Separation for trifles is no way warrantable, so neither can it be
approved as consistent with Christian Prudence, and that care of the Flock
which all faithful Overseers and Pastors ought to have, not to allow at least
such liberty and condescension in such things, as is necessary to the
preservation of Unity in the Church.

2. By Scandalous coldness in Religion, and worldly-mindedness, especially in
the Clergy. There is scarce any more general or powerful (though not always
just) occasion of Separation and Faction than this, especially with devout
people, and best inclined: for men seldom judge by any other rule in this
case, than that of our Savior, -- By their fruits ye shall know them, Mat. 9.
16. and are therefore most apt to judge of the truth of a Ministers Doctrine,
by the virtue or impiety of his actions. There is a certain authority of
Reputation or Reverence, which ought always to accompany authority of
Jurisdiction, and is in truth the more charming and powerful of the two, to
retain people in a sweet, voluntary, and consequently more durable and perfect
obedience. And this being lost, the other, which alone holds them only in a
kind of violent and forced, not natural and genuine obedience, is very
difficult to be managed, liable to be cast off, and seldom of long duration.
Now the former, which is the proper authority of the Church and Clergy, (for
what is Coercive, more than bare Excommunication, is in truth a branch of Civil
authority) can never be acquired or retained by only abstaining from those we
call Scandalous sins, but by the constant, sincere, and vigorous exercise of
those great Evangelical Virtues, -- Humility, Meekness, Heavenly-mindedness,
Contempt of the World, Devotion in Religion, ardent Love of God, and Zealous
endeavors for the salvation of Souls; for without these, the observance of the
rules only of ordinary moral virtues, may well be counted Heathen Civility,
rather than Christianity, and attributed as much to humane prudence as to
Religion. To see men fiery zealous for the accidents and formalities of
Religion, and cold in the practice of these great essentials and substantial
parts, the very business of Christianity; to hear them make lofty Harangues,
and cry up Morality, as if there were nothing more in Religion than that, and
yet in the Practice even of that to come short of the very Heathen Moralists,
To see men profanely turn the sacred Profession into a kind of Trade, to
design it, and apply themselves to it, no otherwise than others do to common
Secular Imploys, as a means only to get a Livelihood, Honor and Preferment
in the world; and when they have (perhaps by indirect means too) heaped Living
upon Living, and one Preferment on another, they accordingly use, indeed abuse
the Charity of our Ancestors, and the Revenues of the Church, in such
indulgence to Pride, Ostentation, voluptuous or delicious Living, as would not
be excusable in any religious Laiety; without any regard to works of Charity,
and the promotion of Holiness; as all good Christians according to their
ability, and those under their Character more especially are obliged unto.
These things (if any such things are, or should happen to be in practice) would
more effectually weaken the proper authority, and impair the reverence that
should attend the Clergy, much more dangerously than any Ecclesiastical Canons
or Civil Laws can establish it. The truth whereof is apparent from the success
of those, who take a contrary course, for thanks be to God we are not without
some, (I hope many) who by their good Employment not only of their
Ecclesiastical Revenues, but also of their private Fortunes, their virtuous
pious Lives, Apostolical Gravity, and fervent sound profitable Preaching,
prevail with many that were turning aside into corners, to become their
auditors, and finding true Manna constantly at home, leave off the unnecessary
desires of straggling for it abroad: and were there but some effectual course
taken, for more such Lights to be set up in the more conspicuous Candlesticks
of the Church, we should probably find it the best expedient, both to dispel
the Ignes fatui of Fanaticism, and keep out the Roman Foggs from overwhelming
us.

3. We should all be excited by these restless Attempts of the Papists, to be
no less studious and industrious by just and proper means to promote and
propagate the true Religion in its genuine Purity and Simplicity, than they are
by indirect and evil means to advance their Errors, Abuses and Corruptions of
it; and particularly, to be as vigilant and active for the preservation of our
Religion, and with it of our Lives, Liberties, Fortunes, and all that is dear
unto us, as these Sons of Perdition are to destroy them. To prevent which, all
those who have any love to their Country, or regard to the Interest and Safety
of themselves, their Relations, or Posterity (though the consideration of
Religion should not move them) are concerned to use their utmost endeavors.
Let us therefore no longer be wilfully blind, and shut our eyes against that
clear Light, wherewith God, has been pleased to display unto us the horrid
prospect of their dark and Hellish Contrivances. Do they not still go on in
their wicked Designs? And shall the effronted Denials of these lying, dying
Traitors, and their impious obstinacy in confessing nothing at the Gollows,
stagger you in your opinion of their Guilt, against such full Proofs, such
clear multiplied Evidence, such a cloud of Witnesses, as God has almost
miraculously raised up from time to time? Or will you have your Throats cut ere
you will believe? Sic notus Ulysses? Are the Arts of Rome no better known? Will
you still carelessly Dance on the brink of ruin, and give fresh heart and new
encouragement to your mortal Enemies, by a most absurd conceit, that they are
still your Friends? For shame, dear Protestant Countrymen! exert your Reasons,
let not your Offspring be bound to curse you, for betraying them to Popish
Slavery, by your foolish Credulity: But prevent effectually their future
attempts, and by a vigorous and impartial Prosecution, bring the grand
Conspirators to Justice, as well as the petty Incendiaries.

4. There are a sort of lukewarm Laodiceans amongst us, indifferent
Protestants, of Gallio's temper, who cared for none of these things, that
regard not though the Ship they sail in perish, provided they may but save
their private Fortunes, and escape in the Longboat of an early compliance; who
would not only quit the Common Prayer for the Mass Book, but exchange their
Bible for the Alchoran, if required by the frowns of Power. These esteem true
Religion a matter not worth their pains to preserve it, though we are commanded
to contend earnestly for the Faith; but cry out, Let the grand superior Orbs
roll which way they list, if we can but jog on in our Epicycles of Ease and
Profit, and enjoy our Estates and Trades: Are not the Papists Christians? And
why may we not be saved in that Church as well as our Forefathers? And what
need all this bussle then to oppose them? Why should we venture our Lives or
Estates and incur the Displeasure of a Popish Successor, if so (which God
avert) it should happen, etc. To these people it were vain to urge any
Considerations from Divinity; for indeed they are a sort of quiet Atheists, and
profess Religion, this or that, any, or none, according as it is the Mode or
Custom of the Country or Times they live in; yet even these, as politic as
they would be counted, will find themselves exceedingly mistaken in their
measures, if Popery prevail. For though it pretend to be a Religion, and to
design the Salvation of Souls, yet indeed, as it is now managed, it is nothing
but a Plot upon the Purse, and Trick to cheat its Votaries, and enslave people
to the Pride and Avarice of the Clergy; wherein these crouching Sons of
Issachar, these truckling Renegado's must bear as heavy Burdens as any. And
therefore we shall only recommend to them one Story, which perhaps they will
like the better, because we have it from Platina, a Popish Author, who tells
us, That when the Citizens of Papia in Italy were at Dissension, by reason of
the implacable Faction and Feud between the Guelphs and the Gibellines, two
powerful and numerous Families or Tribes always at mortal Enmity with each
other, the Gibellines procured a Favourer of theirs, called Facinus Cajus, to
assist them; Covenanting that he should have the Goods of the Guelphs for his
labor: But he being once come into the City, and prevailing, spared the Goods
of neither of them. Whereupon the Guelphs complained, saying, That their Goods
also were spoiled. But all the Redress they could get, was this smart answer
from him, That true it was they themselves were Gibellines, but their Goods
were Guelphs. Mutato nomine, de te. Give us leave, in like manner, beforehand
to tell all such pretended Protestants, as shall by active stickling, or
passive Cowardice contribute to the betraying of their Religion and Country,
and join though with never so great hypocrisy, with the Romanists, hoping
thereby to save their own stakes, and that all the Fury shall fall upon others,
this will be their very case. They themselves may perhaps be good Catholics,
but their estates shall certainly be Heretics still, and liable to make good
the old Arrears now behinde-hand for above One Hundred years to Holy Church.

Lastly, To those who have been bred and still continue of the Roman Cammunion,
and are in danger to be drawn in to engage in such Undertakings, for the
promotion of their Religion by Fraud and Force, by Treasons and Massacres, by
Disturbance or Subversion of Government, raising and fomenting Wars between
Christian Princes and States; these men we would entreat calmly and without
prepossession to consider, Are not such Means agreed on all hands to be
contrary to those used by our Savior and his Apostles for the Original
Propagation of the Gospel? Are they not most injurious and scandalous to that
most holy and innocent Profession of Christianity, which has been always most
propagated and glorified by the magnanimous, sedate, and constant Sufferings of
its genuine Professors; but always most dishonored by the furious, violent,
and perfidious practices of those spurious Zealots that abuse it? Nay, are they
not evidently and daily condemned by the Judgments of God, disappointing,
blasting and confounding all attempts of that nature in these Kingdoms, for
above One Hundred years together? What Madness as well as Impiety is it then
for you, those of the Nobility and Gentry especially, to engage in such
Undertakings? Have you not had sufficient Experience of the Ill-success and
unhappy Consequence of such Attempts to your felves and your Party, whereby you
have only made rods for your own backs, provoking and exasperating the
Severities of the Laws, and the Detestation of all good men against you? What
got your Ancestors by Caballing with the Spaniard to destroy good Queen
Elizabeth, their lawful Sovereign? Nothing but Danger and Trouble, Loss and
Infamy. What got your Digby, your Piercy, your Rookwood, and the rest that
joined in the Jesuits Powder Plot? Nothing but a just, ignominious Death, and
an odious Memory to all Generations. What got your Irish Cutthroats; your
Macguires, your Oneals, and the rest of your Monsters of Rebellion and Cruelty?
Nothing but Destruction, and an almost utter Extirpation of their Nation, had
they not, like other Vermin of late, revived again by the too indulgent
Sunshine of Favor: perhaps like ungrateful Snakes, to sting those hands that
so bountifully cherished them. And when your Romish Agents had lately dissolved
the Government, and brought all things into Confusion, what did they advance
their Cause by it, but only involved themselves in the same public Calamity,
wherein they had embroiled the Nation? The Emissaries that wheedle you in,
design not in the least your Advantage Spiritual or Temporal, but only the
Pomp and Grandeur of the Court of Rome, whose Creatures they are: They are men
who have neither Estates nor Fortunes discoverable to lose or hazard, nor Wives
nor Children to suffer; but if their Attempts prove unsuccessful, can easily
retire into their safe Dens beyond the Seas; and their Motions and Actions are
steered by Foreigners, who sit far enough out of danger, and in security
expect to make their Profit and a Prey of us all; so that both these have hopes
of vast Advantages, without any great hazard; only you their hood-winkt
Zealots, charmed with their Delusions, run the extremest hazards of Souls,
Lives, Fortunes and Reputation, without any probability, if things be rightly
calculated, of any way mending your Condition.

For what shall the Lay- Roman Catholics and their Posterity get by exchanging
their natural English-Birthright for Slavery? How must they truckle to the then
domineering Clergy, and be squeezed and sucked, rackt and spung'd upon, to
supply the insatiate Avarice of the grand Idol at Rome, and the smaller Fry of
Sharks, Friars, Monks, etc. at home? Those that have Estates or fortunes here,
let them promise themselves what they can, or be their Religion what it will,
must infallibly have their shares of whatever public calamity or mischief is
brought upon the Nation. And if none of these considerations of the Wickedness,
Danger and Imprudence of these courses, can have the influence on our stubborn
Romanists, to make them weary of, and honestly to Confess their late Guilt, and
forsake and abominate, as well in their hearts and Actions, as in words, these
odious Attempts, and that villainous Order that promotes them; we hope Justice
ere long will make them such remarkable examples of Punishment, as may deter
their wiser Posterity, and ever preserve our Church and State from the same.

In the mean time, Blessed be He, and for ever Glorified, that from his high
Watchtower in the Heavens, discerning the crooked ways of perverse and cruel
men, has hitherto maimed, and (we firmly trust) will still infatuate all such
damnable Projects. Thou therefore that sit in Light and Glory
unapproachable, Parent of Angels and Men! we implore; And next, Thee, O thou
Omnipotent King! Redeemer of that otherwise-lost Remnant, whose Nature thou
did assume! Ineffable and everlasting Love! And thou the Third Subsistence of
Divine Infinitude, Illumining Spirit! The Joy and Solace of created things! One
Tripersonal Godhead! Be pleased still to take thine Earthly Image and
Vicegerent into the Protection of thine everlasting Arm, preserve him from the
bloody Malice and the destructive Flatteries of these Sons of Belial. Leave us
not a Prey to these importunate Wolves, but build up this Britannick Empire in
a Protestant Suceession, to a glorious and enviable Height, with all her
Daughter-Islands and Plantations about her. Guard us from the Foreign
Wild-Boar, and the Domestic Foxes that would spoil thy Vine and its tender
Grapes. Unite us entirely to each other, and withal appropriate us to thy self,
tying us everlastingly in willing Homage to the Prerogative of thine eternal
Throne. May our King live long and happily in thy Faith and Fear, and all his
Enemies be scattered; let Treason vanish like smoke, and Idolatry and
Superstition be rooted out; let Tyranny be blasted, and Justice flow like a
mighty Stream; let Unity and Love increase amongst Protestants; let our
Magistrates rule in Righteousness, fearing God, and hating Evil. Let our
Ministers be burning and shining Lamps of Piety; let our Judges be above the
Charms of Bribery, or Frowns of Greatness; Let our Nobility and Gentry count
Religion their greatest Honor, and our Citizens esteem Truth their best
Treasure; and all our Commonalty increase in Virtue, Zeal, and Piety: That
there may be an Highway of Holiness throughout these Kingdoms, that
Wayfaring-men, though Fools, may not err therein: But all with thankful
hearts, and new Songs of Praise in our Mouths, defying the Malice of Hell and
Rome, triumphantly sing, Surely there is no Enchantment against Jacob, neither
is there any Divination against the Israel of the Most High,

Amen.
AN APPENDIX: SHOWING Several Politic Artifices of the Jesuits and Papists for
restoring of Popery, Discovered in Print, in the Year 1663, and ever since
punctually pursued by them and their Abettors.
SECT. 1.
HAving just concluded the foregoing History, we met with a small Treatise
entitled Fair warning, Printed for Henry Marsh in Chancery Lane, 1663. and
Licensed by Dr. George Stradling, Chaplain to the Reverend Gilbert then Bishop
of London, March 31. 1663. which being Published so long since, and under such
legal Authority, and finding therein several most remarkable Discoveries,
relating to the Policies whereby the Romanists were to carry on their Design of
reestablishing Popery in these Kingdoms; We could not but for the Readers
information and satisfaction, transcribe and annex some of the most material
Passages thereof, as follows.

1. In page 47, this Licensed Author names the Priest whom we herein before,
page the 75. mentioned to have triumphed at the Murder of King Charles the
first; telling us, that it was one Sarabrass the then Queens Confessor, who
being present at the Kings death, tossed up his Cap in the air, and brandished
his sword; and being with admiration asked what he did there, answered, that
there were twenty more Priests there besides himself, and that the greatest
Enemy to their Religion fell that day.

SECT. 2.
In page the 30. he recites the methods to be used for restoring Popery in
England, from Father Contzen's printed directions for that purpose in his
Politics, l. 2. p. 16, 17; and 18. in these words.

1. That things be carried on by slow, but sure Proceedings, as a Musician
tunes his Instrument by degrees: lose no opportunity; but yet do not
precipitate the work.

2. Let no Prince that is willing, despair; for it is an easy thing to change
Religion. For when the common people are a while taken with Novelties and
diversities of Religion, they will sit down and be aweary, and give up to their
Rulers wills.

3. The Doctors and leading Pastors must be put out: if it may be, all at once:
[sure he means some Bartholomew-business] but if this cannot be, let it be by
some and some. When the Leaders are down, all will submit.

4. The purpose of changing Religion, and extirpating Lutheranism, must be
concealed: not but that some of the wiser sort [Coleman and a few more] may
know, but the people must not, lest it should move them.

5. Some must be suborned to beg importunately of the Prince for liberty to
exercise their Religion, and that with many and gentle words, that so the
people may think the Prince is not inclined to novelty, but only to lenity,
and to a tenderness for tender consciences, and that he does it not as from
himself. For the vulgar use to commend a Prince that cannot deny the Subjects
their desires, though they are such as were fit to be denied.

6. One or two Churches only must be desired at first, [for the exercise of
Popery, he means] as being so small a matter, that the people will not much
regard.

7. When the zeal of Professors begins to rise against the Change, they are to
be pacified by admitting both Parties to a Conference before the Governors.

8. Let there be a Decree for Pacification, that one Party do not rail at the
other, nor calumniate them. And so the Doctrines that are to be brought in,
will have great advantage, when they are covered, and may not be contradicted,
or so much as named: And so the Rulers will be thought to be only lovers of
Peace, and not to intend a change of Religion.

9. Next that, let there be some public Disputation between the Parties, but
with some disadvantage to them that are to be outed.

10. Let all this be done but on pretense that the several Parties may be
joined lovingly together in Peace: And when the Ministers refuse this, let them
be accused of Unpeaceableness, and Pride, and Obstinacy, and Disobedience
against the Magistrate, and not for their Religion.

When it comes to the putting out of some Ministers, and the People begin to
Petition for them, let the matter be carried silently; and in the mean time,
let the People be told, that it is because those Ministers are heady, obstinate
men; that the people may be persuaded that the Ministers are faulty, and have
deserved it, and may be put only to desire Liberty for the more peaceable men.

11. When thus the People are deluded, and there is no danger of a Resistance,
then turn the Ministers out of the Churches, and put in those that you would
set up in their stead.

12. Then change the Universities, and tell all the Fellows and Scholars, that
they shall hold their Places if they will turn, else not: many will change
Religion with the Rulers.

Next, he instanceth in Asia, where a Prince pretended that all the Professors
and Ministers places were void at the Death of his Predecessor, and he had the
disposal of them by Law. And the Change was there made (as he says) by slow
degrees: one or two Opinions of Religion quarreled at first; and so the people
will think it but a small matter to yield in one or two Opinions, and be easily
brought to obey. At last, let them fall to writing against each other; but be
sure let those that have the Court-favour be cried up as Victors, and that the
others are ignorant, and shamefully baffled.

13. To put out of Honors, Dignities, and public Offices, all those that are
most adverse to Popery: it is just that those that hinder the safety of the
Commonwealth, should be deprived of the Honors and Riches of the
Commonwealth. If men are deposed for heinous Crimes, why not for Blasphemy and
contempt of Truth? [you must believe the Jesuit that this is the Protestant
case.] If those of a contrary Religion be left in Honor and Power, they will
be able to cross the Prince in many things, and encourage the people of their
own Religion.

14. That when a Heresy [that is, the Protestant Religion] is wholly to be
rooted out, and that this must be done by degrees, and in a way of reason, and
cannot be done by mere Command and Power, [by a Massacre, he means, or so
forth] then you must first fall on those Opinions that the common people are
most against, and which you can quickly make them think absurd. So he
instanceth in some that would work out Lutheranism, that speak honorably of
Luther, but fall on his followers, only under the name of Flaccians. So the
Arminians at Vtrecht, when they would extirpate Calvinism, made a Decree that
no man should Preach any thing that seemed to make God the Author of sin. Thus
a Magistrate that would bring in Popeny, must impute to the opposers, and fall
upon such heinous Opinions, which the impudent themselves are half ashamed of;
and bring these into he light that they may be odious; and so the Teachers will
lose all their Authority, when the people imagine that they are taken in a
manifest fault.

15. To make use of the Protestants Contentions. How easy is it (says he) in
England, to bring the Puritans into order, if they be forced to approve of
Bishops? or to reduce the Puritans in the Low Countries, if the Prince adhere
to the Arminians? For the variety of Opinions makes them doubtful, that before
seemed certain; so that when the Magistrate joyneth with one side, he easily
overturns the other, and leaves the whole obnoxious: As Paul did by the
dissension between the Pharisees and Sadduces, joining to one side, he escaped.
This (says he) I would principally persuade an Orthodox Magistrate to; [that
is, a Papist] for he may to as much advantage make use of the Protestants
Disagreements, as of the Papists Concord, to extirpate Protestants. As in Wars,
it is not only the skill and strength of the General, but often also the
carelessness of the Enemy, or his mistake, that gives very great advantages for
success. To forbid the Protestants privately or publicly to Assemble together.

To proceed to severity of Laws and punishments. [Here he endeavors to prove
this violence lawful; Fire and Faggot is reserved to the last.] But this
violence, though it must be for the change of all, need not be exercised on
all. Cut off the Leaders, and the Multitude will follow the authority of the
Rulers. Shame will retain some, and fear others; but a vain security will
prevail with most, when they know not how to help it.

Within these few years, [if he say true,] above an hundred thousand have been
turned to Popery in France, and more in Germany; nor did ever any of the
Princes of Germany, that did endeavor to draw over his people to the
Catholics, find any Force or Resistance contrary to his Laws. [Note this, all
you slanderous Papists! that accuse Protestants so much of Rebellion, to bide
your own: Here Is a Jesuits testimony on Record for our vindication.]

He commends many smaller helps: As 1. Music, to entice people by delight.
2. To cause all at their Marriage to profess the Popish Religion, and so rather
than go without a Wife or Husband they will do it. 3. So also to deny
Protestants Church Priviledges, as Baptism, Burial, etc.

Lastly, he concludes, that where the work must be securely done by degrees,
the Magistrate may keep the Institution, Presentation, Confirmation and
Examination of Ministers in his own hand; and so (if he cannot cast them out at
once) he must cast out the most dangerous, [that is, ablest Protestant
Pastours] and put over the Churches the disagreeing, and those that do not
mind matters of Controversy much, and those that are addicted to their own
domestic businesses, [worldly men] and such as are addicted to the Rulers: let
him cool the heat of Heresy, [he means still true Religion] and let him not
put out the unlearned: and so their Religion will grow into contempt.

And therefore let the Magistrates cherish the Dissentions of the erring (he
means the Protestant) Teachers: And let him procure them often to debate
together, and reprove one another. For so, when all men see that there is
nothing certain among them, they will easily yield to the truth (he means
Popery.) And this Discord is profitable to show the manners of those wicked
men: For from these things the Ruler may take occasion for a Change. Let him
enquire into the Original of these Accusations; and if he find them true, he
may punish the Guilty: if false, he may punish (that is, cast out) the
Accusers. [By either way he weakens the Party, and makes room for his Popish
Priests to succeed them.]

SECT. 3.
The same Privileged Author of the said Fair Warning, in page 62. and those
following, sets forth a Copy of a Letter from Seignior Ballariny, to one Father
Young, found (as he testifies) in his Study upon his Decease, Dated April 16.
1662. Translated out of Italian; in English as follows.

Holy Father;
WE do here congratulate your endeavors for the Propagation of the Catholic
Faith, and cease not our Prayers for you: Yet we know that in vain we expect a
Blessing from above, if we do not prudently apply all means here below. And now
upon that wonderful Revolution in England, there must be great alterations in
your Councils and Methods; although you must aim at one great Design, The
obstruction of Settlement; especially upon the Fundamental Constitutions of the
Kingdom; whereunto if things should fall, they would be more firm than ever,
(as some things when shaken take deepest root.) To this purpose you would do
well,

1. To remove this jealousy raised by Pryn, Baxter, and other discontented
persons, of our own having had any design upon the late Factions; and set up
that prosperous way of fears and jealousies of the King and Bishops. You know
an enemy is then with success established in his main hold, when he is with
prudence alarmed elsewhere. We may easily break in upon the English Nation
through Liberty and Anarchy, while they think we are coming in through
Government and Order.

2. You would do well to make it appear underhand, how near the Doctrine,
Worship and Discipline of the Church of England comes to us: how willingly
their Articles would be interpreted in a Catholic sense: at how little
distance their Common Prayer is from our Mass: whereby you may persuade the
world that the Protestant Religion is weary of it self, and that the wisest and
ablest men of that way are so moderate, that they would willingly come over to
us, or at least meet us halfway.

3. Let there be that odium by writing and secret Practices raised upon the
Factious, that the Law may be so intent upon them, that you may escape; and
troublesome persons may be disabled from speaking against you as they used to
do, being odious in the eye of the Law and the people.

4. Let the Power of the King in matter of Religion be decryed; or at least let
there be an Indulgence promoted by the Factious, and seconded by you.

5. You may have such insight into the Trade and Treasure of the Nation, that
you may have the one engrossed between your selves and other discontented
Parties, and the other stopped: so that the inhabitants will for want, either
endeavor an alteration at home, or transplant themselves among us abroad; so
that we may either join with them, or they with us, in order to the main design.

6. It were well, if you took all just occasion to make it plain to the people,
that there is no true Ordination or Succession of Bishops, Pastors and
Ministers in England; and that they who are pretended Bishops and Ministers,
are either worldly and careless on the one hand, or so factious on the other
hand, that it were well they were removed: however, it were well the people
should be taken off from them, by a clear discovery of their unworthyness.

7. Father R. would usually say, that the best way to work upon the English,
was to make use of their natural Affections; and urge them with this; What is
become of your Forefathers, who died in our Religion? where was your Religion
before Luther?

8. We suppose that in England, after twenty years Confusion, they are at a
loss for the Revenue; and therefore it were seasonable such a way were
proposed, that on the one hand might seem very plausible to the King, the
Nobility and Commons, but is indeed very grievous to the People; as any
alterations in the ancient Customs have their advantages for us, so especially
an alteration in the Revenue: which will have that influence upon the people,
which your suggestions and insinuations cannot have. You know what counsel
Father P. gave Father E. of Brussels, to put the King upon the new way of
Imposition by Excise, which must be settled by a mercenary Army of Horse and
Foot, which shall harass the Country.

Lastly, Your method for winning particular persons, you know, given by our
Forefathers, is this.

1. Be sure to keep the Respondents part, and not the Opponents. It Is not so
easy to prove, as to wrangle against proofs.

2. Follow them with certain Questions which the vulgar are not verst in. As,
1. Where was your Church before Luther? or where has it been visible in all
Ages? 2. How prove you that you have a true Scripture that is the Word of God
among you?

3. What express Word of God do the Catholics contradict?

4. How prove you that you have a truly called Ministry, that is to be heard
and believed by the people?

5. By what Warrant did you separate from the Catholic Church, and condemn all
your Forefathers, and all the Christian World?

6. If you will separate from the Catholic Church, what reason have you to
follow this. Sect, rather than any one of all the rest?

7. What one man can you name from the beginning, that was in all things of
Luthers or Calvin's opinions?

8. Do you not see, that God does not bless the labors of your Ministers, but
the people are as bad as they were before? what the better are you for hearing
them?

Our hearty Prayers are for your Success.

And, Sir, I am yours to command, F. B.


These were part of the subtle and more innocent Platforms laid by the Jesuits
to undermine the Protestant Religion, and introduce Popery, which were
discovered and set forth in Print, now almost twenty years ago; yet have they
still ever since vigorously traced the same methods with mischievous success,
and without any great opposition, till finding all these not enough to
accomplish their main work, they applied themselves to more bloody and violent
Counsels, and the hatching of that Masterpiece of villainy, the horrid Plot
whereof we have in the precedent sheets given you a summary account; which
being so far detected, nothing but Gods Judgments on these sinful Nations in
suffering the spirit of infatuation to possess us, can hinder its being
prevented.

The following Transactions happening after the Printing this History, be
pleased to take a summary account thereof, as follows.
THe 10th of December, 1679. was published a Proclamation signifying the Kings
pleasure that the Parliament formerly Prorogued to the 26th of January, should
at that time be Prorogued again to the 11th of November 1680. About this time,
several persons Endeavoring to promote Petitions, and Nine Lords in the names
of several other Peers of the Realm, actually presenting a Petition to his
Majesty, for the Parliament to continue to sit on the said 26th of January, his
Majesty thought fit to publish his Proclamation for the preventing of
tumultuous Petitions; yet many conceiving such humble Petitioning not to be
forbidden by any Law of this Kingdom, did proceed therein; and on the 20th of
December, three persons of the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, sending for
some others that were promoting such a Petition, and having it produced, did
tear the same; for which being carried before a Justice of the Peace (since
discharged of the Commission) they were bound over, and the next Sessions a
Bill being preferred against them, reciting, That whereas the subjects and
liege people of England, by the Laws and Customs thereof have used to
represent their grievances by Petition, or by any other way: And whereas such a
Petition (reciting the words) was prepared and subscribed by many of the Kings
Subjects and liege People; the Persons indicted, being ill-affected, and
contriving, devising, and intending, as much as in them lay, to hinder the
sitting of the said Parliament as was prayed in the Petition, and also to
hinder the Trial of the Offenders, and redress the Grievances therein
mentioned, did as Rioters and disturbers of the Peace, etc. with Force and
Arms, etc. unlawfully, riotously, and injuriously, the said Petition (being
delivered to them at their request, and for the subscribing of their Names
thereto, if they should think fit) did tear in pieces, in Contempt of our
Sovereign Lord the King, and of his Laws, to the evil Example, etc. and against
the Peace, etc. Which Bill was found by the Grand Jury.

And on the 13th of January, a Petition was presented to his Majesty, by Sir
Gilbert Gerrard Baronet, Son in the Law to the late Bishop of Durham, Thomas
Smith, Bencher of the Inner-Tempel, and eight other Gentleman and Citizens, of
considerable Estates and Qualities; the words whereof were as follows.

To the King's most Excellent Majesty, the humble Petition of your Majesty's
most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, Inhabitants in and about the City of London,
whose Names are hereunder subscribed,
Shows;

THat whereas there has been, and still is a most Damnable and Hellish Plot,
branched forth into the most horrid Villainies against Your Majesty's most
Sacred Person, the Protestant Religion, and the well-established Government of
this your Realm; for which several of the principal Conspirators stand now
Impeached by Parliament:

Therefore in such a time, when Your Majesty's Royal Person, as also the
Protestant Religion, and the Government of this Nation, are thus in most
eminent danger; Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Obedient Subjects, in the
deepest sense of our Duty and Allegiance to your Majesty, do most humbly and
earnestly pray, That the Parliament, which is Prorogued until the 26th day of
January, may then Sit to try the Offenders, and to Redress all our Grievances,
no otherwise to be redressed.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray for Your Majesty's long and prosperous
Reign.

To this Petition was annexed a Roll of above 100 Yards long, containing many
thousand Names of many of the most eminent Citizens and Inhabitants in and
about London, that had subscribed the same. His Majesty's Answer was to this
effect: I know the substance of it already; and as I am Head of the Government,
I shall take care of it.

The Papists, though so often bastled, resolve still to play a new Game; and
therefore on the 7th of January, John Gadbury, Prisoner for the Popish
High Treason, as we have before related, sent to acquaint the Lords (appointed
a Committee for Examination) that he had something to communicate to them:
whereupon he was immediately sent for; but (being perhaps not sufficiently
tutored) he then excused himself that he did not expect to be so suddenly
called, and therefore desired further time; whereupon he was ordered to put
what he had to say into writing. And on the 9th of January being again examined
before His Majesty, did declare, That about September last, Sir Robert Peyton
desiring to be reconciled to the Interests of his Majesty and the Duke of York,
Gadbury acquainted Mrs. Celier the Midwife therewith, between whom and Sir
Robert there grew an intimate Correspondence; and that Sir R. Peyton did then
say, he should hereby lose a considerable Interest, which could put him in the
Head of 20000 men in two days time, and that could raise 60000 men in little
more than a Week: And that these people, in case the King had died the last
Summer at Windsor, would have seized the Tower, Dover-Castle, etc. secured the
Mayor of London, and opposed all that should have proclaimed the Duke of York.
-- Mrs. Celier (though both pretended to be kept close Prisoners, he in the
Gatehouse, and she in Newgate, yet being now brought up) confirmed in substance
the same Story; only adding, that they were to murder the Lord Mayor, destroy
all Episcopists, set up a Commonwealth; and to that purpose allowed Pensions to
several old Officers of the late Rebellious Army. All these things and words
Sir R. Peyton absolutely denied; yet was by Warrant from the Council committed
to the Tower for High Treason, for Conspiring to raise Arms against the King, a
close Prisoner; (though the Five Popish Lords, directly charged upon Oath, and
Impeached by Parliament for a Design to Murder the King and Subvert the
Government, were admitted mutual Converse, and free access of Visitants, yet)
no body without special Warrant being admitted to visit him.

In the mean time, both Gadbury and Celier were flusht with hopes of procuring
their respective Pardons; but that being stopped upon diverse weighty
Considerations by a most judicious and Honorable Peer, Gadbury began to relent,
and on the 14th discovered the whole contrivance of this Sham-Plot; that he
knew no harm by Sir Robert, but was drawn in by Mrs. Celier, etc. to testify
such things against him, etc. whereupon there was an Order that Celier should
be kept close Prisoner, and it is supposed Gadbury will at last make a full
honest Discovery.

On Saturday the 17th of January, at the Sessions in the Old-Bayly, were
Arraigned eight persons, as Popish Priests, viz.

David Joseph Kemish. Lionel Anderson, alias Mounson. William Russel, alias
Napper. James Corker, and William Marshal, Two Benedictine Monks, formerly
tried for the Plot with Wakeman. George Parris, alias Parry. Henry Starkey, and
Alexander Lumsdel.
Of whom the first, that is, Mr. Kemish, being very ancient and sickly, was
upon his humble request after Arraignment, referred to another time for Trial,
when he might be better able to make his defense.

The other seven being severally tried, the chief Witnesses that gave Evidence
against them, were Dr. Oats, Mr. Bedloe, Mr. Prance, Mr. Dugdale, and Mr.
Dangerfield.

The particulars of their respective Charge and Defense, are too tedious here
to be set forth: the sum was, that they were severally proved by the Witnesses
(some speaking as to some of the Prisoners, others to others) to have said
Mass, consecrated and administered the Eucharist, and frequently performed such
Functions as no Layman in their Church is allowed to meddle with.
Particularly, it was proved by Mr. Dangerfield, that Anderson, alias Mounson,
having scowr'd his Kettle, that is, took his Confession, and given him
Absolution, and ordered him to receive the Sacrament, which he did accordingly,
did yet the same day persuade him to endeavor to get some secrets out of
Stroud, then a Prisoner with them in the King's Bench, against Mr. Bedloe, and
to do it by drinking hard with Stroud: and the Witness seeming to be a little
scrupulous of being drunk the same day he had Received, this holy Father said
he might venture without danger; it was no harm if he were drunk, since he did
it for the good of the Cause. The Defenses made by them, were either silly, or
else rather subtle than solid, alleging that there was no way to convict them
of being Priests, unless the Witnesses saw them actually take Orders. Which if
true, the Statute would be vain, and its whole force eluded. None of them had
either so much zeal, as now to own himself a Priest (though one of them had
confessed it before to the Court, which he now denied) but rather all seeming to
deny it, lying at catch with the Witnesses words, and urging them to name the
very days they heard them say Mass, that they might by their Gang, prepared to
affirm any thing, contradict them: Which appeared evidently, in that Marshal
was not ashamed openly to declare, That let Mr. Oats name any time or place
whatsoever, he would bring Witnesses to disprove him. This Marshal was their
great Orator, who made long Speeches, but to very little purpose; there being
nothing of weight or matter in what he urged. Starkey was an Old man, that said
he had been a Major in the late King's Army; and 'twas proved that he had
boasted, that he had said Mass twenty and twenty times in that Army; and of
late the Witnesses had diverse times and at several places heard him say Mass,
etc. After a full and fair Trial, the Jury brought in Six Guilty; who thereupon
received Sentence of Death. But Lumsdel, being a Scotchman, was left upon a
special Verdict, it being doubted whether he were within the Statute of the 27
Eliz. cap. 2. on which they were Indicted: So that he must lie, till the Judges
have determined that Point.

FINIS.

