Licensed, October. 1. 1677.

Roger L'estrange.

A COLLECTION OF Select Discourses Out of the most Eminent WITS of FRANCE AND
ITALY.

A Preface to Monsieur Sarasin's Works by Monsieur Pelisson.

A Dialogue of Love, by Mr Sarasin.

Wallenstein's Conspiracy, by Mr Sarasin.

Alcidalis, a Romance, by Mr Voiture.

Fieskie's Conspiracy, by Signor Mascardi.

LONDON, Printed by S. R. for Henry Brom at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1678.

A PREFACE TO THE WORKS OF M. Sarasin.
MY Friends, who have sometimes heard me speak against Prefaces, will wonder
perhaps to see me undertake for the Works of Monsieur Sarasin, what I never
advised any to do for his own: But let me apply to these things what a famous
man once said of Funeral Pomps and the Rights of Sepulcher, It Is honest to be
careful for other men's, but not to trouble our selves about our own. And
certainly if there be nothing less praiseworthy than to go in quest of that
praise we have deserved, who sees not that these great number of Prefaces
wherewith Authors do swell their Books, excepting some wherein Discretion and
Judgment shines throughout, and which are either very necessary or very useful,
all the rest, though strow'd with the Flowers of Eloquence, and highly pompous,
deserve more blame than praise. For to what purpose is it to entertain the
Reader at the Entrance with the excellency of that which they present him,
with the difficulties they met withal, and the qualifications necessary to
surmount them; to entreat, to flatter him in some places; to scorn and defy
him in others, to speak sometimes with submission, and sometimes with empire,
as if we would force their liking; or else, as a Spaniard pleasantly says, ask
it with tears in our eyes; discovering to the World a weakness by so much the
greater as we are not able to dissemble it? If our Works are good, let us be
assured upon the Faith of all Ages, and all that ever was wrote handsomely, that
sooner or later the World will do us right, tho we free our selves from the
shame of soliciting it: If they are bad or imperfect, let us think rather of
suppressing then defending them; of correcting our Faults rather then excusing
them: And let us not expect from our Eloquence what was spoken but in jest
concerning that of the famous Pirocles, who, when he was worsted in Wrestling,
persuaded the Spectators he had no fall, and constrained them to give more
credit to his Speeches than to their own eyes. If it be so hard to know our
selves aright, how much more difficult is it to speak of our selves as we
ought? In which case, tho we think as we ought, we ought not always to speak of
our selves as we think, Where open and declared Vanity is insupportable,
excessive Humility always suspected of concealed Vanity, and the way between
these so narrow and so hard to keep, that I know not for what reason, or rather
through what error, so many without any necessity imbark upon a Sea so full of
Rocks, and famous for so many Shipwracks,

But we fear nothing of this, when we labor for a Friend that is no more. It
becomes us to defend with heat the Fame and Praises which concern us not, to
excuse Faults we have not committed, and to speak for him who cannot defend
himself. Passion and transport show handsome here; and though we stretch the
Truth a little, and of a great make an extraordinary man, those who condem our
Jugement will esteem our Affection, and wish to have Friends like us. Let us
add one voice then to the noise of his Praises, yea begin amongst the People,
and in the crow'd of his Admirers these first Applauses, which in all
likelihood will be seconded by those of all France.

His Works have not been collected without much pains, and doubtless would have
appeared handsomer, if he had had the advantage to publish them himself: And we
must acknowledge that there is I know not what of a last hand, which cannot be
given to the Works of the mind but by those that made them. We dare not handle
the Writings of a dead Friend as we would our own; either through a respect we
bear the Genius of another, or a distrust of our own, or fear by confounding
two different ways of producing a bad one; and the more Judgment we have, the
less Boldness. I assure my self notwithstanding, that these Orphans,
unfortunate as they are in the untimely loss of their Father, will have the
good Fortune to please their Country, that a small number of Defects shall be
hid under the brightness and light of a great number of Beauties; that if any
one will attain them, he shall labor only for their glory; and if they must
fight, it will be only in order to triumph.

Amongst the diverse Pieces whereof this Volume is composed, the History of the
Siege of Dunkirk presents it self first, which having already seen the Light,
and gained the public Approbation, seems to refuse my Praises, and send them
to some of its Fellows; however let me say to those that knew Monsieur Sarasin
but by halves, and only by his Poems, That it is the Work of a Masterly hand
that never abandoned Judgment to run after Wit, and sought not Flowers when
'twas the Season of Fruits: So that writing the History of a particular Action,
which held much of bare Relation, he has contained his style within a just
mediocrity, not suffering it to raise it self too ambitiously above its
subject, and has deserved extreme praise in that way wherein he seemed not to
have sought it.

But Walstenis's Conspiracy which follows, as it surpassed this History for the
richness of the matter, had infinitely surpassed it for the beauty of the
workmanship, if the Destiny of human things, which seems every where to deny
perfection, had permitted Monsieur Sarasin to finish so excellent a Piece.
However, if Antiquity thought fit to rank with Masterpieces some Pictures left
imperfect, yea some Lines drawn upon an empty Cloth; why should not we render
the same Justice to this Fragment and its Author? He has not done enough for
us; but be has done enough for himself, and to let us see that if he had lived
a little longer he had got the Reputation of an Excellent Historian.

In these two words I pretend to have included a thousand praises, and
represented a thousand great and rare qualities. Not to speak of that which
depends in some sort on our Will or on Fortune, to be well instructed and to be
faithful; not to employ our Pains and Industry, whether innocently or on
design, to abuse Posterity; a good Historian besides this ought to have an
Universal Knowledge of the World, and of Affairs; a mind subtle and
penetrating, capable of unraveling the true Causes of human Actions from their
pretexts and colors; an Imagination lively and judicious together,
apprehending things as they are, and afterward delivering them so as he has
conceived them: he does not recount, he paints; and if he speaks of a Battle, a
Negotiation, the Passions of Princes or their Ministers, his Readers think they
fight or negotiate, are agitated with the same Desires, the same Inquietudes.
He has besides an exquisite taste in all that may please or displease, weary
or entertain; and though he omits nothing necessary, he knows to extend or shut
up his several subjects according as the beauty of his Work requires. He does
not show his Wit, but lets it be seen every where; he lies not in ambush on all
passages to speak fine things, and apply Sentences of Seneca; he expresses
sometimes a weighty matter in a word, or causes it to be understood without
speaking it, as those that with the sole motion of their eye tacitly approve or
condemn what is said or done in their presence. His style is clear, simple,
familiar, but without lowness, and accompanied every where with dignity; for he
still remembers that he entertains all Nations and all Ages, that all the Earth
hears him, that he speaks, as we may say, in the public Assembly of Mankind,
where nothing ought to escape him which is not mingled with a Character of
shamefacedness, respect, and good manners. But that I be not accused to extend
my self too far on this Subject, all these great things whereof I have spoken,
are found in this Fragment: I have drawn the true Genius of an Historian, but
have done it only by copying it from this Work.

After these two Histories we have put the Dialogue upon the Question, If a
young man ought to be Amorous. Those who are not favorable to our Author will,
I confess, find here something to object, and so oblige me to employ the more
pains to defend it. This kind of writing has been hitherto little used by the
French; Whether they have thought it hard to attain its perfection; or whether
a Nation quick and impatient, as ours, cannot entirely relish Works, where much
time is lost before we can arrive at the Subject, or find what we seek: Whence
perhaps it is, that Dialogues have no where been in so much esteem as with
Greeks and Italians, men of great wits and great leisure. For my part, to speak
my mind, I think the less Dialogues are in use with us, the more honor 'twould
be to bring them into public liking, even against the inclination of the Age;
which would infallibly come to pass, if we used all that Art and Wit they
require. There seems to be three kinds of them, the character and use of each
is different. The first are those we may properly call Didacticks, whose only
end it is to instruct, and are contented with adding to solidity of Doctrine
clearness and elegancie of Expression; they are chiefly useful in this, That
representing to the life the doubts of an ingenious Scholar and the decisions
of a learned Master, they show by the order of Questions and Answers, the order
of Knowledges and the progress of Reason; and that more neatly, and in a way
more lively and animated than a bare discourse could do. The second kind is
opposed to this, and we may rank here Dialogues of raillery, which take only
the flower of things, instruct by laughing, and go not to profit but by
pleasure: They have their value too; and their ingenious, subtle, fine and
delicate strokes descend sometimes deeper into our minds than the most grave
and serious Precepts. But between these two there is a third kind, and may be
esteemed the perfectest, which not having all the austerities of the first, nor
all the sportiveness of the second, holds something of each of them; for it
handles solid matters, and handles them solidly, but brings a thousand kinds of
Ornament to render them more acceptable. The Dialogue of Monsieur Sarasin is of
this last kind, in which three things are necessary to its perfection; the
choice of the Matter, knowledge and profound meditation of this Matter, and the
Art of reducing it to Dialogue. The Matter ought to be some Science or some
Art, but those Sciences and Arts which fall oftnest into Conversation, and do
not wound the mind by their thornyness: Law matters, for Example, cannot be
proper, less Geometry or Algebra; the great Waters we ought to drink of are,
Morality, Politiques, Rhetoric and Poesy. Next follows a profound meditation
of the Subject, either discovering something in it which has not been by
others touched at, or something new upon the common places of others; which (in
my Opinion) is the greatest and most noble proof of human Wit: For what can be
more excellent than to teach men by new ways those general Maxims whence
springs their happiness; to add, as I may say, new rays, new brightness to
those great and eternal Lights which guide the whole course of our life. In the
last place, he must have the Art of Dialogue, that this Conversation he
represents, though more learned and serious than ordinary ones be, yet a
conversation, that is, a free, familiar, and natural entertainment strow'd
every where with mirth and gaiety, and the civilities of honest men. The
Dialogues of Plato and Zenophon do not only instruct us by the Discourse of
their Socrates, but make us wish we had lived with him, and had seen with our
eyes, I say not this Philosopher, but this living and animated Philosophy, so
sublime and so humble, so divine and so human at once. And that inimitable
Dialogue which Cicero has left us, does not only teach us the Rhetoric of the
World and of Affairs, different from that of the College; but also shows us
all the graces of Roman Conversation, and that Urbanity which our words of
civility, gallantry, and politeness explain imperfectly, and which our Language
has not found a proper name for. To come now to our Author, of those three
parts, which make up the perfection of a Dialogue, there are two wherein, if I
do not deceive my self, we cannot reproach him: his Matter is a question of
Morality not only handled, but cannot choose but be handled in ordinary
Conversations: and for that Art of speaking things with the familiarity and
liberty of a true conversation, it appears throughout; he has followed the
track of the Ancients, and happily profited himself of their great Examples.
There rests only to examine the things he has used with this Art; and here all
that is opposed is, that there is too little his own; that there is less Wit
than Reading; more Memory than Invention. And certainly he himself knew, that
having had diverse occasions to show his Wit, this of introducing learned men
seemed favorable for him to display and pour out those rich Harvests he had
made in the best Books of several Languages, and acknowledged he was carried to
a desire of doing it with some excess, and was not the master of it. But his
Dialogue, according to his project, should have had two parts; and as in this
he had given less to Reasonings than to Authorities and Examples, so he
proposed the contrary in the other. Besides, if we consider well, when a man is
acknowledged Master of a Wit, great, noble, and fertile, and reproached to have
taken from others what he might have found in himself, preferring the riches of
strangers to his own: This Reproach, I say, carries with it praise as well as
blame. I would he had done better: But shall it stand for nothing that he has
done well? Because he has not deserved all our praises, shall we refuse him
those he has deserved? Should we not imitate Virgil's Hero, who at the Sports
he celebrated in honor of his Father, after he had given the first prize to
the Vanquisher, gave two others, sometimes three, to those that came nearest to
Victory?

That we may the better comprehend what glory our Author merits by his Poems,
let us make here a general reflection, which perhaps will be neither unpleasant
nor unprofitable. Amongst those Reasons which cause us attribute to Poetry I
know not what of Divinity, methinks I see two which are not the least important.

First, which indeed carries with it something great and mavelous, that in a
Langunge so constrained as this, they can express thoughts the most subtle and
the most delicate, high and sublime, with so much liberty. What Prodigy is
this? when we speak in Prose, and all terms and all expressions of a Language
are abandoned to us, if some thought comes into our mind which is not common,
we have difficulty to make it be understood, and often our words remain below
our matter: whilst these men who seem truly inspired, after they have imposed
on themselves a necessity of using only certain fashions of speaking, and
despising all the rest as too vulgar; to shut up their words in a certain
measure, always like it self; add, if you please, to end always by Ryme; after,
I say, they have submitted to so many hard Laws, and difficult to be observed,
in spite of all these obstacles they make us understand all that they please,
in a way more noble and more easy, than it is possible to do in common
Discourse. One would think they could not say what they say otherways, though
they would, so easy are their expressions; their words drop from their Pen
without design, and each naturally takes it place: The Harp of Amphion did no
greater miracle, when the Stones drawn by its harmony rank't themselves one by
another to build the famous Walls of Thebes.

But in the second place, Poetry may be esteemed Divine in regard of its
Subject, which she draws from her self; whereas Prose borrows it elsewhere, and
does only beautify and polish it. When we consider a House of Pleasure in the
hands of powerful and cutious Master, and see Mountains levelled to please him;
Precipices filled up; Rivers turned out of their way; Springs, before hid under
ground, sport it in the air; we admire man's industry, and cannot enough wonder
that a Creature so weak in appearance should be capable of so great Designs:
But if it should happen that in this vast extent of Air, where before was
nothing to arrest our sight, we should discover in an instant a proud and
magnificent Palace, spacious Fields, Mountains, Forests, Rivers and Seas, we
should instantly cry out, That 'twas not the effect of any Human power, but
something above our Nature. It Is much the same in Poesy and Prose; the one, as
I said, takes its Subject elsewhere, changes it, embellishes it, it is true,
beyond all we could expect; but the other asks nothing of any body, is content
with it self, draws all its Matter from its own bosom, making of nothing
something, by a kind of creation which seems to surpass Human power. Thus we
may say that two things render Poetry admirable, the Invention, whence it has
its name; and the Facility, which is very necessary to it. I do not speak of
the Facility of composing, which may sometimes be happy, but ought always to be
suspected; I mean the Facility that the Reader finds in the Composition, which
is often to the Writer one of the most difficult things in the World, and may
be compared to Terrass Gardens, whereof the expense is hid, and after they have
cost thousands, seem only the work of Chance or Nature. He that does not find
in himself nor richness of Invention, nor this happy Easiness, let him not
knock at the Muses Gate, for it is not necessary we make Verses. Now we should
be unjust, not to acknowledge that they both meet in Monsieur Sarasin. As for
Invention, he has always something ingenious, new, and particular, which he
has not taken elsewhere, and which he owes only to himself: And for Facility,
where is it to be found if not in his Works? never any thing was wrote more
free, more easy, and more sliding: Nature not only appears every where, but,
as a famous man said, appears every where at her ease.

I perceive I am gone far, but how can I but say something of those several
sorts of things of different nature, wherein this great man took pleasure to
exercise himself? To excel in one kind of writing is much; to excel in many,
and almost opposed, as Monsieur Sarasin did, is a certain mark of the greatness
and beauty of a Genius. I will go further; 'twas once said, That an eloquent
man had the same advantage over other men, that other men had over beasts. We
can make without injustice almost the same comparison between him that is not
able but for one sort of writing, and he that is excellent in many. For
certainly, by what name soever we ought to call that Light which conducts
Beasts, it produces so admirable effects, that our Reason, as proud as she is,
is forced into wonder and acknowledgment that she knows not how to attain the
like: But notwithstanding, because this Light which directs them so divinely in
some things, wholly leaves them in others, and there remains not one ray, one
spark of it, we admire what they so marvellously operate, but we esteem them
much below our selves; judging that this principle, which often makes them act
so well, has something of the stranger in it; greater, it is true, than our
Reason, but is not to them what our Reason is to us; that it is rather lent than
given them; that it makes them go to their end without their knowledge, as an
Arrow that flies to the Mark which it sees not, guided by the eye, and forced
by the hand of the Archer: Whereas Man, as he has for the things of the body
an universal Instrument, which is the Hand, has also for the things of the
mind an universal Instrument, that is, Reason, which he imploys continually in
all sorts of occasions and to all purposes; whose extent, rather than force,
distinguishes it from that other and inferior kind. By a like consequence when
we see one excel in one kind of work, and not fit for any other, if we speak
the truth, in what he does so well, we admire rather Nature in him than admire
him: For we conclude, That if he does not act by chance, at least he acts by a
blind Faculty, and only by Imagination, which is that part in us, we have
common with beasts. But that which ravishes all our esteem and all our
admiration is, to see one that acting by this general and universal principle,
and possessing the Idea of several kinds of writing, passes from one to another
with extreme facility: As an able Printer, who having all his Characters before
him, distinguished in their several Cells, chooses without hesitation and
without mistake, the great, the small, the least, according as the beauty of
his own Work demands. Whatever a Wit of this make goes about, he seems to have
applied himself always and altogether to that thing; the Proteus of the Fables,
nor the conclusion of the Naturalists, change not more easily than he. He will
be like that Philosophy expressed in Boethius, sometimes of the ordinary stature
of a man, sometimes his head raised to the Clouds. He will imitate the
suppleness of Alcibiades, who was at Sparta more laborious and more austere
than a Lacedemonian; in Ionica more voluptuous than the Ionians; in Persia more
pompous and magnificent than the Persians, changing manners as Climates and
abode. His light will be as that of the Sun, which Philosophers say is of no
color, nor in it self a color, but becomes any color according to the object
that receives it. He will accord things serious and witty; Verse shall not
hinder him to write well in Prose. Such are the Wits of the first Magnitude,
and such will appear the Genius of Monsieur Sarasin in this Volume.

But now having given him these Praises, let us answer to what may be said in
general against his Works. It is not my design here to reply to all that Envy
or Ignorance can oppose: Now adays, that men boldly tear in piceces the most
famous Authors living, who will wonder, if they treat the Dead after the same
manner? There is not a more agreeable Consort, says a Greek Poet, than that of
two men, whereof one speaks all manner of Ill, and the other hears him without
Answering; let our Age have the pleasure of this sweet music without
interruption, either in behalf of the Living, or the Dead. I shall only speak
to three sorts of persons, that act on a better score, and whose Objections are
most important.

The First are they, who would pass their Melancholy for Solidity and Virtue;
and knowing that our Author has been chiefly celebrated for his Works that are
purely divertising, they refuse his Writings even without reading them, and
accuse him for employing his Pen about things unprofitable. These severe
Judges, more wise than God and Nature, who have made an infinite number of
things for the mere pleasure of Mankind, would have men labor continually in
Law, Physic and Divinity; telling us, That nothing deserves esteem, but what
tends to public benefit. In this last particular I am near to their opinion;
but I cannot believe we labor unprofitably, when we labor agreeably for the
greatest part of the World, and when without corrupting men's minds, we can
divert and please them. Shall we call those unprofitable Works, whereby the
Master of a Family eases himself of his Domestic toils; the Prince and
Minister of their cares of State, a Magistrate of the tumult and noise of
Courts; a Soldier of his pains, and the Artizan of his labor? that make one
forget for a time, his poverty; another his disease; a third his cruel
passions, and all in general their misfortunes? Those that judge so are grossly
deceived, and take the means for the end, for want of going far enough, and
penetrating to the bottom of things. Let us open our eyes, and let us not
imagine that either the Exchange, destined to Commerce; or the Schools, where
they teach and dispute eternally; or the Bar, where they plead particular
Causes; or Councels, where they deliberate of public affairs; or these Armies,
or these Canons, or in a word, these great number of Engines, which move the
vast body of the State, are things made for themselves, or have every one a
particular end: they have all one general end, which is, that the Citizens may
live together virtuously, peaceably, and pleasantly. These three things have,
or ought to have met in the intention of Lawmakers, and those that have
founded Republiques: All that which contributes to the last without hurting the
other two, far from being out of the way to public good, as it may seem, take
a more direct and shorter way thither: For example, The Writings of one well
skilled in the Law are profitable, who denies it? they instruct the Lawyer to
defend his Cause; and the Lawyer well instructed, the Judge pronounces Sentence
aright; the Judge doing Justice, the Citizens live in peace: but we often see,
that the several hands of so many diverse Artizans turn the Art from its natural
intention; and it happens here as in those Machines, fair and of good invention
in appearance; but being composed of many pieces, whereof some one is always
out of order, they are often useless, and sometimes overturn what they should
bear. On the contrary, these other Writings, which treat commonly of Trifles,
if they do not serve to regulate the manners, or to enlighten the mind, as they
may, as they ought and as ordinarily they do, directly or indirectly; at least
without having need of any thing, but themselves, they please, they divert,
they sow and scatter every where cheerfulness, which is after virtue the
chiefest good. The man you blame finds perhaps, that to re-establish his ruined
health, to defend himself from evil fortune, for the good of the Family whereof
he is the stay, it is more profitable for him to make Songs, than to write of
Morality and Politics; if so, we may boldly affirm, that Morality and
Politics bid him make Songs; and it is an injustice without example to condemn
what another does, without knowing the motives or the circumstances. But I go
too far, and M. Sarasin has no need of this defense; for we see by the
different pieces of this Volume, that he reached at Fame by different ways,
that he thought of great things as well as small, if any part of learning can
be called small.

It Is better that I now turn my self to those that are reconciled to the truth
I apply to this kind of composition, but will not pardon the least fault in it;
believing perhaps by their severe Criticisms to gain the reputation of men more
quick-fighted than others. They are deceived; and if there be no malignity in
what they think, deserve to be disabus'd merrily, which I shall essay to do. I
knew an an ancient Gentleman, a great Wit and a great Courtier; Age seemed to
have reverenced these two rare qualities in him, and only to have attempted on
his body; his sight began to weaken in such a manner, that he saw nothing but
with difficulty; yet still he used an extraordinary diligence, not to cure this
imperfection which he knew incurable, but to hide it even from his most
intimate acquaintance: and if at any time he chanced to be at liberty with
them, he would strive by all means to discover either some inconsiderable spot
upon their Clothes, or a Ribband out of its place, or something of this nature;
and when he had given them this proof of his sight, returned with less regret
to his first obscurity, and contented himself with that troubled and confused
light which Age had left him. Is it not by a like Artifice, that so many,
little or meanly Learned, excuse nothing in productions of the Brain, and
pretend that they are not able to support the least negligences? for, in a
word, those that pardon these small defects in an excellent work, see them it
may be better than those that will not. If there be any difference, it is, that
they perceive the beauties much better, which are more sensible. A good Wit
embraces them, as we may say, with his Love; all that is in them please,
because they find a great number of things worthy to please. If it be told us,
that this is a discase of the mind, it is at worst one of those diseases which
are the signs of health, whereof Hippocrates makes mention, and amongst them
reckons Hunger and Thirst, though they are two things purely Natural.

It may be I am preoccupied with a like passion for the Works of my Friend;
however, in the last place, I cannot be friends with an Opinion which some
others have taken up, and which I should have concealed, if their Discourses
had not made it public. But I must say, that I approach this point with
trembling, for I see, or fear I see amongst those I am to combat, some whom I
reverence, and whose Opinions are any where else so many Laws to me. For all
this let us boldly venture either to defend the Truth, if we are happy enough
to know it, or let the World see that we are deceived, as it often happens to
men from the least to the greatest. In one word, I would defend our Author, not
from the Admirers of the deceased Voiture, for I am one of them; but from those
that will admire none but him; who hold him for the only Original of brave
things; and fear not to say, or suffer it to be understood, that all the rest,
and in particular M. Sarasin, are but bad Imitators or mean Copiests. I say
again, none admires Voiture more than my self; not excepting this excellent
man, who being too unjustly condemned to an eternal silence, when he heard some
attack the Memory of his Friend, burst like the Son of Croesus, all the strings
of his Tongue, and cried out (but, good God, with what a grace, and with what
force?) It is the King. Only that I may be the Echo of this voice, I willingly
repeat It is the King, and dispute not to Voiture the first place in many
things, without examining whether he deserves it in all. But certainly the
field of Fame is wide enough for all the World; there is more than one Laurel
and one Crown upon Parnassus. Can we not enough esteem Voiture without
despising those that he himself esteemed? let him ever enjoy the advantage to
have been of the best and most gallant Society that ever was, from which he
received much, and to which he contributed much; let him charm eternally all
the choice Spirits of the World; let him be eternally inimitable; but let them
not eternally accuse us for imitating him, and for being of the number of those
men, or to speak with Horace, those Beasts given to servitude, who have, or so
little Courage, that they dare not undertake any thing of themselves, or so
much Rashness, that they pretend always to do better than those that went
before them. For my part I am of opinion, that a man who has a Genius high and
noble, as M. Sarasin, will endeavor to equal all the Writers of his Age, but
will not imitate one of them. However, let us see in what part of his Works he
could be an Imitator of those of other men's. Is it in the History of the siege
of Dunkirk, in Walstein's Conspiracy? this I think is not that they would say.
Is it in his Dialogue, in his Funeral pomp, etc? there is little likelihood
here neither. Courage then, we have saved half this Volume. Voiture wrote a
great number of excellent Letters, and if we may judge by the pleasure they
give, it is this part of his Works he loved and esteemed most. M. Sarasin on the
contrary has scarce wrote any thing of this kind with care; and when he was
obliged by some reason of necessity or good manners, he applied himself to it
with regret and discontent, for he could not endure that, when a man had got
the reputation of Writing well, he should lose the liberty of writing as other
men do; I have seen one of his Letters wherein he complains very pleasantly of
it, and these words remain with my memory, I envy the happiness of my Lawyer,
who begins all his Letters with, I have received yours, and no body finds fault
with him. Not but that sometimes some Letters escaped him of an excellent and
particular Character; but he keeping no Copy of them, the most are lost by the
regligence of his Friends, and we have found only four or five, which we have
not been willing to publish, lest it should be thought that they were the best
of a great many, and that by choosing them we condemned the rest.

I can pronounce then, that in all these two wrote in Prose there is so little
resemblance, that one of them does not give us the least occasion to think of
the other. Let us come then to the Poetry, where I confess we shall have a task
of it: And yet here we have a great advantage, for they cannot reproach us with
the imitation of any particular Poem. But, say they, you have imitated the
chief, that is, the Style and Character; and that kind of Poetry Voiture had
introduced, which renouncing Gravity without stooping to Buffonry, is most
proper to entertain the ingenious part of the World. To answer this Objection
it is necessary to begin a little further off.

It has been said, that Sciences travel through the World; and as they owe
their light to all the Earth, after they have a long time shined on one
Climate, they leave it in its first darkness to go and dissipate that of
another. To this we may add, That in all Climates, and amongst every Nation,
every Art and Science takes it turn, as we may say, to lose its ball upon this
great Theater, and then retires to give place to another. Whether this variety
proceeds only from the destiny of humane things, always subject to change; or
whether it is bred from the diversity of times, or the different genius of those
who govern, whose Inclinations serve for Laws. Now these revolutions, as those
of Commonwealths, are made by means of some reigning Wit, elevated above the
rest, who not contented with the present state of things, finds out a new way
to greatness and glory: But as soon as one of these extraordinary Wits appear,
we see two other sorts which set out also; the first, who have nothing good,
but a Wit to do well, follow the track, but afar off, and are only shadows and
vain images, imitating him to little purpose; forgetting that there is no
virtue, but has two vices attending it, nor elevation, which is not environed
with precipices. The other does not it is true take a contrary way, for then
they should oppose the gust of the Age, which greedily embraces the novelty,
and perhaps they should oppose their own Inclination, which had carried them to
the same thing, if they had not been prevented; but going the same way they
open different paths, make new discoveries, sometimes they overtake, sometimes
they pass him that was before them; and if they do nor the one nor the other,
they make a different Character that has its price and its proper value.
'Twould be easy for me to justify what I have said by Examples of most
Nations, if that tediousness, which without doubt has wearied my Reader, had
not wearied me too. To come then to our particular Subject, French Poetry was
gay and fooling in the time of Marot and Melin; and though since it has
sometimes appeared with the same face, yet Ronsard, Bellay, Perron, more grave
and serious, had refined it, and our Muses began to be as severe as the
Philosopher of Antiquity, who never was seen to laugh. Voiture, who can refuse
him this praise? comes next with a Wit gallant and delicate, a Melancholy sweet
and ingenious; he called to mind the liberty of our Ancient Poetry, and had
before his eyes that of the Italians, and the most polite Roman and Greek
Authors; of all these together, not following any, he composed a kind of
Writing, which charms no less by its graces, than by its novelty. What should
M. Sarasin do, who came into the World a little after him? if his inclination
had led him from this kind of writing, I assure my self he would have forced it
to accommodate with the time; but I think the contrary, and that he gave thanks
to Fortune for being born in an Age whose taste was so conform to his own, and
which 'twas so easy for him to satisfy. He began then to write in this free
style, and finding himself rich in his own Inventions, no more imitated
Voiture, than Voiture did Marott. Now it these ingenious and learned persons
will confound these two so different manners of Writing, they wrong themselves;
and should leave it to weak and obscure sights, to make no distinction between
things that only have some resemblance. Take a man altogether ignorant, he will
put all the Poets in the World in one rank, from Virgil to the makers of
Acrosticks. Give him a little light, and he will distinguish between
Heroick-Poem, Satyr, Epigram and Elegy; but will not be able to make any
difference between Statius and Virgil; Plautus and Terence; Juvenel and Horace;
Martial and Catullus: and for Ovid, Tibullus and Propertius, he will not
suspect it is possible to distinguish their Genius and Character. On the
contrary, he that has an exquisite taste, and an exact knowledge of good
Authors, will not only distinguish the Characters of these several Writers,
but, as all things have their abuse and excess, he will sin on the other hand,
and mistrust the testimony of Books and Manuscripts; and finding in Works of
the same Author some light difference of Style, he will attribute them to
diverse Authors; without considering that a man is sometimes as different from
himself, as he is from another man.

If our Nation and our Age cannot produce in every kind, more than one man for
our admiration; if Voiture has left nothing for others to do, unhappy they
that follow him, let them renounce Poetry; why should they engage in a business
wherein there is no more Honor to pretend to? but let us not so cruelly
discourage so many brave persons that run the same career. I know some (and how
many are there which I know not?) whose Writings, though in the same kind, will
pass one day, I believe, for Originals and not for Copies. One, with the Spirit
of the World and of the Court, will have something of fine, subtle, labored,
turned, united; another will inspire his works with the Spirit of Love, and
some tender and delicate passion not to be found elsewhere; a third tho
Sportingly, will have the art to strew his Writings with the most excellent
Morality; and who can recount the several Characters which are now to be found,
or may appear hereafter in these things, seeing that from the diverse mixture of
these qualities, as from so many Elements, an infinity of forms and different
species may arise?

Let us try if we can clear this by a Comparison. There is something happens
like this in all good Arts; there is no one of them which has not been
cultivated by a certain number of excellent men; some have gone before, others
have followed, and every one has contributed something of his own to the
perfection of the Art, so that we do not find the entire Art in one, but in all
taken together. Let us consider the progress of Painting, which has so much
affinity with Poetry. Amongst the Illustrious Painters of Greece Apollodorus
was the most ancient; but they said of him, that he only opened the Doors of
the Art, whereas Zeuxes was the first that entered by a more exact imitation of
Nature. After him follows that crowd of famous Painters, Parasius, Protogenes,
Pamphilus, Aristedes, Nichomachus, and several others, every one happy in
certain things, which Pliny has so exactly and pleasantly described, one
excelled in Symmetry, another in the Invention and design; this was esteemed
for well representing the Hair and extremities of the body, that for hitting
the Passions and Inclinations of men; another for admirably finishing his
works; and some for ending in a short time. Appelles surpassed every one for a
certain inimitable grace, which he bestowed on all that past his hands; but
this Appelles, this Great Appelles, as eminent for his Wit as for his Pensil,
freely gave way to Amphion for order, and to Asclepiodorus for heightnings and
due observance of distances. Let us on in this path, for it is all strow'd with
flowers; and we cannot go amiss though we are out of the way; for we now
discourse of those Painters whose Fame is fixed in books, and whose Names had
been efac'd as their Colors, if the Works of Learned Pens did not last longer
than those of the best Pencils. Raphael being the Disciple of Pietro Perugino,
at first followed his Master by an imitation exact, and labored, as they say,
but dry, and imitated his manner so precisely, that what the one and the other
did could not be distinguished: but his Genius beyond compare greater than that
of his Master, could not long be contained in the same bounds; he fortified it
by the imitation of Leonard and Michael Angelo, and added Graces that these two
excellent men, though consummate in the Art, never knew, he composed a new and
charming way, infinitely beyond those he had followed. Julius Romain, the
Scholar of Raphael, had a great Spirit, and was capable of the greatest designs
and most noble capriccios of the Art, but wanted the sweetness and graces of
his Master, though he had labored all his life to profit himself of his
Precepts and Examples; all his Figures were fierce and bold, and he discovered
how our resolution in vain carries us one way, when Nature draws or leads us
another. Jitian on the contrary had an ordinary Painter for his Master, yet
notwithstanding he surpasses all his Profession in the sweet mixture of his
Colors, and in that love which reigns in all his pieces. Correggio owed less
to others instructions, Nature formed him her self, he was born and bred in
Solitude, never imitated any, and yet by an admirable effect of his great
Genius, his pieces have an universal way. which holds something of all the
rest. Let us admire this diversity: One by far surpasses all those he imitates;
another, though eminent in several things of his own, used all his skill to
resemble others, and could not attain it; this, though he perfectly knew what
all their several ways had in them of excellent, yet could not form a better;
that knew it not, nor imitated any one, and one would say he had taken them all
together. They followed one another, and instructed one another, and yet are
all great Masters and not Copiests.

But why do we stay upon Comparisons, perhaps too far from our Subject, when we
have such as are near at hand? Every one knows how much our Language owes to
the admirable Wit of the deceased Balsac; nor can we dissemble it without too
much ingratitude, it was not the same after he began to Write, but changed face
and came about. All those that wrote after him are his Debtors for part of
their Style: even those honest abused people, who when they say, to speak
Balsac mean, to speak ill, if ever they speak handsomely, are obliged without
knowing it, to him whom they outrage and abuse. The Fame of this excellant man
will be without doubt great and immortal; yet not such as to obscure that of
many illustrious Writers, who appeared after him; nor in particular that of
Voiture, who yet is as much his Debtor for expression, as M. Sarasin is to
Voiture for the Character of his Verse. To end this; Voiture, if we will
believe his intimate Friends, was of very delightful Conversation, so was M.
Sarasin; but 'twas, as all agree, in a different way; if Discourse and Writings
are equally the images of the mind, why might not the like different Graces,
which appeared in their Converse, be found also in their Works?

After having bestowed so many Praises on M. Sarasin's Works, let us a while
speak of M. Sarasin himself. I know not by what ill fortune, the genius of
Letters, and the genius for the World, are almost incompatible; those who
consecrate themselves to study, are capable of little else but studying; the
most part of them seem not to live but in their Works; to be Authors they cease
almost to be men; they have their minds full of great knowledges, but when they
would draw some present profit from them, they let us see how great a distance
there is between the beauty of contemplation, and the vigor of action and
practice; like that famous Gally of one of the Ptolomies, which had sourty
ranks of Oars, and could carry Three thousand Soldiers, besides Four hundred
Sailors, and Four thousand slaves; but so vast and unweildy, that 'twas
impossible to set it to Sea, and it served only to look upon. Let us not accuse
Arts and Sciences for this, it is not their fault; it is the imperfection of
humane Wit, not strong enough to bear them, or able enough to manage them; but
as a sick or weak Soldier, is oppressed or hindered with his own Arms. Our
excellent Friend was none of these, and if there be need of an illustrious
Witness, we will produce no other but that Prince, great by Birth, great for
his Mind and Courage; a Prince who judged not by others Eyes or Opinions, but
by his own, and who a thousand times, when environed with a crowd of persons of
quality and merit, found an entire Court in M. Sarasin; whether he was to
deliberate, or execute; to negotiate important and public Affairs; to rely
upon him for the conduct of his private; or sought a Conversation solid and
learned, or would relieve himself by a pleasant one.

Could I but represent by some great and bold stroke of my Pencil the charms of
his Conversation, as they are impressed in my memory; but it happens here as in
all other excellent things, it is easy to say what they are not, and hard to
describe what they are. If it be asked me, What had Monsieur Sarasin in him so
universally to please? He had nothing of that which displeases in most Learned
men, and in such as make profession of Letters. Some, either by a virtue too
austere, or by a Scorn which renders them scorned, hold no commerce but with
the Learned, and voluntarily renounce the Society of the greatest part of the
World: they do wrong to Philosophy, for men instead of conceiving under this
name, good sense and love of reason, which naturally has a thousand charms,
fancy something strange and barbarous, which renders men of bad humors, and
will not let them be Sociable; they forget that Socrates their Founder and
Father (if they are his legitimate Offspring) would laugh, and dance as other
men, and thought nothing unworthy of him, but Vice. There are others who have
not this peevishness nor fierceness, but by a too strong application to their
designs, are always divided, and carry but half themselves to any place, still
looking aside, as a Lover far from his Mistress. Others, that have but little
experience of the World, though a great Judgment, stir not but with fear, as in
a strange Country; they say nothing through a too curious choice what they
should say, and we may divine their minds sooner than see them. On the
contrary, others abuse the Reputation they have got; they speak well, but they
speak always; they speak continually excellent things, but they will not let
others do it; whereas they should do in Conversation, what that Ancient did in
the Commonwealth, when he retired sometimes to let Virtues less bright than his
own appear. What shall I say of those that can talk of nothing, but of their
Works? of those that please at hand, but having still the same thing to say,
grow as tedious the second time, as they were delightful the first? of those,
who to show their Wit are continually contradicting? those Opinionative men,
who, whether it be through a foolish Pride, dispute against the Truth they
know, which is a vice unworthy of an honest man; or whether it be that they can
never know it, being once prepossest, which is always a great fault; or
whether they sustain trifling matters unseasonably, or with too much heat,
without complacency, without discretion, which is a great weakness. But this is
a matter without bounds wherein I am engaged. I stop here, and it shall be
enough to say, None of these weaknesses were discoverable in our Friend, and
whether by this or by a thousand rare qualities, he pleased all different sorts
of Spirits, as if he never thought of pleasing but one of them. The Ladies, the
Learned, the Courtiers; in Affairs, in Pleasures; whether he held a place in a
regulated and serious Conversation, or whether amongst his Friends and
Acquaintance he was carried to those innocent debauches of mind, those sage
Follies, wherein serious Discourses give way to the capriccio's and ends of
Poetry, where every thing is in season, except cold and severe reason. But it
is time to put an end to this long Discourse, wherein I fear to have taken
pains for my own shame rather than for Monsieur Sarasin's honor; however, I
have done what I chiefly desired to do, for I have given public marks of the
Esteem I had for him; may they be as immortal as his Works. I may be accused
for having said too much, but when I consult the passion I have for his glory,
I reproach my self for not having said enough; and I know well, that if I had
not rejected several things that came into my mind upon this rich and abundant
Subject, I had said much more.

A DIALOGUE OF LOVE, Out of French.
BEing come to Paris to justify my Innocence and oppose the Calumnies of mine
Enemies, whilst I expected answer of Letters written to the Court in my favor,
and was in the mean time retired with my intimate Friend M. P. one day after
dinner M. Chappelein, Trilport and Menage came to visit me. These Gentlemen
concerned themselves infinitely in my disgrace, and acted in my behalf with a
noble heart, not to be found in the Histories of Orestes and Pilades, and other
Friends of antiquity. They sound me in the Hall, where I was harkening to an
excellent Musician: I believed, said Mons. Chappelein addressing himself to me,
that in this your Retirement I should rather have found you fastened to
Seneca's Treatise, which proves, that a wise man is not subject to the Injuries
of Fortune, than pleasing your self with Music, which ordinarily does not
delight any, but unperplexed minds. This ought not to surprise you, answered I;
for first you do me wrong to esteem me of a perplexed mind, seeing you know
that my Conscience is very clear: and though this seem strange to you, you that
have been accustomed to regulate your virtue by that of the Stoics, and would
have us, as they, encounter Misfortunes with a stubborn brow, and not take off
our thoughts from the Evil we are to combat, till we have made a perfect
conquest of it; yet it is convenient for us who follow another Sect, and by
another biass defend our selves from Grief, not to wrestle with it, and to
endeavor rather to forget, than to vanquish it. This is, said M. Menage, the
Opinion of Epicurus, who will have us dream of Pleasures to take us off from
the thought of Pains, and ordains, that we master it by Diversion. Truly we
must acknowledge, pursued he, that this man's Philosophy does marvellously
assist Nature, and that his Opinions are very well accommodated to our
weakness; and I cannot enough praise our excellent Gassend, whom we may call,
as they did Epicurus, the Father of Truth, or ar they called Socrates, the
Father of Philosophy; we cannot, I say, praise him enough for having employed
that profound crudition, and long experience, which has got him so many
Admirers to clear up what remains of the Doctrine of this Philosopher, and anew
to found a School, whose Disciples once filled whole Towns in Greece. I am very
glad, replied I, that you have not insulted over this Author of Pleasure, with
the most part of the World, who are deceived by this last word, and who do not
dream that the true Epicureans lead a life as regular as our reformed Monks;
and that you may the better see I combat Grief by flying it, see but the Books
I read in my idle hours, you will not find Boethius or Epictetus among them.
Hereupon M. Trilport coming to the Table found a Lucretius, a Salust and the
Romance of Perceforets, and turning toward me; The first of these Books, says
he, is proper for you, the other is one of our old Tales; but as for Salust,
who can make an Historian one of the Disciples of Epicurus, who forbids his to
meddle with the Commonwealth? I am not sworn, replied I, to observe all the
Rules of this Philosopher, and I only follow those Opinions of his, to which my
Reason and Nature carry me. But, says he, again opening Lucretius, I find you
very bold to read Verse, you that know it is Verse has done you so many bad
offices. It Is true, answered I, that I owe a great deal of ill will to the
Muses, but it is to my own: for I might have read all the Verses in the World,
if I had not made Verses. It was time for me to retire, for having wrote Qu'Eve
ayma mieux pour s'en fair conter,
Prester l'oreille aux fleurettes du Diable,
Que d'estre femme, and ne pas coquetter.
I was so embroiled with the Sex, that I know no Elegies so lamentable, nor
Stanza's so flattering, that could charm the wrath of our Ladies. Perhaps then,
replied M. Chappelein, you have not only bid adieu to Phoebus and the nine
Sisters, but also to Cupid and his Mother; and do not you remember, adds M.
Trilport, the Verse of our Country man Bertaut?

Que s'empescher d'aymer est dur aux belles ames. I remember nothing but what
follows, answered I;

Qu'aymer fidellement apporte de soucy. And to speak freely, retiring from the
Service of Ladies, I rather think I have cured my self of a small Disease, than
deprived my self of a great pleasure. For this time, says M. Menage, you shall
not be alone; and you see one that has long since hung up his Chains in the
Temple of Liberty. Away, away, says, M. Chappelein, you are ungrateful Fellows;
for not to mind you of your good Fortunes, do you not remember, that what you
have of Civility and Politeness, you have learnt it of Ladies, who have
suffered you and been beloved by you? Truly, replied I, I could answer you,
that I never was happy enough to obtain that which you call Good fortune, and
protest to you with the Spaniard, that Amador fui mas, nunca fui amado.However,
that you may not contest on this point, I am content to tell you, that for the
Civility and Politeness which you pretend we owe to Ladies, methinks there
needs nothing but my Example to satisfy you, that a man may spend much time
with them, yet not acquire these Two qualities; but because I impute it to my
inability, that I come forth rude and unpolished from their Conversation, I
leave it to M. Menage, against whom you have addressed your Reproaches as well as
against me, and in whom you may justly admire all those good qualities which I
want, to explain if it has been the company of Ladies that has rendered him
so accomplished. Truce, if you please, with your Complements, says M. Menage,
let it suffice you that I do not aspire so high, and that I pretend not to pass
for Baldassars Courtier, who never lived but in Cicero's Oratory, in Plato's
and Sr. Tho. More's Commonwealth: But whether it be that I am not of Mr.
Chappelein's opinion, I, that am accused not to accustom my self to be of
other men's, or whether I please my self to oppose them, as you often say I do;
seeing there are no Women here, I cannot dissemble, that whatever advantage we
may expect from their Conversation, we meet on the contrary with so many things
in it that may hinder us from becoming gallant men, that I am ready to dispute
against the old Thesis, which exposes it as a thing impossible for a man to be
very proper for the World, if he has not been amorous in his youth. And I,
says M. Cha. am ready to maintain it against you. For my part, says M. Trilport
turning himself to M. Chapter I declare my self your Second, if M. M. can find one
in so unjust a cause, as he is about to defend. If the matter were not gone so
far, added I, and that he had been content to sustain, that Ladies were good
Friends, but very dangerous Mistresses, I think I had served him against you;
but seeing he carries things to extremity, I cannot be of his side. It Is not
the first time, replies M. M. that you have come with odds against me, yet for
all that, not only I have not fled for it, but I have not been vanquished.
Wherefore I once more resolve, having proposed any thing to imitate Ariosto's
Rodomont, who called forth the Knights to combat two and two, or three and
three, and to take for my Motto Horatio Sol contra Tuscana tutta.What you say,
answered M. Trilport, obliges us also, notwithstanding your Rodomontado, to
imitate those Knights, who never went two against one; and seeing M. Chapter is he
that took up the gage of defiance, which you had thrown down, we will let him
enter first into the Lists, and I doubt not to see him come out Victorious. If
this happens to me, replies M. Chapter 'twill be doubtless more by the force of
truth, than by mine: for if his cause were just, I should esteem my self lost,
knowing him a long-winded Knight of great force; or, to speak more familiarly
and quit the Romantic Metaphor, knowing no man more apt than he to maintain
Paradoxes, no not amongst us Stoics, who make a particular study of it. But,
says M. M. I do not hold what I defend so Paradoxical as you imagine; and to
let you understand so much, seeing we have time enough, consider the Reasons on
which I ground my Opinion. After these words being silent a while, and seeing
we prepared to hearken to what he had to say, he began again thus; I have
loved, and often Sans fair levain, mon avanture a este tell
Que de la mesme ardeur, que j'ay brusle pour elle,
elle a brusle pour moy.
I am forced in spite of my modesty to speak to you at this rate, to the end
that being to declare much ill of Love, this may take from you all imagination,
that I go about to revenge my self for bad usage: and also, that you may give
me an entire belief, seeing that I know the good and the ill by my own
experience; for, in my opinion, Hannibal had reason to mock the Greek Orator
that gave him Military Lessons, and the Orator had had no less occasion to
laugh, if Hanibal had undertaken afterward to show him the precepts of
Rhetoric. We cannot discourse well of things which we have not practiced, and
often the use does not agree with the speculation; but I who have Couru les
mers d'amour di rivage en rivage,and know all that is done in the Cloister of
this God, to speak with Petrarch; I may well methinks be believed in what I
shall say. So much the more also as I find my self at present in a condition to
speak of it with an entire indifferency; but because to judge of the effects of
a thing it is necessary we know the nature, we shall not do amiss to inform our
selves who this Love is, that you would have the Author of so much good to
Mankind, and of whom you sustain, that young people have as much need as of
Academies and Colleges. I will also do you this favor, not to enquire News of
him any where, but in your Books, and as I speak to the chief Poet of our Age
and Nation, I will serve my self of the Opinions of those Great men of
Antiquity to whom you have succeeded. They say then, that Love is a Child; they
put a Ribband over his eyes; they clap wings to his shoulders; they hang a
quiver of Arrows by his side; they arm his two hands with a Bow and a Torch:
Thus far this Figure does not make for you, and to consider the outside of this
Picture, Cupid appears only a piece of Grotesque, or a Chimera. But you will
tell me that Poetry has its mysteries, and we must not do that wrong to the
men you esteem, and who had the honor to be the first Philosophers of the
World, to think, that without reason they designed Love under so strange a
Figure. I know that the extraordinary things which Poetry presents have all of
them a hidden sense, and that she serves her self of strange and surprising
Pictures to draw the vulgar to the search of truth. The Modern Italians, who
have outdone the Invention of the Greeks (for the Latins did but copy them)
expose nothing so fantastical, to which they have not fixed an Allegory, and
tell us, that their Enchantments, their Furies, their Giants, their Monsters,
and other pieces of Knight-errantry are only to allure the People, and to
instruct them whilst they seem also to please them: But I go further and say,
that amongst all the Images, which Poetry has represented to us, there is none
more ingenious than this of Love; so naturally it expresses this passion.
Wherefore let us examine it, if you please, and we will consider first this
Child Love. Here I demand of you, if you were to represent Fortitude, Prudence,
or any of the Virtues, should it be under this Figure? I am confident you will
answer me, that you should like better to draw an armed Pallas, or show a
Hercules overcoming a Lion; but on the contrary, if you were to describe
Weakness, Imprudence, Softness, Incontinency, and many other of our bad
qualities, what could serve better to this design than the Picture of a Child?
What think you Poetry would teach us by this? nothing doubtless, but that a man
is subjected to all the imperfections of Childhood, when he becomes amorous. So
the Comicks introduce Love upon their Theaters, without counsel, without guide;
accompanied with Suspicions, Injuries, Enmities; sometimes in Truce, sometimes
in Peace, sometimes in War; and find that these disorders and inequalities are
so natural to him, that they conclude, 'twould be the utmost of Follies to
believe we can love wisely. And it is no wonder a Poet in love found out, that
he who first painted Love a Child had an admirable hand, because he first
discovered how Lovers pass their life, that they are deprived of good sense,
that they lose solid goods to run after toys; but the worst is, that these Toys
and these light Cares do often consume our whole life, and remain with us to
decrepitude. Imagine then, what a sight it is to find an Old man making Love,
and who, like an Ape to run after Nuts, tears the Robe of Philosophy wherewith
he was clad; to see an Old woman every morning put on a foreign Face, dress her
self up like a Puppet, and buy the Cajolleries of a Younger brother with the
best of her Fortunes. It Is for this some body says Venus is angry with Old
people, that Marriage does not become them, and as a Poet in Plutarch sings
Qu'autant vieillard a la barbe fleurie,
Pour ses voisins que pour sey se marie.
And you may remember, that in Old times they publicly hooted at these
Gallants of Proserpine, and that against their approach they armed themselves
with the same preservatives that Pagan Superstition had ordained for the worst
things. In fine, to continue Love when we begin to cease to live is a dotage
most deplorable, and there is nothing more shameful than Les ridicules aventures
D'un amoreux en cheueux gris.
I know not how to let you proceed, said I, interrupting him, without praying
you to spare M. G. and that you may not refuse me, do but call to mind the
pleasure you once took to see him cherish his yellow Ribband which his Mistress
gave him, and how wittily he discoursed of this Favor of hers, so that you
wanted little of wishing an Old age like his; at least, reflecting upon his
Nymph, his Music and his good Cheer you told us, he past this age as Horace
had wished. Truly, added M. Trilport, the Romance of his life is so pleasant a
thing, that I think 'twould be spoiled should it be reduced to a serious
History, and as I have the reputation of soliciting the affairs of my Friends,
I also recommend him to your favor. M. Menage calling to mind the Verse of
Tasso, Habbia vita (rispose) e libertade:
E nulla a tanto intercessor si negbi.
for there is no fear that this one Swallow should lead back the Spring to Old
men, which is the season of Courtship, nor that a general defect can be excused
by by one man's merit. But to return to our Discourse, this Child is Naked; in
this without doubt appears his Imprudence, at least if we will believe the old
Maxim, That there is nothing more shameful, than to strip our selves before
all the Worid, and if he will believe Eustatius, who calls Love the Father of
Impudence: unless we may say, that he is painted Naked to let us understand,
that he ruins his Followers even to the despoiling them of every thing. Let us
now pass on to the equipage they give him: They say then he has a Ribband
before his eyes; what do you think this Blindness signifies; but that the Soul
of a Lover is in an eternal darkness, and that Reason knows not which way to
turn her self, having Passion for her Guide? There is an Italian who will not
let reason escape so, but says she is dead, whereas we only say, she goes
astray. Now without divining, and to speak only according to our Love-Writers,
do you know what excuse they betake themselves to, when they would defend the
Irregularities of their thoughts, or action? they think that whatever
extravagancy they commit they apologize enough, when they protest that, thanks
to Love, they cannot see what they do; and that you may not appeal from these
hearken to Ovid, who has made an art of a Passion, and given rules for a
Folly; he does not only grant, that Lovers do not see what is reason, but he
carries their Blindness even to a want of good manners, and exempts none from
this defect. In the mean time, that this Ribband may not be taken off, that is,
that Reason may not return to Lovers, such as are not willing this madness
should have its lucid intervals, are not content to cover Loves eyes, but they
wholly take away the use of his sight. In this condition, methinks they should
rather furnish him with a Dog and a Staff to conduct him, than fasten Wings to
his shoulders; and as often as I fancy him blind and flying, I am fearful he
should maim himself against some Tree, some Tower, or some Mountain. I doubt
not but those who have thus made a Bird of him, would have left him a plain
humane Figure, rather than thus have shaped a Monster, if they could have
imagined any other way to send him about the World, which they pretend is
necessary for its conservation: but considering he could not do so many things
at once, nor, for Example, in one day wound a Negro and scorch a Greenlander
benumbed with cold, those which drink of the Seine and those which enrich
themselves with the Sands of Plata, if they had not furnished him with an
invention to make these long Journies; they found nothing so proper as to apply
Wings to him, but Wings not only more fit for a flight than those of Falcons,
but more light than the Winds, or than thought it self. I remember one day in
discourse with M. C. M. R. and A. the first very pleasantly maintained, that
considering all these great labors, Love was no better handled by Poets than
their Sisiphus, seeing they employed him continually in a work that seemed more
intolerable, than the rolling of his Stone; the second added freely, that it
seemed to him he was the more tormented, seeing they had to double his
drudgery, chosen the Night for him, which Nature appoints for the Rest of all
Creatures; but the conceit of the third, that excellent Translator, who gives
to his Copies the liveliness of their Originals, was yet more malicious, for
concerning Loves Feathers he explained Petrarchs Verses, In cosi tenebros a
estretta gabbia
Rinchiusi fummo, oue le pen usato
Mutui per tempo.
He pretended this strait and dark Cage, and this mewing of Feathers respected
rather the Health than the Manners. But to return to the Allegorical sense of
these Wings; they signify nothing but the Inconstancy, the instability of our
Loves; nothing but an uncertain and shameful agitation in the actions of
Lovers. Propertius calls these wings Winds, and marvellously strengthens our
explication, for they are to turn Lovers about as so many uncertain
Weathercocks. It remains only that we examine Cupid's Arms, his Arrows, whereof
some are of Lead, some of Gold; and his Torch, which penetrates even to the
marrow, and which burnt Troy the Great. Certainly it is in the use of these Arms
that he shows himself stark blind, for he strikes any where and on all sides.
Sometimes he makes a Monarch adore the daughter of a Dunghill: but let that
pass; Merit is to be found every where. But what will you say to see Old men
make love to young Wenches, and Old women fond of ill-featur'd Boys; Wise men
sigh for a foolish Gossip; to see this irregularity pass even to different
species? Do not you wonder to find in the list of your Lovers a Dragon, an
Elephant, a Peacock; and, to serve you in Fish and Flesh, a number of Dolphins?
You know the story, how this Dragon lay every night with a young Maid of
Etolia, and beat her when he thought he had occasion to be Jealous; you know
how an Elephant in love with an Herb-wise brought her Nosegays, whilst the
Grammarian Aristophanes enamored of the same Wench, was jealously enraged at
the Caresses of his mighty Rival, whom he durst not provoke: to repeat here the
History of Dolphins were to lose time. If we will turn the Medal, we shall find
on the other side our Nature intreagu'd with strange Passions; and Plutarch
will tell us, that the Minotaurs, Sphinxes and Centaurs, were the products of
these little Loves, and we shall praise Thales for advising Periander to marry
his Sheapherds betimes; but we can never call to mind the Adventure of the
Golden Ass and that honest Lady, without Laughing a little; and when we
consider 'twas Love did it, how can we forbear to cry out with the Italians,
bella botta? You see then, by this unreasonable employment of his Arrows to how
many poor affections our minds are betrayed when Love governs them; to what
transports we abandon our selves against the Laws of Honor and Society; to how
many foolish passions we expose our lives. I think, for my part, 'twere better
to be wounded with a poisoned Arrow, than with these dangerous Shafts whereof
we speak; and that the Torches of the Furies would not torment us with so much
rage, as that does which Love wields: at least the effects are not more
dangerous; and those Lovers which this flame devours, dream no less of Poison
and Poignards, nor are less tormented with Fears and Jealousies, and the rest
of such disorders, than Criminals with their eternal pains, and the remorse of
their Consciences. I had forgot this Gold and this Lead which tips his Arrows,
whereof the first give us love, the other cause aversion. To explain this
difference, you must remember that Poverty, which Petronius calls the Sister of
Wit, having often hindered Poets from being happy in their loves, for Old men
and Fools with their Gold are wont to drive them from Families, to which they
promised no less than Immortality, they have invented these Golden shafts which
find nothing impenetrable; and those Leaden ones, which it is true belong to the
same Quiver, but are always blunt, though Love lets them fly with never so
much force. The Master of Lovers writes, that he does not compose his Precepts
for the Rich. And Homer the Dean and Founder of poesy tells them, if they have
nothing but Verse, they shall be chased from Lais Street as well as from
Plato's Commonwealth: by all which we may easily judge, that these Golden
Arrows signify it is Money drives the trade of Love, and that Covetousness
overrules Merit and Beauty. There is no Law which does not stoop to his
Shafts, according to the saying of Count Villa Mediana, who might well know
them: After many disorders, which they had caused in his Fortune and in his
Life, he became their Victim; for you know very well what Jupiter thundered on
this Ixion, seeing it is a Story of our times: and it seemed he was better
contented with Deaths Arrow, than with all those we speak of; at least he that
was in the Coach with him when he was killed reports, that when he received the
wound whereof he immediately died, he said no more, but C'en est fait, as if he
had freed himself of a troublesome business. This Count then, who was the
Honor of Courtship, and the Wit of the Court of Spain, who had a fair Estate,
was of a great hope and a great Merit, and whose Purse was never tied, but with
an Onion-peel, as an Ancient would have those of Lovers to be, amongst his
Works has left us these Verses, De tus flechas por ser d'oro
Ninguna leise deffiende.
He would say, after those experiences which his Liberality had given him, that
Presents are strange Corrupters. Let us confess the Infamy of this traffic,
seeing nothing can be so sordid as to sell Friendship, nothing more base than
to love for Money. And truly, having considered so many defects, we may well
subscribe to what one writes of Love, That by a just Sentence of the great Gods
he was banished from their assembly, because he disturbed it and filled Heaven
with Seditions: and further, That these Gods when they cast him down to Earth
cut off his Wings to bestow them upon Victory, and to hinder him from ever
mounting to Heaven again; and they might well have added, That when Love left
Olympus for Earth, Peace abandoned men to fly up to Heaven. In the mean time,
there is your Cupid in a pitiful predicament, and all his mysteries discovered
little to his advantage. This is his true portraict, wherein I have labored
according to Nature, and I dare say with much success: for, though my Way is
not good, yet the piece is perfectly like him, and in one word I can excuse my
bad Rhetoric by the ordinary Quodlibet and say, that my Picture wants nothing
but words. O Painter Apelles, Painter Zeuxes, cries out M. Chapp. why are not
you now alive? you had learnt much by copying this piece, which exceeds all
yours; and profited strangely under this new Master, whose works pass Nature,
whereas yours only went even with Nature. I know not how you understand it,
said I, but methinks you do not praise our Friends Picture by saying it
surpasses Nature, whereas this Art is consummate when it arrives to equal her.
Truly, replies he, I did not design to make a Panegyric, looking upon it as a
piece meant to please, whereof the invention seems handsome, and the order and
colors may flatter our Judgment and Eyes; but I do not hold it for the true
picture of Love, as I pretend to let you understand. In the mean time, says M.
Menage, I have advanced nothing, which I have not taken from some of your
Fraternity; but because you may reply, that Passion made them write against
their Consciences, and that I have only quoted them where they complain; to act
sincerely with you, I must tell you, that I have displayed none of Loves
defects, whereof I am not ready to give you Examples; and now I have
represented this folly, I will let you see some illustrious Fools. So having
taken breath he began again thus: I will not entertain you with the story of
Iphis, whose Love forced her to hang her self for the cruel Anaxarches; nor
with the disorders of a great many others. The Examples of these particulars
profit little, because no man esteems enough the Loves of the Vulgar to
regulate his own by them; and all blame the Errors of the Common People instead
of correcting their own by them. Let us cast our eyes then upon the great
Atrides, whom the whole Greek Nation, the wisest and most ingenious of the
World, chose for their Chief: He perhaps was elected by the Greeks, because
they were of your opinion; they knew him of an Amarous complexion, and judged
that this temperament would enable him for great matters. Let us look a little
nearer, and see if it were so: The first and most notable Action of his
Generalship was to present his Daughter Iphigenia to be Sacrificed when the
gods stopped his Fleet at the Port of Aulide, and would be appeased by this
victim. This action seems at first blush above the common Virtue; but if I
should tell you that he corrupted the Mariners to give out, that the Winds were
contrary, and Neptune wroth; that he spent some days in the preparation of
this execrable Sacrifice, to give time to his Emissaries to find out a certain
Boy of whom he was desperately enamored; you would cry out, Is this the man
whose Magnanimities ennobled him above all others, and upon whom all Greece had
turned its eye? I pass with silence so many wretches which he suffered to die
of the Plague in the Camp of Troy, because he would not deliver the Daughter of
the Priestess Chrysis. I insist not on the quarrel he had with Achilles, when
he carried away Briseide, by which Rape he not only retarded the taking of
Ilium, but endangered the Greek Vessels to be fn'd. I only let you know, that
when he carried away Cassansandra from her house al dispetto di Madonna
Clitemnestra, he provoked the vengeance of his Wife, and armed for his
execution the weak and effeminate hand of Egistus. But his Rival, the man that
was nourished with the marrow of Lions; brought up under the discipline of
Chiron; so robust that no man could use his Lance; Achilles, for whom the
death of Hector was reserved; what does he when Agamemnon stole his Mistress?
doubtless something high and noble, for he was a Hero and a Lover; first he
rayl'd at the King with the scoldings of an Oister-wife, calling him Cuckold
and dirty Dog, whereby he disparaged the Gentaur which should have brought him
up better. When that would not do, the pitiful fellow went crying to his
Mother, and stayed in his Ship far from the Army, and at the expense of his
Reputation. But what will you say to Hercules, that mighty tame of Monsters,
when you shall find him sitting by Omphale, having changed his Lions-skin for a
Peticoat, and when you see him -- de la clava noderosa in vece
Trattar il fuso, e la conocchia imbelle?
Can you like the condition to which Love had reduced this gentle Spinster?
rather would you not wish, as the Captain in Terence, that the Wenches had
clapped his Cheeks with their Pattins. But not to spend time in reckoning up the
Follies of the amorous Hero's of Antiquity, let us go directly to the Fountain,
and consider the Father of gods and men, Jupiter that darts the Thunderbolt,
who makes Olympus tremble with one wink of his eye, who brags, that with a
Chain tied to his Toe he will toss the rest of the gods out of Earth into
Heaven: We shall find him, saving the respect I owe to to Poetical Divinities,
as very a fool as the rest. Nay, he is worse handled by Love; and Petrarch, who
had seen the Triumph, sings, that amongst all the gods which past before the
Chariot of Love, he was most oppressed with the number and weight of his Chains.
'Twould be tedious to repeat here all his Metamorphoses, or to consider this
Governor of the World sometimes like a Goose, sometimes in some other Figure
as ridiculous; it is better let Ovid conclude upon this Subject, and to believe
him when he says, that Jupiter by his Loves dishonored himself and all his
House. O Love, how excellent are thy inspirations! and how necessary are thou
to humane Virtue! I see by M. Chapter looks, that he is vexed to hear me thus scoff
at the Children of Homer, and that he is in a great deal of impatience to
answer me; I will give way to you presently. In the mean time, if you are not
contented with Examples out of the Fable and the old History; if you will tell
me, that the Inhabitants of Parnassus sing nothing that is not subject to
Caution; that honest Homer slept sometimes, and that a good Poet is but a bad
Witness; I will leave your Hero's and your Gods at rest, and will shut my eyes,
that I may not observe in them the Imperfections of Lovers. I know you have
your answers ready, and that some Mythologist is at hand to relieve you; but I
am sure they have nothing to say to Plato, nor to Aristotle, and these are Men
of such weight, that if you will lay them by, I know not upon whom we may cast
our eyes to examine humane Actions. But I imagine, you have a secret content to
sce these two mavelous Wits numbered with the Lovers, and indeed, if amidst
their Loves they had preserved those great lights with which they penetrated
the most obscure Science, and so prudently established Rules of Manners,
Conduct of Families, Polity of Cities, and Government of States, you had reason
to be proud. But on the contrary, if Love has no less darkened these
all-seeing eyes than those of the Vulgar, and that this Passion has made these
great minds descend to Fooleries, dare you still maintain, that Love is
necessary to Mankind? See how the thing goes: Plato being yet young became
amorous of Aster, and immediately suffered in his understanding. He never lay
down, but he called Aster was a Boy.
her Lucifer and Hesper; and according to the ordinary gibberish of Lovers,
placed her above the Stars. If he were to bid her farewell, he presently
complained he had lost his North-Star, and that his Reason was benighted. But
the Epigram he composed for Archianassa shows us more plainly, that Wisdom goes
out of the Head when Love gets in. This Woman approached Old age, so that he
could not say she was the Aurora or the Sun, but he must write high Lines and
make Phoebus speak in her praise; but see an Impudence that never any Poet
durst be guilty of, whatever Hyperboles they have invented in favor of their
Ladies: Plato seeing that in this surrow'd-face there was no room for Beauty,
thought fit to say, that Love hid himself in those wrinckles as in an
Ambuscade; whereas, if he had had his Reason about him, he would have said,
that he lay there interred as in a ruinous Sepulcher. I know not, says M.
Trilport, how you understand it, but if you pretend to censure Plato for his
Epigram, you pronounce your own Sentence. How so? demands M. Menage. See,
replies M. Trilport, how your memory, that furnishes you upon the place with so
many handsome things, is wanting to you at your need, and in your own case: Do
not you remember that you have made a Sonnet of this Epigram? and that you as
well as Plato have had wrinckled Mistresses. Truly, answered M. M. I had forgot
that Sonnet and those Mistresses, and I do not care for remembering the Follics
of my youth. For your Mistresses, replies M. Trilport, let them be drowned in
Lethe, it shall not trouble us; but the Sonnet would serve to excuse this
Action of the Philosopher. One Folly, says M. M. cannot be the apology of
another; and if my Sonnet forbids me urging the Epigram of Plato, I cannot see
how you will defend the Verse he composed, when he was in love with the fair
Agathon, which says, he never kissed this. Beauty but he shut his Lips, for
fear his slippery Soul should sally out. Now, what think you of this Kiss? is
it according to good Manners? is it not too wanton for a Philosopher? is this
handsome discourse for a man they call Divine, as if it were too little to style
him Wise? Besides, this Plato in the rest of his life was as very a Vagabond,
and as inconstant as Hylas in our Astrea, and like him went di ramo in ramo, di
fior in fior: besides the gallantries recited, he loved Phaedra, he loved
Zantippe; perhaps it was Socrates Wife, and that he made a Cuckold of him the
Oracle had pronounced the Wisest man in the World. Cuckolds are very happy said
I, that have Socrates for their Patron. Let us not Jest, says M. M. upon so
shameful an Action. This Gent. replies M. Chapter does here what Socrates would
have done, who believed men ought not to lay matters of this nature so to
heart, and would have been Scandal'd at it less than you are. I see how things
go, continues M. M. you would support vanquished Reason with a Jest, and I see
you in so merry a humor upon this Subject, that I can expect nothing serious
from you. Perhaps you will excuse the Scholar as well as the Master, and find
some pretense for the worst of Irregularities into which Aristotle sell, when
he Sacrificed to the Eunuch Hermia's Concubine; but he Sacrificed not his Heart
or his Liberty, which are the Imaginary offerings of our Lovers; he Sacrificed
to her solemnly, and to say all, in the same manner as the Athenians Sacrificed
to Ceres. I should be too tedious to stop upon the Examples of other
Philosophers, and I have chosen only these two; first, because public Opinion
has placed them above the rest: and further, because it would have been only a
repetition of the best part of Diogenes Laertius History, which is full of the
Lovetricks of those which the World has worshipped as the Lawgivers of Wisdom.
However, because you may chance to suspect the Grecian Faith, and despise
Beyond Sea Manners, and because our discourse seems principally to regard our
Nation: We cannot abstain from considering some one of our own, who have been
slave to the Son of Venus; but they shall be Knights without reproach, whose
Famous Acts raised them above others; Lovers of that age, when nothing in the
World was so great as our Court, when Charlemain counted almost the days of
his Reign by the number of his Victories; when they preserved Justice,
protected Widows, defended Orphans, exterminated Tyrants, and with their Swords
did more good to Mankind, than the Pens of Plato and Aristotle wrote. And now
enter Orlando. Love made him an enraged Fool; but his folly was incurable, at
least as to the remedies of Hippocrates and Galen, and of so strange a nature,
that Astolpho mounts Elias Chariot and goes to fetch a little phial of common
Sense for him; and that out of St. John's Shop, which the Poet makes a Chymick.
I could produce Hannibal, who failed to Triumph over the Romans, and ruined the
Reputation of his Country by giving himself up to the Caresses of the Capuan
Dames; and Antony, who lost more by the love of Cleopatra, than by the genius
of Augustus. I could mix Sacred story with Profane, and show you David without
Conscience, Solonton without Wisdom, Sampson without Strength; not to say any
thing of our Father Adam, whose Love cost us so dear. But not to weary you with
Examples, and yet to confirm my opinion, which I wish were yours, let us, if
you please, imagine with Petrarch a delicious Island covered with Rosebushes,
Jalsomine and Orange Trees; where the gentle Zephyrs temper and heat; where the
Flowers perfume the Air; where Hills and Woods give shade; where the Winters
are moderate, and where they pass their time in Sports, Feasts and Idleness;
and now let us imagine, that Love has chosen this place to triumph in, and that
here he has assembled all the Lovers between the Poles: and in the last place
let us imagine, that a Tempest has cast us upon this shore; for I will never
consent that we go thither in quality of Lovers; 'twere better we got thither
upon a broken Plank, the remains of a Shipwreck, as to an Enemies Country,
than to go before the wind in the Egyptian Queens Vessel, if we went to pay our
homage. Let us walk up and down a little, to refresh our selves after the
Voyage amongst these troops of Lovers, upon these Flowers and in these Meadows;
but on condition that we hearken to their words, that we mark their actions,
and that we judge then if it be good to imitate them. These that first present
themselves seem very melancholy; at least they have pale faces and heavy eyes,
as if they had past the Night without sleep. But O Jupiter, what discourse! the
first, who is clothed Pastorally and resembles the Myrtillus of Guarini, would
have Fountains weep for him, and the Winds sigh out his Martyrdom. See one
there, that consults the Echo, and is foolishly afflicted or joyed at what he
says to himself. Another recounts his misery to the Sun, to the Moon, to the
Day, to the Night. He there says, he should die contentedly, provided 'twere
embracing her he loves, and that he might have it in an Epitaph. But mark him
on the left hand quite despairing, for he curses the day in which he began to
love. His Neighbor seems more mad, and threatens no less than to break Loves
Bow. But let us leave him for fear of mischief, and let us approach the merry
Troop. Some you may perceive dancing under the Green Trees: let us hear the
burden of their Song, La jou^issance est pleine
De peur d'un changement.
See how imperfect their Joy is, they do not find their affairs well assured,
though they are in the best condition they can wish. Now those that stand by
and look on are crowned with Myrtle too, but for all that in an eternal
inquietude. One torments himself to explain a word his Mistress said to him,
because he doubts it is not advantageous for him: Another complains, that his
Lady looked upon his Rival too long and too pleasantly. This laments, because
he believes he did surprise upon his Ladies Cheeks the remains of a Smile,
wherewith she favored another. Do you understand this, do you not think you
are in Bedlam? were it not better for these poor Lovers freely to confess the
debt, and instead of these Fooleries, wherewith every one amazes us in his
turn, they should join in one Chorus and ingeniously sing.

Tutti habbiamo di pazzia colma la testa? Now to see if they act as they speak;
look upon those there, that kiss the Threshold, crown it with Flowers, rub it
with Perfumes; See those that engrave a thousand insipid stories upon the
Trees; those, that read worse in their Table-books. One, his arms crossed with
grief, another skipping. But see that Wretch who poisons himself, those Rivals
who kill one another. See Leandro in Mare, e Hero a la finestra.See those who
have ruined their Health by a disease detested in ours, and unknown to past
Ages. In one word, they are for the most part without Wealth, without
Reputation. In the mean time, see how they flatter their Tyrants, how they
disguise their Deformities, and though their Mistresses be never so ugly, they
make them Angels and Divinities. Let us reimbark, said I it is not safe to
remain long in an Island thus inhabited. Then you acknowledge, said M. M. that
it is dangerous to be amongst Lovers, and that the habit is dangerous. I have
heard say, that ordinarily we resemble those we frequent, and that we are
equally born good, but bad Company ruins us. But says M. Chapter to me, do you
think the matter goes, as our Friend says it does? What can I do, said I,
against so many Examples and Authorities? truly, if any thing keeps me yet on
your side it is, that I have found you so Judicions in all you hold, and you are
so litte accustomed to choose Opinions that are not good, that I am as yet
wavering, and as the Italian says, Ne si ne no nel cuor mi suona intero.But in
the mean time, pursued I, methinks M. Trilport is a little Melancholy, as if he
mistrusted his cause. You ill explain my Seriousness, replied M. Tr. and esteem
me a man of small Courage; the truth is, if any thing startles me, it is to see
M. M. treating us like Children, to whom they show painted Devils with Tails
and Claws, and terrifying Faces, to make them afraid; for I do not believe,
continued he, that you think Devils are so made, nor that you would go about
with the Poet Bernia, to take the just length of their Horns and Tails. So M.
M. with his Islands, his Imaginary pictures, his Fabulous examples endeavors
to fright us, and take us off from solid Reason. To what purpose is it to speak
of Agamemnon or of Aristotle, to know if a Young man ought to court Ladies? We
shall see, says M. M. a little heated, what this solid Reason will amount to in
the case; but to let you see, if I ought to allege Agamemnon or Aristotle,
whose Examples you believe such strangers to the question, I demand of you, if
this Induction is not reasonable? If Love assembles in himself all the Defaults
of Kings, of Hero's, of the gods of Fable; if Philosophers, who I place above
these Gods; if Men, who have excelled in Policy, in War, and pass the rest of
Mankind, have fallen into these shameful Errors, when they became Amorous; if
generally all Lovers are mad, may we not conclude, that a Young man who Loves
will become imperfect and vicious, as other Lovers; nay, is more subject to
these defects, than Kings, or Hero's, or Gods, or Philosophers, or Lawmakers,
or Conquerours, whose Examples we have been obliged to produce? though we have
besides strengthened our Position with Authorities and Reasons, the Image of
Cupid, the Isle of his Triumph, and the rest which we have advanced. We should
do you wrong, said I, in this matter to reproach you for having alleged any
thing without proof; your discourse in my opinion has been much to the
purpose: But to handle the Question more fully, and to act entirely according
to the taste of your Adversaries; will you not think it necessary to speak
something of our Young Gentlemen and our Ladies, the Lovers and Mistresses of
our Times and Nation; of their Conversation and of their Courtship? for from
things that are so familiar, and which we have every day before our eyes,
'twill be easy to see with which of the Opinions contested between you we
ought to close, and we may judge by the manners of our Lovers, whether we ought
to fly or follow them. For my part, answers M. M. coldly, I should think you
might spare me this pains, which seems altogether needless; and after I have
showed you, that generally all Lovers are extravagant, you cannot think our
Nation more exempt than others. And I am vexed, continued He, that you did not
acquaint me with your desires before we weighed Anchor to come from the Amorous
Island; for there I could have showed you a great many of those people you
enquire after, which yet are not difficult to be met with elsewhere. But now we
will undertake no more Voyages, nor will we quit Paris. To proceed orderly, let
us take our young Cavaliers, who a few Months since left the Academy; and Sons
of the City, Officers newly come to their charge. Let us imagine them Amorous,
and by their Actions examine the qualities Love endows them with. Let the
Gentlemen march first, that we may muster up the good parts they have acquired
with their Mistresses: And first, to study their Conversation, we shall find it
nor wise, nor solid, nor polished, nor gallant: What then? would you know? Let
us draw near them, you shall hear nothing but a gibberish eternally repeated,
composed of fifteen or twenty extraordinary words, which have a vogue in their
Cabal, which they speak improperly, and only to speak them, without considering
how they may cultivate their understandings; they spend in a quarter of an hour
a number of Fooleries, which yet they pronounce with a Jesting Authority, as if
there were Salt in them; or some concealed mystery. The Ladies in the mean time
they laugh upon the public Faith, as if they understood the subtleties; if
they meet with any man, that will not quit Reasons side to comply with them,
God knows with what scorn they use him, and how he shall be handled in all
places where these Starlins assemble to whistle. They believe nothing such an
enemy to wit as Silence; they infinitely esteem their Judgment, which furnishes
them with decisions for every thing upon the place: In fine, by force of
admiring one another, they are brought to think they are at the top of an
agreeable conversation. And now we have examined their Wit, which we find in
pitiful plight, let us consider their bravery. We shall quickly discover, that
their highest design is to guild a Coach, or to vary a Livery, or as Malherbe
says, Le perfum d'un colet,
Le point couppe d'un chemise,
Et la figure d'un balet.
We find them busied, as Women, to dress and trick up themselves, and with such
indecent Effiminacy, that it is left to us to divine not only, if they are Men,
but whether they seek not other men. In the mean time the presumption of being
Sparks gets up into their pates, they esteem themselves worth the Courtship of
an Amazon Queen, and all run the same danger for their Beauty, which the
Narcissus of the Fable did. In this condition, they choose rather the Fortune
of Paris, who was Fair as they, and possessed Helen, than that of Ajax. But they
merit the Reproach, which in Homer is given to this Original of Effeminateness,
Lasche Paris au visage tres-beau.and deserve to be treated as this Divine Poet
handles this little Wanton, when amidst so many thousand Combatants he brings
him in flying the Battle, to go lie with his Wife. From their Conversation and
their Persons let us pass to their Manners. Amongst other faults Libertinism
offers it self first: for, as their end is not to stop at a union of Wills and
Hearts, but to proceed on, as they say, to something more solid, they employ
the utmost force of their Wits to debauch the Consciences of Ladies by a pure
malignity of Nature. Without having any occasion to doubt, as learned
Libertines have, they jest with Religion, they commit a hundred indecent
actions in the Church. With five or six passages out of Charon and Montague,
which the ablest among them preach to the rest, they pretend to overthrow all
Divinity. The rest of their Sentiments are nor noble nor high; they think
nothing worthy the Virtue of their Ancestors; the wings of Love cannot raise
them to any generous thoughts; every day passes alike; the flower of their Lite
slides away in a shameful and unquiet Idleness, whilst they are seated in their
Chairs, extended in their Coaches, or bring disorder into Families that receive
them. But it is not in these times only, that such kind of People make a trade
of imbroiling Families; for you know, the Centaurs, the first Cavaliers of the
World, came to the wedding of Perithous only to make Love, and by consequence
they disturbed the Feast. I should be too long, if after the Gentleman I should
examine the Town-Child: I will content my self to say by the by, he is one that
believes himself an able man; that will talk Latin amongst his Kinswomen, and
before his Mistresses; that will judge of the Merit of his Rivals by their
Money; that wanting Experience in the World, will want Politeness and
Agreement. In the mean time the Citizen and the Gentleman, governed by their
Passions, neglect all the duties of Life, ruin their Domestic affairs,
abandon, together with their Friends, the thoughts of their Fortune, Honor,
and Reputation, and render themselves wholly despisable; and all this for the
Love of Ladies. According to this sense, the Greeian Sculptors, whose Works
often taught Morality, carved a Venus upon a Hee-Goat, thereby comparing a man
subjected to the power of Women to this Animal, which is blindly led to all the
unruliness of Love: but chiefly they were admirable for the invention of a
Figure, which they erected over the Tomb of that famous Courtizan, who had seen
all Greece on their knees before her Gate, and to whom they built a Sepulcher
at Corinth, near to the Temple of Venus the Brown; these Masters placed a
Lioness embossed, which tore in pieces a Ram. I should never have done, should
I recount all the Errors of this Sex when they once fall in Love; and yet, if
I would take the pains, 'twould amount to a great Argument against the contrary
Opinion. For how can we conclude young men should learn any thing that is good
of persons that are accompanied with nothing but Vanity, Weakness, Inequality,
Treachery; that have nothing sincere, nothing great; who have double Hearts,
counterfeit Faces and Actions? Would it not rather draw to a consequence, that
these Young men by conversing with Women, should lose all seeds of Goodness,
and all inclination which their Souls might have to Virtue? Nor is it this
Virtue Women seek for; they still choose the worst; Venus leaves Mars for
Adonis; Helena Menelaus for Paris; -- You are in a fair way, cries M. Chapter and
if we let you go on, it is very likely you will not stop in haste: for you take
a mavelous pleasure in this Story, and I foresee something very odd like to
escape you, if I do not prevent the Storm. You have reason, pursued M. M. and to
tell you true, if you had not hindered me, I was strangely tempted to tell you
the Story of Giocondo, and the Matron of Ephesus, with others of that nature.
Reserve those to another time, replies M. Chapter and I am not of opinion, you
ought any longer to give way to your Choler; and to spare you an unprofitable
pains, you may remember, if you please, that when we inquired of you concerning
those pretended Maxims you attributed to Ladies, we did not ask for the
Dialogues of Lucian's Courtizans, nor Juvenal's sixteenth Satyr, nor the life
of Celestina: we would have you tell us of Artemisia, Penelope, Lucretia. I
take you at your word, says M. M. on condition you will not except against
these Test moneys you have demanded, and that you will judge of Women upon the
depositions of Artemisia, Penelope, and Lucretia; and that after this you will
be content I end a Discourse, which in my opinion has no need of further
proof. For Artemisia, continued he, I know no declared Gossip that would not be
ashamed of the transports of this Queen: I do not speak of those which her
affection caused; they were just, they were honest; and if her grief had
stifled her, whilst she complains of fortune, when she drowned her face in
tears, and said against the stars, what could be said: Tout ce que fait dire la
rage,
Quand elle est Maistresse des Sens.
I say, if she had expired then, it may be that to this time her Friendship
would be as much a marvel as her Mausoleum. But by misfortune she buried her
Grief, for the loss of her Husband, with his Ashes; and this vain and pompous
ostentation of Conjugal union quickly gave place to a second Passion, which
transported her to kill her self. Scaliger, upon the fame of an ancient Author,
informs us, that this Queen fell in love with a young man of Abidas, called
Dardanus, and to revenge her self of his coldness, she surpised him sleeping,
and did tear out his eyes; but that her Revenge did not diminish her Passion,
its violence forcing her to throw her self from the Rocks of Leucadia, she died
of the fall. As for Penelope, Seneca avows, that he found so much concerning
her affection, pro and con, that he durst not conclude, whether she were a
sinner or an honest Woman. Another Author less solid, but very witty, has an
unlucky conceit about the continual Feastings in her House amidst a crowd of
Gallants, and interprets maliciously the trial of her Husbands Bow. And to take
away all doubt, Pausanias assures us, that in his time there past an ancient
Poem, which recounted how Ulysses, when he returned from the Siege of Troy,
beat her out of doors; and that there was a Tradition then current amongst the
Mantineans, that Penelope fled to their Town and died there. Lastly, What can
we judge of Lucretia, but with M. L. that she killed her self after the fact?
Thus by searching things to the bottom, we see that the most part of these
Beauties, who appear fierce and cold, as the ancient Sabines, have often no
advantage over the rest, but that of dissembling well; and all these Heroin's,
which in Ausonius threatened to crucify Cupid, at the instance of Venus reduced
his punishment to a whipping with Roses. Let us not then abuse our selves in a
belief, that Women can inspire generous thoughts; but rather think their Beauty
corrupts our Judgments, making us believe, their Conversation is as profitable
as we find it pleasant. Let us still remember, that this Beauty, whereupon the
most of them would raise a legitimate domination, is no other, according to
Socrates, but a short Tyranny; and that Sophocles often repeated in his Old
age, that he esteemed himself very happy in that he had shaken off the yoke of
this Amorous tyranny. But we will end with the Advice of Thales, and admire the
Counsel he gave a miserable wretch, asking what he should do to free himself
from Love; he first advised him to fast; and when a Diet would not serve, he
persuaded him to expect his health from Time and Absence; but after many months
and a long perigrination, seeing that Hunger, Distance, and Time were too weak
Remedies, he ordained him to Hang himself. I have said. Seeing M. Menage had
done, you have, said I, handled Lovers, as one advised a maker of Romances to
handle his principal person, when he would needs persuade him, that he could
not find out an event, nor more new nor more surprising, than to cause him be
publicly hanged. In this at least I am excusable, answered M. M. which is,
That I have been content to open the cause, and to let the Sentence be
pronounced by another. On the contrary, replied I, it is to be feared you have
acted with malice, and have brought in this Philosopher, that his Sentence
might be as authentic as that of a Judge. That may be, added M. Trilport, but
there is a remedy for it, and I declare to you, says he, addressing himself to
M. M. that I appeal from your Sage to ours. And from Thales to M. Chappelein is
a minori, says M. M. Stop there, replies M. Chapter I must interrupt you, lest you
should think I agree and confess my self a Sage, which God forbid. But,
continued he, addressing himself to M. M. though I am to plead the Cause of
Lovers, your self shall be the Judge. You hold your Cause very good then, says
M. M. seeing you are content to be Judged by your Adversary. As good as your
Conscience, continued M. Chapter and I believe you so just, and find my Cause so
grounded in equity, that I declare, I shall be content with what you shall
pronounce, after you have heard me. We here were silent, and after some moments
M. Chapter begun: If I do not lend to your Opinion that full consent you could
wish, you ought not to complain it is for want of attention. I have hearkened to
your discourse with an entire application, and truly, you have so ingeniously
spoken against Love, that if I had not been bound with the Cords of Truth, you
had perverted me: but at last I am, as a seeond Ulysses, escaped from the
danger of the Sirenes, after having been charmed with their Songs. Whatever
enchantments, for all that, you have practiced to prove the opinion sustained
by you; I am about to let you see, that, if I am not deceived, the contrary is
the better; wishing passionately, that in this cause you would act better than
the Medea of Euripides and Ovid, and that after you have seen and approved the
Truth, I shall declare, you do not remain the Author of a heresy, that cannot
appear fair, but because you paint it. I shall act clearly with you, answering
what you have advanced point by point; showing, if I can, the falseness or the
weakness of them. I will also accommodate my self to your way of
Philosophizing, which is without doubt the most proper for a Conversation, and
of which I shall willingly serve my self, because it is not so severe as that
which is commonly practiced; but is not less strong for being more delicate:
and gently to draw out a confession is better, than to do it by putting a knife
to the throat. So that I shall continue to banish from our discourse these
Syllogisms of the Schools, which make their heads giddy that study to
comprehend and resolve them. We will not take Love from amidst the Graces, to
put him into the hands of Disputants: and I will take care, that our
Conversation, which has hitherto been sweet and easy, does not degenerate
into the querulous noise of two Masters of Art. You began your accusation with
explaining a Figure, whereby you would scare us, as M. Tr. well noted; and if
we should believe you, you have placed Love, which is the sweetest bond of
Humane Society, in the number of Harpies and other Monsters of Antiquity: I
will presently examine, if this Picture be as good as it is common; I will
content my self in the mean time to let you know, that it is capable of
receiving quite another sense to that you have given it; and that there is
nothing but virtuous in this piece, which you set out as if all the defects,
which Humane frailty can suffer, were assembled in it. To proceed orderly, you
pretend, that this Child notes the weakness and other imperfections of that
age. But, if it were so, the most Learned Painters are much in the wrong to
represent him as they do, holding Lions under his subjection: and Poets were no
less to blame for showing him in their works, snatching the Thunderbolt from
the hand of Jove, and exercising his power on his Mother. And those of Cytherea
believed, that this Venus, who drew all her power from Love, presided in War;
and the Cypriots figured her with a Lance; others represented her Statue
armed; yea, the Romans built a Temple to Venus the Victorious. The Prudence of
Love is as easily justified as his Force: and we cannot doubt of it, if we will
remember, that he unravelled the first confusion of the Universe, and that we
may attribute to him with the Italian Poet, Pensier canuti in giovenit etade.We
must not then accuse Old people for being in Love, provided their thoughts
resemble those of this Boy. But we must agree on the point, that Love is
painted Young only to let us see what we are about to conclude, That Love is
necessary to Youth. And it is almost the same reason, which Agathon in the
Divine Philosopher urges to prove that Love is young; because, says he, he is
always sound amongst Young people. But this Boy, say you, is impudent to go
always naked. It Is true what you say, that 'twere a foul action to strip ones
self in the open Market, but you advance little by this; for not only this is
not always true, for the Dacedemonian Boys and Girls were naked together in
the place of their Exercises, and that under a discipline the most austere in
the World; but further, though your Rule should be general, 'twould not follow,
that Impudency were a vice of Childhood, none ever said so: nor that
Shamelessness, which is a sign of this defect, and which proceeds always from
a long custom of filthy and bold actions, is figured by Childhood. Far from
this, we are pleased with those Pictures of the people wherewith we adorn our
Temples, and wherewith we represent Angels. And you would be more scrupulous
than our devout Matrons, who are not yet aware of being scandalized at these
nudities. As to the Testimony of Eustatius, which you allege, if I remember
right, it means nothing but the first boldness of Lovers, and ought rather to
be taken for a piece of Courtship, than an injury. Nay, this Bishop so little
thought of charging Love with Impudence for his Nakedness, that he writes this
God is naked only, that he may dive into the water to preserve the species of
Fish. And in one place of his Romance, Ismenias seeing his Mistress throw her
self into the Sea, prays Cupid to dive after her, and bring her up again. By
this we may easily judge, that the Nakedness of Love ought not to be explained
in a bad sense, as you do, and that it signifies nothing less than his
Impudence; and those who have spoken of it without Passion, have given it a
sense different from yours. Whether they have concluded with Antiphanes, Que
l'on ne peut cacher l'amout, qui va tout nud.or whether, according to the
Opinion of others, this Love thus exposes his Beauty to show, that he disallows
of all artifices wherewith Beauty is set off. And, according to this sense, the
Jupiter of Homer sharply chides Juno for stealing the Girdle of Venus, to the
end that she might augment his flames: or whether this Nakedness signifies,
that the thoughts of Lovers ought to be so noble, that they may expose them
without a Veil to the sight of all the World: or lastly, whether this god is
minded to show his exceeding force in this weak estate. You will come off no
better, I believe, in your interpretation of his Ribband. You take it for a
hoodwinked reason, whereby our minds are cast into darkness worse than
Cymerian, and which hinders us even from discerning what is good Manners. I
could here object to you, that you had forgot they call the Eyes the Guides of
Love: but I will not serve my self of this Opinion, because I disapprove it,
and am of that of the Queen Olympias, who accused a Young man for want of Wit,
because he married only by the counsel of his Eyes; I will only say then, that
our Understanding never is more awake nor more active, than when we love and
have ambition to please. And in this matter I send you to Ovid, who compares
the vigilance of Lovers to that of Captains. But in my opinion, the true
explication of this Ribband, which we might call a Diadem, if we would defend
our selves with as much passion as you accuse us with; the best explication, I
say, is to imagine, that Venus is willing his Thests should be concealed, as
one of the Ancients pleasantly said; and that Discretion is the best quality,
not only of Lovers, but of men the most debauched. You are not ignorant, that
the Italians fay, Discretion staben sin al -- pardon me the rest, and permit me
to pass on to the Wings, Arrows, and Torch. For his Wings, I confess in this
Article your railleries are very pleasant, and there is much wit in the
Conceits of our Friends, but we will take them, if you please, only for Jests,
and not accept of their Testimonies in other manner, than as you intended to
spend them, and let you know in the mean time, that they who first invented
these Wings would teach us, that ous Desires and Thoughts ought to raise
themselves up to Heaven, and not always grovel upon the Earth. For his Arrows,
I can easily approve of those reflections you made; but, to judge wholsomly,
your Invective only strikes at the ill use of Love: and these two sorts of
Arrows do only note the secret motions to inclination or hatred, which we find
in our selves, but not the Causes which give those motions, and least of all
any thing of Avarice or Presents. For in all the Children, which ever proceeded
from the marriage of Theagines and Chariclea, that is, in all the Romances that
ever were, from the Ethiopick History to the Grand Cyrus, is there any thing so
handsome or so frequent, as that scorn wherein Lovers hold Greatness, Crowns,
Treasures, only to preserve their Fidelity to miserable and exiled persons, who
groan under Irons, and have no other advantage, besides their Merit and their
Passion? Nothing therefore can better set out these noble, elevated, and
generous Sentiments than to say, that their Souls are really wounded with a
Golden shaft; and that to destroy these illustrious Prerogatives of Heaven, all
the Treasures of the Earth are leaden arms, which bend and cannot penetrate.
Merlins Fountains, whereof Aristo makes his Knights to drink, and whose scurce
Claudian found before him, confirm what we fay. They were both of a like Water,
and without the advantage to murmur over Golden dust, as Pactolus and Tagus,
they did glide peaceably over the same Sand, and one gave a violent aversion,
the other a violent passion. Ovid, who for the most part explains ingenuously
the nature of these Arrows, when he speaks of the Golden ones, does not give us
the least suspicion, that he thought of Presents, no not those of his age,
which were Fruits, Nosegays, and Persumes. It only rests, that we speak of his
Torch, which you compare to that of the Furies, for which I am much tempted to
accuse you of Impiety; and, I think, I could not say too much against a man,
who so ill handles a fire, that we may call the Soul of the World, which
actuates and conserves all that has any sense in the Universe, and without
which the face of Nature would appear wild and desolate. But because I would
not quarrel you, and that I endeavor to persuade you without displeasing you;
I conjure you, that we may understand this matter aright, to cast your eyes
upon the effects of this Torch, and do not sear it will trouble your fight, as
those dismal Torches of Nights three Daughters, Mira d'intorno, Sylvio,
Quanto il mondo ba di vago, and di gentile,
Opra e d'amore. Amante e il cielo; amante
La terra; amante il mare.
You know what follows in the Pastor fido of Guarini, and how he carries it
even to Animals and Trees, which feel the sweet warmth of this fire: believe
me, this fire has in it something Divine; and the Egyptians, who (compared
with their Wisdom) esteemed that of the Greeks but Boys play, when they would
express Love, did it only by Fire, as the purest and noblest Element. Now, as
you, after your malicious explication of Loves Figure, conclude with him in
Atheneus, that the gods did well to banish him Heaven: I also, having given the
true sense of it am bold to say, that Hesiod, Solon and Plato, never showed
more Wisdom, than when they took Love from the Mountain of Helicon, to lead him
into the Academy adorned and crowned with Flowers; in the midst of Music and
Sacrifices, to constitute him Director and Master. From what I have said you
may conclude, that my Praises make a more reasonable Picture of Love, than your
Invectives; and that the same matter, which has served you for his Accusation,
is very proper to make his Panegyric. But because the sense of this Picture
may yet remain a Problem to obstinate Wits, we will not abide by it; besides,
it is much contested, and diverse Learned men are not of accord with the Vulgar
opinion. Theodorus, in Plato's Banquet, mocks at those who make a Child of this
god; which he esteems the most Ancient of all the gods, not excepting Saturn.
Another Greek in his Hue and Cry for the sugitive Love, far from thinking him
blind, says, he has most penetrating Eyes, and takes this mark for so true a
one, that he gives it to know him by, that, if they met him, they should bring
him home. Eustatius fastens those Wings to his Heels, which the common Opinion
puts upon his Shoulders: Eubulus in Atheneus goes further, and will allow him
no Wings, but says, that the Painters, who invented them, were ignorant
Fellows, and fit only to paint Swallows: Another, in the same Author, gives him
two Bows: In fine, Propertius says, Love was born in the Fields, and that his
Bow and Arrows were only for the chafe of Wild Beasts. These, as you see,
contradict the common Image of Love: Mosebus adds, that his Body is of
Flame-colour, his Hair frizeld, his Look malicious, his Hands small, and
concludes with the rest, that he is a right dangerous Archer. If we should add
the fantastical Conceits of some Modern Spaniards to the Inventions of the
Ancient Greeks, I could furnish you with one Cristova, who in his Verses
strives to demonstrate, that Love is perfectly like the Great Turk. This
resemblance, says M. Menage, is very extraordinary; but I know one that will no
less surprise you, and yet it is of the Old Rock: for what say you when you
read in Macrobius, that the Cypriots, who ought to know Venus, erected a
Statue, which represented her with a Beard? After we had laughed a little,
leaving, continued M. Chapter these Representations, which make little to the
Question, I will come to Plutarchs Opinion, who assures us, that Love is not
visible; and will fay, with one of the Ancient Comicks, that Painters and
Sculptors did not know what Love was; for, as he ingeniously adds, Love is
neither Male nor Female; God nor Man; Wise nor Foolish; but he is made up of
all these, and assembles many different species under one Figure, which has
the boldness of a Man, the fearfulness of Women; is serious in his Folly,
circumspect in his Rage; which suffers the transports of Wild Beasts, and
labor cannot tame him; of a wild Ambition, bringing no less Discord along with
him, than we imagine in Hell; who is capable of things Serious, of things
Peacable, of things Violent. You say more than I could desire, said M. Menage,
and to save you trouble in examining the rest of my Discourse, I will join
issue with you here. Your Cause w'ont be the better for it, answers M. Chapter and
I shall not fail to reply to the rest. But that we may see to the utmost, what
we ought to conclude concerning Love, and rigorously to examine the Good and
the Evil that may be alleged, I will add Plato's Testimony, who calls Love a
cruel Monster, that has as many Heads as Hydra. I will add that of Sophocles,
who says, Venus is not only Venus, but Pluto, Necessity, Rage, Covetousness,
Grief. I will add that of Plutarch, who considering that Love does Cherish and
Hate, Follow and Fly, Threaten and Pray, is Angry and feels Compassion, is Sad
and Rejoices, Will and Will not; and all this at one time and for the same
person, concludes, it is not a thing very Judicious, but an imbroil'd Enigma,
and of difficult Interpretation. If this is not enough, we will continue the
description of Moschus, which we began, and say, that Loves Thoughts are
malicious, his Words flattering, his Discourse contrary to his meaning; that he
has a sweet Voice, is mad in his Anger, a Deceiver and a Fool; and in all his
sportings has some Black design. And this is enough fully to persuade you,
that I have betrayed my Cause, and that you have gained yours; or at least,
that I act too sincerely with you, producing Testimonies which you know well,
but had forgot, and which alone seem capable to convince me. But, as you very
well remarked at the entrance of your Discourse, that the first Poets did
Philosophize, and then you placed me upon Parnassus; from a place so eminent,
which my Modesty durst not pretend to, suffer me to reason with you in a few
words, and till then suspend, if you please, your Judgment of what good or ill
you and I have delivered concerning Love. I say then, that all things which we
possess, let them be never so good, or whatever praises they deserve, become
evil when they pass the bounds of their perfection; whether it be excess or
defect that draws them. For Example, Prudence, which is that that Mankind ought
most passionately to covet, and which indeed is the greatest gist that God does
bestow upon Man, becomes visionary and fanatical when it is too much refined,
and in this condition is no less dangerous, than Folly. It Is the same in other
Virtues, whose extremes are never wholesome; good Sense only is that which
moderates them; and all the advantage which persons have we call Virtuous, is,
the knowledge of the true measure to which they ought to reduce their good
qualities. It Is the same in Love; and therefore Plutarch writes, that Erato,
one of the Muses, did preside over it for its regulation. When it is at the top
of its perfection, there are no praises which it does not merit: When it passes
its limits, it is worthy of all the blame you and I have alleged. Greece, as
amorous as it was of Lais, mocked at those who brought a Talent to this
Courtizan to pass a Night with her; but the insensibility of Zenocrates was no
better handled by them, when he compared her to a piece of Wood. Hence you may
collect, it is not that regulated Love about which we contend, that Authors have
said so much ill of, but that Love which our excess depraves, and which we are
ready to blame as well as you. The better to comprehend the difference between
these Loves, learned Antiquity acknowledged two Venus's; one Celestial, the
other Vulgar: The first they called Urania, the other Pandeme, or the Venus of
the Common people. And they had each of them their Love, whereof one was
governed by the Muses, the other, according to the testimony of a Greek Poet,
durst not approach them; the first was free from all violent Troubles, the
other was the Father of Disorder: that was for Wise men; this, for Fools.
According to this sense one Judiciously said, Wise men Love, but others desire;
whereby he would signify, that the advantage of knowing how to love was
reserved for the Virtuous, leaving to the Multitude all the Misfortunes that
follow irregular Passions. But what defect is it, you will here say to me, that
makes the most part of Mankind stray from this happy Love, and which casts them
upon the furies and griefs of the bad Venus? It Is not one Error, I must answer,
but all those which carry them from the possession of other good qualities. Yet
in my opinion a principal cause of the Disorders of those who love is, they
imbark themselves in this Passion before they have chosen, whence finding
humors contrary to their own, or unruly minds, their life must pass in
disquiets, or they must abandon themselves to that disorder, which they pursued
without any foresight. Doubtless here some one cannot forbear to allege the
half Loadstone, which Plato says we have at our first Creation, which is not
without trouble till it is joined to the other moiety from whence 'twas broken
off; for my part, I pretend to pay you with current Money, and to discourse
more roundly than those that nourish themselves with Idea's. I say then, that
when Esteem precedes Love, and that we judge of the object before we engage our
Passion, Love becomes one of the greatest advantages we have. Bertaut,
according to this sense, of all the Errors we commit in Love condemns chiefly
that of failing in the election, as the source of all the rest, when he says,
Car enfin la fault, qui naist
D'aymer ce, qui n'est point aymable:
Et de n'aymer point ce qui l'est,
Est seul in amor condamnable.
You see, that to this he adds another in favor of the good Love, and which he
thinks no less an Error, it is, not to love that which deserves Love.
Accommodating himself in this to Ovids Opinion, who in his Remedies, exhorts
those who have chosen well to continue with constancy, and, finding their
happiness consists in their Passion, he advises them to make good use of their
Joy, and to spread all their Sails, and says, he looks upon them as upon those,
who entered victorious into the Capitol. Now you will confess with me, that the
Common people, for the most part subject to their first motions, and almost
incapable of reflection, have not this good discerning, especially in a thing
where they trust their Eyes and Sense of the matter, whence we conclude, that
it is no wonder they fall into disasters, which themselves procure, and that
what is said against Love does not respect that of Wise men, but of the Vulgar,
who corrupt it by their bad use of it; I cannot better conclude this discourse;
nor leave with you a more pleasant Idea, than the Opinion which the Spartans
had, they who professed a Virtue so rigid, which is, That when Venus passed the
River Eurotas to present her self to Licurgus their Lawgiver, she left upon the
the Banks her Girdle full of Charms, her Glass, and all her wanton Robes, which
drew in part the adoration of the rest of the World, and appeared before this
severe Man with a Helmet upon her head, her hand is charged with a Lance and
Buckler. Let us apply this, and we shall find that Love, which represents it
self to Common men with all those salse Beauties that deceive and ruin them,
lays by these pernicious Enchantments when he approaches the Wise; or rather,
that it is the Vulgar who dress up Love in this attire, Idolizing him because
they do not know him, and following him down Precipices; whereas Gallant men
strip him to re-cloath him with Ornaments proper for him, and give him that
perfection, which is the happiness of those who know how to love: Now as those
who write to reform the Manners of men, do not aim at these Wise men we speak
of, because they have no need of Remonstrances, and make up the least part of
Mankind; we need not wonder, if those who discourse of Love, consider it in
that deplorable condition to which it is reduced in the hands of the People, and
if to divert or cure this multitude, lost in its own Folly, they have studied
to describe it hideous, and capable of making men miserable: and yet as
monstrous a thing as they have represented it to be, you shall see that they
still mixed some good, yea, in such a degree, that often its excellent qualities
surmount the bad. Whence we may be bold to determine, that Love is always good
in it self, that we can accuse nothing but the disorders that happen in it, and
that they are these vulgar Lovers who have thus disfigured it. And I shall by
and by let you see, that they have handled that of Wise men better. In the mean
time, upon this foundation, which I assure my self you will find solid and
reasonable, it will be easy for me to build the Answers I am to make, and to
defend my self from all those Examples wherewith you are armed. I will add only
two things to this Discourse, whereof you shall grant me one, unless you would
have me convince you by your self, which are, That all the exaggerations in the
discourse of Lovers serve as well to show the quickness of their wit, as the
force of their passion: and that there are certain things in use, which have a
good grace in certain places, which we should be unjust to condemn, though they
are not current amongst us, otherwise we must expect the like; and we should
draw toward the excess of presumption, if we esteem our selves enough to
believe, that our Laws and Customs ought to be the rule of those of Mankind. I
come now to a particular examination of the rest of your discourse, after you
have aggravated Loves faults, the better to make it good, you pass to Examples.
Which at first sight seem to have somewhat of weight in them; for you bring
upon the Stage the great Atrides, the valiant Achilles, the stout Hercules, and
at last Jupiter himself, which is all that Fable has of Noble. For the first,
which are the People of the Iliads, I would join issue with you, if instead of
Agamemnon and Achilles you would produce Ulysses. But I will take these three,
the better to confirm by them what I have advanced, That there is a great
difference between the Love of Common people, and the Love of Sages, that we as
much blame the first, as we approve the other, and that almost all your
Examples lie against that which we find fault with. Horace, whose Censures are
very regular, when he writes his opinion of Homers two Poems, notes well, that
the War of the Greeks and Barbarians contained only the Passions of mad Princes
and foolish People. That in the Camp and in the Town all was full of Sedition,
Deceit, Cruelty, Rage, and brutish Sensuality; and that the Soldiers suffered
through the Folly of their Princes. Coming afterward to consider the Odysses,
he says, that the Poet has proposed Ulysses for a perfect and profitable
Example of all, that Prudence, Wisdom, and Virtue can do. So that you need not
wonder, if Agamemnon and his Rival had their transports in Love; they whose
whole life was irregular, and who, in all they did, never consulted their
Reason, nor took counsel, but of their Will and their Power. After this
discourse of Horace, we may rank their Examples among the Vulgar, and ought to
judge of them according to Seneca's Opinion, That Merit and not Dignity,
separates us from the crowd. If we return to Ulysses, we may consider, that in
his greatest Misfortunes he has had some little Loves, by which the Poet seems
to insinuate, that a Wise man ought always to make Love. But in all his Loves
we find nothing disorderly, nothing defective, nothing which does not set him
off with some advantage, nothing in fine, which were not to be wished. And now
let us come to Hercules, and without seeking to excuse him, as we might, let us
place him amongst this crowd, that goes astray. And indeed all those who have
exalted his Strength, have had but a bad opinion of his mind; and such as have
reported the great Services he did the World, have defamed him as a Mad man,
and one who filled his own House with horrible Spectacles. There remains only
Jupiter to be considered by us, and with him, if you please, all the gods of
Antiquity; if we look upon them as men, we must say, that they have preferred
Violence to Equity, and abused their Power in their Passions. Or if you will,
that we treat them as Immortal gods, it must be on condition, that we remember
Antiquity, which has learnt us their Loves, far from blaming them, have had
them in veneration, and that she has made her greatest Mysteries out of the
most ridiculous Adventures; that she has raised upon Altars and peopled Heaven
with these Generations, and that among the Egyptians we find stately rooms of
Jupiters Mistresses. Thus, you cannot draw consequences disadvantagious to us
from the Examples of these Men-gods, seeing that as Men we hold, that in their
Loves they are capable of all the weaknesses of the Common people; and that as
Gods, we ought not to reduce the Religion of Pagans to our Reason, who invented
these Fooleries to consecrate them. You see now, that you have got little by
these Examples, that we blame the Faults of the people as well as you, but that
they have nothing proportionable to that Love which we prefer. And now you
lead in Plato and Aristotle; great Names, and worthy of a great Respect; and we
are so far from presuming to censure their Actions, that on the contrary we are
ready to take them for the Model of our own. They have Loved, say you; we
believe a Wise man ought to do it. But during their Gallantry they wrote
Verses, and did things unbeseeming their Gravity. Let us see, if in this they
did not allow something to the Mode of their Country, and if upon a matter
indifferent in their Customs they have not suffered their Genius to sport it
self. You know how far Greece once countenanced Love: And you know that
Socrates, who taught Morality to other men, taught Love to Alcibiades; and that
amongst the Works of Philosophers in those Ages there was still some strain of
Love. Now, Love then was accompanied with Poesy, and the Muses were always
present at Greek Feasts. Plutarch says, That in his time men did not cease to
Love, though they made no Verses; as if before, these two had been inseparable.
But these Nine Sisters did not accompany Lovers with that severity, which they
assumed for the Hymns of the gods; they came attended by Bacchus and Ceres,
dressed, perfumed, and merry; they came, as we find them in the Poetry of Sappho,
Anacreon, and other Lyricks, celebrating, amidst Wine and garlands of Roses,
the Beauty and Wit of those they Loved. And this being so, can you think it
strange that these Philosophers followed the fashion of their Country in
Actions, which the Manners of their Nation and Age not only made lawful, but
which were so esteemed, that the wise Solon, who also made Love-Verses, forbids
Slaves to make Love, reserving this honor for Free men? Are you offended, that
in making Verses they served themselves of the same Praises, and used the same
Language with other Poets, that they employed the Sun, the Stars, and the rest
of the comparisons of Beauty? If you are not yet satisfied, but will continue
to blame those transports of Love, which Plato showed for Dion, I will answer,
that 'twas Rapture carried him to the expression, but that he did not feel in
himself all that he said, nor did think his Verse should one day be examined by
so severe a Judge as your self. And for the Kiss of Agathon, without examining
Grecian Manners, let it satisfy us that the World then found no fault with it;
nor will we insist upon the reason he had to love Archianassa, the Wisdom of
that Woman charmed him, and his conceit of Love hid under wrinckles, ought
rather to please than offend you. For what concerns Zantippe, she it may be you
used lets us know, you did not believe 'twas Socrates's wife, and I think you
only played upon the Names, or tempted the goodness of your Memory; for, you
know, the Time and other circumstances destroy this fancy. For the Sacrifice of
Aristotle, if he held the Divinity of Ceres as veritable, I would blame him
exceedingly for having profaned it; but if he was undeceived, ought you to
wonder, if to honor what he loved, he paid to his Mistress the respects which
the Vulgar rendered to Idols, and performed a Ceremony, which not only was
indifferent to him, but which he laughed at? You know that he fled from Athens,
for fear lest the Magistrates, through the politic necessity of Government,
should use him for matters of Religion, as they did Socrates, and, as he said,
lest he should be forced to sin against Philosophy. Having examined the Actions
of these two Great men, we will not meddle with the rest particularly, because
you propose them but in gross, and our general Reasons may serve to your
general Accusation. Now, as if you had foreseen, that these Greek Examples were
weak and could not decide the affair, you descend to our Knights errant, and
bring in Orlando Furioso; but if you will have Romances, and consent we should
draw consequences from them, we have absolutely gained our Cause. But you pass
him and come to Antony, Hannibal, Sampson, David and Solomon; see a troup of
Enemies mustered against me, but a little patience will lay this Storm, and in
a few words I shall be able to rid my self of these famous Names wherewith M.
Menage thinks to oppress me. Let us begin with Antony; this Roman having only
judged of Cleopatra by his eyes, and suffering himself to be seduced by those
Flatterers, which ruined him by upbraiding him with the kindnesses of this
Queen, still crying out to him O homme ingrat de tant de doux baisers.This
Roman, I say, deserves to be put amongst the Lovers we have blamed. To make
Love the Author of Hannibals losses, is it not to be ignorant that the Feasts,
and Bannia's and Delights of Capua ruined him? and if Love had any part in it,
'twas that debauched Love which we condemn, and which ordinarily follows Wine
and Idleness. The same may be said to the rest of your Examples. Now after you
have ended their retail, you pass on to a general Maxim, that all Lovers are
Fools; which you pretend to prove by their Actions, and by their Discourse; and
to this purpose you leave the firm Land to go to an Island where you assemble
Lovers. And here your Learning furnishes you with a long train of passages
which you cite from the Greeks, Latins, Spaniards, Italian; but truly you take
all these things in the worst sense, and it is not fit we explain them thus
literally as you do. They are things, as I said, that Wit has invented, but
does not believe, and a peculiar Language, which long Custom has past from
hand to hand, amongst all those who have wrote of Love. Believe me, we ought
not to banish figures of discourse: let us not imbroil our selves with Lovers
that make Verse; let us leave them their Pearls, Scarlet, Roses, Lillies, the
Aurora and the Sun, which they have possessed time out of mind. But whatever they
say, let us not think they take Hair for Chains, nor Eyes for Archers. If we
find one of the Ancients commanding his Torch be put out, for the fire of his
Passion makes it light enough, let us not imagine he is persuaded it is so: and
if we meet with one of the Moderns singing to his Guitarr, that the
Passing Bell should be tolled as often as his Mistress arms her self with her
two Suns, let us for all that believe, that this Spaniard feared a Fever or
the Small Pox, more than the encounter of this Basilisk. If I should now combat
your Citations with others, and seek Loves Praises in Books, the day would fail
before I could finish half of them. As for those Lovers which you make to act
worse than they speak, which Stab, Hang, and Drown themselves; I can tell you,
that it is out of fashion now: But if any of these desperate persons remain any
where, but upon our Theaters, I consent that such depravers of honest Love be
chained up, not only in your Isle of Petrarch, but in the inaccessible Isle of
Polexander, lest the mode should return again. But to answer what you find more
to say against the Humors and Actions of Lovers; you do ill to make Crimes of
indifferent Gallantries, of these garlands of Flowers with which they crowned
the Doors, or those little Courtships which like Garments fall into the modes
of the Age wherein we live, or places where we dwell. I could send you again to
Plutarch, who says, That what young Lovers ordinarily do, as to go in
Masquerade, to Dance, to Sing, to present Nosegays, brings some handsome and
honest relief to their Passion: and in one word, for what concerns these little
things which you disallow, Nature has as great a share in them, as Love, and
we must not lay to its charge the defects of Humanity. Now there nothing
remains but to answer the description you give of our Youth of both Sexes. In
which particular I cannot do better than to proceed with you as Homers Jupiter,
who of two things Agamemnon asked, granted him one, and refused him one; so I
will confess, there are some of our Young Gentlemen such as you paint them, and
who doubtless are worthy of your Scorn: but I not only deny that it is Love
which betrays them to this condition, but on the contrary, I know nothing which
can redeem them from it, but an honest applying themselves to some Lady of
Merit. The best is, that the number of them is but small, and your Satyr hits
but few. It is true for the Citizen, that the foolish Pride which descends to
them with their Inheritance, and those false Idea's which they form of a
Voluptuous life, corrupt in them the sense of Virtue. But this disorder is not
general. In the mean time you accuse Love for this Artificial handsomness,
which you pretend effeminates our Youth, and allege that such men seem to seek
other men; to which I reply nothing, but that it were to be wished they
resembled him who was first reproached with it, which you know was Pompey, and
you know also, that if it had not been for one man, Pompey had been the first
man of the World. As for Paris, what he did was without doubt of bad Example,
but I cannot think you will impute his want of Courage to his Beauty, for then
Hector should have been as very a Poltron as he, seeing Homer calls him Hector
ayant le visage tres-beau.And Achilles should have been the veriest Coward
amongst the Greeks, seeing, according to the report of the same Homer, he was
the fairest. Let us add, to reconcile you to men's Beauty, the request that
Thales made to the young Eumetis, that Thaeles, which you esteem wiser than all
his six Companions together, finding this Maid accommodating the Hair of
Anacharsis, whom the Barbarians opposed alone to all the Sages of Greece, he
kissed her and prayed her to dress up the Scythian in such a manner, that he
might appear handsome to the Company that were to Sup with Periander. You see
then, that Beauty is not a fault in men, and that what Faults they have cannot
be imputed to Love. And are you not of this opinion, when in that part of your
discourse wherein you employ our Gallants to debauch and pervert the
Consciences of our Ladies, you blame them for not being content with a union of
hearts and wills? whereby you seem to acknowledge, as well as I, an honest Love
which may there be terminable, and that those who pass those bounds by Excess,
corrupt Love, and are not corrupted by it. It Is true, answered M. Menage, I did
merrily tell you that these Gentlemen would not stop there, but I did not say
they ought to do so: and to examine the matter better, if you reduce your
honest Love to these Spiritual affections, I fear your defense is but ill
grounded. Not but that I know, how Philosophers in all times have boasted of
this Union of hearts; but I know also, what Cicero observes, that these People
wrote magnificently concerning things, which they practiced no better than the
Common people; and the conceit of a Greek Poet pleases me well, who says, he
can no more be persuaded, that a Lover does adore without hoping any thing,
than that a Beggar does importune a Rich man, without pretending to draw an
Alms from him. After all, you know how those Stoic Philosophers were laughed
at in Atheneus, who said, they had no design but upon the Soul. Here you will
allege what Plutarch writes, that the love of the Body cannot be called Love;
and that Euripides contends for a Love that only pursues the mind, and that in
fine, an Italian calls the Union of hearts Vltima speme di cortesi amanti.But
after all we must return to Nature, which has an end more noble and more
necessary, that is, the continuation of the Species, and which draws us to it
by the charms of Beauty; and conclude, that in despite of all these refined
Reasonings, that these Spiritual Lovers dwell only in the imagination of those
who feign them. In this particular, says M. Trilport, I fall in with the
Opinion of M. Menage; and for my part I believe that it was the opinion of the
Ancients, but those who have descanted upon their Love Treatises, have a little
too much subtiliz'd their thoughts. For instance, What would you have us judge
of the Discourse which Socrates holds in the Banquet of Zenophon, but that he
approves the Love where the Body has its part as well as the Mind? seeing it is
said, that the whole Company were so touched with this Discourse, that those
who were Married hastened home to make much of their Wives, and all the Young
people swore to Marry forthwith. Truly, added I, seeing one of the Ancients
said, Beauty was the flower of Virtue, I cannot think M. Chapter will be so unjust
to forbid honest people loving this Flower; on the contrary, I assure my self
he will judge of Loves as of Orange Trees, which are the fairer for bearing
Flower and Fruit together; and that he will also believe, that Love must be so
much the more satisfactory, by how much the Lady we serve is Fair. I will not
meddle with you two, replies M. Chapter having enough to do to save a wholesome
Proposition from the art and force of M. Menage. Besies, I am not at such
distance from your last opinion. And if you marked my words, I said, Love might
cofine it self to a Union of hearts, not that it ought; and in my opinion it
may pass further, provided it does not lead us into disorder. That which
further keeps me from blaming your Opinion is, that I hold the nature of
perfect Love to be such, that it grows in the possession of what we love; for a
generous mind cannot receive new favors without augmenting its Passion. Thus
when I have granted you, that Love tends to enjoyment; I must add at the same
time, that the Good tend to it by good ways of Honor, Virtue and fair
qualities, which render a man lovely; and that we endeavor to acquire them
when we love after this manner. On the contrary, those who manage their passion
ill, and who love without choice, employ evil means; whence it happens, that
their intreagues being ill conceived and ill conducted, are not lasting, end
with Scandal, and during their course are traversed with continual disorders.
Confess now, that in this Chapter you find me less severe than you expected. We
find you, says M. Trilport, in this, as in all the rest of your Sentiments,
very reasonable. And I, adds M. M. am content to agree with you here; and in
the mean time, replies M. Chapter this will not favor your Opinion; for though I
confess to you, that the Body makes up part of the Object which Love propounds
to it self, this will not say that Love is irregular, as you think, but on the
contrary renders it more accomplished, and the possession of Beauty is a Cord
that binds it more strongly and more sweetly; but this is when we use it well,
and that we choose before we love. Let us come now to an apology for the
Ladies, which you handle after a strange rate. You will tell me, you mean only
the Gossips; if so, we are agreed, for your discourse does not touch me; but
this Invective was too general, and it is not to be thought, that a man who has
attacked the reputation of Penelope and Lucrece, aims only at those who make
profession of being fair, and lay out for a great many Servants. However, I am
willing to believe, that in this you have imitated Euripides, who blamed upon
the Theater the Sex he adored in private, and that you have not spoken ill of
them because you believed it, or because you have been wronged by them, and the
design of well defending your Paradox has made you betray your Conscience; for
I know no man respects or esteems Ladies more than you, to say nothing of your
Loves, in which you pass for the true pastor fido. But this Consideration shall
not stop me from assaulting your discourse; and as you have appeared to us a
great Enemy of Ladies, I find my self obliged to defend them from your
accusation; which I will make appear to you is more ingenious than true. In
effect, it is easy to sustain their Cause; if 'twere unjust, their Beauty only
would suffice to plead it. You must remember the Judges of Greece, and the
Courtizan Phrine; this Woman was accused; Hyperides defended her; he was a
famous Orator, and one from whom might be expected all the succors of
Eloquence; but the cause being very foul, and the Judges severe, his Rhetoric
was too weak, and the matter inclined toward a hard Sentence: Now to what had
this Advocate recourse in this desperate case? to an infallible remedy, to the
Beauty of Phrine; he tears the Robe of this Criminal, and lets them see so fair
a person, that making Conscience of condemning her, they sent her away
discharged of her Accusation; whence Horace learned, Segnius irritant animos
demissa per aures,
Quam quae sunt oculis subjecia sidelibus.
I assure my self, if I should do so, I should not find you more difficult than
these Reverend Judges; but as I do not speak of Courtizans or Gossips, so I
have no need of using violent Remedies, and 'twill be enough for me to persuade
your Reason, and not drag it along by force. I speak for Ladies which we call
solid, whose Sentiments are elevate and noble; in a word, for Ladies which are
not of your fashion. But yet, Ladies that can suffer Courtship; and we believe
it is not misbecoming them to make illustrious Slaves: and we dare not be more
severe than Plutarch, who advises honest Women to sacrifice to Love. It rests
we enquire, whether there are many such to be found, or only those which you
have mentioned. But this Sex has not been so unhappy as you pretend. All Ages
have had illustrious Women as well as Men, and they have shared with us in all
good qualities. I will not prove their Virtues to you by Examples, which you
may doubt of; I will not tell you, that during the course of Seven hundred
years there was not one married in the Isle of Chio, which was not found a
Virgin; I will not cite the Amazons which fought against Hercules: in the humor
you are in you will hold the first for Apocryphal, and will say, the last is
not very certain. I only say, that in all Nations Women have performed in the
general, and in the particular, quantity of remarkable Actions both for Policy
and War. History has placed a great many Queens at the head of Empires and
Monarchies: if we would have marks of their Courage, Wit, and Virtue, without
seeking amongst the Modern Indians, or our Ancient Gauls, the glorious paleness
which we see in the face of Seneca's Wife, tells us, she will die with her
Husband. Arria, by giving her self a deadly wound, teaches us better than Petus
to despise this life. Portia will perish generously after Brutus. And when we
see Sophronia and Olindo environed with flames, we cry out O spectacolo grande
oue a tenzone,
Sono amore e magnanimo virtute.
But we shall be surpised with a profound astonishment, seeing Laena dumb-in
the midst of Torments, and as little apt to reveal the Accomplices in the
Conspiracy of Harmodius and Aristogiton (who, as Plutarch speaks, had drank in
the same Cup of Love with her) as that Lioness of Brass could have been, which
the Athenians would have erected without a Tongue, in favor of the silence of
this woman. If we would have qualities more peaceable, Greece, which vaunts of
Nine Lyrick Poets, boasts also of Nine Ladies excellent in this kind of Poetry:
and Pindar, the Prince of these Nine famous Poets, was the Scholar of Myrtis,
one of those Ladies, and was not ashamed to be corrected by Corinna, who was
another of them; nor five times to be solemnly overcome by her. If we go
amongst the Philosophers, Aspatia can boast she did share with Alcibiades the
Cares and the Love of Socrates, and we shall find Leontia in the Gardens of
Epicurus. But if we descend to our Age and our Court, we shall find as in a
crowd these wonders, which were but thinly scattered in the past; and we shall
confess with reason, that these illustrious persons are the honor of our
Nation, and have their minds no less perfect than their faces. You know the
Ladies I speak of as well as I, and what honor I owe to this great Princess;
you often enter her Palaces, which are famed for celebrious Schools, where
utmost Politeness is learnt: and I appeal from you to your self, whether there
men are judged of by their outsides or the advantages of Fortune. Believe me,
these are the Examples you ought to have produced, and not have troubled your
self to shake the Reputation of Penelope and Lucrece, too well established by
the general opinion and consent of so many Ages, to depend upon a Jest, a
Tradition, or a Manuscript. That which remains to be proved is, that there does
redound very great advantages to those who are happy enough to be of the number
of our Lovers, and who have their Souls raised to that point, that they dare
aspire to please excellent persons of the other Sex; but the heat being over,
and it being almost time to walk abroad, I must end, for I make conscience of
hindering you from a walk in an Evening that prepares it self to be very fresh
and fair. M. Trilport and my self, and M. Menage, who took a singular pleasure
in harkening to M. Gh. and to whom the matter was not so material, that he
should care much though he changed an opinion, which he had taken up only for
Discourse fake; when, I say, we had all conjured him not to make such haste, I
have been too long, replied M. Chappelein, and I was not resolved to spend any
more time in teaching you a Doctrine which you know as well as I; however,
seeing I am engaged, I will add a few words. No body replying, he continued in
this manner: I have always esteemed the Opinion of Empedocles, who calls Love
the principle of all good; and indeed, when we exactly examine men's lives, it
does seem to be the source and original of whatever passes well. For whether we
consider the policies of Towns and business of Peace, or whether we regard the
Wars of Nations, which have been the Theaters of Heroic Virtue, both public
employments and private retreats owe to Love what they have of fair, sweet, and
honest. To begin with War; Plutarch takes notice of diverse Nations, who were
subject to Love and extremely Warlike: he reckons up several Great men addicted
to Love. We may say, that this divinity presides no less in Combats than in the
calms of Peace; at least, the Lacedaemonians Sacrificed to him in the head of
their Troops, when they were ready to begin a fight. The Candiots did the same,
only with this difference, that they drew out the fairest men from among their
ranks to offer this Sacrifice. There have been Nations who to assure themselves
of Victory, would have the persons loved Spectators of the actions of their
Lovers in sight. But to say all, Did Antiquity ever see any thing more gallant
than that Cohort of Thebaus, which they called Sacred, and which was composed
of Lovers? And do not you fancy the criticism of Pamenes, who censures the Sage
Nestor for having in Homer put the Greeks in Battle by Nations, whereas he
ought to have put all the Lovers by themselves? I willingly pick out Greek
Examples, because we must confess, that this Nation knew and esteemed Love
better than any other; but yet I know not any which has not had its brave
Lovers, or where Valor does not owe much to Love. To this purpose, I remember
that amongst other Romances which were brought me once from Spain, one of the
Songs began Muy rebuelto anda Jaen; this Romance speaks of a sally the
Christians made upon the Moors: the Christians might be twelve or fifteen
hundred, all Gentlemen of Honor and Lovers in earnest, these are the words of
the Song, or rather of the History, for these Songs served then for Chronicles.
Now the Poet, forgetting Religion and Country, for which the most fearful
become valiant, attributes the Victory the Spaniards got only to Love. They
sallied out, says he, when they had first solemnly sworn upon their Mistresses
hands, not to return to Jaen without a Captive Moor, and those who had
Mistresses exceeding fair, engaged for four Prisoners. If from these general
Actions we should pass to particular ones, we might judge that Plato had good
reason to call Love the General undertaker, and that he believed Love gave
Courage, seeing the only recompense he appoints for the Conquerours after a
fight, is the pleasure of choosing amongst the fairest persons her he best
likes, and to kiss her. In this your Perceforests has imitated him, and the
prize in one of his famons Tournaments is to kiss the fairest Woman in Great
Britain. Now these Tournaments, which during the time of Peace were little
Images of War, never had other object but the Love of Ladies; and as they past
into Europe with the Moors, so among the Moors 'twas Love invented them: I will
end this after I have let you know, that Ferdinand and Isabel could not conquer
the Kingdom of Granada till the King Chico had banished the Abencerages, that
is to say, Love; the Knights of this Race being the greatest Courtiers, and the
most amorous of all the Africans. Yea, Fame had raised them to such a high
esteem for gallantry, that 'twas said, never any Abencerage had served Lady of
Granada without being favored by her, and that never Lady was thought worthy
of the Name, if she had not an Abencerage to be her Servant. Thus much is said
by the Moor Abinderass in the Diana of Montmajor; where the History of this
Lover seems to me so lively handled, that if it were separate from the body of
the Romance, what Greece has best in this kind would have no other advantage
over this small Adventure, than that of Antiquity. And now having seen Love
covered in the arms of Mars, valiant and victorious; let us place him in a
condition a little more tranquil, in calms and peace. Zeno the Stoic teaches
us, that in this estate he has care of things which concern the welfare of the
Commonwealth, and that he is the god of Liberty, Friendship and Concord: And
we read in Atheneus, that he was much honored in the Alliances of Nations.
After this, if we consider the good manners of a City, the Athenians, the most
polished men in the World, will show us in the Academy dedicated to Minerva,
the Statue of Love with that of this goddess. If we seek Opinions more regular
than the Common one and will not be satisfied but with those of Philosophers,
Atheneus will inform us, that in the place where they did their Exercises was
raised the Statues of Mercury, Hercules and Cupid; to show that Eloquence and
Strength are unprofitable, unless Love guides them. If we have a mind to pass a
little amidst honest divertisments, Euripides will tell us, that it is Love
which has bestowed Verse and Music upon us. And an Italian will confirm you
in this opinion, Amor primo truovo le rhyme e versi,
E suoni e canti, e ogni melodia.
But not to do all by Authority, but after these convincing Testimonies to give
some place to Reason, I ask of you if it be not true, that Man being an animal
born to live in Society, amidst this great diversity of humors which we behold
the most accommodating are the best? You will grant me this without doubt; but
this Complacency is nothing else but a design to please, and that we have not
this design without some object, I do not suspect you will deny me. In the mean
time, usually Young people do not take up this design to please, but in order
to render themselves agreeable to Women, that they may return them their Love;
for, that neither Ambition nor Avarice can carry them to this, I believe you
will also confess. Then at the same time grant me, that by this Love is bred in
men's minds the quality which is most necessary to Civil life, which is, to know
perfectly, and without trouble to accommodate ones self to the Manners and
Sentiments of others. And without doubt, this sweetness of Spirit is so much an
effect of Love, that the Thebans did not ordain that Love should be practiced
publicly amongst them, but with design to adulce and bend their Manners, which
were too gross and rude. But Love not only renders us capable of acting
civilly, and of being esteemed, it not only gives us good qualities, but
corrects our bad; and Plutarch compares it divinely to the Dictator, whose
power suspended the functions of all the Magistrates of the Roman
Commonwealth, whereby he would signify, that all our other Passions do not
appear when this possesses us. The Polyphemus of the Poets, not only forgot his
barbarism and cruelty when he fell in Love, but, as one of the Ancient says, he
went so far as to turn gallant, and comforted himself in his love with singing.
Pluto himself, this inexorable God Et ces barbares coeurs que jamais l'amitie,
Ni les pleurs des humains n'esmeurment a pity.
gave up Euridice to the love of Orpheus; Circes left her Wichcrasts for
Ulysses, with whom she treated sincerely and faithfully. Did not Love make an
able man of an Idiot in Baccace, who represents his Cimon in his nature so much
a Block, that to increase the number of them he voluntarily left the City to
dwell in Woods; And because likeness breeds love, he resolved to seek no
Friendship but that of Animals; and as a good Politian he imitated them so
well, that he forgot humane Speech, retaining only a confused and indistinct
sound, which signified nothing but the bestiality of Cimon. One day, whether by
chance or destiny, he found a beauteous young Lady sleeping under the Trees; he
thought he saw the Sun lying in the shade; she wrought in him a Miracle
contrary to that of Medusa's Head, and of a Stone he became a man. He began to
use that Reason which at first he did not know, and to himself discoursed
excellently well of Beauty: it seemed that Cupid by the wound in his heart let
in virtue into his Soul; he beheld that face as an excellent book, and in an
instant became a Master in Loves School; the brightness of those eyes though
shut, did shoot light into his eclipsed understanding, and in a short time he
proved an excellent Philosopher, and a gallant Courtier. Does not this bring us
to the Italian Proverb?

Amor puo far gentil un cuor villano. If these Allegorical instructions are not
enough, History will teach us, that the Courtizan Lais became staid and
constant when she fell in love with Hippolochus. We say further, that Love can
make Prodigies in Arts and Sciences; and we may call to mind, that at Antwerp
they admire to this day the famous Picture of Quintin, whom this god in one
year, of a Smith which he was before, made the best Painter of his Age. If the
noblest Sentiments are inspired by Love; if it is he that corrects our defects;
if whatever is handsome in Civil life and in Military actions proceeds from this
noble Passion, ought we not with Euripides, pray the gods to preserve us from
having to do with those who are not initiated into these Holy Mysteries, who
this Poet calls fierce and rustic Spirits; and have we not good reason to
advise Young people not to shun Love, but to use it well? and this I think is
enough to establish what the Italian lays down as an assured Maxim, Tutto e
perduto il tempo che ci accanza,
Se in amar non si spend.
He had scarce ended these words, when, etc.

WALSTEINS Conspiracy.
THE Conspiracy of Walstein was certainly one of the most famous Enterprises of
the last Age; and therefore such as are pleased with the recital of great
Actions, and who would profit themselves of the Vices or Virtues of Famous men,
will like the History. It Is this perhaps has engaged many Learned men to give
us diverse relations, which I should esteem perfect, if they were not
interessed. But certainly the Animosities of contrary sides in which most
Authors are found, slides insensibly into their Writings, and Invectives or
Flatteries fill up the room of Truth. Some have accused the Emperor of
Cruelty; many praised his Prudence and Justice. These have rendered Walstein a
Monster; those, a Hero: whilst love to the Court of Vienna, hatred to the House
of Austria; a design to please or to offend, has deprived them of the freedom
of speaking.

I, not being preoccupied with any of these Considerations, and finding my self
at equal distance from hope and fear, esteem it no offense against modesty, if,
after so many Famous men, I also write a Relation of this Conspiracy. But we
must first speak of the manners and power of this Man.

Albert Walstein was of a great and bold Spirit, but unquiet and enemy of
Repose; tall and strong of Body; his Face rather majestic than pleasant; he
was naturally very Temperate, sleeping little, always in action; supporting
easily Cold and Hunger; flying Pleasures, and surmounting the incommodities of
the Gout and Age, by temperance and exercise; speaking little, thinking much;
writing all his Affairs himself; valiant and judicious in War; dextrous in
raising and sustaining Armies; severe in punishing, prodigal in recompensing,
but with choice and design; always firm against evil Fortune; civil in
occasion, otherwise proud and fierce; immeasurably ambitious; envious of others
Fame, jealous of his own; implacable in his hatred, cruel in his revenge; apt
to kindle; a friend of Magnificence, Ostentation, and Novelty; extravagant in
appearance, but doing nothing without design; never wanting the Public good
for pretext, though he made all serve to the growth of his Fortune; despising
Religion, which he kept in service of his Policy. Extremely artificial, chiefly
in appearing disinteress'd, curious and clear-sighted in the designs of others,
most advised in the conduct of his own; above all, dextrous in hiding them; and
was by so much the more impenetrable, as he affected in public candor and
liberty, blaming in others that dissimulation whereof he served himself on all
occasions. This Man, having studied carefully the Maxims and Conduct of such,
who from a private condition had arrived at Sovereignty, was always filled with
thoughts and elevated hopes, despising such as contented themselves with a
Mediocrity. In what estate soever Fortune placed him, he dreamt always of
mending it: and at last being come to that point of Greatness, that there was
nothing but Crowns above him, he had the courage to think of usurping that of
Behemia. And though he knew the design full of peril and perfidiousness, he
despised the danger which he had always surmounted, and thought all actions
honest which tended to Empire. It Is true, that Ambition, conjuncture of
Affairs, and the accidents of his Fortune, representing the Enterprise just and
facile, pushed him upon the execution.

But it is necessary, before we begin the Recital, to reflect upon his Life to
the time of his Revolt, that we may be the better informed, what it was that
enticed him to this Conspiracy, and the means that he used.

They who have said Fortune raised Walstein from the Plough, and that his Birth
was obscure, erred through Malice or Ignorance: for his Father was a Baron of
Bohemia; that is, one of the greatest Lords of that Kingdom, in which there are
neither Dukes nor Marquesses. The Barons being so jealous of their Dignity,
that if a stranger Duke would be naturalized Bohemian, they would oblige him to
quit his Title, and to content himself with theirs. Besides, they measuring the
greatness of Families by their Antiquity, some Authors have reckoned that of
Walstein among the chief, though not the richest. His Father brought him up in
the Protestant Religion, and would have had him apply himself to Letters; but
his turbulent Spirit not being proper for the repose of the Muses, his Masters
drove him from their Schools, where, instead of studying, he made leagues and
parties, and took off his Companions from their obedience and discipline. Such
force has Nature in that age, when it can neither be hid by dissimulation, nor
corrected by prudence. By this his Parents saw themselves constrained to send
him to Court sooner than they intended; so they present him Page to the
Marquess of Burgh, Son to the Archduke Ferdinand of Inspurch. Whilst he
remained there, falling from a high Window without hurting himself, he turned
Catholic: and fancying, that after this happy escape he was reserved for
something extraordinary, he quits his Master with intent to Travel; thereby to
render himself worthy of that, which his destiny seemed to promise him. He sees
Germany, England and France, accommodating himself to the manners and habits of
those Countries; noting their Scituations, Laws and Forces, taking from each
what he liked best, and at last sits down at Padua, having curiously visited
the rest of Italy. Here it was that he repented his neglect of Learning
(absolutely necessary to a Great man) and rendered himself capable of Arts, if
not knowing in them. Particularly he falls upon the study of Politics and
Astrology, which suited his genius and his designs: pleasing himself infinitely
with those Maxims which are distasted in public by those who practice them in
private; fancying for himself immoderate Grandeurs, lodged in the Stars, which
he did not forbear to hope for, though his Reason seemed to set them at an
infinite distance. But partly awaking from this dream, his mind stuffed with
vast pretentions, perceiving that with his small Forces 'twas not possible for
him to compass his designs, resolves to accommodate his means to his ends by
seeking in Marriage a rich and noble Lady; and gained, by his excellent
address, so much on her affections, that she preferred him to several Great
persons, who were engaged before him. And after she was married, continued so
desperately amorous and jealous, that she had almost killed him by mixing with
his drink one of those Philters, which instead of winning the mind wounds it;
making strange havoc in the body that suffers its violences. A Poison by so
much the more inevitable, as it stands for a mark of affection with those that
give it. He was scarce recovered when his Wife dies without Children, leaving
him her Heir and Master of a great Estate. Soon after, the War of the Archduke
Ferdinand with the Venetians breaking out in Friol, he embraced the occasion he
had so often wished, and thought so necessary for him: believing, that to able
men, the way of Arms was the most certain and shortest to arrive at Greatness;
whereas Peace might enrich many, but raised few: so levying at his own charge
three hundred Horse well appointed, he offered his own and their Service to the
Duke at the Siege of Gradisk: where, by his liberality to his Officers, and
readiness to succor his Soldiers in their necessities; by his conduct in War;
often fortunate, always remarkable, doing actions extraordinary; praising
other men's, silent in his own; acting with vigilance and care; keeping his
Troops in abundance, when the whole Army wanted; he put himself in the
reputation of one, that amongst many good qualities had some extraordinary, and
gained, together with the friendship of Ferdinand, the charge of Colonel over
the Moravia Forces.

The Troubles of Bohemia following, and the Nobility of that Kingdom conspiring
against the Emperor, Walstein continued faithful, though the Rebels solicited
him by offers of chief employment, and by the hopes and recompenses of the War.
But he pretending no less from the Emperor, and as yet preferring things
certain and honest to things doubtful and tumultuary, after having endeavored
in vain to repress the Sedition of Prague, when he saw that he could not keep
his Moldavian Troops in their obedience, and that his Countrymen had
confiscated his Estate, he got as much of the Public Treasure as he could, and
retired to Vienna, where all was squeezed from him except twelve Thousand
Crowns, which he had conveyed away, and with which he raised a Thousand light
Horse. But here I must not omit one passage, which showed the particular care
that Fortune took of this man; which is, that at the first of these Troubles,
and before the Rebels had begun the War, the chief of the party entered in
Arms, and without leave into the privy Chamber of the Emperor; where they made
their propositions with such insolence, that one of them, his hand on his
Sword, durst say, 'twas that should satisfy their demands, if denied. In this
fear and surprise of Ferdinand Walstein arrived by chance with a new raised
Troop, which he meant to show the Emperor, which obliged these bold Rebels,
who thought themselves betrayed and lost, to throw down their Arms and to cast
themselves at the Princes foot, whose favor Walstein possessed from this time
to that of his revolt. Whilst what he did in this War, particularly his
defeating six Thousand Hungarians with fifteen Troops of Horse, purchased him
an extreme Fame and an extreme Envy, (for never any could separate these two)
the Prince of Leistaine constituted Judge of the Bohemian Rebels and Governor
of the Kingdom, accused him at Vienna. But he, that well knew the nature of the
Court, where Absence is criminal, if it be not defended, and where Safety is
always found, if we will buy it, hastened thither with sixty Thousand Crowns,
and not only purchased an esteem for his Innocence, but minding to acquire some
of the Great ones, that might protect and sustain his Fortunes; besides that
Artifice and Interest gained him diverse, he marries the Daughter of Charles of
Arach, chief Counselor and Favorite to Ferdinand and by the credit of his
Father in Law, and the succors of Money, which he lent the Emperor in his
pressing necessities, he obtained, besides his light Horse, two Regiments of
Foot, and the charge of Sergeant Major General.

The victories of this party and the weakness of the Revolted having in
appearance ended the War, Walstein, who perceived how things went, and knew
that the Rebellion was rather dissembled than extinct, and that the Leagues
made all over Europe against the House of Austria might surprise it unprovided;
undertook a thing as memorable as extraordinary, and whereof the execution
might seem impossible for any Private man, who had not that credit with the
Soldier which his good conduct had gained him. He offered the Emperor to
raise an Army of thirty Thousand men at his own charge, on condition he might
be General: and so wrought by his Industry, his Friends, and by engaging his
whole Estate, that he in a short time accomplished it, and succeeding to the
charge of the Marquess of Montnegro, who was deposed for having unfortunately
served the Emperor in Transylvania, he owed his Dignity to nothing but his
Ambition and his Virtue. In this high employment he added much to his
Reputation. He took the Town and Diocese of Alberstad. Conquered Hall and its
Bishopric; wasted the Territories of Magdeburgh; entered into those of Anhalt;
fortified Dessau; defied Mansfield, and with him four Thousand Flemings, the
chief Force of the Danish Army. After that, having taken Debst, and perceiving
that Mansfield and Weimar with their Forces bent toward Hungary by way of
Silesia, to give life to the Rebellion and join with Bethlem Gabor, he pursued
Bethlem and Mansfield, and finding them at the Siege of Novegrade, vanquished
them; cut in pieces the Janissaries that were come to the succor of
Transylvania, and drove Mansfield out of Germany, who had been its Terror for
so many years. Returning into Silesia, where he found Weimar dead, he obliged
half his Troops to surrender themselves, and overcame the rest, took in all the
revolted Towns, and after he had pacified the hereditary Provinces, led his
victorious Army, strengthened by that of Tilly, against the King of Denmark.
With these great Forces he defies the Marquis of Vrlach, conquers the
Archbishopric of Breme and Holsace, filled his Troops out of the new Levies
that Charles of Lauemburgh had raised for the Enemy; rendered himself Master of
all that lies between the Ocean and the Baltic Sea; leaving the King of
Denmark nothing but Glucstad, and that little corner of Land which is separated
from the rest of his Dominions. And though the King had tempted his Fortunes,
he was still worsted; Walstein driving him out of Pomerania, into which
Province he had made a descent and progress; forcing him to remount his Ships,
where yet perhaps he had not found his safety, if Walstein had had Sea Forces:
insomuch as from that time to the Peace of Lubeck, the Dane never enterpriz'd
any thing, contenting himself to succor those of the Sound, who only were able
to stop the torrent of the Imperial Arms, which so many Nations had in vain
opposed.

In this flourishing estate of the Empire, Walstein willing that his Master
should profit himself of his victories, and build the greatness of his House
upon the weakness of his Enemies, leaves Tilly in Frise, under pretext that
something of the Rebellion remained, and that there he should take up his
Winter quarters: but in effect it was, that the Emperor might not have any
longer the Duke of Bavaria for Companion, and that himself might remain,
without Competitor, sole Director of all things. After this, knowing well that
the poverty of the Common people and the depression of the Great ones, were the
ways that lead to the servitude of Nations, free and little affected to the
Emperor; instead of disbanding this multitude of Soldiers, who, having
conquered all, seemed now useless, he raised several new Troops, and augmented
the number of his Officers, to increase by their charge the poverty of those
who were to defray it. His own Example taught his Commanders sumptuousness and
profusion; and, to furnish that, Rapine and Violence. All Germany was overflown
with these Troops: they could no longer distinguish Friend and Allies, from
Enemies and Neuters. The Insolence of the Soldier being unpunished was
boundless; as was the Oppression of the people and their hatred against
Walstein, who they believed the Author of these Evils. Besides, from the
Imperial Court was issued a severe Edict, declaring all those Traitors that
were found to have any way participated in the Counsels of the Rebels: by which
they had the means to secure themselves of the Great ones, and got money to
satisfy the Soldiers and Courtiers. It being not only easy, but honest in
appearance, to calumniate those they meant to ruin. And that the King of
Sweden, who so many miserable wretches looked upon as the last refuge of their
Liberty, should not when he would, or foment a Rebellion, which without him
could have no force, or oppose himself to that absolute dominion of Austria,
which Walstein labored to establish; after having condemned the Duke of
Mekelburgh for holding Intelligence with the Enemy; and being by the gift of
Ferdinand, Master of his Estate and Titles; Walstein secures himself of all the
Ports in the Baltic Sea, except the Sound, to which he lays violent Siege,
and put all his care to the equipping of a Fleet, that might render him Master
of these Seas, as he was of Germany. And now, in spite of hatred or envy, he
might quietly have enjoyed the glory of his great and faithful Services, if his
Pride, that was always above his Fortune, had not transported him. But being
born away with a blind presumption of himself, and an insupportable despising
of others; made Prince of the Empire and Duke of Meckleburgh; styled Highness;
eating alone; stamping Money; and in his Equipage, Expenses, and solicited
Audiences affecting to resemble Kings, he corrupted the solidity of his Virtue,
and gave the World aversions for his injurious and irregular Vanities.

The Peace with the Danes being concluded at Lubeck, the Emperor,
extraordinarily pressed by the Clergy, on whom he depended in all things,
precipitates himself after their passions, and resolves to give the last blow
to the liberty of Germany before it was weak enough to receive it. He publishes
an Edict, commanding the restitution of all the Ecclesiastical goods, which the
Protestants had usurped from the first Troubles of Lutheranism; believing,
there could not happen to him any sinister accident: Not from abroad, whilst
the King of Sweden and Bohemia were in War; he of Denmark weary of his Losses,
and the Transylvanians divided into Factions; the French busied among
themselves and in Italy. And at home he had Walstein; ever terrible to the
Factious, and Armies ready to stifle any Sedition before its growth. But the
Protestants, despoiled of Lands which they had inherited; and apprehensive,
that in sequence of that, their liberty of Conscience might be taken from them
too: finding themselves in despair on these considerations of Religion and
Interest; and the Princes of that party perceiving well, that 'twas they were
aimed at; amongst others, the Elector of Saxony seeing the command of
Magdeburgh taken from his Son, which the Town had bestowed upon him; the Pope
having nominated for their Archbishop Leopold the Son of Ferdinand; endeavored
to find remedies for these utmost extremities, and, by the help of the French,
to oblige Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, alarmed by what was done on the
Baltick-Sea and ambition of Honor, to come to their assistance under other
pretenses. On the other side, the Catholic Princes, to whom the Greatness of
the House of Austria rendered it terrible; and generally all people oppressed
with that Poverty to which they were reduced y Contributions and Winter
quarters (the invention of Walstein, and not any thing of public calamity)
demanded of the Emperor a General Assembly for the good and quiet of his
Empire. Chiefly the Duke of Bavaria solicited this Diet; together with the
Elector of Majence, who he had put into his opinion. The Bavarois mortally
hated Walstein: whether it was, that he thought him an enemy to the Peace of
Germany; or whether he had ambition to pretend himself to the Electorate, which
'twas said the Emperor had promised him, and Walstein opposed. He saw also
that his General Tilly was removed, and found that absolute power lessened,
which he had merited by his fidelity in the greatest peril of the Empire, and
by his Services in sustaining the declining Fortunes of Ferdinand: and, that
which touched him nearest was, that the fruit of all his Labors remained in
the hands of Walstein; apprehending, that this prodigious Power, to the
establishing whereof he had contributed with the hazard of his life and
Fortunes, might be the ruin of both, if his Enemy, who never pardoned any,
continued any longer the Arbiter. These Considerations having cast him into
fear and anger, which ordinarily increase proportionably as their Subjects are
just; he was the man that most earnestly solicited the Assembly, and the
deposing of Walstein. Pushed on also by Monsieur de Lem the French Ambassador,
and the Capuchin Joseph, a man of Intrigues. It was he also, that to obtain
this Diet, and to hinder the Emperor from discovering, they meant to diminish
that Authority which he had usurped, gave him hopes, that his Son should be
elected King of the Romans; an insensible introduction to succession in the
Empire. His Arts took place in a mind that wished nothing more; for we believe
easily what we desire earnestly. The Emperor with his Son came to Ratisbone
the end of June 1630, where all the Electors were met, except those of Saxony
and Brandenburgh; who excused themselves by their Deputies, as not able to
defray the charges of the Journey, the great expense of Walsteins Garrisons
having impoverished them: and 'twas true, that fourteen complete Regiments had
Wintered in the Territories of Brandenburgh only. The present necessity, and
the fear of the future, augmented the boldness of the Electors. And, besides
their dependence on the King of Sweden, who had begun the War in Germany, they
were imbolden'd by the absence of Forty thousand men, who, contrary to the
advice of Walstein, were employed in the War of Mantoua, or lost in that of
Polonia. They were further encouraged by the French Ambassador: for upon
complaint made in the Diet by the Duke of Lorain, that a powerful French Army
was upon the Frontier, the Ambassador assured the Electors, they were there
only to sustain their Propositions in case they should be refused. They first
treated the Peace with the King of France; it being of the Protestants interest
not to be engaged with him, that he might the more freely assist them. Next,
they resolved upon an Assembly at Frankfort the year following, touching the
Edict of the restitution, several difficulties impeding the determination now:
the Protestants expecting, that before that time the King of Sweden should
render it null; and the Catholics believing, that their right would be
fortified by the possession which they had. But when they came to speak of the
affairs of the War, all these parties with one common Voice demanded the
deposing of Walstein, and it seemed as if they had assembled for nothing else.
The hatred born him was general; and the weakness of the Emperor, astonished
by this unthought of blow, was enough to draw a consent to lay him aside, and
so to strip himself of his Power and his Fortunes, and to abandon a man whose
ruins had never been so much their study, if he had been less faithful to him,
or had rendered him less powerful. The Spaniards, who often were the Arbiters
of his Councils, desiring one less proud, and more obedient in his place,
seeing that the King of Sweden was descended into Pomerania, were content with
Tilly, who the Duke of Bavaria, willing to reassume his Authority, offered them
to oppose him. The Emperor saw himself constrained to disband his Troops of
the upper Germany, and to consent to a reformation of the rest, which lost him
the greatest part: the Soldier accustomed to pillage, could not or render that
which they had taken, or resolve to take no more. Nor did the Disorders stop
here: the Generals Anheim and Hoftchen sought entertainment elsewhere, and a
great number of Officers left his Service. So that from that absolute estate,
which made Germany tremble under Walstein, the Emperor by his weakness, the
artifice of the Protestants, and the passions of his own, was reduced in an
instant to dread the Swedish Forces, which Walstein would have slighted, if in
his Authority he had retained the chief strength of the Empire. His Ministers
perceived as well as he, but too late, that they were deceived; seeing, that
after he had forsaken all the interests of the Empire, on the hopes of making
his Son King of the Romans, the Electours waved his nomination by proroguing
it; which in such matters, holds the place of a civil Refusal.

In the mean time Walstein having heard of his being deposed, though the
suddeness of the blow surprised him, seemed rather to regret the Misfortune of
Ferdinand, than his own: Without speaking of himself, he only said, that the
Emperor was betrayed, and his Council corrupted. That same Virtue which had
gained him the Generals Staff, served him to resign it in appearance without
disorder or grief. His displeasure for all that was very great, but very
secret, and only known of his Confidents. Diverse Colonels repaired to him: some
he kept with him; assigned others upon his Lands (whither he sent them) to live
honorably; being in this careful of his Friendship and Reputation. Resolving
to keep such men as he guessed by this voluntary proof could never abandon him,
whatever the dangers were which he might be cast into by his ambition and
resentments. For certainly, under this profound simulation of a moderate
Spirit, which he affected in his Misfortunes, he hid an extreme desire of
Revenge, and cast projects to put himself into such a condition, that they
should not again take away his employment, if the necessity of affairs would
that they recalled him to it; whereof John Baptista Seni his Astrologer shows
him approaching hopes, and whereof he assured himself by the Judgment he made
upon the disorder of the Empire: confirming thus by his own solid reasoning,
the conjectures of an uncertain Art. And thus he fills his mind with high and
bold designs, even then, when he seems to think of nothing but a private life.

And now it may be seasonable to say somewhat of his Customs, and of his
Domestic life; that you may see better how all his actions tended to raise him
above other men, and with more certainty judge of what we write; to which these
Remarks seem not altogether impertinent: but truly I fear, that in reading them
there will want belief for the History, and that the Truths I shall deliver,
will pass for the descriptions of a Romance. This notwithstanding shall not
forbid me to speak of them, without exaggeration, without envy. To begin with
his Houses: That he lived in seemed rather the Palace of a Monarch, than the
dwelling of a particular man: for he shared in this weakness with other men,
who leave piles of Stone for the Monuments of their Greatness; not dreaming of
those importunate accidents of Nature or Fortune, which may destroy them in a
moment; and at the best, whatever care is taken to preserve them, they ruin of
themselves. His House at Prague received those that came by six great Gates;
and in a mighty space of ground, cast its foundation over the ruins of an
hundred Houses, that were pulled down to make way for it. The apartments were
beautiful, magnificent and commodious; the ornaments and movables represented
Luxury and Abundance, and his Lodgings showed them in Excess. I would willingly
describe the retail: the Gardens, beautified with a great number of Statues;
the Fountains, Grots, Fish Ponds, Volaries; rare for their extent, planted with
Trees, filled with Birds of all sorts; if the History would suffer
unprofitable, though pleasing digressions. The Model of this Palace was
different from all others: whether it was, that he believed his fashion of
Building the best; or whether by this particular affection, he would also in
these things stand at distance from vulgar Customs. Near his House at Gidzin
he built a Wall about a fair Park, where he kept above three hundred choice
Horses. For his Stables, of choice Architecture; Marble Mangers and Fountains
to fall into them: I forbear to make any particular remark on them, for almost
all the German Princes are curious in these. If Death had not constrained him
to leave his Castle of Segan unfinished, possibly he had surpassed in that
Edifice all those of the Ancient Romans, as he equaled them by enlarging the
Town of Gidzin, building a Charter House, founding a College of Jesuits, and
a Church of the Protestants. Admirable in this particular, that all this was
done in those few years that he was Master of his Fortune; whereas often, the
lives of two Kings do not suffice to finish a Palace. For his Expense, 'twas an
unheard of profusion. A hundred Dishes always served up to his Table: and the
neatness added much to the good Cheer. Fifty Halbardeers were the constant
guard of his Antichamber; Men chosen by their Faces, and known by their
Actions. Without were Sentinels, and every where Lacquies. Twelve men marched
continually about his Palace to hinder Noise, which he could not suffer: in
this, delicate even to weakness. He entertained sixty Pages, Sons of the best
Houses; who learnt their Exercises under famous Masters, which he kept on
purpose. His Liveries were gorgeous and rich. He had an infinite number of
Gentlemen attending him: four of his Chamber informed him of those would speak
with him, and brought them to audience. Six Barons and six Knights were always
near him to receive his Commands. The Steward of his House was a Lord of great
Note. When he took the field, he had for his Baggage and for his Table fifty
Wagons drawn with six Horses, and fifty drawn with four, and six Coaches for
Gentlemen of Condition, that followed his Court. He always carried with him
fifty Leer Horse, beautiful to wonder, and covered with the most precious
Harness, and these led by fifty men, each mounted on a Horse of price. Such as
love frugal and modest Virtue will blame this Pomp, whilst such as adore
outward Vanity will like it, and all will judge it easy for Walstein, living
more splendidly than Kings, to aim at their rank and dignity. I have not
mentioned the Palace of his Wife; the Pensions he gave, or the Recompenses: nor
of the vast sums he spent throughout Europe to be informed of all; I have said
enough, methinks, for my design and for my leisure: Besides, that things of
this nature please in passing, but tire us when we dwell upon them. Let us then
betake our selves to the History.

After Walstein had given up his Command, those who in his stead they opposed
to the King of Sweden, having little experience in Military Affairs; some
wanting Courage, others Foresight; all, good Fortune; their Party was weakened
by several losses. The Electors of Saxony and Brandenburgh left it openly,
joining with Gustavus; and 'twas only Tilly, that sustained for a time the
burden of the War. He, who possessed the Virtues of a good Captain, Fortune,
Prudence, Valor, Care; and, what is rare, Piety, endeavored to arrest the
Victories of the Enemy, and to maintain the Reputation of his own. But whether
it were, that he alone was not sufficient for the conduct of the Emperors
Armies, and those of the Catholic Princes, Leagued for the defense of Germany;
or whether he was destitute of the absolute Authority of Walstein; so that not
daring to undertake any thing, without consulting the Council of Vienna, or the
Confederates, the time to deliberate lost him that of Action: or finally,
whether it were that Fortune, which favors things in their growth, pleases her
self in forsaking them in their maturities, he was vanquished at Lipsic; and
the loss of this Battle made the Empire decline toward its ruin. More than
half Germany was subjected to the Swede; the Duke of Saxony seized on Bohemia;
the Lantgrave of Hess cast himself on the side of the Victor; the Elector of
Triers sought protection of the French, and the danger seemed so great to the
Duke of Bavaria, that he staggered in his fidelity to the Common Cause, and the
House of Austria. 'Twas believed also, that the King of Sweden might have ended
the War by the Conquest of the Hereditary Provinces, if he had turned his Force
thither after this Battle: but truly, without reflecting on what might be said
to the contrary, humane Counsel seems to be subjected to a Superior cause,
that excuses its defects; and in all actions there is often a fatality, that
overbears Prudence or blinds it. In the mean time, Gustavus being busied in the
taking in the Mein and Rhein, those of Vienna seeing he did not march that way,
having leisure to dismiss their Fears, employed themselves with diligence to
find ready and apt Remedies for these Evils, and after many Consultations, the
extremity of their Affairs obliged them to have recourse to Walstein, who only
seemed capable to re-establish them, if he would undertake it. They considered
his Courage, augmented by Difficulties, far from being terrified by them;
industrious and passionate to execute what others held impossible; his active
Vigilance never surpised; his Riches, proper to facilitate great designs, and
ready to succor the necessities of the Empire; his Credit, his Intelligences,
and the desire the Soldier had to serve under him. And as it is the fault of
our Nature to hold no mean, neither in Prosperity nor in Affliction, those to
whom his Virtue had been intolerable then, when he seemed useless, praised in
him in this pressing occasion even things vain and fortuitous. They believed
moreover, that he would return to his employment with an extreme satisfaction;
that whatever disgust he had in losing it, his Ambition, which was the Master
of his other Passions, would stifle his resentment; that this his obstinate
cleaving to a Private life, had less of truth than ostentation. On these and
the like Considerations they resolved to show him some assured hopes of his
re-establishment, thereby to draw from him some testimony of his desire
thereof: and thought, that by engaging him to ask that Charge they were willing
to give, the Obligation would be less, and the Conditions easier. To this
purpose, notwithstandig the opposition of the Spaniards, who would never
consent, they dispatched Maximilian Walstein, Master of the Horse to the King
of Hungary, having first instructed him in what they thought necessary: for
besides that he was his Nephew, he was one of those he treated with most esteem
and confidence. He then goes to visit him at Zeman, where he remained after the
loss of Prague; and after he had entertained him with a general discourse of
the Affairs of the Empire, that he might be the less able to penetrate the aim
of his discourse, he dexterously turns his Speech on the Praises that were
bestowed on him in the present occurrence, and upon the desire all people had
to see him again undertake the defense of the Empire; advising him not to
reject the occasion, but to go forward toward that Fame that attended him.
Walstein perceived well the Artifice; wherefore minding, according to his
projects, to hide his design more carefully now he saw it ready to take effect;
and to draw all advantages from the necessity of Affairs, he first, touching
his Interest, answered sparingly and modestly; then extended his discourse unto
the sweetness of his condition, and the desire he had to grow Old in quiet; no
more to tempt that Fortune which had treated him so shamefully, that though she
were minded to give him all again, yet it must be by robbing him of his Repose:
and coming at last to deplore the Misfortunes of his Sovereign, as if he had
been deeply affected, he mingled with his discourse tender and doubtful words;
such as might not wholly take off the hopes of his Service, but represent it
almost impossible.

Now, the Ministers of the Emperor seeing they had advanced little by this
means, pressed with time and danger, served themselves of the only way which
remained; to act openly, to entreat, to offer, to yield to any thing that they
might bend him. The Baron of Questemburgh and the Count Wardemburgh, his
Friends, attempted him several times, but in vain. His obstinacy appeared so
great, that they had despaired to overcome it, if the Prince of Echamberg had
not labored in it. And 'twas to him all men expected Walstein should yield,
having lived a long time with him in the straitest confidence, and always
powerfully served him at Court; employing all his diligences to prevent his
Fall, and in his disgrace never grew cold. They considered also the Authority
of this man; powerful over the inclinations of the Emperor, whose Director and
Favorite he was. And certainly his Favor was not ill placed; the greatness of
his Merit going even with that of his Fortune. He then caused himself to be
carried to Zenam, being much vexed with the Gout; and after he had given
Walstein the Emperors Letters, dictated as the present occurrence would; he
lively represented the Honor of saving his Prince and Country; the obligation
they must have to him; the beauty of such an Enterprise; the Fame, and what
else might stir up a mind passionate of Glory. He added the Entreaties of
Ferdinand; that he was Arbiter of all; that he might dispense; that he might
act; with assurances he should find an entire Obedience, and great Recompenses:
engaging for that the Credit of the Emperor and his own, which he knew to be
great, and had ever proved it certain.

Walstein, though he saw that it was time to close, yet at first denied his
assistance, though in a fainter manner than ordinary: opposing, as in doubt,
the malice of his Enemies, ready to calumniate what he might do; the facility
of the Emperor to believe them, and perhaps to cast him off after he had drawn
Service from him: And besides, though he might be secured in these particulars,
he asked, where was the Army whereof they would make him General; and what
means to set right a desperate Affair. But at last, seeing himself incessantly
pressed, sometimes feigning to acquiess in their persuasions; sometimes, to
give way to the importunity of his Friends, he promised his Service; but for
Four months only: in which time he would be sole and absolute; and that ended,
lay down this burthenous Authority; to which Echamberg consented; believing
'twas enough he had engaged him to the Employment, in which the occasions
themselves might oblige him to continue, if his Ambition did not; so having
consulted of what they thought needful, after this final Resolution they
departed. Walstein being left alone, unquiet and raving, began to revolve in
his mind the greatness and difficulty of that which he was about to undertake;
sometimes measuring it by Fear, which renders every thing hard; sometimes by
Ambition, which finds nothing so. The impossibility of usurping a Kingdom from
a legitimate Prince; and of engaging to Rebellion a People, that make Obedience
to their Sovereign a point of their Religion; the danger of trusting such a
Secret; the ordinary infidelity of Factious minds; the punishment and Infamy;
if it did not succed; if it did, the Murders, Poisons, and distrust of all
things terrefied him. On the other side, his resentment of his ill usage; his
hatred, appetite of Revenge, and above all, his covetousness of Rule, which
could never be extinct in his unruly mind, blindly precipitated him. He saw the
half of Germany under the King of Sweden; the rest tottering and ill assured;
the Princes of Europe Leagued with Gustavus, or Ill-willers to the House of
Austria; this House in decline: And he judged by these Conjunctures, the time
ripe for Novelty. He well knew, that extremity of Affairs only having forced
the Duke of Bavaria and the Spaniards, powerful at Vienna, to consent to his
re-establishment, he could expect no other recompense of his pains, if he
should settle the Empire, than to return to his Private condition, and to a
shameful and obscure life: wherefore he thought it more just to serve himself
of those Forces his Enemies had put into his hands, in venturing to ruin them
and to raise himself, than to secure them and to lose himself. He thought he
had the opportunity and the means. He considered himself consummate in the
experience of Military Affairs; dear to the Soldier; ready to command a
mercenary Army; hardy, opulent, and industrious; always succored of Fortune:
whereas he looked upon the Emperor as slothful; little addicted to Arms; of a
soft Nature; slow, exposed to deceits, and more proper to dissemble Injuries
than to repulse them. In this violent agitation, floating in doubts, sometimes
embracing the best resolutions, sometimes the most pernicious; after he had a
long time suffered these torments, he abandoned himself at last to the worst
Counsels, and determined to attempt the usurpation of Bohemia; not being able
to vanquish the motions of his vexed and ulcerated mind, nor resist that cruel
passion for Greatess, which never left him in repose. But seeing, that the
execution of such a design depended on the disposing of several things that
must be public and interpreted, being naturally framed to dissimulations and
feignings, he resolved, without admitting any Confident of this his last
resolution, to bury it under a profound Silence, and to apply himself entirely
to act in such a manner, that all he did should seem to tend to the good of the
Empire; to the end that his designs not being suspected at first, they should
not be able to ruin the beginnings, that are usually weak: and that when they
should come to be discovered, he might be in a condition to carry them on by
force. Being thus confirmed against the danger, and resigned entirely to
something more powerful than his Reason; whether you will call it Fate or
Genius; he began insensibly to drive on his ends, for which he had need of much
Time, great Fortune, and many Artifices. And this was the state of things and
the design of Walstein, when he was recalled to his Employment. After this, to
put the Affairs of the Emperor in reputation, who had scarce any left; and to
relieve the people in their Fears by raising a belief in them, that this side
wanted only a Commander, and not Forces; willing also to build up a great
Opinion of himself, he gives out Commissions to levy sixty Regiments; treats
with the King of Poland for twenty thousand Cossacks; negotiates with the Duke
of Lorain to engage him in the War; sends into Italy to buy the best Arms, and
every where sows Reports advantageous for his Party. And to the end, that the
success might not deceive his Attempts, and that with more facility he might
assemble his Troops, who were to be the source of his second Greatness, he
chose the Territory of Znaim to form the Body of his Army in: inclined to it by
the commodious situation on the Confines of Moravia and the Hereditary
Provinces; where, notwithstanding the Swedish War, Abundance and Peace had
remained, and where the fury of the Enemy and the Domestic mischiefs of Winter
quarter had not penetrated. In this place, whilst he wrote civilly to the
Colonels, dissembling his natural Fierceness, treating them with marks of
Courtesy and Friendship, adding largess and profusion, sparing neither Care nor
Coin, Soldiers flocking to him upon his Credit; he raised in two Months an
Army, if not answering the Fame in number, yet 'twas more than could have been
expected: aided in this by voluntary Contributions of the principal Ministers
of Vienna; great for the particulars, but made more considerable by the
necessity; supplying out of his own Money for the poorer Officers, and engaging
the Richer by his address to raise Troops with theirs, feeding them with hopes
of recovering all out of the riches of Prey and Garrisons.

When he saw all was ready, casting himself again within his wonted Artifices,
he wrote to Vienna, that he had satisfied his Promise, and that now he would
retire; that the Army was ready, but he wished Domestic Peace; that they
should send a General and grant him a retirement. He knew for all this, that
what he as'kd was impossible: for having put into employment the Captains he
retained in his disgrace; given Regiments to his Kinsmen and ancient
Confidents, under pretense of sparing the principal Pay, and training up new
Soldiers under old Commanders, obliging the Colonels to hazard all they had
upon the sole hopes of his Parol; winning the Chief Officers by high
Employments, corrupting the Soldiers by Presents, and all men in general by
the expectation of his Fortune; he had so ordered things, that this Army could
not subsist without him, and reduced the Emperor to an absolute necessity of
maintaining him General.

When they knew at Vienna, that he persisted to signify dislike of the
Service, the Ministers of Spain and those of Bavaria, attempted once more to
take his Command from him. The first, who governed the King of Hungary by means
of his Wife, absolute upon his Spirit, and depending wholly on their Counsels,
took this occasion to render that Prince Master of Arms and of Affairs. The
Duke of Bavaria feared to see the Command in the hands of him whom he had
despoiled of it. They urged both of them, that the Power conferred on Walstein
caused the Revolt, and 'twould confirm the Rebellion, if it were renewed, and
make those contrive to revolt, who hitherto remained faithful; that the
presence of the King of Hungary would lead Princes and People back to their
Allegiance, who would be ashamed to bear Arms against the Son of their
Sovereign, and who must one day be so: besides, what opinion would Europe
entertain of the Successor to the Empire, if he should be deprived of this
Command? And what greater Argument of the weakness of the Empire, than
shamefully to betake themselves to a man, who designed Misfortunes to it? That
this was to condemn of Imprudence the last Councils, and expose themselves
afresh and voluntarily to dangers; that under pretense of Public good they
ought not to trust Walstein, nor put him in condition to revenge the Injuries
he believed to have received, especially since a design of Rule might be mixed
with his appetite of Revenge, and our Fidelities hardly defend themselves
against these two; that this man was proud and immoderate; that he every day
scattered new marks of his Indignation, and that in his retreat at Prague he
had meditated nothing but dangerous and vast designs; dissimulation and revenge.

But these Considerations, though pregnant, gave way to the necessity of
employing him for the conservation of the new Army, the chief support of the
Imperial party. Ferdinand himself calling to mind in his present calamity, the
formidable estate wherein this General had once placed him; as it is ordinary
for the unhappy to suffer themselves to be blinded with the weakest hopes,
flattered himself with thoughts of retrieving his former Greatness, and secured
himself of the Fears they endeavored to instill. Besides, his Council, jealous
of the direction of the Affairs of Germany, which the Spaniards went about to
usurp; hoping that Walstein joining with them, might uphold their credit,
favored his Cause and declared, that the House of Austria had need of him;
that 'twas necessary to reserve the Emperor for last extremities, and not fit
to expose the welfare of his state to the Youth and Courage of his Son,
especially in a conjuncture wherein they could not err twice, and wherein full
experience of the Military Art was scarce sufficient. They added, that the Duke
of Bavaria opposed good designs, because it is natural to hate those we have
wronged, and that he preser'd his private Enemies to the general good; that he
would strip the Empire of its best defense, the more easily to betray it. For
at this time the Loyalty of this Elector became suspected, and by intercepted
Letters they found, that he managed a Peace with the Swede.

And thus the care of the War was put upon Walstein: but as all his feigned
coolness was only to obtain Advantages on which he might found his Usurpation,
perceiving that they did not act sincerely, and that the hatred of his Enemies
gave way only to the despair of their Affairs, ready to break out again, when
they could ruin him securely; that the goodwill of Ferdinand seemed
constrained, and that his words were by so much the less real, as they were
vehement and common in fear; he confirms himself in his resolution of
maintaining his Authority by fraud and by force, believing he could do nothing
unjust against his mortal Enemies.

And now, after many Instances, having declared, that he was ready to do what
they would, provided they furnished him with what was necessary; Echamberg and
the Bishop of Vienna, who were returned with ample power to grant him any
thing, urging him to declare what he desired, as one that accepted of a weighty
Charge, and asked only such things as might aid him to overcome the
difficulties of it, with much confidence he told them, that several reasons
would have forbid him accepting the Command wherein he was engaged, if the love
of his Country and desire to serve his Prince had not controlled them; that he
had already employed his Estate; that he was ready to hazard his life also;
that they would have him add his Honor, which he esteemed above Riches or
Life; that he was upon the point to begin a War, in which 'twas rashness to
hope a good success; with a Great and Warlike King, hitherto Arbiter of
Victory and Fortune, against whom he should only oppose new and vanquished
Soldiers; that he could expect nothing from the weakness of the Empire, the
division of its Councils, the falseness of its Allies; that he found he was the
mark of Hatred and Envy; that in this condition, where every thing was against
him, and he had nothing but his Virtue to encourage him, they expected with
impatience the success of his Employment; that if good men wished him
prosperous, because he labored for the Public good, his Enemies longed for
his ruin, which they preferred to their cause, prepared to accuse him as
guilty, if he failed to be happy, and to impute to him as Crimes the faults of
Fortune. That for these Reasons it behooved him to see, that good men might not
be deceived; that Malice might be disappointed, and his Honor preserved; and
that it was but fit, that those who against his mind had called him to such
difficulties, should grant him what they, as well as himself, must judge
necessary to his present condition, and without which they would ruin the
Affairs of the Empire, and his Reputation.

After this discourse, which in appearance was so much the more innocent, as it
seemed free and disinteressed, he gave them Articles containing, That they made
him General of the Austrian Armies, and Arbiter of Peace, with an entire,
absolute and independent Power; that the King of Hungary should never come to
the Army; that he might by his private Authority, and without communicating
with the Councils of Ferdinand or the Chamber of Spire, dispose of
Confiscations, Permissions and Graces; and that the Hereditary Countries should
be appointed for the Winter quarters of his Army.

These Conditions were hard, and Walstein to excuse them alleged, That great
Enterprises were scarce ever successful, but under the Conduct of one man; that
often the issue had been unfortunate where many were mingled in Command; that
the Romans, when they had chased away their Kings, were forced in the dangers
of their Commonwealth to create Dictatours; that Gustavus acting alone, on weak
beginnings found himself Victorious beyond his hopes; that on the contrary, a
multitude of Masters had lost the best Soldiers of the World, and brought the
Empire almost to its subversion; that this Example was enough to let us see,
how weak Power becomes when it is divided; that the fear of Shame and desire of
Glory made us act vigorously, so long as they touched none but our selves, but
when they were in common, we neglected that reputation and that blame, whereof
little would come to our share. He employed the like Reasons for Negotiations
of Peace, where number hurts the secret; where different Interests and diverse
Conducts hoodwink Prudence, retarding or diverting opportunities of Treating.
He added, that it would not be advantageous the King of Hungary should Command
in the Army, nor fit he should Obey; that 'twas not convenient Soldiers should
leave the Service, and go to seek Rewards of their pains at Court, where their
Faces were scarce known, and where ordinarily forward men and Flatterers
disguised Truth, decry'd the best Actions, and usurped the place of Merit; that
'twas necessary Rewards and Punishments should be present in Armies, if we
would preserve Order and gain Affection; that there were no Soldiers, that
fight for a steril Fame; that the desire of Gain and Greatness drew them to the
War; that their Blood was the price of their Fortune; that the transport of our
Passions being the cause of our Crimes, the pleasure of satisfying them would
turn these Crimes into Habits, when not severely chastis'd; that upon hopes of
Impunity bad men were hardened, Good men corrupted, and Discipline ruined; that
he did desire permission to establish his Winter quarters in the Hereditary
Provinces, only to serve himself of it in extremity, and to maintain his Army,
if he should be reduced to that Retreat, other parts of Germany being harras'd
and possessed by the Enemy; that he should endeavor by all ways to Winter
elsewhere, but if the fortune of Arms, always doubtful, should draw the War in
length, as 'twas probable, or if Fortune should continue lavishly to favor the
worst side, they ought resolve to suffer this moderated inconvenience, unless
they had a mind to see the Swedish Troops pillage the Provinces, and the
Heritage of Caesar's become a prey to the Barbarous.

Though all this appeared necessary and innocent, yet the thoughts of Walstein
aimed further, and tended to grasp a Dictatorship in the Empire, that he might
render Ferdinand despicable, despoiled of his Majesty, and reduced to a perfect
Idleness; and also to accustom the Soldier to acknowledge him their only
Master: every one ordinarily fixing his Servitude to the present fear or
profit; and does not wonder to see the Sovereignty usurped by him that acts
all, from him that voluntarily fitting still, seems to have given it away to
the more worthy.

Now, the better to cover his intentions, and to show that he did not stretch
his designs beyond those of a Private man, after his Propositions that regarded
the Public, he made others for himself; earnestly urging, that the reward of
what Service he should do, might be assigned him in Austria, and that his
restitution to the Dukedom of Meckleburgh should be comprised in any Treaty of
Peace that might be made: as if he dreamt of nothing, but to join himself to,
and depend more than ever upon the House of Austria; limiting his Ambition and
his hopes to the bare recovery of his ancient Dignity. Praying further, that if
they should call him off from his Service, he might have six Months warning, to
prepare himself, as he said, to retire without disorder: whether it were to
make them believe, that holding his Authority as a thing indifferent and
uncertain, he was far from any thoughts of keeping it by force; or whether he
desired to have this warning given him, that he might be the better able to
carry his designs to their ends without precipitation, if he sound himself
obliged to it.

After they had granted him every thing, the Spaniards accommodating themselves
to Affairs, and, according to the time, feigning Joy for his re-establishment,
sent him their Order of the Fleece, as a public mark of Honor and good will.
However, that their proceeding might not be suspected of dissimulation or
weakness, and that they might not seem totally to abandon their Pretentions to
rule in Germany, they proposed, that after the recovery of Behemia, the King of
Hungary should remain at Prague with an Army capable to defend that Kingdom,
and to maintain it in Peace and Obedience.

Walstein applauded this Overture (though he perceived whither it tended) being
certain to hinder the execution, and condescended, fearing lest they should
augure ill from his refusing. The Duke of Bavaria for his part, fearing to draw
the implacable hatred of his ancient Enemy upon his Country, bowed to the
necessity, and chose the least Evil, breaking off his plotted accommodation
with the King of Sweden, and submitted anew to the Fortune of the Empire.

In the mean time, the Court of Vienna was busied in public processions, and
paid Vows for the success of an Army destined to its ruin. But Walstein
persuaded, that whilst they acted nothing, they addressed themselves in vain to
Heaven, which hates the Prayers of the slothful; and on the contrary, that he
could not fail of Success whilst he acted with vigilance, diligence and
prudence, busied himself only to hasten the preparatives to his design, and
attended his good Fortune.

The mention I have made of the Spaniards at Vienna, minds me to say something
of them in a few words, and only for the clearing of the matter. When Charles
the Fifth had shared to his Family the Empire and the Kingdom of Spain, his
Successors remaining in the Union, believed it was their interest to make the
same Peace, the same War, to have the same Alliances; whatever concerned the
Greatness of their House being common to them; and after they had consulted
together for the public benefit they acted apart, and each did his own
business. Rodolphus and Matthias did thus. But the Troubles of Germany obliged
Ferdinand to implore, with more importunity than ordinary, the power of the
Spaniard: they valued themselves upon his easiness and the urgency of the
occasion, to seize on the office of his Ministers, and would themselves have
the government and disposal of those aids of Men or Moneys wherewith they
assisted him. As this first Usurpation took effect, they fortified themselves
in the Emperors Council by Pensions and Presents, so that at length nothing
was done without them. Afterward their Ambassador had a particular Council to
deliberate of that which should be proposed in the general, where most
Resolutions waited upon his projects; not without the extreme jealousy of
those among the German Ministers, who possessed the Favor of Ferdinand, and
would Govern themselves, accounting it a shame, that Strangers should meddle in
the administrations of the Empire. Thus were the two Factions opposed, and the
Empire diversely agitated. Let this suffice.

Walstein having laid so happily the foundation of his Revolt, deliberates to
prolong the War, that he might have time to gain the Soldiers, to ruin the
Duke of Bavaria by the Swedes, to weaken the Hereditary Provinces by Winter
quarters, and at leisure to make his Peace with the Enemies of his Master.
Without all this he could do nothing, and to bring it about much time was
necessary. He resolved however to use all diligence in the Conquering Bohemia,
that after such a quick expedition they should not suspect him for the length
of the War; and that he might insensibly secure himself of that Kingdom. I
thought of nothing less, than to recite the particulars of Walsteins Military
exploits; diverse who of design have wrote the History of the last German War,
have carefully and elegantly recounted them. I shall only say what seems
necessary to my Subject.

OF STYLE.
I Remember that in my first years of Study, at all Academical Assemblies, or
Private Meetings of young Students, great things were said of that Love of
Plato, which ravishes the mind from visible beauties to invisible. No sort of
Argument was more familiar in all men's mouths; nothing furnished Poets with
more propitious matter; nothing suggested to Orators a more benign Subject.
Wherefore, not to seem a Stranger amongst so many Citizens of Plato's
Commonwealth, I betook my self with a great deal of fervor to look into the
reverenced Memorials of that worthy Philosopher; and found, that the Pla^^nical
Doctrine had no legitimate consonancy with the discourse of my Friends: so that
I inquired of them concerning it; but they could never assign me a right
definition of the Love they called Plasonick, according to the true Principles
of their Master. The same has happened to me concerning Style. What word amongst
the Learned and Unlearned, more domestic than this? Who is not bold to judge
of it? who does not pronounce definitive Sentences, condemning the greatest
Authors who have labored for Praise? This has no Style, his Style is too
rough; it is a difficult Style, that is consus'd, and the other is harsh. I weep
over the unhappy condition of the Learned, who perhaps dare not suffer their
Pens to take a flight through the unknown fields of Posterity, seeing the
Heaven of the present Age thus darkened with clouds of Ignorance and Envy, which
thunder upon Historians, lighten in the face of Orators, and blast the Bays
upon the venerable Heads of Poets. I made it my task therefore to search among
the Writings of the Greeks and Latins, and try if I could establish in my mind
with any clearness what Style is, in what it is placed, of what parts it is
composed, or rather from the conjunction of what pieces it results.

If the Science which God at first infused were transmitted to the Sons of
Adam, as well as the Sin which he contracted is propagated, Mankind would have
no need of any other Instrument for the full knowledge of things, than the
Names by which they were called. For though the Divine light participated to
Adam, served to many and noble effects, yet in this it singularly shined forth,
that letting him perfectly know the Essence of Created things, he could impose
a Name upon every one of them, which efficaciously expressed their Nature; so
that every Name might be called, the Definition of the thing named. But because
in that woeful Patrimony, inherited by his unhappy Posterity, the plague of
Ignorance is not the least; we bewail the loss of Infallible Science together
with Original Righteousness; and wandering through the uncertain and deceitful
paths of a cloudy Philosophy, we puzzle our selves amongst shadows of Names, to
arrive the best we may at the brightness of Truth and Essences. Wherefore,
according to the best Examples, let us arrest our consideration upon the Name.

Stylus, according to its Natural sense, was nothing else but an Instrument,
sharp at one end and broad at the other, which was used to write Characters in
Waxen Table-books, or to cancel what was written. From the material Instrument
with which they wrote, the signification was afterward transferred to the act
of Writing, that is, to the use and exercise of the Instrument. It was likewise
appropriated to Composing, and in this sense it is most frequently used. And
because the office of a judicious Author is double, to Write and to Correct,
this last is recommended by Quintilian, who prescribes the use of that part of
the Style which is less acute, and which served to cancel the Characters. The
sharp end of the Style had also its Allegorical signification: for when they
would note a Book for being Bitter and Satirical, they spoke of his Style, not
as of an Instrument of Writing, but as of Arms which pierced and wounded.

None of these Considerations can lead us to that knowledge of Style we seek;
but there is one place in Terence which goes a little further: for he uses the
word Style so, as it is not restrained to signify a bare Composition, but
comprehends besides a certain particular quality or, manner of Composing. It Is
once used by Cieero in the same sense, and afterward frequently by Authors of
less Fame. But though many took Style for a quality of, or manner used in
Composing, yet none have declared what it is, or prescribed Rules for it. So
that we must proceed in our Inquiry.

The use of Speech was given to man for the Instrument of Reason: and if we
were what we ought to be, the simplicity of natural Speaking were enough to
persuade to Goodness, and when the Understanding had Truth any way represented
to it, without any inticements of flattering Eloquence, it would run to embrace
it; and the Will, freely bound by the naked, but efficacious proposal of what
is good, would feel it self ravished to a liking of it, without expecting the
Artificial engines of an Elegant discourse. But because it is long since that
the vigor of our Innocence was enervated, Art strives to come in with its aids
to the relief of oppressed Nature; and has in its Schools composed two sorts
of Remedies. The one violent, called the moving of the Affection, which does
not work but by a notable alteration of the Patient: The other pleasant, called
Elocution, in whose company Persuasion does sweetly instill it self into the
mind. Both of them managed by the Masters of the Art, not as laudable in
themselves, but as necessary to the Infirmities of the Auditors. The last only
serves to our proposed end.

Elocution is generally divided into two parts, Purity and Ornament. Perhaps he
would say the same, that bids us take care ut verba sint Latina, aperta,
ornata. Latina, that they do not break the Laws of received Grammar, nor recede
from the sense given them by the most Famed Authors, nor be rude and
uncultivate. Aperta, by propriety and use, shunning improper ones, and such as
are not commonly used by good Authors. Ornata, with figures, called Tropes and
Schemes by the Greeks. But if Elocution consists only in the choice of Words,
and in the ornament given them by Figures, we cannot rightly call it Style, not
will the body of a Discourse be enobled by it only, as it ought. It seems to
me, that Words (whether in their own nature elegant, or raised to a foreign
sense by using them figuratively) are like Stones which are prepared for a
stately Building. For, whether they are precious themselves (as Marble spotted
or sincere) or curiously wrought by a Chissil, if they have not in the
structure of the Edifice the symmetry which they ought to have, if they do not
keep a due distance, or want equality of measure, they cannot compose a
beautiful Palace or a sumptuous Temple. To reduce Elocution then to a perfect
Form, it is necessary that something be added to the Words and Figures, by
virtue of which their worth may appear the better in the composition; which is
done by a judicious placing of them; wherein an eye must be had to the Subject
which is handled by us. For, as noble and elevate Conceits occur in vain to the
mind, if they do not meet with an excellent Elocution, which can fortunately
display them: so a treasure of excellent Words and ingenious Figures little
avail, if they are not both called out to their proper places by a discreet
Collocation. Thus Elocution being confined within too narrow bounds by those,
who restrain it to the propriety and ornament of Words; further inquiring into
what the Masters of the best taste have said concerning it, we find that they
recommend Elegance, Composition, and Dignity. Under the first name of Elegance
is understood the Latinism of the Romans, Helenism of the Greeks, and Tuscanism
of the Italians, and so proportionately according to the Language; by which
they mean certainly in the Grammar Rules of that Age; clearness, by the use of
received Words, and proper to the matter they handle. The second word,
Composition, expresses the good placing of Words and Periods amongst
themselves. The third, Dignity, signifies the ornament which the Writing
recives from Figures, which consist either in Words or regard the Sentence.

To draw now the most general virtues of Elocution into a Compendium: Let it be
first Pure; that it does not trip in the path of Grammar. And that it not only
be at distance from Vice or Error, but as much as may be, approach that Virtue
which may render the Composition without exception chaste and correct. Let it be
clear and perspicuous: and this perspicuity is chiefly derived from the
propriety of it. We must acknowledge for an undoubted Truth, that those who
Writers, refusing the way trodden by good Authors, practice unused Forms, do so
intreague Elocution, that the poor Reader finds his path entangled, nor can
free his feet from those Enigma's which retard him. An Error common to the
Writers of our times, who think then they are Witty, Si ad eos intelligendos
opus sit ingenio. But because facility in a discourse for the most part borders
upon meanness, we must look that it be clear and easy, but that discretion
prescribe a measure, that it does not become low and grovelling. To this we must
add Ornament, which proceeds from an opportune managing of the Figures, whether
they are of Words or Sentences. It must not be effeminate or lascivious; but as
Quintilian says, Virilis, fortis and Sanctus. Also that sort of Ornament must
be chosen, that fits the nature of the discourse. For one kind becomes the
Historian, another the Poet, another the Orator: or rather none of these must
be always uniform, but vary habit as the matter requires. In Elocution also
regard must be had to the Sound and Numbers. For, though Number principally
appertains to Verse, yet for all that, Prose has its proportionate Numbers
different from the Poetical, whereof the Ear that has contracted a good habit
is the best Judge. And in this particular it were to be wished, that some
Modern Authors bore more respect to the Ears of understanding men: for we see a
form of Discourse introduced, abrupt and loud, which like Water broke off in
the midst of its course by Stones, wonderfully offends the hearing. In the last
place, let it be well placed or disposed. Hence springs the dependence and
joynting of Members and Periods. Whence those who work their pieces ala Musaico
may perceive, that forming a Discourse made up of bits, not chained together,
but broken and no way correspondent, make a Garment of diverse Snips ill
stitched together, but do not weave a regular and uniform piece. Every three
words a Period. Every Period a Sentence, which does not agree with what went
before, nor calls for that which follows.

Whatever I have said of Elocution, I cannot resolve that the Style we are in
search of, consists in it. It Is true we have laid a Foundation, but all the
parts of an entire building are not in the Foundation. We must pass on
therefore: For if to the constituting Style the three kinds or Characters of
Writing are necessary, then Elocution alone is not enough. Elocution, though in
its perfection, if it be without the Characters, forms, or Idea's of Speech,
remains idle and indetermin'd. For if a discourse were to be examined by the
foregoing Rules of Elocution, many things would remain unexamin'd, because they
do not belong to the Elocution, but to the Character or Idea.

The Characters of Speech are three; the Sublime, the Humble, and the
Temperate. Homer is said to have excellently observed this distinction in three
principal persons of his Poem. To Menelaus he attributes a mode of Reasoning
altogether sincere and restrained, without superfluity; which is the virtue of
the Humble Character; whilst words, they said, flowed out of Nestors mouth more
sweet than Honey, and regards the Temperate. But to express the Sublime, in the
person of Ulysses he composes such an ample and stately Eloquence, as is
compared to a Torrent enriched and grown proud by melted Snow.

There is no Subject which may not laudably be managed with diversity of
Character. That Almighty God, who has the Seat of his Glory upon the back of
Cherubins; and sometimes carried upon the Wings of the Wind, sometimes in a
Triumphal Chariot to which Seraphims serve for Wheels, and passes over the
immense Fields of the Heavens; what matter does not this furnish to the
Sublimity of discourse we find in Ezekiel and Isaiah? But the same God, whilst
he gathers the Souls of the Faithful, as a Hen gathers her Chickens, and under
the Wings of his gracious Protection keeps and defends them, humbles himself
under the simplicity of Conceit and Character, with which, for all that, his
infinite Majesty is not diminished or offended. Who more magnificently reasons
of Divine things than the Areopagite? But, who more devoutly discourses of the
same things than St. Bernard? Nazianzen lightens and thunders; as if having put
off humanity, he strove to equal the height of his Subject with a Celestial
facundity. Anselmus sighs and weeps, and accompanies the sense of his Soul with
Humility of thoughts and words.

Let us add, that certain Authors are endowed with a Wit and Genius of that
nature, that whatever Matter they handle they do it with uniformity of
Character; because they are not capable of any variety. Men who write on all
Subjects with a Character so generous and high, that they cannot stoop even in
the most tender and delicate affections. Let us take the Example from Painting
and Sculpture. We see in the Pieces of some that are universally famous, a
certain particular Manner that distinguishes them from others. One is so
excellent in formiug the tenderness of the Flesh, that he unwillingly
encounters a Figure that is robust and nervous; or if he is to draw an Athlet,
in that vastness of vigorous Members there will appear the delicateness of the
Idea, which guided the hand that formed it: Others, on the contrary, profess a
way and Manner more resolute and virile; and these know not how to paint a
Youth, which shall not resemble Hippolytus in Fierceness: they cannot paint a
Lady but like an Amazon; and for all this, their Works are most perfect. Of the
first sort amongst the Ancients was Polictetus, who formed humane Statues
beautiful to wonder, but never could arrive to bestow on the Images of the Gods
that Majesty, or, as Quintilian calls it, that weight which is convenient to a
Divinity. So it happens to Writers also, according to the difference of Genius,
or perhaps of Habit which they contract in composing. Some, though the Argument
be low and vulgar, yet for all that, discourse as magnificently of it as they
can: so on the contrary, the same variety is osten caused by Circumstances
which accompany the Writing. Of a glorious and heroic Exploit in War, may be
formed a Letter, which by way of Advice recounts it; a Dialogue which examines
it; a History that transmits it to Posterity; an Oration that exalts it, and a
Poem that sings it; and who does not see with what diversity of Character this
sole Argument may be commendably handled?

Examples of the Characters out of Tasso.
BY all this discourse we do not reach a decision of Style; for, that it does
not consist in these three Characters, we may consider first, that if Style and
Character were one, there would be but three sorts of Style, as there are but
three Characters; which is so manifestly opposed to Experience, that we find as
many kinds of Style as there are Writers. Besides, we find many excellent
Authors who write in the same Character, which compared are of a Style vastly
different; and every one has his proper excellence, which distinguishes him
from those, from whom he does not differ in the kind or character of Writing.
Virgil and Lucan composed their Heroic Poems in the Sublime character, yet
they are altogether unlike in Style. Let us add, that the most Famous Authors
make use of all the Characters according to occasion, yet the Style with which
they manage them is the same. Nor does Cicero vary his Style with his
Character, whether he writes a familiar Epistle or forms a Dialogue, or treats
of Morality, or thunders in an Oration; but by the consent of all men the
Ciceronian Style is one and the the same. And thus we have found, I think
fortunately enough, in what Style does not consist, and what it is not: But
because to be defined by Negations belongs only to the Divinity, by reason of
that infinite excess in all the parts of it, which does not suffer created
Understanding to comprehend it; let us see if we can in Positive terms arrive
at the Truth we seek.

The Precepts, the Art of Elocution, the Forms and Characters of Discourse are
common to all; but Nature, which endows men with different Genius, has so
ordered it, that every one in the use of those Precepts possesses a certain
particularity, something peculiar, which springs from his proper Genius, by
virtue whereof that Elocution, those Forms, that Character in themselves common
to all Writers become in such manner proper to each one, that one man's Writing
is distinguished from another by that particularness: and this I would call
Style.

Thucidides and Demosthenes, according to the opinion of all Masters of the
Art, formed their Writings according to the magnifick or sublime Character. And
not differing in the Character, by consequence they do not differ in the Form
and Elocution, which are the parts whereof Character is composed: yet, whoever
shall read their Works will find in them a mighty difference, and shall not
know wherein it consists. Now this difference arises from that particularity
which issues from the proper Genius of each of them, so working that though
Character in the kind and the precept be the same, yet it is not the same in
the use: so that from the Character in conjunction with the individual
particularity springing from the use of Thucidides genius or wit, results the
Style of Thucidides; and from the same Character in the application of it, and
individual use of Demosthenes, results the Style of Demosthenes.

It Is on all hands confessed, that Arguments may be drawn from the Writing, if
not infallible and necessary, at least probable and well grounded, of the
affections and manners of the Writer. But this guess cannot be founded in the
Character; for 'twould be insufferable fascity to infer uniformity of passions
and manners in those that compose in an uniform Character: therefore the
illation depends upon some other principle more individual and intrinsic.
Virgil and Lucan, for what concerns Character, must both be ranked with the
Sublime. Now he that in the Works of Lucan traces the manners of the Writer,
will esteem him conrumacious, proud, impatient of Order and Laws; of tumultuous
thoughts, precipitous resolutions; agitated rather by fury than by sober
Counsels; worthy, in fine, to be numbered amongst those that conspired against
Nero. On the contrary, Virgil will appear always noble and honorable; of
pleasing behavior; of a generous, but temperate mind; an Enemy of all
Indignity, tenacious of Decorum; bashful, but manly. Now if this diversity has
no foundation in the Character, which is the same in both, it must have it in
that particular manner in the application and use of the Character, which is
individual to every one, as the Wit which produces it is individual, and makes
the difference of Lucans and Virgils Style.

I will add one Consideration, which, if I am not deceived, serves
efficaciously to display the Opinion I intend to establish. In the short space
of humane face, by an unconceivable miracle of Nature the same parts concur in
every one; and in all, they are disposed in the same order, placed with
correspondent and uniform distance; and yet in this likeness of parts an entire
dissimilitude of Faces appears. Further, let us imagine a thousand Faces
equally beautiful in proportion and symmetry of parts and well tempered color,
yet for all that each of them shall have its proper air, which shall be enough
to distinguish it from all the rest. Whence we say, this has a gentle air,
this a noble mein. It Is certain, the Air does not consist in the parts so
ordered and disposed, nor in the Color tempered and composed after a certain
manner, for both one and the other are common to all of them: yea, it
oftentimes happens, that a Face which is not fair according to the proprieties
appertaining to perfect Beauty, is for all that of a better air, and more
amiable than one entirely Beautiful. So that what we vulgarly call the Air of
the Face, is a proper and individual quality of each one arising from the
particular Complexion, by which it is rendered different from others, in common
with which it has the same measure and order of Parts, and mixture of Colors.
And this, perhaps though understood by all men, we know not how to define or
express. This Air of the Face answers to Style, as the Parts and Color
correspond with Character; and is perhaps what the Masters of the Art often
name Orationis Color, and we may style the Air of a Composition. But it may be
another similitude drawn from Art, will better express our intentions, and it is
taken out of Cicero.

Four things are necessarily required to render a Painter excellent in his Art:
Design, Color, Composition, and Custom; (though for Custom it is known of
few, and observed by fewer:) and if a Painter fail in any of these parts, he
cannot be termed excellent. Raphael, Titian, and Corregio possessed them all in
a supreme degree: and at this day, eminently, Giuseppino, etc. Wherefore in the
mouths of those that understand, they pass for Painters of the first Classis,
and such as fortunately contend with the Ancients. It Is certain for all this,
that amongst themselves they vastly differ. Nor can this difference have its
original in those things which have an invariable and common Rule: for they
have all a regular design; proportionate color, though not uniform; every one
of them preserves an orderly Composition, without confusion, and all of them
study, as they may, livelily to express Custom; and yet those who understand
the excellency of the Art, find out a particularity in their Pieces, by virtue
of which they know how to pronounce this Picture is Giuseppino's, this Guido's,
etc. And to this particularity, by men of the Skill, is given the title of
Manner, or Way; whence they say the Manner of Raphael and the Manner of Titian.
To the Manner of Painters we may compare the Style of Writers, and say as
properly, this is the Style of Salust in Catelines Conspiracy, as this is the
Manner of Raphael, speaking of a Picture.

From all that has been said we may draw these Corollaries. First, that Style
is a particular and individual manner of Discoursing or Writing, arising from
the particular Genius of each Writer in the application and use of the
Characters of Discourse. Secondly, Comparing Character with Style, this holds
of Nature and Genius, that regards Art and Study. And by consequence this
multiplies and varies according to the number and quality of the Genius's; that
remains always divided into three Members, as before we have declared. Thirdly,
To ask any one in what Style he writes, is foolish; because he cannot compose
in any other Style than his own, dictated by his Genius: except that through
imitation he may study to express with some likeness the Style of another; so
that to render the question proper, we ought to say, In what Character does he
write; when we do not mean Imitation. Fourthly, We may say, this is the Style
of Thucidides and Salust; but we cannot say, this is their Character, for it is
a thing common to all, and not proper to any one, as Style is.

The History of ALCIDALIS and ZELIDE;
Written in French by Mr. Voiture.
Dedicated to Mademoiselle de Rambouillet, who invented the Subject of it. --
unfinished. Les plus belles chooses du monde sont imparfaites.

WHen Spain was divided, not only amongst many Kings, but amongst many Nations;
and that the Goths, Moors, and Spaniards held each a part of it; Aragon was
under the power of one King, who amidst the Wars wherewith his Neighbors were
busied, had always maintained his Subjects in Peace; and who had nothing
remarkable, but his being Father to him whose History we write. His Wife, when
she had given him a Son, left him a Widower, much about the time that the
Countess of Barcellona, a young and virtuous Princess, lost her Husband. band.
Though he was now old, his Council and Subjects found, that for the safety of
his Person and Estate, it were to be wished he could leave more than one Heir;
and prayed him to that purpose, to choose a Wife to his mind in his own
Country, or amongst his Neighbors. The Beauty and Virtue of the Countess were
known beyond Aragon. And besides that reason of State required, that an
occasion of joining to his Kingdom a Town so important as Barcellona should not
be lost, the inclination of the King did entirely carry him to it. Rosalva (for
so she was called) was fair enough, and Judicious as she was fair: and finding
her self a Sovereign Princess, nothing less than a Scepter could tempt her to a
second Marriage. But having only one Daughter, and the King of Aragon but one
Son, she believed that it was not only to make her self a Queen, but to leave
an hereditary Kingdom to her Daughter: and that being amidst many Neighbors,
who designed upon her State, she could not be blamed for securing it by putting
a Crown upon her head. She easily agreed then to lose the name of Countess of
Barcellona to be Queen of Aragon; and was received with all the Joy and
Magnificence possible. Being young, fair, and witty, in a short time she
absolutely governed the King, and soon after the whole Kingdom. The most
important Affairs were not determined without her advice: And the King had
quitted all sorts of care for that of pleasing her. But in this great Power,
her main design was to marry her Daughter with the Prince: and the knowledge
she had of her Son in Law daily augmented in her the desire of this union.
Alcidalis ('it was the name of the Prince) was born so happily, and with so many
advantages of Nature, that one of his least qualities was to be Son to a King.
He had a Beauty which gained the hearts of all that looked upon it, a Wit which
in the first years of his age found no equal, and a height of Soul and Courage
which gave respect and fear to all the World. The Childhood of Alexander was
not greater nor more mavelous than his. There past no day wherein he did not
say or do something which astonished all the Court. Those who had the art to
judge of men's Fortunes by the lines of their Faces, spied promises of many
great and incredible events in his. And those who considered his Actions and
his great Qualities, said the Crown of Aragon was too small for a head like
his. They foresaw that the Moors, who were the Neighbors of his Father, should
one day be forced to put the Sea between him and them; and that no more time
was necessary to give up Spain to one man's power, than was needful to give this
young Prince strength to draw his Sword. All these qualities daily augmented
the Queens affection toward him, who knew him better than any. She wished with
impatience an occasion to effectuate the Marriage which she had projected: and
did not esteem it so great an advantage for her Daughter to be Queen of Aragon,
as to be Wife to Alcidalis. But whatever we say of Fortune, it must be
confessed there is no prudence like hers. She establishes her designs so far
off, and guides them by such secret paths, that it is impossible for our
foresight to hinder them; and in despite of our conduct she arrives at the end
of what she enteprizes. She had resolved to combat the Prudence of Rosalva: and
see, she brings from beyond the Seas an infant Maid, who, an Orphan and a
Stranger, shall overthrow the designs of a most powerful and prudent Queen. The
Prince of Tenarus, of one of the most Illustrious Families in the Kingdom of
Calabria, and which had formerly given Kings to Naples and Sicily, had a great
and important Succession in Aragon, which he resolved to go in person and
possess himself of, because it was disputed him. But extremely loving his Wife,
and both of them having a great passion for an only Daughter about the age of
six years, they could not resolve to part, but passed with all their Family to
Aragon. They were received of the King and Queen with all the goodness and
civility due to Strangers, and to Strangers of their quality and merit. But
soon after their arrival the Prince fell sick, and in few days died; leaving
his Wife in a despair, wherein 'twas not likely she could live long. She
received from the Queen, whose affection she had gained, all the consolation
and assistance she could wish, in her affliction, and in her Affairs. Rosalva
had always found the Princess to her mind; but after her misfortune, pity did
in such a manner increase the affection she bore her, that she began to love
her as her self. She lodged her in the Palace, and had so much care of keeping
her near her person, that it seemed she lost somewhat when ever she parted from
her; and that she was not at all her self where Camilla was not: 'Twas so they
called this afflicted Princess. In the mean time, these extraordinary
kindnesses of the Queen, which perhaps were capable of curing any other malady
but hers, wrought no other effect in her, than to sweeten it a little, and to
cause her bear her grief with less impatience and despair. And to say the
truth, the death of the Prince her Husband in such an ill conjuncture was so
rude a shock, and so hard to support, that all the goodness and consolation of
the Queen could not hinder her being arrested, for want of nourishment and
sleep, by a sickness which she presently judged would be the last of all her
Evils. This extremely grieved the Queen, who passionately wished her health.
She conjured the most expert Physicians to practice the greatest secrets of
their Art; but though at her solicitations they employed all their skill, and
spared no diligence, the sickness of the Princess prevailed upon all their
Remedies: Which she well knew, and resolved to follow the Prince her Husband
with all the tranquillity which could be permitted by the only trouble she had
in death, of leaving her Daughter in her need, and leaving her an Orphan in an
age so little capable of Reason; and in a strange Country, where she could not
hope assistance, but from the goodness of the Queen. During these different
thoughts which agitated her in the height of sickness, the Queen, who visited
her as often as possible, having demanded how she did, Camilla sweetly turning
her eyes upon her took her hand, which she kissed often without speaking: then
on a sudden addressing her voice she told her, That she had infinite
obligations to the best Queen in the World for the interest she took in her
health. That seeing she did her the honor to enquire into the truth of her
condition, she would please to suffer her to say, she felt her self drawing
near her end. But that the most mortal thought she had in her present
condition, was not that of her death; and that loving her daughter more than
her life, she had more regret to leave her than to leave the World. She prayed
her then to permit she might manage those few hours that remained, and that she
might employ them in pouring into her bosom the last and most tender Sentiments
of her Soul. Which were, That she should bless Heaven with all her heart, for
bringing her into a condition to follow the Prince her Spouse to his Grave, if
before her death she would daign to receive from her hand the Present she was
about to make of all, which in the World remained most dear and precious to
her. That in all her miseries she could not believe Fortune was absolutely her
Enemy, seeing she had given her the honor to be known to her; that, excepting
the misfortune of her Husband, she esteemed the Voyage of Aragon a happy one,
though she easily judged, 'twould cost her life as well as his. However, she
thought she had the good fortune of being beloved by her at an easy rate;
which she so esteemed, that if the World had any thing she lost with
impatience, 'twas her Friendship. But that she comforted her self with hopes,
that her Daughter should succeed in the honor of her Favors. That she would
have the goodness to be her Mother, and would do her the favor to have a care
of her, as of a person she be queath'd in dying. That she prayed her with all
her heart to accept the Gift she made: and that leaving her with this new
quality of Daughter to the Queen, she believed she left her richer in it, than
in the two Estates to which she remained Heir. That she should die content, and
believe her death would be in some sort happy for Zelide, if it procured her
the honor to be brought up by the wisest Queen in the World. The Queen
embracing her said, that she received with much joy the Present she made her,
on condition she would not revoke it: That from that moment she would believe
she had two Daughters; and that there should be no difference between them but
this, that Zelide should be always the eldest: but, that she would take heart;
and that she hoped she might live long yet, to be her self a Witness of the
effects of her Promise. This extremely comforted the mind of Camilla, but did
not diminish her disease. She lived two days longer, at the end whereof she
went out of the World with as much satisfaction, as men go out of Prison; and
left all the Court in sadness, and the Queen in an affliction which cannot be
represented. Thus Zelide in less than three Months saw her Father and Mother
interred in the Tomb of those persons to whom they came to succeed. See her now
at the Age of six years, three hundred Leagues from the place of her Birth, in
a strange Country, and, which is more to be feared by her, in the power of a
person by whom the Stars threatened her with all the Misfortunes of her life.
But Fortune is the best Mother in the World: and no ill can happen to the
Children which she will adopt. She took this Orphan into her tutelage; and, by
so unhappy beginnings, undertook to put two Crowns upon her head. Zelide was
the most perfect piece that the Heavens ever made. As her life was to be full
of Miracles, her person was so also: and this History which is every where
likely, is incredible only in what it recounts of her. Since the Sun made his
course round this Globe, it had never seen a Beauty more accomplished than
hers: and in the fairest body in the World, she had a mind which cannot be
imagined by ours: it seemed to be of those which are not to govern other Bodies
than those above, and which have been made to conduct the Stars. In an age
wherein others scarce know how to pronounce words, she said things which would
have been admired in the mouths of Sages. There was never known a Birth so
happy as hers. All the Stars had conspired to bestow upon her what was best in
them: and the Heaven had imparted so many of its excellencies, that the least
part of her was what she held of the Earth; so that she seemed a Celestial
person dropped down here below by miracle. Her inclinations carried her so
powerfully to good, that it seemed she had not free will to do amiss: and all
the Virtues were so natural to her, that she must have done violence to her
self not to exercise some one of them. There never was any combat in her Soul.
She never was in doubt between good and evil: and she always followed what was
right and handsome in following all her will. Besides so many perfections which
were known, these hidden qualities and secret graces, which make us love a
person without knowing why, were in her to such a degree, that she was always
the inclination of all the World. There was I know not what charm in all her
Actions, which shed love and delight in the hearts of all that beheld them: and
the tone of her voice had something which enchanted Souls. She had infinite
other amiable qualities, which cannot be expressed: and the least part of her
perfections were those which could be.

See her, Madam, I think in every thing so like you, that there is no body but
would take her for your Sister. And for my part, though I extremely well
considered her when you showed her to me, yet there were so many things to be
observed, that I vow I could not paint her in my memory; and should not have
drawn her Picture so well, if I had not coppied her by you. With these Arms
Zelide must conquer the Kingdom of Aragon: and there needed no other, seeing
that for this purpose she was only to gain the heart of Alcidalis, which all
the force in the World could not vanquish.

She was received into the Palace with such a general joy and affection, that
an augury might have been drawn from thence, that she entered as Mistress, and
that she should one day Command there. The Queen, who thought she could never
have been comforted for the death of the Mother, could not be sad as often as
she saw her: and the King scarce found a difference between the affection he
bore her, and that which he had for his Son. Alcidalis and Zelide were in the
age wherein we are wont to paint Cupids: and both of them with all the charms
and all the graces, which the most excellent Painters know how to give them.
They had a Beauty so equal, though extremely different, and men saw Qualities
shine in them so extraordinary, that there was no body but thought they were
born one for the other. Each of them had been in the World without an equal, if
they had not appeared at the same time in it. So that, to say the truth, though
they gained the affection of all that saw them, they had never been loved
worthily, if they had not been loved by one another; and there were no other
Souls but theirs, which were capable of so great a passion as each of them
merited. Love, who resolved to give signal proofs of his power in two such rare
persons, established it betimes; so that they felt it a long time before they
could know it; and would not let them pass this first season of their Age in
quiet, which Nature seems to have freed from Passions. Zelide did not fail at
first view to work the same effects in the heart of Alcidalis, which were
ordinarily wrought by her in other men: and he also at the same time did cause
in the breast of Zelide an emotion, which she had never felt for any. The
Queen, pursuing the design she had projected, had always brought up the Prince
with those Artifices which might induce him to love her Daughter: from the time
that he could speak, they were wont to call her his Mistress: they carried him
every day to visit her: and all those which were about him lost no occasion to
praise her Beauty, or her Wit. But the inclinations of Alcidalis were not of
accord with the Queens will. And he who had sweetness and complacency for all
the World, seemed to want it only for the young Countess, and never appeared so
constrained as when he was with her. Whether it was that this glorious mind
took it ill, that they should destine him to any thing without informing
themselves of his will; or that the Stars, which had caused him to be born for
Zelide, gave him a secret aversion for all those who would usurp her place. So
that when she was entered the Palace, and that the Queen had given her for
Companion to her Daughter. His mind seemed to be changed all at once. He never
left the apartment of the Countess, nor enjoyed good hours, but those he past
in Zelids company. Love, to be welcomed into the Soul, makes its entrance
accompanied with joy and beauty: and does no evil or violence till he thinks he
is Master of the place, and that he has rendered himself so powerful, that he
need not fear to be chaced thence. At first these two young Lovers felt nothing
in themselves extraordinary, but an extreme pleasure to see each other. At
their interviews they were touched with a certain joy and content, which they
were not used to feel: and there was no body, but thought they imbellish'd each
other as often as they met. Zelide, who till then had past a dull Childhood,
began to be more awake than formerly. And Alcidalis was so gay and pleasant
when he saw her, that it seemed he reserved a peculiar humor and a grace to
appear in before her. In this Innocent state they were some Months peaceably
enjoying this pleasure; which was doubtless the most happy condition they knew
for a long time after. But their minds from day to day taking new forces, their
passion did so too. And Love began to be so powerful, that at last he made
himself be felt, and rendered himself knowable. Alcidalis began to be more
melancholy than formerly, and when he did not see Zelide, he paid for the
content of having seen her by an extraordinary sadness. There were no sports
nor pastime for him, but those he took with her; nor other pleasure, but that
of seeing her, and if any thing could touch him in her absence, 'twas to be
speaking of her. He, who in his Infancy proposed to subject all the World,
dreamt of nothing now but the conquest of Zelide: and if any thought of his
first ambition returns, it is only with design to render himself more worthy of
her; and to lay at her feet as many Crowns as she deserved. As often as he left
her, he seemed to have fallen from Heaven to Earth; and loosing her company, he
could suffer nothing but solitude. And then he past exactly in his mind all her
words and all her actions: and considering them by all their biasses, he drew
conjectures favorable or disadvantagious. Then calling to mind all that he had
said or done, he still repented him of something. Sometimes he blamed himself
for being too fearful; another time for being too bold; and still remained as
ill satisfied with himself, as he was well satisfied with her. He began by
little and little to leave all those pleasures which pleased him before.
Hunting did not content him, if she was not present: and if he had any care of
his Exercises, 'twas only that he might appear more acceptable to her. In fine,
he considered Zelide as if she had been alone in the World, and all his
thoughts and designs began with her and ended with her. Love, on the other
side, was well entered in the heart of Zelide; but had not made so great a
progress, nor extended his power so far: whether acquainted with her
fierceness, he durst not make himself known to her; or whether she being
younger by two years, was less capable of this passion. However, she felt some
change in her self as often as she saw the young Prince. She had more care of her
Beauty and Dress than ordinary. She loved less the Countess, because she was
destined for him: and the Duties which by force he rendered her, though 'twas
with more coldness than formerly, did not fail to concern her. In the mean
time, as she had a Soul great, strong and lively, and by consequence capable of
a passion which had all these qualities; the Merit of Alcidalis, and the Stars
which inclined her, wrought with time an impression there which nothing could
ever efface, and formed in it an affection as fair and perfect as her self.

Love, between persons of High condition, is like a Fire upon a Tower, which
cannot be hid, and which is seen afar off. The affection of Alcidalis and
Zelide was quickly known to all the World: and many had taken notice that they
were amorous one of another, before they perceived it themselves. At first,
when their Childhood rendered their Actions less considerable, 'twas thought
there was no other Love between them, but that of sports and pastimes, which
they took together: But when with time Zelide became more serious, and that
Alcidalis made appear in all his actions a Judgment which might serve to govern
his Fathers Kingdom, there was no body in the Court but thought their two Souls
were united by a veritable passion, and that 'twould be hard to separate them.
The Queen, who was very able, and to whom nothing was so considerable as the
young Prince, began betimes to suspect the Graces of Zelide, and was one of the
first who took notice of this affection. But trusting much to her Wit and
Authority, she thought she could not be troubled with them, or find relistance
in two young persons over whom she had a power; she, who had bowed the greatest
and ablest men in the Kingdom. In the mean time, the Beauty of Zelide increased
daily: and whereas hitherto it had been as it were in its dawn, she now
advanced with so much light and splendor, that it seemed she declared openly
against the Queen; as if in despite of her, she would gain all the hearts in
her Kingdom. On the other side, the young Prince, feeling his Birth and his
Power, became weary of living under the Laws of Governors, and under the
conduct of a Woman. His Breast, naturally great and Royal, was also swelled up
and enlarged with the passion which filled it, and could no longer acknowledge
any other Empire than Zelides. He began openly to let appear the affection he
had for her, and granted no Favors but by her recommendation. He wore only her
Colors in Tournaments; and in Dances all his devices spoke of her; and he could
not endure it should be imagined any, but she had a part in his Soul. There was
no body which did not in his heart favor this affection. Every body made
secret Vows for them. Their passion was that of all the World; and their
desires were followed with the desires of all others. The Queen now began to
fear, and to perceive she had too long deferred to oppose so great a fire; that
it would cost her care to extinguish it; and that she should be forced to serve
her self of violent remedies. But she would first try all others. She essayed
by all ways to regain the mind of Alcidalis, which she saw was estranged from
her. There was no artifice she did not use to diminish the Beauty of Zelide,
and to augment her Daughters. She instructed her in every thing she was to say
or do. She appeared always with a great deal of Pomp; always dressed, and hid in
Jewels. But Zelide neglected, as she was, shined more. Her eyes and color took
away the glittering from Diamonds, and whiteness from Pearls: and the Riches
which Heaven had given her effaced all those of the Earth. The Queen therefore,
observing how much her presence was contrary to her designs, and that with one
look she overthrew all her Counsels; resolved at last to separate them, and to
carry Zelide farther off: hoping that Absence might blot out those impressions
which Love had stamped in their minds, as yet young and tender; and that those
she had placed about Alcidalis to gain him, might find him more capable of
being persuaded, when he should no longer see the object of this growing
passion. She feigned then, that for the health of her Daughter she would go and
pass two or three Months at a House she had in Catalogua. And having
communicated it to the King, she commanded every thing should be made ready for
her departure, and said, she would not be accompanied by any but her Women. The
astonishment of our Lovers, when they heard this news, is not a thing that can
be represented. Hitherto they had not felt any of the bitternesses of Love, and
had only had his Sweets and Roses. They had quietly enjoyed each others
presence: and except some apprehensions for the future, which could not be
strong in minds so young and full of confidence, their Joy had been without
trouble and without a cloud. Alcidalis was most sensibly touched with this
displeasure; or at least he could worst dissemble it. There was not any thing
which he did not attempt to break this design: and all things, even the most
extreme, past through his imagination. But seeing that this Evil was without
remedy; and that at last the time approached that Zelide must be carried from
him: he resolved at least, not to let it pass without openly declaring his
affection, and letting her know of what quality it was. To this time he had
lived with her without saying any thing of his Passion: and all his actions
spoke to her daily, though his words witnessed nothing of it. Whether it was,
that shame, which is ordinary to this Age, had hindered him; or that being
entirely filled and satisfied with the pleasure of seeing her, he did not think
of any thing else. In fine, the last Evening before her departure he went to
the Queens Lodgings; where, after some time, he finds the way to meet Zelide
apart. This was the first time that Alcidalis had felt what Fear was. Twice or
thrice he tried to say what he had resolved upon: and having opened his mouth
he said something else, not having resolution enough for that. Whereas at other
times, at the sight of Zelide he was all fire, he felt himself now all Ice. But
at last, after some indifferent discourse, with a palpitation of heart, and a
voice low and trembling he told her; I doubt not, Zelide, but you know I love
you: but I am sure you do not know how much. And because this absence of some
days ought to be to me for so many years; and that I cannot tell whether I
shall live so long: I will let you know my affection, to the end, that if you
find me not at your return, you may know at least how much you ought to pity
me. If you consider your self, Zelide, and consider me too; you will easily
conclude, that you cannot breed ordinary affections; and you will believe of
me, that I cannot receive mean ones; and if there is any thing extraordinary in
my person, you must conclude it is chiefly this affection I bear you. By the
knowledge you have of your self and of me, you may imagine how sincere it is,
how faithful and how respectful; but how great it is you cannot know. That is a
thing beyond all imagination: and I who feel it cannot express it, and
oftentimes I cannot comprehend it. From the moment I saw you, the passion I
have for you was at a point to which after much time the greatest are wont to
arrive: and from that time there has not past one moment in which it has not
received growth and augmentation. Whilst I was a Child, I was not able to tell
it you; and since, I durst not. Even at this time I tremble in saying, I adore
you: and if you do not re-assure me by a favorable regard, I shall not have
force to finish what remains for me to say. Here she, who had hitherto kept her
eyes upon the ground, sweetly cast a glance upon him. It seemed to Alcidalis,
that he had seen the Heavens opened in the eyes of Zelide, and taking courage
he continued thus; It is true, Zelide, that I know the passion I have for you,
is the greatest and most perfect that ever was. But how do I know that it is
permitted to Men to have a passion for you? I will tell you freely, Humility is
a Virtue that you only have made me understand. I ever believed, that all the
Earth was too little for me. But I now believe, that I my self am too little
for you: and as much as I esteem all things below my self, I hold my self below
your merits. I know well, that my Fortune is the last thing which you consider
in my person: and I am not To unhappy, but you may find in me some qualities,
which you will esteem more than that which my Birth has given me. But if there
be any thing worthy of you, it is this Soul which I present to you; and which I
can say is great enough, and noble enough to be received by yours. I would not
praise it thus boldly, if it were still mine: and I speak advantagiously of it,
as of all things that belong to you. Since it has had any knowledge, it has
had but two designs: the first, and which entertained its Infancy, was the
conquest of the World; and since it has been more bold and more reasonable, it
has desired Zelide. If this adorable Zelide does not oppose me, 'twill be
easy to bring about the other: and the Crown of Aragon, which I promise her
now, and which all our Enemies cannot hinder me from giving her, shall be but a
small part of that which I will one day lay at her feet. Alcidalis was silent,
expecting Zelides answer; who, in the trouble wherein she was, had scarce
strength enough to pronounce these few words. Sir, I am so astonished to hear
you speak so seriously in a matter of this nature, and to see how every body
considers our discourse, that I know not what to say at present, and pray you
permit me to defer the Answer till our return. In the mean time you may
believe, I shall be glad they do not give me much time for it. During this
discourse, there was no body who did not fasten their eyes upon Alcidalis and
Zelide, and who did not take notice, that he spoke to her with more earnestness
than usual. The Queen, who above all others had minded it, and to whom this
converse gave much disquiet, rose up, and approaching them said pleasantly to
Alcidalis. Sir, you speak to Zelide with so much action, and such a serious
countenance, that it seems you have some quarrel with her. If it be so,
complain to me. For I will be on your side; and before she parts, she shall do
you right. Alcidalis having born the first brunt, and taken the boldness to
speak of his affection to Zelide, was confident enough; and being desirous to
continue the conversation, was in despair seeing it interrupted: and, scarce
looking upon the Queen, answered fiercely; Madam, I hold Zelide for so just a
person, that if she had done me wrong, I would have no other Judge but her
self. There is no occasion, that any should mingle themselves in our
differences: and whatever quarrel we have, I cannot be pleased with those that
think it their duty to part us. Every body took notice of this Answer; and the
Queen, who was most sensible of it, seemed least to understand it, and
presently changed the discourse. In the Morning Zelide departed, and left the
Prince in a mortal heaviness; but she was in this more unhappy than he; for
besides that she felt the like, she had moreover the pain of concealing it, and
to be obliged to laugh before the World, when her Soul wept tears of blood.

Amongst all the displeasures which Love draws along with it, Absence is one of
the most sensible. There are some sharp griefs, as Jealousy, which pierce and
wound more: but there is none so weighty and so hard to support, and which
overwhelms all sort of vigor as this. The first thing which Alcidalis did was
to retire alone to his Chamber: there he cast himself upon his Bed, and melting
into Tears aad Sighs, suffered the same regrets as if Zelide had been dead, and
not absent. Why do you complain, Alcidalis? you have all your life peaceably
enjoyed the fight of Zelide, and do you not know how to endure a few days
absence? Love is wont to lend all his Joys at gross usury. He makes his
Subjects pay for all at last. And it is not his ordinary course to leave those
that owe him any thing so long at repose. You are one of those he has treated
most favorably. Reserve then these Tears to another occasion, wherein they
shall be better employed. The time will shortly come when you shall have more
reason to lament: and the day approaches that Zelide and you shall be more
cruelly parted, without hopes of ever meeting again. He passed all that day
without seeing any body, and the following without speaking, except when he
went to see the King, and could not avoid to answer him. At last, having past
eight days in all the sadness and impatience imaginable: he thought he was at
the end of his life, and that it was a thousand years since he had seen Zelide.
So that one Evening being alone in his Chamber to entertain his thoughts;
without taking Counsel of any, but his desires and inquietudes, he resolved to
go where Zelide was. And seeing that in this absence he foresaw an infallible
death, he concluded there could not worse happen to him from his attempting to
see her.

After that the Heber, which is one of the most celebrated Rivers of Spain,
has passed along the Walls of Saragosa: as if there were nothing more worthy
of him in Aragon, he takes the way of Catalogna; where having received in his
passage many small Rivolets to enter more magnificently into the Sea, at last
he renders himself to it half a League from Tortosa. All the ground which he
waters is extremely fertile, and covered with Trees; and by so much the more
pleasant as the rest of the Country consists in dry and naked Plains, or in
Mountains black and scorched with a fervent Sun. Fifteen Leagues from its
mouth, it passes by a Valley of two Leagues in length, and two in breadth; and
which is encompassed on one side and on the other with Mountains. In this place
the River glides very peaceably by the encounter of certain Rocks, which four
Leagues further oppose its course, and makes many doublings in the Plain, as
doubtful of the way it ought to take through those Mountains. Its Banks are
extremely shady and flowery. And its Waters so clear and neat, that there is not
a Tree near it, nor scarce a Flower which is not seen twice; and which does not
appear in the Water as fair and distinct, as upon the ground. The ordinary
Plants of this Country are Oaks, Olives, and Pines: and besides that it is not
cold, there are none of these Trees that fear it. The Mountains of Catalogna
defend the Valley from the North Wind, so that at all times it is covered with
green; and the Winter, which they always see on the Neighbor Mountains, is not
felt there. 'Twas in this Paradise that Zelide made her Hell, and where the
House to which the Queen had carried her stood. One would have said, that the
River, Flowers, and Plants were imbellish'd by her presence. She only was sad
amidst so many objects of Pleasure, and lost daily that luster and beauty,
which she seemed to impart to all things. The absence of Alcidalis afflicted
her extremely. But above all, the designs of the Queen cast her into
perplexities: and her imagination so well represented to her all those Evils
which were to befall her; that often the fear of what was to come, took from her
the feeling of the present. She saw that her Goods, her Fortune, and her self
were in the power of the Queen; and, that which she dreaded most, that
Alcidalis was so too: he that was more dear to her than her self, than her
Goods, or than her Fortunes. She considered that the Princes Affection was not
ordinary, that his Courage was extraordinary; but that his power was as yet but
weak. That he would never be suffered to despise the City of Barcelona, which
Fortune offered him so happily with the Queens Daughter; to take an Orphan and
a Stranger who had no Riches, Friends, or support, but beyond the Seas. That he
alone could not resist the King and Kingdom. That the Queen absolutely governed
both. That whilst they were Children, all men liked their affection, but that
no body would approve of their Marriage. And, that some already looked upon it
as the Enemy of the State, and the Torch which should one day fire the Royal
House. These thoughts, and others like them, filled her mind with a thousand
Troubles. And as far as she carried her sight into suturities, she saw no day
for her Hopes: and without knowing, in this Labyrinth, what end her Adventures
might take, she easily judged it could not be a happy one. One day amongst the
rest, accompanying the Queen, who walked in a Wood extremely shaded, whose
Alleys led to the Meadow, which served as a border to the River, she sound
opportunity to leave the Company, followed only by one of her Maids. And it was
not a small consolation to her, that she sound her self at liberty to be sad,
and to appear so. Representing to her self the Fortunes of her life; running
over the past Misfortunes, the present, and those which threatened her; her
thoughts had entertained her so well, that not thinking of the way she had
made, she found her self upon the Banks of Heber, and in a place so pleasant as
might have diverted any other Grief, but hers. The Sun, which in this Country
lies down in the Ocean, and appears fairer than in any place of the World; was
now ready to hide it self in those clouds of Gold and Azure, wherewith it is
invelop'd when it goes to visit the Nymphs of the Sea. But having seen nothing
from its rising so fair as Zelide; it seemed, that to behold her longer, he
made no haste to descend into the Floods: and cast so much Gold upon all the
Leaves of the Trees, and Waves of the River, that he seemed to rekindle his
Rays to continue a day in favor of this Princess; invironing her in such a
manner, and according so well with the rest of her Beauties, that it was
doubtful whether those Rays were the Suns or Zelides. The charms of this
delicious place the sweetness of the Air, and the pleasure she took in being
alone, enticed her to continue her walk in the Meadow. After some time, taking
the Path that led to the Queen, the sound of a Horn, which seemed not to come
far off, made her turn her head toward the neighboring Mountain; where, having
arrested her sight, she saw as she thought, two men struggling together, who
rolled down from the height of a Rock: But afterward she perceived that what
she took for two men, was a man and a Bear which wrestled together; but with
that disadvantage, which we may imagine in a combat so unequal. At the same
time she saw, near that part of the Mountain from whence they fell, a young
Cavalier advantagiously mounted, carrying a Horn hanging in a Ribband, and a
Lance in his hand. Who stopping a little, and seeing the danger in which the
man was, who seemed to be of his company; put on his Horse, or, to say better,
precipitated him to the bottom of the Mountain. But such was the strength of
the Horse, the skill of the Cavalier, or the fortune of both, that, as if he
had run in a plain field, without receiving any hurt, he found himself near the
Bear, and thrust the Lance he had in his hand so far into his entrails, that at
the same time he lost his life and his prey: All this too, to thunder down the
Mountain, kill the Bear, and deliver his Friend, was done so in an instant,
that one might say, Lightning does not fall more swift, nor more readily work
its effects. It displeased Zelide, that any but Alcidalis had given this blow:
and she was vexed to have seen in any other but him something that might please
her. But the Cavalier making toward her, and wading over the River, she began
to doubt if it was not he: and as he drew nearer, having finished to know him,
but not daring to remain certain, she turned back to her Maid and asked her, if
she knew that Cavalier. Madam, replies she, when he was further off, we ought
to have known him by what he did, but now we see that it is the Prince. He was
now twenty paces from them. Wonder, fear and joy, at once seized upon Zelide;
so that she could not find words for the first Complements. The Prince, who was
prepared for this encounter, though with much difficulty on his side, was more
assured than she; and said to her, If I had not known, Madam, that this was the
place where you were, by the Pleasures of it 'twas easy to divine, that Zelide
was not far off. None but you could cause the birth of so many Flowers in so
desert a Soil, or could have wrought this Miracle in the Mountains of
Catalogna. Sir, says Zelide to him, who now had leisure to recollect her
Spirits, you are ungrateful to the Heber, on whose Banks you are, and which
seemed to stoop under you to favor your passage over, to give me a glory which
is due to the fertility of its Waves: which water and embrace this Valley with
so much care, that when you shall have well considered the beauty of this
Meadow, these Woods and this Park which we are entering, you may confess, that
the Palaces of Saragosa, and the Magnificences of the Moorish Kings, may be
left for this solitude. But, after all this, I assure you Sir, says she
smiling, we have seen nothing in this Valley so handsome, as what you showed
upon the Mountain. And I, says the Prince, who was minded to change this
discourse, that when from the Mountain we had the prospect of all about us,
nothing appeared so fair, as what you let us see in this Valley. Now they had
taken the path which led to the Queen, and the Maid that followed them, staying
a little behind, Zelide with a low voice said to him; Sir, you have performed
two things of a great deal of boldness; one, to precipitate your self from the
Rock to combat such a savage Animal; the other, to give the Queen a visit in a
time she so little expected it. Madam, answered Alcidalis, it had been a
greater boldness for me to have staid in Saragosa. For that had been with a
firm foot to attend that death I could not shun, if I had remained longer
without seeing you. So that what seems to you a rashness, is rather want of
Courage: seeing I am come hither to avoid a greater peril, than either of those
you say I have engaged in. I could not have imagined that, says she to him. And
for my part, I vow to you, I durst not have fought the Bear, and I durst as
little have displeased the Queen. But I think I have courage enough to suffer
an Absence. To know what an absence is, replies Alcidalis, we must know what
affection is: and you cannot suffer here, you Madam, who ought to love none but
your self; and who carry always with you whatever is amiable in the World.
Alcidalis, answered Zelide, you do not believe what you say: and if you thought
me so ungrateful and so vain as not to love any but my self, you would not have
so much impatience to see me. But to the end that you may be better informed,
give me the hearing and leisure to make that answer I promised you at our
parting. And because in saying this, she felt she blushed extremely, and saw
that he took notice of it, she began thus; The color which mounts up to my
Cheeks, proceeds rather from my being about to speak something which I am not
wont to speak, than from an apprehension of doing any thing in it contrary to
my duty. I know not, if it be always a shame for a Virgin to confess she Loves;
but I know, if any may be excused, it is I more than another. I will not say,
that the Stars have done me violence, or that your qualities have obliged me to
it: it is a cloak and pretense under which all others may shrowed themselves. I
will only allege what is particular for my defense. Before I knew that 'twas
not lawful to love, I knew you to be amiable: and I received your affection in
a time, when I did not know those Laws which forbid our Sex to entertain any. I
cannot be blamed for indulging a passion, which I may say, I found in my Soul
rather than let it in; and which has been so long its Guest, that I can no
more remember its birth than my own. The first Sentiment I had in the World
was, that which concerned me for you: and Self-love, which we feel betimes, and
which is so natural to all the World, entered my mind later than that
Friendship I bear you. My Reason, which appeared long after, found it so well
established, that it took it for a part of my self: Besides, it seemed so
innocent and so just, that she has rather strove to fortify, than to destroy
it. I say all this, to excuse me with you and with my self; and to let you see,
that a mind the most strong and most just in the World, had been taken as mine.
If you are glad then, that I love you, do not thank me for it; but thank the
gods that willed it. And if you are obliged to me in any thing, it is for that I
have been willing to confess it. For if I had not strength enough to extinguish
the affection I bore you, I had enough to hide it: and it was in my power to
dissemble it all my life; or as some do, to drop out a confession after you had
long attended it. But if it be unreasonable and unworthy of you and me, it
would never be time to discover it: and if on the contrary, it is such as I
ought to have to be worthy of Alcidalis and Zelide; why should I not give you
now the content of knowing and being assured of it? I tell you then Alcidalis,
I love you; and though I speak it with a blush, yet I speak it without shame; I
accept of that heart which you say you give me. For what concerns the Crown you
promise me with it, Fortune shall dispose thereof. I esteem more what you have
given me, than any thing she can offer; and I prize your heart more than your
Kingdom. I am glad to see there is not a quality in you which is not Royal. But
I wish your Birth were not. This Crown which you promise me as the Crown of my
selicity, will be the cause of all my misfortune: and to get from me that which
I least esteem in you, they will use all ways to ravish from me the rest. I
see, at this hour, but with an assured Brow, all the evils that threaten me. I
know your Love will procure me all men's hatred; and because you wish me well, I
shall suffer much ill. But she, who with the heart of Zelide has also that of
Alcidalis, ought to fear nothing. I will resist all with a resolution shall
astonish you: and seeing the Heavens will have me bear an affection; I will
accompany it with so much Constancy, Courage, and Virtue, that what is
ordinarily blamed in our Sex, shall be in me a subject of esteem and praise.
Alcidalis, who at the beginning was dead with fear, as a man who was to hear
the Sentence of his life or death; perceiving after what manner she spoke, and
that it was much more favorable than he durst wish, could scarce believe his
ears. But at last, seeing he was not deceived, he found himself in such a
ravishment, that he was a long time without saying any thing, and could not
find words to thank her. Indeed, there were none to be found; and his seeking
for them was an effect of the present perplexity. He answered better by Silence
and tears of Joy. But having turned into another Alley, and seeing himself out
of the sight of her which followed them, he put one knee to the ground, and as
he began to speak, he spied the Queen at the other end; who knowing of
Alcidalis arrival came to receive him. The Alley was not so long, but what was
done in it might be seen distinctly from one end to the other. Alcidalis rose
up as speedily as he could. and Zelide, extremely troubled at this encounter,
told him, Sir, your undue humility will cost you dear, and see a beginning of
my Prophesies. Madam, answered Alcidalis, I can fear nothing seeing you are for
me: and we shall be too strong for all the rest of the World, so long as we are
of a side. Therefore, replies she, they will soon find ways to part us. They
said all this with an action wherewith we speak things indifferent, still
having an eye upon the Troop which came toward them. The Queen was now
advanced, and Alcidalis being near her, she received him with a face so open
and pleasant, that Zelide could not have done more. When the first Complements
were finished, and that the Prince had told her, his Sport having led him
within six or seven Leagues off the house, he believed himself bound to come
and kiss her hands; the Queen said, she was beholding to Fortune for conducting
him thither. But Sir, says she, I believe you are well paid for the trouble.
For it is to be imagined, that the favor Zelide has granted you is not
ordinary, seeing you were obliged to thank her on your knee. And truly at first
I could not know you, but thought it was one of your Servants. However, I am
glad no other than your self received this satisfaction. Tell us, I pray, what
is the matter, and what she has promised or given you, that I may share in it,
or join with you to thank her. Zelide did not blush, for, from the time she
began her discourse with Alcidalis, she had not put off that Color. And
fearing he could not come off in this discourse; as indeed Women's wits are more
at hand, and serve a surprise best; she advanced to answer for him, and said,
Madam, I asked Alcidalis news of Saragosa, he who doubtless thought of his
Hunting did not reply; I reproaching his heedlessness and silence, he put his
knee to the ground to satisfy me; believing by an irregular and immeasurable
civility to repair the small care he had of answering me. That is to be very
civil, says the Queen coldly. And because you think the Prince dreams still,
you step up to answer for him. Zelide began to faulter, seeing the Queen press
upon her in this manner, and believed, she would not be able to suppress the
evil-will she bore her, but that now 'twould break out before all the World.
But Alcidalis perceiving her perplexity came in to her succor, as she had done
to his, and broke off the discourse with that of his Hunting. He was so possessed
with Joy for what Zelide had said, that he entertained the Queen all that day
with a mavelous complacency, and was more careful to discourse with her
Daughter than ever before. But these two young persons were not crafty enough
to deceive her. She soon took notice of this change. By the pleasantness of
Alcidalis, and the extraordinary assiduities which he rendered to her Daughter,
she thought he must be well content and assured of Zelide. She saw by this,
that there was no time to lose, and from that day took up the resolution, which
afterward cost our Lovers so many tears and dangers. Prepare your self
Alcidalis for the misfortunes which threaten you: and take the contentment you
have this day received, as the last kindness of Fortune. Expect no more
Friendship from her, and content your self with that of Zelide. The next day
the Prince went for Saragosa, and the Queen eight days after. Alcidalis
suffered this Absence with more patience than the former; his thoughts being
now so sweet and satisfactory, that with them he could not but be happy. But as
a fair day is always more fair than the fairest night, and as there is no
perfect contentment in darkness: it seemed, that the presence of Zelide brought
a new Joy to his Soul, and gave new force to those pleasures which without her
he could not entirely relish. He passed some Months with an extreme content,
and so perfect a one, that from thence only 'twas easy to guess it could not
last, and that this great calm would be followed by a violent tempest. The
satisfaction and assurance which he had, made him live with more discretion
than formerly, and with more fear of displeasing the Queen. He served her
Daughter with more care, and entertained Zelide but seldom, and contented
himself with the liberty of seeing her. She also, who was serious from her
Infancy, began to be more so; to speak to the Prince with more respect; to give
him fewer occasions of approaching her, and to sear more, lest they should
imagine any thing of her affection. But this discretion, as for the most part
that of Lovers, came too late. The Queen would not be abused by it: and with
much care, secrecy and diligence took order for the execution of those designs
she had projected. As those who are in a Citadel which is secretly undermined,
have ordinarily more fear of any other peril than that which threatens them,
and are quiet whilst their Grave is digging, and whilst that ruin is preparing
that must in a moment overwhelm them: so these two Lovers suspected nothing of
the Treason which was hatching against them, but were in a profound
tranquillity; and if the ill will of the Queen made them apprehend some
misfortune, they did not imagine it so great, so present, nor of such a nature
as that which was to happen to them. Here begin those Misfortunes which seem to
be endless; and adventures so strange and involved, that if it be scarce
credible that they did really happen, it is no less hard to believe, that they
could be invented, or be the effects of the strongest imagination.

It seemed to Fortune, that Aragon and Catalogna were too narrow Theaters, to
represent the fairest piece she had ever acted in the World: she would take one
more spacious; and changing the face of that we have hitherto seen, instead of
Saragosa and Barcelona, Meadows and Walks; she will let us see the Sea and
Africa, persons unknown, people scarce heard of, Ships taken and burnt, Duels
and Battles. And what is more strange, at the same time and in the same
Subject, Chains and Crowns.

Four Months after the Queen had left Catalogna, she took occasion to return;
but did not declare her mind till the day before. Alcidalis and Zelide were so
surpised, that they had scarce leisure to bid adieu. But when the Prince
declared his grief for her departure, she told him, Sir remember what you said
in Catalogna, That there was nothing in the World you could sear so long as I
was of your side. We have other manner of Evils to suffer. But in all your
misfortunes remember, that you cannot be unhappy, being assured I love you. You
cannot doubt of that, seeing I say it. If that be not enough receive this Ring,
which in the presence of the Gods I give you together with my heart. Alcidalis
took it, and having given her another with the same words, they parted. The
Queen the next day pretended she had received News from Barcelona, which
obliged her to go thither; so she left her Daughter with part of her Train, and
carried Zelide along with her. They came to that fair City, which no less for
its situation, than for the fertility of its Territory, is one of the most
famous in Spain. Zelide wondered, that the Queen having left her Daughter, did
not leave her too. And having well considered the Novelty, she judged it was
not done without some reason. But on what side soever she cast her eye, she
could not imagine any thing; and seeing nothing which she could particularly
fear, she feared every thing. The Queen having employed the rest of that day in
beholding the Magnificences of her reception, gave the next to those affairs
which 'twas thought led her thither.

The day after 'twas told her, a Ship which bore her Name entered the Port. She
said, she would presently go and see it. In their way they beheld all that pomp
of the Sea, which is so pleasant to see when we are on the Shore. But nothing
could be a divertisement to Zelide; her heart told her, that the Evils she had
foreseen began to tread upon her heels, and on all sides she feared Ambushes.
The Queen put her self into a Boat, and bid Zelide follow her. She found the
Captain aboard and his Wife, and after she had taken a view of the Vessel, she
shut her self up with them in the Cabin. This augmented the Suspicions of
Zelide: and with tears in her eyes she cast a look upon the Land, and began to
doubt, if she should ever return thither. An hour after the Captain and his
Wife came out and told Zelide, the Queen called for her. All her Blood at this
instant froze in her Veins. The Queen bid her shut the door, and thus delivered
her self.

It Is long since, Zelide, that we lost together, you the best Mother in the
World, and I the best Friend. The affection I had for her will never be lost in
me, nor the memory of her last words, wherewith she prayed me to have a care of
you. If this consideration had not engaged me, yet your Beauty, Parts and
Virtue would have obliged me to it. And having nourished you thus long, and
found in you with advantage all those qualities which endeared her to me, I
should not be reasonable, if I had not a kindness for you too. And I may say,
that in this I have done more than she desired. She prayed me to love you as
her Daughter, and I have always loved you as mine. She, whom the Heavens only
gave me in the World, lost the name of only, from the day I took charge of you.
I have had the same affection, and the same tenderness for you, as for her: and
I have considered the one and the other, as if you were equally mine. It being
so, and not one of your actions, or any thing that concerned you having been
indifferent to me, you may believe it hard, that I should not have some
knowledge of that passion which your Beauty, without your consent, has bred in
the mind of Alcidalis; and that, as well as you, I have been often troubled
about the wrong it might do you. You know what trust is to be given to persons
of his age and condition, who have equally the privilege to deceive and to
deny. And I make you Judge, if it be possible the affection he has for you can
ever be advantageous to you. You see, as well as I, all the reasons that will
not permit it. You are too wise ever to have hoped it: and though it should be
in his power and yours, you are Just enough, and grateful enough not to desire
it. I know your Virtue, Zelide; and I know there is nothing in the World which
can endanger it. But, as great as it is, you cannot take from the Prince
occasions of visiting you, nor from others of speaking of you. All that your
Virtue can do in this is to hinder the evil, but it cannot hinder the fame: and
I know of what prejudice this report is to persons of your Sex; and
particularly, what displeasure it causes to persons of your wisdom and honor.
I thought therefore, 'twas my part to come in to your assistance: and that
'twas time to perform the Promises I made your Mother. The Duke of Tarant is a
Prince wise and virtuous; considerable in Italy, and esteemed of all his
Neighbors: He, by his Letters and Messengers, has long since declared to me a
great passion for you: I would not tell you of it till the matter was certain
and fully ripe. This day I understand he expects you, Zelide, to give you
possession of his Estate and Person. He that Commands this Vessel left him but
fifteen days since, and promised him, on my part, to carry you thither in as
many more. Diligence and Secrecy, for reasons I cannot now acquaint you with,
are so important, that it is needful you depart this minute. I doubt not but
your good nature will cause in you some regret to leave us. But though we are
separated by the Sea, our affections shall not be less united. In fine, you
ought to be glad of returning into a Country, where you will find your Estate,
your Kindred, and the place of your Birth. But though this should not be your
will, it is enough to let you know that it is mine. Besides the power that my
quality gives me over you, I have that of a Mother which lends me more
authority. Consent then, and willingly agree to a thing, which besides that it
is just, is also necessary: and by a ready obedience to what I counsel and
command you at once, make appear that modesty you owe to your self, and that
respect you owe to me. This you may easily resolve to do, for he you think so
faithful to you, and who ought most to oppose it, is the first that consented
to it. With these words she embraced her; and pretending she would not take a
long adue for fear of afflicting her too much, left the Cabin.

Grief, despite, shame, rage and the excess of the Misfortune, did so oppress
the Spirits of Zelide, that not being able to speak a word or stir a foot, she
remained in the condition wherein the Queen left her: and doubtless, 'twas the
best wherein she found her self for a long time after, seeing that at this
first brunt she felt nothing. All our powers are so weak and so limited, that
we are not capable of any thing extraordinary: and, as a great light blinds us,
and a great noise deasens us; great Griefs are not felt, no more than great
Joys are. She had remained thus without motion a quarter of an hour: when at
last her Spirits, buried under this sudden ruin of all things, beginning to
return, she thought there would be no remedy to this evil, if she did not find
one in this instant; so she runs out of the Cabin, intending to cast her self
at the Queens feet, and to try if she could change her mind. But when they told
her she was gone, and that she saw they were got out to Sea, she cast her eyes
upon the shore, and her thoughts upon what she had left there, and on a sudden
took up a resolution which seemed to quiet her. Then, with a serene
countenance, turning toward those about her, she spoke some few words, and
seeming to receive the Consolations they tendered, she went to her Bed, and
prayed them to leave her to her rest. Miserable Alcidalis, thou art now
counting the moments as they pass: and when thou think of the eight days in
which thou shall not see Zelide, this term appears infinite. Whilst she is
removed from thee for many years. In a few days the Sea shall be between thee
and her. The Wind hurries away all thy Joys and all thy Hopes; and is about to
put into the power of another the only good thou desire in the World, and the
only one that is worthy of thee in it. Fear and Hope are the two Winds of our
Soul, which never cease, and there are no Tempests in it which are not made by
one of them. The present, being only a point, would not be considerable to us,
if one of these two passions did not make us feel the future. Zelide believed,
that Fortune had put her in a condition, wherein it was not in her power to
hurt or succor her. So that she was in that fatal tranquillity in which those
are who neither fear nor hope, and who only expect the end of their miseries in
the end of their life. And amidst so many miseries, at least she had not that
of seeking remedies, which is one of the greatest torments to wretched persons.
Being well resolved of what she had to do; and knowing, within a little, how
long her Misfortunes could last, she past the night in thinking of Alcidalis,
and flattered her self with some content, when she confider'd that signal proof
she was about to give him of her affection and courage. Though the Queens last
words, whereby she would have made her believe, that the Prince betrayed her,
caused in her some violent transports.

When the Captain and his Wife thought she was awake, they entered the Cabin,
and asking her, if she would not eat; she replied, that not only she would not
eat now, but that she would eat no more. They were startled at the Answer, and
thought she was relapsed to her first sadness, and that it required more time
to digest it. But, some hours after, seeing she did not call, they returned and
used all Arguments to persuade her to eat: To all which she did not answer, but
by an obstinate silence, and by so cold and resolved a look, that she did not
seem to hear them. They went out the second time extraordinarily troubled, and
began to fear some tragic end of this strange resolution. At night they
returned, and with a Niece they had of the age of Zelide they kneeled about the
Bed, conjuring her by all things, to have a care of her life. They could not
for all this obtain an Answer, but withdrew at last, that they might not rob
her of her repose, which seemed to be the only benefit left her. Three days
past in which they were not able to change her mind by prayers, tears and
remonstrances, or draw one word from her. The fourth day they came again to try
their utmost, and getting about her upon their knees, melting into tears,
offering her every thing, conjured her to have pity of her self and of them.
When Zelide had hearkened to them, setching a sigh, with much pain she sat up
in her Bed. Then they knew the extremity to which she was reduced. In the
fairest face of the World they saw an affrighting image of despair, and
approaching death; and something which struck them with fear and pity at once.
When they had looked upon one another for some time, at last she broke that
Silence which she had so long kept, and spoke to them after this manner:

My Friends, you ask me a thing which none but you can give me. You pray me to
live. I pray you, that I may. And it is in your power, not in mine. I have
resolved I will not be carried alive to the shore of Italy: and I swear it
again by the gods above, by the Fire and by the Light; by those below, and by
the shades of my Parents. It is not then in me to dispose otherwise of my self.
And seeing you can carry me, or not carry me thither; you must pronounce the
sentence of my life or death. Can you now refuse me that, which you have begged
of me with so many tears? And will you be my Murderers, that were chosen for
my Conducters? The Duke of Tarant expects me; but has never seen me. Here Is
your Niece, of my age, my stature, and not much unlike me. You may put her in
my place; and procure her this good Fortune, and deliver me from the greatest
misfortune in the World. It Is true, you will deceive the Duke by another person
than he expects: but if you could conduct me in the condition wherein I am,
would it be Zelide? And is not this Maid more like to what I was, than I am to
my self? Will not the Duke be more happy to have a Wife that will be content,
and who wishes for him, than one that long considered, whether she should
choose death or him? and which at last preferred death to his person? But it is
not mine he loves, seeing it is unknown to him; it is my Fortunes, which I now
make over to your Niece, with the name of Zelide: and call the gods to witness,
that for me no person alive shall know of it, and that I will never repent of
it. It Is true, the Queen has commanded you to convey me where I am expected;
but are not you bound to follow her will rather than her words? And don't you
think that if she were now present, and saw the danger in which I am, she would
not rather provide for my safety in any place, than send me dead for Italy? Did
she bid you put me into the hands of the Duke, alive or dead? Don't you think
she intends this Marriage for my good and advancement? and that she, who has
had a care of my Fortune, would have a care of my life? When all the World
shall reproach her with this cruelty, will she not discharge her self upon you?
But who can oblige you, except you will, to return to Barcelona and give her
account of what you have done? With this Ship you may go any where, where the
Winds go, and you have all the World before you. Then drawing out a small
Cabinet the Queen had left her, containing her Mothers Jewels, she told them;
These Jewels are of infinite value. The Queen would not give you more if she
presented you Barcelona. I present them all to you, for the ransom of my life
and liberty: and as these two surpass in value what I present; and that Liberty
alone is worth all the Riches in the World, you may give me more than I give
you, and I shall still be your Debtor. With these you will find Friends,
Kindred and Country any where. Many would be tempted to take away my life,
with what I offer you to save it: and I incite you to a good action, by a
reward capable of purchasing others for a bad one. If you are touched with a
scruple of obeying the Queen; are you not more afraid of murdering an
Innocent? Can you more easily resolve to kill one of her Friends, than to break
one of her commands? Are you not more afraid of provoking the gods, than of
offending men in the person of a Woman? And if a dread of her hatred or revenge
restrains you, ought you not to consider, that there are some in Aragon, as
powerful as she, who will seek you throughout the World, and make you give
account of my person and life? But after all, if these Reasons should not
appear so; I adjure you by that compassion you seemed to have of me, and by the
tears you lately shed, to deliver me out of this misery: and by a ready
complying show, that it is for the love of me, rather than for your own
consideration, that you do it. But if my Reasons, my prayers, and my offers
cannot prevail; and if I cannot persuade you to an action which is just, safe
and profitable: I shut my mouth never to open it again; and in despite of you,
death shall one day give me the liberty you have refused. Ending this discourse
she opened the Cabinet and let the Stones sparkle in their eyes. Which indeed
was not one of the weakest means whereof she served her self to persuade them.
They were moved with what they heard; but more by what they saw; and 'twas hard
for them to resist so many violences at once.

The Captain was much a Soldier, and of great Courage: who had past the half
of his life upon the Sea; and who had run many Fortunes, but made none. He
thought that now she would pay him all at once: and was astonished to see in so
small a space, more riches than he had ever beheld in the Indies. He presently
began to think how many Ships he would build and Man out with a part of it. All
Zelides Arguments appeared good ones. He thought that generosity obliged him to
succor a Princess so amiable, and so unjustly afflicted: and thought besides,
that if he could bestow her in some place, whence he might afterward render
her to Alcidalis, he might return to Spain with more favor than ever; and had
ground to hope as great Reward hereafter, as that which he saw before him. When
he had attentively hearkened to Zelide, he remained silent a long time: and
resolved upon what he would do, he only studied what he should say. She
believing he doubted what resolution he should take, added so many prayers and
promises to what she had said, and knew how to press him in such a manner, that
at last seeming to render himself up to her Reasons and to pity, he swore by
solemn Oaths to do what she desired. Zelide, who hitherto in the height of her
misfortunes and despair had never dropped a tear, felt her self now stirred with
joy, and a pity she had of her self, reflecting on her condition, and began to
weep abundantly, as miserable persons are wont to do, when in their griefs some
glimpse of hope darts in upon them. She did not think so much of her being
snatched from the arms of Alcidalis, as of her being delivered from falling
into the Dukes. With the help of this Joy she soon recovered her strength; and
reestablished her health in as few days as she had lost it. They agreed then,
she should not show her self: and Erminia their Niece was shut up in a Cabin,
and received Lessons to act well the part of Zelide. At last they came near the
Shore, and they suffered her, being well instructed, to be seen by the
principal Officers of the Galleys, and she rehearsed before them the part she
was to play upon a more noble Theater. Though Zelide saw things well disposed,
and the extreme passion her Guardians had to bring about their design, her
heart failed her when she saw the Land. In the mean time, that they might not
expose the false Zelide to the eyes of the Crowd, which covered the Shore, as
soon as she was Landed they put her into a close Chair, pretending her
indisposition, and so conveyed her to the Palace: and they advised her, with
the same pretext to shun the sight of People, and to keep her Bed till she had
fortified her action and countenance, and was well accustomed to be a Duchess.
So that she was seen of none but the Duke; who, though he did not find in her
that great Beauty which had made so much noise; was content, and attributed
something to her sickness and a Sea Voyage: or at least to the deceitfulness of
Fame. The Captain and his Wife, laden with Presents, took leave and went to
Sea. When they were returned, and that Zelide saw the Ship was under Sail, and
she at distance from this fatal Shore, which she had so much feared; she was
filled with such a Joy, that it wanted little but the pleasure of leaving Italy
made amends for the grief she felt in leaving Spain. But what serves it for an
unfortunate person to escape one Misfortune? And what safety for those that
Fortune pursues? All the Earth, without doubt, is of her Empire. But the Sea
seems to be her proper Inheritance. It Is there she is most to be feared; and
there are wrought her greatest miracles and greatest perfidies. In the mean
time, as if there were nothing to be feared, Zelide thankt the gods: and being
upon the most unfaithful Element of all, in a weak Vessel, and amongst people
from whom she could expect nothing, having no more to give them, she is in the
same assurance as if she were upon the Land, in a Palace, and amongst her
Friends. They made for Sardinia, to which place the Captain designed to carry
the young Princess, and commit her to the care of a Sister of his, till he
could find means to put her into the power of Alcidalis. After a few days sail
with a favorable Wind, one Evening they descried three Sail.

There is no place where men live with so much distrust, as upon this Element.
The Water, Air, Earth and Fire are enemies to Voyagers. But men are more so,
and amidst so many dangers there is nothing a Vessel fears more, than the
encounter of another. This News roused them all, they made all fail possible,
and the Night came on, but in the Morning they found them by their side. Then
astonishment seized upon them; the most fearful betook themselves to Cries and
Tears, and the most resolute to their Arms. And the wisest judged the one and
the other were equally in vain. Though the Captain had experience enough to
judge that he could not defend himself, nevertheless a regret to loose so much
Riches, and to see that Fortune would snatch out of his hands what she but now
gave him, put him in despair, and made him resolve to die rather than yield. In
this general alarm and confusion Zelide only was unaffrighted: and whilst
others feared for their Goods, Lives and Liberty; she, to whom all these things
were indifferent, thought of preserving that she esteemed most. After she had
faced the danger with a firm and resolved mind, she shut her self up in the
Cabin with the Captains Wise. The first thing she did was to throw the Cabinet
of Jewels into the Sea, lest she should be discovered by them. After that she
prayed her to cut her Hair: and then with Tears in her eyes, seeing what
Fortune constrained her to, made her bring a Suit of her Husbands Clothes,
which she put on. In the mean time the Ships, now known to be of Africa, were
within Canon-shot, and finding that our Ship pretended to defend her self,
discharged a Broadside; ours did the same, but with different success; for
having done no hurt to the Enemy it lost Mast and Sails. At this noise Zelide
came out, and put her self amongst the most resolute, and where there was most
danger: believing by this means she should find her death, or better disguise
her self. The Combat was so unequal it could not last long. The Corsairs
quickly boarded the Ship; where having killed ten or twelve of the stoutest,
and amongst them the Captain, the rest ask their lives. The Commander of these
Vessels was of of the Kingdom of Bareba, a part of Africa which confines on one
side with Egypt, on the other with Nubia. These people, extremely Savage, know
not what-Commerce is; and have no other way of communicating with Strangers,
but by vanquishing of them, and carrying away Merchants and Merchandise: What
we call Stealing, they say is to gain upon the Enemy; and call that Valor,
which we style Piracy. What they can have at the price of their Blood, they
would be ashamed to get otherwise: and to take a thing by force and with
danger, is amongst them the most honest sort of acquisition. This man being of
the noblest and most powerful of his Nation, had been for a long time the
terror of the Grecian and Italian Coasts, able and extremely valiant; pitiful
and humane, more than his Country or Trade permitted; good and generous,
without knowing what goodness or generosity was. As in the coldest parts of the
North there are found some veins of Gold as fine as that of the Indies, though
not in so great quantity: so in all sorts of Climates, Nature is pleased
sometimes to produce rich dispositions, which she instructs and dresses up her
self; and bestows upon them, without their study, all necessary lights. When
Orchant, which was the name of the Corsaire, viewed his Captives and the prey
he had made; the Beauty and Majesty which sparkled in the face of Zelide struck
his sight: and asking who she was; she said, she was a Spaniard by Nation, and
named her self Zelidan, Cousin to the Captain of the Ship he had taken; that
she was sorry she could not follow him; and that she esteemed him happy to have
lost his life rather than his liberty. She said this with a Countenance that
held nothing of the Captive; without tears, without prayers, without
submissions. But in spite of her self her face and good grace pleaded for her;
and her Constancy and Courage were recommendation enough. So that Orchant
esteemed her Pride; and what would have invited the anger of another, bred
admiration in him. He exhorted him to be of good courage; that his Servitude
should not be harsh; that he should taste more liberty than before; that he
might hope 'twould not last, seeing he had a Master who kept no Slaves, but
those who deserved to be so: that for his part, he did not practice the Sea as
a Merchant; that he rather sought Fame than Gain; that he took more pleasure in
making Freemen, than in making Slaves: that for his part of the Booty, he
would content himself with Zelidan, and leave the rest to his Soldiers: that
he might ransom himself when he would; that one gallant Action would be enough
to do it; that if the rest of him answered to his face, he might believe he
should be longer his Friend than his Slave. Zelide, who expected nothing like
this from a Barbarian and a Pirate, was glad, and wondered at his discourse,
esteeming her Captivity much more supportable. And now having shunned an odious
Marriage, see her the Slave of a Pirate: and she thought this Accident less
afflicting than the other, because it had more remedies. There was no good
fortune for her, but to be Alcidalis's; nor ill, but to be another. Besides
this, she knew no good nor evil in the World; and all things were indifferent
to her. Thus she who deserved to command the Universe, resolves to serve: and
that heart which was so vast and elevate, that the Heavens are not more, stoops
to the lowest of Misfortunes, with more patience than the meanest Mariner taken
with her. But it was impossible for Zelide to serve long. This disorder and
violence could not last in nature. It had been easier to submit the sphere of
Fire to the other Elements: and it was impossible but those divine qualities
which were in her, should be known and admired. Besides that the Heavens had
bestowed on her all Beauties in perfection; and the charms of body and mind,
together with all the graces which breed love and respect: she was born under
such a strong Constellation of Empire and Command, that she would have been
obeyed by the most Savage Animals, and easily gained Authority over reasonable
Souls. So that Zelidan, for we must accustom our selves to call her so, became
the Master of his Master. Slaves, Mariners, Soldiers equally loved her, and he
absolutely Commanded in the Vessel where he was Prisoner. Considering the
passion Orchant had for him, he guest how easily this Friendship would convert
into Love, if he were known; and that in this case, that affection which might
be some way a succor to him, would be the inevitable cause of his loss. He
took care then to conceal himself: and the better to do it, resolved to oppose
his Courage to all sorts of dangers, and to inure himself to those things
wereof this Sex does not seem capable.

They past that Summer without making any Port, except for Water; often
changing course and design; following the Winds, and the way they thought they
might furnish prize. In which time Zelidan signalized her self in all occasions
that offered; running where danger was most apparent without Armor, and the
most rash remained behind her. There are no enchanted Arms like those of good
Fortune, not Buckler which covers like hers. Those she defends may run naked
upon Swords points; but for those she bears ill will to, Armor of proof will
be faulty. Now, the hopes Orchant had conceived of her became a confirmed
opinion, and an esteem solidly established.

'Twas necessary we should leave Alcidalis, and necessary we leave him no
longer. For his first grief could not be described; and at first 'twas
impossible to represent all his sighs, tears, rages and suries. Having seen the
Queen return without Zelide; and having been eight days without being able to
discover what was become of her; he past that time in a mortal sadness and
inquietude. But when he came to know the history of her Misfortune, and knew
the Evil was without remedy; when he considered her in the arms of another, and
that his Imagination had presented to him whatever might torment him: Then his
tears ceased, and despair seized him; then he lost all sorts of respects and
fears; he lowdly threatened the Queen; and testified all those resentments,
which highest wrongs can breed in the greatest heart in the World. He was two
days deliberating, if he ought first to revenge himself on the Queen, or go and
ravish Zelide from the hands of him that possessed her, or rather rid himself of
his miseries by a voluntary death. But at last his body, which for some time
had as 'twere nourished it self with poison, sunk under so many evils, and put
an end to the transports of his mind. A Fever seized him, which at first was
accompanied with such furious fits as gave fear to all the World: and those who
knew the cause of his disease, believed this would be the end of it. In few
days he became forceless; and, which was well for him, without knowledge,
without sense. So all those thoughts, which his different passions crowded into
his mind, were dampt; and he that would pass the Seas and run through the
World, was detained in his bed for four Months. A Fever, Love and Jealousy,
that is, the greatest Evils of body and mind equally consumed him: and each of
them were in him to such a height, and with such circumstances, that there was
no probability any one of them was capable of remedy. But Nature would not lose
the fairest piece that ever passed her hands: and she had in him so much force
and vigor, that against all reason and against his own mind she returned him
to health. And now having less of Sickness he had more of Sorrow: and not being
able to stay till he had recovered his strength, he left Saragosa, and
imbarking at the first Port went for Italy with some shadow of Joy, in thinking
he escaped the hands of his Enemies and followed the footsteps of Zelide.

The false Zelide had Fortune more favorable than the other; and her designs
prosper'd better. She had a midling Beauty, and that sort of Wit which is
proper for Craft. Seeing the danger of her attempt, she endeavored by all ways
to gain the heart of her Husband, and to fortify her self against all
Accidents that might happen. He was in that season of his life wherein the
approaches of Age begin to give men distrust of themselves, and wherein they
ought not to hope for love from any Women, but those who are by duty obliged to
it: so that the Beauty, behavior, and kindness of his Wife easily gained him.
As Flowers are never so acceptable to us, as at the beginning of the Spring or
end of Autumn; those for their novelty, and these because we think we shall
quickly lose them: the pleasures of Love do not in any Season touch us so
sensibly as in the first youth, or decline of our Age. It Is so great a
satisfaction and rare a pleasure for an Old man to be beloved, that there are
none which upon this opinion do not become young, and kindle their ashes again.
But likewise, as the Sun shining far off us makes the longest shadows: when
Love shines in this Age, from which it is naturally distant, it causes largest
Shadows. As soon as the Duke felt himself amorous, he became Jealous. This
passion, which is elsewhere a fortuitous effect of Love, is an inseparable
Accident in all men of this Climate. They do not believe a great desire can
subsist without a great fear: and Love and Jealousy are the two Twins, which
are always here born together. Whether then the excess of his affection wrought
the effect, or the Air of the Country, or the suspicious humor which years
brought along with them; or whether he had notice of Alcidalis passion: his
distrust arrived to that point, that he was not safe but when the Duchess was
in his sight. And besides, 'twas with impatience, that he suffered her to be
seen by any eyes but his own. She, who for another reason feared nothing more
than to be seen, easily met his humor: and pretending to please him, said, she
equally loy'd all the effects of his passion; that his fear for her pleased
her, seeing 'twas a proof of his Love; however, she would try all ways to
satisfy him, and that he needed not take care for any thing but his own quiet.
For her part, she would be always content if he were: and seeing that he was to
her instead of all things, she would believe she possessed all, when she possessed
him. He received these offers with much content: and used the liberty she gave
him in taking away hers. So that daily paring away something, from a great
Palace and an infinite number of Servants, she is reduced to a few Chambers, a
Gallery, and five or six Women. As the Duke gave her proofs of his Jealousy,
he would also give her some of his Love: and satisfying himself, he strove
likewise to content her. There was nothing rare either in Europe or the Indies,
which he did not cause to be bought for her. Whatever was precious in the
World, the richest workmanship of Nature, the most accomplished Masterpieces of
Art adorned her Cabinets. She had, in fine, the fairest Prison we can imagine,
if any Prison can be said to be fair: and she saw whatever she could desire,
except men. But because the most pleasing Solitude has always somewhat of
Melancholy, he would remedy that too. With great care and expense he sought out
the handsomest and strongest Slaves. And having got a great number, he caused
them to be instructed by the best Masters of Italy, in all exercises wherein
the Nobility are wont to excel. These were called the Duchess Slaves, and wore
her Livery: they had no other mark of Servitude but a Ring of Gold about their
necks, with a Chain fastened to it, and a Medal of their Mistresses Arms. Three
times a week they entered a spacious Court, which answered to the Windows of
her Gallery: and there they exercised. The Duke invented this for two ends; one
to entertain the Duchess, who was extremely beloved by him; the other, to make
her despise all men by letting her fee in Slaves, that is, in the vilest
persons among them, the same qualities which are found in those most Nobly
descended, and which render them considerable.

Alcidalis coming to Italy understood all this; and having considered some
time, he thought no quality could become him better than to be Zelides Slave;
and that the greatness of his Fortune having caused all his Misfortunes, he
could not cure them better than by putting himself into the lowest state. He
imparted his design to him that accompanied him. Who seigning himself to be a
Merchant, went to those who governed this Troop. They seeing in Alcidalis all
the qualities they sought, quickly set a price upon a Person invaluable, and
with a small sum of Money bought for a Slave the Son of a King, and the most
accomplished person on Earth. At first he was a Scholar to them to whom he
might have been Master; and suffered himself to be taught what he knew better
than they, or any body else. Thus pretending every day to learn something of
them, he made such a progress in a short time, that he was admired by all.
Whether he did Ride, Wrestle, or Jump; he showed every where so much address,
strength and disposition, that it proceeded to a prodigy. Horses seemed
naturally to obey him; and that without any motion he made them understand his
mind. If he were chaleng'd at Wrestling, or at the Course; he so easily cast
one on the ground, and got ground of the other, that it seemed he was born to
be their Master, and that they ought always to be at his feet or much behind
him. When he run on foot, Horses had not such speed, and when he was on their
backs, they were swifter than Birds. In fine, no prize was proposed which was
not his: and there was no way to make an equal match, if he were in, except he
were on one side; and yet so, he did not fail to vanquish. In the mean time,
amidst all these Praises, he felt some shame in himself to contend with Slaves.
He had a heart to ask Kings for his Rivals. But this was necessary for his
design. Though he performed every thing with a mavelous grace, yet it was
with so little attention, and in so careless a manner, that 'twas easy to
perceive he thought of higher Victories. As often as he entered the Course, and
could be seen by the Duchess, he came first and went away last. In all his
Exercises his eyes were still fixed upon the Grates, whence he believed she
beheld him, and whatever himself did or others did, could not divert them. To
what blindnesses are Men subject? The most faithful of Lovers Idolizes a Beauty
he never saw. He sighs for her, he sends her his heart by his eyes: and having
a Mistress he loves a hundred times more than himself, he voluntarily sells
himself to another. Alcidalis, who would have been remarkable amongst the most
accomplished Princes in the World, was easily so among Slaves. The first day he
entered his Beauty and Behavior drew the Dutchesses eyes upon him. Soon after
he gained her esteem, and admiration: and having considered him better, she
thought she beheld in the gallantness of his port, something extraordinary, and
which was not of his present condition. She minded the attention with which he
looked toward her. She marked his sighs, the paleness and grief which dwelt in
his face: and how amidst general applauses, nothing could affect him. All this
begot in her first Curiosity, then Pity, and at last Love.

I have always heard you say, Madam, she was not touched with this last
passion, and that she had only the curiosity to know a person, who in so low
Fortunes showed such high Indowments. But you shall permit me, not to be
satisfied with what you say. I have heard you sometimes excuse persons less
excusable than she, and I know you are scrupulous to a degree of fearing to
offend a person that never was. If you consider the Duke was Old and Jealous;
the Duchess young and a Prisoner, and the Prince the most amiable person in
the World, you will find, it is not a very rash suspicion to think she was
amorous. One Evening, as this Slave left the Palace, he felt himself pulled
aside into a dark Entry by a Woman he did not know; who told him, Sir, if you
are the gallant Man you seem, go to morrow two hours in the Night to the foot
of the Greek Tower: where, if you serve your self of the occasion that will
present, you shall be happier than ever you hoped to be. She said this in
haste, and left him without expecting an Answer.

It could never be imagined how the Duchess, shut up and watched as she was,
could find a way to let Alcidalis understand her mind. You, Madam, never gave
good account of it: And I remember, Madam, your Mother, who never lost an
occasion of saying a handsome thing, praised you for having failed in Invention
at this part of the History. And truly it is very remarkable, that when you
could save Alcidalis in so many Accidents, and keep Zelide untouched amidst
Pirates, and bring them both to their Kingdoms after so many wanderings; your
imagination fell short in this occasion, and you could not find a way to send a
man a Message. Since Alcidalis began to be unfortunate, he had never seen the
least glimmering of Joy but at this instant. He presently thought this Message
came from Zelide, and with tears in his eyes thanked Heaven, which seemed to
begin to take compassion on him. However, whether the Souls of great men see
something in the darknesses of the future; or whether the miserable dare not
trust the Promises of hope, wherewith they have been often abused: he durst not
be confident of his good Fortune; and beginning to hope he began to fear too.

Here, Madam, a more eloquent Writer than I would not fail to say, That all the
hours seemed days, and all the days years: And that his amorous impatience made
him count the moments; blame the slowness of time, and of the Sun; and accuse
all the Heavens. But without saying all this, we may easily imagine the
Inquietudes of Alcidalis by the causes he had for it. The Day, or rather the
Night of the assignation came at last. And before she had well thickened her
shadows, he was at the foot of the Tower. 'Twas an Old building joined to the
Palace. Its foot was washed by the waves of the Sea. The Prince had provided
himself of a Fishing-Boat; which he fastened to some Rings in the Wall, and
attended that success which Fortune would give to this Adventure, in the
darkness and silence of the Night, which was not interrupted but by the waves
of the Sea. He staid an hour without seeing any thing: diversely agitated with
hopes and fears; which being two contrary passions are, for all that, often
found together.

He formed all those Imaginations which another may conceive; but which neither
you nor I, Madam, who never knew Love, can relate. At last, when he began to
despair, and had thoughts as black and dreadful as the Night and Sea, which
environed him, a noise he heard from above restored him his lost hopes. He
thought he heard some words, which he could not understand; to which having
answered by a noise he made below, he heard something fall into the Sea, and
perceived it white upon the Water: which having reached to him, he knew 'twas a
Ladder of Cord, to which a piece of Linen was tied that he might the better
see it. Now Alcidalis suffered himself to be deceived by the apparences of his
good Fortune, and believed she would give him back something of Zelide.
Presently, without considering the danger, and in spite of the Darkness, and
Winds which blew horribly, he undertook by this dangerous way to mount to an
extreme height; without knowing whither he went, of whom, nor how he should be
received. He at last finds a Window, where he perceived a person who gave him
her hand, and by many turnings and windings conducted him to a Chamber,
enlightened by three Lamps of Gold, and richly adorned. The Woman bid him sit
down a while, and left him. Now considering what had past, and what he saw, he
confirmed himself in the opinion he had, that he was sent for by Zelide. And in
the midst of so many perils which he might imagine to himself, by a secret
presentiment of his Misfortune, he feared nothing so much as not to see her. I
cannot tell you the diverse thoughts he had; his impatiences, desires, fears,
distrusts, suspicions, surprises, alarms. All which cannot be represented upon
Paper: and nothing but humane mind is capable of this confusion. He remained
thus an hour. At last the same person entered; You will pardon me by and by
Sir, says she to him, for making you stay; the Honor you are going to
receive, deserves to be staid for. The Prince having thanked her, and prayed
her to let him know what that Honor was; after some pause she told him. If it
were not easy to conclude the greatness and force of your mind by what we have
seen of you, it would not be fit to tell you your good Fortune all at once, but
give you time to use your self to it, and to try how you could bear it. But it
is to be believed of you, that you will not be surpised, and that your
thoughts are no less high and noble than your actions. Know then that you are
in Zelides Lodgings, and in a moment you shall be in her Chamber. The Duchess
has taken notice of all those qualities which render you esteemable: and
seeing that there is nothing low in you but your Fortune, she will take care of
that her self and make it better: and to this purpose she would know who you
are. Hereafter show as much discretion and conduct, as you have hitherto shown
art and valor. With this she led him to her Mistresses Chamber.

The weakness of our minds is very strange. Alcidalis, whom death and all that
is horrible could not affright; who in spite of the Wind, the Night and the
Sea, by a weak Ladder of Cord was got so high; and who durst at Noonday have
ventured to deliver the Duchess from the hands and power of the Duke; trembled
here, where he knew there were none but Women. That heart which would fearlesly
have confronted a World of Enemies, is filled with fear approaching the only
person he loves, and by whom he knows he is beloved. The Chamber was enlightened
only by a Torch, and the Duchess was in her bed, with that little light which
such enterprises, the shame and astonishment of a young unexperienced person
demands. So that if the Prince had been more himself and less surpised, scarce
could he have known his error, and the cheat which Fortune put upon him. At
first he put himself upon his knee; and having begun to say some words, which
were ill pronounced and worse followed, he stopped in the middle of his
discourse. The trouble of his mind and a troop of passions pressed him so, that
he could not proceed: and half beside himself, he fell with his head upon the
Princes Bed. Who putting out her hand to remove it, he took it, and coming to
himself, he said, At last, Zelide, the Heavens have had pity of Alcidalis; and
however they have opposed me, I must thank them for permitting me to see you
before I die. Here his Sighs broke off his discourse. And as he was beginning
again, he heard a great noise in the Palace, and she that led him in, enters
amazed, saying it was the Duke, and that he was now in the Dutchesses Lodgings.
The good Man, little imagining what passed in the Palace, had left it with
design to stay three days abroad a Hunting. But whether his Love or Jealousy
called him back; or whether he thought it a piece of Courtship to show his
impatience and his affection to the Duchess, he returns the same day, and
presently hastens to see her.

I am extremely vexed he came so unseasonably. For I would fain have understood,
what the Duchess could answer in that astonishment she must needs be in,
hearing Alcidalis speak as he did. I find him very troublesome to arrive just
now, and if I had made the History, in spite I would have -- The Duchess was
so affrighted, she could not speak one word. The Lady that brought the Prince
in, taking him again by the hand and conducting him by the same way he entered,
carried him to the Window; whence, seeing the treasons of Fortune, he had a
mind to precipitate himself, rather than descend.

FIESCHI'S Conspiracy, Out of Italian.
THe War raging in Italy between the Emperor Charles the Fifth and Francis the
First, King of France, Andrea Doria an experienced Commander in Sea Affairs,
followed the Banner of the French. With his Valor and Counsels he sustained
the reputation, and notably promoted the Interests of that Crown; satisfying at
once the Faith due to his King, and the fierce hatred he bore the Spaniards for
the cruel Accidents happened in the Sack of Genoua. But as it is the fatal
infelicity of Princes, not to esteem eminent persons whilst they are engaged in
their Service, the King by ways little discreet exasperated the mind of Andrea,
a Minister so necessary to him at this time. He did not pay him his assigned
Stipend; and after he had taken from him the Prince of Orange, his Prisoner of
War, and set him at liberty, thereby defrauding him of his due Ransom, he
demanded with importunity and insolent threatenings the Marquess Vasto, and
Ascanio Colonna, taken in fight by Philippino Dorea, Lieutenant to Andrea. But
that which most pierced the Soul of the good Old man, was the small faith of
the King in complying with his Promise, touching the Interest and Reputation of
the Genoueses. The City of Savona had withdrawn it self from the obedience of
the Commonwealth; expecting, under the protection of France, to meliorate its
condition by the commodiousness of the Port, which furnished them with
extraordinary emoluments, to the irreparable damage of the City of Genoua.

Andrea had often complained of this to the King, praying him, that in
recompense of his Services, he would restore to his Country what by all right
was due to it. The King overcome by the honesty of the Request, had promised
Doria to satisfy him; but his regard to Justice being combated by the hopes of
Interest, he at last inclines to the worst choice, and resolves to detain that
City. He had seen by experience how inconstant the Genoueses were, and how
little he could depend upon that Commonwealth for his War in Italy. For
tyrannized by factions it easily changed its form of Government, according to
the different prevailing humors: therefore esteeming it necessary for his
designs to have a Port at his devotion commodious for the Affairs of Lombardy,
he chose Savona, and gave the charge of it to Momorancy. Conceiving, that with
this determination he had at once bridled the inconstancy of the Genoueses, and
greatly advantaged the course of his Enterprise; because the City of Savona
being near to Piemont, Montferrat and Lombardy, it became an opportune Scale,
no less for Merchandise than for War. Hence 'twas feared, that in a few years
growing in Reputation and Riches, it might not only divert the Trade from the
Port of Genoua, but rival it with them for the principality of that Sea. Of
this Doria, as a singular lover of his Country, sharply complained. But at
last seeing it was in vain, he turns his mind to other Counsels. In the mean
while growing cold in his devotions to the King, he by degrees slackned his
wonted diligence in serving him: and directed Philippino how to comport himself
in the future. The French, who besieged Naples under Lautrech, quickly found
the damage they received by the voluntary negligence of Philippino: for he who
but little before had with incredible Valor worsted the Imperial Navy, now
could not hinder a few Barks from entering into Naples with Provisions: And this
was the beginning of the ruin of that design. Pope Clement the Seventh
understanding how Doria was alienated from the Crown of France, seriously
admonished the King by his Legate, to provide speedy remedy for this Evil, by
giving satisfaction to a Captain of so much reputation and so powerful at Sea,
lest being provoked to pass over to the Service of Caesar, he should carry with
him all hopes of the approaching Victory. He sent likewise to Doria his
Secretary Sanga, to mitigate his resentments. They now deliberated in the Kings
Council on this important affair. Some amongst them painted Doria as a man too
proud in the use of his Authority, and esteeming it impossible to gain him
counseled, that he should be cut off; preventing by a sudden violence those
designs, which by gentler ways could hardly be impeded, so depriving Caesar of
that Aid, which in the present conjuncture would be of much avail to him.
Accordingly necessary Orders were given to Barbigios, who passed into Italy
with the charge of Admiral. Doria in the mean time having notice hereof, and
detesting that ingratitude and perfidiousness with which the French Ministers
would have recompensed his Services, treated with the Marquess Vasto, his
Prisoner, about serving the Emperor; by whom being gladly received, he openly
renounced the Friendship of the French King, and returned him the Collar and
Order of St. Michael. The first Conditions he made with Caesar, were such as
might be hoped for from a Citizen, who dearly loved his Country; to wit, the
liberty of Genoua under the Imperial protection, and the reducing Savona: the
rest respected principally his own profit and reputation. The resolution of
Doria did in such a manner startle the drowsy King, that willing to correct
his past neglects with present sollicitousness, he begins to study how he might
bring him back on Honorable terms. But his Repentance came too late. For Doria
altogether intent upon the freeing of his Country from the yoke of Strangers,
would admit of no Conditions that might retard the execution of his designs.
The King notwithstanding as impatient to recover, as he had been careless in
keeping him, with diminution of Decorum and Majesty, descended of his own
accord to offer him all that satisfaction which he had formerly denied; and,
which was worse, without first secretly trying by means of Friends how Doria
stood inclined, he prostituted the Royal dignity to the ignominy of a Repulse.
Which being returned most precise and resolute, it is not to be imagined, how
it filled the Kings mind with vexation and shame.

Doria now in the Service of Caesar, with twelve Galleys applied himself to
procure the liberty of his Country, which had ever been the sole Object of his
thoughts. The Commonwealth at this time was become a prey to the will of the
Common people; who putting no difference between private License and public
Liberty, under the name of the Common good fomented with continual tumults the
passions of particulars. And when one Faction found it self weak in its own
Forces, having recourse to Strangers, they introduced a new form of Government.
Thus one while the Adorni drove out the Fregosi, and anon were driven out by
them: Governors from Millan were called, and sent away again: the French yoke
accepted, and shaken off. So that the wounds in the body of the Commonwealth
were still kept open by change of Plasters, which had need of being well
closed by Concord. All which Doria considering came before Genoua with his
Galleys, to give heat to the good will of those, who together with himself
desired the Common good: nor was he deceived in his thoughts. For diverse
Citizens tired with the calamities of past Discord, applied themselves to more
wholesome Counsels, desiring a good and firm Union. The City was now governed in
the name of the French King by Triultio, who having before acquired the
reputation of a valiant and prudent Captain, it begot the more wonder in all
men's minds, when they considered how little this action of his corresponded to
that praise which was due to the rest. For though he understood that the
discourses and designs of the Genoueses did tend to Peace, he took no care to
disturb them: either because he esteemed it a mere reconciliation of private
Enmities between the Nobility and People; or because he relied too much upon
the Kings Forces and his own Valor: not considering, that Genoua put into his
hands by civil Discord, might be snatched from him only by Union. Doria thus
valuing himself, both upon the good disposition of the Citizens, and the
opportunity presented him by Triultio, attempted to conduct his Enterprise to
its end: which he did so happily, that without bloodshed he got the City,
driving thence the French Garrison. Being received by the Genoueses with
incredible demonstrations of Joy, and persuaded by several to open his bosom to
the favors of Fortune, which offered him the Dominion of Liguria, with a mind
superior to Worldly happiness, he refused it. Afterward by a weighty Speech,
and worthy the Father of his Country, he exhorted the Citizens at last to know
themselves, and for the future to maintain that Liberty which he freely
bestowed upon them. The City of Genoua obliged by so many benefits desired to
show efficacious signs of a true gratitude; wherefore, granting to him and his
posterity large Privileges, they erected a Marble Statue, and by certain words
ingrav'd in the Base thereof, declared him the Author of the public Liberty.
He now grown Old retires himself, and enjoys in the bosom of his Country the
fruit of that Victory and quiet which himself had procured. He had with him
Giannettino his Cousin, a young Man of great Spirit and known Virtue; and who
had merited by his Valor to be his Adopted Son and destined Successor in his
Charge at Sea, with the consent of Caesar. Thus, by reason of the quality of
this Excellent person, esteemed by all Princes, rich, no less in Fame than in
Fortune; and for the Reverence the Ganoueses bore him as the public
Benefactor, his House was frequented, not as that of a simple Citizen, but as
of some great Prince. These things thus summarily described, were the true
causes of Fieschi's Conspiracy. With a memorable Example to all Free Cities of
the incredible damage which the Greatness of an eminent Citizen, though never
so Virtuous and discreet, is to the Public; and of that necessity, which moved
the Athenians to publish their Law of Ostracism.

Pope Paul the Third and the King of France were they which envied Genona's
public, and Doria's private happiness; because by that, Cities being withdrawn
from the Service of the French, and put under the protection of Caesar, sprung
up extraordinary obstacles to the Affairs of Millan, which the Pope would
gladly have seen favorable to the King; as well to curb in some measure the
power of Caesar, now formidable to all; as to vindicate himself for the
impediment he received, in advancing one of his Family to that Dukedom. Nor
could they endure, that Doria the only Author and promoter hereof should remain
in an Honorable repose a Spectatour of others Misfortunes.

They now expected some Accident which might minister an occasion to their
designs. But that opportunity which they could not find, was put into their
hands by Fortune, not yet entirely reconciled to the Genoueses. Gio Luigi de
Fieschi, a young man of great Spirit and turbulent humor, was at this time
compassing how he might better his Reputation and Degree. He was descended of
Noble Parentage; rich no less in Adherence and Followers, than in Vassals and
Estate. Not contented for all this with that Honorable condition which
descended to him from his Ancestors, he suffered himself to be hurried by the
heats of his Age and by Ambition, the ordinary disease of the Nobility, to
dangerous hopes. From a Boy he gave manifest signs of an immature fierceness,
from which wife men collected, that he grew up for the disturbance of his
Countries Peace. To these pernicious Incentives of his Nature was added a bad
Education, the incurable pest of Youth; for though his Master, Paolo Pansa, was
both Learned and Virtuous, those with whom he most freely conversed were
dangerous persons, who employed their skill by Flatteries to nourish in his
mind perverse and novel designs, styling them Noble and Generous. Nor (as 'twas
said) was his Mother wanting to add Fuel to this growing flame. For, more
ambitious than considerate, she often wounded the mind of her Son with bitter
Reproaches, as if he poorly contenting himself with a private Fortune did
degenerate from his Ancestors, who in their Country and out of it, were wont
to sustain the greatest Dignities. And to make all sure, he (by the Advice of
his Friends) gave himself to read and study the Life of Nero, Catilines
Conspiracy, and Machiavels Prince. From which Books he did suck in priciples of
Cruelty, Perfidiousness, and love of Private Interest, above divine or humane
Reason. So much force has good or ill to change even the will of the Reader,
when conveyed by a powerful Pen, and apt to persuade.

Those who watched over Advantages to ruin Genoua, had penetrated the
Qualities of Gio. Luigi, and believed him a fitting Instrument for their
important design. They endeavored by all ways to put him upon the action,
setting before him the Profit and Honor of it. Amongst others, Caesare Fregoso
attempted him in the name of the French King, whereof Doria had notice, but the
Advice did not find belief with the Old man, who was preoccupied with an
affection to Gio. Luigi, and with his own opinion, founded upon the incertainty
of vain Conjectures. Nor was the Pope wanting to invite him to it, and he being
then in the Popes state caused four Galleys to be sold him by the Duke of
Piacenza. Where likewise Cardinal Triultio, Protector of France, gave him a
Visit, and knowing him a man greedy of Fame, spoke to him after this manner:

If Fortune were propitious to your Virtue, Noble Youth, I might be happy to
see you in a condition far above that of a private Citizen. But seeing through
the Iniquity of the Times your rewards do not go equal with your merits, take
in good part that I pity your condition, and join with all good men to wish you
better Fortune. Your Birth and Parts have made your Advancement the subject of
all their Vows, who desire the Common good: and I, who by the height of my
place have a fair prospect into the Affairs of the World, cannot but wish you
had a larger Theater opened for so much Valor. You are born in Times so
calamitous, that in your own City it is not lawful to aim at Eminency: because
it being reduced to a Civil equality, will not endure you other than a mere
Citizen. Besides, that Andrea and Giannettin Doria have, under pretense of
public Liberty, so firmly rooted their Power, that the greatest public
Concord consists in serving their Wills. Thus the Genoueses have chastis'd
themselves for that blind resolution, which withdrew them from the dominion of
a Potent Prince, by their so tamely subjecting themselves to the tyranny of two
private Men. They, upheld by Caesar, and formidable by a good number of Ships,
will not suffer a noble and generous Spirit; but will look upon the Virtue of
an eminent Citizen, as dangerous to the growing Fortunes of their Family. They
will value themselves upon the specious names of Fathers of their Country, and
Restorers of its lost Liberty, to oppress the bravest Men under pretense of the
Common good. So that under their Empire you shall be more sure of Injuries than
of Life: and if all this has not happened hitherto, impute it to the unripe
Greatness of Doria, and the moderation of Andrea, who gives check to the
rashness of Giannettin. He being of a proud and impotent nature, when he shall
see himself girt about with his own Forces, and for the importance of his
Charge reverenced by all the Nobility, what is it which he will not make lawful
for his Power? Do you think that his thirst of Rule, provoked by his
approaching hopes, will be extinguished by any thing but the Blood of the
Innocent? Do you believe, that content with the Greatness which his over
partial Fortune and Folly of the Citizens has invested him with, he will die
with the bare name of Giann. Doria? I for my part cannot think so. He is not of
that moderation, that either he should know how, or be willing to stop the
course of his extreme felicity. He expects, I imagine, the death of Andrea, and
then by a wicked Invasion staining all his famous Actions, done in behalf of
his Country, he will usurp the Command of it. But let us suppose the Divine
goodness prevents these designs, can his present height be endured by a
well-born Citizen? If you have not hitherto tasted of his Insolences, you are
obliged to the tenderness of your years, not to his good Manners: but hereafter
you will find yourself involved in the Common misery. You, you I say, amongst
the rest shall be seen to visit, accompany and serve him; Giannettin shall be
able to number amongst the Trophies of his intolerable Insolence, that Gio.
Luigi de Fieschi, Earl of Lavagna, and Lord of so many Vassals, courted him,
reverenced him, and bowed to him. How much better were it, that awaking your
mind to Resolutions worthy of your Country, Family, and Virtue, you should
deliver all others and your self from this Servitude? And can you want Forces,
when you please to use them? Before you leave Rome, you shall be furnished with
all necessary Aids. I can promise you the assistance of the King of France. In
Genoua the Common people ever at variance with the Nobility, shall be to you a
Sword and Shield. Giannettin sleeping in the arms of his good Fortune, will
fall an easy prey into your Nets; your own Subjects, and those of the Duke of
Piacenza, will be able to defend you against any Force that can be raised. In
short, all things invite you to Victory: only wants your own determination, not
to fight, but to triumph. Consider, it is necessary you command or serve; either
render your self formidable to others, or live in perpetual fear.

Triultio could not have touched his mind in a part more sensible: for having
long envied the Greatness of Doria, he looked upon Giannettin as a reproach to
his own tameness: So that having his Will well prepared, he soon took fire from
this spark the Cardinal administered. When he had greedily hearkened to the
Conditions propounded in the name of the King, he did not think them
despisable; and they were the following, That he should presently receive money
for the maintaining six Galleys; That he should be secured of Pay for two
hundred men, to be put into his Castle of Montobby; That he should receive
twelve thousand Crowns per annum for his provision. Which Conditions were soon
after confirmed to him by the Kings Order. He gave now good hopes of himself;
not only by that alteration which Triultio quickly spied in him, but by words;
yet reserving his last Resolution to his return for Genoua. Where being
arrived, he began more diligently to observe the proceedings of Giannettin: for
though the splendor of the Family derived it self chiefly from the person of
Andrea; yet because most worship the rising Sun, the eyes of all were turned
upon Giannettin. He having increased his natural pride by a Military education,
and being reverenced for the Command he had of 20 Galleys, and for the
succession in the Admiralship designed him by Caesar, heightened also by several
Proofs he had given of his personal Valor, had drank in Conceits far beyond
the condition of a private Citizen: whence, not caring to acquire by Courtesy
those men, which he believed were obliged to him by Interest, he studied more
the ostentation of his own power, than others good will. For all this, he was
much hated by the popular Faction: and the young Nobility which followed him,
were drawn by the profit they hoped to reap from him, and not invited by his
manner of treating them. He also used Fieschi but coursly, which provoked him
in such a manner, that he was so far from seeking his Friendship by the
ordinary servilities, that he rather indiscreetly betrayed some signs of his
evil-will: and to show that he stood in no need of him in that very particular
which made him so Famous, he bought the four Galleys of the Duke of Piacenza to
the infinite vexation of Giannettin. In the mean while Triultio would not by
omitting his diligences corrupt the hopes he had conceived of gaining Gio.
Luigi; and knowing that in important Resolutions the nature of Youth must be
taken warm, that the heat of his past Negotiation might not cool, he sent
Nicolo Foderato, a Kinsman of the Earls, to Genoua. He, by renewing the Treaty
and enlarging the Cardinals Promises, drew Gio. Luigi at last to an express
declaration of his readiness to assist the French Army in reducing Genoua to
the Kings Obedience, upon some Conditions favorable to his own greatness. The
Earl now puts his design to Consultation; and three Persons there were which he
called to it; Vincenza Calcagno, an old and faithful Servant of his; Raphael
Sacco, his Lawyer; and Gio. Battista Verrina, a Citizen of Genoua. This last
being a near Neighbor of Fieschi's easily obtaind his acquaintance, and by the
Earls Liberality sustained his declining Fortunes: and had insinuated himself
into a participation of his greatest Secrets. He was of a vast Spirit, and bent
to the greatest Exploits: an implacable enemy of the Nobility, as well through
Faction as for particular Injuries. Nor could he be content with the present
Government, which being in the hands of the Nobility, excluded him from all
hopes of sharing in it. Add to this his slender Fortunes clogged with Debts, a
powerful spur to Sensitive minds, which puts them upon a desperate embracing
any strange design, as well by consideration of their present wants, as the
memory of their past abundance. Verrina then perceiving he could no longer
conceal his broken Fortunes in the serenity of a public Peace, desired to hide
them in the universal confusion of his Country. For if the designed wickedness
were accompanied with Fortune, he should marvellously better his condition: and
if it were fatal, he should miscarry, be ruined in the common ruin, and expire
in the heat of a great Enterprise, he comforted himself with the famous infamy
of having provided for his Name. So mad a thing is Ambition, which makes no
difference in Fame, whether good or evil, so it be Great. On the other side
Calcagno, one of a ripe Judgment, but a timorous nature, being used to the
delights and ease of a plentiful House, hated to think of those dangers into
which he saw Gio. Luigi about to precipitate himself: Besides, that sincerely
loving the Person rather than the Fortunes of the Earl, in whose Service he had
grown up from a Child, he had no Interest of his own which he desired should
flourish at the expense of his Master. Sacco seeing the matter every way
dangerous stood Neuter, not declaring his Sentiments, that he might accommodate
himself opportunely to that Resolution which should be embraced by the Earl.
Gio. Luigi now lays open his mind, with a short, but vehement Speech,
declaring, That he was absolutely resolved to attempt some great matter, and
that he asked their Advice only about the manner. Notwithstanding which,
Calcagno bearing himself upon the tender love he bore to his Master, and long
Familiarity, with singular liberty spoke to this purpose:

If in your Resolutions of attempting this design you are as obstinate as your
words seem to declare, I may rather weep over the Common misery, than hope to
effect any thing by contradicting you. But if prudence and your better Fortune
have left place for Second thoughts, which are wont to be most matur'd, you
shall this day have proof of my fidelity in freely speaking to you, as you have
hitherto had in my faithful acting for you. You have hitherto lived in a
constant tenor of happiness, and have not seen the threatening face of Fortune:
so that according to the manner of the Fortunate, you dream of nothing but
Victory, increase of State and Lordships. But I fear much, that these gay
Figures which revel in your Imagination, will be defaced by some disastrous
event; which will be so much the more intolerable, by how much the less it is
feared. To introduce a change in the Government of this Commonwealth is a work
of so much difficulty, and exposed to such evident danger, that I cannot do so
much violence to my own thoughts, as to fancy it secure and easy. For you
either design to value your self upon the Forces of Strangers, or you hold
Intelligence with the Citizens. I see no Foreign Forces ready; and if they were,
they can neither be so speedy or so secret, but it may come to the notice of
the City, Doria and Caesar. Italy, for our Misfortune, is at present the Stage
of such important Actions as keep open all men's eyes: and Genoua being the only
Frontier of this Province, is the more jealously looked to. The State of Millan
(both the Field of Battle, and the destined prey to the Fortune of the Imperial
or French Arms) causes Caesar to watch over Genoua as the Bulwark of his Power
in Italy. Doria assists him with twenty Galleys; and the Citizens hating the
tyranny of the Duke of Millan and King of France, loath the name of Foreiners.
You may indeed with a small Force discover your intention, but not bring it to
effect; and whence you should hope great I cannot imagine. The King of France
has enough to do to secure his own Frontiers; or if he should assist you, will
not Caesar oppose him with Superior, or not unequal Force? In such a case at
least the uncertainty of the event will take place, which depends on the
doubtful success of a Battle. After which you will be forced to accommodate
your self to that Fortune which shall be prescribed you by the Conqueror; and
nothing remain with you but the infamy of having ungratefully deprived your
Country of its liberty, and put it under the yoke of Strangers. If you expect
assistance within the Town, either I do not know the nature and condition of
the Genoueses, or you have a slippery foundation for your hopes. Tell me, from
what order of Citizens you attend Succors; perhaps from the Nobility: But they
are the Creatures of Doria, and bound to him by notable Intcrest. They live in
an honorable Peace, and possess the Command of the Commonwealth: so that if
the least mutation will endammage their condition, how can you expect they
consent to a turbulent Revolution, which must cast them into worse Calamities
than the past? Will they, think you, to please your will, put in oblivion their
Country, Liberty, Fortunes, Wives and Children? Will they, for your
Friendship, slight the Protection of Doria, now reverenced as their Father by
so many particular and common Titles? Nor can you make better Judgment of the
Common peoples inclination toward you. For, the greater the hatred is they
profess to the name of the Nobility, the less can they hope that you, one of
the chief in that Order, will without any appearance of reason endeavor to
extinguish it. But if you design to compass to your self the Command of the
Commonwealth, what Action less popular than this, or more unlike to gain the
People? But perhaps you pretend to restore the first Form of Government changed
by the violence of Doria, in which flourished the popular Power, and by
declaring so much you think to stir up the People in your favor: nor am I
obstinate in believing the contrary, but rather imagine those who are at
present ill-satisfied, will greedily embrace an occasion of renewing the past
Tragedies. To which they will be more easily moved, whilst they shall reap the
profit, and you the infamy of the Action: unless you can persuade your self,
that the Adorni and Fregosi will yield to you that pre-eminence in the popular
administration, which they have so long and so often sought for themselves.
They will praise your rashness, and call it Valor: they will follow your
Ensigns as their Deliverer: they will be glad to see the Nobility crushed by a
Noble man; the bowels of the Commonwealth wounded by your Arms; the Common
Peace overwhelmed by your Fury; their Tyranny restored by your Folly; and
keeping aloof from the wickedness you set on foot, (let every thing be called
by its right name) they will take their time to enter upon the harvest of your
Labors; to share in the honor of your Attempts, in the triumph of your
Combats. In what condition shall you then find your self? odious to the
Nobility you have betrayed; scorned by the Commonalty, who enjoy the fruits of
your Artifices; hated by your Country, which through your means has lost its
Liberty; an Enemy to Caesar, under whose protection we are; not trusted by the
King of France, who aimed at the absolute Command of Genoua; abhorred by the
whole World, which justly detests all Treasons. And further I must tell you,
and it is necessary you hear it; for the fidelity I owe to your Service, and the
love I bear your Person, makes me thus bold: I fear (and God grant my Fears be
vain) I fear I say, that these unquiet and tumultuous Thoughts are the
instigations of your evil Fortune, which has destined you to the loss of
Reputation, Life and Estate. You know that Doria looks upon you with an envious
Eye; and you have complained to me, that you dread his Malice; Why then will
you put Arms into his hand, wherewith he may justly oppress you? With how much
eagerness will he encounter an occasion to satisfy his Hatred to you, under
pretense of Love to his Country? He will secretly be glad of that resolution
which thrusts you forward; and openly taking Arms, with what reasons may he not
justify to the World his opposing you? You shall be the Enemy of the public
Peace, the Tyrant of public Liberty, the Betrayer of your Country, a Rebel to
the Commonwealth, the Catiline of Genoua. With these magnificent and plausible
words, who amongst the Commonalty, Nobility, Citizens; what Stanger, what
Private man, what Prince will not Arm himself against you? I am astonished to
think, much more to speak of it. At last, you shall remain oppressed by a Common
force conspiring your destruction. Your Lands confiscate, as those of a
Traitor; your memory stained and dishonored in the Annals of Genoua; and
Giannettin acknowledged the Second Deliverer of his Country and Restorer of
Liberty, will build his Glories upon your ruins. The gratitude of the
Genoueses will raise up a Statue to him, to accompay that of Andrea, in whose
Inscription shall be inserted the Name of Gio. Luigi Fieschi the public Enemy,
overthrown by Giannettin Doria the public Benefactour. Do not then suffer your
self to be hurried by the impetuousness of your Youth, or resentments to such
dangerous Attempts. Be content to be restrained by a pity to your Self, Family,
and Subjects. Compassionate the infelicity of your Mother and Wife. Deliver
those that love you from so just and necessary Fears. This your Youth
accompanied with so much worth, does not deserve to be prodigally cast into the
hands of Fortune: Enjoy, enjoy those Riches, which in such abundance your
Father left you; for you are placed in a degree every way so eminent, that you
may live envied by Giannettin.

These words were not heard by Fieschi without some trouble of mind; for having
received other proofs of the tender affection of Calcagno, he saw it now
accompanied with so many and so powerful Reasons, that he remained not a little
altered; which Verrina observing, and considering, that if he let his Thoughts
gather force, all was in danger; handsomely, but with a detestable Impiety, he
thus opposed Calcagno's Arguments:

I would to God that the Affairs of the Commonwealth were reduced to such
terms, that the Citizens might quietly enjoy their own; you could not then wish
your self in a better condition: for as Calcagno has well considered, for
largeness of Territory, Nobility of Birth, and for Riches you have not your
equal in Genoua: nor ought a Wise man in the height of his felicity to provoke
his Fortune, which cannot suffer change but for the worse. But Destiny, the
Enemy of your welfare, has so entangled matters, that you must attempt great
things, or perish. Giannettin Doria, who for so many years has destined to his
Covetousness the Command of Genoua, will never endure you. If you do not
plainly read in his Forehead the implacable Hatred he bears you; if in his
Behavior you do not discover his Pride, the Galleys bought by you speak loud
enough, that you are a Thorn in his side. That Insolent man does ambition the
free and absolute Dominion of these Seas, nor will he endure that any body
should dare to disturb or divide it with him. How can you imagine he will long
suffer you to share with him in that Power, when the Jealousy of Rule does not
spare the Blood of Brothers, Sons, or Parents? Either you must then by a
shameful flight retire to your Castles, and leaving your Galleys leave the
Field; or else you must awaken that Courage which shall be sufficient to oppose
him. If you resolve to redeem your self from the approaching danger with your
Infamy, and lead your life as received in gift from him, go, I will not stop
you: a more wretched condition the hate of Giannettin could not wish you. But
your Virtue bids me hope something more generous, and that I shall see the vain
Pride of that rash man broken by your Valor. You are then to embrace such an
Enterprise as Giannettin himself shall envy. Fortune has placed between you
two the Empire of Liguria, nor can one of you attain it without making way for
the wheels of his Triumph over the breast of the other. He can best secure
himself of Victory, that knows how by prevention to cut off his Enemies way.
the necessity of securing your own safety is common to both; he will appear
wisest, who by the celerity of a resolute execution shall be beforehand with
tardy and immature Counsels. Either assault, or expect to be assaulted. Either
prevent him, or fall into his Nets; or kill, or die. Perhaps my words may
appear too sharp; but Necessity, which in desperate cases is the Whetstone of
Fortitude, is likewise the Shield of Innocence. Let the folly of Giannettiu be
accused; the Cowardice of your Country and the iniquity of Fortune, which have
reduced you to such inevitable straits. You are not injurious to any, whilst to
defend your self you follow the order of Nature. It is part of prudence to
divert that Tempest upon the head of our Enemy, which threatens our own; and if
this cannot be done without appearance of evil, it is not your fault, but
Destiny's, which left no way to maintain your life but another death; and
grants no other defense for your Virtue, than Vice. But why do I say Vice? this
is your word Calcagno, and you have learned it in the School of the Vulgar,
Strangers to the doctrine of Rule. The Actions of Private persons are styled by
this name, not the Enterprises of Princes. If your Rule were right, all Empire
should be wicked: for it all proceeds from the force of the stronger over the
weaker. Nature produced Mankind in a perfect equality, and left it to Virtue to
attain Supremacy. Whence those are called Princes, who by their Wit and Force
knew how to compass a Command over others. I deny not but some will join with
Calcagno to chide your Resolution before it be conducted to its end: for
dangerous and bold Actions are not celebrated till they have attained their
effect; but when the Fortune of the execution shall have authenticated the
nobleness of the Attempt, that blaming shall be converted into wonder, and what
was first called Rashness shall be honored with the Title of Valor. Whilst
Caesar himself had his Arms in his hand, and fought for the Empire of Rome, not
only Pompey, but the greatest part of the Nobility obstinately opposed him; but
when he had overthrown his Enemy in the Pharsalian Field, and mastered the
Commonwealth, Civil hatred ceased, and he was so sincerely beloved by the
Romans, that they severely revenged his death. Let the Genoueses for a time
call you Tyrant, and don't think that Name injurious, but imagine only that
dying Liberty talks idly. They will by degrees be brought to acknowledge you a
legitimate Prince. You see how I confide in your Fortunes, designing you Empire
before you are prepared to fight for it. But such is the disposition of
Affairs, that you may rather be wanting to your self, than Empire to you. For
if the difficulties are great in the opinion of Calcagno, you have Force enough
to master greater. And grant that it is a hard and knotty Enterprise; what
Famous Action do you meet with in Ancient or Modern story, that was conducted
by smooth and flowery ways? Great Enterprises were ever accompanied with great
Dangers, and the greatest heights confine upon Precipices. A man of elevated
thoughts will not for all that let an uncertain fear of eminent Calamity
deliver him a prey to certain Misery. In a Private condition it is prudent
Counsel to stick to Mediocrities, but in occurrences of State middle ways are
most pernicious; especially when the business must begin at execution: For not
being able to put bounds to things that are once a foot, and out of our hands,
we must reach our proposed ends, or fall into ruin. But let us not give to our
Affairs such unhappy Auguries. Let us take a view of Misfortunes by a necessary
foresight, not to torment our selves in the expectation, but to prevent their
bad effects by prudence; let us walk warily, but let not too much Caution
render us fearful and irresolute. Let something be left to the disposal of your
Fortune; and Fate, who having chosen you for Genoua's Deliverer, and Restorer
of the Ancient Italian Valor, will find ways to unravel all difficulties; only
consent to be Absolute, and embrace with largeness of heart those Favors which
Fortune freely pours into your bosom, without dividing them. To what end should
you call the French to share in your Fortunes, who having lost what they
possessed on this side the Mountains, together with their Reputation, are not
secure of Caesar in their own Territories? Besides, you ought to consider the
natural Hatred that Nation bears to the Italian Name. That King, it is true, is
indu'd with Qualities truly Royal, but for all that he has his weaknesses,
inseparable from great Princes. And what Recompense can the French give you
worthy of your pains and dangers? perhaps leave you in the Government of
Genoua, with dependence upon them? But this were to make your self mercenary in
that Country, where Nature has invested you with part of the Principality:
it is better you value your self on your own Subjects, Friends, and
Confederates; and not let that Crown be put on your Head by others hands, which
is so worthy of you, and you of it. When you shall have established your Power
in Genoua, and thereby keep even the Key of Italy, the best Princes of
Christendom will ambitiously court your Friendship. Then, when you shall have
overcome the envy of Competitours, your Family shall be placed in a height to
which none of Genoua has attained. Giannettin shall fall at your feet,
reverence you as his Lord, and fear you as his Prince; with a beck you shall
regulate his Actions, and your will shall give Law to his desires. Let the
French alone then in their Country, and there let them hear the sound of your
Victories. To you it belongs now vigorously to encounter what stands in the way
of your design. Do it with a Resolution worthy of your Birth and Courage.
Deserve that Triumph which the Heavens have destined you. Let the World see you
know how to build your own Fortunes. Let my mighty Hopes be surmounted by your
Virtue. Secure a Kingdom to your Family, and eternity to your Name.

Gio. Luigi had never applied his mind to get Genoua for himself, but for the
Crown of France; contented to lessen the excessive Power of Doria, and to
better his own condition under the Kings protection: but being covetous of
Fame, and in his nature inclined to vast Pretenses, 'twas easy for Verrina to
take him off from the French, and put him upon his own Advancement. So that no
longer weighing the Reasons of Calcagno, he was as it were fatally carried to
the execution of the most dangerous, and least honest Advice. But for all this
he was much perplexed with an apprehension of the difficulties wanting the
French assistance. In which doubt Raphael Sacco confirmed him, who being of the
French Faction praised the Conditions offered by Triultio, as fit to be
embraced. But Verrina detesting all mixtures as dangerous in a business which
called for extreme Resolutions, endeavored by all ways to remove this obstacle
which cooled the fervency of Gio. Luigi. So he replies with much vehemence,
That 'twas a meanness unworthy a Noble mind to be frighted off a design with
Phantasms. That in the Garrison of Genoua were no more than two hundred
Soldiers; Doria's Galleys though many in number remained useless, for by
reason of the Season improper for Navigation they were disarmed; Andrea and
Giannettin far from all suspicion of Violence, lived abandoned without Guard
public or private; Gio. Luigi might in an instant bring in a good number of
Soldiers from the neighboring Castles, which should surprise the Doria's in
their House; at the same time 'twould be easy to master the Galleys: the rest
would happily fall in of it self, through the inveterate hatred the Common
people bore the Nobility: He offered himself to stir up the Commonalty in
favor of the Enterprise, whose minds he had by his endeavors already well
disposed. These, and other particulars urged by Verrina with great subtlety,
especially a superiority of Genius which he had over Gio. Luigi, gave the last
shock to his wavering mind. So now sully descending into the opinion of
Verrina, he began to consider how he might proceed to carry the design
prosperously. The first and joint Resolution of them all was, that seeing the
safety of the Doria's was inseparably linked to the present Government, to
change this 'twas necessary to take those out of the way: and, to be secure in
their Revenge, to kill likewise Adamo Conturione, Father in Law to Giannettin,
and some others of the Nobility.

From the first day that Gio. Luigi gave way to these thoughts, after he had
bought the Galleys he retired to his Castles, where he was wont to exercise the
Militia of the Country, pretending to fear the Duke of Piacenza his Neighbor;
but really with intention of fitting his Subjects, that they might become
proportionable Instruments to his designs. Returning to the City at the
beginning of Autumn, he used great Art to purchase the Friendship of those
among the Nobility, which were styled Popular. He insinuates himself into their
Conversation with wondrous facility: to some he gave; others he assisted in
their occurring Interests; to every one he offered himself with great
demonstrations of Courtesy. And being of a lively Wit and a bending Nature,
it is scarce credible how fortunately he gained their confidence. When he saw
that he had mastered their wills, he began as occasion offered, to mock at the
Tyranny of the Nobility, as he called it; at another time he would seem, by
abrupt discourses, to pity the condition of the Common people, sometimes he
would hint, that there was a way to suppress the Arrogance of the Nobility, if
they were not wanting to themselves; sometimes exhorting them by a bitter Irony
to patience, and ever with perplexed words leaving some sting in their minds.
But above all, exaggerating the iniquity of the Government, if by chance any
thing fell out displeasing to the Common people. Nor did he omit his diligences
even with the dregs of the Commonalty; ready in his Salutations; pleasant in
encounter; splendid in his Habit; Courteous to all. In this Nature helped him
not a little, being of exquisite Form, in the flower of his Youth, and of a
Jovial complexion; whence by a sweetness of air in his Face, and an elegant
Behavior, he was beloved even at first sight, and verified in himself what was
said of Absalon. Besides, he frequently exercised Horsemanship, and did it with
infinite grace and becomingness. But because an opinion of Liberality is the
strongest Chain to bind the Multitude, it is said, that he one day called to him
the Consul of the Silk-weavers, of which Trade there are a great number in
Genoua, familiarly asking him the condition of his Company; and understanding
that they lived in great misery by reason of the badness of Trade, he showed
signs of a most tender Compassion toward the Poor men, and said, they were not
to be abandoned in a time of so much need; he therefore orders him to send
secretly to his House such whose necessity was most manifest and urgent. The
next day comes a great number of them one by one, and he as one of singular
Charity, divides amongst them a certain quantity of Corn; telling them withal,
that it being the Ancient Custom of his Family to relieve necessitous and
afflicted Persons, he could not degenerate from his Ancestors, therefore when
they wanted Means to sustain their Families, they might confidently value
themselves on his Substance, which they should always find exposed to their
Relief, provided they were silent; Secrecy being a main circumstance in Alms.
They departed no less comforted by the Relief, than amazed at the Liberality,
reputing their Benefactour worthy of all good Fortune. He in the mean time
would not in such a manner cast himself into the arms of the Commonalty as to
fall into Jealousies of the Nobility; but studied to use such a temperament,
that the confidence of the one should not destroy the Friendship of the other.
Wherefore he betook himself to a profound Simulation, and began to frequent
Doria's Palace more than before: and dissembling well the mortal hatred he bore
Giannettin, behaved himself with all Familiarity, craving his Advice and
assistance in all his Affairs. In the mean while he corresponded with the Duke
of Piacenza, who promised him two thousand Foot to join with what Force he
could raise in his own State. He likewise causes one of his Galleys to come to
Genoua, pretending to send it for the Barbary shore. Nor was Verrina idle all
this while, but cunningly gained diverse persons to promise him their aid in a
certain occasion. With these Preparations they thought a sufficient foundation
was laid for the building up of their design, and met once more to consult of
the execution. The first opinion was, that they should intimate a new Mass in
the Church of St. Andrea, to which Andrea, Giannettin, and some of the
principal Nobility, whose lives they designed upon, should be invited. But this
seemed no less wioked than unsafe; for Andrea would have excused himself by his
Age: Besides, it seemed too horrid to give beginning to their design with the
Sacrilegious profaning of a Temple and Sacrifice. But because the Reins once
let loose we are hurried precipitously to all sorts of wickedness, though shame
gave check to the last determination, it broke out afterward in a most
detestable Impiety. For upon occasion of a Marriage to be celebrated between a
Sister of Giannettins and Guilio Gabo, Marquess of Massa, and Kinsman of Gio.
Luigi, they resolved that the Earl should invite the Doria's, and those of the
Nobility which they thought stood most in the way, to Supper with the Brides
Company; and that all of them (violating the right of Hospitality) should be
murdered by certain Men concealed in the House for that purpose; and that the
Earl should immediately issue out with his Followers, and call the people to
Liberty; and that at the Palace Verrina, by a plausible Speech showing the
necessity of reforming the Government, should prepare the Commons to accept of
Gio. Luigi for their Prince. Hereupon order was given, that from Gio. Luigi's
Castle should enter into the City one by one the best of his Soldiers, and the
Duke of Piacenza was solicited to send his promised Succors. These diligences,
especially of listing Soldiers, could not pass so secretly but the Governor
of Millan had some notice of it, and sent to Genoua to give it Doria and the
Emperors Ambassador. Andrea notwithstanding, deceived by those flattering
demonstrations of affection, and that serenity of Countenance which he
continually found in Gio. Luigi, was a second time incredulous to those
pregnant Circumstances which lay against him. Nor did he change opinion, when
the same Government of Millan having a confirmation of it from the Court of
France, advised him once more seriously to take it into consideration. And
certainly, if we did not read of several Great persons, who have been hardly
induced to give credit to what they heard was plotting against their safety,
the simplicity of Andrea were sharply to be blamed; who in a matter that
concerned his life, and the safety of the Commonwealth, lent more belief to the
dissembling looks of Gio. Luigi, than to the thing it self; as if it were an
unusual thing to put on a Face to serve the Scene; or as if for the safeguard
of our Country and Life any kind of Vigilance were superfluous. But seeing the
Stories of all times do furnish a hundred Examples of prudent men, who have
suffered themselves to be bewitched by this fatal Incredulity in things of the
greatest importance, we must needs say, that the Accidents ordered or
inevitably permitted by the Providence that governs them, require to bring them
to effect this momentany Folly in the brightest Intellects, as the assault of a
violent fit in the most healthful Bodies, to mortify Worldly wisdom, which in
Affairs of greatest weight appears lightest. More quick-sighted was Paolo
Pansa, who with a loving as well as a prudent Eye, studying the Actions of Gio.
Luigi from the time that he bought the Galleys, did much suspect some important
Action depending, and by the Authority which his condition gave him, reproved
him. After that, weighing exactly what he heard and saw, he found occasion to
augment his conceived suspicion. For Gio. Luigi, who was wont before to impart
to him his most secret Affairs was now silent, and withdrew often to private
Consultations with others. And though riding about the City, or in conversation
with his Friends, he marvellously concealed his inward thoughts; yet when he
came home he was changed into another man, full of profound thoughtfulness, and
little less than astonished. Nor did he hide his designs from Pansa for any
other reason, but because knowing him a Man of singular integrity, he concluded
that he would by all means endeavor to divert him: or at least, as one that
was a Stranger to Military noises, and educated in the pleasing idleness of the
Muses, examining every Circumstance with too much Caution, he would measure the
Enterprise by terms of security, impossible to be had in such cases. One day
Gio. Luigi coming home more than ordinarily Melancholy, by an unquiet motion
and uncertain countenance gave signs of some great alteration; so that Pansa
resolved to speak to him, lest by deferring it, the Remedy might come when the
Disease was past cure; and withdrawing into a Chamber with him, he thus began:

To pry into another Secrets is as unworthy a gallant man, as the faithful
keeping of them, when deposited, is laudable; and I, who would have promised
this, if it were not known to you by so many proofs, have abstained from that,
not to do a thing that might displease you. Your unwonted Silence speaks to me
notwithstanding loud enough, and signifies Matters of so much the more weight,
as they are deeply concealed. I read in your disturbed Face the necessity of my
Cares, and I learn from your Fears to fear. I fear Gio. Luigi, I fear, nor do I
know what: I know well, that this is the fervency of the Love I bear you, and
one of the Raptures of my Fidelity. And how can I persuade my self that your
mind is bent upon a fitting Subject, when it has the power to disturb its
serenity? The execution of your design cannot be peaceable, when the bare
thought of it works such a change in you: and you give too unhappy augury of
that Enterprise, which you commence with inquietudes. To what end do those
Counsels tend, which leave you floating in a thousand perplexing Cares? These
secret Assemblings of men Violent and Crafty, I fear much, will lead you astray
from the path of Honesty, (Suffer me to handle the Wound in order to its cure,)
they are not of so Innocent life, or such sincere Piety, that I dare promise my
self from them an honest and religious Advice. Perhaps they abuse your Years,
and finding you generous, propound Actions in appearance Magnificent, but
indeed rash. Open your eyes Gio. Luigi, for one fool may thrust you down that
Precipice, from which the arts of a thousand Wise men shall not recover you.
It Is easy to set a House on fire, but with how much sweat, and after how much
damage is it extinguished? Look to it, that they do not use you as the way to
their end, or that your loss does not profit those that deceive you. Those
Counselors are too rarely found, which aim at what is right separate from
Interest; and yet by this Touchstone you ought to try them. I cannot believe,
that he who leads his life amidst a thousand Debaucheries, will invite another
to Virtue: for though what he says contradicts what he does, yet the principal
part of persuasion lies in the Example, not in the Tongue; at least the Mouth
and Hand must go together. What do they desire of you? what Novelty would they
have you attempt? Your condition has no need of motion to change it. That
Fortune, so propitious to your House, may be easily provoked. The least
alteration which can succeed must be worse than your present state. Envy has
long sought to enter amidst your happiness, and will soon get in, if you put it
in disorder: for many of those which are Inferior to you for Birth and Place,
go in quest of occasions to traduce you. Youth has not a sweeter food than
Hope, it is true; but it is as true there is nothing more slippery than
Prosperity: Look to it then, that by reaching at what you hope for, you do not
lose what you have in your hands. Those who are of your Counsel have nothing to
lose. Tumults, Seditions and Ruins, by which bad Men rise, make for them: he
does not fear to fall that is not placed on high. You ought to walk warily, for
you are obliged to furnish Fame with matter worthy of your Birth.

This Discourse was heard by Gio. Luigi with impatience, for his mind was
elsewhere: He answered him notwithstanding confusedly, That he intended nothing
but what was Noble and worthy of his Birth, which at convenient time he should
understand from him. Whilst the day appointed for the Feast, being the fourth
of January, was expected by the Conspiratours, there happened an Accident which
put them on a necessity of hastening the design; to their infinite vexation,
seeing their hopes of seizing on a good part of the Nobility at the Creation of
a new Duke frustrate. For Andrea taken with unwonted and excessive pains of the
Gout could not come according to his Promise, and Giannettin was to leave
Genoua upon some urgent Affair; so that considering a Conspiracy has not a
greater obstacle than Delay, they resolved to execute it the night of the
second of January. And now Gio. Luigi gives out, that he will send abroad one
of his Galleys against the Pirates. And under this color he brought in the
Soldiers sent him from Piacenza, and some of his own Vassals, pretending an
Election out of them. And to the end that the Number of them which came from
his own State, beyond the occasions of one Galley, might not give suspicion, he
caused some of them to be brought in fettered, as Criminals destined to the
Ore: others entered singly at several Gates, and Arms were provided for them
all. Afterward, the better to deceive Giannettin, under pretext of Confidence
he imparts his design, praying him to interpose with Andrea, that it might not
be impeded; seeming to be fearful, that because a Truce was made between the
Grand Signior and Caesar, he might stop the Galley. The first of January, which
preceded the Night fatal to Genoua, Gio. Luigi called home to him certain
Soldiers of the City Garrison, whereof some were his own Vassals, others had
obtained their Places by his means; then he goes to Andrea's House, where he
staid late, showing signs of a most tender love and respect: and meeting with
the Children of Giannettin, which were playing in the Hall, with a tender and
curious flattery, in the sight of their Father he kisses them several times,
and takes them in his arms: At parting he renews his instance with Giannettin,
to take care his Galley, which that Night was to set sail, was not hindered by
his Men. And further, he advises him not to be surpised, if by chance he heard
Guns shot off, or other noise; for a business of this nature could not be
effected without some disturbance. When it began to be dark, he brings into his
House those Soldiers he had need of, and set such as he esteemed most Faithful
and Valiant at the Gates to admit all that came, but not to suffer any go out.
He dwelt in the highest part of the City, in a place as it were divided from
the rest, which was opportune for his design. When the Sentinels were to be
set, he who commanded the Garrison missed some of his Soldiers, and found they
were gone to Gio. Luigi's House; so that suspecting some pernicious design, he
advised the Senators who were at the Palace. And now began to appear the fruit
of Gio. Luigi's Dissimulation and Caution: for Giannettin possessed with what he
had heard concerning the Galley, stifled their growing Fears by telling them,
That those Soldiers, or Vassals, or Servants of the Earl, were employed by him
about the Voyage for the Lieutenant. So short sighted is Humane understanding,
that then men build up their own Misfortunes, when they think they have put all
in security. Gio. Luigi, after he had given necessary Orders at home, went
abroad to visit the Vegli's which the Nobility are wont to keep at their Houses
in Winter Evenings. About four hours in the Night he came to the House of
Tomaso Asereto, where Verrina had cunningly drawn together three and twenty of
the young Nobility of the Popular Order. He treats them with much kindness, and
invites them home with him to Supper; praising the stilness of the Evening,
enlightened by a pure ray of the Moon. When he was come home, he carries them
into a certain remote Chamber, and orders Pansa to entertain his Wife Leonora
in another Room till he returned. In the mean while Verrina goes up and down to
the Palace, to Doria's House, and other parts of the City, to see if there were
any Rumor. The young Gentlemen were not a little astonished to see the House
full of Arms and Armed men, and looked upon one another, when Gio. Luigi his
Countenance altogether changed (whether with horror of the approaching
Parricide, or with rage against Giannettin, which hitherto violently smothered
in his breast, now began to attempt a passage through his eyes and mouth)
leaning upon a Table, and striking upon it with his hand, he thus delivered
himself:

So it is gallant Gentlemen. He that has but one drop of ingenuous Blood
cannot suffer it. The constancy of my Thoughts receives too great a violence
from the unworthiness of those who go about to ruin me. Too sad a Spectacle is
drawn in my mind by the fear of my falling Country, and oppressed Countrymen.
If the Evils which mortally afflict the Commonwealth could hope a remedy from
Time, I would willingly submit to any delay that might be useful to the Common
good: but seeing our Affairs are arrived at their last Precipice; it is
necessary we go meet our misery to sustain it. Dangers generously encountered,
lose their force; patiently expected, gather strength. Giannettin Doria
fatiated with the idle Felicity that pursues him, wearies himself in following
that Ambition which torments him; and now ready to gather the fruits of his bad
designs, threatens you with loss of Liberty, and me of Life. Not content to see
the People of Genoua, who were lately absolute Moderators of all Liguria, now
stripped of their Dignity, and a scorn to the Pride of the Nobility, he dare
subject it to a Tyrannous Principality, which he is erecting for himself. To
this effect, not enduring a Private Fortune, become in a Free Country more
barbarous than Strangers, he arms his heart with such a contumacious Pride as
cannot be overcome by Modesty, nor escaped by Humility. He keeps, as you see,
your Sea besieged with twenty Galleys; he passes up and down the City
surrounded with the Nobility, who by Andrea's favor, possessed of those
Dignities which were yours, render to Giannettin a Servile respect, as a Reward
for his crushing the Common People: and that which more afflicts me, I have
invincible Proofs, that by the assistance of a Great Prince he prepares a cruel
Yoke for the Public Liberty. And because I alone being partial, not so much to
your Order as to Right, have never consented with the rest of the Nobility to
the oppression of the People, my life is aimed at. Why then do we lie buried in
Sloth, my Countrymen? why do we remain fearful Spectitours of our own
Miseries? For what Enterprise do we reserve our Courage, if in the utmost
desolation of our Country we unhappily abandon our selves? It is no longer
time to complain of them, but to be revenged upon them; let us leave the
Tongue-War to Women, and he that is a Man let him use his hands. We have too
long born their Insolence, who call our Modesty Cowardice. The impunity of past
Crimes is pregnant of new, and too much dissimulation of the Oppressed provokes
the minds of Oppressors to greater Injuries. And what do we expect further
from them? Having lost the Government, and all place of Command in the
Commonwealth, can you be content to see your Goods snatched from you by
Giannettins Officers, your Families destroyed, your Lives betrayed, your Wives
and Children dishonored, and all those Villainies committed, which may justly
be feared in a Tyranny bred out of the ruin of your Country, nourished with
the Public hatred, grown up with the Injuries of the Citizens, established by
the death of Good men? Are our minds so low, and our Bloods so Spiritless? Are
our Arms so blunt, that we cannot by a Revenging hand cut of their infamous
Lives, who honor themselves with our Disgraces, triumph in our Misfortunes,
and feed on our Miseries? Shall we not tear from the Breast of Giannettin his
wretched Bowels? Shall we not rend that Heart from its fibers, which is the
nest of such enormous Treasons? Shall we suffer a Citizen with an Insolent foot
to trample on us, and to have over us, as over Slaves born to serve, the
arbitrament of lise and death? I for my part esteem a Liberty bought with great
Danger more glorious, than a Servitude flattered with Idleness: and as I count
it my Honor, that the Common Enemy designs to join my death with the
destruction of the Commonwealth, so I willingly consecrate my life to the
conservation of its Liberty; and I should be unworthy of it, did I prize it
above my Country. Only I would discover in you such a freeness of Soul as is,
if not worthy of your Virtue, at least correspondent to your danger. Wherefore
either Captain or Soldier, which you will for my part; if you lead, I Will
follow; follow me, if I lead. I consign you my Mind fearless in all Accidents,
my Body shall be always in your hands. But you, whether Honor be dear to you,
or whether you desire to be safe, it is necessary you be Courageous, and betake
you to your Arms: for such a Resolution which as to Valiant men is glorious, as
to Cowards is profitable, and every way necessary. Nor do I call you to an
indigested and rash design; for several Months since I have not only foreseen,
but provided for this hour, by assembling sufficient Forces, which distributed
in fitting places invite you rather to a Spectacle of certain Victory, than to
the danger of a doubtful Combat. When you shall reduce to your memory the
Abuses of the Nobility, and the Pride of Giannettin, I am confident, that
awakening in your selves the desire of an honorable Revenge, it will make you
so bold in the manage of your Arms, that our Enemies to their loss shall be
forced to admire Valor in those whom they despised; whilst you on the contrary
shall make experience, whether they have so much force in feats of War, as
softness in the encounters of Peace. Along then my Companions, this shall be
the end of my Speech, and the beginning of your Conquest. Let us go out into
the City, where we are expected, to put a speedy end to an Enterprise so well
begun. The Gates are in the power of Soldiers by me corrupted: the Galleys, at
a sign given, will fall into the hands of such as are bold and able to keep
them: In the City fifteen hundred Artizans ready Armed expect us: In the
Suburbs by this time are arrived two thousand Foot from Piacenza, and as many
more of my own Soldiers. Let us call the People to Liberty: Let us return to
the sweetness of the Ancient Government, and root out the Tyranny of Giannettin
and the Nobility. Generously, my Companions, in one sole Night, more bright
than a thousand Days, let us restore to the obscured Name of the Populace its
Ancient splendor, and cancel all memory of past Cowardice. But if any of you
shall be so stubborn as to think of opposing so Noble and Pious an Action, let
him behold this horrible Scene of Arms and Armed men, and think the point of
every Sword is levelled at his breast. I vow, Companions, it is necessary to
fight, or die: That Blood which ungratefully is denied to the succor of the
suffering Commonwealth, shall be spilt in this very place to wash off the stain
of so much perfidiousness; and he as the first Victim to be consecrated this
Night to the love of our Country, shall fall here by my hand, if any dare
oppose me.

Those who were present startled at this terrible Speech, and frighted to see
themselves encompassed on all sides with Armed men, were silent awhile; but at
last, swayed more by the fear of the present danger, than by the horror of the
future wickedness, appeared willing to apply themselves to the will of Gio.
Luigi. In the mean while rather a short Collation than a Supper is brought in;
which while they were eating Gio. Luigi goes into the Chamber where his Wife
Leonora was with Pansa, and discovers to them in a few words what he was about
to do. The Lady wonderfully astonished at the wickedness of the Fact joined
with the extreme peril of her Husband, all in Tears fell at his feet; By what
is most dear to you in the World (says she to him) and by that tender Love I
bear you, let me beseech you Gio. Luigi, to have a care of your own Life, and
do not stain the Honor of your Family by so unworthy an Action. By these my
Tears I conjure you, not to forget your self, me, your Country, and God. To
what Precipice are you hastening? and me, where do you leave me? Must I stay
here with a trembling heart, expecting the cruel News of your death, and remain
a disconsolate Widow, pointed at by all for having been the Wife of a Traitor?
Can you find in your heart to abandon me a prey to the License of Soldiers,
and of the Common people, who flocking hither to sack this House, as the nest
of a Rebel, shall satiate their Cruelty, and perhaps their Lust in this my
Body? Stay Gio. Luigi -- She could not proceed, hindered by her Tears, and
interrupted by the Earl, who seeing Pansa prepared to second her, cut off all
in saying, Do not, my Dear Wife; lend so bad Omens to my Enterprise, but
sustain your mind with better hopes. I go whither I am called by my Fate.
Prepare your mind for all Events. My Affairs are reduced to that point, that I
am not at liberty to retire. A few hours will let you know my Death, or your
Happiness: Rest in peace. And now comes in Verrina, and tells them no
opposition could be suspected in any part of the Town, and that the Galley
stust with stout Soldiers was ready to stop the mouth of the Darsena, and as
it were to besiege those of Doria.

Now Gio. Luigi, Arming those he had assembled, goes out at Ten of the Clock at
Night, sending before him an hundred and fifty of his best Men. He follows
accompanied with the Nobility, taking great care that none of them slipped away.
Being come to the Town, he sent Cornelio his Natural Brother with a Squadron of
Soldiers to possess themselves of the Gate del Arco; which they did, the Guard
consisting but of a few, being easily oppressed. Heartned by this favorable
success he goes on, and sends Girolamo and Ottabruno his Brothers with Calcagno
to seize on the Gate of St. Tomaso: but himself hearing the sign from the
Galleys, hastens to the Bridge de Catani, and finds his way made for him by
Borgognini, who had by Water got into the Darsena. And now 'twas not difficult
for him to enter Doria's Galley. The Mariners and Slaves awakened by the
unexpected Violence of Armed men in the Port, did wound the Air with a confused
and horrible noise of Chains and Voices, crying Liberty. The Slaves all
striving to break their odious Fetters. But Gio. Luigi, whose intentions and
occasions could not be served by naked Galleys, to hinder the damage which
might result from their escape, ran hastily toward the Captain, and getting
upon a Plank which was laid to pass from the Poop to the shore, the Galley
having some small motion, he fell together with the Plank into the Water; being
Armed at all points, he could not help himself by Swimming; and by reason of
the noise of the Tumult, and the darkness of the Night, he was not seen nor
heard of any body, but miserably perished rather in a puddle of Muddy water,
than in the Sea, oppressed by those very Arms to which he had trusted the
safety of his life. Thus the unerring Providence of God sports with the foolish
prudence of unhappy Mortals, and by a light and casual motion, like the Stone
cut out of the Mountain in an instant, destroyed the proud Machine of a
Conspiracy, which had been long building with a great deal of Artifice, and
secured by so much Force: driving back upon the heads of the guilty those
Thunderbolts, which they barbarously darted at the bosom of their miserable
Country, and so many innocent Citizens. For all this the Galley was taken and
secured by the Conspiratours. Nor was Girolamo and Ottabruno wanting to their
charge; for hearing the Gun shot off, as was agreed, they affaulted the Gate
St. Tomaso with sixty Soldiers, not only to reduce it into their hands, but to
pass by it to the Palace of Doria, which stood a little without the City. Here
they found some resistance, but in a short time became Masters of the Gate. The
noise in the Darsena was heard to Doria's Palace. And Giannettin rising from
his Bed, thinking some quarrel might have happened aboard the Galley at Play, or
by some other Accident, rapt by his Destiny to encounter death, accompanied
with one Servant and a Page, goes toward the Gate, which he believed was kept
by the wonted Guard, and with his usual fierceness increased then by his anger,
he calls to have it opened. The Voice being known by the Conspiratours they
readily opened it; but he was scarce stepped in, when with a tempest of Blows he
was cruelly murdered. At the very same point of time (as some observed) that
Gio. Luigi, the sole Author of his death, perished unfortunately in the Water:
The Revenge issuing from the hand of God at the same instant the Crime was
perpetrated by the order of the Earl. It was a thing that did beget wonder,
that the Murderers did not go presently to Andrea's House, conform to their
first resolution, to secure themselves at the same time of his life, who might
once more give life to the Public Liberty, and from whose wrath they might
justly expect a signal Revenge, not only for his private Injuries, but their
public Rebellion. But they abstained perhaps by reason of the Confusion, which
a wicked Action is wont to cause in the minds of Bad men; or perhaps hindered by
Girolamo the Brother of Gio. Luigi, who having thus dispatched Giannettin, a
young Gentleman, fierce and of resolute Counsels, and his Companions having, as
he believed, seized the Galleys and subdued the City, did not much fear Andrea,
a man of Eighty years, infirm of Body and stripped of his Forces; nor perhaps, on
the other side, was he willing the Soldiers greedy of Rapine, and altogether
intent upon the prey, should dissipate and spoil those precious Movables,
which he would reserve entire for the needs and covetousness of his Brother. In
the mean time the Rumor increasing more and more, and Andrea not knowing
whence it might arise, inquired often for Giannettin. At last he was told by a
Servant, that the City was fallen into the Power of Gio. Luigi de Fieschi; that
the Commonwealth was in extreme danger, the Galleys in the Power of the
Conspiratours, the People seditiously crying out Liberty, and calling upon the
name of Fieschi; nothing any where to be seen, but Slaughter, or heard, but
threatenings of the Nobility, and his own life. Andrea not astonished, but
overcome by a pity to his falling Country, resolved to remain a voluntary prey
to those Furies; saying, It was not fit he should live after the ruin of his
Country, but readily sacrifice the poor Remains of his years to the last
gaspings of Genoua's Liberty. But his Wife with vehement Prayers accompanied
with Tears, and with the loving violence of his Domestics hastened his flight,
telling him, 'Twas necessary he should withdraw; that he ought to reserve the
last act of his Honored life for the Common Service; that he should therefore
be content to live, to get new Glory by renewing his Service to the
Commonwealth, which again might be delivered by him: That now 'twas a time to
authenticate his past Valor by Constancy, and to take Counsel of his own
Virtue: That he ought to consider, that upon the safety of his Person did
depend the Hopes of his Country; which oppressed for a while by the Fury of
Bad men, could not despair of rising again, as long as their Deliverer was
free: That he should go elsewhere to prepare Remedies for the Public wounds,
which he could not hope to do now in Genoua: And that it was not a flight, but
a charge his afflicted Country laid upon him for i^s own Relief: So much was
said and done, that he at last was carried to Massoni, a Castle fifteen miles
from Genoua.

Amidst these many and fortunate Atchievments of the Conspiratours, Gio. Luigi
being missing every one called upon him; but through the obstinate Silence of
every body in giving Tidings of him, there entered into their minds a necessary
suspicion of the fatal Accident. But for all this they did not abandon the
course of their Victory; for leaving a good Guard at the Gates and upon the
Galleys, two hundred of the stoutest among them joined with Girolamo, and went
up and down the City, stirring up the People to take Arms: but with little
fruit; for though at the first the name of Gio. Luigi did invite a great number
of the Meanest sort to follow, yet those of any Account did not stir. Whether
it were, that desirous of the Common quiet they abhorred that disorderly
Insurrection; or whether they did not like, that a Nobleman backed by the Common
people should promote his own particular ends; or, that they held themselves
ill treated by Gio. Luigi, who without their participation had put his hand to
such an important Enterprise; or lastly, remembering the continued and grievous
Excesses lately committed, they hated that manner of Plebeian Government, which
casting the Supreme Dignities upon the Vilest of the People, the Public
business was managed with small Decorum; and the most difficult matters falling
into the hands of persons rough and incapable, Resolutions were formed upon
them always violent and precipitous.

The City in the mean time was all in disorder; every one madly running about,
not knowing whither: enquiring mutually what might be the occasion of such a
terrible uproar, without finding any body to answer: The Women at the Windows
with Cries and Tears calling back their Husbands, Brothers and Sons: The amazed
Nobility would have run to the Palace, but feared the plundring of their own
Houses: Caesar's Ambassador would have left Genoua, lest he should in his own
person expose the Dignity of his Prince to some outrage; but being persuaded to
stay and assist the Commonwealth so devoted to Caesar with his utmost Forces,
he went presently to the Palace, where he found diverse of the Senators, and
concluded, with them to send fifty Soldiers to secure the Gate St. Tomaso,
which they valiantly attempted, but were beaten back. All this while G. Luigi
could not be heard of; and Verrina, who saw the plot (hitherto well conducted)
was in danger without him, betook himself to the Galley, resolving, if he saw
things miscarry, as 'twas to be feared, to withdraw himself from the danger by
flying to Marseille. The rest of the Conspiratours seeing neither him nor G.
Luigi, one the Head, the other the Heart of the Conspiracy, were not entirely
satisfied of Girolamo, who unexperienced and foolishly heady, guided the matter
rather with Impetuousness than by sound Advice. Nor did they find in themselves
that motive to Reverence, which is ordinarily born to persons of great Valor,
and who for long time have been in possession of a good opinion; whence they
began not only to cool in their first fervencies, but to look out for an
opportunity to fly. Of so much moment is that good conceit which a Captain
acquires amongst his Soldiers. But an Accident, which in reason ought to have
mortified the rashness of Girolamo, extremely heightened it; though not long
after having inspired him with an inconsiderate Ambition, it served t ruin
him. The certain News of Gio. Luigi's death was spread amongst the
Conspiratours, and Girolamo considering he was left the absolute Head of that
Faction, would be likewise Heir to the Earls projects, and devouring in his
imagination that Principality for himself, for which hitherto he had sought in
the behalf of Gio. Luigi; with so much the more vehemence he attended to mature
the fruits of his Victory, by how much he was flattered at hand with unexpected
hopes; and by how much sharper the Spur is that puts us upon acting for our own
profit, than for another benefit. The Senators and other Citizens assembled
in the Palace, were not wanting to assist in this extreme necessity of their
Country: but not having Forces, nor knowing the designs of Gio. Luigi they
could not betake themselves to any determinate resolution. However, they would
have sent Cardinal Doria, Kinsman of Gio. Luigi, to speak with him, and to try
if the eminency of his Dignity, sometimes more prevalent than ties of Blood, or
force of Eloquence, were enough to withdraw him from his rash Attempts: but
being advised by diverse prudent persons, not to cast the Respect due to his
place into the hands (always indiscreet, but now tumultuous) of the P'ebeians,
but to reserve the use of his Authority for a p^ivate Conference with Gio.
Luigi, when it might be ^ad; he resus'd to go. So that they now made election
of other Gentlemen, who met with Girolamo and inquired for the Earl, that they
might deliver to him what they had in Commission. To which Girolamo answered,
they were to expect no other Earl than himself, but should presently deliver up
the Palace to him. From which imprudent and unseasonable Answer they collected
the Earl was dead, and the Genoueses began to take heart: for they returning to
the Senate with the News of Fieschi's death, and the contumacy of Girolamo,
twelve of the Nobility were ordered to assemble as many of the Common People
and of the Guard as they could, to drive the remainder of the Conspiratours out
of the City, or to suppress them in it. But there was no need of fighting, for
the Common people, which at name of Liberty were called forth, desirous to
plunder the Houses of the Nobility, seeing the vanity of their hopes, and
repenting the Sedition, did dissipate themselves by degrees; and the Morning
approaching none would be known for a Complice in the Conspiracy; and others
now sainting, turned their thoughts rather upon that safety which they might
owe to their own flight, than to the gain of others Victory. Girolamo now
seeing the weakness of his own, and the strength of those Forces which were
picked up to oppose him, knew not which way to turn himself; but as the best,
bent his course toward the Gate del Arco. But in the Palace every one took
heart, and some advised that they should set upon the Squadron of Fieschi
already put into disorder, and not vilify the Majesty of the Senate, by
introducing Capitulations of Accord with Armed Rebels. But others more mature,
opposing profitable to specious Arguments, would not consent: as well to spare
the Blood of Citizens (of which a Prince or Captain is laudably covetous) as
not to leave room for some unforeseen event, which might overwhelm the Affairs
of the Commonwealth, now as it were in harbor. For by Public Authority to put
Arms into the hands of Citizens now in motion, and in the Night, whilst many of
them were ill satisfied of the present Government, and many now declared
Rebels, was to disturb by motion the humors of an infirm Body, which had need
of being settled by repose. To Paolo Pansa then the honor fell, to heal by
prudent Advice that Evil, which he could not hinder by the preservatives of his
Exhortation. Brought therefore into the Senate, and having briefly given a
satisfaction not necessary concerning his own Actions, he was sent in the Name
of the Senate to command Girolamo depart the City, leaving his People behind
him, on which condition the Senate would grant a General Pardon. Girolamo by
the industry of Pansa was brought to condescend, and left Genoua, going with
his Servants to Montobbio. Verrina, Calcagno and Sacco, seeing the Affairs of
their Companions totally ruined, set Sail for Marseillia. The Body of Gio.
Luigi not being sound for four days, it wrought in the minds of the Common
People a firm opinion of his flight for Marseille: So that many thought the War
rather deferred than extinct; which they believed would in its time be so much
the more cruel, by how much Gio. Luigi would be more resolute in moving and
conducting it, after he had by so enormous an action put off the Mask of a
Citizen, and openly implored help of the French. But this suspicion did not
last long; for the Body being found, after some time was again cast into the
Sea, which put an end to the Common Fears.

AN Historical Transition varied: BY MASCARDI.
THe History this.

At the same time that Hannibal wasted Italy with his Army, and threatened the
fall of the Roman Empire; Scipio, the Pillar of the declining Commonwealth, by
a memorable Victory ruined the Africans in Spain: and recovering by his Arms
the lost Province, opened his way to the Conquest of Africa, and the desolation
of the Carthaginian Empire.

The Historian, having recounted the Successes of Hannibal, is to pass over to
the Actions of Scipio.

(1) In the mean while, Scipio, who knew how to fight Hannibal even in Spain,
left no way untried, by which he might forceably draw him out of the bowels of
Italy. So that, etc. (2). The Carthaginians, who for so many years had been
used to hear good News from their Armies, were the more astonished at the
tidings which came from Spain. For Scipio, etc. (3) But the confidence which
the Carthaginians drew from their continual Successes, lessened every day by
reason of News which came from Spain. Seeing that Scipio, etc. (4) But the
Reports of Scipio's Victories abated the force, and drowned the noise of
Hannibals applause in Carthage. (5) In the mean while, the Advice which came
from Spain to Carthage did not only terrify the City, but divided the minds of
the Senators: for, some of them, considering the mavelous progress of Scipio
so near to the bowels of their Empire, etc. (6) All Hannibals Victories could
not give perfect consolation to the Commonwealth of Carthage, seeing a powerful
Army of Romans hovering over them, commanded by Scipio, a valiant Captain. Who
in Spain, etc. (7) But the Commonwealth of Rome, amidst so many calamities did
not lose their hopes of rising: For the Conquests of Scipio in Spain weighed
down the losses they sustained in Italy. (8) Never was there a time wherein the
power of Fortune more clearly appeared in matters of War: for when the Affairs
of Carthage over the Romans appeared best established, then they began to
totter by the Virtue of Scipio. Who in Spain, etc. (9) The Commonwealth, taking
their eyes off the losses they had received by the sury of Hannibal; and
considering the Actions and Virtue of Scipio, assumed new Courage. For the
valiant Consul, etc. (10) Fortune at length reconciled to the Romans, on a
sudden returned to favor their Empire, which hitherto she had wounded with
such mortal strokes. For Scipio, etc. (11) In the mean time, Scipio, knowing
that the burden of the falling Empire lay upon his Shoulders, did in Spain,
etc. (12) But the calamities of the Romans in Italy were as so many sharp spurs
to the mind of Scipio; who, resolved to sustain his Country by his Valor,
did, etc. (13) In the mean-time, the felicity of Hannibal being arrived to its
highest point, threatened (according to the course of humane things) a sudden
fall. For Scipio, etc. (14) Amidst so many and satal losses of Armies and
Territories in Italy, the Romans were succored by the Conquests of Scipio in
Spain. Who, etc. (15) Scipio, in the mean time, resolved to snatch out of
Hannibals hands the rich prey of the Roman Empire, did in Spain, etc. (16) The
Roman generosity never appeared more manifestly in any occasion: for, not
discouraged with so many losses sustained at home, they designed the
destruction of their Enemies even in the utmost parts of Spain. Where Scipio,
etc. (17) The fall of the Roman Empire seemed inevitable through so many
dreadful and repeated strokes, if the Valor of Scipio had not come in to its
relief. Who in Spain did, etc. (18) But because Worldly accidents have not
perpetuity and constancy in their nature, the glory of the Carthaginians in the
happy progress of Hannibal was interrupted by the Virtue of Scipio. Who in
Spain, etc. (19) In this miserable state of Affairs, the oppressed City
comforted it self with the News brought them from Spain concerning the
proceedings of Scipio. Who, etc. (20.) The fierceness of Hannibal could not
have been restrained by a more potent Bridle than that of the notable progress
of Scipio. Who in Spain, etc. (21) In the mean time Hannibal, used to the sweet
sound of Victory, had his ear wounded, but much more his Soul, with the bitter
News of the loss of Spain; where Scipio, etc. (22) Hannibal could not so
perfectly rejoice over his Acquists in Italy, but that he found a greater
occasion of displeasure in the loss of Spain. Where Scipio, etc. (23) But
Spain, which had been to Hannibal and all his Family a large Theater of Fame,
became now to them a necessary occasion of grief and infamy. For Scipio, etc.
(24) But it was fatal to Hannibal, that the same Provinces, which served him as
a Ladder to climb up to the possession of the Roman Empire, were the occasions
of his precipice by withdrawing him from Italy. Seeing that Scipio, etc. (25)
In the mean time, Spain, which was to Hannibal the beginning of his Reputation,
being possessed now by Scipio, was considered by him as the beginning of his
ruin. (26) But Hannibal could not now hope his felicity should be lasting,
whilst Scipio with a fortunate current of Affairs victoriously overran Spain.
(27) Amidst these fortunate events of Hannibal in Italy, Scipio courageously
revenged the public Injuries, as well as his own private Losses in Spain. (28)
But if Italy wept under the yoke of the African Arms; Spain in the mean time
had no cause to rejoice, being conquered by the Valor of Scipio. Who, etc.
(29) In the mean while Scipio, who designed to vanquish Hannibal in Africa,
proceeded in his Conquest of Spain, thereby to smooth his way to an entire
Victory. (30) The People of Rome now understood effectually the worth of a
generous and prudent Commander. For Scipio by his Valor in Spain served to
beat down the Pride, and afterward the Reputation of Hannibal, gained by the
slaughter of so many Consuls, and defeat of so many Armies. (31) Experience now
taught the Romans, that in accidents of War there is no condition so desperate,
which the Virtue of a good Captain cannot mend. For in the extreme peril of the
Commonwealth, Scipio carrying his Victories through Spain, was the occasion of,
etc. (32) But in fine, so long as the War lasts, the Conqueror cannot be so
secure, as not to fear a Revolution, which of^ comes from whence we least dream
of it, as it happened to Hannibal, who securely reposing upon his Conquests in
Italy, saw his Fortune equaled and overcome by the Valor of Scipio. Who in
Spain, etc. (33) At this time Hannibal thought he had secured his Affairs,
keeping a victorious Army in the very heart of Italy; and did not foresee, that
in Spain (as in the parts most remote from the vital) the body of the
Commonwealth should receive vigor and breath from the Valor of Scipio to
contend with him. For that Valiant, etc. (34) But Hannibal, bewitched with his
own good Fortune, foolishly measured things by his late Prosperities; and could
not foresee by prudence those Miseries, to which he was destined by the Valor
of Scipio Warring in Spain, etc.

TO CLEOPATRA, Persuading her to kill her self. Out of Italian.
IF your Misfortunes were more supportable, or your heart less generous, I
would not prompt you to those Remedies which, being extreme, are due only to
extreme Evils. Nor would I counsel you to forego your life, if you had not lost
all that which made it dear to you, and were now to encounter all that which
will render it hateful. Things are come to that pass, a little delay will
deprive you, as of the liberty of living, so of the liberty of dying. Nay, your
evil Destiny has not left you free to thought: it is not for Cleopatra to
consult whether she ought to die, when it is resolved she must no longer Reign.
They who can outlive Empire, never deserved it. And what motives are wanting to
determine you? You have hitherto owned a Fortune more fruitful than your Nile;
your Genius invoked more than the gods of Egypt; your height of happiness more
astonishing than that of your Pyramides; and for you Africa has been monstrous
only in Pleasures. If you have fought, you have been victorious: when you have
fled you have been followed; as if your flight were more worthy to be attended
than others Triumphs. You have reigned, and Caesar's have got Trophies only for
you, whilst your Antony has thrown into your bosom the hopes of the Universe.
What can you wish, but to have died then? What can you fear, but to lose the
opportunity of dying now? Perhaps you would have expired Commanding, and so
abandoned Fortune, rather than now leave the World when Fortune has left you:
some have chosen to put a period to their life, rather than see the end of
their happiness. But what we do that we may not become miserable, we ought to
do that we may cease to be so. The best of Fortune is not to taste of miseries,
next to that is to know how to end them. If you be not followed to your
Sepulcher with the pompous train of your Subjects, at least you shall not make
one of that ignominious troop, which must sacrifice to the pride of your
Enemies. Though you do not triumph in death by a Royal Funeral, at least your
self shall not make up a part of the Roman Triumph; and though you do not die
Queen in Egypt, you shall not live a slave in Italy. And though you could
dismiss that fear, and entertain a hope from the generousness of your
Conqueror to be re-instated in your Throne, would you accept from his hand
that which before you owed only to the bounty of Heaven, and so become twice a
slave, to your Enemies force, and to his courtesy? Would you re-ascend, to
fall again from that height whence you have already fallen? What can you enjoy,
which you have not enjoyed? Can the wit of Fortune or Nature present you any
new happiness? Would it not pose your most exquisite desires to fancy more?
Has not the Sea produced new Treasures, not only for your ornament, but for
your luxury? Is not Nature weary in distilling strange pleasures for you? What
kind of honor is there, that has not paid Tribute to your Scepter? and are
you not cloyed? How many have killed themselves, being wearied in a tedious
repetition of the same happiness? He has lived enough, that has perfectly
enjoyed. What should we do, when we can meet nothing new but Mischiefs? You
live not now to live, but because you have not courage to die. And suppose a
return of your first good Fortune, shall your Antony return again? But I
flatter you, O Queen. Nor Antony, nor Kingdom, or ought of your first estate
remains for you: only rests those miseries, which are not to be allayed with
thoughts of not deserving them; for who would not accompany, or will not follow
Antony, merits worse. Perhaps you rely on the kind offers of Augustus: But
reflect upon the vast Treasures you have hid, and consider, that those feed
with hopes who desire possession. Perhaps his courteous Visit in your sickness
comforts you, but the veyl with which he would have shadowed his Pride was too
transparent: he was content you should fall at his feet with the tremblings of
a sick, as well as of an unfortunate person: he suffered you to embrace his
knees with those hands, whose beck once commanded the same petitionary posture
in a Kingdom. He was slow to raise you up, and under a feigned sweetness
cloaking an imperious gravity, with scant speech he bid you to hope well. But
he that would have you hope for what is in his power to give, would obtain
somewhat himself; but means not, you should ever obtain what he bid you hope
for. Consider what cunning that man is master of, that could resist your
powerful charms: and since you could not draw him into the snares of your
beauty, take heed you fall not into those of his ambition. Consider, that life
cannot be good for you; since your Enemy desires it: and he bids you live, that
gives you nothing but hope, and could give you what he would.

You are too fair a Spoil for a Triumph. Nor can Augustus better repair his
loss (seeing Antony has escaped his hands by death) than by leading you in
triumph, who have triumphed over Antony. Prepare then to grace the Tiber with a
new spectacle: To show your selt, not as once your Antony designed to present
you, but in Servile habit, a slave amidst a throng of Slaves; your Hair
disheveled, perhaps shaved; Barefoot, going before or following the Chariot of
your proud Lord; pointed at by Children, mocked by the Licentious Soldier,
thus scost at by the Roman Matrons, There goes the great Queen, not of Egypt,
but of Whores; There Is the mighty Amazon, who overthrew Emperors -- upon a
Feather-bed; See, how with down cast eye she is come to teach our Virgins
modesty. And is all this supportable? Have you the heart to expose your self to
the outrages of the wronged Octavia? No breast more true to hatred than a
Woman's, no Woman more cruel than a Rival. How often has she preserr'd her Vows
to Heaven, that she might with her own hands tear out those eyes of yours,
whose wounding influence murdered affection in the heart of her Husband? How
often has she covenanted with the gods at the price of her own life, to rip up
that bosom which has so long usurped possession of her Antony? And will she
not now use her good Fortune? will not her fond Brother Augustus bestow you
upon her, that she might share in his Victory? Unhappy Queen! methinks I see
those base Services she designs you. Those taunts with which she will wound
your Soul: upbraiding you with dissolved Pearl, when she appoints you a draught
of Wormwood: commanding you to put her into that dress which caught the heart
of Antony. In fine, I see, and with horror consider the Scorns, the Abuses,
with which a great, a provoked Lady and a Mistress will take revenge of past
wrongs. Call to mind then, what becomes you as a Queen. Behold the magnanimous
Dido opening her bosom with a generous blow. She might by living have revenged
her self on him that betrayed her; you in not dying, betray him that loved you.
She remained a Queen, you have lost your Crown. Or if you would take a lesson
of freedom out of that Rome, whither you are a destined Slave; consider
Lucrece, and see if the loss of a Kingdom requires as much as the loss of an
opinion. If that public shame which attends you weighs with her secret
disgrace. But why do I muster Examples, when you have before you that of your
dead Antony? If his memory be not enough to steel you with resolution, what
Argument is sufficient? If this be not enough, unhappy Antony! thou art
deceived. Thou did never believe, that the Lady thou esteem'dst worthy to
receive Kingdoms in gift from thee; whom to follow when she fled, thou
thought no less glory than to pursue a flying Enemy; in whose bosom to
recover thy self, seemed a sufficient recompense for the loss of half the
World; thou never thought, I say, that she had a heart capable of Servitude.
Thou have not escaped by death, but art still subjected to thy proud Rival, who
triumphs over thee in Cleopatra. See, a noble testimony of a grateful heart!
Cleopatra considers not which is best, to live or to die; but whether in Chains
by the violences of the enraged Octavia, or whether she should now snatch an
Antidote from Death against the malice of her Fortune, and unite her self for
ever to thy blessed Shade. Call to mind your Antony, when stained with the
blood of those Veins his own bold hand had opened; when he threw himself into
your embraces, and seemed to live no other life than what you breathed into him
by your last kisses; when with an undaunted courage he fronted his Fate, and
taught you those steps which the unfortunately Magnanimous ought to tread. You
then filled his breast with mighty hopes, imprecated the worst of Roman
Slavery, if you did not follow him, whilst he embraced you as if he had hugged
Victory in his arms, and with an inviting smile bid you hasten alter him, and
expired. And will you deceive the honored Ashes of that mighty Hero, which
from their Urne seem thus to summon you? There advances but a few minutes, O
Cleopatra; you may die when you will, but you cannot die free when you will. If
you kill your self now, you do it to bestow your self on me; if afterward,
it is to steal your self from others. Give that life up to your Love, which
shortly will be usurped by your impatience. But if thou will live, withal
remember when thou shall be in Rome, that the Body of thy Antony is in Egypt.
Now what remains, but that I conjure you by these private walks, the
Secretaries of both your Fortunes, where you have lived free, and may die free;
by your Household gods, and more by the genius of Antony, your Sovereign Jove,
(which without doubt hovers in the Air about us) that you will not by your
weakness make Egypt blush, where you have been Queen, and may by your Courage
be numbered amongst her Deities?

FINIS.
The Sublime Character; Out of Tasso, Lib. 4.
THe dreary Trumpet blew a dreadful blast,
And rumbled through the Lands and Kingdoms under;
Through Wastness wide it roared, and hollows vast,
And filled the Deep with horror, fear and wonder.
Not half so dreadful noise the Tempests cast,
That fall from Skies with storms of Hail and Thunder:
Nor half so loud the whistling Winds do sing,
Broke from the Earthen prisons of their King.
The Temperate. Lib. 14.
SO in the Twilight does sometimes appear
A Nymph, a Goddess, or a Fairy Queen:
And though no Syrene, but a Sprite this were;
Yet by her Beauty see'md it, she had been
One of those Sisters false, which haunted near
The Tyrrhene shores, and kept those Waters sheen.
Like theirs, her Face, her Voice was, and her sound:
And thus she sung, and pleased both Skies and Ground;
Ye Happy Youths, whom April fresh, and May,
Attire in flow'ring green of Lusty age,
For glory Vain, and Virtues idle ray,
Do not your tender Limbs to toil engage.
The Humble. Lib. 7.
MY Son, quoth he, this poor estate of ours
Is ever safe from storm of Warlike broyl:
This Wilderness does us in safety keep,
No thundering Drum, no Trumpet breaks our sleep.
Happily just Heavens defense and Shield of Right
Does love the innocence of simple Swains.
The Thunderbolts on highest Mountains light;
Seldom or never strike the lower Plains:
So Kings have cause to fear Bellona's might;
Not they whose sweat and toil their dinner gains;
Nor ever greedy Soldier was enticed
By Poverty neglected and despised.
Errata.
Page 2. line 27. read Pericles, p. 3. l. 34. attack, p. 12. l. 20. Chamaleon,
p. 17. l: 1. that, p. 19. l. 2. toss, p. 23. l. 6. Titian, p. 29. l. 7.
Chapebain, p. 58. l. 14. Abydos. p. 101. l. 29. Stralsound, p. 130. l. 9.
Writers, who.


