A MESSAGE FROM THE Spirit of the Lord To the People called ANABAPTISTS, AND To
the rest of the Sects who are scattered up and down these Nations, and in the
ARMY; that they may read and consider why the Lords Controversy is against
them, and that they may understand what the Lords Purpose is concerning them.
HOW is my bowels filled with grief, and my heart compassed about with sorrow?
Woe is me for you, I am even undone for your sakes who despise reproof, and
reject the counsel of the Holy One; Surely you are a rebellious house, and a
gainsaying people, says the Lord: All the day long have I stretched out my
hands unto you, and visited you in loving kindness, and called upon you to
return; but you have stopped your ears, and hardened your hearts against me,
says the Lord; You have despised my Messengers, and set at naught those who
have been sent unto you, and have not regarded my Word: How many of my servants
have been as a Sign, a byword, and as a proverb and a reproach amongst you?
And you have not considered the evil day that is to come upon all the
Inhabitants of the Earth: Why had you not seen? Why had you not beheld my
goings out in my Servants in this day, even amongst all the Sons of men? How
have I made them to bear the iniquities of this Nation, and have suffered the
Rulers thereof to afflict them, even from day to day, and from time to time?
yet have they not ceased to warn this Nation in their Towns and Villages, in
their Markets, and in their Streets; in their Goals, and in their Assemblies:
How many of my Servants have dyed in prison, and you have not visited them,
even for the Word of God, and for the Testimony of Jesus, even the exercise of
their pure consciences? These things have not been done in a corner, but in the
sight of the Sun, before your eyes, and you have not laid it to heart, but
ready to add affliction to their Bonds, and to join your hands with their
persecutors in your Books and Pamphlets, in your preachings and pretended
prayers, and in your places of Justice; and you have strengthened the hands of
the Wicked, and persecuted, slandered and reproached my Servants.

Wherefore thus says the Lord, I am now arisen in jealousy even for the meek
of the earth, and I will be avenged of my adversaries, and plead the cause of
my despised remnant, even by sword and by fire will I plead with my enemies; I
will overturn their counsels, and will blow upon their whole strength, and they
shall not be: But as for your parts, you have had a day, and a price put into
your hands, but had not hearts to use it, you forgot me says the Lord, and did
not remember the cause of the innocent, but every one sought his own honor and
his own advantage, and forgot me and the cause of my people: Therefore did I
cause your Sun to set at noon, even in the midst of your day, and did deliver
you up into the hands of your enemies, even without a Sword or a Spear; but by
my own might and power, that you might know that I am God, and that I can do
whatsoever I will in the Kingdoms of men. Look back now, and see if your
Fathers could ever remember, or the generations that are past could ever
declare, that the Lord did greater wonders, or that my Arm has brought
stranger things to pass then your eyes have seen, and your ears have heard. But
will all this awake you? Will all this make you to consider? Why do you not
break off your sins by repentance, and turn unto me (says the Lord) that I may
heal your backslidings, and wash away your sins? What advantage is it unto you,
that you set your selves against me, and devise mischief against my chosen?
What do you reap unto your selves to make peace with your enemies, to destroy
my Heritage? Surely this people have forgotten me, and they trust unto an arm
of flesh, and a number of men, and their own fear overcomes them: Can you not
look back, and call to your remembrance the former days, how I was with you in
the day of distress, how I girded you with strength, and made you a terror to
your enemies, even to them unto whom now you are become servants? And why is
all this come to pass? Because you vowed a vow unto me in your distress, in
that day when many enemies had compassed you about, from whom I delivered you;
but you forgot the vow and the promise that you had made, and thought not upon
my Cause, and the Cause of my people, but rejoiced and sat down in the spoil
of your enemies, and corrupted your selves with those things, until your hearts
became fat, and you filled and corrupted with all the abominations of them
which were cast out before you, so that no deliverance was wrought in the
earth, but like treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously; and so your
reward must be according to your works.

And now what is man that you should trust in him, or the sons of men that you
should regard them, and forget me, says the Lord? Yet once more return, return
unto me, that I may once more build you up, and not pluck you down; Humble your
selves before me, and consider of your backslidings. Consider that ye have
forgotten me, and trusted to lying vanities; and slight not the day of your
visitation, neither despise my Messengers, nor reproach my Servants; for he
that despises them, despises me; for they are as dear unto me as the apple
of mine eye; and whosoever rises up against them, shall be confounded; but he
that blesses them, shall be blessed; because they have chosen me to be their
fear, and they have not sought themselves, nor defiled themselves with the
World nor its vanities, nor its fading and perishing glory but have walked
before me with an upright heart in the midst of a perverse generation, amongst
whom they have been as sheep for the slaughter, and have been killed even all
the day long; and who have pleaded their cause, or who have stood up in their
defense? But even all people, all professors, and all powers have combined
together to root out their Name, and to blot out their memorial from the earth,
had not my power upheld them, and my own Arm made bare for their deliverance:
How often had they been devoured by the teeth of their adversaries, and by the
jaws of their cruel and oppressing enemies? had not I arisen for them, and put
my hook into the nose, and my br^dle into the teeth of their enemies, and
turned them backwards, confounded their enterprises, overturned Rulers, and
Powers, and Armies; yea reproved Kings for their sakes: And this let it be
known unto you, He that blesses them, shall be blessed; but he that curses
them, shall not prosper; For, for their sakes is all this come to pass, because
I will make them the oy of many nations; and they shall tread upon the High
Places of the earth. And although I may suffer them to be tried even as Gold in
the fire, that they may be purged and purified, that their beauty may shine out
of obscurity, and their praise may return unto me; yet will I never forsake
them, my loving kindness will I never take from them, but will return unto them
in tender mercy, and in the midst of the fire will I be with them, and my power
and my presence shall accompany them, and I will plead with all their
adversaries, and consume their enemies, and will crown them with dominion in
the sight of them that rise up against them.

Wherefore once more this is a call and a warning unto you to return unto me,
and to seek me with your whole heart, that you may not for ever be a prey to
your enemies, nor that the rod of the wicked should for ever remain upon the
back of the righteous; wherefore if you will return unto me, and consider of
your backslidings an repent of the evil of your former doings, I will yet make
use of you for my glory, and for my own Name sake, that this Egyptian Power,
even Pharaoh and all his Host may be overwhelmed, that I may cause my righteou^
Branch to prosper, and to spread, and to go over the earth, and to give unto my
chosen the Land which I have promised unto them, even a Land that flows with
Milk and Honey.

Therefore now arise, and put on Courage and Boldness, and fear not the face of
your enemies; for though they be many in number, yet I am the Lord, and all
power and might is in my hand: And every one of you make war in righteousness
against the enemies of your own souls which are within you, (to wit) the lusts
that wars in your members, and take the sword of the Spirit, which is my Word
in your hearts, which discerns the lusts in your hearts, and every thought,
and every intent in your hearts; and by this sword shall you become more than
conquerors; this will cut down your lust, your pride, ambition, and
self-seeking; your covetousness, and your wantonness, and all such abomination,
for which my hand is against you; And this my Word is within you, and this must
purge and purify you, if ever you are purged; even that within you, which lets
you see your abominations, which have caused me to hide my face from you, and
to visit you in judgment: and when you have repented of the evil of your ways,
and are returned unto that which lets you see your self-seeking, proud,
persecuting, covetous, worldly, treacherous, deceitful spirit; that by the same
which lets you see it, you may be humbled in my presence, and return unto your
first love, that which first visited you for your sins, that by it you may be
truly purged, and may truly deny yourselvs, and not seek the worlds glory, but
my glory; and not your own Interest, but the Good Old Cause, the Cause of my
People: That truth and righteousness may flourish in these Nations, and that
the Land may be swept of evildoers, and that all superstition and Idolatry may
be rooted out, and all oppression and tyranny amongst people may be clean done
away. If you thus return unto me in the uprightness of your hearts, then will I
return unto you, and my presence shall be with you, and your strength shall
return as in the days of your youth; and I will yet prosper you, and you shall
take root downward, and bear fruit upward, and your flesh shall be fresh as the
flesh of a child, and you shall be the joy of many Nations* But if you refuse
to return unto me, and to seek me with your whole heart, and to be obedient
unto my voice, and not take counsel at me, but follow the counsel of your own
hearts, and offer unto me your wonted hypocritical prayers and fastings, and
your hearts after your covetousness, envy, pride, self-seeking, and
vainglory; though you may make many prayers, yet I will not hear, neither will
I answer, but suffer a lying spirit to go forth amongst you, which shall
deceive you, and speak peace when there is no peace, and you shall be lifted up
to that end you may be destroyed; for I will give you into the hands of your
enemies, and they shall do unto you according unto that which is in their
hearts, and my loving kindness will I for ever take from you, and my habitation
will I utterly remove from amongst you, and nothing but misery shall attend
you, even one woe upon another, until you are scattered and driven away,
confounded and consumed from the face of the earth; but my chosen will I
deliver in that day, I will cover them, and I will hide them under the hollow
of my hand, and my arm shall compass them about, because they have chosen me to
be their fear, and have had regard unto my Word, and have walked in my
Statutes, and observed my Ordinances, and have despised the glory, honor,
riches and preferment of this world, even for me, and for my kingdoms sake, for
whom I have ordained a kingdom everlasting and eternal, where all the power of
darkness shall not touch them

Therefore take heed unto the Word which I have spoken, and no longer be of a
proud and perverse spirit, nor of an uncircumcised heart; but let your ears be
open unto reproof, that you may learn righteousness, that in truth you may be
established, that my power and my presence may be with you, that you may arise
as a Lion out of his thicket, or as a Giant refreshed with wine; That you may
plead my cause with the men of the earth, that the Whore which has made all
Nations drunk with the cup of her fornications, and has drunk the blood of the
Saints and Martyrs, that you may give unto her double, even blood to drink; and
that her children may be dashed against the stones: for the hour of her judgment
is come, and great Babylon is now come in remembrance before the Lord, and the
cup of his fury and indignation is in his hand, which shall be powered out
without mixture, and the dregs there of shall she drink: for now is the Angel
gone forth with the everlasting Gospel to preach, saying, Fear GOD, and give
Glory to Him; wherefore blessed and happy shall he be that receives the
everlasting Gospel of GOD, who are brought into his fear that keeps clean their
hearts; who gives the glory unto God, who do not seek glory unto themselves,
nor seek honor unto themselves; for the Lord God is arisen to stain the glory
of all flesh, and the loftiness of man shall be abased, and the haughtiness of
man shall be laid low, and the Lord alone shall be exalted: For he will
overturn, overturn, overturn, until he comes whose right it is, and he will
give it him; for the Kingdom and the Government shall be his; for the Lambsday
is come, and his Kingdom and his Government shall be established: Though all
the powers of darkness rise up against him, yet shall the Lamb and the Saints
have the victory, though Gog and Magog join together in battle against him.

Therefore be ye warned, and take heed of giving your power unto the Beast, and
the false Prophet; for the wrath and vengeance of the Lord is against him, and
the day of Babylons destruction is near, in which all her Merchants that have
traded with her shall weep and howl; for none shall buy their wares any more,
saying; Alas, alas, for that great City is fallen by which so many were made rich
through her Merchandise; for now is the Lord arisen to uncover her skirts, and
to make her shame and her nakedness appear in the sight of all men. Therefore
be not of a fearful heart, but be valiant for the Lord, for he will bring
mighty things to pass, such as your eyes has not seen, nor your ears heard,
nor has entered into your hearts to believe; for he is working a Work and a
Wonder; the understanding of the Wise shall be confounded, and the Wisdom of
the prudent shall be hid; for the Lord has purposed, and he will certainly
bring it to pass; for he has seen, he has seen the affliction of his people,
and his eye has beheld the cruelty of their enemies, and all their purposes
are before him, and his soul has pittyed his remnant, and his anger is kindled
against his adversaries, and the day of their recompense is near, wherein he
will reward them, even as they thought to do unto his chosen; and their own
mischief which they imagined in their own hearts, even with the same shall
their own bowels be filled; that as they have thirsted for, and greedily
desired the blood of the innocent, even so shall it be done unto them. The Lord
has spoken, and it shall surely come to pass.

And now take heed unto your selves, and let the fall of others be a warning
unto you, and see you build upon a right foundation; for there is nothing but
truth and righteousness shall stand, all other buildings shall certainly be
overthrown: Therefore in humility and meekness consider with your selves, that
the Lord has not left himself without a Witness in the hearts of every one of
you, that the people who have been despised and hated, reproached and cruelly
entreated, has not been so dealt withal for any evil that they have done, but
for bearing a true and faithful testimony for the Lord, against all the pride,
ambition and vainglory of this wicked and untoward Generation, and against all
the superstitious, Idolatrous and vain worships, and against all the hireling,
greedy, devouring, Idol, dumb Shepherds; and against all the vain heathenish
customs, fashions and traditions that has been set up by the will and pride of
man, contrary to the Scriptures, and out of the fear of God; and for keeping
Christ's Command. Has not this been the cause why we have been hated,
persecuted, imprisoned, slandered, murdered, and all manner of evil done unto
us; because we are not of this world, even as he is not of this world, but has
chosen us out of the world, to bear testimony against the deeds thereof that
they are evil? Therefore try now and thoroughly examine the ground and reason of
all the hatred, evil-speaking and dealing that has been against us; And in
moderation, and the fear of God, without prejudice, see wherein our practice is
not agreeable with the Scriptures, and let not your minds be any longer blinded
through an evil heart of unbelief; but let the long-suffering of our God lead
you to repentance; And not by resisting his Spirit to hardness of heart, and
his righteous judgments overtake you, and there be no remedy.

The 22d. of the last Month, 1659: JOHN COLLENS.

LONDON, Printed by M. I. for Robert Wilson, at the sign of the
black-spread-Eagle in Martins l'Grand, 1660.


