A Funeral Oration ON THE Most High, Most Excellent, and Most Potent PRINCESS,
MARIE STUART, QUEEN OF England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, etc.

Recited by the Learned Author of The Collection of Canons and New Pieces, In
his Third Tome, page 274.

Done into English from the French Original Printed at the Hague.

LONDON, Printed for J. Dunton at the Raven in Jewen-street; and Sold by Edmund
Richardson near the Poultry-Church, 1695.

A Funeral Oration, etc.
Favor is Deceitful, and Beauty is Vain; but a Woman that fears the Lord,
she shall be Praised, Prove. chap. 31. v. 30.
WE cannot but wonder and be sensible of the works which Nature sets before our
Eyes; but on the other side we must acknowledge that those Objects so lovely
and worthy of our Admiration, are subject to Corruption, and that they fade
away and Perish. All things that are under the Sun shall Perish; and there is
no longer any memory of things that are past; and those things that are to
come, shall be forgotten by those that come after us, says Solomon in the
Ecclesiastes. Those Empires formerly so Vast and Potent, what are now become of
'em? The mighty Men and Potentates of the Earth, after they have made a noise
in the World for Fifty or Threescore Years at most, whether do they retire?
What is become of all their Grandeur and Luster? They are returned into the
Earth from whence they came, and by a fatal necessity they instruct us, that
All that is no more then Dust, must return to Dust. The Days of Man, says
David, are like the Flower of the Field, which in the Morning is clad with a
Thousand lively Colors, but no sooner is it cropped, but it Fades and Withers,
nor is there the least Beauty of it to be discovered by the Evening. This is
the fate of the things of this World. It Is then upon the meditation of their
Vanity that they ought to reflect. It Is to the Consideration of Eternal
Blessings that we ought to apply our selves, to the end we may learn so to
govern our days, that we may be said to have a Heart of Wisdom and
Understanding. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom: A good
Understanding have all they that do his Commandments; His Praise endures for
ever, Psalm 3. Favor is Deceitful and Beauty is Vain, but the Woman that
fears the Lord* she shall be Praised. It may be justly said, that never any
Person merited this Praise more then the Most High, Most Excellent, and Most
Potent Princess, MARY STUART, Queen of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland.

My Design is therefore to endeavor to set before your Eyes the surpassing
Virtues of this great Queen, not only to excite your Admiration of that Piety,
that Greatness of Soul, that prudent Conduct which she made appear in all her
Actions, and in all her Words; but more especially to follow the Examples of
Piety and Sanctity, of which we have been some part of Us the Eyewitnesses
during her Life, and which she left us after her Death.

I must acknowledge my self altogether unable to undertake a task so far above
my strength; only my Zeal for the Memory of this great Princess, and the great
desire I had, that we should make the best benefit of a Life and Death so Holy
and so Precious in the sight of God, has engaged me in despite of my self, and
caused me to forget my weakness in going beyond the limits of my Character.

Think it not then strange if I observe not in this discourse, all the Methods
and all the Rules of Art. Consider that there is something, I know not what, of
Irregular in Sorrow and Affliction, and that it is not so much the work of my
Wit as of my Heart; it being out of the abundance of my Heart, that my Mouth
speaks. Most Holy and Divine Spirit, who did enliven this Pious Queen,
enliv'n me now with a sacred Fire, to the end I may render serviceable to thy
Glory, the Holy Examples which he has given us, and that by the imitation
thereof we may become more Prudent and more Pious.

Never fear it, it is not here my design, according to the Idea's of the Worldly
Eloquence, to study for flattering Discourses, to give in this place false
Phrases to false Virtues.

When we have for the subject matter of such discourses any one of those common
and Worldly Lives. in whom we can find nothing to commend but the last motives
of a long delayed and almost fruitless Repentance, it is a difficult thing I
must confess, if I may not say impossible, but that we must flatter Vanity, and
confound Fortune with Virtue. But here all our trouble will be, that we shall
not be able to find Elogies enough to set forth so many Virtues, nor Terms strong
enough to express so many admirable Qualities wherewith Nature and Grace seemed
to be at strife to accomplish this most incomparable Queen. What a Majesty and
Grandeur in her Air! What a sweetness! What a modesty in her Counnance! What a
politeness in all her Manners! What Charming Graces in her Person! And these
you know were the least things to be commended in her: For if we pass to the
qualities of her Soul, what a large Field was there for Elegies, or rather what
a subject of wonder and admiration! In the first Years of her Youth, this
Princess displaid the best Natural disposition in the World, a sweet Humor,
agreeable and always equal; a Heart upright and sincere; a solid and firm
Judgment, and a Piety beyond her Age. And it was upon this sincere report, that
the great Prince who espoused her, desired to be united to her, declaring, That
all the circumstances of Fortune and Interest did never engage him so much as
those of her Person, and particularly those of her Humor and Inclination. A
sentiment truly great, generous, prudent and Christian-like, and so much the
more noble, and worthy to be observed, as being rare in great Personages, who
regulate their Friendships only according to their Interests, and have neither
so much Christianity nor niceness, as to consider that it is Virtue which
produces and cherishes Friendship, and that when a Man is really a Man of
worth, he can never be too attentive in making choice of the Person to whom he
is to be tied all the Days of his life. However, this was the Care of the great
Prince who espoused her, and as his intentions were pure and upright, God heard
his Prayers and his Wishes in giving him for a Consort, I will say, not only
the most amiable and most accomplished Princess of Europe, but the most perfect
of all Women that ever were in the World. Of whom we may say, that all Virtues
were assembled together in her without any mixture of Vices. And in saying so,
I say no more then what was the public and unanimous Voice of all People; and
of this Princess it is, that we may justly say, what is said in the Proverbs,
Many Daughters have done Virtuously, but thou excellest them all.

Now in regard that all the Precepts of the Gospel are enclosed in these two
things; love God with all thy Heart, and thy Neighbor as thy self, these were
the two Essential things that comprehend so many others, which this Pious Soul
most effectually studied. 'Twas by Reading and meditating upon the word of God,
that her Soul was purified and exercised it self in the desires of Eternal
Blessings. That we may be always with God, it behooves us to Read and Pray
often. God speaks to us in Scripture, and we speak to God in Prayer, says St.
Austin. The Reading of the Holy Scripture fills the Soul with light, and
separating it from the Vanities of the World, raises it up to the Love of God.
This our Pious Princess knew most admirable well, and this was that which she
practiced with a Devotion and Zeal, always worthy of Applause. With what
respect, with what attention did she Read this Sacred and Divine word! With
what Zeal and Fervency did she apply her self to Prayer! This is the
accomplishment of Happiness, said David, Happy is the Man who sets his
Affection upon the Law of the Lord, and meditates upon it Day and Night. Happy
he, who Addresses himself to thee. I lift up my self to thee, and I make my
Prayer to thee in the Morning. In this sacred Book it was, that this Pious
Princess had learnt, that the only employment of the blessed in Heaven will be
to adore God. Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God who art, and will be for ever, is the
continual Song of the blessed Spirits above. You People of the World, who only
conform your selves to the examples of the Grandees upon Earth, learn from the
Pattern of the most solid and most Illustrious Piety that can be set before
your Eyes, to make Prayer a most assiduous and regular Duty. Prayer is no way
different from the Practice of other Virtues, and we attain to it by the same
ways. It Is by a diligent Care and Practice, in applying the mind to the objects
of Faith, in entertaining good Thoughts, and by endeavoring to excite in our
selves Holy desires and Holy affections. Not but these means may be sufficient
of themselves to cause them to grow in us; but because that God is pleased to
conceal his supernatural Operations under those means that appear Human. Knock
and it shall be opened unto ye; ask and you shall receive. The Queen's, great
employments never hindered her one Day from being present at public Prayers,
which may be said to be the least time that she employed on that Duty. For how
often in her Closet did she not humble her self before the King of Kings, in
whose sight the King's of the Earth are but as Dust, to acknowledge how mean
and despicable she was, in comparison of him, before whom the Angels cover
their Faces. With what Humility did she not pay him Homage for all that she
had, and for all that she was.

Nor can I pass over in silence the trouble and perplexity of this great
Princess, when the Prince her August Husband, after redoubled solicitations
from the English Nation, found himself constrained to pass over into England.
Which way soever the Princess turned her self at that time, she beheld nothing
on every side but occasions of fear and affliction. France and the King of
England in League together, were upon the point of destroying the protestant
Religion. This Republic saw themselves in imminent danger. The liberty of
Europe was threatened with approaching Ruin. England in particular was in such
an agitation as tended to a general Insurrection. The wronged and oppressed
People were resolved to hazard all, rather then see their Laws and their
Religion overturned. In this extremity what was our Princess to do, but pray to
God, as she did without ceasing, in the public Churches, in her Chapel,
privately in her Closet, that he would be pleased in order to the
accomplishment of his Holy Will, to direct all things for his Glory, to the
advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ his Son, and the preservation of the
lives of Two Princes, of which the one was her Father, and the other was become
another self, as being tied to her by the strongest ties on Earth. God heard
her Prayers. Never was a Revolution of that importance with less Tumult, with
more Calmness, and less Bloodshed. The People who had called in that grsat
Prince for the support of their Laws and their Religion, receive him with loud
Acclamations and Testimonies of their extraordinary joy. Afterward K. James
took upon him a Resolution to retire out of his Kingdom, without being obliged
to it, and without the least violence offered to him. 'Twas to the prudent
Conduct of the present King, and the Queens Prayers, that we are to ascribe the
success and easiness of this miraculous Revolution through the dispensation of
Divine Providence.

They who had the Honor to be acquainted with the Character of this great
Queen, well knew that the luster of a Crown did never dazzle her. No, never
Princess of such an Illustrious Birth and Rank as hers, descended, as every
body knows, from a long Race of Kings, and Allied to the greatest Princes of
Europe, was endued with such a real Humility: And tho she were more capable of
Reigning then any Person of her Sex, and that she had given Testimonies of it
in ticklish and difficult Conjunctures, and tho she performed that burdensome
employment, so much to the satisfaction of the English as will cause her to be
always beloved and lamented by that Nation, nevertheless there was a real
sorrow to be perceived in her Countenance, that she was to quit this Country to
which she had been accustomed, and to whom the pleasantness of it appeared so
charming, where she had been respected, caressed, esteemed, and if I may
presume to say it, adored by all the World; where while she led a calm and
pleasing Life, she has been heard to say, and I have heard her my self, when
she was congratulated upon her advancement to the Crown, That many times, so
much Grandeur was a burth^n. That in such Stations People lived with less
content to themselves then others, and that she should wish she were in Holland
again. And indeed she had Reason to say so: For it may be said of those that
Govern, that they resemble the Stars that shine with a bright luster, but are
never at rest. And this repose it is which being made so good a use of as she
was wont to do, that is so beneficial for those that desire to take care of
their Salvation.

'Twas this desire of her Salvation which estranged her so fervently from the
things of this World, and which caused her to think so often of her end. 'Twas
this Idea of unavoidable death, which this devout Soul still set every day
before her Eyes, looking upon it, as attended and accompanied with the Sentence
of God, that will in that very moment either pronounce for or against us, an
Eternity of Glory, or an Eternity of Misery and Damnation. Come Lukewarm Souls,
unworthy Souls that think you have done enough for your Salvation, and who,
overruled by the multiplicity of your Affairs and your Pleasures, delay your
Conversion till the last minutes of your gasping breath, come and learn by the
Example of a great Queen, that the most Eminent, the most difficult, the most
indispensable employments ought never to make us forget the grand affairs of
Salvation, and the formidable Judgment of the last day. I have let no day pass,
said the Pious Queen, when they told her what a dangerous condition her Life
was in; I have let no day pass without thinking upon Death. So that she did not
look upon it, as the people of the World are wont to look upon it, with dread
and Horror, but she looked upon it after a Most Christian-like manner, as the
end of her time, and the happy entrance into Eternity. 'Twas this Reflection
upon the shortness of Life, and the inconceivable Diuturnity of Eternal Bliss,
which wrought in her this Effect, that she was not taken with any thing of
Temporal Grandeur, but that she had a high esteem of Eternity. She had
frequently thought upon that Sentence which will be pronounced to every one of
us at the hour of Death. You shall be no more. A fatal Sentence for so many
people, a Terrible decree, of which Death it self is to be the Executioner. But
they who, like her, think and meditate upon death in their Life time, die not
when they die, death being no more to them then the Beginning of Life.

This Pious Queen meditating upon death and the duties of Christianity, had
learnt in the Sacred Scriptures, that the Love of our Neighbor necessarily
attends the Love of God, and that the Glorious promises of Life Eternal, are
only made to those who are useful to Mankind; either by Instruction, or by
Succor or Assistance. 'Twas this Charity which is so highly recommended in
Holy Scripture, by the Savior of the World, which this Pious Queen exercised
with so much care and so much Zeal. Whatever represented it self to her Eyes as
a suffering Person, was the object of her Compassion and her Charity. With what
goodness did she still inform her self of the wants of necessities of those
that were in Affliction? With-what care did she order 'em to be provided for?
Her Alms had no other Bounds then those which God had given to the Grandeur of
her Power. We have seen Tears in her Eyes, for sorrow that she could not do so
much as she desired. With what Goodness, I will not say of a Princess and a
Queen, but of a Mother; did she take particular Accounts, and make particular
Enquiries for the succor of Poor Families, Parents over-burthen'd with a great
number of Children, Children deprived of their Parents, Aged People without any
relief of Children or Kindred? But more especially, with what Goodness, with
what Tenderness, did she interest her self in the Distresses and Want of a
great number of Persons of Quality, who had generously quitted their Country,
their Dignities, their Estates, their Relations, to follow Jesus Christ, rather
then do any thing to wrong their Consciences. You know it, you that weep, you
that with so much reason lament a loss so great, so overwhelming and so highly
deserving your Moans and Lamentations. I cannot disapprove the Tears you shed,
let 'em have their free course; if ever Person merited the Effects of your
sorrow, without doubt 'twas this August Queen: But set 'em however their just
bounds, and remember that it is the decree of Heaven, and that we ought to yield
an entire and profound submission to what ever comes from thence.

Let us take care to appease the Wrath of God justly provoked against us, which
bereaved us of this Pious Queen, of which the World was not worthy. If we
desire to do any thing pleasing to God, acceptable to the memory of this Good
and Charitable Princess; let us make good use of this Example of Charity which
she has showed us while she remained among us in this World; let us renounce
all manner of Pride and Vanity; and if we have any thing to spare from our
Necessities, let us employ it well, let us be Charitable as much as in us lies,
Let us Love our Divine Savior in the Persons of the Poor who represent him, so
that he may say to us, at the Great Day, as he has said to the Queen, I was a
dry and ye gave me to d^ink, I was a Hungry and ye gave me to Eat, I was a
Stranger and you Rescued me, etc. Verily I say unto you, for as much as you
have done it to one of these little ones ye have done it to me, Come and enjoy
the Kingdom which was prepared for ye from the Beginning of the World.

'Twas this Charity that made her shut her Ears against Calumny and
Backbiting. Never durst any one speak ill of any body before the Queen. Neither
Flattery nor Calumny, two of the most dangerous Pests of Sovereign Courts,
durst never open their Mouths in her Presence. Slander was utterly bannish'd
from her sight and Hearing. I abominate the Secret Slanderer, and him that is
double Tongued, for he is the Destruction of several that lived in Peace, says
the Wise Man. And indeed it is not enough for Great Persons not to be
Slanderers, but they must never show any marks of their taking Pleasure in
Slander; let it be delivered with never so much Wit and quaintness. For what do
they do by their Complacencies and encourging smiles, but animate the
Slanderer, and warm the malicious Serpent, that his malignant Sting may pierce
more surely and more to the quick. Let 'em Understand that they are no less the
Assassins of their Brethren, when by their Cruel Abettings, they sharpen the
weapon that runs 'em through; then if they stroke the Fatal blow themselves
that made the Mortal Wound. Lord says David, Who shall abide in thy Tabernacle?
He that is pure in his Life, whose actions are just, who speaks always
according to Truth, who Slanders not his Neighbor, and who lends not his Ear
to the Backbiter. This is then one more Encomium which it behooves us to give
the Queen, and which you, who had the Honor to be near her Person, knew that
she most justly deserved. Let us endeavor to imitate her in this as well as
the rest of her Admirable Virtues.

If I make it thus my business to set before your Eyes, the Virtues of this
Queen, it is because they were those which She particularly Caressed; and
because they are also in reality solid Virtues, and the Foundations of all the
rest. But if she possessed 'em in an eminent Degree, it may be said without
Flattery, that there are few persons in the World, that had for their share a
greater number of those which the World so highly boasts of, and which without
doubt are very agreeable and most useful to persons of Quality, and
particularly to those that are so highly exalted above others.

Besides that Beauty, that Majesty, that comely Grace, that noble Air which
accompanied every thing she did; She had together with a solid Judgment, a
Polite and pleasing Wit. She was extremely addicted to reading, and had made
good use of it. She gave a Sound Judgment of men's Writings, and the Products of
Wit, but with an extraordinary Modesty, which made her frequently demand the
Opinion of others, rather then give her own Judgment. Her Conversation was
easy, and she gave a pleasing Turn to every thing she said, she spoke French
and Dutch with the same readiness as English. And when there happened to be
persons about her of those three Nations, that understood no other then their
own Language, which happened almost every day, she spoke sometimes one, then
another Language, with a Surprising readiness, and without ever mistaking,
which is very Extraordinary, and so well ordered her business, in speaking to
every one in their turn, that never any Body departed from her presence but was
extremely satisfied; and charmed with her obliging behavior. She also wrote as
she spoke a free and natural Hand: She was very well read in History, she was
likewise a Lover of French Authors, and understood all the Delicacy of that
Language.

She was perfectly well instructed in Religion; and having had frequent
Discourses with Learned and able Divines, she had greatly advantaged her self
by their knowledge. So that it may be truly said that the Devotion was an
enlightened Devotion, Sincere and far remote from Superstition and all manner
of Ostentation.

However a Considerable time was requisite to accomplish all this; and
therefore there was something of admirable in the Diligence of this Excel^ent
Queen, and very Extraordinary in a Person of her Sex, her Age and Degree: She
was wont to rise by six a clock in the morning Winter and Summer.
For she spent every hour of the day to profit and advantage, far different
from most People, who covetous of many things, are so prodigal of that little
time which is left 'em, and which is so burdensome to 'em, that they seek
always to wast it. Who is able to apprehend two things so opposite? So much
Love for Life, and so little esteem for the time that Limits it.

But I return to my Subject; and I must tell ye, that besides-this knowledge
and these Lights that the Queen had acquired; she has a good relish in general,
which gave her the advantage to find out in things, that which was good, and to
observe that which was bad; she was able justly to distinguish, and she had a
high esteem for Persons of merit and Piety. And it may be truly said, that
those Persons that she Honored with her particular Confidence and Esteem, are
Persons of solid and distinguished worth; therefore she highly cherished 'em,
and whatever business she had, she wrote to 'em from time to time with her own
Hand: Together with all this: Her Inclinations were admirable; she was generous
Charitable, Good, Liberal and Beneficent beyond Expression. So that she was
beloved, not as usually Great Personages are beloved, out of Interest, or
Necessity, or Policy; for she had in that the same Advantage that Private
Persons have, to be beloved by Choice, by Esteem, by Inclination, and because
she was altogether Amiable.

Never was the Esteem and Affection which all the World had for this Great
Princess so well understood, as when she departed for England. Every Body
pressed to make their Addresses to her, and though she were going to receive a
Crown, the sorrow that the People had to see that she must leave 'em, made 'em
forget their joy that so much Grandeur and Honor was preparing for her. The
People crowded in throngs from distant Cities: They brought their little
Children to see her, to make 'em Admire her, to make 'em remember her, and to
wish her the Blessing of Long Life and Prosperity with their Undefiled and
Innocent Mouths. When she parted from the H^gue all the People thronged in
Heaps the Court to the Coaches could not pass; every Body Wept, and every Body
loaded her with Benedictions and tender wishes. All the People attended her to
the Sea, and the Sky resounded with the loud Cries and Farewell Acclamations of
the Multitude. And indeed when these sort of Demonstrations of Love and
Affection happen, more especially in Republics, where the People are not
obliged to testify what they have in their Hearts, it must be acknowledged,
that these loud Cries, these good Wishes and Benedictions are the Voice of the
Heart, or rather the Voices which Merit and Virtue produced in the Heart, and
caused to issue forth from as many Lips as there were Persons.

But besides the good Qualities peculiar to those of her Sex, it may be said,
that she had a Ripe and Solid Judgment, and a surprising Capacity for the
management of Affairs, and which caused the Admiration of Foreign Ministers.
This Great Queen in a Word was endued with all the Virtue, and all the Charms
of the most Virtuous and Amiable Women, and all the Merit and Capacity of the
most Famous Men. This, next to God, was your Workmanship, Great and Magnanimous
Hero, who having made choice of this Princess, a Princess after your own heart,
took pleasure in making it your business to bring to perfection such happy
Inclinations, and instructed her in the Great Art of Ruling, so difficult for
those that are desirous to acquit themselves as you do.

'Twas with so good a second that this Great King shared the Government,
leaving to her the Conduct at Home while he was obliged to cross the Seas, and
put himself at the Head of a League, of which he was the soul and Primum
Mobile. What was then the Employment of our Pious Queen? She redoubled her Vows
and Prayers to Heaven, and in the midst of her Alarms and Fears for the
Preservation of a Person so dear to her, she kept her self at the foot of the
Mystical Ladder, where her Prayers and the Answers to 'em were as so many
Angels continually Ascending and Descending to and from Heaven. But then you
saw her at the Helm of Government, issuing forth her Orders like a Prudent and
Politic Princess, and truly worthy the Great King with whom she was Associated;
and whose Genius and Maxims she observed. Yet with so much Discretion and
Reservedness, that when there fell out any thing of Delicate and Unexpected,
upon which she could have time to consult the Great Prince her real Oracle, she
always did it. With what Transports of joy did she behold the return of this
Great Monarch! After he had been exposing himself to guard all Europe from the
Slavery, into which, in all human probability, it was falling, without the
Interposition of his Resistance. What Satisfaction, what Gladness on his Part,
to Reimbrace the Object of all his Esteem and all his Tenderness! What
Acclamations! What shouts of Joy! How were the People charmed to behold the
Reunion of two Persons of such an exalted Merit, of so rare a Virtue, and so
Unanimously tied together for the preservation of their Religion, their Laws
and their Country! And then it was, that this great Princess surrendering her
Scepter and Royal Authority into the Hands of her August Husband, betook her
self again to reading and resumed usual Employments, like that Roman so Famous
in History, who after he had led Armies and won Victories, returned to manure
his small Farm, with the same Humility as if he had never won Battle, or
merited Triumph.

But if this Great Princess were admired while she held the Reins of
Government, she was yet more to be admired when she retired to her Privacies,
where the more nearly she was known, the more she was beloved esteemed and
respected. She carried her self toward all whose Protectrix she was! What an
Affliction to so many poor People to whom she was a Bountiful Mother! What a
Blow! What a cruel Blow to a Prince, who having such a Sincere and immaculate
Friendship for such a Virtuous Consort, grounded upon Esteem and Merit, feels
his Bowels rent and his Heart pierced through with a Thousand Darts, in loosing
a Dear Companion the only Object of his Tenderness and Inclination. She in
whose Bosom he confided his Secrets; with whom he comforted himself in his
Sorrows, and Rejoiced in his Prosperities, and who had for him the most
profound Veneration, the most Sincere Affection, and a Friendship the most
Ardent and Tender that could be imagined. Thus this Great Heart that was never
known to be Greater nor more Constant then in misfortunes, was cast down by
this Fatal Stroke, that took her for ever from his sight. Fatal Minute,
Sorrowful Minute for him and for us; but happy for her, who is now entered into
the Possession of Eternal Glory. Let all the Veneration, all the Zeal, all the
Affection which we had for these two August Persons whom Heaven it self had
brought together, be now united in Hero who still remains among us. His
Interests are ours, his Misfortunes ours, His Advantages ours, His Prosperities
ours, and in a word our State depends upon him, Let us pray to God to Comfort,
Preserve and Bless him. Let us accompany his designs with our Prayers, our Vows
and our best Wishes, and with all that lies in our Power. But if we desire that
our Prayers and our Vows may be heard, let us put our selves into a Condition,
that that we may hope to obtain a Gracious answer. Let us use all our
Endeavors to perform the Duties that Christianity enjoins us, and by observing
the Commands of God we shall fulfill the Vows of this Pious Queen, who concerned
her self with so much goodness to all those who had quitted their Country for
the sake of Religion. Piety and the Glory of God which she had always before
her Eyes, made her continually wish that Persons who had showed their Zeal and
Affection to the Service of God, might do nothing but what became the Character
of that Zeal which had inclined 'em. This is the Sense of a Letter which the
Queen wrote a little before she fell Sick* to Mademoiselle de Moussay.
Let us fulfill these Wishes, so just and so Christian like. The Incoruptible
Crown of Glory shall not be given to him that begins, but to him that
perseveres. Let us therefore Labor our Zeal and Fervency while we may, to the
end we may find Grace and Mercy at the day of our Death; and that we may be
made Partakers of that Bliss and Eternal Glory which now the Queen enjoys. That
Queen who because she was a Woman that truly feared, the Lord, deserves far
greater Praises then we have been able to give her.

AN ORATION OF Peter Francius, UPON THE FUNERAL of the Most August Princess
MARY II. QUEEN of Great Britain, France and Ireland.

Pronounced at Amsterdam, in the Old Dutch-Church, March 5. 1694-95* the very
Day she was buried.

Done into English from the Latin Original.

LONDON. Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in Jewen-street, and are also to
be Sold by Edm. Richardson near the Poultry-Church. MDCXCV.

A short PRAYER,
SEeing I am ascended into this Place, appointed for Divine Worship, and
preaching the Word of God, not of my own accord, nor rashly of my own head, but
by the Command of the most Honorable Consuls, what more just and reasonable,
what indeed more necessary, than that turning our Faces from men to God, we
should begin with a Prayer addressed to him, to whom the Heathens themselves,
far remote from the true Worship of God, always thought it proper to make their
Invocations at the Threshold of their Labors?

THEE therefore, Omnipotent and Eternal God, without whose aid we can undertake
nothing auspiciously, with a mind no less submissive and prostrate, than Body,
I implore and supplicate, that thou will vouchsafe to look upon this my
Oration, not sacred indeed, however neither impious nor profane, nor
misbecoming the Sanctimony of this Place, with a Gracious and Favorable
Countenance: And while I rehearse and commemorate, not so much the Praises, as
the Virtues of a most Pious and Religious Princess; not so much her Merits, as
thy Benefits; that thou would deign to afford me that Constancy, that
modesty, which the Reverence of this Place, and the Dignity of the Subject
requires from me. Pour down upon me thy Spirit, and inspire me with a sparkle
of that Caelestial Fire, wherewith of old thou did enliven thy Apostles,
those Divine Interpreters of thy will; touch my Tongue, kindle my Breast, and
so Enlighten my mind, so temper my words, that I may utter nothing but what is
Grave and Serious, and beseeming this Place, that I may be enabled with a
be-fitting Fervency, to Celebrate the Obsequies of this Princess, to set forth
her Virtues, and bring to the Propounded End the Work by me begun, and fulfill
the Duty laid upon me, if not with an Applause and Commendation becoming the
Subject, yet without disgrace and contempt.

A Funeral Oration OF Peter Francius, etc.
AND was this, this then the only disaster that remained to complete our
Calamities, and the Miseries of this Republic, continued for so many Years,
that in this Condition of Affairs, the War still raging, and, like a
Conflagration, every where Consuming, the support of our Defense, the
Consolation of this Affliction, the no less Best than Greatest of Queens, MARY,
should be violently extorted from the World! Breathless, Breathless she lies,
she that was the most Wise and Prudent Governess of the British Empire and of
this Republic; and in the half way Race of her Life, in the highest Station of
Honor, in the brightest splendor of Fortune, that far shining Constellation
is extinguished. Give Credit, Noble Auditors, if not to Fame, which rarely in
bad tidings deceives us, if not to your Ears, that so often have heard the sad
yet too true News, however to your Eyes; you have before your Eyes the
sorrowful Prospect. The Obsequies are now prepared; the Queen is now carried
Forth; and whatever in her was Corporeal, Frail, Mortal or Terrestrial, is
now committed to Enterment and the Earth. The day is come, is come, the fatal
dismal day has spread a gloomy light over all the World, that has vvithdravvn
from our sight the Noble Domicil of her Soul, the Habitation of all Virtues,
that svveet and amiable Queen, the love of the British Nation the delight of
ours, and now she sleeps among her Ancestors. All London follows the Funeral
Pomp, and Enters the Royal Spoils. Sorrow makes her way through all the Cities
of Britain; nor will she be confined within the Limits of one Kingdom; It
crosses the Sea, and ranges through all the Cities of Confederate Belgium; All
places are filled with the Sounds of Mournful Knells, with weeping, lamentation
and mourning, and every one displays the Convictions of his Grief. What a
number of mournful Elegies? How many Sermons in Churches, how many Orations in
Academies, and what variety in their complaints? It Is a common Lamentation, and
a Public Sorrow. Franeker, Vtrecht, Leyden, and this City, the most spacious
of all the Rest, this City also is a witness of the Universal Sorrow.

Prudently therefore, and no less deeply concerned, as the Illustrious
Governors of those Academies, so the most Honorable Presidents of this
Gymnasium, and the most Honorable Consuls of this City, in this City also,
under their own Jurisdiction, and most Flourishing Emporium of the whole World,
thought requisite to Command a Funeral Oration in Honor of the most Serene and
Potent Queen of England, and made choice of this Day and Place to Solemnise
this Ceremony with so much the more numerous Concourse of People. And indeed
what Day more Conspicuous, or more Pompous than the same which is set apart,
and chosen by the King's Council for Public Lamentation, and the Funeral
Osequies of the Queen? What place more fit than this most Sacred and Religious,
than this the most spacious Church within these Walls? Where could a Princess,
so Pious and Religious, so devoted to God, during the whole course of her Life,
be more worthily Applauded, than in this Place, consecrated to God and his
Sacred Worship? Where did she deserve more properly to be Extolled, than in the
Church, which she Erected in her most Pious Breast, and the most pure recesses
of her Heart, a Structure most acceptable to God, and a most Beautiful Temple?
What more agreeable and Consentaneous to Reason, than that the Encomiums of
this Princess should be sounded forth from this Pulpit, from whence the word of
God is continually Preached to the People, and the Oracles and Decrees of
Heaven are daily Promulgated; She who so willingly, and so assiduously
frequented sacred Sermons, and framed the whole course of her Life according to
those Divine Admonitions and Precepts, and according to that Rule and Method.
And I could wish that the most Noble Fathers could behold a Person no less fit
to speak, than the Time and Place is fit for Audience; who when they laid this
task upon me, imposed a Greater Burden upon me than my shoulders are able to
bear. For it is a Burden both difficult and Ponderous, and almost surpassing
Human Strength, to set forth the Praises of a Princess so transcendently
Excelling, so Absolute in all Perfections, so Adorned with all sorts of Virtue;
that is, to Extol Virtue it self.

But it behooved us to Obey; for neither this Obedience to our Governors, nor
this Duty to the Queen, was to be denied. For if that once Victorious and wide
Commanding People, paid this last Honor to Illustrious Persons, and such as
well deserved of the Republic; if to their Parents, and those Related to 'em
by any Tie of Blood or Consanguinity, and proposed their Virtues and Endowments
as Patterns and Examples to be followed by themselves, whom shall we deem more
worthy of this Honor, or more deservedly Extol, than the best of Princess, not
recommended to us by any single Virtue? For what Person more Illustrious than
the Queen? Who better deserved at our Hands then she? Who ever Cherished and
fostered us with a more Material Affection, than the Public Parent and Common
Mother of us all? What Woman e're set us an Example of more or greater
Virtues, who was her self a Living Examplar of all Virtue?

Seeing then no Woman ever left behind her a more plentiful Subject for true
Panegyric, nor a juster cause to bewail her Loss, unanimously join with me
most noble Auditors, and let us pay that last and only Duty to a Queen so well
and highly always deserving at our Hands, which our Gratitude and her deserts
demand. I behold your Aspects, I view your Countenances and your Eyes, and
Sorrow painted forth in every one: I behold your sable Garments, the Pulpit
hung with Mourning, and methinks I see the Representation of that time, when
the renowned and valiant Michael Adrian Ruytir, that Thunderbolt of War, that
terror of the Ocean, was the Theme of my Funeral Encomiums, and the Hero,
whose Obsequies I had the Honor to solemnize. And if that Grief were just and
lawful, if his Fall were dismal to the Republic, how much more just is our
Sorrow now, how much deeper is the Wound which the Commonwealth has received by
the Death of this Princess. This Dart has pierced so much more inwardly and
deeply to the Marrow, and our Sorrow is so much the more grievous, by how much
the more Illustrious the Person was whom we deplore. Certainly we have
sustained a most unspeakable loss, not to be expiated by many Victories; nor
has the loss been more detrimental to England then to those our Provinces. Both
Nations at the same time now pay their last Duties, and their last Honors to
her Memory. Let us accompany the Royal Funeral, and as far as it is in our
power, follovv her to the Grave it self. And since we cannot pretend to
behold that Solemnity with our Corporeal Eyes, let us set before the Eyes of
our Minds those Virtues and Endowments with which she was so richly stored, and
let us view with the Eyes of Contemplation what was illustrious and Memorable,
what was Amiable, Splendid, Transcendent, and truly Royal from the Beginning to
the Exit of her Life. Which while I endeavor to perform, Think not, noble
Auditors, that I intend to implore your favorable Attention. This numerous
Concourse promises me that already: The Theme of my Oration assures me of it
more. For who but had a Love for a Princess so Amiable, and who but will honor
with his Love a Woman that so highly honored all us with her Affection.

Think not that I shall ascribe false Praises to her, or that I shall make use
of any Adulteration, or Caresses of gaudy Words in extolling her who contemned
all Adulation, and Counterfeit Ornament. I will give her her own true, proper,
due Praises; and only crop the chiefest Heads of her most signal Virtues, it
being impossible for me to make a full display of all.

Come on then, fellow Citizens and Countrymen, come on, if any present,
Foreigners and Strangers: attend these great Obsequies; you never attended,
never shall attend greater, and unfold with me the Birth, the Life, the Death
of a Queen, the most renowned in the World.

And that we may begin from her Cradle, the most August Queen was born in the
sixty second Year of this Age, upon the tenth of May; James then Duke of York,
and the Lord Chancellor's Daughter being her Parents. If Splendour of Birth can
add any thing of Reputation to her, what place more famous than London, the
most celebrated Emporium of all England, and of all Europe? What Family more
illustrious than that of the Stuarts, which placed both James and Charles, and
this his Renowned Niece upon the most August Throne of Great Britain? And has
diffused the Splendor of its Race into all parts of the Earth. But as it was
both Noble and Great, to be descended from an Illustrious Country and Family,
so was it much more Noble, much more Great to have adorned them with her own
Virtues, and to have added new Splendour to 'em. For neither had the Family of
the Stuarts ever a more excellent Woman, nor the British Empire a more
Excellent Princess; who gave more Honor, more Glory to the Royal Dignity then
she received from it; and as far excelled all other Queens, as Queens exceed
Private Women.

Many, and conspicuous were the Prognostics of a true and far from
counterfeited Piety, that glittered in her, and shined forth in the early dawn
of her Infancy. For when in her tender Years she had lost an excellent Mother,
and under the tuition of Persons less concerned, was deliciously bred up in a
Court full of all manner of Pleasure and Voluptuousness, such was always her
Constancy, such her Temperance, and Modesty, that no Example of others, no
Allurement of Vice, no Contagion of Neighboring Courts could force her to go
astray from the right Path. Charles the Second cherished these sparks of
Virtue, and Seeds of Piety, and that he might alienate her from the Roman
Ceremonies, commanded her to be instructed in the Fundamentals of the true
Reformed Religion by the Bishop of London, which he so happily laid, and she so
cordially imbibed, that she could never be shaken by any Treacherous
Insinuations, any Promises or Threats, any Punishments or Rewards; choosing
rather to dye, then never so little to receed from the Truth, wherein she had
been grounded.

After she had spent the rest of her Childhood in those Studies, by which
generous and illustrious Souls are raised to the Expectations of great Fortune,
and had abundantly furnished herself as well with Christian as with Royal
Virtues, in the fifteenth year of her Age, she was auspicionsly Married to
William the third of that Name, Prince of Orange, Governor of those our United
Provinces, a Prince no less renowned for his Virtues, and his far famed
Achievements, then for the Images of his Ancestors, and a long Series of
Pedigree. William Marries Mary, a Kinsman a Kinswoman; and thus by a double
Tie, and a firmer Knot then hitherto, the most noble Families of all Europe are
joined together. She, for her Ancestors claims the Family of the Stuarts; he,
the Nassavian Race; She, the Monarchs of Great Britain; He, the Governors of
Germany, and the Caesar's themselves.

The Nuptial Solemnities being over, the Royal Bride crossed over out of
England into these Parts, together with her Husband, and chose for her Seat and
Residence, the Hague, the most pleasant and delightful place, not only of
Holland, but almost of all Europe, first of all the Seat of the Counts of
Holland,, afterward of the Princes of Orange, and native Country of this
Prince; where beloved of all Men, and fixed in the Good Will of all the People
propensely devoted to her, for the space of some Years, she so charmingly and
affectionately lived with her Husband, the best of Men, and no less cordially
affectionate to her, not only without the least contention or quarrel, but
without the least suspicion of Luke-warmness, that she might well be said to be
a conspicuous example of Conjugal Affection, not only to Kings, and Princes,
and Men in high Degree, but also to private Persons. By which Matrimonial
Conjunction, not only the Persons who contracted it, but both People and
Nations, and the Countries themselves, otherwise divided by the Sea and the
Interflowing Ocean, were combined together by a stronger League of Friendship
and Society then before, and a stricter tie of Amity.

After some Interval of Time, when they who bare ill will to our Princes and
us, to Liberty and Religion, and more especially to this Republic, stirred up
new Troubles in England, and the Nobility of the Kingdom called to their Aid
our Prince, who was only able to apply a Remedy to the growing Mischief; and
that our most undaunted Hero, undertaking a vast and absolutely Herculean
Labor, such as will scarce find credit with Posterity, not without a Miracle
altogether divine, while he strove one way, and the Winds drove another, at
length wafted over with favorable Gales and Wishes, safely arrived in England,
and without Resistance, but rather with the general Applause of the Nation, and
as it were born upon the Shoulders of the People, came to the Royal City: when
afterward he invited his dearest Consort, then the Companion of his Bed, now
of his Kingdom, to partake of the Honor offered him, and the Dignity soon
after to be conferred upon him, and the equal share of his Fortune, in the
eighty ninth Year of this Age, luckily and auspiciously both Husband and Wife
were declared King and Queen, with equal Power and Authority by the common Vote
and Suffrage, and unanimous Consent of both Houses.

What was then the Grief of these People, when not without sighs and Tears, and
Sobs interrupted with grief, when a Princess so dearly beloved, set Sail from
this Shore, and left this her so well beloved Country, never to return: What
was then the Joy of those People, when she arrived upon the English Coast; when
the Citizens of London beheld their Future Queen, what Crouding, what
Applauses, what Acclamations, is more easy to be imagined than to be related,
or comprehended in Words.

But when the King was to subdue Ireland; when our Great General was frequently
to cross the Seas, in order to withstand the Common Enemy of Europe; with what
prudence did she administer the Grand Affairs? how wisely, and advisedly govern
the Kingdom, and with what Magnanimity confirm the Minds of the People? Witness
that Dismal and Fatal Day, when upon the Tidings of the Navy shattered at Sea,
and of the threatened Invasion of the Enemy by Land, like an Armed Minerva, she
rode through the City, raised the dejected Spirits of the People, restored Life
and Courage to all, and mustered her self the Soldiers designed for the Guard
of the Coasts. Witness Havre de Grace, and that other Town upon the Coast of
France, by the Courage of the English Fleet which her industrious Care set
forth, laid in Ruins, and thundered into Ashes. Witness Both Houses of
Parliament, that returned Thanks to their Queen upon that occasion, and openly
and publicly expressed the sentiments of their Hearts in words at large. So
that the English were hardly sensible of the absence of their King; nor nor was
there any thing which they wanted, but only the Person of the King.

Thus for several Years this Royal Heroess held a Divided Empire between her
Royal Husband and her self. She ruled England, while William governed Belgium,
till toward the end of the preceding Year, she began to sink under the first
Assaults of a Terrrible Disease; which tho it slackened at the Beginning,
afterward every Day prevailing more and more, and the fatal hour approaching,
after she had bid adieu to Royal Pomp and all Earthly Affairs, she betook her
self to pious meditations, placed her only hopes in God alone, and to him
commended her soul.

In the mean time, together with several others of the same Order, the Pious
and most Reverend Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr. Tennison, visited her, who
observing how dangerously ill she was, and for that Reason, with pious and
wholesome Exhortations, putting her in mind in her approaching End, with an
undaunted Countenance, she returned him this masculine and truly royal
expression, I am not now to prepare for Death; it has been my study all the
days of my Life. Then the Archbishop gave her the Memorial of the Divine Body,
the Sacrament of our Militia. Which having received, after she had given her
last, and never to be repeated Embraces to her most Dear Husband, she composed
her self altogether to die, and between the sixth and seventh of January, about
midnight, in the Royal Palace of Kensington, piously and placidly expiring,
surrendered her chaste soul to God, as became so Devout a Princess.

Oh Black and Dismal Night! O horrid Day that followed, and blacker than the
Night it self! Fallacious Hopes! and Vain Cogitations, even of Kings
themselves! The Hero, sooty with the Dust and Smoke of War, and tired with the
Labors of a Tedious Campaign, delighted in the Embraces of his Beloved
Consort, and thought to have wasted the Winter Hours in her Society. But his
Wishes were disappointed: Instead of Joy he meets with Sorrow, Mourning instead
of Applause, and finds a Funeral where he thought to have met a Wife. His
otherwise Invincible Courage, gives way to Raging Grief; and he who had so
often contemned the Bullets and Swords of his Enemies; he who dreaded neither
Flames nor Steel, nor Death it self, Languishes, Falls, and Swoons away upon
the Death of his Dearest Queen. He remembers himself to be but a King, finds
himself a Man, and not unwilling, acknowledges the Excess of his Grief.
Miserable man that I am, said he, I have lost the best of Women, and the most
pleasing Companion of my Life!

Nor was that so much the Exposing of Love as of Truth it self: For all that
knew her, acknowledge this Queen to have been the best and most Excellent of
Women, endu'd with all Royal and Christian Virtues, and Adorned with all the
Graces both of Body and Mind.

And although these Blessings of the Mind are really solid and sempiternal
Blessings, far to be preferred before the Perfections of the Body; yet Virtue
shines more Beautifully, and more pleasingly insinuates it self into us from a
Graceful and Beautiful Body, after a manner not to be expressed. Which if it be
true in private Persons, how much more in Princes, in whom that Excellency and
Grace of Body charms and adds to the Allurements of Dignity by unknown and
secret Insinuations. For seeing that the most Beautiful Workmanship of God is
Man, and the more excellent part of Man is the Mind; how rare a thing and how
transcendent is it to carry a beautiful Mind in a beautiful Structure of Body,
and to how few Mortals does that perfection happen? But in the Queen both these
Perfections were Eminent. For she had a structure of Body to Admiration; Taller
than usual, well shaped, well proportioned, and Majestic. Correspondent to her
Body was her Face, becoming Empire and Command. A radiant Beauty overspead her
Countenance, and the Concomitants of Beauty, Grace, a Royal Majesty, and a
certain severity, tempered with a mild serenity: You might know her to be a
Queen by her Aspect. But a much nobler guest Inhabited this Domicil; a mind
more Lovely than her Body; from whence, as from a perpetual Fountain, and a
certain unexhausted Spring, all other both Royal and Christian Virtues
exuberantly Flowed; which how many, how transcendent and Illustrious they were,
their Enumeration and Contemplation will make manifest.

In the first place, How extraordinary was her understanding and her insight
into all Affairs? How quick and smart her judgment in discerning? How great her
Memory in retaining? With what a Fortitude endowed in undertaking? With what a
Resolution to Execute? What an Elevation of mind? On the other side, how Mild,
how Gentle, how Clement, how Courteous? How Affable? How Good, and what an
inbred and natural Benignity toward all Men? How Prudent and Wise in
administering the Affairs of the Kingdom? How severe and just in the
determination of Differences? In the Distribution of Punishments and Rewards?
How munificent and liberal to the Poor? How singularly modest? How frugal and
temperate in the midst of the Temptations of Life, and in the Pleasures of a
Court? That hardly ever any private Person less indulged her self, than a
Princess advanced to such an Illustrious Station of Honor and Dignity.

But nothing was more Illustrious in her, nothing more commendable, or more
deserving Admiration and Encomium, among so many and so great Virtues, than
that primary and above all transcending Virtue, real and sincere Piety, which
the wisest of Kings adjudg'd to be the beginning of all Wisdom. There was
nothing which she esteemed more Religiously incumbent upon her, than to serve
the Immortal God, and be assiduous in his Worship; to defend, maintain and
propagate, with all the Force of her Kingdom, the true Religion purged and
purified from Idols and Superstition. Nor was it her Opinion, that piety
consisted in the Lips, but in the Heart; not in subtle Disputes, but in good
Works; not in the Knowledge but the Observation of Precepts, and in the Cordial
Performance of enjoined Duties. Nor was it her choice with the Athenians,
rather to know than do that which was right; but with the Ancient Cato, tho
more truly than he, rather to be good, than to seem so. In the morning she rose
with the Sun, and Worshipped the Lord of Heaven and Earth. But when she was
sometimes forced to rise at midnight, by reason of the Urgent Affairs of the
State, and could not afterward sleep, she commanded either the Holy Scripture,
or some other Pious Book, to be brought her. If any persons came to Visit her
in a morning before she had poured forth her Prayers, she sent 'em back with
this Expression, That she was first to serve the King of Kings. If any persons
were said to seek her Life by Treachery and Conspiracy, her Answer was, That
she submitted to the Will of Heaven.

She was ever present at Public Congregations, especially when the Army was in
motion, and some more imminent dangers threatened.

And when she was there, no person more attentive to the Preacher, no person
poured forth more fervent Prayers to God, with a mind, rather than a
Countenance Dejected and fixed upon the Earth.

Then, how benificent, how bountiful, both in the Church, and without it, to
the wanting Members of the Church, in all Parts of the Earth? How many
thousands did she support at her own Charges, which that same horrid Tempest,
and dismal Rage of the Monks, which they call Piety, had driven into these
Countries, or into England, Exiles from their Native Country, and deprived of
the Liberty of their Consciences, much dearer than their Country? Who, lastly,
ever was in real Want, to whose Succor something did not always flow from that
abounding Fountain? Four times every year, she sent Letters, Subscribed with
her own Hand, with Money to be distributed to the Poor, from whom she never
desired the Repayment of Thanks. It Is not above three years since, that she
sent a vast Sum of Money into Holland for the Relief of the Poor, and to supply
the necessities of a bitter Winter, concealing her Name, according to her
Custom. Benign and Munificent Princess! Give thou would, but yet conceal thy
Name: Had thou been now alive, how many poor and indigent, that Perished
through the intense Rigor of this last Winter, had been then relieved by thy
most Royal Bounty?

But as she Consecrated her first and chiefest Duties to God, her next she
Dedicated to her Husband. How Lovingly did she Accompany him at his Departure?
How affectionately did she Embrace him Returning? With how much Kindness and
Sweetness did she Compensate the Hardships of War, and continual Travel by him
stustain'd? This last time, unhappy last Time! With what an incredible speed
and Fervency, contemning the Injuries of the Weather, did she hasten to meet
her dearest Consort, and Congratulate his safe Return? While the King was
absent, she alone took care of all the Affairs of the Kingdom: When he was
present, she ceased to meddle with any Public Business, but surrendered back
the Government of the whole Empire into his Hand; more joyful to resign it,
than to take it up. So that never any Mother of a Family could be more
obsequious to her Husband, than she was to the King.

Nor are you to believe, she wasted that Life in idleness. She had business
enough to do. She obliged all People by her Favors. She studied to deserve the
love of all men: She Cured the Sick; she succored the Afflicted; and dispersed
Relief to all that were in Want, or that Labored under any Calamity of Body.
Of Time, so precious, and the only thing of which we may be laudably allowed to
be Covetous, she was most sparing and parcimonious. Many times she set her
Royal Hands to Embroider; which she did not think beneath her self, in
imitation of the Ancient Queens. When at the same time (give ear great Seneca,
who so highly commendest to us Covetousness of Time) she ordered to be read to
her some profitable and learned Piece, which treated either of Politics, or
History, of Ethics, or of Divinity. She her self also Read very much, whether
in the City or the Country, and with honest, yet delightful ease deceived her
solitary Hours; so that like the great Scipio Africanus, she was never less at
leisure, than when at leisure, never less alone than when alone; and like that
other Scipio, Advantageously and Elegantly divided her Intervals of Leisure and
Business. An Egregious Act, enough to shame not only Women, not only Youth,
but Men of Years and Learning. Nor was it long since (give Ear ye Kings and
Princes) that she Erected in her Palace, a Library peculiar to her self; a
Precedent but rarely heard of before; and had furnished it, not so much with
Gaudy as with useful Books. Thence had she drawn a copious Stock of Learning;
deeply Read in History, and no less skilled in Architecture, and Geometry: So
that the Situations of all Countries, Regions, Cities and Seaport-Towns were
familiar to her.

And she, who expended so much upon the Worship of God, her Duty to her
Husband, upon the People, and upon all in Necessity; how much did she Expend
upon her self? She spent all upon her Mind; took little or no care of her Body.
When any new fashioned Garment, or costly Ornament was showed her, she
rejected 'em as superfluous, and Answered, The Money might be better laid out
upon the Poor. Wonderful Princess, endu'd with so Pious and Modest a Mind!
Great Exemplar, fit for Imitation! She bestows upon the Poor, she denies her
self, she contemns, so great and Potent a Princess neglects and scorns those
Things, which all other private Women so ardently and vehemently covet and
desire.

Which shall I most admire amidst so many, and so great Virtues? Whether that
extraordinary Piety toward God, that shun so brightly forth in her tender
Years; while never Woman worshipped, loved, and honored God with a more fervent
or purer zeal? Whether that sacred, and Praiseworthy Desire of promoting
Religion, upon which she was so singularly intent, that without the Providence
of God, and the Care and Vigilance of this our Princess, we should have hardly
had any stirring by this? Whether that most ardent Conjugal Love, wherein she
far exceeded Cyrus's Panthaea, Mausolius's Artemisia, and Mithridates's
Hypsicrataea? Whether that Prudence and Wisdom in Governing, wherein she
surpassed not only Women, but many famous Men? Whether her Equity in the
Administration of Justice; while Men looked upon her as Superior to Aristides,
to Phocian, and deemed her to be Justice her self? Whether that Benign, both
Mind and Countenance that equaled her with Socrates, and his Imperial
Competitor Antoninus, while her deportment was affable and benevolent to all
sorts and degrees of People; fully convinced that nothing could be more Royal
than the Saying of that most excellent Prince, and Emperor, most like herself,
that it behooved her not to let any Person depart sad from her Presence?
Whether that Modesty and Temperance, that Frugality in so great an Exuberancy
of Fortune; by means of which she stood impregnable to all the Temptations, and
Circaean Sorceries of a Vicious Court, nor could be seduced from the Paths of
true Virtue? So that her Court seemed not to be the Mansion of a Queen, but the
House of some private Matron, or rather the Temple of Chastity; by which means
she made the Bad Good, as is said of Antoninus the Philosopher, the Good Better
and like her self? Or whether her Clemency, and good Nature prone to win the
Good Will of all People; so that she was no less grieved than they who
Petitioned, if it so fell out that she could not grant their Requests; and like
that most Magnanimous Prince, thought that day lost wherein she was not kind to
some body or other? Or that transcendent Benificence, her Compassion, and that
Motherly Affection of a Munificent Princess to the Sick and Poor, whose
charitable Deeds, like those of the Roman Centurion may be thought to have
ascended up into Heaven? Or lastly, that extraordinary, and more than Masculine
Magnanimity and Constancy, as well through the whole Course of her Life, as at
her Death? Who among the poorest, and most miserable ever with more easiness
resigned this mortal Life, so obnoxious to a Thousand Calamities, than She, in
the midst of Regal Pomp, and plenty with a Royal, and truly Heroic Mind,
contemned and surrendered all the Pleasures of Life, and Regal Dignity, and
hastened to the Supreme King of Heaven and Earth, by whom she had been only
sent us hitherto? How many proofs did she manifest of a Mind undaunted, joyful,
and desirous to leave this Life? How many clear and evident Demonstrations did
she give of her Love to God? How comfortably did she address herself to the
King and the rest of the standers by? How well assured of Eternal Life and
Immortality did she bid farewell to this Life, and all Terrestrial Felicities,
and transmigrate to that same only Fountain, and perpetual Spring of all
Beatitude? So that her Life and Death was a most perfect and consummate
Exemplar of Virtue and Piety: Nor did Nature ever produce any thing more
excellent than she, who in all her Life never did, never said or thought any
thing but what was Praiseworthy; so that what was said of Scipio Aemilianus
may be more truly recorded of our Princess, whose Virtues were so many, so
great, and of that moment every one, that no Man ever durst presume so much as
tacitly to beg of the Immortal God, as this our Queen obtained from the most
indulgent Dispenser of all Good.

And because the mind of Man is better discerned by his Death than by his Life;
for Man is apt in his Life time to conceal and dissemble his Affections; but at
his Death the Mask being removed, he appears what he is; what was more noble or
signal than the Death of this Queen? What more becoming a Wise Man and a
Christian than that saying of hers, This is not the first time that I prepared
my self for Death. Great Sentence! most worthy a Philosopher and a Pious Man!
What more does Philosophy teach us, what more the Christian Religion! For if
Philosophy be meditation upon Death, as rightly of old the Platonics observed;
if we must be always learning to dye, according to the Stoies, may not she be
said to have lived a Philosophical Life, and the likest to Socrates himself,
who during the whole course of her Life, was always meditating upon Death?
Socrates is every where lovely, every where appears a Virtuous and Holy Man,
but no where more lovely or greater, than at his Exit, and at his death which
he so generously sought, by which he immortalized his Virtue and Integrity, and
confirmed what he had all along taught, not by Words but Deeds, and his
Voluntary Exit out of this Life. How much a more signal and Laudable Testimony
of her Virtue and Sanctity, than that Philosopher, did our Queen give to the
World by her death, so Heroic, and to be imitated by all Christians? Who
forsook not a private, not a miserable, but a Royal Life, abounding in all
delights, without the least repining; who so departed this Life as from a
Banquet; efcap'd from the Court as out of a Prison; who more assured of the
immortality of her Soul, and the hopes of a better Life, with a greater
Resolution, did not inflict a spontaneous Death upon herself, but expected a
decreed Stroke from the Hand of the Supreme Lord of all things* who forbids us
to quit our Stations uncommanded by himself; and beheld the common Enemy of
Mankind, the most terrible of all most terrible things, with a Mind altogether
undaunted, and a Countenance nothing terrified. No wonder she had learnt to
dye, it had been her only Study. She understood the Frailty of Life, like
Glass, the brighter the more brittle. She knew that we died every day; that the
beginning of Life was the beginning of Death; that there was nothing firm and
Stable here; that we are promised another Life, constant, solid and and
permanent; that Death is but the Passage to it; that no Man can dye well, but
he that lived well; that no Man lives well but he that has Death always before
his Eyes, and has learnt to dye well. Our Princess filled with these
Cogitations, scorned and repudiated all the conveniences and blandishments of
Life, Honors and Dignities, Scepters and Diadems, and whatever Men deem
Fortunate; and with a great and Royal Mind while she lived, contemned Life, and
Death when she died: and by so doing, nobly and gloriously triumphed over both.

Renowned Woman of a Masculine, and Courageous Spirit, victorious over Death it
self! By what name shall I call thee? Whether Parent of thy Country, formerly
the Surname ascribed to Livia, bnt more truly to be given to thee? Whether
August, which was attributed to the Roman Empresses, but due to thy Merit, than
which nothing was more Sacred, nothing more August? Or the best of Princesses,
which was first allowed to Scipio Masica, afterward to Trajan, by decree of
the Senate: An Epithete, that must never be renewed again, now thou art gone,
nor will return to Earth without the Remembrance of thy Virtues? Or the
Defendress of the Faith, a Title more truly appropriated to Thee, than to Him,
to whom it was first indulged? Most Holy and Religious Princess, before whom no
Woman is to be preferred!

Let sacred and profane Histories recommend to us the Fortitude of Deborah,
the Charity of Dorcas; the Prudence of Semiramis, and her Knowledge how to
Govern; the Courageous Soul of Zenobia, and her fervent Love of Learn-the
incredible Endowments both of Body and Mind in Aspasia, and her singular
Modesty; the Piety of Placilla, and her assiduous care of the Needy and Sick;
let the British Annals extol their Maud, their Philippa, their Elizabeth, and
their transcending Virtues; neither Antiquity, nor this our modern Age can
boast of any thing that is to be compared with this our far surpassing Queen,
worthy of far greater Encomiums. What singly they possessed, this had
accumulatively crowded in one Person, as being a Compendium of all those
Virtues.

For my part, when I revolve all these things in my Mind, and diligently weigh
the particular Virtues of this single Woman, I am plainly and evidently
convinced that never any thing was produced in this world more excellent than
this Princess, nor that ever any greater Blessing happened to Mortals. For if
that saying of Plato be true, as it is most certain, that Cities then will have
an end of all their miseries, when great Power and Prudence, by a certain
divine State, meet with mutual Embraces with Equity and Justice; if the World
shall then be happy, as the same Author asserts, when either Kings are wise, or
wise Men Reign, how happy and fortunate would have been our Republic, and the
People and Nations committed to her care, who with so much prudence and wisdom
governed her Kingdom; who with so much Justice and Equity tempered her Power;
who in that high Station of her Fortune never did harm to any Man, when she had
so much Power to injure; whose Humility contended with her majesty, whose
Clemency with her Severity, and whose Goodness with her supreme Authority; who
thought herself so much Greater, by how much she was better than others, as
Agesilaus said of Artaxerxes; who splendidly and wisely governed Cities and
People, then which Knowledge how to Reign well, Dioclesian from his own
Experience was wont to affirm, that there was not any Art or Science more
difficult to be learnt? And if Fabius Maximus were styled of old the Buckler of
the Empire, Marcellus the Sword, do we not behold the true and genuine Effigies
of our King and Queen in these two illustrious Captains; of which he, like
Marcellus defends us with his Sword; she like Fabius protected us with her
Buckler, and holding in the one hand her Spear, her Shield in the other, now
represented to our Eyes the Armed Pallas, then again the gentle and Pacifick
Minerva, as well the Goddess of Prudence as of War.

Lastly, if man were made after the Image of God; if Kings are ordained of God;
if the most conspicuous virtues of the supreme Deity are his Immense Goodness
and Power, how evidently did our August Queen represent the Image of God both
in her words and deeds? How piously did she perform her Vicegerency? How nearly
imitate his Virtues? Who greatest in power, best in Goodness justly deserved
to be called the Best and Greatest of Princesses, by a holy Appellation, and
common to her with God himself? For he is Optimus Maximus, the Greatest Best,
but first he is called the Best, and then the Greatest. By which what other did
Antiquity signify to us, but that this was the chief Character proper to God,
and that he had no Attribute more excellent than his Goodness? This chief and
primary Virtue of the supreme Deity who among Mortals more truly ever imitated
than our Queen? Who as she had received supremacy of Power from God, so
likewise a Will propensely inclined to deserve well of all Men; who distributed
the Gifts conferred upon her from Heaven, for the common Good, and Benefit of
All; who showed herself not only a munificent Queen, but a certain Divinity
visible upon Earth, and conspicuous to our Eyes; so that the People committed
to her Care might know and be sensible that they lived under MARY, the most
Pious and upright, that is to say, the Best, and surpassing all the best in her
Kind.

Such a Princess therefore, so excellent, and so far as Virtue can be
understood, so admirable and Transcending we have lost; who by sweetness of
Manners, and by her singular Clemency and Beneficence had won the Love of all
people. The English loved her, the Hollanders loved her, and as she so loved
both Nations, that it was hard to discover which the best, so the people of
both Nations reverenced her with an equal Affection; only the strife between
'em was, who loved her most Fervently. Nor had she only engaged the English;
the Hollanders and other Nations subjected to her Empire, but among Foreigners
and Strangers, she had also won the favor and good will of all People; all Men
extolled that Woman whom no man ever spoke ill of, unless he were at the same
time the professed Enemy of all Virtue.

But as she was then the Love of all Nations, the delight of both People; so is
she now the Subject of their Lamentation. She is now become the public and
common grief of all Men. However there is that Consolation still remaining
among us, which if it cannot absolutely assuage, yet well may serve to alleviate
and mitigate our Sorrow. We have a King still living, strong and healthy, who
being safe, we may believe that God has not altogether cast us from our
Protection. We have Peers, and the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom, who with
all the King's Forces, all his warlike preparations, both at home and abroad,
both by Land and Sea, will carry on the War. We have our own Republic, strong,
flourishing, potent, and equally sustaining the burdens of the War. We have
our powerful Allies and Friends, Caesar, the Spaniards, the Germans, joined
together with us in the same League and Confederacy of War. But above all
things we have the Supreme God of Heaven and Earth, propitious and favorable
to the Religious Cause of his People; through whose assistance we promise
better things for the future, and a prosperous Issue of this War. But onr
Mourning exceeds all Consolation, nor will our grief for the death of our best
Princess endure that any Restraint should be put upon it; a Princess, whom
Nations at length begin to value, now that they have lost her. She is now
translated to a better place, and freed from the fetters of this mortal and
perishing Body, has exchanged for an immortal, this frail Life, a Terrestrial
for a Celestial Kingdom, and all her Royal Splendour upon Earth for a far
brighter Glory; where with Holy Quire of the Blessed, and her Illustrious
Ancestors she possesses the Fruition of never ceasing Gladness, and sempiternal
Joy, leaving only to us Tears and Lamentation, a long lasting Sorrow, and as a
grateful, so a sad and mournful Remembrance of her. The King bewails the best
of Wives; the English the best of Queens; the Hollanders the best of
Princesses; the Republic a protectress; the Church a Defendress; Widows and
Orphans a Foster-Mother, the miserable, the needy, and the sick a true support,
and all a Mother and a Parent. Most certainly we have lost a Mother and a
Parent, our Mother and Parent; who as she had by many Merits and Benefits
engaged the Kingdom of England, and our Republic, with the true Worship of
God, the Reformed Religion purged from Roman Contamination, all honest and
laudable Arts and Sciences, so would she have heaped upon 'em greater
Obligations, greater Benefits, had the supreme Arbiter of all things vouchsafed
her ease, Peace, and a longer Life. Now we have lost the Harvest of the present
time, and the hopes of the future: Now we are sensible of a double loss; now
we bewail, deplore, lament the Best and most Excellent of Princesses, snatched
from us by a Death untimely and fatal to us all. And though it become us not to
disturb her Celestial Joys with our importunate and troublesome means, since
our Tears can never recall her, however who will not be so indulgent to our
Humane Weakness, as to pardon us the Mourners at so Calamitous a Funeral? Who
in the midst of general Sorrow and Lamentation can refrain from public Tears?
These are the last Offices which are due to her; and this day appointed for
Universal Mourning. But the rest must be reserved till another time, as being
dedicated to the Muses, who must then be the Close Mourners.

DIXI.
EPITAPHIUM Augustissimae heroinae MARIAE II. magnae Brittanniae, Galliae, and
Hiberniae, Reginae.
ANglorum Matter, Batavum spes, Gloria Sexus, Prudens, aequa, Sagax, pulchra,
Benigna, gravis, Conjugis, and Populi lachrymis in marmora versis, Hic tegitur,
generis magna Stuarta decus.

B. D. MANDEVILLE. Med. Doct.

A Funeral Oration Pronounced upon the DEATH OF THE Most Serene and Potent
PRINCESS, Mary Stuart, QUEEN of Great Britain, France and Ireland.

By JOHN ORTWINIUS.

Spoken the 2d of March, 1694-95.

From the Latin Original Printed at Delph.

LONDON: Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in Jewen-street: And are also to
be Sold by Edm. Richardson, in the Upper Court in Scalding-Alley, near the
Poultry-Church, 1695.

TO THE Most Potent, Most Invincible, and Most Sorrowful WILLIAM, KING of Great
Britain, France and Ireland.

AS ALSO To the Most Noble, and Right Worshipful the Magistrates of Delph,
Sharers in the Royal Mourning, This Funeral Oration, pronounced upon the
Decease of the Most Serene QUEEN MARIE STVART, Consecrates and Dedicates

Your Sacred Majesty's, and Your Lordships most Devoted, JOHN ORTWINIUS.

A Funeral Oration UPON THE Death of the QUEEN.
Illustrious Praetor: Most Noble, most Worthy and Grave Consuls, Consulars,
Judges, Senators, and you that are Assistant to their Councils and Acts: Most
Reverend Preachers of the Word of God: Most Learned Doctors in all the
Sciences, Most Honored Collegiates, And you the most Select Surrounding Crowd
of my Disciples,

WHere e're I look about me, it is not the bare Apparition of Sadness, and
Forlorn Disconsolation that strikes my Eyes. For Two Months together, the
greatest part of the Northern World has lain covered with Snow, and hardened
with Extremity of Cold; and Navigable Rivers have stopped their Course, condensed
and congealed by sharp contracting Frosts, while we could hardly warm our
selves, nor defend our Bodies from the Rigor of the Season, tho profusly
furnished with comfortable Fires. Nor could we silently brook, nor dissemble
our Regret for being deprived the Fruit of Commerce and Pleasure, and for being
seated in such a desert Solitude. But when we consider the approaching Change,
when it would soon come to pass, that the Plough'd Fields, Fettered in Chains
of Ice, would be set free by the warm Western Gales, that the Frozen Moisture
in all the Hoary Mountains, Roads and Streets, would soon melt away, dissolved
by the Sun's ascending Heat, and that the Rivers, their Ponderous Weight
removed, would hasten with an unbridl'd Torrent to the Sea, and reinforce our
Trade, abounding and Wealthy in all sorts of Merchandise, which the
perverseness of the Season had obstructed; that the concealed Seed, the
Husbandman's Expectation, would soon rise up above the Earth; that the Birds
would cheer the Tepid Air with their Harmonious Notes; and that the Flocks and
Herds would soon be sporting and wantoning in our Delightful Meadows, this
readily induces us to take in good part this Spectacle of Complaint and Horror,
without Lamentation or Tears. The Reason is, because the Severity of the hard
Season is allayed by a certain Expectation of an approaching time when all
things will revive and flourish. But when I behold the most Illustrious Orders,
the Fathers of their Country, Personages in High Stations, and Exercising the
Sovereign Function of the Commonwealth, clouded in Sable Mourning, and Ponder
in my Thoughts the Occasion of that same Doleful Habit, I perceive our selves
subjected to a much profounder Grief, scarce capable of Consolation, which no
Circumvalation of Years can repair, and which all good Men, the Exact Adorers
of Truth and Justice can hardly brook with Patience. There is not any one among
ye, Most Noble Auditors, who has not heard me speak of the Late Untimely Death
of a Queen, who neither had, nor will have her Equal, or her Second upon Earth.
So that when I had fully resolved, these Brumal Holydays, to atone the Muses,
and Sincerely to have reconciled my self to their Favor, at other times
distracted with my public and private Schools, the Public Sorrow interrupted
me; but more especially my City of Delph, which, no unprofitable Citizen, I
study with all Veneration, to serve, whispered me in the Ear, and thus seemed
to Expostulate with me. What! when the greatest part of the Cities of Germany
have laid so deep to heart the Loss of the Queen, and that their Temples, and
their private Houses resounded with numerous Orations and Epicediums, both in
Prose and Verse; must I, the Metropolis, once Conspicuous for the Nassovian and
Orangian Princes, and still entrusted with their Sacred Mausoleums, with a
Religious Silence only celebrate the Obsequies of this most Serene Queen?
Heaven defend it. And though I am not capable to enumerate all the Virtues of
this August Exemplar of Womankind, yet I shall presume to draw 'em in
Minature, tho with a Rude and far from Magisterial Pencil, and pronounced not
from my own but from the Lips of all men that live in this, or in the other
Hemisphere; and who are equal sufferers by this deadly Wound.

In Obedience therefore to my most Honored and Beloved City, demanding only
what is Just and Equitable, I have undertaken the performance of this mournful
duty; afraid however, so disconsolate and cast down with Sorrow, as I am, lest
my Sobs should interrupt my Words, and obstruct the passage of my Speech. Which
if it should come to pass, I beg and beseech ye, most Learned Auditors, to
pardon my Just Tears, while I am performing the last unpleasing duties to the
Manes of an incomparable Queen.

Whoever will give his mind to peruse the Annals of a Noble People, shall find
therein the Famous Actions, Renowned Enterprises, Laurels, Palms, together with
other Grandeurs intermixed, and publicly now commemorated. To this purpose the
Historian assembled all his cares and cogitations, that he might consecrate
those Eternal Monuments of the mind, which no Antiquity could ever deface, and
leave behind him not an Effigies of Breathing Brass, but of Virtue, set forth
and polished by the most sublime Wirs. We find it also Recorded, that this
Propagation of Honor, from whence Antiquity would have succeeding Ages take
Example, was transmitted to the Female Sex, in the six hundred sixty third year
from the building of Rome, neither has Nature so straightened and contracted her
Praises, as out of envy to malign the Women, and shower her Favors on the Men.
Julius Caesar made a Funeral Oration upon his Aunt Julia in the Public Hall of
Justice, wherein by the Mothers side he derives her descent from a long Series
of Kings, and by the Father's side deduces her Lineage from the Immortal Gods.
Following the Footsteps of this most Elegant of Orators, for that Title Tully
gives him, though with unequal Paces, I thought I could not take a better
Method, then to weave my Oration upon the same Loom, beginning from the
Nativity of the most blessed Queen, with a purpose afterward to expatiate into
a Portico full of Images. Happy Age that produced such a Princess, -- Happy the
Parents of such Daughter, the most absolute Examplar of all Virtues, even by
the Confession of those that burst with Envy. Let the Sons of Romulus please
themselves with those, who by an intermixture of Progeny have wrested their
Country from the Galls, and derived to themselves a singular Commendation from
that Elogy; but all these things signify nothing to our MARIE, who alone was
endued with so many ornaments of Pious Manners, so many, and so illustrious
Ensigns of true Glory, as have eclipsed the fame of all the most Celebrated
Matrons in the World. It Is enough then that our Immortal Queen Mary derived her
descent from a long Race of Royal Blood, and that her Ancestors sat enthroned
for Many Ages; 'twould be a mean Begging of the Question to repeat her Pedigree.

She was born in the Month of May, 1662. She grew up in the Bosom of her
Parents, educated in a Court flowing with those Pleasures that usually charm
the Fancies of Children that have little restaint upon 'em, and seduce 'em from
their innate Goodness. But she, postponing all those gay delights with which
render Age, fit for any Impression, is fed, detested all those Syreus of
Voluptuousness, whose Charms enticed to Sloth and Luxury, the two Destructions
and Shipwracks both of Body and Soul. Intent upon the painful Arts that first
Minerva taught, she made it her only Business to outdo Penelape with her
Needle, dedicating her time wholly to Embroidery and the Curiosities of
Needlework, which are still to be seen, the Monuments of her Industry.

Alexander thus formerly sold to Sisigambes, the Mother of Darius, a Garment,
the Elaborate Work and Gift of his own Sisters. The Coverlets and Carpets of
the deceased Princess, wrought with Babylonian Art, are daily to be beheld with
Wonder. All this while, how zealous she was for the true Worship of the True
God, apparent to the Eyes of all Men, plainly demonstrated. For when her Uncle
Charles II: (whose care for his Brother's Daughter is not to be past over in
Silence) appointed her a Tutor to lay the first Foundations in her of the most
corrected and sincere Religion, they were so deeply fixed in her Breast, that
afterward no Menaces, no threatened dangers, no promises of Golden Mountains,
no Temptations of Pleasure could undermine her. In this same Station of
Laudable Exercises, and Eximious Piety for sixteen Years together, She was at
length looked upon by William, at that time Prince of Orange, the most prudent
and valiant Commander and Admiral of the Belgian Army, and Statholder of the
Commonwealth, as the only Person worthy for him to demand in Marriage, and He
adjudged the only Person fit to be joined with Her in Conjugal Affection. For
if Vettue becomes more acceptable in an amiable Shrine, there were in Mary
those Accomplishments of Beauty, that might well enforce and inflame Prince
William's Ardour. The Rays of Lively Youth, a cheerful Decorum in her Eyes, the
Gayety of her dishrevel'd Tresses, and besides the Ornamental Artifices of her
Dressers, her Lovely Stature recommended the Princess Mary to her Lover.
Content with a slight, but decent Dress, she abhorred that wanton diligence
which they only instance of, who carry their Beauty in their Cabinets, and have
nothing but Jemms and Jewels to set 'em off; measuring Maiden Accoutrement by
the true Estimate of Chastity, Modesty, Constancy and Fidelity, and believing
she stood in need of no other Cerusses to render her acceptable, The Contract
therefore was signed, and I may say most happily for us, upon the 18th day of
December, 1677. A day so much the more to be celebrated, for that upon the same
day Prince William entered into the twenty seventh year of his Age. This Family
League confirmed in her Native Country; this near relation of Blood, and the
Nuptial Bed, this Unity of sacred Worship renewed our hopes of establishing for
the future the Amity and Friendship with the English, our Neighbors, before so
often violated and broken, nor did they fail your Expectation; it is incredible
how the Face of Affairs immediately altered. For the next Year the French King
surrounded with the Strength of a most Flourishing Kingdom, pretended to caress
the Laws of Peace, and earnestly of his own accord sued for an Accommodation.
Others who thought it their wisest way, there to bend their Forces where
Fortune turned the Scales, suspecting and envying this same riveted Bond of
Conjugal Affection, refolv'd to provide for their own safety, and to unite
their dubious Interests with Ours.

When this same most serene couple, then which there never could be yet
imagined a Royal Pair so closely knit in coningal Affection, as the most
sorrowful King, in his Letters to the most Illustrious States, wherein he
signifies the unexpected and never too much deplored Decease of his
Incomparable Queen, apparently discovers, had enjoyed all the variety of
delight, and Princely Pastimes that London could afford, in Company with their
Father, their Uncle, and the Princes of Britain, he began to think of returning
back to our Horison, and re-adorning with his own, and presence of his Royal
Consort, his Principal Abode and Glory of our State the Hague. With what a
profuseness of Love and Admiration, with what exquisite Testimonies of
Veneratiou and Honor the two Princes were received and welcomed home, upon
their arrival ashore, would be needless for Me, most Learned Auditors, to set
forth in multitude of Expressions, since all who are now alive, either beheld
it with their Eyes, or heard it by unfeigned Relation. And it would take up too
much time to collect together the continued Series of those Things which the
Princess Marie, indefatigable in doing good, and sought to by her native
Countrymen, to gratify their Petitions performed in order to the composing the
Affair of Britain, the Restoration of Tottering Religion, and depressed
Liberty. It behooves us therefore to trace the chiefest Footsteps of the Virtues
of our Princess, but not to speak so much as may deservedly be spoken of 'em,
but such Things only as without a heinous offense cannot be omitted by me, nor
can suit with any other but the Queen.

As to her Piety, which the most Excellent of Orators rightly calls the
Foundation of all Virtues, she had such a true, and real Veneration for it,
that she believed there was no degree of Majesty whatever, no Power of Princes
which were not obliged to submit their Puissance to it. She was fully confirmed
from her Infancy, that Piety neglected by Princes and Governors of States was
an ill Omen of apparent Destruction; and that they themselves were convinced of
the necessity of it, who, though they lived altogether in Contempt of it,
nevertherless (the worst sort of Mimicry) feigned to have a Love for it, and so
would seem to be Pious, not really to be so. But if the Sun infects with
Blackness those who are continually scalded with his Beams; if a Head that is
sain and sound, imparts Motion, Strength, and Vigor to the Members. In like
manner Domestic Servants and Subjects derive their Dye and Color from the Life
and Conversation of the Princess, and their Sanctity and Integrity from the
Prince, who is the Head of the Commonweal. Antiquity has recorded, that Midas
being initiated into sacred Rights by Orpheus, filled all Phrygia with
Religion, which rendered the Country much more durably safe, then the strength
of her Arms. Therefore the most Serene Princess consecrated certain fixed Hours
to Divine Worship, which she either spent in Prayer, or else in reading Books
of good and solid Divinity. Sublime Example! fit to be transmitted by
Encomiums, Eulogies, Orations, Writings and Monuments to all Posterity, and to
be erected to the Eternal Infamy of Slothful and Irreligious Matrons! When
those more solemn Duties of Religion were over, she never gave her Mind to the
frivolous stories of Amadis, and impertinent Fictions of Amad. but attentively
studied the Volumes of those Authors by which she might improve her Knowledge
and her Prudence. And lest, most learned Auditors, any one should think this
short Oration composed at the obsequious Instigations of specious and
pleasingly delusive Flattery, I shall relate not what I gathered from the
common report of Fame, but from the Lips of a most worthy Person, and my
Friend, who being admitted in the Morning to kiss her Hands, found before her
Cambden's Annals of Queen Elizabeth, and Doctor Burnet's History of the
Reformation. But Piety is never to be accounted solidly accomplished unless
accompanied with Liberality; otherwise it would be Piety only in words, and not
in deeds, as she her self upon the approach of her Expiring Minutes discoursed
of a Godly and Virtuous Life. You People of France, who abandoning your Native
Soil, because you would not suffer Violence upon your Consciences, nor listen
to the adulterate Charms of Bards, and Druids. You People of France, I say,
deprived of all supports of Life, fled to this most Clement Princess, as to the
Altar of some Sanctuary, or some present Female Deity. What time the Princess
struck with Compassion, pleaded your unfortunate Cause before the Fathers of
the Country, she sweetly solicited the wealthy Treasures of many to pity your
Condition: Solicited do I say! Nay more, she sent 'em away relieved and
succored with her own Royal Revenues. That others also were no less Sharers in
her Princely Munificence, the Money which she ordered to be solded and sealed
up in Papers, and distributed without Vainglory, and with an unwearied Charity
to the Indigent, sufficiently manifested. Believing it more Generous, and more
Praiseworthy by this means to oblige her Debtors, which were many, see that for
two or three Years together she ordered to be expended; and divided
considerable Sums of Money to those, who in the Cities of Holland were not able
to provide against the extremities of the Season, and the injuries of the
Weather. That she was affable and courteous, by which she acquired the Respect
and Love of all Persons, is undeniably acknowledged on every Hand. For what was
more usually observed in this Princess? She never stayed for the most
convenient times of Address, and the fittest times to be spoken with, but
meeting the Desires of those that made their Suits and Petitions to her,
received 'em with a Serene Countenance; Saving the Veneration that was due to
her, believing that Affability and Gravity might reside together in one
Mansion, she re-saluted those that bowed to her; offered what not desired;
rightly deeming, that no Person was to return dissatisfied and Pensive from the
Presence of a Prince; which was the saying of that Emperor who was called the
Love and Delight of Mankind. Now then if we but duly consider those Virtues,
most Learned Auditors, what Man so Iron-Tongu'd, and Leaden-hearted, who can
blame all sorts of Persons, whether of high or low degree, for being perplexed
and troubled at the departure of a Princess so Pious, so munificent? But
unavoidable Necessity demanded, and commandingly required, that she must begin
and follow her beloved Husband, the most renowned of Generals, then busily
engaged to deliver the Necks of the English from being trampled on by
Superstition, and illegal Slavery. But when the most Serene Princess called to
mind the remembrance of her Subjects, by whom she was most entirely and dearly
reverenced, and esteemed; when she thought of that Palace of Loo, where she often
went to alleviate and divert the Cares of her Mind, from having a full Prospect
of the Woods, and spacious Fields of Velau, she beheld her Husband in pursuit
of the wild Beasts, with a full Cry; when she revolved in her Mind how terrible
a thing it was for a Kingdom to be without a Head and Chieftain, contented with
her Lot, and sore against her Will, she was torn away by Force from her Belgian
Delights. The public Cause was in Dispute, and that overcame her Charity
toward her Subjects, her Country Pleasures, her Moderation, her equity of Mind,
nay, even the Considerations which she had for her Father himself, whom she
never went about to impugn, nor ever desired his being ejected, but enforced
only to Consent that a Parliament might be duly Summoned, and that what had
been altered, shaken, or broken, might be restored to their former State, that
is to say, according the Laws and most ancient Constitutions of the Kingdom,
which he had sworn to observe, and that above all things care might be taken
that Religion and Liberty might receive no harm. Reluctant therefore, and as it
were by Constraint (for according to the Socratic Paradox, a Wise Man does
nothing unwillingly, nothing for which he is sorry, nothing by Compulsion)
departing from us upon the twelfth of March, in the Year 1689, with a fair Wind
she arrived in England, which was now without a Governor, and where the Army
was without a Leader. But lest any External Force, while the Minds of the
People were variously distracted and provoked; as Rumor spread abroad, the
Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom resolved to resign the Care of the Kingdom,
and Administration of the Government to the two Princes; and upon the seventh
of the Calendar of March, in the year beforementioned, the same day, as some
aver, that put an end to the Reign of Tarquin the proud, declared William and
Mary King and Queen of England, France, and Ireland, and upon the third of the
Ides of April, what day they obtained the Royal Crown and Scepter, King and
Queen of Scotland also. From that time forward they held the two Kingdoms with
equal Auspices, and concording Minds, yet so that by reason of the Wars, which
the French King, grasping in his boundless hopes the Dominion of all Europe,
have every where inflamed, was forced to cross the Seas, and remain abroad for
some time. Therefore during the absence of the King, the Empire of the Kingdom,
so great was her Genius, was committed to her Care, which she managed with so
much prudence and fortitude, that she repelled from the Coasts of the Kingdom
an Insulting Enemy, menacing to Land; and suppressed and extinguished
Conspiracies entered into by a new sort of Catilines. She mustered the Land
Armies, and viewed the Fleets, and took care that nothing should be wanting in
either that might be useful either to stop or invade the Enemy, or relieve, and
assist her own. For this Tranquillity of the Times, for this same singular
Providence, and Virtue, did she not more truly then any Princess before her,
deserve the Appellations of Augnst, of Parent of her Country, of Best Mother,
and Mother of the Martial Camps? This every year she labored to see
accomplished, to the end the King might recross the Seas in his Military
Ornaments, the Key of the Kingdom being delivered to the Queen, till toward
the end of last Autumn; after an Expedition ended upon the Borders of France,
he hastened to the Embraces of his Royal Consort, and to provide for those
things which were to be consulted in Parliament for the raising of Money
toward the supplies of the Armies and Fleets. The King took Shipping, put to
Sea, and with a prosperous Wind arrived in England, where he had no sooner set
his Foot ashore, but the loud acclamations of the People were heard in all
quarters of the British Dominions, Long flourish Great Britain, long live our
Country, long live King William. And not long after her Majesty meeting the
King, all along upon the Road these lucky Omens, and transcending Applauses
filled the Sky. Under the Protection of our King and Queen we live; under their
Protection we Navigate and Trade; under their Protection we enjay our Fortunes
and our Liberties. Then most August Monarch, should any one from among those
vast congratulating, and triumphing Multitudes have showed himself, and
presaged that those Rejoycings were but the Forerunners of Grief, and would be
soon defiled by some signal Calamity impending on the Royal Family, would he
not have been deservedly looked upon as some impertinent Enthusiastic? So
ignorant are human Minds of future Chance and Fate. Such Sacrifices and
Attonements as these the Omnipotent has prescribed to vaunting Mortals, and
ordained it as a Law, that the greatest Inconstancy should rule their Affairs,
the Prosperity of which no Man could ever so assuredly promise himself, as to
depend upon a Fortunate Course of his Life without some intermixture of
Adversity. Thus it fell out, that when the toilsome Labors of the Camp had
recalled the King to Rest, and Pastime, a mournful Calamity shook and oppressed
his generous Soul, still wakeful over the safety of his Kingdoms, where all
succeeded according to his Mind, and no less vigilent for the Common Good of
the Belgians, who conceived in their Minds a lucky Omen of succeess from the
more early then usual, though ardently wished for return of their renowned
General. For upon the third of January 1694-95. The Queen was seized with a
slight shivering, but which threatened nothing of danger to her Life, the
Physicians giving hope of Relief and Cure, believing this Royal Fortress might
be defended by their Hands. But upon the sixth of January the Fever gathering
Strength, and reinforcing its Virulency, and the Smallpox, a Contagion
generally incident to Youth, appearing, but not kindly coming forth, though all
help and remedies were applied that human Experience has invented against the
violence of that distemper, it was in vain at length for all the Art of Physic
to contend; for the Disease immediately seized upon the Queen with such a
pernicious force as vanquished all the aid of Man. All the while the King
refused to stir from the Languishing Queen's Bedside, assiduous to serve her,
and careless of the Infection that many times accompanies that Malady; and
being often requested to spare his Royal Person, and not to inflict another
Wound upon suffering Europe, made Answer, That when he Married the Queen, he
Convenanted to be the Companion not only of her Prosperity, but of whatever
Fortune befell her, and that he would, with the hazard of his Life receive from
her Lips her last expiring Gasps.

Felices ter, and amplius
Quos Irrupta tenet Copula, nec Malis
Divulsus querimoniis
Suprema citius solvet Amor Dic.
All hope of Recovery now was fled away, and the most Reverend Father in God,
the Archbishop of Canterbury being admitted into the Room in order to perform
the last Duties of his Function, told her Majesty, that the fatal hour was at
hand, that the Forces of her Body being weakened, and broken, Death was making
his Approaches, and therefore she had nothing more to do, but to submit herself
to the Pleasure of the Almighty. Such a harsh and disconsolate Message would
have struck another Person, though long exercised and hardened in Stoical
Indolency, with Horror and Trembling. But what said the Queen to this? Full of
Faith and Constancy, she received the tidings with a cheerful and undaunted
Countenance, saying withal, That she did no way seek to shun the the stroke of
Death, but was ready prepared for the Dark Mansion of the Grave, for that she
had always so led her Life, that whenever Death gave her his last Summons, she
should be a gainer by it. Having thns spoken without the least emotion of Mind,
she received the certain Pledges of Divine Peace, and ineffable Consolation to
allay the Thirst and Hunger of her Soul, delivered her by the Most Reverend
Father, at the same time with most ardent Wishes, and pious Ejaculations,
calling upon her Redeemer nailed to the Cross.

This last and most mournful Act remained, and then the King oppressed, and
bowing under the Burden of his own Sorrows, e're death had quite benumbed her
trembling Arteries, and the warm Vapor of Breath lay panting in her sacred
Breast, bid her Eternally farewell. Which last demonstrations, and evident
signs of the most tender motions of the Soul were performed with that Sincerity
of a Cordial Passion, that you may readily, most Learned Auditors, conjecture
the Anguish of such a doleful Parting, though my Oration, my bow being
enfeebled with Sadness, cannot reach the perfect Description. At length -- my
words stick fast upon my Tongue -- At length -- I say, upon the seventh day of
the Ides of January, about twelve a Clock at Noon, the Blessed Queen resigned
her pure Soul to God with a most placid Exit, not having fully accomplished the
thirty third year of her Age, and consequently in the flower of her Years: This
was the End of a Queen, in whom not only Piety, Benignity, and Humanity, but
all Virtues seem to be eclipsed. Oh cruel Fate! Oh untimely Death! Timely I
should have said, my Account failed me. For if we measure the Course of the
Queen's Life, circumscribed by Years, at first sight it appears to be very much
straightened, and very short. But if we look farther, we shall find it to be a
long, and immense Race of Glory. One day of a Wise Man, says Possidonius, is
more extensive then the whole Age of an ignorant Person. That same Alexander,
whose Achievements acquired him the name of Great; Germanicus Caesar, endu'd
with as many Graces of Body and Mind as I remember any Man to have been, both
died at the same Age, and if we may presume to compare small with great things,
he whose Garment and Thigh has these Words inscribed upon 'em, Rex Regum,
prolonged his days no farther: In this account we find it often fall out quite
contrary to the Opinion of Diogenes, maintaining by way of Dispute, that they
who make it their Business, during the whole Course of their Lives, to be
beneficial to Mankind, and to seek renown by Laudable Atcheivments, and
profitable Sciences, ought to live longer then they who waste their leisure in
sloth and Idleness.

The King, when the first word os her final departure, swoon'd more than once
away; and that some undaunted Hero, Fearless of all Dangers, who never was wont
to fly before a tenfold Number of Enemies, who never gave way to the ensnaring
Ambuseadoes and Thefts of War, who always stood immovable in the middle of
Showers of Bombs, Grenades, and Bullets, sunk under the weight of one single
Sorrow. But he is easily to be pardoned. For he wants the Queen, the sweet half
of his Soul, whom he was wont to lay in his Bosom, whom he loved more tenderly
than his Eyes, whom he was wont to make the partaker of his Cares, and whom he
always made the Companion of his Joys. The Palace of Whitehall resounded with
the Sobs and Sighs of those wail'd her Decease, but the Public Lamentation not
to be confined within those narrow Walls, orewhelm'd the whole City of London,
and struck with Consternation the Hearts of all Men, Peers, and Common People,
young and old, Matrons and Virgins, so deeply did the sense of the Misfortune
penetrate all Ages. The unspeakable cruelty of Death was bemoaned, the spacious
Age of Time upbraided and accused, the General Misfortune bewailed, and a
universal disguise of Sorrow, disfigured the Countenances of both Sexes.

This fatal News from England reached our Coasts; to which at first, because we
always slowly believe those Rumors which are unwelcome to us, we gave but
little credit. Presently all People were in a hurry, one runs one way, another
another, and what is this sad News they cry, whence comes it, who reports it?
But being at length assured by frequent Confirmations, presently all Men of
Worth and Prudence, who made a just Estimate of the loss which the Public
sustained by the Death of the Queen, were seized with more than ordinary Grief,
which failed not to diffuse it self into universal Mourning and Lamentation.
And now you People of England, who retain the acknowledgment of those Immortal
Benefits, which the Queen conferred upon ye, when she succored your Religion
and Liberty. You Belgians, to whom the Queen, for her Maternal Indulgence was
dearer then your Lives I make my appeal to ye in the memorable Words of
Metellius, surnamed Macedonicus, who when the News was brought him of the Death
of Scipio Aemilianus, thus bespake his Sons: Go, Children, Solemnize the
Obsequies; you will never behold the Funeral of a braver Citizen, So I say to
you -- Go English Men, go Belgians, solemnize her Obsequies. -- You will never
behold the Funeral of a greater Queen. But wherefore do I by an unpleasing
Commemoration go about to impose Affliction and the performances of Respectful
sorrow upon those that are forward enough of themselves. Let us rather return
Thanks to God, that he permitted the Residence of so great a Queen among us,
'till he called her to himself; which was the saying, and the Consolation of
those who attended the Funeral of Marcus Antonius, that most worthy Emperor,
without any Tears or Lamentations. Let us raise our Minds above Necessity, and
our Thoughts above Fate. Were her Manes permitted to return back to us, the
Queen would tell us she was well, and that we did but envy her in grieving: For
that indeed, that is to be accounted the affection of true Love, which
outwardly shows it self, and which forgetful of it self is transported to what
it loves. But as they say the Effigies of Phidias can never be defaced from the
Shield of Pallas, so we cannot better deserve of Marie, the most renowned Queen
within the Memory of Ages, then by storing up her Virtues in the most secret
Recesses of our hearts on purpose for imitation. We know that the Roman Senate
was wont by a decree to propose for a Pattern to all those that were sent
abroad to command in the Provinces, one only Quintus Mucius Scaevola, once
their high Priest, as if they had displayed in that one Person whatever was
Egregious and Illustrious, and consequently fit for Imitation: So now they who
at present sit, or shall hereafter sit at the Helm of Government, have one only
Queen, far transcending not only her Sex, but Mucius himself, to be by them
recommended for universal Imitation to all those who would not want any of
those accomplished Perfections, by which we ascend the Steps to Heaven. I
congratulate thee, O Queen, for that Felicity of Living so long, as it was this
thy desire, while it was thy daily acknowledgment, that thou had learnt to
dye. Hail, and farewell most beautiful and blessed Royal Soul. The King, and
all of us must follow thee in that Order which Nature has appointed. Hail most
happy Soul, all hail, and Eternally farewell.

Lastly to thee, most Potent Monarch, environed with Anguish and Affliction,
and welcomed home with such an unfortunate Calamity, I address my self. Forbear
great Sir, forbear to bath your Royal Cheeks continually in streams of Tears,
but set just limits to your Sorrows, Sorrows that will nothing avail. -- I
know, said the Wise Athenian, and for that reason grieve the more, that all my
Mourning and Lamentation does me no good. I confess indeed, Invincible Prince,
I must acknowledge it is a great matter, the remembrance of the Embraces, the
Company and Converse of such a Queen, the depository of the greatest part of
your Cares, so studious, and diligent in her Obedience and Complacency. But
your transcending Prudence doubtless considers that the Supreme Arbiter of all
things is not bound to fulfill all our Wishes and desires. It Is a trite
Proverb, The young Man whom God loves soon dies. The great Reward of Dying well
is fixed beyond all danger of those Vexations and Calamities with which the
Life of Mortal Men contends. Then with your wonted Resolution sustain a Loss
that could not be avoided; revive your Spirits, and renew your Strength, bowed
down with Sorrow, and like a second Joshuah, your days of Mourning being over,
take care of your Person, take care of the Welfare of all Europe: and may the
Almighty, who has been your Protection all along, wipe away all your tears of
Grief, prosper you Counsels and Affairs, and add to your own the Years which he
has taken from your Queen.

DIXI.
A Funeral Oration OF J. G. Grevius, UPON THE DEATH OF MARY II. QUEEN of Great
Britain, France and Ireland.

Performed by Authority of the Illustrious and Potent Orders of the Diocese of
Vtrecht.

Done into English from the Latin Original.

LONDON. Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in Jewen-street, and are also to
be Sold by Edm. Richardson near the Poultry-Church. MDCXCV.

A Funeral Oration UPON THE Death of the QUEEN.
THIS Day is Buried the Greatest Queen of Great Britain. Are our Affairs
reduced to this, that what was only wanting to complete our Miseries, the
bitter Death of August MARY, as an Accumulation of our Sadness, must sall out
to render yet more Grievous the Misfortune of these Mournful Times! the Death
of August MARY, that has afflicted England with an Unspeakable, loss that
hardly admits of Consolation, has struck Holland with Astonishment, and filled
all the Christian World with Anguish and Consternation. Already brighter Suns
began to shine, and the Minds of all Men were erected to hope a more prosperous
Fortune, and more easy times; when of a sudden an unexpected Tempest, like
Thunder rattling with loud Noise and Terror from a serene Sky, strikes and
throws down all before it, and changes all our promising Hopes into Fear and
pensive Solicitude. Oh, how sudden and how swift is the Vicissitude of Humane
Affairs! Therefore we behold not only the Dresses, but the Countenances of all
men changed with sorrow, and the deeper sense of so great an affliction; which
having pierced the very Marrow, is not to be asswag'd, nor alleviated by any
applications of comfortable Words. For together with this most pious Queen,
even England and Holland themselves are this day carried forth to be entombed.
Therefore we behold the Fathers of our Country in Sable, Pale, and with their
Eyes fixed upon the Ground, and deluged with tears, and by their mournful
silence testifying the Extremity of that sorrow which afflicts their Breasts.
Nor is it a smaller Demonstration of embitter'd Grief, which all Degrees, and
every Age, and every Sex in all places openly discover by their sobbings, sighs
and lamentable Wailings. Nor does the Ignorance of Infancy, nor the forgetful
Insensibility of decrepit Years, nor the simplicity of Women sitting at home,
exempt 'em from the sadness that oppresses Us. Not only Men, but the Country
Cottages, the Coverings of our Cities, our Marketplaces, Courts of Judicature,
our Tribunals, our Schools and Academies, o're-spread with Deformity, mute, and
almost in Ruins, seem to grieve, as being afraid of being levelled with the
Earth, now their Supportress is gone. The very Walls of this Magnificent
Church, the Portice's and Chapels hung with Mourning, and despoyl'd of their
Ornaments, fill our Eyes and Minds with all the Marks of Incredible
Distraction. Lastly, there is no place, wherein there is not some Monument or
other fixed of Public and Inconsolable Lamentation. When the Death of Drusus
Germanicus, who by his singular Virtue and Benevolence toward all Men, had
after a wonderful manner won the Good Will not only of his Fellow Citizens, but
of all foreign Princes and People, was reported at Rome, the Romans, inflamed
with a certain Rage of Mourning and Sorrow, defaced their Temples, pulled down
the Altars of their Gods, threw their Household Deities into the Streets;
Fathers of Families exposed the Newborn Births of their Wives: foolishly they,
and wickedly, who went about to bring their Gods into Hatred, by Abjuring their
Worship, with whom they were angry, for the loss of Germanicus, ravished from
'em. But we are angry with our selves, and our sins, by which God being
deservedly provokd, has taken from us the best of Queens within the memory of
History, at an unlucky time, and in the flower of her Age. And yet we no less
impartially Grieve, than those Ancient Romans, tho we are far remote from their
impious Piety. For this incurable Wound, which is laid upon us, so tears and
rends the minds of all Men, that the Torments of infinite Grief overcome all
Consolation, and all Physic whatever is too weak for the terrible Distemper,
under which we groan. But as the Death of so great a Queen is an accident
lamented by all Good, so by none more bewailed, if we except the King himself,
than by the most Illustrious Fathers of Vtrecht. How many Signs and Arguments
of this most Just Grief for our incredible Loss are Extant every where!
Nevertheless they were desirous that the Force and Exuberancy of it should be
also from my Lips made known as well to others Living, as to succeeding
Posterity.

How well could I now wish that I had never understood Letters! And this I
speak with more sincerity, than that Emperor, who being to subscribe the
Warrant for the Execution of a Capital Offender, cried out in like manner, Oh,
that I had never known to Write! For my mind abhors and Flies the Performance
of this Dismal function, both because of the weight of that sorrow which has so
broken and weak'nd all the parts of my mind, that they can hardly recollect
themselves; as also, for that tho I were in perfect Vigor, neither struck nor
afflicted with any Trouble, yet I am conscious to my self of my own Inability,
and must acknowledge my self inferior to the Task imposed upon me, of setting
forth the high Praises and Merits of this Divine Queen. Yet there is two things
which not a little confirm me, and inspire something of a Soul in me, the
praise that attends Obedience, which was all along a most sacred and certain
convincement, that no man, tho most plentifully furnished with all the
Endowments of Wit and Learning, and exceeded all Mortals in speaking Eloquently
and Politely, can be able, I will not say in words, but in thoughts, to reach
the true Encomiums of August Mary, who alone shined forth in all sorts of
Virtue, not only above the Genius of her Sex, and the Age she lived in, but
above the Examples of all the most praiseworthy Heroesses in all times; that
she may be deservedly proclaimed to be the Only Queen, or rather more truly the
Queen of Queens. Nor can there a greater Praise belong to any man, than that it
is not in the Power of any man to praise him sufficiently.

I shall therefore speak of MARY STVART, because I am engaged to speak, not
according to the Dignity of the Subject, the excellency of which no mortal can
attain to, but according to the Strength of Capacity and Endowments. Nor do I
doubt but you, most noble and Worthy Auditors here present, out of your
Incomparable Veneration for the Queen, will give a favorable attention to what
I shall say, tho it may not answer the Merits of the Queen, nor your
Exyectation. While I obey the Will of those, from whom my will ought never to
disagree; I am in hopes that you will also be satisfied with my most earnest
Zeal to satisfy your Commands, tho my strength may not equal the Decree of my
mind.

I am unwilling, Noble Auditors, at the beginning, to be tedious in those
things, upon which the Orations of those Men that pay the last Duties to the
Manes of great Personages are wont to enlarge. I shall say nothing of Great
Britain, the most Fortunate of all the Islands upon which the Sun shines, the
Parent of Emperors, the Foster-Mother of so many Potent Kings, and famous for
their Noble Atchievments in all Climates of the Earth; the Nurse of so many
Courageous Leaders; the Domicel of the Reformed Religigion and all laudable
Arts, the Seat of Liberty, wherein MARY first drew her Vital Breath. Let them
admire and boast the Felicity of their Country, to whom their Country is an
Ornament, not they who adorn their Country. MARY, in whatever Land she had been
born, had been adjudg'd worthy of that high Degree, to which the State of her
Birth had exalted her, as being formed by the Hands of more Benign Nature to
Royal Dignity. She had Shon with her own Beams even in Darkness it self; such a
disposition to Virtue appeared in her from her tender Years. The Glory of an
Illustrious Family, won by the Virtue of the Founders, is admired among all
People. For as Gems more splendidly glitter when set in Gold, so Virtue shines
forth more dazlingly in true Nobility. However, they who are puffed up with
Titles, and grow big with the Images of their Ancestors, supported by no Virtue
of their own, are not worthy of those Ornaments. They fall from their
Nobility, who fully the Dignity of it with Pride, Sloth and other Vices. MARY
was sufficiently Ennobl'd by her Descent: But so great and so incredible was
the multitude of the admirable Virtues of this Princess, that she rather
Illustrated her Ancestors, than was illustrated by them; and contributed more
Ornaments to the Enlargement of their Glory, than she received from their
Antiquity. What men have admired as the principal Ornaments of an Illustrious
Family in particular Persons, all those crowded together, so far as her Sex was
capable, in MARY, the most accomplished with all Endowments and Perfections of
Body and Mind, which God, the giver of all good things, had largely conferred
upon her. But why do I insist upon those things which are common to her, with
her Ancestors, when she abounds with so many particular Graces and Ornaments
peculiarly her own? Among which, that her Piety to God, and her Love of
Religion, held the chiefest place, there is none of you that ever doubted.

What the Sun is in Heaven among the Stars, that Piety is among the Virtues.
All Light is derived from the Sun. From Piety also and Religion, as from the
only and most Limpid Fountain, flow the rest of the Virtues, which she fostered
in her Bosom and her Embraces. What Prudence, what Fortitude, what Fidelity,
what Moderation, what Benignity can be found in any other person, where there
is not care taken to suppress the Turbulent Motions of the Mind, to restrain
the Impetuosities of Desire, and be mindful of their Dignity and Duty? But this
is the Work of Religion only. Now with what a Love of Religion the August MARY
was inflamed, with what a fervency of Mind she was incensed, to the Improvement
of her Piety, I should not adventure to commemorate, were it not a thing well
known to all people, not only to such as attended about her Person, but to the
Ambassadors of foreign Princes and Commonwealths, who frequented the Queens
Court. They will hardly gain credit, perhaps, among those who understand the
Manners and Customs of Courts, and of those that are bred up in 'em; or among
such who are persuaded that Religion, Piety, and Modesty, are only Names made
use of to impose upon the People, or at least the Properties of private persons.

They who would be accounted Pious among Men, think it sufficient to say their
Prayers Morning and Evening, to read a Chapter in the Bible, and go duly to
hear the Sermons at Church upon a Sunday: If they acquit themselves of these
Duties, they think they do enough; and considering the Contempt and Neglect of
sacred things now adays, their Piety is to be commended. But MARY'S Religion
was not circumscribed within these Narrow Limits: In the Morning so soon as she
rose, she spent Two hours alone in her Bedchamber, in Prayers, in Reading, and
Contemplation of Heavenly Things. If Affairs of Moment called her sooner to the
Public Management, she rather chose to spare something of her accustomed Hours
allowed for Sleep and Rest* than to lose a Moment of the time which she had
consecrated to God. About Nine a clock she went to the Chapel, and there with
the Royal Household, and such others as moved by her Example resorted thither,
she offered up her most Innocent Supplications to God. The same thing she did
every day about five a Clock. Nor would she suffer her self to be called away
from this settled performance of sacred Duties, by any Sports, and Allurements
of Lawful Pleasures, any Audiences of Princes, or Royal Ambassadors.

This was the Law which she had Ordained to her self of daily attoning God. O
singular and unwonted lover of Religion in that so high station of Fortune, in
that healthy condition of Youthful Age, in that abundance of Delights and
Pleasures, wherein Devotion is but little minded! And this is that, which I am
sure you all admire. Attend, I beseech ye, and ye shall hear those things which
will redound to the greater Admiration of the QUEEN. When WILLIAM, Prince of
Orange was Solicited and Importuned by the Unanimous and loud Voice of
England, to vindicate her Sacred Rites, that were Polluted, to assert her Laws,
that were trampled underfoot, to ward off the Destruction and Bondage that hung
over the Necks of all the People of England, and Europe that was wounded
through her sides; by a certain Instinct of Heaven, and with the good will of
all Kings and Princes, those excepted who designed and Plotted all these
Mischiefs, he undertook the English Expedition. Then it was, that the most
Pious MARY spent, not only three or four Hours, as she was wont to do, in
Prayers, in Supplications; and as well in public as Domestic Performances of
Divine Duties. When she had performed 'em all in the English, she went to the
French Church, and after that to the Dutch Congregations; in all which, Prayers
were put up for several hours for the Preservation of the Greatest Prince, and
for the prosperous Success of that Expedition undertaken for the Preservation
of the Christian Name, and the Defense of its Dignity. No wonder then that
Heaven, whose Cause was then the Subject of the Contention, bowed down a ready
Ear to the Suppliant and most Pious MARY, and the Prayers of so many good
People. But I return to MARY's daily Meditations of Piety. The rest of the day,
which required not her Care of the Kingdom, in the King's absence, she did not
wast in vain Discourses, in hearing stories of the Amors of Princes and
Illustrious Ladies, nor in reading those Trifles, commonly called Novels; but
she read over her self, or caused to be recited by others, either the Divine
Monuments of Sacred Story, or such other Books as explained the Mysterious
Heads of Christian Doctrine, or by wholesome Precepts stirred her up to the
leading of an Honest and Virtuous life. She was so taken with reading the
Sacred Scriptures, which the Prophets and other Celestial Authors Inspired by
God delivered in Writing, that she never laid it out of her Hands, but twice a
year read it over from the beginning to the end, once her self in her Chamber,
then again in her Chapel, where in the daily service so much was recited every
day by the Minister, as would suffice to complete the going through the whole
Book within the Year. Is there any one among Us, most Noble Auditors, the
Ministers themselves, who have so Assiduously in their hands the Divine
Oracles? Is there any one who with so much Affection, so much Diligence, or
rather with so much Benefit to themselves? This Queen had searched so
profoundly into the Doctrines, of Christian Religion, she had so imbibed it,
she had so retained it in her memory, that she excelled most men, who had spent
all their Lives in the Study of this Celestial Doctrine: So that she was able
accurately to refel the Impetuous Violences of those that labored might and
main, to stop the Foundations of Truth. Nor could she by any Allurements, by
any Threats, by any Dangers be deterred from defending the true Doctrine.

I see not a few, who have hitherto heard what I have said, with impartial
Ears, contract their Brows, and silently wonder at my Boldness, who have
attributed those things to a Queen but young in Years, which few could attain
to, who have grown Old in the Study of Divinity, so far as to accuse me of foul
Adulation; or of that Levity, of which some Orators are guilty, who being
carried away with an Immoderate Love of those things, which they have designed
to praise, aggravate their Encomiums, with expressions too far strained, and
extol what they praise to an higher pitch, than what it truly deserves.

I fear lest they should lay to my Charge what in the last Age was laid to the
Charge of Walter Haddon, Master of the Requests to Great Elizabeth, that other
Immortal Glory of the British Queens, by Jerome Osorius, Bishop of Sylvia in
Portugal, a most Eloquent Person in his time. Haddon had answered an Epistle of
Osorius, written to Elizabeth, wherein the Bishop had most bitterly inveighed
against Innovators, as he called 'em: in this Answer Haddon had extolled the
Queens Prudence in Ecclesiastical Matters, and admonished Osorius that he
should take heed lest the Queen should brandish the Improvement of her Studies
against him. This Osorius took ill in his defamatory Answers to Haddon's
Defense, and taxed him for Imprudent Flattery. Osorius allowed, that he could
easily suffer Elegancy of Wit and Learning, Humanity, knowledge of the Greek
and Latin Tongues, and deep reading in Philosophy to be applauded in a Queen;
but for a Woman to be extolled for her Knowledge in Divinity, was a thing
neither to be endured nor believed. Nevertheless then Elizabeth exceeded Mary
in Years. But I shall easily, most Noble Auditors, wipe off from my self the
suspicion of Adulation, if, as hitherto you have done, you will lend me an
attentive Ear.

What Elizabeth could do I shall not now dispute; what Mary did I shall
faithfully relate without any Rhetorical Colors, a thing worthy for all
Nations to hear. Then do you be Judges, whether I have spoken like a Flatterer,
or, as others more softly say, like an Orator; or whether plainly, truly, and
faithfully.

King JAMES the Father of MARY, when he came to the Crown, employed all his
Cares and Thoughts, and made it his Business to repeal several Acts which his
Ancestors had made for the Support of the Reformed Religion; more especially to
abolish the Law which enacted taking of the Test, which abjured all Power and
Authority which the Pope, or any other Mortal claimed, or could claim either in
Civil or Ecclesiastical Matters within the Kingdom. MARY openly declared that
she could not approve his Conduct, nor assent to those who urged that the
English might be absolved from the Sanctity and observance of that Oath, nor
that any one for the future was to be forced to it. The King informed of this,
ordered his Envoy, then at the Hague,, to make it out to MARY, and persuade
her, that she had a wrong Opinion, enduc'd thereto by false Reasons and Grounds
of her Father's Intentions and Meaning in that Particular. The Envoy taking a
fit Opportunity, held the Queen in a long Discourse upon this Subject, bringing
not a few, nor those Vulgar Arguments out of Scripture, many Testimonies out of
the most Ancient and most Learned Fathers os the Church, and more than one
Reason from the Knowledge of things which Nature has imprinted in our Minds.
When the Queen had attentively heard him, She did not answer him with a
Laconism; she so readily and so smartly of a sudden took to pieces the Envoy's
Discourse, and his Arguments, refuted all his Reasons with so much Judgment,
that when the Envoy was dismissed by the Queen, he could not forbear testifying
and acknowledging in the public Hall of the Court, before a great many Persons
of high Quality and Dignity, that he could never have believed there had been a
Woman in the World endued with so much understanding of the Christian Doctrine,
and of the Opinions urged to her upon the several Heads of that Doctrine; or
that could defend what she thought with so much strength and weight of Reason,
and fortify it with so strong a Guard against all assaults of open Hostility or
Treacherous Insinuation.

He added moreover, that he was persuaded, that this Princess could be moved by
no man living from those Opinions concerning Religion, wherewith she was so
thoroughly seasoned. Nor would he be the occasion that any One should attempt to
Discourse her any more upon that occasion, unless he intended to lose his
Labor: And this was what he also wrote to King James.

In this Conference with the English Agent the most prudent Princess added thus
much farther, That she could not sufficiently admire, nor indeed imagine how it
should come to pass, that any man, not void of Reason or Sense, or that had a
right Judgment of God and Divine matters, or had comprehended in his mind the
true manner of Worshipping him, could prove a Deserter, and run from our
Religion to the Ceremonies of Rome. When the Agent Replied, that her Father,
the King of Great Britain, was a living Example of a better Approbation of the
Romish Worship. She made Answer, That there was nothing grieved her more; and
the only thing she wondered at, by whose seduction, upon what occasion, by what
arguments he could be induced to betray the Bulwork of purest Truth; and having
left that, upon what supporters, the Security and Tranquillity of his mind
could rely. These things the most Wise and Prudent MARY.

Not long after, when there was no question but that King James had been
Certified of all these things by his Agent's Letters; the Father sends a long
and weighty Epistle to his Daughter, wherein he set forth at large the
occasion, the reasons and methods he had followed in abandoning our Worship,
and embracing the Opinions of Rome. This Letter from King James was delivered
to MARY, upon Tuesday in the Evening; the Messengers who brought it, being to
return into England the next day. Wherefore, when she had read it over and over
again with extraordinary attention, and Studiously considered every thing; she
set her self to return an Answer, wherein she spent the greatest part of the
Night. And tho frequently put in mind that it was time to go to Bed, and that
it behooved her to take care of her Health, which would be much disordered by
Watching; the most Prudent Queen made Answer, That the Duty of Answering the
King's Letters, was to be preferred before Sleep, lest she should be straightened
in time the next day, and thereby be hindered from performing what she owed to
her Father. That therefore she made the more haste, lest if the Messenger
should slip away without her Answer, it might be suspected that she had made
use of help, and got some Divine to write her Letters for her; which if her
Father should believe, they would want that weight and Effect, which by the
Favor of God, she promised her self from dispatching 'em with all speed she
could.

The King's chief Argument was taken from the Antiquity, and the long and
immovable endurance of the Roman Church, Established and Founded upon the
Promises of Christ; Thou art Peter, etc. To which were added other places,
Arguments and Testimonies heaped together to corroborate that Opinion. All
which the most ingenious Princess Answered and refuted in so short a time, and
with so much Politeness and Judgment, that an Eminent Divine, and some few
other Persons, conspicuous for their Quality and Integrity, who afterward were
permitted to see a Copy of that Epistle, ravished into Admiration, asserted,
that they could never have persuaded themselves that such a Letter, so full of
Grave and Efficacious Arguments, could have been Written by any Man, much less
by a Woman, unless by one who had Devoted his whole Life to the Study of the
Scriptures, and true Divinity. Strange swiftness and perspicacity of a Divine
Wit! Strange piercing Force of Judgment! No snares of Treachery were so
occultly laid, which the August Queen did not readily discover; no Sophisms so
fallaciously specious, that could deceive Her; No knots so difficult, but she
should unloose 'em at first sight. Go now, you that are all over nothing but
Envy or ill Will; you that are blinded by your own ignorance, weigh the vast
Endowments of the Greatest of Queens, by the Exilities of your own slender
Parts, go now and taunt me with Adulation.

This Oration is so far from flattery, that all men now may see, that the
greatest applause of Words is far inferior to the Merits of so great a Queen.
Such was also the sanctity of MARY'S Life, that King WILLIAM, after her
Decease, calling to mind her Piety toward God, the Integrity of her Life, and
her Extraordinary Knowledge of sacred things, brake forth into this Evpression,
That if he could believe that ever any mortal man could be born without the
contamination of sin, he would believe it of the Queen. And she preserved her
self so chaste and spotless, that while she resided upon Earth, she lived the
Life of the Saints, even in the hurry of the Court, where there are so many
incitements to evil, that entice men from the Exercise of Piety, so many
allurements to pleasure, that inveigle and bewitch the mind.

But as our Divine MARY burned with a singular Love of Piety and Religion, so
was she of a Soaring and Exalted Mind. For they, who addicting themselves to
the Observance of the most pure Religion, are once assured, that being as it
were encompassed with Celestial Protection, they shall not be forsaken, will
never despond, let the Confusions of War Rage round about 'em, let the Earth
Tremble, and Heaven be ready to fall, and all things menace present Mortality
and Pestilence.

As to her Contempt of Humane Glory, her Constancy in the most violent Storms
of Adverse Fortune, I wish, as they are great things, and Aggravations of her
lofty Soul, I wish it were in my power to set forth in as magnificent Language!
The Field is infinitely large of rare and unusual Examples; but neither the
barrenness of a slender Wit, nor the straitness of my Time will permit me to
expatiate into these Boundless Themes. We must be content with a Few.

How great was the Consternation of all men, how general the Dismay and Terror,
when William, Prince of Orange, not so much Invited and Requested by England,
tho she stretched forth her suppliant Hands to Him for succor, as by the Call
of Heaven, at an unseasonable time, when both Seas and Adverse Winds with
tumultuous Fury opposing him, with such an handful hastened to England's
Relief, under the Oppression of Numerous Armies, I believe that most of you
remember. For we may sooner forget our selves than such a dreadful season. Only
MARY undaunted awaited the Event of Heaven's Decrees; She Only wanted no
Consolation; She alone exhorted and confirmed the Trembling; Womanish Fear in
Men, in MARY Manly Resolution and Courage was to be seen. These were Noble
Things, and to be celebrated with the Encomiums of all Ages and all Men. And
yet they are but Sport and Play, if I may so call 'em, to what you shall now
hear. An Hideous Bulk of threatening Evils at the same time roul'd with all its
Force to overwhelm all England and Holland: The Heaven, the Sea and Land seemed
to have conspired their ruin and destruction. The Army of the Confederates had
received a deep wound in the Battle of Fleurus. In the sight of England a
misfortune befell our Fleet, some of our Men of War being sunk and burnt; whilst
others were detained by contrary Winds, from succouring those that were over
Powered. From Ireland News was brought, tho ours had Vanquished the Rebels at
the Boyn, that the King was Wounded, in the heat of the Fight, with a Canon
Bullet. The Report was spread abroad that he was slain, insomuch that public
Rejoycings were ordered at Paris by public Authority, in a Tempestuous Night,
and all the Streets and Houses Blazed and Shon with Illuminations and Bonfires,
the signs I will not determine whether of Joy or Madness, not to be defaced by
length of Time, as if the War had been at an end, had the King of England been
Dead. All these things were at the same time tumultuously repeated, while Fame
augmented, as is usual, every thing for the worse. To this we may add how
certainly it was believed that the French Fleet were preparing to Land a great
Army in England, which was to penetrate into the Heart of the Kingdom, naked
then of Military Defense; the Souldie^y being either in Ireland, or the Low
Countries. It Is hardly to be imagined how great the Fear the Dread, the
Consternation was of the Nobility, Gentry and common People. Still the Queen
displayed no sign of Fear, nothing of dubious anxiety, nothing of sadness
either in her looks or words; more Especially when she heard, that the Wound in
the King's shoulder was neither Mortal nor Dangerous. MARY at that time Rode
through the City of London, with so Serene a Countenance, that Tranquillity and
Security seemed to shine in her Eyes. The People beholding the Queen so void of
any Perturbation, repented and recovered themselves from their extraordinary
Consternation. Nor were the People only refreshd and revived with cheerful
Hearts and Countenances, but also the Nobility, the King and Queen's Friends
and sharers of all their Arcana. For when the Queen showed the same mind in
Council, no less sedate and Void of Tumult; so soon as she was gone, a person
of the Highest Quality and Dignity acknowledged that after he had seen and
heard the Queen, he was much more Confirmed in his Mind than before. That so
many Messengers of ill News from all parts, one upon the Neek of another, had
struck a dread into him, and a very great fear of more terrible Calamities, but
that now he was releast from his Fears, in regard that neither in the Queen's
Countenance, nor in her Words, he perceived not the least sign of any
Perturbation or Anxiety; but that she still consulted for the general Good with
the same constancy as before; that with the same Advice and Judgment, she took
care that nothing should fall out amiss at Home, that the public should
receive no damage; and provided abroad, how Miscarriages might be attoned,
losses repaired, and the Counsels of the Enemy be disappointed. These things
when he saw, he could not sufficiently Admire the Incredible Fortitude of the
Queen, nor could he believe the loss was so great, or Affairs in so ill a
Condition, as they were generally thought to be. What an Illustrious Person so
much admired, all Nations, all Posterity will wonder at. That there was so much
Resolution in a Woman, that she could not be dejected by the severest Frowns of
adverse Fortune, that would have shaken, and did shake the Courage and Counsels
of Men themselves. Octavianus Caesar, when he heard of the Varian Slaughter,
foolishly suffered his Hair and Beard to grow, as if the Germans had been
afraid of his careless Beard, like men that are terrified with the streaming
Tail of a Comet. He wept like a Woman, beat his Head for madness against the
Wall, and like a man that had been Frantic, cried out, Varus, Restore me back
my Legions; as if these Clamours could have Terrified the Enemy, or that the
Slain could have thereby revived. And this same Despair and Female Imbecility
of Mind, the same Augustus betrayed, as if Hannibal had been at the Gates of
Rome, when three Legions were Defeated by the Germans in the utmost Confines of
the Roman Empire. But what did our Courageous and Prudent Queen do, when the
Army was Routed in the Adjoining Low Countries; when in the very sight and
throat of England, the Enemies Navy, numerous and Victorious, Rode Mistress of
the Seas; when Rapines, Burnings, Slaughters, Desolation, presented themselves
before the Eyes of all men; if the Enemy, which many were afraid of, which
wicked Subjects boasted abroad, and Rebels wished, had turned their Forces
against the British Shore, in the King's absence, and while the Arms of England
were Employed either in our Territories, or in Ireland? Nothing of all these
things moved MARY's Courage; She did not yield to raging Torture, or submit her
Courage to it; but the more boldly made resistance with an undaunted Virtue,
never to be sufficiently Extolled by human Expressions; and with such a
sublimity of Mind, whereby she not only overcame the Opinion of all men, but
her self out-did her self; by which she attained to such a Degree of Glory and
Dignity, as a Prince of highest Virtue can hardly be allowed to wish for in
this Life.

No less Conspicuous was the Excellency of her lofty Mind in moderat
Prosperity, as in her Courageous Brooking Adversity. She never proudly abused
so great a Power; never in that most Towering Station of Human Affairs, uttered
an haughty word, or did an unequal Act. For it was always her Opinion, that
Royal Majesty consisted not in the Ensigns of Royalty, the Globe, the Scepter
or the Crown; but in Virtuous Ornaments, in Gentleness, and the Power of doing
Good to all People; and was desirous it should be conspicuous for Sanctity and
Sweetness of Manners, and Nobleness of Mind; not in swelling Pride, in haughty
Pride, and intolerable disdain of her Subjects, and of all other Men, with the
Cecropide arrogated to themselves, and Men of mean Condition, advanced above
themselves to splendidness of Fortune.

Nor did the Queen more laudably excel in Majesty of Empire, than in Modesty;
of which how many Examples did she show to the World? But this was most
singular and wonderful. She was called by the People of England, together with
her Husband William, to be his Associate in the Kingdom, that as she was the
Confort of his Bed, she might be the Companion of his Scepter, and that they
might Administer the Government with equal Auspices. This Power she never
exercised, unless when the King, in Vindicating and Asserting the Liberty of
the Christian World, was thundering with Arms abroad upon the Meuse, the
Scheld, or the Boyne, and going to cross the Seas, committed the Reins of the
Kingdom into her Right Hand; which she ruled so prudently with the general
Applause of all Men, in the most difficult times, that none of her Subjects
could perceive the King was absent. The King was wanting in his Person, no body
missed his Courage or his Prudence. In Council, when Affairs of greatest Moment
and Intricacy were Discussed, the most prudent Queen never hesitated, never was
at a stand; such was her Diligence* such her Discernment, so Capacious was her
Counsel, that she saw with a most piercing Eye, what was needful to be done,
and readily found out the Expedient, which way things were to be accomplished.
For she had a Wise prospect into Futurity, that she might be thought to
Prophesy, rather than Pronounce Decrees; and Judged so truly of this present,
that she might be thought to have derived every sentence she spoke from some
Oracular Answer of a Deity. So that the King might deservedly complain, when he
lost our most Prudent MARY, that he had lost the best of all the Counselors he
had in his Council. You have heard a most true saying of great WILLIAM, who
himself, as well in Military Courage, as in the Wisdom of Peace, is second to
none of all the Kings that are, or ever were. He could never perform such great
things abroad, unless he had those at home upon whose Fidelity and Counsel he
might rely: For never at any time more certain Shipwreck threatens a
Commonwealth, than when such a one sits at the Helm, who wants* to be Steered
and Governed himself. But so far was the Queen from depending upon the Counsel
of others, that many times, they who were of the Council, were convinced by her
Arguments, and came over to her Opinion, tho before they Dissented from it: And
many times she greatly confirmed those who waver'd between several Opinions.

What need I call to your Remembrance, the Vigilance of the Queen? Day and
Night, as in a Watchtower, she watched over the safety and Dignity of England,
and the United Provinces. She never looked off from their Preservation. She
laid nothing more to Heart than the Public Safety, the Liberty, the Ease of
the People, the Harmony and Union of the Parliament, and the Harmony and
Tranquillity of the whole Commonwealth. It was the most sacred of all her
Cares, to Govern her Subjects with a concording Moderation. Which when she
performed to a Miracle, the People on the other side, in the mortal Person of
the Queen, reverenced the Present Immortal God, whose Image on Earth all
supreme Powers Represent, so long as they faithfully and prudently fulfill all
the Duties of just and legal Rule.

By this means she not only suppressed, not so much by force of Arms, as by the
Love of her Subjects, with which she was always strongly Guarded, from the
Exorbitant Fury of Wicked Men, who during the King's absence, Plotted her Ruin
and the Destruction of the Kingdom. These are Great things, and to be
Celebrated by the Tongues and Pens of Posterity: Yet will I not contend with
those who assert that the British Empire was Governed by Elizabeth, with no
less Applause of Prudence and Moderation. But this is wonderful and unusual,
that a Queen, when she sat at the Helm in the King's absence, all good
subjects wishing all Prosperity to so just and mild a Rule; while others were
astonished, that the Rudder of Government should be so prudently and knowingly
held by a Female Hand; so soon as the King set foot again in the Kingdom,
should not concern her self with any part or care of it, as if she had not been
married to the King, or that the Administration of the Kingdom had nothing
belongd to her, tho his Associate in the Government. Read over the Annals,
Noble Auditors, of all Times and Nations; revolve in your Memories whether you
ever read or heard of any thing that may be compared with this Moderation of
the Queen. There have been many Queens, many Princesses, who have taken upon
'em Masculine Cares, who have either had Uxorious Husbands, or have been by
them willingly permitted to share the Sovereignty with 'em. You shall find no
Woman, who being called by the Legal Suffrages of the People, to be an
Associate in the Government, who ever actually executed the Regal Office, that
did not challenge her self a great share of the Command, and thought she had an
Injury done her, if she were not admitted to all Counsels taken concerning the
Administration of the Government, or if she were not advised with in all manner
of Transactions; or if she were Equal in Authority with her Husband, did not
challenge to herself an Equal Right. They who have once tasted Sovereign
Command, are hardly reduced to lead a private Life. You may sooner wrest
Hercules's Club out of his hand, than desire of Dominion from such persons,
especially from the Female Sex, who are generally Petulant, Proud, greedy of
Power, Covetous of Command, and expert at putting all things into confusion, so
they may attain their Desires. That She Ulysses, that she might not be
despoiled of that Power which she had exercised so many years by the connivance
of her Husband, extinguishd all Augustus's Family by her Treacheries, Frauds,
and wicked Contrivances; not so much out of her Novercal Hatred, though that
were also none of the least violent; but inflamed with desire of Command, that
she might advance her own Son to the Empire, and rule under his Minority as she
had done before under the Indulgence of her Husband. Infinite other Examples of
Female Pride, and Desire of Rule, might be produced, which neither Time nor
Place will give us leave to recite. And indeed who can be ignorant of 'em, when
every Age has produced several such Monsters? So much the more is the
Moderation of Divine Mary to be wondered at, who might have Reigned in her own
Right, but would not, but in the Absence of King William; and who was so far
from complaining or repining, that she gladly and freely resigned the
Government of the Kingdom upon his Return, as an hard and heavy burden, which
she had unwillingly born all the time before.

Where can a Moderation like to this be found, within the memory of History?
She thought it the Greatest, and most Noble Act of Sovereignty, to be able to
command her self. Those Tears, which were no counterfeited Droppings, and which
she shed when she understood that the Crown was Voted to Her and William, by
both Houses of Parliament; what else did they signify, but that MARY's Mind
was far remote from all desire of Rule? Remember, I beseech ye, with what Grief
and Reluctance she suffered her self to be torn from our Re-publick. But it was
not for her to withstand the hidden Counsels of Eternal Providence. She was to
go where Destiny called her, not with an Intention to dethrone her Father, as
an audacious Impostor lately took upon him to vomit forth against the most
Pious Queen: For the Father had dethroned himself by his subversion of the
Laws, the Religion and Constitutions of the Kingdom, before any Forreigner
moved to the Relief of England; but that she might succor her Country,
forsaken, complaining, groaning, and imploring the Aid of Heaven, and the Faith
of William and Mary. For this was the Only Remedy for Britain upon the Brink of
the Precipice; nor had she any other to whom in her Despair she could have
Recourse.

Therefore did Great Britain stretch forth her Right Hand to MARY, when she
came, and received their Conservatrix with a more than Ordinary Joy. Thence a
New and Benign Light, in the midst of so great a Mist and so dark a Night,
spread a bright, splendor quite through Britain, insomuch, that the day
wherein MARY and WILLIAM were inaugurated, might be accounted England's Second
Birthday, that wiped off Rusty Decrepidness and Deformity from a Kingdom gayly
flourishing before. But the Spring and Fountain of this wonderful Modesty,
which during the whole course of her Life, she made appear by so many Rare
Proofs to the whole World, was that, of which you have been told already, Her
Piety and Observance of Religion. From thence proceeded that undefiled Conjugal
Fidelity, that Chastity without blemish, that Benevolence toward all Mankind,
that Munificence and Bounty toward the miserable. If ever any Woman, eminent
above others; for the Splendour of her Descent, and Excellency of her Outward
Form, were the most affectionate to her Husband, and the most jealous of her
Chastity, DIVA STVARTA was she. Who ever knew a Wife more Obedient in a private
Family? I here forbear to relate with what an Excess of Grief she parted from
her William's side, when setting forward, and ready to quit the English Shore
in order to restore the Low Condition of Europe's Affairs. I neglect to tell,
with how much Joy and Affection she received the King returning from the
Conquest of Ireland. These are the vulgar Commendations of all Wives; but what
I shall now commemorate, is a singular and most Illustrious Pledge, of a
certain, more than wonderful Affection.

When King James, confiding in an hasty Flight, deserted the Kingdom, and left
the Royal Throne quite Empty and in a manner falling, it was Debated in the
Convention, who should be set up in James's Room; whether the Ensigns of
Sovereignty should be Offered to the Prince of Orange, and Mary his Consort, to
Reign with Equal Power; or to Mary only, the Eldest Daughter of James, and in
her Right to William her Husband. Many were of the last Opinion, but upon this
Condition, that Mary should be Crowned Queens; but that the Administration of
the Government, should by Authority of Parliament, be committed to Prince
William, as Mary's Husband, The Resident of a Certain Prince, who then Resided
in England, so soon as he understood these things, though but uncertainly
reported, overhasty and credulous, as if the Thing had been already
determined, presently hires a Messenger, and orders him with all the speed
imaginable, to carry the News to his Master, that MARY the Eldest Daughter of
King James was by Decree of Parliament to be the next day Proclaimed Queen of
England.

The Messenger was to pass through the Hague, and to impart the News in the
Residents Name to a Person of High Authority, and no less high both in William
and Mary's Esteem. He immediately hastens to the Court, and informs Mary of
this Vote of the House, and congratulates her Advancement to the Royal Dignity.
She, according to her wonted Good Nature, mildly indeed, but with a less
familiar Countenance, and a more contracted Brow, made Answer, That she neither
hoped those things to be true, which he related, neither did she believe that
William would accept the Kingdom, as a Substitute to Female Authority, or as
one that was to be beholden to a Woman for a Crown.

I beseech ye, Noble Auditors, could the best of Princesses declare the Excess
of her most tender Affection by a more Illustrious Argument? She had rather
that her self, she had rather that her Husband should lose a Kingdom, than
permit that he should receive it as her Gift; or that William should obtain by
Female Favor, what he had deserved by the suffrage of his own Valor, as
having undergone so many Toyls and Dangers for the Preservation of it. Hence,
when some Peers of the highest Rank, who wished well to MARY, obstinately
urged, That the Kingdom should be decreed to William upon no other Conditions
than those already mentioned; and asserted, that it would be a means to fix
themselves in MARY's Favonr; She took it so unkindly, and after she was Crowned
Queen, openly complained of their Preposterous Argument; nor would, for a good
while, admit those who had Voted after that manner, to kiss her Royal Hand; nor
did admit 'em, till after some time that she was at last overruled by the
King. What could be done more Lovingly; or what greater Testimony of Affection
could Fiction invent? By what greater Argument could she demonstrate that
nothing was dearer to her than her Husband? Neither Scepter nor Crown, for the
sake of which, many Women abjure their Chastity, their Religion, all Veneration
Divine and Human; if separated from King William's Interests, which she always
preferred before her own. Oh singular Conjugal Fidelity; O admirable Affection,
of a Queen, that never can be too highly Applauded! Infinite are the Examples
of this her wonderful and incredible Affection toward the King, which we have
not Language nor time sufficient to Enumerate. However, one in the midst of so
much Plenty most Illustrious, must not be omitted.

In the Eeighty fourth year of this Age, the Ambassador of a certain King, not
necessary here to be Named, Plotted an unworthy Contrivance at the Hague, and
had Solicited certain of the Prince of Orange's Attendants to Associate with
him; which come to Light, so highly Incensed a Prince, at other times so mild
and gentle as to incur a Censure of being slow, that he could not dissemble his
Anger. The King recalled his Ambassador from the Hague, no doubt informed of
the Just reason of the Prince's Indignation against him. The Ambassador
therefore, knowing that Kings and Princes have long hands, was willing, before
his departure, to reconcile himself to Prince William. To which purpose making
his Addresses, and submissively, and with humble Protestations of his
Innocence, and Deprecating his Offenses, the most Mild of Princes Magnanimously
forgave him. But from Mary, by no Allegations, by no Expiations of Satisfaction
whatever, could he obtain his Pardon. Upon which, when it was admired that Mary
should be so implacable, when the Ambassador had done nothing against Her, nor
had injured Her either in word or deed, when William, Justly offended had
pardoned the Delinquent, she ordered this Answer to be made, That had the Crime
been committed against her, she would not have been either severe, or
inexorable; but that she could not forget an Attempt against her Husband, nor
grant her Pardon so easily to him, who had so highly offended William. Who can
sufficiently extol this Conjugal Fidelity, this unusual Affection of a Queen
toward a Husband? For my part, I am not able to Admire it as I ought to do.

Nor was the Queen beloved with less Affection by the King, than was the King
beloved by Her. There was no need of falling out to renew their Love; but such
was the Harmonious agreement of their Minds and Counsels from the first day of
their Auspicious Marriage, that their Wills were still the same, whatever
pleased, whatever disliked the one, always disliked, still pleased the other;
such an Agreement of Opinions in all things, both private and public, that tho
in Persons divided by long Intervals of distant Leagues, yet by an
unaccountable Sympathy, they were always of one mind in all Affairs most
difficult, and of dubious Event, which would have puzzled the most acute and
experienced Politicians. So that they might be said to be Born under one
Constellation, but rather that one Soul resided in two Bodies. And that you may
not think I speak a Fiction; behold an Example of a real Harmony of Minds,
almost beyond belief.

About three years ago, at what time the King arrived in Holland, Intelligence
was sent from no mean Hands, nor from one place, to the King here present, to
the Queen in England then sitting at the Helm, that the French were fitting out
a Navy, and that they intended, in a short time, to put to Sea, with a design
to Land a considerable Army in England, and with all their Might, to endeavor
the Restoration of King James to the Crown, that he himself had thrown away.
The King considering the Danger, was in deep suspense for some time, whether he
should return back into England, or stay in the Low Countries, to curb the
Fury, and disappoint the Counsels of the Enemy. The first was advised by many
who were of the King's more secret Counsels in England, and not a few of the
Officers here about the King were of the same Opinion. In this same Commotion
of his Fluctuating Thoughts, after an anxious deliberation, the King at length
decreed, That the Yachts that wafted him hither, should be sent back into
England; but that the Men of War that guarded him, should be so disposed of,
that if need required, he might be speedily conveyed back into England:
Whither he also sent word, that Forty of the Men of War, with the Admiral,
should steer away toward the Coast of France, with this Design, that if they
found an Opportunity; they should burn all the Enemies Transport-Ships. But
before the Yachts, and the Messenger who was sent with the King's Expresses,
arrived in England, the Queens Letters were brought hither to the King, giving
him an Account, That she had ordered a Fleet of Forty Men of War to sail away
for the Coast of France, and burn the Enemies Ships which were reported to be
designed to infest the English Shore.

What Symphony could produce a more harmonious Harmony of Notes, then this of
the Opinions and Counsels of the King and Queen* when the one knew nothing of
the others Mind. Insomuch that similitude of Manners and consent of Minds not
Fortune, seemed to have joined William and Mary together. This is that true
Love that so conglutinates, and knits both Hearts together, that nothing can be
more closely joined, not to be severed by any distance of Time or Place, and
constitutes such a concord of Opinions that no force is able to dissolve. Which
who sees not in the King and Queen, and being seen does not admire, must needs
be blind and ignorant of what is to be wondered at. Therefore in all varieties
of Times and Fortunes, the King still found the greatest safety in the Love of
the best of Queens. It was a Saying of the King before he thought of Marriage,
to Charles the Second's Ambassador, at a time when there happened an accidental
discourse about the choice of Wives, that of all the Qualities to be sought for
in a Wife, his first care should be to find out the Best-Condition'd. And he
himself made himself the Master of his Wish; for he could not have found a
better Wife, had the Sun it self, according the Proverb, been to have sought
her out.

But as the King met with his chief help and assistance in the Queen's Love, so
not only her Subjects, but all others for whom it was in her Power to do good
found more than ordinary Succor in her bountiful Nature. She thought the Day
lost, wherein she had not an opportunity to do good to several. She measured
her Felicity in that indulgent Height of Fortune by nothing more than by her
Power to render others happy. Yet was she not profuse, nor did she scatter her
Benefits promiscuously, without Judgment, or diligent Enquiry; but gave
plentifully, gave considerately, gave to fitting Objects. She took more
Pleasure, if she had placed her Charity right, than if Princes had heaped upon
her self all manner of Benefits; and more rejoiced in bestowing, than they who
wanted in receiving. She never forgot those Benefits which she received from
others, but still recalling 'em to Mind, never suffered to slip out of her
Memory. What she bestowed upon others, she scarce remembered, as if she had
lost her Memory. I wish I could find Words to set forth the flowing Liberality
of the most Pious Queen, and were able so loudly to proclaim it, and in such
Language, as that it might be heard in all Places! Sparing to herself, profuse
to the miserable and wanting, who believed that she herself enjoyed what they
received from her. How many experienced the Bounty of her Munificent and
Liberal Hand, as well in England as in Germany, the Low Countries, Piedmont,
but more especially the French Exiles, who rather chose to lose their Estates,
than to hazard the loss of their Souls? And the Splendour of this Benevolence
shined forth in Mary's first coming into this Country. For the Prince of
Orange, so soon as Mary became his Consort, ordered such a sum of Money to be
paid her for the necessary Expenses of her Apparel, and Princely Ornaments.
What did the Divine Princess do with it at those Years? She did not stifle the
Money in close and dark Chests, nor did she lavish it out in gorgeous Attire,
upon Pearls and Gemms; which other Women far distant from her degree, are so
mad after, that they never cease this Fury till they have quite ruined their
Husband's Patrimonies: But moderate in her layings out, considering the
Grandeur of her Fortune, upon her Apparel and other Ornaments which the Dignity
of so great a Princess required, she introduced into the Court Diligence,
Frugality, Parsimony, Virtues most commonly unknown in Courts. The rest of that
large Allowance she consumed in relieving the distresses of honest and worthy
People, who labored under great Necessities, not through their own
Extravagancy, but reduced thereto by Misfortune, and the hardness of the Times.
Magnanimous Queen, superior to all Applause! For who is able deservedly to
extol the Excellency of so bountiful and beneficent a Soul? Where is the Woman
among Ten Thousand that would deprive herself of the Money allowed her for fine
Clothes, and gaudy Ornaments, to bestow upon the poor and needy, while so few
are contented with wearing the spoils of fair Estates upon their Backs, and
think all misspent that is not wasted upon Vanity and Finery. But alas! to
compare the Queen with other Women, is to do an Injury to her Divine Virtues,
wherein she equaled or exceeded the Praises of the Greatest Men. Nor did she
expect or desire any other Fruit from this her Bounty, than a Conscience that
told her she did well. She never vaunted her Charity, nor imputed it to Merit.
Most commonly she sent her Charity by Persons unknown, who were not permitted
to discover the Doner, that she might not burden the Modesty of the Receivers.
So far was she from seeking the Favor of those on whom she conferred her
Bounty, that she denied 'em the Hopes of returning thanks, when the greatest
part were ignorant who bestowed the unlooked for Liberality. Arcesilaus is
highly applauded who laid a bag of Gold under the Pillow of his poor Friend,
but counterfeiting poverty all the while, that he might privately supply the
want of one who was needlessly modest. Which Praises are not to be attributed to
Mary; who relieved not her Friends, but Foreigners and Strangers, whom she
never saw, whose Exigencies she had only heard of, contrary to their
Expectation, and unlooked for. Nor did she open those Fountains of Beneficence
once or twice only, but constantly and every Year, that she might not be
thought to give out of a sudden heat, or through weakness, but upon mature
Consideration and Advice. She sent from England certain Persons, who
distributed this same Tribute, if I may so call it, of her Liberality, and
ordered 'em to make a faithful Report of the Condition of those to whom she
decreed her Charity, that she might enlarge her Bounty, if what she had sent
did not suffice to allay the Troubles of their Exigency. The French Fugitives
despoiled of all the Comforts of Fortune, upon which Domestic Harpies had laid
their Gripes, with what a plentiful Benignity she cherished, both here and in
England, they themselves are Witnesses. An Illustrious Widow died, who was
Married to a Prince in Germany. To him an Annual Pension was owing and paid
him out of the Common Treasury of the States. Therefore that this Money might
be converted to the support of the French, especially of Noble Ladies and
Gentlewomen, who had forsaken their Country for the sake of Religion, and had
no way to get their Living, as having been bred up tenderly, and in the midst
of Affluency at home, was a favor for which they are beholden solely to the
Queen: whose desire of deserving well from the Indigent, was never tired. To
the Savoyards and Vaudois, of the Reformed Religion, exhausted by long
wanderings from Place to Place, by Hunger and Misery, when they returned again
to their Native Habitations, she ordered a Sum of Money to be sent for the
support of fourteen Ministers, as many Readers, and as many necessitous Laymen.
Nor was the most bountiful Queen less compassionate upon the Seamen, who naked,
stripped, and wounded, swam from the sunk Vessels, which the Enemy burnt. As many
as went to London, and they were not a few, were clothed by the Queens
Command, and furnished with Money to supply their necessities. She took care
also all along the Shores of Kent and Sussex, that the Wounded should be taken
in, diligently looked after, cured and kindly used. To the Widows and Children
of the Slain, she dispersed her bounty even in this Land, that their Losses
might be repaired and their Sorrows allayed. Lastly, in all parts of England
and Holland she imprinted innumerable Marks of her Royal Munificence and
Charity.

Nor was she less a Peculiar Specimen of Clemency than Liberality. She rather
chose to forget than revenge Injuries. For she remembered, that the One was the
Character of the fordid Vulgar; the Other, of those who excel Other Mortals in
Virtue and Magnanimity. Nor was she inferior for the Commendations of Justice
to any of the Areopagites. She allowed nothing to Favor, nothing to Hatred. No
body suffered Punishment or Fine, who was not more gently used than he could
think or hope for, had the Law been rigorously Executed.

Honor was bestowed on no Man, but the Reward far exceeded the Merits. What
her Innocence and Temperance was in the midst of so much wealth, your selves
cannot be ignorant, who know how pious she was; Nor have I any thing to add as
to her Chastity, when you have heard how entirely she Loved the King. She
could not endure a wanton word, nor the sight of a Woman who was reported or
suspected to have violated her modesty. Her Women's Apartment was a kind of
Temple of Chastity, Integrity and Sanctity. The Affability of MARY, born and
bred up in a Court, all people admired, more especially the Dutch, when first
she came into Holland. Before they understood her, many feared an Imperious
Mistress, and the swelling Disdain of those Courts, where the Name of Civility
is either unheard of, or hated. In her Dress, her Diet, her Royal Ornaments, in
her Converse, in her making and repaying of Visits, she hardly exceeded Common
Familiarity. How easy of access to all Persons, and at all Hours when she was
at Leisure from Divine Worship, or the Administration of the Government. For
tho she spent her leisure hours in reading either History or Geography, wherein
she was so expert, that no man knew so well his own Lands and House, as she
understood the Nature of Countries, Islands, Kingdoms, Citys, Rivers,
Mountains; and the manners, Religion and Laws of the Inhabitants, so that in
this sort of Polite Learning nothing could be more Elegant, or accomplishd then
Mary, yet was not the Pleasure which she took in reading so great, as to detain
her from giving audiences to all persons at any leisure time. What Burgomaster
or Mayor of a Town could be easier of access, or more freely spoken so, then
this Princess to Hollanders and English? Her affability and sweet Delivery,
wherewith she Seasoned all her Virtues, exceed belief. As she excelled all in
Majesty, so she suffered none to outdo her in Humanity. I will give you one
rare Example of her extraordinary affability and goodness. An Ambassador of a
great Prince, after he had paid his Duty to Mary at the Hague, retiring out of
the Chamber, lest he should turn his Back to the Princess, went backward,
stopping and bowing two or three times. By chance it happened, that after he
had bowed a second time, still retreating backward, his Periwig caught hold of
a Branch that hung in the room, which either he had not seen, or else had
forgot, and pulling it off discovered his Bald Head. The Ambassador blushed,
and the Ladys and Maids of Honor could not forbear Laughing; only the
Princess did not so much as smile but kept her Countenance with the same
Gravity, as when she heard the Embassadour's Address. After the Ambassador was
gone, one of the Ladys who was greatly in her favor, admiring the Reservedness
of the Princess upon such a Jocular accident, made bold to ask her, how she
could hold laughing? To whom the Princess, I should have done the Ambassador
an Injury, said she, should I by an unseasonable fit of Laughter, added to the
shame and trouble of a Person who was in Confusion and Perplexity enough at
what had unhappily, and through no fault of his befallen him: No, Madam, that
had been ill done, and against my Duty. With this Serenity of Aspect, and
sweetness of her Countenance all people who were admitted to the Queen were so
moved, that they could not think they beheld a Queen, but some certain Goddess
beneficent and propitious to mankind. A singular Gravity accompanied this
Divine Goodness, after a wonderful manner intermixing Majesty and Familiarity
together: Add to this, the Graces of her Countenance, the Serenity of her
Aspect, the Sparkling and Cheerfulness of her Eyes, and indeed the Majesty of
her whole Body. No body could behold her who was not struck with so many
Excellencies. No wonder then that so many Ornaments both of Body and Mind,
should beget so much Love and Admiration, and love in the minds of all People,
in so much that she was beloved, and worshipped like a Goddess sent down from
Heaven to enlighten this Age, and procure the safety of so many People, and
generally after her Death desired and bewailed.

Now as she was always like her self, through the whole Course of her Life, so
neither did she swerve from her self at her death. The manner of her most pious
and constant End, apparently answered, the most Holy Purpose of her whole Life.
As against all other fears, so against the most terrible of all Terrors her
Courage was Invincible, neither the cruelty of the Disease, nor the unlucky
approach of Death in the Flourish of her Age, in the midst of so many soothing
Pleasures of this Life, could prevail with the Queen, to show the least sign of
sadness. On the other side, when she heard and was sensible of being called
away, many and most Illustrious were the signs of her undaunted departing from
this Station of Life. When the Right Reverend Archbishop of Canterbury, sent
for some few days before she expired, gave her to understand the certain
Approach of Death, that she was to prepare for the Journey which all Mortals
early or later are to take, placidly, without any sign of a sick Mind, though
extremely weakened in Body by the Force of the Disease, she made Answer, That
that was not the first Day of her Learning to prepare for Death; for that she
had served God during the whole Course of her Life. A saying truly worthy of so
great a Queen, worthy the Remembrance of all Ages. She had learnt, that then we
begin to live when we die. We die as soon as born; every day something is
imperceptibly cropped from our Lives, till by degrees the whole be lopt away. And
that this most pious Queen neither deceived her self, nor the Archbishop, is
apparent from that memorable saying of hers about six years before her fatal
day, when she sat by the Bedside of a Noble Person's Wife, whom she highly
Loved, and valued, to confirm and comfort her, then drawing her last breath.
They who were present desired her, that she would turn away her Eyes from the
Expiring Lady. But the Queen refused, saying withal, That it rarely fell out
for Persons of her Rank and Quality to see such a Spectacle as now was offered
her by the designed Favor of Heaven, to make Advantage of it in better
understanding the Vanity of our Life. What Advantage she made of it, the
conclusion of her Days sufficiently taught us. After this she fed her Soul with
the Celestial Food of the Body and Blood of Christ, with a deep sense of the
Pains which our Redeemer Suffered for us. Refreshed with this Sacred Banquet,
she cast away all Further Care of Earthly Affairs, that she might think upon
nothing else but of Enjoying God, when freed from her Corporeal Imprisonment;
that God, whom upon Earth she had so fervently loved, and so purely Worshipped.
She bid the King farewell in these words, which are uttered by me in Latin; for
you do not hear what she could say, but what she said; I leave the Earth: I
hope, dear King, you never mistrusted my Fidelity and Love. Moderate your
Grief. I wish that with the same Joy that I depart, with the same easiness you
may set bounds to your sorrow. Soon after the Divine MARY expired in the Hands
and Embraces of the King, who never left her, nor stirred out of her Chamber Day
or Night, whilst she lay laboring under three most cruel Diseases, the
Smallpox, an Erysipelas and a Pestilential Fever, either of which was enough
to have carried off the strongest of Men.

It Is better to pass over in silence the Grief that overwhelmed the King, than
to spend time and words in vain. For words cannot be found, that can in any
measure express the Vastness of his Grief. Such was always, and so great the
Resolution of the most Courageous King, and such his Fortitude, that tho
assailed with Angry fortune's utmost Fury, he never could be moved, never
succumb'd, but bore his Adversity with an Elevated mind. Never any Man,
whatever were the madness of Raging Disaster, could perceive any change of
Countenance in the King. But this same Grief he was not able to withstand,
Vanquished by the Force of his Love and Loss; as having lost the most certain
and faithful Componion of his Fortune, of his Counsels, his Cares, his Labors,
and his Thoughts; who far exceeded all the Excellencies of the Female Sex, that
hardly the Virtue of any Woman, in any Age, can be compared to hers. For that
reason perhaps it was that Heaven denied her Offspring, lest she should bring
forth a worse than her self and her Husband, seeing Nature could go no further.

No wonder then that Invincible Resolution, that undaunted, yet sedate Courage
of William, in all the Rudest Tempests of this Life, was so deeply struck and
shaken with this Thunderbolt. For he now misses the only Best and Wisest of
Queens, when he most needed her, and might have reaped infinite Advantages from
her Fidelity, Prudence and Assistance in Governing wisely at Home, while he
performed Wonders abroad. There is no man so Iron-hearted, but must be sensible
of the Extremity of Pain, when the One half of his Soul is severed from him, by
so violent a stroke.

However, we doubt not, but the King, out of his incredible Wisdom, tho his
Grief can never be exhausted, will recollect himself, and re-call his Mind from
the Bitterness of his Grief; to accomplish what he has so prosperously begun,
that Work, which turns the Eyes of all Europe upon him, on whom the Fate of it
depends: To the End that by his Conduct and Counsel, Ease, Tranquillity and
Security may be restord to so fair a Portion of the Habitable World; and Peace
so settled, that not only Arms may be laid down, but with those Arms all fear
of taking 'em up again.

Wherefore as all men unmeasurably Grieve for the Death of the Queen, as being
a Wound by which all suffer; so now again all Pray for the Safety and
Preservation of the King; all, who are concerned for the safety and liberty of
Europe.

Mary was; The Flower of Queens was once; the Ornament of the Age, the Love of
the People, the Delight of the World, the Granary of the Poor, the Altar of the
miserable. Thou, best and Greatest of Queens have lost nothing, who Reapest now
Eternal Beatitude, the Fruit of a Life so Piously, so Chastely, so Prudently
Led, exempt from all the Cares and Troubles wherewith we miserable Wretches are
tossed by Storms and Waves of these wicked times.

The King has lost the Alleviation of his Cares, the Ornament of the People in
Prosperity, their Aid in Adversity; and all good Men their main Tower of
Defense.

Thou Departedst this Life in the Flower of thy Age; but what remorseless Death
has abstracted from the Number of thy Years, men will add as much and more to
the Eternal Glory, Fame and Remembrance of thy Name. That was not to be said
thy Life which thou ledst in the Chains of thy Mortal Body; but is to be called
thy Life which thou art to Live, immortal in the Hearts and Minds of all
People, who will always burn with Love and Admiration of thy Virtues. Thou have
no reason to grieve, that thou did not bless the King with Offspring, the
only thing which many thought was wanting to complete thy happiness of Earth;
and which indeed is a more than ordinary Grief, both to the King and us. For as
of old, when Epaminondas was upbraided with want of Issue, he boasted, that he
left a Daughter behind him, meaning the Battle of Leuctra, which would not only
survive him, but be Immortal; so thou, most Blessed MARY, the Mother of so many
Kingdoms and People, the Mother of the Oppressed, the Mother of the Poor and
Needy, wilt leave behind thee so many Daughters that will never Dye, the
Eternal Encomiums and Sempiternal Glory of thy Goodness, Beneficence, Charity,
Clemency, Mildness, and the rest of thy other most lovely Virtues, which will
live immortal in the Remembrance of all Posterity. This Life will prolong thy
Consecrated Memory to after Ages. Nor Marble Mausoleum, nor Golden Vrn shall
hide thee; Thy Tomb shall be our Breasts.

DIXI.
A Funeral Oration TO THE SACRED MEMORY OF THE Most Serene and Potent MARY II.
QUEEN of Great Britain, France and Ireland.

By Francis Spanheimius, F. F. Chief Professor of the Academy of Leyden.

Pronounced by Public Authority in the Hall of the Most Illustrious States.

Upon the Day of the Royal Obsequies, March 5. 1694-95.

Containing many Remarkable Passages in the Life and Death of Her Late Majesty,
not hitherto made Public.

LONDON. Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in Jewen-street, and are to be
Sold by Edm. Richardson near the Poultry-Church. MDCXCV.

A Funeral Oration UPON MARY II.
QUEEN of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
WHether I should express my self in Inarticulate Lamentations, intermixed with
Tears and Sobs, among so Great and so many Provocations to Grief, that am to be
a Spectacle of Mourning to ye all (most Sorrowful Assembly of all Degrees and
Orders) or whether I should let loose my Tongue, Speechless almost, and
motionless, through the bitterness of my Anguish, into articulate Words, tho
interrupted with frequent Throbs, astonished and forsaken by my Senses, I was
long time considering. No man can believe that a Flood of Eloquence should flow
from his Mouth whose Eyes are blubbered, Cheeks are overflowed with Torrents of
Water continually streaming, while we bewail the Funeral of this Day. These
Walls deformed with ghastly and unusual Accoutrements; this very Pulpit
resembling a Scaffold prepared for some sad Execution, the alteration of our
Senators Weeds, every Order in Sable, and the Muses in Black, the Ensigns of
Magistracy reversed, our Citizens with dejected Looks, every where a profound
Silence, every where dropping Eyes and deluged Cheeks more livelily and
forcibly express, even without an Interpreter, the Grief unspeakable, beyond
what Imagination can Comprehend, and so ponderous upon the Hearts of all Men,
then it is in the Power of Human Utterance to do, tho every particular Member
of the Body were turned into Tongues, and resounded forth several Mones and
Lamentations. Must I be the Person, I who first in this same School, in a
Public Speech congratulated not so much the Royal Ensigns of Kingdoms offered
to William and Mary, tied together in an Association rarely known (Oh that it
had been Eternal) Two the Choicest Boons of Heaven bestowed on the Britannick
World, and the two Tutelar Numens upon Earth of the Universal Church: Must I be
the first, bound by the Sacred Tie of Duty to those who in their own Right have
Authority to Command, after they had once ordained this solemn Day, wherein No
Body counterfeits Grief, that am obliged to perform the Office of a Herald of
Death; to Proclaim the Death of Britannic Mary. It was unanimously agreed then,
Conscript Fathers, the Best of Queens is gone; in which one word all things are
comprehended: Not in the sense of the Lacedaemonians, who at the Funerals of
their Kings, always called the Last the Best: Nor as Nero styled his Poppaea,
the Genius of the City, which was the Surname of the Best Emperors; but She is
gone, who, by the General Voice of all People, so deserved the Appellation of
BEST, that while it remains the allowed Glory of Kings and Queens in this
World, can never be ascribed to any other by the same Universal Consent of
Mankind. The most Splendid, and most Benign Constellation (if ever any other
enlightn'd and shed down its Influences upon Earth) of Britain is set; the
Constellation of the United Belgian States is set, but in an Eternal and Gloomy
Night, only now to refresh both Nations with the sole shadow of her Name. MARY
is set, like that Star which causes the vicissitudes of Day and Night,
returning from whence first of all She rose. And in this Common, tho far
different loss of all men, WILLIAM bewails more than the one Half of his Soul:
The Court, as it were grown decrepit with Age, bewails their Delight: The
Kingdoms bewail an Empress hardly shown to 'em, yet Greater than the Narrow
Limits of Kingdoms or an Age could contain: The Subjects bewail their most
Indulgent Mother, more truly then formerly Livia or Julia the Pious, the Mother
of their Country, the Senate and the Armies: Holland bewails her Foster-Child,
as it were ravished and torn from her tender Bosom, wherein she had continually
cherished Her, even divided from the whole World beside. The Female Sex now
misses. Her that was their Luster, their Excellency, their Glory: The Universal
Church, her most loving Protectrix: They that were stripped of all their
Fortunes, their Liberal Reliever: The Miserable, the Asswager of their
Calamities: The Oppressed, their certain Consolation; The Banished, their not
to be violated Sanctuary: The Sons of Peace, their Irene truly so called:
Lastly, All Ages, all Orders, all Nations, who ever they are that in the
highest Station of Human Affairs, reverence Virtue and Piety, miss their most
Sacred, and most United Head. And who among us is not deeply affected and
pierced to the Heart, in beholding the Mournful sight of one single WILLIAM,
that most invincible Hero, resembling some One of those most Valiant Captains,
who being oppressed by some sudden Astonishment, stand Speechless for a while; at
least bewailing the Companion of his Counsels and his Labors, his Delights and
Royal Functions snatched from an unexpected Fate? Of that WILLIAM, who was
never puffed up with Prosperity, nor broken by Adversity, who terrified by no
dangers, nor dismayed at any Terrible Accident; as if his Breast were environed
with a Threefold Corslet of Brass, or that he carried not an Iron but an
Adamantine Heart; now wounded beyond the Aid of Cure, cannot refrain from Tears
and Throbs; as not being wounded or pierced through by any Bullet of his Enemy,
but by a Force surpassing Human, God Himself (which befell the most Holy Men)
thus wrestling with our Hero in a Dark and Bitter Night, till at length the
Supreme Creator of all things rent away the Rib that stuck to his Royal Side;
not when he was asleep, as in that Fabric of Eve, but when he was awake and
watching over the Public Safety. And this was a Pain, which the First of
Husbands, in Primitive Felicity was not able cope with. Yet does he not sink
under so much Grief; nor does the Greatest of Hero's refuse to submit his Equal
Courage to the Arbiter of Life and Death so cruelly afflicting his Royal
Bowels. So neither would it become us, who ought, in imitation of so Great a
King, to lift up our selves to him by whom all Human Affairs are governed with
a Nod, this sad and unfortunate Day, to solemnize the Royal Exequies with
Female Lamentations or the hired Howlings of the Ancient Praesicae, which the
Law of the Twelve Tables forbid the Roman Matrons, or to fill the Market,
Public Streets, the Temples and Tribunals with hideous Clamours. For neither
Breasts distended with vain Sighs, nor Countenances composed to sadness, nor
the warm streams of Tears still gushing from our Eyes, will afford any
alleviation to our afflicted Minds; these being many times vain Shows and
Ostentation of Sorrow, which the Bitterness and Solemnity of our Present
Calamity abhors above what it is possible to imagine. What then? Shall we
suppress and hide our Grief, until we turn into Noibe's and Stones; shall we
make known our deeply conceived Sorrow to our Fellow Citizens, to the People,
to succeeding Posterity by no Demonstrations of Piety, by no long lasting
Monument? For Rome, the Mistress of the World decreed to the Women in High
Stations, after their deceases, no less then to the Soveaign Emperors, besides
Divine Honors, and the Vows of Sacrilegious Piety, Funeral Encomiums also,
such as were made with Solemn Pomp, and in public Commemoration of their
Virtue; upon Augustus's Livia, Nero's Poppaea, Hadrian's Sabina, Antoninus
Pius's Faustina, and Severus's Julia Domna. But for the most part these things
were so carried by the control of those that Governed, or according to the
prevailing Manners of a loose Court and a dissolute People, that the Dishonours
and Disgraces of their Sex were Consecrated to Immortality under the Names
Juno's, Venus's and Mothers of the Gods. With the same Confidence and Lust of
Flattery, did the Princes that succeeded extol the Father's Praise: The Tables
transmit to Eternity the Clemency and Moderation of Tiberius, the Prudence of
Claudius, the Patience of Hadrian, the Indulgence of Caracalla, the Noble Acts
of Commodus, as if they had been born to eternize the Roman Name. Oh! how
different is the Reason of this Days most Religious Solemnity, by which the
whole World is made a Witness of Batavian Piety! How far different are thief
Parentals, truly Just, the sign of Love and Judgment, which the Fathers of this
Republic and Academy have by a Solemn Decree, and with redoubled Honor,
decreed to MARY the AUGUST. Imitating the Piety of Octavius Caesar, who
ascribed that Honor to his Sister Octavia, a Renowned Woman, that the Emperor
himself, in the Julian Temple, and Drusus in the Public Place of Judicature,
in Mourning Vestments delivered themselves in Praise of the Deceased. How far
that Commendation of this Queen is from Idolatry, most Noble Auditors, or from
whatever vain Ambition is usually wont fallaciously to forge, I leave to you;
the Commendation of a Queen, whose Divine Genius, Pure and Chaste Virtue and
Immortal Glory, all People, Subjects and Confederates, Domestics and
Foraigners, they who reverence Virtue in an Enemy, with equal consent of Mind
and Voice, admire and extol to the Skies. Nay, the Fucus's of Flatteries, and
all crisp'd and curled Orations would as much dishonor Her Sacred MANES, as
not only the Bitterness of our Sorrow forbids the practice of such Delusions,
in commanding us to lay aside all Gaiety of Ornament, but She Herself, who when
alive and breathing, but sparingly admitted moderate Praises; and not only
expelled from her Royal Presence all Adulterated Beauties, all Dissimulation
and Sycophantizing Language, all Feigned Acclamations, the very Pests of the
Court and Mothers of Nero, but was always wont to call 'em the Affronts of
Majesty. For my part, Fathers, Collegiates, Citizens and Strangers, in this
condition of my dejected Mind, I shall be so far from all Assentation, or
suspicion of Immoderate Praise as my Oration is distant from necessity. And if
I have take upon me this day the Task of paying a Last Duty to the IMMORTAL
WOMAN, believe it done not out of any confidence of Performance, nor any
profuse Ostentation of Piety, but merely out of Shame to refuse; for the truth
of which I appeal to those that sit at the Helm of our Affairs. But when I
revolve in my mind, that formerly upon occasions of Important and Public
Mourning, Kings themselves took this Office upon 'em, David of Old, and since
him, Persons of Consular Dignity, from Valerius Publicola, sometimes the
Caesar's or Princes of the Roman Youth, when Julius, Augustus, Tiberius, Drusus,
Caligula, Nero ascended the Tribunal, to Commemorate dishonored Virtue with
that Majesty of Countenance that became it. When I am in the midst of silent
Contemplation to renew Reflections upon this August Queen, of whom nothing Low,
nothing Mortal ought to be said; Octavianus Caesar himself refusing the
Panegyricks of any but the Sublimest of Wits: Lastly, When I behold All you
that with Anxious and Wistful Looks surround this Pulpit, nothing from without
presents it self to my Eyes, nothing to my Mind and Affections, but what is
sufficient to cast down a Person worn with years, and almost spent with Labor,
but most certainly languishing with the Public Sorrow, and to deter him from
speaking. Therefore in so much plenty of Matter, I shall shorten this Funeral
Encomium of mine, from which the strictness of going according to the Laws of
Panegyric is not to be exacted; such a one as the Father of Grecian Eloquence
was longer Elaborating then the Macedonian Victor was subduing almost all the
World: And in kindness to your Patience and my own Infirmities, I shall leave
it to Masters of Art, Men of Florid Age and Elocution, to expatiate upon what I
have contracted, beseeching your Pardon at the beginning, if my Abilities prove
not equal to the Majesty of a most August Princess, or the Bitterness of my
Anguish.

How Bright soever be that Star, which sometimes sharpened into Horns,
sometimes with a Half Face, at length with a full Orb, in some measure,
supplies and mitigates the Absence of the Sun, it shines not however with its
own Light, but borrows all its splendour from the Aspect and situation of the
Sun. In like manner the World has frequently beheld Illustrious and far shining
Women, but that I may speak in the Words of one Septimius, they have more truly
glittered with the Decorations of their Husbands then their own: Much of Light
and Splendour since Her Conjunction with the Present Sun of the European World
has been added to our Heroess, from the Reflections of his Beams. However She
shone with Her own, and Her ownmost Radiant Light, and made it doubtful, which
way She from Her self diffused the serenest Light, whether by her Royal
Descent, or by weilding the Royal Scepter, Her self in her own Right Associate
of the Empire, or lastly by Her Royal Virtues and Graces, conspicuous through
all the Regions of the Earth. Where the Sun hides, and where he brings forth
Day.

And wherein She far surpasses the Lot of all Women: What August Queen did ever
the least Fabulous Annals, what Queen did former Intervals of Ages, measured by
the Line of our Ancestors, or the Times wherein we live, e're show to the
World, who from an interrupted series of succession of Kings, like Hers,
derived her Birth; and of whom with more Justice, and without Assentation it be
unanimously said, Missa per innumeros Sceptra tuetur Avos?
-- Scepters does She defend,
That from unnumber'd Ancestors descend?
We take no Notice of Kings descended from the Immortal Gods; the Father of the
Romulean Race from Mars, the Macedonian Amyntas or Philip from Hercules, the
Hornbearing Alexander from Jupiter, the Julian Pedigree from Aeneas and Venus,
into which the Wife of Augustus, by the Name of the Goddess Julia is to be
inserted. How much more true and sacred, without offense to these Deities, was
the Original of this PRINCESS, who understood Her self to be not only the
Progeny of the Stuarts, from Robert the Second, Surnamed the Happy, and three
Ages lower, but from a more Ancient Original of the Royal Race in Scotland, not
to descend into the dubious Succession of Hector Boethius: Then from the
Anglo-Saxons, by the Marriage of Margaret to Malcolm the Second. From the
Norman, by the Marriage of the Daughter of Henry VII, and Elizabeth, the Wife
of James IV. From the Danes, by Ann Her Great Grandmother. Lastly from the
Blood of France, by Her Grandmother, Mary of Bourbon, the no less Unfortunate
Mother of the unfortunate James. So that to what ever corner of the Heaven our
Heroess turned Her Eyes, she certainly saw her Ancestors Cloth with Royal
Dignity.

But tho she were descended from such a Progeny of Kings (and would to God she
had been the Mother of Kings) Since Women born, there never was any like her,
who as it were forgetful of her Extraction, of her Ancestors, and the Power
derived from Antiquity, which many believe to be sufficient to authorize their
Transgression, who carried her self more humbly to all Fortunes, Degrees and
Conditions of Men, even to the poorest sort, negligent of her Station and that
Towering Throne, from whence with her Great WILLIAM she gave Laws to so many
spacious Kingdoms, so many Seas, Islands and People. MARY, in that same High
Degree of Dignity would not be thought unworthy of the Scepters of her
Ancestors, nor the Glory of her Progenitors, nor her own proper Lot to Command
and Reign. She bore in mind, that High and Low were in subjection to the same
Law of saving and coming into the World; tho the same Fortune and Splendour did
not attend all alike, yet all were of the same Mould, they who are clothed
with Imperial Purple, and they who are forced to shroud themselves under the
meanest Cottages: Which was the saying of Socrates, that there was no
difference between Alcibiades, nobly descended, and the most Obscure Porter:
She well knew, that Long descent and Ancient Lineage, were but vain shadows;
that the Blood which is sprightly and ruddy in Youth, grows languid and
degenerates with Age; or rather that the Beams of the most Splendid Light
diffuse themselves upon Common-sewers: That is to say, upon Julia's and
Agrippina's, upon Caligula's and Nero's, upon Domitian's and Nero's, born to be
the Insamy of their Families; rather Excrements then Blood. Whence it came to
pass, that they rather chose to be accounted the Heads and founders of their
Race and Name, then that it should be thought the Glory of their Ancestors
extinguished in them.

I remember, Noble Hearers, the one day that this Pious and Pensive Princess
recalling to Mind her Father, who had so lately ruled most flourishing
Kingdoms, but gone astray from that Faith which the Laws of God and Man had
established ever since the Reign of Edward VI, the Josiah of his Age, and which
his Father and Grandfather had subscribed to; I remember, I say, that being
admitted into her Private Chapel, after she had let fall a shower of Tears,
she gave thanks to God, the Supreme Parent of all things, who sometimes forsook
the Sons and Grandchildren of Hero's, sometimes in them supplied what was
wanting in their Parents, correcting the Vice of Nature by the Benefit of
Grace. Which when I had confirmed by the Examples of her self, and her Great
Grandfather James the Son of Unfortunate Mary; and that it was done by the same
Miracle of Grace, as we daily see Nature produce Gold and Diamonds out of stony
and craggy Mountains, and Sweet Juices out of Bitter Roots, I added by way of
Consolation of her Afflicted Piety, that perhaps the Father of so many Tears
and Sighs would not be lost in Heaven. Whose chiefest Glory it was to have
begot MARY; and from whom she received her Being, while he on the other side
received from his Daughter the benefit and aid of her Prayers, then which there
is nothing of greater force to expugn the Clemency of Heaven; and a useful
Pattern of Grace, which she every day set before his Eyes. And indeed whatever
there was of Great that raised our Heroess above all the Queens of all Former
Ages, whatever the English almost adored in her, what the Batavian loved, the
German honored, the Switzer reverenced, and the girning and reluctant French
admired, Fame has also so loudly proclaimed to the utmost Limits of the
Hyperborean, Eastern and Western World, that she can never be said to have
celebrated the fame of any other Woman, as she has sounded forth in Praise of
this Princess. And all this we must certainly conclude was never infused into
her by any Human, but by a Divine, an Immortal Operation.

In the first place that most Sweet and Holy Name of MARY, consecrated from the
very Birth of Grace it self, was a most Auspicious Augury of the Future
Salvation, Restoration and Security of Britain. And it was as fortunate in Ours
as it was Ominous and Fatal in Four Former MARYS of England, Scotland, France,
and lastly of Italy, whose Fame, Religion trampled under foot, the Sacred
Worship of God profaned, Laws violated, Halters, Slaughter-Houses, Racks,
Funeral Piles and Flaming Busts, and lately the Church it self upon the brink
of Ruin, and groaning under most oppressive Servitude proclaim far and near. In
like manner as the mournful Annals of the Church declare both the Substance and
the Omen to have failed, under former Christian Governments in the Fausta's,
Eudoxia's, Honoria's, Eusebias, Theodora's, Irene's; Specious indeed but empty
Names of Christian Queens in former Ages. And therefore Britain that had been
ruined by MARY'S, was at length to be preserved by a Mary; and as it was of
old, by many ways afflicted by two William's First and Second, so it received
New Life and Spirit from WILLIAM the THIRD. On the other side, by a contrary
Example, in the Name of James the Second, as in the fatal Names of Darius,
Philip, Antiochus, Aristobulus, Augustus and Constantine, we see the
unfortunate Catastrophe of that which began under the same Names with joyful
and lucky Auspices.

But above all things, who among ye can forbear to admire the Conduct of the
Supreme Architect, who framed this wonderful Structure at the Beginning,
without the Aid or Knowledge of the Sleeping Parent of Mankind, when this
Goodly Form, this Pulchritude and Procerity of Female Body represents it self
before your Eyes, not Hero like, but rather almost Divine; such a Majestic
Forehead, such a Graceful Countenance, such Radiant Eyes, such an Harmony of
Shape and Lineaments, accompanied with Sweetness of Favor, and a Charming
Aspect in our MARY, surpassing all the Graces and Venus's of the Greek, tho
enlivened with Apellaean Colors. Deserving indeed not only more then Mortal
Empire, which the Ethiopians decreed to Majesty of Form, but also of Eternity
of Reign, if any such thing might be granted upon Earth. Her Celestial
Courage, her Lofty Mind, Her Wit that penetrated the most hidden Recesses, Her
Judgment certain and unacquainted with Mistake, Her inexhaustible Thirst of
Reading, the incredible Treasure of Her Memory, Her Heroic Genius, all these
were deposited in a Royal Domicil or rather Temple, reared by the same
Architect as the Universe. There was eminently to be seen in her Words, in her
Aspect, in her Habit, in her Eyes, in the Posture and Carriage of her Body,
unaffected Sincerity, Fidelity, Candor, and whatever else could procure Love
and Reverence. Besides the Gracefulness of her Delivery, the Accomplished
understanding of three Languages, and her Knowledge of things Divine and Human,
she was adorned to perfection with harmless and Chaste Manners, which no
Impurities could defile, no envenomed Breath, no Pestiferous Gales, the
Familiar Contagion of Courts, could ever infect. Her pure and spotless Mind
might rather be broken, like Crystal Glasses cracked by the Infusion of Poison,
then endure what was not accompanied with Virtue and Honesty, or some public
or private benefit. So that whatever most usually puffs up with Arrogance, or
corrupts with Stomachful Pride, a Sex most covetous of Rule: What makes others
swell and look down upon their Inferiors with Contempt, as Nobility of
Extraction, Beauty, Wit and Wealth, like Boxes glittering without with Gold and
Gems, but within enclosing Arsenick, such as have more of Aloes then Honey, all
these Blemishes of her Sex, she was a Princess who from her Infancy detested.
So that she whom the Supreme Parent of Nature had rendered every way perfect and
fortunate, bewailing only this one thing, that she was better then her Father;
she, when but a Child, was never observed to swell, or abate of her usual
Affability, Mildness, Easiness to give admission, or of the humble Opinion she
had always of her self. And as much as there was in her Countenance of
ingenuous and Royal Erubescency, so much was there in her Heart, of Bashful
Modesty; by which means Majesty was always seasoned with Benignity, Gravity
with Cheerfulness, Clemency with Severity. And as many as were admitted to the
Presence and Ear of so Great a Princess, knew they were to undergo a perpetual
combat with her Modesty, so that they must be forced to submit their discourses
to this same Modesty, or else to be silent altogether.

Conscript Fathers, I speak those things which are vulgarly known, chiefly
aiming at this, that no man should believe, so many and such great Endowments
of Mind were transmitted into MARY with the Blood of the Father and Mother;
which were the only Workmanship of God, who would only vouchsafe by this to
show how far he could accomplish Nature, and this I boldly and confidently
aver. For in the most Corrupt times of King Charles and King James's Courts,
when Popery adventured not only to creep in privately, but pulling off her
Vizor, to rush in with open force; when Religion was a Cloak for Fraudulent
Artifices; when Effeminate Arts, Dissolute Clemency, Undecent Practices and
Wanton Pastimes were the Delights of the Court, and Flexible Youth was led away
by the Princes as they pleased themselves; it came to pass, not without the
Assistance of God himself, that all this while MARY and ANN, under the tuition
of Noble Matrons, and other Exquisite and Pious Instructors, as formerly the
two Sisters Pulcheria and Arcadia the Daughters of Eudoxia, by the Order of
Charles II. were kept to a strict Discipline. By whom the Minds of the Royal
Virgins, that were one day to be advanced to Sovereign Dignity, might be
rightly formed, and excited not so much to the Desires of a Pompous and
Illustrious Fortune, as to the Study of true Piety, and a Religion purged from
Superstition. Thus Nature has taught us, that Parian Marbles are to be cut
smooth, Ivory plained, and Diamonds polished; that Gold is to be purified,
Plants and Trees to be trimmed and lopt, and the choicest Seeds to be improved
by Art, when no Industry can Correct or Polish the Pumice, the Tophus and
Spung. These being then the first Initiations of both Princesses, the most
prudent Henry, Bishop of London, being afterward to improve the Inherent
Promptitude of Nature, and the management of their Infancy, our MARY by
degrees, having already made her choice, so accustomed her self to reading and
hearing at the Feet of Jesus, which she washed with the daily and most fragrant
Perfumes of her Prayers, Oblations and Vows, that afterward she valued all
other things as little worth, looked upon 'em as Empty Vanities, and an
Imaginary Shadow of Glory, and ceased thenceforward to admire, Aulae Fumum and
Opes, strepitumque:
The Smoke, the Riches and Noise
of the Court, and whatever Ambitious Minds hunt after, without the Pale of
Heavenly Contemplation, like the Crow flying about the Empty World out of the
Ark of Noah. I will report a known Truth. When first the News was brought of
the Inauspicious, but certain Nuptials of James the Father, with Mary of
Modena, by the Mediation of LEWIS, not only she, toge with ANN her Sister, with
a Cast-down Countenance and Watery Eyes received the Tidings, attended with a
deluge of Tears, which Doctor Thomas Doughty, then Domestic Chaplain, could by
no means put a stop to, but our MARY also after she somewhat alleviated her
Sorrow with Weeping, brake forth into these Expressions, worthy to be engraved
in Cedar. However things fall out, said she I hope we shall preserve immaculate
to God our Faith and our Religion, let all other things pass away, which we
shall look upon as of little consequence. What certain presages were these,
Most Noble Hearers, that the HEPOESS, whom we bewail, would one day be the most
inexpugnable Tower and solid Bulwark of the more Holy Religion, and a most
perfect Exemplar of those Virtues, which would render her the Immortal Desire
both of us and our Posterity.

But from these Exercises of her Youth, she was called to Greater and Higher
Things, and to lay the Foundations of Empire and Council, under the Conduct of
WILLIAM HENRY: And what a Name was that! This was he to whom the Divine Wand,
and that Mortal pointing out the way, marked out MARY of Britain, she that was
only to kindle his Flame; She that among all Women was the only Person fit for
his Choice, to be the Glory and Ornament of his Conjugal Life, and such a One
as Solomon sought, but could not find among thousands. As He alone among all
the Hero's and Princes, truly Christian, was brightly Eminent and fit for
MARY'S Wish to be the Conductor of her Youth and Life: As in whom there was a
Concurrence of all Praises and Universal Glory: As in whom alone all those
Great Things met, divided of Old in the Persons of the four Ephori that were to
instruct the Persian Princes, selected to the Government of the Empire; of
which, the First to infuse Religion; the Second, to govern the Affections; the
Third, to inspire Fortitude of Mind; and the Fourth, to infuse Love of Justice
into those that were to Reign. And MARY so deeply imprinted in her Mind the
Image of this Great Master, and her Mind being capable of Great Things, beyond
her Sex, she profited so well, by the Company of so Great a Prince, not only by
his Instructions, but by his Example, that she was taught to Reign before she
could know her self. I will faithfully relate what I only heard my self, and
therefore can attest. While she staid at the Hague, after the Expedition for
England, expecting a Wind, I was admitted to the Presence of the Royal
Princess, and found her turmoil'd with many Cares and deep Cogitations. At what
time she, who was never wanting in any measure of Familiarity, casting a
Propitious Look upon the Interpreters of the Holy Bible, delivered her self in
these Expressions to me.

What a Severe and Cruel Necessity, said she, now lies upon me, either to
forsake a Father, whom my Grandmother first ruined, (hence France the Author of
our Parents Calamity,) or to forsake a Husband, my Country, nay God himself,
and my Soul, my Nearest and my Dearest Pledge.

It Is a Cruel Necessity indeed, Madam, answered I, but not to be avoided;
Heaven not enduring divided Duty, nor divided Affections; Heaven, that has not
only joined you by an Eternal Tie to WILLIAM, but calls you to Succor your
Laboring if not Perishing Country, the Church of God, your Religion, and these
your Batavians, over whose Necks the Sword or Bondage hang. You forsake a
Father, Madam, it is true, but who first forsook Himself, Nature, his Children,
Kingdoms, Religion, Laws, his Word, and the Hopes of his Subjects; who departed
himself from the Government, that he might serve the Conveniences of those, who
under the pretense of False Religions, measure all things Divine and Human by
their own Advantages. And when I added, that she was called by the Voice of
Heaven from a most delightful Ease, to be the Companion of WILLIAM in his Cares
and Toils, and unless our Wishes failed us, to the Government of one of the
Greatest Empires in the World.

I, said the Very Image of Modesty it self, I Govern a People and Weild
Scepters! I who have only learnt to handle, next the Sacred Bible, Books that
either may instruct or recreate the Mind, then to handle my Needle, Pen or
Pencil, or to mind my Flowers, Garden, or whatever else belongs to my Family
Affairs, or calls off our Sex from the Contagion of Idleness! And therefore be
not deceived in your Opinion, continued she, smiling, as if the Prince by his
Society had instructed me in the Arts of Peace and War. It Is true, after Hard
Hunting, or wearied with Continual Audiences, or tired with Incessant Cares for
the Good of the Republic, He comes to my Chamber, about Supper-time, upon this
Condition, that I should not tire him more with multiplicity of Questions, but
rather strive to recreate him overtoil'd and almost spent, with pleasing Jests,
that might revive him with Innocent Mirth.

Thus you see, most Noble Auditors, that MARY may be said to have been, for the
greatest part, her own Schoolmistress in the most difficult of all Arts, the
Art of Reigning; nor would she so lately have taken Empire upon her, had it not
been to preserve the Empire from Ruin. And indeed her first Rudiments, from the
time that she betook her self to the Helm of the Republic, while WILLIAM was
laboring beyond the Seas to stop the Career of an Impetuous Enemy, equaled if
not surpassed the consummate Foresight, Sagacity, Courage, Virtue and fidelity,
as well in Council as in the Field, either of the Marcia's, formerly among the
Britons, or the Zenobia's in the East. And that which amazed the World was
this, that neither the Pride, nor the Ambition of those Women actuated her; yet
when all things were in a Tottering Condition within the Kingdom, when the
surrounding Ocean shook with Gallick Thunder, and all good men were struck with
astonishment, and under the Terror of dubious Event, she showed a Courage
undaunted and unacquainted with Fear. The British Sea was covered with the
Enemies Fleet, in a manner Victorious, and contemning Female Empire, blocked up
the English Havens, when at the same time, after their Fidelity sold and
adulterated for Money, the English and their Admiral looked on as immovable,
while the Belgian Ships deserted by Nefarious Conspiracy, were sunk and
battered, when they least expected it. Within the Bosom of the Kingdom also,
Fell Conspirators endeavored through hidden and pernicious Mines, not delv'd
with Spade or Pickax, but Horrid Machinations, to open a way to a most Crafty
Enemy, who under the Specious pretense of James's Name, not only threatened the
Queen with Chains, the English with Servitude, Religion with Exile, and to mix
all things with Confusion, Slaughter, Conflagration, Sack and Rapine, but sang
their IO Triumphs, as if the Town had been their own. In Flanders, through a
certain Fatal Misfortune, and by the Craft rather then the Courage of French
Impetuosity, our Horse giving way to their first Fury, the Confederate Forces
were worsted. All this while WILLIAM was a great way off in Ireland, where the
French in conjunction with the perfidious Irish, possessed all the Cities,
Towns, Castles, Fortresses, Ports, and the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom. Nor
were Affairs in a doubtful condition only, but almost desperate, beyond the
Power of Human Sagacity to imagine, that ever our Hero, in view of an opposing
Enemy, should ford the Boyn, as Caesar did the Rhine and Baetis, exposing his
Royal Person, not unwounded neither, to the Cannon Bullets, and Musket Hail,
and in one day put the Barbarians with their French Confederates to flight, and
constrain Trembling James to quit the Island. In the midst of so many
Streights, what did MARY do? Did She despond, was She terrified with the
hideousness of the Danger? Did She shake for fear, when Et Tellus atque Horrida
contremuerunt Aequora? Was she afraid of suborned Ruffians? Did she slink away
from the Royal Palace? Did she, dubious what Course to take, commit her self to
Fortune, expecting the Event? Or rather did she not with a Manly Courage, an
Example unheard of for many Ages backward, appear a HEROESS the more Undaunted
in the distress of Affairs, Shine more great in the midst of so many
Adversities, and with a Presence of Mind, Wise in Council, Swift in Execution,
stop the Threatening Navy, dissipate the Machinations without, raise the
drooping Spirits of the Consternated, inspire Fortitude into the Cowardly,
suppress the Rebellious, terrify the Perfidious, break the Cataline's
Conspiracy, revive the destituted and forsaken Belgians, and disperse and
dispel the terrible Storms and Tempests that threatened on every side: Every
where Ubiquitary, in the Palace, in the Council Chamber, in the Camp, in the
Temple: Supplying all the Offices of a Queen, of a Senator, of a Captain by Sea
and Land, and of a Flamen, raising toward Heaven all Pious and Christian
Devotion.

Haec nos Foeminea vidimus acta manu.
These things we saw by Female hand performed.
These Acts of Taming a Haughty Enemy, and preserving her Country, were her
first Essays: These were Auspicious Commencements of that Deborah, who
disappointed and brought down more then one Sisera, curbed with a then
seasonable Fear. Soon after, all things being composed, and the last Night, as
it were of British Liberty, being changed into serene Daylight, and her Royal
Spouse being restored to her self and to his Kingdoms, she returned to her
former Quiet and Tranquillity of Mind. The rest* who can be ignorant of most,
Noble Hearers, how MARY while WILLIAM marched with his Victorious Arms beyond
the Seas, quelling the Haughty Fierceness of the French, and disappointing by
provident Delay their crafty Stratagems, how our HEROESS quite extinguished the
Remainders of the Irish War, by the Courage and Conduct conspicuous in War of
our Athlone? Then how still she duly Day and Night watched over the Safety of
her Kingdoms, her Subjects and the Common Cause; how Assiduous she was in Court
and Council whole Days together to advise with all People for the Common
Welfare; how she ordered Heaven to be Violenc'd by Prayers of the People
through the whole Kingdom, rather imitating her Example, then in Obedience to
the Public Proclamations, for the Preservation of WILLIAM; and which I look
upon to be more then all the rest, how by severe Edicts she Triumphed not only
over Treachery and Envy, but over Impiety and Profaneness?

This AUGUST Queen being such, and so Great a Person; so endowed with a Genius
so capacious to manage the Affairs of Peace and War, both in Council and the
Field, and so true a Keeper of Secrets, no wonder the Magnanimous Hero rested
secure in the Bosom of His MARY: If he trusted her Prudence with his most
Important and Toward Secrets; which her Curiofity never affected: If sometimes
pressed, though never oppressed by the Weight of Affairs, and Burden of his
Cares, he called her to his Assistance, and equally divided with his Royal
Consort, even in most important and difficult Affairs, One Mind, and One Will,
his Leisure and his Business, his Profperity and his Misfortunes; and that
always the same Union of Hearts, the same Conjugal Fidelity, the same AUGUST
CONCORD, never disturbed with Discontents or Clamours, have always been the
Glory of their Nuptial Chamber, since their first Consecrated Tie of Individual
Society. So that their Two Souls seemed to be United in One; not so much by the
Mixture of one Common Blood, or the Law of Conjugal Necessity, as by the
Resemblance of Manners, and an Emulation to reach Heaven. Far unlike to what
the Historian writes of Placidia, the Daughter of Theodosius the Great, Married
to the Haughty Visigoth, Athaulphus, That there was then a Brittle Disposition
of Clay joined to a Disposition of Iron. Livia is also Recorded to have been
Easy to Augustus, feigning her self wholly at the Beck of her Husband; not for
her Husband's sake, but for her own and her Children's; for whose Advancement
she became a Mother pernicious to the Republic, and suspected of her Husband's
Death. And whatever Sempronius Gracchus and Caius Caesar boast of their
Cornelia's, M. Antonius of his Octavia, Drusus of his Antonia, Germanicus of
Agrippina, or Trajan of his Plotina; Whatever the British History vaunts of
Marcia Proba, the Wife of Guitheline; of Maud the Good, Wife of Henry the
First; of Joan Beaufort Married to James the First, King of Scotland; of
Eleanore of Castile, the Wife of Edward the First; Philippa of Hainault Married
to Edward the Third, for their Manly Deeds, for the Preservation of their
Husbands or their Kingdoms, or for their Conjugal Fidelity; certainly WILLIAM
might justly exalt his Single MARY above all the Wives of Former Times. Than
whom no Woman Greater for her Courage, more Religious in her Affection, more
Amiable in her Countenance, more Modest in her Habit, more Affable in her
Discourse, or who with a more obedient Readiness to serve her Royal Consort,
whether present or absent; was more his Counselor, his Hands, his Ears, his
Eyes, and every way more Assistant to him. Certainly this was the true Rose of
YORK, born indeed among Thorns, yet free from Prickles her self; whose Heart
was without Gall, her Forehead without a Frown, her Words without any Sting,
her Modesty without any Focus, her Piety without any Pretense, or Vail, unless
you mean the Vail of Modesty, Chastity and Humility; in which sense Piety is
represented Veiled in the Ancient Coins; and as now lately the August WILLIAM
told his Mournful Bishops and Grandees, That MARY'S outside was known to Them;
but that her Intrinsic and Just Value was only known to himself.

But as in this Mortal life, no Man can hope for perfect Happiness, and for
that Human Affairs are many times the Sport of Human Wisdom, so this one thing
was wanting to our Incomparable QUEEN; I mean the Appellation of Mother, Mother
of the World, Mother of the Gods, Mother of Kingdoms. God so providing, because
he never perpetuates his choicest Blessings to the World. Then, left if WILLIAM
and MARY, two Miracles of Nature and Grace had had Issue between 'em, either
the Offspring might have degenerated from so great Parents, and have eclipsed
their Glory: Or had they filled up the Measure of so great Names, they would
have exceeded the Lot of Mortals, and by the Dazzle of so much Light and
Majesty, given Man a Pretense by too much Veneration, to have injured Religion
and the Worship of the Immortal God. Nor did MARY brook her BARRENNESS with
Impatience: She did not cry out, Give me Children, or else I dye: She did not
Contend with Heaven, nor Violence it with querulous Complaints; but so put up
her Prayers to the Almighty, that, though unanswered, they might rather inflame
her Piety and Faith: I say, her Piety, most Noble Auditors, which MARY looked
upon to be the Compendium, the Seasoning of all Virtues, and the Support of
Kingdoms; and therefore Religion was always her first Care, and her Supreme
Law; as it was also to her Glorious WILLIAM. And therefore it was the frequent
Saying of those two August PRINCES, That neither the Guards of Majesty, the
Councils of Princes, Emperors Legions, Cities Garrison, Courage of their
Leaders, Well disciplined and Veterane Armies, nor the Sinews of War any thing
availed to the Preservation of Sovereigns or their Subjects without God's
Assistance. By which means it came to pass, that since the first Foundation of
Monarchies, and the rejecting of that Nation which was once so Sacred to God,
never did any other Reign more happily resemble the Form and Image of a
Theocracie or God reigning over Mankind. I know that the sollicitous Piety of
more than one Empress is extolled to the Sky by the Annals of the Church; not
with that servile Pen of some Historians, neither as when Josephus commends
Poppaea Sabina, a Woman of a Prostituted Leudness, for her Sanctity to the
Gods. But whatever Religion has inspired into the most Holy Women, for whom
Public Prayers have been put up, as for the SAFETY and SECURITY of the
REPUBLIC, and for whom Public Anniversaries have been Solemnized by all the
East, such as Helena, Pulcheria and Aelia Flaccilla; yet that all those
Mixtures of Humility and Superstition, Magnified by the Officious Failings of
Human Interest ever came near the Conspicuous Sanctity of our HEROESS, neither
Friend nor Foe will betray his Judgment so far as to believe. What Queen like
Her, with equal Ardour and Affection, was ever so Assiduous in her private
Conversations with God, to whom she not only offered the First Fruits of her
Morning-sacrifices her self, but Commanded it to be done by all that served
her? Who converted almost into Chapels, her Bedchamber, and the Innermost
Recesses? Who so resigned her self to Associate with her Savior, that besides
her Morning and Evening-Prayers, besides her Monthly and set Fasts, every Day
in her Closet alone by her self offered up her Particulations, not of
Frankincense or Wine, but of Sighs and Tears? Importuning Heaven with her most
fervent Prayers, as well for the Despaired of Conversion of her Father, as for
the Preservation of her Husband, her Kingdoms, Armies, the Confederate Cause,
and the many Calamities which the Church groans under? More especially, how
fervently did our Queen implore the most Merciful Deity, with deep-fetch'd
Sighs, powerfully to avert from the Sacred Head of her Royal Husband, on which
the Welfare of All depended, so many Dangers by Sea and Land, so many Darts
contorted against it; so many Machinations and Ambushes of malicious
Conspiracy, so many Bloody Right Hands of Hired Assassinates? Who so entered
the Temple of God, as one that only intended Adoration, casting out of her
Royal Chapel the quavering Singers and Fiddlers, admitted merely to tickle the
Ears; accustomed always to compose her Mind, and not her Looks or Hair;
moderate in her Dress, sparing in her Train, but eager and humble in her
Attention? Who, when ever she entered the Church doors, or happened to sneeze
in the time of Divine Service, impatiently brook'd the Bowings and Cringes of
the Sycophant Ground; professing. That in the House of God, the distinction was
the same of Meanest and Highest from the most Infinite Majesty. What other
Princess, in the very Imprisonments of Life and August Glory, in the slippery
Station of soothing Age, Beauty and Sovereign Power, in the midst of so many
good Wishes and Adorations, was ever observed to exalt her Mind so sublimely,
yet so humbly to Heaven, as if she coveted every Day the Presence of her Soul
in Bliss; who thought every Day lost, that was not spent according to the
Precepts of Christ? Who trampled with contempt upon what was Transient and
Mortal, as Thrones, Scepters, Palaces, Crowns, Diadems, Robes of Dignity,
Purple Trains, and whatever else she knew to be only deceitful Show? But as
once Mecaenas said, Nobly, to Augustus Caesar, That he would never dye more
Immortal, then when he called to mind every Day that he was Mortal, through an
equal necessity of being born and dying; so was this the frequent, if not daily
Meditation of our August Queen. So that, as it were foreseeing her approaching
Mortality, conscious to her self that the Laws of Fate never regarded Youthful
Years, nor Majesty of Thrones, nor the Pomp of numerous Guards, nor surrounding
Attendance, nor the good Wishes of Men; She, a rare Example, moved by the
untimely Death of several Illustrious Women in her Court, thought it high time
more familiarly to converse with Death, and meditate upon Eternity. And that
she might always have him in her Eye, besides the sacred Books which she turned
over more frequently then ever Alexander did Homer's Iliads; she apyly'd her
self to other Books no less familiar to her, which taught the Art of Dying
well, more especially the Treatise upon that Subject of Charles Drelincourt,
which she confessed to his Son, then one of her Physicians, that she had read
above seven times over. So that it may be said of this August Queen, what
Theophilus Alexandrinus is reported to have admired upon his Deathbed in the
Great Arsenius, who embraced a solitary Life in Egypt, wearied out with the
Honors of Theodosius's Court, Happy Thou, who did always set this last Hour
before thy Eyes.

This being the Temper and Disposition of Mary's Mind, and the Sanctity of her
Life, how Great may you think was her Desire to reform what she found to be
corrupt and depraved in the Manners of the Times, through the Licentiousness of
the former Reigns? The sollicitous and pensive Queen recalled to her Mind the
late Royal Court and the Nation it self, softened and effeminated by the
Delights of the Climate and the Soil, and the Temptations of Sin freed from the
Fear of Punishment; when all People wantoned in Plenty, Ease, Luxury, Play,
Balls, and Vitellian Wastings of the Night, so that the Nerves of all manner of
Virtue seemed to be shrunk up. She observed there was no Piety, but what was
either in the Looks or outward Habit: Manners everywhere dishonored; the
Public Churches adorned like Scenes; Burdens converted frequently into
Honors, and Incumbent Duties made beneficial; the Ministry of the Church into
a kind of Civil Domination, and the large Revenues of it made the Pampering
Food of Wallowing Sloth and Domestic Luxury. Who can now doubt but that MARY
used all her Endeavors to reduce all things into better Order, that she might
restrain People from Things dishonest, more through the shame of Transgressing,
then the Fear of Punishment: And that she might promote to the Care of
Spiritual Things, to the Priesthood and Preferments in the Church, August
WILLIAM permitting this Choice to her piercing Judgment, none but such as
excelled in Learning, Piety and Moderation. By which means it came to pass,
that those Vices which openly before erected their Heads, now look out for
skulking Holes and voluntary Exile. Luxury being expelled the utmost Limits of
the Court, Profuse Expenses being restrained, the Incitements and Rewards of
Vice being taken away, and the Discipline of the best Times being again
restored. For all were to be taught to live and imitate the Manners of both
Princes, and to conform themselves to the Example of WILLIAM and MARY, which
was at it were the Censure and Accusation of Luxury and Intemperance.

And who can be ignorant of the Streams of Royal Beneficence, that were always
flowing from this Inexhaustible Fountain of Piety? Not petty Rivolets, but
large and spreading Rivers; Rivers of Milk, Rivers of Honey. Which ran at first
indeed through the Thirsty Sands of MARY's Kingdoms, into which a Cruel Tempest
had cast Myriads of miserable People; afterward abounding in Water, through
the Annual Exhibitions of Our QUEEN, amounting to no less then Forty Thousand
Pounds English, if credit may be given to the Letters written from thence. Then
the same Waters were to flow, but through occult and latent Passages, without
any noise, without any murmuring, beyond the Seas, into the thirsty and gaping
Channels within Belgium it self, of several Societies; or else into the Bosoms
of distressed Families, Widows, Ministers, Noble Matrons and Virgins, whose
Possessions and Patrimonies afforded ample subsistence before, but now
abandoned and ruined. After this, Germany wasted with Fire and Sword, was to be
refreshed with the same Fountains; or Switzerland almost overwhelmed with
Multitudes of the Miserable flying for Harbor from the Valleys of Piedmont,
where there was neither House nor Hovel for suffering Innocence. But as to
these things, no Praises, no Panegyricks are more Efficatious then silence and
secrecy. MARY her self was silent, tho the Stones now speak. Yet are they not
Pillars, nor Obelisks, nor Chapels of the Superstitious, magnificently adorned
with Gold, Silver and Marble; nor Consecrated Oblations to the Lady of Loretto;
but more Sacred Monuments then all these; every where Houses of Piety,
Hospitals both public and private, which she either built with her Money, or
liberally endowed. Lastly, The Moans and Lamentations of an Infinite Number of
all Conditions, Sexes and Ages, who Gratefully and with Tears acknowledge they
are beholding to her for their Lives and all the Conveniences of Life, extol
Her to the Skies. So that no Body in want, no Body truly poor, no Body reduced
to Misery, ever found MARY'S Benignity e're closed against him, or made his
case known in vain, whose Petitions she did not only answer, when applied to,
but for the most part prevented, when she was acquainted with their
necessities. 'Twould be too long to enumerate every particular. It Is enough,
that we have seen in our Age, a MARY pouring forth from Her Royal Viol the most
Precious Liquor of the Exquisite Nard, to anoint Myriads of Poor People lying
at the Feet of Jesus, and in that abundance, that the Fragrant Odor of it has
filled the whole House of God in every Corner of the World. Oh -- most truly
the Better Part, made choice of by the beloved of God! Oh! most Joyful
Catastrophe, while those Treasures that before were scattered with an
Inconsiderate Bounty among Harlots, Buffoons and Players, as formerly at Rome
among the Pathic Pallas's and Narcissus's, and such like Instruments of
Wickedness, the Senate being defrauded, are now laid out either for Public
Preservation, or to succor the Necessities of the Miserable. Oh truly Royal
Munificence, not bountiful of other Peoples, but their own, giving what was by
Violence torn from no Man; all People being convinced that this is no
Restitution of what was unjustly taken away, or that an Exchequer now is opened
again, which being exhausted and in debt by Prodigal Liberality, or the
Expenses of rashly undertaken Wars, was supplied again with the Tears, the
Blood and Substance of the People, as was done under Tyrannic Domination.

But whither will my Subject extend it self; or how should those Great Actions
which cannot be contracted within any Limits of Places, Regions or Ages be
confined within the Bounds of One Oration, or the Walls of this Temple? Yet
were I not too narrowly straightened, how many Things could I say of the Earnest
Desires of our Pious Queen to see extinguished, or, as much as could be,
lessened the Impious Divisions, too deeply rooted, but first sown by the Wicked
Emissaries of Rome, to the Ruin of her Country. How averse was she from the
Severity of former Times, which decreed the Dissentors, if not to be
exterminated by the Sword, yet to be routed out by Excommunications, and
macerated by Imprisonments, Fines and Banishment, for the only sake of their
differing Discipline, free from all other the least Stain or Pestilence of
Heresy or False Doctrine? And how earnestly has she wished in my hearing (that
saving to the Church of England and the Bishops their Ancient Rights) there
might be a moderate way found to consolidate the Common safety of England, and
the Universal Church, by the Union of all Parties; all Offenses being Removed
all Animosity being laid Aside, all Passion being Moderated, and whatsoever on
either side savoured too much of Human Invention, being utterly rejected.
Neither if we have any thing of Prophetic in us, is all Hopes of such a Union
cut off in the Loss of MARY, while WILLIAM still remains. What need more words,
Conscript Fathers; What a Veneration of Equity was there in our Heroess? What a
Reverence of the Laws? What a Moderation of Mind next to that of Angels, so
that Her Anger never, Her Reason always moved? What a Pleasing Affability to
all her Servants, who strove to out-vye each other in Love, Fidelity and ready
Obedience to such a Mistress, whose Commands were Entreaties? How patiently did
she pass-by Injuries, tho done to Majesty, which tho Aristotle, in his Moral
Precepts, looks upon as Servile, she with Octavius Caesar, thought to be Royal;
the only Woman that would not forgive Backbiting and Slander in others,
Flattery of her self, and Contumely against God. But in what Annals do we meet
with that Clemency in Princes, as in MARY and WILLIAM, not excepting the
Titus's, Trajan's or Antoninus's, who would not dip their Scepters in the Blood
of their Enemies, much less of the Guilty, merely out of a Desire to Save and
Reform? For Augustus was by Nature known to be more prone to Revenge, only his
Prudence made him Mild; which was the Reason he was so merciful to Lucius the
Consul, to Metellus the Father, for the Son's sake, to Cornelius Gallus, to
Cinna, to the Mutinous Legions, whose Names, delivered him in Writing, he flung
into the Fire. But MARY was so slow in requiring the Punishment of Offenders,
so accustomed to Pardon, and to be atton'd by the Wives, Children and Kindred
of Rebels, and whoever embraced the Knees of Majesty, and fled to the Altar of
Royal Mercy, that many thought it an allowance of Treason, and an Authorizing
Impunity But the Clemency of the AUGUST COVPLE being rightly considered, the
Prince was not deceived by the Perjury; but the Perfidious themselves, ill
consulting their own safety, while they willingly and voluntarily devoted their
Lives, their Families and their Fortunes to the Vengeance of a Revenging God.

From that Extraordinary Indulgence, and desire of curing rather than ruining
the Guilty, who is there that may not easily make a Judgment of all the rest;
of her Constant Mind in Adversity, her steady Faith in God, her Love to her
Subjects, her Affection to her Servants, her Fidelity to her Confederates, her
Pity to the Afflicted, and her Love toward all Men? Take some Specimens in a
few words, but most worthy your Attention. Presently upon the News of the Death
of Charles II. MARY'S Uncle by the Father's side, who Loved her better then if
he had begot her.
Plus quam si genuisset Amarat.
When this Most Noble Senate interposed their kind Offices of Condolement for
so great a Loss, by which her Father came to the Sovereignty, but upon which
most dark and dismal Storms threatened the Kingdom, the Church and the Reformed
Religion; she, as she was never without all the Marks of Civility, after she
had answered the Messenger, added these Expressions,

That it was the Will of GOD, through whose Providence, there was no reason to
despair of the Public safety: That the Best Consolation in Affliction was a
Relyance upon GOD: That there was a Threatening Cloud hung over Her Father's
Kingdoms, but that he was able to bring forth a splendid and most Acceptable
Cloud out of the Thickest Darkness.

Oh MARY a true Prophetess, and Words, a Certain Augury of what was to come!
It Is now about two years since that the fatal news reached the Ears of the best
of Queens, that News more especially doleful to our Merchants, that so many
Ships laden with Rich Goods and Wealthy Treasure bound for the Levant, either
through Perfidiousness or supine Negligence, were either sunk, or burnt, or
yielded up to the French; which penetrated so deeply to the Heart of the
Compassionate Queen, that she could not forbear watering her Royal Cheeks,
before all the Standers by, with a deluge of Tears; nor did she only with her
Tears bemoan the losses of those who suffered after a more than ordinary
manner, but also testified her sympathizing in their Misery to the Widows and
Orphans that were hardly able to bear up under so great a Calamity. Nor shall I
ever forget that Cruel Hour, when going to take my leave of the Princess
returning to her Country.

I am called, said she, to my Husband, to my Native Country, to my Fellow
Citizens, and whither Providence leads me, I must follow. But when I leave this
Palace, I leave the Seat of my Leisure, my Tranquillity and Delight: And first
shall my Right Hand forget it self, before I will ever forget this my Belgium,
after so many Proofs of the Affection and Judgment of this Republic. Whose
Losses, added she, without the least Commotion of Mind, whose Misfortunes and
Calamities, and also whatever Prosperous and Joyful befalls it, I shall look
upon as my own, as long I remember my self.

Pardon me, Noble Auditors, if Sorrow weakens me to that degree, and intercepts
my Voice in such a manner that I am forced to draw a Vail over all the Rest.
More especially as to the pour'd-forth Good Wishes of the People, those
Respectful Duties of the Reverencing Fathers, the Weepings and Lamentations
filling all the Streets, the loud Farewell Acclamations which the flocking
Multitude of Men, Women and Children, of both Sexes and all Ages sent up to
Heaven, and with which they rather seemed to call her back, then take their
leaves of her. Farewell Pious, Farewell Best of Princes, Farewell the most
Affectionate to Us, and never to be enough Beloved again. Oh Severe and Cruel
Remembrance! Oh sad and dismal Presages of a Last and Eternal Separation! But
here my Sorrow stops my Mouth, and I must put an end at length to my Most
Bitter Memorial of her Praises. But wherefore do I say an End, when dying she
was so much above all Praises, by how much the more she approached nearer to
Heaven and Eternity. Ah Fatal and Unfortunate Day, fit to be expunged out of
the Records of Time, when all things prosperous by Sea and Land, at Home and
Abroad; a Bright Sun gloriously shining in Britain; the Court in Jollity, the
King Safe, the Parliament in perfect Union; the People pouring forth
Acclamations, Conspirators all suppressed; the Armies breathing forth nothing
but Battles and Triumphs; all things composed under the Auspices of the turning
year, as it was thought to more lasting Joys; when the Eyes of all the World
were fixed upon the Incomparable Pair of of Sovereigns, and the Good Wishes of
all were, A Happy New Year to the Master and Mistress: Ah, Unfortunate and
Fatal Day, when of a sudden the Sky being overcast, and a Dark Afrightful Cloud
covering the Meridian Sun, the Face of Things was changed, and Pangs like those
of Childbed succeeded. This Day was the Thirtieth of December, according to the
Gregorian Account, when the most desired of Queens, Youthful, Cheerful,
Vigorous, and born, as all Men thought, to Eternity of Empire, and whom the
suffrages and desires of all Men had destined to exceed the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, felt the first signs of an Incroaching Disease, that was soon after
to lay her in her Grave. And presently at the beginning, Nature Deceiving Art;
and the Genius of the Distemper, the most Sagacious Physicians, while some
conjectured it to be the Small Pox, others the Measels, others an
Intercuticular Ignis Sacer, some one thing others another; the Flame gathered
strength so insensibly, and the Fire wanting no Fuel, fed so fiercely, while
the latent Mischief stuck within her Bowels, that no repeated Bloodletting, no
force of Medicaments, no Human Providence, no Industry of Art could quench the
Heat, or drive the Contagion to the outward Parts.

Thus that QVEEN in whose Eyes, never was any Fire but what was truly Holy, in
whose Countenance never any Color but what was in imitation of the Rose, in
whose Praecordia never any Boiling Choler, or Burning Anger ever known, her
Mild and Patient Breast, at length the Cruel Flame so shook, endeavoring to
break forth, that within the space of Eight Days, the most Lovely and Splendid
Structure was burnt down and fell to the Ground. Yet fell in such manner, that
the Tower of her Reason untouched, and in vain assailed by Noxious Vapors, the
Soul that only lodged within so great a Domicil, the Divine Mind that guided
the whole Frame, and which being sprinkled with Celestial Dew, like the
Burning Bush received no Harm in the midst of the Flames, retained the
Knowledge of God, Her Self and her Condition. And thus with a Composed and
Quiet Mind, the Lamp of Faith and Hope continually burning; and a Hidden Light
from Heaven illuminating those Darknesses wherewith the Dying Queen was
encompassed, and the Serenity of her Forehead lessening the Ghastliness of her
Countenance; the Fortunate MARY was to be Eternally withdrawn from the most
unfortunate Age: Almost at the same Years, and with the same fury of the
Disease, as Alexander was ravished from the World, or Germanicus Caesar,
bewailed by those who knew him not, tho their immortality were not the same.

For with what a Countenance think ye, Noble Auditors, did she receive the
Dismal News of her approaching and certain Fate, the terror of Demigods and
Hero's, before the last Combats and Struglings of Expiring Nature. When the
renowned THOMAS TENISON, a Person, in whose Learning, Eloquence Integrity and
Fortitude of Mind, St. Ambrose and Chrysostom may more truly seem to be revived
than in his Cope and purple, like another Isaiah, was sent to comfort up the
Queen, and thus delivered himself to her at the last minute of her Life.

Madam, Settle your Affairs, your Family and your Mind; you have lived and
finished the Course which the Parent of Nature has allotted you: She received
it with the same cheerfulness of Countenance and Mind, as she was wont to do
every thing else: not complaining and murmuring at her last Gasps with
Germanicus, that she had just cause of Complaint against God, who took her away
by an untimely end, in the Flower of her Youth, from her Husband, from her
Country, from her Servants, her People and Friends. Nay, nothing terrified with
the Image of Death, she made this Reply.

Father, how good a Messenger are you to me, who, as it were, commanded from
Heaven, bring the Tidings of my last necessity of dying! Here I am ready to
submit to whatever pleases God the Disposer of my Life and Death. I am not now
to learn that difficult Art of Well-dying. I have made up my Account with God,
by the assistance of my Surety Christ. I have discharged my Conscience long
since, I have considered the condition of my Mortality: I have settled all my
Affairs; and surrendered into the Bosom of my Dearest Husband all those cares
that concern the World: And therefore he that calls me, finds me ready to lay
down the Burden of this Life, being no more than a Load of Infirmities, Sin
and Labor.

The turning to her Royal Husband, standing by her Bedside, she is said to
have brake forth into words to this Effect.

Farewell, my WILLIAM, and live mindful of our undefiled Matrimony, till Thy
Lot shall restore Thee to Me, or Me to Thee. I shall not altogether dye, while
Thou singly possessest the Sole Image of Us both. Thou will be My Living Tomb,
more Sacred and more Honorable than any Mausoleum or Funeral Monument. I was
bound to My Spouse Jesus, before I was tied to Thee, nor do Thou envy him the
Prerogative of My Love, who first joined Me to himself. Farewell the last time,
and once more live the greatest Part of me. Thus it behooved Me to go first, and
that Thou should close My Eyes, and not I Thine. I was not born to accomplish
those Things which being begun by Thee, and by Thee strenuously carried on,
remain to be brought by Thee to perfection. It Is Thy business to wage Wars; the
Supreme Emperor has girded Thy Loins with a Sword. And if there be any Sense of
Human Affairs in Heaven, while Thou a Second Joshua art fighting in the Field,
Thy MARY shall pour forth Her Prayers for Thee and Thy Israel in the Mountain
of Eternity. Lay aside the Vehemence of Thy Grief, Dear Prince, give way to
Destiny, rely upon God; and forbear to recall Me again by thy Tears, from the
Port of Tranquillity, and the End of my Labors to New Conflicts which I have
so often sustained as I have thought upon thy Dangers; nor hasten to follow
this Soul of Mine, but live out those Years that Nature has denied to Me and
Thy own too. And if Thou have any Love for My People, for the Church, for
Holland, for all Europe, be more careful than hitherto of Thy own Preservation.

Soon after, notwithstanding the Flame that preyed upon her Marrow, a stronger
Fire from Heaven so inflamed her Celestial Soul, so that her fervent Heart
that now no longer thought of any thing Mortal, soared up to God, her sparkling
Eyes were fixed upon Heaven, and her deep fetched sighs ascended up to Jesus;
those Precious Oblations breathing forth most Sweet Perfumes to Heaven, like
Costly Odours laid on Burning Coals. Till at length, the most August and Pious
MARY STVART in the midst of the Wailing Throbs of all the Standers by, and
mournful WILLIAM sipping her last Gasps, made a full end of Living and
deserving well of Human Kind, only in the Lasting Example and Emulation of her
Virtues, the first day of the Kalends of January, in the Year MDCXCV. toward
the Sixth Year of her Reign, in Thirty Third of her Age, and Seventeenth of her
Conjugal Conjunction with the Renowed WILLIAM, and some Months over.

Thus dyed the AUGUST QUEEN MARY, PIOUS, COMPASSIONATE, BENEFICENT, VICTORIOUS,
BLESSED, who magnificently triumphed over Envy, Ambition, Pride, Ungodly
Affections, the Vices of the Age, during the whole Course of her Life, and
lastly over the Great Enemy of Mankind, with whom we are all to struggle. Thus
she surrendered Scepters, Purple, thus all Pomp and Glory, not till she had
first enjoyed and tasted the Vanity of every one; she, then whom Ancient and
Modern Ages never knew any thing more Majectic or more Venerable, nothing more
Elated above all the Bounds of Envy or Human Custom; and like to whom it will
never be possible for the Imagination to form any other Princess, while
Kingdoms and Empires Endure. Thus now must be enterr'd in a Royal indeed, but
small obscure Six Foot Domicil, that Noble, but Embowell'd Body of MARY, from
which they now must turn their mourful Eyes and Hearts, who so lately were
Cheered and Exhilerated by the Brightness of her Royal Structure, by the
Majesty of her Serene and Awful Aspect, by the Celestial Splendour of her Eyes,
and the Charming Sweetness of her Words. Thus e're she had measured the one
half of ELIZABETH'S Reign by several years, MARY ceased to live. But still this
Name seems much more Happy and Auspicious, than was the most Praiseworthy Name
of Elizabeth. For Elizabeth was the Astonishment, this the Love and Delight of
the World. She reigned in the Hearts of a Great Nation, This in the Hearts of
all People. Elizabeth was Famous for the Splendour, Magnificence and outward
Pomp of her Court and Church; but MARY won more Renown by her Humility, her
Bounty and her Alms. Elizabeth exalted the Grandeur and Honor of the English
Name. This studied those Things which tended to the Consolation and Succor of
the Miserable, and to the Eternal Concord, Peace and Felicity of her People.

Oh Sempeternal Ornament of QVEENS and WIVES! Did thou here therefore only
come, permit me the Repetition of the Words that were said to Cato, suddenly
withdrawing himself out of the Senate, Did thou come hither, only to be gone
again! To deceive the Wishes of so many Mortals, who thought there could
nothing more corroborate their Felicity in this moveable Scene of Wordly
Affairs, then if MARY should long live and Govern! Do thou thus, Great QVEEN
withdraw they self from thy WILLIAM, from thy People, from thy Hollanders! Of
whom we may more truly say, then fawning Rome of her Augustus or Severius, that
they ought either never to have been Born, or never to have Died. Whose First
Birth, when thou were born to the Earth, might be looked upon as the Palilia or
Foundation-Festivals of Britain and the Universal Church; but thy Last Birth,
by which thou were born to Heaven might be thought the utmost Line of Both,
did thou not still live in WILLIAM. Behold how the Reformed Church, and of
all Hands the most Fortunate, that was Illustrated by such a Sun, is now wrapped
up in Darkness by the departure of so Bright a Luminary portending great and
unspeakable Calamities, unless the most benign Deity avert them, bowed by the
loud Prayers of His Elect. However we envy thy Immaculate Happiness; in this
our single Love of thee exceeding whatever Charity we have for our selves, that
we strive not to recall thee back to those Frail Glories which thou see below
us and tramplest 'em all under thy Feet; raised above all the Rage of
Treachery, the Snares of Envy, the Violences of Enemies, the Injuries of Age,
or the Fleet Image of Worldly Things. We bewail our own and the Losses of the
whole World, but with bruised Breasts we accuse our Transgressions against
Heaven, as the Causes of our Calamities. And may it then be lawful for us also,
in these our last Funeral Offices, to give thee a long and Eternal Farewell.
Farewell AUGUST MARY, lately the Most Sacred Pledge of Heaven, the Felicity of
the World, the Ornament of the Age, the Admiration of the People, the Palladium
of Britain, the Delight of Holland, the Consolation of the Church, the Support
of Truth, the Curb of Vice, the Foster-Mother of the Poor, the Hope and Defense
of the Miserable. Suffer us, tho taken from our Eyes, that we may always fix
thee in our Minds; that we may always behold with a joyful and perpetual
Remembrance, that Countenance, that Aspect which formerly we approached with
Veneration, that Royal Right Hand which we have often so submissively Kissed,
but more especially that Celestial Mind, and in That, the Concurrence of all
Praises and all manner of Virtue. Lastly, HAPPY SOUL, accept, not the vain
Noises of profuse Applause, which they pour often from their Breasts that are
prodigal in praising others; not Female Lamentations, not Fruitless Wishes, not
Windy Expressions and Vollies of Idle Words. Accept, not Sacrilegious Altars,
nor Temples, nor Masses, nor Circension Pomp, nor Funeral Chariots, but accept
this Public and Grateful Testimony of Minds most devoted to thy Virtues, to
thy Benefits to what thou have merited of us, CONSECRATED TO THY ETERNAL HONOR
AND MEMORY.

And now we turn our selves to Thee, the MOST INVINCIBLE, yet the MOST
SORROWFVL of Things, in whose Royal Palace, among Triumphant Laurels the
unfortunate Cypress supplies the room of the most Auspicious Rose. You with
more right implore from the Immortal God, what Augustus Caesar is reported to
have begged at the Funeral of Drusus Germanicus, that his False Deities would
grant him an Exit equally Glorious; you with more right I say, this day that
MARY is carried to her Tomb with public Funeral Splendour, implore of God an
Exit like that of your QVEEN, and the Glory of a Death like Hers. But we above
all things stretch forth our Hands and Hearts to Him under whose disposal we
live, that none of us may see that Black Day Rise, wherein the Hasty Death of
WILLIAM would prove the Common and the Fatal Funeral Pile of all Europe, and
the Universal Church. Strengthen your self with Virtue and Courage MOST VALIANT
of HERO'S: You that are accustomed to vanquish others, even angered Fortune it
self. You that appeared more wonderful in Adversity then in Prosperity. You
whom the World's Sovereign Emperor has hardened from the Cradle by Misfortunes,
and whose Virtue had been less conspicuous, had it been less subdued and
exercised; so frame your Mind to Constancy of Resolution, that it may be
manifest not only to Britain, but to all the World, that you could overcome
your Self, whom no man else could ever vanquish; even when Invincible Nature
was to be expugn'd, which is the Chiefest Victory of all. We do not desire Your
Breast should be inaccessible to Grief or Joy, which Marcus Aurelius is
reported to have affected, far from any commotion of Mind: We only desire this,
that after Your Tears have proved You to be a Man, You would remember that You
are a Prince, and such a Prince, upon whose single Fortitude, so many Nations,
so many People, so many Panting Souls believe their Safety their Liberty, their
Hopes and Fortunes depend. You have all along been mindful, which we look upon
and esteem to be the Greatest Thing of all, that you are a Christian, bred up
in the more Sacred School then the most Eloquent of the Romans, while you are
fully convinced that nothing happens preternatural or unusual to the Laws of
Providence, not so much as the fall of a Sparrow, much less of a Man, still
much less of all those who are the express Image of that Immortal Deity whom
they represent. Your Mind GREAT KING, that horrid Thought never troubled, which
disturbed the Famous Pompey, after the slaughter of Pharsalia, whether the Gods
took care of things on Earth? You that have learnt to wage War with Kings, not
to contend with the King of Kings, suffer not your self to be incensed against
Heaven, for redemanding the Pledge which it had given You, but for no certain
Time. So that it may seem doubtful to many, whether You have more Reason to
lament for what You have lost, or to be gratefully thankful for what You once
enjoyed. You dive not into the Secrets of the Eternal Mind, or that all
Provident Wisdom, who in a moment seems to us to have destroyed his own
Workmanship, and to have disturbed and disappointed all both Yours and our
Hopes. This is not the First Day Your Experience, how many times God frustrates
the Desires of Mortals, frequently curtailing long-grounded Hopes by speedy
disappointment, and no less often converting into unexpected preservation the
despair arising from sad and sudden Accidents. Even YOU YOUR SELF, Great
Sovereign, have proved by Trials of Your own, who and how Powerful is that
Upholder of Princes, that Preserver of Your Person, even before You were born,
that Protecting and Avenging God, who wrested you from so many Ambushments when
You were hardly come into the World, who dashed in pieces so many Conspiracies
against Your Life, held back the Hands of so many Hired Assassinates, scattered
the force of growing Distempers, stifled the Hatred and Animosities of Your
Enemies, averted the Effects of attempted Poisons and threatening BULLETS, and
every where covered Your Sacred Person, in Your Cradle; in Your Palace, in the
Camp, in Battle, in Your Journeys, and in all Manner of Dangers. He it was, who
when all men thought there had been a final End put to the Rights of Royal
Succession, Ex falso, mendaci ventre, Puerperio:
By the False-birth of a Fallacious Womb,
That the Ruin of Britain, her Laws and Religion had been determined, and the
Extirpation of the Reformed Name, and the Total Destruction of Carthage had
been concluded, raised up You, far greater then Constantine; MARY, then Helena,
to be the Saviors of the British Orb. So is it also the same God who has
safeguarded Your Person till these times by so many Prodigies and Miracles, to
be the Asserter of Liberty, the Curb of Tyranny, the Terror of a Potent Enemy,
the Bulwark of the Christian World, the Sanctuary of Religion, and the Standard
by which the Successes of the Greatest Actions and Deliberations are Debated.
In You alone, as in a certain Center, now the Wishes of all men meet, which
before were divided between Two. And now, as long as the FIERCE GAUL still
proudly advances his Head, tho with a languishing Kingdom, exhausted Treasures,
intercepted Trade, Manufactures laid aside, and the Blood of the Subject
supplying the Exchequer, the Generality of the People oppressed, and
languishing under Exactions, Slavery, War, Famine and scarcity of all Things,
it is Your Part to restore and revive what has been prostrated and laid waste by
so many cruel Losses received from a Triumphant Enemy; to wipe away our Sorrows
and our Grievances, and to raise again to its Pristine Luster, Peace and
Security, almost all the European Orb, tired out with so many Calamities,
wasted by so many Conflagrations, deformed with the Ghastly Footsteps of Gallic
Fury, and streaming every where with Human Blood. In a Word, it is You POTENT
WILLIAM, that the World demands for its Restorer, Britain for her Preserver,
Holland for her Defender, the Church for her Vpholder, the Army for their
Leader, the Oppressed and Wandering for their Avenger, the Confederacy for their
Bond of Concord, and all Europe for the Arbiter of her Peace and Wars. And
while we singly pray that all Things Lucky and Prosperous may attend your
Enterprises, we wish that by the same means all Things may Prosperously and
Fortunately befall Your Kingdoms, this Our Republic, all the Christian
Churches, our Selves, our Wives, our Children, and our Posterity. In the mean
time we also implore this Advantage to our selves from the Death of your Dear
MARY, that wherever we contemplate that Most Accomplished Image of all Virtue
and Perfection, so far as Mortality would allow, Her LIFE and DEATH may to
every one of us, be Guides to Heaven.

DIXI.
Books lately Printed for John Dunton.
SOme Remarkable Passages in the Life and De^^h of her late Majesty, not
hitherto made public, as they were delivered in a Funeral Oration, pronounced
by Public Authority, in the Hall of the Most Illustrious States, upon the Day
of the Royal Obsequies, March 5. 1694-95. By Francis Spanheimius, F. F. chief
Professor of the Academy of Leyden. Done into English from the Latin Original.

A Sermon upon the Death of the Queen of England. Preached in the Walloon-
Church at the Hague, Feb. 6. 1695. upon these words, Acts 9. 36, 37. There was
at Joppa a certain Disciple whose name was Tabitha, which signifies Dorcas, who
was full of Good-Works and the Alms deeds which she did. It hapn'd in those
days that she fell sick and died. By Isaac Claude, Minister of the
Walloon-Church. Done into English from the Second Edition Printed in French.

Le^h imae Suce^dotis. A Pindarick Poem Occasioned by the Death of that most
excellent Princess, our late Gracious Sovereign Lady Mary-the Second, of
Glorious memory. By Henry Berk, Curate of Wentworth in Yorkshire.

The History of all Religions in the World, from the Creation, down to this
present time, in 2 parts; the first containing their Theory, and the other
relating their Practices. By W. Turner, M. A. and Vicar of Walberton in Sussex.
Price bound 6 s.

The First and Second Vollumes of the French book of Martyrs, published in
English with her Majesty's Royal Privilege. Price 20 s. -- The Third and
Fourth Volumes, containing all the Persecutions of Iewis the fourteenth, will
be also done into English soon after the said Volumes are published in Holland.

The Tigurine Liturgy, published with the approbation of Six Reverend Bishops.

Dr. Burthogg's Essay upon Reason, and the Nature of Spirits dedicated to Mr.
Lock. Price 2 s. 6 d.

The Works of the Right Honorable Henry late L. Delamer, price bound 5s.

Malbranch's Search after Truth, complete, in Two Volumes, in Octavo. -- The
Second Part of this work was lately published, to which is added the Author's
Defense against the Accusations of Monsieur de la Ville; also the Life of
Father Malbranch, of the Oratory at Paris; with an Account of his Works, and
several particulars of his controversy with Monsieur Arnaud, Dr. of Sorbon,
and Monsieur Regis, Professor in Philosophy at Paris. Written by Monsieur Le
Vassor, lately come over from Paris: both Volumes done out of French from the
last Edition, by Mr. Sault, Author of the New Treatise of Algebra, both Volumes
10 s.

Bishop Barlow's Genuine Remains, containing near an hundred distinct subjects,
Theological, Philosophical, Historical, etc. Published from his Lordship's
Original Papers, by Sir Peter Pett, Knight. Advocate General for the Kingdom of
Ireland. Price bound 6 s.

Dr. Becker's Examination of the common Opinions concerning Spirits,
Apparitions, their Nature, Powers, Administration and Operations; as also the
Effects men are able to produce by their Communication.

A Detection of the Court and State of England, during the 4 last Reigns, and
the Interregnum; consisting of secret Memoirs, etc. with Observations and
Reflections; Also an Appendix, discovering the present state of the Nation; in
two Volumes; by Roger Coke, Esquire; Price bound 8 s.

Casuistical Morning-Exercises, the 4th Volume; by several Reverend Divines in
and about London. price bound 6 s.

The Tragedies of Sin contemplated in the Fall of Man, the Ruin of the Angels,
the destruction of the Old World, the confusion of Babel, and con^^agation of
Sodom; by Stephen Jay, Rector of Chinner in Oxfordshire. Price 2 s. 6 d.

A Practical Discourse on, These. 4. 7. by John Branden, Rector of Finchamsted.

A Treatise of Fornication, by W. Barlow, Rector of Chalgrave.

The Divine Captain charactariz'd, in a Sermon Preached by Edm. Hickeringal,
Rector of All Saints in Colchester.

The Frailty and Uncertainty of the life of Man, delivered in a Sermon at the
Funeral of a Person that died suddenly, by the Reverend Mr. W. Bush.

A Practical Discourse upon Col. 3. 5. by R. Carr, Vicar of Sutton.

Dr. Singleion's Practical Discourses upon 1 John 12. 28.

An account of the Conversion of Theodore John, a late Teacher among the Jews.

Heads of Agreement assented to by the United Ministers, price 4 d.

The Countries Concurrence with the London, united Ministers, by Mr. Chandler,
p. 1s.

The Life of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Brand, written by Dr. Annesley, price 1s.

Practical Discourses on sickness and recovery, in several sermons, as they
were lately Preached in a Congregation in London, by T. Rogers, M. A. after his
recovery from a sickness of near two years continuance.

Early Religion, or a Discourse of the Duty and Interest of Youth. The second
Edition. Price 1 s.

Fall-not-out by the way, or a persuasion to a Friendly Correspondence between
the Conformists and Nonconformists, in a Funeral Discourse on Genesis 45. 24.
occasioned by the desire of Mr. Anthony Dunwell, in his last Will. All three
written by T. Rogere, M. A. price 1 s.

The Mourners Companion; or Funeral Discourses on seveal Texts, by John Shower,
price 1 s. 6 d.

Mr. Boyses answer to Bp. King.

The Vanity and Impiety of Judicial Astrology. price 3d.

Mensalia Sacra, or Meditations on the Lord's Supper, by the Reverend Mr. F.
Crow, M. A. late Minister at Clare in Suffolk. price 1 s.

A Practical Discourse on the late Earthquakes, by a Reverend Divine. price 6d.

Triunity, or the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity asserted in a Discourse on 2
Cor. 13. 14. by Isaac Maudult, Minister of the Gospel, Price 6 d.

An Earnest Call to Family Catechism and Reformation, by a Reverend Divine,
price 6 d. or 50 for 20 s.

Comfort for Parents mourning over their Hopeful Children that die young, by T.
Whitaker, Minister at Leeds in Yorkshire.

The 3d Edition of the Life and Death of the Reverend Mr. John Elliot, who was
the first Preacher of the Gospel to the Indians in America; with an Account of
the wonderful success which the Gospel has had amongst the Heathens in that
part of the World. Written by Cotton Mather. price 1s.

Gospel Truth stated and Vindicated, the Second Edition. price 1s.

A Defense of Gospel Truth. price 6 d.

Man made Righteous by Christ's Obedience, being two Sermons at P^^^ers Hall,
with inlargements.

The Vanity of Childhood and Youth, all four written by D. Williams.

The Young Man's Claim to the Sacrament, by J. Quick. price 6 d.

Mr. Barkers Flores Intellectuales. In two parts.

Some Remarkable Passages in the Life and Death of Mr. John Mason, late
Minister of Waterstratford, drawn up by a Reverend Divine, to which is added
his Christian Letters, printed from the Original Copies.

Proposals for a National Reformation of Manners, to which is added the
Instrument for Reformation, etc. price 6 d.

The Knowledge of the World, or the Art of well educating Youth through the
various Conditions of Life, by way of Letters to a Noble Lord, Vol. 1. to be
continued in that Method till the whole Design is finished. Printed first at
Paris, afterward reprinted at Amsterdam, and now done into English.

A Narrative of the Extraordinary Cure wrought in an instant upon Mrs.
Elizabe^^ Savage, Lame from her Birth, without the using of any Natural Means;
with the Affidavits which were sw^rn before the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor, and the Certificates of several credible Persons, who knew her both
before and since her Cure. price 6 d.

The Fourth Edition of the Lives and Trials of those Eminent Protestants, who
fell in the West of England, and elsewhere, from the year 1678, to 1680.

COMPLETE SETS of the Athenian Mercury (being sixteen Volumes, etc.) resolving
all the most nice and curious Questions proposed by Ladies and Gentlemen for
the last FOUR YEARS.

The History of several Remarkable Penitents -- to which is added a Sermon
preached at Boston in New England, to a condemned Malefactor, by Increase
Ma^her.

A Narrative of the conversion of Mackerness, late of March, in the Isle of
Ely, by Mr. Buroughs Minister at Wisbech. price 1 s.

Directions, Prayers, and Ej^culations for such as lead a Military Life. price
2 d or 100 for 14 s.

A New Book of Trade, entitled Panarithmalogia, by VV. Leybourn, Author of
Cursus Mathematicus. Price 4 s. 6 d.

The Trials of several Witches lately Executed in New England, published by
the special Command of his Excellency the Governor of New England. The third
Edition. Price 1 s.

All these aforesaid books are sold by John Dunton, at the Raven in
Jewen-street, and also by Edm, Richardson near the Poultrey-Church.

BOOKS now in the Press, and going to it, Printed for John Dunton.
PROPOSALS for Printing by Subscription -- An History of all the Remarkable
Providence which have happened in this present Age, as also of what is Curious
in the Works of Nature and Art, with parallel Instances from former Ages -- By
William Turner, M. A. and Vicar of Walberton in Sussex. PROPOSALS and SPECIMENS
giving a full account of this Work, may be had of the Undertaker John Dunton,
at the Raven in Jewen-street, as also of Edm. Richardson, near the Poultrey
Church, and of most Booksellers in London, and the Country. -- It Is desired
that those Remarkable Providence concerning Atheists, the answering of
Prayers, and upon several other Heads mentioned in a Letter lately sent to the
Undertaker of the History of Remarkable Providence; might be sent with all
convenient speed to John Dunton, at the Raven in Jewen-street. -- This is
further to give notice, that those that expect any Benefit by the Proposals
made concerning the said Work, would send in their First Payment, viz. 15 s.
with all possible expedition by the first of September next, that being the
longest time allowed for taking in Subscriptions.

* Upon the 26th of this instant June will be published -- An Essay upon the
Works of Creation and Providence: Being an Introductory Discourse to the
[History of Remarkable Providences] now preparing for the Press; to which is
added A SCHEME of the said Undertaking, -- as also a SPECIMEN of the Work it
self, -- together with MEDITATIONS upon the Beauty of Holiness.

* The Funeral Orations made in Holland, upon the Death of the Queen of Great
Britain, by Dr. James Perizonius, Professor of History, Eloquence and the Greek
Language; The Learned Grevius at Vtretcht, and Mr. Ortwinius, etc. -- It Is
designed these Foreign Orations shall be published all together in One Volume,
which will delay their publication something the longer.

There is preparing for the Press -- All the Memorable Sayings of the late
Queen Mary, collected into one Volume under proper Heads, by a Reverend Divine
of the Church of England.

If any Ministers Widow, or other person have any Library or parcel of Books to
dispose of, if they will send a Catalogue of them, or notice where they are, to
John Dunton, at the Raven in Jewen-street, they shall have Ready Money for them,
to the full of what they are worth.

FINIS.

