A COLLECTION OF NOVELS: VIZ. The Secret History of the Earl of Essex and Queen
Elizabeth. The Happy Slave. And, The Double Cuckold.


To which is added, The Art of Pleasing in Conversation. By Cardinal Richlieu.

LONDON, Printed for R. Wellington, at the Lute in St. Paul's Churchyard: And
E. Rumball, at the Post House in Russel Street, Covent Garden, MDCXCIX.

THE BOOK SELLER TO THE READER.
THE Following Histories and Novels have already found so kind a Reception in
the World, that it would be needless to Commend them. The frequent Demands for
them upon the Account of their Scarcity, encouraged the Re-printing them. In
the former Editions they were Published singly, whereas now they are compiled
into a Volume, which is portable and cheap: And if this Volume meets with a
quick Sale, I will oblige the Ladies with a Second, which shall contain the
Subscribed Novels. In the mean time I wish them much Diversion in the Perusal
of this, and remain their Humble Servant.

Novels to be Inserted in the Second Volume, viz. THE Heroine Musquetier.
Incognita: Or, Love and Duty Reconciled. By Mr. Congreve. The Pilgrim. Both
Parts. Neapolitan: Or, The Defender of his Mistress. By Mr. Ferrand Spence.
THE ART OF PLEASING IN CONVERSATION.

Written by the Famous Cardinal Richlieu.

Translated out of French.

LONDON, Printed for R. Wellington at the Lute in St. Paul's Churchyard: And
E. Rumball at the Post House in Covent Garden, 1699.

THE CONTENTS.
ENtertainment I. Page 1 Entertainment II. Page 9 That one must be civil, yet
without falling into incommodious Ceremonies. Entertainment III. Page 22 Of
Polite Language, and the manner of telling a Story, Entertainment IV. Page 38
Of the Conversation of Ladies, and how far the Complaisance we may have for
them will permit us to flatter them. Page 43 Entertainment V. Page 43 Of Decent
Behavior at Table. Entertainment VI. Page 50 Against great Talkers.
Entertainment VII. Page 59 That it is not possible for a Man, who is generally
esteemed a Liar, to please in Conversation. Entertainment VIII. Page 67 That a
Detractor is generrlly hated, and that he cannot please any other than envious
and malicious Persons. Entertainment IX. Page 77 How one may insert
Commendations in Conversation. Entertainment X. Page 91 That to please in
Conversation, one must be discreet, and keep an exact Decorum. Entertainment
XI. Page 98 What Care must be taken in Raillery. Entertainment XII. Page 113 Of
witty Sayings and Repartees. Entertainment XIII. Page 128 Whether it be fit to
reprehend any one in Conversation. Entertainment XIV. Page 136 Of the Air it is
fit we should have in Conversation. Entertainment XV. Page 141 Whether it be
good to prepare our selves for common Conversations. Entertainment XVI. Page
146 That to please in Conversation, a Man must be Master of his own Humor.
Entertainment XVII. Page 156 That we must speak Reverently of Holy Things.
Entertainment XVIII. 161 That State Affairs must be discoursed of with great
Reservedness. Entertainment XIX. Page 167 That to speak justly of the Passions,
of Vices and Virtues, we should ordinarily descend from a general Discourse
into particular Distinctions. Entertainment XX. Page 177 After what manner we
should tell News.
THE ART OF Pleasing in Conversation.
ENTERTAINMENT I.
HOW glad I am to see you, my dear Nephew (cried Dorante, in embracing Lisidor)
and how farther joyful should I be, could I prove serviceable to you in this
Town?

Lisidor. You know, Sir, the occasion of my coming, was, because you was here;
had it not been for this, those that have the care of me, would never have
consented to this journey.

After these words Dorante made Lisidor enter into an Apartment he had provided
for him, and having ordered the Collation to be brought in, he desired him to
sit down, and thus continued the discourse.


Dorante. I do not at all wonder, you have so greatly desired to come into this
Town. All young people desire the same; for one may say, that Pairs is not only
the Capital of a flourishing Monarchy, but is even respected as the predominant
City of all Europe. People come here from all parts, some to polish themselves,
others to get Employments, others to see the finest Court in the World, and the
greatest King on Earth. However, to be well acquainted with Paris requires
time. Strangers are surprised in not finding immediately all the varieties they
have been told of it; they seek them, and discover only the least part of them,
as long as they see only the Streets and Buildings.

But how great is their admiration afterward, when they enter into the Houses,
and view the magnificence of the Furniture? If they be admitted into the
Company of Persons of Wit and Merit which at certain hours meet together?


Lysidor. I profess, Sir, that I love Paris the more for that reason, and above
all things wish I were capable of making one in these Conversations; but I am
sensible how unfit I am for it. I want natural parts to second the care you
will take of me.


Dorante. You have no reason to complain against Nature, you have been better
used by her than I expect you will tell me; and were I as able, as she has been
favorable to you, my Counsels, and your Talents, would make you go very fast
and far in the way you desire to enter. However, I doubt not of the success,
notwithstanding the smallness of my assistance.


Lisidor. I know, Sir, how great a Master you are in the Art I would learn; and
all the World knows that your Age, which has yielded you Experience, has taken
nothing from you of that agreableness, which makes the Charms of Conversation.


Dorante. As I am naturally complaisant, and that I love Company, you may hear
something in my commendation, and therefore I shall not by an unseasonable
modesty oppose my Friends opinion of me, seeing it may make you to receive the
advice I am desired to give you with greater relish. It is at your Father's
request, Sir, that I have undertaken this Province, who is the dearest of my
Relations, and therefore you may easily imagine I shall use my utmost
endeavors to satisfy both you and him. I much approve of your design; for
nothing is more important in the commerce of life, than to please in
Coversation; and if men are born for Society, one may say that it is
Conversation which is the Bond of Friendship. But I know not if before we enter
into matters which we should treat of, I should not ask you what you understand
by the word Conversation?


Lisidor. I am not at all displeased, Sir, you ask me this, seeing it will cost
you an explication; for I confess, that although I comprehend what a
Conversation is, yet I should be perplexed, should you require a proper
definition of it.


Dorante. I am not at all surprised at what you say; I have seen in the same
pain, persons more experienced than you can be at your age. There are a great
many distinctions to make hereupon, and every time several persons speak in
these Assemblies, they form not what we call Conversation. Obscure Sciences and
great Affairs must have a less share in their discourses, than agreeableness
and diversion. For in a fine, let a man treat gravely of important matters, in
a Council of State or War, in a Lawsuit or Distemper; where a Physician shall
banter you with hard words, and a Lawyer cramp you with Presidents; all this is
no more a Conversation, than the Brawlings in public Disputes, or the Scolding
of Fish Women.


Lisidor. What then, Sir, must there be no mention of Sciences, of the Court,
of War, or Politics, in the discourses you mean.


Dorante. So for am I from banishing the subjects you speak of, that I affirm
they serve to uphold Conversation, and to render it more instructive. The
Palace or pleading places, have now and then such Causes as furnish the best
Companies with entertainmnet. There are great Subornations, contested
Marriages, and Divorces, which give occasion to some to Moralize, and to others
to utter a thousand witty Reflections. However a Man would prove very
troublesome, if, to make himself admired, he should enter on particularising an
important Subject, and discourse of nothing else all the day long. It is
variety which makes any thing agreeable, an air easy and remote from
affectation, which is never tiresom; whereas should a man discourse on a
sublime Subject with affected expressions, you could not hearken long to him,
without falling asleep. Yet great Interests, and extraordinary events may find
their place in most Conversations; provided they enter naturally, and be
treated of with that capacity and modesty they require. Particularly one is
assured to please, if there be News wanting, and you be the first that relates
a considerable Marriage, the birth of a Prince, the gaining of a Battle, or the
taking of a place. Men are generally pleased at the recital of Regulations
which relate to the Peoples welfare, or the beautifying of Towns, and
Fortifying of places. Add that we hearken with pleasure to one who comes from
Court, if she describes a Magnificent Entertainment, or a Fashion that is not
as yet known in Town. Yet those recitals must not be long, the particulars must
only be touched on, wherein the chief of the Company may be concerned; and the
most important advice I can give you, is to consider always before whom you
speak. Without this precaution you will be in danger of offending Persons whom
you would please; and therefore if you will believe me, you will never act the
Philosopher before young People, who desire only to talk of Plays and fine
Women; neither must you appear severe in a Ball before Ladies, who think of
nothing but dancing and diverting themselves. In fine, you must consult Reason,
which being your guide, I see few matters, but may be Subjects of Conversation.
It Is true one ought to speak less of ones self than any thing else. For what
can we say of our selves; We shall make our selves ridiculous in displaying the
good qualities we possess. And can we have the Imprudence to publish our
defects? Or shall we deaden the Entertainment in speaking indifferent and
ordinary things of our selves? Extend this Rule, if you please, to Domestics:
An Husband must speak little and modestly of his Wife; a Mother would little
divert, should she give an account of the cryings of her Children, and the care
which the Nurses take of them; we must be no less retentive in citing the
faults of our Servants. What matter is it to the Company, if we have a lame
Footman, or a slovenly Cook, or a Steward that makes us pay dear for that which
he buys cheap? We should always observe what diverts, and what tires; and that
it is easier to avoid a fault, than to acquire a perfection: Examine we
presently what may render a man troublesome, and we shall soon perceive how to
make a Spirit of gayety and politeness reign in Conversation. You have seen an
agreeable representation of these importunate people in the Comedy of the
Troublesoms, and I doubt not but you have read the Conversations of a person
who is generally esteemed.


Lysidor. I have observed with pleasure, in that Comedy, after what sort one
becomes troublesome in making long discourses, void of agreeableness, wherein
the Company takes no part. I cannot endure that Man who pretends that his
Prince should recompense him with a Vessel which he has lost. He tells you,
without any Man's offer to ask him, the Reasons whereon his pretentions are
grounded, and what may be alleged against them, and the replies he can make
thereto. He at lenght names those who built his Ship, and describes all the
parts of a Vessel, to show that his was very fine and costly.


Dorante. However here is something to be learnt in this narration, but what
profit can we draw from a dry and tedious genealogy, wherein we are not at all
concerned. I am not much interess'd to know that in a Family which is unknown
to me, that Thiband was the Son of Enguerrand, and that Enguerrand had Guy for
his Father. I find more diverting that Brave in the Comedy of George Andin, who
tells us, that one of his Predecessors, named John Giles of Sotenville, had
heretofore leave to sell all his Goods to go beyond Sea.


Lysidor. I confess these Genealogical recitals are very tiresom; yet methinks
not altogether so vexatious as those Relations of tragical Events heapt up one
upon another, especially being recounted with a lamentable tone, as if designed
to make us bewail all the sad accidents which have happened since the beginning
of the world.


Dorante. I grant you that nothing is more troublesome than these doleful
Relations; but when a Man is about making them, you will not, I suppose, advise
him to speak fecetiously of them. Not that I think it always necessary to
accommodate ones Words and Countenance to the Matter treated of. On the
contrary, a Man cannot more easily raise a fit of Laughter, than in relating
some pleasant passage with a cold and serious air. There is likewise a certain
turn of Language which requires one to speak highly big of mean things, and to
give a plain and simple relation of great and noble Subjects. You may easily
perceive the Reason, for these latter bear up themselves, and others have need
of props. I suppose this is enough for this bout, having given you these
general Advices, whereunto I may add, that in all sorts of Entertainments, you
must be sure to avoid whatever may favor of Formality and Affectation.


Lisidor. I protest, Sir, you have already given me such a clearness of
understanding, that if you continue to instruct me, perhaps you will perceive
such success, as will hinder you from repenting it.


Dorante. I can assure you my counsels will be of little use to you, unless you
mix therewith the frequenting of Company, and making close and constant
Observations thereupon. The Maxims of the greatest Masters are not of
themselves able to make a complete Gentlemen: A man becomes not a Painter, but
by using the Pencil, how great a Judge soever he may be of good Pieces; and
therefore I will not give you any Maxims for the world, unless you intend to
see it. These instructions will be fruitless to a Solitary; he can never
acquire the facility of using them. The best Precepts and choicest Morals will
never take from him the perplexed countenante which he brings from his Desert.
We can never take off that dust and melancholy air of his Cell. But on the
contrary, we may say, that advice gives great Assistance to persons that take
care to practice it. An hours reading is more profitable to these, than a whole
year can be to contemplative persons who keep always in their Studies. A Man
must practice immediately as soon as he is furnished, with good Rules; and it
is useful for a Man ever and anon to examine these Precepts, when he enters
into Company. This Precaution makes known the faults wherein one may fall; and
there are some of such a nature, as to make a Man ridiculous for his whole life
time, the first time he commits them. So that a Man cannot be too much
cautioned against them.

Dorante had no sooner said these words, but he observed the Collation bringing
in, which he made him proceed no farther in that discourse. They went both of
'em into a Garden which Dorante had taken care of embellishing. Lisidor viewed
the Flowers, a small Fountain, and some Statues; and being afterward fat down
with Dorante in a pleasant Arbor, this last reassumed his discourse, and began
this second Entertainment.


ENTERTAINMENT II. That one of must be civil, yet without falling into
incommodious Ceremonies.
Dorante. BEfore we reassume our discourse, you are desirous, I suppose, dear
Nephew, that we should say something touching the being handsomely clothed
before you appear in the Companies wherein I pretend to bring you. I do not
think you have made you Clothes before your departure, nor that you esteem your
Tailors so as to prefer them to ours. We will go to morrow morning, if you
think fitting, to find out what is most modish and proper for a person of your
years and condition. You know we must not neglect the outside. We should always
so order it, that the first impressions turn to our advantage, and dispose
people the better to relish the Sentiments of our mind, and the agreeable
products of our Fancies. That which does farther contribute to these favorable
dispositions, is a certain manner of behavior and speech that is soft and
polisht, which gives the name of civil to those which commonly use them.

You know what are the Qualities which that which we call Civility requires;
and you have observed without doubt, That that of our French, and the Urbanity
of the Ancient Romans, draw their original from two words which signify City
and Villa. And we almost ever see that the persons who have been brought up in
Cities, have an handsome behavior opposite to that which we call Rusticity in
Country People.


Lisidor. If you please, Sir, tell me in what manner one may practice this
civility, and wherein it consists?


Dorante. The most important Rule which I would give in this matter, were I fit
to be consulted, should be, that a Man who would gain on affections, should
carry tokens of Modesty in his countenance and behavior. He cannot draw envy,
unless he appears possessed in a good opinion of himself; and on the contrary,
he cannot but be pleasing to Company, if, instead of appearing fierce and
positive, he gives them marks of esteem and submission.

I would have one also to observe exactly a decent behavior, according to the
Sex, Age, and Quality of the person you converse with, with regard likewise
both to time and place. In effect, a Lady would be but little charming, should
she appear with the blustering mien of a Soldier; neither would a Captain look
well, if he affected to speak soft and fine, like a Sir Courtly Nice; and an
old Man would be ridiculous, should he look on his Toes, and ever and anon
throw back the locks of his Peruke, like a young Beau of eighteen. Now to come
to another kind of men; would you speak to a great Prelate, or to a grave
Magistrate, with as mimic an Air as to a Chamber-fellow in the Academy? We must
allow that Decency requires that we not only behave our selves respectfully
with persons of a distink Rank, but even not so much as to speak of them in any
manner which savours of equality. I do not believe that a person who has been
of the Retinue of an Ambassador in his Travels, will be so ridiculous as to say
in his ordinary Discourse, When my Lord the Duke d'Estree and I went to Rome
together: Yet there are People, who speaking to a great Lord, observe so little
distance as to say; You remember, Sir, what befell us when we set out for
Lions; whereas they should have mentioned only the Lord's name, and barely have
said, When my Lord Duke d'Esstree went to Rome; and as to the second
expression, When your Lordship parted.

I do not tell you that there are an infinite number of other Rules to be
followed by a Man that would appear like a Gentlemann. You know that we must
not only give the right hand and the wall to persons of Quality, but likewise
yield them generally whatever seems most commodious. Your own Reason will show
you what is fitting in these matters, without my advice. However it is good to
use most of these little Maxims with an address so much the greater, in that it
must not be perceived.

All must appear natural in a Gentleman, and nothing must savor of Art and
Affectation.

I might moreover insert some one of these precepts in our Entertainments:
Should I collect them all at present, you would be perhaps disgusted at them.
Let us first consider those which are to be observed in entering into Company.
When you go to see a person of a Rank above yours, you know, without doubt,
that it is to use too much familarity, to enter with your Coach or Chair into
the Court of his house. Civility requires we come out of them to enter on foot,
unless the Porter, by his Master's order, opens the great Gate, and entreats
you to enter more commodiously. If you be not known, and your name be asked,
you are only barely to mention it, without adding thereto your Title of
Marquess, or Sir John. You likewise are not to be taught, that when we find the
Chamber door fastened, it is not civil to knock loudly with your stick, but
rather softly with your knuckles, or scratching the door. This fashion came
from the doors of the Louvre, and is now gotten to those of the Ministers and
Grandees of the Court, and I doubt not but it will get by degrees to all Houses
where there is any Quality. But when a Man first presents himself, commonly he
whose office is to introduce persons, takes care of leveling these little
difficulties.


Lisidor. However there is one; for when we find persons already at the door,
or there come any before it be opened, Civility requires one to withdraw, to
let them first enter who came before us, and offer the door even unto those who
came after, if they appear to be persons of any Consideration. However this
does not free me from my perplexity; for if I be not known to those Persons;
how far am I obliged to carry on my Civility, or, to speak better, this kind of
Ceremony?


Dorante. There is on the Countenance and Behavior, certain Characters which
may make us guess at the Condition of Persons; and which determins us to treat
them with more or less Civility, according as our Conjectures shall direct us.
But when a Man that wants Experience, and Penetration, finds himself in the
Uncertainty you speak of, he must take the surest side, which is, to pay more
respects than we think are due, seeing it is better that People who are not
worthy of them, should be obliged to us for 'em, than to expose our selves to
disoblige Persons who merit more Civility than we have paid them. Yet we must
not fall into those Ceremonies which were so incommodious in the former Court.
They have been long since banished, and we can hardly believe Men should make it
an Art to torture themselves and others.


Lisidor. I know, Sir, there was never any Comedy more pleasant than was one of
those Contests whereon they fell every time two or three met at a Gate I have
heard say, that they added strange Contentions to their Complements; that they
step back, to advance again immediately, and to push forward with Violence
toward the Passage, those Persons to whom they would give place.


Dorante. The Eloquent Expressions which were studied and spoke with great
Deliberation, were no less ridiculous, than the Postures they made; and
methinks I see a Viscount and a Baron of those Times thus contesting it with
one another.


The Viscount. No, no, Sir; say and do what you will, I Will pass no farther, and
stir no more from hence, than London Bridge does to White Hall.


The Baron. And for my part, Sir, let one word be as good as a thousand, I will
not enter; I Will as soon lie here all Night in this Corner, where the knowledge
of your Merit has made me withdraw. In fine, Sir, I protest if it lay in the
power of my Wishes, I would choose rather to dwell eternally here, than to
suffer your Civility to supplant my Duty.


The Viscount. No mention of Duty, good Sir, for that belongs to me; and were
there another Judge than your Modesty to decide our Differences, I should soon
gain my Cause. Fie on this Modesty, it is not equitable enough to be our
Arbitrator, she will take what is due from you, and give me that which does not
belong to me. I hope she will be sooner tired than your Reason; and you must
yield to me, in permitting me to yield to you.


The Baron. However I shall do nothing, unless you command me to do any thing.


The Viscount. Well then I command you; That I may obey you.


The Baron. In this case, my Obedience will excuse my Fault; and I may now say,
that we shall go in Procession; where the Principals march the last.


The Peace had no sooner ended this Conflict, but at a new Door, new Phrases
and new Strivings. Lisidor. I think the young People happy in being born in a
time wherein they are delivered from these tiresom Fashions: But, Sir, pray
whence came they, and how came they to be received in a Country, where
Franchisement has given the Name to the Nation therein established.


Dorante. It Is true, one would wonder how we could relish them, for the French
are too mercurial to remain whole hours in a state of complementing. But the
Italians, on the contrary, more patient and more at lesure, and of more pliant
Spirits, perhaps have introduced this manner among us. However the famous
Monsieur de la Care tells us, that the Ceremonies past from Spain to Italy; but
supposing this were true, and that the Spaniards have taken them from the Moors
of Granade, as well as their Gallantry, yet I must still believe, that they
rather come from Italy, than from any other Nation. I have ever imagined that
the Italians have made a kind of Art of them, and keep as it were a Register of
them, which one may term their Ceremonial.


Lisidor. I suppose the word Ceremony is not ancient; and that it may have come
from that given to respectful Actions which Churchmen make use of to denote
the Honor they give to God, or to Holy Things.


Dorante. I am of the same Opinion as you: We have extended in process of time
the signification of this Term. It has been thought fit to apply it to the
Reverences which men make to one another, in bowing down, in uncovering the
Head, and by accompanying these Actions with an hundred other Grimaces, the
more to testify our Submission. This Custom is but the shadow of what it was,
and it is well for us it is so.

However it is not so much abased, but that it endeavors to raise up its Head.
But those Persons as know the World, retrench all these Superfluities, and
observe only what Decency requires. Hereby they fall not into fruitless Excess
of Words, and Submissions, which are seldom taken for sincere. And therefore
they be commonly used to flatter in appearance such Persons as we do in effect
despise.

To proceed farther; all these Ceremonies, and these Protestations of Amity,
would not only be looked upon as so many Dissimulations, but one might look
upon them as Crimes and Treacheries; if those Terms, which are at every turn
used, had not lost their first Validity through long Custom. But we are wont no
longer to take these in a strict sense. We see every day People embrace one
another, kiss, and make a thousand offers, as if they were the best Friends in
the world; and who, a moment afterward acknowledge, without Hesitation, that
they scarce knew one another. However we must follow this Custom, instead of
attempting to change it. It is less our Fault than the Fault of our Age; and
all that wise People can do, is, to use it with moderation and discretion. When
all the world falls into a Fault, no body can be blamed; and how extravagant
soever a Mode may be, a Man would yet be still more extravagant, if he refused
to comply with it. Should he alone offer to withstand the general Consent of
his Country. Let us grant therefore, that there are Ceremonies of Duty from
which we cannot fairly excuse our selves, but offend Persons who will imagine
we pay 'em not their Dues. So that the Authority of Custom may do all things in
point of Ceremony; and therefore it must be regarded as a kind of Law. Let not
a Man examine whether this Law be good or bad, it is sufficient it has
obtained, whereby we are obliged to obey it; and therefore it is necessary to
know after what manner we should carry our selves, and what terms we should use
in receiving Visits, how to return them, and to salute according to the Custom
of the Country. Great is the variety of expression in these rencounters: Among
us Civility requires we should use the plural in speaking to a single person;
perhaps to signify to him, that we esteem him as much as many others.

Addressing our selves to a Person of ordinary rank, yet we accost him with, I
pray you, Sir; whereas the ancient Romans said, I pray thee. Which way of
speaking is still amongst some Nations. The Turks, who are so submissive to
their Sovereigns, whose mean Slaves they term themselves, yet use these kind of
expressions when they speak to him, If thy Highness commands it, etc. And
heretofore in Spain, Amirante used the word thou in speaking to the King of
Arragon; and we see that the Subjects of most Princes speak in a quite
different manner: Amirante followed the Custom of his Country, and we ought to
obey the Custom of ours.


Lisidor. I have observed in a Relation (...) Court of Spain, that there is
still practiced (...) very strange, which is, That a Lover (...) his Mistress
in the Queen's presence (...) her with the same liberty which he might
elsewhere. Nay, he takes that of being covered, without offense; his passion
excuses all; it must be supposed to be too violent to permit him to think of
good manners. The more faults it makes him commit, the more it appears obliging
to the person he loves.


Dorante. I know not whether you have observed in the same Book one thing which
is no less surprising. Which is, That the young Gentlemen who make love to the
Queen's Maids, send them openly dishes of meat, and without any scruple, at
every meal. But we shall go too far, should we examine the difference there is
between our manner of carriage and those of other Nations. Let it content us in
saying that among us we must salute persons, accost them, or receive them in
the manner in use. A French man who would scruple to say, I am your most humble
Servant, because he felt in his Soul that there was no such thing, would pass
for a ridiculous Misanthropos. Men do not take these words strictly; and we
commonly use them without thinking on what they signify; and whatever
harshness there is in them, it is softened by long Custom. The exactest probity
permits us to use them, and when a Man asks me how I do, I may aswer, That I am
in good health, and ready to do him service; without being obliged to attend
him at that very moment; and follow him (...) ^is house like his Servant.

(...) ^^at which Reason enjoins us in these occa^^^ (...) to use distinctions
in the Civilities which (...) ^bliges us to pay. We must have regard (...) and
the condition of persons, and the state wherein they are; and if we find them
sick or busy, the more ceremonies we use, the more incommodious we make our
selves. We must cut short, and show our sentiments, rather by some respectful
Action, than by tedious Compliments. This proceeding shows that we know the
World, and he that shall do otherwise, will pass for an imprudent person.
Moreover our civilities ought to be different according to the difference of
Places and Persons. We see in the Palace Royal a politeness not to be met with
in St. Dennis-street; and in St. Dennis-street we hear not the Quodlibets with
which the Lawyers offend our ears. The Officers of an Army, nor Magistrates, do
not love we should make 'em lose time in fruitless Ceremonies; and a great Lord
would not much relish the compliments made him by a Tradesman, no more than a
Master would be pleased with his Servants offers of service to him.


Lisidor. It seems that the instruction I may draw hence, is, That in matter of
Ceremonies, we must be neither sparing nor prodigal. If we make too few, we may
pass for uncivil; and we become troublesome, if we fall into the contrary
extreme.


Dorante. In the difficulty there is of observing always a just Medium, I think
we should do better, if Ceremonies were entirely suppressed, our Fathers passed
well enough without them, and so should we likewise; but it is a contagious
Distemper which our Neighbors have introduced among us as well as others. We
cannot, as I have already said, be dispensed from being subject -- them. It Is
true, we must never pass the bounds prescribed by Custom. This were to proceed
to such a Superfluity as Reason forbids, and which Persons will not endure that
hate to be fed with smoke and appearances.


Lisidor. Although Men take pleasure to receive Respects, yet they would be
without doubt disgusted at those paid them that savored of Design or Artifice.
I suppose likewise that excessive praises cannot please. Those who give them
us, have a strange opinion of us. They take us for vain or credulous Persons,
and easy to be deceived.


Dorante. I now told you, that Persons of great leisure made more Ceremonies
than People who are busied: So that you will not be surprised, when you shall
see Ladies, knowing enough in this Art, to read Lessons to others. They make
Reverences to certain Persons, Smiles to others, and make their Servants keep
an exact Register of the different Seats they must offer, high and low Seats,
Chairs with and without Arms.


Dorante had no sooner ended these words, but he was interrupted by the noise
of a Coach which entered into his Court. Here Is Erastus, said he, with joy. You
have heard he is the dearest of my Friends; for you know all my concerns, as
well as I know yours. And therefore have I not asked you any news of your
Family. As for Erastus, notwithstanding the inequality there is in our Age, yet
we are, I say, the best Friends in the World. You Will see a man of excellent
humor, and I can assure you he will be no small help to you in the Companies
whereinto you will go with him. Lisidor. But how know you so precisely that it
is Erastus?


Dorante. Because he enters without any notice given me, and it is only he that
claims that privilege of me.


Immediately Erastus appeared at the Garden door, and, addressing himself to
Dorante, said: Reckon not (said he to him) this visit made to you, it is wholly
to Lisidor; suffer me to embrace him, and to demand his Friendship. In ending
these words he addressed himself to the young Gentleman, who had advanced toward
him; and having held him some small time in his Arms, they spoke both of them
in few words what Civility requires at a first enterview. I doubt not, said
Erastus, but that you were on some agreeable matter of Conversation, pray take
it up again, I need it to cure me of the headache, which a very different
Entertainment has given me; I prepare, my self to hearken to you. Dorante. How,
to hearken! You shall speak more than we, if you please; and therein we shall
find our advantage.


Erastus. I know how I shall find mine; I come to sup with Lisidor, I shall
leave him as little as possible; and if it be not fair that I should take him
from you to night; I hope you will not deny me that happiness to morrow; for he
shall dine with me then.


Dorante. Not so hasty, good Sir, when my Nephew knows that your House is a
kind of polished Court, he will not be in such haste to go thither: Judge a
little, Lisidor, arriving from one end of the Kingdom to Paris, the first time,
whether you find your self presently in a condition to visit a Lady, whose wit
and beauty --


At these words Erastus interrupting Dorante: Do not believe him (said he to
Lisidor) he has perhaps his Reasons to hinder you from seeing my Wife; but she
will be revenged on him, and will come and see you; let us talk no more of it;
it is a thing agreed; think only of renewing the Conversation which I have so
unseasonably interrupted. Dorante. We were discoursing of the Ceremonies which
Custom may approve, and of those which are incommodious, and of the ridiculous
Compliments which heretofore attended them.


Erastus. I would willingly hear how you have condemned these Ceremonies and
these Compliments: But instead of continuing to make Remarks on these defects,
I had rather you would tell me, how one may speak agreeably.


Dorante. Another than my self would tell you that one must speak like you; but
is it just you should expect this sweetness from a Man you come from offending?
I also see you pretend to edge me on; and engage me to make a discourse wherein
I shall find more difficulty than you imagine. It Is true, that I shall not be
alone in the perplexity; if I be hard put to it in treating of this matter, you
will have no less trouble in harkening to me.


ENTERTAINMENT III. Of polite Language, and the manner of telling a Story.
Dorante. IT seems that the most important Maxim is, To take care of the
Subject of Conversation, and to choose requisite thoughts and expressions. We
must lay aside whatever may seem light or trifling when we should be serious.
Neither must we affect to appear Philosophers, where the company are all
disposed to be free and cheerful. A Man that would prove any thing by
undeniable arguments, would not much divert young Ladies, whom the only word
Argument is enough to scare out of their wits. Others moreover would please
less, if to show themselves unseasonable Wits, they set upon retailing jokes
before Persons in affliction. As to the choice of words, we must observe what
is in use and approved of by able and refined Persons; as when we dress our
selves, we cannot do better, than to apply our selves to the Modes which
Gentlemen of the best fancies do follow.


Erastus. I read yesterday that it is no less rediculous to make use of words
that are obsolete, than to wear Steeple crowned Hats, although these words may
be brought in pleasantly enough in Raillery.


Dorante. You may have observed in the same Book, that if Prudence requires we
should omit words which are no longer in use; she forbids us likewise to hunt
after terms which the Ear is not accustomed to. We must leave these Novelties
to young People, seeing they affect them, and that Boldness is natural to them.


Lisidor. But must not a Language, that loses words on one hand, not only
recover them on the other, but also enrich it self?


Dorante. I grant it; but it is not every bodies Province to enrich it: it
belongs to learned and refined Persons to bring in new words; as it belongs to
Persons of the Court, that are well made, Richest, and of the best Fancies, to
invent Fashions for Clothes.

However it is not enough to have chosen words which Use approves. We must
prefer those which are properest to give the Idea of things which we would
express; we ought also to seek with care words which please the Ear, and which
have Sweetness, or Magnificence, according as the Matters require. As for
Quibbles, Puns, and fulsom Jokes, we should leave them to the common People, as
being suitable only to men of their Rank.


Lisidor. I would willingly know why figurative Expressions are more graceful
than others, and how they make up the Ornament of a Discourse?


Dorante. We may say they affect more, because we are less accustomed to them,
but especially because they attribute more to things whereto they are joined,
than do the Proper and Natural Terms. They even enliven that which is
inanimate. I could cite an infinite number of Examples. You hear Men say every
day; What a sad Place is this old Castle! How I love this Meadow! How every
thing smiles there!


Erastus. For my part, I am for an Irony; and an Hyperbole; these are my two
Favorites; and I have an hundred times observed the Conversation would be
asleep, did not these two Figures ever anon keep it waking. Had Dorante ever so
little wit, or learning, he would do me the greatest pleasure in the World in
discoursing of them.


Lysidor. Methinks you cannot more pleasingly begin this discourse, but by this
Example of an Irony.


Dorante. Do not you see that Erastus imagines he can disengage himself, by
thus smoothing me up; but he is mistaken, for I shall not quit him thus. He
must entertain us on this Subject. I am sure he is a perfect Master of it,
seeing these two Figures are so dear to him; and that he is a Man not apt to
fall in love where he is not well acquainted.


Erastus. As to an Irony I am willing to say all I can on that Subject, but
I Will warrant you I shall take heed of speaking of the Hyperbole; for the report
is among the Wits, that you married her, when she was in mourning for Mounsieur
de Balsac her first Husband. So that it belongs to you to inform us of her good
Qualities: For I will not believe my Friend's Wife has any bad one.


Dorante. I confess, that to do me honor, two or three of my Friends have said
that I had a strict Union with the Widow of this Illustrious deceased; but you
may have observed, that if my Conversation shows she pleases me; I appeared
less affected in what I wrote. However seeing you are pleased that I should
entertain you about her, I will do it, and instead of respecting her as my
Wife, I shall only consider her as a Figure, to the end you may love her
without any scruple.

An Hyperbole has commonly only excessive expressions, she augments or
distinguishes things in excess; but if it be permitted her to go beyond the
bounds of Truth, yet she must never pass those of resemblance to truth. You
know how I have treated of this elsewhere; and Lisidor, not having seen the
passage I speak of, I need only repeat what the Idea which I still retain will
furnish me with. I cannot forget a bold stroke I gave, which perhaps will never
be pardoned me.

I said that Virgil went too far, when he set forth the lightness of Camilla;
and that I knew not whether in so great a Poem, one might make a Princess run
over the tops of Corn without bending them, and over the Waves of the Sea,
without wetting the soles of her Feet. These are in truth glistering
expressions, but I think 'em not so well placed in a serious style, as they
would be in a light Poem.

There are also Authors, who think they carry not their Exageration far enough,
if they do not heap Hyperbole upon Hyperbole. Now although there are infinite
Hyperbolies in the Writings of witty Men, who are pleased to sport ingeniously
with them, yet we must not think this Figure ought to be only used in raillery,
and that it cannot well be seen in the most serious matters. One of our Authors
praising Cardinal Richlieu, addresses himself to him in these Terms, in an
Epistle Dedicatory.

But my Lord, as there was heretofore a Valiant Man who could not receive any
wounds, but on the fears of those he had already received, so you cannot be
praised, but by Repetitions; seeing that truth, which has its bounds, has said
for you, whatever falsehood, which knows none, has invented for others.

I may add, that Hyperboles make a great impression in a Tragical Subject. This
Monster having not sufficiently glutted his Cruelty; and being not satisfied
with the Rivers of Blood, which he made run down this desolate City, put all to
Fire and Sword before him. He foamed with Rage, and his Eyes more ardent and
dismal than two Comets, etc.

But before we end, methinks we should not forget Voiture, who is so full of
agreeable Hyperboles. Have you not observed, How many Towns he discovers, which
are in no Maps? How many Mountains, which Geographers know nothing of; How many
Terra's Incognita's; and how many Rivers, and Seas, which the World never
before heard of. He ingenuously confesses in another Letter, that he makes use
of the Figure we speak of: He makes the description of a Feast, and says, if I
be not mistaken, That the Sky appeared on Fire, that all the places round
about shined like Stars, and that it seemed as if the whole Universe was
turning into a flame. He afterward coldly adds, that these are 3 Hyperboles,
which reduced to their just value, are just worth nothing.

I know not, Erastus, whether what I now said satisfies you: You, I say, to
whom the Hyperbole was so familiar before you had espoused Cleonice. Perhaps
you have not as yet forgot how you set this Figure at work, when you came to
find me, to impart to me your Joy, or relate to me your Griefs. It is not above
six Months since, That one minute without seeing Cleonice, was an Age of
Trouble to you; and I am certain, that if you could Entertain her an Age, you
would look on this Age but as a Moment.


Erastus. I confess in those days I made more often use of the Hyperbole, than
the Irony; but seeing I find my self at present in a calmer condition, I should
be more disposed to Gaiety than the Figure requires, which you would have me
speak of. You know better than I, what a great relish she yields to Raillery,
and I believe that Lisidor is not to be taught that an Irony consists in
learning neatly to be understood, the contrary of what we say. I saw yesterday
at a Lady of Quality's a Marquess, who this day was to set out for his
Province, where he goes to confine himself. He came to Paris on occasion of a
Law suit, and I believe he returns less out of humor for having parted with a
great deal of money to Solicitors, and Lawyers, than to have remained three or
four Months from his Seat and his Farms. He took a great delight in recounting
how he busied himself in the Country; and being my near Kinsman, I could no
more suffer what he said, than his manner of living. A Lady of the Company took
notice of the Pain I was in, and represented, to the Marquess; That in France a
Person of Quality thought it more becoming him to serve in the Wars, than to
amuse himself in feeding Ducks and Pigeons. Our Country Gentleman smiled, and
showed by his answer, That he pitied those Persons that served in the Wars. I
could not then forbear speaking, and directing my discourse to this Lady, My
Lord has reason (said I to her a little roughly) and I assure you that the
Conde's, the Turenne's, and the Crequi's, are to be blamed for not following
his Example. Their lives would have been Glorious far from Armies; whereas they
determined to spend them in beating their Enemies, gaining Battles, and taking
Cities. I know not what they thought in embracing a profession which so greatly
lessens their Memory. It Is true, they had the mishap of not consulting a Wit so
solid as that of my Lord the Marquess. I uttered these words with a serious
Air, the Company smiled, and my Kinsman lost his Countenance, and could not get
it again all the Dinner time.

I do not doubt but Lisidor knows, That we comprehend the sense of an Irony,
either by a tone of Pronunciation which discovers that we are not in earnest,
or by the apparent opposition there is between the words and the thing spoken
of. It was by this last means that I was understood; for they saw nothing but
what was serious in my Discourse and on my Countenance. But seeing that you
have cited Authors, methinks it is lawful for me to say, That an Irony glisters
throughout all the Works of Voiture and Sarasin. You are not surprised at this,
but I am, in seeing in Malherbe's Letters a Raillery ingeniously turned, which
I may take for a kind of Irony. I was so content with several passages of this
famous Author's Rhyme, that I dared not read his Prose, so greatly was I afraid
of losing the Esteem I would preserve for him. Lisidor will not be displeased
in hearing how ingeniously Malherbe relates the News of the Siege of Virtue.

The Spaniards are always before Verue, it is a place that is a little more
worth than Chaliot; but is far from being so good as Lagny. However the Duke de
Feria lies starving there with cold, notwithstanding the Dog Days. The Marshal
de Crequi has lodged himself between the Besieged and the Besiegers, and does
wonders, according as he is went. If you ask me what I expect, I believe that
the Spaniards will see the Steeples and Chimneys of this Town; but as for the
Streets of it, they must get their notices of them in the Map. I would advise
them, if they pretend still to the Universal Monarchy, either that they would
proceed more quick in their work, or beg of Heaven to put a stop to the end of
the World, that they may have time enough to finish it, etc.

I shall not expatiate any longer on this matter; I find it large, and I like
it; I am afraid lest it should carry me too far.


Dorante. You ought not to have the same fear of the Antithesis. I have ever
heard you say, That you could not endure it. However, the opposition of words
and thoughts, may give great luster to a discourse. But I am of your mind, that
he that uses this Figure, must be an Enemy to all Affectation, and not so much
consult the sporting with Words, as the uttering good Sense.


Erastus. Let us leave here these Matters; for they require too great
Application, and I am for diverting the Conversation.


Lisidor. I demand Quarter for the description. It is agreeable, it renders the
Assembly attentive, and I see nothing more necessary than to know how to paint
well the things we would represent. We may find our selves every moment obliged
to make use of this Figure; sometimes in describing a pleasant prospect, a fine
House; otherwhiles a Shipwreck or a Battle. Especially if I came from seeing a
Stranger of great Quality, or a beautiful Princess lately arrived, and I were
asked what I thought of one, and the other, should not I be glad to make a
Portraicture of them so like, as might place before their eyes the Persons I
would speak of.


Erastus. What you say makes without doubt the principal Beauty of what one
relates; but here is in what Terms Dorante has explained himself in one of his
Books touching Portraictures, which every one undertakes to draw after his
Fancy. There are a great many People who set forth their Friends; There are
others who set forth themselves, and who retail out their Defects and their
Virtues, without concerning themselves at what the public will judge of them.
In fine, every body takes the Pencil in hand; but I know not whether there be
many Apelles 's among this great number of Painters. Yet it is certain, that a
Mediocrity is not excusable in these sort of works, for laboring therein less
through necessity, than for Ornament, every thing should glister therein, and
nothing should appear languishing. One may describe or make a Recital in two
different manners; The first Natural, Simple, and Succinct; The other more
Extenssive and Flourishing. If the dispute be touching the Waters of a River,
as to the right which may be pretended for the watering of Meadows, or turning
of Mills; a Man need only relate precisely the circumstances, which may serve
to give light into the dispute. But if I speak not of this River, but to
describe a delicate place, I may then expatiate, and say, That it is Crystal
Waters wind themselves about a delightful Valley, either to water it in the
more places, or to show that they are pleased with it, and leave it with
regret. It is in these occasions that Poetry may triumph, provided she uses,
with a lively Fancy, and a solid Judgment, the priveledge she has of showing
her self bolder, and less reserved than in Prose. And therefore, in this last
manner of making a description, or a recital, I should forget none of the
Circumstances which may give any relish to what I undertook to recount. If it
were an History, or some adventure of those great Fables which have diverted
our Nation, under the name of Romance, I would endeavor to paint my Hero's in
a most exact manner. Those who were to here me representing them, should make,
if I may so say, such a kind of acquaintance with them, as would engage them to
hearken to me, and induce them at the same time to take part in whatever
regards the Persons I should entertain them with.


Lisidor. I assure you, that in reading the works of Calprenede, I have always
interess'd my self in whatever happened to his Hero's and Ladies; and when I saw
in Faramond all those Kings.


Dorante. Perhaps you saw too many of them. The Author, you speak of, has
gathered together as many on the the banks of the Rhine, as the Marquess d'Urfe
did Shepherds on the banks of Lignon: However you may easily judge there are
something fewer Kings than Shepherds, yet we may justify Calprenede in some
sort. The Romances he set forth were like Epic Poems in Prose. They had more of
the Illiad and Enead than the Theagenes and Astrea. Moreover the Age of
Faramond permitted him to mention those great number of Sovereigns. It was
after the death of the great Theodosius; and as his Children succeeded not in
his Valor, and that they weakened the Empire in sharing it, so an infinite
number of Barbarous Nations took that time to settle themselves in better
Countries than their own. These Nations marched under Leaders who were Kings,
or to whom one might give this Title, which Homer has so prodigally bestowed on
so many Greeks. As for the Characters, I confess they are a little too uniform
in the writings of Calprenede. We find none therein but brave and fierce
Blades; whereas there should be variety, to give relish to a Recital, and to
render it more probable.


Erastus. I believe likewise we are obliged to observe a greater resemblance to
truth in what we invent, than in the true Facts which we mix with some
adventure: for we commonly believe what is true; and when it should not be
believed, by reason of it is little resemblance, we shall not be Vouchers, as in
things which come from us.


Dorante. It seems to me, that to make things probable; besides the truths
which we ought dexterously to insert, it is good to set forth Persons such as
they should be, to execute what we make them undertake. As for a bold Action,
we should describe a strong Man, brought up in the Wars, of an assured
Countenance, and a grim Aspect. But if I may again speak of the Expressions
which we should use, I would say they must be Natural, without Flatness, a kind
of Nobleness and Elevation in them; according as the matters require, but
nothing flatulent or forced. A Man should banish Equivocal Terms and
Tranpositions, and use only Parentheses through Necessity and with Judgment;
and retrench all those Circumstances which serve neither to instruct nor
delight.


Erastus. Speaking freely, as we do in these matters, we may add something as
to the choice of words. It is not enough to use those which are properest to
give the Idea of what we would represent, we must also know the Terms which
belong to Arts, whether our Recital relates to matters concerning Painting or
Sculpture, War or Navigation.

This Remark brings to my remembrance a brisk Answer which an Officer of our
Fleet made to a young Gentleman of this Town, who made one Campaign on his
Vessel. The Parisian walking one night on the Bridge to take the Air; Pray,
Sir, says he, let us be gone, the wind is very high, etc. Sir, says the Officer,
know that for a Seaman to say, The wind is very high, is a very great
absurdity; seeing the term is, It is foul, or hard weather.

Although we must use terms proper to Arts, yet it is not necessary to be so
scrupulous as a Physician of my acquaintance was the other day. Having called
to him a Surgeon who was in the Sick Man's Chamber: You must not fail, says
he, to Phlebotomise the Gentleman to morrow morning. I will never suffer it,
(cried out the Sick Man in a fright) and I am not, continued he, in so bad a
condition to have recourse to so dreadful an operation. The Surgeon replying
immediately thereupon (that he might not lose his little profit,) Sir, said he
to the sick Gentleman, be not troubled, the Doctor only orders a bleeding. Ah
for bleeding, replied he, I matter it little, but for the rest, I will as soon
dye as endure it.


Dorante. Do you think it enough to have spoken of words which signify
precisely what we have to say, or which are proper to Arts? Is it not also
fitting to find Terms which may neatly enclose the things which we would have
understood, and which modesty will not permit us to express openly; Should I
not do better in saying, There is a secret Correspondence between the Marquess
of -- and the Countess of -- than to explain my self too grossy on the manner
of their Commerce? It is also fitting in these occasions to heed the tone of
the voice, and certain smiles, which may make us too well understood, and
transgress those polished manners which a well-bred Man should never forget.

I find likewise that there are expressions which Gentlemen should use when
there happens some contest between them. If any one should make me repeat some
circumstance of a Recital, and he should tell me he did not hear me, I would
not answer him; That it is your fault, not mine; I speak plain enough, but I
cannot make my self be heard when I am not hearkened to. Politeness requires
softer terms, Perhaps, Sir, I am mistaken; let us see, if you please, whether I
did not say that, etc. Civility likewise requires that we make not too vehement
reproaches, nor too precise, whenever one has failed of his word given. So that
instead of complaining against one, that has not performed his promise, I
should choose to say; That I hoped he would do it; but that I supposed he either
forgot his promise, or met with more difficulty in the thing than he foresaw.


Erastus. Can you suffer a Man who domineers in Conversation, who continually
talks, or criticizes with the tone of a Master, whatever others say?


Dorante. I find this more intolerable than People who deign not to speak, and
who seem to testify, by a slighting silence, that it is not in such company as
this, where they will utter what they know.


Erastus. I know some who are for appearing too knowing: I saw one the other
day who perplexed himself with speaking with a Stranger the Language of his
Country; and having not sufficiently studied it to use it freely, he fell into
such confusion, as gave great trouble to one part of the Company, and set the
other a laughing, according as they were differently inclined.


Lysidor. This is commonly the fault of young people: But they commit a far
greater, when they laugh at a Stranger who does not speak our Language well; or
run down in his presence the Vices of his Nation.


Dorante. Neither ought one to scoff at certain defects before persons who have
the like; and likewise a polished Man does not directly praise the persons to
whom he speaks. He does it delicately; whereas people, that know not the world,
give praises with so little address, and with so great excess, that they
perplex and put to the blush those they think to oblige. Whereunto we may add,
That a Man who excels in his profession, must not presently speak of it; and
when he does, it must be with great modesty, and when the Conversation turns on
that hinge.

In fine, There are several things requisite to form this Politeness, which
makes the chief agreeableness of Conversation. And there needs no fewer to make
a recital which may draw the attention, and please, and even (as it were)
enchant those who hearken to it. Besides what we have said touching the choice,
and placing of words, beauty of expressions, and lively descriptions to be
inserted; it is necessary there should be novelty, or something mavelous in
what we recount; that we should have ready in our Memories, not only the main
of the story, but also the names of persons and places, lest we hesitate in
searching them.

There are Authors, who find it advantageous to make a relation of a Person
known by the defect we reprehend: as of a covetous Man known by his
Covetousness. I acknowledge, that those who hearken have more pleasure, when we
cite a Person of their acquaintance, because they represent him such as he is;
but I should always choose to be less diverting, and more civil, and deny my
self and others that pleasure, than to disoblige any one. So that it is better
to invent names for the Persons who are to be concerned in a Recital, and even
to lay the Scene of the adventure in another Town, than where we dwell.


Dorante could not continue his Discourse: One came to speak with Erastus, and
told him that a young Sister of Cleonice was just arrived. Erastus. Ah,
Dorante, this haps very well, Lisidor and Lindamire arrive both of them the
same day at Paris. There is without doubt an assignation or destiny in this
affair: However we have reason to rejoice at it; the world already praises the
growing charms of my Sister-in-Law; and if Lisidor and Lindamire come to be
smitten with one another, the desire of Pleasing will do more in their hearts,
than all our Remonstrances can make impressions on their minds: We shall soon
see a change; they will have a better Air, more Sweetness and Complaisance; and
I profess I much wish it, for the advantage of Lindamire.


Dorante. You know that which Lisidor will find.


Erastus. Adieu; I expect him to morrow at Dinner, bring him to me; and seeing
he must be new Rigged as well as Lindamire, Cleonice will take care of both.
She has good Skill in choosing Stuffs, as you have in giving good advice.


Erastus departed in ending these words, and Dorante and Lisidor walked till
they had notice Supper was served in. ENTERTAINMENT IV. Of the Conversation of
Ladies, and how far the Complaisance we may have for them will permit us to
flatter them.
DOrante and Lisidor had no sooner supt, but the first began the discourse in
this manner. We cannot be excused from going to morrow to Erastus; but although
I use freedom with him, yet we will discourse to night of certain polished and
respectful manners with which it is fit to appear before Ladies. You know,
without doubt, that nothing makes a young Gentleman so much valued, as the
approbation of a Lady of merit; and that nothing more hinders Persons of your
Age from falling into irregularities, than the visiting Persons whose
sentiments incline ordinarily to Virtue. In the mean time, speak we of the
precautions it is necessary you be furnished with for this visit; and let me
begin by an advice which perhaps you little expect, which is on the manner of
making an honor. You are persuaded, without doubt, That your Dancing Master
has omitted nothing he ought to tell you hereupon; and I am likewise willing to
believe you salute with a better Grace than he that taught you to salute. I
know that most Masters are too formal in these matters; They bow down, and
raise themselves up by rule only. Every thing is starched in them, all savours
of Art, and scarcely have they ended their Reverence, but they seem to promise
the beginning of a Courant or Minuet. Persons of Quality on the contrary,
salute with a better Air, and in a more natural manner. If you feel still any
kind of constraint, you must get rid of it as soon as you can, and give to your
countenance and action all requisite liberty. Remember then, if you please,
That we must always endeavor to do with a good grace what may draw the first
respects of Persons we address our selves to. Nothing afterward renders us
more agreeable than Complaisance: It is this which makes up the Charms of
Society; without it we must neither expect friendship among Men, nor a
diverting Conversation in Company, nor any part at play, or in a walk, or any
other diversion. But when I say we must be complaisant, I do not mean, That
base and servile Complaisance which Juvenal attributes to certain Greeks of his
time, who made their Court at Rome. It must be acknowledged, says he, that this
Nation is very comical. Do you say it is hot, they wipe the Sweat off their
Forehead. Do you complain it is cold; they call for their furred Gown. There
are then several complaisances which one must not have. It is not lawful to
betray our sentiments in essential things, nor to favor Vice in any occasion
whatever. One may show the respect we have for great Persons and Ladies, but we
must never show them a Complaisance which may be prejudicial to them. They will
no sooner perceive it, but they will hate and despise us.

Lisidor. I conceive that Complaisance is good in a thousand particulars, and
that no Conversation could be kept up long without it. However I know not
whether Conversation would not dye, if Complaisance reigned too absolutely in a
Company, and every body willed the same thing; whereas it becomes lively and
instructive, as soon as an ingenious debate encourages us to maintain different
opinions. So that I would willingly know in what bounds one may include a
commendable Complaisance, imagining that it consists in a Medium, between two
vicious extremes, like other Virtues.


Dorante. We may without fear of being blamed, prefer, through Complaisance,
one pleasure to another, as play before walking, and of Plays the choice of
that which shall best please the Person for whom we have a deference. However
our Complaisance must not turn to our notable prejudice, nor be prejudicial to
Persons for whom we must not have so much Complaisance, as to play at a play
which a Person of great Quality may like, without any Skill in it, seeing our
Complaisance might be suspected of Interest. It will be generous, if we know
not so well the Game as the Person of Quality who engages us to play; however
we must never expose our selves to the undergoing a loss, which may incommode
us; for this last Complaisance will be liable to be ridiculed.

The best effect of Complaisance is to make us endure the weakness of a Friend,
and not to yield to Anger when he is disordered by it. Far from provoking him,
by earnestly withstanding what he desires, we should immediately seem to yield
to him, and oppose only Sentiments full of Sweetness to the violence of his
Passion. But there are several Complaisances which I can never approve of: We
may observe one, which may be called Universal, which makes Men say, Yes, to
all sorts of things, without distinction; and this appears to me to be such a
sorry Humor, that I should like better to be sharply contested with.

I find no less incommodious that which the Citizens have one for another. It
is ordinarily attended with long Compliments, and never ending Ceremonies.


Lisidor. The Complaisances you mention, may displease; but they deceive no
body; whereas those of the Court serve commonly only to make one take false
Measures. A great Lord promises all, and a quarter of an hour after, he does
not so much as remember that he made any Promise. So that all we get by these
fair words, is the vexation of renouncing the Hopes we were made to conceive.


Dorante. The Complaisance which one has for Back-biters is yet more
pernicious; for this is a sacrificing those who are absent, and the upholding a
Vice which all generous Persons detest. I find this Complaisance so mean, so
criminal, that I think it needless to say any thing more against it; being
persuaded you can never be capable of falling into it. Let us rather return to
the Subject which has cast us on this matter, and let us say, That the
Complaisance which we ought to have for Ladies has Bounds large enough. You
know that Men are weak, but with respect which we owe to Women: we may say they
are yet weaker, and more credulous than we. As they are ordinarily prepossessed
with a good Opinion of themselves, so they, like those who flatter this Self
love, and cannot bear with any body that shall disabuse them. A solid Friend
who should undertake to open their Eyes, will soon be cast off for a Friend;
and I have found it more than once, That they put a sincere Person on very
vexatious Trials. Not that I would be so scrupulous to contradict them in
matters of small moment. On the contrary, I would give to the Defects which
they might have, the Names of the Virtues which come nearest them: I would call
Covetousness, Frugality: I would commend in a lean Lady the liberty of her
Shape; and I would endeavor to commend the ample Corpulency of Madam Bouville
(a great fat Woman in Scarron 's Comical Romance) by saying she was in good
plight. Sometimes one must declare himself smitten with the golden Color of
Red, otherwhiles with the Brown, and Black, all being to be commended,
according to the Companies wherein a Man shall find himself. If it be permitted
to have this flattering Complaisance for Ladies, you judge you must not fail to
practice, when with them, the Precept of never speaking of a Defect before
Persons who may have the like. To speak all in two words, let us say in general,
That to be complaisant, it is good to consult the Countenance and Humor of the
Person whom we would please, and that we do in such a manner conform our selves
thereto, that she may not doubt of the part we take in what concerns her.

I think we have talked enough of these matters for to day: it is late, and you
have need of Rest.


ENTERTAINMENT V. Of Decent Behavior at Table.
THE next morning, Dorante and Lisidor walked out together to pay their devoi^s
of Piety, which ought to be never omitted in the beginning of the Day. Scarce
were they returned from Church, but Dorante turned himself to Lisidor, saying,
I know that Erastus keeps a very good Table, but you are young, and they always
dine late where Women are, and therefore let us advise you to take a Breakfast.

After that Lisidor had followed Dorante's Counsel; this last reassumed the
discourse in these terms. Although I am certain that Cleonice will excuse your
faults, if you commit any, however it will not be amiss to give you some little
advices which respect the Table. This matter, perhaps, may not appear to you
very important: yet is it not permitted a Gentleman to be ignorant. You know
that amongst civilis'd Nations, there were ever diverting or instructive
Conversations at Festivals. The Banquet of the seven Wisemen, and the
Table-Talk in Plutarch, do sufficiently show it. But perhaps you will not
believe me, when I shall tell you that our Fathers, maugre the ignorance of
their time, respected the Tables of great Lords, as Assemblies wherein was much
to be learnt. A Proverb of those times makes me judge as much: [Good Table, a
good School.]

Lisidor. To ascend higher, and to come up to the Ancients; besides what the
works you have cited do discover to us; we may conjecture, that at the Table of
great Persons the Conversation made one part of the Regale. In effect, the
Parasites, for to be there suffered, were not contented in being complaisant
even to the meanest flatteries, but they studied likewise to say something
witty, to divert those who furnished the Feast.


Dorante. I agree with you in what you say; but must tell you farther, that
these Parisites were more contemptible than diverting. Their profession was to
be pleasant; and you know what we have already said, That nothing can be
pleasing where there appears affectation. But let us leave these Wretches, and
return to the little advices which I am willing to give you.

Being to dine at a Friend's, I make no mention to you of certain Ceremonies
touching washing with Persons of great Rank. He must be very ignorant of the
World, who shall draw near to the Basin at the same time a Prince or great Man
shall dine in the same company. You must stay till he entreats you to advance,
or by taking you by the hand, or by some sign denoting he intends you this
honor. Then you are to show, by a respectful bowing of the body, that it is
only out of obedience to his commands that you offer to wash with him; but in
washing at Erastus's, the Servants come not immediately to take the Towel,
Civility requires you hold it till the Officer be present, or Erastus himself
takes it out of your hands. It is his part not to suffer you in this posture.
You may stay till Cleonice places you; but I believe it will be more neat for
you to place your self at the lower end of the Table, to avoid Ceremonies. Have
you never reflected on the different ways used in these occasions?


Lisidor. I have observed it an hundred times in my life, though I am not very
old. I have seen People cast their eyes greedily on the meat, as it were to
devour it before they came to it; and scarce were the sat down, but they
snatched up what they liked. They reached over their hands into the farthest
dishes, without minding whether they ought to stretch their arms over other
meats, and before Persons to whom they owed respect. I have also observed, that
in the beginning of the repast, there are some who bend themselves over their
Plates, as it were, to keep them in their fight, or to eat there with their
Eyes, what they cannot hand up quick enough to their Mouths. These are a sort
of People who bow continually, who excite others to eat and drink, and who
endeavor to change the Mirth of a Feast into Fury. They put all into Disorder;
they imagine to bring greater Honor to the Treat, and the more trouble and
confusion they cause, the more they think the Master of the House is obliged to
them. I have known others, who disdain to make use of Spoons and Forks, as much
as if they were not made for their use: Their Knuckles are indifferently in
every Dish, and by this means they quickly make their Fingers and Napkins
loathsome to the sight of the Company.


Dorante. Seeing you have made these little Observations, and that it is
chiefly the things which regard an Entertainment that we have chosen to
examine: I will tell you, that at Treats Men commonly fall into two contrary
Faults, which are equally to be avoided; which is to praise with excess the
Dishes before you, or to say nothing at all, but look coldly on the Delicacies
and abundance of a Feast. By the first Defect a Man shows himself little
accustomed to good Tables, or too greedy of the good Cheer; and by the other,
he seems to despise whatever Obligations the Master of the Feast intends to lay
on him. Neither would I have a Man to speak with great earnestness of the Meat
he loves best, or those which he cannot endure; there are certain affected
Relishes, which are only tolerable in Women.


Lisidor. I imagine likewise that it is a great Indiscretion, not to appear
content with the manner of seasoning certain Dishes. One cannot find fault,
without provoking the Master of the House against his Servants, and making him
threaten the turning them away, and putting him all the time out of humor; and
the whole Company into a mournful silence.


Dorante. I am very glad you have made this Remark, it will hinder you from
appearing uneasy, and passionate against your People, whenever you make an
Entertainment. I hope too you will not fall into a Fault which I think an
intolerable one in Gentlemen; which is to drink hard your self, or make others
do it. Do you judge whether these Excesses are agreeable to the Politeness we
discourse of; and whether a Man whose Reason is drowned in Wine, can have an
agreeable Conversation? Is it not a shame to make it a point of Honor, to
empty more Bottles than the rest of the Company, without considering that in
this ridiculous Contest, the gallantest Man of the Court, cannot excel a Porter
or Carman? You know the Lacedaemonians took a particular Care to inspire an
Aversion to Drunkenness. They exposed their Slaves full of Wine to the sight of
their Children, and found nothing more likely to make this Intemperance odious,
than the side-long steps, the extravagancies, and nauseous belches whereto
Drunkenness subjects us. Let not any one tell me, that a Man is willing to show
that he has a strong Head: It is in other sort of occasions we should give
Proof of that; and not weaken our Heads, when all that is required of us, is
only to be cheerful, and observe Moderation. Let Us draw a Consequence which
relates to our subject, and affirm that a Conversation cannot be agreeable
during a Repast, nor immediately after, if we introduce excessive Drinking, and
a tumultuous Noise.


Dorante could say no more, Erastus came and carried him, together with
Lisidor, to his House; where they found a lovely Woman called Belise, a near
Kinswoman of Cleonice: Lisidor was received by these Ladies with all the Marks
of Friendship, and it was observable that he saluted young Lindamire with some
emotion on his Countenance: However gay this Company was, yet no jocose Remarks
was made thereupon, lest he should be put out of Countenance as well as
Lindamire: On the contrary, Erastus turned the Discourse on another Subject,
and spoke to Dorante with his wonted Fac^tiousness. Erastus. You see what care
I have taken to content you. We are six, which is just what needs: You told me
the other Day, That at Table the number should never exceed that of the Muses,
nor be under the number of the Graces; and now here we are equally distant from
one and the other.


Cleonice. We shall come nearer the number of the Muses than you are aware of,
Belise expects Philemon who is to come from Versailles; and word is left at his
House to send him as soon as he comes home.


Dorante. I am very glad of it; it is near eight days since I saw him.


Belise. I question whether he will come this morning, seeing he is not already
arrived: but let us talk of the two numbers about which Erastus seems to be so
precise.


Dorante. I said it was the Fancy of an Ancient, not to be well-pleased at a
Banquet, where there was more than nine Persons, nor in another where there was
less than three. Let Erastus now joke if he will, provided the rest of the
Company finds he has reason; for my part I cannot see it easy to avoid
Confusion, where so many Persons eat together; and we observe on the other
hand, that when there is but two at Table, the Conversation often flags for
want of Variety. I refer my self to Cleonice if you --


Erastus. Pray, Sir, excuse me; I Will not part with my right so.


Dorante. It is certain, that a Gentleman of your age, that disputes against me
that am very young, should not expect the Ladies to be very favorable to him.


Erastus. No mention of Ages, I entreat you: I confess I am younger than you,
but you know I am married.


Cleonice. He has reason.

Whilst they were smiling at these passages; Philemon entered; and Belise,
affecting to appear a little astonished, made him this kind of reproach.


Belise. How happens it that you come when I did not expect you; I flattered my
self with the thoughts of being without an husband at this Regale?


Philemon. Before I answer you, I must salute an amiable Person, who pleases me
as much; as a young Gentleman, whom I shall afterward embrace, can be
agreeable to you.

After these words, he offered to Lindamire and Lisidor all the civilities
usual in these occasions: And Cleonice in a low voice bidding Dinner to be
brought in, the Company sat down, and Philemon reassumed the discourse.


Philemon. I had been here an hour sooner, had not my misfortune brought to me
the greatest Babbler that ever was. He fell upon the news of Hungary, and the
Morea; and not contented to retail out the Progress of the Imperialists and
Venetians, he has extended their Conquests according to his humor. He has made
two or three Treaties of Peace, which he has broken. He has elevated to the
Throne five or six Bassa's, in their Governments; and in fine, regulated the
affairs of the two Empires, without my so much as once opening my mouth; being
willing to let the discourse fall, and be gone.


ENTERTAINMENT VI. Against great Talkers.
I Find nothing more troublesome, than a Man that always talks, who hears no
body but himself, and interrupts those who begin to speak, as if they usurped a
privilege which belonged only to him. It is very difficult for such a one to
speak things weighty enough to draw the attention of the auditory, and to
express them in a pleasing exactness.

Erastus. Some Men indeed cannot bear with these great praters. However, as for
my part, I shift well enough with them; for without troubling my self with
hearkening to them, or speaking in my turn, I think on my own affairs, and
leave the field open to 'em.


Cleonice. You can then excuse these Troublesomes, who hinder able People from
entertaining the company to better purpose.


Erastus. I am very glad, Madam, that for the interest of your Sex, you
undertake to impose silence on ours; and indeed it is not to be expected that
Men should speak much, seeing there are Women in the World.


Clonice. I am perhaps less a woman in this matter, than you think I am; and I
profess sincerely, that a prating Gossip is the more intolerable. Women have
commonly their minds less cultivated than Men. They speak fewer things with
more words, and leave a greater Vacuum in a discourse. To prove this, I need
only tell you what a Chagrin I had at a visit I received yesterday; it was
Arpalice that gave it me. She entered into my Chamber, with a languishing Air,
and complained immediately of an oppression at her Stomach, which she said
filled her with boding apprehensions; so that, continued she, you will pardon a
poor infirm Creature, who is forbid to speak, if she endeavors to testify to
you the joy she has to see young Lindamire is truly worthy to be your Sister. I
protest, adds she again, that it is only in this occasion that I am glad to
dispense with a silence, which I take pleasure in observing in every other
Rencounter.

I am far from the humor of those Women who will talk on continually; when
there is one that begins a discourse, the rest of the company must be silent
till night; but, in fine, what can she talk of all this while? would it not be
better to take breath a little, and let others have their turns? When she has
showed her Petticoat, and made the color be approved of, what matter is it to
the Company that she bought the Stuff at the Crown or Blackamore's-head; That
this Stuff has cost 4 Guineys more, or 4 less than the just Price. Must this
prating Gossip show her Commode, and make the Company guess what it cost, and
where she bought it? How happy am I who have been never tempted to prejudice my
health by much speaking, and to deafen the Assembly. I had rather go into a
Cloister, than to be troublesome as these everlasting Praters are, Dorince,
Arcione, Bellamire, Armasia, and Cleonne: You know they give the headache from
morning till night to those who have the mishap to meet with them in Company.
Where do they gather up all this trash? For among us, they are no more knowing
than an infinite of women who talk less. Should one forbid them to speak of
their Accoutrements; you reduce them to a profound silence. As to my self, were
I minded to entertain you of these things, I would desire you to take notice of
the Gown I have now on, which I may say, without vanity, is the finest in
Paris. Pray observe it, view it well; The more you observe it, the bet-you'll
like it. It was gazed at with admiration yesterday at the Princess's; the
Duchess of Mazarine took Coach immediately to buy the rest of the Piece, and
the Marchioness of Carnarvan was greatly afflicted 'twas all gone. I Will not
tell you it cost me a Farthing more or less than it really did; I leave these
Fooleries to Parthenissa, and Melinta. Is it not strange women should be so
vain in these occasions; for my part I will not say this Stuff cost me so dear
as Berenice would say it cost her; This woman is strangely extravagant in these
matters. Does she think to draw more esteem, by having it imagined, that her
Petticoat cost more than another? Has she not reason to apprehend on the
contrary, that she will pass for a Fool, in giving more for things than their
value? Neither would I have you, Madam, to imagine that I am about to tell you
my Gown stood me in less than it was worth; No, no, I pretend not to set up for
a great housewife, thereby to get an Husband. I have one already that I would
be loath to part with. You cannot imagine how complaisant he is to me, he brings
me home ever and anon a thousand knick-knacks; There can be no Opera, but I
must be at it; and the same it is for walks; and I do not remember that for two
years We have been together, that he once spoke of my Conduct, but to approve
it. It is true, I give him no cause; I never bring home any of those Gallants,
or Vagabond Sparks, that walk from Street to Street, casting up their Foppish
Countenances at every Window, and now and then step and strut, like a Crow in a
gutter who never want fine sayings for all Complexions. Perhaps it may be
judged I am not handsome enough to attract them; but I see on the contrary every
day a thousand homely Pugs, who have no more charms than I, and yet are
continually surrounded with crowds of Idolizers. I dare scarce add, what I was
told yesterday at the Princess Demarata's, whom I lately mentioned to you.
However I was almost as much out of order then as I am now, and you know with
what disadventage a woman is looked upon then. Yet a certain Spark would needs
persuade me I was the finest woman.

I thought I had now a good opportunity of speaking, imagining Arpalise would
not refuse to hear me in the occasion she offered me of praising her. Yet she
interrupted me at the first word I began to speak, and continued on talking
till night, with that rapidity, that I had not so much as time to thank her for
her visit. At length I had a deliverance, but I heard her tongue run all the
way she went down Stairs, asking my Servants questions, and answering them her
self, and I cannot tell but she may be yet talking whilst I am relating this to
you.


Dorante. Here Is the most pleasant Satyr that can be made of a prating Gossip;
I have heard it with no small satisfaction, although it hinders me from
complaining of the vexatious hours I have had from these everlasting talkers;
for what can one say after Cleonice?


Erastus. I fancy she puts upon us, and makes Arpalise speak thus, only that
she might have occasion to speak much her self.


Cleonice. To speak the truth freely, you deserve no less than that I should
become as talkative as you accuse me to be. However I Will refer my revenge to
Arpalice, whereby you shall know what it is to affront a woman.


Erastus. O ho, You would fright me, would you; know that I am not so easily
scared; let this Torrent of words wherewith you have threatened come, I have
prepared a Dike, wherein Arpalice will not find her Reckoning. If she entertain
me about her Coiffings, I Will talk to her about my Hat, and with that quickness
of speech, and will suffer my self to be so little interrupted, that I shall
not fear her attacks the second time.


Cleonice. But what can you --


Erastus. I Will tell her I bought my Hat on London Bridge. I Will tell her how
this Bridge is built on woolsacks, in what King's Reign it was built I Will tell
her how many Arches it stands upon --


Belise. But --


Erastus. Do you think, Madam, I Will stop here on this Bridge, no I Will be hanged
first; I Will travel out of sight immediately; I Will pass over into America,
Dialogue with the wild Indian who truckt the Skin of the Castor, whose hair was
mixed with the wool of which my Hat was made; I Will recount what trinckets were
given in exchange for the Castor's Skin; and afterward fall on the several
Commodities which go off well at America.


Philemon. This is something --


Erastus. I Will insist on the two parts of this new World, Northern and
Southern; I Will forget none of the great Rivers, nor golden Mines, nor Rocks,
nor Mountains; whereunto I will add a Philosophical description of the Fruits,
Trees, Flowers, Plants, and Animals of these several Islands.


Dorante. Proceed.


Erastus. I Will embark my Castor Skin on a Vessel, I Will raise a storm against
this poor Ship; I Will make a large and most Poetical description of this
Tempest; I Will represent the Vessel as the Tennis Ball of the Northen blasts and
Southern too, as most irreconciliable Enemies. But do you think I can forget
our old friend Christopher Columbus the first discoverer, and Americ Vespuce,
who gave his name to this great Country. I will make the first come to the
Court of France, where he shall be received as a Dreamer; I Will carry him
afterward over into Spain, where Ferdinand and Isabella give him a favorable
hearing; I will recount the famous Marriage which united so many Kingdoms in
joining Aragon to Castile; and if I must accompany these Recitals with
considerable revolutions, Mariana, whom I have lately read, will supply me with
matter.


Belise. Pray be not so confident with your Mariana; these Historical Events
will sooner end than the prattles of these Gossips.


Erastus. Pray, Madam, you do not observe I have a Feather in my Hat; Cannot I
coast Afric whence we have our Plumes, and passing by Tunis, can I forget
Carthage? Let a whole douzen of Gossips come after this, I Will in serious tones
set forth to 'em the famous War of the two stately Republics who contended for
the Empire of the Universe; I Will cite the Scipio's, Fabius's Flaminius's,
Marcellus's, Emilius's, Varro's, Hamilear's, Hannibal's, the Syphax, and
Massinisses. If my Companions dare open their mouths, I Will ascend to the
foundation of Carthage; recount the amors of Dido; and if this will not do,
I Will have a Virgil ready, which I will read in a sad Tone before my Arpalises,
to the last Verse of his Aeneads.


Cleonice. That which I approve of best in your Rhapsody, is, that you mix a
great deal of true History among your Banterings.


Dorante. A Man must deal in this manner with this sort of People, to make 'em
more ridiculous.


Philemon. These kind of Folks in their relations heap up a thousand
circumstances which relate no more to their subject, than the foundation of
Carthage to Erastus's Hat and Feather.


Belise. It is strange to me people should take so great delight in prating:
for without doubt these Persons are not senseless, and it is the vivacity of
spirit which transports them beyond the matter they treat of: Whence is it
then, that this same vivacity does not show them what they trouble those who
hear them, and disturb even those who do not hearken to 'em?


Philemon. They are like those Horses who see nothing during the swiftness of
their course; who pass the bounds of their carreer, and who stop not till they
are beyond it, in running their heads against a wall which beats them backwards.


Cleonice. I believe there are few of these Animals that are so fierce; whereas
one half of the World consists of great talkers.


Dorante. If this were so, the other half would find it self very unhappy, and
I know not what you would have it do.


Cleonice. It need only hold it is Peace.


Philemon. This is like receiving several Blows in a Combat, and returning
none: However, Madam, I dare believe that there are great Talkers, who in
several occasions imagine they have a real kindness for us, and are many times
punctual in their Promises.


Erastus. For my part, I love a Woman better that should speak a little too
much, than a Man that should not speak enough. But I had like to have forgot to
tell you, that we have left our young Folks a great while in silence, they have
not opened their Mouths, for fear of falling into the Fault we now reprehended;
I would fain therefore hear what Lisidor will say on this Subject.


Lisidor. That in a Company as this is, he ought to hear much and speak little.


Erastus. I know not whether this Answer be as wise as it seems to be: For
young People must speak to acquire the facility of speaking; and they can no
where better make trial, than before their Friends, who will make it a matter
of Duty to correct them. But seeing I have spoken sententiously, I must proceed
and interrogate Lindamire. How comes it, that being witty, young, and gay, you
have said nothing? Were there but three Persons of your Humor in this Chamber,
the Discourse would quickly be at an end.


Lindamire. I can assure you, Sir, it is not that I would keep it up; though to
speak again it should cost you a second Voyage to America.


Dorante. Very well hit, for a Girl of Fourteen; we come to see Lindamire, and
we find another Cleonice.

No sooner was this said, but the Person Dorante named saw the Dishes bringing
up; and being moreover very glad to break off a Discourse, which might tend to
her praise, she reassumed the Discourse in these Terms.


Cleonice. Methinks for People who blame great Talkers, we have enlarged enough
in this Conversation.


Belise. Before we end it, I would declare the Instruction which a certain Lady
not far, has made me draw hence, which is, that to be never accused of speaking
much, one should speak as she does; and one had need only to see her often, to
accustom ones self to speak little, through the pleasure a body may have in
harkening to her.


Erastus. It is your self, Madam, who now speak too much, and you are now about
being recompensed for your Flattery. The Lady perhaps whom you would have us to
understand, will be far from applying it to her self; and to punish you again
in another sort, I believe she will make you but very ill Cheer.

At these Words the Company arose, Dorante gave his Hand to Belise, Philemon to
Cleonice, and Lisidor his to the young Lindamire. They withdrew into a little
Parlor, where they washed without Ceremony, and after the same manner sat down
at Table. Although this was only a Treat for Friends, yet every thing was
proper and neat: Scarce had they dined, when they returned into Cleonice's
Chamber, where they sat down, and talked only of indifferent things, till
Erastus began to speak to enliven the Conversation.


Erastus. Lindamire will perhaps be astonished if she hears me speak again
without setting forth for America, where she would again send me. So long a
Voyage does not seem to me absolutely necessary, for the reassuming of the
Discourse we left off. I need only tell you, that among the Defects of great
Talkers, we have not, I think, made any mention of Lying, which yet is the Vice
wherewith such Persons are commonly reproached.


ENTERTAINMENT VII. That it is not possible for a Man, who is generally
esteemed a Liar, to please in Conversation.
Dorante. ERastus has thought of a thing, which we ought very willingly to
examine, seeing it regards no less the main businesses of Life, as all manner
of Conversation.


Cleonice. Before we enter on so considerable a matter, I would entreat you to
tell me punctually what it is to lie. It appears to me at first to be very
easy to comprehend; however I believe the matter will admit of many
Distinctions, and I would very gladly learn them.


Dorante. Seeing you would have me undertake this Task, I will tell you, Madam,
that we lie as often as we betray our sentiments, and that our words do not agree
with our thoughts. Thus I may add slandering to lying; should I say that
Timocrates, basely ran away in a Fight, wherein yet I saw him behave himself
most valiantly. But I know not whether you will not be surprised, when I shall
show you, that one may lie in telling the truth. Chance sometimes makes a thing
to happen which at first seems strange. Let us, if you please, suppose I give
you a visit in a time when your affairs oblige you to go out, and that as soon
as I have left you, you go forth in effect, without my knowing it. I meet
immediately after with Theagenes; he asks me if you are at home, and through a
humor, which you shall call what you please, I answer, you are just gone out.
Thus in speaking the truth, I speak against my own thoughts, which tell me you
are still in the room where I left you.


Erastus. I believe I do not find all my reckoning in this Example, and that
you may well give another.


Cleonice. Neither was it for you that it was given, no more interruptions, and
do not enter where you are not called. Continue, if you please, Dorante, and
tell me whether I am to blame, when I imagine that the whole World is full of
Liars.


Dorante. You are not at all mistaken; one part of Men use all their Industry
to deceive the other, and to disguise the Truth; in War, Craft, Ambuscades,
false Marches, false Alarms, and false Attacks, are Proofs of it; and if these
Artifices are employed in a Profession wherein is seen so much generosity, what
is there not practiced in others?


Philemon. I am persuaded there is ever something that is mean and low in lying
and dissimulation. There have been great Captains who would never have recourse
to Stratagems, they would win a Victory, not steal one.


Dorante. I confess this is a generous Sentiment, and it is observable, that
only weak Animals endeavor to supply by craft, the defects of strength, which
Nature has not given them.


Erastus. If Cleonice will give me leave to speak when Dorante has done, I
would say, that if there be any sincerity in the World, it is to be found among
Ambassadors.


Belise. But Ambassadors may, without scruple, disguise the truth. Having
received their instructions, it is not permitted them not to follow 'em; this
would be to betray their Master, and to fall into an unpardonable Crime.


Philemon. What may we not say of Lovers? They lie continually in the
protestations they make; and their Mistresses are no less dextrous at
dissimulations: In fine, they torment themselves, they groan, they dye; and yet
are scarcely got out of their Mistresses sight, but they make a party in the
divertisement with the first friend they meet.


Belise. These light words you speak of are so common, that they cannot be
condemned as lies, when there is no design mixed with them of deceiving: A Lady
who hears her eyes praised, of her mouth, looks on this piece of Gallantry,
only as a gaiety of Fancy which Custom has authorized. But what Liars should we
not find, should we run through the different professions of Men, from the
highest to the lowest?


Cleonice. We should have too much to speak of, should we enter on each
particular; and if on the other hand we should examine the falsities wherewith
the Arts deceive our Senses, either agreeably, or with horror.


Erastus. We are not now to moralize on the Vices of Men, nor on the Marvels of
the Optic: We treat only of Conversation, and it is sufficient to show, that a
Liar cannot please in a serious Entertainment.


Dorante. We are agreed that we would have such a one be silent, for we are
soon weary of hearing what we do not believe. We so greatly love truth, that
those who never speak it, are very willing that others should not disguise it
from them; and I believe there are only Romances and Poetry, wherein fiction
can divert. And here a resemblance to truth is required; and a relation that
wants it, would not draw much attention. So when a Man has a design to please
by his discourse, he should mix, methinks, a Character of sincerity to the
agreableness of his expressions and behavior. It is hereby that a discourse
pleases and insinuates it self; on the contrary, we hear with uneasiness (as I
said before) what we do not believe.


Philemon. But how will you distinguish an effective sincerity, from that which
is only so in appearances? You know that they are ordinarily only persons of
Wit who dissemble; and you cannot doubt but they use all their Art to disguise
the truth.


Dorante. I confess they are more capable of dissembling than your gross dull
people; and therefore it is we see less sincerity at Court than in the Country;
and we see a subtiliz'd sort of People in a Neighboring State whose words are
not greatly relied on. However, it is not impossible to make the distinction
you speak of, provided a Man has a piercing and discerning judgment. A man that
would appear sincere, without being so in effect, does oftentimes discover
himself, even by the care he takes to conceal himself. He forgets nothing to
attain his ends, but it is not so hard as you imagine to perceive certain
efforts he makes to persuade. The earnestness which he shows, and the turn
which he gives to his expressions are observable. Frankness guides it self in a
direct contrary manner, it tends plainly where it would go: It has a more open
Air, appears in the eyes, in the gesture, and all the countenance. In stead of
having recourse to Ornaments of Language, it rejects them as fruitless, it is
an enemy of ostentation, and neglects the appearing wholly and fully what it
is. It speaks without Art, and with Confidence, and yet never fails of making a
soft impression. Whereas scarce have we perceived the artifices of a
dissembling Person; but so far are we from being pleased in hearing him, that
we are at a defiance with him, as imagining he is always ready to deceive us.
An ingenious carriage produces different effects, agreably insinuates it self,
and according to the intentions it may have, it sets our hearts at rest, or
moves our affections.


Belise. However it is to be considered how far sincerity should proceed; for I
find nothing so ridiculous in Conversation, nor nothing more incommodious in
the occasions of life, than for a man to speak whatever comes into his head.


Dorante. You know, Madam, that sincerity has its bounds, as well as all other
Virtues; and I do not think we are obliged to imitate the simplicity of a
Country Lover, who declared his Passion in a manner which I think was very
pleasant. He swore to his Mistress that he was desperately in love with her,
and yet he could not consent to marry her. How, said she in a Rage, can you
pretend you find me such a one as you like, and yet not willing we should spend
our Days together? To speak ingeniously, replied he, I can love you as my
Friend, but I am of the Humor of my Father, who would never marry.


Erastus. Though he declared himself very ingeniously a Bastard, yet he hurt
thereby no body but himself, whereas there are Simplicities which perplex a
whole Company. And of this I have an Instance in the beginning of the last
Month, when the Court was at Fontain-Bleau. We were together in the Country,
Timante and I, and we visited in our Journey honest Merigenes, to whose
Politeness and Capacity I suppose you are no Stranger. Cleonice seemed shy of
traveling with two Men, and therefore took one of her Friends along with her,
called Melicerte. I cannot tell whether you know her, but I can truly say, that
if she be not handsome, she is young and witty. She was of so an agreeable
Humor the first Night we supt at Merigenes's, that the Good Man showed himself
really smitten with her, and addressing himself on a sudden to Timante, I
wonder, said he to him, you should reckon Melicerte homely; I find you but a
bad Judge of Beauty, and I Will never trust you in these matters again.

Consider, I pray you, into what Confusion this Simplicity cast us. Timante did
what he could to repair the Fault he had committed in speaking, without doubt,
too freely to a Person of Merigenes's Humor. Remember more punctually my
words, answered he; I told you that Melicerte was a very amiable Person, and
yet the Charms of her Face were not wholly comparable to the excellency of her
Humor. Acknowledge, Timante, (replied Melicerte, endeavoring to smile) That
you are less sincere now, than you was when you spoke of me before, and yield
that Merigenes is incomparably more than you. It is true, Madam (replied
immediately the honest Man) you do me Justice; I protest I always speak what I
think is the Truth. I perceive it, said she with a cold Air, and being not able
to dissemble her resentment. I began to talk, to turn the discourse on another
subject. My endeavors were vain, a solid peace could not be made, and the end
of the Feast answered not the beginning.


Dorante. I saw Merigenes some days after, and found him as knowing, as he
appeared to you dissimulative. He is as excellent a Geographer as he who looked
for Democracy in the Map, because we therein find Dalmatia. In entertaining our
selves on the the conquests of the Imperialists, and those of the Venetians, we
pleased our selves in enlarging on the Morea, that ancient Peloponese where was
the famous Lacedemonia, which the Modern Misistra does but imperfectly
represent. Merigenes was ravished at the great success we mentioned; and in the
transports, which made him lift up his eyes to Heaven, he interrupted us to
tell us, he could not believe the Country of the Moors was so good as we made
it. He began again to speak very pertinently when we entered into the particular
relation of what was done in Hungary, he much wondered the Turks should build
the most famous Bridges in the world. That of Essek, said he, must needs be a
very great and strong one, seeing two great Armies have long since fought to
get and keep possession of it. Yet I cannot imagine it is comparable to
Pont-Euxin, for it is not above four or five years that I hear talk of that of
Essek, but I have heard all my life time, admirable relations of the other. We
could not forbear smiling at the exact Geography of Merigenes, and we better
informed him in the sequel, lest the resemblance of names should make him
confound again such different things.


Cleonice. I am very glad this Conversation is ended, for you know that Belise
and I are to go and choose Stuffs for Lisidor and Lindamire.


Erastus. I think it were fit your Servants should eat their Dinners before
they put their Horses in the Coach; you have time enough.


Cleonice. Choose then another subject of discourse, in speaking against Liars
we are insensibly brought to detraction.


Belise. There is no body has more aversion to detraction than I have; however
I believe there is no harm in making little Recitals for Diversion, provided we
wrong not the reputation of people: Do you think you wrong Arpalise, in saying
she talks much? Why may you not call a woman a great talker? Do you not every
day say, that the Crow is Black, and that a Swan is White?


Erastus. If what Belise now said satisfies you not, we are ready to speak
against detraction.


Cleonice. You cannot do me a greater pleasure.


ENTERTAINMENT VIII. That a Detracter is generally hated, and that he cannot
please, any other than envious and malicious Persons.
Philemon. I Wonder there are so many Detractors. All the World hates them,
they are respected as fierce Beasts; they are feared, and yet we do not avoid
them, as we shun Tigers and Panthers. It is they on the contrary who shine most
in Companies, they are hearkened to, and even applauded, whether out of fear of
provoking them, or that Men are naturally pleased with Detraction.


Erastus. I should be sooner surprised, at their being driven out of Societies.
Let Us not flatter our selves, most Men had rather hear four Satyrs than one
Panegyric.


Cleonice. You have a strange opinion of Mankind; if what you say were true,
there would be a great many Misanthropos's in the World.


Dorante. And indeed there are more than you think, but they better disguise
their sentiments, than Timon of Athens did heretofore, and the Alcestus of
Moliere at Paris now.


Cleonice. But whence can proceed so malicious an inclination?


Dorante. From self-love. If we have defects, and we are sensible of them; we
are pleased in hearing there are greater than ours: If on the contrary, we can
sufficiently flatter our selves, to believe we have great Virtues, we have the
satisfaction of seeing that we are lifted up above the people whose faults are
related to us.


Belise. Do not you find that the most dangerous Detractor is, he that begins
by praises; seeing by this Artifice he may persuade he speaks sincerely, and
without aversion.


Philemon. What you say brings to my remembrance an adventure, which diverted
the other day a great company at the Princess Demerata's; they seemed to be
astonished there should be such a strict tie of friendship between Celanire, to
whom one may give thirty years, without being too liberal; and Dorinice, who
has never yet seen eighteen. However there was no doubt made but each might
find his reckoning in this Society; it was said that Celanire, being less
virtuous than she appeared to be, found no disrelish in sharing in the
voluptuousness of a young person, whom Lovers and Pleasures every where
attended. That Dorinice on her side might receive good advice from an
experienced friend; and even that she might vail her wanton Air under the
pretended modesty of Celanire. Scarce were these words ended when Celanire
entered, and a while after was told, that they had been just talking of the
friendship she had for Dorinice. I am not the only person that loves her,
replied she; it must be allowed she appears very amiable, when one does not
thoroughly examine her. It may be truly said she has a delicate Complexion, and
fire in her eyes; but I think she seems too affected in her carriage, and too
greedy of applause. I love her sincerely, I wish she would lay aside those
little humors, and endeavor as much to get reputation as new admirers; I
would not be thought to admire her defects; for we had like to have broke off
for the Gown she has worn for these four days. The Stuff is so rich, and so
remarkable, that every one will judge that Timocrates bought it. I was not
wanting in advertising Dorinice of it; I told her what was whispered abroad of
it, and that this report might become more public, and probably it might be
added, that a Woman who accepts of presents, will grant favors. Dorinice
appeared to me surprised; and answered me, that Timocrates was not so well at
ease as was imagined, and that instead of making presents, he was scarce able
to satisfy his Creditors; that she had much ado to get an hundred Guineys of
him which she had won at Basset, even before this play was forbid; that, in
short, she was forced to make him take up this Stuff on credit to pay her.
That, as to the rest, she never made it her study to shut peoples mouths. That
she knew very well Calumny spared no body; and that to have ones mind at rest,
it was sufficient that one had nothing to reproach's one's self withal. I made
show as if I believed what she said, and I replied coldly to her; That I wished
the World was convinced of the truth of what she now told me. And thus did
Celanire testify the sincere respects she had for Dorinice; and as if it had
been a decree of Fate that we should see the end of the Comedy; Celanire was no
sooner gone from Demarata's, but Dorinice entered, set forth in the,
magnificient Gown so much discoursed of. Every body set forth the richness of
the Stuff, some praised it sincerely, others added roguishly, that what they
liked it best for, was, that Dorinice had not put her hand in her Purse for it.
At least, pursued Dorilas, if we may believe what Celanire now told us. I know
not (replied Dorinice coloring) what she may be pleased to say; but I suppose
she has said no harm of me. But if any spark of Envy has induced her to pour
venom in her relations, I could utter such Truths as would not be very
advantageous to her. Dorilas, whose humor you know would not let pass this
occasion of diverting us, and pretending to be in the interests of Dorinice,
whom he thought fit to edge on; I know not (said he with a feigned ingenuity)
whether Celanire has a good way of setting off her Friends; however, I must
say, she has no good way of covering their defects. Why should she come with
her circumstances, the relations of which we never called for; what are we
concerned with her Timocrates, that she should bring him into a relation, when
the discourse was only about a Gown or Petticoat. I would willingly know
(replied Dorinice all in an heat) what she could say of Timocrates, and whether
she has had the malice to empoyson -- You are to blame in complaining (said
Dorilas, interrupting her coldly) she has only fairly related the opinions
which the World has, when a Man buys a rich piece of Stuff, which is afterward
observed to be carried to a fair Lady; and after all, who can say, that
Celanire will speak of it any where else? What she has said here signifies
nothing; here was not in this room above four or five Men, and seven or eight
Women. We could not forbear laughing at this pleasant passage, which Dorinice
observing, she appeared moved with it, and was ready to fly upon Dorilas.
However she bethought her self not to disoblige any body, in a company which
she was glad to make favorable to her; and, dissembling her resentment, she
discovered only her passion against Celanire. I cannot comprehend, said she,
how this Woman could have the imprudence to speak against me. Certainly she
must be Mistress of a great stock of Calumny, and very fertile invention.
Besides, she should never have used these to offend a Person who has long since
learned to hold her tongue, but who can now break silence in a terrible manner
for her. However, Madam, replied Dorilas, whatever she said, she spoke with an
assured tone, and I am much mistaken if you can dismay her. Is it that she is
persuaded, replied Dorinice, that her Knight is redoubtable enough to stop the
mouths of the World? I would advise her to have less presumption, if it be only
this which renders her so bold. I am no more afraid of Timante than Celanire,
and I have an hundred times told them both, that I was ashamed of their
conduct. It Is well known that Timante has not above two hundred pound a year to
live on, and yet keeps his fine Coach, and three Lacqueys. It Is true he is
young, and well shaped, and is never from Celanire, whose old Husband has
immense riches. I suppose one may draw from these particularities, such
consequences as will not be much to Celanire's advantage: but instead of
stopping at conjectures, I can find effects which will not tend to the
justifying of her conduct. It Is not three months since she gave money to a
Person of Quality who went into Flanders, and entreated him to buy her some of
that Countries Horses. The Commission was executed, the Horses came, but not
into Celanire's Stable. They draw every day Timante in his visits to Court and
other Walks. The Coach they draw is a very fine one, and the Master of it knows
no more than I, what it cost. After this, shall a Woman so liberal as she find
fault with Timocrates's paying me what he owes me?


Cleonice. This Comedy is pleasant enough, although the matter of it be neither
new nor rare; these are Farces we see every day acted; but I would willingly
know whether the Divertisement you had, hindered you from feeling some
Indignation. Can you like that the desire of detracting should break off a real
Friendship, or make one renounce Civility, and the Consideration one should
have for the appearance of Friendship?


Philemon. Observe all the Particularities which concur in this Detraction. It
is Indignation which makes Celanire declaim first, she disgorges her self
against a Person younger and handsomer, to whom she sees Lovers run as soon as
they are together, to the neglect of her self.


Belise. Is not the itch of talking to be at all regarded?


Dorante. The ease which a Woman may expect when she reveals a Secret that lies
like a weight on her heart, occasions these Disorders.


Cleonice. As well as the pleasure of showing that she sees to the end of the
Intrigue.


Erastus. Let us not forget the Honor which Celanire does her self, when she
says she always gives good Advice to Dorinice.


Dorante. Pass on farther, and confess we, that when Detraction has no real
Causes, she forms imaginary ones; she disguises every thing, and imposes what
Names she pleases; she calls the Prudence of a General of an Army that
retreats, Cowardice; she terms Valor, Stupidity; and speaks of an Heroic
Constancy, as brutish Obstinacy. She spares least of all Women, because they
are less in a condition to revenge themselves, however great their Desire may
be to it. Detraction will speak the gallant Air of Arsinoe to be the mere
Affectation of a Wanton: The easy Temper of Amasie, to proceed from cold
Temper and want of Spirits: And if Partenice, who is naturally very handsome,
should wear a fine Gown, Detraction will not fail to accuse her of a Pride
capable of ruining her Family. You shall hear Praises given only to authorize
Detraction. It Is said that Timocrates has Wit, when it is only to persuade that
he is crafty and designing: And Dorinice is painted young, and handsome, only to
render her more probable light and wanton.


Erastus. It is true, that we see every day Detraction spares nothing; but
leave we to others what concerns Manners; and let us see, whether we cannot draw
some strokes of Satyr which may serve to exhilerate Conversation, without
offending Persons.


Dorante. One may observe from the Air and Behavior of those who speak,
whether the Exaggerations they make tend only to divert the Company. Then their
Discourse is only to be regarded as a mere Jollity, which I would not condemn:
but I would not like they should fall into an effective Detraction. So far
ought we to be from mixing Malice, and citing Crimes, that we should never
touch seriously on the faults we would describe. If this be observed, I can
freely share in the Diversion.

A famous Author speaking of a Pleader, made use of such Expressions as seem to
me more pleasant than injurious. I am tormented, said he, by the most famous
Pettifogger of our Province, and I believe Normandy never bore a more dreadful
one; his only Name makes Widows tremble, and makes Orphans run away: There is
not a piece of Glebe or Meadow, within three Leagues of him, that is safe from
him. He shows great favor to Children, when he is content to share with them
in their Paternal Inheritance.


Belise. I have an Aunt who has so great an Aversion to Women who seek only to
draw Praises, that she was pleased heretofore to set forth her self in such a
manner, as furnishes us with those Strokes of Satyr we mentioned, and here is
part of the Terms she used. I my self will give you my Picture to the life; and
first represent you with a low wrinckled Forehead, great Cheeks, and a picked
Chin, which put together make none of the most agreeable Figure. My Eyes are
small, round, and melancholic; they speak nothing, and my Mouth says as
little. It has made a perpetual Divorce with Smiles and Pleasanties. There is
seen such a Color on my Skin, as will not displease those who love variety. My
Shape is like Madam Bouvillon 's in the Comical Romance, and I may say I am as
well qualified for Conversation. I never dispute, being no ways concerned in
what is said, and they would be to blame who should complain that I interrupt
People, seeing I always keep Silence. Curiosity which is natural to my Sex, has
no Power over my Spirit: I know nothing, I have learned nothing, and I have no
mind to learn any thing.


Erastus. I must represent to you a Cavalier, whom the Lady you speak of was
not willing to make your Uncle. His Size is low, and there is seen I know not
what of ill boding on his Countenance; his Eyes are so small, and so sunk in
his Forehead, that no body to this hour can tell whether they be black or gray;
the Hair of his Eyelids cover them, and were the Hair of his Head as long, he
would not need to wear a Peruke; he has a strait and pointed Forehead, great
Lips, hollow Cheeks, and a tawny Complexion; I say nothing of his Teeth, they
are so few, that they are not worth mentioning. The Qualities of his Soul
answer those of his Body, he is of a Chagrin Humor, restless and contrarying,
nothing pleases him but what displeases others, and he finds nothing agreeable
but what the world disapproves: Envy and Hatred are his predominant Passions,
he is never more out of Humor, than when he can do no Mischief, and when he
finds an occasion to do it, he embraces it with joy. He has learned all sorts
of Languages, the better to deceive all sorts of People; he imagines the Cheats
which are made, denote a Superiority of Spirit with which he is charmed. Judge
whether his Conversation be profitable and agreeable: He stutters, and cannot
utter four words distinctly; the Difficulty which he has in speaking would make
him avoid Company, did he not frequent it to provoke and disturb it. Yet it is
said he is in Love; but if we believe him capable of being so, it is only to
disappoint a Rival, and give perpetual Trouble to a Mistress.

As Erastus ended these words, Cleonice was told that the Horses were in the
Coach, the Company arose, and Belise began in these words.


Belise. We have no reason to complain for our being interrupted; for we have
said enough of Detraction. We know it diverts but too much, and is but too much
in use. But I could wish we would treat of another Subject of Conversation very
different, and which I have a mind to propose. I would willingly hear how a
Person might be handsomely praised in Company without putting him to the Blush,
or disobliging others whom we do not praise.


Dorante. This is a nice Point, and we may examine it to Night. Lisidor makes
signs to me that he will treat us at Supper, and carry you to his House; and
therefore you may take your Measures accordingly.


Cleonice. You being the chief of our little Society, we must be ruled by you.
I ought indeed to be gladder than the rest of the Company, because the good
Supper we shall have, will make amends for the course Dinner I gave you.


Dorante. Good, Madam, do not thus impose on a Man of my Years; you think to
engage me by this Address to give you a Regale? Do you not see on the contrary
that I entreat you to sup with me, because two Feasts are not to be expected on
the same Day?

After these words, the Ladies were led to Cleonice's Chariot to prosecute
their Affairs. At Night the Company came to Dorante's, and Belise, whilst
Supper was making ready, claimed the Promise had been made her.


ENTERTAINMENT IX. How one may insert Commendations in Conversation.
Dorante. IT will be easier for us to speak of the Maxims which are ordinarily
observed in Praising, than to say with what tenderness we may season Praises,
to make them agreeable. What a turn ought we to give, and what Novelties must
we not speak to please in these occasions? If our commendations be but mean,
the Person to whom we direct them, owes us less thanks than spite; and the
rest of the Company will scarce vouchsafe to hear us. If on the contrary, we
praise with excess, we cast into confusion, those whom we endeavor to exalt to
a pitch they do not deserve, and we are despised by others, as pitiful
flatterers.


Philemon. I am persuaded that it is less difficult to use the precepts which
serve to make a Panegyric, than to find the address of agreeably insinuating
praises in an Entertainment. And therefore the Ladies shall permit, if they
please, that I relate what my memory furnishes me withal, in respect of great
Praises, and I will leave to Dorante and Erastus the improving of this subject,
with a better and more delicate Air.

Beginning commonly, as we do by birth, I Will tell you first what I have read
heretofore on that of a great Monarch.

He was born in Purple, the Throne was his Cradle, and if it were possible to
find an Infancy in so glorious and rational a life, we should find that he
could only play with Scepters and Crowns.

Expect not I should enter on the particulars of what we may find praiseworthy
in a person whom we would commend.

You know better than I, that one may respect the Gifts which he may have
received from Nature; as an elevated Soul, an upright Heart, constant and
generous, a sublime Spirit, vast and penetrant; an happy Memory, a solid
Judgment, and delicate Discernment.

As for the gifts of the Body, all the World immediately declares it self for
the Beauty of Women, and the good Mien of Men, and for my particular, I prefer
Health and a noble and free Air in all manner of Behavior.

We forget not the Favors which we hold of Fortune. It is she which gives
Riches and Honors. And I dare even affirm she often contributes to our Glory,
in conducting us as it were by the Hand, into conjunctures, which become happy
to us. But say we, in few Words, that true Merit consists chiefly in the good
use we make of the different advantages we now mentioned.

I will follow the Custom we have to refer this discussion to Morality, without
charging our Conversation with it.

However I cannot but say something of Valor and Liberty, which are my two
favorite Virtues.

It is certain, that to be charmed with 'em, I would have them be in all their
purity, without mixture. That Valor lead us to brave Actions, without
proceeding to Rashness; that it be accompanied with a prudence which may make
us fear the ill Success which may be attributed to us; in a word, that it
marches to glory through perils, without Ostentation. I likewise require that
it have no need of any assistance to render it self worthy our admiration. That
it be not sustained either by Ambition, nor Anger, nor Revenge. That in a
Battle Emulation, Shouts, and Cries make it go neither farther nor with more
earnestness, than if it saw it self alone and disarmed. Neither do I know
whether I should give it the name of Virtue, how blazing soever it were, if it
appeared to me unjust.


Belise. There are then few Conquerors whom you esteem, and I believe you spare
neither the reputation of Caesar, nor the glory of Alexander.


Philemon. I confess I would have Equity reign every where. So that I would not
condemn those who reproach Caesar for having oppressed the Liberty of his
Country; and who cannot bear with Alexander's carrying Fire and Sword into
Countries where they never so much as heard of him. Let Us instance, for
Example, a great Monarch who makes only lawful Conquests.

Here Is what I read this Morning of it: Has he ever attacked any place without
winning it? Has he ever given Battle without vanquishing? Were ever better
disciplined Troops seen, Troops more zealous, more ready to fight and signalize
themselves? What Conqueror, surrounded with warlike Nations, has stretched the
limits of his Conquests so far, in so short a time? What Warrior has triumphed
over such puissant Confederates, and ever rendered his Dominions more redoutable
and flourishing?

Here Is what was said heretofore of an Illustrious Warrior, whose Valor
raised him to the Empire.

He practices himself alone all the Military Virtues, and it is an admirable
thing, that being above all Corrivals, he contends for glory with himself; he
endeavors to ravish it from his first actions by others still more glorious.

As to what concerns Liberality, I would have it no less exempt from Ostenation
than Valor. I would have it readily showed, in a grateful manner, and the most
seemly as is possible, when it is to relieve persons who want necessaries for
their Subsistence. But I require, on the contrary, that one give in the sight
of as many People as is possible, when the gift is the recompense of Merit.

In a Word I would have a liberal Person to do as one of my Friends, did whose
liberality is thus mentioned.

His Liberality equals that of a magnificent Prince in the greatness of
Presents, and surpasses it in the choice of Persons. Those who receive his
Benefits, are the only Persons that can speak of 'em. In fine, his generosity
would be more universally admired, if it were not so great, because more
Persons would comprehend it, in an Age wherein this Virtue is so rarely
practiced in it is perfection.

Loving as I do extremely this beneficent humor, you would have me speak more
of it, and enlarge my self a little on the bounty of a great King.

One cannot speak more advantageously of a private Person, than to say that he
has the spirit of a Prince; and one cannot better praise a great Potentate,
than in saying he has the goodness of a private Person: That in a condition
which permits him every thing, he endeavors only to satisfy others. Was ever
seen in a mean fortune so much goodness as he shows in the midst of his
greatness? Whilst all Europe lies prostrate at his feet, imploring his
protection, or redoubting his prowess; it seems as if he had need of the least
of his Subjects; so sensible is he of their afflictions, so earnest is he to
offer 'em remedies, so favorable an ear does he lend to their supplications.

This incomparable goodness extends it self to all conditions; the great
receive every day Testimonies of it, the People every minute bless it, the
domestics are charmed with it, and strangers admire it. Of the two parts of
Justice, he leaves to the Parliament that which disposes of the Punishment of
Crimes, reserving only that which distributes Recompenses. He uses his
Authority only to restore, to repeal, to pardon. In fine, his power appears
without bounds, when he is to do good; and it seems, as if it were without
Authority, when it is to punish. The Refusal of a favor is a Language unknown
to him, and his Closet as well as his Heart, is always open to the
remonstrances which is made him in behalf of the miserable.


Belise. I take notice in the praises you now made, you have spoken only to the
advantage of Men, and not one Word of Commendation to those of my Sex. I
believe it is I that hinder you, but if I shut your mouth herein, methinks
Cleonice should open it.


Philemon. Well then, for the love of her I will open it. I Will Praise a
celebrated Beauty whom all the Court admires; and Cleonice will have the
pleasure to see one part of her Charms, in the piece which I shall set forth.

Yet Dorante could bettter than I acquit himself in this affair, he knows the
Author that drew the Picture; and the Lady for whom he wrought. But what ought
I not to undertake to recover your favors? I will satisfy you then, Madam,
and recite Word for Word the little work I promised, provided my Memory will
give me leave. Here Is in what terms the Painter addresses himself to the
Beautiful Lady whose Picture he drew.

You know, Madam, that ordinary Beauties go only to the Painters to seek some
new Charms, or to get rid of some Defects. You only, Madam, are above Arts
which flatter and embellish. They have never wrought you on but unfortunately,
and in making you lose as many advantages, as they are wont to bestow on
Persons less accomplished than you. But if you are little obliged to Painting,
you are less to Dresses. You owe nothing to the Science of others, nor to your
own Industry, and you may securely remit your self to Nature, she having taken
such excessive Care of you. Most Women are handsome only from the Dresses they
use. What they put on serves to hide their Defects, whereas on the contrary,
whatever you put off discovers some new Charm.

I shall not give you any general and common Praise. The Sun will no more
furnish me with a Comparison for your Eyes, than the Flowers for your
Complexion. I might speak of the regularity of your Face, and symmetry of every
part of your Body. But I perceive, beyond the observations I have made, there
are a thousand things to think, which cannot be expressed, and a thousand things
which are better self than thought on.

You have collected in your self the diverse Charms of different Beauties. That
which surprises, which pleases, which flatters, which touches, which sharpens.
Such a one has resisted a disdainful Beauty, which has yielded to a delicate
one; and delicacy may give disgust to Lovers who like only to submit to
disdainfulness. You only, Madam, know how to charm all the World: The
passionate find in you the Subject of their transports. Different Spirits,
diverse Humors, contrary Tempers, all are subject to your Empire.

The Charms of your Conversation are not a whit inferior to those of your
Face. One is no less affected with hearing you than seeing you. You can create
a passion for you, though veiled. Never was so much Politness seen as in your
discourses, nothing so lively, nothing so just, nothing so happily thought. In
fine, Madam, what one may say, after one has examined you, is, That there is
nothing so unfortunate as to love you, nor nothing so difficult as not to love
you.

Having ended this Recital, Philemon continued to speak in this manner.

I see that Erastus is ready to die with Impatience to insult over me. His Eyes
tell me, that what I now gave out for a Picture, represents nothing in
particular, the whole being but a general Description, an heap of Expressions
which an Author would have pass for exquisite ones.


Erastus. Fear not that I shall complain for not having seen in this
Description, a certain resemblance which you made me hope for: It belongs less
to me, than the Lady who expected it to make you reproaches. Had you been as
good as your word, Cleonice would have had the pleasure of believing her self
handsomer than she is, and I the vexation of finding her more disdainful. This
is a business that is between you and her.


Philemon. It is plainly seen you would set us at odds; but Cleonice may easily
distinguish in my Recital, The Regularity of her Face, and Symmetry of every
part of her Body.

Moreover I would fain know to whom may be better applied, what I said of
Conversation, and Politeness? Must I declare openly that it was of Cleonice
that I spoke?


Cleonice. I would advise you not to do it, because no body will believe you.


Belise. You understood him well enough, he need not explain himself; and I
wonder my Husband should tell you such fine things in my Presence. Let him
protest if he will, that this is only to practice the Maxim we speak of, and
that he inserted these indirect Commendations, only to praise in an ingenious
manner. It belongs to Erastus to see whether he will agree in it.


Erastus. I Will agree to nothing to day. I have a controuling Humor in my Head,
and it is Timagenes who gave it me by his Obstinacy.


Dorante. You have been in a Dispute then; let us know whence arose your
Difference, and what has caused the Heat you seem still to be in.


Erastus. It is observed, that of late, Timagenes has a particular Love for
Berenice. He was notably set upon for it at Celysire's, even to the putting him
almost out of Countenance. But in fine, being ashamed of his Confusion, he took
Courage, and with an assured Tone thus spoke: Is it any marvel, says he, that I
should love a most amiable Lady? Show me any Snow whiter, or any Rose of a more
lovely Color than her Complexion? Berenice's Eyes are black, great, well set,
and tempered with such Sweetness, and yet so sparkling, that the Room she sits
in seems to be on fire with 'em. Her Mouth is small, well shaped, her Lips
scarlet, which as soon as a smile opens them, you see the finest Teeth in the
World.

I added immediately, that nothing could be truer than what Timagenes had said
of Belise. Of Belise, said he briskly, the resemblance of the names deceive
you, it is of Berenice that I speak. So much the worse for your Eyes, replied
I, with a tone of assurance, it is not the conformity of names, it is the
Praises you give to Berenice, which have made me believe you rendered justice to
Belise.


Belise. I would not interrupt you as soon as I ought. The Company it seems
must remark after what manner you give Praises, whether true or false; besides
I have not the strength to make you silent immediately, for I am a Woman, and
you give me fine Words.


Cleonice. I shall never hear any discourse of Praising, but I shall remember
an Elogium which a Friend of Dorante's made for the King. Two Shepherds spoke
therein, one an Italian, whom I shall call Thirsis; the other a German, to whom
I shall give the Name of Menalca. Their Character was as different as the
Genius of their Nation. Thirsis loved ingenious Arts and Rest. Menalca's
inclinations lay only for War; and his greatest delight was in a tumultuous
Life. They came to France only to see a King who filled all the Earth with his
Name. After they had considered him with great admiration, they looked on one
another, and immediately knowing one another to be strangers, they accosted,
and enquired the occasion of their Travels. They had no sooner understood it,
but this conformity of design made 'em continue their Conversation: But I know
not whether I should make them to relate in wretched Prose, what they most
ingenuously expressed in Verse.


Dorante. Your Prose is well worth my Friend's Poetry; only go on.


Cleonice. I will tell you then in few words; that Thirsis was astonished how
the King could so easily govern a great Kingdom, as a Father of a Family rules
his House. He admired the Kingdom should be so flourishing, and in so good
order, even as Menalca admired the Discipline observed in the Armies. When the
Italian acknowledged that Paris exceeded Rome for fine Arts and Painting,
Buildings and Music; the German was charmed to see with what exactness all
that respected the Military Art was observed. He said there were never any
braver Troops, never any better picked Men, better clad, better armed, and more
willing to serve. If Thirsis mused at Court on a King extraordinary well
shaped, Equitable, Magnificient, Wise, Merciful; Menalca could not be tired in
Praising the Armies of a Vigilant Prince, Indefatigable and Intrepid. In fine,
not to engage my self farther into a discourse, whence I cannot, perhaps,
easily extricate my self, I shall content my self in telling you, that the two
Shepherds obstinately disputed; that they could not agree, and that in their
contest, they published all the King's Virtues both Civil and Military.


Belise. I do not doubt but you expect that I should Praise in my turn, and
instead of excusing my self through modesty, I am willing to do it, provided my
memory furnishes me with the Subject and Expressions.

It is then the Elogium of a Victorious Prince which I undertake, with the
assistance of a delicate Wit, whose Works to my great misfortue you too well
know, to thank me for what I recite out of 'em.

This Author writes to the Prince after the winning of a considerable Battle,
and makes him certain reproaches, and forms a kind of Quarrel, in a manner,
infinitely more agreeable than the most regular Congratulation. You may judge
by several passages which I remember.

Hew joyful I am, my Lord, to be at a distance from your Highness, that I may
the better say what I have long since thought of you. I dared not declare it,
lest I should fall into the inconveniences, wherein I have beheld Persons who
had taken the like Liberties. But, my Lord, you do too much to be past over in
silence, and you will be unjust, if performing the Actions you do, it remained
there, and no mention were made to you of 'em. If you knew in what manner all
the World talks of you, you would be astonished to see with how little fear of
displeasing you they speak of what you have done. In truth, my Lord, I know not
what you have thought of, for it was a great boldness in you to have at your
Age topt two or three old Captains, whom you ought to respect, if it were only
for their Age. To have taken sixteen pieces of Cannon which belonged to a
Prince who is the King's Uncle, and the Queen's Brother, with whom too you
never had any difference. To have put into disorder the best Spanish Troops who
so kindly let you pass. All this is contrary to good manners, and matter
enough, I think, for your Confessor. I have heard indeed that you were
obstinate, and that it was not good contending with you, but I did not think
you would have been transported so far, and if you continue, you will render
your self insupportable to all Europe. Neither the Emperor nor King of Spain
will have any thing to do with you.

You know the Letter is longer, but the Author speaking openly what he pleases
in the rest of it, I confess I would not charge my memory with it.


Cleonice. I have the same relish, and I had rather a thousand times know how
to praise in this lusory manner, than to be able to compose those long and
serious Panegyricks, which are very laborious to those that make them, and very
troublesome to those who are obliged to hear them.


Philemon. I wonder that Dorante has said nothing yet. Does he think to be quit
for having given us a Supper? Let him not be mistaken; we have now praised a
valiant Man; let him make an Elogium of a liberal one.


Dorante. I shall recount to you the tour of a gallant Man, whose inclinations,
you will find, led him to liberality.

I doubt not but you have heard that Voiture was a great Gamester, and that he
lost in one Day 1400 Lewis's at the deceased Monsieurs, where he had the Office
of introducer of Ambassadors. Being an Honest Man as well as a Man of Wit, he
would send away the next morning the Sum he had lost; and finding at home only
1200 Lewis's, he sent to demand 200 of Costar his intimate Friend. Send them to
me spedily, wrote he to him, you know I play no less on your credit than mine
own. If you have them not, borrow 'em: If you find no hody that will lend 'em
you, sell all that you have, even to your good Friend Monsieur Pauquet. For I
must not fail of having 200 Pistols. You see with what imperiousness my
Friendship speaks, the reason is because it is vehement. Yours would say, I
entreat you to lend me 200 Lewis's, if you can, without putting your self to
any inconvenience; I beg your pardon that I should be so free with you.

Costar sent the 200 Pistols, and answered, he never believed he could have so
much pleasure for so little Money. Seeing you play on my credit, says he, I
will always keep a stock to preserve it. I can moreover assure you that a near
Kinsman of mine has always a 1000 Lewis's as much at my diposal as if they were
in your Coffer. However I would not here by expose you to any considerable
loss. One of my neighbors told one yesterday, that his lost Pecunia would have
proved the best Friend in the World to him, could he have kept him by him, and
I advise you to keep yours. I send you back your Note, but am surprised you
should deal thus with me, having taken such a different course with Monsieur
Balsac.

I will add then, that Balsac having need of Money, sent to entreat Voiture to
lend him 1200 Livers, and charged the Porter to give him a Note for the like
Sum; Voiture told the Money, and took the Note, wherein were these words.

I underwritten confess to owe to Monsieur Voiture the Sum of 400 Crowns which
he has lent me for, etc.

Voiture takes the Note, and subscribes these Words.

I underwritten confess to owe to Monsieur de Balsac, the Sum of 800 Crowns,
for the pleasure he has done me in borrowing of me 400.

After this, he gives the Note to Mr. Balsac's Valet de Chamber to carry to his
Master.

The Company was very well satisfied with this Recital, and could not but
entertain themselves with it all the Supper time.

Scarce were they risen ftom Table, but Cleonice reassumed the discourse; I am
charmed, said she, with the contents of Voiture's Obligation written under that
which Balsac sent him.


Belise. I like very well too the manner after which he sent for 200 Pistols,
grounding this sort of boldness on the firmness of this Friendship.


Philemon. Nothing but a strict familiarity could authorize this liberty;
without this there had been neither discretion nor civility in this proceeding;
and you know what would become of Societies without these two so necessary
qualities.


Cleonice. They are so necessary; that we cannot better spend our time, than in
treating of them.


ENTERTAINMENT X. That to please in Conversation, one must be discreet, and
keep an exact decorum.
Philemon. HAve you not observed, that it is not young people who generally
please in Conversation, whatever agreeableness their youth may give them?


Dorante. I do not wonder at it, for besides that they have not a sufficient
stock of experiences for Conversation, they be commonly too hot in speaking,
and show in what they say more impetuosity than reservedness: But that which is
most considerable, is, that they seldom consider what they are, and before whom
they speak.


Lisidor. I beseech you to show 'em no favor for my sake, for I acknowledge
they are for the most part little discreet, and greatly conceited; they speak
with a blustering Air, interrupt, and interrogate after the same manner; they
speak what they please, without considering whether it may not displease others.


Erastus. We shall not accuse you of these defects; for so far are you from
interrupting, and questioning, that you have said little, but to the purpose:
But let us hear what Lindamire will say in her turn.


Lindamire. That Girls of my Age are less obliged to speak than to hold their
Tongues; and that it is easy for me to observe a modesty, which might be of
different use to a Person of Wit.


Philemon. Men have less moderation than those of your Sex, and the heat they
have ordinarily when they come into the World, makes 'em to speak and act only
in a blustering way.


Dorante. That which I like worst in most of them is, that they never think of
correcting themselves, and never reflect on what good manners require.


Lisidor. But wherein consists this Decorum you speak so much of?


Dorante. I know not whether we have not already sufficiently explained it.
However, seeing our conduct is so greatly concerned in it, we will further
deliver our opinion about it. I think that to speak with a due Decorum, is to
utter only things precisely which are suitable to times, places, and persons;
such as are fit for him that speaks, and those who hear.


Cleonice. Do you think it easy to know what we are, and of what humor the
Persons are before whom we speak; to know what is proper for us, and what may
please the rest of the Company?


Dorante. I acknowledge it is hard to judge of the disposition wherein the
Persons are that compose an assembly. The greatest part of Mankind makes it a
kind of Merit to be always on its Guard, and to conceal its intentions.
Besides, Men's Humors change; Health is not always the same; Ambition, Love,
and different Interests inspire different Inclinations. But, Madam, it is not
necessary that our knowledge should reach to the Hearts of Persons, and that we
sound into the depths of their Souls, whether they be such in effect as they
appear to be. It is sufficient we know what their rank is, that we may have the
deference for 'em that is due; and that we consider what their capacity is;
that we may not speak too boldly before abler Folks than our selves. It Is true,
that these reflections are not sufficient, we are obliged to remember our
selves. What would you think, if a little young Gentleman, though born in Wales,
should draw his Chair, and sit jig by joul with a Duke or Marquess; or
interrogate in a familiar tone with a Marshal of France?


Erastus. To pass over what refers to Persons of Quality. I say there are
things which are truly ingenious, and yet which lose their relish in the Mouth
of a Man that is not of the profession. You have perhaps heard of a
neighboring Prince entertaining one day his chief Minister, on the most
subtle parts of Natural Philosophy: His Favorite heard him with impatience,
and being desirous his Master would rather apply himself to the Study of the
Art of Reigning, than Physical Questions. Sir, (said he to him, in interrupting
him discontentedly) are you not ashamed to be so well verst in these matters?


Philemon. If a Man of a moderate capacity, not knowing himself, should take on
him to speak great, would he not deserve to be told with an Ancient, My Friend,
you seem to me to strive to speak beyond your Ability?


Erastus. There are People whom another sort of Vanity blinds. You knew
Clitandre, he was the Son of a mean Citizen, and an Office which he held under
the King, was not more considerable than his Extraction. Yet he was well enough
received by Persons of the greatest Quality, and it was his Conversation that
procured him this admittance. I may likeways say, that he would have extremely
pleased, had he but remembered what he was: But he showed more Vanity than Wit
in his discourses and behavior. One day being at a Princesses, where there
were none but Persons of great Rank, he addressed himself to some old Lords, who
were Governors of Provinces, or the King's Lieutenants of Countries, and
talked to them of Versailes, as one would speak of Japan to Persons that had
never seen the Map. You cannot believe, said he to them, how great the Charms
are which fix us to the Court, maugre the fatigues and perils we may meet
there. I profess our Life is a real Navigation, that we are tossed about, behold
every Day wracks, and are uncertain whether the Waves will drive us into Port,
or run us on a Rock. Judge in what astonishment was the Company. They looked on
one another, they smiled, and failed not to demand of Clitandre news from
Versailes, with as much earnestness, as when our Ambassador arrived from Siam.
In fine, his presumption so blinded him, that the Company grew weary of hearing
him, and bearing with him any longer.


Cleonice. I have a Neighbor that is no ways inferior to your Celintandre?
She is Wife to an Officer under the King, whose place is too mean to be known:
This Neighbor comes often to work with some Work-women whom I have employed to
work me a Bed. Some four Months past I found her more melancholy than ordinary,
and I asked her the reason. How, Madam, said she, with the greatest surprise
imaginable, do not you know that the King sets out to Morrow for Luxembourg,
and that my Husband is obliged to follow him. To speak freely, added she
sighing, the Women of the Court are very unhappy, they pay dear in certain
occasions, for the honor they have in others. I saw yesterday enter into your
Apartment a Judge's Lady, whose Countenance seemed very Serene. I protest
sincerely, that in my affliction I wished to have a Husband of the same
profession, that I might spend my days with less hurry.


Philemon. There are an infinite number of Clitandre's in the world, and we may
say every day, that a Man who thus forgets himself, is the common
Laughing Stock of Companies.


Cleonice. But is it so difficult a matter for one to know one's self? Do we
not feel our selves? Can we believe that we should conceal our Sentiments from
our selves, as we dissemble 'em to others?


Erastus. Yes, Madam, we take pleasure to deceive our selves. It so seldom
happens that our opinions be as just as they ought to be; that our Hearts are
therewith irritated, and makes us secret reproaches of it. And therefore it is
that we dare not m^ke too sincere reflections on the things which put us out of
humor; and if on the contrary, we be so satisfied with our selves to set
cheerfully on this examination, we fall into a Vanity which is more
intolerable than the Ignorance of our selves can be.


Cleonice. But why so much subtilizing to know exactly what we are, and the
Persons before whom we are obliged to speak; when the matter concerns only the
due Decorum we ought to observe to one another. If we meet with Persons of a
considerable Rank, or extraordinary Merit, do we not naturally fear to
displease them? And does not this fear lead us to testify to 'em the deference
we owe them? Do we feel any repugnance in yielding them the most Honorable or
commodious Place? In stopping to let them go in or out, in directing our words
to them before the rest of the Company, in showing Complaisance for their
Sentiments, or at leastwise in not directly opposing them, if they prove
contrary to ours?


Belise. I imagine that it is more easy to keep this Decorum and Character of
Discretion with Persons that are our Inferiors, than with those to whom we are
obliged to submit. Our Hearts are imperious, they suffer not over patiently
that any Law should be imposed on them; but perhaps they are generous enough to
lay only easy ones.


Cleonice. Do you believe all Peoples hearts have the generosity of yours? You
are very favorable to 'em, if you have this opinion of 'em. Many Servants who
are continually ill used, will not consent to what you say, That they have only
a light Yoke laid on them.


Dorante. It is true, most Masters are very unjust, and far from that
discretion we speak of. Those who find themselves constrained to serve, are
they not unfortunate enough, without increasing the Misery of their condition,
by Injuries and a Tyranny which comes near Inhumanity?


Erastus. That which I cannot comprehend, is, That in the Army most young
Gentlemen fly upon their Servants and misuse them, without considering the
need they may chance to have of them. You know how many occasions there are
wherein the Life of a Master may depend on the fidelity of a Servant.


Philemon. Shall we say nothing of our equals? And whatever familiarity we may
have with them, shall we not observe a Character of Respect in our dealings
with them? That which contributes most to preserve Friendship, to speak
properly, is only the effect of Discretion and the Civility we speak of. These
two Qualities are so necessary, that a Man cannot well pass through the World
without them; and it is impossible that Pleasure and Politeness should riegn in
a Conversation where these are omitted to be practiced.


Cleonice. And this Discretion and Decorum, which you so much commend; do they
hinder us from mixing some Railleries in our discourses?


Philemon. No, Madam, but they hinder our joking in such a manner as may give
offense.


Belise. It would not be amiss to examine within what bounds our Raillery
should be included; but it is late, and it is better to defer this discourse
till to Morrow, when the Company comes to dine at Philemon's, who entreats it.


Cleonice. This entreaty savours of Ceremony. Have you any Lindamire come,
whose arrival you would celebrate, as Dorante and Erastus have done for that of
a Nephew, and Sister in Law?


Belise. I find you little equitable, in that you would not let me have my part
in this joy; and profiting so much by this Conversation, it is no marvel if I
endeavor to renew it.

The Company consented to Belise's desire, and met at her House next Morning,
where they dined after the same manner as they did at Erastus's and Dorante's:
They afterward past into Belise's Chamber, and began the discourse after this
manner.


ENTERTAINMENT XI. What care must be taken in Raillery.
Dorante. RAillery has been always respected, as Salt which seasons
Conversation, and renders it agreeable, by a little sharp relish that it gives
it. A Discourse that is not enlivend with it, will appear no less flat and
insipid than Meat without Salt. It Is true, we cannot suffer Meat that is too
salt, and a Raillery too picquant is more intolerable.


Belise. Nothing is more certain, than that Ragouts are so far from preserving
of Health, that they ruin it. Yet the ravage they make in our Bodies, is less
hurtful, than the disorder that Raillery causes in a Society. It introduces
division, and breaks those Friendships which appear to be the most solidly
established.


Erastus. Why, would you have a little Mirth to destroy a Society, unless it be
composed of ill natured People? Supposing an assembly of ingenious Persons do
meet, their minds being agreeable, and well turned, they will understand
Raillery, and divert one another, instead of falling foul on each other, and
quarrelling.


Belise. Believe me, Erastus, the Persons you speak of, who seem to take all in
good part, and understand Raillery, yet keep a secret grudge against these
Railers. They revenge themselves as often as they meet with an occasion, and it
is well if they can disguise the Subject of their Revenge.


Cleonice. I acknowledge my humor leads toward Raillery, but I resist the
inclination, when I consider the consequences. I find we ordinarily trangress
therein the Rules of Civility and Discretion, and expose our selves to the
danger of offending Persons whom we should not disoblige. In a Word, if there
be less Pleasure in refraining from Raillery, yet without doubt there is more
safety; as I find more in walking in a broad Path, than in dancing on Flowers
on the brink of a Precipice.


Erastus. For my part, I am persuaded that there are Raileries which does no
more offend, than effectual injuries. When we utter injuries, it is anger which
transports us against Persons that we hate; but it often happens, that we despise
so much those whom we jear, that we disdain to put our selves into a Passion
against them.


Belise. The more I search what Persons one may innocently rally, the fewer I
find. Let Us examine particulars, and Dorante will afterward tell us, whether
there be Persons that we may lawfully Rally. I will begin by Friends; I would
have them spared, and Friendship respected as a Sacred thing. Moreover are we
not obliged for our Interest, to conceal their defects, that we may not give
occasion to be reproached for having made an ill choice?


Cleonice. For my part, I shall think less of rallying my Enemies; and if I
loved Revenge, Raillery would appear to me too weak a means to satisfy me.


Philemon. Persons of Merit should be still more remote from our Raillery, when
even we can distinguish some defect among their Virtues. Do we not consider,
that there is nothing perfect, and that we are bound to take every thing in the
most favorable sense we can?


Belise. I find moreover, that Persons without Merit are too contemptible to be
rallyed, and I would not so much as spend one breath about them.


Cleonice. It must be granted too, that Raillery is too weak to use to an ill
Man.


Erastus. But what will Lisidor and Lindamire tell us? They must speak their
opinions, and intermix in our Conversations.


Lisidor. I would not have young People rallied, lest they be discouraged to
enter into Company; the small Experience they have, requires they should be
indulged, and their first faults pardoned.

And it being not fit I should speak only for my interest, I could wish
likewise that instead of rallying Old People, they should have all Respect
showed them. I have heard say, that Nations who had the power of choosing
Magistrates, took them always from among Ancient Persons. But why should we
jear Old Men? Is it because they have lived long, is this their fault? If it
be, it is a Crime which every one is desirous to be guilty of.


Erastus. It Is your turn now, Lindamire, to speak.


Lindamire. I would not have Women rallied, but that Men should have a
Complaisance for them, mixed with Respect, as is observable in the behavior of
polite Gentlemen. However, to be no less equitable than Lisidor, I would not be
more partial toward my Sex, than he has showed himself for the interests of
his Age. And I acknowledge I like worse that Women should undertake to rally
Men, for they expose themselves thereby to blunt Repartrees, and bring Men out
of the bands of Respect and Civility wherein they should always keep.


Philemon. And I for my part add, that we must not let Lindamire nor Lisidor
speak, or resolve to hold our tongues. I doubt not but Cleonice and Dorante are
very glad to see the manner after which they enter into our Conversations; but
Belise and I who have not the same interest, cannot be expected to like that
young Persons should show themselves more able than we.


Cleonice. He make no answer to a Person who will regale after several manners;
it were better to renew our discourse, that I seek still farther for Persons
whom it is not fit to rally. It is not to be doubted but the unfortunate are of
that number, and that we ought to show our compassion to their misfortune, far
from making it a Subject of Raillery.


Belise. There is also a kind of inhumanity at laughing at deformed Persons,
whether Lame or Crookt-back'd. This Man not having made himself, why should I
reproach him with his defects, as one might do a Carver for an ill proportioned
Statue?


Erastus. I find no less injustice in mocking of a Stranger, in that he speaks
not well our Language, or that his Bonnet pleases us less than a Hat.


Philemon. For my part I pardon one who rallies the first on some slight fault,
but I cannot suffer he should make a Jest of a considerable failing.

Lupo d'Uberti, according to the report of a modern Author, encreast his shame
instead of excusing his Cowardice, when he himself made a Jest, grounded on the
allusions of his Name. Having surrendered a Castle which he might defend, he
contented himself with saying, That Wolfs did not like to be shut up. But let us
see whether Dorante can cite many Persons whom it is permitted to rally.


Dorante. Pray then tell me, if you please, whether I may not rally People who
are full of themselves, who are conceited of their own merit; in a word, who
are ridiculous, or intolerable, through the extravagancy of their presumption.
Can you greatly blame me, if I enquire seriously of an hectoring Bully, whether
he has killed no body to day; and entreat him to tell me what Captain is to be
esteemed most after himself, Caesar, or Alexander? Shall I spare an infinite
number of People, who carry the Fortune of the World in their Hands, who
promise employs, dispose of places at Court, help Maids to Husbands, and
Batchelors to rich Wives; who can tell what-passes in all places; know what the
King whispered the other morning in the Queen's Ear; who talk only of Lords,
Dukes, and Earls, and look upon it as a great condescension to so much as cite
the name of a Knight or ordinary Gentleman? Will you spare those who step first
into all Fashions, and distinguish themselves by the magnificent Guadiness of
their Clothes, being but of ordinary Birth; and as mean Fortune? May I not seem
to admire the Points and Ribbands of one of these Gallants, and to make
exclamtions on every thing that I see? May I not affirm that his Cloth is too
good to have been made in Europe? That his Peruke is longer by a Fingers
breadth, than that of such a Lord's, and of a better color, and sits better on
him than that of the Count de -- does on him? Will you forbid me to tell him in
his ear, that there is a most rich Stuff made in such a Place, and that only
the King and his Royal Brother have any of it yet; and that I esteem my self
happy in having so luckily met with him before this Wear becomes common? Shall
I not laugh at those Persons who think they are full of Science, who approve of
nothing, who condemn every thing, who speak all Sentences, and explain
sometimes English into Greek to make it better understood; as he that
pronounced gravely these words; It is with reason that we call Man a little
World; that is to say, a Microcosm?

Will you not suffer me to deride a Covetous Miser, whom an insatiable
Greediness makes starve with Cold and Hunger in the midst of abundance? May I
not tell him, that his Money is no more his than mine, seeing he makes no more
use of it? Would you have me love an odious Person, who contributes to the
Public Misery; who keeps locked up a Treasure which would be useful in Trades,
and who takes a secret pleasure in seeing the poor suffer, that he may make the
better Market of what he keeps in his Barns?


Cleonice. I confess the gentlest Treatment which Covetous Men can expect is to
be rallied; and I think it is with these sort of People that one diverts ones
self most.


Philemon: You have, perhaps, heard a story of a Man of this stamp, who was
more covetous than Plauto's Euclio. It is said that he had a prodigious heap of
Corn, whence he pretended to draw a most considerable Profit; when of a sudden
the Rain which was much wanted came and destroyed his Hopes. He would needs
live no longer after this misfortune; he fitted a Rope to his Neck, and fastened
it to a Beam of his Chamber, and throwing himself in a Fury off the Chair he
stood on, by mishap he threw that down, which made such a Noise, that the
People underneath came running up and beheld this Spectacle, and a Neighbor
cut the Rope, to save, if possible, this Wretches Life. In fine, he was so
carefully plied with proper Remedies, that his Life was recovered against his
Will. Endeavors were also used to compose his Mind, and a certain Almanac was
produced that promised such Storms of Hail as would destroy all the Corn in the
Fields. But he fell again into disquiet, when he was told in what manner he was
preserved. Nothing would serve his turn but that his Rope should be paid for,
and knowing that his Neighbor laughed at his Folly, he got a Warrant for him
to bring him before a Justice to satisfy for the Damage he did him in cutting
his Rope.


Erastus. I have a Kinsman who has not hanged himself yet, although his
Covetousness is no wise inferior to your Usurer's. My Kinsman is young, he has
Birth, and Courage; and yet a base Humor blemishes whatever otherwise is
praise worthy in him: I persuaded him to serve in the Wars, and the better to
prevail with him, I set before him, that if he lived, he would be recompensed;
and that if he happened to die, he would find -- You believe, perhaps, I told him
that he would find Honor; not at all, but that he would find an end of his
Expenses, which a Man is obliged to make during the course of his Life. Our
Miser resolved upon it; but when he was to buy Horses, and provide the rest of
his Equipage, he soon renounced War; he told me he had rather retire to an
Estate he had near Paris, and that he could subsist on a hundred things, whence
Farmers draw a Profit, which he pretended not to let them have. To turn him
from this Design, I offered to make a Campaign with him at Sea, if he were
willing to go; and he needed no Horses nor Tents for this; and the Captains
Table being at his Service, he consented thereto, and we set out. It Is not
necessary to relate to you what our Naval Army did, I shall only tell you, that
at our Return, we found our selves at Provence in the beginning of Winter. We
would needs enjoy the fine time of that Country, and therefore made a Match of
walking out with Ladies. One day as we walked in a Path, separated from a
Meadow by a Ditch; we thought that this Separation was not great enough to
hinder us from leaping to the other side, and enjoying a nearer Conversation
with the Ladies. Our Miser, being accustomed to sparing, was so sparing of his
Strength, that he leaped into the Ditch. The Ladies burst out into a Fit of
Laughter, and I made what haste I could to assist my Kinsman. I stooped as low
as I could to draw him out thence, bidding him only give me his Hand: This Word
affrighted him more than his Fall; and looking earnestly upon me, What would
you, answered he immediately, have me to give you? At these words I observed
the Fault I had committed, and explaining my self in a manner more conformable
to his Inclination; Cousin, replied I, shall I give you my Hand? With all my
Heart, answered he, dear Cousin; and having offered his, I drew him out of the
Ditch, where I believe he would have still lain, had I not changed the
Expression.

The Company having laughed at Erastus his Relation, they prosecuted their
Discourse.


Dorante. You acknowledge then that one may deride a covetous Man, and I
suppose you will as easily grant, that we may jear those Persons who imagine
they are always sick, who are continually taking Medicines, and who yet sleep
well, and eat better.


Belise. I know a Woman who has a great deal of Wit, and talks well when there
is no mention of Sickness or Remedies. But she gives very good diversion, as
soon as the Conversation turns on matters relating to Health. I was saying
something to her yesterday about her Husband, who is a very honest Gentleman,
and after she had allowed his good qualities, she aded, that he had one bad
one, which she could not cure him of; which is, says she, that he is so
obstinate, that he will take no Remedies? But why should he take any, replied
I, if he be well? How, said she, do you think it enough to be in Health,
without taking Remedies for preventing Distempers which you may fear?

In fine, when this imaginary sick Body takes Medicines, she tastes it then,
and says there is too much Sena in one, too much Rhubarb in another; just as we
find fault with Broths being too hot or too cold. Her Physician in ordinary
died not long ago, and her Friends fixed another on her of a Humor so frank and
brisk, that instead of prescribing Remedies to her, he did her the Displeasure
to tell her, that she was in good Health. She fell into a Passion, and answered
smartly to this honest Doctor, That if he would order her nothing, she knew
where to find out others that would. The next morning she chose one, who
Regales her every morning with different Medicines to her Content. It Is not
above three or four days ago that I was at her House, and diverted my self with
hearing her talk of the several sort of Diseases she feared, and their
particular Remedies. Her Friends do never fail to send to know of her Health;
and a Lacquey of Amasia's being come on the same Errand, You may tell your
Lady, answered she, with a languishing Air, that I thank her for her
mindfulness of me, but that my Health is lost, there falling a cold humor on
my left shoulder which puts me to grievous pain. This Lacquey was no sooner
gone, but we saw the Princess Demarata's Gentleman enter; he made such another
sort of Compliment, but he had a different answer made him. I pray you, Sir,
said our fanciful Lady, to let the Princess know how sensibly I find my self
obliged to her, tell her that a grievous pain in my head has hindered me ever
since yesterday from taking any rest. As soon as ever this Gentleman was gone,
I looked on the pretended sick body with amazement. Is your distemper gotten up
into your head within this minute, said I to her briskly, or have you forgot
that it is not a Moment past that your illness was in the left Shoulder? Did I
say it was in my Shoulder, answered she? Nothing more true, replied I; it is no
matter, added our fancyful Lady, provided I said I was troubled with some great
illness, it is enough, I need say no more.


Dorante. When I should leave to the Stage the representing the humors of
these imaginary sick Persons, yet I may at lest rally Lovers, and affirm that
they have Capricio's that reach to extravagancy; but I shall make me too many
Enemies, should I declare my self against so universal a Passion. Of six
Persons who hear me, there would be four who would murmur against me. But as
for Gray Headed Lovers, I doubt not but you will deliver them up to me, and
allow 'em to be ridiculous, when they creep to a young Wench, who laughs at
them and their superannuated sweetnesses.


Philemon. What will you say of those young Hearts, who feel the first strokes
of Love, with so much the more pleasure, as not knowing it yet, they think
themselves not obliged to oppose it.


Dorante. Instead of rallying them for their Innocence, I would recount to them
little Stories which might open their Eyes.


Belise. You make me remember how you droll'd with Cleonice, when her Heart
inclined to prefer Erastus before all his Rivals, when she did not then know
the Sentiments she had for him.


Dorante. To pass by this discourse, Is there any thing more pleasant, than to
see the pains your Coquettes take to bring in new Gallants, and to pile Hearts
one upon another, just as Erastus's Kinsman would please himself in heaping up
Money? Have you not a thousand times observed the continual perplexity of one
of these Wantons, how to dress her self, and to keep all she thinks she has
acquired? She speaks to one, looks on the second, and smiles on the third. This
Theme is so large, that it is sufficient to deter a Man that has talked enough
already. I dare no more insist on the Railleries which one might make of
jealous Persons. I shall content my self in telling you, that these last Fools
are yet more ridiculous than others. They never fail to form imaginary Subject
of their frenzy, when they cannot find any real. They see nothing in the
Objects which they behold through their jealousy, but what may relate to this
passion, as we see all things yellow when we have the Jaundise. An Husband that
takes notice his Wife is careless of her self, thinks he is not loved by her;
and if she dresses, then it is to please others. I should never have done,
should I describe all these follies.

It Is sufficient to say, that a jealous Person poisons every thing, and that
instead of favorably interpreting things, for to set his Heart at ease, he
gives every thing such a construction as may increase his disquiet. Among his
misfortunes, I observe one which is peculiar to him; which is, that a jealous
Person is derided instead of being pitied; although all other wretched People
are usually commiserated.


Erastus. What stories might one not tell of a jealous Person?


Cleonice. And what may one not say of a Coquette?


Erastus. Madam, be ruled by me; let us not enter too far on such a nice
Subject; how do we know but we shall make the World laugh at us; Perhaps we
flatter our selves, and the World may know us better than we do our selves.


Cleonice. I Will not oppose my self against the common custom of the World;
People may laugh as long as they will with all my Heart, provided you continue
always as jealous as you have been hitherto; and I continue to be as great a
Coquette as you have found me since you knew me.


Philemon. Methinks we have spoken enough of Persons that one may rally, but I
know not whether we may not add something on the manner, after which civilized
Persons may rally one another.


Dorante. We have already said, that if they do it, it must be finely and
delicately, and to make the Conversation more agreeable. If you will, we will
say likewise, that indirect Railleries do please no less in an Entertainment,
than praises which are given indirectly, have a grace in a Panegyric.

Here Is a Tour which will not displease you, it alone makes an indirect
Raillery so much the more delicate, as it appears simple, natural, without
affectation, and without malignity.

A certain Person of Paris whom I shall call Lisicrates, had nothing but what
was obscure in his Birth and his Life. However, a Son he had, being gone into
Italy very young, had got a great Estate at Rome, and sent wherewithal to make
Plenty reign in his Family. The Father died, and a Nephew to whom he had left a
good Portion set up for a Spark. It came into one of my Friends Head to abase
his Pride, and to show him that his Family was still obscure enough not to be
known in his own Country. He found him in a Company where the Conversation
turned upon News. My Friend was asked what he knew, because he was a Person of
good Intelligence: He told them what was talked of at Varsailles, and passing
afterward to Foreign Countries, he reported with an Artificial Tone, That the
Letters from Rome inform us, that Lisicrates is dead in this Town.


Cleonice. Ah! Dorante, how this Satirical stroke pleases me! How smart is it
and ingenious! How it gives to understand, what your Friend would not explain!


Philemon. That which I like best, is, that the Nephew of Lisicrates could find
no just Cause to be angry. One might say that Dorante's Friend gave only a bare
Account of what he had read in a Letter.


Belise. I confess I should sooner give the name of a witty word, than that of
a Raillery, to what Dorante has now related to us.


Erastus. This Expression is short enough to be called a witty word, if it had
I know not what of sharpness in it; for a witty word should more touch to the
quick, and surprise, than Raillery.


Philemon. It Is true, that Raillery is more extensive, and that, according to
the Opinion of an Italian, its sharpness should rather resemble the bitings of
a Lamb, than those of a Dog.


Belise. There are Raillers which we may effectually compare to Dogs, they make
as great a a Noise as if they barked, they set upon People and bite them.


Erastus. The Cynical Philosophers were too biting in their Railleries, and in
their pretended witty words; but seeing we are on witty words, shall we do
amiss in examining wherein they differ from Raillery? I am jealous too that I
am mistaken in citing a pretended witty word, of Lupo d' Uberti for a Raillery.
In effect, the Allusion he made to a Wolf, and the few words which comprehend
his Thought, would make one take what he utters for a witty Saying, if any but
himself had spoke this Witticism.


Cleonice. Before we come to witty Sayings, shall we say nothing of gross
Raillery, having spoken enough of that which is delicate?


Belise. I am very glad you censure those Balderdash Fellows, who imagine they
are fine Wits, when they retail out some sorry Equivocation, or trifling
Allusion.


Cleonice. Besides this Raillery you speak of, is there not still a gross kind
of Raillery among the mean People, such as Porters and Carmen?


Belise. We must let them have their Jokes too, and if they be suitable to Men
of their Breeding and Conversation, no more can be expected from them.


Philemon. These People have a very diverting way with them, which is, to give
one another Blows with their Hands on their Shoulders, and these with them are
very diverting Strokes.


Erastus. They feel 'em so, I suppose.


Belise. I think Raillery should appear natural and without Constraint, and the
Air of the Countenance, the Tone of the Voice, and all the Countenance of him
who rallies, should be accommodated to the Subject of the Raillery.


Dorante. Except, if you please, when one pretends to raise Laughter, for then
we should appear cold and serious, the better to surprise by the Joke, which
must not be expected or foreseen. Sarasin was admirable at this, and Voiture
too. The Works of both show what an happy Genius they had in an agreeable and
ingenious manner.

But let us pass to witty Sayings, seeing you desire it, and the matter leads us
thereto.


ENTERTAINMENT XII. Of witity Sayings and Repartees.
Dorante. RAillery does not always include witty words; we may utter 'em (if we
can) in all occasions, and on all sorts of Subjects; but they being more
commonly used in Satyrs than in Panegyricks, let us begin with those which we
may regard as Railleries. They should be close, sharp, and lively, and in some
sort like Epigrams. So that all those pretended witty Sayings which are long,
and include a great Morality, are rather Maxims and Sentences, than witty
words; I am sure they relish not well with Cleonice.


Cleonice. You may answer for me. You know the aversion I have to hear cited
with a grave tone, a Sentence or a Proverb. I leave these Expressions to old
grave Citizens, or to some Doctors who are overrun with an excess of Greek and
Latin. I have over observed, that Courtiers and fine Wits, who understand the
World, speak with less swelling, and in a more easy manner.


Dorante. You will not then be over fond of a Moral Saying of Charles the 5th.
which the Spaniards take for very Witty. This Emperor said, That the
Counselors of State were the Princes Spectacles, but that those Princes were
very unhappy that needed them.


Erastus. I not only prefer an Answer of Lewis XII. before this Sentence, but I
acknowledge I am charmed with it, I find a more exact Sense in it than in
Charles the 5th's Maxim, and I admire the generosity of its Morality. These
Ladies without doubt know, that Lewis XII. was a Branch of the House of
Orleans, which had had bloody Bickerings with that of Burgundy; and perhaps
they know already what I am going to say. When Lewis XII. was on the Throne,
one of his Courtiers joyfully told him, Sir, you have now the Power to be
revenged of your Enemies. No, no, answered this generous Prince, it is not for
a King of France to remember the Injuries offered to a Duke of Orleans.


Cleonice. I like better these Noble Sayings, than those of the Ancients, which
I have heard so greatly commended. And truly many of 'em do not over-please me,
I cannot tell whether it be my fault or not.


Dorante. However, we must do justice to the great Men among the Ancients. If
their fine Sayings appear to us flat, it is because we enter not into those
Interests which made them speak them. They are no more enlivened by the Persons
who uttered them. They may have lost some of their Beauty by the Translation,
which has made you understand them, and they are found void either of the
allusions, or of favorable conjunctures which upheld them.

However, Madam, the Circumstances which I now remarked, hinder not, but that
there remains from the Ancients, an infinite number of great Sayings, with
which you may be satisfied. But very likely you have not been much delighted
with the Language of Amiot, when you have read the Tracts of Plutarch, called,
The Notable Sayings of Princes, Captains, etc.


Philemon. I fancy this famous Author chose rather to relate the notable
Sayings of the Lacedaemonians than other Greeks, because they spoke at Sparta in
a more concise manner, and that those kind of expressions do more properly
belong to what we call witty Sayings.


Erastus. And therefore the learned give too strict and short ways of speaking
the name of Laconiestile. These Ladies will pardon me, I hope, for using this
Word Laconie, although it only means Lacedemonian.


Belise. My ignorance reaches farther, and I confess I know not what means the
Word Style, although I use it every day, and hear other People talk of it too.
Dorante should tell me what this Word does strictly signify:


Dorante. You know perhaps, that Ink and Paper are of modern Invention. The
Ancients made use only of Tables of Wax, or the Bark of Trees, and thereon
engraved with a Pencil, which they called Style, as we write with a Pen on
Paper. So that by a figurative way of speaking, they said a Fine Style, as we
say a Fine Pen, when we speak of the Writings of a good Author.


Belise. I am very glad to be informed of a Word which is of so common use.
Cleonice may now talk of her Lacedaemonians as long as she pleases.


Cleonice. I dare declare to you, that as to what regards this Conversation,
the Lacedaemonians are not so much mine as you think for. I am not so much
pleased with their notable Sayings as their notable Actions. However, I
acknowledge I have remarked an Answer which is of good relish to me, though I
cannot tell how you will like it.

A Man of Sparta, being at Table at the same time with a Persian, fell upon a
discourse of War, which was likely to be between the two Nations. The Persian,
proud of being under the Government of a Monarch who was called the Great King,
and who held a vast Empire, would fright the Greek by giving him to understand
the Power of his Master. We shall have an Army so numerous, said he, that the
Arrows which we shall draw will darken the Sun. The Lacedemonian taking nimbly
his turn to speak, without any Commotion; So much the better, said he, for then
we shall fight in the Shade.


Erastus. That which a Captain of this warlike Nation, answered, appears to me
worth relating; The Lacedaemonians, says he, never ask whether the Enemy be
numerous, but in what place they be.


Belise. I would willingly know wherein consists the Beauty of notable Sayings?


Philemon. There needs only an Equivocation to make a jocose saying.


Belise. And oftener to make a pitiful quibble.

About two Months past I was extremely surprised with one of these Quodlibets.
I was in the Country, where some of the Women of the Neighberhood came to see
me. There was a young one who bore away the Bell for Wit, she spoke much, and
laughed yet more, and was mightily stored with Quibbles.


Cleonice. It Is usual with these Quiblers to say, that a Scrivener is an
obliging Man, by reason of the many Obligations he makes.


Dorante. There was heretofore at Court a Man who past for a pleasant
Companion, but I question whether his fancy would be so much approved of by the
Court as it was by the City. You may judge of him by his Quibbles. An Abbot,
who had perhaps more Ambition than Merit, would needs pretend to be made a
Cardinal. He went to Rome for this purpose, but having taken wrong measures, he
returned little satisfied with his Voyage. At his Arrival he went to make his
Court, and appearing indisposed with a great Rhume, he was asked whence
proceeded this indisposition? Do not you know, answered our witty Gentleman,
that be came from Rome without an Hat?


Erastus. I have heard you tell another story of the same Courtier. He came
from the Camp, which held a Town besieged, and which we did not take: This rare
Wit was sent to the King to give him an account of the condition of the Place
and Army; so that all the Court was very earnest in demanding News of him. What
say you of the Siege? say they. That she is very well, and begins to rise,
answered he.


Philemon. I know that Erastus has an Aversion to Quibbles, and that the other
day having quietly heard Timocrates utter many of them, he seemed at last to be
angry at him for them. Now for my part, I am for letting them pass, and think
my self obliged in some sort, to those Persons who endeavor to divert me,
although they prove not always fortunate in their undertaking. But I could
never endure in History, that great Men should make use of an Equivocation to
break their Word. Can we execuse that Captain, who by a Truce grants, that no
acts of Hostility shall be exercised for eight days, and immediately after
shall send out Parties every night to ravage the Enemies Country?


Cleonice. He may take this for a Warlike Stratagem, yet all the World will
condemn his breach of Faith. We may call things how we will, but that will not
hinder us from being infamous, if we under pretense of a Treaty, surprise our
Enemies. I much blame your Captain, but do more detest the cruel prefidiousness
of a Turk toward a Venetian. The latter of these surrendered himself, and the
Capitulation bore, That his Head should be safe from all mischief. His Enemy
had him no sooner in his power, but he made him be sawed asunder in the midst
of his Body. In the excess of his pain, the Christian invoked Heavens Vengeance
against so cruel a treachery. And the Infidel answered him, with a malicious
smile, that he had no reason to complain, seeing his Head was not touched.


Philemon. Have you obsev'd one thing which I now remark? which is, That
designing only to examine what may please in Conversation, we are gotten
insensibly to Examples, wherein there are more Moral strokes than Maxims which
respect an Entertainment. May we not be told that we vary from our Subject, and
that we should retrench these digressions?


Dorante. I confess that a melancholy University Logick-chopper might form a
Quarrel hereupon, and charge us home with our digressions, requiring a
Conversation dry, servile, and tiresom. But as to us who have a different
relish, we will allow our selves this liberty; and when any History or Tale
may serve to recreate the austerity of Precepts, or make us more exact and
cautious, we will gladly entertain it. Thus being instructed, if we are to make
a Truce for eight days, we will take such measures as not to be deceived, we
will express that it shall be for eight natural days of twenty four hours,
wherein the nights shall be comprehended. But instead of troubling our selves
with justifying our citations, it is enough to allege that they please us; and
if Philemon has any scruple hereupon, let him send it to some musty Pedant, and
let him be pleased with us as heretofore. I am so sure that he will be so, that
I will reassume the discourse where it was broke off.

Here Is an equivocal Word which heretofore surprised the whole World; or
rather, here is a subtlety of extraordinary consequence. You know, that of the
Scipio's there were two that bore the name of Affrican; that the first
vanquished Hannibal, and that the other destroyed Carthage. This last, the
better to subdue Enemies who were so terrible to the Romans, made use of an
Equivocation, or rather of a distinction which you will not find worthy of so
great a Man. The Carthaginians, finding themselves too weak to hold out long,
offered to capitulate and surrender their Town; and Scipio promised them there
should be no hurt done to their City. But scarce was he Master of it, but he
caused the Fortificaons of it to be destroyed. The Carthaginians cried out,
that the Faith of the Treaty was violated: But for all that, Scipio failed not
to level their Walls and Towers.

He endeavored afterward to justify himself, and show that he had not broke
his Word. He represented to the Carthanigians, that the Romans did not confound
the names of Town, and City. That the Body of the Citizens formed the City, and
that the Walls and other Edifices composed the Town. That he should have been
displeased had the Inhabitants been ill treated; but more displeased, had he
left the Walls and Fortifications entire, which could be of no use, but only to
raise a Jealousy in the Roman People.


Erastus. I like not these Artifices to deceive People, and can yet less allow
it in great People. But as for the distinction you now speak of, I think it has
been always used, and will be still so.

The Athenians, fearing to be besieged, and subjected by the Persians,
consulted the Oracle on the Revolutions they were to take. It was answered,
That the City must depart the Town, and save it self by wooden Walls. So that
it was interpreted, that the Citizens should abandon a Town, which was not
strong enough to secure them; and that they should get on board their Ships, to
fly from the Danger wherewith they were threatened. There is no body in this
Room, but has heard talk of Paris in this double Sense. When we mean the Town,
we say that Paris is every day embelished; and when we speak of the
Inhabitants, the Body of which makes what the Ancients called City; we say,
That all Paris is walking in the Park; That all Paris is gone into the Country
in the beginning of Autumn.


Philemon. A Man may speak a witty thing in making an Allusion; as when we sort
with Words which refer to one another, when they are repeated, or the Sense of
them varied.

When the Marshal de la Meilleraie was Grand Master of the Ordnance, there were
several Latin words engraven on the Cannon, which we may explain in these Terms.

Here Is the Key, when the Door is refused.


Belise. I like this Allusion, and I find it grounded on a double Refusal which
may be made.


Cleonice. And I take a Cannon to be a terrible Key.

It Is true, according to Rablais, that there is nothing more aperitive.


Philemon. Here Is a sporting with Words of another nature. It Is said that a
Soldier having not been orderly paid, had the Insolence to complain, in this
manner to one of our Kings: Sir, three words; Money, or Discharge. The Prince,
who was merciful, contented himself in returning this Answer: Soldier, four:
Neither one nor other.


Erastus. Shall we say nothing of Repartees, when Anacharsis furnishes us with
so good an Example? This famous Philosopher was a Scythian; and a Greek, who
had no other Merit but that of being born in Greece, looking on him with Envy,
I acknowledge, said he to him, that the World has some Esteem for thee; but it
must be granted, that there is nothing more barbarous than thy Nation: Very
well, said he; Then I am the Honor of my Countey, and thou the Shame of thine.


Cleonice. A Marquess who has ruined his Family, had the other day a bickering
with one of his Neighbors, who is a thriving Person, and has lately bought a
considerable Office. Is it for you, said the Marquess, to contend with me, who
begin your Family? I begin mine, said he, but you end yours.


Erastus. This brings to my mind two Answers which you will find are very
ingenious; the first is of Phyrrus King of the Epirots, who being demanded
which was the best Player on the Flute, Python or Cephisus? Polipercon is the
greatest Captain, answered he; giving to understand that he was to judge of Men
of War.

The other answer is of Count Maurice of Nassau. A Lady entreated him to tell
her who was the first Captain of the Age? Count Maurice was unwilling to speak
his mind on so nice a point; his Modesty did not permit him to name himself,
and his Merit would not permit him to part with an Honor, of which he was
worthy; so that seeing himself straightened, Madam, answered he at length, The
Marquess of Spinola is the Second.


Philemon. I like this turn, and I think this second Answer is more ingenious
than that of Phyrrus; the words of this Prince are one of these notable
Sayings, which has more Morality than Sharpness of Wit, as well as that we have
related of Charles the 5th. and Lewis the 12th.

I believe our discourse would last a great while on this Subject, if we would
relate whatever comes into our minds hereupon. It Is better to take Coach, and
go to the new Opera, for I have taken places.

Scarcely were orders given to make ready the Horses, when Erastus reassumed
the discourse in these terms.


Erastus. It must be acknowledged that Philemon has thought of a very agreeable
thing. Every thing is new in the death of Achilles, and I do not question but
there will be great croudings to see it the first time of acting. But whilst
things are getting in a readiness, would it not be better to take up our
discourse again on witty Sayings and remarkable Answers? And besides, do we not
see that therein is to be found a continual variety, which cannot but please?


Dorante. I am so much of your mind, that I Will tell you of an answer worthy of
Alexander. Darius asked a Peace of him, and offered him half of Asia, together
with Ten Thousand Talents. Parmenio charmed with such an advantageous offer,
Sir, said he to his Master, I protest, were I Alexander, I would gladly accept
of these offers: And I too, if I were Parmenio, answered he.


Cleonice. How sparkish are these Words, and how worthy of Alexander, of a
Conqueror that will not terminate his ambition, but by the compass of the
whole earth?


Belise. I shall admire as long as I live the ingenious answer which the Queen
of Siracuse, Gelon's Wife, made. This Prince had a Breath strong enough to
incommode those that came near him, his Favorite thought himself obliged to
give him notice of it; and this Prince, angry that the Queen had never spoke to
him of it, complained to her very much about it. How, (answered she, with a
Surprise, with which I am extremely taken) is it not the same with all other
Men?


Cleonice. This simplicity gives a great Opinion of the Virtue of this Princess.


Philemon. But before we end this discourse, should we not have some Modern
Instances? I profess I prefer 'em before the Ancients; and it is certain every
Body is more concerned in them. Here Is one then with which our Ladies perhaps
will not be too much satisfied.

It Is not above two or three years past, since a gallant Man, whom we all know,
and whom I shall call Themistus, became --


Belise. Ah! Philemon, I shall never forgive you this beginning of your Recital.


Philemon. I have committed a great fault then in few words, seeing there is no
hopes of pardon for me. But may I be so bold to ask wherein I am so culpable?


Belise. Did not you say that you preferred the Modern Examples before the
Ancient?


Philemon. I say so still.


Belise. And have you not added the reason, which is, that we are nearer
concerned in what touches the Persons of our acquaintance, than in things which
respect only Persons who have been dead several Ages?


Philemon. Most certainly.


Belise. Why then do you give a fantastical name to a Man whom we know? Are you
afraid we should hearken too attentively; or that we should take too great a
part in the adventure which you are minded to relate?


Philemon. You say well, that I should not have this fear, when I should have
named the Man whom you know. My discourse would not be so touching, as to
produce so good an effect; but to speak freely to you, I was apprehensive lest
I should raise up two Enemies against my Friend. I believed that Cleonice and
you would not fail to insult over him, in respect of an opinion he is
prejudiced with, and which I am assured you will both of you condemn before the
World.


Belise. How! before the World! what will you increase our faults, by accusing
us of dissimulation? What opinion then is this of your Friend's, let us know it?


Philemon. You shall know it, if you will let me go on without interruption.


Belise. Say what you please, I shall not so greatly heed you, as to raise any
more questions.


Cleonice. Am I no body? Am not I a Woman? May I not have a little curiosity,
though Philemon blame me for it?


Philemon. To repair the fault I have committed, I Will lay aside the story I was
going to tell you.


Cleonice. Not so, if you please, for that will be worse; go on with it, pray.


Philemon. I Will tell you then, to satisfy you, that Themistus was carried into
the company of a young Lady, whose sight struck him with great admiration.
Celimene, let me so call her if you please, had but a very mean Fortune, with
an extraordinary Beauty, so that Themistus, who had immense Riches, made
serious reflections on this sudden and violent engagement. He could take no
rest, He found himself in a perpetual agitation, and feared above all, lest his
passion, which he felt so violent in its beginning, would lead him in fine, to
the satisfying his desires, to the prejudice of his Fortune.

He resolved to banish from his Soul so dangerous a tenderness, he opposed it
all he could; and finding he could not immediately overcome it, he called in a
sentiment of Glory to the Assistance of his Reason. He had the strength to part
far from what he loved, and to go a Volunteer into the Army; but he returned
thence more amorous than he went. He visited his Mistress with greater joy, and
a stronger desire; then blaming himself for his weakness, he made a second
effort, and undertook a second Voyage, which was into Italy. He would try
whether the divertisements would appease those inquietudes which the perils and
fatigues could not allay, but the Carnaval of Venice was as little conducive to
that purpose, as the Siege of Buda. Our Themistus appeared to me at his return
more ardent and passionate than ever. My dear Philemon, said he, I lead a
wretched life, I cannot forget Celimene, I have her always in my thoughts and I
see her continually before my eyes with all her Charms. In fine, added he, and
this was his saying, In short I must marry her, that I may cease thus to love
her. He married her in effect, and fifteen days of Marriage changed his violent
and tumultuous Love, into a sweet and delightful Friendship.


Erastus. I profess I like the saying well, and let the Ladies take it how they
please.


Cleonice. We cannot do better than follow a Maxim which you approve.


Belise. Your Friend was not so easily drawn into Marriage as my Uncle, who is
married again lately. His Children made great complaints to him on the
resolution he had taken of giving them a Mother-in-Law: They besought him to
tell them wherein they had been so unhappy as to displease him, and entreated
him to let them know what it was that offended him? I am so pleased with you,
answered he, that I only marry again to have other Children like you.


Cleonice. I am much mistaken if your Cousins took this for a good saying.


Dorante. You know that the illustrious Person who has given such fine
Conversations to the Public, yet was more pleased in doing a good Office, than
in making a fine Book; so that you will not be surprised, if she used her most
earnest endeavors in begging an employ for a young Gentleman who had been
recommended to her. The thing depended on a great Lord who was one of her
Friends, and to whom she said a thousand good things of the Person whose
interests she prosecuted. The great Lord examined the Person, he found him very
fit, and that he wanted not sense; but he answered, he seemed to young for the
business he was recommended. How, Sir, answered our generous Friend, will you
reproach him with a fault, which we every day correct but too much against our
wills?

At the same instant as Dorante had said this, Word was brought that all was
ready; the Company immediately arose, and set out to go to the new Opera. They
saw it with a great deal of satisfaction; but the application which Dorante had
to it, hindered him not from examining more than once Lisidor's Countenance.

He was desirous to observe the effect which a splendid sight might produce in
the mind of a young Man who had never seen the like. Cleonice consulted
Lindamire's eyes for the same reason, and took notice that she and Lisidor
concealed one part of their surprise. That they sometimes spoke, that they
looked on the People of Quality which were in the Boxes; in a Word, that they
did not like those great wonderers, whose ignorance is the only cause of their
astonishment.

As soon as ever the Curtain was let down before the Theater, Cleonice and
Belise turned themselves toward Dorante, and asked him how he liked what he
had heard and seen?


Dorante. I dare not give you my opinion of an Opera which I have but once
seen. It Is true I shall soon have an opportunity to satisfy your curiosity.
Philemon has given the first sight of this Opera to Cleonice, Lisidor shall
give the second to Lindamire; and perhaps he will admit us to bear him company.


Cleonice. Having said enough about this Opera, I would willingly have Dorante
tell us in general, whether one may reprehend any one before People; and after
what manner we may speak of a work that is criticis'd in a Company?


Dorante. I am of opinion that we ought to be very reserved in these occasions,
but seeing you will have the Conversation turn on this Subject, instead of
excusing my self, I will be the first to tell you my opinion of it.


ENTERTAINMENT XIII. Whether it be fit to reprehend any one in Conversation.
Dorante. THere are every day to be seen in Companies so many Persons who
commit faults, in respect of Language, or good manners, that it will be an
endless work for any Man to set about correcting them. Were it not better for
Men to be easy in Conversation, to speak, and to let others do so too, than to
be perpetual Dictators, to quarrel with People about Words, to top every Body,
and strive only to run all others down? I should be greatly troubled, should
Lisidor (he will let me cite him) fall in any essential point in Conversation;
and my Remedy would be to take up the discourse, to enter on the opinion which
he should be of, or to mention the expression which he should have used; yet I
would not direct my discourse to him, lest I put him in confusion, and make a
Fault observable, which perhaps one part of the Company took no notice of.


Cleonice. If one of your Friends, talking in Company, should use a manner of
speaking little exact, or contrary to Custum, would you rather choose to leave
him in his error, than make him know it?


Belise. For my part I believe it were fit to reprehend him.


Dorante. You might do it, yet with great Caution and Moderation. If the
Friend, you suppose, had a mind to buy Horses, and that he said, I desired
Erastus who knows Horses -- I would not interrupt him, and demand pertly of
him, What Horses does he know, Coach-Horses? On the contrary, I would make him
note his Fault in saying thus, You cannot do better than to address your self
to Erastus, no body understands Horses better than he does.

Should any one interrupt me unseasonably, and with little Civility, in these
Terms; What is that you say there, I do not know what you mean, and yet I may
say I understand English well enough?

I do not speak as I should do then, would I answer him, without showing him
any Discomposure; or I would repeat again the same thing more at large, and in
a clearer manner. I do not doubt but this Moderation would produce two good
Effects. It would gain me Esteem, and might soften the sharp Humor of the
Person who controlled me.


Erastus. But should you have a Work given you to examine, would not you freely
speak your opinion of it?


Dorante. You will not be against my making a distinction on what you demand.
Should I be thought able to give good advice, and a Manuscript were put into my
hand before it went to the Press, I would speak ingenuously what I thought of
it; and should think my self unworthy the confidence put in me, did I deal in
another manner.

Thus you see, I am not always so complaisant as you have taken me to be. I
will tell you too moreover, that it is not long since that an Author found me
as untractable in matter of Sonnets, as Moliere's Misanthropos. He showed me
one full of Antitheses, wherein a Lover complained of the death of his
Mistress; I could not bear with all his juglings, and impatiently interrupting
the Reader; How, Sir, said I to him, will you have this Man amuse himself in
sporting with Words, instead of bewailing his misfortune? This is so beside the
subject, that I doubt I shall not have patience enough to hear it out to the
end.


Erastus. Let me tell you a story of a young Author, who came from a little
Town of Guienne to Paris, for the Printing a Piece for which he thought to gain
the admiration of the Universe. One of his Friends advised him to address
himself to some ingenious Man, and consult him before he exposed his Book to be
criticis^d by the Public. This Country Author would by no means yield to this
at first, thinking this advice fruitless for a Poem which had been approved in
his Country, but at length he permitted himself to be led to Chapelain,
apparently to acquire esteem for it, rather than to admit of corrections. He
told him he came to show him an Epic Poem he had made at home, and that he
would gladly hear so great a Master's opinion on his Work. To speak freely,
answered Chapelain, you are to be commended for having undertaken so difficult
a Work at your Age, and in a Country so far from all assistance, which one
might have at Paris. Sir, replied the Author, I will dedicate this Poem to the
Marshall d'Albret. You cannot make a better choice, replied the complaisant
Chapelain, the Marshall is a Man of Wit, and he is Governor of your Province.
You will be near a Mecenas, who will relish your Writings, and give you his
protection. After these words the Manuscript was opened, and the young Wit read
about 50 or 60 Verses. This beginning was wide, and had no coherence with the
Subject, so that Chapelain telling him, I see, Sir, you have thought fit to
treat of things at first in general, to descend afterward into particulars
which more closely relates to your Subject. Ah! Sir, cried the young Man, what
satisfaction there is in consulting a Person like you, you know already the
scope of my Poem, as well as if I had read it all to you.

No sooner was this said, but People came in, the Lecture broke off, and our
Author went out. He was so well pleased with the Visit he made, that turning
himself toward him that had introduced him, You must acknowledge, said he to
him briskly, that no first Book had so great success: I do not see how,
answered his Friend, you can say that a Poem has succeeded before it comes
abroad into the World; unless you do as the Marquess Moliere speaks of, who
liked the Play before the Candles were lighted. To speak sincerely, Monsieur
Chapelain has too great Indulgence; and if you will be ruled by me, we will
consult some one that has less.

They went to the Abbot d' Aubignac, and after the accustomed Civilities were
past, the Young Man told him that he had made an Epic Poem. So much the worse,
replied the Abbot briskly, for I am sure you know not what an Epic Poem is,
seeing that at your Age you set about a thing which the most consummate Learned
Men dare not undertake. This Boldness shows me better than your Accent from
what Country you come. But, Sir, replied the Author, with Astonishment
sufficient, I composed this Work only to dedicate it to the Marshal d' Albret.
You could not worse address your self, replied the Abbot. Do not you know that
the Marshal d' Albret is one of the finest Wits we have? That he loves to
rally, and that he will laugh at you and your Poem? He being Governor of our
Province -- For this very reason, replied impatiently the Abbot, you ought not
to lay your self open to him, and expose your self to be the Laughing Stock of
your Country. But, Sir, replied again the young Man, you speak of Faults,
without having seen any; hearken, if you please, and you may better judge
afterward: He took then immediately a Sheet, and read it, without allowing the
Abbot so much time as to interrupt him. But before he came to the Sixth Verse,
the Abbot d' Aubignac being tired with hearing it, said with some sharpness to
him, I would gladly know, Sir, says he, whether this be the beginning of a Work
of Piety, or of a Profane Piece, of an History or Fable? But, Sir, a little
more Patience, till I -- Pray tell me not of Patience, answered the Abbot,
Virgil, who perhaps knew as well as you the Rules of an Epic Poem, says
immediately that he sings the great Actions of that Hero who came first from
the Trojan Shores into Italy.

The young Author, being as it were Thunderstruck, goes to Chapelain to
comfort himself. Sir, said he to him, I am lately come from the most
intolerable Critic in the World, who is the Abbot d' Aubignac, who would not
so much as suffer me to read seven or eight Verses of my Work. He told me my
Beginning was not worth a Straw, and that it had no Relation to the Subject. I
believe, answered Chapelain, that Monsieur the Abbot d' Aubignac is not wholly
in the wrong; but however, the Business is not past Remedy, you can make
another Beginning, and keep that of your Poem for the first Work you shall make.


Cleonice. I like this Management of Beginnings, and I find no less agreeable
this Opposition of an excessive Complaisance, and a Severity that proceeds to
Extremity.


Philemon. I did not believe Chapelain of this Humor, and I have had a very
different Account of it, from that which Erastus gives us. I was told that the
deceased Count de Fiesque, coming from the Play, met Chapelain, and told him he
had been greatly diverted with the Sight of a Play he named him. Is it
possible, Sir, answered him Chapelain, that so great a Man as you, and who has
so great Wit, can behold with Pleasure a Comedy wherein the Characters are not
upheld, wherein the Actors come and speak, without knowing why, nor how; and,
in fine, wherein there is not the Observation of the least Rule? The Count was
for reviewing the same piece with a greater Application. He considered better
of it, and went afterward to Chapelain, Pray, says he to him, restore me my
Ignorance, I was greatly diverted with the Play before, but now I take no
Delight in it.


Dorante. It is certain, that for our Satisfaction, it is necessary we should
behold sometimes the Plays on the Theater with Indulgence. Can a Man divert
himself with Harlequius's Emperor of the Moon, if in entering he leaves not his
sound Sense and Rules at the Door?


Philemon. Hereunto we may add, as I have already said, that it is dangerous
being too complaisant, or too severe in the Advices one gives. The Abbot d'
Aubignac was perhaps the Occasion on of the young Man's leaving Paris and his
Studies; and on the other Hand, Chapelain might induce him to apply himself
thereto with too great Negligence, and without Success.

They enlarged themselves no farther on this Subject, and the Company judged it
late enough to depart. Erastus, Philemon, Cleonice, Belise, and Lindamire went
out, and returned home.

A small time after Dorante and Lisidor supt, and still entertained themselves
on the Care which was to be observed in reprehending and criticizing in Company.


Dorante. I believe a Man should be less hasty to answer, when his Advice is
asked in Relation to Manners, and the ordering of ones Life. Besides the
Presumption we show, when we give over hastily these kind of Advices, it seems
as if we were sure of the Event, and that we may be justly responsible, when
the Success answers not Expectation. So that we must let others speak,
especially if they have more Experience than we, and let us not give in our
Opinions before we are asked more than once. If we be obliged to answer, let it
not be too affirmatively, let us modestly utter the Reasons which uphold our
Opinion, and show we not in our Countenances, nor Discourses, an Air of
Confidence, which may make us appear full of our selves. I know you are not of
an Age to be consulted, and there is little Likelihood that old Men will need
your Advice, but young Persons may require it, and others too hereafter.
Moreover I do not keep strictly to the giving you precisely the Precepts
suitable to you; it will do you no Hurt to know others, to the end that minding
the Persons who observe them, you will come the better to know the World. I
doubt not but you are satisfied with the Company you have seen, they are
extraordinarily well humored and ingenious. You have taken notice how free
they are, and remote from all constraint and affectation; you have seen nothing
but what is easy, natural, and ingenious in what they say; it is this Air you
must imitate, if you will please in Conversation.


Lisidor. I would willingly know wherein it consists; methinks it is very
apparent, yet it is hard to say precisely what it is.


Dorante. You have reason, and I know not whether I can satisfy your Curiosity.


ENTERTAINMENT XIV. Of the Air which is fit we should have in Conversation.
Dorante. BUT instead of entering on a precise definition of a Word, let us
rather examine what may regard Conversation in general. Your principal design
is to please in the Conversation of the World, let us therefore see what may
contribute to this Design.

It is a great advantage to have a gallant Air, but it is an advantage which a
Man can acquire but imperfectly by his endeavors. Nature must begin it in us,
and we must afterwars cultivate these favorable dispositions. We may pollish
them, and perfect them by frequenting Persons who have already this Air, if we
imitate them in their Conversation, and manner of behavior.


Lisidor. Is it not sufficient to please in Conversation, that we are able by
our good Mien to give weight and relish to our Words?


Dorante. A good Mien alone does not always produce this good effect; we see
every day Country People, who are well shaped and of a good aspect, and yet are
in no wise agreeable company. The Air I speak of, is the Soul of a good Mien;
without this Air, it is very difficult to please; it is this gallant and polite
Air, which renders every thing pleasing. It Is seen on the Countenance, in a
Discourse, Clothes, at Table, Household-stuff, Equipage, and even in Buildings.
Most young People strive to out do one another in Gallantry, but they are less
gallant than they think for. They do not moderate themselves enough, and their
heat makes 'em carry things too far. The air of Politeness we speak of requires
sweetness, and young People have I know not what that is brisk, which does not
agree with the Character of a gallant Man. You have observed that they are
commonly too hasty in taking up what is newest in Modes, and that they seldom
fail of going beyond the bounds which a gallant Man should prescribe. Instead
of a well contrived suit, they are for laying on the heavyest Lace or
Embroidery they can get. If they give a Treat, they proceed to excess, and for
their Equipage they are not contented with what is neat and fit, they add more
Splendor than their Quality or Estate requires. They think of nothing but
distinguishing themselves hereby, far from regulating their expense by their
Revenue.

Neither must a Man; to-render himself agreeable in Conversation, utter only
subtle things, or out of the common Road. It is not necessary to show a great
stock of Learning, and a vast deal of Wit. It is sufficient to speak with an
easy air, and that nothing savours of affectation and constraint, as I have
already recommended to you more than once. I was very glad that you saw so soon
Cleonice, Belise and Lindamire. The two first have a very ingenious manner,
which may contribute to make you get the same air and the same tour. You will
never part from them without profitting either in your Understanding or Will.

You will meet with few Women whose Conversation is more agreeable; you may get
by them such an air, as the reading of the best Authors, nor the most learned
Conferences will never afford you. I likewise confess that I am not displeased
at your seeing of Lindamire; it is natural for you to wish to please her, and
it cannot be, having this design, but that you must endeavor to pollish your
mind, to make your humor sweet and insinuating, in a word, to acquire the
qualities which may gain the esteem of Ladies. Moreover, the desire which one
may have to touch the Heart of a fine Woman who has Quality and Merit, may
serve as a preservative against a disorder wherein Persons of your Age do too
often fall. Not that I pretend you should bound your visits to Cleonice, and
that being so young you should begin to sigh in form for Lindamire. When you
have made two or three Campaigns, I will ask your sentiments hereupon, and I
will tell you mine. However, I must needs acknowledge to you, that I should
rather see you fixed on Lindamire, than any other Person I know; but however I
would not have this respect for her proceed so far as to hinder you from seeing
other companies, and to make thence your observations of different humors.
However I do not mean you should go from House to House, to flatter and make
Courtship to Ladies who will not be displeased with it. A Man that makes this
his business, will be so far from being respected as a gallant Person, that he
will be accounted no better than an idle Fop.

Now as to such directions as concern young Men in general. Have you not
observed they fall often into defects contrary to the manners of polite Men?
They laugh every moment so loudly, that their laughter is in no sort like the
subtle smiles observable in the Conversation of polite Persons. They disengage
Friends to draw them into other Companies, and instead of living respectfully
with Women, they imagine it the best breeding to use 'em familiarly. That which
I find strangest, is, that they sometimes proceed to swearing, like the
rascally mean People.

And yet it is not difficult to avoid these faults, and I wish you at no
greater trouble in attaining the fine Air we spoke of. You have all the
dispositions which can be desired, and I hope you will cultivate them with
success.


Lisidor. I have been an hundred times surpised to hear say, that Melicrates,
whom you know, is a polite Person, yet we all agree in our Country, that he is
far from what we call politeness.


Dorante. There is much difference between a Man of great Air, and a Man that
has the Air great; and I add, that we must no more confound a gallant Man, with
a Man gallant. The first has this Air gallant, so much talked of in France, and
which answers in some sort to the Urbanity of the Ancient Romans; the other may
without politeness be a Woman's Gallant, or have an inclination to Gallantry in
general. An old Man may please by the quality of Gallant Man, but he would be
ridiculous if he made Gallantries in his old days.


Lisidor. I suppose that when we say that such a Man has a good Air, we praise
him less, than if we attribute to him the Air great, or the Air Gallant.


Dorante. You need not doubt of it, and it is likewise certain, that the good
Air agrees differently to the two Sexes, to all ages, and all professions. A
Sword Man, has commonly an open and fierce Air, a Magistrate is grave; a Woman
should have sweetness and modesty, but the Air great is the most rare; and
sometimes among several Princes, we see few of 'em, whose Mien does denote the
Elevation of his Rank. This is an advantage which we admire in the Person of
the great Monarch, to whom you shall be presented, when I shall find you used
to Conversation, and the Manners of the Men of the World. I will carry you
first to several Persons of the Court, to the end that going afterward to
Versailles, you appear there the less surprised, and that you may find Persons
to whom you may speak: It is there, more than in any Place of the World, that
you will meet with Persons of all Airs which we have discoursed of. It is here
that you will find more politeness and less Affectation, than in any Court in
the World. Most here have the Air gallant, and there is scarcely any one but has
a certain easy Air, which makes all the agreeableness in Conversation.


Lisidor. I profess I should have confounded this Agreeableness you speak of
with the Air Gallant.


Dorante. It Is true, they are like enough to one another, and they both please
almost in the same manner. Yet what we call agreeableness is more general, it
suits with more things, it insinuates it self more sweetly, it reaches to the
Heart and touches it. The Air Gallant takes another course, it seizes on the
Fancy, and gains Esteem: But to speak in general, nothing can please in Persons
who have not a good Air. It Is true, that one may in some sort obtain it, in
being careful that ones Action be free, and in acquiring a facility of Speaking.


Lisidor. I knew a Man who spoke with great Facility, and yet who did not at
all please. It was thought that he studied what he spoke, and I observed that
this Opinion which the World had of him, did not contribute to the procuring
him a Reputation. I would know whether you will condemn this kind of Care?


ENTERTAINMENT XV. Whether it be good to prepare our selves for common
Conversations.
THE Reading every day of Books, and the People whom we every moment converse
with, may serve as an insensible and continual Preparation for the
Conversations wherein Chance may engage us. It is by these two ways that our
Memory enriches it self with infinite Notices, which she imparts to us
afterward in occasions wherein we may need them.

Lisidor. I know that the Memory has been ever considered, as a Treasurer to
whom we must give a Fond, if we will draw the Assistances we need.


Dorante. This is the justest comparison we can make of it; when we learn
things agreeable, or instructive, we only entrust them to our Memories; this is
a Pledge which she keeps only to restore it. She does as the Steward of an
House, who receives the Revenue of his Master, only to pay away what is
demanded. But both one and the other must be faithful, and there would happen a
troublesome Disorder, if the Memory retained not enough, and the Steward retains
a little too much.

I know not how it comes to pass that I am fallen to sporting with Words. It Is
not my custom to do it; and though it has come in naturally enough, yet many will
condemn it as a point of Affectation.


Lisidor. The niceness of these People would be troublesome, your Conception is
grounded on the Truth, and the Term, whose Repetition makes the Sport, suits
equally with the Steward, and the Memory. But to return to the Question, Do you
believe it is sufficient to prepare ones self in general, as you now said; or
do you not think it good, that I should prepare my self on certain Subjects,
which are likely to be the Entertainment of the Company where I may chance to
be?


Dorante. If you desire to have matters ready for all sorts of Conversations,
you will without doubt set upon collecting all the remarkable things you read
or hear related. You will reduce these Observations to a certain Order. On one
side you will set down Tragical Events, Thrones overturned, strange Deaths,
Misfortunes unforeseen, and, in general, whatever you find most Tragical. On
the other Hand you will collect the happy Successes, as surprising Marriages,
unexpected Promotions, in a Word, whatever has happened that is pleasing in the
Revolutions wherein Fortune has been pleased to Favor those she loves. If
being well provided, you go and recount your lamentable stories in an afflicted
House; will your long Narrations be suffered in a Chamber wherein silence
reigns, wherein is nothing seen but pale Countenances, and nothing heard but
sighs and Groans? I believe they will be filled with indignation, to see you so
little sensible of the misfortune which has happened to them; and if their
grief will permit them to see you want no Memory, will they not likewise see
too that you want judgment? Without doubt you will adminster great consolation to
a Woman whose Husband is lately assassinated, if you represent to her, that the
first Empress of Rome suffered heretofore a more considerable loss. That it was
when Caesar was stabbed in the Senate, and that this great Man knew among his
Murderers, Persons whom he tenderly loved. Should not I have made a very
diverting recital in dining at Philemon's, had I set to talking of the Banquet
of the Seven Wise Men, and the Festival of Cleopatra? If we would affect
Persons agitated with any Passion, we must entertain them only with adventures
wherein they may take part, and reserve Historical Events for certain
Conversation, which we may term sedate ones, or those which may be called
Conferences.

To return to the distinction which I am obliged to make, I must say, that in
certain occasions you may prepare your self for common Discourse, though it were
perceived that you have studied what you shall say. In effect, if there comes
Ambassadors from far distant Countries, and little known, you will easily
imagine that this will be discoursed of in Companies where you may chance to
be, and that you will not do amiss to instruct your self in a matter which will
be the entertainment of an infinite number of People. So that you will be
pleased to see in a Map, the extent and situation of the Country whence these
Ambassadors come. You will read in some Relation of Travels, the strength and
Government of the Nation, you will endeavor to find out the Interest she has
to seek our Alliance, or to have our Assistance or our Commerce.


Lisidor. May not one likewise discourse of the different Formalities to be
observed in the Reception of Ambassadors, according to the different States who
send them, or according to the higher or lower Rank of the Ambassadors? I have
heard say, that the Chief of the last Embassy of Muscovy, called himself
Prince, and even a Kinsman of the Czars. But I confess to you, I know not what
this Word Czar signifies, which yet I pronounce very boldly.


Dorante. You must know then that the great Duke of Muscovy is not content with
the Title of Emperor, but takes even that of Caesar, which the Muscovites
pronounce Czar, this suppression of a Letter is common enough in all sorts of
Languages, whether to soften the pronunciation, or render it less languid, by
straitning the words.


Lisidor. Methinks the Name of Caesar, which gives a great Idea, is not so long
that it needs to be abridg'd, and I did not observe that we take in our French
Words the liberty you speak of.


Dorante. You have not then examined them, but you will change your sentiments,
when you will hear say, Sevrin and Merri, for Severin and Mederic. But I cannot
excuse our Tongue, when she changes or abridges fine Names to make them
disagreeable, as Thibaud of Theobald, Thierri of Theodoric, and Alix of
Adelaide. I could cite you likewise the Names of several Houses and Towns which
we pronounce otherwise than they are written, but our Business is not to enter
on these particulars, it being better to return to the Advices which I began to
give you.


Lisidor. I had already profitably used that relating to Ambassadors. When the
Algerins came to make their Submissions to the King; I failed not to instruct
my self in what might be said of these Pirates, on their little State, their
Government, their Ships, and the Forces of their Militia, which they dare call
invincible.

I had less pains in informing my self on the Riches and Commerce of Genoa, the
Magnificence of those Palaces, which make her have the Title of Proud, and I
especially enquired into the Authority of the Doge, seeing he was the Chief of
the Republic, whom she was obliged to send into France. You may easily judge I
had not the same facility in learning of the Kingdom of Siam what I would know
of it. But the Embassy which came from so far a Country, being too
extraordinary, not to be the subject of all Conversations, I read Relations
enough, to find wherewith to make my self be hearkened to in speaking of the
Siamoises.


Dorante. I am very glad you need not much of my advice in this matter; I shall
only advise you to recall every Night the Ideas of what you have heard say, that
is most agreeable and most instructive, and to examine after what manner, or by
what discourse, certain Persons have had the opportunity of pleasing, in the
time when others could not be heard, though they were brim full of discourse.

But here is enough for to Night, it is time to end this Discourse, and to leave
one another. You shall have brought you to Morrow Morning wherewith to Cloth
you handsomely, and it is fit that Erastus, who is to come to take us with him,
should find you ready to go along with him. We will go and see Persons of great
distinction, and to whom I would very gladly have you go sometimes. You must be
presented to them by Erastus, he can recommend you in such a manner, as is not
proper for me to do, and I am sure he will have no less Address than Affection,
when he is to do you good Offices.

After these Words Dorante left Lisidor, and went into his Chamber.


ENTERTAINMENT XVI. That to please in Conversation, a Man must be Master of his
own Humor.
THE next Morning Dorante was with Erastus, and Lisidor at the Prince
Viridatus's, where was commonly the rendezvous of the most ingenious and polite
young Gentlemen of the Court.

Viridatus offered Lisidor all the Civilities which Dorante could expect, and
directed often to him his discourse, although he had a geat deal of Company that
day with him. I know not, said he to him, with an obliging Air, whether you
have not left in your Province something which your Heart may regret; but I am
much mistaken, if this Country does not afford wherewith to comfort one, for
whatever he may have left in others.

Erastus. It Is certain, there is nothing which can make Life easy, and even
pleasant, but comes to Paris from all the Countries of the World, yet methinks
we must except a certain kind of Liberty which one has in little Towns for
Conversation and Behavior.


Viridatus. But what advantage can one make of a Liberty which leads to
nothing? Is it worth the Constraint which contributes to our Fortune?

At these words, a Person of Quality, named Pharnacius, took up the Discourse,
and answered Viridatus in these terms.


Pharnacius. I know not how a Prince of your Humor can approve a way of
living, which is regarded as a continual torture. What, I shall never have the
pleasure of speaking my real Sentiments? Were I grossly Ignorant, should I be
obliged to praise the Sciences before Viridatus; to declare my self against
them, how able soever I were, if I would please honest Timophanus? Is there any
Grandeur, which a Man pays not too dear for, if it be bought at this price?


Viridatus. You will be more surpised, if I tell you, that this kind of
Constraint, which you represent to your self so dreadful, gives more
Satisfaction than Vexation. And in effect, is it for the sake of Timophanus,
and Viridatus, that you commend or discommend the Sciences? Is it not for your
own sake, that you accommodate your self to the Humor of the Persons from whom
you expect good Offices? Do you take for Dissimulation a stroke of Prudence
which requires you to seem to enter into the Sentiments of a Man whom you would
very willingly draw into yours, when your Interests require it? For my part I
think you have right to applaud your self, when you can insinuate your self
into opposite Humors: What Pleasure is it, in discoursing with a Learned
General, to cite the Instructions which Aristotle gave to Alexander, the
Eloquence which made Caesar famous before his Conquests, and the Politeness of
Scipio, to whom it is said Terence owes that which appears in his Works. When,
on the contrary, we entertain our selves with a Warrier, who has nothing but
his Courage, do not we take a fit course in mentioning only Captains, the
single Impetuosity of whose Courage has made their Men victorious?


Dorante. We may call that Man happy that has this Suppleness of Humor, and
when Nature refuses it, we should esteem the Persons who endeavor to acquire
it. Had I a Patron of a dumpish, restless, and suspicious Humor, I would not
accost him with an open smiling Air: And should I go to a young Prince who
loved Pleasures, I would not carry a Countenance whose Melancholy and Austerity
would seem to condemn all Joy.


Lisidor. I know not whether this be not an approving of Inequality and uneven
Tempers in maintaining such an Opinion.


Dorante. A Change which is grounded on Reason, cannot be called Inequality; we
see every moment, that the Commerce of Life requires that we speak
indifferently in the same Day. I should be wanting in Civility, if I did not go
and rejoice with a Friend who had married advantagiously, and I should yet
commit a more considerable Fault, should I not appear sensible of the
Afflictions of one of my Relations, who had just lost his only Son. A Man that
will only live for himself alone, and take no part in what may happen to
others, must renounce the World, and retire with his Indolency into Solitude.
Shall I go into a Company to show there a Passion contrary to that which reigns
therein? Must I discover a Mien which condemns the Senments with which the
Company is prepossest?


Viridatus. Nothing is more opposite to the Maxims of the civil Society than
this Conduct, and a Person who shall obstinately follow it, will be in Danger
of never getting Friends. All the Ancients have admired the easy Humor of
Alcibiades, and we still wonder that a Man could so well accommodate himself to
the different manners of Countries where he lived. Nothing was so much talked
of at Athens, as his Eloquence and Gallantry. Among the Persians he was always
feasting, and nothing was seen more splendid than his Dress and Equipage. But
he past over to other opposite Manners, when he was obliged to go to Sparta.
The most regid Lacedemonian led a Life less austere than his Pharnacius: It Is
certain, that Alcibiades was not content with following the diverse Custums of
Nations, but he moreover distinguished himself by a more exact regularity in
practicing them.


Erastus. We may regard the Conduct of this famous Greek, as a Complaisance of
Manners, if one may speak thus. This is a quality which gains mightily on the
People. It is necessary for Persons who travel, and are designed for Embassies;
yet we may justly say, that this Complaisance of action is neither so necessary
nor of so frequent use as the complaisance of words. We have every moment
occasion of yielding to the Opinions of Persons whom we have a design to
please, and it seldom happens that we are obliged to quit our Modes and
Customs, to take those of Strangers.


Virdatus. Methinks we should not regret the time spent, in learning how to
enter delicately into the sentiments of others.


Dorante. Herein appears the address of the Men of the World. They never
approve, without endeavoring to justify the approbation they have given; so
that their Reasons cannot be disagreeable to those whose side they take; they
testify to the rest of the Company that there is neither affectation nor
flattery in their discourse.


Erastus. To return to our subject, we may say, that though we be Masters of our
humor, yet we must never abuse this power, in betraying our Sentiments, in
maintaining an error, or in giving Praises to words or actions which do not
deserve it.


Pharnacius. But if you follow your own opinion, if you praise only things
praise worthy, and you take no party which you cannot justify by reasons, what
violence do you suffer your self, and wherein do you appear Master of your
Humor?


Erastus. When I sacrifice it to that of others, when I renounce my own Will,
to accommodate my self to others, to whom I am willing to give tokens of my
submission. I will undertake a Journey which shall be proposed to me, in a time
wherein I would rather choose to lie still; and I shall suffer my self to be
engaged in a splendid divertisement, which will cast me into an expense and
trouble, which I should have been very glad to avoid. Thus my actions will show
the deference I have; my words, and even silence will give no small tokens of
it. If a Prince, whom I would not willingly displease, commends an ill Man,
that has disobliged me, and whom he does not well know, I will overcome my
resentment, and add to a motion of generosity, a submission which will make me
silent, when I cannot be of the same opinion of a Person whom I will not offend.


Viridatus. It seems to me that it should be chiefly to Women that a Man should
subject his Humor, there being many Capricio's to be born from them. As the
greatest part among them do not strive to be over Constant, so we do not make
our Court right to them, if we do not change with them; yet see how far their
lightness leads. It being to the handsomest among them to whom we chiefly
endeavor to render our selves agreeable, from them therefore we must expect to
suffer most. Besides, that they have no less inconstancy, it is certain that
the continual flatteries wherewith they are fed, make them generally more vain,
and less equitable.


Dorante. Yet I should think, that having the Charms you speak of, they should
be so well satisfied as to have their Spirits less envious, and more quiet.


Lisidor. Moreover we are naturally led to use a deference to Persons that
please us.


Viridatus. I am much mistaken, Lisidor, if Nature alone has showed you that it
is of her you have the inclination you speak of. Some fine Lady or other has
opened your eyes on what you feel. However, I must not yet pretend to be your
Confident; and I well know that in the first engagments we are pleased with
making a mystery of every thing.


Pharnacius. Your Conjectures perhaps are better grounded than you think. There
is a very lovely young Woman come to Erastus, for whom already I am told
Lisidor sighs.


Viridatus. I know it, and will undertake that he will sigh no longer than
Dorante and Erastus shall think fit. You speak of a Sister of Cleonice, that is
very young and handsome. Erastus can tell us news of her, whilst we are making
ready to go to his House, to see whether he gives us a faithful relation.


Erastus. I will not tell you that Lindamire is Old, Cleonice who is her Eldest
Sister will never forgive it. Yet I will acknowledge to you she will soon be
fourteen, and I know not whether this Age can well suit with a Lover that has
seventeen, and who is not to be Married before he be twenty.


Viridatus. This agedness will be intolerable both to the one and the other;
but will you tell us whether Lindamire be as disagreeable as she is Old?


Erastus. It belongs not to me to answer this question, Lisidor can better
satisfy your Curiosity.


Dorante. Yet he has less seen Lindamire than you have.


Erastus. He has seen her less, but he has better beheld her.


Lisidor. After the War which has been made me, I dare not speak of Lindamire.
The Praises which I should give her will be suspected, and if I speak things as
I feel them, I may make them be felt likewise by others, and that is what I
shall avoid, if you please.

At these Words Viridatus embraced Lisidor, and spoke to him in this manner.


Viridatus. If we judge of you by the dispositions you have, and by the
continual Entertainments you will have with Dorante and Erastus, a Man needs
not be a great Divine to say you will be one of the finest Men of the Court.


Erastus. I must needs say that Dorante and I find no less our reckoning in the
conversation of Lisidor, than Lisidor can draw advantage in ours. At his
arrival from a far Country, we hear him at Paris with as much attention and
pleasure, as they would have in his Province, in speaking of a Polite Man of
this Town.


Viridatus. I believe Dorante is much troubled at it.


Erastus. You may judge, and I can assure you I am so too, although I be not
Lisidor's Kinsman.


Viridatus. You respect him as Dorante's Nephew, but it will not be long before
you have other reasons to espouse his interests.

Scarcely had they ended these Words, but other Company came in; Dorante,
Erastus, and Lisidor dexterously got away, and were no sooner in their Coach,
but Erastus demanded of Dorante, how he intended to spend the rest of the
Morning?


Dorante. In visiting the Prelate whom you know: But there are reasons for
Philemon's being of the Company.


Erastus. We need only go and take him up, we shall find him undoubtedly at
home, for he expects I should send him Word whether we shall go together to
Versailles: For Lisidor we shall not consult him on the visits he would make,
'till he has acquaintances by himself, and separate from yours.


Lisidor. However the good dress I am in reproaches me, that I have not yet
returned thanks to Cleonice for the pains she has taken.

I know, answered Erastus smiling, that you are very thankful, when you have
Clothes bought you; and having a Complement in your head, which you would be
gladly eased of, I need only bid my Coachman drive home. He shall go
afterward for Philemon, and so every body will be pleased.

They were no sooner arrived, but that they light at the door, sent the Coach
to Philemon, and went up to Cleonice's Apartment. Madam, said immediately
Erastus in presenting Lisidor, here is a Gentleman who tells me he is ready to
dye with desire to see you. I bring him to you, and with the less constraint,
in that I am sure he came not wholly to admire you.


Cleonice. Methinks you might have a better opinion of me.


Erastus. I confess it, but it were well if Lisidor had not so good a one of
Lindamire.


Lisidor. You see, Madam, that I am not so much as allowed the time to thank
you as I ought. I am continually set upon, to see after what manner a Man of my
Age can disengage himself; however I have a better Office done me than is
imagined. The sentiments which I have are made known, which I dare not declare
my self.


Cleonice. You cannot have any that can be disapproved, and therefore the
assistance which you say is given you, is not necessary to you.

In this moment Lisidore and Lindamire could not forbear looking on one another
and blushing; Cleonice observed it, and resumed the discourse, to turn the
conversation on another subject.


Cleonice. It is not possible that you have made your visits. You have put them
off till another Day, or not met with those you went to see.


Dorante. We come from Viridatus, and we expect Philemon to go together to a
Prelates, where a business which we have calls us. I am pleased to see the
surprise wherein Lisidor will be, in hearing Erastus discourse learnedly on the
most serious and important matters, having as yet only seen him in his merry
Humor. I wish you had heard him the other Day on the new Conversations of
France, you --


Erastus. I read, on this subject, a Manuscript, which is going to the Press,
and the opinion I had of it, made me say things which Dorante finds
extraodinary in a Man of (...) Humor.


Cleonice. That which you now ^ay puts me on a reflection whence I may draw some
profit. You gave some Days past Maxims for Conversation, and you said nothing
of what is most important therein. Which is to know after what manner one
should talk of what respects Religion.


Dorante. You have reason, Madam, and we cannot better spend the time we have,
than in making some observations on so considerable a matter.


ENTERTAINMENT XVII. That we must speak reverently of Holy Things.
Erastus. I Know not any Man that loves mirth better than I do; I will have it
reign in my House, and I endeavor to inspire it whithersoever I go, and I
every where affirm it to be the best and most universal remedy that we can use
in our misfortunes. Yet I may say there is no body has more aversion to
Libertinism. I look on it as a Rock that we must avoid, and I shun a Libertine,
as a Man infected with the Plague. Not that I fear his pretended reasons will
make any great impression on my mind, but that I scorn them, and am ashamed to
be seen with them, as imagining them worse than Beasts.


Cleonice. I believe that those who speak little respectfully of Religion, and
who scoff at the things they ought to reverence, are led to this extravagance
only by a ridiculous Vanity. I believe they would distinguish themselves, and
that they intend only to show their Wit in maintaining particular Opinions,
contrary to such as are generally recei^^d. Yet perhaps this Irregularity
passes not ove^ into their Morals.


Erastus. However this is true, that there is no better Preservative against
all sorts of Irregularities than Religion.

That which hinders Women from being drawn as often into this Disorder as Men,
is, that they do not so soon lose the Impressions of Piety, which we all
receive in our Education.


Cleonice. The Ignorance wherein we are kept, the Modesty which is every moment
recommended to us, and the continual Submission wherein we spend our Life, are
advantageous to us, in that they contribute to what we ought to believe, and
therefore thank God it is not us that are charged with being the Authors of
Heresy.


Lindamire. I have heard talk of a Sect lately discovered at Rome.


Cleonice. I have always had a Desire to entreat Dorante to relate to me the
chief Particulars of it, but I forgot till now to mention it to him. This
occasion of doing it offers it self too naturally to neglect it. Will you
refuse, Dorante, to let me know wherein this Heresy consisted?


Dorante. You well judge, Madam, that I will do what you please, yet you must
permit me not to enter on particularising the Errors which the Quietists
followed.

For thus were those called who embraced this Sect. They drew this Name from
the Rest they pretended to enjoy when they had raised their Souls to
Contemplation by the means of a Prayer they recited. They held it was
sufficient for them to make an Act of Faith, and set themselves in the Presence
of God, and to rely wholly on his Providence. This was methinks a good way to
draw abundance of People; whether that being lazy, they choose rather to yield
themselves up after this manner that they may not act; or that they had the
Vanity to believe themselves capable of well contemplating. If Women, as you
now say, are not the Authors of Heresies, yet we see 'em ready enough to follow
those they are taught, as either being desirous of new things, or suffering
themselves to be taken with the fine appearances, wherewith the Errors which
are proposed be generally disguised. However it be, several Persons of your Sex
followed the Opinions of Molinos the Chief of the Quietists. It is true, this
Spaniard passed for a Saint before he was discovered to be an Heresiarch. You
know, Madam, that he has abjured his Errors, and that he is shut up for the
rest of his Life.


Erastus. One may in a Conversation relate the History of an Heresy, recite
the Establishment of it, the Progress and Decay of it; for there is none but we
have seen destroyed in the end.


Dorante. However we should never mix with these Relations, any thing which may
make these Novelties relish. They are sometimes more dangerous than the
Opinions of Libertines. To convince these latter, I need only entreat them to
consider the Course of the Sun, the Motions of the Stars, and the productions
of the Earth. They will see that Man could not set that Order which we admire
in the Universe, he that cannot regulate so much as a simple Digestion in
himself, and who has been so long ignorant of the Circulation of the Blood in
his own Veins. Must it not be acknowledged that he who so well governs so vast
a Machin, must needs be a wise and infinitely powerful Being; and if he be such
a one as we say, can we refuse him our Adorations? I would willingly know after
what manner we should regulate the Worship which should serve to testify our
Acknowledgment and our Submission? Must this be the Fancy of some frantic
Enthusiast, or by the Pious Maxims of great and holy Personages which have been
always in the Universal Church? This matter is too fine and large to be
included in our Entertainments. Instead of engaging our selves therein, it is
sufficient to make known to you in few words, that it is no hard matter to shut
the Mouths of the Libertines, provided they prefer not their Obstinacy to the
Reasons wherewith one may convince them.

However I would not have those who maintain the right side to appear puffed up
with their advantages; they must speak with good sense, with respect, and
without sharpness and ostenation.

Whilst Dorante ended these Words, Erastus's Coach was heard to come before the
Door, and presently Philemon and Belise entered into Cleonice's Chamber.


Philemon. You expected me alone, and I bring my Spouse with me. She comes to
stay with Cleonice, if we go to Versailles, where I know that Dorante and I
shall meet with a Prelate whom we design to see this Morning.


Erastus. We shall do better to eat what may be presently ready, and to go all
together. I will leave you to do your business, and make your Court as long as
you please, and I will take care to satisfy the curiosity of Lisidor, and
Lindamire.

The Company having consented to what Erastus proposed, such orders were given
as were fit for so small a journey.


Philemon. I must tell you, that Belise's coming has occasioned me to make you
stay so long, and I entreat you to pardon me, if I did not know that as long as
you be together we shall never believe you in danger of being weary.


Cleonice. It Is true that Dorante has entertained us in an elegant and easy
manner, on a very nice and important subject. He has showed us in what terms
and after what manner we may speak of our Religion, and I am so satisfied with
it, that I wish Belise had her share in the Entertainment.


Philemon. Perhaps she would have had less pleasure than you imagine: For it is
certain it is not for discourses of this kind that she has the greatest
curiosity.


Belise. My ignorance is the cause. I am ever afraid that it would cast me into
errors, however good my intentions may be. But you know I am not so fearful in
other matters. I speak with a tone of assurance of the Customs of People, and
the Government of States, when I enter on the politic Humor you so often twit
me with.


Cleonice. Ah, Belise, you are then bolder than I am; for I confess, that of
the three sorts of distinct Governments, I dared never speak of any but the
Monarchical. Neither would I hazard my self in pronouncing the names which
relate to the different Republics we know.


Belise. And I say audaciously Aristocracy and Democracy* and without Vanity I
have not been four Months a learning these two words.


Cleonice. For my part I should be three years on resolving whether I should
speak them, and after so long a term, I believe I should remain still
irresolute.


Erastus. Let Us leave these Jests, if you please, and whilst Breakfast is
getting ready, let us entertain our selves with a Science which Belise and all
great Persons prefer before others.


Belise. Rally as much as you will; but if Dorante will take my part, I will
consent that he shall talk alone, and you will see whether my opinions be ill
maintained.


Cleonice. We like this expedient well, and Dorante, never refusing to comply
with his Friend's proposals, he will accept your offers, and we shall thereby
be gainers.


ENTERTAINMENT XVIII. That State affairs must be discoursed of with great
reservedness.
Dorante. I Will speak then, seeing you enjoin me, and will first say that I
put a great difference between Foreign Affairs and those which relate to us. We
may speak our opinions touching the Government of other Nations with as much
boldness as Belise does, supposing we understand the Interests and Maxims of
them. But when we are pleased to discourse on the State under which we live, we
should never extend our conjectures too far, nor affect to appear too
penetrating. You know nothing does more contribute to the happy success of an
enterprise, than the secrecy observed therein. The Captains themselves whom the
King chooses to excute his designs, commonly know what they are going about, and
learn it only by the Orders which they must not open, but at certain times, and
in certain Places. After such exact precautions, can our affairs be mentioned
with an affirmative tone? Dare we reason on uncertain conjectures? Persons of
good sense never talk of those matters but with great modesty, and for my part
I can only forgive this imprudence in Persons who are incapable of making any
reflection. How many do we hear every Day censuring that Government which they
do not understand, they make War and Peace according to their Fancy, and wholly
busy themselves in hearing News, and modelling the affairs of State, when
their Families at home are perhaps ready to starve for want of Bread.

It Is true, that since the King has so considerably increased his States, the
Govenment is not so much spoke against.


Philemon. I would willingly know whether there can be found any appearance of
reason for the not admiring it. Foreigners are no less surprised than our
selves at what passes every Day in this Kingdom. We may cite, as a kind of
Miracle, the Conjunction which we have seen made of the Canal of Languedoc with
the Sea: The stately Building in the Plain of Grenelle deserves no less our
admiration, than the magnificence we see at Versailles, and the Security which
is now at Paris and all the rest of the Kingdom.


Dorante. Whereunto we may add those incomprehensible Machines at Versailles,
which triumph over Nature, and force Rivers to take Beds where the imagination
cannot conceive they can ascend.


Belise. I will tell you then, that if the King was not our Master by the right
of his Birth, and that it was permitted us to choose a Sovereign, his merit
would immediately claim the Scepter which he holds from the Salique Law.


Cleonice. What a Pleasure you have done me in citing this Law, which I have
heard termed a fundamental one of the State. It is so often mentioned, that I
would willingly know what may be said particularly of it.


Erastus. I believed, Madam, that having read the History of our Nation, you
are sufficiently instructed in this matter.


Cleonice. I know that this Law takes its name from the Saliens, a considerable
People among the Ancient French; or that it is called Salic, because it was
published near the Banks of the River Sala. I have also observed, that this Law
has three parts relating to the Government: The first requires the State to be
Monarchical. The Second, That it be successive. And the Third, at which I am
not a little grieved, deprives the Persons of our Sex of the succession to the
Crown. It Is said 'twas Pharamond who instituted this Law, but I wish any one
would tell me the reasons he had thus to regulate the Sovereignty of our
Nation; to the end that if I should speak of it before Belise, she might not
laugh at my ignorance.


Erastus. I am to tell you, Madam, that Belise, and the rest of the Politicians
of our time, are persuaded that the Salic or Ripary Laws respect only the
Justice and Policy which is to be observed among the French, and that they
speak in no sort of the Sovereign adminstration of the affairs. They affirm,
that the Law, which requires the State to be Monarchical, and to be ordered in
the manner we now related, was never written but in the Hearts of the People.
They pass farther, and believe there never was any Pharamond. They ground
themselves on that Gregory of Tours, who wrote the History of the French,
speaks not a word of Pharamond, and it is certain that he would never have
failed to mention a Prince, who was the first King of the Nation, of which he
had undertaken to leave us the most considerable adventures. Belise will inform
you of several other particulars.


Belise. What can I not say? However I am willing you should treat me as if I
were not knowing, and you should tell me the Reasons which Cleonice requires of
you, that I may see whether you can justify what so famous a Law enjoins.


Philemon. Have you not Apprehension that your Policy will make us exceed the
Bounds which our Entertainments prescribe?


Belise. Why fear it? Do we not grant the liberty of talking on all sorts of
Subjects? And would you have the Principles of a Science omitted, which places
a Man above multitudes of others? I hope the Company will punish you, and
oblige you to speak the first your Opinion on the Monarchical State. Do you
prefer it to other Governments?


Philemon. I find you very forward, in that you will not expect till the
Assembly authorizes what you enjoin; but I see it is time ill spent to correct
you, and that it is better submitting to you. I will tell you then, Madam, that
one may soon determine ones self on this Subject. We must be for Monarchy, and
consider there is more Ease and Security in obeying one Master, than if we were
constrained to acknowledge several.

It is certain, that Divisions do easily get among Persons who share the
Sovereignty, and that it is very difficult keeping a Secret among them; judge
then what we may fear from one and the other. Moreover, a King is too much
accustomed to Grandeur, to appear giddy-headed with it; whereas it is but too
often seen, that Citizens, who are immediately exalted to the Throne, become
intolerable through their Pride.


Belise. Well, you have said enough; pray now let us see whether Erastus will
declare himself for the Regal Succession, or for Elective Kingdoms. What say
you, Sir, Do you judge the People in a better Condition who have a Right to
choose their Sovereigns, than those who are obliged to receive them, for better
for worse, from the Hands of Nature?


Erastus. You do not consult me on a matter difficult enough to gain me any
Credit; and there is no body but may easily determine himself herein. We see it
seldom happen, but that the Presumptive Heir of the Kingdom is Educated
according to the Rank which he must one Day possess. Such Sentiments of
Clemency and Equity are inspired into him, as may contribute to the Peoples
Happiness; whereas the like Education is not bestowed on particular Persons,
who are too far distant from the Throne, to make it thought that they will one
day possess it. Judge of the Factions which are formed for an Election of this
Importance; and into what Wars these Factions may draw the People. These
Troubles are not feared in successive Kingdoms, therein happens no change. If a
King dies, his Son takes his Place, and several Reigns appear but one continued
Reign.

It is not to be supposed, that only Persons remarkable for their Virtues are
chosen, and in whom there can be found no Fault, seeing these Persons use all
their Industry to dissemble and hide their Vices, and to adorn themselves with
Qualities becoming their Ambition: But when they have gotten their Aim, and
have nothing more to desire or fear, they then throw off their Masks, and
abandon themselves to all manner of Dissoluteness. I could give a great many
Examples of this; but you will find enough in the Roman History, if you will
take the Pains to read it.


Belise. You see, Dorante, that I have reserved the difficultest part for you,
according to my mind, seeing it now lies upon you to tell us by what reasons
the Salic Law could exclude Women from succeeding their Fathers, and deprive
them of what Nature allowed them.


Dorante. It troubles me, Madam, that I am not so sensible of the Honor you do
me, and to tell you that the Salic Law had an admirable foresight in this third
part which you condemn. If this Kingdom should fall into the Feminine Line, and
we saw a presumptive Heiress of the Crown, to what Misery should we not be
reduced? In effect, should it happen that the Princess would choose a Husband
among her Subjects, those who expect this Honor, would make strong Parties,
and carry things to a greater extremity, than in Elective Countries, seeing the
prize is no less than a Crown, which would pass to their Descendants, and
remain for ever in their Family. He that has the good fortune to be preferred,
will be so unhappy as to be hated of his Rivals, the greatest Men at Court, and
who will never faithfully serve him. If on the contrary, the Heiress of a
Kingdom should cast her eyes on a neighboring Prince, to bestow on him her
Heart, and her Scepter; we should fall under the Domination of a stranger, our
Monarchy would become a Province of his States.

Thus, Madam, you see you have no reason to complain of the injustice done your
Sex, you must rather think this was ordered for the best; seeing hereby is
prevented all those dismal Revolutions which I have now denoted to you.


Belise. I must needs acknowledge you have satisfied me with your Reasons,
although they be not very favorable to Ladies. I believe that Cleonice is in
the same sentiment, and that she is not troubled that I have been so curious.


Cleonice. You shall see that I will not be behind hand with you in another
kind. You have declared your self an able Politician, and I must declare to
you, that I have particularly applied my self to the study of Morality.
Moreover, I will be no less complaisant, than you: I consent that Dorante,
Philemon, and Erastus tell us after what manner we should speak of Passions,
Vices, and Virtues; and I offer to show you afterward, whether their Opinions
be conformable, of contrary to those I maintain.

The Company having laughed at the pleasantry of Cleonice, it was granted that
there was no matter which oftener fell into Conversation, than that she came
from proposing, so that it was resolved on, that some time should be spent in
discoursing on that subject.


ENTERTAINMENT XIX. That to speak justly of the Passions, of Vices and Virtues,
we should ordinarily descend from a general Discourse into particular
Distinctions.
Cleonice. BEfore we enter on the subject we are to treat of, I would willingly
know what it is to speak justly?


Philemon. I can boldly say I understand the justness which is found in an
expression, but I acknowledge I should be puzzled to say wherein it consists.
Dorante can clear up this point.


Dorante. I am persuaded that what does most contribute to the justness of a
discourse is, when there happens a real relation, or a real opposition between
the terms, and between the things which are put together. Thus I should not
speak justly should I say that Lisidor is of Provence, and Philemon an Officer
of the Kings; seeing there is no relation, nor opposition between a Country and
an Office. Neither should I any more speak justly, if being willing to testify
my acknowledgment to Cleonice, I should explain my self in these terms. I
return Graces to a Person who has 'em infinitely. This is properly what we may
call a Galamathias, and it is very hard to understand two words which are tied
together without any relation. In effect, in the first Place the Word Graces
signifies only thanks, and the other Word which is understood, is only taken
for some agreableness of the Countenance, or of the Person. I might moreover
give you infinite Examples on this defect of justness, but I shall content my
self with telling you, that it is chiefly in comparisons, where it is to be
chiefly avoided.

I should speak ill, should I say that the Barbe Isabella of Philemon is as
fine as the Diamond which Erastus wears, though it be permitted me to esteem one
as much as the other, and to offer an Hundred Lewis's for the Horse as well as
for the Ring. But we should not compare the Beauty of a Stone with that of an
Animal, which is to say, two things which have neither any relation or
opposition between them.


Erastus. I found yesterday Juvenal lying on one of my Friend's Table, I opened
it, and 'twas exactly on a passage of his sixth Satyr, where he speaks of the
manner after which the Women of those times coifed themselves. He describes the
bucklings and coiffings several Stories high which a wanton Dame wore, and says
that her Size was so tall with them, that she might be taken for another
Andromacha, in beholding her before; but if you viewed her behind, she appeared
only to be a little Woman. Now let it not displease Juvenal, if I say he did
not speak justly, he had cited Andromacha, he should then have opposed a Woman
famous for her little Stature.


Cleonice. Whence should he have taken it? Perhaps History mentions none.
People do not usually take notice of a Quality so little recommendable.


Erastus. Juvenal should then have chosen a tour which might furnish him with a
just opposition, and have said that this Lady might have been taken for a Giant
before, though she appeared but a Dwarf behind.


Belise. I now undestand what is contrary to the justness of an expression, and
you imagine well that the rest of the Company comprehends it yet better. And
therefore we may speak of the matter which Cleonice has given us, and
acknowledge in the beginning, that there is nothing so dangerous as the
passions. For my part I am persuaded, that could our Hearts free themselves
from their Tyranny, we should enjoy a serene and happy Life.


Cleonice. It Is true, that the greatest part of the World regards Ambition,
Love and Hatred as the Springs of all Evils, and it is commonly their violence
which leads to the committing of the injustices which we see in the World.


Dorante. We grant you that the impetuosity of the passions hurries but too
often to the committing of crimes, but can she not likewise be of great use in
the leading us to Heroic Virtue? Without Ambition we should see no Conqueror,
hear nothing of Alexander nor Caesar, and none of those glorious Actions would
be performed which procure an immortal Reputation. So that instead of
condemning the Passions, I rather wish a good use were made of them, and that
they were rendered profitable. We love the effects of Clemency and Compassion,
we admire that which the love of Glory produces, and the sequel of Infamy. And
however decry'd Fear is, yet in a thousand occasions she makes up one part of
Prudence. It is from her that we foresee evils, and avoid them. What may we not
moreover observe, if we examine the other passions?


Erastus. It seems to me that we have only the passion of Love to examine,
there being scarcely any other but it. It takes different names according to
the difference of its objects. Ambition is only the love of Greatness;
Covetousness the love of Riches; and Hatred, which appears so opposite to Love,
is, to speak properly, only a disguised Love; seeing we have only aversion for
that which is offensive to us, because we love our own preservation.


Philemon. When we had only to explain what Love is, do you think we should be
without Perplexity? Although it be so natural and general a Passion among an
infinite Number of Persons which feel it, you will find few that can tell you
what it is. You may be persuaded of what I say by this Philosopher, who says
that Love is I know not what, that comes from I know not where, and goes away I
know not how.


Dorante. We are so little accustomed to enlarge our selves on this Subject we
speak of, and to engage our selves in Subtilties which serve only to tire the
Mind, that I do not think we ought to discuss the Nature of Passions. Those who
are minded to inform themselves farther, may read the Works we have on this
Subject, and in the mean time content themselves with the Distinctions which we
have promised to bring. It must be acknowledged that we are to blame in
condemning the Passions, and in being afraid of them. They are indifferent in
themselves, and if it happens they sometimes disturb the Tranquillity of our
Life; there are other Occasions wherein they are of great Help to us. Men
without Boldness, would they march to Glory through Fatigues and Dangers? Let Us
make another Distinction, Shall we call a Man valiant who has done a great
Action by an Impetuosity of Boldness, and shall we accuse of Cowardice a Person
that panick Terror has seized in some Occasion? True Valor is, when in every
Rencounter our Courage disposes us to vanquish the Obstacles which oppose our
Designs; as a Man must not pass for a Coward, but when it is his Custom to avoid
Danger. Thus we may reason on the other Vices, and on the other Virtues. A
Magistrate is not to be praised as just, for having done Justice once. To merit
this Commendation, he must be in a firm and constant Disposition to render to
every one what belongs to him.


Cleonice. I have for this Quarter of an Hour had a Desire to ask you the
Reason for the calling Passions, those Emotions which agitate the Heart.


Erastus. It is because they make the Body suffer through their Violence.


Belise. I return then to what I have ever said, that the Passions are Monsters
which are to be rooted out.


Philemon. Are you willing to begin with Shame? Women will be very much obliged
to you. You will free them from a Passion which keeps them in a strange sort of
Bondage. Were they once without Shame, they would have the Pleasure of doing
what they liked, without troubling themselves about what the World calls
Reputation.


Erastus. It Is true, that Shame serves as a Guard for our Women, and there are
other Passions which are necessary for the Commerce of Life. The Compassion we
have for the miserable, leads us commonly to succor one another in our
Misfortunes.


Dorante. Does not Emulation excite to obtain the Advantage we want, to raise
us to the Persons we see above us?


Cleonice. But is there not a Mixture of Envy in Emulation?


Erastus. Nothing is more different than these two Passions. Emulation is
lively and generous, and Envy base and malicious. The first is a Regret at our
small Desert, the other a Vexation which arises from the Merit of others.
Emulation would raise us, and Envy would abase what is above us. In fine,
nothing is more worthy of our Contempt than Envy, nothing is more commendable
than Emulation. It made Caesar weep at the Sight of Alexander's Picture, and
hindered Themistocles from sleeping near the Trophies of Miltiades. You know
what Caesar and Themistocles afterward executed.


Philemon. As to what regards Vices and Virtues, I would speak differently of
them, according to the different Circumstances thereto joined. There was seen
heretofore in Greece a Republic wherein Theft was pardoned, provided it was
committed dexterously; and you know well that Robbery found not the same
Impunity in any other Country.


Erastus. We have at this Day Neighboring Nations where the Customs are very
different. If Dorante would be praised for his Temperance, probably he would
not go to search Applause on the Banks of the Rhine, as you would not advise me
to go toward the Tyber, if you proposed excessive drinking.


Cleonice. Are Distinctions to be made when we speak of Virtue in general, is
it not equally reverenced by all Nations?


Dorante. Every body does not regard it in the same manner, and I know not
whether it will not puzzle us to say precisely what it is. It Is true, there is
a natural Equity which is generally approved; but it is not less certain that
it is diversely practiced. There never was any Obligation more indispensable,
than that requiring Children to serve those who brought them into the World,
especially when they are grown old, and find themselves afflicted with
Diseases. All the People of Europe observed so just a Maxim; and yet the
Scythians, who possessed more Country than Europe comprehended, accused those
Children of Inhumanity who let their Parents live under an incurable Malady.
For their Parts they gave the fatal Blow as a Stroke of Grace, and thought it
just to terminate thus their Parents Misery. They extended further their
pretended Charity. They eat their Bodies instead of burning or interring them,
imagining nothing more pious than to give this Sepulture to their Parents, for
to change them into their proper Substance, and make them live again in
themselves as far as it was in their Power. Consider this well. The Scythians
commend a Man who comes from committing a Parricide, and other Nations punish
him as the greatest Criminal.


Erastus. In speaking of the different Manners of People, we may cite the
Punick Faith, which is to say, the little Fidelity the Carthaginians observed
in their Promises. It Is certain, the Romans had more Probity, and I should have
more relied on the Word of Regulus, than the Oaths of Hannibal and all his Army.


Philemon. I think it more usual to distinguish the Vices and Virtues according
to the Professions of Persons, than according to the Customs of their Country.
A Virtue renders us recommendable only according as it is suitable to us. A
Person consecrated to the Service of the Altar should prefer the Knowledge of
Religion to all other Sciences, and his Piety must be so great as to make his,
Words and Actions exemplary. A Soldier must glister after another manner,
Valor should be his Virtue; and what regards Military Discipline, or the Art
of Fortification, should be his chief Study.


Cleonice. But can I not be told precisely what this Virtue is in general, so
much talked of?


Dorante. It is not an easy matter wholly to satisfy you on this Subject, so
diversely has the Virtue you speak of been considered. I know not whether you
will approve of an Opinion which I find the most plausible. I am persuaded that
this Virtue, of which we form so fine an Idea, and which is believed so proper
to make us live happily, is properly what we call Justice.


Belise. But is not Justice the particular Virtue of Magistrates?


Dorante. It should be the Virtue of all People, and had we all that stock of
Equity necessary for the Commerce of Life, we should need neither Law nor
Magistrates. Men would render whatever they are obliged to render, and they
would begin by the Worship due to God. Subjects would obey their Sovereigns,
Children their Parents, and as no body would claim what does not belong to him,
there would be no mention of Thefts nor Murders; even Detraction would be
banished all Societies.

Whilst Dorante ended these words, word was brought, that the Meat was on the
Table, and Erastus being risen up, You must acknowledge your selves, said he,
greatly surprised at the Novelty of my Compliment; for I know not whether I
shall begin with Gentlemen, or Ladies; you must draw me out of this Perplexity;
and for the rest, I know it by Heart.

The Company having laughed at the serious Air wherewith Erastus spoke this,
answered, that he might use his Liberty; so that he reassumed the Discourse in
these terms.


Erastus. Come let us end at Table this Discourse of Distinctions. You Will soon
distinguish between the wretched Treats I give you, and the delicate
Entertainments you give. What say you of these Antitheses?


Dorante. That they are admirable, although we are on the point to convince
them of Falsity.

After these Words they eat, and bad the People who were to set out with them
to make haste; and they returned to Cleonice's Chamber.


Belise. I always go to Versailles with a great deal of Pleasure, but at my
return I am strangely importuned by Arsinoa, she will have me to describe new
Magnificences, or new Rarities, and puts such Questions to me as are strangely
troublesome.


Cleonice. I am yet more troubled with Celisira, she asks News of me with the
greatest Earnestness, and will have me give her an Account of all that passes
in the whole World. She has given me such a great Aversion for what we may call
News, that I neither have asked nor told any for these Twelve Months.


Dorante. But, Madam, hereby you deprive your self of a very considerable
Diversion, and hinder your self from learning important matters, wherein an
infinite number of People are concerned. And, therefore, Madam, I must beg your
Favor for News. They are an innocent Cause of the Vexation which Arsinoa gives
you, and it is not just you should for this reason extend your Resentment so
far as to hate them.


Philemon. But should we not seek some means to make them agreeable, to
reconcile them the more easily with Cleonice?


ENTERTAINMENT XX. After what manner we should tell News.
Erastus. I Cannot so far interest my self in the Quarrels of Cleonice, as to
take her part against News; however I must prefer those which divert before
others. I am very earnest to tell of a Marriage lately made between two Persons
who sincerely loved, and were much traverst in their Design. I am pleased to
describe a gallant and magnificent Feast, or a famous Action performed at the
Head of two Armies. And I must acknowledge I am no less delighted in telling
with what Subtilty a covetous Hunks has been put upon, or by what Address the
Precautions of a jealous Person has been rendered fruitless. You see I discover
my Defects to you, and that I am not exempt from Malice, nor an Enemy to
pleasant Relations. It Is true, there are very few Stories that please me. If it
be an adventure, I would have it surprising; if the News respects only those
ready and lively answers which we call pleasant Repartees, I require a great
delicateness in the tour of expression.


Belise. I am not of Erastus's mind in point of News. The gay please me less
than the sad; and my Spouse must pardon me if I say, that I love to have my
Heart lively touched with compassion.


Cleonice. There is indeed I know not what kind of sweetness in being touched
with pity. Other passions are more violent and less agreeable. Experience shows
it us in the representation of a Tragedy. Infinite numbers of People are drawn
to it by the tenderness of their sentiments, and do not part wholly satisfied,
if they have not been forced to weep.


Erastus. The Tragedies you speak of, and the sad News which please Belise,
have a farther good effect, which apparently you have not thought on, which is,
that we cannot see a Person of great merit fall into a great misfortune, but
that we feel a secret mitigation of our evils Can we justly reproach Fortune in
giving us a moderate stroke, when we see what cruel pains she inflicts on
Persons of an extraordinary Virtue.


Philemon. Do you not think that the News which War furnishes you with, ought
to carry it before all other sort of relations? Can one better draw the
attention, than in describing a great Battle, the taking of a considerable
Place, the conquest of a Country, or the revolution of a State;


Cleonice. Were I a Lover of News, I would only recount such wherein those
should be Interess'd that heard me; and if this News were News of that part of
the Town where I live, they would please me better than the News Philemon
commends.


Belise. And I must declare my self for that kind of News which is instructive,
and it is of that sort methinks wherewith we should entertain our selves.


Dorante. I know not, Madam, whether there be News which may in particular, be
called instructive, but I may say that all News in general may become
instructive, when they are related by an able Man. He can render the
circumstances thereof useful for manners, for the administration of affairs,
for the Government of People, and for the ordering of Armies. If a Siege or
Battle be set forth to us in their proper colors, we shall observe the defects
or the good conduct of the Generals, and thence make our advantage. If we be
told of the consternation wherein the Ottomans were, we shall see that we must
lay aside Pleasures, when business requires a constant attendance. We shall
accuse Mahomet IV. of blindness, in going to divert himself in hunting, when he
should be at the Head of his Armies.

We shall observe that things are generally preserved by the same means as they
were acquired, that Valor is necessary to keep a Sovereign on the Throne; that
Cowardice draws on the contempt and inignation of the Soldiery and Subjects.


Erastus. That which passes at Court serves still more for our instruction. We
see that all People must do their Duty under a Master who is never deceived,
and who only recompenses Merit.


Cleonice. What you say would give me a great desire to inform my self on the
Affairs of the Court of Rome, did I believe we might entertain our selves with
that sort of News, as well as with those we now spoke of.


Philemon. I do not believe it unlawful for to speak our sentiments on things
we see Printed, and posted up; provided it be rather to instruct us, than to
make our selves Busybodies, who fancy we must decide all things.


Dorante. We can add nothing to what was said on this matter by a great
Magistrate, whose Learning and Eloquence has long since been admired by all the
World. The force of his Reasons and his Citations have increased the
Astonishment wherein I was before, at the Usage was showed our King's
Ambassador.


Erastus. Yet the Law of Nations, which requires that the Person of an
Ambassador be sacred, is known by all the World; and every body has seen after
what manner we have received the Embassies which were sent us from Infidel
Kings. They have dealt in a different manner at Rome, toward the Ambassador of
the Eldest Son of the Church, the most Christian King, a Monarch whose
Predecessors have protected and defended the Holy See.


Dorante. Will you believe me, instead of wading farther into this matter, do
as I have done, buy the Book we have already hinted at, read it more than once,
and you will have the pleasure of profiting by the Labors of a great Man who
knows more of it than we shall ever know.


Belise. Return we then to what we are to say of other News. Do you think we
may draw any Instruction from the little Relations Erastus has declared himself
for?


Dorante. We need not doubt thereon; for when we are told with what Dexterity a
jealous or covetous Person has been imposed on; we are instructed how to make
use of the like Subtilties; and the Covetous and Jealous are hereby taught to
take better Care. In fine, Cleonice must permit us to say that News may render
a Conversation agreeable; That a Polite Person may recount them, provided he is
sure of what he says, and that he does not wholly set up for a News-monger.


Cleonice. I find nothing so ridiculous as to apply one's self to the telling
of News from Morning till Night to all those we meet.


Philemon. It Is true, there are People who have no other Business. As soon as
they are seen, they are immediately asked how many Bassa's are strangled at
Constantinople, or in the Turks Army. They are questioned on the manner after
which the Imperialists live in Transylvania; they must know whether the King of
Poland pretends to make himself Master of Caminec; and what Design the General
Morosini may have.


Dorante. A News-monger can answer all Questions; if he has any knowledge in
Maps, and the Interests of Princes, he may return probable Answers, otherwise
he pays for his Boldness. For if there be any News-mongers who guess right,
there are others who speak Confidently without knowing what they say. These
last sometimes bring themselves into Trouble, and imagine thereby to make
themselves famous.

As Dorante ended these words, they were advertised that every thing was ready,
and this agreeable Company parted for Versailles.


FINIS.
THE Secret HISTORY OF THE MOST RENOWNED Q. Elizabeth, AND THE Earl of Essex.

By a Person of Quality.

LONDON, Printed for R. Wellington at the Lute in St. Paul's Churchyard: And
E. Rumball at the Post House in Covent Garden, 1699.

THE EARL of ESSEX: OR, THE AMORS OF Q. ELIZABETH. PART I.
THE People had seen Essex in extraordinary Favor with the Queen; and were
therefore the more surpised at his Fall. She had raised him to the highest
Dignities of her Kingdom; and he continued then General of her Army in Ireland,
against the Earl of Tyrone, who had raised a Rebellion there. His Endeavors to
divert his Misfortune were vain; and after an obstinate Resistance he was
brought up to London, and confined to his House.

The Services he had done the State by his Valor, were very considerable: But
the Favors the Queen's Goodness had heaped on him, proceeded from a more
secret Cause, and more pressing Motives. Had the Earl of Essex never signalized
himself by the Glory of his Actions, the Kindness she had for him would have
made her distinguish him from the rest of her Subjects: And it is certain, her
Affection had made him her Favorite, before he could pretend to it in the
least by his Services. She was highly renowned above the Women of her Time, for
Courage, and Strength of Mind; yet too weak to be Proof against the Impressions
of Love. She had a passionate Tenderness for the the unfortunate Criminal,
which was his Advocate, and defended him from the Severity of Justice; and was
so far from taking Pleasure in a public Revenge of him, that she abhorred in
her Heart those cruel Maxims that crossed her Inclinations.

She kept her Bed to prevent public Discovery of a Trouble it was not in her
Power to hide; and admitting of no Company but the Countess of Nottingham (her
intimate Confident) she gave Vent to her Tears, and freely lamented the
Misfortune that threatened the Repose of her Life.

The Countess had a little suspected the Queen's Inclinations; and thought her
self obliged by powerful Reasons to find out the Mystery: But this being a
tender Point, and having to deal with a Princess naturally of a very high
Spirit, the Countess was silent. But the Queen's Grief was too violent, to
continue long mute: Her Sighs confirmed the Suspicions of the Countess; and her
repeating in her Trouble the Earl of Essex's Name, convinced the Countess of
the Truth of what till then she had but slightly fancied.

The Countess had that Command of her self, she easily concealed her Concern in
the Adventure; and appearing only sensible of the Trouble of the Queen, she
used all the Art she had to comfort her; and failed not to put her in mind, how
serviceable on that Occasion her Virtue might be to her, which had already made
her the Wonder of the World.

Ah, Madam! (says the Queen interrupting her) You do not yet know me. The Force
I have long put upon my self, has made you think, with the rest of the World,
that the Height of my Spirit, has raised me above the Infirmities of Nature;
and the Greatness of my Thoughts, secured me from the Troubles of Life. But,
alas! Poor Elizabeth is a Slave to her Weakness; and has all this while but
sacrificed to Reputation all the Quiet of her Soul, and Happiness of her Days.
It Is high time, Madam, to reveal the Mystery, my Heart, Madam, is sensible and
susceptible of the deepest Impressions: And what I have in Appearance,
condemned most, is perhaps the only thing has most Power over me.

The Earl of Essex is no less famous for the Victorg gained over my Heart, than
for his Treasons against me: And I, who have maintained the Freedom of my Soul,
and preserved the Liberty of my Affection, from submitting to the Efforts of
all the Princes of Europe, and the Greatest of my Subjects, have now the
Misfortune to find my Inclinations violently swayed in Favor of a Person, as
ungrateful as faithless. You know what I have done to raise him; nor can you be
ignorant how ill he has requited me by his Crimes. A Man, who being Governor
of Ireland, General of my Army, in quiet Possession of the best Offices of my
Kingdom, and Master of my Affection; yet could not forbear conspiring against
that Authority I was but too much inclined to give him a Share of; and perhaps,
against a Life I took no other Pleasure in, but the Opportunities I had by it
to make his happy --

It was not in the Queen's Power to say a Word more. And the Countess more than
ordinarily concerned at the Discourse, grew so much the more curious; and
pretending to comfort the Queen, engaged her dexterously to a further Discovery.

No, Madam, (replies the Queen) there is no Hope of Comfort for me, if the Earl
of Essex dye. By the Condition you see his Imprisonment has put me in, you may
guess what I am like to be reduced to by his Death. His Crimes I abhor, but am
in Love with his Person; and find, that as I have been so weak to let him know
it, I shall again be so weak to pardon him all. You do not know his Carriage
toward me. And perhaps my Affection will as easily find Excuses for his
Ingratitude, as it did for my Kindness. I will give you the Relation of it; but
conjure you to reproach me so plainly with the Shame I expose my self to, that
I may at last prevail with my self, to abandon the ingratefullest of Men, to
the Rigor of his Fate.

I Shall not give you an Account of the Interests of England, otherwise than
what the Earl of Essex stands concerned in. I will pass by the Obstacles raised
against my Establishment; and tell you only, I quickly gained Possession of the
Throne, was adored of my People, and happy beyond the Hopes of a Person of my
Sex. But Elevation is not always attended with the Pleasure of Life; and that
smooth Gale of Felicity and Repose in the Beginning of my Reign, quickly blew
over, at least, in my Opinion.

Being settled in my Government, I found my Court thronged with Suitors of
sovereign Grandeur, striving to merit the Choice it was in my Power (at once)
to make of a Husband, and a King: The Earls of Somerset, Leicester, Arundel,
and Hertford, had most Right to pretend to it. But finding my self disturbed by
their Importunities in my most serious Affairs, and not at all inclined to
entertain their Suits, I formally declared to them I designed to live single,
and endeavored to make them amends by considerable Employments, and Allyances
I bestowed on them. Three of them openly quitted the Hopes they had conceived:
Only the Earl of Leicester, more ambitious, or more constant than the rest,
kept afoot his Pretensions, and publicly continued his Services: But it was
not ordained his Perseverance should be crowned with the Reward of my Affection.

The Earl of Essex having signalized himself against the rebellious Earls of
Northumberland and Westmerland, made, about this Time, his first Appearance at
Court; and found with more Ease the Secret to please me.

Those who presented him to me, spoke much in Commendation of him. And I was
too much an Eyewitness of the Merit of his Person. I looked upon him as an
extraordinary Man. Nor could I but think it equally extraordinary, to find my
self so strangely affected with him at the first Sight. The Reception I gave
him, was very obliging; and the Acknowledgments he made me, were full of
Repsect: So that for the Time, I saw no Cause to check my Inclination.

I may date from this first View, the Loss of my Repose. I presently fell into
a Disquiet I had till then been altogether a Stranger to: And in spite of my
high Spirit, I could not but inwardly acknowledge the Cause. And all the
Efforts of my haughty Humor against it, served only to make the Triumph of the
Earl of Essex more Glorious.

You would better comprehend the Condition I was in, did you know the
Resentments of a great Soul, jealous of its Reputation, in Extremities of this
Nature; the Combats it undergoes, and the Confusion that attends the Defense.

I feared my Eyes would discover the Pleasure I took in looking on the Earl of
Essex, and my Weakness occasion Discourses in the World, to the Prejudice of my
Glory. I shunned the Sight of him; but to little purpose, when I carried the
Idea of him in my Heart. I was angry with my self for it, and summoned my
Reason to my Assistance to deface it: But Love had so violently seized my
Heart, that I struggle in vain to dispossess him.

By little and little I yielded my self Captive to that powerful Inclination
which had at first Sight made me so much in Love with the Person of the Earl of
Essex: And pretending the Services he had done me against the Earls of
Northumberland and Westmerland, and the Memory I had of the good Services of
his Father, as the Ground of my Favor, I made him Knight of the Garter, Master
of the Horse, and of the Privy Council, though under Age.

Thus did I cherish and indulge the Weakness I had so long struggled with, and
condemned my self for. The higher he grew in Office, the dearer he was to my
Person. His Complaisance, his Respect, his Looks, (which to me appeared all
kind and languishing) and especially my Affection, which had Tenderness enough
to give a favorable Construction to the least of his Actions, conspired to
betray me.

Envy raised him Enemies: The Earl of Leicester* (concerned to be jealous of
him) quickly suspected the Truth. And looking on the Earl of Essex, as a Person
of Merit, capable to cross his Pretensions, he made it his Business to supplant
him; which I presently observed. I easily foresaw the Trouble my Favor might
cause between Persons so considerable: And the better to countenance the
Kindness I had for Essex, I affected a little Complaisance for Leicester, which
somewhat abated the Edge of his Jealousy.

About that time, the King of Sweden, the Emperor, for his Son, and the Duke
of Anjou, made me their several Proposals of Marriage, which I was forced to
receive; but wanted not Pretenses to send home their Ambassadors, without any
Fruit of their Negotiation.

How contrary to the real Motive of my Actions, were the Interpretations Men
made of my Refusal of Marriage with these Princes! It redounded much to my
Honor; my Glory was increased by it, and the World admired my Contempt of
Love, even then when my Soul was wholly possessed by it.

The Aversion I expressed for Foreign Alliances, raised the Hopes of the Earl of
Leicester; and Essex seemed overjoyed at it: Not (said he, as I heard
afterward) but that the Queen is discreet in all her Actions; and her Choice,
had she made one, had been decent and just: But that I think her so fit to
reign alone, that I could not without extreme Trouble, see her share her
Authority with a Husband, who perhaps would in time be her Master.

The Construction I made of the Earl of Essex's Zeal, was suitable to my
Affection, and the Desire I had of gaining his Heart; which I wished so
passionately, that I fancied it done, and that the pretended Severity, that
made me slight Kings, was the only thing that frightened his Respect; and that
he had declared his Love to me, could he have thought he durst presume to do it.

The Duke of Alanson (not discouraged by my Refusal of his Brother) began soon
after to make Addresses for himself; and it was not in my Power to deny my
Consent for his Voyage to London. But what Advantages soever he pleaded in his
Favor, certain it is, the Earl of Essex lost not any he had gained over me.
The Stay of that Prince in England, fortified the Earl's Interest: He was
constantly at my Elbow. When the Duke of Alanson spoke to me, methought I read
Reproaches against my self, in the Earl of Essex's Eyes. The Earl of Leicester
watched me as carefully; though not with equal Regard from me. I raised so many
Difficulties against the Duke of Alanson's Design, that he was forced to
desist: And I rid my Hands of his Person, and his Suit, without giving him
Cause of Complaint.

You know that after the Death of the Queen of Scots, the King of Spain (who
still makes himself indispensibly subject to a Necessity of opposing me)
entered into a League with the Pope against me. And having filled the World
with injurious Declarations against my Right to the Crown, they joined all
their Forces to pull it off my Head. The Spaniards made themselves on the
sudden Masters of Daventer: The Duke of Parma laid Seige to Sluys. It was high
Time to provide for Defense; and the Earl of Leicester was sent away with all
the Nobility of the Kingdom, in the Head of a numerous Army.

The Earl of Essex was one of the first to follow him; and as strongly inclined
as I was to stay him, yet I thought the Man I loved ought not to be idle when
he had Opportunity by Glorious Actions to merit the Kindness I had for him.

I will not spend Time in giving you a Relation of a War, which perhaps you are
sufficiently informed of, and concerns not the Secrets of my Life. It tended to
our Advantage; all (to the very Winds) having favored our Side. When the
Generals of the Army arrived at London, I was carried in Triumph to St. Paul's:
yet the Joy I had to see the Earl of Essex, was greater than that for the
signal Victory obtained. Amongst an infinite Number of Persons of several
Ranks, my Eyes were fixed only on him: And much ado I had, sometimes, out of
Policy, to cast a Look on the Earl of Leicester. Both of them had done very
great Actions: I commended them publicly; and particularly joy'd the Earl of
Essex, for the Success of his Valor and Conduct; who spoke so much in Praise
of the Valor and Conduct of the Earl of Leicester, that he was forced in
Requital, to do him Right, in giving him openly the Elogies he deserved.

Not long after this Expedition, the Earl of Essex fell into a very deep
Melancholy. I was the first that perceived it; and took it for an Effect of
some secret Passion. I wished now and then he would once take the Boldness to
declare himself, but presently my Reason, upon second Thoughts, set before my
Eyes the Confusion would certainly follow an Explication of that Nature, to the
Ruin of my Reputation, and that high Esteem the World had for me: Yet (to
speak Truth) I could not resolve what to do, or to wish. I am in Love, I
desired to be loved again; and that was all I could make of it

The Earl of Essex, in the mean time continued sad. I was troubled to see him
so; and fancying my self the Cause, I was desirous to know it; and resolved to
fetch it out of him.

He had full Liberty of Access to me, and I enlarged it daily: But not to
expose my Reputation in forcing him to declare himself, I pretended an
Inclination to favor the Earl of Leicester; who, since his late Victories, had
entertained new Hopes.

One Day, as the Earl of Essex came to thank me for the Government of Ireland I
had bestowed on him, I was loath to lose the Opportuity; and interrupting what
he would have said in Acknowledgment: You need not enlarge your self (said I)
on a thing I am fully assured of. I take Pleasure in raising your Fortune; and
wish I could as easily remove your Melancholy, as I am pleased to give a new
Proof of the Sense I have of your Service. You may; in your Turn, oblige me
(added I) who am fallen into a troublesome Conjuncture, and find it very
difficult to reduce my Affections into a Compliance with the Necessity of the
State. This presses me hard, to provide England a King: This Choice is
difficult; and I have not a mind to make it among Foreigners. You are discreet,
and (I have Reason to believe) not the least loving of my Subjects. I will take
your Advice; speak your Mind freely, what Man in England you think best
deserves this Fortune?

I looked on him with that Kindness, as would have inspired the most fearful
with Boldness: I observed in his Eyes extraordinary Emotions, and all the
Symptoms of a Secret ready to break out. The Point appeared Tender, and My
Imagination flattered Me, all would be as I wished. Your Majesty's Resolution
(answers he) will render a Man more Glorious by the Quality of Your Husband,
than of the Greatest Monarch on Earth. Remember (said I) I expect not a
Panegyric, but Advice from You: And that your Business at present, is to
Nominate the Man I am to make King; not to Commend his good Fortune in being
so. The Business is so nice, Madam, (replied he) I dare not speak my mind,
though Your Majesty order it. Did you know (said I) what moves me to this
Confidence in you, you would perhaps express your self with a great deal more
Freedom. But because to bring you to it, I must proceed further; tell me,
whether you think the Earl of Leicester deserves to be your Prince? The Earl of
Leicester (answers he) is Well Born, and a Person of Great Merit, and will
answer the Honor your Majesty intends him. Is that all you have to say to me,
said I? Ah, Madam (answers he, with a Sigh, which made me expect something more
Pleasing) I should have more to say to you for my self, than the Earl of
Liecester. What hinders you? said I. The respect I have for your Majesty,
answered he. I am in Love, Madam; but it is not a thing fitting to make my Queen
my Confident. I Blushed at those Words, and was in a Mind not to proceed
further. But I looked upon him, and there needed no more to declare my
Weakness: I have that esteem for you, added I, that I am not unwilling to be of
your Council. Well, Madam, since you will have it so, continues he, I must
acquaint You, I am desperately in Love with the Countess of Rutland; and that I
cannot Live, if Your Majesty consent not that she shall make me happy.

You may easily guess what an Astonishment I was in at this Explication; having
upon so good Grounds expected to have heard My Self named; it was well for me,
I had not altogether lost the Haughtiness of my Nature: the Poor Remains of it
were my only Help to preserve me from discovering more Weakness to the Earl,
then he had discovered Love for his Mistress. His Transports helped me to cover
mine. He perceived not the Blow he had given me. And sacrificing my Grief to my
Glory, I affected to appear calm and unconcerned, when my Soul was full of
Trouble and Confusion. You have made a good Choice, said I, and the Countess of
Rutland will very well deserve the Kindness you profess for her. Madam, replies
he, with Satisfaction in his Looks, which heightened my Grief, You have done
more for me, in approving the Passion I have for the Countess of Rutland, than
You could have done, had You procured me the Empire of the Universe. It is your
Desire then, added I, with a Sigh my Despair forced from me, that I should give
her to you. I desire any thing, says he, that may preserve me from dying for
Love of her. Go your way then, said I, to be rid of him, and ease my self of
the intolerable Constraint I was under, Be assured, I will concern my self in
your Amor: You shall know it in time. But take heed you give not the Earl of
Leicester the least intimation of the Secret I have imparted to you. Not before
I have Order from your Majesty, answered he, to congratulate his Happiness, and
pay him the Devoirs of an Affectionate Subject.

Had you seen with what an Air he pronounced these words, you would have
abhorred him for his Ingratitude. As for me, I was left in so desperate a
Condition, it was long e're I could recover my Reason out of the Entanglements
of Love, Anger, and Jealousy.

I was partly the Author of my Misfortune, by calling to Court the Countess of
Rutland, after her Husband's Death, without considering she was one of the
handsomest Ladies on Earth; and but Sixteen Years old. I have not observed any
particular Kindness the Earl of Essex had for her: He visited her as other
Ladies of the Court. But their Intreague was mysterious; and the more secretly
it was carried, the Engagement was the stronger, and the Affection more tender.

It is impossible to express the Trouble I was in when Anger seized the Place
Grief had possessed in my Heart. Though the Earl of Essex had been ignorant of
his good Fortune, I could not forbear reproaching him for slighting it as he
did; and forgot not to charge him with Treachery and Ingratitude. But when I
considered he was so far from apprehending my meaning, that he was gone
directly to make a solemn Tender of his Love to another, and carry her the
joyful News of his Success with me; I resolved, at least to delay the Pleasure
of it for a time; and went out of my Closet into my Chamber, to call him back.
I thought I heard the Earl of Liecester's Voice and his in the Antichamber;
and going to the Door, found I was not mistaken. Leicester's Jealousy, had, in
all probability, made him watch Essex as he entered my Chamber; and when he saw
him return with Satisfaction in his Looks; You are happy, says he, in a
Priveledge, to entertain the Queen as long as you please; when others, who as
passionately desire it, cannot obtain that Happiness for a moment. I am
persuaded, replies Essex, you better deserve it; and make no doubt, but you
will find more pleasure in it. I will leave you at liberty to go in Search of
it; and you may do me a Favor not to stay me, being called another way, on a
very pressing Occasion. He had no sooner said so, but he went his way; and I
was so confounded with this new Sight, I scarce knew where I stood.

Having at length recovered my Reason, I had the Discretion to hide my
Weakness. Presently my Anger would have vented it self on the Countess of
Rutland: But I considered her only Crime was her Beauty; and that she knew not
my Concern for her Servant.

The Earl of Leicester having at his Entrance perceived me in Disorder, durst
not take notice of it; but after a short Visit, withdrew.

A little before, I had sent to Congratulate the King of Navarre, upon his
coming to the Crown of France; and having intelligence he wanted Aid to secure
his Government, I resolved to send him some under the Conduct of the Earl of
Essex, in hopes his Absence might Cure me. I would have persuaded my self, the
Cause of my removing him on that Occasion, was my Desire to forget him; but
upon second Thoughts, I must confess, it was rather the Desire of removing him
out of the Sight of a beloved Rival.

Being resolved on the Point, I hastened the Execution; and having ordered the
Earl of Essex to attend me: You love Honor, said I to him, and I cannot think
you will prefer the Pleasure of Sighing before a Mistress, to the Opportunities
of acquiring Glory: I have provided One for you; and am resolved you shall
Command the Troops I am sending to the French King. And to fortify your self
against the Troubles of Absence, you need only think of the Pleasures of a
Return. His Answer was only in Sighs; and that passionate Language made me
hasten his Departure.

Soon after the Countess of Rutland (whom I could not forbear using very
coldly) desired leave to go into the Country, a considerable distance from
London. I had then so little Love for her, I did not desire to have her near
me; but readily consented she should retire.

The Hopes she had to see the Earl of Essex return, supported her so, that she,
with much moderation, saw him take his leave: But I am assured by Experience,
the Grief for his Departure, equaled (at least) the Hopes for his Return.

When he was arrived in France, Fame spoke aloud in Commendation of him: his
Absence altered not my Affection; and in spite of all I could do to the
contrary, I had a sensible Pleasure to hear him Commended.

Had I been desired, I should have called him home as soon as France was in
Peace: But I sent him new Orders to join Admiral Howard, who was going for
Spain: And I gave him the like Commission for this Expedition, as for that of
France.

He did Wonders in Spain: His single Valor frightened the Enemies. And having
taken Calis, and pillaged the Coast of Portugal, he put again to Sea for
England. The Fleet was scattered by a Storm, and we had News the Earl of Essex
was lost. Then it was I knew better than ever, the Kindness I had for him. I
could no longer persuade my self that his indifference for me deserved mine for
him.

I accused the Sea a Thousand Times, for having taken too unreasonable a
Revenge for me; and was under Sufferings more cruel than Death, when News was
brought me, that by the Assistance of the Admiral of Holland, he was arrived at
Plymouth; from whence, in few days he came to Court.

To show you how little Reason we have, when we are in Love, and how fickle are
the Resolutions of a tender Heart, though provoked by Slights and Contempts: I
had lamented the Death of the Earl of Essex, and received the News of his being
Alive with a Thousand Transports of Joy. I was extremely pleased with the
Report of his Arrival at London. But when I considered I should see him full of
Love for another, and that perhaps I should not be able to conceal my
Jealousy, I was tempted to order him to give the Council an Account of his
Conduct, and not admit him into my Presence. I was sometimes of the Opinion, I
should be able to do so: But this weak Heart of mine, so prepossessed in favor
of him, revolted against all my Resolutions; I must follow my Inclinations, and
see the most dangerous Enemy of my Repose, the Troubler of my Rest. He came to
Whitehall; I admitted him to my Presence, I looked upon him; and, spite of all
my high Spirit, he saw nothing but Kindness in all my Actions.

You may imagine, what an agreeable Surprise it was to me, to find at our first
Conference, that Absence had weaned his Affections from the Countess of
Rutland. He appeared no longer in that Languishing Melancholy I observed him in
before his Departure: He had Satifaction in his Looks: The Air of his Actions
were smooth and calm; and I fancied as much Joy in his Face, though the Countess
of Rutland was absent, as I felt in my self, at the Explication he made. I see
you again returned with Victory, said I: But am sorry it is not in my Power to
reward your Toil with a Sight of the Countess of Rutland. But if any thing I
can do, can comfort you -- I am easily comforted for her Absence, when I am
permitted to see your Majesty, answered he. I have no passion now, but for the
Glory of Serving Your Majesty; and the Countess of Rutland is now to me no more
than other Ladies of the Court. Are you no longer in Love with the Countess of
Rutland? replied I, between Joy and Distrust. You have spoken too fast. When
you see her again -- When I see her again, says he, interrupting me, it shall
be without those Transports I expressed for her, not forgetting the Respects due
to Your Majesty. What, answered I, are you not afraid of the Reproaches of a
provoked Mistress? No Madam, said he, in a free and unconcerned manner: All I
am concerned for, is to do my Duty, and approve my self worthy Your Majesty's
Favor. This, answered I, deserves my Acknowledgment; and time shall let you
see I am not ungrateful.

Thus did the Earl of Essex assure me he was Cured of his first Passion: And I
was in Hopes, it might be in my Power to see him one Day entertain another. A
Week after, he desired leave to go into the Country, about his private Affairs:
He was absent a Fortnight; and returned more calm and unconcerned than ever.

The Earl of Leicester had doubled his importunities in this Absence of the
Earl of Essex in France and Spain; and obliged me at last, to put him out of
Hopes. He is naturally Bold; and was so blown up with the Opinion of the Glory
he had gained by some late Atchievments, that he proceeded to telling me
plainly, He was jealous of the Earl of Essex: and would have made a Crime of
the Discourse I told you of, past between them, as Essex left my Chamber. The
Answer I made him, was an Absolute Command, He should be silent: Which was so
far obeyed, that after some days Murmuring, he held his Peace. Yet this put me
in mind to observe some measures, and not to follow openly my Inclinations.

Things continued in this State, till the Troubles of Ireland. I have often
opened my Mouth, to let the Earl of Essex know the Advantges he had over me;
but Modesty shut it again: Yet seeing him under a Necessity of going for
Ireland, when the Earl of Tyrone had raised a General Rebellion, I had not the
Power to let him take leave without acquainting him, The Kingdom was at his
Command. Upon the first News of the Troubles, he threw himself at my Feet,
begging the Honor of my Command, to go Quiet those Disorders. You have done
enough, said I, and there is no need you should (by exposing your self to New
Dangers) oblige me to New Acknowledgments. I doubt not, Madam, (answered he)
but the Favor I beg of your Majesty, will be envied me: But I take the
Boldness to say, Your Majesty cannot refuse it me, without doing your self
Injury: It being an occasion may contribute to meriting the Favor you have
already honored me with. The Ardour you express for undertaking Great Actions,
Replied I, is not perhaps so Pleasing as you imagine: And all the Good that may
Redound to England through your Valor, is less considerable than the Trouble
is given me, who take less Care of my Crown, than your Life. I am Ambitions:
Yet -- Ah! My Lord, save me the Confusion of a more particular Explication of
what you ought and might easily have long since understood. I might perhaps
presume too far in my Wishes, says the Earl, in some Disorder. Wish boldly,
answered I, I Love you; and if I blush to tell you so, it is not that I am
either Ashamed, or Repent of it. You may believe this Acknowledgment a very
hard Task for a Person of my Humor, who have seen you sigh for another, when I
slighted Kings for your Sake, and would have Sacrificed more to your
Satisfaction. What Madam! cries he, like a Man astonished, Have You loved me,
and I been so unfortunate, to make my self unworthy Your Kindness by those
Sighs I now disavow? Did my Eyes never tell you what I looked for in Yours?
said I. I never had the Boldness, answered he, to make any such Constructions
of your Looks. Your Fear was the effect of indifference, said I; but no more of
what is past. Tell me now, can ye love me? Rather ask me, Madam, answers he, if
all the Affection of my Soul can merit Your love? And whether the Earl of
Leicester, whom you design to make the Happiest Man on Earth, shall not carry
the Day from me? The Earl of Leicester, said I, was but a Pretense to make you
speak. I told you then truly the Thoughts I had of you. My Trouble for you was
not small, both in your Absence, and since your Return: But all is forgotten.
Be henceforth as I wish, and doubt not of being Happy.

He answered me with some Disorder, which I fancied the Effect of unexpected
Joy. I thought it time to be no longer scrupulous; and that it was in vain to
have any Reserves, when I had said so much. I will not let you go under any
Uncertainty, proceeded I, but to convince you clearly of the Truth of what I Have
said, take This, said I, delivering him a RING, as the highest Mark of my
Favor, keep it as a Pledge of my Kindness; which I conjure you to preserve in
the State it is in: And on that Condition, I promise you, never to deny you any
thing you shall desire of me, when you show me this RING, though it cost me my
Life and my Fortune.

His Joy and Acknowledgments at receiving the RING, were in Appearance,
extraordinary and unparalled; and attended with Promises of as high a Nature.

He went for Ireland in few Days, leaving me fully persuaded his Thoughts were
wholly taken up with me. But he had scarce advanced up to the Rebels, but he
was charged with all the Crimes which occasioned his Imprisonment, and that of
the Earl of Southampton. Then it was, I began to repent I had not given Ear to
the wholesome Advice Cecil would have given me, concerning the secret Conduct
of the Earl of Essex.

In a Word, while my Thoughts were wholly employed to make his Fortune
glorious, he was plotting with the Earl of Tyrone, to surprise and make me
Prisoner in this Palace.

You know the rest, Madam; his obstinate Resistance, his want of Respect for my
Orders, his imprisoning my Ministers, his murdering my Soldiers, and his
intolerable Pride in all his Misfortunes.

Thus ended the Queen's Discourse; which having called fresh to her Mind all
that had passed between her and Essex, she was more troubled than ever.

The Countess of Nottingham has heard her with Attention suitable to her great
Concern in the Discourse. She, as well as the Queen, had been in Love with the
Earl; and advanced many Steps, but in vain, to raise a Passion in him: And
having newly understood the Cause of his slighting her, it added infinitely to
her former Resentments.

She had no mind to condemn the Queen's Weakness, knowing her self guilty of
the like: Nor was she inclined to speak in Favor of a Man who was grown so
much the more odious to her, as she had formerly passionately loved him. She
thought it sufficient to comfort the Queen with Discourses that seemed to
proceed only from Zeal for her Service; when, in truth, her Thoughts were
wholly bent for the Ruin of an ungrateful Lover; who in her Judgment, deserved
nothing but Hatred at her Hands.

Though Love thought not fit the Earl of Essex should admire the Countess of
Nottingham; yet another was her Captive, whose Character did (in a manner) make
her amends: It was Secretary Cecil; who amidst his great Offices, and the
Gravity that became them, discovered in the Beauty, Ingenuity, and high Spirit
of the Countess of Nottingham, some Charms, that made him capable of a strong
Passion for her; which was heightened by the Hatred both of them had professed
against the Earl of Essex; Cecil having always looked on him as the invincible
Obstacle of his ambitious Pretensions: And the Countess had against him all the
Rage and Aversion that usually succeed Kindness abused.

They were glad of the Imprisonment of the Earl of Essex; but the favorable
Inclinations the Queen expressed for him, alarmed them.

The Countess had no sooner taken Leave of the Queen, but she gave Cecil an
Account of all she had learnt. Having considered the Consequences, they
concluded it necessary, while their Princess sighed secretly for the Prisoner,
means should be found by private Ways, and in artful Conduct, without their
appearing to have any such Design, to take away the Mercy which Love might
inspire into her.

Cecil, for the first Step, pressed the Queen to bring Essex to his Trial; and
caused certain News of his Death to be spread throughout England.

Essex, in the mean time, was busied with Thoughts of more Weight than those of
his Life. He knew well enough, his Queen loved him, and knew as well, he had
deceived her; and that she might with a great deal of Justice not only
reproach, but condemn him.

The Queen had not seen him since his going into Ireland: But having not the
Power to give him up to his ill Fortune, without having heard him, she resolved
to go to his House, where he was Prisoner, to reproach him as he deserved; and
endeavor, if possible, to find him innocent.

It is not far from Whitehall to Essex-House: and the Queen took so good Order
in the matter, that no Notice was taken of the Undecency of the Visit; having
been introduced by her Confidents alone into the Chamber of the Criminal.

He was surpised at the Presence of the Queen: The languishing Condition she
was in, made her sigh. All went for him, and the Victory seemed easy. He
saluted her with a profound Respect; and then fixing on her Face those Eyes of
his, which had so often charmed her, he fetched some Tears from hers. Well, my
Lord, (says she, drying them) you see what I do for you notwithstanding all the
Crimes I can reproach you with. I am come to you, and with a Design to hear
you, if you have any thing to say to justify your self. I have loved you too
well, not to wish it above all things: And, would Heaven were pleased, your
Justification might be purchased with any (the most precious) Thing in my
Power. My greatest Crime is, that I thought my self too happy, Madam, replies
the Earl, sighing. Had you rested there, said the Queen, I should have been too
well satisfied to have complained of you* But to believe your self happy, was
it necessary you should betray me? And, must you needs have made use of violent
means, to make your self Master of a Fortune I was willing to share with you?
What Reason could you have to seek the Protection of the Kings of Scotland and
Spain? Did any Interests oblige you to secret Correspondencies with Tyrone?
And, was it for the Safety of my Person, you designed to make me your Slave,
and his? All you have done since to my Subjects, against my Orders? Are those
the Expressions of your Respect? Is it by Fury and Treason you show your Zeal
for me and the Public? Or, is all we have seen and heard of you, but Illusion
and Fancy? Yes, Madam, replies the Earl, those Accusations of Treason and ill
Designs, have run me upon the desperate Resistance I made. You have been
pleased to heap Favors upon me; and I (too proud of what I so little deserved)
flattered my self with Expectation of a thousand Pleasures which you had not
absolutely forbid me to hope for. This let loose the Envy and Jealousy of
others against my good Fortune: They abused your Majesty with Mis-informations;
and I had the Misfortunes to be assured your Majesty had ordered I should be
Arrested; though my Innocence would have persuaded me the contrary. I confess,
Madam, I was in a Rage, to see my Enemies insult over me; being abandoned by
your Majesty, and on the Point of suffering (perhaps) a shameful Death. I
thought it neither for my Reputation, nor your Majesty's Honor, I should die
as a Criminal. This put me upon having Recourse to those Succors and
Assistances they reproach me with; and the Resolution I took to go out of
England, in hope to confound my Accusers. But I found all the Passages stopped:
And I must acknowledge, in that desperate Condition, I vented my Fury, by
taking Revenge on your Ministers. They, Madam, and only they, were the Objects
of the Rebellion I am charged with. My Design was, only they, who had so
industriously labored to make me appear guilty, should do me Right, in
declaring my Innocence; and permit me to lay it, and my Life at your Majesty's
Feet. I never doubted, but your Majesty would have done me the Honor to hear
me: And that by a clear Discovery of the Truth, I should have certainly
confounded the Envy of my Enemies. But their Malice has had the Success to see
me a Prisoner, hated by my Sovereign, despised by the World, and made a
Sacrifice to their Rage: And now what remains, but that I receive the Sentence
of my Death pronounced by them; and see Cobham, Cecil, Rawleigh, and their
Fellows, share the Favors you honored me with. You are well assured I hate
you not, says the Queen, interrupting him: But, should I believe you? Can I
give you up to the ill Fate that threatens you? I shall never murmur against
your Majesty's Orders, replies the Earl, but submit to them readily, whatever
they be. But I confess, it would make me mad, should my Enemies have the
Advantage to condemn me.

The Earl of Essex knew the weak Side of the Queen; and easily revived in her
that Tenderness he had formerly inspired her with. No, says she, having paused
a while, you shall not die. Make use of your Advantages: triumph over a Heart,
whose Inclinations you very well know. I will believe your Intentions less
criminal than they appear. But, my Lord, I conjure you by that Kindness of
which you have such particular Experience, that you give me no Cause to repent
of it. Trouble not your self for your Reputation and Honor, I will take care
to repair it. And before two Days be over, I will restore you to the highest
Place you ever had under me.

Essex transported with Joy for the happy Success of this Conference, affected
the Queen so much with submissive Acknowledgments, that he restored her Spirits
to perfect Tranquillity. At parting, she promised to call a Council on the
Morrow, and in a glorious manner to declare him innocent.

As soon as it was Day, she sent for Cecil: And the Countess of Nottingham
waited on her. Having told them in a few Words of a great Conflict past between
her Justice and her Mercy, she concluded for the latter, and ordered Cecil to
summon the Council, that she might declare to them the Design she had to set
Essex at Liberty; assuring him she had invincible Reasons for doing so. This
was a mortal Blow to the ambitious Cecil, and the Countess of Nottingham. They
presently looked on one another, as if they would have askd each others Advice
what Course to be taken: Afterward they spoke to the Queen, in hopes to divert
her; but she was inflexible: and Cecil was forced to order an extraordinary
Call of the Council.

But while the Earl of Essex's Enemies thought his good Fortune on the Point of
being reconciled to him, Chance labored for them with unexpected Success.

As the Queen was going to Council, Word was brought her, the Countess of
Rutland desired to wait on her. The Queen blushed, remembering what was passed:
And looking on the Request as unseasonable and unlucky, she was minded to have
put off the Countess to another time: But considering, she used not to deny any
Person Access, and that the Countess of Rutland was a Lady of the best Quality;
she commanded she should be admitted; and the Countess immediately came in.

Though her Eyes languished, her Looks were sad, her Dress and her Gate very
careless; yet her Beauty was conspicuous, and moving; she threw her self at the
Queen's Feet; and with Extremity of Grief in her Looks, Madam, says she, with a
great deal of Pain, I come to implore your Majesty's Goodness for the
unfortunate Earl of Essex. For the Earl of Essex, Madam? Answers the Queen. How
come you concerned for him, who has quitted you with so much Indifference,
after so many Promises of extraordinary Kindness? I expected you were rather
come to join your Resentment with mine; and desire me to take a full Revenge,
for the Injury done to your Beauty. No, Madam, replied the Countess, not the
Transports of a forsaken Mistress, have brought me now into your Majesty's
Presence, but the tender Affection due from a virtuous Wife, to a Husband she
loves; in begging for the Earl of Essex, I beg for mine. This Confession may
perhaps add to our Guilt; but it is no dallying for those who are on the Brink
of Destruction. I acknowledge, Madam, that after a thousand Crosses, we had
that tender Kindness one for the other, we married privately, contrary to the
Respect due to your Majesty. This, Madam, this only, and his Fear of your
Majesty's just Indignation, put the Earl of Essex upon seeking Refuge out of
your Dominions: He thought it fit, I should go out of them; but never harbored
a Thought of conspiring against your Majesty. However, this has ruined us; and
if you protect not an unfortunate Person, whom you have so much honored, he is
irrecoverably lost. Consider, I beseech you, Madam, that a few Drops of Blood
at your Dispose, and a poor Life you are Mistress of, are not a Revenge
suitable to the Grandeur of a Queen, adored for many Virtues; yet chiefly, for
your Clemency.

The Queen was so astonished at the Discourse, that the Countess had full
Liberty to end without Interruption. But this was sad News to a Heart lately
full of the Delights of a pleasing Reconciliation. What a Torrent of Anger
overflowed her Constancy? A Queen as she was, high spirited, haughty, and
passionately in Love; to see her self thus cruelly betrayed, and find it out at
a time, when a blind Credulity had stifled all former Resentments! Yet she
forced her self to dissemble her Grief; and fixing a severe Look on the
Countess of Essex: The Life you beg of me, says she, is not in my Power: The
Peers are his Judges. Ah, Madam! cries the Countess, my Husband is lost, if you
give him up to their Fury: Their Jealousy will do that which Justice cannot.
Why should: you trouble your self, if he be not guilty, says the Queen? Though
I am satisfied of his Innocence, Madam, answers the Countess, yet your cruel
Ministers are not disposed to believe it. Let me entreat you, Madam, if your
Majesty will grant me no more, you will be pleased to allow me the Privilege
of being put into the same Prison with him: I am as criminal as he, and perhaps
more. I wish it in my Power, to grant your Desires, says the Queen, but common
Policy forbids any Correspondence to be allowed between so considerable
Persons, in your Circumstances. You may, if you please, wait his Fate and your
own, in a Chamber in this Palace. Ah, Madam, replies the Beautiful Countess,
consider the last Favor I beg of you, is, that I may be put into Irons. Can
you apprehend we shall attempt any thing against you in so deplorable an
Estate? This is the Eve of our greatest Disaster: That Barbarous Justice, to
which you absolutely commit the Care of your Vengeance, will to morrow,
perhaps, part us for ever. Deny us not, at least, the Comfort of mixing our
last Tears. What can you fear from a Grief without Power -- I fear being
troubled with it, and I will be obeyed, answers the angry Queen, and goes away
into her Closet, while the Countess of Essex was carried to a Chamber, where
she was left under Guard.

Never was Fury equal to the Queen's: The Madness she was in to see her self
deceived, made her for some time forget all her Tenderness. Her Thoughts were
wholly bent on Revenge, and giving up to the Severity of Justice, a guilty
Person she had too passionately loved. Death, says she, shall be the Reward of
his Ingratitude, and I will make his Punishment an Example to the Universe.

With these Thoughts she came to the Council: When she had declared her self,
the Peers were named for trying the Earl of Essex and Southampton. Armed as she
was with Resolution to do it, she trembled at the doing; and could not forbear
mixing some amorous Sighs with the violent Expressions her Anger forced from
her. She withdrew under very great Trouble, and admitted no Visit for several
Days.

It Is hard to express what a pleasing Surprise it was to Cecil, to see the
Queen angry, and declare her self against Essex, whom he thought her resolved
to pardon. He carried the News to the Countess of Nottingham; who was as joyful
at it, as a cruel Person could be on such an occasion. Yet they could not think
all sure, while the Earl of Essex was only Prisoner in his House, from whence
his Friends (if minded to do it) might get him out. They concluded to take the
Opportunity of the Queen's Anger, to obtain her Order for putting him into the
Tower of London; which Cecil, under a Cloak of Zeal for her Majesty's Service,
easily gained, and readily executed. The Earl of Essex was generally beloved;
and Cecil, fearing Commotions and Tumults if he should be carried through the
City, ordered him to be sent to the Tower by Water: Which was accordingly done.

The Earl of Essex not able to guess at the Cause of a Success so unsuitable to
the Promises of the Queen, prepared himself for the worst that might happen;
and in few Days, had Resolution enough to bear his Misfortunes. The Queen was
as full of Trouble, as Cecil and the Countess of Nottingham were of Hopes, to
see their common Enemy condemned in few Days.

The Countess of Essex having no Comfort but her Tears, nor Company but her
Fears, endeavored from the Pity of her Guards, to have some Intelligence of
her Husband's Condition. She was told, His Judges were appointed, and that he
was in the Tower: Worse News she could not have. The Queen was irrecoverably
angry: Nor could she by Letter, convey with Safety to her Husband, the Advice
she thought good for him. A Conference she thought better: And Money being a
Charm seldom resisted, she did by some Presents of Value prevail with her
Guards to serve her to her Mind. Having fully possessed them, she neither
designed her own Liberty not her Husband's: All she desired was a Minute of
private Discourse with him; which her Guards undertook, and brought happily
about. The Guards at the Tower, gained by their Companions, easily introduced
the Countess into her Husband's Chamber.

He knew nothing of the Passages at Whitehall. But when he was told, he was in
few Days to appear before his Judges, he expected with a great deal of
Resolution and Constancy, the End of his Misfortunes; comforting himself with
the Thoughts of the Countess being retired into Scotland. But seeing her so
near a Danger he thought her so remote from: Ah Madam! says he, with his Eyes
full of Tenderness, What came you to look for in these fatal Places? And in
whose Power was it to bring you hither? My Grief and my Guards have brought me
hither: Answers the Countess. What, Madam! cries the Earl, are you the Queen's
Prisoner? And does she know we are Married! Yes, replied the Countess,
mournfully, and is so angry, we are past Hope. I was absenting my self from
you, as you had desired me, but the News of your Death stopped my Retreat. And it
was not in my Power to betake my self into a Place of Safety; there to attend
the Issue of your Troubles: If it were not in my Power to ease you of them, I
thought it my Duty, at least to share with you in them. This made me present my
self to the Queen, and omit nothing that might move her Compassion: But she
proved altogether inflexible. Ah, Madam, says the Earl, interrupting her, Your
Impatience has ruined us; Had you not appeared, I had been at Liberty. By a
dextrous Justification, I had regained her Confidence, and you should have in
few Days seen me come in search of you in Scotland. But now, there is no Hopes;
the Queen will be revenged. What! Says the Countess, has all I have done,
tended to your Ruin? Make use of your Advantages, I conjure you: The Queen
retains some Tenderness for you: You may easily revive it. Oh! be not a
Sacrifice to her Anger. Invent any thing in excuse of our Marriage. Disown it,
if you please; I will consent to any thing, rather than see you condemned to
Death. Let her banish me into any Part of the World; I will go most willingly.
And, if it may conduce to your Safety, make use of the Pledge she gave you --

Ah, Madam, replies the Earl, can you give such Advice to a Man, who, you know,
adores you? Have you found by any of my Actions, that I love my Life more than
I love you? No, I love it for nothing else, but to spend it with you: And I
will part with it, with all my Heart, when I must be deprived of that Pleasure.
My Fears were only for you; and can you believe, I could have the least
Satisfaction in the Queen 's Favor, when her Jealousy should make her banish
you? Let it break out, let her ruin me; I will glory in my loving you, and
telling it to her Face. I know, the precious Gift she bestowed on me, leaves me
some Hopes; and I may make use of it; but I would do it with Safety, and it may
prevail for more than my Life. I apprehend you, says the Countess, you would
reserve all for me, and neglect your own Safety: But you cannot incur a Danger,
wherein I have not a Share; and the way to preserve my Life, is to secure yours.

This Dispute had lasted somewhat longer, but the Countesses Guards minding her
it was time to withdraw, she disposed her self to bid her Husband Adieu. Their
Separation was moving, accompanied with abundance of Tears; to which a
Multitude of tormenting Inquietudes succeeded, and ushered in a Day, that
instead of diminishing, heightened their Sorrows.

The End of the First Part.
THE EARL of ESSEX: OR, THE AMORS OF Q. ELIZABETH. PART II.
THE Queen, though angry, gave no Order for comprehending the Countess of Essex
in her Husband's Impeachment. The Morrow after their Conference, the Peers met
in Westminster Hall, and the Earl of Essex and Southampton were brought before
them by the Constable of the Tower. The Particulars of the Trial are set forth
at large in the Histories of the Time: It shall suffice to insert here, That
the Prisoners being charged to have held criminal Correspondences with the
Kings of Scotland and Spain, and entered into secret Alliances with Tyrone, and
Traitorously laid and carried on a Plot against the Queen's Authority, made a
very stout and resolute Defense.

As politic as Cecil was, he could not hide the Malignity of his intentions;
but it was observed he was not only a severe Judge, but a dangerous Enemy: The
Heat and Animosity he discovered against the Earl of Essex, were answered by
him with a slighty Resolution, and undaunted Constancy. Yet, for all he could
say in justification of himself, he was Condemned with the Formalities usual on
such Occasions, Sentence was pronounced by the Lord High Steward, That the
Earls of Essex and Southampton were guilty of High Treason, and should be
Beheaded. The Earl of Essex was not moved in the least, to hear himself named,
but appeared Heartily sorry to find the Earl of Southampton under like
Condemnation; and conjured the Judges to examine with less Severity, the
Conduct of a Person whose only Crime was, the Love he had for him. But not able
to prevail, he melted into expressions of the greatest Tenderness in the World,
for his Friend.

The Queen being informed of the Condition of things, gave secret Orders to
delay Execution. She was of a High Spirit, and highly provoked: yet found it
very difficult to raise her Anger to a pitch equal to her Tenderness.

Cecil trembled to find the Execution of a Sentence deferred, which he had with
so much pleasure heard pronounced. The Countess of Nottingham was equally
alarmed.

The Proofs were but slight against the Earl of Southampton; and the Queen,
sensible his long Friendship with the Earl of Essex, had chiefly engaged him in
the Matters in Charge, pardoned his Life at the Request of his Friends.

News was brought of it to the Earl of Essex, whose truly brave and generous
Soul immediately broke forth into sincere Protestations, He should die now with
Satisfaction and Content, since the Queen had owned by her Pardon, the
Innocence of Southampton.

While the Earl of Essex expected with a Resolute Constancy, the Catastrophe of
his Tragedy, the Countess, his Wife, was informed at Whitehall, he was
executed. Till then, she believed it uncertain; but this News surpised her so
terribly, she filled the whole Court with her Lamentations The Queen heard
them, but was not concerned, as the rest were for them. Let her cry, says she
to the Countess of Nottingham, she must shed many more, to wipe out the Score
of those Tears she has cost me.

The Countess of Nottingham was so far from endeavoring to pacify the Queen,
that all her Care was to keep up her Anger. And because she was ignorant of
many things she thought her self concerned to know, she took advantage of the
trouble the Countess of Essex was in, and made her frequent Visits; not to
bemoan her afflictions, but to find out something to render her more miserable.
It must needs have been an unparalled Cruelty, not to pity the handsomest
Lady on Earth, appearing to our Eyes in a Condition more deplorable than can be
expressed. She fell every minute, for very Weakness, into the Arms of the Women
about her; and recovered her self only to lament the more pitifully: Which
affected all but the Countess of Nottingham, who saw all this with an
Unconcernedness suitable to the hardness of her Heart. Ah, Madam! says the
Countess of Essex, as soon as she saw her, Will you not use your Interest with
the Queen, in favor of the Earl of Essex? You know my Lord of Southampton has
his Pardon, replies she, and the Queen, perhaps, will do as much for your
Husband. Madam, says the Countess of Essex, It Is not the Crimes charged on my
Husband, jointly with the Earl of Southampton, nor those common to both, that
render the Queen inexorable: You understand me, when I tell you, there are
others she more deeply resents. And she hates the Earl of Essex less for the
Attempts attributed to his Ambition, than his Engagements with me. But, Madam,
replies the Countess of Nottingham, willing to find out the Mystery of their
Love she was yet ignorant of, If you thought the Queen would oppose it, or be
unsatisfi'd with it, why did you not quit a Business wherein you were to expect
nothing but Crosses? If you were ever in Love, says the Countess of Essex, you
know very well, we have not always our Wits about us when we are deeply engaged
in Affection. However, Madam, when I Married my Lord of Essex, I did not know
the Queen was so much concerned for him. Perhaps, answers the Countess of
Nottingham, I might do you some Service, were I thoroughly acquainted with the
particular Passages between my Lord of Essex and You. I am not in a very fit
disposition to discourse you, Madam, says the Countess of Essex. But if I could
by any Confidence, prevail with you to do something for us, I would give you an
Account of all you desire. I will not promise you, I shall certainly prevail
with the Queen: But, Madam, adds the cunning Countess of Nottingham, I will use
my Interest, and perhaps, effect more than we have Reason to hope for. Have a
good Heart, Madam, do not despair: The Queen is good, and I will zealously
serve you, when I am instructed what course to take.

The Countess of Essex yielding to the Persuasions of her bitterest Enemy,
dried up her Tears; and after a short pause, spoke to this purpose.

MY Mother died very Young, leaving no Child but me. My Father's Offices
obliging him to a constant Attendance at Court, he committed the care of my
Infancy to a Sister of his, settled about a hundred Miles from London. He could
not, at thy Distance, see me so often as he would, so that when I came to
Fourteen Years of Age, he thought, by disposing me in Marriage, to bring me
nearer him.

The Earl of Rutland had but one Son; and the intimate Friendship between my
Father and him, induced them to think of a stricter Alliance. Our Fortunes were
equal; and the Earl of Rutland's Son being Returned out of Italy, his Father
acquainted him with his Design of Marrying him. His Affection was no way
engaged to the contrary: And the Business was agreed on without my Knowledge,
who was looked upon as too Young to be Consulted with, in a Cause of that
Nature. Yet, Madam, my Heart was sensible so early, and capable of Discerning
between Person and Person; and made it appear by Experience, Obedience and
Affection do no not always agree.

The Equipage of the Young Gentleman was no sooner ready, but he came where I
was. Being not in Love, nor expecting much Pleasure in waiting on a Mistress he
had never seen, and was represented to him as a Child, he prayed Three of his
Friends to Honor his Nuptails with there Presence: The Earl of Essex was one
of them. When they arrived, my Looks were divided between several Men, all much
of one Age, and equally unknown to me. I know well enough, the Earl of
Rutland's Son ws designed my Husband; and I presently wished he were the Man
whom I afterwads knew to be the Earl of Essex; at the first sight of whom, all
my Trouble for being Married so Young, was presently over. He was the First
spoke to me and looked on me more earnestly than any of the others. This made
me believe it was as I wished. But I was sadly undeceived, when the Young Earl
of Rutland was presented to me. I Blushed and Sighed, not knowing the Cause.
The Earl of Essex did also the like; his Eyes went still in search of me; and I
was not reserved enough to avoid them. The trouble I appeared in was attributed
to the Innocence of my Age; and I quickly learnt to take care to hide it.

Our Parents being arrived, we were Married, without being asked by them, If we
were willing. The Earl of Rutland's Son appeared pleased with his Fortune; and
perhaps, found me more amiable than he expected. I, Madam, was so in Love with
the Earl of Essex all I could do, was not to hate my Husband. Yet I had the
good luck, my Kindness for my Lord of Essex was not so much as suspected.

'Twas believed I was then sensible of no other Pleasures, but what Children
delight in; but no Age is a stranger to Love. I quickly knew what it was to
have a Kindness; and soon complained the Liberty of my Inclination had been
usurped upon. I had little joy in being so far Mistress of my self, as to wish
I could love my Husband, and endeavor it; and to have an indifference for the
Earl of Essex; for all my Efforts to that purpose were vain.

The first Resolution I took, was to avoid the sight of a Man, who could only
contribute to make me more unhappy. And when he had taken his leave with the
rest of my Lord of Rutland's Friends, I prayed my Father to spare my Youth for
some time, and not to expose me so early to the Court, where I never had been.
My Desire was granted; and when my Father returned for London, to satisfy me,
they took me to Rutland.

But the Course I took, produced not the Effect I proposed: The Idea of the
Earl of Essex accompanied me, in my Solitude. And my Father-in-Law being dead,
we were forced to go to London, after a Years stay in the Country.

I trembled to think, I should see the Earl of Essex again; and resolved with
my self, I would be the most retired Person on Earth, to avoid all Occasions of
meeting him; when News was brought me, he was gone with the Earl of Leicester
into the Low Countries. The Queen received me with that Kindness she usually
expresses to those she intends to Honor. I admired her Merit; and the Pleasure
to see my self respected by her, suspended a while my secret inquietudes.

But within less than half a Year, my Father died, and soon after my Husband. I
was much afflicted at these losses: I bewailed my Father's Death a long time:
And if I had not for my Husband, that great Kindness, which is rarely met with
in Marriages of Obedience, my Reason, and his Complaisance had forced me to
esteem him, and to express Acknowledgments sincere enough, to save me the
Trouble of any just Reproach from my self, or any other.

The Queen having told me, she desired to have me near her, I quitted my House
for an Apartment in this Palace, and my Fortune, which was very considerable,
gave me such Charms, as drew about me a number of Suitors, who pretended mighty
Kindness for me; but were really rather a Trouble, than Pleasure to me.

In this condition was I, when the Earl of Essex returned to London. The
Queen's Army had been Victorious; and she ordered a public Thanksgiving, when
the Generals arrived. I waited on her to St. Paul's; and had not the Power by
any Consideration, to be so reserved, as not single out from all the Nobility
of the Kingdom, the Earl of Essex alone, to fix my Eyes on.

The morrow, he was one of the first to wait on the Queen: I was with her
before. I was moved at the sight of him: we looked on one another several
times, with equal Concern. Madam, said he, as soon as he could speak to me, I
have not had a moments liberty to signify to you, how great a share I bear in
your Losses. I believe, answered I, you are sorry for my Misfortune. It Is
natural for every one to be concerned for such a Person as you are, adds he:
But, Madam, I am much more concerned than any other.

The Queen interrupted us: But in all the respects the Earl of Essex paid her,
I would not but observe his Eye was toward me. I confess, I was glad to see
him so eager; and perhaps, I answered him a little too soon; but I was young,
tender, and Independent. His Merits were then extraordinary; and he had the
advantage of my first inclination.

He came the same day to see me in my Apartment; and failed not to do it
constantly afterward. All his Actions persuaded me, at length that he loved
me; and it was not long, e're he let me know it.

Madam, said he, one Evening, having brought me to my Chamber, after I had left
the Queen, Do you remember the time we accompanied the Earl of Rutland to your
Country House? I have not forgot, Sir, answered I, that you were one of them
that did him that Honor. Is that all you remember of it? adds he. Did you
observe nothing in my Eyes worthy taking notice of? And was it possible, you
should inspire into me so much Love, without feeling the Power of it in your
self? The Friendship I had for the Earl of Rutland, and the Progress he had
made, prevented my speaking of it. Yet Time and Absence have but increased my
Passion. And I protest sincerely, from the first moment I saw you, my Heart was
never affected with any but your self.

A Discourse of this nature, may perhaps be thought unsuitable to the Condition
I was then in; who Mourned for a Father and a Husband: Yet I had not the Power
to be offended with it. The Earl of Essex assured me, I had gained his
Affection: I was willing to gain his, and I cared for no more.

You will give me leave, Madam, to pass over my Answers; and tell you only, the
Earl of Essex was very well satisfied with them; that we then settled the
Correspondence we have so long maintained; and that we found Occasions, and
Opportunities to polish and perfect it.

Thus far you see me ignorant of the Queen's Inclinations: I, as well as
others, attributed the Favor we saw the Earl of Essex was in, to his Services,
and his Dexterity in setting them out to advantage. But in time, I perceived my
mistake: And as reserved as the Queen was, found out the Mystery, and tremble
at the Discovery.

The Earl of Essex had an elevated Soul, and capable of Greatness, Ambition
might rob me of him; and I was willing to fortify my self against all
Misfortunes, and to reserve only an Esteem for him. But what hopes of doing
that now, which all my reason, and two Years Marriage had not effected?

At last, Jealousy succeeded my Fears; and I began to believe, the respect the
Earl of Essex had for the Queen, might proceed from a secret Affection. I
fretted at this, and grieved at the Heart: The Earl perceived it, and
solicited me long to tell him the Cause. I refused as long as I was able. I am
Jealous, said I to him at last, with a little Heat, and afraid I should lose
your Affection. It Is not an Unhappiness, answers he, to see you love me so, as
to doubt of me: But there is no Cause to question my Faithfulness, who never
loved any but you. The Queen loves you, said I; and her Kindness for you, with
the Advantage of her Grandeur, may be dangerous Temptations to your
Perseverance. The Queen love me, Madam! Replies he, How you interpret her
ordinary Bounty, which has (perhaps) too generously recompensed my Services
beyond their Merit? She is too Haughty, and too Great a Mistress of her self,
to fall into such a Weakness. You know, what Illustrious Alliances she has
slighted; and are to believe, she is above the reach of Love. There is not a
Monarch on Earth, but I would prefer you before him, answered I; and measuring
the Queen 's Affection by mine, I am easily persuaded, she may do so too, her
Eye is always upon you, spite of all her Precautions, and is never else
satisfied; and I have observed some Sighs from her, which a Heart concerned as
mine, cannot hear without Trouble. I did not till now know how happy I was,
says the Earl of Essex; but your Jealousy makes me sensible of it. Yet, Madam,
give me leave to assure you, you have no Cause for it. Were the Queen Weak, as
you Imagine; did she offer me her Crown and her Kindness; I would, by my
Refusal, let you see, though I have Ambition, my Love for you infinitely
exceeds it. To satisfy you of your Mistake, allow me to procure her Consent to
our Marriage. You have mourned long enough, to avoid all imputations of
Indecency: It is in your Power to make me the happiest of Men, and to clear all
the doubts you have of my Faithfulness.

I was far from opposing the Proposal he made; and I was not fully convinced
the Queen was in Love with him, yet, I thought, if she was, he knew it not.

To let you see, adds he, I will not conceal from you any Kindness the Queen
has expressed for me; I declare, I Sacrifice to you, one of the handsomest
Ladies of the Court, who has a thousand ways invited my Love.

I pressed him to let me know her Name; but he conjured me to be satisfied with
what he had said; and, not to force him to further Indiscretion, I gave over
Pressing him.

[The Countess of Nottingham Blushed at this Part of the Discourse, having
Reason to believe her self the Person intended. She Hated him the more for it;
but had the Command of her self, not to interrupt the Countess of Essex; who
proceeded in her Story.]

This freedom of the Earl put an end to my suspicions. I left him to take his
Time for speaking to the Queen: When he went to thank her for the Government of
Ireland bestowed on him, he returned to me with a Transport of Joy, to tell me;
The Queen had not only Consented to his Desires, but intented to make the Earl
of Leicester King of England. This quieted my Spirit, and made me acknowledge,
I had no cause to be Jealous.

We spent some days with a great deal of Pleasure; but were Cruelly interrupted
by the Order the Earl of Essex received to go into France, to command the
Forces the Queen sent in aid of that King. I had not time to express my Grief
to him, or to be a Witness of his. We parted in haste: and then it was, I
repented I had believed him; and that the Queen's Coldness toward me,
convinced me of the Truth of my former Suspicions; and that her sending away
the Earl of Essex, was but to remove him from me.

I left Court, as soon as I could, with Decency, ask the Queen leave to retire
into a House of my Fathers, about Fifty Miles from London. I will not tell you
how I was Alarmed at the News of the Earl of Essex his Death in his Return from
Spain; nor how we Writ to one another, in his absence. I was ready to Dye for
Grief, when he arrived at my House, more Respectful and more Amorous than he
had ever appeared.

He would have put me out of my Opinion, concerning the Queen: But I
obstinately maintained it True. When I had convinced him of it, he offered to
leave England, if I would name a Place where he might Live quietly. I had
Affection enough to incline me to Consent to this Proposal: But considering it
Unjust in me to spoil the Progress of his good Fortune, and put an end to his
hopes, by an Unexcusable Retreat, I told him, it was impossible. And ushering
with a Sigh the Advice I was going to give him: Forget me, Sir, said I, for I
see your Fate will force you to it. The Queen will still cross us, and never
want Pretense to Separate us: It Is better breaking off an Engagement, that
suits not with your Affairs; Nothing in the World, can be a greater Misfortune
to me; but I will submit to it, if it be for your Good. You suspect me of
indifference (said he interrupting me;) and you have the Cruelty to advise me
to it. Did you love me more, you would know me better: And were I capable of
doing an unjust thing, I believe you would Exhort me to forget you, for no
other cause but that you might think of me no more. But, Madam, to shorten our
Discourse, and our Doubts, which almost make me Mad, Believe it, I love you
above all things in the World, there is a sure and easy way to satisfy you of
it. You are not willing to go with me out of England; and yet you are still
afraid of the Queen: Let us Marry privately, and conceal it till we see a more
favorable Time. This will frustrate the Queen's design to our Prejudice; you
will no longer doubt of my Affection: And if the business be discovered, it is
but flying out of the Reach of the Resentments we fear.

I was strangely moved at this Discourse: Every thing obliged me to believe
him. Yet considering it would reflect upon my Reputation to be privately
Married, I was afraid to consent. The Earl Complained of me; I Cried: Love was
our Arbitratour, and decided the Controversy in his Favor. After long
resistance, I agreed to a private Marriage; on Condition the Earl would go for
London on the Morrow; and appear dis-engagag'd to the Queen from all the
Kindness he had had from me. We agreed to be Married at the Earl of
Southampton's, his particular Friend; where I was to stay, while he went for
London. Thus we parted: He took London Road; I went for Southampton, attended
by Tracy, a Domestic of the Earl of Essex's, in whom he reposed an entire
Confidence.

As the Earl was on the Road, he had leisure to consider what Measures to take.
My Lord Southampton came to receive me at his House; where the Earl of Essex
arrived, soon after he had obtained leave from the Queen, to Absent himself a
few Days.

We are now come to the Instant that ushered in our Crosses. We were Married in
the Presence of my Lord Southampton, Tracy, and some Women of mine, and a
Kinsman of the Earl of Essex. He gave me an Account how the Queen had received
him; and began to confess, he believed she loved him.

He stayed but six Days at Southampton; in which time we agreed what course to
take.

I was too far from London to see the Earl often without discovering our
Correspondence. Nothing seemed more proper to Conceal it, than a House he had
within few Miles of London, on the Thames side: It stood alone, and was strong
enough to prevent a Surprise. Having settled my Affairs, I was conducted
thither by my Lord Southampton and Tracy, while the Earl of Essex returned for
London.

Nothing could be more pleasant, than the Solitude I was in. My Lord of Essex
came to see me every Day: And I spent there two Years, without a moments
Trouble. At last, an Accident happened that miserably perplexed us.

The Earl of Essex had an infinite of Enemies, who envied him; and for all his
Caution, they took notice of his extraordinary Assiduity for the Place I was
in. They told the Queen of it: She was disturbed at it; more perhaps, for the
Suspicion she had of some Private Gallantry of his there, than for those
matters they would have possessed her with.

I gave her no Trouble: The Earl's Disengagement, with my pretended Journey
into France, had secured her as to me. Yet she would go see whether the Earl
frequented that House, only for the Pleasure of the Place, or some hidden Cause.

One Day, as the Earl was with her, she gave Orders, her ordinary Retinue
should be ready to wait on her. I have long had a mind to see your
Country House, says she to the Earl, I have had a very pleasant Description of
it: The Weather is fair; and I believe a Walk so far may do me good.

You may imagine the Fears this put the Earl in: He durst not openly oppose her
Design; but endeavored to divert her, by saying, His House deserved not the
Pains it would cost her, to go so far.

When he saw her resolved upon it, he begged leave to go before, to put things
in order for her Reception. Nay, says she, you shall be my Guide: There Is no
need of Preparation.

The Earl, at these Words trembled for me. He was deprived of all means of
Precaution; and the Concern he appeared in, made the Queen more curious.

Imagine what a Trouble he was in by the way, and how often he wished something
might hinder their Arrival. But Fortune favored the Queen's Designs so far,
that they came safe to the House; and she would presently go see the Lodgings.
The Earl astonished, gave her his Hand. The Chamber I used, was the best in the
House; and the first the Queen staid at. The Earl seeing no Remedy, steps to
the Door, which he found open contrary to Custom, and was pleasingly surpised,
to find only Tracy there, sleeping, or rather pretending to sleep on a Couch.
He was quickly awaked; and having expressed his Surprise and Respect,
immediately withdrew.

The Earl of Essex, who thought him at London, began to take Heart, fancying
his good Genius had revealed the Adventure to Tracy. But a new Trouble arose:
My Picture hung in the same Room, under a Curtain. The Queen asked If it was
the Earl's? He answered, with some Trouble, It was not. The Queen drew the
Curtain, and saw her self drawn at length, where the Earl thought my Picture
would appear. Then it was he was persuaded, the faithful Tracy had had an
Intimation of the Journey.

The Queen expressed much Joy, to see her Picture in the Earl's Chamber.

From the House, she went into the Garden; took a short Repast, during which,
Tracy found the opportunity to whisper the Earl, He need not trouble himself --
and returned to London, without the least suspicion.

Thus Matters passed on their side. As to ours, The very instant the Queen told
the Earl of Essex, she would see his House, the Earl of Southampton was at her
Chamber Door. You are come in very good time, to go along with the Queen to the
Earl of Essex 's, says the Officer, who was going to provide the Equipage.

The Earl of Southampton by these few Words, quickly discovered the Storm that
threatened his Friend: And to provide a Remedy; I am not very well, said he to
the Officer: Perhaps the Queen may command me to wait on her; I will not go
into her Presence. Pray, let her not know you have seen me. The Officer
promised, she should not; and Southampton hastened to the Earl of Essex's, to
tell Tracy; who immediately took the best Horse his Master had; and put him so
well to it, that he was with me before the Queen left London. I was not a
little troubled at the News. Tracy hid me, and my Women in a Quarter, where was
no likelihood of our being discovered; and then changed the Queen's Picture for
mine.

That Evening, the Earl of Essex, came to see me, and gave me an Account of the
Tortures he had that Day endured for me; and how Southampton and Tracy had
delivered him out of them.

The Irish rebelled; I lay in at that time: The Earl of Essex, who loved me no
less than his Glory, had within himself desperate Conflicts. His Duty
prevailed: He desired he might command the Army, the Queen granted it; and the
same time, plainly delar'd her Affection for him; which I was before but too
well assured of. She gave him abundance of very kind Expressions; and (to
confirm the Truth of them) a RING, which still leaves the poor Earl of Essex
some Hopes.

He was sufficiently prepared to manage the Queen: And you see, by this time,
Madam, whether he was not under a necessity of some Dissimulation.

He gave me a faithful Account of all passed between them; and being fearful
for me in his Absence, he resolved to remove me, and to go himself out of
England, if matters were discovered.

This put him in search of some Places of Refuge. The King of Scots promised
him, among others, the Palace of Dimbourg. The Earl of Tyrone made him many
Proposals; but certain it is, he never hearkened to any of them.

I was weak when he left me, and obliged to recover a little Strength, before I
would undertake a Voyage for Scotland.

I was on my way, Fortune stayed me, the Earl of Essex was charged with several
Matters; and the Queen prepossest by our Enemies, took our innocent Precautions
for Crimes.

At last, Madam, the Earl was forced to come and shut himself up in the Place
where I was; and was resolved to perish in Defense of me.

You know what followed. Consider the Frights I was in, amidst so much Trouble
and Blood, I saw every day spilt.

The Earl conjured me incessantly, to quit a Place where he could not make any
long Defense against so many Forces, as were employed to take it.

I exhorted him to yield, and implore the Queen's Goodness. He protested, He
would never do it, till I was in a Place of Safety.

Thus was I forced to leave him, and go for Dimbourgh. The faithful Tracy, who
should have conducted me thither, had perished already, in maintaining the
Interests of his Master.

The Earl of Essex committed me to the Charge of one of his Kinsmen; they
forced me out of his Arms, to put me aboard a Boat that waited for us on the
Thames, and was to carry us to the Place where our Convoy attended us.

My Fears, and my Grief put me into a Fever: This staid me some Days, at a
little Village, where I had News of the Earl's Imprisonment, and the Queen's
Resolution to ruin him.

The Extremity of my Despair, put me on the Resolution of presenting my self to
the Queen, and endeavoring to obtain some Favor by an ingenuous Confession.
But, Madam, you know I found in her no Disposition to pardon us.

My Conduct has produced a terrible Effect: And I may justly reproach my self,
to have been the Cause of all my Lord Essex his Misfortunes.

This Discourse ended in Tears. The Countess of Nottingham took small care to
stop them: She was too much concerned in more than one Part of the Story, which
heightened her Fury: And leaving the Countess of Essex to the Horror of
Despair, she returned to the Queen, whom she found almost drowned in hers. She
used all her Art to revive the Queen's Anger; and by her cruel Address,
effected her Design; without saying a Word directly against the Criminal.

Cecil and she were tormented to see the Execution delayed.

What shall we do, Madam, says he to her, if the Queen, in the Height of her
Anger, will not give way that Justice be done? What are we to expect when her
Anger is over? What are we not to fear from her Love, if it once get the
Mastery of a Heart as hers is? It Is no where so imperious, no where so
absolute; and I very much doubt, whether all our Caution can prevent the ill
Effects of it. In a Word, condemned as the Earl of Essex is, by an August
Assembly, it is possible, he may recover his former Favor with the Queen, and
utterly ruin us, as soon as he sets Footing at Court. I shall bestir my self a
little, ere that come to pass, (says the Countess of Nottingham;) I have the
Queen 's Ear: I know how to speak; I am not suspected; nor am I a Stranger to
the Secrets of the one, nor the other: Yet we are not to flatter our selves;
the Earl of Essex is Master of his Fortune. If he petition, the Queen will not
have the Power to deny him. He has a Pledge, which gives him an obsolute Power
over her: But, thanks to his Pride, he will not make use of it. Besides, whom
can be employ in an Affair of this Nature, but we can corrupt? I will not leave
the Queen, and I Will pawn my Life, I will secure all with her. Do your part, and
let us not be surpised.

Cecil knew the Countess Nottingham too well to doubt of what she said: He
parted better satisfied; and thought of nothing but what flattered their common
Hatred against Essex.

The Queen had had a very ill Night, tormented equally with Sickness and
Trouble. She considered the Unfaithfulness of the Earl of Essex; his plotting
against her Authority, his private Marriage, his giving himself wholly up to
the Pleasures of it, while he pretended to be entirely at her Devotion, and his
Pride in the Depth of Misfortunes.

She thought sometimes these Reflections strong enough, to enable her to see
him dye.

But presently, the pleasant Idea of him she would destroy, his Merit, his
Services, and the natural Inclinations she had for him, inspired her again with
gentle Resolutions. She thought it better to see him a Criminal, than never to
see him more. The Thoughts of his Execution put her almost besides her self,
though it was in her Power to prevent it.

The Countess of Nottingham was as wakeful as the Queen, though for different
Reasons; and waiting on her in the Morning, as usual, You find me in a
lamentable Condition, says the Queen; and if you help not to comfort me, I
shall not be able to endure it much longer. The Wretch who causes me all this
Trouble, is always before my Eyes, in the most pitiful Condition imaginable. It
is possible, I should do nothing for him in such an Extremity? Shall I permit
him to perish, as if I had no more valued him than another; when I have
declared to him I loved him? Shall I reproach my self one Day with Cruelty, to
have forsaken him, when it was in my Power to save him? What your Majesty shall
be pleased to do in his Favor, replies the Countess of Nottingham, will be the
more generous, for that he has not solicited it. If he petitioned, your
Bounty would be looked upon as an Effect of your Pity, and his Submissions: But
now, it will proceed purely from your Goodness.

These Words effected partly what she aimed at. The Queen blushed, sighed, and
was silent a while.

It must be confessed (proceeds she) That to do all for him, without putting him
to the cost of one Sign of Repentance, is to approve of his Pride, and
encourage him to carry it on to the highest Extremities. He would have my
Kindness do all; and without any Reflection on the Outrages he has done me, he
believes, I shall think my self too happy in beholding the Executioner's Hand.
Never doubt, Madam, (says the Countess) but he makes account to triumph still
over that Goodness your Majesty has always made appear toward him. Had he
been carried from Westminster to the Scaffold; had you given him a Sight of
that Sense of Death, and pardoned Southampton, without respiting the other's
Execution, he would have been glad to make use of any means, in his Power, to
move you to Mercy. But he knows the Power he has over you; and pretends that
by receiving a Pardon he vouchsafes not to Petition for, all the World will
believe him innocent. But, Madam, if matters be carried on thus, What will the
World judge of your Majesty? There is not a Person ignorant of this Adventure:
And if the Earl of Essex, without acknowledging his Crimes, sees himself at
Liberty: Will it not be said, That England is governed by a Queen, not so
discreet as Fame reports her to be?

At this, Cecil arrived and fortified extremely the Countess of Nottingham's
Parley: He seconded her with all the Art of a cruel Eloquence, to persuade the
Queen, She was concerned in Honor, the Earl of Essex should die.

The Queen, in a Pet, consented he should be executed suddenly; and Cecil lost
no time in carrying her Orders to those who were to be Actors in the Execution.

The Earl of Essex (as the Countess of Nottingham had shrewdly guessed) had no
Thoughts of petitioning for a Favor, which, in all Probability, the Queen's
Kindness would of it self freely grant him. But when he saw himself on the
point of being carried to the Place of Execution, he thought it his Duty, not
to neglect the Medicines he had in his power, to bring about the Queen. Then he
resolved to implore Her Mercy, and put her in mind of her Promises and Oaths.
And knowing the Countess of Nottingham was her Favorite and Confident; though
he had Cause to believe, she had no great Kindness for him, he was persuaded,
she might have Generosity enough, to serve him in this important Meditation.

He sent to desire the Favor of a Visit from her. The Countess, impatient to
know the Cause, went directly to him, without acquainting the Queen.

Who, but a Barbarian, could have seen the Earl of Essex's Person, and at the
same time know his Misfortune, without being melted into Compassion? Yet the
Countess of Nottingham, at the sight of him, was all Cruelty and Revenge; But,
feigning some sweetness, she gave him away to declare himself thus.

Can you, Madam, pardon the most unfortunate of Men, the Trouble he gives you,
at a time when he has no cause to flatter himself you have any Remains of
Kindness for him? Yet nothing can be now of greater Advantage to me, than your
Protection. I know the Power you have over the Queen; and would you be pleased
to join it to my Sorrow and Repentance, for having offended Her, I doubt not,
but we may prevail much. Tell Her then, Madam, continues he, (putting his Knee
to the Ground) That you have seen me in this suppliant Posture, full of Grief
for having deserved Her Hatred. Restore her this RING, which I have kept; and
entreat Her to remember the Promises She made when She gave it me. I beg my
Life by this PLEDGE, and She cannot deny it me, without forgeting Her Oaths. I
can no longer look on Life, as a thing pleasing to me; but a miserable Wife,
and the Interest of a Son press me to continue it as long as I can. I cannot
think, the Innocence of the One, or the Infancy of the Other, needs my
Justification: The Favor to be begged of the Queen, is for me alone.

The Countess of Nottingham was transported with Joy, to see the Earl trust her
with the RING, which had so often Alarmed her, and whose Power Cecil was still
afraid of. She frankly promised what she had not the least intent to do for
Essex, added feigned Tears to her false Promises, and assured him, she would
directly go use her utmost Interest with the Queen, in his Favor.

But instead of going to the Queen, to give Her an Acccunt of her Visit, she
went to Cecil; who waited for her, praised her Cruelty, and had the Pleasure to
see in his power, the sole Obstacle against Essex's Death.

They went together to the Queen, who asking, How Essex received Her last
Orders?

He was never observed so haughty, Madam, (answer's Cecil;) he cannot prevail
with himself to show the least Sign of Repentance. He thinks of nothing but his
Wife, and she is the whole Subject of his discourse to those who go to him. Let
him die then, let him perish, (says the Queen, very angry) since he will have
it so. Let Me be eased of the tormenting Uncertainties and Disquiets I am
under. I am no longer against his Execution.

This Zealous Minister was unwilling to leave the Queen the least time of
Reflection: And while the Earl of Essex was in expectation of the Effect of the
Promises of the unfaithful Countess of Nottingham, provision was made for his
Execution in the Tower, to avoid a Rebellion among the People, who loved him.

His Soul was naturally great, and discovered not the least Weakness, in the
last extremity.

Never did Man go to his Death with more Constancy and Firmness. He did not
murmur in the least, against the Queen; though he might have Reproacht her with
Promises. He mounted the Scaffold Resolutely, Undrest himself, Recommended his
Family to those about him; and having drawn Tears from all Eyes that were
Spectators of that last Act of his Life, he received his Death, without so much
as giving way his Eyes should be covered.

Thus Died this famous Favorite of Queen Elizabeth. One of the best Qualified
Persons in the World; and a Man who had been too happy, had not Love had too
great a Power over him.

Soon after the Queen had consented he should be Executed, she Relapsed into
her former irresolutions; and after a sharp Conflict within her self, she
resolved to Pardon him; and sent an Officer of her Guards, to forbid their
proceeding further: But it was too late: Cecil had foreseen what might happen,
and cruelly provided against the Effects of her relapse into former Kindness.
The Earl of Essex was already Executed; and that was the Answer he carried the
Queen.

Then it was she lost her ordinary Moderation; then her Grief broke out
publicly.

Cecil, says she, What Mischief has your Barbarous Zeal, and Impatience done
me!

With that, she burst out into Tears, and would not endure the Caresses or the
Comforts of any about her.

While the Queen abhorred her self, for the Orders her Anger had given; Cecil,
who had so faithfully caused them to be executed, enjoyed the Pleasure of
having procured them: And the Countess of Nottingham Triumphed in her self, for
the Revenge she had taken of a Man who had slighted her Charms.

It Is impossible to express the Grief of the Countess of Essex: the most Stony
Hearts had Tears for her. The Queen, (whose Anger was dead with the Earl) sent
to comfort her, and assure her, she was at Liberty, and might dispose of her
Husband's Estate.

Let Her take my Life, and keep Her Pity to Her self, (says the Countess to the
Queens Messenger) She has Robbed me of all that made my Life dear to me; and
it is not in Her Power, to repair the Mischief she has done me.

The Earl of Essex his Friends, finding her, at present incapable of Comfort
(even from them whom she esteemed highly, for their Love to the Earl) took her
from London, in hopes, that Time might make her Susceptible of that
Consolation, which the Violence of her present Sorrows rendered altogether vain.

As for the Queen, She languish'd out the rest of her Life: The only Comfort
she had, was to think the Earl of Essex had slighted Her to his Death, and
never made Her any Submission.

The Countess of Nottingham had small Joy of her Faithless Life. A violent
Malady seized her, and made her sensible of the Horrors of Death: Remorse of
Conscience tormented her; the Ghost of the Earl of Essex (whose Death her
Cruelty occasioned) seemed to Haunt her incessantly. And being at the point of
Death, she could not depart, without acknowledging her Crime to the Queen.
Having begged one Moments Audience, she confessed all that had passed between
the Earl of Essex and her, the Love she had for him, the Implacable Hatred that
succeeded it, and her Perfidiousness in keeping the RING he had trusted her
with. With that she presented the RING to the Queen; who was ready to dye at
the receiving it; and was within very little of making the dying Countess feel
the violence of her Resentment.

Wretch, cries she, with looks full of Indignation, What Remorse have thou
exposed me to! Whether Heaven will Pardon thy Crimes I know not; sure I am, I
shall never forget them.

Having thus said, the Queen went out, and the Countess in few Hours Dyed.

This proved a Mortal Blow to the Queen's Health; who not long after Dyed,
uncomforted for the Death of the Earl of Essex.

Cecil had loved the Countess of Nottingham too well, to be easily Comforted
for hers.

By the Death of Queen Elizabeth, the Crown of England passed into the
Illustrious House of the STUARTS, whose Right it was: King James, after a
Glorious Reign, left it to his Posterity, for the Repose of his Kingdom.

FINIS.
THE VICEROY OF CATALONIA: OR, THE Double Cuckold.

Made English by JAMES MORGAN, Gent.

Fronti nulla Fides -- Juven. LONDON, Printed for R. Wellington at the Lute in
St. Paul's Churchyard: And E. Rumball at the Post House in Covent Garden, 1699.

To all secure in their own Thoughts, and Undiscovered CUCKOLDS.
Gentlemen,
AS I doubt not, on one side, but this Title comprehends, in reality, a most
numerous and powerful Party, and am proud and full of confidence having put my
self under your Protection, -- Cornua sumo; so on the other side I lose much of
my assurance, when I consider that it is to destroy the very being of your
happy condition, to imagine that any of you will think your selves concerned in
this Dedication, since that very thought would make you really cease to be so,
and rank you in another herd amongst the Jealous and Suspicious, to whom I do
not apply my self. It is to you (Gentlemen) I speak, who are sure you are not
spoken to; It is to you only our resolute Don Gabriel submits himself, though
at the same time like a blunt Soldier, as he is, he tells you, that even to
you he yields in nothing but his Fortune, which it seems, was as obstinately
bent to force upon him the knowledge of that fatal secret, as he was to avoid
it; and though he confesses he was guilty of much weakness in permitting
himself to be carried away by the importunity of Don Fernand, even so far as to
watch the actions of his Wife (a horrid sin in it self) yet he desires you to
believe that even in that action he never consented to any thought that
suggested to him the least doubt of her Virtue, but Armed his Soul with a
strong contempt of Don Fernand's Jealous Humor; In fine, he had still been as
Happy as any of you, had not his unkind Destiny peevishly forced upon him that
secret which your kinder Fates so carefully keep from you, doubly kind indeed,
since they both take from you the knowledge of a reality which would destroy
your Happiness, and with the Idea of an imaginary thing (your Wives Virtue) no
where existent but in your own Brains, make you really Happy? Here he submits
and acknowledges the advantages your favorable stars have given you over him;
he adores that Heaven of Happiness from which he is fallen, and instead of
giving thanks to his officious Friend Don Fernand, or others, who had
contributed to Awake him out of his Golden Dream of Security, he cries out with
the Grecian in Horace, -- pol me occidistis amici
Non servastis --


Don Fernand on the other side, though he stands in need of Friends, deserves
no Favor from you: A Jealous Mad Man; he swears you are all Cuckolds, but
believe him not; believe him, said I? You know he lies: Poor envious Cuckold,
he would disturb the quiet security of your thoughts, and use you as he has
done Don Gabriel; but hearken not to him, and if ever you fall into Don
Gabriel's Misfortune of knowing what you would not know, let it never be justly
objected to you that you did in the least contribute to your own unhapppiness,
but confirm your Hearts in your just contempt of those miserable Wretches, of
whom it is so fitly said, that I need not name my Author, Rather then not be
knowing, they will know,
What being known creates their certain Woe.


This is the Advice of the brave Soldier Don Gabriel, who has been tried in
both Fortunes; And this is highly recommended to you by him, who as much as any
one, desires the continuance of your happy ignorance.

James Morgan.

The Double Cuckold.
IN the Reign of Philip the Second, a Gentleman, named Don Fernand, governed in
Catalonia in quality of Viceroy; a Man (to give him his true Character) of a
most agreeable humor, and endued with extraordinary quality; but much addicted
to Pleasures, and above all, to those of Love, which he pursued even with the
Hazard of his Reputation.

He married one of the greatest Beauties of Spain, a virtuous young Lady, and
of so Pleasant a Wit and Humor, that any other but he would have found reason
to have been highly satisfied in her; but there are some Husbands who think no
Women so bad as their own, of which Number Don Fernand was. The quiet
Possession palled him, and being disgusted with the continual serving up of the
same diet, he was resolved to divert himself with change when he could, at the
Expense of others.

He had for these some Months used to Hunt upon the Grounds belonging to the
Grand Master of the Artillery; whose Wife, though not altogether so absolute a
Beauty as his own, yet shone with so many charms, as that few of her sex could
stand in competition with her; and withal, was extremely pleasant and
divertive in her humor, and of the most pleasant and gallant Wit in the World.
-- In a Word, a Woman exactly framed to his own Mould, and Temper.

The Grand Master was a Man perfectly cut out for War, and so consequently, you
may guess, very unfit for the Court. He bent all his mind to the Duty of his
charge, and left the Affairs of his House to the manage of his Wife, of whom he
had a good opinion, being of a Temper, contrary to the Genius of those of his
Country, not at all inclined to the yellows.

Some Relation between him and the Viceroy, together with the Friendship that
was contracted between the two Ladies who had been long acquainted, served for
an inducement to bring the Grand Master to Court, where Don Fernand would needs
honor him with a particular Apartment.

Hitherto all went well; neither did any one perceive the Viceroy's design upon
Donna Angelica (so was the Grand Masters Lady called:) he spoke not to her but
with his eyes, and by his handkerchief, which in that Country, serves for a
Love-Interpreter as well as the eyes: But now since of an outward he had made a
domestic Amor, the convenience of daily seeing and entertaining the object of
his Ardent Affections, increased his Passion to such a Height, that it could be
no longer kept a reserve from the quick sight of so penetrating a Lady as his
was.

A little Jealousy is sufficient to disunite two Women; A bare suspicion will
dissolve the strongest Tie of Friendship that can be between them. The
Viceroy's Lady began to look very indifferently upon Donna Angelica without
assigning to her any reason for it: For most commonly one Woman does not love
to betray the jealousy she possibly may have of another; that seems to her to
be such a Point of Honor, as she will never, but in the last extremity, and
when she is no longer capable of concealing it, discover the reproachful signs
of this weak passion in her.

Donna Angelica soon perceived the change, and as soon guest the occasion of
it; yet she behaved her self in her usual manner toward the Viceroy's Lady. A
Woman takes an extreme Pleasure to see her self beloved, especially by a Person
of Quality and deserving Merit as Don Fernand was But Donna Angelica showed so
much discretion in her conversation with him, that his Lady had nothing to
ground a Quarrel on. But that discretion was wanting in him, whose Passion was
raised to such a height, that it was not in his power to restrain it.

The Viceroy's Lady, who would no longer serve them toward the convenience of
their interviews, seeing that Donna Angelica abated nothing of her free and
indifferent carriage, he refused her the ordinary civility of entering into her
Chamber, where he used frequently to wait on her; and which had served the
Viceroy as a pretense in his Visits to her. Donna Angelica could not dissemble
this affront, the injustice of it being too great considering the freedom of
her conversation wherewith she had hitherto treated Don Fernand; and she was
now resolved to be revenged, and spare nothing whereby she could be able to
make her jealous in good earnest.

It is something dangerous to provoke an Enemy, when it lies in his power to do
us more mischief then yet he has done: Donna Angelica had no sooner seen the
Viceroy, but assuming to her self a more serious countenance than ordinary; Sir
(says she) I know not what Pleasure you can take in making dissension betwixt
your Lady and me: I, Madam? answered Don Fernand, absolutely astonished at the
Reproach she made him: Yes, you, your self, replys she: you make her by some of
your actions imagine that you love me, and she by hers would confirm me in my
belief of the same. I did not think, answered the Viceroy, smiling, that I
could ever have been so much obliged to my Wives ill humor, as that she should
make a declaration of love for me; but since it is so, Madam, I wish she may
always continue it, for I swear to you, nothing is so true as what she would
persuade you to; And Madam, I love you to such a degree as no Man yet ever
loved before me. I perceive (replys she) that she is already extremely jealous,
but she shall be sufficiently punished for it. Yes, Madam, replied the Viceroy,
if you would but love me a little; Not so, replied she, although indeed any
other would do it perhaps through revenge, if not through inclination; but,
added she, laughing, I desire not to push on my revenge so far.

This Discourse was interrupted by some Ladies who came to visit Donna
Angelica, and the Viceroy, being obliged for that time to retire, writ a
Lettter to the Lady the same day to this purpose.

Revenge your self, Madam, revenge your self of the Vice-queen, who has had the
Curiosity to pry into the secrets of my Heart; she is persuaded that none can
have so tender and ardent a Passion as that I bear you; that I think of none
but you, that I seek nothing but you, and that I have no Pleasure but when I
see you, and am so happy as to be in your Company. It seems she has penetrated
into the most secret folding of my Soul, and you ought to be angry with her in
earnest; for since this offends you, and it is to your resentment I must owe
your kindnesses, I would wish to see you so incensed against her as may make me
truly Happy; at least you cannot choose a fitter revenge; all the mischief will
fall upon her, and we alone shall enjoy the Pleasure. Once more, Madam, let me
beg of you to take your revenge; for though there were no subject for it, you
will however but do an Act of justice, in bestowing a little Love upon a Man,
who is not altogether unworthy of some Place in your Heart, being

Don Fernand.


This Letter was delivered to Donna Angelica, which she read not without a
Smile, but returned him no Answer; nevertheless the Viceroy from this time, saw
that his affairs were not attended with any extraordinary ill Circumstances.

The Vice-queen perceived she had committed an error, and that by refusing
Donna Angelica the priveledge of her Chamber, she had given her Treacherous
Husband a fair occasion to see her in private. Her Jealousy daily increased,
she imagined a thousand times more then was indeed, and she suffered more
trouble in one poor moment, by what she saw not, then she had in many days by
what she had seen: she was forced to change her conduct, and to feign a desire
of renewing her friendship with a Woman whom she hated more then Death. To how
sad a point is a poor Lady reduced, when she is so innocent as to trouble her
self about the little Follies of her Husband, and dares not render him quid pro
quo! She would fain have had this satisfaction (though a very afflictive one)
of seeing what passed betwixt these two perfidious Creatures, and putting a
check to their Pleasure by her Presence, for she was from Morning until Night
either with the one or the other.

The Viceroy was extremely weary of her everlasting Company, he could have
wished with all his Heart, that she had continued her ill humor and quarrel to
Donna Angelica. Whatever he did, she would make one: if he walked out, she did
so too; if he went to pay a visit to Donna Angelica, she followed him, and
would be the last there; I leave it for your Married, Young, Brisk Gallants to
judge, whether this was not damnable troublesome. He knew not what to do: Donna
Angelica, who loved him not to the expense of her Reputation, would contribute
nothing, on her part to make him more happy, for fear of giving the Vice-queen
an advantage over her, who possibly waited but for an opportunity to ruin her.
So that being in despair with anger and vexation, after having sought a
thousand ways to rid himself of this trouble, without meeting success in any,
he at last bethought himself of an expedient queint enough, and such as few
Spaniards would have thought on. But the Ascendant of Love often carries them
above that of their Nation. He believed that Women were not jealous of their
Husbands, but for want of something else to amuse them, and that, as one
passion drives away another, he should quickly put an end to the Vice-queen's
jealousy, if he could find her out a Man capable of making a tender impression
of Love upon her. He studied a good while whom he should make choice of, to do
him so important a service, without prejudice to his Honor: the affair was
pretty nice and delicate; but when a Man loves to that degree that he loved,
and is fired with the thoughts of enjoying those pleasures he was in search of,
he must pass by a great many such Scrupulosities.

In fine, having run over in his mind all the Gallants of his Court, that were
capable of inspiring Love into the breast of a young Lady, he cast his eyes at
last upon a young Neapolitan Lord, something allied to him, and for whom he had
procured a Regiment of Foot; and who was newly arrived at Barcellona: he was
young, full of sprightly air, for whom the Vice-queen had already a particular
esteem, and he could not elect a Centleman more fit for his design.

He found him one evening walking alone in the Park, and having taken him with
him, he fell into the discourse of the Ladies of Barcellona, and smiling, asked
him how he found himself, whether he had hitherto preserved his Liberty, and if
he were not engaged in some Amor. My liberty is entire, answered the young
Neapolitan. How! replys the Viceroy, among so many fair Ladies in this City,
has no beauty had the power yet to reach your heart? either you have a very
obdurate one, pursues he, or I must believe you have left a Mistress in Naples
to whom you will not be unfaithful. Neither the one nor the other, Sir, replys
the Colonel; I was never amorous; not that I am insensible of the passion, but
the business and art of War pleases me better than that of Love. You are young,
says the Viceroy, smiling; and you ought not to have such Ideas, for the one
does not hinder the other; you may make Love, and yet very well discharge the
duty of a Soldier. Nay, I will tell you more then that, continues he; there was
never any great and perfect Warrior but who was made so by Love; and so
engaging him further in that discourse, he began to number up I know not how
many Great Captains, who owed the most glorious Actions they ever performed, to
the inspirations of Love; and he concluded at last that he must imitate their
Example, if he would not pass for a Barbarian.

Count Henry (for so the young Neopolitan was called) yielded himself to the
Viceroy's arguments, but more out of complaisance, than through any
inclination, judging very well that it would not become a young Courtier as he
was, to dispute against a passion, on which all the World knew the Viceroy was
so violently bent: I will court a Mistress then, says he, since you advise me
to it. Don Fernand demanded of him, whether he would not be content to receive
her from his hands; at which proposition the Count began to laugh, but made no
answer. Do you fear then, pursued the Viceroy, that I shall not serve you to
your satisfaction; I know how to acquit my self in such an affair, but too
well, Seignior, says he, and for that very reason it will be dangerous to owe
that obligation to you: No, no, you need fear nothing, says Don Fernand,
smiling; it is true, I have loved the Lady whom I would willingly bestow on you
for a Mistress; but she is at present a trouble to me; and I hate her almost as
much as ever I loved her. What a fine present, Sir, says the Count,
interrupting him, do you make me then? will not the kindness you have for me,
inspire you with something more obliging than to charge me with a Woman you
know not what to do with? No Sir, says Don Fernand, and I may tell you withal,
the offer I make you deserves not to be refused, and there are few men would
have been so generous as I am in it: If you please Sir, (replies the Count)
honor some other Person with your liberality; for I must return to what I have
already told you, that notwithstanding the examples of so many Heroes that have
loved, yet War pleases me better. Lord Henry, says the Viceroy, the Person I
speak of is one of the greatest beauties in this Kingdom, and in wit and
ingenuity not inferior to any: I believe it, Sir, replies the Count, but she
is withal a Woman, Peevish, Conceited, Cross, Spiteful, Jealous, Imperious, and
possibly worse than all this. You do not know, says Don Fernand, smiling upon
him, and folding his Arms, that it is my Wife you speak of: Yours? answers the
Count blushing, and thinking he had misunderstood him: My Vice-queen, replies
Don Fernand, whom I intend to bestow on you for a Mistress: consider whether
she be so unworthy of you. It is true, Sir, says the Count, blushing more and
more, I have made some visits to your Lady the Vice queen, but it has been with
your permission, and I thought I had not been so unhappy, as to have caused any
unjust suspicions in you by my conduct, you mistake me, answers the Viceroy, I
tell you, that if you like my Wife, it would please me extremely to see her
made sensible of your deserts; and you will oblige me by endeavoring to make
her so; do I now speak plain? If this raillery, Seignior, answers the Count, is
but to make a trial of my respect, I declare unto you, I am so Religious an
observer of my Duty, that, setting aside the high Obligations I have to you, so
great a Sacrilege would never enter into my thoughts. The Viceroy, thereupon
walked a while without making any answer, and then turning suddenly toward the
Count; All this, says he, would be proper for another in another Conjuncture;
but since I desire not this respect or duty from you, can you do me any
displeasure, think you, by serving me my own way? I tell you again, pursues he,
raising his voice a little higher, you will oblige me extremely, if you will
make love to my Wife, or at least endeavor to make her sensible of your Love.
Count Henry more astonished than ever, at the strangeness of the proposition,
knew not what to think, nor what answer to make. At which the Viceroy laughing,
I see, says he, this discourse surprises you, and you have reason, but I have
mine too. I love most passionately, even more than ever, and the greatest
Obstacle that opposes my Love, is my Wife, and what would not a passionate
Lover do to remove such an obstacle? She is jealous, and troubles me
continually with her importunities. What remedy is there for me? I have tried a
thousand ways in vain, she has counter turned all my inventions, I am
continually wearied with her endless complaints and reproaches. She follows me
where ever I go; and poisons with her Presence all the pleasures of my Life. I
have fancied that something which may amuse her, would do me Knight Service,
and much relieve me, and that you are a Man very proper to inspire love into
her Soul. You are Young, Handsome, Pleasant in your Humor, have abundance of
Wit, and she has an esteem for you. It is true, she is proud and haughty, but
still she is a Woman as other's are. For my part, knowing the Sex so well, I
doubt so little of your success, that I must desire you to keep such moderation
in it as I may hope from a Relation and Friend. You are discreet, and I confide
in you, you know well enough how far the service I desire of you ought to
extend.

The Count, after some opposition of accepting such an Employment, either out
of complaisance to the Viceroy, or else because the Vice-queen pleased him, at
length suffered himself to be overcome by the Viceroy's persuasions, which
reached so far as to let, him understand that he would not complain, though to
the prejudice of his Honor, this amusement should happen to be carried on
somewhat further then he desired.

Thus they parted, the Viceroy highly satisfied that he had engaged the Count,
in a service, which another would have feared to have entered into. And the
Count, on the other side, wondering at the charge of such a commission as this,
which was laid upon him. He had never been very much in love himself, and he
could not well conceive, how any one should be so far transported with that
passion. The Viceroy was to entertain the Ladies the next night at a supper,
which was to present the New Gallant with an occasion of entertaining his
Mistress.

The Vice-queen, (as I have already told you) was a very beautiful Person, and
such a one, as Count Henry might very well make his applications to, without
doing himself any considerable violence: Yet nevertheless because it was a
thing put upon him so, he found not in him that inclination which no doubt he
would have had, had it voluntarily came from his own motion. Though her beauty
was excessively charming, yet the too prodigal bounty of such a Husband, was a
great allay to a young Heart, which is sooner engaged by the difficulty than
the too great facility of the enterprise.

He was at this feast, where he appeared something abasht, and his Spirit was
seized with such a melancholy, which was not usual in him, for he was generally
mighty Brisk, and a Person of one of the best humors in the World. The part he
was to play had something embroiled him, and taken off from his accustomed
jollity that Evening. Not that the declaration of love, which he was to make,
seemed so difficult to him: there is less trouble in saying we love when we do
not, than when we do; but that love is so ingenious as to furnish a Man with a
thousand inventions which are impossible to come into the fancies of those that
are not possessed with that passion.

The Viceroy's Lady appeared that Evening more beautiful then ever; she gave
him fair play, because she fell upon him railingly twice or thrice about his
melancholy: But the Count, more frozen and contracted than Ice it self, scarce
made a word of answer to all the raillery that the fair Lady was pleased to
bestow upon him. The Viceroy looked on him with an eye of pity; And being
ashamed of his want of confidence, came up to him, and reprocht him with the
title of the poorest and most pitiful Gallant he ever saw in his Life, telling
him, if there were no better, the Ladies would be very much put to it. Sir,
answered the Count, I will be what you please to ordain me, but I protest I
must obey you in it with a World of Distraction, for I fear you may lose more
by it then you will get. And what does it concern you, briskly answered the
Viceroy, what I gain or lose? do but what I desire you, and trouble your self
no farther.

The Count who could no longer excuse himself, advances toward the Vice queen,
who having also a desire to speak with him, met him almost half way, and told
him in whisper, she had something to say to him, and desired him not to go away
before she had spoke with him. The Count overjoyed that she had given him so
fair an occasion of obeying the Viceroy, deferred his Court-ship to that time.

When it was grown pretty late, and most of the Company was retired, the
Viceroy waited on Donna Angelica to her apartment. Which his Lady had no sooner
seen, but she made a sign to the Count to follow her, and she led him into her
Closet, where having made him sit down by her. My Lord, says she, what is the
cause why you are so extreme melancholy? may we not ask you, pursued she, with
a most charming Air, whether it be not the effect of some Inclination? This
question, and the freedom she had used toward him all that Evening, having
made him suspect that all this was a trick that the Viceroy and she had before
agreed to play him, and that they had a Mind to divert themselves at his
expense, he was upon the Point of spoiling all, but to show he understood
raillery; Madam, answered he, smiling, I have not been for a month together in
such a Court as this is, where there are so many fair Ladies capable of
inspiring the most tender Affection, without feeling the Power of Love: You
love then, says she. Yes, Madam, I do, replies the Count, since it must be so.
How! since it must be so, says the Ladies, are you forced to it against your
inclination. No, Madam, replys he, but there are, you know, certain Stars that
incline our Hearts which way they please: saying this, he laughed, and looked on
the Vice-queen with such Grimaces, and Gestures, which extremely puzzled her,
to comprehend the meaning of what he said to her, and, to make him explain
himself, May we not know, says she, who this beauty is, to whom these amorous
Influences have inclined your affections? Madam, answers he, with a good
assurance; if you please to take the pains to consult your Glass, it will soon
show you that beauty. I understand you not, says she, putting on a serious
Countenance, and I believe being what I am, I do you a favor in not being
willing to understand you. If I may pretend to any favor from you, Madam,
replies the Count, it is, that you would understand me, and be assured, that
you need not go out of this Closet to find the object that has charmed me in
this Country. You forget your respect, Sir, says she, and now I see how far,
the little too much esteem I had for you, has carried you. But if you return
not within the limits of your Duty, and forbear hereafter such discourses to
me, I shall be angry in earnest. You are young, pursues she, seeing him struck
Mute, and these are faults which may be excused in such as you. If you have a
design to love, added she, learn where to address your self better, and in a
place where something may be hoped. Alas, Madam, replied he, my success is so
bad the first time, that I should do well never to love more. No, no, says she,
smiling, you must not despair of good success: You will find others more
sensible of your love then I am; and if you will let me advise you, I will tell
you where you may direct your Languishing Courtship, and I dare engage you will
be satisfied with the Person I shall choose for you.

This Adventure was pleasant enough: For you see on the one side the Husband,
on the other the Wife, endeavored to bestow a Mistress on him. But he to
crossbite 'em, pretends to act the part of the scrupulous Lover, and to make a
conscience of being constant to his first Affection, and therefore immediately
tells her, he cannot promise that his Heart will be able so soon to resolve
upon a change, that the choice he had already made was good, that nothing could
console him after so bad a Success. Nevertheless, after a great many Motives
she laid before him, and even Entreaties which she used, he feigned at length
to be overcome; and told her, since it was her absolute Pleasure, he would
endeavor to obey her, though he could not do it without forcing his
Inclinations; and in conclusion, asked her, who it was she had judged proper for
the Empire of his Heart? She answered him presently, that it was Donna
Angelica, who had spoken to her of him that Day in such a manner, as gave her
to understand she was not insensible of his Merits, and that if the Resentments
she had of him were not tender and amorous, yet they contained an Esteem which
amounted to little less.

The Count would have been overjoyed if what the Vice-Queen had told him had
been true; for of all the Court Ladies, he had seen none that pleased him so
well as Donna Angelica. The Truth was, she had spoken very advantagiously of
him to the Viceroy's Lady, but it was not without Design. The Viceroy, who
concealed nothing from her, had acquainted her of the Snare he had laid for his
Wives Heart in the Person of Count Henry: So that, Donna Angelica, who no less
than he, interessed her self in the Success of this Plot, was resolved to help
on toward the advancing of it, by prepossessing the Lady's Heart with the good
Qualities of this young Gallant.

The young Neopolitan, ravished with Joy, that the Viceroy's Lady had so happily
met with his Wishes, in the Choice of Donna Angelica, dissembled, for the time,
his Satisfaction: He only tells her, that after her self, all other Beauties
were indifferent to him; that he cared not whom he received, provided it were
from her Hands; but as for Donna Angelica, he had neither Access to her, nor
the Privilege of going to her Apartment. The Vice-queen bids him be at no
Trouble for that; she would remove all Difficulties, and that, if he pleased,
he might see her, and speak to her in her Chamber, where she came every Day.

It is easy to guess what the Design of the Vice-queen was, in making a Love
Intrigue between Donna Angelica and the Count. The Employ was something beneath
her Quality. But where the Interest of the Heart is concerned, we pass by the
nice Scruples of Honor. She had a mind to give her Husband a Rival, and such a
one as might be formidable to him, and one whose Qualities were too charming,
not to be as much beloved as he: For, judging of her Constancy by the Faith she
kept to the Grand Master, she did believe she would not prove more faithful to
her Lover, than she had been to her Husband. And indeed, she judged well. The
Ties of Love are as easily broke as those of Marriage; and where there is a
mutual passing of Oaths, those of the Wife ought to be as binding as those of
the Mistress: If the former are violated, the others may very well be so too. A
perfidious Mistress and unfaithful Wife, are alike.

The Count knew not that it was to Donna Angelica, the Viceroy made his
Pretensions. This Amor had not as yet made any great Noise about the Court: He
was a great Gallant, and whatever he did in this kind passed for a piece of
Gallantry which was ordinary to him. He had not as yet acquainted the Count
with his Love, and the Vice-queen concealed it from him, for fear the Knowledge
of it might divert him, and make him scrupulous how to be jointly concerned in
a Love Affair with the Viceroy. So that, finding Donna Angelica a Woman exactly
to his Humor, he resolved, by the Assistance of so powerful a Confident, to
attempt so fair an Enterprise. The bare Idea of it made him amorous; and he was
already impatient to see his charming Mistress. The Viceroy's Lady told him he
need but come the succeeding Morning, and he might find Donna Angelica with her
in her Chamber. He retired, full of this Hope, but was hardly got from her
Apartment, when he meets with Don Fernand, who reproacht him with his
Negligence: Why, Sir, says the Count, interrupting him, do you find that I have
not performed my Duty well? I am but now come from the Vice-queen, I have been
two long Hours with her in her Closet, where I have sighed, talked of Love, and
feigned an Excess of Passion. What would you desire more? I know not what you
have done since I saw you, answers the Viceroy, but a while since, you made me
conceive so ill an Opinion of you, that I began to lay down all Hopes of
finding any good Relief from you. You were sad, dejected, and said not a Word,
is that the way to insinuate into the Hearts of the young Ladies? That
melancholy Air that I affected, Sir, answered the Count, is none of the worst
means to take some Hearts, at least it was the means that persuaded your Lady
the Vice-queen to lead me into her Closet to ask me what the matter was. And
there, in private, I told her what I had to say, and I hope, added he smiling,
you will find your desired Repose. I wish I may, answered the Viceroy, not
being overfond of entering into the Particulars of that Conversation, and, after
having encouraged him to pursue the Design, they each went away to their
respective Apartments.

The Morrow following, this new Lover, who used always to go extreme rich in
Clothes, took a particular care to please his Mistress in his Habit. He found
her, as he had been told, with the Viceroy's Lady, and as soon as they saw him
come into the Chamber, they both fell a laughing at the different Thoughts they
had of this Visit, each looking upon the other as the pretended Mistress of
this Gallant: It was pleasant to observe the Care they both took to render
themselves pleasing to him. Do you not see, Madam, says Donna Angelica softly,
how delilicately he is shaped, what a sweet Air he has, how particularly
graceful his Person is. I observe it all, says the Viceroy's Lady, being
overjoyed to hear her speak in this manner, and I confess, if I were one of
those Women that would entertain a Gallant, I would make choice of Count Henry;
for Donna Angelica did judge by the gentile Behavior of the Count, and the
Disposition of the Lady, that if no Amor was yet a foot between them, it would
soon be begun: And the Vice-queen was persuaded, that Donna Angelica, being
persuaded, as she was, of the Merits of the Count, either did already, or would
quickly be brought to love him. The Count acquitted himself as to his part well
enough for a young Scholar. He sighed sometimes to one, sometimes to the other,
to the Satisfaction of both. When the Viceroy's Lady made him a Sign, he went
to Donna Angelica, and then returned to her upon the silent Commands of Donna
Angelica. Never was Man better diverted, all was well received from him, he had
the Privilege to do what he pleased, and they permitted him, each for the
others sake, all the little Liberty he had a mind to take with them.

Some Days past in this manner, during which time the Viceroy's Lady and Donna
Angelica, gave themselves this Diversion, and where the Viceroy himself had no
mind to be seen for fear of spoiling their Mirth. The happy Count enjoyed,
alone, these fair Ladies Company, and grew every Day more familiar with them:
He was very handsome as to his Figure, and of so free and airy a Humor, that
it sparkled through all his Actions, and his Company was very pleasant and
delightful to them. But Don Fernand, who besides the little Advantage he had
hitherto got by it, began to fear, that Mischief might happen to his Mistress,
which he intended only for his Wife, grew weary of their Divertisements, and
gave Donna Angelica notice, that she would do him an extreme Kindness to
forbear being seen there any more, since she was unable further to contribute
to that Design. But she, who by no means would permit the Viceroy to concern
himself about the Measures of her Conduct, and knowing from what Motive his
Advice proceeded, did but laugh at him, and went immediately from dinner to the
Vice-queen's Chamber, where she was sure the Count would not fail to be: What
is it to me, says she, what the Viceroy desires, I will not deny my self the
Satisfaction of seeing the Count. I never passed my Time more pleasantly than
since I was acquainted with him. The Vice-queen was of the same Opinion: They
sought not so much now to please one another, because possibly they both loved
him, and it may be already repented they had been so liberal, and not
endeavored to retain him each for her self. But, as both of them had a good
Opinion of their own Power to charm him, they flattered themselves with a
Conceit that they could retrieve him at their pleasure.

The Count being with the Viceroy's Lady, and the time of going to take the Air
drawing on, they propos d to walk in the Garden, when there came in some
Ladies, to wait upon the Vice-queen, and their Visit growing somewhat tedious,
Donna Angelica whispers the Viceroy's Lady that she would stay for her in the
Garden, with the Count in the Arbor, near the Labyrinth, and so they took their
leave of her, and went both together.

This Lady did most extremely long to know which of them had the geatest Empire
over the Counts Affections, though she did not much doubt but it was her self,
his Eyes, and all his ways of Expressions, as well as his Mouth, had
sufficiently confirmed her in this Belief, but to avoid the ordinary Mistake of
Women, who are willing to flatter themselves in this Particular, she was
resolved to have from him a clear Declaration of the Truth; and they were no
sooner in the Arbor, but, beginning to laugh after a very charming manner; for
a young Lover, says she, Count Henry, you have made a great Progress in a
little time: You are but newly arrived in this Court, and you have got already
such an Esteem among all the Ladies, that I I should not very much flatter you,
in saying it is arrived even to the point of Love. You are obliging, Madam,
answered the Count, but I should be too happy, were the Progress I have made,
capable of reaching your Heart. My Heart, says she, with a kind of secret Joy
that appeared in her Eyes, you have no Thoughts of it, you questionless take me
for the Vice-queen. No, Madam, replies the Count; I know to whom I speak, and
if either of us mistake, it is you, if you imagine my Wishes and Sighs are
addressed to the Vice-queen: It is you, Madam, that are their fair Object, and
they only aspire at your Heart. And, seeing she answered nothing (for possibly
she was then at a stand what to say to him) he made use of her obliging
Silence; and having put one Knee to the Ground: Madam, says he, most
passionately taking one of her fair Hands, and giving it a thousand Kisses, I
have a long while waited for an Opportunity, to swear to you by all that is
most powerful, and tender in Love, that not only I never had any other Design
than to love you, but also that I never will love any besides your self so long
as I live. As he was speaking in this manner, the Viceroy, who was by Accident
then walking in Alley that led to this Arbor, saw him in this Posture; but at
the distance he was from them, he could not well discern whether it were his
own Lady, or Donna Angelica, that he saw. His Reason would fain persuade him it
must be the former, but there were some Motions of Jealousy that began to
torment him, having made him apprehend it might be the other; he was resolved
to be sure, and therefore hastes toward them to know the Truth. Donna Angelica
was the first that perceived him, who hastily making the Count rise up from the
Ground: What have you done, Sir, says she, the Viceroy has seen you, and I know
not what he will think of it. Madam, answered the Count, I know not whether you
may have any cause to fear on his side, but I am in despair for your sake,
although not in the least for my own. It is upon your account I speak, replies
she, and you know not possibly the interest he will take in it.

The Viceroy no sooner knew Donna Angelica, but changing color twice or
thrice, according to the different motions wherewith he was agitated, his voice
failing, as if he had been stabbed to the Heart. Certainly, Madam, says he, the
Count has either received, or does demand of you some extraordinary favor, to
be in that supplyant posture I saw him in at your feet: One or the other, says
she, being netled at his words, may possibly be true; but you may better be
informed of it from him than me, to which purpose I leave ye together. The
Viceroy would have stopped her, but she desired him to let her go, with such an
air, as Don Fernand durst no longer oppose her in it.

Never was Lover so dissatisfied as the Viceroy. What he had already seen
almost gave him his deaths-wound, and for his comfort afterward, she fled from
his sight. He walked about there without saying a word, his mind being tortured
with a thousand thoughts, each more destracting than other; and at last making
a stop before the young Neopolitan, who was also in as dumb a figure as
himself, By what I perceive, says he to him, without looking on him, you are
one of those who with great difficulty begin to love, but when once they are
set in, none comes amiss to them. A few days since, you knew not what love
meant, now one Mistress is too little for you. The Count, which though young
and unexperienced in these affairs, yet had a piercing wit of his own, readily
apprehended, by the trouble he saw in the Viceroy's countenance, as well as by
what he had heard him say to Donna Angelica, that it was she he was so deeply
in love withal, and that it was his jealousy only which had made him speak in
that manner, so that to repair the ill effect of this last adventure, he told
him, that he was utterly ignorant of the ground of this reproach which he made
him, and that if he were in love, it was with the Vice-queen, and that too in
pure obedience to him, and that he had not thrown himself at the feet of Donna
Angelica, but to render her his Acknowledgments for the many good offices she
had done him as to his Lady.

This reason, though plausible enough of it self, did not work a perfect cure
upon the mind of the jealous Don Fernand, but however he was somewhat appeased
by it. You Italians, says he, as a small matter obliges you, so you carry your
acknowledgments to such an excess, that one would imagine you had received very
high favors, and that no less then a perfect surrender of all was made to you,
when indeed, very little or nothing is done for you. It was I, continued he,
that desired Donna Angelica to serve you in your love to my Wife, and it is to
me only you are to owe the Obligation. And to leave you nothing more to guess
of this business, but to repose an absolute confidence in you, it is Donna
Angelica whom I love; and therefore, that you might not be any longer deceived,
and that in leaving the Vice-queen to your dividend, let me desire you that you
would forget to cast your eyes on the other, and to avoid even being seen in
her company, at least in private. If I were in your place, I know which of the
two would please me best: and I must confess, there is no Woman I could love
better than my Wife, were she another; but she is mine, and that title is
sufficient to give all Husbands a disgust who are of my humor and
constitution. Do not think this to be any caprice; most married men are of this
temper, and I know also good store of Wives endeavor to imitate them, and so
to repay them in the same Coin.

As he was discoursing after this manner, the Vice-queen, who as soon as she
could, had got rid of her visitants, came hastily into the Garden, with a
resolution, caused partly by curiosity, partly by Jealousy, to over-hear Donna
Angelica, discourse with the Count, and passing through the Labyrinth, that she
might not be seen, she came to the place time enough to over-hear some part of
the moral discourse her honest Husband held with the Count; she listened with a
great deal of patience, even with that which exceeded other Women, and she
heard the Count make her Husband this answer. Sir, the Vice-queen is certainly
one of the most beautiful persons under heaven, and a man must be then, as you
say, her husband, not to love her; but likewise, you ought not to fear, that a
man who is not her husband, and to whom you have given the liberty of loving
her, should not make his advantage of that blessing, and should ever dream of
engaging himself elsewhere: as for my part, I will stand firm, as a Rock to
this inclination, as long as you shall think good to permit me.

This Resolution of the Count's did a little comfort the Vice-queen, for her
Husband's contempt, who heartily endeavored to persuade the young Gallant,
that he could not make a better choice than that of his Wife, nor find a more
Agreeable Husband than himself, provided he came not to one particular point,
which he kept for a reserve, leaving him all the rest. They parted thus from
the Arbor, and being come to the Palace together, the Viceroy took his leave
to go to Donna Angelica, with whom he was to make his peace before he went to
bed, if he meant to sleep quietly that night.

As for the Vice-queen, she was walking still in the Garden, making diverse
reflections upon what she had heard. What a vexation was it for a person of so
many killing charms as she abounded with, to think of the rare Dialogue,
wherein her husband, with his usual eloquence, had set forth the esteem and
love he had for her? Women of what condition or quality soever, can never
pardon such kind of slights, especially those that are handsome. She call d him
by the most injurious names she could invent. Is it possible, says she, that I
can be so little valued, and that a man, for whom I have given my self a
thousand torments, and whom I have loved hitherto even to the contempt of a
thousand that deserved it better, should himself labor for his own dishonor?
Oh Heavens! pursues she, this indifference of his, or rather this insupportable
injury he does me, cannot sufficiently be punished. I ought to content a
husband that is of this humor: I have yet the same charms and winning looks as
I had, wherewith I might allure a thousand lovers to me, without giving him the
trouble of seeking them for me; he shall not have cause to complain on that
score. I will see how for his patience will extend; and I am a fool my self if
I make not him the greatest of all mankind. Let me begin with this young
Neapolitan, I perceive I am not indifferent to him, and since he is a Gallant I
receive from my husbands hands, let me entertain him so kindly as that he may
have no cause to be dissatisfyed. He will lose more by it then my self.

With these thoughts she bore her self company to her Chamber, and entertained
her self with them the greatest part of the night, during which, she confirmed
her self in the resolution she had taken, of seconding her disloyal husband's
good intentions.

When a virtuous woman has taken the pains to convince her self, and is fully
persuaded thto' the motives of Revenge and Honor, that the sin is excusable,
neither virtue nor honor is of strength sufficient to oppose her.

The Count was extremely out of humor, that he had met with so unlucky an
encounter, with the Viceroy's Mistress. He foresaw the consequences of it, and
he was not a little troubled at the Resolution he had taken. To think no longer
to love Donna Angelica was nonsense, because already he was so far engaged; and
to continue it, was absolutely to ruin himself. What in the world to do he
knew not, as the case then stood, if he had been able to believe his interest
in this fair one so powerful, as to persuade her to agree with him in deceiving
the Viceroy, they might then keep their love secret; but he durst not flatter
himself so far as to that point: he had a desire, notwithstanding, to satisfy
himself in this particular, if he could find ever an opportunity for it,
without plunging the Viceroy into new suspicions.

Whilst he was laboring under this inquietude, he saw him come into his
Chamber. The Count altogether surpised at this visit, presently judged that
some great important business had brought him thither. The Viceroy, observing
in his Countenance the trouble that lay upon him, to put him out of his pain,
after he had familiarly seated himself on the bedside where the Count was
laid. You see, says he smiling, what it is to be in love by my being up so
early; when you are as fast taken in the Amorous lime-twigs as my self, you
will then sleep as little as I do: and passing from this little preamble to the
occasion of his visit, he told him, That Donna Angelica was mightily incensed
against him, even almost to the last extremity, for what he had said the
evening before, in the Garden: You know, pursues he, whether I testified any
kind of regret or jealousy, when I found you alone with her, though possibly I
might have had very good ground for both. But however, she has past a thousand
severe censures upon that action. You must go wait upon her this morning, and,
if she puts you upon that Chapter, endeavor what you can to disabuse her; but
above all, be sure to take no Notice that I have spoke to you, or that I have
in the least made you my confident of my passion for her. If she speaks to you
of the Vice-queen, let her understand that all your inclinations are bent that
way for her. It is the ordinary frailty of Womenkind to flatter themselves that
they are extremely admired by the men, and you having seen them both together,
she perhaps may think you have made a dividend of your heart betwixt them; but
let her understand your inclinations, let her see your heart is incapable of
adoring any more than one Divinity; and that, having made choice of the
Vice-queen, you have given up your self absolutely to be subject to her Empire.

After these, and a great many other good Remonstrances, the Viceroy went his
way, and the Count, having dressed himself to the most advantage he could,
directed his way to the Palace, and found Donna Angelica bright as the Day,
setting before her Toilet; she blushed when she saw him, possibly at the
remembrance of the last words he had spoke to her, and having made him sit
down, they both remained silent, perplexed, I am apt to believe with the
multitude of their thoughts, rather then want of matter for a Discourse. But
Donna Angelica, unwilling any longer to insult upon the young Lovers disorder,
took pity on him, thereby to retrieve his Courage; I thought, says she, you
came here to ask my pardon for the boldness you took yesterday in the Evening,
but by what I perceive, you have forgot it already. It is true, Madam, answers
he sighing, I am criminal enough to beg your pardon, since I have been so
unhappy as to displease you, but I must confess to you, though I were to
expiate my fault with the laying down of my life at your Feet, I know not
whether I could ever repent of what I said to you; and if it be a crime to love
you, I am in danger of being, all my life, the greatest criminal in the World.
You do not feat then, replies she, to offend me. Alas Madam, says he sighing, I
dread your least displeasure, but love is a God more to be feared than you. It
is high time to explain my self, and I am so wretched as not to please you, let
me then at least understand my misfortune. Well Sir, says she, will you be
satisfied if I tell you, that such a Man as you, never sighed in vain; she
could not bring forth these words without blushing, but they so strangely
possessed our young Lover with a joyous transport, that flinging himself at her
knees, he embraced them a thousand times: She made him rise, and told him,
smiling, he should have a care the Viceroy did not find him again in that
Posture, whom he was to look upon as his most dangerous Enemy. I know it,
Madam, says he, in a tone wherein there was less assurance, and that he is
already too well established in your Heart, ever for me to hope to displace
him: it is not on that point, replies she, you ought to fear him, but it is
because he will have a Watch over your Actions, and if we are not wonderfully
circumspect, his jealousy will bring a great deal of trouble to us both. Then
the Count acquainted her with the visit he had received from him that Morning,
and the Discourse they had held, and that it was by his Order he had made her
this visit, and in fine each of them passing from these confidences, they
entrusted one another with their deepest reserves. The Count acquainted her
with what had passed between him and the Viceroy's Lady, and Donna Angelica to
requite him, concealed nothing that had passed between the Viceroy and her
self: Thus having diverted themselves, they took their measures how to deceive
both the Viceroy and his Lady: After which, having made a very fair progress in
so early an Amor, they parted infinitely satisfied with each other.

The Vice-queen, who used every Morning to receive a visit from her dear
Gallant, waited for him with more impatience than ever, and began to be quite
and clean out with him for tarrying so long from her, as if he could have
divined the favorable dispositions of her heart toward him that Day. She
could stay no longer, but immediately after Dinner, she went to visit Donna
Angelica, to hear what was become of him: she was told, he had passed part of
the Morning in her Chamber, which news, together with some other melancholy
thoughts, put her clearly out of all good humor for the rest of that Day.

The Count came not to her till about the Evening, and found her in her Chamber
very much indisposed, and full of thoughtfulness. No doubt she was thinking at
that time of him. And she received him with such an indifference as gave him
plainly to understand, she had a quarrel with him; and he was not long ere he
knew what it was; for, after he had used some importunities to beseach her to
disclose, she reproached him with a thousand things, many of which he was not
guilty of, and which ended all in the visit he had made that Day to Donna
Angelica, upon which she made a long and smart descant. The Count answered her,
that if he should be in love with that Lady, he paid but the Duty of an
Obedience to her in it: You are a Traitor, replies she, you have obeyed me
without repugnance, and it appears but too plain, that I counseled you
nothing, but what was agreeable before to your inclinations, and thar in
refusing your heart, I only hindered you from becoming perfidious to me. You
have yet so much power, Madam, answered the Count, over this heart, that if you
please but to recall the gift you have made of it, it will easily return an
absolute Captive to you.

To speak to her in this manner was indeed to deserve the name of a Traitor;
but he had reason to apprehend some danger from her, as well as from the
Viceroy. He plainly saw, she had engaged him in an Amor with Donna Angelica,
whom she mortally hated, but with an intention to ruin her. Moreover, as he
knew not what was in the Breast of this fair one, although he had of late
discovered some increase of her inclination toward him, he did not imagine
that what she said to her would be of so great a consequence. But the
Vice-queen, who really imagined, that the Count's inclination was greater
toward her rival, had not any difficulty to be persuaded to what she was
willing to believe, and so engaged him to make his most tender addresses to
her. The young Count, who after he had so happily passed the Morning, was now
full of Gallantry, added Treachery to Treachery, and said to her, all he could
have said to Donna Angelica, insomuch that the abused Vice-queen, furiously
swallowed all his Courtship, and was most passionately charmed with it.

These sort of Treacheries, are much in use as well among Men as Women; which
is the reason that we take a stricter care, and rely no more upon the faith of
words then upon that of looks. The Heart it self often proves a great Liar;
what it longs for one Day it has an aversion to the next.

The young Count was something tainted with the corruption of the Age: and the
Vice-queen, though otherwise a very ingenious Woman, suffered herself to be
deceived, because she extremely wished all things just to the standard of the
young Courtiers Rhetoric to her.

He saw Donna Angelica, but it was privately, and from her, he came full of
Love to make his Courr to the Vice-queen; He used the same disguise toward the
Viceroy, whom Donna Angelica treated more favorably, to amuse him, and not to
make him suspect that she had any secret Intrigue with Count Henry. But it is
impossible for a jealous Man, and a jealous Woman, long to be abused, by those
whom Love takes pleasure sometimes to blind: It is very difficult when we are
possessed with a great Passion, to be always on the Defensive part against
another Passion; and if we are the least forgetful before those who watch us
narrowly, we are soon caught.

The Vice-queen, and Donna Angelica very seldom saw one another; the Jealousy
which had already embroiled them on their Husband's Account, had now also
disunited them on the Account of a Gallant. As for the Viceroy, he was well
satisfied with the Proceedings of the Count as to his Wife, but not as to his
Mistress, and while he was at rest from the Importunity of the former, he was
much disquieted for the love of the other. The submissive Posture in which they
had seen the Neapolitan Count in the Garden, came continually into his mind,
and he had observed so great a Change in Donna Angelica's Carriage and
Behavior since that time, who did sometimes absent herself for half a day
together, so that no body knew what was become of her, that it gave him
sufficient matter for his Thoughts to work on.

The Vice-queen was much happier then; for she imagined she had an equal return
of Love from the Count, to that she gave him; she saw him every day, and took
all the Liberty with him, that any Woman would take who cares not if all the
World knows she entertains a Gallant: She had a right to it not to be
questioned; nay, further, none could indeed tell how to say any thing against
it. Her Husband would have it so; he was a Gallant she had received from his
own Hand, who had trained him up on purpose to make him pleasing to her. It is
true, he had prescribed him some Limits; but however, the Vice-queen was
mightily pleased, in that he left her the means of revenging her self on him,
and it was in the transgression of those Limits, that the pleasure of her
Revenge consisted.

When Inclination is joined with Revenge, we very seldom miss our Blow: And
Women especially, who have always their Revenges ready at hand. The Vice-queen
found her self one Morning extremely inclined not to pardon her Husband: She
had had that Night a thousand pleasant Dreams of the Count, and possibly waited
only for his coming, to make those Dreams out: My Traitor of a Husband, says
she to her self, is absent, I am alone, and if the Count should come at this
instant, I know not what I should be able to deny him; and I am very sure few
Women in the World would have had my Patience. What? Abused on all sides by a
Man, who, instead of adoring me as he should do; does court another before my
Face, even to the last Point of Gallantry! Nay, more just Heavens! He seeks me
out a Gallant to comfort me for his Disloyalty, or rather to amuse me, he
teaches him Ways to please me, nay, and complains of him that he does not
please me enough. Oh! Had the most virtuous Women living such Husbands as mine,
we should see if their Honor were able to hold out against such cruel
Injuries. From these Thoughts she passed to others more agreeable: She
represented the Count to her Mind in a thousand charming Ways; and the Ideas
whereof filled her with an Impatiency of seeing him, not to be expressed. But all
the Desires, and languishing Motions of her Soul, brought him not: Noonday
came; and now she prepared her self to make him a thousand Reproaches, being no
less enraged against him than against the Viceroy, though in a very different
manner.

The unfortunate Count was at that time embroiled in a very troublesome
Business, and so could not much think of her: She had sent twenty times to his
Lodging, and as often to Donna Angelica's, but could hear no Tidings of him.
What Misfortune had happened to him, what was become of him, you shall now hear.

The jealous Viceroy, who had been advertised by secret Spies he kept over
Donna Angelica, that the Count visited her almost every Night, had often
attempted to surprise them together; but whether it was the good Address of the
Gallant, or whether Love was so kind to favor them, I cannot tell; but so it
was, that they had always the Happiness to come off safe: So that being almost
in Despair, and being infinitely desirous at what Price soever, to bring about
his Design, he had planted one of his Spies when it just began to be dusky,
behind the Tapistry at her Chamber Door, to see when the Count came in, or she
went out to find him.

It is very well if we are but once happy in such an Amor: Too much good
Fortune often times makes us negligent; and we find our selves very near a
Precipice, when we think our selves just at the Zany of our Happiness: But we
ought not to rely too much upon our past good Fortune, and in matters of
Danger, we ought to be as vigilent as our Observers. Heavens defend all Lovers
from such a jealous Man as this Viceroy of Catalonia, who had abandoned his
Wife to another Addresses, that he might have the Pleasure to make his
Applications to a Mistress without being troubled in his Business.

He had Intelligence brought him about midnight, that his Rival was come, and
slipped into a Closet that was near Donna Angelica's Chamber. This News
transported him both with Joy and Anger: He disguises himself in the Habit of
one of his Men, comes immediately to the Closet, and knocks softly at the Door.
Count Henry used every Night to come to that happy Place, where, when the Grand
Master was in Bed, he past an Hour or two, as Affairs would give him leave, in
most pleasant Conversation with Donna Angelica: And now hearing one knock so
gently at the Door, he doubted not but that it was his fair Mistress. He opened
the Door softly, and perceived one with a Hat on, who endeavored to force an
Entrance; but being young and stronger than the Assailant, he pusht him back,
and clapped the Door so suddenly to, that the Viceroy ran a very great Danger of
leaving Part of his Nose behind him. Just at this time the Grand Master came
from the Town, and hearing a Noise, as he passed toward his Lady's Chamber, he
asked what it was. The Viceroy had taken care to put out two Lights which
usually stood there; and hearing the Grand Master's Voice, being seized with a
sudden Fear (for he would not for the World be seen in that Disguise)
endeavored to make his Escape, which he did not however acquit himself so well
of, but that the Grand Master, in the Pursuit, regaled him with his Cane; with
which he gave him two or three severe Drubs, crying out, Thieves, Thieves: But
he escaped for all this happily enough, if this may be called a Happiness.
Donna Angelica heard this Alarm in her Chamber, but felt it more in her Heart.
They told her there was a Thief that would have broke into her Closet, but she
doubted it was her dear Count: So that trembling all over with Fear, she came
out of her Chamber, to see whether he were taken. The Grand Master told her he
was not, but that he had so mauled him with his Cane, that he did not believe
he would come thither any more this good while. This News gave the affrighted
Lady some Comfort, not but that she was much concerned that her dear Gallant
had been so ill treated. But after the Danger she thought he had escaped, she
thanked her Stars that he had come off so cheap. These are the Fruits of Love,
which many young Lovers have sometimes gathered before the Flowers: She made
some Complaints within her self, which being past, she could not but laugh at
the Reflection she made upon the Adventures of Lovers, and how different their
Days are, one from the other. She knew not that it was the Viceroy, that had
been paid so handsomely for his Curiosity, and undergone the Punishment due to
his extravagantly jealous Humor.

That unfortunate lover came home very much mortifyed as may be imagined,
cursing after a strange rate the folly of Love, but yet more Donna Angelica; I
beleieve it was a pleasant Soliloque he entertained himself all that night, and
if he had been with her, he had vented his passion in dreadful reproaches. He
would not go to bed before he had writ to her a letter which he charged one of
his servants to deliver her the next morning as soon as she was known to be
awake; He flourished it over after this manner.

You are the most ungrateful of all women, and least worthy to be beloved by a
man of honor. It is in my power to ruin you; but I have compassion on you. A
Lusty young Gallant has the happiness to please you, and in the night time a
closet is a very good place to hide him from your Husbands eyes, and to favor
your Love. He Is a poor Husband that relies upon the honesty of his virtuous
Wife! you may abuse those that will be blind, for my part, thanks be to Heaven,
I have opened my eyes; and shall look upon yours with the same indifference, as
I would look upon the ill conduct of a common woman: for you deserve to be no
otherwise regarded. Don Fernand tells you so.


When he had writ this letter, and read it several times over, he went to bed a
little comforted, and resolved not so much as ever to think on Donna Angelica
more. But alas! how little does a lover know himself? And when we have
delivered up our reason into the power of a passion, how little reasonable are
we! No soul ever felt any torment comparable to that of the Viceroy that night.
In the morning, when he began to slumber, for he was not to expect any sound
sleep, news was brought him, that the Grand Master was at the door, and desired
to speak with him. He knew not what should be the cause of his coming thither
so early, unless it were to insult over him for the drubs he had given him with
his cane, which he yet felt: he sent him word that he was not very well, but
however he might come in if he had any business of moment with him. The Grand
Master, who thought it his duty to acquaint him with what had happened in his
apartment, the night before, was not willing to defer telling him that thieves
had broken into the Palace; and that he had come home in the critical minute,
to hinder them from stealing the pretty curiosities his wife had in her closet.
He would have told him what swinging drubbs he had given one of them with his
cane; but the Viceroy, to whom that relation was uneasy, interrupted him, and
told him he had heard all that passage, and further, that it was thought these
thieves were some servants that had a private correspondence at his house: that
he ought to watch them as well by day as by night, and that if he would give
himself the trouble of searching that closet, he might possibly meet with one
of them there still. Sir, says the Grand Master, my wife has the key, and there
is no way for them to get into it, except she consents and opens the door.
There may be something in that too for ought you know, replys the Viceroy, or
they may have false keys; and I tell you, you ought not to be too confident,
for there are familiar Robbers, who many times seek something that is above
your money, or your choicest rarities either: what can they seek above those,
says the Grand Master, interrupting him, it must be either my honor, or my
Life. As for the former, the virtue of my Wife secures that: and as for the
other, I have no ground to fear; for I think there is none can say I am his
enemy: However, replies the Viceroy to him, go and search that closet, and if
you find any one of the thieves there, you may judge by his mien of what
character the rest are. The Grand Master took his leave without making any
answer, and went directly home, wondering at the Reasons which moved the Viceroy
to speak such things as he did. He came into his wives chamber, who had but
just received and made an end of Don Fernand's obliging letter: but it madded
her to the soul. He gave her an account of the discourse he had had with the
Viceroy, and of his imagination that the thieves that had been there the last
night, were persons more dangerous than they were aware of, and that he thought
some or other lay still perdue in the closet. Having both of them laughed at the
Viceroy's fancy, he would needs go himself, and visit the closet: But Donna
Angelica, who, after the letter she had received from the Viceroy, had reason
to apprehend some treachery, endeavored to divert her husband from that
curiosity. Do you not see plainly, says she, that he plays the fool with us.
Prithee, how should a thief, pursues she, come into that closet; or if he had a
false key as he speaks of, could not he easily have made his escape before
this. It Is true, says the Grand Master, but the Viceroy would fain persuade me,
that these thieves have greater designs then we think for, and he has left me
in a kind of dispute whether they aim at my honor, or my life. And how should
he know their design, says Donna Angelica, certainly he must have some
intelligence with them if it be so. I confess, answers he, I am a little
surprised at it, but for his satisfaction, and that he may not say I have
slighted his advice, let us go and search the closet. Donna Angelica followed
him, and though she thought her self secure as to matter of the Count, yet her
heart did strangely bear within her at the apprehension of something, though
she knew not what. But in short they did search the closet, though they found
no body: The Grand Master was not satisfied with that, but he was resolved to
search likewise all the chambers, and go the round, that so he might be able to
give the better account to the Viceroy, and there was not a corner, wardrobe,
no, nor even a chest of any considerable bigness, but he pryed into it. After
all this labor to no purpose, he went to give an exact account to Don Fernand,
and was very importunate with him to know the reason of those suspicions he had
taken up concerning the thieves; but the Viceroy had no disposition to extend
his resentments so far, and pretend to make a discovery of things which he was
not able to go through with so effectually as he could have wished; which
caused the Grand Master to think no more of the business, and only to fancy
that he might perhaps be subject to visions.

Donna Angelica, was in no small perplexity: she understood by Don Fernand's
letter that he was acquainted with what had past the night before, and that he
knew she was wont to entertain the Count in that closet: This did extremely
plunge her, and she could not apprehend how the Viceroy should come to the
knowledge of all this; for she did not in the least imagine that it was he on
whom the unlucky Catastrophe of that scene had fallen. In short, she knew not
what to believe of it, and she resolved to write to the Count, to see whether
he could not any better clear up this mystery to her. She sent a messenger to
him, in whom she reposed a great deal of trust, who after having sought him two
or three hours in vain, returned to her with the letter, telling her he could
neither find him, nor hear any news of him. But all this daunted not Donna
Angelica, who imagined he might possibly have received some small hurt from her
husband, which might oblige him to conceal himself, from the sight of his
acquaintance, who might have made some conjectures upon it, perhaps to
disadvantage; she was nevertheless very much disquieted, and thought it
strange, that he should not have the civility, or kindness to write to her
after such an adventure as that, which he could not but imagine would create
her a great deal of uneasiness. She stood at the closet-window, which looked
toward the sea, and reflecting upon all that had happened to her, she sighed
and complained of the negligence of her lover; when, casting her eyes by
accident on the platform that was under the window, she saw in a little lodge
built for a sentinel, a man that made her a sign with his hand not daring to
show himself, for fear of being seen, from some other windows of the Palace
which looked that way. She looked earnestly upon him, not knowing at first who
it might be; but at length, not without a great surprise, she discovered him to
be her dear Count, which gave her no small trouble. There were upon this
platform two Culverins; but the place being almost inaccessible, they were
little looked after, and that gate which went to them was never opened but when
they had an occasion to discharge them: so that were was no danger of his being
sought for there; but the main difficulty was how to get him from thence. The
window was so high, that she could not imagine how he could get down without
hurting himself. But they could do nothing before night came on; that was the
only time to remedy all. She writ to him in the mean while several little notes
to comfort him, which she threw down, together with some sweet meats, and
indeed whilst he was under that severe fatality, without having any thing to
eat, I am apt to think he really wanted some such refreshment as that, or else
the comfort of her letters was not of it self sufficient to keep up his
drooping spirits.

Night came at last, having been long wished for by both the Lovers; and Donna
Angelica having thrown him down a strong Rope which she had prepared for that
purpose, the young Gallant mounted up to the Window with an incomparable
Address, and you may guess, that what he had eaten that Day, had not very much
overcharged him. What a Joy was it to the fair Angelica to see him in her
Closet? It was such as could not be moderated but by the Fear of some new
Misfortune which might happen to them.

The Count acquainted her with all the Accidents of the precedent Night, and
with what had obliged him to leap down upon the Platform: She, on her part,
told him the Consequence of that Adventure, what Alarms it gave her on his
account, and the Grand Master's Discourse thereupon with the Viceroy.

They concluded that it must be some of the Viceroy's Spies, or possibly he
himself that had been so shrewdly beaten. Then laughed at the Thoughts of it,
and they would have carried the Discourse out further, but reflecting upon the
present Juncture of Affairs, they concluded they had railed at it sufficiently,
and it was time the Count should withdraw, not doubting but that they should be
now more narrowly watched than ever; so that the Pleasure of seeing one
another, and of being together, giving way to the Danger that threatened them
both, they began to study which way the Count might get out of her Apartment,
and not be discovered. There were in this Closet some Women's Clothes, and the
Count being of no extraordinary Stature, Donna Angelica even ventured to dress
him up in one of those, and found they fitted him extraordinary well: She had
no sooner got them on, but the Grand Master knocks at the Door; Donna Angelica,
though trembling with Fear, was forced to open it; and her Husband seeing the
young Lady, asked her whether that were one of the Thieves the Viceroy would
have him fear, and so went out again, not staying for an Answer, which happened
very well to his Lady, for I believe at that time she was in no extraordinary
good Condition to make him one, sufficient to pass muster.

After such a Deliverance, we cannot think our two Lovers would defer any
longer taking their leaves of one another: The Count, having saluted his fair
Mistress two or three times, got out very happily, and came safe home to his
Lodging. The next Morning, he was no sooner out of his Bed, but he received
this Letter from the Vice-queen.

For a young Lover, Count, your Passion is very cold: What! Is this the Love
you have promised me? To let slip a whole Day without seeing me: Nay, so much
as without sending to inquire after my Health! I find, Sir, I must even teach
you your Duty: But that is a little too much; however I have Compassion on you:
You are young, and it seems you know not yet what it is to be deeply in love.
But come to me, for I have resolved to make you happier to Day than you could
reasonably expect. Adieu, I shall expect you at ten of the clock this Morning,
fail not to come.


The Count went to see her; and, after some few Love Quarrels for his so long
Absence, for which he excusd himself as well as he could, they entered into a
more particular Conversation, in which the Vice-queen used all her Charms to
set him on fire. Count Henry, whose Spirit was under no Constraint as to this
fair one, spoke the most endearing and most gallant things to her in the World,
and such as possibly he could not have said, had he been extraordinarily in
love; for Love, though it suggests some times very good Thoughts to us, yet it
does not inspire us with Boldness of speaking them. The abused Vice-queen in
the mean time answered his obliging Discourses in such a manner, as discovered
how well she was satisfied; one thing only in this Gallant, displeased her;
that having so much Love for her as he pretended; he had no more Confidence,
but suffered all his Passion to consist only in Words.

Non voglion le done inviti;
Violenze desian per iscusare
Con l'altrui forza i loro appetitu.
She looked upon the Count with Eyes which drew him to her, and as soon as he
approached, she pushed him back, now making one Complaint, and then another;
and in fine, like a Woman that sought an occasion to quarrel, and at the same
time was desirous to make Peace; though I leave it to the Reader to judge what
War and what Peace it was she desired. She was in an Undress capable to inspire
any Soul with the most passionate Tenderness; for, besides that the Spaniards
have naturally something in them extremely charming, both Art and Love had
mutually agreed, to make her so, and they had dressed her in such a negligent
manner, that was able to poison the most obdurate Hearts. I know not what
happened between them; and I should be loath to speak it, though I should know;
but this I know, that, besides the Revenge to which the Vice-queen was carried
out, she was not a Woman that would be at all the Charge of such a Scene to no
purpose. A Man of Honor stands much upon his Fidelity to his Friend, but no
Principles of Honor could resist such powerful Charms. Some Days past in this
manner, during which, the Count, who for some Reasons of Polity, did not visit
Donna Angelica, but made his Court to the Vice-queen, to amuse the Viceroy. But
Women are less discreet in Love than Men, especially when they love as this
Lady did. Donna Angelica had a dying Impatience to see the Count, and was angry
at him, that he did not rather expose himself to some Danger, than suffer her
to languish as she did; and though she had her self forbid him for some time to
come to her, yet she would have had him testified to her, that his Love was
more powerful than her Prohibition; and that he loved her to such an Excess, as
made him incapable of obeying her. Besides these Complaints, which she thought
she had reason to make of him, she had her Jealousy also, which not a little
tormented her: She understood that he went every Day to the Vice-queen, and
though she had advised him to do so, the better to conceal their Love, yet she
was so vexed at it, that she could not pardon him: Insomuch that she writ him
this Letter upon that Subject.

When you do not see me, the least you can do, is to see no body; but you have
need of Consolation, and it is in the Arms of the Vice-queen you find it.
Ungrateful Man! What can you say to this? Will you yet say, it is to amuse her?
What can you fear from her: You are a Traitor, and you endeavor only to
deceive all the World; me you shall not, I assure you, Aieu.


What a Cruelty was this to the poor Count, into what a Gulf of Despair did
the Perusal of this Letter plunge him! He thought to go and wait on her that
very Moment, either to justify himself, or die at her Feet: But lest his
Rashness might ruin them both, he thought he could not use too much
Circumspection. At length he bethought himself, that as he had by the Disguise
of Woman's Clothes, got undiscovered out of her Apartment, so the same Disguise
might be favorable to him, and get him into it. He was young, handsome, and
well shaped, his Complexion was such as might become a young Lady: And there
was no Danger, that the Grand Master, with whom he had no Acquaintance, and who
had seen him but once or twice en passant, should know him. He goes then to a
young Lady, one of his intimate Friends, and desires her to furnish him with a
Suit of Women's Apparel that might fit him. She brought him one, helped him on
with it, and it became him so extremely well, that nothing could appear more
charming. This done, he takes the same Lady's Coach, and being attended by one
of her Women, that knew nothing of the Intrigue, came to the Palace. He goes
into Donna Angelica's Apartment, desires to see her, and is admitted into her
Chamber, under the Name of Donna Brigitta, a Country Lady, who came to wait on
her from another Lady of her Acquaintance. He was no sooner in the Chamber, but
to his great Confusion, he saw the Viceroy there: But by good Fortune, Donna
Angelica, who came before him to receive the Stranger, hindered the Viceroy from
observing his Disorder. The Jest was, that she did not know him, and that she
would have him brought him further into the Chamber, but the Count soon put her
out of her Ignorance, by squeezing her Hand, and she was so extremely surprised
to see him, that she stood a good while in a Maze, but at last she recovered
her self, and led him into another Chamber, and presently returned to Don
Fernand. But with what Trouble and Disquiet I leave to the Judgment of any
Woman, that has loved and found her self in the like Circumstances: She had
with her the most dangerous of all her Enemies, at least, she looked upon him as
such; though he had an extraordinary Passion for her: And on the other side,
was the dear Object of her Desires, whom, for some Days, she had not seen, and
for the Sight of whom she most passionately languished.

To complete all, in comes the Grand Master, who finding this Lady alone, and
understanding she stayed for his Wife, who was with the Viceroy, being a very
civil Person, though naturally no great Courtier, he thought himself obliged to
keep her company. The Count, as I told you, had a very winning Air with him.
The Grand Master easily mistook him for a Country Lady; for he had not seen any
so handsome in Barcelona; and though he was by his rough disposition not much
inclined to admire the Sex, yet he found this Lady so exceedingly adjusted to
his humor, that he even surpassed himself; he passed a thousand Complements on
her after this manner: He offered, she telling him that she was but newly come
to Town, to show her the Artillery, to lead her to the Arcenall, and to walk
with her upon the Ramparts, to salute her with the great Guns; and a thousand
other things belonging to his trade of War, and which he thought a handsome
Woman ought to love as well as he. This was the sum of his Courtship and
Gallantry to her: The Count, who was very complaisant, seriously thanks him, as
if those were the greatest Obligations he was capable of laying upon him; and
being desirous to gain his favor, he looked upon him in so obliging a manner,
as was enough to gain the absolute conquest of his heart. And no doubt the
Grand Master would at last have made Love, had he known how; but as that was
not his Trade, he contented himself with making her several other, as he
thought, signal offers of his Service, either for herself or her Friends: And I
believe he would have also made her a tender of his Purse, had not Donna
Angelica come in, to whom, according to the Spanish fashion, he was to yield
his Place, though it was extremely against the grain with him so to do.

This amorous Lady had a great deal of trouble, to get rid of the Viceroy, but
it was well repaired by the charming sight of her dear Count; she looked on him
with admiration, and blushed, not with anger, for it was not possible for her to
conserve any against so dear, and so obliging a Gallant; But rather with Love
and Jealousy, to see him so handsome and so attractive in that figure.
Perfidious Man, says she to him, with a charming Air, you see every day new
ways to surprise me; but I had sufficiently been revenged on you, had the
Viceroy or the Grand Master discovered you; for they, you know, are two
enemies, you ought to fear. No, it is your self, Madam, replies the Count, whom
I fear more than all the enemies in the world besides; therefore let me beg of
you to give me some assurance that you are not angry with me, and I shall be
contented. And who, says she, sighing, can be long angry with you? The very
sight of you pleads your excuse, Go, says she, blushing, you know too well the
way to get your pardon.

I shall not go about to acquaint you with the sequel of this Discourse; but we
may imagine they would have sealed the Articles of a firm Peace, had not Love,
which still delighted to be interfering, sent them the Grand Master, who
already being fired with a passion for Donna Brigitta, could tarry no longer
without seeing her. He took the pretense of telling them, it was Dinnertime,
and desired his Wife to persuade the young stranger to dine with them. These
two young Lovers, who had not had time to make the full advantage of their
interview, yielded without difficulty to the Grand Master's request. Only the
Count made some scruple for fashions sake, but it was to be the more earnestly
entreated, which the Lady did with so good a grace, that she could not be
denied. All Dinnertime the Grand Master had his eyes fixed upon the fair Donna
Brigitta, he carved for her, and forgot not to drink her Health. The Count and
Donna Angelica, who observed all his earnestness and care, could not forbear
laughing at him. The new Lover never had been seen in so good a humor in his
life, and he took a great delight to see them meet with so pleasant a
Diversion. The Count did as much as the decency of the Sex he had taken upon
him would permit, to make him really Amorous, who never till then had been in
Love with any thing but his Sword. The Count drank the Grand Master's Health,
he showed him all the respect imaginable, he took all occasions to oblige him,
so that the Grand Master believed he had already got some place in Donna
Brigitta's affection. He spoke very highly of her Beauty, and said, he was
forced to confess, having made his Excuses to his Wife, that he had never seen
a more beautiful Creature in his life. Donna Angelica managed this Scene
extremely well, and played the part of a good-natured Wife, telling him, she
would serve him as his Confident, but gave him warning that he was to expect a
Rival. A Rival, replies he in a fury, being heated both with Love and Wine, and
who is it that will dispute here with me? The Viceroy, answers she, if he sees
her; but that shall not be here, pursued she; for, as a faithful Confident, I
will keep her entirely for you. The Grand Master was so well pleased with his
Wife for this Complaisance, that he could have given her the Empire of the
World, if it had been in his power, to express to her the sense he had of such
an extraordinary kindness.

Dinner being ended, he kept his Wife and Donna Brigitta company a little time;
but having some important business that indispensably called him away, he was
obliged, though with a great deal of regret, to take his leave of them.
Whereupon the Count pretended he must be gone too: but the Grand Master opposed
it, and employed, besides his own importunities, those of his Wise, to oblige
him to tarry till his return, which should be within as short a time as
possible, telling them otherwise he would not go, how pressing soever his
business was. Donna Angelica frighted with this last Menace, as well as with
that of the false Brigitta, told him, she would take the charge of that Affair
upon her, and that she would lead the Stranger into her Closet, from whence she
would not suffer her to stir, till he returned. The Grand Master earnestly
entreated his Wife to be as good as her word; and having waited on them to the
Closet, for the better security, as well as to show a piece of Gallantry, he
locked them in, and took the Key with him.

The Viceroy, who notwithstanding the just ground he might have to complain of
this Lady's imprudent Conduct, was now a little reconciled to Donna Angelica,
being yet uneasy and disquieted; spent whole days in her Apartment; so that
not being satisfied with his Mornings Visit, which had lasted three or four
hours, he came again after Dinner. Having met with no body, and being there
well acquainted, he came as far as her Chamber, and hearing some laughing in
the Closet, he put his Ear close to the Key hole, and knew it to be the Count's
voice, which made him hearken more attentively, for he was unwilling a word of
their Discourse should escape him. I leave you to judge, whether it could be
pleasing to him or no. He resolved at first not to interrupt them, but hear
them patiently out to the end; but it was hard so long to restrain the
impetuous motions of his troubled Soul. The more he heard, the more his grief
enlarged upon him. But what should he do in this Circumstance? he was almost at
his wits end, and knew not what was his best course to take; to knock at the
door was a trouble to no purpose; he might very well imagine they would not
open it, without making him speak, and much less if he should speak; and what
measure soever he should use, it would but the more advise them to manage their
precaution. If he had followed the motion of his first thoughts, he had
presently endeavored to break open the door; but besides that, the door was
strong enough for the efforts he was able to make against it, he had so much
reason remaining in him, as to see it did by no means become a Person of his
Character, to use that violence in another Apartment; and if he made any
noise, he apprehended that the worst consequences of it might light upon
himself. He concluded then, it was his best way to wait there without making
any bustle, till they came out, or the Grand Master would come in. For he was
resolved this time to undo them, and the occasion was too fair to be slipped.
Those in the Closet continued still their Merriment. But the deep sighs the
Viceroy fetched (who sitting on a Chair he had placed near the door, the better
to overhear them, bit his Nails to the blood) having given them some suspicion
of the truth, made them speak lower; and then it was, that the Viceroy being
upon Sentinel, and enraged at the heart, not knowing what their secret way of
Diversion might be, would fain have found some device or other to peep in upon
them, though he could not well have hoped to see any thing there that might be
very pleasing to him.

The Grand Master, who was under a violent impatience to see Donna Brigitta,
could no longer defer his return. Those who have never loved, are more violent
than others, when they begin to be fired. He left his business half undone, and
sighed all the time of his absence from her: He could have wished for a winged
Chariot, to bring him home so much the sooner: But however, at last he gets
thither, and running directly to the Closet, he finds, not without great
surprise, the Viceroy in a very sad posture, and with a Countenance which
sufficiently witnessed the Confusion that possessed him; at first he made a
pleasant judgment of it, and reasoned after this natural manner; What a Cur of
a Hound, says he to himself, is this; no sooner have I any Game here, but he is
presently nosing after it, however he seemed as if he knew nothing, and told
him, as he came up to him, that he was amazed to see him there alone, and asked
him, if he knew where his Wife was. You may hear News of her, answers the
Viceroy, in a Tone that sufficiently expressed his Astonishment, if you will but
open the Closet door. The Grand Master, who had the Key in his Pocket, would
seem cunning, and having no desire that the Viceroy should see the fair
Brigitta, whom he imagined to be the Person he sought, knocked at the door, and
desired his Wife to open it, telling her the Viceroy was there. She answered
that she could not, and desired to be excused. The Grand Master being glad of
this answer, told Don Fernand that he must excuse her this time, that perchance
she was doing something she would be loath to have any men witnesses of: I
know, replies the Viceroy, that she is doing something belonging to her Sex,
but it is such as cannot be done without the assistance of a Man, and if you
will persuade her to open the door, you will see, she could not have chosen one
more gallant, or more young. I understand you, Sir, answered the Grand Master,
smiling; but as he is, we will let him alone with her; and I hope you will not
be more concerned at it than I. No, I assure you, answered the Viceroy: But Don
Gabriel, (so the Grand Master was called) deceive not your self, do you know
who it is? I know him so well, answered the other, that I my self locked them in
together, and that you may not doubt, pursues he, with an Air full of Raillery,
see here the Key. Don Fernand, strangely surprised to hear him speak in this
manner, was some time without giving him any answer; and after having walked two
or three turns in the Chamber, looking him in the Face, as if he would read in
his Countenance, whether he spoke in good earnest: Your Temper, says he, for a
Man of Honor as you are, in such a Circumstance passes my understanding. What
you please, answers Don Gabriel smiling still; but all this shall not oblige me
to show you my Wife's Gallant. I know him well enough, replies the Viceroy.
Since it is so, answered Don Gabriel, let us leave them in quiet together, for
it is not the part of a good natured Husband to interrupt his Wife's pleasures,
when she is taking them with her Gallant. The Viceroy, being more astonished,
knew not what to say. He expected the Grand Master's fury would have made him
sacrifice them both to his resentment, and he was thinking with himself, if he
could not divert him from it, at least to endeavor to save his Wife: How
contrary was the Event to his expectation! He makes a Jest of it; he is agreed
with them, and has made himself their Jailer. What can the amazed Don Fernand
imagine, but that the Grand Master has lost his Wits, or that they have given
him a Spell? He went his way, for he knew not how to deal with a Man of his
Character, and looking upon him with scorn, he marched out of the Chamber: Don
Gabriel waited on him: The Viceroy told him he ought to have more care of his
Reputation; the other laughed at the advice, and answered him only in raillery.
In fine the Viceroy left him with the worst opininion one man could frame of
another.

Those that were in the closet had not heard all this dialogue without a great
deal of concern; They had both been undone had the Viceroy persuaded Don
Gabriel to open the door; and they trembled when he came back to them: The
siege being raised, at last, says he to them, this Viceroy would be a terrible
man, if he did not find some others as cunning as himself; He told them all the
discourse they had had, but with such mimical gestures, as forced them almost
to burst with laughing, notwithstanding the little inclination they had to it.
This Comedy had lasted much longer, had not the Count, observing the trouble
Donna Angelica was in, occasioned by the Viceroy, resolved to retire.

But what gave them most trouble was, that Don Gabriel would by all means wait
on them, and there was need of all their Rhetoric and addresses to divert him
from it. The fair Donna Brigitta made use of all the power she had over him;
promising him that whenever she came to Town, she would come and pass some
time with them: So that at length he yielded to let her go, and she without any
further impediment got to the Ladies lodging, where she changed her clothes,
and reassumed her former figure.

The next day Donna Angelica, impatient to hear news of the feigned Brigitta,
sent a note, which by misfortune fell into the hands of Don Fernand, by means
of one of his spys, which he had placed at Count Henry's door, to observe what
passed, to whom the messenger entrusted the note, taking him for one of the
Counts servants. The Viceroy was reading it when he saw the Grand Master coming
to speak with him about some important business, and beginning to laugh, he
asked him what news of his wives Gallant? they said very pleasant things to
each other, both of them believing they had reason to be pleasant on that
subject. You are a man of good sense, Seignior Don Gabriel, said Don Fernand to
him, we are not responsible for the follies our wives commit; and it is a
madness to be disquieted at them, or to make our reputation depend on them: how
many men are there of your humor, and where are the husbands that are not
subject to the like.

The Grand Master, who saw the Viceroy's raillery went a little too far, I
shall come to you, Sir, says he, to comfort me in this case, when I have need
of it; for you are prepared, I see, upon this subject: but let me tell you, it
is no more true, that there was a Gallant yesterday in the closet with my wife,
than that there were theives there the other day. I agree with you in that;
answers the Viceroy that the one is as true as the other. But, Sir, says Don
Gabriel, the closet is not so large; I have eyes, and I think -- I know you
have eyes, interrupted Don Fernand, but I know too you will not make use of
them. I told you it was a Domestic thief who sought neither your money, nor
your other little Closet-knacks; but it seems you care not; since you are so
good as to lock him in your self with your wife. What! is that the thief,
answered the Grand Master, with a violent laughter, which hindered him to
pursue his discourse. I wish, added he a little after, such thieves would come
every day; I will give them liberty to steal what they please. But Sir, to
leave you no longer in your error, I will tell you, the thief you speak of is
one of the handsom'st women in the Kingdom. A woman, replies the Viceroy,
laughing as well as he, and since when is Count Henry become a woman? Count
Henry, says Don Gabriel! I think I have seen him; but he has not such
lineaments, (though this were possible) nor such a complexion, nor such a fine
neck, nor I know, added he, I am not a man to be so deceived, as to take a Man
for a Woman: yet, says Don Fernand, it was the Count who was yesterday in the
closet with Donna Angelica, and the thief I mentioned the other day. What, the
thief that I cudgeld, replys Don Gabriel. I speak not of the drubbs you gave a
man the other night, answers the Viceroy, but what I have told you is very
true. Sir, replys Don Gabriel, if my wife had a design of making any gallantry,
she would not sure elect such a raw young Gallant as he is. The youngest men
are not the worst Gallants, replied the Viceroy, and youth is seldom
displeasing in a way of gallantry, nay, more, I assure you, I know his voice
too well to be deceived. We are more easily deceived, replys the Grand Master
by our ears, then our eyes. I see very well: And I too, said Don Fernand, and
to convince you fully, read this Note, which one of your wives Pages delivered
this morning to a servant of mine, whom he took without doubt for another. Don
Gabriel takes it, and finds in it these words.

Are you not ashamed if your negligence? you should have writ to me two hours
since: what say I, two hours? you ought not to have gone to bed without writing
to me, but I pardon you for Don Gabriels sake, who loves you already almost as
much as I. Love works every day great miracles, but this is so extraordinary,
that I believe never any resembled it. At least I can say, that none but Donna
Brigitta has found out the secret of reconciling two such contrary things in
the world as is love and jealousy; and make her self be equally loved by the
husband and wife. Adieu, if you come not this day at least write to me.


This Note had no superscription, and Don Gabriel, having read it, asked the
Viceroy what he found in it, that reflected upon his honor, and how he knew it
was addressed to a Gallant, rather than to a Lady. I think it is enough to clear
that doubt, answers Don Fernand, that it was sent to Count Henry; but for your
sake, added he, laughing, I will believe if you will have me, that it was to
Donna Brigitta, whom the Note mentions. Well, replies Don Gabriel, rising to be
gone, if I have no other enemies to fear, but the young Neapolitan, I hold my
self very secure on that side, as to my Wife.

The Grand Master having thus left the Viceroy, came to his wives apartment,
and asked her, whether she had writ any note that morning; she, who readily
suspected the Viceroy of some treachery, answered him without any trouble, that
she had, and that it was to Donna Brigitta: Don Gabriel who would have sworn
for his wife's virtue, believed what she said, showed her the letter the
Viceroy had given him, and told her from the beginning to the end all the
discourse they had had together. Whereupon the incensed Donna Angelica spoke
all that her anger suggested against Don Fernand. She told Don Gabriel that
which most troubled her, in the baseness of the Viceroy's actions, was, that
not being contented to use all means to create an ill understanding betwixt
them, he had to her greater dishonor, charged her with a man whom all the
Court knew to be the Vice-queens Gallant: And that you may not doubt it, added
she, besides the report that runs abroad of it, I will show you a letter which
I found the other day by chance, in which you may see what the Lady writes to
the Count. She went to the closet, and brought one her lover had sacrificed to
her, which he had received but two days before from the Vicequeen. The Grand
Master read it with an inexpressable joy, that he had somewhat to insult over
the Viceroy withal: He went instantly to find him out, and, accosting him with
a smiling countenance, Sir, says he, I know not what day this is, but all
love-messengers are destined to mistakes on it: Count Henry has more then one
mistress; a while since one of your men surprised a note which my wife writ to
him, and see here another which is fallen into the hands of one of my servants,
and which one of the Vice-queen's Pages carried to the same Gallant. Some
mistake on both sides; but as you had the goodness to deliver me that of my
wives, I thought my self obliged to bring you this from yours. Take it, Sir,
added he, you know the character, I think it is your Ladys. It is so, answered
the Viceroy coldly, and began to read.

You have scarce left me, my dear Count, but I languish to see you again, and
the same pains other lovers suffer for a months absence, I suffer them all for
that of one night, or a day. Cruel are the minutes I pass without seeing you.
Return to morrow more amorous then ever, if you will repair these disquiets.
The pleasure of being loved by you is so charming to my heart, that I cannot
purchase it at too dear a rate. I find glory in it; honor, and revenge, and
all that another would lose by it. Adieu for some hours; for I hope as soon as
I awake to receive the good morrow from you: from whom alone I expect my
happiness. Nor do I desire to have any more of them, if they do not come from
you. Adieu.


The Viceroy having put the note in his pocket; with the same coldness, he had
read it, and looking upon Don Gabriel, who expected to hear him vent his
passion in the most bitter terms imaginable; what would you have, says he, I am
one like your self; like me, Sir, replys the Grand-Master then, methinks my
wives Letter should speak so as that does of the Vice-queens, but there is a
great deal of difference betwixt them. That difference is just nothing, answers
Don Fernand, and I tell you, though our wives do not write the same, they use
us both in the same manner. Sir, replys the Grand Master, if you are willing to
believe so for your own comfort, I will subscribe to it: but raillery apart, I
know what I ought to think, and till you have showed me as convincing proofs as
I bring you, you will give me leave, upon the subject of our Wives, to put a
difference between your fortune, and mine. The Viceroy told him it would not be
difficult to convince him, provided he will believe his eyes; and Don Gabriel
having promised he would contribute on his part to the discovery as much as he
could, they parted, the Viceroy being resolved not to leave one stone unturned,
to be revenged of the incredulity of the husband, and treachery of the wife;
The Grand Master designing to let him use his endeavors, without giving any
notice of it to his wife, of whose loyalty he thought he had no reason to
entertain the least suspicion.

Count Henry, whom Donna Angelica had not failed to acquaint with all that had
passed between the Viceroy, and Don Gabriel, went no more to her apartment: but
they could not be long without seeing each other. They made several
assignations, of which very few succeeded according to their wish* having
always found some that followed them, or gave them some interruption. They were
observed not only by the Viceroy and the Grand Master, but by the Vice-queen
also; who, some Days since, became more jealous of the Count than ever, because
she saw him but seldom; and caused him to be dogged from Morning to Night, and
followed him sometimes her self. The Palace Garden had been more favorable to
them than any other Place, whether for the Convenience Donna Angelica had of
going thither without Noise, or without being followed; or that it was not
mistrusted, being always kept carefully locked. But it is dangerous to go often
to one and the same Place, and in Case of an Amor, the surest way is often to
change Stations.

This Garden was one of the pleasantest of Catalonia, the chief Country of
delicate Gardens. There was in the Middle of it, a kind of an enchanted Palace,
made of Trees artificially ranged, and composed into Galleries, Halls,
Chambers, and Closets, with all their Appurtenances, one of the most curious
Pieces of Art in the World. There was but one way into this Palace of Trees,
which was by a Drawbridge, it being surrounded with a deep Mote full of Water.
The Thought of passing an Hour or two of the Night in so pleasant a Place, no
sooner presented it self to our Lovers, but they found means to get false Keys
to the Garden-door. The Viceroy had at length some Notice of it, and advised
the Grand Master, the better to surprise them, to tell his Wife, that he was to
make a Journey into the Country for two or three Days. Don Gabriel, who could
not yet believe what he heard, consented to what he desired of him. The Spies
were sent into the Garden early, who immediately got up into the Trees to keep
sentinel. It was scarce Night, when they saw a Man, of a very good Presence,
walk toward the green Palace, and within a little while after, a brisk jolly
Lady, who took the same way. They stole down from the Trees, having no more to
do, and having drawn up the Bridge, according to their Orders, they ran
presently to the Viceroy, to acquaint him that they had taken the Quarry. What
a Joy was this to Don Fernand: Don Gabriel was neither merry nor sad. He
desired to know the Truth, and then he knew what Resolution to take, if things
were so as they reported. Now the Truth will appear, says the Viceroy, but I
must beg a Favor of you, which is, that you would not be transported against
your Wife, and that you will content your self with putting the Gallant into
the Hands of Justice. I believe, answers the Grand Master, that in such Affairs
we do not take Counsel of any Persons, but tell me what you would do your self,
should it happen to be your Wife. I would shut her up in a Convent, replied the
Viceroy, or send her back to her Friends, and I beg that Favor at your Hands,
for Donna Angelica: For I protest to you, I shall not endure to see a Woman ill
used for a Misfortune which she should always have reason to accuse me of; show
her me, Sir, says Don Gabriel, and then it will be time enough to interceed for
her; but to tell you the Truth, my Heart, which uses to give me the first
Alarm, when any ill Accident threatens me, does not yet give me the least
Commotion. Don Fernand begins to laugh, and without any further Reply, marches
toward the Garden, and Don Gabriel followed him, being each of them attended
by five or six Servants well armed, to apprehend the Gallant.

They entered the Garden: The Night was so dark, they could hardly see each
other; they advanced toward the Place, caused the Bridge to be gently let
down, where having commanded their Servants to tarry, that they might make the
less Noise, and withal not to have them for Witnesses of this Adventure: Only
they two went in, and softly stole toward the green Palace. But it being of a
large Extent, and having a thousand Places wherein to skulk, it was hard in
this Obscurity, to find those they sought. The Viceroy marched before, and he
would have been pleased that Don Gabriel should hear part of the Discourse
between the two Lovers, not any longer to doubt of the Title with which his
Wife honored him. I believe it would have been a pleasant thing to have seen
two Persons of their Character, animated each by different Motions, marching on
Tiptoe in the dark, sometimes listening, and taking even the Noise themselves
made for the Voice of some body; particularly the Viceroy, who interessed
himself so much in this Affair, that the moving of the least Leaf gave him an
Alarm: They held each other by the Hand, as the Song is; and Don Fernand having
the Vandguard, was the first who met with one; but instead of catching, he was
caught himself. He had scarce entered one of the Rooms, where he had heard some
Noise, but he was seized by the Arm. Most treacherous of all Men, says the
Person that held him, and whom he knew, by her Voice, to be his own Wife, will
you now own your Treachery, or will you yet tell me you come hither to seek me?
I leave it to the Reader to judge whether the Viceroy were not sufficiently
astonished, he knew not whether she spoke to him in earnest, or whether she took
him for another: But for Don Gabriel it is hard to express his Joy: Ah wretch!
continued she, could you after all my Kindness, betray me in this manner? What
Pleasure could you take in abusing me with a Belief that you loved me, was it
only to comply with the Viceroy, who chose you to be my Gallant? Why do you not
speak to me? I should have been content to have given you a Mistress as I did,
without giving you a Heart which you refuse. These Words were too clear to
leave the astonished Don Fernand in any Doubt. He would have retired, full of
Confusion, with what he had heard; not so much upon her account, as Don
Gabriel's, who kept close to him behind, and would needs see the End of this
Scene, which could not but be exceeding pleasant; but before we pass any
farther, it will not be amiss, for the better understanding of this Adventure,
to tell you, how the Vice-queen happened to be there that Night.

I have already spoke of her Jealousy, which for some Days before tormented
her, and caused her to observe all the Motions of the Count, and sometimes
followed him in Person. She had notice, as well as the Viceroy, that he went
every Night into the Garden, and not doubting but it was to see Donna Angelica
there in private; she went thither by Night disguised in Man's Apparel, to the
end she might not be known. The Palace of Trees being the fittest Place for an
Interview, she judged they had made choice of it for theirs: So that she went
thither to wait for them, and a while after saw Donna Angelica come toward the
Place; but it being the Count whom she principally sought, she let her pass
without Interruption. It is true, that in the Impetuosity of her first Motions,
when she was near her, she had like to have been transported to some Action,
more conformable to her Jealousy, than her Sex.

The Spies, as I have already told you, went immediately to give the Viceroy
notice: And the Count being come thither presently after, was much astonished to
see the Bridge drawn. He imagined there was some Mystery in it: He went round
the Moat, to try whether he could hear any Noise, which might give him some
further Knowledge of that Accident. He w^^ resolved at least not to go out of
the Garden (...) he had found to what End this Precaution, of drawing up the
Bridge, had been used, and he had a thousand different Imaginations about it.
But he had scarce made his Round, when he heard the Viceroy and the Grand
Master coming, and understood part of what they said from behind a Hedge, under
which he skulked till they were gone past him. He saw them enter into the green
Palace, and presently draw up the Bridge, which stabbed him to the Heart, in
that thereby he was deprived of all Hope of bringing any Succor to Donna
Angelica: No Torment could be eq^^l to his, who doubted not, but the
Conseque^^^s of this cruel Adventure would fall heavy upon ^^s dear Mistress.
The Truth is, she was for her part strangely perplexed. At first she was much
surpised to hear the Vice-queen speak in a Place where she not only thought no
body was, but where she so little expected her. She rose up at the Noise the
Viceroy and the Grand Master made, thinking it was the Count, and was going
toward them, when on a sudden she heard the Voice of her Rival, reproaching
her Lover: She was seized with Fear, and knew not what to undertake in so
extraordinary an Adventure.

The Vice-queen, who knew that Donna Angelica was in that Place, spoke in this
manner to the false Count, on purpose to oblige him to an Answer, such as she
desired Donna Angelica should hear. Speak, ungrateful Man, pursued she, seeing
he made no Answer; What do you find in Donna Angelica more than in me! Is it
that she is false as you are? As for her Wit or her Beauty, you know us both
too well to prefer her to me. Will you tell me, it is to revenge me on the
Viceroy? No, it is nothing but the Pleasure you take in Treachery, that could
engage you: For you will not deny but you have loved me with Passion, and have
told me a thousand times, that if I pleased, you would no more see that Lady,
and that you had not the least Inclination to her: And in the mean time, while
I give my Heart entirely to you, and you assure me of yours, you cast your self
upon a Woman whom you profess not to love.

In all this there was something pleasing, and something disagreeable to both
the Husbands. When any thing was said that displeased Don Fernand, he made a
step back, and the other pusht him forwards; when it was any thing that
reflected on Don Gabriel, the Viceroy pulled him back by the Cloak. I have not
yet done, pursues the Vice-queen, seeing he still kept silence, you shall not
part from me till you have declared which of us two, Donna Angelica or I,
reigns Empress in your heart. I know it must be I, added she; if you follow the
Viceroy's Counsel; for you know there is no Woman he could love above me, if I
were not his own Wife already. But follow the dictates of your own heart, and
tell me whether you deceive us both, or if I be the only deceived person. You
only, Madam, answered the Viceroy, in whom the Spanish phlegm began to take
fire; you are doubly deceived, pursues he, both in taking me for the Count, and
in persuading your self that he loves you. You did not, pursued he, think me so
near you, when you made me acquainted with your Affairs. No, certainly, answers
she, in a great astonishment, which nevertheless she soon overcame, but I am
not angry that you heard what I have said, for you know whether you have not
deserved all this, and whether any one has contributed to your dishonor more
than your self. All this, replies he, might be better told if I were alone; but
here is the Grand Master, replies the Vice-queen to him, has too great a share
in this Evenings Adventure to laugh alone; and if he will give himself the
trouble of searching all these Rooms, he will find a Lady of his acquaintance
here who came not hither to meet with him: Donna Angelica who was not far off,
heard this Discourse, and I leave you to judge what her apprehensions were. The
Grand Master, who knew it was his Wife the Vice-queen spoke of, did but laugh,
not seeing any probability of her being there; and answered her, that he did
not conceive the Rendevous was intended for two Ladies, since there was but one
Gallant. It is true, answered the Lady, but the assignation was made for Donna
Angelica. Then, Madam, replied Don Gabriel, what brought you hither? The same,
answers she, that brought you, though my Success has been as bad as yours. But,
Madam, says Don Gabriel to her, you see I have no reason to give credit to what
you say, since by your own confession, you are jealous of my Wife; nevertheless
if you can show her to me here, I shall then believe you. The Vice-queen having
told him, he need but search the place. The Viceroy, sent some of his Servants
to the Palace for Lights, though she endeavored to oppose it, being unwilling
to be seen in the Equipage she was in: But notwithstanding, the Order was
given, and they strait ran to the Palace, to fetch some Flambeau's.

Don Fernand had no reason to be very well satisfied with the Vice-queen;
though besides his not loving her, he saw, that to give true Justice to all
Persons, the fault lay not wholly at her door; and that it was but just he
should suffer for his own folly: Yet, notwithstanding all these Reasons that
made against him, and of which he endeavored to convince himself, he could not
but be exceeding vexed to think Don Gabriel was witness of his shame. It was
necessary to make the Scales even, that he should show him Donna Angelica; and
he dyed with impatience to have the Lights brought. This unfortunate Lady was
in the greatest perplexity imaginable; she had hid her self under the Bushes,
but when she heard them talk of Lights, she thought there was no place of
security for her; she would have made her escape, but she found the Bridge
guarded. What course to take she knew not; she walked round the Moat with tears
in her Eyes, demanding of the Night to redouble her darkness, to save her from
the unhappiness that threatened her; and she was resolved rather to throw her
self into the Water she saw before her, then to be exposed to the laughter and
scorn of her most cruel Enemies: When on a sudden she discovers through that
obscurity the end of a Plank, which rested on the bank of the Moat where she
stood. She was fearful at first, but taking courage by little and little,
examined what it was, and could not imagine from whence that succor came: She
stuck not to venture her self upon it, and try to pass to the other side; but
she was scarce halfway, when she met a Man coming toward her upon the same
Plank: Her fear redoubled, and she was just upon the point to return back, had
she not been stopped by the voice of that Person, who asked, Is it you, Madam? Ah
my dear Count, answered she, with an incredible Joy, how opportunely has Heaven
sent you, to free me from the greatest Misfortunes that could befall me. The
Count, (for it was he) gave her his Hand, and told her, he had been above an
hour seeking some means to relieve her, and that by a great goodness of
Fortune, he had found that Plank at the lower end of all the Garden.

Their Discourse was not long, the time would not permit it, the Lights of the
Viceroy had sent for, appeared already in the Green Palace. They drew away
their Plank, and having tumbled it into the Moat, they got by a by-way,
presently to the Gate, at which they were used to come in, to think how to
manage their Affairs, and secure themselves from their jealous Observers. As
they past, they could perceive the other three very busy in Search of the fair
Fugitive. There was not a Hole or Corner in the Palace, which they left
unvisited: Not a Bush unshaken, and hardly any of the higher Grass unsearcht:
In fine, no Place, though never so abstruse, which was not carefully examined,
as well by the M^sters as the Spies themselves: Who all affirmed they had seen
two Persons enter the green Palace, and the Vice-queen more positively than
they, added for the further Credit of the Story, that it was Donna Angelica,
whom she had seen, touched, and followed for some time.

The Grand Master, as he had reason, laughed at all this: And even took Pleasure
in making them run from one side to the other, to no purpose, the Vice-queen
was absolutely in the last Despair, and protested she would not quit the Garden
till she had found Angelica. You will find, says Don Gabriel, continuing his
Railery, that this dangerous Count has carried her away; for you must needs
confess with me, that a Woman being alone, and without Help, cannot otherwise
than by Enchantment, get out of this Place, the Bridge being drawn. They had
great Contests on both sides, which at last ended in the common Confusion, both
of the Viceroy and his Lady, who being weary at length with their unpofitable
Search, took their way to the Palace. Don Fernand, nevertheless, commanded that
the Bridge should remain drawn all the Night, and that Guard should be kept,
intending the next Morning to renew the Search. To what end, says the Grand
Master, is all this Precaution, but to cherish so many idle Imaginations of
your own Brain: Sometimes a Thief is in my Wife's Closet, another time a
Gallant transformed into the Country Lady, and now to conclude all these
Adventures, I am to find my Wife, by Night in the Garden with Count Henry;
where, instead of her, I met with yours, who takes you for that young Gallant.
What ought I to infer from all this, added he, but that you were pleased to
give me the Diversion of a Comedy which we will conclude, if you please, in my
Wife's Chamber, whom doubtless we shall find asleep, whilst you have given your
self so much Trouble in searching for her here. The Viceroy, whose Head was
full of what his Spies had told him, and of which he doubted not, since his
Wife had confirmed it, took him at his word, and went with him toward his
Apartment.

As for the Vice-queen, she had left them in a great dispute which of the two
was graced with the Largest Antlers.

They came into the Palace, and meet in the Guard-room the Major of the place,
who waited for the Viceroy to deliver him the keys of the Town-gates, and told
him, that Count Henry was just gone forth at one of the gates of the Haven, and
had embarked himself with a very handsome Lady whom he led with him. A Lady,
replys the Viceroy looking on Don Gabriel, to observe his countenace: You will
find, says the Grand Master to him laughing; it is she whom we seek. The
Viceroy, without giving any answer to the Grand Masters raillery, asked the
Major of what stature she was. But he could give no exact account, because they
walked fast, and gave him but little time to observe them. The Viceroy's heart
notwithstanding, misgave him that it was no other than Donna Angelica: and
running to her apartment to know the truth, he found in effect that she was
absent, and came presently with the news to her incredulous husband, hoping he
would lose no time in pursuit of her. Don Gabriel was for the present a little
astonished at it; but like a man of sense, by the Viceroy's example, he would
not afflict himself overmuch, and told him, that since his Wife was not as she
ought to be, the Count had done him a favor, ridding him of her: so that the
poor Viceroy being afflicted on both sides, and made a Cuckold too in the
bargain, fell to consider what he should do with his own Wife; but he found his
condition common to so many husbands, that comforting himself with others in
the like circumstance, he resolved not to part with her, and I think he did
well.

A Cuckold! none more a-la-mode than he,
The number does increase so much;
Who names a Husband means a property,
And their Wives use them all as such,
FINIS.
Novels and Plays Printed for, and Sold by, R. Wellington, at the Lute in St.
Paul's Churchyard; E. Rumball, at the Post House, Covent Garden; and B.
Lintot, at the Cross-Keys in St. Martin's-lane, near Long-Acre.
THE Drudge, or Jealous Extravagant. Princess of Cleves. Nicerotis. A Novel.
Agiatis Queen of Sparta. Revengeful Mistress. The Duchess of Mazarines Memoirs
written by her self. Cardinal Mazarines Letters. Count de Soisions. Chaste
Seraglio. Count de Amboise. Don Henrick. Court Secret. Fatal Beauty, or Agnes
de Castro. Art of Making Love. Neapolitan, or the Defender of his Mistress.
Amors of Count Teckley. Don Sebastian. Rival Princess. Character of Love.
Unhappy Lovers, or the Timmerous Fair one. Clytie. A Novel. Humors and
Conversation of the Town. Rival Mother. A Novel. The Lovers Secretary. The Nuns
Letters to a Cavaleer. Religio Laici, in a Letter to Mr. Dryden. Intreagues and
Gallantries of Christina Queen of Sweden. Homais Queen of Tunis. Life of the
Duke of Guise. Unfortunate Hero. Irish Princess. Bassa of Buda. Lisarda, or the
Travels of Love, and Jealousy. Duke of Alancon and Queen Elizabeth. Amors of
the Queen of Polonia. Hattigi King of Tameran. Pilgrim. Scanderbegg. Revived
Fugitive. Mrs. Behn's Novels in one Voll. Incognita, or Love and Duty
Reconciled, by Mr. Congreve.
PLAYS.
THe Relapse, or Virtue in Danger. Spanish Wives. Unnatural Brother. Plot and
no Plot. Younger Brother, or Amorous Jilt. Old Bachelor. Agnes de Castro.
Rover, or Banished Cavalier. Rule a Wife and have a Wife. Country Wife.
Rehearsal. Anatomist, or the Sham-Doctor. Cyrus the Great, or the Tragedy of
Love. Don Quixot in 3 Parts. Roman Bride's Revenge. Marriage-hater matched.
Country Wake. Neglected Virtue. Phyrrhus King of Epirus. Very good Wife.
Woman's Wit, or Lady in Fashion. The Gallants. Sullen Lovers. Humourists.
Mackbeth. Timon of Athens. Oedipus. Ibrahim the 13th, Emperor of the Turks.
Canterbury Guests. Lost Lovers. Love's a Jest. Plain Dealer. Brutus of Alba.
London Cuckolds. Sir Courtly Nice. Earl of Essex. Squire of Alsatia. All for
Love. Devil of a Wife. Lancashire Witches. Cleomenes. Don Sebastian. Oroonoko.
Abdelazar. Pastor Fido. Love for Money. Loves last Shift, or the Fool in
Fashion. Young King, or the Mistake. Roundheads, or the Good Old Cause. City
Heiress, Conquest of Granado. Cheats. Titus Andronicus. City Politics.
Debauchee. Venice preserved. Rival Queens. Villain. Sir Antony Love.
Theodosius. Princess of Cleve. Antony and Cleopatra. Disappointment. Fond
Husband. Mithridates. Caesar Borgia. Woman Captain. Rival Ladies. Wives Excuse.
Bury Fair. Orphan. Novelty. Tempest. Caius Marius. Chances. Don Carlos.
Friendship in Fashion. Hamlet. Indian Emperor. Philaster. Sacrifice. Sir Martin
Marr-all. State of Innocence. Traitor. Virtuoso. Virtue betrayed. Wild Gallant:
Empress of Morocco. Town-Fop. Innocent Mistress. Impostor defeated. Alcibiades.
Amazon Queen. Ambitious Statesman. Amboyna. Amyntas. Andromache. Atheist.
Banditti. Belphegor. Benefice. Bonduca. Bussy de Amboise. Calisto. Caligula.
Cambyses. Carnival. Commonwealth Women. Cornish Comedy. Country Wit. Darius
King of Persia. Destruction of Jerusalem. Duke of Guise. English Monsieur.
False Count. Fools Preferment. Fortune-Hunters. Gloriana. Grateful Servant.
Heir of Morocco. Henry the Sixth. Humorous Lieutenant. Injured Lovers. Innocent
Usurper. Julius Coesar. Kind Keeper, King and no King. Libertine. Love in a
Tub. Love in a Wood. Mary Queen of Scotland. Massacre of Paris. Mizer. Miseries
of Civil Wars. Mistaken Husband. Nero. Love without Interest. Othello.
Pausanius. Provoked Wife. Psyche. Reformation. Regulus. Richard the Second.
Richmond Heiress. Rival Sisters. Royal Shepperdess. Scornful Lady. Scowrers.
THE HAPPY SLAVE, A NOVEL.

Translated from the French.

By a Person of Quality.

The Third Edition.

LONDON, Printed for R. Wellington at the Lute in St. Paul's Churchyard, and E.
Rumbal at the Post House in Russel Street, in Covent Garden. 1699.

Advertisement.
THE Book I Publish scarce deserves an Advertisement. But that I give you, is
not to bespeak the Critics in my favor. I cannot believe any Person of Wit
will exercise his Faculty on a Trifle, which perhaps I have spent less time to
Compose, than he must to censure. But it is because some Persons having small
kindness for an Author, have been pleased heretofore to comment on my Tables,
to make stories of my stories, and to stretch my fancy to conjectures which
never came into my Head: It were easy for me to justify my self in this
particular, if it were desired; but I conceive my manner of proceeding has
sufficiently done it, to Dedicate it to one of the Principal Lords of the
Kingdom, a Book, such as they make my former, by their strange interpretations
to be, and to put my Name to it, was it not the way to gain my self Enemies,
and utterly ruin me? I have committed faults in my time, but never of this
nature. Therefore I declare to the Public, and especially to those who busy
themselves in penetrating into other men's intentions, that under the literal
sense of my Tales there is not hid any Allegorical meaning, that when I speak
of the Turks and of Africa, I have not any Ideas in Europe or any other Nation,
and that they will make me think quite otherwise than I think, if they make me
speak any otherwise than I speak, if the Intrigues or Adventures I write of,
have some conformity to those of our times, I am not to answer for it: It Is the
fault of Chance and not mine. There are so many in Love, that though Love takes
infinite ways, they can hardly avoid meeting sometimes: were Writers confined
to entertain you only with things rare and extraordinary, they would be soon
drawn dry, and all their stories quickly exhausted; the Reader is entreated to
do me Justice herein, and not pay me with ingratitude for the Presents I make
him of my Toys: This shall be followed by a Second Part, where the History of
Laura, who shall bear the principal part in it, shall be matter of Gallantry,
and far exceed this of the Sultaness.

THE HAPPY SLAVE, A Novel.
AFRICA, for some Ages, has past for a part of the World, where the People
were no less Cruel and Savage than the Lions and Tigers that fill the Deserts
of that Country: But since the discovery of Love there, it has appeared, that
as Love grows in all Countries, so Barbary it self has nothing of Barbarous
but the Name. To verify this, I shall entertain you with a piece of Gallancy
acted there, which may justify what I affirm.

Count ALEXANDER, a young Roman Lord, very considerable for Estate, (but more
for Birth and Parts,) had scarce appeared to act his part on the great Theater
of the World, but he found himself pressed by his Relations to Marry: He was
handsome, high spirited, and witty, as those of Old Rome, but addicted to
Pleasure, as those of the New; humoursome, and wholly given up to the pursuit
of his Fancy and Inclinations. As for Marriage (upon the good Advice he had
received not to engage, but as late as he could,) he usually said, What a
pitiful Utensil a Wife is? witness the greatest part of those Gentlemen
dignified with the Illustrious Title of Husbands; especially now adays, when
Men seem to have Wives only for this, That others may make use of them.

These Consequences he drew, as well from Experience as Example; for being
Young, Handsome, and Rich; he was sufficiently qualified not to fail of good
Fortune, with a Sex (in our Age) very kind and susceptible, and had not wanted
his divertisements of that Nature; and therefore he had small inclination by
taking a Wife, to give others the Opportunity to pay him in his own Coin.

In the mean time the Interests of the Family (which often prove Poison to the
greatest pleasures of Life (obliging the most excellent Persons to ordinary
Actions: The Young Roman, to deliver himself from the importunity of Relations,
chose rather to quit the Pleasures of ROME, by Traveling abroad, than to make
himself subject to a Law so contrary to his Humor, and that beloved Liberty he
preferred before all things. He communicated his design to his Valett de
Chamber, who had served him long, and being active and ingenious, quickly took
order to have all things in readiness that were necessary for their purpose.

The Spring was come, and the Weather seasonable for Travel, when on a fair day
the Young Gentleman and his Servant privately left Rome, and imbarqued at
Civita Vecchia in a Felucca hired for the purpose. His design was to visit the
best Courts of Europe, beginning with that of Spain. But there are Persons over
whom Fortune is so rigorously imperious, that she seems jealous of any thing
they undertake, without consulting her first. 'Twas she who provided Count
Alexander a Voyage into Africa, when he had designed to confine his Travels to
Europe: Of the Towns he was to see, Tunis was marked out by Fortune for one;
and though much out of his Road, yet where Fortune intermeddles, there always
happens something extraordinary; her excesses and extravagancies being that
which chiefly makes us take notice of her.

The fourth day after he had left Civita Vecchia, this Young Lord began to
perceive, that though all the Elements are terrible at Sea, yet Men who are
Enemies are more terrible than the Elements. Till then the Weather had been
fair to extremity, not a puff of contrary Wind: He proceeded in his Voyage with
what speed he could wish, and blessed himself at the happiness of the Weather.

The Coast of Italy is dangerous, especially in Summer, being then subject to
In-roads by People of the South, whose livelihood is Robbery; and when the
Weather is fair, their Trade is so great, that whosoever is not upon his Guard,
is happy if he escape them; I mean the Corsairs of Barbary. Count Alexander,
who never thought he had left Rome, to be led in Triumph to Tunis, saw himself
at break of day saluted by a Brigandine of that Nation: The poor Seamen
presently took Alarm, the sight of one Turban was sufficient to affright them:
And the Turks had scarce discharged three or four Muskets at the Christians,
but they leapt into the Sea to save themselves by swimming; the Italian Count
and his Servant staid in the Vessel, not in hopes of being able to defend
themselves against that number of Enemies, which the strength of Rollando, and
the Enchanted Armor of Amadis could scarcely have done, (whereas now a Man is
but a Man, and among other Secrets that of Enchanting Arms is lost.) But having
no skill in swimming, he could not expect to escape as the Mariners: Yet he was
not so out of love with his Life, but that he held it better to be a Slave than
be drowned. But that those Barbarous Corsairs might see what a Person they
dealt with, and that he might sell his Liberty as dear as possible; having
commanded his Servant to throw his Baggage overboard, he gave him order what
further to do. I will omit the Description of the Action, though reputed the
most glorious ever done on the Mediterranean, being a Combat of Two against
Thirty, whereof they laid six dead on the Deck, and many more wounded. 'Twas an
Engagement of a Herd of Wolves against Two young Lions, who defended themselves
with unparalled Valor and Courage. It Is true, the Turks (not to lose the
Money they did expect from their Ransom) spared them at first, using Cudgels
only against them; but at length the Blood and Death of their Comrades, and the
shame and disdain they had of so long and obstinate defense made by two rash
Christians against them, being so many, having filled them with rage, they had
recourse to their Symitars: And with so much advantage, that having killed the
Valet, the Young Count (after several Wounds received, his strength, not his
Courage, having failed him in so tedious a Fight,) was forced to yield, being
no longer able to lift up his Arm to make use of his Sword. The Cowardly
Villains had scarce the Courage to board him, and durst not approach him, till
they saw him fallen flat on his back. They took him, and carried him on board
their Brigandine, where they gave him all the help in their power for saving
his Life, having no other mark of their Victory, but the taking one Valiant
Person, who had cost them too dear to be proud of their Prize: They beheld him
with Admiration, and could not comprehend how an Age so tender could be capable
of so much Courage; and that in a Body appearing so delicate, there was
strength enough lodged to perform the actions they had seen. And being
Naturally Superstitious, they did really believe there was something
supernatural in the Young Man's Person, or at least, that he was the Flower of
Christendom; this conceit helped them to bear with more patience the shame of
their Victory. And finding their Men thin, and having taken before some
considerable Prizes, they resolved to return directly for Tunis.

The Weather was favorable, and in few days sail they arrived at Gouletta,
where going ashore they put the poor Count on Horseback, bound and pinioned
like a Robber, and brought him to the Town; some of these Barbarians having got
the start of the rest, spread such a Report of his Valor and Courage, that
they drew together not the ordinary People only, (who are curious of small
matters) but the Principal Persons of Tunis, and the Bassa himself, who
accompanied with many of his Friends, came walking toward the Ruins of
Carthage, to see the arrival of this Famous Christian, whom they imagined a Man
that carried Terror in his looks: But how were they surpised to see a Youth
pale and disfigured, yet keeping with his good mien the marks of Grandeur in
his Countenance. He was pityed by all, and the Bassa being a gallant and
generous Person, was presently seized with such Indignation against the
Villains, who used in that manner one so little deserving it, that he commanded
them forthwith on pain of his displeasure to unbind him upon the place; which
they instantly did, not daring to disobey him, who next the Dey was of greatest
Authority and Power in the Kingdom: He asked them the price of their Slave,
and, having commanded him to be conducted to his Palace, paid the Corsairs five
hundred Patacoons, being the Money they demanded.

Count Alexander having happily fallen into the hands of so good and generous a
Patron, began to recover He was Lodged in a handsome Apartment, where the
Bassa's Chyrurgions searched his Wounds: And being more carefully looked to than
on board the Brigandine, he soon found himself better, though weak, and sore
bruised by what he had suffered at Sea from the hands of those Barbarians, who
having no pity for any, had not been too careful of him; yet there was no
danger of his Life, the Fever he had was not great, and they had hopes to see
him well in few days. The Bassa visited him Morning and Evening, and by degrees
his care and kindness grew to that height, that he came more frequently to see
him, and not only took more particular notice of him, but increased daily the
esteem and friendship he had for him.

Before I proceed, it may not be amiss to satisfy the Curiosity of the Reader,
in giving him an account of the Person; the Birth and Character of the Bassa.
Mahomet Bassa by the Father of Sidy Marat, and Mahomet Lapsy the new Beys, was
the Son of a Renegado of Corsica, of the Family of Petrosanty, who by the
handsomness of his Person, and the excellency of his Wit, having gained the
good Opinion of the Dey or King of the Country, made so good use of the favor
of his Prince, that he advanced him to the highest Office of the Kingdom,
whereof he left his Son Mahomet his Heir. But, to shorten the Story, Mahomet
the younger being deeply embroyled with the Dey and the Divan, (who, jealous of
the Authority his Father had gained, would have divided the Offices of Bassa
and Bey) went to the Port, and returned Victorious: Tunis never flourished as
under him, being as fit for Arms as Gallantry, of a great Spirit, and excellent
Wit, the most Brave, the most Generous and Magnificent of Men: He loved the
Christians, and did them Justice; and entertained a Commerce of Civility with
many Princes of Europe. He sent and received Presents every Year to and from
the Great Duke of Tuscany; in a word, no Lord of that Country ever carried
himself better, and had more Merit and Reputation than he: Some resemblance of
this Splendour may yet be seen in the Person of Mahomet Lapsy his Son; he had
inclinations worthy a great Lord, as he was, and the Soul of a Man truly
Generous, and of Eminent Virtue.

The Bassa was charmed with admiration at the Wit of the Count, extremely
pleased with his Conversation, and sometimes past three or four hours in
familiar Discourse, sitting on his Bed. He was chiefly surprised to find his
Apprehension so clear, and Knowledge so general, that what Subject soever he
chose to Discourse of he spoke of to admiration. This made the Bassa speak of
him to his Friends with so tender Affection, and so much to his Praise, that he
gained him the Esteem and Amity of all the principal Lords of the Kingdom, who
came to see him, and made him Presents according to the Custom of the Country.

The Bassa, by many Illustrious marks and clear discoveries, was induced to
believe the Count a Person of no ordinary Quality, but did not think fit to
question him on that point; and had no further knowledge of him than that he
was an Italian. Nor durst the Count acquaint him with his Condition, fearing,
the knowing of it might make his Enlargement the more difficult: But after so
many favors from the Bassa, he could not in gratitude conceal himself from a
Person who had obliged him so highly, and to whom he did owe more than his
Life. Therefore being asked by the Bassa, whether his Parents were living, and
why he writ not to them: Sir (said he) I should be the basest of Men should I
ever forget the Obligations you have put upon me, nor could I be guilty of a
greater dishonesty, than to be prevailed upon by fear, or any other
consideration, not to pay you what I owe you. I confess, (and I hope you will
pardon me,) that I scrupled to make a full discovery of my self to you, for
fear my Captivity might be the harder, my Bondage more severe, and my Liberty
valued at a higher rate: But having found you so generous, I cannot, after the
Favors you have heaped upon me, the Rights you have over your Slaves, by
forbearing to tell you, I am a Person of Quality, of one of the best Families
of Rome; that my Name is Count Alexander, and that if ever you restore me to my
Liberty, I must pay you my Ransom with most grateful Acknowledgments of your
Kindness and Favors.

The Bassa smiled, and with much tenderness answered, Alexander, you shall not
fare the worse for your discovery to me; I am no Merchant of Slaves, nor did I
buy you to sell you again: You are free, and shall live with me in this Country
as if you were in your own, with one of your Friends: And if I detain you here
a little longer than perhaps you would wish, it is because I can hardly part
with one for whom I have so high an esteem, and so cordial affection. To these
he added other expressions of Kindness, which were joyfully received by the
Count, and dispelled all his Grief for the loss of his Liberty.

As soon as he had recovered his Strength, the Bassa made him partake of his
Pleasures and Divertisements, in Hunting, Walking, Horse-race; in all which the
Count appeared Eminent above others, and became more Famous than ever any
Christian was in those Parts; every considerable Person was ambitious to visit
him, and took pleasure to see, and to treat him, which is a special favor to
those of their Country, much more to one who professed a Religion, to which
they are open irreconcilable Enemies. Hence you may observe the Power of
Merit, and how irresistible are influences of a fortunate Destiny. The esteem
the Bassa expressed publicly for him, contributed much to all these
advantages; but you are to consider his Person, and the sweetness of his
Temper, and candor of his Actions as the effectual means for gaining him Amity,
and that which won him the Love of the most Excellent Persons.

But notwithstanding his Illustrious Acquaintance, and agreeable
Divertisements, the Honors and Favors he daily received, he could not forbear
wishing with sighs for a return into Europe. He lived as one free, but was
really a Slave to the Affection of the Bassa, from which he thought his
deliverance more difficult, than from Fetters and Chains. His Wit and
Inclnations were not for the Men of that Country; he loathed, and was weary of
them: The Turks have a good sense, and will reason well enough of the Affairs
of the World, and are great and subtle Politicians; but for Wit and good
Breeding, they know not what it is; their Conversation is barren, and consists
more in the smoke of Tobacco than Excellent Discourse: Their Knowledge is
small, having ordinarily no advantage of Reading or Travel. The Bassa alone had
more Wit, and more Reason than the rest altogether; but his Employment in the
State engaging him in a thousand indispensible Affairs, would not allow him to
be always with Alexander, who in the mean time past his Melancholy hours in the
Garden of the Seraglio, where he had the privilege to walk, being a retired
and very pleasant place, and that wherein he took great delight. But alas, how
different were these days from those at Rome! the Italians are naturally apt to
be Melancholy, and this Solitude made the Count so: The Bassa, who loved him
sincerely, and passionately, wished to have him always in good humor, was
troubled to find him sad and dejected; but having often enquired the cause,
could not obtain farther satisfaction, than that it was an effect of his
Temper: He had furnished him to excess with all that Country could afford for
the Pleasures of Life, and could not imagine the cause of the grief, but
fancied at last, that to complete his Divertisements, Alexander might want the
conversation of a Woman. The Bassa being a Person much given to Gallantry, was
the more easily inclined to believe he had found the true cause of his
Melancholy. And looked upon it as no incurable Disease, but presently resolved
to find out a Remedy, by furnishing him with a Mistress, which was a high
strain of complaisance in a Person of his Character; but there were no limits
to the Love he had for his Alexander.

The Law of Mahomet is very severe in this Point, against Persons of another
Religion, though very indulgent to those of his own. Those who fall into the
Hands of the Turks, and will make love to their Women, are under the necessity
of changing their Religion, or Burning: these Extremities are hard, yet of the
many Christians reduced to those straits, I know not one who has thought
Martyrdom so charming, as not to prefer Circumcision before Burning: the Bassa,
though no zealous observer of the Law, was willing however to avoid the Scandal
that might follow, if the Intrigue were discovered, and therefore designed to
marry him to a Christian. There was with the Sultaness his Wife, an Italian
Slave, a young Maid of good quality, lovely and witty: it was not long since
the Bassa had been in love with her, but without any success: whether it
proceeded from the respect she bore to the Sultaness her Mistress, who loved
her entirely, or from scruple of Conscience in point of Religion, with which
she excused her self, certain it is, his addresses were vain; and after three
Months eager pursuit of his design, being not accustomed to so much resistance,
he quitted her, and cast his eyes on other less difficult conquests: he hoped
that one Christian with another might have better success, and that Alexander
being very lovely, and young, needed only to show himself for gaining the love
of a Maid of his Country, professing the same Religion with him: he endeavored
to dispose her for the purpose, by raising in her an esteem for the Gallant he
provided her: he had often spoken of him in the Chamber of the Sultaness, where
Laura, the Slave we are discoursing of, did constantly attend.

And having formed the design, he seldom entertained them with any thing else,
but Alexander did this, or Alexander said that; of which he gave them so
pleasant Descriptions, that he could not fail of making some impressions of
love for him in a Woman, though never so little susceptible.

The Count knew nothing of all these good Offices; the Bassa smiling sometimes
at his sadness, would tell him, he should shortly see him in a different humor.
One having disposed all things on Laura's side, (who had told him, she would
not be displeased to see this Christian) he took him into the Garden of the
Seraglio to walk, and after a turn or two, asked him if he had ever been in
love. The question did very much surprise him, apprehending, that being among a
People naturally suspicious, the Bassa might perhaps have had some Jealousy of
him, though he could not imagine the cause. But to disabuse him, he held it
necessary to affect great indifference in the business of Women, and (the truth
is) to that day he had not been in love. And though it were ill courtship to
the Bassa, who was an admirer of Women, to tell him he had never been in Love;
yet he chose rather to commit a solaecism in courtship, than to give him the
least cause of suspicion The Bassa advised him to have a care of himself, lest
Love should one day be revenged of him, and told him, he despaired not of
seeing him a Lover in Barbary: You are, said he, handsome and witty, and there
are here, as in Europe, dangerous Ladies, who perhaps may have designs on your
liberty; and you are not yet got out of Tunis: This Discourse unexpected, and
spoken with such an Air, so troubled the Count, he knew not what answer to
make. The Bassa much pleased at the disorder he had put him to; What, said he,
does Love appear so terrible to you, that you dare not encounter it? can a Man
of your bravery be afraid of a Passion? Recollect your self, and think it not
so dreadful here as in Italy; you arm your Cupid with weapons of War, we dress
ours with Flowers; nothing is less cruel than Love among the Turks: our Women
are kind, and good natured, and never are the cause of any man's death by
coyness and disdain; the sole difficulty is in getting a sight of them; gain
but that point, and nothing can be more easy than the rest: your Ladies are
scrupulous and shy of showing favor to theirs Lovers, and ours make a
conscience of seeing theirs Languish: it is not so odious to be fond and coming
with you, as it is to be cruel and insensible here. We follow in the first place
the Law of nature, preferring it to Mohomets, as being Men before we are
Muslulmans. We hold our selves obliged to pay kind regard and affectionate
tenderness to Female Beauty, and expect from it a return of complacency. And
those who approve not these Maxims, we esteem unworthy to taste the pleasures
of Love. I know that in Europe you use this Passion an extraordinary way,
making that Martyrdom which should be a delight; but I would fain know, what
the design of that Woman can be, who sees a man every day on his knees at her
feet, sighing for that which she also desires, and it may be, more
passionately. Why then must he be tormented? Why so many sighs, why so many
tears expected from him, when the passion of both Sexes is equal, if that of
the Female may not pass for the greater?

The Count having in this time recollected himself, answered; I believe, Sir,
that in Love as in other matters every one may have his particular fancy, and
different Maxims for conduct: but if I, who was never in Love, may be allowed
to deliver my opinion of it, I conceive that Men born under a Law, are
insensibly disposed to bear it with ease. And I dare confidently affirm, there
is more sweetness, and charming delight in the torments we endure in our way of
Loving, than in those easy pleasures that cost you nothing: think not, Sir,
those torments so cruel as our Lovers represent them; they aggravate them only
to affect their Mistresses the more, and to make them more sensible. It would
certainty surprise you to hear them cry, Increase, O love, Increase so sweet a
pain: their sufferings are pleasures. The Bassa was so charmed with hearing him
speak, that he would not interrupt him, so that he proceeded, What satisfaction
can you find in a Love that is fulsom and dull, without any pique to make it
poynant, and season it for relish? What divertisement to be expected from an
innocent Cupid, a Child without wit, without waggery, that permits you to do in
all things as you please? The Bassa could not forbear laughing, and told him,
that to make him believe that Love the most charming, that made him suffer
most, he must make it appear by trial in himself by being in Love, enduring
with pleasure all the torments he spoke of: Sir, said Alexander, I was never in
love in my Country, where you know we have freedom of living, and Liberty of
converse with the Female Sex; it is not probable then I shall fall in love
here, where we are not allowed so much as a sight of them: means may be found,
replied the Bassa, to satisfy you in that particular, if you desire it. I do
not conceive it for my advantage, said the Count, to thrust my self into the
fire to try the experiment, or to change my Religion. No, no, said the Bassa,
it is with a Christian I would have you acquainted, and one in my judgment very
beautiful, and not unworthy your sighs: had I been of your mind, and like the
Lovers of your Country, taken pleasure in being vexed and tormented, my business
might have been done. She made me pine for her above three Months, till weary
of a Mistress that had so little sense of my pain, I betook my self to others
that were more of my humor; her beauty and wit will certainly charm you, and
you may find her as haughty, as fierce, as cruel as you can wish: it may be
difficult to have a sight of her, as being with the Sultaness, who, since she
knew the inclinations I had for her, would never permit her to step out of her
Apartment: but I Will bring you thither disguised as an Eunuch; there is no other
way of entrance for you into the Seraglio: and you are so young, that by Night
you may pass for an Eunuch without any suspicion. The Count gave him a thousand
thanks for the favor, not but that he could have been very well content to
have been without it, having no great desire to engage himself in Acquaintance
in a Country where he would tarry as short time as he could; yet in
complaisance to the Bassa, and of Curiosity to see a Slave the Bassa
represented so beautiful, he accepted this offer with some kind of joy.

The fourth Prayer being over, he came to his Patron, being the time he usually
went to the Seraglio: And having taken the Habit of an Eunuch provided for him
there, he waited on the Bassa to the Apartment of the Sultaness: Laura, who had
notice of their coming, waited their entrance; the Bassa came smiling up to
her, and whispered her in the Ear, that he had brought her an Eunuch, who could
tell her News out of Italy; prayed her to have a care of him, and to use him as
a Person he loved entirely. Laura fell a laughing, and answered, she doubted
not but the Eunuch should give him a good account of his Reception. The Count,
though Disguised, was so easy to be known, that, had the Bassa said nothing,
his good Mien had discovered him: No Eunuch, no Turk had so good an air. She
gave him her hand to lead her into a Chamber, where they should not be exposed
to their view who past by. Sir, said she, I know not what thanks to give the
Bassa for the favor he has done me, to afford me a sight of you, no man being
allowed entrance here but himself, and the Eunuch whose Habit he has caused
you to take. I cannot impute it to any thing but the extraordinary affection he
has and daily declares for you. It Is true, Madam, answered the Count, the
kindness of the Bassa to me is extreme; but if either of us have reason to be
concerned how to thank him, (as he very well deserves) it is certainly I, for
the favor he has procured me; yet I could wish I were not wholly beholding to
him for it, but that (as he would have me believe) you had a hand in it. Sir,
replied Laura, I shall tell you no lie, I have made it sufficiently known to
you, I desired this favor from him. He told us things so glorious of you, and
related them so much to your advantage, you may easily believe, I (who, for
three years I have been here, have not had the Liberty of Converse with any
Man) could not but desire acquaintance of a Person so generally esteemed.
Madam, said he, this Country has been favorable in allowing me a Reputation,
which perhaps I may find difficult to maintain in your Opinion. You need not
fear that, replied Laura, your Mien confirms sufficiently the reports that have
past of you. But to change the Discourse, do you know, said she smiling, that
sometimes it is dangerous in a Nation like this, to make your self so much the
subject of Discourse; if not on the Men's account, yet certainly on the Women's,
who fall in Love merely on report, without a sight or knowledge of the Party:
The Count answered smiling, Madam, there is no danger of your being of the
number of those kind-hearted Ladies, I am not so Fortunate. And why, said she,
might not I be one, who have so longed for a sight of you: but to lose no more
time, I must tell you, your Fortune is better than you think; and I do that for
another, which perhaps I would not have done for my self. The desire of seeing
a Man is here reputed a mighty advancement of Love, where to see and to agree
are all one. But I have undertaken this affair, and made the Bassa believe I
have very favorable thoughts of you. And to satisfy your Curiosity of knowing
the Party for whom I have so much complaisance in store, it is for the Bassa 's
Lady, Madam Alhie the Sultaness: The confidence she is pleased to repose in me
is so great, that she has entrusted me with this Secret, and my kindness for
her should not admit one moments scruple doing her this Service. I cannot doubt
but you have heard of her Beauty; never was any so famous in this Kingdom, nor
perhaps in the World, more worthy admiration: And as for her temper, it is the
sweetest and most lovely that can be imagined. The first view you have of her,
will persuade you she has an Inclination to Love, so tender, so languishing is
the air of her Countenance. And though this be natural to the Women of this
Country, and that the first thing they are taught, is to sigh, and appear
languishing, yet I have not observed those weaknesses in her but on your
account. To deduce things from the Original, I must inform you, that when the
Bassa returned from Constantinople, having dispatched the Affair depending
there between him, and the King, and Divan of this place, and being confirmed
by the Grand Signior in the Offices his Father had left him, which they had
disputed; the King, in order to Reconciliation, was advised to give the Bassa
his Daughter in Marriage. Alhie was then Sixteen Years old, and her beauty at
the height; though at this day in my judgment, no man that sees her, but must
be in Love with her. These Marriages of Policy and State interest, to which the
Daughters of great ones are subject to be Sacrificed, seldom prove Happy. The
Bassa Espoused Alhie, and perhaps loved her a Week, but after that returned to
his former Engagements, and for ordinary Beauties quitted the greatest of the
Kingdom. It Is true, it often happens thus in this Country, where Men abhor
loving by Duty and Obligation, and commonly love Mistresses better than Wives:
But this Lady, in my Opinion, ought to have been excepted, as wanting nothing
requisite to satisfy the Passion of any reasonable Man; but she is as
unfortunate as others. The Bassa, though otherwise a Person of much Gallantry,
visits her scarce once in a Month; yet he pays her all the respect in the
World, and she has no cause of complaint but of his Love; but take Love from
Marriage, what signifies the rest? What a trouble is it to a Young Lady, who
knows her own merit, to see her self slighted in that whereof she is most
sensible? A Lady who would think her self happy in being beloved, and thinks
she deserves it: You must be a Woman before you can comprehend the rigor of
this usage, and the greatness of her misfortune. But to come to what concerns
you; the Sultaness has ever had a great inclination for Christians; and the
greatest Pleasure she takes, is, in stories she makes me tell of my Country,
which surprise her so (especially when I speak of the Freedom Men have there
with Women) that she has a thousand times wished her Fortune had been as mine,
and that she had fallen into the hands of a Christian, who would have carried
her into that Country It Is certain, a Woman had better be a Slave with us, than
free among the Turks, where their Life is nothing but a perpetual Slavery. The
Adventures of Love and Gallantry have pleased her so well in the relation, that
she longs for a sight of one of those I called Persons of Quality and Merit,
who were so Gallant and Handsome, as I represented. You were no sooner arrived,
but she came with great joy to tell me, the Bassa had newly bought a Christian
of whom they spoke Wonders. I fell a laughing, and asked if it were not such a
one she had often wished for her Slave. She blushed, and turning about with a
sigh, answered, who knows what may happen, and whether Fortune has not
designed him for me. She made me her Bedfellow that Night, to entertain her on
that subject. On the morrow the Bassa having confirmed the reports of you, and
commended your Person, she and I for several days had no discourse but of you.
The kindness she has for me, makes me somewhat familiar with her; nor do we
very strictly observe here our distance toward great ones; this made me
sometimes take the Liberty to quarrel with her for the longing she expressed for
a Man she had not seen. I confess, said she, this were falling in Love a little
too soon, if we managed our Love as the Christians do theirs. But the Bassa
having made such a description of this Man, there is not a Woman in the Kingdom
who would not have had a greater Passion for him than I have expressed. And you
may believe he would not have spoken so much in his praise before the meanest
of his Empresses; but though he slight me so, that he cares not what I think,
my Affections are free. You would esteem your self happy, Madam, said I, to
have such a Christian in Love with you. More happy, replied she, than you can
imagine. And I will assure you, I could willingly change the state I am in, for
the condition of a private Christian Lady: What good does it me, to abound thus
with Riches, to receive so much Honor, to be the Daughter of a King, and the
Wife of a Bassa, if I cannot be content, nor do as I would, nor love where love
is due? In a word, I am nothing less than I am taken to be, but a Slave more
unhappy than those under Chains. Poor Laura (said she, embracing me tenderly)
how I pity thee, who have tasted the Pleasures and Liberty of thy Country, and
have unhappily fallen into their hands who use so unworthily all sorts of Women.

With such discourses as these did we entertain our selves ever since they
spoke of you at Tunis. The Bassa came oftener to visit the Sultaness, though we
knew not the reason; and almost every day brought us the News of you: And, as
he loves you entirely, took pleasure in relating every thing you did. Perhaps,
had he known the favorable inclinations the Sultaness had for you, he had been
more sparing in his expressions of you, for I cannot believe he designed to
prejudice himself in speaking obligingly of you. But it was an oversight, and
most unpardonable in him who so well knew the temper of Women of this Country:
Judge you whether so good a report from so good a hand could want its effect.
The Sultaness was affected with them so much to the purpose, that what at first
was a bare inclination, grew up by degrees to a settled Passion. Her humor was
suddenly changed from Merry and Jocund, into Sadness and Melancholy; and I, who
alone knew her Distemper, could not but pity her sighs and complaints, and was
extremely afraid she might fall into a Disease, which they call Fantasy, and
is a kind of Melancholy that proves Mortal to many Men and Women of this
Country. I did my endeavor to cure her of this Passion, by representing to her
all the obstacles in her way to the happiness she desired. But my Remedies came
too late, I did but trouble her to no purpose, having said to her self all that
I could possibly say to divert her from the affection she had taken: So that
despairing of Remedy on that side, I applied my thoughts another way, and
flattered her hopes of bringing that to pass, which I could not discover the
least possibility to effect. But to prevent the growth and increase of her
Distemper, it was necessary to deceive her by flatteries and hopes. At last, I
know not how it fell out, that the Bassa having spoken of you to me two days
ago, as he frequently does when he finds me alone, I told him, I should be very
glad to see you, if it might be done without noise and scandal: I was extremely
astonished how easily he promised it: And you may believe I had not waited here
for you, but that I very well knew him a Man of his word.

The Count having hearkened to all this discourse with mavelous attention,
and thanked Laura for all her good Offices, and answered all her obliging
expressions in behalf of the Sultaness, discovered to her the Bassa's design,
and the reason of his being brought thither; Laura was ravished to hear his
discourse, and though she foresaw her concern in the Affair was like to be
small, yet she was pleased with the News she received, being willing to
sacrifice all Interests of her own, to the satisfaction of her Lady. But, Sir,
to tell you all, said she to the Count, having paid my thanks to the Bassa for
the favor I was in hopes of from him, I went presently to bring the News to
the Sultaness, who could not sufficiently embrace me, being so extremely
transported, that nothing in the World could have made her more joyful; she
has scarcely been able to sleep ever since: She and I have laid a hundred
designs, and framed to our selves a thousand devices how she may have a sight
of you: but if the Bassa will not permit you to come alone hither, I do not see
how it may be effected: The Sultaness in the mean time will be ravished with
joy that I have seen you, and that you know some part of her mind.

The happy Roman being charmed at the kindness a Lady of that beauty and
quality had for him, was very urgent with Laura to oblige him on this occasion,
and pressed her to say to the Sultaness from him, all that a heart extremely
sensible of the favor she did him, was capable to express. That he would have
esteemed himself the happiest of men, had it been in his power to have merited
this honor, and that it should be the business of his Life, to deserve it by
his Actions. Sir, replied Laura, all she desires of you, is that you will so
manage the Liberty the Bassa does afford you, that she may once have a sight of
you: I find my self engaged to it by so many reasons, said the Count, that you
may be assured I will not forget any thing that may gain this honor: I must
entreat you to assure the Sultaness accordingly, and that I have at least as
much passion as she. He had no sooner said this, but the Bassa came to them,
which made them change their discourse, and the Bassa having condescended to
make himself one of the company, and very pleasantly rallied; then said, he
perceived by their Countenances they were obliged to him for the Acquaintance
he had procured between them, and that they were very well pleased the one with
the other: The Count and Laura having returned the Complement, the Bassa took
his leave, and he and the Count went out of the Seraglio.

The Bassa had observed such joy in Alexander's Countenance when he was with
Laura, it made him believe he was very well pleased with the visit he had given
her. But he had the curiosity to ask him how he liked her; and whether she
appeared so beautiful as he had represented her: The Count answered, it was
certainly impossible to see a Lady more handsome, or more witty: And that he was
charmed at her Beauty and Conversation. The Bassa, who desired nothing more
than to see him in Love was extremely glad at the confession he made; and told
him it should be his fault, if he saw her not again, and, if he desired, he
might do it on the morrow, that he would give him a Key to enter the Seraglio,
and that he might go alone; lest if he brought him in, the Sultaness might be
jealous: it being not his custom to visit her so often, the Count failed not to
acquaint him how highly that favor would oblige him; so that the Bassa bid him
go to bed, and take his rest, and told him he should see Laura on the morrow
about the time he had seen her that day.

Never was a night so restless to any man, as this to the Count, her
inclination, like that he had to marriage, with the principal and most
beautiful Lady of the Kingdom, was a thing so rare, and so tempting for a man
of his temper; what Laura had said of those obliging thoughts that charming
Person had for him, did so ravish him with Pleasure, that in the depth of
misfortune he could not imagine any man more fortunate than himself: But when
he considered, that she was the Wife of the Bassa, a Person to whom he was so
strictly obliged, he was troubled extremely, and sighed for sorrow; these
second thoughts prevailing at that time over the other, he highly reproached
himself for entertaining a thought of so base an ingratitude. But it is a
ticklish business to repent of a thing that extremely delights us, and men
seldom charge themselves home for a fault so pleasing and lovely, as the
pleasure of being beloved: Those reproaches of the Count against himself, were
not altogether the most violent that might be, and sometimes he would be angry
with himself for making so much ado. At last, being assaulted by turns, on the
one side by Reason, on the other by Passion, by the Glory of that, and the
tenderness of this, he got up in the Morning, without having been able to take
any other resolution than to yield himself up to be guided by his Destiny, to
be governed by Fate, and be merely passive in the management of the business;
that is to say, to love, in this particular, like a Turk, and to see the
Sultaness, if it were so predestined: But to do nothing in order to it,
though he had promised Laura to contribute on his part all that lay in his
power, and had told the Bassa, he should be extremely glad to go again to the
Seraglio. His resolution sometimes was very tottering and weak, and to speak
truth, it is almost vain to take one against love: He wished a thousand times
that day, that his Fate to whose conduct he had given himself up, would incline
to bring him to the Sultaness. He waited the Hour with a great deal of
impatience, however he would fain have persuaded himself to the contrary: But a
young heart cannot be insensible, being so apt to take fire, that it scarce
requires any help to inflame it.

As soon as the Bassa saw the Count in the Evening, he showed him (smiling) the
Key of the Seraglio: And he received it with the greatest joy in the World. But
I give it, said the Bassa, on condition that you make me your Confident. And I
think I have done enough to engage you to do me that pleasure. The hour was
come for his going to the Sultaness, and the Count having put on his Eunuchs
Habit, his Patron every day more obliging than other, would needs bear him
company as far as the Seraglio; Laura having notice of his coming, had waited
for him above an hour at the Gate, and no sooner saw him arrived, but ravished
with joy, she gave him her hand, and told him, You are either the most
dexterous, or else the most fortunate Person in the World: you bring about
things so difficult and in so short a time, that all things seem to join in
your favor: I am obliged for it to my fortune, answered the Count; for, as for
Addresses I had no occasion to use any, but if you would make me believe my
self as happy as you say, help me to a sight of the Sultaness. Laura told him,
he should presently hear of her, and brought him into a Chamber, where her Lady
was used to receive visits. It was her custom to seat her self in a kind of
Alcove, the passage to which was through her Chamber, made up with great
Ballistres guilt, and covered with a Curtain of very thin Silk, through which
she could see those whom she honored only with a sight of her; which is a
piece of State used in that Country.

Laura told the Count, that the Sultaness would see him from behind that
Curtain. And shall not I then, said he, have the honor to see her. I know not,
said Laura, but it is a favor so great, that it is never granted but when they
are willing to grant all that may be expected: Ah Madam, said the Count, I
beseech you to desire that favor for me; tell her it will be of small
consequence to give a stranger a sight of her, and that I shall die with grief
if she deny me that honor. Laura promised him all the assistance in her power,
and leaving him for a moment, went to advertise the Sultaness, who questionless
longed for news of the arrival of her dearly beloved Christian. In the mean
time the Count considered the Riches and Ornaments of the Chamber, being the
most magnificent of the Apartment, it was set out with four Crystal Glasses
which had a pleasant effect on the Gold and the Jewels which glittered all
about: Scarce had the Sultaness seen Laura, but she knew by her countenance the
happy news she brought; and without allowing her time to say any thing, she
past to the Alcove, from whence she designed to take a view of the Christian,
before he should know that she was there. But she made too great a noise at her
entrance, and the Cavalier let her know, he had perceivd her, by saluting her
as he did, after the Turkish mode: Laura arrived the same time from the other
side, and going to the Ballistre, went to whisper the Sultaness, who was not
able sufficiently to express the pleasure she took in seeing this Christian,
and the Charms that appeared in his Person. As for him, he was strangely
perplexed at a visit of this nature, where he could neither see, nor speak to
the Party he visited. He went, he came, he turned about as desired, and at the
end of the Show, went silently to the Ballistre, and addressing himself to the
Sultaness, having seen a shadow of her through the Curtain, he told her a
thousand pretty Stories, a thousand Gallantries to oblige her to afford him a
view, for she understood Italian, and spoke it pretty well, having learnt it of
Laura. She was very well pleas d to hear the Count speak, and heartily laughed
at it, but answered not a word, nor had the Curtain drawn. The Count was
impatient, and accounting every moment lost he spent in that manner, seemed to
fret and be angry, and in a frank and free way told her, he should die of the
Fantasy, as the People of that Country, if she denied him this favor, and
that at last he would with his own hand draw that troublesome Curtain: and he
had certainly done it, if Laura, who feared the Sultaness might take it ill,
had not hindered him. But Laura was mistaken, and her Lady gave her not thanks
for her pains.

It Is a Maxim among the Women of that Country, not to sin of themselves against
the Rules of their duty; but press them a little, and offer them the least
violence, they will presently yield without any resistance: their excuse is,
that nature is weak, that men know it well enough, and are very much to blame
to press them so home: that if there be harm done, it must be laid to their
score, who cause them to do it, and not to them who are ignorant of it, and
innocent in the business. Laura not well verst in the use of this Maxim,
committed a fault, when she thought she had been discharging her duty. The
amorous Sultaness would have been ravished with joy to have been seen by the
Christian, and the officious Slave spoiled all by a piece of useless
discretion. But her Lady was willing to receive the miscarriage, and satisfy
in some measure the extreme desire her dear Christian had to see her; she gave
him leave to ask what he pleased, to make him amends for the rigor of the
custom of that Country, which made it undecent for her Sex to show themselves
to any but their Husband. The Count presently desired she would at least do him
the honor of showing him one of her fair hands: The Sultaness no sooner heard
him, but lifting up the Curtain a little, she gave him her hand over the
Ballistre. The young Count was so charmed with this favor, that transported
with joy, he laid his knee to the ground, and kissed her hand with such
passion; that the Sultaness, equally transported, wrung his hand, pressing it
so hard, to let him know she approved of what he did. She was not over careful
to keep her self unseen; and having put forth her arm, she could not choose,
but sometimes appear to him in part by one chance or other (to which perhaps
she contributed a little.) Her Gallant could have wished he had had a full
sight of her, but thinking he had enough for the first time, he would not
adventure to desire any more. The pleasure the Sultaness took in the sight of
him, was so great, and so charming, that she could have willingly past that
night with him. But knowing that many eyes were upon her, and that she lived
where men are extremely given to jealousy, and especially of their Wives, she
had apprehensions of being Lampoon'd in her own Apartment for staying so long
in the Alcove, at a time so unseasonable for receiving a visit. And Laura had
told her, 'twas time to withdraw. But how cruel a thing it is to be forced to
part from that which we love? it cannot be done without pain and regret. Still
she found some little pretense or other to stay him a little longer; at last
she presented him with a Gold Chain beset with Jewels, and told him obligingly
it was not fit a Slave like him should wear any other. The happy Count better
satisfied with this Chain, than if she had given him the Grown of Tunis,
answered her Gallantry, and the favor she did him, with the most passionate
and the most grateful expressions imaginable. And seeing the necessity of
parting, he took his leave of the Sultaness, and withdrew with Laura, who
accompanied him to the Gate of the Apartment.

Presents among the Turks, are the first Evidences of affections, and often
pass for declarations of love. Laura, who knew it well enough, made the Count
sensible, before parting, what that meant which he had received from the
Sultaness; and that he was not to doubt, having heard and seen so much of her,
but she passionately loved him. Yet he was to take heed, and believe he had
need of abundance of discretion, to deal with the Women of that Country, whose
passion of love is sometimes so violent, that they observe no bounds; that the
Sultaness was indeed the most rational she had known amongst them, and had the
most wit, yet tender and passionate as the rest. That she and he would be
immutably ruined, if the Bassa, who had no small experience in Amors, should
once have the least suspicion of the Intrigue. That there was not in the
Kingdom a man more tender of his honor than he; and that all the kindness he
had for him, would not save him from his indignation, if he once came to know
he had seen his Wife.

As much taken as our young Roman was with the pleasant beginnings of his
Amors, and for all his rejoycings at those evident kindnesses he had received
from the greatest Beauty under Heaven, yet he could not forbear reflecting on
Laura's good counsels, but went musing along the Seragilo, what course he
should take, what means he should use against so dangerous a Passion, which
would certainly bring him to ruin and confusion. When the Bassa, going to one
of his Mistresses, met him by the way, and seeing him pass by, without so much
as saluting him, he presently fell a laughing, and taking him by the arm, Now,
said he, I see that you are in love. The Count being confounded at his
surprising him in that case, made excuses for his fault. The Bassa made answer,
that if he desired to be pardoned, he must freely confess the truth, and
acknowledge himself extremely disordered at the Merits and Beauty of Laura:
More Sir (said the Count, with a very deep sigh) than you can possibly express
or imagine. But it being late, and the Bassa not willing to stay, he deferred
the more particular inquiry to another opportunity, and dismissed him to his
Lodging. This was a great happiness, and no less pleasure to the young Lover,
who was not then in a condition to give the Bassa an account of his Amors.
Part of that night he passed walking in his Chamber, as if he had intended to
come to a Resolution before he went to bed. It was not the fear of death, or
misfortune that troubled him, but the horror of ingratitude; and having
received so much kindness from the Bassa, thought it inexcusable in him to have
any unjust designs on his Wife: But, then says he, should I not be the most
ungrateful of men, should I slight the affection of so charming a Person, to
whom, if I consider her obligations according to their value, I owe more than
to the Bassa? And is it not possible for me to see, and to love her within
bounds, so as to be blameless on the one side and the other? No, no, if there
be ingratitude in that, I cannot help it, there is nothing in the World can
excuse me to the Sultaness, and love ought to make my excuse with the Bassa.

This was the last Combat between gratitude and love in the heart of the
Count; the last carried the day, and going to bed thereupon, he rested very
well. The Bassa who was extremely desirous to see him so deeply in love, that
he should not be able to deny it, was the first that spoke to him, to return
again that day to the Sultaness Lodgings: he gave him the Key of the Seraglio,
and laughing, told him, he need not make such haste to come back, if he found
as much pleasure as he wished him there: but that he must have a care, he did
not engross all the love to himself, but he should give Laura some part, unless
he were minded to languish as he had done, a long time to no purpose.

The amorous Italian went straight to the Seraglio, and Laura, who waited for
him, told him at his arrival, he might pass to the same Chamber he had been in,
and that she would give her Lady notice of his coming; but she not having the
patience of waiting so long, was got already into the Alcove. The Count having
an extreme curiosity, and longing for a sight of that place, thought it
convenient for the purpose, to make use of that time, when he believed the
Sultaness was absent; and coming up to the Ballistre, gently took up the
Curtain. But how was he surprised to see on the sudden, that charming Person in
a Posture the most capable of any, to make one in love.

I shall not trouble you with a description of the Alcove, which being a Room
of State for the Wife of so puissant a Lord, you may easily believe, was very
noble and rich: It was raised a foot higher than the Chamber; the approach to
it being by a space covered with a fair Turkey Carpet, checkquer'd with little
squares of Damask wrought with Gold. The Sultaness lay on a Bed of Damask of
like work; and having designed to show her self that day to the Count, she had
not forgot to put her self in an equipage and posture capable to charm him at
first sight: she had turned her face toward the Ballistre, leaning her head
carelessly on her left arm, which you might clearly see in her great Tiffany
sleeve after the Turkish mode. Her black hair was partly pleated with great
ropes of Pearl, parting down on her Breast, and part on her shoulders, and set
off the clearness of her delicate Complexion (vying with the Snow in whiteness)
to so much advantage, that it wrought wonderful effects in the beholder. She
had about her body, a small Gold Bodice only, her bosom being half open, and
the rest covered with a piece of fine Tiffany, like an Amazons Scarf: all was
visible from her Neck to her Breast, and so admirable to behold, that it had
been impossible for an eye, having seen it, (as the Count did) to escape being
enamored of it: she had on her head, plumes of several colors, and in the
midst of them a crescent of Silver. Her Coat was of a light Stuff Imbroydered
with Gold, after the fashion of the Country, with Diamond Buckles to tuck it up
at the knee: her Leg was half naked, and the rest covered with Buskins all laid
over with Diamonds and Pearls; in a word, she was all so Rich, so Gallant, so
full of Charms, that the poor Count was utterly undone at the sight. His joy
and astonishment were visible to her in that confusion of action and words, in
which he was so miserably plunged, that he knew not what was become of himself,
nor what he would say to her. But falling into an Ecstasy, and wholly swallowed
up with admiration, his Eyes and his Sighs were Orators for him. The fair
Sultaness as soon as she saw him, would, with a Handkerchief she had in her
hand, have covered her face, and hid from him part of the confusion she was in.
But the happy Lover, recovering courage by degrees, passing his arm betwixt the
Ballistres, hindered her from it. Once you might have had reason Madam, said
he, to have kept from my sight those treasures of love, as knowing full well
that no man can see them without dying for love of them, but now it is too late
to conceal them from me. I have seen more than any heart is able to bear,
without yielding it self; and it would be extreme cruelty in you, not to
complete what is so happily begun. As the Count was speaking to her in this
manner, she looked upon him with eyes so tender and piercing, that she seemed
willing to execute what he desired. The crafty Count having seized one of her
hands, (to which, as he looked upon it, he gave a thousand amorous kisses) by
little and little drew it out so far on his side, with so feeble resistance
from the Sultaness that she came at last to lean her head on the Ballistre just
over against the head of the Count. Then it was, he had full liberty to take a
view at his leisure of those Beauties that put him to amazement, and ravished
him with such joy as he had never before been sensible of. As ill luck would
have it, the Ballistres were so close, that not any two of them stood half the
head distance one from the other. However the two Lovers meeting half way, made
a shift to slip through a great number of Kisses, the most charming and sweet
that Lovers e're tasted. The Count being naturally bold, made one Liberty but a
step to another, and seeing what he was permitted to do, and the pleasure she
took in it, he pressed his amorous temerity so far, that what he did may pass
for half an enjoyment. Till then their entertainment was made up of dumb
engagements, a thousand times more eloquent than the finest expressions in the
World. Their eyes, their sighs, their actions, their toys had spoken a
Language intelligible enough to persuade both they loved one another entirely.
They had no need of other conversation; yet, Laura arriving, they changed it a
little, but they spoke before her the most tender, and most passionate things
you can imagine. The Sultaness who had that confidence in her as to conceal
nothing from her, was not troubled at her coming. But the Count, who took not
so much pleasure in these discourses, though very obliging, as in those dumb
entertainments, made a sign to Laura to take the other turn; at which the
Sultaness seeming a little angry, let down the Curtain, and so fastened it
behind, that he could not take it up. But this being in Jest, and to provoke
his passion the more, her rigor was short-lived, and Peace presently made more
firm than ever.

The first favors give a privilege for others, and a kind of right not only
to hope, but demand them: The Count, to be revenged of his Mistress for the
piece of spite she had done him, thrust both his Arms between the Ballistres,
and embracing her on the sudden, kissed her with that violence, that he forced
Blood out of her lips. The Sultaness was so far from complaining of the
rudeness of his Caresses, that being charmed with the pleasure of them, she
carefully saved all the Blood on her Handkerchief to preserve it as a Trophy to
show Laura, as a most sensible mark of the extreme Passion her dear Alexander
had for her.

Let me acquaint you by the way with a rarity of those parts; that for a Woman
to have been beaten by a Man she loves, is esteemed in that Country a great
evidence of affection to the party beaten. I confess such favors are somewhat
rude, but it is the temper of the Country, and such is their custom: As for the
Blood that came from the lips of the Amorous Sultaness, we may believe it
proceeded from a transport of Love. With us, one may be bitten, but not beaten
through extremity of this Passion; but blows exceed the limits of Gallantry,
and that Woman must be an African, that loves to be so courted. It Is a fashion
will never pass in Europe, and though they use it sometimes, yet never to
oblige Women; none of whom that I know of were ever pleased with a bastinade.
The rest of this visit having been spent in foolery and toys, though sometimes
of much moment in matters of Love, I will not trouble you with the particulars.
Laura, who was not far distant from the Lovers, appeared at the least sign of
their pleasure to have her attend. The Count and the Sultaness bid each other
adieu with the greatest kindness imaginable: And Laura brought him to the Door
of the Apartment, so deep in Love, he scarce knew where he was. He went
directly from thence to the Bassa, who instantly observed the visible change of
the Count's former Sadness and Melancholy into a tender and languishing air; at
which the Bassa taking occasion to laugh, said, Well, Alexander, has Love
played his part well?

Is it your pain, or your pleasure has so charmed you to day? I confess, Sir,
said he with a sigh, it is the pleasure I have met with; but pleasure, I fear,
which may cause me much pain. The Bassa believing, that to be the Confident of
the Count's Passion, might be of some use, took him by the hand, and led him to
the Garden, to take a turn in the Walks. He fell presently upon the subject of
his good Fortune, and prayed him to tell him truly, how his Affairs stood. The
Count having his Heart and his Fancy all full of Love, with very great ease
gave him such a ravishing description of his tenderest affections, and painted
the pleasures he had taken that Evening so much to the life, adding his sighs
and exclamations, with gestures and looks so eloquent and passionate, that he
awaked in the Soul of the Bassa the affection he had formerly for Laura, and
lately laid asleep. What care soever is taken to cure one of this passion,
still there remains enough in the Heart of a Lover to set it on fire by the
least spark that falls on it. The insensibility and resistance of Laura had not
Ice enough in them to quench all the heat of the Bassa's affection. She had
only covered it with ashes, to preserve it the better against another time: Had
the Count acted like a Politic Lover, he had easily foreseen, how ticklish
and dangerous a business it is, to make such representations before Persons who
are amorously inclined; and especially before a Man whom he had reason to
consider as a Rival, and in whose Power it was to dispose of him as he pleased.
But the truth is, that in speaking thus of Laura, he thought he hazarded
nothing of his own; he had really no kindness for her, but hoped to do his own
business the better, in making the Bassa believe that he loved her; which is
the reason he did not carry himself in this with so much caution, as he would
have done in another conjuncture.

The Bassa slept not that Night. Laura appeared a thousand times more handsome
and charming, in the description of the Count, than ever she had done in his
Eye at full sight. He esteemed himself the most unfortunate of Men, not only
for that he had quitted the pursuit, but had contributed so much to see her in
the Arms of another: Hereupon jealousy presently possessed him, attended with a
train of spite, rage, and peevishness to torment him. What greater shame,
thought he, could ever happen to a Man as he was, who never found resistance
from a Woman, than to have been slighted by a Slave, who was his dependent, and
had yielded to another Slave as soon as she had seen him? For after the
passionate relation Alexander had made, the Bassa made no doubt but all was
concluded; he had fancies of this kind that troubled him extremely: and if he
did not then hate the Count, it is certain, he retained not for him that
kindness he had formerly expressed toward him: And as for Laura, though he was
then more in Love with her than ever, he had a pique against her, and could not
forbear reproaching her all Night, for her want of discretion, in making
greater account of a man's kindness, that could do her no Service, than of his,
by whom she might have made her Fortune. These thoughts were followed by others
concerning his Person. He accused himself of baseness, and weakness of Heart,
to trouble himself with the thoughts of a Creature that so little deserved his
esteem, or to intend to hinder the satisfaction of two Lovers, whose Love he
himself had caused and promoted. All this notwithstanding, he went on the
morrow with the Count to the Seraglio; but for no other end, but to observe the
countenance of Laura, who surprised to see him come: This is extraordinary,
Sir, said she laughing, twice in one week: What will People say of it? As for
you, said the Bassa, you will say no ill of it, I come in so good Company; and
should others believe as formerly, that I come for love of you, you know it is
not for my self, and therefore you are the more obliged to me. Laura very
civilly thanked him for his goodness. They fell then all three into a little
discourse of Gallantry, wherein the Bassa spoke so many kind things to Laura,
that she might understand part of that Amorous trouble he was in, if she had
mistrusted it; but he delivered himself with such an air, that his Complements,
and kind Expressions were taken for mere effects of his good humor. But the
Bassa's coming thither, being under pretense of seeing the Sultaness, he could
not dispense without giving her a Visit; but he was not long with her, being
not able to rest till he returned to the two Lovers, which he did with all the
speed in his power. He told Laura a thousand things more obliging than
formerly; and having highly caressed her, gave her at parting such a look, that
if she had made the least reflection upon it, she might have easily perceived
the kindness he had formerly for her took fire afresh with more vehemence than
ever; but she could not suspect in the least he would trouble her any more,
after the kindness he had expressed for his Alexander, and having been the
instrument of the pretended Passion between her and the Count. She took all for
Gallantry, and made it the subject of raillery with the Sultaness, to whom she
gave an account of all that had past with the Bassa, and with Alexander. The
fair Turk went that Evening to bed, ill satisfied with her fate, having been
disappointed of an Entertainment she had expected, as pleasant as that she had
received the day before from her dear Christian; she could not sufficiently
lament the unluckiness of the Visit given her by a man who Courted other Women,
and seemed to have been born to incommode and give trouble only to her. Laura
answered in raillery, She had little reason to complain of it to her, to whose
complaisance she was beholding for a sight of her Lover: Ah Laura, said the
Sultaness, who knows for what reason he has been so complaisant: You may very
well believe, it was not to oblige me. I believe so, Madam; replied Laura, but
you are obliged to him however, and ought to thank him for me. After this
little raillery, they fell to discourse, what could have brought the Bassa
thither that evening; and could not imagine, but it was in Complement to the
Count.

The Bassa by this time was fallen into a deep Melancholy, seldom appearing,
but when he walked in the Garden, sometimes alone, and sometimes with
Alexander, and then not a word of Laura, nor any discourse of going again to
the Apartment of the Sultaness: This troubled our Lover, who besides his
affliction for being deprived of the sight of a Person he loved better than his
Life, and ceasing to see her, must cease also to live; had a thousand
tormenting surmises and troublesome fancies upon the Bassa s change of humor,
which he could not attribute to any thing but his having taken some umbrage and
jealousy of him, on the account of the Sultaness. The Sultaness and her
Confident were no less tormented on the other hand; they had seen a first, a
second, a third, and a fourth long day pass without a sight of their Alexander:
Lovers are very exact Accomptants, and keep reckoning of the very moments, but
account nothing more tedious than a day of absence. What should be the meaning
of all this, said they one to the other, having a thousand fears upon them,
though they knew not of what: it is a difficult matter to keep any thing secret
in places of that nature Yet they could not imagine they had given any occasion
of discourse, or that any Person in the Apartment had made the least discovery
of their Intrigue. At last, on the fifth day, after abundance of Affliction,
the Bassa came to see them; but, the mischief of it was, that he came alone.
Besides he appeared so dull, so musing, and so much out of humor, they made no
more doubt but he had smelt out the Intelligence they held with the Count. But
that which gave them the killing blow, and raised their fears to the height,
was, that Laura having, according to her custom, waited the Bassa out of the
Chamber, and asked him, what he had done with her dear Eunuch? I am jealous of
him (said the Bassa, making no stay) I need tell you no more: Laura made have
to give her Mistress the Alarm, and told her, there was no more doubt to be
made, but jealousy was the cause of the Bassa's not bringing Alexander with
him, the Bassa himself having told her so that instant; those who are guilty,
are easily frightened, and fear has this property, that it so confounds the
imagination, that the lightest suspicions are taken for clear and
unquestionable truths. With what sighs, what tears did the poor Sultaness
afflict her self; yet not so much for the ill consequences she might apprehend
from the jealousy of the Bassa, as for the fear she had, that if he were
really jealous of the Christian, she should never have a sight of him more. She
did heartily wish she could have written to him, but there are few trusty
Messengers to be found in those places, where there is cause to distrust every
one you converse with; and every Eye that sees you, is a spy on your actions,
at least if not gained by Money or kindness, wherein, after all possible care,
you may be deceived: as she was in this trouble, Laura received a Note from the
Count, brought her by an Eunuch, and carried it forthwith to show it the
Sultaness, being in these words.

Madam, the Bassa every day more obliging than other, is pleased to grant me
the honor of walking with you this Evening in the Garden of the Seraglio. I
know not whether you can dispense with your self till then. Let us take the
hour you think most proper. He will be there with one of his Mistresses. Send
me word, if you plaese, if I may expect this favor from you.

The Bassa would never have thought of this walk, but out of the extreme desire
he had to know certainly, how Laura and Alexander stood affected one to the
other; and that he might inform himself of what they should discourse. The
Garden was a place very fit for his design, especially by Night, where he could
hear without being seen. He had made the proposal to the Count, in confidence
he would receive it with a great deal of joy, which in appearance he did, but
without hope of any great satisfaction from the Adventure, it being scarce
probable the Sultaness would permit Laura to come. But that which really
troubled him, was the opinion he had, the Bassa was certainly jealous of his
Wife, since he gave him so clear proof of his unwillingness that he should see
Laura at her Lodgings any more.

The Question then was, how to write to the Slave, to dispose her for the walk.
But the Count having written the Billet, the Bassa sent it by an Eunuch, and
stayed for the Answer.

The Sultaness read the Billet, and was of opinion with her Gallant; that it
was for Love of her the Bassa was unwilling he should come any more to see
Laura in her Apartment. It was long e're they came to a resolution in the
point, whether Laura should agree to the assignation: Laura very wisely thought
it better not to go, but the Sultaness, wholly led by her Passion, and too
deeply in Love, to act any thing with reason that concerned her affection,
notwithstanding any thing Laura could say, made her write him this Answer.

It were to act the part of a very ill Person, to be all alone in the Garden,
while others are diverting themselves there: I consent for pity, to come and
bear you company, but on condition that you will be wise, and that we be at
some distance from the Bassa, because I would not be known by her, that he
brings with him. If you can promise me these two things, I am for you after the
fourth Prayer, when the Sultaness is a Bed. Adieu.

This answer was beyond the expectation of the Count who rejoiced extremely at
the pleasure he promised himself with the Slave, from the discourse of the
Sultaness, while they should continue in the Garden.

Night being come, and the fourth Prayer over, the Bassa told him, he might go,
and bring Laura to the Garden, while he went for one of his Mistresses, who was
lodged on the other side. It is the Custom of the Grandees of that Country,
among a multitude of Women they have in their Seraglio, when they have not a
particular inclination for any one, to take this to day, and another to morrow;
and having lost the taste of Love, to search for Pleasure in change and variety.

It may be easily imagined, that Alexander received this Commission with a
great deal of joy, and was in no small haste to go to the Sultanesses Lodgings.
She who was charmed at the sight of him, could not express her joy without a
thousand transports of Love, and the most tender caresses a most passionate
Lady could possibly make her dearest Lover. Alexander did his part to
admiration, not only returning transport for transport, and caress for caress,
but excelling his pattern, Love working in him, or he in the Sultaness such
things as gave her very great satisfaction. It may be admired Peradventure that
two Persons so little acquainted, should in so few days become so very good
Friends. But we must know, Love in these hot Countries makes far quicker
progress than in the cold, where the Winds, and the Snow, and the Rain spoil
his Wings, and hinder his flight: Whereas on the contrary, the Sun is there
almost still at the height, and Love being a tender Infant, and going always
naked, thrives there the better, where he finds hearts very well disposed, and
ready to take fire.

The Count, who could not stay long there, was willing to bestow the small time
he had to spend with the Sultaness in gentle reproaches for her permitting
Laura to come and walk with him. You have, said he, a very good opinion of my
Affection, Madam, or else you love me with a great deal of indifference, that
this does not in the least trouble you at all. The Sultaness answered, she
relied not so much on his Fidelity, as on Laura's Discretion, whom she knew too
well, to think she would betray her. Look you to your self, as for her I place
a confidence in her, and if you do your Duty, I am persuaded she will not be
wanting in hers. Having thus spoken, she would not detain him longer for fear
of the Bassa, but retired to her Chamber The happy Lover, very well pleased
with the lucky moment he had past with the Sultaness, asked Laura if she were
ready; She made him answer, he should not stay for her longer than while she
fetched her Barnus, which is a kind of Hood that covers them from Head to Foot.
The Count seeing her return mufled up in that garment, went his way before,
according to their custom there, and she followed: He said not a word to her
while they were in the Seraglio, for fear of being overheard, and discovered;
but being arrived in the Garden, where they had liberty enough, Who will
believe, Madam, said he, but we made an Amorous assignation, being come to a
place of Rendezvous so fit for the purpose. And the Bassa will not fail to
think us the happiest Lovers in the World. Laura made him no answer, but kept
on her way, till they came to the Bower that was assigned them at a convenient
distance from the Bassa's, as Laura had desired. The Count gave her his hand,
and knowing very well every turn' in those Walks, which he visited almost every
day, he made her fit on a place of green Turf made for the purpose. Then, said
he, this, Madam, is to try a man's Fidelity with a Witness, to expose him to
pass part of the Night in such a place as this with a Lady so beautiful as you.
Surely the Sultaness will hence-forward rest assured of my Passion. The Count
made a pause, expecting her answer, but not receiving a word from her, he
proceeded, telling her, I thought we had not been so debarred the pleasures of
an Assignation, but we might have enjoyed that of discourse; but for ought I
perceive, you mean to follow the fashion of Turkey; and since it is a favor in
this Country for a Woman to show her self* or speak to a man, you will deprive
me of the one and the other: But while we are together, I pray let us live
after the mode of our Country, which is far better than the Turkish. To do
otherwise with we, were altogether too rigorous, and more, I believe, than you
have promised the Sultaness, or she expects at your hands. Away, I beseech you,
said he, taking her by the Barnus, with this useless Hood, and do me the favor
to tell me some News of the Sultaness; or if you please, of the Adventures
brought you hither, which from the day I first had the honor to see you, I
have had an extreme longing to ask you: This you will not deny me, if you think
I may be any way useful to you, as I doubt not but I may, being your
Countryman, and so well esteemed by the Bassa, as to be able to do you some
Service. All this Discourse so obliging for Laura, she heard, without replying
a word, or quitting her Barnus, as he had desired. The Count seeing this,
pressed her no further, but with more serious air said, if you desire, Madam,
to pass the Evening in this manner, it will be very unfortunate for me; but I
must comply. And removing a few paces from her, he went and sat him down in a
corner of the Bower, where he continued a while without speaking a word. The
fair Lady fetched a sigh, as if she had been displeased at his quitting her.
The Count laying hold on that occasion to be even with her, took his turn of
tormenting, in not answering her sighs. At last she came to him, took him by
the Arm, and embraced him, with many grimaces, as if she would have turned all
into ridicule. The Count fell a laughing, and said, Madam, I beseech you be
satisfied with the Sacrifice I make to Love, without trying my patience any
further; let us, if you please, have a little conversation, but answer me when
I speak, for I do not love talking to my self. But all would not do; she
laughed under her Hood, and took pleasure in vexing him. The Count at last
growing impatient; this is too much, Madam, said he, and since you will needs
laugh, I Will show you a trick shall make you speak in spite of your Heart;
having said so, he took her in his Arms, and not being able to take off her
Hood, he used some Familiarities with her, would have forced speech from a Maid
of Laura's Discretion and Modesty: But the Lady was still silent, and so little
concerned, that she scarce made any resistance. At which the Count was
extremely surpised, and after all the esteem he had for Laura, apprehended
there might be a design in the business, and that he was abused: Then it was he
did all in his power to get sight of her through a little glimmering of light
that came into the Bower. Did the Sultaness know, said he, the liberty you
allow me, she would give you no thanks for your silence, or your being shie of
affording me a sight of you, which it seems you do to give me occasion to
attempt greater matters, and deny me small favors to grant me the principal
The fair Lady not able to defend her self longer, quitted her Barnus and having
escaped out of his hands, Ah, little Traitor, said she is this the Fidelity you
have promised me? Oh Heavens Madam, said he, is it you? t was the Sultaness her
self had taken Laura's place* and you may imagine what a pleasant surprise this
was to the Count, who could not on the sudden otherwise express it than by his
exclamations* and running after her (who fled not too ^^st) he overtook her at
the Door of the Bo^^r, and embracing her most tenderly, My dear Sultaness, said
he the second time, is it you? Yes, answered she (suffering her self to be
gently brought back into the Bower) it is I, who repent me already of what I
have done for you, who did not deserve it. Did you think me so simple, to
expose into the hands of another, that which I hold most dear in the World? Do
not I see how ill it is trusting of you? Your Constancy was very tottering; it
was at least half overcome. And had Laura, the counterfeit Laura answered your
offers, where would you have been? Never was Man more confounded than the Count
at all these Reproaches: He made a free Confession, but excused himself by her
carriage toward him, alleging it impossible for any Man to have withstood the
attaques she had made. At last, he carried the Cause, all was accommodated, and
Agreement made, and Love singed the Articles.

To come in search of a Gallant (as the Sultaness had done) into a Garden where
she knew her Husband was present, was an Adventure somewhat bold: And
doubtless, there are many Women who will condemn her conduct as imprudent; but
of those who are in Love there, are few, who being in her place, would not take
the same course. The Bassa, though accompanied with a very Beautiful Person,
past away time somewhat worse than the Count: Chabania his Mistress had
(besides Beauty) an excellent Wit, and a very taking carriage, which made her
pass for the most charming Person in the Seraglio. The Bassa had formerly been
deeply in Love with her; but Love for convenience is not very durable: Her
Patron was not in an humor to Entertain her that Evening, and had not brought
her with him into the Garden, but to serve for a pretense to color other
designs; she apprehended as much, as soon as she knew that Laura was in the
Garden, which the Bassa unluckily told her, thinking he might satisfy her in
that point, by letting her know that Laura was deeply in Love with Alexander,
in whose company she was. But Chabania was so far from believing it, that she
presently fancied Alexander to be no other than the Bassa's Confident in the
Affair, and that he had not brought Laura into the Garden but for his Master:
She had been formerly jealous of him, even to distraction, and I know not how
it came to pass the Bassa was so overseen, as not to have made choice of some
other of his Women, who might have been more for his turn on this occasion: She
was at her wits end for the small countenance he gave her; all the while he was
with her she had scarcely four words from him, and saw clearly his thoughts
were wholly of Laura. This was vexation enough for a Woman in Love, who knows
her self handsome, and is high spirited withal. But that which put her into
absolute despair, was, that the Bassa not able to obtain any truce from his
jealousy, having spent some time in her company, without any caress, or giving
her the least evidence of kindness, though she had more than once given him
occasion to show it; told her, he had a longing desire to go and hearken, and
know how the Christians in the Bower entertained one another: She made him no
answer, but letting him go, she the next minute after went another way toward
the same Bower to observe the Bassa, and see what he did there.

The Nights in that Country are very clear, especially in Summer: The Bassa,
notwithstanding all the caution he had used to post himself securely near
Alexander's quarter, under the favor of the Hedges, that covered his approach,
was perceived by the counterfeit Laura in the Bower. She had discovered him by
his shadow, and having made her lover aware of it, he presently went out, and
ran to meet the Bassa, to entreat him not to come any further, but permit him
to enjoy that moment of pleasure he had been pleased to procure him. The
Sultaness not knowing what wind had brought the Bassa to that side of the
Garden, and fearing he would come into the Bower, would not be persuaded by any
thing that Alexander could say to her, to stay after him in the Bower, but
presently went out to hide her self in some corner of the Garden, where she
might be in better security.

The mean time the jealous Bassa, confounded at the discovery, and having lost
the opportunity of executing the design he had so unfortunately laid, suffered
himself to be prevailed upon by the entreaties of his Rival, and returned
toward his Bower, as Alexander to his; where being arrived, he was
sufficiently amaz^d at missing the Sultaness, but thought she had fled away for
fear, which troubled him extremely; but just as he was leaving the Bower to go
in search of her, he saw in the furthest and most retired part of it, something
that seemed to have the shape of a Woman: Then going up thither, and finding he
had not been mistaken, he fancied it only to be a trick of the Sultaness; this
pleased him extremely, and passionately embracing her, Madam, said he, are not
you very waggish? You would fain have made me run all about the Garden in
search of you: She answered not a word* but getting out of his arms, she went
away briskly, and withdrew into another corner of the Bower: the Count was
surprised at this manner of proceeding, being not so gentle as he expected from
the Sultaness, who loved him so tenderly; but to undeceive himself as soon as
he could, and to find out the cause of so sudden a change, he went up to her
the second time, and taking her by the hand; What may be the reason, Madam,
said he, that you run away, and hide your self from me? there is no fear of the
Bassa; he is withdrawn to his quater, and bath promised not to give us any
further disturbance. But all this could not make her answer a word; so that not
knowing what to think of this rigor, he kneeled on the ground where she was
sitting on a seat of green Turf, and kissing her hand, prayed her for loves
sake, to tell him the reason why she seemed angry with him; he courted and
embraced her with great passion and tenderness, and she as patiently took it,
but at last perceiving her laugh a laughter very different from that of the
Sultaness, he examined her more nearly, and knew by the difference of her
shape, and her Clothes, that he was mistaken. It was inconceivable, what a
trouble this put him in. He thought himself arrived in Fairy-land, to see the
strangest sights in the World. That Laura had been changed into the Sultaness,
was not so surprising as pleasant, but that the Sultaness should be turned into
another Woman, and perhaps a Mistress of the Bassa's, this was the thing he
could not comprehend: that which troubled him most, and extremely disquieted
him, was the pain he was in, for not knowing what was become of the Sultaness;
and the fear he had, the Bassa might have met her in the Garden, and known her:
this moved him again to go out in search of her, but Chabanea (for it was she
he had mistaken for the Sultaness) held him fast by the sleeve, and staid him,
telling him in the Moors Language, it was not fit for him to quit in that
manner a Lady for whom he had already expressed some affection. The Count
understood not her language, prayed her to let him go for fear the Bassa should
come, and be offended at his being with her. But all to no purpose, she no more
understood his Italian, than he her Moresque, and was so far from letting him
go, that she would have made him sit by her, that she might revenge her self on
the Bassa for the slight he had put upon her. During this little contest, which
could not but be some what extraordinary between two Persons who understood not
one another, the Sultaness comes in quiet out of breath, and throws her self
half dead into the arms of Alexander, who happened to be in a place ready to
receive her. What frightful fancies had he then in his head? He presenly
imagined they were utterly undone, and that she had been discovered. But the
Bassa arriving presently after, set him right again, in saying, you run away
Madam, speaking to the counterfeit Laura, from a Person who wishes you no ill,
nor intends you any; then turning toward Alexander, he was about to excuse
himself to him for breaking his word, but seeing Chabania stand by him, he
suddenly altered both his mind and his Language, asking her in Moresque what
she was come thither for. She answered him aloud, and gave him a thousand
reproaches for his unworthiness and weakness in quitting her, to follow a Slave
that run away from him. This was a very rare Scene, and the Dialogue not a
little pleasing to the Sultaness; but she had not long to laugh at it, for
Chabania being vexed to the heart for the slight the Bassa had put upon her, and
for what he had said to her before her pretended rival, flew like a Fury upon
the Sultaness, with that promptitude and swiftness, that neither the Bassa, nor
Alexander* who would have staid her, were able to save the counterfeit Laura
from being somewhat ill handled The Count was touched to the quick at this
outrage, and no consideration of life or of duty, could have prevented him
from having satisfaction, had not his fear of losing the Sultaness prevailed
more upon him than his resentment. The Bassa was as angry as he, and taking the
enraged Chabania by the hand, he drew her somewhat rudely out of the Bower, and
led her away.

The Count was no sooner alone with the Sultaness, but embracing her tenderly,
Madam, said he, with a passionate tone, what dangers have you gone through for
love of me! what a cruel assault have you but now endured? The Sultaness did
nothing but laugh at the last adventure she had been in, and told him she took
more pleasure to see Chabania's despair, (for whom she had ever a natural
aversion) than she had suffered of harm by her outrage and violence. But she
confessed the same time, that she was in extreme perplexity when she met with
the Bassa ranging over the Garden in search of that Woman, and that it was the
highest piece of good fortune imaginable, that she had her Barnus with her, to
hide her self in. She added that her dear Husband had said to her a thousand
gallant things, and had done also some things a little extraordinary; but that
it was her good fortune to be not far from the Bower, and to make her escape:
She told him further, that there remained no more doubt of the Bassa's being
newly fallen in love with Laura, and that she was very well assured of it by
the kindness of his expressions, and the transports she observed him in at this
rencounter; that this was the true cause of all their alarms, and the reason
why he brought him not into the Seraglio as formerly: The Count was of the same
judgment, and both held it necessary to make good use of the occasion, and that
Laura who was to act the principal part, should employ her best address and
complaisance in their favor.

The Bassa taking small pleasure in the Garden after the unhappy success of his
amorous designs, having done his endeavor to pacify Chabania, would bring her
back to her Lodgings, and passed by Alexander's Bower, to let him understand it
was time to withdraw. The Count followed him immediately, being extremely
joyful to have come off so happily from a walk that had proved so full of
adventures: He bore his dear Sultaness company into her Apartment, where he
staid not long for fear of the Bassa, but withdrew to his lodging. He past the
rest of the night very pleasantly, though he slept not at all; and the truth
is, he had reason enough to be well pleased, though his Patron had not, who was
more laboring under mortal afflictions: Laura, whom he now was more deeply in
Love with than ever, put him in despair by her Rigours and Cruelties: if no
more pity from her, then no more pleasure to be expected in his life. His great
affection for Alexander could not keep him from being his rival, and wishing to
share with him in the favors she did him. His passion was arrived at a point
which is the highest of sufferings, that of not being loved: and when he
thought of the opportunity he had let slip the night before, when he had Laura
in his power, he was so cruelly vexed, he could have found in his heart to be
revenged of himself: yet he had no great cause to blame his discretion, for he
had done enough, and unless he would have driven hi^ Gallantry to the last push
of all, he could not ha^^ done more. He was not willing to declare himself to
Alexander, nor acquaint him with the thoughts he had newly entertained, as well
to prevent the displeasure he believed it would give him, as for that he
conceived the Count might be of use to him in the design, and that the
discovery might be to his prejudice.

In the Morning as soon as he was up, he went (as he sometimes was used) to the
Count's Chamber without any attendant, and found him in bed: A Man said he,
must be as happy as Alexander in his Love, before he can sleep as quietly as
he. If there be any answered the Count, has cause to commend his good fortune
on that account, it must without doubt be a Person of your comeliness and
Gallantry, who to gain love, need no more than say you are in love. Yes,
replied the Bassa, with a smile, except it be to Laura, who has made me very
sensible that I can sigh to no purpose, and that the master of her person may
not be the master of her heart; It was necessary that Alexander should come
from Europe to Africa to make that Conquest: This, Sir, replied the Count, may
be an instance of the Vagaries and Extravagancies of Love, who often knows not
where to fix, but follows the effects of destiny, or the Stars which are
predominant over the affections. And I believe Sir, added he smilling, as for
the Love of Laura, you are already very well satisfied, and so little concerned
where she bestows it, that you never designed to make me in Love with her, that
you might be my Rival. However, said he, observing the Bassa sigh, I assure
you, should it so happen, you cannot do me a greater favor than in letting me
know it. And you shall find that all the passion I can have for her, shall not
hinder any performance of the duty I owe you. I will quit all my pretentions as
I know you have the least design upon her, that I may prevent all dispute with
a Person to whom I am so deeply obliged, that there can be nothing so dear to
me, but I will part with it for your sake. Believe it Alexander, answered the
Bassa, it is not so easy a matter to be disingaged from a passion like yours:
you may as well persuade me, you cannot be in Love. I am certainly in Love,
replied the Count, and it may be as deeply as possible; but having so many
favors daily heaped on me from you, there is nothing in the World I shall Love
more than your repose and satisfaction: And, Sir, if Laura appear now as
amiable as formerly to you, I must tell you again, I love her no longer; so
easy a matter was it for the subtle Italian to be generous in parting with
that in which he was so little concerned. The Bassa asked him if he would say
as much before Laura. He answered, he believed him too just and too gallant to
desire him to make a declaration of that nature before one who had been his
Mistress. At last the Bassa proposed another walk in the Garden that very day,
and at the same time prayed him to write about it to Laura; which the Count
having not been able to avoid, received his answer.

The burnt child dreads the fire; we do not commonly expose our selves twice to
the same danger. The Bassa 's usage of me last night, gives me small
encouragement to trust him the second time. And you are an eye witness how ill
I was handled by her he had with him. Let it satisfy you, that if you come
hither, I will have the honor to see you. But no more walking.

The Bassa much troubled at so unexpected an answer, went out of the Counts
Chamber without saying a word, and passed in solitude the rest of the day. But
in the Evening he went to the Sultaness, where he presently met Laura; who
inquiring of Alexander, and why he had not brought him with him; would it
displease you, said the Bassa, if I supplied his place this Evening: that were
too great an honor for me, replied Laura smiling but the Sultaness expects
you, and is not very well. The Bassa gave her his hand, and would have led her
into a private Chamber; Laura perceiving it, and that he was in good earnest,
prayed him to let her go; that her Lady was not well, and he knew well enough
she could not endure her being a moment out of her sight: I, I, replied the
Bassa, the Sultaness is sick, and cannot be a moment without you; but it is
because it is! desire to pass that moment with you; had it been Alexander you
could have staid a little longer. The Bassa said this with so pleasant a tone,
she could not forbear laughing. You know Sir, replied she, it is another case
when you are with the Sultaness. Besides Sir, added she smiling, one would
venture a little for a Sweetheart: Well, well, said he, pressing her to go
along with him, it is love has brought me hither: I, Sir, answered she,
striving to get away from him, and it is Love obliges me to avoid the occasion
of being found alone in your company; for though I know you a most accomplished
Person, you will allow me to tell you, you have not too much respect for our
Sex, and it is very hard trusting you, witness your assaults last night in the
Garden. The Bassa made her a thousand Oaths he would keep within the bounds of
that respect and discretion she might expect from the severest virtue, and
protested he desired only one quarter of an hours discourse. Laura, who knew
the violence and obstinacy of his humor, when denied any thing he held
reasonable to be granted him, disposed her self to entertain him that quarter
of an hour. He reproached her a thousand times for her hardness and cruelty
against him, and gave her withal the kindest words and the most tender and
passionate expressions imaginable. Laura, to defend her self, pleaded her
Honor, her Religion, and her Duty to the Sultaness her Mistress; three things
she would not betray for the World: Had you but a little Love for me* said the
Bassa with a sigh, you would not find so many reasons for defense. I have my
Religion as you have yours, and the Precepts of it perhaps as severe as yours;
but Love is stronger than all the Precepts, the Laws, the Religions of the
World, and those who serve him, worship no other God. As for the Sultaness, how
are you concerned, that is my business, not yours; and it shall be your fault,
if ever she know it. But what do you tell me of Honor?

Surely it is more for your Honor to love a Man as I am, than to love such a
one as Alexander. You mistake your self, Sir, answered Laura, if you think that
in the visits he has made me, there has any thing passed contrary to my duty.
It Is not with those of our Nation, as with the People of this Country: We may
be together, and no body by, yet my Honor secure. I swear to you, Sir,
Alexander never received that favor from me, which I could not afford the
Person for whom I am the least concerned in the World. The Bassa interrupted
her; what, not in the Garden? Neither in the Garden, nor any where else,
replied she, had he ever any other advantage than a sight of me, which with us
is accounted for nothing. Can you make me believe, answered the Bassa, what you
say? Laura told him there was nothing more true, and he might rest assured of
it: But Sir, said she, for your better satisfaction, bring him no more hither,
and you shall see whether I make my complaint for it: 'Twere pity, replied the
Bassa, to destroy so fair a friendship; and I do protest to you, that were it
in my power, I would give you no trouble, but I am not so much Master of my
self, to gain this point on my heart, to be unconcerned in your Love: But since
you love Alexander with so much indifference, that you can so easily resolve
not to see him more, I have no cause to afflict my self, but rather to hope you
may one day love me perhaps as much as you do him.

After these words the Bassa retired, with a heart a little better at ease than
when he came in, but as deeply in Love as before. He gave not an entire and
firm credit to what Laura had told him of her indifference and small
concernment for Alexander, but did believe her passion for the Christian not so
great as he had imagined, or that their Love had been cooled by some quarrel,
for he had observed on the one side and the other, more indifference than is
usually consistent with that passion.

But then reflecting suddenly on himself, may not this be (said he, resuming
his jealousy and diffidence,) an effect of their policy? may they not be
agreed to deceive me? and being already sufficiently assured of one another
affections, may they not pretend they have no Love for one another, that they
may Love one another with greater security? No, no, adds he, this cannot be*
there is no hiding of Love, it will appear if not smothered to death: She loves
not Alexander at all, or loves him but indifferently; thus he the more easily
persuaded himself to be so, in that he did most passionately desire it might be
so; and thence-forward his passion increased so fast, it became greater than
ever. Hope being a passion that more than any other foments that of Love,
easily promises it self happy events, and flatters it self with expectation of
good fortune and success.

Laura gave the Sultaness an account of all the pleasant discourse; and the
Sultaness could have wished Laura had not been altogether so severe to the
Bassa, but a little more kind and complaisant, without which she thought they
could not see Alexander so often as she desired. Laura on the contrary told
her, that to have been complaisant, would have spoiled all, for that the Bassa
would then have entertained some hopes of favor from her, and so become more
amorous than before, and consequently more jealous of his supposed Rival than
ever. What shall I do then, said the poor Sultaness, who can do nothing but
fear, and cannot expect any thing but crosses and misfortunes? Laura told her,
things were not in so desperate a condition, that she need trouble her self for
it, for the Bassa had promised to send Alexander on the morrow* and that they
would consider with him how to order their business.

The Count did not know that the Bassa had been with the Sultaness; but having
not heard from him that day, he went on the morrow to wait on him at his
rising. He found him abed, so dejected and melancholy, that he might by his
countenance easily discover the heaviness of his heart. Yet he received him
with that air of kindness and friendship might well assure the Count he was not
displeased with him. The Bassa was silent a while, and then looking on the
Count with an air of friendship and confidence; Alexander, said he, I am the
most unfortunate of men, especially in Love. Laura, added he, sighing, the
cruel Laura has not the least tenderness for me; no, not the least pity for
the torments she sees me suffer for her: and unless you will be a little kind
to me, I know not what will become of me. Ah Sir, answered the Count, let me
but know what you desire of me, and what I can do for you: you know it is not
in my power to dispose of others hearts; but if I may contribute to your
satisfaction; if you would have me speak to her; if -- How happy should I be,
said the Bassa, interrupting him, would you do what you can. Sir, replied the
Count, if it depend upon me, you may promise your self success. The Bassa held
his peace for a little time, as if he studied what to say; but Alexander
pressing him to declare himself, he told him with some trouble, that he should
appoint an assignation with Laura in a Chamber, in the Apartment of the
Sultaness, where the Bassa might meet her in his stead. The Proposal was so
unworthy and unfit for Alexander to consent to, that it astonished him on the
sudden so extremely, that having blushed at it very much, he knew not what
answer to make. The Bassa observed the disorder he was in, and was more out of
countenance at it than the Count; but for fear he should interpret it otherwise
than intended, and taking his blushing for no very good Omen, he told him, (to
be rid of him) that he might go think of it, and that if he gave him any
answer, it should be a favorable one.

The Count went out of the Chamber, and made a thousand reflections on his ill
Fortune, which had reduced him to the extremity of making him serve such a
person; not but that he was fully persuaded, Laura would not come, and that he
should be little concerned, though she should entertain the motion, and favor
the passion of his amorous Patron: But besides the baseness of the employment
he put him upon, he was mad to think he took him for such a Villain, that
loving a Maid, as the Bassa believed he did Laura, could betray her so basely.
This was the only thing troubled him; nor would he have done it, though he died
for it*

The Bassa having seen him leave his Chamber in that manner, thought there was
small hope of effecting his design that way; yet being a person of great reason
and worth, he was so far from thinking the worse of the Count, or being
offended with him on this occasion, that he esteemed of him the better, and
considered of other means to gain satisfaction to his love in the enjoyment of
Laura. His passion was now arrived at a height beyond the power of reason to
manage, and capable to put him on any enterprise whatever. The most virtuous of
men when changed into a desperate Lover, become the most furious and
extravagant of all; being so much more sensible of slights put upon him, as he
conceives himself a person of merit.

This transported Lover having failed of his design to make Alexander of his
Party, to serve his ends in a Proposal that included Treachery, resolved to
deceive Laura himself, by going to see her that night disguised as an Eunuch.
The design was not very well laid, but it took, as shall appear by the sequel.
He had not the patience to stay till his ordinary hour of going to the
Sultaness; but as soon as 'twas night, he went away disguised like an Eunuch,
and came to the apartment, where he found one old Moor at the gate, who not
taking so much notice of him as to know him, he sent her to Laura, to tell her
that an Eunuch of her acquaintance desired to speak with her in the Chamber of
Repose; so called because it was retired, and far from noise, and the place
where they used to take some hours rest after dinner in Summer. He made choice
of this Chamber as the most proper for his design; and the old Woman was no
sooner gone about her message, but he went to hide him there. Laura was then
busy, and the Sultaness having casually met the old Woman in search of Laura,
asked her, what she would have with her? the old Woman having had no order to
keep private her business, told her freely, there was an Eunuch desired to
speak with her in the Chamber of Repose. The Sultaness hearing of an Eunuch who
would speak with Laura, made no question at all but Alexander was the Man; and
without further enquiry what kind of Man the Eunuch was, or any other
consideration, she takes Laura's Barnus, and goes to the place of assignation;
had she made the least reflection on the message, she could not have been so
deceived, nor have exposed her self so easily to the danger she went into. It
was not the custom of her Gallant to use her thus, or to see her any where but
in the Alcove-chamber; he scarce knew the name of the Chamber where she was
told he staid for Laura, and knowing what she did of the Bassa, she had reason
to mistrust him. But those who are in Love as the Sultaness was, are subject to
greater over-sights than these. She knew that Alexander was not to see her but
by night, yet she waited for him from the first moment she awoke in the
morning; and in this amorous expectation, which tantalized her extremely, and
kept her in a mortal inquietude whether he came or came not, there needed no
help to hurry her away when the time drew near. Women who have been in Love,
will easily confess there is nothing so hard as to be prudent on such
occasions, and that the name of their Gallant when expected, has made them
start up for joy, and run to meet him e're they knew whether he were come.

The passionate Sultaness having given up her self to be led blindfold, where
she thought Love waited for her, borrowed wings of that God to carry her the
sooner into that Chamber; there was not any light there, but this did not
surprise her, it being not usual to place any in that Chamber* She pleased her
self with the fancy of putting a Love-trick on Alexander, by making him take
her once more for Laura, this made her resolve to be silent a while, as she had
been in the Garden, and to divert her self that way. But as she was entering,
she was taken with a shivering all over, and such a sudden fear, that she was
on the point of going back again. But the Gallant who waited for her, having
taken her by the Hand, she began to recollect her self, and went along with him
where he pleased: he led her away to the further end of the Chamber, where he
was so loath to lose time for making use of the occasion, that embracing her
with some transport, though trembling withal, he had almost put it out of her
power to defend her self. The Sultaness thinking this action too violent to be
Alexander's, began to mistrust; and having given him his liberty till then, she
did the utmost in her power to resist him, and knew, though a little too late,
that she was abused, and that this Man had neither the shape, nor the stature,
nor face of her Alexander, and that it must be the Bassa, which some marks she
knew about him, soon put out of question, she changed her method, and stood
upon her guard. The resistance she made after the kindness she expressed at the
first, was observed by the Gallant, and made him perceive that the cheat was
discovered, and no hopes of hiding himself. So that without further dallying he
made his last efforts, and rendered those of the Sultaness so useless, that he
obtained his design. This transported Lover was happy at least in conceit,
which sufficiently proves the power of imagination, and that our greatest
pleasures proceed from it. I am sure, there is no unfortunate Lover but may
envy his mistake, and that chance could not put a greater obligation on any
Man, than this on the Bassa. His passion thus satisfied, he withdrew, without
saying a word, and the Lady made all the have she could to her Chamber, for
fear the passionate Bassa should renew the assault. Laura who had been much
troubled at missing of her, was no less amazed to see her come in the condition
she was in, which made her throw her self on the Bed; where half weeping, half
laughing, she told her the story of the adventure: At which Laura did nothing
but laugh; expecting very pleasant conclusions from so comical beginnings.

The Count had been at the Bassa's in the Evening, and not finding him within,
came on the Morrow to acquaint him with the resolution he had taken on the
proposal. As he entered the apartment, he was told that the Bassa had been ill
that night, and had not slept at all, and that he had forbidden any entrance
into his Chamber; but the Count having more privilege than others, they let
him pass, and he found him abed, and writing, with so sad a mien, and so
dejected a countenance, that the Count presently concluded he had had a very
ill night; seeing Alexander on the sudden, he colored a little; but the Count
laying one knee to the ground, I come, Sir, said he, to beg one favor more of
you: You are the principal Author of all the Love I am engaged in; it is my
misfortune that you feel the same passion. Accept, I beseech you, the sacrifice
I make you Sir, I will never love, and if you will have it so, I will never see
Laura more. Bless me! cried the Bassa, what Lovers are these! is it posible
that two persons who began to love one another with so tender affection, can
part with such ease? and that I, who am am not beloved, cannot bring my self to
this; speak Alexander, and tell me whether it proceeds from any distaste you
have taken, or that you do it for my sake. No Sir, answered the Count, Laura is
this day as amiable in my eyes as the first day I saw her; but rather than see
you in the condition I find you in, I will not spare the doing my self any
violence I am capable of; and for your quiet and my own, I heartily wish I
never had seen her. This example is so rare, replied the Bassa, that nothing
less than the esteem I have for you, can make it credible. In the mean time
this Billet will let you see, that I have not staid for you to set me a
President, but that I know in my turn how to give Presidents for others to
imitate, but not to out do. It is written to Laura, read it: And there it will
appear to you, that if I have done you wrong, I know how to punish my self for
it. I should be heartily sorry, so virtuous and excellent a person as you,
should part from us, with an ill opinion of me. The Count extremely surprised
at this discourse, not comprehending the reason of it, after an answer full of
respect and acknowledgment to his dear Patron, took the Billet, and there read
these words.

If all the passion Man can have for a Woman, is not capable to justify the
crime I committed against you, you ought to pardon me, at least having suffered
in one night all the torments* and afflictions of a cruel repentance, which yet
fills my soul with grief and confusion. And if by giving you and your Lover
your Liberty, I may in some measure make amends for my faults, you may make you
ready for your voyage, for to morrow morning you shall go both together.
Farewell, and think of the violence I did my felf, in forcing from my bosom two
persons, whom of all I ever saw, I loved most entirely, and then you will find
me not altogether unworthy of pardon.

The Count was so confounded at reading the Billet, as never was Man, and had
much ado to hide the disorder it put him in; he kneeled the second time, as it
were to give the Bassa thanks for this last favor, which before his engagement
in Love with the Sultaness, had been the greatest he could have done him; but
now after his passion, it was certainly the greatest misfortune could befall
him. He was willing by this action to hide from the Bassa the trouble he was
in. But the Bassa took him up, and told him, he could not see him in that
posture, for a business where he had more cause to complain of him, than to
thank him, that he should know at leisure the whole matter from Laura, and that
in the mean time he had nothing to do but prepare for his Voyage; that he had
given order to stay a Christian Vessel, which should have gone off that very
day for Italy, and should land them at Legorn; that the weather was fair, and
that without fail he should embark with Laura on the morrow: for all which he
gave him his word.

The Count having taken leave of the Bassa went out of the Chamber with a heart
so full of trouble and affliction, for the news he had received, that he wanted
a more proper place to comfort himself, and to vent his thoughts of the
resolution the Bassa had taken to give him his Liberty, and to send Laura with
him. He knew not what might have obliged him to a resolution of this nature,
though upon reading the Billet, he did imagine the Bassa had committed some
outrage on Laura; but this was not the thing troubled him; it was the
Sultaness, from whom he must part, and must bid her adieu for ever: to part
with a Woman one loved so tenderly, to part with her for ever, and to part with
her in the height of his passion, sounds very harsh, and where is the Lover
could take such a resolution for any reason whatever? Yet Liberty, which to a
Man who knows what it is to be a Slave, to a Man of Alexander's quality, is a
thing so attractive; to return to his Country after eight or nine months
absence; the pleasure of Rome, and the consideration that if he lost this
opportunity, he might perhaps never have such another; all this, I say, made
such a Party, that the most beautiful, and most charming Lady in the World,
could not have hindered many excellent Persons from quitting hers to take it.
But true Love which values nothing above its own satisfaction, slights a
liberty to be bought with too many tears: yet in this conjuncture, it was
almost impossible for Alexander to refuse this cruel liberty, being all he
could in appearance desire, and bestowed on him by the Bassa, with a Mistress
with whom he believed him passionately in love. What reason could he find to
refuse such a Present which had cost the Bassa so dear, and ought to be the
most acceptable to him? He despaired to find any, and saw clearly there was a
necessity of parting, unless Love, favorable to Lovers in extremity, would
come to his aid, and make the Bassa alter his resolution, as they commonly do
who take any against love; never did Slave pay more Vows to be delivered from
his Chain, than he did for the continuance of his Captivity, choosing rather to
be a Slave the rest of his Life, than to be for ever removed to such a distance
from that which he loved a thousand times more than his Liberty.

The Bassa having passed some hours after in his Bed, to muse upon the
resolution he had taken, which he adhered to, though it made his heart ache,
called for his Aga, and gave him orders for the departure of the two
Christians, causing store of Provisions, and very rich Presents to be carried
on board the Vessel; this done he sent his chief Eunuch to the Sultaness his
Wife, to entreat her to give Laura her Liberty, whom he was minded to send home
to her Country, together with Alexander, for reasons of importance to her, as
of necessity for him, and for the ease and repose of one and the other. Having
given these orders, and the same time sent the Letter he had written to Laura,
he took Horse for Bardou, one of his Houses of Pleasure, a mile from the Town,
and staid there till midnight, having all that time walked alone in the
Gardens, to wean himself from the sight and company of Alexander, and the
pleasure he took in Laura's discourse.

That night the Bassa could not sleep, and in the Morning his Aga being come to
bring him an answer from the Sultaness, as to his request for giving Laura her
Liberty; he went presently to carry it to Alexander, whom he found in
appearance ready to be gone, but in truth never less disposed, but hoping every
moment some change of resolution in the Bassa. Ah, Alexander, said he, we must
part, but I know not how we shall; for the Sultaness who loves Laura with the
same affection I do you, notwithstanding my representing to her how much she
was concerned in interest to have us part, and to desire it as much as I,
cannot resolve upon it, but has sent me word this Morning she will sooner lose
her life than her Laura. You must go see Laura, and tell her 'twill be her
fault if she be not free, and go along with you; for as for me, what I have
promised I will perform. In the mean time I will give order that the Vessel be
staid longer, that it may not sail without you. Sir, answered Alexander, there
are frequent opportunities of Transportation, and when you have given some
longer time to satisfy the Sultaness, and dispose her to grant Laura this
favor, our obligation then will not be less for our Liberty you are now
pleased to grant us. Alexander replied the Bassa, resolutions like that I have
now taken in your favor, go so much against the grain of a heart affected as
mine, that delays may be dangerous, and time may make them faulter: make use of
the good motions reason and equity have inspired into me. I do not tell you my
thoughts are unalterable. The spite I have against my heart often its weakness,
the outrage I did Laura yesterday; my shame to appear before her after it, and
the small hopes I have of gaining her Love, are the true causes of your good
fortune: all this is yet fresh in my mind; stay not till time deface these
impressions, there being nothing men are apt so soon to forget, as the injuries
they had done to others.

As they were discoursing together, a huge Moor who served as Purveyor for the
Count, and brought him every Morning his Provision from the Seraglio, came on
the sudden into the Chamber with a great Basket on his head, not thinking
(without doubt) of the Bassa's being there. The Moor started at the sight of
him, would have gone back, but the Bassa with his hand made signs for him to
stay; he obeyed, and laid the Basket on the ground, which appeared very heavy,
and so he withdrew; the Bassa, of pure curiosity to see what they had sent
Alexander to eat, bid a Moor, who waited in the Room, take up the Basket lid,
which he did, and found the Provision to be a Woman very pleasantly tucked up
and mufled in her Barnus that she might not be known. But being in the Habit of
a Christian (which the Bassa and Alexander had formerly seen Laura in) they
made no doubt but it was she. The Bassa at first was very much surprised, but
then fell a laughing, and said to the Count, the Invention is rare, and that
she had far more wit than the Women of that Country; but this is a product of
Love the Father of Inventions. However, it is certain nothing could have been
done more proper for our design: But shall not we see, said he, all your
Provision? Madam, you are here between the two best Friends you have in the
World; and you have no reason to be shy of showing your self; having said this,
he drew near to the Lady, and would have taken her by the arm to help her to
rise, but she refused and thrust him back. I see Madam, said he, you have not
yet granted me the pardon I begged of you. I confess the offense was too great
to be so quickly forgiven; but you are taking your leave, and it is not fit we
should part without being friends; for it would be a perpetual grief to me, to
see you leave this Country with hatred in your heart. Deny not this favor
(added he, reaching forth his hand) to a man reduced to despair for having
offended you, and punishing himself so severely for the fault, that there is no
need of this extreme cruelty from you. But all he spoke was in vain, for she
hid her self more closely, and fortified her self in the Basket to prevent
being seen. The Bassa was unwilling to press her any further, but addressing
himself to Alexander, told him, it was his part to make peace, and to prevail
with Laura to let him see her once more being the last time* The Count took it
ill that she made so shy of showing her self to a Person to whom she was too
much obliged, to deny him his request in such a conjuncture, what cause soever
she might have had of quarrel against him. Besides, he was particularly
concerned to press her to show her self; for the last refuge he had, was his
hope that the Bassa's tenderness for her, would perhaps at the moment of
parting take fire afresh, and make him change his resolution; with these
thoughts he went to her, and gave her all the reasons he could invent to be
reconciled to the Bassa, and let him see her a moment; but all to no purpose.
He had not one word of answer, which angered him so, that having taken her
twice or thrice by the arm to make her rise, he was just going to force up her
Barnus, and threatened to do it; but the Bassa would not suffer it, bidding him
force her no further; that she had cause enough to complain, without doing her
new violence for love of him. But, says he, let us make use of the time, and
since she is brought hither to our hands, and you have no more to do but
embark, let us finish what we have begun, and perform what we have undertaken,
there never can be a fairer opportunity; and I cannot think that Laura will be
sorry to leave such a Country as this, or part with us to go along with you.
The Sultaness in all probability is yet asleep, let us not stay till she awake.
We must presently carry Laura (as she is in the Basket) into the Ship: you
shall bear her company, and as soon as you arrive, you shall hoise sail and
away; as for me, I will pass the rest of the day at Bardou, and give out such
orders as may be necessary, that in case the Sultaness miss Laura, and find she
is escaped, you may not be staid. Having said this, he sent a Moor to the Port,
with order to have a Shallop in readiness to carry Laura and Alexander aboard
the Christian Vessel riding at Gouletta. This done, he sent for the Captain of
his Guards, and bid him accompany the Count, and commend the care of that
Basket to the Moors who were to carry it along. Having given these orders, he
had no more to do, but bid his dear Alexander adieu; and having embraced him
with tears in his eyes, he bore him company to the Shallop, and from thence
went to Bardou with a heart full of grief. The poor Count was more to be
pitied: He was not much concerned to express how sorry he was to part with the
Bassa; but as for the Sultaness, whom he could have wished to have seen once
more at least, his trouble to leave her was so great, that he felt not the
grief he should have showed when he bid the Bassa adieu, who had so highly
obliged him. When he saw he must part, and no hopes of seeing her, his heart
was so full he could not speak a word; the tears ran down his cheeks, which
much moved the good Bassa, who thought they were shed for him, and was not
displeased to see himself outdone by a Man who was not ungrateful, and
cordially loved him: At last he saw him embarked, and bid him the last adieu.
The afflicted Count was so oppressed with grief, that from the Haven to
Gouletta, having given his heart a little more liberty than he durst have done
in presence of the Bassa, he let fall such lamentable expressions, looking
toward the Town, that the Captain of the Guard, and the rest that accompanied
him, were extremely astonished, and moved to compassion. By good luck they
understood not Italian, but his gestures, his tears, his looks, and the color
of his countenance expressed an unparalled trouble and affliction.

He no sooner got a board the Ship, but he threw himself on a Bed, and was so
much beside himself, that he did not as much as think of his Basket; but the
Captain of the Guard had eased him of that care, and caused it to be carried
into his Cabin; after which he took leave of him, and having commanded the
Captain of the Vessel to hoise up his Sails, he went into the Shallop and
returned to Tunis; then was it that Alexander finding himself alone in his
Cabin, abandoned himself to the torment of his grief. Ah Fate, said he, unjust
Fate, what have I done that you use me so cruelly, that you force me away from
a Person without whom I cannot live. Ah my Sultaness, dear Sultaness, must I
leave you, must I absent my self from you for ever? For ever, said he again,
rising up: Ah Heavens! let me rather be set ashore, I shall find pretense
enough with the Bassa; let me rather trust Love than Fortune, she has betrayed
me: Whatever happen I must die, and I had rather die at her feet whom I love,
than at this cruel distance. Having said this, he went to see if they were
still at Anchor, but found they were already a great way from Land, and sailing
with a favorable wind, had almost lost sight of Gouletta. What despair was he
in? Ah my heart said he, there is no remedy, now I must perish. Dear Sultaness,
added he, taking his Sword in his hand, see whether I am guilty of this
absence, and receive the Sacrifice I make you of my Life; with that he drew his
Sword, and was going to thrust himself through, when on a sudden the Person in
the Basket, who had thus far hearkened to all he had said, threw her self upon
him to prevent further mischief. Let me alone to finish a life which cannot but
be unhappy at this distance from all that I love. Ah dear Alexander, answered
the Lady, embracing him with all tenderness, her joy not permitting her to say
any more. The Count finding immediately (notwithstanding the trouble and
transport he was in) some difference between this voice and Laura s, looked
behind on the Lady who held him in her arms: But what an astonishment, what a
charming surprise was it for a heart like his, and in the condition he was in,
to see that it was the Sultaness her self?

THE HAPPY SLAVE. The Second Part.
OH Heavens! Is it you, Madam, cried the Fortunate Lover? Is it you? says he
again, overwhelmed with a full Tide of Joy, flowing so fast it had almost made
him speechless; may I believe that I see you the moment I thought I had utterly
lost you? Oh happiness unparalled and beyond expectation! But, Madam, direct
me, I beseech you, where to pay my Devotion; am I obliged to Love, or to
Fortune? Your thanks are due, dear Alexander, said the Sultaness, for the
Design, to Love; and to Fortune, for the Success.

The Happy Lover extremely amazed at so surprising an Adventure, found in
himself so sudden an alteration from the depth of Grief to the height of Joy,
that to enjoy more fully the present pleasure of so blessed a change, he
thought his moments too precious to be employed in satisfying the curiosity of
knowing by what means he was so unexpectedly arrived at so complete a Felicity.
The Vessel under sail with a favorable gale rendered them as secure as Mortals
can be on an Element where the Winds are in a manner Master of our Lives as
well as Resolutions. The Happy Lovers lost not the advantage of the Season to
enjoy one another with as much pleasure and satisfaction as prosperous Love is
capable of.

The Captain of the Bassa's Guards being arrived at Tunis, took Horse, and soon
got to Bardou, where he found his Master walking alone in the Garden, and gave
him an account of the departure of Alexander. The Bassa, like a man dejected
and disconsolate, having lift up his Eyes and Hands to Heaven, without saying a
word, withdrew into a Marble Bower in the midst of the Garden, where he
continued all that day, having given his Guards express Orders not to permit
any Person whatever to come near him; hoping thus to free himself from the
importunity he feared from the Sultaness, on Laura's account. His Servants and
Guards were much surprised at these Orders, not knowing what might be the cause
of his displeasure, unless it were that Alexander was gone.

In the Evening arrived at Bardou a Spahie, who brought him a Letter, and was
followed by another, and he by a third, who all came to speak with him on
business of extreme haste and importance; but being acquainted with the Orders
he had given, they durst pass no further, but resolved to wait his coming out
of the Bower.

The Turks observe exactly the Orders of their Masters; but Aly the Captain of
the Guard, gathering from the number of Couriers the importance of their
business, thought it his Duty to step to the Town, being but three Miles
distant, to learn what the matter was, and getting presently on Horseback,
went directly to the General of the Galleys, being one of them who had
dispatched the Spahies. The General sent him instantly back, with strict Order
to speak with the Bassa, and tell him, that to oppose the designs his Enemies
had against his Life, his presence was absolutely necessary at Tunis; Aly, who
apprehended the consequence of the affair, made no scruple (when returned to
Bardou) to present himself before his Master; who extremely enraged to see his
Orders broke first by him, would neither hear him, nor receive the Letter he
would have delivered him from the General of the Galleys. But locking himself
up, past his time till the fourth Prayer, when he took Horse to return to the
Town. By the way he received Letters from several, but thinking they came from
the Sultaness, or some of her party, he opened not one of them.

The General of the Galleys astonished not to see him come, after News sent him
what was Plotting against him, resolved to go in Person to see what stayed him
at Bardou, and by the way met him. The Bassa seeing him come with a very large
Train, asked him smilling, if he thought he had been Besieged, that he came to
meet him with so numerous a Party. You are pleasant, Sir, answered the General;
but I wish we stand not in need of far greater Forces before we come to Tunis.
The Bassa observing him to speak in good earnest, fixed his Eye upon him a while
without speaking a word, then asked him, what need there could be of the Forces
he mentioned; and (with Indignation) what, says he, will they Assault me for
love of the Sultaness? Do not you think, Sir, replied the General, there is
reason enough for it? Can you believe that a Prince like the Dey, your Mortal
Enemy (but from the Teeth outward) can brook the injury you have done him, who
loves the Sultaness his Daughter better than his Life? What injury, said the
Bassa? What injury, replied the General? An injury, than which, in my Opinion,
a greater could not have been offered. What, answers the Bassa, interrupting
him, will they dispute my Power to set two of my Slaves at liberty at my
pleasure? No, Sir, said the General, no question is made of your Right or Power
in the particular you mention; but the Sultaness was not your Slave, and unless
you designed to engage in a new Civil War, not only the Rules of Honor,
Justice, and Religion, but the Maxims of good Polity, should have prevailed
with you, not to deliver her into the hands of a Christian, than which a
greater misfortune cannot befall a Woman of our Religion. The Bassa thought this
Discourse so extravagant, that he burst out a laughing, and gave him no other
answer, but that he had taken the Alarm too soon. The General being moved,
reply d with some heat, you know me too well to think me concerned at that you
reproach me with; but when you come to Tunis, you shall judge if I had not
cause to take the Alarm. If the Dey, answered the Bassa, design a breach with
me, he will find a better pretense than you speak of. True it is, I have sent
away Laura with Alexander the Christian, without the consent of the Sultaness;
but there were reasons for it, and such as the the Sultaness of all Persons
living had most cause to approve. The General of the Galleys did verily believe
the Bassa was seriously bent upon raillery, and willing to keep that as a
secret which all the World knew; which he took in ill part, and had not spoke a
word more on that subject, had not the Bassa continued the Discourse. But, Sir,
said the General, interrupting him, what pleasure can you take in endeavoring
to conceal from me (one of your best Servants and Friends) a business so
notorious to all? Every body knows Laura is in your Seraglio, and that the
Sultaness is embarked with Alexander. Not to mince the matter, I must tell you,
the general voice is, that for Love of this Slave, you have rid your hands of
the Sultaness and Alexander, and that you design to Marry Laura, though a
Christian. But give me leave to tell you, that besides the novelty of the thing
(the like having never happened in this Kingdom) not only the Dey and Divan
will oppose it, but your Friends will to their power obstruct it, and prevent
it if they can; and I dare undertake, you will scarce find a Person of your
side.

The Bassa hearing him speak in this manner, thought him distracted, and would
have used him accordingly, but restrained by the Friendship he had for him;
Laura, says he, whom I saw carried in a Basket, whom I accompanied to the Port
(where they put her aboard a Shallop) whom the Captain of my Guard conducted to
the Vessel in which she was Embarked, and he saw under sail, this Laura is in
my Seraglio, and I am to Marry her Sir, answered the General, did I not know
you very well, and were fully persuaded of the good esteem you are pleased to
Honor me withal, I should not know what to think of your Discourse; for it
cannot be but you know the whole Affair better than any Man. But to end the
Dispute, let us go to your Palace, where you shall see whether it be Laura or
the Sultaness that is there.

It was not long ere they arrived at the Palace. The Bassa, who took all that
the General had said to be fabulous and vain, would not so much as have sent to
the Seraglio to know how things stood, thinking it foolery to doubt of the
Sultaness being there. However in complaisance, and by way of raillery, he
ordered Aly to wait on the Sultaness, and to Complement her for him, upon the
displeasure she took for the departure of Laura.

The Captain of the Guard not fancying his Master ignorant of what was past,
took his Order for a mere matter of Address, and a color only to hide the
truth of what he would have concealed; and approve himself able to manage the
intrigue, as one who could penetrate into the desires of the Person who
employed him, he went to the Seraglio, where he presently learnt what he
formerly knew, that 'twas Laura was there; and returning to the Bassa, made him
a civil answer as from the Sultaness. This put the General into very great
disorder, and gave the Bassa new occasion to laugh, telling him, he did not
understand the design of the Dey, in raising those Reports to procure him the
ill will of his Friends, and hatred of his People, and renew their former
broyls with greater violence than ever; but that he should find the means to
bring him to Reason, and that in the first place, he would expose the Sultaness
to the view of all the People, and then send her home to the Dey, to let him
see how unwilling he was to have any Alliance with a man who made it his
business to find occasions to ruin him.

As they were Discoursing, they heard a great noise on the sudden in the
Palace, followed by Vollies of Musket Shot, and People crying, to Arms, to
Arms. The Bassa went presently out of his Chamber to see what the matter was,
and met Aly coming to tell him, that the Palace was invested on all sides, and
that an attempt had been made to enter it by force, but that he had beat them
back with ten or twelve Soldiers of the Guard, who by good Fortune happened to
be with him. The Bassa, of all men the least subject to fear, and of a ready
Wit, and admirable judgment in the most surprising occasions, knowing himself
destitute then of Forces to make any resistance, and hearing them threaten to
set fire on the Palace if the Gate were not opened, ordered they should cry out
at the Windows that the Gate should be open d, that those who had begirt the
Palace round, and were, for the most part, drawn thither with hopes of Plunder,
might run all to the Gate, and give him opportunity to make his escape another
way.

The Stratagem took according to his desire, and he made his escape by a
private way from his Enemies, who had showed him no Mercy had he fallen into
their hands. But he, with the General of the Galleys, and Captain of the Guard,
got safe to the Mountains, Inhabited by the Moors, who had great love for him.
He no sooner gave them notice of the need he had of their help, but they came
to him that Night, so that by break of day he found himself at the head of 8000
Men, Armed some with Muskets, some with Pikes, both equally useful to them.

Poor Laura was alone, abandoned to the Mercy of this Popular Torrent, who
having pillaged in a moment that Rich and Sumptuous Palace, without respect to
the place or the Sex, entered the Seraglio by order from the Dey, and took out
thence the unfortunate Slave, leaving the rest exposed to the will of the
Rabble. It was Laura's good Fortune, that he who had the Commission to take
her, was a Person of great honesty and worth, a private Friend of the Bassa,
and one who expressed as much respect for her as she could wish in such a
Conjuncture. She was carried to the Castle, where she was committed to the same
Officer's Custody, being a Secretary, and generally esteemed by all the Divan.
And being the only Person could speak to her without danger of being heard, he
confidently told her the first time he saw her, that the Bassa, whose Conduct
till then appeared admirable, had committed a fact no less difficult to be
repaired, than generally condemned by the best of his Friends, but that he
feared the greatest smart would be hers. The poor Slave sufficiently Alarmed by
seeing her self forced out of the Bassa's Seraglio, and made the Dey's
Prisoner, was frightened much more by the Discourse of this Turk, who appeared
to her a very credible Person; she prayed him for Heavens sake to tell her what
the matter was, what fault the Bassa had committed, and how she was concerned
in it, that she must be thus handled? If you are ignorant of the passages this
day, answered the Secretary, I will let you know them.

I believe, continues he, that you know Chabania, or at least have heard talk
of her, all the World is convinced of the Malignity of her Nature, and illness
of Disposition: But to the business in hand; that which she affirms, is
grounded on Proofs so pregnant, and Reasons so clear, that her Malice has
compassed the effect she desired. Whether she was jealous of you, or in disgust
with the Bassa, I know not, but she is the cause of the disorder you have seen;
which, if not remedied, may prove the ruin of the Kingdom: The Dey was at Chess
when word was brought him, that a Lady from the Bassa's Seraglio desired to
speak with him on business of great importance. Instantly he quitted his Game,
and retiring into a Chamber to give the Woman Audience, he sees Chabania enter,
attended with her Eunuchs who Ushered her, who falling before him on her knees,
spoke to this purpose. Sir, I bring you News, which doubtless will trouble you.
But if I deserve Death for not being able to endure an injury done to your
Royal Blood, and the whole Nation, without giving you Advertisement, I am
content to suffer for it, having the satisfaction to see you. Revenge the wrong
has been done you, which is, that your Daughter is gone, that she is delivered
over into the hands of that Christian who sailed away this Morning, and that a
pitiful Slave is to succeed in her place, to the infinite dishonor of your
Highness and the Nation. Take your Revenge of the Author of this disorder, and
execute, that Justice which you ought against so cruel an attempt, acted to the
dishonoar of God, the injury of your Blood, and dishonor of your Country.
Scarce had she made an end, but the Dey inflamed with Anger, and extremely
enraged, called in those who had waited in the Antichamber, and scarce able to
speak for the Passion he was in, made Chabania repeat before them all that she
had said to him. It unhappily fell out that all who were there, were Enemies to
the Bassa, and instead of appeasing the Dey, took the present occasion to
animate and encourage him to get satisfaction for so cruel an outrage. Women
and Eunuchs were sent from the Dey to the Bassa's Seraglio, on purpose to know
the truth and particulars of this Affair, who made their report, that the
Sultaness was not there, that no body knew what was become of her, and that you
only were able to give us any news of her. A Messenger was presently dispatched
to Gouletta, to enquire at the Castle, if there were not a Woman in the
Christian Vessel that sailed away this Morning; the answer he gave was, that
the Vessel was sailed away without being searched, and that the Bassa had sent
order to that purpose by the Captain of his Guards, who accompanied the
Christian aboard the Ship. These Circumstances so clear and apparent, did but
too much confirm what Chabania had said. Hereupon diverse Counsels were held;
and the Assembly consisting of Persons ill-affected to the Bassa, or at least
too Zealous for the Dey, the Result was, that Revenge should be taken. I cannot
conceive how it was possible the Bassa had no news what past, the report having
been presently noised over the Town. It was designed he should be surprised at
Bardou, where it was believed he would have lain this Night. But News being
brought, that he was on his way hither, the Dey's Aga had Order, if denied
entrance, to set upon the Palace, and seize his Person living or dead. And I at
the same time was to go to the Seraglio, and to carry you away: They missed of
him, and it was well for you he escaped; for had he been taken, both he and you
had been by this time dead. But having so luckily made his escape, and being
Master of the Militia and Moors of the Kingdom, he may become formidable to the
Dey, and be in a capacity to deliver you from danger.

The unfortunate Laura, too much acquainted with the unkindness of her Stars,
did nothing but sigh and groan at the apprehensions of the new storms that
threatened her. She knew better than any, the little reason they had to charge
the Bassa with the flight of the Sultaness; and being of Opinion, that by
justifying the Bassa, her cause would appear better before the Dey; she told
this Turk, that her Patron was not, perhaps, so guilty as they thought. I know
not, continued she, what is become of the Sultaness since she left the Seraglio
this Morning; but the confidence you have expressed in me, in the freedom of your
speech to me, and your generous carriage obliging me not to be so reserved to
you, as I would to another; and seeing the extremity matters are reduced to, I
must acquaint you, that if the Bassa sent away the Sultaness with the
Christian, as is reported, she was very willing to go. And because it is
probable you will hardly believe me, without telling you more, I shall be
forced to relate part of a story which may serve at least to excuse, if not
justify the Bassa.

You must know, Sir, said she, that the Sultaness loved Alexander; and that she
loved him entirely; the occasion was this: The Bassa, whom every one knows to
have had a mighty affection for that Christian, had a longing desire (whether
for Divertisement, or to fasten him more closely to his Person) to see him in
Love with some Lady; and was of Opinion, I might be fit for the purpose, if he
could but contrive how to bring us together. But because I stirred not out of
the Seraglio, and that it would have been a very scandalous thing, to see a
Christian enter a Palace, where none of your Religion but Eunuchs have access;
he put the stranger into the habit of an Eunuch, and having prevailed with me
to accept of a Visit from him, brought him to me one Evening. The Sultaness,
already full of good thoughts for the Christian, whom the Bassa had a thousand
times spoke to her of, was extremely glad to hear of the design, to bring him
to her very Apartment, and with very great earnestness prayed me, if possible,
to procure her the pleasure of seeing him. This proved no hard task for me to
perform: The Bassa, who seldom came to visit the Sultaness, sending him almost
every day disguised like an Eunuch into the Seraglio; so that I had no more to
do but provide for the Secrecy of the interview between my Mistress and
Alexander. They had a sight of each other; and if Alexander was so handsome, as
to please the Sultaness, you may imagine that so Beautiful a Lady could not
displease him. Their Love increased day by day to that height, that they saw
one another very often. The Bassa seeing his Christian in Love, and thinking me
the object of it, took singular pleasure in it. The Bassa had formerly had some
kindness for me, which cooled by my resistance; but having one day for
Divertisement caused Alexander to give him an account of the progress of his
Amor, the fire of his Love so long raked up and smothered, kindled afresh into
a flame; and gathering from the success of Alexanders Address, that I was not
insensible, as I pretended to him; he renewed his Courtship, intermingled now
and then with reproaches for the little esteem I had for him in preferring the
affection of a Slave before his: I foresaw the danger, but was unwilling to
make him sensible of his mistake, to save the two Lovers from the
inconveniences which would certainly attend the discovery. And making my self a
Sacrifice to the pleasure of the Sultaness, I let him believe I was not
insensible of the Merit of Alexander. The affair thus managed, there followed
many pleasant Adventures and Intrigues, which for fear of troubling you too
much at present, I shall defer the relation of it to a better Opportunity. The
mean time, the Bassa extremely pressed me, and reproached me daily for
slighting his Passion, and at the same time favoring a Christian far less
worthy of my affection. He left no stone unturned to compass his Amorous
designs, insomuch as at last he found the means to have a private and dumb
interview in the dark with his Wife, whom he mistook for me, and did her all
the violence imaginable to be revenged of the insensibility I had for him.
Having satisfied himself, he parted with her without knowing her, blessing
himself for the good Fortune of having obtained that which he might have
commanded every day. But grieved at last for the outrage he thought he had done
me, and not knowing how to excuse himself to a Mistress extremely offended, he
judged no better amends could be made for his fault, than setting at Liberty
two Lovers, whose Passion he had so unjustly injured, after having been not
only the promoter, but first Author of their Love. He sent me the News of his
Resolution by a Billet he writ to me, wherein he pleaded in excuse the great
Passion he had for me; that to expiate his fault, he would deprive himself for
ever of the sight of me, and send me back with my Love to my Country, being all
could be desired from a generous Rival: And that if I were sensible of the pain
and regret my absence would cost him, I should find him punished beyond his
desert. My joy was not greater than the trouble of the Sultaness upon receiving
this News which put her into an unspeakable affliction. Her Nights and her Days
were wholly spent in Tears; she used all means possible to prevent the
misfortune she apprehended from Alexander's return into Italy. I gave her way,
choosing rather to renounce my Liberty, than see her die for grief in the
condition she was in. But the Bassa, the firmest of men in what he resolves on,
not perceiving the reason she had to oppose a design she had more reason than
he to promote, considering the Passion she knew he had for me, which must needs
trouble her, was true to his Resolution; and knowing there was in the Port a
Christian Vessel ready to Sail for Italy, he caused it to be staid for our
Embarking therein. What a trouble was it to the Sultaness to see the Bassa so
obstinate, and us on the point of departing! Never was a Person so plunged in a
Sea of despair, never were sighs so lamentable as hers; I was resolved to
entreat the Bassa to put off our departure to another occasion, that I might
gain time to dispose her to grant me the favor; but whether it were for the
shame to see me, or for fear that the sight of me might melt him into a
tenderness that might alter the Resolution he had taken, he appeared not at the
Seraglio. The Morning we were to be gone, the desolate Sultaness resolved to
die, or to follow us; she had long studied to contrive a way how to do it: I
was her Bedfellow, but neither of us slept a wink. Laura, says she, having
considered well what she would do, thou know the affection I ever had for
thee, that I have used thee more like a Sister than a Slave. Thou know my
heart, and I need not tell thee I cannot live without Alexander. I desire no
acknowledgment of what I have done for thee, (added she, kissing me with her
face all bathed in tears) but for pity sake, forsake me not in the most
desperate condition that a Woman, in Love as I am, can be reduced to, but do
something to save my Life: had she desired mine with such melting expressions,
I could not have denied it her, which she might perceive by the tears I shed to
accompany hers. Then she told me of an intention she had thought of, whereby to
get aboard with us, and that she doubted not of the success, if Alexander had
the Passion he pretended to have for her; and if he had not, she would comfort
her self, and find pleasure in Rage for the absence of so ingrate a Person;
that without the knowledge of any one in the Seraglio she would be carried to
his Lodging, and thence aboard the Vessel we were to Embark in; and that the
Bassa sending for me to be gone, we might all three get aboard before any
Discovery could be made of her departure. To give her content, I approved of
what she said, but did really apprehend the success of this affair, and
presage, I know not how, that I should be the sufferer. It Is a dangerous
business to yield ones self up to the conduct of Lovers, in that which concerns
the interest of their affections; they are apt to flatter themselves, to puff
themselves up with hope, and admit of no fear. When the day began to appear in
our Chamber, we thought it high time to set about and take order for what we
thought necessary for accomplishing our desires. We got up, and the Sultaness
having put on a Suit of mine, commanded me to call her one of the Eunuchs, who
was Purveyor for Alexander, and ready to Sacrifice his Life for the Service of
the Sultaness; she sent him for the basket wherein he used to carry the
Provision, and placing her self in it, wrapped up in my Barnus, commanded him to
carry her to Alexander's Lodging. I saw her go away in this manner, waiting
with fear and impatience enough to hear the success of this contrivance of the
Sultaness, and expecting every moment Orders from the Bassa for my going away.
At last, the time of Embarking being over, and the Sultaness not returned, I
was desirous to be informed how matters past, and understood with astonishment
and displeasure enough, that Alexander was gone, and that the Bassa, having
brought him to the Port, returned for Bardou. Then it was, Sir, I felt the
stroke of my ill Fortune, in losing, not only the hope of returning to my
Country, which might have given me some comfort, but of ever seeing the
Sultaness, the Person of the World I had most kindness for, and one who rendered
my Captivity pleasing. I could not doubt but her flight would be laid to my
charge; but the consideration of a Life so unhappy as mine, had produced in me
so clear resolutions for death, that, had you taken notice at your arrival, you
could not observe any trouble in my countenance. And in good earnest the loss
of my dear Sultaness afflicted me so, that the appearance of death could not
have done more. They asked me oftentimes what was become of her? the answer I
made, was, that I knew not: But having been long taken for her Confident, I was
shrewdly suspected. As for the rest of her Servants, you might have read in
their countenances, the trouble of their minds.

This is that, Sir, I had to say to you of the Sultaness; and if you think this
Story may be of use to the Bassa, and conduce to the procuring peace between
him and the Dey, I should be very glad you would relate it to him, though I may
appear guilty of having committed a crime against the one and the other But
they have prudence enough to be sensible of the condition of a poor Slave,
whose happiness consisted in her complaisance to a Mistress, who loved her so
well as to make her a confident in affairs of this consequence. The Turk made
answer, that the Bassa had so much kindness for her, and so little for the
Sultaness, that he would easily pardon the Treason she was guilty of; and as
for the Dey, he could not be much offended with her, for having done his
Daughter so eminent a service, in assisting her in a piece of unfaithfulness to
a Husband who (the Dey knows) had not any Love for her: and that he would make
use of the particulars of this Story to reconcile them; that he would manage
this business with some Friends of the Divan, and particularly with the Aga,
the Deys Favorite, who had great influence over him, and though a Renegade,
loved the Christians very well, and might do her some service. To these
expressions he added a thousand assurances on his part, and civilities enough
to oblige her extremely. This done, he withdrew, to avoid the suspicion her
Guard might have of a longer discourse, it being already very late, but
promised to see her again on the morrow, and bring her News of all that past.

The Bassa being now at the Head of so many Moors, thought himself strong
enough to take the Field, and as soon as it was day, marched down toward the
Town, to favor the retreat of his Friends, and of the Soldiers who came
flocking in to him; so that before noon he had an Army of Moors and Turks above
ten thousand strong. The Dey used all diligence possible to arm his people, but
found himself not strong enough that day to encounter the Bassa, whose Arms
were already grown terrible to his Enemies, who from his just indignation
against them apprehended a Siege. But his quarrel being chiefly to the Dey, and
wanting Cannon to attack him in the Castle he was in, the Bassa was forced to
wait the arrival of the Artillery he had sent for to the Port whereof he was
Master.

In the mean time, having assembled the principal of his Friends, to make his
complaint to them of the unjust proceedings of the Dey, and to demand their
advice, he was not a little amazed to hear them all maintain, as the General of
the Galleys; that it was his Wife was gone away with the Christian; and that
Laura staid in the Seraglio; and that the Dey had reason enough for what he had
done, in the belief he was in of the Bassa's intentions to make away his
Daughter. The Bassa, who still fancied that they were abused, would not
vouchsafe to contradict them, but calling in the Captain of his Guards, asked
him before them, if he had not the day before spoken with the Sultaness. Poor
Aly shivering for fear, fell down at his feet with his face to the ground, and
confessed he had thought the Bassa had sent him to the Seraglio, on purpose to
blind the world, and that it was desired he should justify before the General
of the Galleys, he had seen the Sultaness there, but that in truth she was not
there, and that he found only Laura weeping for the departure of her Mistress.

The Bassa for all this would not be persuaded, but said, he must see the Slave
before he could believe it, having many Reasons to the contrary, when he
received a Billet from the Deys Secretary to this purpose.

My Lord, Mahomet Bassa; I know not whether it was your good Fortune or mine,
that ordered the Dey's making choice of me to take away and guard your fair
Slave; but you may be assured she could not have fallen into better hands: she
wants for nothing, and you may believe, I hold neither my Estate nor my Life
too dear to bestow in your service, and obliging of her. If in the mean time I
may be allowed the liberty of giving you Counsel, I would advise you to
endeavor the advantage and peace of your Country, rather than that War and
Ruin which will be inevitable, unless you moderate your Passion. There is no
Man more sensible than I of the injury they have done you; but I am sensible
also that the appearances, for which you are condemned, have misled the Dey;
and that the blame of the departure of your Wife ought to be charged only on
your Wife. The rash Counsel of disaffected persons, which the Dey has followed
in this affair, has put you both into this present disorder. God grant it
proceed no further, and that we may not, to the scandal of other Nations, see
our Country ruined by those who have it in charge to maintain and preserve it.
I hope both of you will be better advised, and waiting your Answer, I wish you
all happiness.

Adieu. Assen, Secret.


The Bassa, having read this Letter, could no longer doubt of the truth of the
thing, knowing Assen to be a person of great Integrity, and his very good
Friend. He was easily comforted for the loss of the Sultaness, and laughed at
the adventure, and could not believe she had had a design to follow the
Christian, if he had not given order to carry her aboard in the Basket. He was
not much troubled at the mistake he had been guilty of, and thought that in
matters of Love, a Mistress of at least as good value as a Wife. He never
suspected any treachery in the Case, but was willing to know what reason could
have reduced her to disguise her self in that manner, and go along with
Alexander; yet he could not but think Laura of the Plot, but thought himself
revenged of her, and her sufficiently punished, in having lost at once her
Lover, and the occasion of her liberty, to pleasure a Mistress, who might
become a Rival. He longed extremely to see her, to know the whole business; and
Love adding new flames to this curiosity, made him so impatient of delay, that
how dangerous soever the enterprise might have been, he would have gone that
very day to Tunis, if his presence with the Army had not been absolutely
necessary, to receive those who every moment came over to his party. He sent
his Friend this Answer.

Mr. Secretary, You have in your hands a Treasure, which if the Dey knew how
much I value, he would not have trusted you or any other therewith, as being
assured he might with it make his peace when, and on what conditions he
pleased. Take care of her, I conjure you, as you would of my person, and
believe, I will never forget a service of so much importance. Send hither your
Moor to morrow at the fourth Watch; I shall want him for a business I cannot
trust any other person withal, nor write to you at present.

Mahomet Bassa Dey.


By that time he had written this Billet, the night was far gone; yet for more
surety he would not let the Moor go till three or four a Clock in the Morning.
The Walls of Tunis are very low, and in some places easy to get over. True it
is, they were then very well guarded; but the bearer of the Billet being known
to belong to the Deys Secretary, there was no danger of his being staid; and
accordingly he found his passage free as he could wish.

The generous Assen had been that Evening to visit his fair Prisoner according
to promise, and given her an account how matters stood, with some hopes of
accommodation between parties at difference; for that it was clear by the
confession of the Eunuch who had carried the Sultaness in the Basket, that if
the Bassa had a hand in sending away the Sultaness, she had contributed not a
little to her enlargement, out of a criminal passion she had for Alexander, by
going to see him at his Lodging. Laura well pleased with this News, could not
sufficiently thank Assen for the obliging care he had of her. He had sent so
many several sorts of excellent refreshments, that she found her self better
used in the Prison, than in the Bassa's Seraglio; she knew not what to
attribute so much goodness and complaisance to, and was a little troubled, out
of an apprehension she had there might be some love in the case; for the Turk
appeared so civil, so punctual, and so full of kindness, above the ordinary
rate of those of his Country, that she had cause to think him rather a Lover of
her, than a mere Friend of the Bassa's; yet had he not in a syllable
transgressed the respect that was due to her, which pleased her the more, that
she had no cause on that account to be angry with a Man who had done her so
many good Offices. And the truth is, he acted only out of a principle of
generosity, having been five or six years a Slave in Italy to a Patron who had
used him very well; and therefore being of a generous nature, he held himself
obliged to do the Christians good offices, as having for them a more than
ordinary Love and Esteem.

As Laura was complaining of her ill Fortune, which threw her out of one
mischance into another, he prayed her to tell him how she was made a Slave.
Laura was so much obliged to him, that the trouble she might expect in her
self, upon a fresh relation of her misfortunes, could not hinder her from
giving him that small satisfaction, in acknowledgment of the many services he
had done her; so that having assured him there was nothing pleasant in the
story of her life, yet to let him know the first rise of her misfortunes, she
begun in this manner.

Sir, I was born at Genoa, and of one of the best Families of that Republic,
but you shall excuse me, if I conceal the name: I will save my Family that
shame, since my misfortunes can do it no credit. I was born in a prosperous and
flourishing Estate, and my Parents having no other Child, I was bred With that
care and expense I may rather call profuse than great. It was my misfortune
that my Mother died when I was but 12 years old, and that my Father, though
aged, married a young Lady more considerable for Birth than Estate; but my
Father had sufficient to satisfy the ambition or pride of a Woman of quality.
But these were not the Vanities my Mother-in-law was subject to, it was Love
had the Ascendent over her. My Father was old, she was young and handsome, and
he had cause to be jealous of her. He let her stir but very rarely out of her
Lodging, and never but in his company, and then only to Church, or to make a
visit to a Friend or Relation. But who can resist his fate? My Mother-in-law,
little pleased with the severe hand my Father held over her, found her
inclination to be unfaithful to him, increase more and more; nothing provokes
desire more than restraint, and difficulties and straits are Sisters of
invention; she made use of several to carry on some little intrigues in the
Town, but all to no purpose; my Father, an old Master in Gallantry, was so
cunning and mistrustful, that nothing could escape him. So that the kind Lady
desparing of relief from abroad, was willing to try if she could find at home
any means to satisfy her inclinations. She cast her eyes on a Man, of
condition so mean, I dare not for her reputation let you know what it was,
though otherwise very handsome, honest, and till then very faithful to my
Father, who had more trust in him, than in any of his Domestics: this
acquaintance and familiarity so dishonorable for a Lady of her quality, lasted
for some time without being discovered, till at last by ill fortune for them
and for me, having laid me down to sleep on a bed of repose in my
Mother-in-laws chamber, I was an eyewitness of their Infamy: they were not
aware of me, my Maid having by chance covered me with a piece of Tapestry, laid
usually on the bed. I saw them, and they me, with what surprise you may
imagine. I was then 14 or 15 years old. Was he not a Slave, says the Turk?
interrupting, with a tone full of joy and surprise. Yes, Sir, answered Laura
(astonished at the Question, which made her look earnestly on him) he was a
Slave, and of Turkey. Ah Madam, cries the other, as soon as she had said so, is
it possible you should not know Assen? and that you should be Madam Elinor? At
this Laura was mute for some time, and then recollecting her self, Oh Heavens!
is it you, my poor Assen, says she? By what good fortune have I met you here,
and fallen in your hands? By the best fortune in the world both for you and me,
says the Turk, ravished with joy to find himself in a condition to serve her,
and being under the obligations I am to you, I should be the most ungrateful of
men, if I employ not my self in your service. I know you may accuse me on the
account of your Mother-in-law, but what could a poor slave have done, tempted
by the charms of a fair Lady, who offered him Money and Liberty when he
pleased? You will confess, men are gained by less matters, and that if I
committed a Crime in doing as I did, after the Confidence so good a Master as
your Father reposed in me, and the bounty he showed me, yet it is pardonable;
at least I believe I have made some amends for my fault, in saving your Lives,
which your Mother would have robbed both you and him of by poison. But I had
that influence over her Passion, that I diverted her from it. She made me a
thousand promises, if I would put in Execution that horrible design; but
because you are ignorant what followed that Adventure, I will tell you in few
words.


Your sight of us, as you said, surpised extremely both the one and the other;
and in that desperate Passion your Mother-in-Law was then in, I know not what
she would have done to have been rid of you. But, as I told you, I opposed her,
and made her understand, that the course she proposed, would certainly plunge
us into irreparable Mischiefs, and doubtless, cost us both our Lives. That it
were better to endeavor to gain you by fair means, in hopes that being very
good natured, you would not pursue our destruction, by making your Father
acquainted with that which would certainly be the cause of his Death, and bring
him to his Grave. You cannot but remember I went alone with you out of the
Chamber to persuade you. And that I told you, it concerned the Honor of your
House to keep the matter private, with several other reasons, with which you
expressed your self convinced. At last, you promised me not to make any more
noise of it, if your Mother-in-Law would, for the future, keep within the
bounds of her Duty. I made a relation of all this to her, expecting that the
experience of your discretion, so well known in the Family, would have past for
current Security, for your keeping your word. But it could not secure her from
strange inquietude and trouble of Mind. She could not see you without shame,
nor come near your Father without trembling. She buzzed instantly in my Ears,
that there was a necessity of making you both a Sacrifice to her Repose; and
that till then she could not expect any Pleasure in her Life. She told me, I
must help her to effect the design, or expect to be the first that should feel
the weight of her wrath. I endeavored the best I could to reduce her to
Reason, but for some time she would not hear any. At last, her ill humor
desired only the satisfaction of your being put out of your Lodging, and was
content to find out several pretenses to persuade your Father to put you into a
Nunnery, or at least out of his House. Notwithstanding all the Arts of her
Complaisance and Cunning, she found it no easy matter to bring this about; but
for the quiet of the House, it was necessary to please her, and place you under
Pension in a Nunnery. Shortly after, whether it were that you had discovered
the business, or that she feared you had done so, or rather that she was
willing to be rid of me, by this Stratagem she came one Night to my Chamber,
while your Father was asleep, and with a fright in her looks told me, I was
undone, that my Master knew all, and that I had no more but that Night for to
save my self. Whereupon she gave me Money, and seeing me resolved to be gone,
bid me her last farewell. I kept, as you remember, the Keys of the House, and
so got easily out. I had, for a Disguise, taken a black Suit of your Fathers,
and as soon as it was day, and the Port open, I hired a Felucca, which carried
me to Legorne, where I lay private three days, staying for a Vessel of the
Great Dukes, which was to carry a Present to Mahomet Bassa, my Ancient Friend,
who made use of his Interest with the Dey to restore me my Estate, which since
I was a Slave, had been Confiscated, upon a belief I was dead. But having
failed of his desire, he procured me in recompense, the Secretaries place,
which is no great matter here. This, Madam, is the account of my Life since I
left Italy. You may oblige me in acquainting me with yours, which I could not
come to the knowledge of, having never heard since from Genoa.

That which remains to be told you, says Elinor (whom we will yet call Laura)
is a story full of troubles and misfortunes; the more difficult for me to
relate, that a Person of Quality cannot but be ashamed of them. But I will be
free with you.

Having spent two Years in the Covent I was placed in, my Father moved with
many tears, took me home; where for the time I stayed there, I was under
continual Persecution from my Mother-in-law; who having got the Ascendent over
the good Man, made him believe what she pleased. She had new designs in her
Head, which you may believe was the cause of the fear she put you in: for my
Father never had the least knowledge of your familiarity, and was much troubled
at your running away, declaring he had lost in you the best Servant he had. He
had designed to have set you at Liberty, which was the reason he sent not after
you, as he might have done. I was by this time become somewhat clear sighted,
and what I knew of my Mother-in-law, made me suspect every thing she did: I
watched her narrowly, and in few days discovered a new Gallant. You may
believe, that after the mischiefs she had done me, I failed not to do her all
the ill Offices in my power: it is the nature of our Sex never to Pardon. But
besides the pleasure of Revenge, I was engaged in Honor against her. This
raised a War between us more violent than ever, and my Father had trouble
enough to content us both. At first she thought her self hard enough for me,
having once already turned me out of the House, and afterward sent you
packing; and putting on a bold face, feared nothing, as knowing I would not
accuse her of any thing, but her impudence could bring her off, my Evidence
being gone. But when she perceived by my obstructing her new practices,
rallying her on all occasions, and other cutting effects of my resentment, that
I understood her Secrets, she spared nothing that Rage and Fury could suggest
to her against me: At last, she fell heavy upon me with my Father; and having
not prevailed with him to return me into the Monastery, forced him to turn me
again out of his House, and place me with his Relations; where I passed six
Months with one, and six Months with another, to the great displeasure of the
Family. Till at last a Grandee of Spain, an old Friend of my Fathers, having
been created Viceroy of Naples, and passing by Genoa to go and take Possession
of his Government, my Father entreated him to take me along with him, which he
readily did. The Viceroy and his Lady received and entertained me, not only as
the Daughter of their intimate Friend, but as their own, and honored me with
such expressions of Civility and Bounty, that I thought my self too happy in
being of their Train. And the truth is, I was not deceived; these beginnings of
kindness growing every day to greater perfection, especially on the part of the
Viceroy's Lady, who appeared not able to live a moment without me. She had been
a great Beauty, and was not then unhandsome, though not very young. She kept
nothing from me, but imparted to me her most private thoughts, and made me the
Confident of her dearest affections. This lasted as long as I was
disinteress'd, but there is no trusting one another of our Sex, especially in
matters of Love. I was reputed not unhandsome, and having a full Purse at
command, I lived at that Court with Splendour enough. It was presently known, I
was not the most inconsiderable of Genoa, and this advantage set off with a
little Beauty, raised so great a number of Pretenders to me, that I could not
pass a day without treats and addresses of Love. The Court of Naples has
always passed for the most Gallant of Italy, by reason of the multitude of
Persons of Quality in the Kingdom, but was never so pleasant as then. I was so
young that I knew not what Love was, and was not concerned to make haste to
learn it, but made the Cares and Sighs of those in Love, my sport and
divertisement. But Love will in time be revenged, and make sport of us that
make sport of him. I had not yet seen the man who had the secret to affect my
heart, no not one who could please, though that Court had of all sorts, and
some very handsome. The Son of the Viceroy, being a young Lord very well
accomplished, and not a little concerned for me, did but give me trouble. But
as I hinted before, I paid dear for that indifference and those slights I
gloried so much in. Five or six months after our arrival at Naples, there
appeared at Court a young Gentleman, whom Love seems to have raised up for my
ruin. It was the Marquess Hippolito of the House of Accelyn, equally
considerable for his good parts as his Birth; a Youth whose outside was taking
enough to charm at first sight, but as traitorous and wicked within, as he was
outwardly handsome and well accomplished. When you have heard out my story, you
will say I speak with too much moderation. It is hard to hate what we have been
once truly in Love with. In spite of that unpardonable outrage he did me, I
find that if I saw him, and had it in my power to take my revenge of him by
death, which he has but too well deserved, my resentment would give place to
the inclination I had for him. He was newly come from France, and had got the
Court-air, so peculiar and natural to those of quality of that Nation. I was
extremely pleased to see him, and looked upon him with delight, the first time
he appeared, at Court; and was sensible of it, though with shame and anger at
my self. From thenceforth he was constantly in my thoughts, though very
troublesome to me. I was displeased with my self for it, and would upon any
terms have put him out of my mind, but the more I endeavored it, the more I
found him settled there. I saw him several times after, and to end the War
within me would fain have persuaded my self, it was not for my honor to
entertain such thoughts of that Gentleman; but I found in the end my ingenuity
deceived me. That which contributed most to my ruin, that both by his looks and
his actions he seemed to prefer me before all the Ladies of the Court, and
though he did not declare so much, yet I could observe he had more than an
ordinary respect for me, and would now and then say to my self some things I
fancied he might and would have said to me. At last I made my self of his
Party, and blaming my past coyness, I thought it very allowable and just, to
have some esteem for a man who merited it from all the World: Having once
entertained this thought, and convinced of it as reasonable, my passion and
Love finding my heart already more than half open, pressed in and absolutely
took it. The Viceroy's Lady, who often diverted her self in entertaining me
with all the Intrigues of the Court, having one day told me several Stories,
asked me if I knew the Marquess Hippolito's Mistress, for that, for some days
past, she observed him very solitary and out of humor, which she took for an
effect of some inclination. Had she looked upon me when she asked me the
question, she might have read in my countenance how much I was concerned; for I
changed color three or four times. But being upon the Tarrass of the Palace on
the Country side, she was looking that way, and took no notice of me; so that
having time to recover my self, I answered with an affected coldness, that he
was a dull young fellow, and I believed incapable of Love: and thereupon out of
Jealousy her question had raised in me, I made a description of him as really
unlike him, as contrary to the thoughts I had of him. The Viceroy's Lady fell a
laughing, and having looked upon me so, as she believed, would have put me out
of countenance; is it possible, says she, that you should think so of a man
whom all the other Ladies esteem the handsomest of the Court? If I were not
very well persuaded of your indifference for all men, I should believe of you
quite contrary to what you say. But look to your self, for sooner or later you
shall be met with, and your insensible heart shall have her turn as well as
others. As for me, I confess, were I as you, that young Gentleman would please
me, and I would not have you slight him: Think of it, he is a Person of merit
and worth, and wants nothing of what may justly deserve Love from a fair Lady
as you are. Who would not have believed but she spoke in good earnest? Who
could have mistrusted her after so many kindnesses and favors she daily laid
out on me? I know not whether I was to blame, but must confess I yielded my
self to be taken, and was ready to unsay in her presence all that I had spoken
against the Marquess Hippolito, and to acknowledge I had prevented her in the
thoughts she had been pleased to inspire into me of him, but my modesty
restrained me. I thought my self concerned in honor, to expect an Address from
him, before I would confess my self taken. I could never discover perfectly
this Ladies design, but as far as I can guess by the consequence, she
questioned me of pure jealousy, endeavoring to discover whether I had any
affection for the Marquess. She had often seen us talk together; judging by her
thoughts of him, that it it was hard enough for a Lady to be acquainted with a
Gentleman of so many charming Qualities, without loving him; she had doubtless
some apprehension I had on his account ceas d to be insensible. But finding by
what I said, that I continued indifferent, her jealousy giving place to
Love-policy, she desired to settle some friendship between him and me, to serve
her for a pretense to see him as often as she desired. At least I am of opinion
these were the reasons obliged her to speak of me as she did, and to tell me,
if ever I meant to love, I could not make a better choice. I stood out stiffly
to the end, telling her, my Liberty was so precious, that I would not part with
it for any consideration in the World, if the keeping depended wholly on me:
But because those of my condition were not born to enjoy it all their Life;
whatever I endured, I would be guided by my Friends, and absolutely obey their
pleasure who had the right to dispose of me. Hereupon she embraced me, and
said, all the Maids of the World would be wise, were they of my humor, and
followed my example. In the mean time, since I was resolved not to slight the
Counsel of Friends, it was her advice I should admit the Marquess Hippolito to
see me sometimes. But Madam, said I, interrupting her, has he desired leave to
do it, and is it at his request you make me the motion? She answered, saying,
that I need not trouble my self for that, but might believe this overture came
not altogether from her; and that the Marquess had found me out as well as
others. You may imagine what a pleasure she did me, in telling me this, who
desired nothing more than the love of that Gentleman.

This discourse being over, we parted extremely mistaken in our thoughts of one
another. She imagined I was still the same, and altogether insensible of love;
and I thought she had spoken as a Friend, and really desired to see me in love
with the Marquess: We began to have the young Lords Company, after the
particular kindness between him and Don Alphonse, Son to the Viceroy, gave him
free entrance where he pleased; and the Viceroy having no small esteem for the
Marquess, was not only glad to see him at Court, but engaged him by his
Civilities to come to him oftener. I shall forbear mentioning what the Lady
contributed on her part; but you may believe if very probable, that having the
kindness she had for him, she omitted nothing in her power to further these
Visits. At first he was altogether for me, at least in appearance; for several
days he wanted nothing of diligence or complaisance to please me. Wherever I
went he still waited upon me, approved all that I said, and took my part on all
occasions. In a word, he practiced all that may be done, for gaining a
Mistress; and was presently looked upon in Court as a new Servant of mine Many
of my Friends congratulated my Conquest, and I could not but laugh at them. Not
but that I believed it, being easily persuaded to credit what I so much
desired, but that I was afraid to believe it so soon, and was unwilling it
should be known, to avoid the shame that might attend a mistake. He had not as
then spoke to me of Love; and the least I could do, was to expect he should
declare himself. A Lover of so much Wit as the Marquess, could not fail of
finding an occasion. But I know not whether fortune befriended him so ill, as
not to afford him one. However, it is certain he never took any to discover his
Passion by Speech: All that I knew of it, was from his looks and his sighs,
which perhaps my kindness interpreted too favorably. Men being now accustomed
to a general Gallantry, that in show and appearance, both their words and their
actions speak altogether of Love. These promising blossoms of an apparent
affection, were all blasted on the sudden. I was surpised at it to
astonishment, to see him so far advanced to make so sudden a stop, at a time I
least expected it, and prepared my self to give occasion to discover his
affection, which I feared his respect for me, or his fear to displease me, had
hindered from doing. I could not imagine the cause of so sudden a change; for
three whole days he absented from the Court, and when he appeared there, he
looked like a man so cold, so altered, as if he durst not cast an eye upon me,
whereas before he was jovial and complaisant, and his eye never off me, you
cannot easily imagine how terribly this vexed me. I was upon the point of asking
him the reason, and had certainly done it, but that I was overruled by a
little haughtiness and pride, which making me look on his inconstant
proceeding, as an effect of manifest Treachery, inspired me with scorn and
aversion against him; which however I smarted for in the end: for two whole
days I did nothing but weep and complain of Love and my own wickedness. The
Viceroy's Lady observing me sad and dejected, though I did all in my power to
hide part of my trouble, asked me what I did ail, which probably she knew but
too well, but was willing to have the pleasure of hearing what I would say, I,
who till then had not the least reason to distrust her, made no scruple of
telling her in plain terms the cause of my grief, and told her, she had more
than any contributed thereto. This made her blush, and comprehending on the
sudden what I meant, but thinking without doubt I had discovered her secret.
But I fell unhappily to explaining my self, and seriously confessed to her,
that what she had said to me of the Marquess Hippolito, had produced in me some
disposition of kindness for him, which cost me then very dear, having been very
confident she would not have deceived me, but that the Marquess had now
deceived us both. I must confess, says the Traytress, I was willing to conceal
from you the inconstancy and change of a foolish young flash, and did design
not to speak to you any more of him, not thinking you could be much concerned
for him after what I had heard you say of him. But since you are aware of his
inconstancy, and so much concerned at it, I must tell you, that to my grief as
much as yours, I have discovered he is otherwise engaged. She perceived me
blush extremely at that word, and in truth I was so disordered within, it was
impossible to hide my despair. Otherwise engaged! Madam, said I, sighing: Yes,
answered she, to a new Mistress very lately. Judge you, continued she, what I
said to him on that occasion, and whether he did deserve to be reproached,
having expressed so much passion for you, that I thought it impossible a man
could have been more deeply in Love. Oh Heavens, cried she, how deceitful are
men now adays! He excused himself by the Friendship he has for my Son; that to
be his Rival, were to betray him, and that the confidence he had in him, in
acquainting him at his arrival, with his offection for you, obliged him to make
a Sacrifice of his heart, to serve my Son's interest. Sorry excuses, I confess,
says she, but how can we help it? It Is a mercy however, he knows not the
favorable inclination you have for him, for which he is unhappily beholding to
me, as the cause of your kindness. He should never have known these worthy
inclinations, replied I: I never discovered them to any but your self Madam,
for whom I had no reserve, and I hope you have not told him. Think not, says
she, I could so far forget my self: though I were not so much your Friend as
you know I am; I know very well with what caution to manage their concerns, who
repose a confidence in me. Then I asked her trembling, whether she knew the
fair Lady had robbed us of him* That, says she, I cannot learn of him, but I
will endeavor to discover it by my Son, who without question knows who she is;
leave that to me and I will bring you news of her as soon as I can discover her.

Thus did my Rival triumph and laugh at me. I must confess I was a very Fool,
in that I had not then more wit, than to trust any Woman; but it was the
confidence I had in her, that blinded me. Yet when I call to mind a thousand
things then spoken and done, I cannot but wonder, I who had seen so much of the
world, could not make discovery of the treachery they acted against me. I did
nothing but torment my self night and day, and avoided all occasions of being
with the Marquess, for fear my weakness should to my disgrace prevail over my
resolutions. I saw him entertain himself commonly with the Viceroys Lady, and
asking her one day, what it was they discoursed of; and whether she had
discovered the secret I was so desirous to know; she answered me, no, but that
I should not trouble my self, for the Marquess would come to me again; and that
she studied how to bring it about. I was vexed at this, and told her I did not
desire it: that she might do her pleasure, but that I desired to be
unconcerned. And the truth is, the pains I endured, would, I believe, by
degrees have made me insensible, and cured me at last But on a day the Viceroy
treated us in the Garden* I quitted the Company, and walking aside to muse in a
dark and solitary place, I met with the Marquess. I thought it an effect of the
Ladies care, and that she had made use of this occasion to reconcile us. I know
not whether he took the haughtiness and seriousness of the Looks I entertained
him with for an ill Omen, or not; but sure I am, he trembled as he approached
me, and with a very settled tone, told me, it was very strange to see a person
of my Humor finding out so solitary a Walk, there being so much good company
in the Garden: it had been, said he, excusable in any other, as an effect of
some amorous thoughts; but for you, Madam -- for me, replied I, interrupting
him, and who has told you but I may have been led hither by Love? Ah Madam,
answered he, we know you too well to entertain any such suspicion; and I am
sure, if you can love any thing, it must be only your self. It Is well, replied
I, if it be true as you say, that I love nothing at all; but as for what you
reproach me with, it is reported you are not altogether indifferent: there is
some ground for the report, Madam, indifference being a Quality I never stood
much upon, especially toward you of all the people in the World. What not
toward me? replied I, when you knew me insensible. It Is true, Madam, answer-
he, I was told so, but submitted however to the destiny of those many
unfortunate Lovers, you have made such in this Court. In matter of affection,
said I, we are not to be led by example; some have more merit or at least
better Fortune than others; we are sensible toward some, when we are not so
toward others: One person shall please, without knowing wherefore, amongst an
infinite of others who shall not have that advantage, though equally handsome.
In a word, every one has his lucky moment: you may believe I could not have
said all this without blushing; The Marquess having heard me with such
attention, as clearly discovered him surpised at my discourse, was just going
to answer me, when the Viceroy's Lady, who would never with her good will have
us both out of her sight, unhappily interrupted us, and surprising us on the
sudden, said, I dare lay a good wager you were, speaking of Love: it is true,
answered I smiling we were discoursing of a very pleasant question, occasioned
by being reproached by the Marquess for my insensibility. He has reason,
Madam, replied the Lady, to prevent an answer from the Marquess; he who is so
deeply in Love, may justly reproach you: if you know it not, I can assure you
of it, and will in time tell you more. I thought, said I, we had not been so
great strangers, but I might have known it from himself, without being obliged
to another for the News, and if we two were alone, I know how I would quarrel
with him for it. All this was spoken with an air of raillery, which wrought
very effectually on the inclinations of the Marquess, which the Lady discoursed
of; I applied to my self, imagining what she spoke of it, was done for my
honor, and to engage me to an obliging answer, which I gave. She presently
fell into other discourse, and led us insensibly toward the Company.

On the morrow, the Marquess having mused all night on what I had said, found
me alone looking out at a window of the Palace, and falling insensibly on the
discourse of the day before, asked me, though I had no inclination to love,
whether I would be displeased at one who loved me with the greatest passion in
the World: I answered, there were but few I would allow that liberty to; and
that in the whole Kingdom I knew but one I could permit to use that privilege.
I believe he could not but understand I meant him, and my looks did but too
much confirm him in the opinion; he, though he observed it, would not take
notice of it. I know, Madam, says he, it is extremely imprudent to propose a
Person of a meaner rank than yours, or one of small merit, or not Master of
Qualities worthy your esteem; but the Person I speak of, is beyond all
exception. Finding him take a course so contrary to what I expected, I had not
patience to permit him to make an end, having ground enough to believe, it was
not for himself he made this Declaration; and interrupting him briskly, A
Lover, said I, (blushing with anger and shame) perhaps would not displease,
provided he were like the Marquess Hippolito; any other may come too late. I
had scarce spoken these words, but I repented me of them, and unwilling to hear
any more in the confusion the torrent of my Passion had put me in, I withdrew,
Oh Heavens! cried he, running after to stay me, How unfortunate am I?
Unfortunate, said I, turning toward him: Is the esteem I have for you a means
to make you unfortunate? Yes, Madam, replied he with a sigh; that precious and
charming esteem, I was made believe, could never be gained, which I would have
purchased with all I have dear in the World -- He stopped there. Well, said I,
what of that esteem? Ah Madam, answered he, they have made me renounce it. I
had no sooner heard these words, but I went on my way, having given him some
looks full of indignation; but seeing him follow me, and not able for very
grief to speak to him, I made signs to him with my hand, that he should come no
further. It is beyond imagination what a desperate condition I was in that
night: Rage, shame, spite, fury, repentance; in a word, all the Vexations of a
Lover, mocked, betrayed, assaulted me by turns. I fell so sick, that for many
days I kept my Bed; however I resolved to speak to him once more, to know who
had caused him to renounce my esteem, as he had told me. I presently fancied it
was Don Alphonso; but was very desirous to learn how the matter had been
managed, and expected every day to see him with his Friend, or with the
Viceroys Lady, and that I should find an opportunity to speak to him of it. In
the mean time he came not to my Chamber, though all the Court did me that
honor, for the short time I continued indisposed: this surprised me extremely,
and hearing one day he was in my Antichamber, I sent Clarice my Servant to
desire him to come and see me, having something to say to him. He would have
come instantly, as the Maid brought me word; but the Viceroys Lady, with whom
he was discoursing, stayed him: at which I was not a little astonished; but
much more, when soon after I saw him come in, in the company of that Lady. He
looked very pale, and his countenance much altered, which contributed not a
little to allay my bitterness against him, though I had small reason to think
my self concerned in honor of that change that appeared in his looks. You see,
Madam, said I to the Lady at their entrance, this Gentleman must be sent for,
if we desire the pleasure of his Company. These are favors, continued I, not
usual with me, and such as I would not by any means have done him, while it was
in my power to have any esteem for him. But since he has told me, they have
made him renounce my esteem, you may believe, Madam, I am not much disposed to
have any esteem for him; and that what I now do, proceeds not from any such
cause. It Is true, answered the Lady, he does not deserve your esteem but you
must pardon his Youth. I will pardon him, replied I, on condition he will tell
me who had the power over his Heart or Wit, to make slight of an esteem not
altogether unworthy a Gentleman of his Quality; and it is for that purpose I
have sent for him hither. He stood mute; so that turning my Head toward the
Lady, to ask her the reason of his silence, I was again surpised to find the
Lady in greater disorder than he. I was just speaking to him again, when I saw
him rise to tell me, with trouble in his face; I will satisfy you, Madam, in
that particular, but entreat you let me take a fitter time. A fitter time, said
I, and why not now? Is it my Lady that hinders you? You know I conceal nothing
from her. Ah, if it be I, said the Lady, I will withdraw to leave you at
liberty; and with that she retired toward a Window, in far greater disorder
than if she had been angry. This made me more curious than ever to hear what
the Marquess would say to me. Yet he declared himself no further, but reaching
forth his hand toward me, he showed me a Billet, which I would not have
received on any other occasion; but in this Conjuncture I made no scruple of
it, believing I should find in it the Secret I longed for: Hereupon he withdrew
without saying a word. And the Lady returning toward me; Well, Madam, said
she, how comes it he is gone, without naming to you the Person you have so much
cause to hate? I must tell you, it is I, and that will surprise you. It really
did so, the word she had spoken having astonished me, I could scarce make her
an answer: You must know then, continued she, that having told me he had been
obliged on the account of my Son to change his thoughts of you, and engage
himself to another Beauty; I pressed him for your sake to tell me who it was;
and after a long refusal, he had the insolence to tell me, 'twas I. You may
imagine how I used him on such an occasion: However, I was of Opinion, that a
little more than ordinary complaisance I had expressed for him, had given him
that Confidence. But finding him sensible of his error, I was a little better
pacified, and let him see he was mistaken on all hands. That he should not have
quitted the design of serving you, being unquestionably the best deserving in
this Court of Passion, and esteem of a Person of his Quality, and that he was
very ill advised to make addresses to me, who was neither for Gallant, nor
Gallantry. I was no stranger to the Character of this Lady, and knew very well
what she said was quite contrary to the inclinations of her temper. And having
had leisure while she spoke, to recover my self from the astonishment she had
cast me in at the beginning of this Discourse, and to observe the alteration of
her Countenance, I made no doubt of her perfidiousness. This, Madam, said I
very seriously, was to engage further in my concerns than I deserved, and in
truth than I desired. You had formerly told me, this young Gentleman would have
pleased you, had you been as I; and since he preferred you before me, it was
too much for you to part with him for my sake. I did, says she, but what I
ought both for you and my self. This, Madam, replied I, is a piece of more than
ordinary Friendship; and I question very much, whether among the best Friends
of our Sex, the pleasure of being beloved by a Person whom all the Ladies of
the Court own to be the handsomest and best accomplished in Naples, would not
prevail over their Friendship, and make it appear that one Woman seldom
scruples to be treacherous to another in cases of this Nature. But, Madam,
methinks what you now say, is somewhat contrary to what you formerly told me of
the Passion of the Marquess then wholly for me, I thought so then, I confess,
said she, but I was mistaken. And is it not possible, you should be now also
mistaken, answered I, for I have some reason to doubt it. You do but deceive
your self, replied she. Well, Madam, said I with some heat, let us try which of
us is deceived; peradventure it will appear in this Billet I received from him.
Whereupon I fell to the opening of it. The Lady much surpised, asked me, if it
came from the Marquess. I told her, it did; and that nothing but the curiosity
I had to clear this Affair, could have prevailed with me to take it from him,
Alas, says she, what assurance can that give you of the inclinations of a Man
who changes them every moment; and will, it may be, tell you the same he has
told me already. I was in such haste to open the Letter, that I made her no
answer, but fell to reading it, being to this purpose.

How great an unhappyness is it, Madam, in matter of Affection, and great
trouble of Heart, to follow other Counsels than those of our Passion! Never was
Person so deeply in Love, as I was with you, from the day I first had the
happiness to see you. And I may very well affirm, I continue so still,
notwithstanding the many Oaths I have been forced to the contrary. But some
Persons, whom I had not the least cause to suspect of design, having taken the
pains to represent your humor so haughty and insensible, that I almost despair
of gaining your esteem, I was obliged to address my self to some more indulgent
Beauty; not out of inconstancy, but to cure my self of a Passion, the
consequence whereof I extremely apprehend. Those who advised me to it, were so
kind as to condescend to serve me in it: And the truth is, their Compliance was
such, being Persons of Quality, that had not I desired their Assistance, I
could not have refused it. But, Madam, there are some evils for which there is
no Remedy. That which your Eyes have done me is of this nature. If I have
committed a fault, in entertaining thoughts of breaking my Chains, I smart for
it more cruelly than you can desire. I know not to what extremity my grief
would drive me for the time I have lost, were it not for the hope I have to
redeem it. Be pleased, Madam, to give me leave to wait upon you with more Love
than ever, and by serious Repentance to deface those ill impressions my error
have wrought on you, concerning the constancy of my Affection. For should you
be more haughty and insensible than you have been represented, yet I am
resolved to die altogether yours.

Hippolito.


Ah, Traitor, cried the Viceroy's Lady, as soon as I had done reading the
Billet, is it possible he should have the Confidence to justify the most
visible inconstancy man was ever guilty of, and to accuse others of it? Madam,
said I without any Passion, it is fit we should hear him speak for himself; and
if you please to stay, we will send for him, and see how he will defend himself
against you. Alas, says she, what should I stay for? I am not otherwise
concerned than on your account. You may now do as you please, but if you will
be advised by me, see him no more. That must not be Madam, replied I, though it
were but to know who they are he speaks of in the Billet; I must see him once
more, and then I shall understand what measures to take. I had hardly done
speaking, but the Murquess came in. He thought without doubt the Viceroy's Lady
would not have favored me so long with her company, after he had been gone;
and the impatience he had to know how I took what he wrote in the Billet, or
perhaps to tell me what made me so earnest to be informed of, made him
presently return. He was not a little surprised to find us together. He was
just stepping back to be gone, but I prayed him to come in. The Viceroy's Lady
seeing him, and confounded at the sight of him, or for fear I would put him
upon making the discovery before her, as I had certainly done in the condition
things were in, stood up, and taking him by the hand, turning toward me: I
have something (said she) to tell him; after which you may satisfy your self.
This action of hers moved more my pity than my jealousy. I know very well she
was not a Woman of the best, conduct in the World, but I should never have
imagined her Passion could have carried her so far (after all she had said to
me) as to make her give in my presence such an instance of her weakness. I let
them go without saying a word to one or other, but expected to see the Marquess
again, and assured my self of very pleasant divertisement by what he should
tell me of the Lady: But he came not at all that day, which angered me not a
little. On the morrow I perfectly recovered. My malady was a pure effect of
jealousy and vexation, and when I knew how matters stood, I was soon cured of
both: Not but that I had reason to fear the Viceroy's Lady. But the sorry
course I saw her take, and her pitiful conduct, secured me from the
apprehension of any harm she could do me: I was well enough to appear at Court,
but hearing there was a Ball at night, I resolved to be sick one day more, that
I might steal at night in Masquerade to the Ball, and there speak with the
Marquess. My design took not, for he came not thither all the while I stayed.
But by reason of my going to and fro to seek him out, the Viceroy's Lady knew
me, and being Alarmed at my Disguise, followed me to my Chamber, where I was
amazed to see her, and could not believe it was she. Well, and what News of the
Marquess, said she? I must know that of you, Madam, answered I, for I have not
seen him since yesterday, when you denied me the pleasure to discourse him one
moment in a business you and I were sufficiently concerned to be satisfied in.
I believe, replied she, you are not now to seek for satisfaction. How can that
be, replied I, when I have not spoken with him ever since. It is reported
however answered she, you were this Evening together in Masquerade. Those, said
I, who report it, are very much mistaken; but I must beg your pardon, Madam, if
I tell you there is not any one but you capable of such a mistake. I know what
becomes me, and there are but few who make a doubt of it: Persons of my Honor
are seldom guilty of such faults. The Viceroy's Lady having a desire to vex and
fall out with me, never gave over till I had told her part of my mind, and let
her understand I was not to be fooled by her. The truths I told her, madded her
to that degree, that she broke out into expressions so cruelly offensive, I
could not forbear crying, and unwilling she should have the pleasure to see the
Tears run down my Cheeks, I rose up to retire into my Closet What, says she, I
interrupt your Meditations in the Charms of your fine Marquess, is not that the
cause of your withdrawing? Or rather, continued she, to provoke me yet more,
are you going to seek him in your Closet where you have hid him? That which you
say, Madam, does so little become you, that nothing but extreme madness could
have made you think so unworthy of me; but I see what pleads your excuse. What,
replied she, I hope I have no great reason to trust her that will not trust me.
And the right I have to over-see and regulate your Conduct gives me the
privilege to visit any place I suspect. With that she took up a Flambeau that
lay lighted on my Table, and went up toward my Closet: I looked upon her with
that slight and indifference as wholly unconcerned at her Action, which angered
her more than any thing I could have said to her. I do not yet know what was
her design; for she knew me too well to have the least suspicion of what she
charged me with, but it seems she was resolved to try me to the utmost, and be
revenged of me that way. In the mean time, by very ill Fortune for me, the
Marquess was in the Closet, and she was the first that discovered him; she
shrieked out with the surprise of it, which made me turn about that way, and
put me into such a fright, that together with the displeasure that accident
gave me, cast me into a swoon, and made me fall as dead upon the Bed near which
I then stood. The Marquess, seized with true or feigned grief for his being the
cause of so unhappy an accident, begged my pardon on his Knees with Tears in
his Eyes. What the Lady said to this I know not, but one of my Chamber-Maids,
who came to help me, told me she saw her go out so angry, that fire seemed to
sparkle out of her Eyes. When I was come to my self, I saw her not, but the
Marquess kneeling before me with a countenance so sad and so dejected, it
melted me into pity, and e^sed me of more than half of my anger. What have you
done, Sir, said I? you have utterly ruined me. Go and see me no more but at
seasonable Hours, and when every body might see me; after which, though I was
very well pleased with his Company, I prayed him to withdraw, to prevent
further occasion of Discourse.

I am sensible, dear Assen, I spend too much time in relating particulars so
inconsiderable, and abuse your Patience in entertaining you with such trifles.
But this having been the best of my time in that Court, and best part of my
story, you will excuse the difficulty I find in my self to come to the relation
of Accidents so shameful for me, that the memory of them is more terrible than
Death. Assen having answered; that all she had said was very material; and that
he thought himself equally concerned in the smallest Circumstances of her Life,
as well as the greatest, she proceeded in this manner.

The Viceroy's Lady having fallen out with me, and finding reason enough of
difference with the Marquess, who in spite of her visited me often, you may
believe she past her time very melancholy and sad. The first time the Marquess
came to see me, I insisted, that if he designed to please me he should begin to
do it by telling me in particular all the kindness and caresses past between
the Viceroy's Lady and him. But he entreated me with so much Ingenuity, not to
make use of the power I had over him, to oblige him to a thing so mean, that
his Discretion prevailed over my Curiosity, and made me esteem him the better
for it: however he let me know 'twas of her he spoke in the Billet, as I had
easily guessed. The disconsolate Lady, who could not but be concerned for us,
was willing to seek Peace, and having found a fair pretense for it, sent me
word by one of her Women, that I might do her a pleasure if I would give her a
Visit, which I failed not to do. She received me cheerfully, and with smiles in
her Countenance, she being an Excellent Mistress of the Art of Dissembling,
after some Civilities showed me, she brought me to the Closet, where beginning
her Discourse with a very great sigh, Well, my dear Elenor, said she, are you
still angry with me? I am heartily sorry, Madam, said I, that you gave me
cause, who never deserved it. Come, let us agree, said she, to say nothing of
what is past, and give me leave to let you see I am your Friend. It is that I
desired, Madam, replied I; and the Honor I have always had for you, must needs
make you believe your Friendship very precious and dear to me. It Is enough,
said she; come tell me presently, if there were a proposal of Marriage between
the Marquess and you; do you love him so well, as not to refuse him? Such a
Proposal from her appeared very suspicious, and seeing me laugh, as one who
would not be caught in that Trap, I do not speak to you now (continued she, as
a Rival) as you have believed me to be, and as perhaps (added she smiling) I
have formerly been; but as your true and sincere Friend I tell you, that if you
desire to Marry the Marquess, it shall be your fault if it be not done; with
that she showed me a Letter from the Viceroy to my Father, written to that
purpose at the request of the Marquess, and said, your Father has so much
respect for my Husband, that there is no doubt but it will take effect; the
Marquess having desired my leave to speak of it to the Viceroy: and finding by
the Character of the Letter, they endeavored in good earnest to unite me to a
Man who was furnished with all I could wish, as well for a settlement, as to
please my affection; I was ravished with Joy, but let it appear as little as I
could, mistrusting my Fortune, especially being in the hands of a Person who
would dearly repent it, before it could be effected. I thanked her with the
most acknowledging and affectionate expressions I could invent; and there
passed so many Caresses on the one side and on the other, that you would have
thought we had never been so great Friends before. At my return I found the
Marquess in my Chamber, where he waited to bring me this pleasing News, with a
Countenance full of Joy; and that the Viceroy had given him free liberty to
visit me. I told him I had heard all this from a Person he could not easily
guess, and in truth it was hardly credible it should be the Viceroy's Lady. I
told him it was she, and related all our Discourse.

The Liberty granted the Marquess to visit me when he pleased, having heightened
the affection we had one for another, degenerated by degrees into a kind and
tender familiarity. He took a little more upon him than had been allowed him,
and more indeed than I ought to have permitted him. But it is hard for one in
Love, so deeply as I was, to be proof against the Amorous assaults of a Man she
expects to be her Husband on the Morrow. At first I made resistance enough, and
would not so much as give him my hand to kiss; but Love blinds so, that he does
insensibly lead us away, and accustom us to things we never durst think of.
After the first blush, the rest follows of course. We expected with equal
impatience my Fathers answer. We were already mutually engaged, so that if his
answer should not have proved favorable, we were resolved to complete our
happiness: Such engagements given to save a Maids Honor, are but snares Love
lays for her Virtue. The Marquess, as all true Lovers, being impatiently
earnest for the possession of my Person as well as Affection, whereof he was
assured, and fearing cross Accidents that might hinder our Bliss, let me know,
amongst some little favors I allowed him to take, that he was very desirous to
obtain of my gift what I had forbid him to hope without my Fathers consent; and
that if I loved him, I would make it appear in obliging him in that particular.
I made as if I did not understand him, but by degrees he spoke so intelligibly,
that I was under the necessity of being very angry with him, or of defending my
self with Arguments: Finding it impossible to be angry with a Man I loved, I
fell to Disputing, but he was too hard for me. And certainly, in matters of
Love, a Maid that comes to reasoning, is in danger of being lost. However our
combat lasted long enough, to make me fancy I had satisfied my humor; but at
last I must yield. I thought there needed not so much caution, with a person
who had given the Viceroy his word that he would marry me, and assured me, (as
I believed) by a thousand Oaths, that he would make me his Wife. He was to come
to me in my Chamber at night, an hour after all should be in bed; and because
my Chamber was near that of the Viceroys Ladies, where I had liberty of
entrance at my pleasure, I told him I would leave the door open, and prayed him
not to make a noise, or speak a word, lest the Lady should hear us. You see,
Assen, I conceal nothing from you; though I might allege many reasons in
excuse of my fault. I cannot tell you all this without blushing; for I must
confess had I been more wise, or more prudent, I could not have been so
unfortunate as I am. The Viceroy was gone that day out of Town; all things
seemed to favor us, but it was for my ruin. The hour was come, and I heard a
man entering softly into my Chamber, for there was no light to see him by, and I
easily believed it was my dear Servant. I received him with the kindness of a
Woman in Love, and made no doubt but it was he; for he had the same imbroider'd
Wastcoat, which he had caused to be made against our Wedding, being one of the
richest ever seen in the Court. Part of the night we passed in an amorous
silence, till at last he fell asleep. As for me, I found my self a little
indisposed, and wanting a light to find something to take, I ventured to go
into the Ladies Chamber, which commonly had a watch-light burning all night.
Having opened the door from my Chamber to hers, I was not a little surprised,
when approaching the watch-light, and casting my eyes toward her to see if she
were a-sleep, the Curtains being all open because of the hot weather, I saw a
man in his clothes lying by her. I doubted very much whether it were best to go
back whence I came, or take away the watch-light; but the need I had of this
prevailed with me to go on, and light the candle I had in my hand; and having
seen so much, I was possessed with a Spirit of curiosity to know who that
fortunate Gallant might be; I perceived him in the habit of Marquess Hippolito.
I was surpised at the adventure, and had I not been fully persuaded I had
newly left him in my Chamber, I do not know what extravagances I might have run
into. However this Circumstance inflamed my desire of knowing who it was. I
perceived he was of the same stature with the Marquess, and had the same hair;
the Ladies arm was over his face, so that I could not see it. I was at the beds
feet, and could not be mistaken; I trembled all over, as an Omen of my
misfortune. Heavens! said I within my self, am I awake or asleep? is not that
the Marquess? could he quit me this night to come to this Lady? perhaps they
held correspondence together, and she knew he was to pass this night with me.
All these Reflections were made in a moment, and the next moment after that, I
came into my own Chamber, to find out the truth. But how was I astonished to
find the Marquess there too? Oh Heavens! cried I, which of the two is the
counterfeit? And drawing near him in my Chamber, I perceived by the color of
his Hair, how unhappily I was deceived, and that it was Don Alphonso was there.
What a Fury, what Rage did this put me in? I seiz d the Poniard he had laid on
my Table, and not knowing with which of the three to begin, being all equally
perfidious, I thought the Marquess as most criminal, was first to be sacrificed
to my just revenge, for fear of an Escape. So that I went into the other
Chamber; but the noise that I made, having awaked Don Aphonso, he was amazed to
see a Light, and perceiving me enter his Mothers Chamber, he got up in a trice,
and frightened at the sight of the Poniard in my Hand, he ran after me, and laid
hold on me by the Arm, just as I was going to stab that Traitor the Marquess;
but he was also sufficiently surpised to see me lifting up my hand to kill the
Marquess, lying by his Mothers side. He was enraged at the sight, and to wash
away the stain of his Family with the blood of the Traitor, was ready to
execute that vengance he had hindered me to take; but I staid him, and throwing
my self upon him, Traitor, said I, this blow was not reserved for thee, thou
shall not have the pleasure of being first revenged. At these words, and the
bustle that we made, the Marquess and the Viceroy's Lady awaking, were at their
wits end, not knowing what resolution to take. The Marquess judging that the
Poniard Don Alphonso had in his Hand, threatened only him, made use of the time
I held him, to lay hold of his own, and stand on his Guard. I left them in this
furious Disorder, hoping they would sufficiently revenge one on another, for
their Treason against me; and re-entring my Chamber, I shut the door on that
side, and having taken with me all that was considerable in money or Jewels, I
went out at another door, and ran through the Streets like a mad Woman, to seek
a Felucca in the Port, to carry me to any place my despair would lead me. I was
so unhappy as not to find one ready, and had not the patience to stay, for fear
of being pursued, and forced back to that Court, where I had rather die than
appear. At last with much ado I found a Barque bound for Barcellona; provided
they went far enough from Italy, and that my Name and my Birth were concealed,
I cared not whither they carried me; so that I went on board, without taking a
moment to consider. It Is not a single Accident makes us unfortunate; the
greatest disasters have commonly a large train of misfortunes: Thus far my soul
entertained not a thought, but what the transports of despair and resentment
had suggested. But when I saw my self at Sea, and in no other Company than that
of five or six poor Mariners, who knew not what to think of me, my heart was so
full, that nothing could ease it but a torrent of tears. I will not trouble you
with a Relation of the sad thoughts I had for two or three days that I had the
opportunity of a solitary entertainment; but on the fourth I found my self
plunged into new afflictions. About Sunrising the Seamen put up such a
lamentable cry, it almost broke my heart: I thought we had been Shipwrack'd,
and asked what the matter was, more out of curiosity than any fear of death,
being the thing I heartily wished for. I found the Galleys of Biserti had us in
Chase, and took us an hour after: I received this disaster with such
tranquillity of spirit, as really astonished all the Spectators. All my fear was
for my person, having fallen into the hands of men who are the most barbarous
and inhumane on earth, and have no respect for our Sex. However, whether it was
my particular good fortune, or that they had some regard for a Woman which
appeared of more than ordinary Quality, I may truly say, that setting aside the
haughtiness and rudeness of their first approach, in forcing open the door of
my Cabin with their feet; I was better used than the rest, and more favorably
than I expected. As soon the Soldiers saw me, not one of them entered; only the
Captain of the Galley took that liberty, and very civilly asked me in Italian
who I was, and for what place I was bound. I hid from him both my Name and my
Quality, telling him, I was called Laura, and went for Barcellona to my Father;
then in the service of the King of Spain. Then I put into his hand a little
Box, in which were my Money and my Jewels; and the more to oblige him, I told
him I made him a Present worth above twenty thousand Crowns (as in truth it
was) and that I might have thrown it overboard, as most of the Seamen had done
their Clothes and their Merchandise. The acknowledgment I desired of him, was
that I might be civilly used; which he promised me, and the same time told me,
I should say nothing of the Box, assuring me of a share at our arrival at
Tunis. I was ravished at this Conjuncture, not so much for the hopes he gave me
of restoring part of my Jewels, but because this secret rendered me useful and
necessary to the Captain, and obliged him to a greater care of me. And the
truth is, I had no reason to complain; he caused me to be presently carried
aboard his Galley, and gave me his own Cabin, and never came into it till we
arrived at Biserti. Our Voyage was not long; we had a great Calm, and having in
three days gained the Cape of Carthage, we got safe into the Port of Biserti;
where being landed, I was put into a kind of Litter carried by a Camel, and so
carried to Tunis, under a Guard of five or six Horsemen. I fell to the Bassa's
share, who, joyful of it, made a Present of me to his Lady.

Thus you have, dear Assen, the fortune of a Maid born of an illustrious
Family, and to a plentiful Estate, as you very well know. The Turk being
perfectly acquainted with the condition of her Family, could not sufficiently
admire the strangeness of her fate, and assured her of his best endeavors to
make her more happy for the future, and to gain her liberty to return to her
Country, which she had no cause to scruple; That the Accident at Naples was a
disaster to be remedied by her Marriage with the Son of the Viceroy, who
doubtless would be glad of it: That if it should fall out otherwise, she had
many excellencies and advantages to comfort her against all the disasters of
her life: That her misfortune in the Neapolitan Court could not be laid to her
fault, but the infamous Treason of a Man, who sooner or later was sure to be
punished for his Crime. In a word, after long discourse to this purpose, he
renewed protestations of his readiness to serve her, and to leave no stone
unturned to free her from her misery: That he had many good Friends about the
Dey, and was very well assured he could not take any sinister resolution
against her, but he must have notice of it time enough to prevent, or escape
it. Laura was not wanting to her duty of gratitude, for these signal
testimonies of Affection to her Family and her; and could not sufficiently
thank Heaven, that in the midst of her misfortunes she had met a Man so devoted
to her Service, and of unquestionable fidelity.

Thus Assen left her a little comforted against the malignity of her destiny,
and promised to come again, and pass part of the night following with her,
being obliged that day to wait on the Dey, to see how Matters were carried.

The End of the Second Part.
THE HAPPY SLAVE. The Third Part
ASSEN got home, but was extremely astonished the Moor was not returned: he
went to Bed, but had very bad rest, fearing some ill accident had befallen the
Moor. And considering of what dangerous consequence it might be to him in the
present conjuncture, to be found to have held correspondence with Mahomet, he
began to repent he had so rashly exposed himself to discovery. The thought of
this kept him from sleeping; but at length the Moor arrived, and having given
him an account what had staid him so long, dissipated his fears, and quieted
his Spirits.

Assen was satisfied, took the Bassa's Letter, read it; and instantly
dispatched the Moor back again, it being a pretty while before Day, and a
fitter time than at the fourth Watch, as the Bassa had appointed by his Letter.

The Bassa was surpised to see the Moor so quickly returned; but having heard
the reason, he was not displeased, but hid him in his Tent; and as soon as it
was night, sent him in search of his General confident and dearest Friend the
Master of the Galleys. Romadan, says he to him, with some disorder in his
looks, what think you of me when I tell you I intend to lie at Tunis to night?
I must tell you Sir, says Romadan the Master of the Galleys, I think you too
wise to expose your self to that hazard, without assurance from our Friends
there, that they will open you the Gates; nor do I believe you can take
pleasure in putting your Country to Fire and Sword. You understand me not,
replies the Bassa, when I tell you I design to lie at Tunis to night, it is not
to execute my just vengeance against it; I am too tender of the Blood of my
Friends, to revenge my self by night, when I cannot distinguish my Friend from
my Foe; I speak of going thither, only attended by a Moor I have here, to speak
with Assen, to learn what passed at the Divan, to enter the Castle, see Laura,
and return. Romadan heard him with that attention and silence, which
sufficiently expressed his wonder and astonishment. He thought it unnecessary
to use reasons to dissuade him from a design so rash and extravagant. The Bassa
who read in his looks the substance of what he might have said to him. I
confess, says he, I expose my self to some hazard, and that it is imprudence,
or (you may call it) folly to run such a risque; but that matters not, and to
ease you of the fear of being charged for not telling me what you think of the
business, I declare to you, I sent not for you to ehav your advice, whether I
ought to put it in execution or not, for that is already resolved. The story
they tell me of my Wife, that she is gone away with the Christian, and that
Laura is at home with the Dey, are the things that prevail with me, nothing but
a sight of her, can convince me it is true; the more I think of it, the more it
perplexes me: I would be satisfied at least how the business was carried, and
there is no knowing it but by the Slave. However, were the reasons I have told
you not sufficient to make you approve of the design, I cannot refuse an
irresistible passion to so small a compliance.

The Bassa having said this, held his peace, in expectation of Romadan's
answer, who having for some time fixed his eyes on the ground, lift them up on
the sudden, saying, God preserve you Sir from the mischief you run into; but if
it be so ordained, you cannot avoid your destiny. Then he showed him the many
obstacles and dangers he should meet with before he could get to Assen. How
impossible it was to effect some of the things he desired; that he could not
enter the Castle without being discovered, and that for a sight of a Christian
Girl his Slave, he hazarded the ruin of himself, his friend, and his party,
that a little patience would make him master of his designs without pains or
danger. The Bassa, instead of being persuaded by Romadan's reasons, expressed
by his countenance a visible impatience to hear a discourse so unnecessary and
useless after the resolution he had taken. His passion tempted him to try his
fortune, and deprived him of patience as incompatible with love.

The night being pretty well advanced, he disguised himself the best he could;
and having given Romadan such orders as were necessary, that his absence might
not be perceived, he went away with the Moor, who led him a way he came the
night before: they entered the Town without meeting any, but being hard by
Assen's House, they fell among a company of People belonging to the Divan, the
Bassa's sworn Enemies: But by good fortune he passed undiscovered, for which he
was obliged to the Moor, who being a witty fellow, told those who would have
staid them, that he was one sick of the Plague, whom he had in charge to carry
to the Pesthouse. This made them stand at a distance, and give them free
passage; though that disease be not so dreadful there as in other places, being
very common and ordinary in those parts.

The Bassa was glad of so easy an escape; and when he got to Assen's, he
rewarded the Moor according to the merit of so considerable a service.

Assen was abroad at the Bassa's arrival, but was extremely surprised at his
return to see the Bassa there. Ah! Sir, said he, embracing him, is it possible
you would hazard your self thus? it might have been excusable in a hare-brain'd
young fellow, who had nothing to lose but his life, but for a man of your
prudence and conduct, (being the second Person of the Kingdom) to come, without
design perhaps, at least without necessity, to throw your self into your
Enemies hands, and expose your life to a thousand dangers. This Sir, how ill
soever you take it, is a thing I can never pardon you: For Sir, adds he, what
could have obliged you to hazard your self thus?

The Bassa fell a laughing, and taking all in good part that was spoken by
Assen, whose kindness he was assured of, asked him if he had ever been in love,
and whether he knew not that love had made the greatest of men guilty of
faults, and that those faults had always their pardon. But Sir, said Assen,
what have you to do with love? is it not Laura you are in love with? and is not
she in the Castle? Yes, replies the Bassa, but being in your custody, it cannot
be impossible to have a sight of her. Assen would have dissuaded him from the
design, as the most extravagant and rash he had ever enterprized; but prevailed
no more than the master of the Galleys. Strength of reason and fear of dangers
are obstacles too weak to stop the progress of a passionate Lover. Love feeds
upon hope, and death is not half so formidable as the happiness of seeing a
Mistress is charming and pleasant. The Bassa resolved, whatever befell him, to
go into the Castle. But it was impossible to do it by Night, the Gates being
then open only for Assen, and others the Dey's principal Officers. So that it
must of necessity be between Nine in the Morning and Six at Night; and the
strict Examination they used in that time would have cooled any Man but the
Bassa from proceeding in so disperate a design. But those Southern Lovers are
too hot to be coold by Obstructions that appear invincible to others. Assen
told him, he had no better way than to put him into one of the Meal-sacks he
had order to send into the Castle on the morrow in a Cart. The Bassa was
content, and thought it an excellent invention; and that there could be no
danger in it at all. Having resolved on this, they past part of the Night in
Discourse of the present posture of Affairs, what past at the Divan, what
designs the Dey had, what Forces were raised, and such other particulars as
were necessary for the Bassa to know. After this, they went to Bed, where Assen
took his rest; but as for Mahomet, he had no mind to sleep, he dreamt waking of
the happiness of seeing the fair Laura on the morrow.

At length the day appeared, and the Cart was loaded with Meal-sacks for the
Castle, and among them the Bag with the Bassa in it, was so placed, that he lay
pretty conveniently. The Moor led the Horses, and Assen walked at some distance
before; the Castle-gate was opened, and no search made in the Cart, the Dey's
Secretary was Personally Convoy to. They past freely to the Magazin of
Victuals, where several Moors instantly attended to unload; but Assen very
dexterously got rid of them, sending them away on several Errands. This was well
for the Bassa, who having been almost stifled in the Bag, had untyed it, to
take a little breath, and had certainly been discovered, had those Moors staid
in the Magazin. Assen left him there all that day, not thinking it fit to bring
him to Laura till Night; so that he locked him up there, took the Key in his
Pocket, and went to the Dey's Palace to learn what News.

Poor Laura being all day alone, thought it very long, and with great
impatience wished for the Night, that she might have a sight of her dear Friend
Assen. At length the hour came he usually visited her, but no news of Assen,
which troubled her extremely. At last, she heard the Door open, and rising to
meet him, Did you but know, Assen, says she, the Sufferings I lie under in the
condition I am in, having no Friend but you, you would not have made me pine so
long for a sight of you; for in good truth, I am half dead with staying for
you. Assen fell a laughing, and turning about to the Bassa, who followed him,
here is one, says he, knows how to bring you to Life again, and I doubt not but
for his sake you will pardon my long stay. Assen had not told the Bassa of the
Ancient intimate Acquaintance he had with Laura; this made him interrupt her so
quickly, to make her take notice of him. But he was so white all over with
lying in the Meal-sack, that she took him for one of Assen's Men; but seeing
him laugh, she viewed him more narrowly, and knew him, Oh Heavens! is it you,
Sir, says she. Oh? whither are you come in search of an unfortunate wretch,
which has already given you so much trouble, and too great cause of complaint!
It is easy, answers the Bassa, to pardon those we love. But is it possible you
are here, and that the Sultaness is gone away in your stead? tell me, was it
she that betrayed you, or was it Alexander? I know not what to think of it; but
when I consider his proceedings in this last adventure, I cannot suspect him
tracherous. For 'twas not his fault I discovered not the Sultataness, it was I
hindered him to take off her Barnus, that I might see her. However, if he loved
you, I am sufficiently Revenged of you, for you have lost more than I; and if
he was false to you, you may comfort your self with the assurance of the
affection of a Person not so unworthy of your favor as he was. These last
words put Laura to the blush; but making no answer to them, As for me, Sir,
said she, I neither lost a Lover in him, nor have cause to charge him with
falsehood, but must lay on my ill Fortune all the blame of my being left behind
him. You surprise me much, replies the Bassa, and make me conclude you an
excellent Dissembler, or my self the most abused Man in the World. Call to
mind, Sir, says Laura, What I told you so often, that my affection for
Alexander was very indifferent; and to be taken off when I pleased. The Ladies
of your Country differ very much from those of Christendom in their course of
Love; yours are very susceptible, easily take impression, and are equally
unconstant. Ours are more shi^ of engaging in Love, but when engaged, their
love is more lasting. You believed me a Turk, and several times did me Honors,
due only to the Sultaness whom you often mistook for me. The Sultaness, replies
the Bassa, much surpised at the News. The very same, Sir, says Laura, for it is
now time to disabuse you; and since I may justly glory to have made of my
Passion for Alexander a Sacrifice to her Love, I may now be allowed to declare
it, when she is out of all danger of inconvenience by my owning it. The
Sultaness, Sir, continued she, more affected than I with the good qualities of
that Christian, looked upon him as worthy of her Love. But permit me to say,
you may thank your self for it, who first sought out the means to gain the
Honor of finding a Gallant for your Lady. You may believe, replies the Bassa,
I designed no such matter, yet I pardon it in a Woman I had no kindness for.
But the falseness of the Christian was unpardonably base, who besides the
regard he should have had for the daily favors I did him* ought to have
observed at least the Laws of Hospitality. The Sultaness, Sir, said Laura, had
a Beauty of power to corrupt the most upright of Men; and had she been another
Wife, I durst not have undertaken for your integrity in the case. I had a
desire to see the Christian; you brought him into the Seraglio; she had a sight
of him: He was handsome, she loved him, and told him so; what could he do? The
Bassa could not forbear laughing at her relating the story. And it is all the
concern the Turks express for the falseness of their Wives, especially those
they have no love for, having Seraglio's well stored, and the privilege to
change Wives at pleasure. The Bassa very patiently took the loss of his
Sultaness, and told Laura it must be her fault if he should not be now more
happy than ever. The subtle Slave, very sensible how useful he might be to her
in the present conjuncture, thought it unseasonable to give him a repulse, but
resolved to manage to advantage so good an overture; she told him only, that
was not a time to make Love. You see, Sir, continues she, I am here in a
Prison, I know not how to get out of. But I know how to do it, replies the
Bassa haughtily; and if within three days you be not at Liberty, I Will fill the
Streets of this Town with the Bodies of the Inhabitants. Ah Sir! answers Laura,
that were the way not to save me, but to hasten my Death. And it being known I
am the cause of this Disorder, you may easily guess what Mercy I shall find. If
you have, Sir, any value for my Life, since it may be saved without shedding
Blood, and that matters are now in a way of accommodation, let me entreat you
not to think of those horrible extremities. Believe me, says the Bassa, it is
their design to amuse me, till the Troops they expect from Tripoly be arrived;
but I shall take Order for that, and if you will prevent inconveniences that
may happen, you must resolve to get out hence this Evening, and go along with
me. Get out hence, Sir, replies Laura, and how shall it be done, out of a
Castle where I am under Guard, and have so many Gates to pass? You see, says
the Bassa, spite of all those Guards, and those Gates, I have entered, and
resolve to get out again; and may not you so too? But, Sir, says Laura,
consider I am a Woman, and however disguised, may be easily discovered by my
gate, or my stature; and the least obstacle we meet with, will put me into such
a fright, will infallibly ruin both you and me. Assen fortified her Reasons
with his, and absolutely condemned the Enterprise proposed, as exposing the
Bassa and her to apparent danger of inevitable ruin. You shall see, Sir, adds
he, by the difficulty you and I shall find to get out, the trouble we should
have to get a Woman along with us. I am of Opinion with the rest of your
Friends, it is best to come to an accommodation. The Troops from Tripoly will be
long a coming, and if you keep the Town straightly blocked up a few days
longer, you will oblige the People to Petition the Dey to make Peace, which we
of your Party will not fail to help forward: And the Dey being of a timorous
irresolute temper, will be glad of the pretense to come to an Agreement.

The Bassa, though more inclined to violent than moderate actions, yielded this
time to the persuasion of two Persons who were the dearest to him of any, and
whose interest he knew it was not to give him any Counsel to his disadvantage.
He told them he would stay a Week longer, but if in that time neither the
Threats nor Intercession of his Friends should prevail, he would make use of
some Stratagem to reduce the Town; and if that failed, he would employ all his
Force to bring the Dey to Reason.

Assen was easily induced to assent to all this, knowing the Town was ill
provided of Corn, and that the Inhabitants began already to be straightened, and
murmured at the exigences they were reduced to, and not without cause, although
it was given out these murmurs were raised by those of the Bassa's Party, in
favor of his designs.

The Bassa shifting his Discourse from the general affairs to his private
concerns, desired Laura to give him a particular account of Alexander's Amor
with the Sultaness, which Laura related in the most civil expressions she
could, not forgetting the Adventure in the Chamber of Repose, where the Bassa
had mistaken his Lady for her: the Bassa could hardly believe this, and was
more vexed at it, than all the rest of the story. Then she told him the design
the Sultaness and she had to go both aboard, and why the Sultaness had put her
self into the Basket without acquainting Alexander with her intentions. I do
verily believe it, said the Bassa, for I was in the Chamber when the Basket was
brought in, and feigned it was you; and was unwilling Alexander should do you
the least violence. I gave Order my self to have it carried aboard, and
together with Alexander went along with it to the Port. Assen and Laura could
not forbear laughing. The Bassa told them he was as ready to laugh at it as
they, but that Laura made one of the party, and had a hand in putting the trick
on him. For as for his Wife, the hatred he bore her Father, and the small
kindness he had for her, were sufficient assurances he was not sorry to be rid
of her. But he expected satisfaction from Laura for the ill Offices she had
done him; none being more guilty than she of the Treason of the Sultaness.
Raillery made up the rest of the Discourse, and the Night being far gone,
Assen, not affected as the Bassa with the Charms of Laura, told him it was time
to withdraw. The Bassa entreated him to stay a little longer, and said, while
Night lasted, he thought there was no danger; and that he had not taken so much
pains to enjoy that lovely Girl only for a moment. At last, Laura acquainted
him with the fear she was in, having been so long together, which heightened the
danger; giving the Guards cause to suspect so long an interview, and to stop
his passage if he staid much longer. The Bassa, to satisfy her, retired,
making new protestations of a Passionate Lover, who would rather perish a
thousand times, than not see her delivered from the hands of her Enemies by an
Honorable Peace, or a bloody War.

A new invention must be thought of for the getting out of the Castle, where
the Examination was as strict almost at going out as at entrance. Assen led the
Bassa back again to the Magazin, and having daubed his Face sufficiently with
Meal, laid a parcel of empty Sacks on his shoulders, without any disturbance,
past all the Guards with him, as a Servant of Assen's. It was not yet day; and
the Bassa thought it fit to make use of his time, to return before Morning to
the Camp, where he thought his presence very necessary. Assen bore him company
to the Walls of the Town, and having belp'd him over, took his leave.

Laura longed extremely to hear what was become of him, and could not rest till
she saw Assen. Cheer you, Madam, said he, as he entered her Chamber. The Bassa
is out of danger, and all will be well. Alas! dear Assen, answers she,
peradventure things may go well, but not for me. You will be certainly set at
Liberty, replies Assen, and in very few days. Yes, says Laura, I shall be set
at Liberty from the Dey, to be made Prisoner to the Bassa, whose Passion will
render my Imprisonment a thousand times more unfortunate than my present
restraint. Heard you not what he said? And what will become of me, when in his
power? Ah, Assen, adds she, with Tears in her Eyes, I did but too clearly
foresee the misfortunes that did threaten me, unless Heaven divert them. A
Maid of my Quality had better die a Prisoner, than buy her Liberty at that
rate. Assen sighing for pity, answered, he had already thought of all she said,
and that it was not without cause, he so much opposed the Bassa's designs of
taking her away that Night. That he could have found means enough for it, had
he thought it for her advantage; But that he resolved to represent to her
first, how much harder it would be for her to get out of the Bassa's hands than
the Dey's. And that he was very glad she had first spoken of it; that he would
keep his word with her, to do her all the Service he could, to help her back
into her Country; that he was very sensible it was as much as his Fortune was
worth, and perhaps his Life; both which he must hazard in the case: but that he
never scrupled to expose the one, or the other, but was ready to sacrifice both
for the interest of a Family he was more indebted to; and that he was very
willing to return among the Christians, whose Religion and Customs he loved far
better than those of his Country.

This ushered in a long Discourse of the Business in hand; the Conclusion was,
that Assen should use the interest of his Friends with the Dey, to persuade him
to set Laura at liberty, and send her back into her Country, to prevent the
Confusion to be feared, if he should be obliged to restore her to the Bassa,
and see her supply his Daughter Seat and Room. That, if this would not take, he
should try the utmost extremites, to endeavor the getting her on board a
Brigandine of his, which should be made ready to carry her away with the first
Opportunity. Poor Laura, deeply sensible of the Obligation she had to so honest
a Man, told him more than once, he might assure himself, she would not be
ungrateful for so considerable Services; and that he should never fail of a
Friend while she lived, but might command any thing in the power of her Family.
Assen, who needed no promises to persuade him in this particular, took his
leave; and went to spend the rest of the Night in thinking of the business, for
which his inclination and gratitude were motives sufficiently powerful to
engage his utmost endeavors. He slept not a wink, but as soon as it was day,
he went to visit those he thought to make use of, to speak to the Dey. Of
these, Beyran-Aga, the Dey's Favorite, was one, in whom he placed most
confidence, as most favoring the Christians, and his particular Friend. He
found him ready to serve him, but at the same time, he desired the favor of
seeing the Slave. Assen fearing the effects of her Beauty on a young man, as
the Aga, might obstruct the design, was so far from expressing a willingness to
comply with him, that he strained his invention to find the most specious
pretenses to divert him. Beyran took it for a denial of his Request, and was
somewhat displeased. He thought Assen was in Love with her, and told him only,
he would do him all the Service in his power to persuade the Dey to give the
fair Slave her Liberty. But the truth is, he endeavored it but coldly; so that
either the Dey believed, a time might come he might give Laura in exchange for
his Daughter, or that the Bassa loving her as he did (in case of necessity) to
make Peace with him, would for her sake grant him better Conditions, he was not
of Opinion with Assen's Friends, who advised him to be rid of her.

Assen much troubled his project had failed, resolved to put himself into a
condition of stealing her away, hoping to effect it as a thing depending
entirely on himself. Beyran whose desires to see Laura increased, by the
difficulty he found of obtaining it from Assen, would not ask it of him the
second time; but went straight to the Dey, to beg leave to see her, under
pretense of learning from her, the truth of what was reported concerning the
Sultaness, and the Christian, who was fled. The Dey too well assured of the
amor betwixt them, by the evidence of the Moor, who carried the Basket; and of
several Women of the Seraglio, and other Circumstances, little needed further
Information. But Beyran being his Favorite, and thinking his request proceeded
merely from curiosity of seeing the fair Slave, he granted it; and gave order
to Laura's Guards to let him see her.

This Favorite had heard the Slave was very handsome, but could not learn how
long she had been at Tunis, nor how taken; fortune having so ordered it, that
he addressed his inquiry to Persons that could give him no certain account.

Assen had been busy that day, arming his Brigandine under pretense of sending
her a cruising, and commanded his People, being almost all Christian Slaves, to
be ready at the Cape of Carthage to sail with the first Orders. Laura was
disposed the the night before, to venture passing the Sea in that little
Vessel: The weather was fair, the Season pleasant, and they hoped, if the wind
served, to reach the ^sle of St. Peter in two days. Assen goes to visit her,
and finds her trembling for fear: Madam, says he, this is not a time to
tremble, but to arm your self with Resolution and Courage. I am a Woman, Assen,
answers she, and one unhappy enough to have cause to fear the worst, both for
you and my self. Assen endeavored to hearten her, saying, she should be set at
liberty on the morrow, and that he would take her out of the Castle without
difficulty or danger. Laura was in fear still, and so much disordered, she knew
not where to begin to provide for her escape; when on the sudden, she heard her
Chamber door open, and turning about, saw a man enter, which frightened her so
(apprehending a discovery) that she fell in a Swoon with these words in her
mouth; Ah! Lord we are undone! Assen extremely surprised at the accident, and
the Moor foreseeing the Aga, knew not what to think might occasion his coming
thither, believing it could not be, but in behalf of the Dey. Both Beyran and
he were busy about Laura, holding her up, but of the two Beyran seemed most
concerned. He viewed and reviewed her Countenance, her stature, her hair, her
hands, with a diligence and trouble too extraordinary, not to surprise Assen to
whom he had not yet said a word. But all on the sudden, giving free passage to
a thousand sighs, his surprise had stopped or suspended: Oh Heavens! Cries he as
a man transported, it is she, it is she, my Dear Eleanor. And at the same time
falling down at her knees, embraced them with that tenderness and height of
affection, you would have thought he would have died there for joy. These words
and transports, and hearing him call her Eleanor, surprised Assen, he knew not
whether it was the Aga, he saw there, or some other that had borrowed his
shape. Laura the mean while was pretty welcome to her self, and angry at
seeing at her feet a man she knew on no other account, but that the sight of
him had almost cost her life, struggled the best she could to get from him. But
the Aga, with eyes full of tears, and not able to say a word, held her so much
the faster. Laura extremely astonished, Sir, says she, if this be an effect of
pity, you have for the fortune of an unfortunate Slave, have done (...) to be
so much alarmed at the sight of you. But I thought you came on a design
contrary to my wishes. You little know, Madam, says the Aga, with a languishing
tone, the Person prostrate before you.

Laura, feigning she knew the voice, fixed her eyes on him to take a better
view: Heavens! cries she, what do I see, is it possible it should be he? With
that she falls into a second Swoon into the arms of Assen, who much troubled at
it, entreated the Aga to withdraw a little, fearing the sight of him might be
the death of the poor Maid, not knowing who he was. What say you, says the Aga?
Alas! she knows me too well, being the sole cause of all her misfortunes.
Assen, I know you to be honest, and my very good Friend, and therefore I
apprehend no danger in telling you, she is a Person whose Merits as well as
Birth make her worthy your Care; and one for whom I would lose a thousand Lives
to save her from harm. Assen hearing this, fell from one astonishment to
another, and would have fain cleared the Mystery of the Adventure, but was so
busied with endeavoring to fetch Laura again, that he thought it convenient to
respite the Discourse to a fitter Opportunity. The Aga extremely concerned,
assisted him with extraordinary diligence; and Laura beginning to take breath,
Assen asked her, if she desired that Turk should quit the Room, and told her,
he was the Aga, the Dey's Favorite, he had told her of. She making no answer,
turned her dying Eyes toward the Aga, and with a languishing voice, Ah cruel,
said she, What Fate brought thee hither to persecute me to Death? Beyran could
not hear that Language, without falling the second time at her feet, and
washing them with a torrent of tears, without speaking a word: Leave me
Traitor, says she, leave me, that I may dye in quiet, rather than be deluded
again with thy tears, which deceitfully as they are, have but too strong an
effect on my feeble heart. Assen the spectator of so tender a Scene, having
fresh in memory the story of Laura, with Marquess Hippolito, and Don Alphonso,
knew not what to think of it. The Aga was a Renegado arrived at Tunis a year
before; and Assen fancied he might be one of those Lovers, and rather the
Marquess Hippolito, than Don Alphonso. Laura in the height of her anger, having
expressed a tenderness for him, which she could not have retained, but for one
she had loved. He had a desire to know the bottom of the business, but thought
it unseasonable to interrupt them, and was in hopes this Scence would end in a
discovery of the Mystery. Yet being himself straightened in time, and that they
were fallen into a deep silence, using only expressions of mutual sighs. He
thought fit to say to the Aga (whom he sufficiently perceived no Enemy of
Laura's) Had my former acquaintance with you been too small to give me hopes,
you would not cross the design we have in hand; yet Sir, what I have but now
seen and heard, were enough to persuade me, you will be so far from obstructing
it, that I assure my self, we shall have your assistance to compass it. By my
request to you yesterday, you know my endeavors for the Liberty of this Slave:
those proved ineffectual, but I have thought of other means, which if you
please, we will execute this evening. You know well enough the Bassa is
passionately in love with her, if we give him time to see her once more, it
will not be in our power to get her out of his hands; If a War be resolved on,
it will be equally difficult to save her: And who knows but she may be put to
death here, the People being already extremely incensed against her, as the
cause of all this disorder; and upon the noise of a War, they will be too apt
to make her a Sacrifice. Let us be wise in time, all things are in readiness,
and if you will make use of them presently, I do warrant the success. The Aga
looked upon him as a man newly out of a Trance, and oppressed with grief. Let
us do, Dear Assen, says he, whatever you think fit, for in the condition that I
am in, I am not capable to give you any reasonable Counsel, but will do all you
shall desire of me, and employ my whole power in the Castle to favor your
design, and help this Lady out of danger. Ungrateful man, answers Laura, do you
speak of helping me out of danger? you who are the cause of all my misfortunes.
Go wretch, go, I Will never be so much obliged to you, but choose rather to dye
here in Prison, than not to have still just cause to reproach you. This is not
time, Madam, says Assen, (whose conceptions were too gross to apprehend the
delicacy of her Sentiments) to refuse any help, especially the Aga's, who being
Captain of the Guard, can give order for opening us the Gates; when we please,
without stop or examination. What confidence can we repose, answers she, in the
most perfidious of men? No, no, Assen, were it possible for him to be more
honest on this occasion, then he was faithful in his love, I will rather dye
than make use of his assistance, after the double Treason he committed against
me: The very thought of it, adds, she with tears, is more cruel than Death.
It Is true, Madam, says Beyran, with the most moving action imaginable: I have
deserved death, yet peradventure I am not so guilty as you think me. Don
Alphonso and Clarice, who betrayed us both, have expiated their Crimes with
Death, and if mine must be punished with equal rigor, my life is at your
dispose. You see me in a Country, Madam, whither nothing but despair on the
news of your death occasioned my coming; for after diligent search of the way
you had taken, having been told you were embarked for Barcellona, I took the
same road, and arrived at that City, where soon after it was reported, the
Vessel you embarked in was cast away, and not one Person saved. Never was
grief equal to mine, every one pitied me; nor had I escaped death, but that
Heaven moved at my tears, reserved me the happiness of seeing you again, to
justify my self before you, and not to dye in your ill opinion, the thing next
the loss of you, I was most of all troubled for. The life I have since led,
has been full of afflictions sufficient to expiate any Crime, if not committed
against you. Laura took pleasure to hear him, and heartily wished to find it
true. He was not so much to blame as she believed. But the evidence was so
apparent against him, that the very thought of what she had seen, made her more
angry than ever, so that she commanded him out of her sight, bid him quit the
Town, and never see her more. Poor Beyran bebeing still on his knees,
endeavored with the kindest and most tender expressions imaginable to pacify
her. Assen, who by this time was sufficiently assured he was the Marquess
Hippolito under the name of Beyran, moved with his tears, took his part against
Laura, whom he thought not inflexible, and entreated her to have some regard to
the penitence of so tender a Lover, ready to deliver her out of all her
troubles, and free her from Slavery which he had occasioned; but perhaps
without any fault of his, and so against his will. But Laura more angry than
before (at least in appearance) answered, she valued not her Slavery, but would
choose rather to return to the Bassa, than go away with a man she hated worse
than Death. This troubled Assen, but he could not despair to see the fair Lady
yield at last to the pains and tears of a Lover, though she appeared unwilling
to be overcome by the persuasions of a Friend.

For anger in a Ladies heart,
Is but short lived, though it may be smart,
Against their Crimes who have the Art
To please;
For these
No sooner at the Bar appear,
Kneel, sigh, look sad, and drop a tear;
But they with ease,
A pardon for the offense obtain,
And are admitted into Grace again:
While the fair Judge, whose angry brow,
Lowr'd, and looked terrible but now,
To the poor Lover there below,
Finding her tender heart relent,
Begins her Anger to repent;
Thinks her self Criminal, that she
So rigorous to him could be;
Owns her Severity a fault,
And that she may it expiate,
Submits his Prisoner to remain,
Bound in her own affections Chain.
Laura's heart was of this temper, she thought her self concerned in honor not
to yield too soon. Assen did her no small pleasure in taking the part of
Marquess Hippolito, whom we will yet call Beyran. And she was very willing
Assen should have the honor of obtaining from her a pardon for the ungrateful
Beyran, if he could plead any thing to justify himself, or extenuate the
Treason he was guilty of, but that would have ushered in a Discourse too long
for the present conjuncture, and Assen told the Aga, if he had a mind to
execute the design he had told him of, he must be at the Cape of Carthage
before day; for there the Brigandine waited their coming. Beyran answered, it
was impossible to get that night out of the Castle, the Dey having not above
two hours since had news from the Spies, he maintained about the Bassa, that
the night before, the Bassa entered the Town, whereupon the Dey gave strict
order no Person should go out or in but by day. Laura and Assen were surprised
at the news, and perceived the Bassa had been in danger. Beyran seeing Laura a
little mollified, was extremely desirous to improve so happy a beginning by a
suitable progress to an entire pacification. But though she saw him much
troubled and very penitent, she gave him not the comfort of a kind expression
or look, but against her inclination forced her self to appear harsh, and act
the cruel against him. Assen, who thought one night at least necessary to be
afforded Laura, to dispose her self for an entire Reconciliation; and that
being upon the point of executing so hazardous a design, care should be had to
take their measures aright, asked the Aga whether he thought it not fit to
retire, lest being seen to come from Laura so late, he might give cause of
suspicion. The Aga answered, he need fear nothing, the Dey having given him
full power to stay as long as he pleased. But Laura, who had more reason to be
of Assen's than of the Aga's opinion, who was wholly led by his passion, spoke
to him, though somewhat against her will, to withdraw. The Aga ready to obey
this order, begged the favor of her to give him hopes at least, she would
pardon him, if he made it appear he was altogether innocent as to the matter of
Alphonso, and that her hatred of him should be at an end. She made him no
answer, but her eyes betrayed her heart; and spoke clearer in his favor than
her voice could have done, Beyran kissed one of her hands, which she could not
refuse him, and left her full of that evenings adventures which found her
entertainment. The rest of that night not knowing what to think of Beyran's
fortune, whom she believed turned Turk for despair; at the thought of this, the
tears trickled down her Cheeks, and she perceived, that if what he told her was
true, of her having been betrayed by her Maid, and that he had not any hand in
Alphonso's base action, as in truth it was scarce credible he had, she would
love him more than ever, and pardon his being found with the Vice Queen, though
this was a tender point, and not to be remembered without a volly of sighs.

Assen found the Aga's news true, and not able to get out of the Castle, went
with him to his apartment, where the pretended Renegado caused a Bed to be
provided him, but they spent the whole night in discourse. Assen you may
believe had an itching curiosity to hear the story of Marquess Hippolito*
having heard Laura's; Assen as soon as they were private, fell into that
discourse. The Aga, who knew how much he wanted Assen's help to plead for him
to Laura, was ready to pleasure him with the relation, and having understood
Laura had told him part of What concern d her, he was willing to acquaint him
with what came not to her knowledge, and began thus.

When I arrived at Naples, I found there the Viceroys Son, whom I was
acquainted with in my younger days, and renewed our friendship, established
rather in the conformity of our age, than of our Inclinations: he brought me to
Court, and esteemed it necessary a new comer should be a little instructed in
the passages there, he took the pains to tell me all the principal Intrigues
and ^ffairs of Love, and made me the Confident of his Passion for the fair
Eleanor, expecting from the fair friendship between us, I would, when
acquainted with her, do him the best service in my power; I had a sight of her
and by the first effects of that view, could easily foresee there was no
continuing Alphonso 's Friend, without becoming his Rival: I was troubled at
it, and reproached my self for my unfaithfulness; but what signified that when
there was love in the case? There was no resisting Eleanors charms, and I had
instantly taken the resolution to love her, had not the Vice Queen used all
possible arts to divert me; she expressed no small complaisance for me, which I
attributed to the friendship between her Son and me. But having found me one
day in deep meditation, she asked me, whether I would freely acknowledge the
cause of my melancholy; if she could guess what it was, and might serve me in
the business? I assured her I would; she adds, I was under the Fate of many
other unfortunate Lovers, who could not see Eleanor, without being affected
with the excellency of her Beauty. I was strangely surpised, to find a passion
scarce entertained in my Soul, already known to the Vice Queen, and could not
imagine how she came by the discovery of a secret, I had resolved to keep close
as long as possibly I could: it was not in my power to deny it; the trouble in
my face and change of my color, having given her sufficient evidence, how
truly she had guessed. I told her I found my self too weak to resist the Charms
of that beautiful Maid, and was sorry only Don Alphonso her Son, and my Friend
was concerned: she answered, that a passion we cannot master, was not to be
complained of, nor blamed, and that her Son could not be so unreasonable, as
not to pardon my falling into a distemper, himself had been afflicted with. But
she believed, I should prove as unfortunate as her Son; but to keep her word
with me, she would let me see, my concerns were more dear to her than the
Interest of her Son; but I must not blame her, if her endeavors should prove
ineffectual, which she had too much cause to expect, from the strange and
unparalled insensibility of that fair Maid, that she would speak for me that
very day, and see what hopes of a favorable reception, and whether she defied
love, out of a general aversion for Mankind, or a particular disgust against
some of that Sex. The same time she assigned me Ten a Clock at night, to meet
her in the great Walk in the Garden, to receive an account of her Negotiation:
I was there to wait for her, and she keept her Assignation. I saw her come with
one of her Maids, who was her Confident; and having given her my hand to lead
her into a Bower, I went in with her trembling, for fear of having ill News,
which I presently apprehended from her Countenance. Poor Marquess, says she,
you have no better fortune than others; this Girls heart is proof to all
Essays; and did you but know that ill-favored description and scurvy character
she gave of you, you would soon judge it to no purpose to apply your self to
her: but I would have you believe, I say not this to discourage you, but should
be sorry to see a young Gentleman as you, having qualities worthy the esteem of
a fair Lady, should employ them where there is not any hopes to prevail. I had
certainly suspected this extraordinary condescension, and goodness of the
Vice-Queen, had not what she said been agreeable to the report of the whole
Court, that the fair Eleanor was the most insensible person in the World. I
knew well enough, 'twas not any concern she had for the Passion of her Son,
made her speak as she did; she loved him very little, and the complaisance she
had expressed for me, secured me on that side. I might have been so sagacious
and quick-sighted, as to see she spoke for her self, and advised me to quit the
thoughts of Eleanor, to gain her self Advantage; but I was so oppressed with
grief at the News, that I was utterly incapable of making any reflection: she
was a Lady, the most dexterous and insinuating on Earth, and made so good use
of the power she had over me, that she not only shook the passion I was under,
but helped me to take resolution to rid my self of it, though with the loss of
my life. To bring this about, I thought it necessary to find another Beauty to
amuse my Affections; but where ever I cast my eyes, in the Court, or out of it,
could discover nothing capable to make me forget one moment, the Charms of the
beautiful Eleanor. The Vice Queen having after that evening said nothing to me
of it, saw me one morning alone in her Chamber, where her Son had newly left
me; she asked me smiling, Whether I had taken her advice; and followed her
Counsels? Madam, answered I, that cannot be done without my having equal
command over my Affections, as you have over yours; or ^nding at least in
another Lady, those Excellencies I admire in the fair Eleanor. This Discourse
had not pleased her, could she have thought her self of the number of those I
mentioned, not comparable to Eleanor. But the good opinion she had of her self,
and the respect due to her quality contributed to the good construction she
made of my expressions, so that my words gave no offense; but on the contrary,
being extremely glad, no Beauty at Court but Eleanor's pleased me, she told me
smiling, She would find me out a Person, that wanted nothing of what might
engage the affections of a gallant man, and that she was very well assured, I
would not deny it. I gave her a thousand thanks, not doubting in the least of
the good success of her choice, but was very unwilling to abuse her great
goodness: that as to Eleanor, she had done her pleasure; but that the respect
due to her, would not permit me to give way, she should be at the trouble to
find me a Mistress. She told me, she took delight in it; that she was loath any
ones Affections should be lost for want of being engaged; and that knowing my
merit, she would think it a pleasure to serve me, and take care I wanted
nothing in her Court.

All this she said with an air so free, so full of goodness, it charm d me: And
I had almost answered, She might without further search, find in her self what
she promised me elsewhere. The truth is, setting aside her Age, she might have
passed for one of the fairest and best humoured Women of the Kingdom; but I was
not willing to venture so far for fear of miscarriage, and was content to wait
for a sight of her, she would provide for me. I desired her not to make me
languish, being an impatient Lover, and in a condition required present remedy.
She assured me, I should hear from her that day, and that I had no more to do,
but prepare my self to be deeply in Love.

At this we were interrupted by company coming in, which oblig d me to withdraw
I spent the rest of the morning in musing of what passed between us, guessing
sometimes she meant one Lady, sometimes another of those I knew most intimate
with her, and most proper for the design, but could not fix my judgment on any.
This gave me some disquiet and trouble, with an impatient desire to see the
Vice-Queen again. I made in the afternoon forty journeys to Court, to see if
she had any thing to say to me; she laughed at my haste, and at length told me,
my hour was not yet come, nor the day gone; that I should go home and have
patience, and when the time came, she would send me news. Night came, but no
news from the Vice-Queen, which made me believe, she fooled me; so that I could
not forbear returning to the Palace, where I heard she was gone to visit a Lady
her Friend. I was so ready to imagine it was the Lady she spoke of, that I
enquired her name, and where she lived; but could not learn either. The caution
she had used in that particular, fully convinced me, she was gone about my
business, and that she made the visit private, that my love might be as secret,
and the Court kept ignorant, how far her complaisance had carried her to serve
me.

I returned in all haste to my Lodging, as assured of all this; nor was I much
mistaken, for I was scarce got thither, but I received from her a Billet,
brought me by a Lady attended with two Chairs, and expressed as follows.

I have done what you desired, and I think, found out the person you wanted;
you will easily confess I am very much your friend: the sole acknowledgment I
expect is, you would not make me a Liar, having promised the Lady that upon the
bare description I made you of her, you would bring her a heart full of love.
See you do it, for if you deceive me in this, I shall never pardon you the
fault. You have no more to do but follow her that brings you this Billet,
without noise or attendance; for you are to come into a place of safety.

Had it come from any other, I should not have gone without a Guard at
distance, but coming from the Vice-Queen, I could not suspect danger. All I
thought of it was, that being a jovial and pleasant Lady, she had a frollick in
her head, and resolved to put on me some pleasant trick: without more ado, I
made me ready to laugh with her in good earnest: I went into one of the Chairs,
and followed her who brought the Billet, and was got into the other. They
carried us a great way into a private part of the Town, and there set down the
Chairs, which my Guide sent away, and we marchcd a little further, till we came
to a house which made a fair show; I learnt afterward it belonged to a Lady of
her Bedchamber, her Confident, who indeed was my Guide, and having opened the
door, made me go in without noise: I saw neither Lacquey nor light This
surpised me, and made me the more confident, some frollick intended: I said
not a word, but prepared, in case things went not as I could wish, to have my
share of the mirth with them, who came to laugh at my cost. At last the Lady
took me by the hand to lead me up a pair of stairs in the dark, which brought
us to a room no lighter than the stairs, and thence into a Chamber where were
two Flamboys lighted. It appeared a good room, but what pleased me most was,
the sight of a fair Lady, who carelesy laid on a very rich bed, seemed asleep
with her hood over her face. I began to repent my censure of the Vice-Queen,
whom I then thought to have written in good earnest: I saw nothing in this Lady
but what pleased me extremely, and to speak the truth, it was the sole moment I
may be said to have forgot the fair Eleanor, since I loved her. She was in a
loose dress, but handsome, and rich beyond expression: I had not seen the like
at Court, and knew not what to think, the Richness of the furniture, as well as
her dress declaring her to be a Lady of no ordinary quality: but I was very
much perplexed to guess who she was. I made up to her, and spoke; and the
amorous impatience I had to know her not permitting the use of much Ceremony
toward the Lady that stayed for me, I put my knee to the Ground, and laying
hold on one of her fair hands, which she allowed me to kiss; It was but reason,
Madam, said I, I should have languished all this day as I have done, who could
not expect this happiness, without being put to the pain at least of longing
for it. I looked for an answer, in hopes to know the voice, but she said not a
word. I entreated her to ease me of the pain, she might believe I was in, and
that if she resolved not to be seen, she would however vouchsafe to speak to
me, that where I was directed to bring a heart of love, I hoped to see a Lady
that had Beauty and Wit; that as yet she had only moved my curiosity, but if
she meant to reach my heart, I must see her. As I spoke thus, I perceived her
laugh, which gave me the boldness to lift up her hood: She put back my hand,
but so weakly, I thought it would not displease her to press a little further:
there were but we two in the Room, her Confident having doubtless received
Orders to withdraw, and I was ready to put her to the squeak, when at last she
threw off her hood. But how was I surpriz d to see 'twas the Vice-Queen. Well
Sir, says she, blushing, will you be content with your good fortune? And will
it not be presumption in me to fancy my self capable to make you forget all
other Beauties. I answered her more like a Gallant than a Lover: she was
satisfied however, and without engaging further in the relation of a discourse,
of which you may guess the consequence, I will tell you only that having spent
two or three hours in her company, I returned to my lodging the way I came, and
she to the Palace.

I saw her on the morrow, and our Correspondence held for some time, but cured
not my passion. Her Son with whom I had particular as well as general reasons
to maintain a fair Correspondence, expressed more friendship for me than I could
have wished: he was not content to make me the Confident of his affection, but
employed me to speak for him to the fair Eleanor, expecting more benefit from
the Intercession of such a Friend, than any addresses of his own: I did, and
you have doubtless heard from her; she let me understand, I should speed better
in speaking for my self than for him, 'twas then I thought my self the most
unfortunate of men, for believing so easily what the Vice-Queen had said to me,
whose conduct convinced me sufficiently, how far she concerned her self in my
business. I designed that moment to abandon her favor, and give my self up
entirely to my first passion; but to prevent the trouble I might expect from
the Vice Queen, if she knew it, I thought fit to dissemble a little, and
disingage my self by degrees, without declaring on the sudden for Eleanor. I
observed the best I could the measures I had taken, but it is a difficult matter
to conceal a passion from a jealous and a witty Woman. The Vice-Queen perceived
my relapse, before I made Eleanor acquainted with it; she punished my Apostasy
with a thousand reproaches, which were seconded with tears, and I (the better
to manage her) pretended a firm Re-ingagement to her. But what will not a
slighted Lady do? or what more dangerous than a jealous Woman? I was
thenceforward more curious of seeing and speaking with the beautiful Eleanor,
and avoided the occasions of being found in her company, while the Vice-Queen
was by, but all to no purpose: the Vice-Queen knew all, and so well discerned
what was true, from what was feigned, that she guessed exactly right of the
privatest of my thoughts. One day as I walked with her in the Garden, she told
me, we had both lost time to no purpose, I inforceing my self against my
Inclination, to pretend continuance of affection for her, and she endeavoring
to make me love, though against my will: That she saw well enough what I now
did, was but the effect of my civility to a Lady of her quality, who had
expressed kindness for me. But 'twas time to put an end to our pain, and to
satisfy me she intended it; she assured me, she would no longer oppose my
Inclination, and that I would believe it, upon the Confession she made me, that
I might expect from Eleanor not only a kind reception, but something of love;
yet I put no great confidence in all these good words, as coming from a party
too liable to suspicion: But when by an Excess of goodness she added, that to
convince me, she was more my Friend than I could imagine, she would contribute
more than any other to my satisfaction; and procure a Letter from the Viceroy
to Eleanor's Father, to persuade him to consent I should have his Daughter. I
was so transported with joy, I could not forbear making her very large
acknowledgements. She told me, I should see by the answer to that Letter what
good Service she had done me: She did as she promised, and after the Letter she
procured from the Viceroy, I doubted not of being completely happy in few days.
The news was confirmed by the beautiful Eleanor, and I had the pleasure to see
her glad of it as I was: nothing troubled me then but the slow pace of time.
The Viceroy had sent an express to Genes, but the Courier was scarce got a
Horseback, but I wished him returned: every moment seemed a year by my longing
and impatience: the only pleasure I had, was the time I was in Eleanor's
company, who assured on her part of the success of the Viceroy's
Recommendation, who had great Interest with her Father, and sensible of the
pain I was in to have the matter confirmed; had not the power to deny my
passion the favor of a visit, which I begged I might make her, having engaged
my self to her with all the promises and oaths, to be expected on such an
occasion from a Lover beloved. The assignation was made, and her Chamber agreed
for the place of Rendezvous. Pardon me, my dear Assen, for fetching a sigh at
the remembrance of that day, which should have been a time of love and of joy,
but was the most dismal and unfortunate of my life.

Night was come, and when I thought my self just ready to be possessed of so
great a happiness, Clarice, who waited on Eleanor in her Chamber, and was her
intimate Confident, brought me a Billet, I will show you, having by good
fortune kept it safe to this minute. With that he took out a little Purse from
his pocket, and out of the Purse the Billet, which he read to Assen in these
words.

I am heartily sorry, my dear Hippolito, I must fail my assignation. But an
unhappy accident I must not now tell you of, will for a few days retard our
happiness: you may believe me, as sensible of it as you are, but love me as you
have done Love will furnish us with opportunity enough. Adieu


I had never received a Letter from Eleanor, nor knew her Character; so that it
was easy for Clarice to make me believe that Billet came from her: I asked her
what her Mistress ailed; Nothing, says she laughing, but that she is not very
well this evening. I fancied! understood her meaning, and examined her no
further; but withdrew sufficiently displeased with my ill fortune that night,
when a Page of the Vice-Queens met me coming down stairs, and told me, his Lady
desired to speak with me. In the humor I was in, I could have wished a
Dispensation from waiting upon her; but not knowing what excuse to make, being
so near her, and fearing she might have something to tell me from Eleanor,
being the common subject of her discourse with me, I followed the Page into her
Chamber, where I found her expecting my coming: she was at her Toilet, and the
Viceroy being out of Town, as soon as she saw me, she reproached me for
deserting her so, she could of late scarce see me in the crowd; that if I would
not out of Gallantry, I should at least out of civility have afforded her my
company, when destitute of other. I was not disposed for giving her so pleasing
an answer as I would have done another time, however I said not any thing to
disoblige her: I was melancholy and vexed, but so deeply in love, I had a stock
of kindness, and complaisance which abundantly furnished me with pleasing
expressions, which the Vice-Queen did not disapprove of: I had not seen her in
a better humor; and falling into discourse, she kept me with her a great part
of that night; but she thought me out of humor, and quarrelled with me upon it:
I excused my self, as having sat up all the night before at play. Hereupon she
invited me to lie on her Bed; I was priviledg'd to be familiar, and without
further entreaty made use of my liberty: for the truth is, I was almost dead
for want of sleep; within less than two hours I was awaked on the sudden by the
light of a Flamboy, held before my eyes, and the first object I saw, was
Eleanor with a Poniard in her hand, to take away my life, had not Don Alphonso
laid hold on her arm, and prevented the stroke. Judge you what amazement I was
in, I might with some reason have suspected all this a Dream: But my Rival
having seized the Poniard, to execute what he had hindered Eleanor to do, had
she not done me in her turn the like Service. I thought it high time to take
care of my life, and running to my Arms, put my self in a posture of defense.
The Vice-Queen half dead with the fright, came running to part us, but was like
to have been killed by her Son, who seemed as eager to dispatch her as me: I
happily saved her two or three times, and at last standing before her, the fury
Don Alphonso was in, made him run on my Weapon, and kill himself rather than be
killed by me: I saw him fall, which troubled me extremely, foreseeing the
dreadful Consequence of such a misfortune. I turned toward the unhappy Mother,
to ask her what she would do, and found her swouned away, and lying without
motion: I was so much afflicted with the spectacle, I wished my self dead: at
last necessity pressing me to withdraw, I entered Eleanor's Chamber, to see her
once more, and dye at her feet, if she desired my life to expiate my fault, but
I found her not, and so left the Palace without any obstacle. My design was to
pass into Sicily, and being in search of a Felucca to embarque in, found
Clarice almost drowned in tears at the Port. I knew her, and asked whither she
went, and what she would have, Ah Sir, said she, I have been looking for my
Mistress, who the Mariners tell me, is embarked not a quarter of an hour since
for Barcellona. I was strangely surprised at the news, and without further
deliberation, took the first Felucca I met, and Clarice being very willing to
go with me in search of her Mistress, or rather to get away from a Court, where
she had reason to fear the severest extremities, after the disorder lately
happened, wherein she knew her self concerned; I put her aboard, and had the
weather so favorable, we hoped to reach Barcellona before Eleanor could be
there. I took care to enquire the Name of the Felucca she was embarked in, and
the Masters. I was till then so distracted and oppressed with grief and
despair, it was not in my power to make any resolution on all these
misfortunes; but being got to Sea, I recollected my self, and considered all
those disasters; but the more I thought on them, the more was I perplexed about
them. I could not imagine by what accident Don Alphonso and Eleanor should be
together to surprise me in the Vice-Queens Chamber; unless we had been
betrayed, or Don Alphonso more in favor with Eleanor than I believed: and if
that were so, why should my Rival prevent my death, as he did, and why did she
take her turn too, to save my life from Alphonso, unless both were ambitious of
the honor to have killed me? However I must confess I deserved death, and wish
I had received it at Eleanor's hand; I should not then have had the displeasure
of imbrewing my hands in the Blood of a Person, who had all the reason in the
World to be revenged of me.

Clarice was very ill in the Felucca, of the fright she had taken, or else
Sea-sick. I had not seen her all the time of the disaster at Naples, I told her
part of the story, and found it so much afflicted her; especially when I
acquainted her with the death of Alphonso, she grew worse and worse: I asked
her several questions, which she answered with a great deal of trouble,
pretending Ignorance, but in such a manner as gave me cause enough to
suspectned the contrary, and believe she was more concer in this business than
I was aware of: I was unwilling to press her in the condition she was in, to
reveal the secret, though I was curious of a discovery, but hoped to make it,
when she should be a little better.

We arrived at Barcellona, but no news of the Bark Eleanor went aboard of: I
resolved to have patience a while, as well as the Merchants, who had effects in
it of great value: But how careful soever I was of Clarice, she grew worse than
at Sea, and all the Physicians could do for her, prevented not her being
reduced to that extremity, they gave her over as desperate; so that finding her
self at deaths door, she sent for me to her Chamber, and having desired to
speak with me in private, the rest of the company quitted the Room, and she
told me, that Don Alphonso having gained her, she did him all the Service she
could against me with her Mistress; and having overheard part of my last
discourse with Eleanor, she instantly acquainted my Rival with it, who
transported with rage and despair, against a design so fatal to his Affection,
resolved by any means to defeat it, and if possible make advantage of it for
himself. That in order to this, he made her write a Letter, and carry it me, as
from her Mistress; that Don Alphonso took his time, and his measures
accordingly; having learnt from her the hour, and the manner of my coming to
Eleanor's Chamber; that he got in without difficulty: but what passed further,
she knew not; only some hours after, hearing the noise of Swords, she ran in,
where she found her Mistress all in disorder, packing away; that she would have
followed her, but her Mistress begged of her to let her go alone. At last
finding the noise increase in the Vice-Queens Chamber, she was frighted, and
went toward the Port, where I found her; with that the unhappy Girl with
abundance of tears, begged that now at her death, I would pardon her a Crime
had cost her her life. She said no more, but two hours after died: I will not
tell you the different motions of my heart, during the dismal Relation this
Wretch made me; but the appearance of Death in her face made me pardon her. As
for Don Alphonso, I heartily wished him alive again, as not sufficiently
punished by one death for his Treason; but the Traitors being both in another
World, I had no Subject to exercise my Revenge on, unless my ill Fate, against
which I spent my time in fruitless Complaints.

To Complete my misery, News came, the Bark we expected was lost, which was
confirmed by Advice from several Parties. Never man in such despair as I; I
will not tell you the extravagancies it made me run into; it distracts me to
think on it: there was no other remedy to bring me to my self, but to persuade
me the News from Sea were not so sure, but that we had reason to expect further
Confirmation, and that Vessels reported cast away, came frequently safe into
Port: that the Sea was a large Country, and one Vessel might be easily
mistaken for another, and that many fell into the hands of the Turks, which
were supposed to have been wracked, because they were not heard of. This gave
me but small comfort; yet I thought I had some reason of hope, undertaking a
Voyage to visit all the Ports of the Levant, till I should learn some certainty
of the Felucca I was in search of.

The Aga having finished his Story, Assen told him, he was very glad for his
sake, that Matters passed otherwise than Eleanor believed; that it would be no
hard matter to make his peace, when she understood the Treachery of her
Chambermaid; that he was not to wonder at the Anger she expressed against him,
for that she knew not any of the Particulars he related to justify himself,
but suspected him of Intelligence with Don Alphonso to betray her. Heavens! is
it possible, cries Hippolito, she should do my Love the injury, to entertain
such a thought of me! had I not loved her as I did, could she fancy me capable
of so much baseness? Sir, said Assen, when there is Evidence against us, and no
Plea in defense for our justification, we are easily cast: what could you
expect a Lady dishonored by the Son, should have believed of you, whom she
found in the Arms of the Mother, but that he sacrificed the one to you, that
you might leave him the other. Ah! Assen, replies the Aga with a sigh, let us
talk no more of what is past; as innocent as I am of the one side, I must
acknowledge my self guilty of the other. But let me entreat you to excuse and
extenuate the fault as much as you can before her; or rather never speak of it,
but endeavor only to disabuse her, and alter the ill opinion she has of me,
and assure your self, whatever Fortune befall me, I will not be ungrateful for
the Service you will do me. I believe you have heard from her who I am, and if
the condition she is in, or any other Reason, has obliged her to conceal her
Birth, and other things concerning her, that might render her more worthy the
zeal you have for her Service, I will satisfy your curiosity in every
particular. Assen thanked him, and fell a laughing, and answered, he had known
her too long to want Instructions in those Particulars, and could give a better
account of her Birth and Family than any Person whatever. The Aga, surpised
at it, entreated him earnestly to let him understand, how he being a Turk,
should so long and so particularly know her. Assen told him the Story, and part
of what happened at Genes.

It was day by that time Assen had done, which put them in mind of taking some
resolution about the design in hand, and the means to be made use of, to get
Laura out of the Castle without danger. They thought of several ways, but all
appeared full of uncertainty and inconvenience; yet they two could best do it
of any, the one having all the power over Laura's Guards, and the other over
the Garrison of the Castle. But all things were so strictly examined by the
vigilance of the inferior Officers, whom the Dey (a man as vigilant as fearful)
had strictly commanded to be always on Guard, and not permit any to come in, or
go out, without taking exact notice of them, that it was absolutely necessary
to take right measures, and still fear the success. Assen at length bethought
himself of a Stratagem, the less subject to discovery, as covered under a cloak
of Religion, though in truth, apt to startle a nice Girl as Laura. There was a
Soldier of the Castle dead the night before, to be buried that day; he resolved
to lock up the Corpse in a Chamber, and carry out Laura on the Bier, as if she
had been the Soldier, to be buried in the Churchyard behind the Castle. The
Aga was of opinion, there could be no danger in the expedient, but doubted much
whether Laura could be induced to make use of it; yet after long consultation,
and discourse of other means, they thought that not only the best, but the only
one they could promise themselves a good design from. But to prevent the
trouble Laura might have upon the apprehension of Death, or other sad Accident,
they agreed not to tell her of the Bier, but propose carrying her out in a
Chair. This being resolved on, Assen, who was to see her that morning,
undertook to persuade her to it, and the Aga in the mean time gave order, the
dead Soldier should not be buried till the Evening. He recommended to Assen,
the care of his Affairs with his Mistress, gave him Clarices Letter to produce
in justification of him; and after a great deal of Civility and Kindness on
both sides, they parted, to meet again at Dinner at Assen's, for fear their
long Conferences in the Castle might occasion suspicion in the Garrison, being
extremely jealous and mistrustful. Laura, who had scarce rested all night for
Dreams, which troubled her, was very joyful to see Assen come so early, to
divert her from the thoughts of them. Well, dear Assen, says she, shall we be
once eased of our Chains? and must we carry this Traitor along with us?
Traitor, Madam, answers Assen, he is the most honest and most passionate of
Lovers. Ah! says she, I foresaw he would corrupt even your fidelity; I know too
well the power he has to gain affection, and had reason enough to distrust
him. Be not so hasty, Madam, replies the Turk, to condemn a man unheard. Why,
what says she, can he offer against what what I have seen? Did not I find him
with the Vice-Queen? Was it not he that helped the Traitor Alphonso to abuse
me? No, Madam, I assure you, answers Assen, be pleased to let me tell you, what
you know well enough, that he loved you too well, to be capable of an action of
that kind; and to clear all your doubts, adds he, showing her Clarices Letter,
Know you that Character? Well, said she, somewhat surpriz d, it is my
Chamber-maids: Read it, replies Assen, and you shall see who was guilty of the
Treason. Laura read it, and had searce done, when relenting at the Injury done
Hippolito, or troubled for the Treachery of a Maid, she had so much confided
in; O God of Vengeance, cried she with tears, will thou leave unpunished a
Wretch so treacherous, and one who bath been the cause of so many disasters? No
sure, says Assen, for she is already dead, if not as her Treason deserved, yet
for grief of having committed it. With that he related to her, what she knew
not of the Story of the Marquess, and found it no difficult business to appease
the great wrath she had expressed against him, to procure him her general
pardon, and obtain her consent for his going along with them. Assen, like a
dexterous Confident, said not a word of what concerned the Vice-Queen; and
Laura, who had no desire to be any more angry with her dear Servant, was not
very curious to question him on that point: she was content to believe him
innocent of one side, and to be furnished with a pretense not to hate him; so
hard a matter is it to use ill those we love, how criminal soever. Assen then
told her of the resolution taken by the Aga and him, to have her carried out in
a Chair, and found her disposed to do whatever they should think fit, but with
condition there should be no more danger for them than for her. Assen undertook
it, and told her, she had no more to do, but make ready against the first
Watch, whilst the Aga and he took Oorders for other things. Assen went home,
where Beyran-Aga came shortly after, and gave him an account of all he had
done. Assen labored with much diligence and dexterity to see the Brigandine
well stored with Necessaries; you may believe, Beyran failed not, as busy as
he was, to desire an account of what most concerned him, the state of his
Affair with his Mistress. His dear Confident Acquainted him with what success
he had discharged the Commission he gave him, which Beyran was so gald of, as
it was not his power to express his Acknowledgment. All was ready, and Assen
had given out the necessary Orders, as well for the Brigandine, as for Horses
and Men. The Aga and he went together to the Castle, where the Aga made him a
Present of all the Jewels he had received at several times from the Dey, and
entreated him to accept them not as a satisfaction, but a pledge of the
assurance he had given him to be ever his Friend, and serve him on all
occasions. Assen, who endeavored, but in vain, to refuse his liberality, would
not accept of it, but on condition the Aga would make use on all occasions of
what he had bestowed, as still his own, and believe Assen sensible, he had not
sufficiently obliged him to merit so rich a Present. They went From the Castle,
to make their Court to the Dey; and the hour being come, Assen first changed
Laura's Guards, relieving them by three of his Servants, whom he was to take
with him, that none might be left behind to discover the Design, or the Road
they should take. The Aga quickly followed him, longing to see Laura; he fell
down at her feet in such a Transport of Joy and Love, it moved to that
tenderness, she could not forbear embracing him. As she raised him from the
Ground, they were falling into amorous Discourse; but Assen told them, it was
not a time to discourse, but to put their Design in execution, unless they had
a mind to see it miscarry; and that when they should be once out of danger,
they should have leisure enough to say what they pleased. Laura and Beyran, who
desired nothing more than to see themselves at liberty, were easily persuaded
to follow his Advice. And the Chair being brought by the Aga's Order, who had
hidden the Corpse, they wrapped up Laura in a clean Sheet, and without saying a
word of the Bier, put her in it, and caused it to be carried out of her
Chamber, where having according to the custom of the Place, thrown a Carpet
over her, one of Assen's men took the Lanthorn, and the other two carried the
Bier; Beyran leading the Van, and Assen bringing up the Rear. A Corpse is a
sacred thing among the Turks; nor would any of the Guard have thought of
searching the Bier, though neither Beyran nor Assen had been with it. They went
to the Churchyard, where having taken Laura out of her Grave, they marched
toward the Carthage-gate, which the Aga commanded to be opened, that they
might take Horse, which attended them hard by Laura and the Aga, whom we will
hereafter call by their names, could not yet take any pleasure to see
themselves out of the Castle and City, for fear of ill Accidents, but longed to
see themselves at Sea; however they were glad they got happily so far, in hopes
Fortune would in favor of Love, improve that lucky beginning to a suitable
end. But this small Lightning of Joy quickly vanished, being dashed out by the
cruelty of their Fate; for being arrived, where they expected to take Horse,
they found by Assen's Servants, the Bassa's Sophies had taken them away. In
what perplexity then was this unfortunate Company? they were five or six
Leagues distant from the Cape of Carthage, where the Brigandine was; they had
no time to lose, and knew not what to resolve on, when on the sudden they heard
the noise of Horses making toward them. Assen hid Eleanor and Hippolito under
an old Wall, and advanced with some of his people toward the Horsemen: They
marched apace, and quickly asked, who is there? Assen told them who he was, and
by good fortune, found it was Romadan, the Master of the Galleys, coming from
Port-farm with a Guard. He told him, the Bassa's Sophies had taken from his
people some Horses he had in readiness to go for Cape-Carthage, to see a
Brigandine he was sending out to Sea. Romadan, who knew the respect the Bassa
had for Assen, was angry for what was done by the Sophies; and to remedy the
inconvenience, told Assen, he might take his choice of what Horses he pleased
out of his Troop, and not trouble himself for his own, they should be sent him
where he pleased to order. Assen, glad of the opportunity, accepted his offer;
and Romadan taking him aside, told him, The Bassa had a design to come again to
him, and by any means to get Laura out of the Castle, and that he would do well
in his return from Cape-Carthage, to take the Camp in his way, and endeavor to
divert the Bassa from so dangerous an Enterprise. Assen having promised it,
dis-engaged himself from Romadan as soon as he could; but Romadan would oblige
him at parting, with two of his Horsemen, to accompany him, and serve him from
the Parties that were abroad, and might set upon him unknown. This put Assen
into a little perplexity, but he would not refuse the kindness, for fear of
giving cause of suspicion: And having taken his leave, he advanced toward his
company, and acquainted the two Lovers in few words, what fortune he had met
with. All mounted, and Eleanor in Boys Clothes, passed for a young Slave of
Assen's, the night helping to cover the disguise, they made all the haste
possible, Hippolito being still at Eleanor's elbow, the Master of the Galleys
Horsemen led the Van, to answer those they met; and Assen, as Commander in
chief, sometimes on one side, sometimes on the other, without affecting much to
be near Hippolito or Eleanor, by the help of the Horsemen they had free
passage; and were several times saved from being taken and carried before the
Bassa. At last being come to the Brigandine, they delivered the Horses to be
restored to the owners, and having rewarded them well for their pains, Assen
sent them back with this Letter to the Bassa.

Sir, Be not displeased with me for endeavoring the liberty of a Maid, to
whose Family I owe mine: you have often heard me speak of my obligations to my
Patron, when I lived among the Christians; I have met with an occasion to
satisfy them in the Person of his Daughter, being that same Laura the Dey kept
Prisoner. Wonder not my gratitude has prevailed with me, to expose my life for
those who saved mine. The Dey perhaps may have as much reason as you to excuse
me, but in actions that honor and reason inspire, I fear no reproach. Laura
was the (...) of the difference betwixt you, the Peace will be easier made now
she is gone. Thus doing my duty, I procure the good of my Country, which every
honest man wishes, and will certainly thank me for. Adieu, live content, and
prosper in your designs, and be so just as not to condemn

Assen.


They instantly hoised sail, and the Weather being favorable, they doubled the
Cape, passed Port-Farine, and were got a great way to Sea, before the Horsemen
could have come to the Bassa, whom we will leave foaming with rage and fury
against Assen, and return to the happy company, now beginning to take pleasure
in seeing themselves out of danger at least from Land; for as to the Sea, while
you are on it, there is no security against it.

Hippolito sat sighing by his beautiful Eleanor, and she feasted her self with
the sweetness of liberty to enjoy in safety the conversation of a Lover she had
given over for lost. Assen was busy giving orders in the Brigandine; but being
becalmed on the sudden, and no way to be made but by rowing, he sat by them to
congratulate their happiness. It Is true, says Eleanor, I should esteem my self
the most fortunate person on Earth, if after what you have assured me of the
Marquess, you could ease me of the scruples, the Turks habit he wears, raises
within me. Was it possible, adds she blushing, you should change your Religion?
It Is the very thing I longed to know of him, Madam, and how he came to Barbary,
for he has not yet told me. No, Madam, answers Hippolito, I am still a
Christian, and had I been threatened with Death, or with Torments, I should not
have changed my Religion, but it is true I have been long thought a Turk. Assen,
who could not conceive how it could be so in a Country like his, where in
matters of Religion, there are Formalities not to be counterfeited, prayed him
to declare what course he had taken, and how it was possible for him to escape
Circumcision, being the first of the Ceremonies used in that case. Hippolito to
satisfy him, knowing he should at the same time do Eleanor a pleasure, went on
with his story.

I told you formerly of the resolution I took, of searching every Creek of the
Mediterranean, for the Vessel this Lady embarked in: I did so for seven or
eight months, in a little Frigate with six pieces of Ordinance, wherein I was at
last taken by a Vessel of Tripoly of no less than thirty Guns, after six hours
Fight, and the loss of almost all our men: I was carried to Tripoly, where they
presented me to the Bassa, who upon the good report they gave of my behavior
in the Fight, used me very civilly, and having in few days expressed no small
affection for me, wished I would turn Turk, and sent me for the purpose to a
famous Cady to be instructed in their Faith: this Mohammedan Doctor was a very
honest man, and witty; he was the Son of a Renegado, and had less Faith than
his Father in what he taught others; he spoke very freely to me, and I opened
my self to him, and prayed him to make the Bassa believe I was turned Turk; he
did so, the Bassa believed it on his word, and expressed for me more kindness
than ever; but he had a Nephew who was jealous of it, and often quarrelled with
me on that score, which might afterward have produced further inconvenience.
The Bassa, who had a tender love for this Nephew, foresaw what might follow,
and resolved to part us for some time, till this Nephew were cured of his
jealous and tempestuous humor; he sent me with great Presents to the Dey of
Tunis, his intimate Friend, recommending me very earnestly and affectionately
to him. The Dey within a week after my arrival, made me his Aga: You know
Assen, what a sad life I led; but who would have thought, says he, addressing
himself to Eleanor, I was so near what I searched for, and loved above all the
World, yet knew nothing of it; and that my Fate should make me so happy, when I
was just upon losing you.

The Marquess and Eleanor entered into further discourse of their adventures;
and the Masters of the Vessel coming to consult Assen, he left them together to
go on with their stories. The wind chopped about, and threatened a Storm, the
Vessel being small, they thought it inconvenient to venture further to Sea:
They tacked about, making toward Biserti, intending to sail near the Coast of
Barbary, till they should come over against Sardinia, that they might cross
over (as soon as the weather served) into the Isles of St. Peter, where they
hoped to anchor. This was their resolution, and 'twas well for them they
followed it, for the Storm was so great, they were forced to lie at Anchor
three or four days among the Rocks on the Coast of Barbary. They were so far
from Tunis, they had no cause to fear pursuit, being at Anchor in a place where
a thousand Vessels might have passed by without discovering them in the storm.

The storm at length was pretty well over, and thc Brigandine pursued her
Voyage along the Coast of Barbary; meeting by the way several Creeks, floating
Hogsheads, and Planks, and other pieces of broken Ships, which they doubted not
were cast away in the last storm. For two days they cruised along that Sea;
they were frequently entertained with those lamentable spectacles, and at last
heard the voice of a Man, which they fancied must have come from a Rock at
least three miles distant from Land; they presently concluded it was one
escaped out of the late Shipwracks. Eleanor was moved to pity at the cry, and
Assen at her rerequest, turned the prow of his Brigandine toward the Rock. The
Sea was then calm, and when they got within some paces of the Rock, they saw a
man almost naked, without Hat, without Stockings, without Shoes, so maimed and
disfigured, they knew not whether they should more fear him or pity him. Assen
having ordered the Seamen to cease rowing, asked him in Moresque, how he came
upon that Rock, and what he would have. I am an unfortunate Christian (answers
he in Italian) and not unknown to you, and if you will take the pains to get
foot on land here, you will find what perhaps you are in search of, but you
must lose no time, otherwise your help may come too late. Assen amazed to hear
him speak so, observed something in his Countenance, made him think he had seen
him elsewhere. Eleanor was particularly astonished at his voice, and fancied
she knew it; but the man was so disfigured, she could not possibly call to mind
who he was. Assen asked his name, and where he had seen him to know him: I tell
you, answers the man, I have here what you perhaps go in search of much
further; the man you see is Alexander the Bassa's Slave, and if he has sent
thee for his Wife, thou may find her on this Rock half dead with her
Sufferings these two days we have been here: he had scarce done speaking, but
Eleanor invaded at once with joy and grief cried out, which made the man turn
his face, and she knew him to be Alexander. Ha Sir, says she, is it possible it
should be you, and not know Laura? As she spoke thus, Assen having commanded
the Oars to turn the prow to land, ordered a Plank from the Vessel to the Rock,
and passed over it first, Hippolito following with Eleanor by the hand, and all
to embrace poor Alexander, who was so transported with joy, he could not say a
word: he prayed Assen to get him something from aboard to comfort his dear
Sultaness, who had not eat any thing for three days past. They gave order
accordingly, and instantly ran toward the place where the Sultaness lay under
a Bush, where they found her half dead; a sad sight for Laura, yet mixed with
joy to see her; but what an astonishing surprise was this to the Sultaness, who
could scarce open her eyes, and knew not whether she were awake or in a Dream,
and whether what appeared to her, were Persons or Spirits. You may imagine the
haste Eleanor made to help her, being readily seconded with Hippolito's
assistance: What are you here Laura, says the Sultaness with a feeble and
languishing tone, and am I not mistaken? what good Angel has sent thee to
rescue me from the Jaws of Death? Heavens! my dear Sultaness, answers Laura,
not able to forbear crying, Heavens! which has had pity on us, and delivered
me also out of the hands of the Bassa. The Sultaness began to recover, but had
not strength to speak long. Assen told Alexander she would be better aboard
than at land, the Sea being still. The Count, who had not yet had leisure to
discourse them, asked where they were bound for, and having understood they
sailed for Italy, he could not sufficiently bless Heaven for so happy an
accident. The Sultaness was carried aboard, and the weather being fair, they
resolved to put out to Sea, and direct their course for Sardinia.

Laura was so careful of the Sultaness, that she began to gather strength;
Assen and Hippolito did their part with the Count, who had no less need of
nourishment and rest: This took up one day; on the morrow the weather
continuing fair, and the Sultaness finding her self in a condition to
discourse, they related to her what passed at Tunis since her departure, and
desired Count Alexander to inform them how they came to be wracked, and by what
Fortune they got upon the Rock; he answered to this purpose.

You have heard without doubt, how the Sultaness was carried aboard by the
Bassa's order, who thought (as well as I) it was Laura: You may imagine my
surprise great, and my joy inexpressible At our putting to Sea we had a good
wind, but scarce past the Cape of Carthage, but we saw the Heavens cloudy on
the sudden, and had the wind in our Teeth, and so strong a Gale, that our
Vessel being small, and the storm increasing, we were driven on this Coast and
cast Anchor; presently a violent and most terrible Hurricane broke out Cables,
set us a-drift, and cast us upon the Rocks. I leave it to you to guess, what an
extremity this was for a Lover, having her he loved above the World ready to be
lost before his face, which heightened to the utmost the terrors of danger and
death: I stood by the Sultaness, who with grief and fear was already half dead;
and reaching out her hand, Dear Alexander, says she, since the hour is come we
must dye, let us dye together. These words so resolute and kind, pierced my
very heart, and turned me into a Statue, leaving me without sense or motion.
All I could do, was embracing my dear Sultaness for a final Adieu, when the
Vessel giving a great crack, made me turn my eyes toward the Window of my
Cabin, where I saw a Rock almost touching the Poop; this surprised me not a
little, and taking a sudden resolution, I placed the Sultaness on my back, got
upon the Deck, and in spite of the Seamen, who would have diverted me, I
leaped on the Rock without doing my self or the Sultaness harm. A moment after,
the Sea which cast the Vessel on the Rock, carried it off again, leaving me and
the Sultaness there helpless of help, unless our Seamen would pity us, but
they could not master the winds, and the night was far gone, so that no good
was to be expected from them till the morrow, if the storm would over. A sad
night it was, the poor Sultaness endeavored to comfort me with hopes the
Mariners would not forsake us; but what a lamentable spectacle had I at break
of day, to see some Leagues distance half a Ship a float, which by the number
of People I saw returning from one end to another to get nearer land, was sunk
by the greatness of the waves, and all the men drowned. What afflicted me most,
was the sight of the Sultaness, though she, by I know not what presage, would
not despair of good Fortune, but would tell me still, Heaven had not saved us
from the Sea, to let us perish on that Rock; but would send to our aid one of
the many Vessels that passed by that way. It was a piece of good Fortune I did
not expect, yet I looked constantly about to discover some sail, when at last
having almost lost hope, having for two days seen nothing on the Sea, I ken'd
on the sudden something floating on the water, but being at distance, and
discovering no sail, I knew not whether to think it a Wrack, or some small
Vessel with Oars; yet seeing you draw toward the Coast, and the nearness of
the objects magnifying them every moment, I knew it to be a Brigandine, and
brought the Sultaness the News, who was not much pleased with it, fearing the
Vessel came from Tunis, and being more willing to dye on the Rock, then return
thither, I hollowed, and cried, and had the luck to be heard by you; and if I
did not presently express that joy which might have been expected upon knowing
you, you will pardon it as an effect of the miserable condition I was reduced
to, and will easily believe it could not but be great.

Count Alexander having ended his discourse, every one spoke his thoughts of
all these adventures, mingling sighs with their joy, which increased at the
news of one of Assen's Servants, that he discerned land, and that it could be
no other but Sardinia: He was in the right, but they could not anchor till the
morrow; and the weather continuing good, within eight days they arrived at
Genes, to the infinite satisfaction of this happy company, and all Eleanor's
Friends. Her Father was dead, and those who were entrusted with the tuition and
disposal of her (if heard of) were easily induced to consent she should be
married to Marquess Hippolito, who found means to make his Peace with the
Viceroy of Naples. The Sultaness turned Christian, and Count Alexander married
her: Assen followed the example of the Sultaness, and Count Alexander as well
as Marquess Hippolito served him with their Credit and Estates, to make his
Fortune, and live happily the rest of his days.

Books Printed for R. Wellington at the Lute in St. Paul's Churchyard, and E.
Rumball at the Post House in Russel Street, Covent Garden.
THE History of Polybius the Megalopolitan; Containing a General Account of the
Transactions of the whole World; and principally of the Roman People During the
first and second Punick Wars Translated by Sir. Henry Sheers and Mr. Dryden To
which is added a third Vol. never before published. Price 10 s.

A Treatise of Education, Especially of young Gent. in 2 parts. By Obadiah
Walker, D. D. Price 3 s.

A Discourse of the Nature and Faculties of Man; in several Essays: With some
Considerations on the occurrences of Humane Life. By Tim. Nourse, Gent. Price 4
s.

Familiar Letters: written by John late Earl of Rochester, to the Honorable
Henry Savile Esquire and other Persons of Quality. With Love Letters written by the
late Ingenious Mr. Tho. Otway, Sir Gorge Etheridge, and the late Duke of
Buckingham. In 2 Volums. Price 5 s.

Tho. Brown's New and Easy method to understand the Roman History, by way of
Dialogue; for the use of the Duke of Burgundy. Translated from the French, with
large Additions. Price 2 s. 6 d.

Sir Tho. Pope Blount's Remarks upon Poetry; with a Character and Censure of
the Modern Poets Price 5 s.

Sir Tho. Pope Blount's Essays on several Important Subjects. Price 3 s.

Where you may likewise be furnished with Mr. Lee's and Mr. Otway's Works,
bound up in the Order they were written. Mrs. Behn's and Mr. Crown's; and all
other Modern Plays.

Loves a Lottery, and a Woman the Prize; a new Play.

FINIS.

