A Collection of Papers Relating to the Present Juncture of Affairs in England.
VIZ. 1. The Humble Petition of Seven Bishops to his Majesty. 2. Articles
recommended by the Archbishop of Canterbury, to all the Bishops and Clergy
within his Jurisdiction. 3. Proposals of the Archbishop, with some other
Bishops, to his Majesty. 4. Petition of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, for
Calling a Free Parliament; With his Majesty's Gracious Answer. 5. Vindication
of the aforesaid Petition. 6. Extract of the States General their Resolution.
7. Prince of Orange his Letter to the English Army. 8. Account of a Design to
Poison the Prince of Orange before he came out of Holland. 9. A Relation of a
Strange Meteor, representing a Crown of Light, seen in the Air near the City of
Orange. 10. Lord Del -- r's Speech to his Tenants. 11. Prince of Denmark's
Letter to the King. 12. The Lord Churchil's Letter to the King. 13. Princes
Ann's Letter to the Queen. 14. A Memorial of the Protestants of England, to the
Prince and Princess of Orange. 15. Prince of Orange his Declaration of November.
28. 1688. from Sherborn-Castle.


Printed in the Year 1688.

To the King's most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Petition of William
Archbishop of Canterbury, and diverse of the Suffragan Bishops of that
Province, (now present with him) in behalf of themselves, and others of their
absent Brethren, and of the Clergy of their respective Diocesses.
Humbly shows,
THAT the great averseness they find in themselves to the distributing and
publishing in all their Churches your Majesty's late Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience, proceeds neither from any want of Duty and Obedience to your
Majesty, (our Holy Mother the Church of England, being both in her Principles
and in her constant Practice unquestionably Loyal; and having, to her great
Honor, been more than once publicly acknowledged to be so by your Gracious
Majesty;) Nor yet from any want of due tenderness to Dissenters, in relation to
whom they are willing to come to such a Temper as shall be thought fit, when
that Matter shall be considered and settled in Parliament and Convocation. But
among many other Considerations, from this especially* because that Declaration
is founded upon such a Dispensing Power as has been often declared Illegal in
Parliament, and particularly in the Years 1662, and 1672, and in the beginning
of your Majesty's Reign; and is a Matter of so great Moment and Consequence to
the whole Nation, both in Church and State, that your Petitioners cannot in
Prudence, Honor, or Conscience, so far make themselves Parties to it, as the
distribution of it all over the Nation, and the solemn publication of it once
and again, even in God's House, and in the Time of his Divine Service, must
amount to in common and reasonable Construction.

Your Petitioners therefore most humbly and earnestly beseech your Majesty,
that you will be graciously pleased, not to insist upon their distributing and
reading your Majesty's said Declaration. And Your Petitioners, as in Duty
bound, shall ever pray. Will. Cant. Will. Asaph. Fr. Ely. Jo. Cicestr. Tho.
Bathon. and Wellen. Tho. Peterburgen. Jonath. Bristol.


His Majesty's Answer was to this effect.
I Have heard of this before, but did not believe it. I did not expect this
from the Church of England, especially from some of you. If I change my Mind,
you shall hear from me; if not, I expect my Command shall be obeyed.

THE ARTICLES Recommended by the ARCHBISHOP of CANTERBURY
To all the Bishops within his Metropolitan Jurisdiction, the 16 th of July,
1688.
SIR,
YEsterday the Archbishop of Canterbury delivered the Articles which I send you
enclosed, to those Bishops who are at present in this place; and ordered Copies
of them to be likewise sent in his Name to the absent Bishops. By the Contents
of them you will see that the Storm in which he is, does not frighten him from
doing his Duty; but rather awakens him to do it with so much the more vigor:
and indeed, the Zeal that he expresses in these Articles, both against the
Corruptions of the Church of Rome on the one hand, and the unhappy Differences
that are among Protestants on the other, are such Apostolical Things, that all
good Men rejoice to see so great a Prelate at the Head of our Church, who in
this Critical Time has had the Courage to do his Duty in so signal a manner. I
am,

Sir, Yours.
London, July 27, 1688.
Some Heads of Things to be more fully insisted upon by the Bishops in their
Addresses to the Clergy and People of their respective Diocesses.
I. THat the Clergy often read over the Forms of their Ordination; and
seriously consider, what Solemn Vows and Professions they made therein to God
and his Church, together with the several Oaths and Subscriptions they have
taken and made upon diverse Occasions.

II. That in Compliance with those and other Obligations, they be Active and
Zealous in all the Parts and Instances of their Duty, and especially strict and
exact in all Holy Conversation, that so they may become Examples to the Flock.

III. To this end, that they be constantly Resident upon their Cures in their
Incumbent Houses; and keep sober Hospitality there according to their Ability.

IV. That they diligently Catechize the Children and Youth of their Parishes
(as the Rubric of the Common Prayer Book, and the 59th Canon enjoin) and so
prepare them to be brought in due time to Confirmation, when there shall be
Opportunity; and that they also at the same time expound the Grounds of
Religion and the Common Christianity, in the Method of the Catechism, for the
Instruction and Benefit of the whole Parish, teaching them what they are to
believe, and what to do, and what to pray for; and particularly often and
earnestly inculcating upon the Importance and Obligation of their Baptismal
Vows.

V. That they perform the Daily Office publicly (with all Decency, Affection
and Gravity) in all Market and other Great Towns, and even in Villages, and
less populous Places, bring People to Public Prayers as frequently as may be;
especially on such Days and at such Times as the Rubric and Canons appointed
on Holy Days, and their Eves, on Ember and R^gation Days, on Wednesdays and
Fridays in each Week, and especially in Advent and Lent.

VI. That they use their utmost Endeavor, both in their Sermons and by private
Applications, to prevail with such of their Flock as are of competent Age, to
receive frequently the Holy Communion: and to this end, that they administer it
in the greater Towns once in every Month, and even in the lesser too, if
Communicants may be procured, or how-ever as often as they may: and that they
take all due Care, both by Preaching and otherwise, to prepare all for the
worthy receiving of it.

VII. That in their Sermons they teach and inform their People (four times a
Year at the least, as what the Canon require) that all Usurped and Foreign
Jurisdiction is for most Just Causes taken away and abolished in this Realm,
and no manner of Obedience or Subjection due to the some, or to any that
pretend to act by virtue of it: but that the King's Power being in his
Dominions highest under God, they upon all Occasions persuade the People to
Loyalty and Obedience to his Majesty in all things Lawful, and to patient
Submission in the rest; promoting (as far as in them lies) the public Peace
and Quiet of the World.

VIII. That they maintain fair Correspondence (full of the kindest Respects of
all sorts) with the Gentry and Persons of Quality in their Neighborhood, as
being deeply sensible what reasonable Assistance and Countenance this poor
Church has received from them in her Necessities.

IX. That they often exhort all those of our Communion, to continue steadfast to
the end in their most Holy Faith, and constant to their Profession; and to that
end, to take heed of all Seducers, and especially of Popish Emissaries, who are
now in great numbers gone forth amongst them, and more busy and active than
ever. And that they take all occasions to convince our own Flock, that it is not
enough for them to be Members of an Excellent Church, rightly and duly
Reformed, both in Faith and Worship, unless they do also reform and amend their
own Lives, an so order their Conversation in all things as becomes the Gospel
of Christ.

X. And forasmuch as those Romish Emissaries, like the Old Serpent, Insidiantur
Calcaneo, are wont to be most busy and troublesome to our People at the end of
their Lives, laboring to unsettle and perplex them in time of Sickness, and at
the hour of Death; that therefore all who have the Cure of Souls, be more
especially vigilant over them at that dangerous Season; that they stay not till
they be sent for, but enquire out the Sick in their respective Parishes, and
visit them frequently: that they examine them particularly concerning the state
of their Souls, and instruct them in their Duties, and settle them in their
Doubts, and comfort them in their Sorrows and Sufferings, and pray often with
them and for them; and by all the Methods which our Church prescribes, prepare
them for the due and worthy receiving of the Holy Eucharist, the Pledge of their
happy Resurrection: thus with their utmost Diligence, watching over every Sheep
within their Fold (especially in that critical Moment) lest those Evening
Wolves devour them.

XI. That they also walk in Wisdom toward those that are not of Our Communion:
and if there be in their Parishes any such, that they neglect not frequently to
confer with them in the Spirit of Meekness, seeking by all good Ways and Means
to gain and win them over to our Communion: More especially that they have a
very tender Regard to our Brethren the Protestant Dissenters; that upon
occasion offered, they visit them at their Houses, and receive them kindly at
their own, and treat them fairly wherever they meet them, discoursing calmly
and civilly with them; persuading them (if it may be) to a full Compliance with
our Church, or at least, that whereto we have already attained, we may all walk
by the same Rule, and mind the same thing. And in order hereunto that they take
all Opportunities of assuring and convincing them, that the Bishops of this
Church are really and sincerely irreconcilable Enemies to the Errors,
Superstitions, Idolatries and Tyrannies of the Church of Rome; and that the
very unkind Jealousies which some have had of us to the contrary were
altogether groundless.

And in the last place, that they warmly and most affectionately exhort them,
to join with us in daily fervent Prayer to the God of Peace, for an Universal
Blessed Union of all Reformed Churches, both at Home and Abroad, against our
common Enemies, and that all they who do confess the Holy Name of our dear
Lord, and do agree in the Truth of his Holy Word, may also meet in one Holy
Communion, and live in perfect Unity and Godly Love.

An Account of the late PROPOSALS of the Archbishop of Canterbury, with some
other Bishops, to his Majesty: In a LETTER to M. B. Esquire
SIR,
I Am much surprised at the ill Constructions some People make of the Actions
of those Bishops, who have lately waited upon the King; especially considering
that most of them are the very Men, who not many Months ago appeared so
publicly and so courageously, even to the hazard of all the Interests they had
in this World, in Defense of our Protestant Religion, and the Laws of the Land.

In order to the removing all groundless Jealousies, and unreasonable Surmises,
in an Affair of so great Consequence, which our Popish Enemies will, I am sure,
be very ready to foment and keep up, I have here sent you the Heads of those
Matters which were proposed by them to the King.

They waited upon Him, not as a Party separate either from the Nobility or
Gentry, whom they could (I believe) have wished his Majesty would rather have
called for at this Juncture; or from the rest of the Bishops or Clergy of
England; but as Persons whom the King was pleased, upon Reasons known only to
his Royal Breast, to command to attend upon Him.

The Heads which I send you, are not taken from any Copy of the Paper which my
Lords the Bishops presented to the King. I understand that all their Lordships
have been extremely careful to prevent the publishing of any Copies, and that
they still refuse to communicate any, tho they now lie under no Obligations to
the contrary. However, I do assure you with all faithfulness, that these Heads
which I am now sending you, are true Contents, obtained by another Method,
which in prudence you will imagine not fit for me to disclose.

You have already been told from me, that every one of these Bishops were sent
for up out of their Diocesses by Expresses from his Majesty, whom they first
waited on in a Body, on Friday the 28 th of September. I cannot, upon the
strictest inquiry, find that any thing passed betwixt the King and them, at
that first attendance upon Him, besides general Expressions of Favor and
Protection from his Majesty, and general returns of Duty and Loyalty from the
Bishops. This was matter of Admiration to us all here, who could not believe
but that the King had other Intentions of a nearer and more particular Concern,
when he first resolved to send so far for some of these Bishops: but these
Alterations in Councils are Things not sit for you or I to meddle with.

However, my Lords the Bishops were not satisfied herewith, concluding (as I
suppose) that his Majesty would not have sent for them so far, if he had not
intended to have advised with them in this Juncture, and to give them the
liberty of offering Him such Counsels as they thought necessary at this Time:
And therefore when his Grace my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury waited on the
King alone the first time, on Sunday morning, Sept. 30. being indisposed when
the other Bishops attended on Friday, their Lordships did, by my Lord of
Canterbury, intimate their Thoughts about that Affair, and their readiness to
the King; who was pleased not only to permit them to give him the best and most
particular Advices, but to encourage them to do it with all the freedom that
was necessary for the present Occasion.

Upon this Royal Invitation their Lordships assembled together the next day at
my Lord of Canterbury's Palace, and prepared, upon the most mature
deliberation, such Matters as they judged necessary for hi^ Majesty's Knowledge
and Consideration: And on the Wednesday after waited on the King in a Body,
when his Grace in his own, and in the name of the rest of the Bishops then
present, did, in a most excellent Speech, represent to his Majesty such things
as were thought by them absolutely necessary to the Settlement of the Nation,
amidst the present Distractions, and to the public Interest of Church and
State.

I am assured that his Grace delivered himself upon this Critical Occasion, as
with all dutifulness to his Majesty, so with all the readiness and the courage
that did become such an Apostolical Archbishop as God has blessed our Church of
England with at this Time.

You must not expect here his excellent Words, but an Abridgment of them,
according to my Talent, in a meaner Style.

I. First, the Bishops thought fit to represent in general to his Majesty, That
it was necessary for Him to restore all things to the state in which He found
them when He came to the Crown, by committing all Offices and Places of Trust
in the Government, to such of the Nobility and Gentry as were qualified for
them according to the Laws of this Kingdom; and by Redressing and Removing such
Grievances as were generally complained of.

II. Particularly, That his Majesty would Dissolve the Ecclesiastical
Commission, and promise to His People never to Erect any such Court for the
future.

III. That He would not only put an effectual stop to the issuing forth of any
Dispensations, but would Call in, and Cancel all those which had since his
coming to the Crown been obtained from Him.

IV. That he would Restore the Universities to their Legal State, and to their
Statutes and Customs, and would particularly Restore the Master of Magdalen
College in Cambridge, to the Profits of his Mastership, which he had been so
long Deprived of, by an Illegal Suspension; and the Ejected President and
Fellows of Magdalen College in Oxford, to their Properties in that College:
And, that He would not permit any Persons to enjoy any of the Preferments in
either University, but such as are qualified by the Statutes of the
Universities, the particular Statutes of their several Foundations, and the
Laws of the Land.

V. That He would suppress the Jesuits Schools opened in this City, or
elsewhere, and grant no more Licenses for such Schools as are apparently
against the Laws of this Nation, and His Majesty's True Interest.

VI. That He would send Inhibitions after those Four Romish Bishops, who under
the Title of Apostolic Vicars, did presume to Exercise within this Kingdom
such Jurisdictions as are by the Laws of the Land Invested in the Bishops of
the Church of England, and ought not to be Violated or Attempted by them.

VII. That He would suffer no more Quo Warranto's to be issued out against any
Corporations, but would restore to those Corporations which had been already
disturbed, their ancient Charters, Privileges, Grants, and Immunities, and
Condemn all those late Illegal Regulations of Corporations, by putting them
into their late Flourishing Condition, and Legal Establishment.

VIII. That He would fill up all the Vacant Bishoprics in England and Ireland,
with Persons duly qualified according to the Laws: and would especially take
into His Consideration the Sea of York, whose want of an Archbishop is very
prejudicial to that whole Province.

IX. That He would Act no more upon a Dispensing Power, nor insist upon it; but
permit that Affair at the first Session of a Parliament to be fairly Stated and
Debated, and Settled by Act of Parliament.

X. That upon the Restoration of Corporations to their Ancient Charters, and
Buroughs to their Prescriptive Rights, He would Order Writs to be issued out
for a fair and free Parliament, and suffer it to Sit to Redress all Grievances,
to Settle Matters in Church and State upon just and solid Foundations, and to
Establish a due Liberty of Conscience.

XI. Lastly, and above all, That His Majesty would permit some of His Bishops,
to lay such Motives and Arguments before him, as might by the Blessing of GOD,
bring back His Majesty unto the Communion of Our Holy Church of England, into
whose Catholic Faith He had been Baptized, in which He had been Educated, and
to which it was their earnest and daily Prayer to Almighty GOD, that His
Majesty might be Reunited.

All these Counsels were concluded with a Prayer to GOD, in whose Hands the
Hearts of Kings are, for a good Effect upon them; especially the last, about
bringing the King back to the Protestant Religion.

And now, Sir, I cannot but ask you, What grounds there are for any Men's
Jealousies of the Bishops Proceedings? Pray show this Letter to all your
Friends, that some may lay down their Fears, and others may have this Antidote
against taking any up. I do assure you, and I am certain I have the best
grounds in the World for my assurance, That the Bishops will never stir one Jot
from their PETITION; but that they will, whenever that happy Opportunity shall
offer itself, let the Protestant Dissenters find that they will be better than
their Word given in their Famous PETITION.

In the mean time let You and I, Commend the Prudence of these Excellent
Bishops, Admire their Courage, and Celebrate their just Praises, and never
forget to offer up most fervent Thanks to GOD, for his Adorning the Church of
England, at this Juncture, with such Eminent Apostolical Bishops. I am with all
Respect.

Yours, N. N.

The PETITION of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal for the Calling of a Free
Parliament: Together with his Majesty's Gracious Answer to their Lordships.
To the KING's most Excellent Majesty, The Humble Petition of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, Whose Names are Subscribed.
May it please your Majesty,
WE your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, in a deep Sense of the Miseries of a
War now breaking forth in the Bowels of this your Kingdom, and of the Danger to
which your Majesty's Sacred Person is thereby like to be Exposed, and also of
the Distractions of your People, by reason of their present Grievances, do
think our selves bound in Conscience of the Duty we owe to God, and our Holy
Religion, to your Majesty, and our Country, most humbly to offer to your
Majesty, That in our Opinion, the only visible Way to preserve your Majesty,
and this your Kingdom, would be the Calling of a Parliament, Regular and Free
in all its Circumstances.

We therefore do most earnestly beseech your Majesty, That you would be
graciously pleased, with all speed, to Call such a Parliament, wherein we shall
be most ready to promote such Counsels and Resolutions of Peace and Settlement
in Church and State, as may conduce to your Majesty's Honor and Safety, and to
the quieting the Minds of your People.

We do likelise humbly beseech your Majesty, in the mean time, to use such
means for the preventing the Effusion of Christian Blood, as to your Majesty
shall seem most meet.


And Your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc. W. Cant. Grafton. Ormond. Dorset.
Clare. Clarendon. Burlington. Anglesey. Rochester. Newport. Nom. Ebor. W.
Asaph. Fran. Ely. Tho. Roffen. Tho. Petriburg. Tho. Oxon. Paget. Chandois.
Osulston.


His Majesty's most Gracious Answer.
My LORDS,
WHAT You ask of Me, I most passionately desire: And I promise You, upon the
Faith of a King, That I will have a Parliament, and such an One as You ask for,
as soon as ever the Prince of Orange has quitted this Realm: For, How is it
possible a Parliament should be Free in all its Circumstances, as You Petition
for, whilst an Enemy is in the Kingdom, and can make a Return of near an
Hundred Voices?

The Lords Petition, with the King's Answer, may be printed, November. 20. 1688.
A Modest Vindication of the Petition of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal for
the Calling of a Free Parliament.
THIS D^fence is grounded upon three Fundamental Principles:

I. The Right of Petitioning. II. The Necessity. III. The Duty.
I. It is the undoubted Right of the Subjects to Petition, being founded upon
an Act of Parliament, and the highest Reason in the World; for that is a very
monstrous Government, where the People must not approach their King, and
acquaint him with their Grievances. The People have the greatest Property in
the Land, and therefore the most concerned when a Foreign Enemy is upon it;
their Welfare is the Supreme Law, and yet they must not desire to meet in order
to consult their own Preservation. The Jesuits (the sworn Enemies to the
English Nation) will take care of us, and our Posterity; therefore why should
we trouble our selves at this Juncture? They can levy Money with a Proclamation,
they can dispense with all Laws, and what should we do with a Parliament, when
the whole Statute-Book serves for no other End but to wipe the Tails of these
Reverend Satyrs, who fly into their Dens and Thickets, at the very sound of a
House of Commons?

II. The Necessity, and that an indispensible one: The Government turned
Topsy-Turvy, no Law, no Rule, all in a state of War; all Treaties broken, all
Obligations ceased; and yet the People must not come together to know why or
wherefore they Fight, or how they may avoid destroying one another; they must
hack and cut one another to pieces blindfold, and to no other End, but to save
the Jesuits, and the Knaves, and to ruin themselves: But the most Reverend
Bishops are told, that they shall have a Free Parliament as soon as ever the
Prince of Orange has quitted this Realm; that is, such a Free Parliament as
they were like to have had before the Prince came hither, shuffl'd, cut, and
packed, by Mr. Brent and his Missionaries; or perhaps ten times worse, or
rather none at all: for the Church of Rome is grown such an infamous Bankrupt,
that no Body will trust her further than they can command her: She may be
compared to the Tiger, which fawns, sneaks, and lurks, as long as the Hunter is
armed with his Spear and his Gun; but when once the Weapons are laid down, the
Beast flies upon the unwary Forester, tears and devours him.

III. The Duty: For what better Office could those pious Prelates and Patriots
of their Country do for the Publick-Good, than to make all People Friends, to
save the Lives of many Thousands, and to heal all our Wounds and Sores, which
they of the Roman Faith have inflicted upon a People too kind and good natured
for such ravenous Monsters, who go about seeking whom they may devour. France,
Ireland, Hungary, and the Valleys of Piedmont are still reeking with the Blood
of their poor innocent Preys, and ecchoing with the Lamentations of a People
ruined, by trusting these Crocodiles too much; and if God in his infinite Mercy
had not watched over these Kingdoms, and sent a Gabriel to guard them, they had
certainly fallen a Victim to the intolerable Pride, the lawless Fury, and
untractable Barbariety of a sort of Animals, called Catholics, subtle and
treacherous by Custom and Discipline, not to be chained by any Law, either of
God or Man; and therefore every Body knows how far we may rely upon them, when
the Archangel leaves us.

Exeter, Nov. 21. 1688.
Extract of the States General their Resolution. Thursday, 28th October, 1688.
UPon mature Deliberation, it is found sit, and resolved, that notice be given
to all their Ministers abroad, of all the Reasons which induce their H. and M.
to assist the Prince of Orange, going over to England in Person with Ships and
Forces, with Orders to the said Ministers to make use thereof in the several
Courts where they reside, as they shall think most convenient; and that it be
also writ to the said Ministers, that it is known to all the World that the
English Nation has a good while very much murmured and complained, that the
King (no doubt with the Evil Counsel, and Inducement of his Ministers) had
gained upon their Fundamental Laws, and labored through the violation thereof;
and by the bringing in the Roman Catholic Religion, to oppress their Liberty,
and to ruin the Protestant Religion, and to bring all under an Arbitrary
Government: That as this inverted and unjust Conduct was carried on more and
more, and the Apprehensions thereupon were still greater, and that thereby such
Diffidence and Aversion was stirred up against the King, that nothing was to be
expected in that Kingdom but general Disorder and Confusion. His Highness the
Prince of Orange, upon the manifold Representations, and the reiterated and
earnest Desire which was made to His Highness by several Lords, and other
Persons of great Consideration in that Kingdom; as also upon the account that
Her Royal Highness, and His Highness Himself, are so highly concerned in the
Welfare of that Kingdom, could not well endure that through Strife and Disunion
they should run the danger, however it went, of being excluded from the Crown,
held himself obliged to watch over the Welfare of that Kingdom, and to take
care thereof; and also had the thoughts of assisting the Nation, and giving
them a helping-hand, upon so many just and good Grounds, against the Government
that oppressed them in all manner of ways that lay in his Highness's Power, for
that His Highness was persuaded that the Welfare of this State (the Care
whereof is also entrusted to him) was in the highest manner concerned, that the
said Kingdom might continue in Tranquillity, and that all misunderstanding
between the King and the Nation might be taken away. That His Highness well
knowing, that to succeed in so Important and Laudable a Cause, and not to be
hindered and prevented by those that were evil inclined toward it, it was
necessary to pass over into that Kingdom accompanied with some Military Forces,
has thereupon made known his Intentions to their Highnesses, and desired
Assistance from their Highnesses, that their Highnesses having maturely weighed
all things, and considered that the King of France and Great Britain stood in
very good Correspondence and Friendship one with the other, which their
Highnesses have been frequently very well assured of, and in a strict and
particular Alliance; and that their Highnesses were informed and advertised,
that their Majesty's had labored upon a Concert, to divide and separate this
State from its Alliances; and that the King of France has, upon several
occasions, showed himself dissatisfied with this State, which gave cause to
fear and apprehend that in case the King of Great Britain should happen to
compass his Aim within his Kingdom, and obtain an absolute Power over his
People, that then both Kings, out of Interest of State, and Hatred and Zeal
against the Protestant Religion, would endeavor to bring this State to
Confusion, and if possible, quite to subject it, have resolved to commend His
Highness in his undertaking of the above said Designs, and to grant to him for
his Assistance, some Ships and Militia, as Auxiliaries; that in pursuance
thereof, His Highness has declared to their Highnesses, that he is resolved,
with God's Grace and Favor, to go over into England, not with the least
insight or intention to invade or subdue that Kingdom, or to remove the King
from his Throne, much less to make himself Master thereof, or to invert or
prejudice the Lawful Succession, as also not to drive thence, or persecute the
Roman Catholics, but only and solely to help that Nation in re-establishing
the Laws and Privileges that have been broken, as also in maintaining their
Religion and Liberty; and to that end, to further and bring it about, that a
free and lawful Parliament may be called in such manner, and of such Persons,
as are regulated and qualified by the Laws and Form of that Government; and
that the said Parliament may deliberate upon, and establish all such Matters as
shall be judged necessary to assure and secure the Lords, the Clergy, Gentry,
and People, that their Rights, Laws and Privileges, shall be no more violated
or broken, that their High and Mightinesses hope and trust, that with God's
Blessing, the Repose and Unity of that Kingdom shall be re-established, and the
same be thereby brought into a Condition to be able, powerfully to concur to
the common benefit of Christendom, and to the restoring and maintaining of
Peace and Tranquillity in Europe. That Copies hereof be delivered to all their
Foreign Ministers residing here, to be used by them as they shall see occasion.

The P.O's Letter to the English Army.
Gentlemen and Friends,
WE have given you so full, and so true an Account of our Intentions, in this
Expedition in our Declaration, that as we can add nothing to it, so we are sure
you can desire nothing more of us. We are come to preserve your Religion, and
to restore and establish your Liberties and Properties; and therefore we cannot
suffer our selves to doubt but that all true Englishmen will come and concur
with us, in our desire to secure these Nations from POPERY and SLAVERY. You
must all plainly see, that you are only made use of as Instruments to enslave
the Nation, and ruin the Protestant Religion, and when that is done, you may
judge what ye your selves ought to expect, both from the cashiering of all the
Protestant and English Officers and Soldiers in Ireland, and by the Irish
Soldiers being brought over to be put in your places; and of which you have
seen so fresh an Instance, that we need not put you in mind of it. You know how
many of your fellow-Officers have been used for their standing firm to the
Protestant Religion, and to the Laws of England, and you cannot flatter your
selves so far as to expect to be better used, if those who have broke their
word so often, should by your means be brought cut of those Straits to which
they are reduced at present. We hope likewise, that you will not suffer your
selves to be abused by a false Notion of Honor, but that you will in the first
place consider, what you owe to Almighty God and your Religion, to your
Country, to your Selves, and to your Posterity, which you, as Men of Honor,
ought to prefer to all private Considerations and Engagements whatsoever. We do
therefore expect, that you will consider the Honor that is now set before you,
of being the Instruments of serving your Country, and securing your Religion,
and we will ever remember the Service you shall do Us upon this Occasion, and
will promise unto you, that We shall place such particular Marks of our Favor
on every one of you, as your Behavior at this time shall deserve of Us, and
the Nation; in which we will make a great Distinction of those that shall come
seasonably to join their Arms with Ours, and you shall find us to be

Your Well-wishing, and Assured Friend, W. H. P. O.

An Account of a wicked Design of Poisoning the PRINCE of Orange before he came
out of Holland. ALSO A Relation from the City of Orange of a strange METEOR,
representing a Crown of Light, that was there seen in the Air, May the 6 th,
1688.
In a Letter from a Gentleman in Amsterdam, to his Friend in London, October. 1.
1688.
SIR,
THE two enclosed Relations are sent me from an Eminent Divine, now at the
Hague, you will do well to make them public: The poisoning Business I doubt
not but was contrived by a sort of Men that in all Ages stick at nothing to
carry on their Bloody Religion.

An Account of a Design of Poisoning the PRINCE of ORANGE.
THere is a Man of Lunenburg Wolfenbuttel, who being fallen in Debt in
Amsterdam, upon his Father's Death, his Brother taking no Care of him, was put
in Prison and brought extreme low; yet he was brought out by the means of a
Friend: And soon after a Man who pretended to know him, and to have seen him
before, (though the German believes he never saw him) seemed to take pity on
him, seeing him in a Coffee-House, and gave him a Ducatoon, and promised he
should never want; so he entered into a great familiarity with him, but would
never let him know where he lodged, only he gave him Appointments in
Coffee-Houses, and Taverns, and fed him from time to time with Money: At last,
after some weeks, he drew him into a secret Walk in the Grounds that are not
yet built, and asked him if he had a Heart to do a bold Thing? The German said
he had, if it were not such a Thing as might bring him to a Scaffold. The other
said, There was no Danger, only it would require a little hardiness. Then he
asked an Oath of the German, That he would either do that which he was to
propose to him, or presently go out of the Country. The German said, He could
not go out of the Country, for he had no Money: And then he gave him eight
Ducats in Gold, and then he he swore the Oath: So the other proposed to him the
poisoning the Prince of Orange: that startled him, but apprehending he should
be killed if he refused it, he undertook it. The other told him, That in the
last Age Men had tried Stabbing or Shooting, but these were dangerous Things,
Poisoning was a safe and sure way: He added, That he should have 3000 Pistols
in hand, and a Fortune besides. The German asked, From whom? The other, who
called himself Corn, and spoke French like a Stranger, but the German cannot
judge what Nation he was of; the other, I say, said to him, That if he had the
Money, he was not concerned to know from whence it came. In short, he made a
Proposition to the German, giving him a Quill with a Water in it, carefully
stopped, and told him, that he (the German) lodged in the House of an
inconsiderable Man, of whom no regard would be had; and if he would cut the
Quill, so that one drop of the Liquor fell into any thing that his Landlord was
to drink, he would be certainly dead before to Morrow; and if he would begin
with him, one should come to him to such a place to Morrow, having a white
Feather in his Hat, who should deliver him 1500 Pistols, and instruct him how
to manage the Poisoning the Prince, which he should find would be easy and
safe; then upon his going on he should have the rest of the Money. The German
went Home, but was struck with Horror, and so resolved to keep that part of his
Oath of going out of the Country; yet he showed another his Gold, and told him
of his going Home: But from Osnaburgh he writ to one about the Prince; this
happned in the beginning of March last. So he was desired to come back, which
he did, and the Matter being brought into the Court of Holland, upon an Oath of
Secresy, Mr. Halewyn Deputy of Dort, and another, were sent with him to
Amsterdam; they found many collatoral Confirmations of part of his Story; but
no such Man could be seen in all the Places where he had met with him formerly;
the German came to the Hague, and being in the Fair, seeing one of the Shows,
and a Dane with him* as they came out in a huge Crowd, the German complained
that one struck him on the Breast with a Battoon: But this was not minded till
they were quite out, and he found one had struck at him, as it seems, with a
Stilletto under the left Pap, his Cloak and Coat were cut, and the Wound proved
but a slight Scratch: the Quill with the Poison in it sealed, is in the Court.
It seems, a German was thought a fit Tool, being of a Nation that would not be
easily suspected; and the putting it on a Lutheran would have been thought a
Masterpiece. I give you this Account, which I will Answer for, to satisfy some
of your Friends, both Here and in England, who will perhaps desire to know the
Certainty of this Matter.

A Relation from the City of Orange, of a Crown of LIGHT that was there seen in
the Air, the 6 th of May, 1688.
ON the 6 th of May, 1665, when his Royal Highness, the Prince of Orange, took
Possession of that Principality, and whilst his Deputy Mr. Ziulechem was taking
the Oath of Allegiance of all the People in the Prince's Name; which was done
in the Fields, in the Enclosure of the old Roman Cirque that yet remains; over
the Chair of State that was set there for the Prince, a Crown of Light appeared
in the Air, and hovered over the Chair above an hour: And now this Year, 1688,
the same day of the Month, in the same place, the like Crown appeared and
continued there three Hours, all the People of Orange looking on; all the
difference between this Years Crown, and that of 1665, being, that this had an
Edg of Red about it.

This is written from Orange by an Old Professor of Physic, that is past
sixty, and not apt to take Things upon Trust; he writes, that he himself, as
well as all the Town, looked on it for above two Hours with great admiration of
that strange Meteor.

An Account of that strange Meteor in 1665, is relat^d by Aitrema in his 5 th
Tome, fol. 595. well attested, and he is a good Author.

Lord Del -- r's Speech.
THE occasion of this, is to give you my Thoughts upon the present Conjuncture,
which concerns not only you, but every Protestant, and Freeborn Man of
England, I am confident, that wishes well to the Protestant Religion and his
Country; and I am persuaded, that every Man of you thinks both in danger, and
now to lie at stake. I am also persuaded, that every Man of you will rejoice to
see Religion and Property settled; if so, then I am not mistaken in my
Conjectures concerning you. Can you everhope for a better Occasion to root out
POPERY and SLAVERY, than by joining with the P. of O. whose Proposals contain
and speak the Desires of every Man that loves his Religion and Liberty? And in
saying this, I will invite you to nothing but what I will do my self; and I
will not desire any of you to go any further than I will move my self; neither
will I put you upon any Danger where I will not take share in it. I propose
this to you, not as you are my Tenants, but as my Friends, and as you are
Englishmen. No Man can love fighting for its own sake, nor find any Pleasure in
Danger. And you may imagine, I would be very glad to spend the rest of my Days
in Peace, I having had so great a share in Troubles; but I see all lies at
Stake, I am to choose whether I will be a Slave and a Papist, or a Protestant
and a Freeman; and therefore the Case being thus, I shall think my self false
to my Country, if I sit still at this time. I am of Opinion, that when the
Nation is delivered, it must be by Force or by Miracle: It would be too great a
presumption to expect the latter, and therefore our Deliverance must be by
Force, and I hope this is the Time for it; a Price is now put into our Hands,
and if it miscarry for want of Assistance, our Blood is upon our own Heads; and
he that is passive at this Time, may very well expect that God will mock when
the Fear of Affliction comes upon him, which he thought to avoid by being
indifferent.

If the K. prevails, farewell Liberty of Conscience, which has hitherto been
allowed, not for the sake of the Protestants, but in order to settle Popery.
You may see what to expect if he get the better; and he has lately given you,
of this Town, a taste of the Method whereby he will maintain his Army. And you
may see of what sort of People he intends his Army to consist; and if you have
not a mind to serve such Masters, then stand not by and see your Countrymen
perish, when they are endeavoring to defend you.

I promise this on my Word and Honor, to every Tenant that goes along with me,
That if he fall, I will make his Lease as good to his Family, as it was when he
went from home. The thing then which I desire, and your Country does expect
from you, is this, That every Man that has a tolerable Horse, or can procure
one, will meet me on Boden-Downs to morrow where I Randezvouz: But if any of
you is rendered unable by reason of Age, or any other just Excuse, then that he
would mount a fitter Person, and put five Pounds in his Pocket. Those that have
not, nor cannot procure Horse, let them stay at home and assist with their
Purses, and send it to me with a particular of every Man's Contribution. I
impose on no Man, but let him lay his Hand on his Heart, and consider what he
is willing to give to recover his Religion and Liberty; and to such I promise,
and to all that go along with me, that if we prevail, I will be as industrious
to have him recompensed for his Charge and Hazard, as I will be to seek it for
my self. This Advice I give to all that stay behind, That when you hear the
Papists have committed any Outrage, or any Rising, that you will get together;
for it is better to meet your Danger than expect it. I have no more to say, but
that I am willing to lose my Life in the Cause, if God see it good, for I was
never unwilling to die for my Religion and Country.

Prince GEORGE'S LETTER TO THE KING.
SIR,
WIth a Heart full of Grief am I forced to write, that Prudence will not permit
me to say to your Face. And may I ever find Credit with your Majesty, and
Protection from Heaven, as what I now do, is free from Passion, Vanity or
Design, with which Actions of this Nature are too often accompanied. I am not
ignorant of the frequent Mischiefs wrought in the World by factious Pretenses
of Religion; but were not Religion the most justifiable Cause, it would not be
made the most specious Pretense. And your Majesty has always shown too
uninterested a Sense of Religion, to doubt the just Effects of it in one whose
Practices have, I hope, never given the World cause to censure his real
Conviction of it, or his backwardness to perform what his Honor and Conscience
prompt him to: How then can I longer disguise my just Concern for that Religion
in which I have been so happily educated, which my Judgment thoroughly convinces
me to be the best; and for the Support of which I am so highly interested in my
Native Country? and is not England now by the most endearing Tie become so?

Whilst the restless Spirits of the Enemies of the REFORMED RELIGION, backed by
the cruel Zeal and prevailing Power of France, justly alarm and unite all the
Protestant Princes of Christendom, and engage them in so vast an Expense for
the support of it, can I act so degenerous and mean a part, as to deny my
Concurrence to such worthy Endeavors for disabusing of your Majesty by the
Reinforcement of those Laws, and Establishment of that Government, on which
alone depends the well-being of your Majesty, and of the PROTESTANT RELIGION in
Europe. This, Sir, is that irresistible and only Cause that could come in
Competition with my Duty and Obligations to your Majesty, and be able to tear
me from you, whilst the same Affectionate Desire of serving you continues in
me. Could I secure your Person by the Hazard of my Life; I should think it
could not be better employed: And would to God these your distracted Kingdoms
might yet receive that satisfactory Compliance from your Majesty in all their
justifiable Pretensions, as might upon the only sure Foundation, that of the
Love and Interest of your Subjects, establish your Government, and as strongly
unite the Hearts of all your Subjects to You, as is that of,

SIR, Your Majesty's most Humble, and most Obedient Son and Servant.

The Lord CHURCHIL'S LETTER to the KING.
SIR,
SInce Men are seldom suspected of Sincerity, when they act contrary to their
Interests; and though my dutiful Behavior to your Majesty in the worst of
Times, (for which I acknowledge my poor Services much over-paid) may not be
sufficient to incline You to a charitable Interpretation of my Actions, yet I
hope, the great Advantage I enjoy under Your Majesty, which I can never expect
in any other Change of Government, may reasonably convince Your Majesty and the
World, that I am acted by a higher Principle, when I offer that violence to my
Inclination and Interest, as to desert Your Majesty at a time when your Affairs
seem to challenge the strictest Obedience from all Your Subjects, much more
from one who lies under the greatest personal Obligations imaginable to Your
Majesty. This Sir, could proceed from nothing but the inviolable Dictates of my
CONSCIENCE, and a necessary concern for my RELIGION (which no good Man can
oppose) and with which I am instructed nothing ought to come in Competition;
Heaven knows with what partiality my dutiful Opinion of Your Majesty has
hitherto represented those unhappy Designs, which inconsiderate and
self-interested Men have framed against Your Majesty's true Interest and the
Protestant Religion. But as I can no longer join with such to give a pretense
by Conquest to bring them to effect, so will I always with the hazard of my
Life and Fortune (so much Your Majesty's due) endeavor to preserve Your Royal
Person and Lawful Rights, with all the tender Concern and dutiful Respect that
becomes,

SIR, Your Majesty's most dutiful and most obliged Subject and Servant.

The Princess ANNE of Denmark's LETTER to the QVEEN.
MADAM,
I Beg your pardon if I am so deeply affected with the surprising News of the
Princes being gone, as not to be able to see You, but to leave this Paper to
Express my humble Duty to the King and your Self; and to let You know that I am
gone to absent my self to avoid the King's Displeasure, which I am not able to
bear, either against the Prince or my self: and I shall stay at so great a
distance, as not to return before I hear the happy News of a Reconcilement: And
as I am confident the Prince did not leave the King with any other Design, than
to use all possible means for his Preservation; so I hope You will do me the
Justice to believe that I am incapable of following him for any other End.
Never was any one in such an unhappy Condition, so divided between Duty and
Affection, to a Father, and a Husband; and therefore I know not what to do, but
to follow one to preserve the other. I see the general falling off of the
Nobility and Gentry, who avow to have no other End, than to prevail with the
King to secure their Religion, which they saw so much in danger by the Violent
Counsels of the Priests; who to promote their own Religion, did not care to
what Dangers they exposed the King: I am fully persuaded that the Prince of
Orange designs the King's Safety and Preservation, and hope all things may be
composed without more Bloodshed, by the Calling a Parliament. God grant a happy
End to these Troubles, that the King's Reign may be prosperous, and that I may
shortly meet You in perfect Peace and Safety; till when, let me beg You to
continue the same favorable Opinion that you have hitherto had of,

Your most Obedient Daughter and Servant, ANNE.

A MEMORIAL OF THE Protestants of the Church of England Presented to their
Royal Highnesses the Prince and Princess of ORANGE.
YOur Royal Highnesses cannot be ignorant that the Protestants of England, who
continue true to their Religion, and the Government established by Law, have
been many ways troubled and vexed by restless Contrivances and Designs of the
Papists, under pretense of the Royal Authority, and things required of
unaccountable before God and Man; Ecclesiastical Benefices and Preferments
taken from them, without any other Reason but the King's Pleasure; that they
have been summoned and sentenced by Ecclesiastical Commissioners, contrary to
Law, deprived of their Birthright in the free Choice of their Magistrates and
Representatives; diverse Corporations dissolved; the Legal Security of our
Religion and Liberty, established and ratified by King and Parliament, annulled
and overthrown by a pretended Dispensing Power; new and unheard of Maxims have
been preached, as if Subjects had no Right but what depends on the King's Will
and Pleasure. The Militia put into the Hands of Persons not qualified by Law;
and a Popish Mercenary Army maintained in the Kingdom in Time of Peace,
absolutely contrary to Law: The Execution of the Law against several high
Crimes and Misdemenours superceded and prohibited; the Statutes against
Correspondence with the Court of Rome, Papal Jurisdiction, and Popish Priests,
suspended; that in Courts of Justice those Judges are displaced who dare acquit
them whom the K. would have condemned, as happened to Judge Powel and Holloway
for acquitting the seven Bishop^: Liberty of choosing Members of Parliament
(notwithstanding all the Care taken, and Provision made by Law on that behalf)
wholly taken away by Quo Warranto's served against Corporations, and the three
known Questions. All things carried on in open view for the Propagation and
Growth of Popery; for which the Courts of England and France have so long
jointly labored with so much Application and Earnestness. Endeavors used to
persuade your Royal Highnesses to consent to Liberty of Conscience and
abrogating the Penal Laws and Tests, wherein they fell short of their Aim.

That they most humbly implore the Protection of your Royal Highnesses, as to
the suspending and Encroachments made upon the Law for maintenance of the
Protestant Religion, our Civil and Fundamental Rights and Privileges; and that
your Royal Highnesses would be pleased to insist, that the Free Parliament of
England, according to Law, may be restored, the Laws against Papists, Priests,
Papal Jurisdiction, etc. put in Execution, and the Suspending and Dispensing
Power declared null and void; the Rights and Privileges of the City of London,
the free Choice of their Magistrates, and the Liberties as well of that as
other Corporations restored, and all things returned to their ancient Channel,
etc.

THE PRINCE of ORANGE HIS DECLARATION of November. 28. 1688.
WE have in the course of our whole Life, and more particularly by the apparent
Hazards both by Sea and Land, to which We have so lately exposed our Person,
given to the whole World so high and undoubted Proofs of our fervent Zeal for
the Protestant Religion, that we are fully confident no true Englishman, and
good Protestant, can entertain the least Suspicion of our firm Resolution,
rather to spend our dearest Blood, and perish in the Attempt, than not carry on
the blessed and glo^ious. Design, which by the Favor of Heaven we have so
successfully begun, to rescue England, Scotland, and Ireland from Slavery and
Popery, and in a Free Parliament to establish the Religion, the Laws and the
Liberties of those Kingdoms, upon such a sure and lasting Foundation, that it
shall not be in the Power of any Prince for the future to introduce Popery and
Tyranny.

Toward the more easy Composing this great Design, We have not been hitherto
deceived in the just Expectation we had of the Concurrence of the Nobility,
Gentry, and People of England with Us, for the Security of their Religion, the
Restitution of the Laws, and Re-establishment of their Liberties and
Properties: Great Numbers of all Ranks and Qualities having joined themselves
to us; and others at great Distances from Us, have taken up Arms and declared
for Us. And, which we cannot but particular mention, in that Army which was
raised to be the Instrument of Slavery and Popery, many (by the special
Providence of God) both Officers and Common Soldiers, have been touched with
such a feeling Sense of Religion and Honor, and of true Affection for their
Native Country, that they have already deserted the Illegal Service they were
engaged in, and have come over to Us; and have given Us full Assurance, from
the rest of the Army, that they will certainly follow this Example, as soon as
with our Army we shall approach near enough to receive them, without the Hazard
of being prevented and betrayed. To which End, and that We may the sooner
execute this just and necessary Design We are engaged in for the Public Safety
and Deliverance of these Nations, We are resolved, with all possible Diligence,
to advance forward, that a Free Parliament may be forthwith called, and such
Preliminaries adjusted with the King, and all Things first settled upon such a
Foot according to Law, as may give Us and the whole Nation just Reason to
believe the King is disposed to make such necessary Condescentions on his part,
as will give entire Satisfaction and Security to all, and make both King and
People once more Happy.

And that we may effect all this, in the way most agreeable to our Desires, if
it be possible, without the Effusion of any Blood, except of those execrable
Crimin^als who have justly forfeited their Lives for betraying the Religion,
and Subverting the Laws of their Native Country, We do think fit to declare,
that as we will offer no Violence to any but in our own Necessary Defense; so
we will not suffer any Injury to be done to the Person even of a Papist,
provided he be found in such Place, and in such Condition and Circumstances as
the Laws require. So we are resolved and do declare that all Papists, who shall
be found in open Arms, or with Arms in their Houses, or about their Persons, or
in any Office or Employment Civil or Military, upon any Pretense whatsoever,
contrary to the known Laws of the Land, shall be treated by Us and our Forces
not as Soldiers and Gentlemen, but as Robbers, Free-Booters and Banditti; they
shall be incapable of Quarter, and entirely delivered up to the Discretion of
our Soldiers. And We do further declare that all Persons who shall be found
any ways aiding and assisting to them, or shall march under their Command, or
shall join with or submit to them in the Discharge or Execution of their
Illegal Commissions or Authority, shall be looked upon as Partakers of their
Crimes, Enemies to the Laws, and to their Country.

And whereas we are certainly informed that great Numbers of Armed Papists have
of late resorted to London and Westminister, and parts adjacent, where they
remain, as we have reason to suspect, not so much for their own Security, as
out of a wicked and barbarous Design to make some desperate Attempt upon the
said Cities, and their Inhabitants, by Fire, or a sudden Massacre, or both; or
else to be the more ready to join themselves to a Body of French Troops,
designed, if it be possible, to land in England, procured of the French King,
by the Interest and Power of the Jesuits in Pursuance of the Engagements, which
at the Instigation of that pestilent Society, his most Christian Majesty, with
one of his Neighboring Princes of the same Communion, has entered into for the
utter Extirpation of the Protestant Religion out of Europe. Though we hope we
have taken such effectual care to prevent the one, and secure the other, that
by God's Assistance, we cannot doubt but we shall defeat all their wicked
Enterprises and Designs.

We cannot however forbear, out of the great and tender Concern we have to
preserve the People of England, and particularly those great and populous
Cities, from the cruel Rage and bloody Revenge of the Papists, to require and
expect from all the Lord-Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, and Justices of
Peace, Lord-Mayors, Mayors, Sheriffs, and all other Magistrates, and Officers
Civil and Military, of all Counties, Cities Towns of England, especially of the
County of Middlesex, and Cities of London and Westminster, and Parts adjacent,
that they do immediately Disarm and Secure, as by Law they may and ought,
within their respective Counties, Cities, and Jurisdictions, all Papists
whatsoever, as Persons at all Times, but now especially most dangerous to the
Peace and Safety of the Government, that so not only all Power of doing
Mischief may be taken from them, but that the Laws, which are the greatest and
best Security, may resume their Force, and be strictly Executed.

And We do hereby likewise declare, that We will Protect and Defend all those
who shall not be afraid to do their Duty in Obedience to these Laws. And that
for those Magistrates and others, of what condition soever they be, who shall
refuse to assist Us, and in Obedience to the Laws, to Execute vigorously what
We have required of them, and suffer themselves at this Juncture to be cajoled
or terrified out of their Duty, We will esteem them the most Criminal and
Infamous of all Men, Betrayers of their Religion, the Laws, and their Native
Country, and shall not fail to treat them accordingly; resolving to expect and
require at their Hands the Life of every single Protestant that shall perish,
and every House that shall be burnt or destroyed by their Treachery and
Cowardice.

William Henry, Prince of Orange. By his Highness special Command, C. HUYGENS.
Given under our Hand and Seal, at our Headquarters at Sherburn-Castle, the 28
th day of November, 1688.
FINIS.
A SECOND Collection of Papers Relating to the Present Juncture of Affairs in
England. VIZ. I. An Enquiry into the Measures of Submission to the Supreme
Authority; and of the Grounds on which it may be lawful or necessary for
Subjects to defend their Religion, Lives, and Liberties. II. An Answer to a
Paper, entitled, Reflections on the Prince of Orange's Declaration. III.
Admiral Herbert's Letter to all Commanders of Ships and Seamen in his Majesty's
Fleet. IV. An Engagement of the Noblemen, Knights and Gentlemen at Exeter, to
assist the Prince of Orange in the Defense of the Protestant Religion, Laws and
Liberties of the People of England, Scotland, and Ireland. V. The Declaration
of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty at the Rendezvous at Nottingham,
November. 22. 1688. VI. The Duke of Norfolk's Speech to the Mayor of Norwich on
the first of December instant, in the Marketplace of Norwich. VII. The Address
of the Lord Dartmouth, and the Commanders of his Majesty's Fleet, giving his
Majesty hearty Thanks for calling a Parliament to settle the Realm both in
Church and State.


Printed in the Year, 1688.

AN ENQUIRY Into the Measures of SUBMISSION TO THE SUPREME AUTHORITY: And of
the Grounds upon which it may be lawful or necessary for Subjects to defend
their Religion, Lives, and Liberties.
THis Enquiry cannot be regularly made, but by taking in the first place, a
true and full view of the nature of Civil Society, and more particularly of the
nature of Supreme Power, whether it is lodged in one or more Persons?

1. It is certain, That the Law of Nature has put no difference nor
subordination among Men, except it be that of Children to Parents, or of Wives
to their Husbands; so that with Relation to the Law of Nature, all Men are born
free: and this Liberty must still be supposed entire, unless so far as it is
limited by Contracts, Provisions and Laws. For a Man can either bind himself to
be a Servant, or sell himself to be a Slave, by which he becomes in the power
of another, only so far as it was provided by the Contract: since all that
Liberty which was not expressly given away, remains still entire: so that the
Plea for Liberty always proves it self, unless it appears that it is given up
or limited by any special Agreement.

II. It is no less certain, that as the Light of Nature has planted in all Men
a Natural Ptinciple of the Love of Life, and of a desire to preserve it; so the
common Principles of all Religion agree in this, that God having set us in this
World, we are bound to preserve that Being, which he has given us, by all just
and lawful ways. Now this Duty of Self-preservation is exerted in Instances of
two sorts; the one are, in the resisting of violent Aggressors; the other are
the taking of just Revenges of those, who have invaded us so secretly, that we
could not prevent them, and so violently that we could not resist them: In
which cases the Principle of self-Preservation warrants us, both to recover
what is our own, with just Damages, and also to put such unjust Persons out of
a Capacity of doing the like Injuries any more, either to our selves, or to any
others. Now in these Instances of Self-Preservation, this difference is to be
observed; that the first cannot be limited by any slow Forms, since a pressing
Danger requires a vigorous Repulse, and cannot admit of Delays; whereas the
second, of taking Revenges, or Reparations, is not of such haste, but that it
may be brought under Rules and Forms.

III. The true and Original Notion of Civil Society and Government, is, that it
is a Compromise made by such a Body of Men, by which they resign up the Right
of demanding Reparations, either in the way of Justice against one another, or
in the way of War, against their Neighbors; to such a single Person, or to
such a Body of Men as they think fit to trust with this. And in the management
of this Civil Society, great distinctions is to be made, between the Power of
making Laws for the regulating the Conduct of it, and the Power of executing
those Laws: The Supreme Authority must still be supposed to be lodged with
those who have the Legislative Power reserved to them, but not with those who
have only the Executive; which is plainly a Trust, when it is separated from
the Legislative Power; and all Trusts, by their nature import, that those to
whom they are given, are accountable, even though that it should: not be
expressly specified in the words of the Trust it self.

IV. It cannot be supposed, by the Principles of Natural Religion, that God has
authorized any one Form of Government, any other way than as the general Rules
of Order, and of Justice, oblige all Men not to subvert Constitutions, nor
disturb the Peace of Mankind, or invade those Rights with which the Law may
have vested some Persons: for it is certain, that as private Contracts lodge or
translate private Rights; so the Public Laws can likewise lodge such Rights,
Prerogatives and Revenues in those under whose Protection they put themselves,
and in such a manner, that they may come to have as good a Title to these, as
any private Person can have to his Property: so that it becomes an Act of high
Injustice and Violence to invade these: which is so far a greater Sin than any
such Actions would be against a private Person, as the public Peace and Order
is preferrable to all private Considerations whatsoever. So that in Truth, the
Principles of Natural Religion, give those that are in Authority no Power at
all, but they do only secure them in the Possession of that which is theirs by
Law. And as no Considerations of Religion can bind me to pay another more than
I indeed owe him, but do only bind me more strictly to pay what I owe; so the
Considerations of Religion do indeed bring Subjects under stricter Obligations
to pay all due Allegiance and Submission to their Princes, but they do not at
all extend that Allegiance further than the Law carries it. And though a Man
has no Divine Right to his Property, but has acquired it by human means, such
as Succession, or Industry, yet he has a Security for the Enjoyment of it, from
a Divine Right; so tho Princes have no immediate Warrants from Heaven, either
for their Original Titles, or for the extent of them, yet they are secured in
the Possession of them by the Principles and Rules of Natural Religion.

V. It is to be considered, that as a private Person can bind himself to
another Man's Service, by different degrees, either as an ordinary Servant for
Wages, or as one appropriate for a longer time, as an Apprentice; or by a total
giving himself up to another, as in the case of Slavery: in all which cases the
general Name of Master may be equally used, yet the degrees of his Power, are
to be judged by the nature of the Contract: so likewise Bodies of Men can give
themselves up in different degrees to the Conduct of others: and therefore
though all those may carry the same Name of King, yet every ones Power is to be
taken from the measures of that Authority which is lodged in him, and not from
any general Speculations founded on some Equivocal Terms, such as King,
Sovereign, or Supreme.

VI. It is certain, that God, as the Creator and Governor of the World, may
set up whom he will to rule over other Men: But this Declaration of his Will
must be made evident by Prophets, or other extraordinary Men sent of him, who
have some manifest proofs of the Dvine Authority that is committed to them on
such occasions, and upon such Persons declaring the Will of God in favor of
any others, that Declaration is to be submitted to and obeyed. But this
pretense of a Divine Delegatation, can be carried no further than to those who
are thus expressly marked out, and is unjustly claimed by those who can prove no
such Declaration to have been ever made in favor of them or their Families.
Nor does it appear reasonable to conclude from their being in Possession, that
it is the Will of God that it should be so, this justifies all Usurpers when
they are successful.

VII. The measures of Power, and by consequence of Obedience, must be taken
from the express Laws of any State or Body of Men, from the Oaths that they
swear, or from immemorial Prescription, and a long Possession, which both give
a Title, and in a long Tract of Time make a bad one become good, since
Prescription, when it passes the Memory of Man, and is not disputed by any
other Pretender, gives by the common Sense of all Men a just and good Title: so
upon the whole matter, the degrees of all Civil Authority are to be taken
either from express Laws, immemorial Customs, or from particular Oaths, which
the Subjects swear to their Princes: this being still to be laid down for a
Principle, that in all the Disputes between Power and Liberty, Power must
allways be ^roved, but Liberty proves it self; the one being founded on^y upon
a Positive Law, and the other upon the Law of Nature.

VIII. If from the general Principles of Human Society, and Natural Religion,
we carry this matter to be examined by the Scriptures, it is clear that all the
Passages that are in the Old Testament, are not to be made use of in this
matter of neither side. For as the Land of Canaan was given to the Jews by an
immediate Grant from Heaven; so God reser^^^ still this to himself, and to the
Declarations that he should ^^^^ke from time to time, either by his Prophets,
or by the Answers that came from the Cloud of Glory that was between the
Cherubims, to set up Judges or Kings over them, and to pull them down again as
he thought fit. Here was an express Delegation made by God, and therefore all
that was done in that Dispensation, either for or against Princes, is not to be
made use of in any other State that is founded on another Bottom and
Constitution, and all the Expressions in the Old Testament relating to Kings,
since they belong to Persons that were immediately designed by God, are without
any sort of Reason applied to those who can pretend to no such Designation,
neither for themselves nor for their Ancestors.

IX. As for the New Testament, it is plain, that there are no Rules given in
it, neither for the Forms of Government in general, nor for the degrees of any
one Form in particular, but the general Rules of Justice, Order and Peace,
being established in it upon higher Motives, and more binding Considerations,
than ever they were in any other Religion whatsoever, we are most strictly
bound by it to observe the Constitution in which we are; and it is plain, that
the Rules set us in the Gospel can be carried no further. It is indeed clear
from the New Testament, that the Christian Religion as such, gives us no
grounds to defend or propagate it by force. It is a Doctrine of the Cross, and
of Faith, and Patience under it: And if by the order of Divine Providence, and
of any Constitution of Government, under which we are born, we are brought
under Sufferings for our professing of it, we may indeed retire and fly out of
any such Country if we can; but if that is denied us, we must then, according
to this Religion, submit to those Sufferings under which we may be brought,
considering that God will be glorified by us in so doin^, and that he will both
support us under our Sufferings, and glo^iously reward us for them.

This was the State of the Christian Religion, during the three first
Centuries, under Heathen Emperors, and a Constitution in which Paganism was
established by Law. But if by the Laws of any Government, the Christian
Religion, or any Form of it, is become a part of the Subjects Property, it then
falls und^^ ^^other Consideration; not as it is a Religion, but as it is become
one of the principal Rights of the Subjects to believe and profess it: and then
we must judge of the Invasions made on that, as we do of any other Invasion that
is made on our other Rights.

X. All the Passages in the New Testament that relate to Civil Government, are
to be expounded as they were truly meant, in opposition to that false Notion of
the Jews, who believed themselves to be so immediately under the Divine
Authority, that they could not become the Subjects of any other Power,
particularly of one that was not of their Nation, or of their Religion;
therefore they thought they could not be under the Roman Yoke, nor bound to pay
Tribute to Caesar, but judged that they were only subject out of Fear, by reason
of the force that lay on them, but not for Conscience sake: And so in all their
Dispersion, both at Rome and elsewhere, they thought they were God's Freemen,
and made use of this pretended Liberty as a Cloak of Maliciousness. In
opposition to all which, since in a course of many Years, they had asked the
Protection of the Roman Yoke, and were come under their Authority, our Savior
ordered them to continue in that, by his saying, Render to Caesar that which is
Caesar 's; and both St. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, and St. Peter in his
general Epistle, have very positively condemned that pernicious Maxim, but
without any formal Declarations made of the Rules or Measures of Government.
And since both the People and Senate of Rome had acknowledged the Power that
Augustus had indeed violently usurped, it became Legal when it was thus
submitted to, and confirmed both by the Senate and People: and it was
established in his Family by a long Prescription, when those Epistles were
writ: So that upon the whole Matter, all that is in the New Testament upon this
Subject, imports no more, but that all Christians are bound to acquiesce in the
Government, and submit to it, according to the Constitution that is settled by
Law.

XI. We are then at last brought to the Constitution of our English Government:
so that no general Considerations from Speculations about Sovereign Power, nor
from any Passages, either of the Old and New Testament, ought to determine us
in this Matter; which must be fixed from the Laws and Regulations that have
been made among us. It is then certain, that with Relation to the Executive
part of the Government, the Law has lodged that singly in the King; so that the
whole administration of it is in him; but the Legislative Power is lodged
between the King and the two Houses of Parliament; so that the Power of making
and repealing Laws, is not singly in the King, but only so far as the two
Houses concur with him. It is also clear, that the King has such a determined
extent of Prerogative, beyond which he has no Authority: As for Instance, If he
levies Money of his People, without a Law impowring him to it, he goes beyond
the Limits of his Power, and asks that to which he has no Right: So that there
lies no Obligation on the Subject to grant it; and if any in his Name use
Violence for the obtaining it, they are to be looked on as so many Robbers,
that invade our Property; and they being violent Aggressors, the Principle of
Self-Pres^rvation seems here to take place, and to warrant as violent a
Resistance.

XII. There is nothing more evident, than that England is a Free Nation, that
has its Liberties and Properties reserved to it, by many positive and express
Laws: If then we have a Right to our Property, we must likewise be supposed to
have a Right to preserve it: for those Rights are by the Law secured aginst the
Invasions of the Prerogative, and by consequence we must have a Right to
preserve them against those Invasions. It is also evidently declared by our
Law, that all Orders and Warrants that are issued out in opposition to them,
are null of themselves; and by consequence, any that pretend to have
Commissions from the King for those Ends, are to be considered as if they had
none at all; since those Commissions being void of themselves, are indeed no
Commissions in the Construction of the Law; and therefore those who act in
virtue of them, are still to be considered as private Persons who come to
invade and disturb us. It is also to be observed, that there are some Points
that are justly disputable and doubtful, and others that are so manifest, that
it is plain that any Objections that can be made to them, are rather forced
Pretenses, than so much as plausible Colors. It is true, if the Case is
doubtful, the Interest of the public Peace and Order ought to carry it; but
the Case is quite different, when the Invasions that are made upon Liberty and
Property, are plain and visible to all that consider them.

XIII. The main and great Difficulty here, is, that though our Government does
indeed assert the Liberty of the Subject, yet there are many express Laws made,
that lodge the Militia singly in the King, that make it plainly unlawful, upon
any Pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the King, or any Commissioned by
him: And these Laws have been put in the Form of an Oath, which all that have
born any Employment, either in Church or State, have sworn; and therefore those
Laws for the assuring our Liberties, do indeed bind the King's Conscience, and
may affect his Ministers; yet since it is a Maxim of our Law, that the King
can do no wrong, these cannot be carried so far as to justify our taking Arms
against him, be the Transgressions of Law ever so many and so manifest. And
since this has been the constant Doctrine of the Church of England, it will be
a very heavy Imputation on us, if it appears, that though we held those
Opinions, as long as the Court and Crown have favored us, yet as soon as the
Court turns against us, We change our Principles.

XIV. Here is the true Difficulty of this whole Matter, and therefore it ought
to be exactly considered: First, All general Words, how large soever, are still
supposed to have a tacit Exception and reserve in them, if the Matter seems to
require it. Children are commanded to obey their Parents in all things: Wives
are declared by the Scripture, to be subject to their Husbands in all things,
as the Church is unto Christ: And yet how comprehensive soever these words may
seem to be, there is still a reserve to be understood in them; and though by
our Form of Marriage, the Parties swear to one another till Death them do part,
yet few doubt but that this Bond is dissolved by Adultery, though it is not
named; for odious things ought not to be suspected, and therefore not named
upon such occasions: But when they fall out, they carry still their own force
with them. 2. When there seems to be a Contradiction between two Articles in
the Constitution, we ought to examine which of the two is the most Evident, and
the most Important, and so we ought to fix upon it, and then we must give such
an accommodating sense to that which seems to contradict it, that so we may
reconcile those together. Here then are two seeming Contradictions in our
Constitution; The one is the Public Liberty of the Nation; the other is the
Renouncing of all Resistance, in case that were invaded. It is plain, that our
Liberty is only a thing that we enjoy at the King's Discretion, and during his
Pleasure, if the other against all Resistance is to be understood according to
the utmost extent of the Words. Therefore since the chief Design of our whole
Law, and of all the several Rules of our Constitution, is to secure and
mai^tain our Liberty, we ought to lay that down for a Conclusion, that it is
both the most plain and the most important of the two. And therefore the other
Article against Resistance ought to be so softened as that it do not destroy us.
3. Since it is by a Law that Resistance is condemned, we ought to understand it
in such a sense as that it does not destroy all other Laws: And therefore the
intent of this Law, must only relate to the Executive Power, which is in the
King, and not to the Legislative, in which we cannot suppose that our
Legislators, who m^de that Law, intended to give up that, which we plainly see
they resolved still to preserve entire, according to the Ancient Constitution.
So then, the not resisting the King, can only be applied to the Executive
Power, that so upon no pretense of ill Administrations in the Execution of the
Law, it should be lawful to resist him; but this cannot with any reason be
extended to an Invasion of the Legislative Power, or to a total Subversion of
the Government. For it being plain, that the Law did not design to lodge that
Power in the King, it is also plain, that it did not intend to secure him in
it, in case he should set about it. 4. The Law mentioning the King, or those
Commissioned by him, shows plainly, that it only designed to secure the King in
the Executive Power: for the word Commission necessarily imports this, since if
it is not according to Law, it is no Commission; and by Cons^quence, those who
act in virtue of it, are not Commissionated by the King in the Sense of the
Law. The King likewise imports a Prince clo^hed by Law with the Regal
Prerogative; but if he goes to subvert the whole Foundation of the Government,
he subverts that by which he himself has his Power, and by consequence he
ann^ls his own Power; and then he ceases to be King, having endeavored to
destroy that upon which his own Authority is founded.

XV. It is acknowledged by the greatest Assertors of Monarchial Power, that in
some Cases a King may fall from his Power, and in other Cases that he may fall
from the Exercise of it. His Deserting his People; his going about to enslave,
or sell them to any other; or a furious going about to destroy them, are in the
opinion of the most Monarchial Lawyers, such Abuses, that they naturally divest
those that are guilty of them, of their whole Authority. Infancy or Phrenzy do
also put them under the Guardianship of others. All the Crowned Heads of Europe
have, at least secretly, approved of the putting the late King of Portugal
under a Guardianship, and the keeping him still a Prisoner for a few Acts of
Rage, that had been fatal to a very few Persons: And even our Court gave the
first countenance to it, though of all others the late King had the least
reason to have done it, at least last of all, since it justified a younger
Brother's supplanting the Elder; yet the Evidence of the Thing carried it even
against Interest. Therefore if a King goes about to subvert the Government, and
to overturn the whole Constitution, he by this must be supposed, either to fall
from his Power, or at least from the Exercise of it, so far as that he ought to
be put under Guardians; and according to the Case of Portugal, the next Heir
falls naturally to be the Guardian.

XVI. The next Thing to be considered, is to see in Fact whether the
Foundations of this Government have been struck at, and whether those Errors
that have been perhaps committed, are only such Maleversations as ought to be
imputed only to human Frailty, and to the Ignorance, Inadvertencies, or
Passions to which all Princes may be subject, as well as other Men. But this
will best appear, if we consider what are the Fundamental Points of our
Government, and the chief Securities that we may have for our Liberties.

The Authority of the Law is indeed all in one word, so that if the King
pretends to a Power to dispense with Laws, there is nothing left upon which the
Subject can depend; and yet as if the Dispensing Power were not enough, if Laws
are wholly suspended for all Time coming, this is plainly a repealing of them,
when likewise the Men, in whose Hands the Administration of Justice is put by
Law, such as Judges and Sheriffs, are allowed to tread all Laws under-foot,
even those that infer an Incapacity on themselves if they violate them; this is
such a breaking of the whole Constitution, that we can no more have the
Administration of Justice, so that it is really a Dissolution of the
Government; since all Trials, Sentences, and the Executions of them, are become
so many unlawful Acts, that are null and void of themselves.

The next Thing in our Constitution, which secures to us our Laws and
Liberties, is a Free and Lawful Parliament. Now, not to mention the breach of
the Law of Triennial Parliaments, it being above three Years since we had a
Session that enacted any Law; Methods have been taken, and are daily a taking,
that render this impossible. Parliaments ought to be chosen with an entire
Liberty, and without either Force or Preingagements: whereas if all Men are
required beforehand to enter into Engagements how they will vote if they are
chosen themselves, or how they will give their Voices in the Electing of
others? This is plainly such a preparation to a Parliament, as would indeed
make it no Parliament, but a Cabal, if one were chosen, after all that
Corruption of Persons who had preingaged themselves, and after the Threating
and Turning out of all Persons out of Imploiments who had refused to do it: And
if there are such daily Regulations made in the Towns, that it is plain those
who manage them, intend at last to put such a number of Men in the
Corporations, as will certainly choose the Persons who are recommended to them.
But above all, if there are such a number of Sheriffs and Mayors made over
England, by whom the Elections must be conducted and returned, who are now
under an Incapacity by Law, and so are no legal Officers, and by cons^quence
those Elections that pass under their Authority are null and void: If, I say,
it is clear that things are brought to this, then the Government is dissolved,
because it is impossible to have a Free and Legal Parliament in this state of
things. If then both the Authority of the Law, and the Constitution of the
Parliament are struck at and dissolved, here is a plain Subversion of the whole
Government. But if we enter next into the particular Branches of the
Government, we will find the like Disorder among them all.

The Protestant Religion, and the Church of England make a great Article of our
Government, the latter being secured, not only of old by Magna Charta, but by
many special Laws made of late; and there are particu^ar Laws made in K.
Charles the First, and the late King's Time, securing them from all Commissions
that the King can raise for ^udging or Censuring them. If then in opposition to
this, a Court so condemned is ercted, which proceeds to Judge and Censure the
Clergy, and even to disseise them of their Free-holds, without so much as the
form of a Trial, though this is the most indispensable Law of all those that
secures the Property of England; and if the King pretends that he can require
the Clergy to publish all his Arbitrary Declarations, and in particular one
that strikes at their whole Settlement, and has ordered Process to be begun
against all that disobeyed this illegal Warrant, and has treated so great a
number. of the Bishops as Criminals, only for representing to him the Reasons
of their not obeying him; If likewise the King is not satisfied to profess his
own Religion openly, though even that is contrary to Law, but has sent
Ambassadors to Rome, and received Nuncio's from thence, which is plainly
Treason by Law; If likewise many Popish Churches and Chapels have been
publicly opened; if several Colleges of Jesuits have been set up in diverse
parts of the Nation, and one of the Order has been made a Privy Counselor, and
a principal Minister of State: And if Papists, and even those who turn to that
Religion, though declared Traitors by Law, are brought into all the chief
Imploiments, both Military and Civil; then it is plain, That all the Rights of
the Church of England, and the whole Establishment of the Protestant Religion
are struck at, and designed to be overturned; since all these Things, as they
are notoriously illegal, so they evidently demonstrate, That the great Design
of them all, is the rooting out of this Pestilent Heresy, in their style, I
mean, the Protestant Religion.

In the next place, If in the whole course of Justice, it is visible that there
is a constant practicing upon the Judges, that they are t^rned out upon their
varying from the Intentions of the Court; and if Men of no Reputation nor
Abilities are ^ut in their places; If an Army is kept up in time of Peace, ^^d
Men who withdraw from that illegal Service, are hanged up as Criminals, without
any color of Law, which, by consequence, are so many Murders; and if the
Soldiery are connived at and encouraged in the most enormous Crimes, that so
they may be thereby prepared to commit greater ones, and from single Rapes and
Murders proceed to a Rape upon all our Liberties, and a Destruction of the
Nation: If, I say, all these things are true in Fact; then it is plain, that
there is such a Dissolution of the Government made, that there is not any one
part of it left sound and entire: And if all these things are done now, it is
easy to imagine what may be expected, when Arbitrary Power, that spares no
Man, and Popery that spares no Heretic, are finally established: Then we may
look for nothing but Gabelles, Tailles, Impositions, Benevolences, and all
sorts of Illegal Taxes; as from the other we may expect Burnings, Massacres,
and Inquisitions. In what is doing in Scotland we may gather what is to be
expected in England; where if the King has over and over again declared, that
he is vested with an Absolute Power, to which all are bound to obey without
reserve, and has upon that annulled almost all the Acts of Pa^liament that
passed in K. James I. Minority, though they were ratified by himself when he
came to be of Age, and were confirmed by all the subsequent Kings, not
excepting the present. We must then conclude from thence, what is resolved on
here in England, and what will be put in Execution as soon as it is thought
that the Times can bear it. When likewise the whole Settlement of Ireland is
shaken, and the Army that was raised, and is maintained by Taxes that were
given for an Army of English Protestants, to secure them from a new Massacre by
the Irish Papists, is now all filled with Irish Papists, as well as almost all
the other Employments; it is plain, that not only all the British Protestants
inhabiting that Island, are in daily danger of being butchered a second time,
but that the Crown of England is in danger of losing that Island, it being now
put wholly into the Hands and Power of the Native Irish* who as they formerly
offered themselves up sometimes to the Crown of Spain, sometimes to the Pope,
and once to the Duke of Lorrain, so are they perhaps at this present treating
with another Court for the Sale and Surrender of the Island, and for the
Massacre of the English in it.

If thus all the several Branches of our Constitution are dissolved, it might
be at least expected that one (...) should be left entire, and that is the
Regal Dignity: But ^^^cer^^ng the Birth of the supposed Prince of Wales, no
Proofs ^^re ever given either to the Princess of Denmark, or to any oth^^
Protestant Ladies, in whom we ought to repose any Con^^^^^ce that the Queen was
ever with Child; that whole Matter b^^^g managed with so much Mysteriousness,
that there were violent and public Suspicions of it before. But the whole
Contrivance of the Birth, the sending away the Princess of Denmark, the sudden
shortning of the Reckoning, the Queen's sudden going to St. James's, her no
less sudden pretended Delivery; the hurrying the Child into another Room
without showing it to those present, and without their hearing it cry; and the
mysterious Conduct of all since that time; no Satisfaction being given to the
Princess of Denmark upon her Return from the Bath, nor to any other Protestant
Ladies, of the Queen's having been really brought to Bed. These are all such
evident Indications of an Imposture in this Matter, that as the Nation has the
justest Reason in the World to doubt of it, so they have all possible Reason to
be at no quiet till they see a Legal and Free Parliament assembled, which may
impartially, and without either Fear or Corruption, examine that whole Matter.

If all these Matters are true in Fact, then I suppose no Man will doubt, that
the whole Foundations of this Government, and all the most sacred Parts of it,
are overturned. And as to the Truth of all these Suppositions, that is left to
every Englishman's Judgment and Sense.

An ANSWER to a PAPER, entitled, Reflections on the Prince of ORANGE's
Declaration.
IT seems a strange piece of Arrogance that any Man should reflect on a
Declaration, because it does not begin as he would have it; that is, with a
Manifestation of our Clandestine League with France, whereby an Army of
Frenchmen, together with our Papists, Irish, and other Mercenaries, might
establish Popery in England. The Reflector ought to have considered, that a
Clandestine League, though it may be very notorious to its Existence and Effects,
may likewise be very difficult to prove, according to the meaning of the word
Clandestine. But that there is such a one, we have the Testimony of the King of
France, in a Memorial delivered to the States of Holland; and though it has
been since disowned by our Court, and Mr. Skeleton upon it committed to the
Tower; his short Confinement, and sudden Advancement to a Regiment, shows that
his Disgrace was but a trick of State: It is also an inconsequential way of
Arguing, that because the Prince does not begin his Declaration with it,
therefore there is no such League, things of that high consequence being easier
and better carried on by secret Messages, than Writings under Hand and Seal.

2. In his second Reflection, he tells us the Prince had needed less Apology,
if he had pretended only to have come to deliver the King from Evil
Counselors, and to engage him further in the Interest of Europe; forgetting
the Prince does declare to us he comes for that end, though not singly, and
brought over his Army to secure him from the Rage and Fury of those Evil
Counselors. His next Quarrel is, that the Prince uses the Style, Of We and Us
within His Majesty's Dominions; a thing, I believe, ordinary enough in Great
Princes, when they speak, or write to their Inferiors. The Prince of Orange is
General of a great and numerous Army, Admiral of a vast Fleet, State-holder to
a High and Mighty Commonwealth, and consequently, too great to speak in the
Style of a Private Person; so that Rewarding, Punishing, Commanding, Advancing,
may very naturally fall within his Power. Nor is it any Crime to endeavor the
calling of a Free Parliament, and settling the Nation, tho by ways and methods
unusual in our days, nothing being more frequent in our Histories, than for our
Barons, with Arms in their Hands, to compel their Kings to call and hearken to
their Parliaments: But now there being a standing Army of forty thousand
Mercenaries in the Land, it was grown a Crime to petition for a Parliament, and
a Folly to expect a free one, new Charters and Corporations, and a general
Nomination of incompetent Magistrates, having taken the Election of Members for
Parliament out of those Hands, the Laws of the Land, and Memorial Custom, had
entrusted with them. According to the new Scheme designed by those Upstart and
Popish Counselors, no Man was to Elect, or be Elected for Parliament, that
would not engage, as far as in them lay, to take away the Penal Laws and Test;
nay, those wicked Counselors prevailed yet farther upon his Majesty; and he
that pardoned so many of his Enemies, was not suffered to forgive his best
Friends, and most Loyal Subjects a Refusal or Excuse in that particular.

That the Prince will send back his Army, seems to some a strong presumption
that he will not stay behind, since even our own lawful King thinks himself not
safe without an Army of Mercenaries in his own Kingdom. From a strained Phrase
or two, Of We and Us, Require and Command, sometimes used in his Declaration,
to infer, That the Prince of Orange intends to make himself King of England,
seems to all rational Men a very captious and unsatisfactory way of arguing,
and a very unjust Calumny cast upon so great a Prince, since more than once in
express terms, he declares he has no design upon his Majesty's Crown or Person,
so that all that Reproach falls to the Ground.

3. In his third Reflection, he tells us the Prince wants a clear Call, and
that a Son against a Father, a Nephew against and Uncle, a Neighbor against a
Neighbor, cannot be such: That he is a Son-in-Law, and a Nephew to his Present
Majesty, gives the Prince a fair and just pretense to interpose in our Affairs:
had he been a Foreigner, as our Reflector terms him, it might have looked like
an intended Conquest; had he not been a Neighbor, it had been Impossible for
him to have afforded us this seasonable Assistance. But some think, that where
Attempts are made to introduce the Catholic Religion, by a Conspiracy against
the Laws that secure and establish the Protestant Religion and the Test, that
only can keep the Papists out of the Government: And to carry on this
Conspiracy the better, the old Charters are taken away under pretense of
Forfeiture and Surrender; new ones granted, such as might bring Elections
within the Power of those Evil Counselors; Papists upon the Bench, a Jesuit in
the Council, and whole Troops of them in the Army: 'Twas high time for a
Protestant Prince, that had so near relation to the Crown of England, to look
about him, and choose rather to be censured by our Reflector, and such as he,
for entering upon the Stage a little before his time, than be justly reproached
and cursed to the End of the World, by all such as love the Protestant
Religion, and ancient Government of England, for appearing too late in their
Defense. The Example of Henry the Fourth of France, may teach us how hard it is
for a Protestant Prince to obtain his Right, where the Catholic Religion is
predominant; nor was the new Armor of Popery he put on at last, sufficient to
defend the old Protestant against the Stab of a Jesuited Novitiate.

4. His fourth Reflection acquaints us, the Protestant Religion is at once
exposed and hazarded; for if the King prevail, what can the Prince of Orange's
sort of Protestants expect at his Hands, which are indeed all sorts of
Protestants that I know of, for the Presbyterians, Independants, Phanaticks,
Church-of-England- Men, are in his Army: It Is fair warning, and I hope God will
give the Protestants Grace to make the right use of it: As for their changing
Masters, it is a Chimera of his own, and utterly foreign to the Declaration he
pretends to reflect upon. Lest we should forget, he remind^ us with that
admirable Demonstration of, I say, that the whole Protestant Religion is at
stake; for which I heartily thank our worthy Reflector, for tho it be very
true, we had not seen it in Print but for him.

5. In his fifth Reflection, he tells us that some Laws are better broken than
kept, which will not be easily granted; it is indeed true, that some Laws were
better be repealed than continued: But then they must be nulled by the same
Power they were constituted, and not by any part of it in contradiction to the
whole.

His instance is, That Christianity could not have been introduced had the
Pagan Laws been executed; by which Parallel he would warrant Popery to be the
true Christianity, and the Protestant the Heathen Persecutors; Laws for
Idolatry cannot bind, therefore Laws against it cannot; a very strange
Inference, and I allow that a Lawful Authority by exceeding their just Bounds,
may act unlawfully, but the Legislative Power cannot, since all over the World
the Supreme Power ever was absolute, be it in one or more. He says, no Man is
obliged to maintain a Religion that is not true, be it never so legally
established: So that it is but saying the Protestant Religion is not true, and
His Majesty, notwithstanding his repeated Engagements, is no longer bound to
protect it. For in the words of our Reflector it is an Absurdity and Impiety to
do so.

6. The sixth thing considerable in our Reflector is, his Defense of the
Dispensing Power, and the use His Majesty, seduced by his Evil Counselors,
makes of it; which is no other than the setting aside of all our Laws made for
the Security of the Protestant Religion; but sure such a Prerogative can never
be legally vested in the Crown, which, if admitted, were the destruction of all
Law.

Had those Evil Counselors only prevailed with his Majesty, to have dispensed
with the Penalties inflicted on Catholics and other Dissenters, for serving of
God according to their particular Consciences, though perhaps contrary to Law,
the matter had never been complained of: But to put them into Places of the
highest Trust, to make one Lieutenant of Ireland, another President of the
Council, a third Lieutenenant General of the Tower, a fourth a Judge; employing
numbers of them in the Army, Court, etc. is a Transgression of the Law, which
is certainly very dangerous, if not immediately, yet inevitable in its
Consequences to the Protestant Religion and Government, and therefore a
Mischief remote only (as an Egg is from a Chicken) from the worthy Reflector's
Malum in se, which he acknowledges this Dispensing Power extends not to. And
the particular Catholics breaking the Law in these Points, are without Excuse:
For no Man is obliged in Conscience to be a Judge, a Priest, a Minister, a
Privy-Councellor, a Courtier, or a Soldier in time of Peace, contrary to the
Laws of the Land. Nor do those Laws deprive the King of the Service of any of
his Subjects absolutely; since all Men, if they please, may capacitate
themselves for Employment. If the High-Commission-Court be at an end,
Magdalen-Colledge and the Bishop of London restored, we may in all appearance
thank the Honesty and Caution of some of its worthy Members, and the Noise of
what our Reflector calls the Prince of Orange's Invasion; though some will say,
a Descent upon England made by a Prince of the Blood, Married to the Eldest
Daughter of the present King, upon the Invitation of many Lords both Spiritual
and Temporal, and of the considerable Gentry, Commonalty of all Counties, might
have deserved a fairer Name. Nor ought any Man to complain if his honest
Neighbor break violently into his House at a time when his Family cry out Fire
or Murder; the common Obligation of Humanity, and a due care of their own
Preservation, exact no less of them. But this Paper is not intended for a
Vindication of the Prince, I will therefore return to my Reflector again, who
undertakes for all good Protestants that they only refused to repeal the Test,
by reason of the Security it affords to their Religion. As if they had cast off
all care of their Civil Concerns, and were only intent upon Religious Affairs,
so as to consent to give his Majesty a Majority of Papists in the House of
Lords; by which he might have two Negative Voices upon all Laws to be offered:
and an House of Pears ready to repeal the Habeas Corpus Bill, and such Statutes
as any ways seem to incumber what Papists think his Majesty's Prerogative, of
which they maintain the Dispensing Power to be an Essential Part; and well they
may, since it is the very Power, by which he maintains them in Places and
Employments: So that by leave of my worthy Reflector, the Considerations of
Religion, tho they are the principal, are not the only Reasons, that have
determined all good Protestants to a Non-concurrence with his Majesty in the
Repeal of the Test.

8. In his eighth Reflection he tells us, That Chapels are places of Devotion;
so are Turks Mosques, and the Jews Synagogues, yet no good Christian but would
be offended to see them multiplied and encouraged, either in his own, or his
Neighbors Country.

9. In his ninth he tells us, The King was content the Test should remain. I
answer, These Evil Counselors were not content the Test should remain, but
sent their Regulators and other Agents, to threaten, promise, remove and change
the Magistrates in all Corporations in order to the procuring Members of
Parliament, such as were to enter the House under solemn Promises, and firm
Resolutions, to take off the Penal Laws and Test, notwithstanding all the
weighty, nay, convincing Arguments they might meet with there to the contrary:
A desperate sort of Senators, and fitter for Catalines Conspiracies than an
English Parliament. Nor did these Evil Counselors cease to solicit even
Knights of the Shire, till the general Indignation their Proposals met with,
together with the Noise of the Prince of Orange's Preparations, frightened them
from a further prosecution of their enormous Attempts. He ingenuously confesses
the seizing of Charters to have been a fault, so there is no Contest between us
on that Point; but he adds, That the Prince of Orange has nothing to do with
it; now others think him highly concerned in it; for if, according to Sir
Thomas Moore, Rex Potest Iuriper Parta mentem and potest and destrui; or
according to the Opinion of latter Times, a Parliament may make a Bill of
Exclusion; a Prince that has so near a Relation to the Crown of England, ought
not to suffer any foul play in the calling together such an Assembly as may
null his Title, or preclude him of his Right to the Crown in time to come. It Is
true, the Counsel for seizing Charters was given in the last King's Reign, and
most of them then seized, but no Man can deny but some have been condemned and
seized in the Reign of his present Majesty, and restored not till the
Apprehension of the aforesaid Invasion; so that we are promised a Free
Parliament, only because they cannot put one of their own framing upon us.

10. His tenth Paragraph needs no answer.

11. In his eleventh, he tells us there were but two Papist Judges, as if the
Laws were not broken unless the Judges were all Papists; or that Judges sitting
contrary to Law could give a Legal Sentence. Both these defects he supposes
supplied by the Dispensing Power, a Power sufficiently baffled by those
Gentlemen of the long Robe of Counsel for the Bishops, and not defended by
either Judges or Counsel on the other side; for which two of the Judges, Jones
and Holloway, lost their places on the Bench.

12, 13. His twelfth and thirteenth concern Ireland and Scotland, and therefore
I will leave them untouched, to the Gentlemen of those Nations, who best
understand, and are most sensible of the Oppressions they are under.

14. In his fourteenth, he pleads the Validity of the King's Declaration for
Liberty of Conscience, though that pretended Prerogative has been discussed and
baffled in Parliament, within these few years, and deserted as such by His late
Majesty; he affirms, that the King, as Head of the Church, might oblige the
Bishops to cause the Declaration to be read in the Churches, which if they had
complied with, in the Opinion of many good Protestants, they had precluded
themselves of their Votes in Parliament against it; for with what Forehead
could they Vote against the Declaration, when they caused it to be read in
their Churches? An Act amounting to no less than maintaining, or owning, the
Dispensing Power.

15. In his fifteenth, he allows the Prince and Princess of Orange, have, in
terms full of respect, signified to the King their deep regret which all these
things have given them, and their Thoughts abour Repealing the Test and Penal
Laws as an Expedient of Peace; but blames him, it seems, for doing all this so
respectfully and privately, and would rather had it done by a Manifesto, that
some of the Prince's Friends might be imprisoned for delivering it, as Captain
Lenham is for bringing over the Declaration. He tells us next, the King has
come up almost to Fagel's Letter, which was the Declaration of their Minds,
viz. The Church-of- England-Test, and Laws of Supremacy to remain; then urging
the King's Concessions, which may be observed to bear date only from the report
of the Prince's Preparations for England.

16. He tells us in his sixteenth, That the Prince thinks a Free Parliament to
be the last and great Remedy for these Evils* but complains these Wicked
Counselors are against it, for fear of being called to Account, that they had
preingaged Voices to take off the Penal Laws and the Test; and regulated
Corporations and Buroughs, that so they might assure themselves of the Members
of Parliament. He allows the Charge, but says, What has all this to do with the
King? No Man says it has, and the Prince only requires the removal and
punishment of those Evil Counselors in a Free Parliament.

17. Next our Reflector tells, That there never was a Parliament absolutely
Free, but that Drink, Money, and other Evil Arts, have had a great sway in
Elections. This is true, but no reason that we should consent to a General or
Fundamental Corruption of our Elections, because we cannot avoid some few and
casual Ones. Then he would have had the Prince have desired the King to have
laid aside those Evil Counselors, as if it were not Notorious, that the
Princes dislike of some Men has been their ready way to Preferment in our
Court; and Ambassadors for Holland have been, of late, chosen out of those he
has most aversion for; as if these Wicked Counselors feared nothing so much as
a good Understanding between His Majesty and the Prince of Orange.

19. In the nineteenth he tells, The Prince and Princess of Orange's Question
concerning the Birth of the Prince of Wales, saying, That during the Queen's
pretended Bigness, and in the manner in which the Birth was managed, there have
appeared so many just and visible grounds of Suspicion, that not only the
Prince himself, but all good Subjects in England, do vehemently suspect that
the pretended Prince of Wales was not born of the Queen.

20. Next our Reflector tells us, That the Prince ought to have writ to the
King for a private satisfaction in this Matter, which the King would no doubt
have given in the manner that all reasonable Men do when they are examined
against themselves. All Men allow the imputation of such an Imposture, to be a
great Reflection on their present Majesty's. But some think they have in a
great measure drawn it upon themselves, by omitting to have those Witnesses by,
and those Methods observed, that our Laws require to prove the Birth of a
Legitimate Prince of Wales: It Is not perhaps enough to say, that there were as
many Witnesses, and as good Proof of it as the Law exacts; still the Question
returns, Why not the same Persons? a Legal Proof admits of no Equivolent.

Our Reflector will not deny, but that there has been common Fame all over
Europe, that this Prince of Wales was not Born of the Body of her Majesty, and
common belief of it among Protestants; this of it self were enough to make the
next Heir to the Crown look about, and move every Stone that the Matter might
be examined by impartial Methods in a Free Parliament, which is all that the
Prince and Princess of Orange aims at; for their Proofs to the contrary, it is
not to expected they should acquaint the World with them before the Trial.

22. In his two and twentieth Reflection on the eighteenth Paragraph, where the
Prince says, He was invited to this Expedition by many Lords, both Spiritual
and Temporal, and many Gentlemen, and Subjects of all Ranks: Our Reflector is
pleased to tell him he is mistaken, as Monmouth was. Notwithstanding those
eminent Peers, Gentry and Commonalty of all sorts that are already in his Camp,
and such as are going daily, as well Soldiers as others; nor considering the
great number of the Nobility that are in the Country and have not been
examined, and that such as were examined here in Town, did no more than answer,
Not Guilty to the Charge of High Treason: So that there are more Nobility and
Gentry with him than with his Majesty.

In his three and twentieth Reflection on the 19 th and 20 th Paragraph, where
the Prince refers all to a free Parliament; our Reflector says it belongs not
to him, to refer other Men's business; as if the Prince had no relation to the
Crown: Then tells us we are already in possession of what the Prince promises
us; as if the Catholics were all out of employment, the Dispensing power given
up, no standing Army, no apprehensions of Popery and Arbitrary Power, and a
Free Parliament for redressing of Grievances of all kinds in being.

24. In the twenty fourth Reflection on the three last Paragraphs of the
Princes Declaration, he tells us, The Prince has a manifest design upon
the-Crown, because he summons the Nobility, Gentry and People of England to his
Standard: And if so, who must stay with the King? To that may be answered, All
such as believe the Prince of Orange has brought this Army, and intends to make
War upon England to subdue it to his mere will and pleasure, trample all Laws,
both Divine and Humane, under his Fleet, dethrone his present Majesty, and make
himself King; they will stay and fight for him, or at least to the best of
their power, in some other manner assist and help him: On the contrary part,
such as believe the Prince means nothing of all this, but brought over his Army
only the better to assist the Nobility, Gentry, and People of England, upon
their earnest desires, and frequent solliciations, and reiterated complaints,
in the recovering of the old Legal way of choosing Members for Parliament,
which by Illegal new Charters, on pretended Forfeitures, was in a ready way to
be for ever lost; in rescuing all the Laws of England from the devouring Jaws
of a Dispensing Power; in reducing Popery within those bounds the Law has
prescribed it, which, like an Inundation, had so over-flowed its Banks, that
our Religion and Government were in peril to be swallowed up by it; and
finally, to redress these and all other grievances, if for these and no other
ends or concerns Men think the Prince has landed here, such Men will take his
part, espouse his quarrel, and contribute to his success: and in these cases
every Man will judge for himself, as they did in our late Civil Wars.

Again, he charges the Prince with a design of Conquest; which not only the
Prince himself disclaims throughout his Declaration, and will hereafter disown
in all his Manifesto's; but the States of Holland, who have so vigorously
assisted, and engaged themselves with all their Power and Credit, to maintain
him in this Attempt, have assured us he left Holland under high and solemn
Protestations to the contrary. All this is, I hope, sufficient to dash the
strained inferences of an inconsiderable Reflector.

As for that impudent Calumny of Perjury he endeavors to fix upon the Prince,
it needs no other refutation than a serious consideration of the Charge it
self; his Words are, The Prince of Orange swore to the States of Holland never
to be their Stateholder, though it were offered him, and yet is now that very
Stateholder he swore never to be on any terms. Now let any reasonable Man
consider, whether it be possible a Wise State should by an Oath given him,
disable the Prince of Orange from being their State-holder, though Circumstances
and times should so change, that their immediate preservation and very
existence of their State should require him to accept, and execute that Office.
For his personal Reflections toward the latter end, I think very Impertinent,
and only fit to be buried in Contempt.

Thus having followed my tedious Reflector through his twenty four Reflections,
I take my leave of him, reserving the Princes farther Vindication to some time
when I shall be more at leisure to write, and people willinger to read, than
they can be under the present surprise, hourly expectation, and continual
anxiety, for the event of this Heroic Enterprise.

Admiral HERBERT's Letter to all Commanders of Ships and Seamen in His
Majesty's Fleet.
Gentlemen,
I Have little to add to what his Highness has expressed in general Terms,
besides laying before you the dangerous Way you are at the present in, where
Ruin or Infamy must inevitably attend you if you don't join with the Prince in
the Common Cause, for the Defense of your Religion and Liberties; for should it
please God, for the Sins of the English Nation, to suffer your Arms to prevail,
to what can your Victory serve you, but to enslave you deeper, and overthrow
the True Religion, in which you have lived, and your Fathers died? Of which, I
beg you, as a Friend, to consider the Consequences, and to reflect on the Blot
and Infamy it will bring on you, not only now, but in all After-Ages, That by
Your means the Protestant Religion was destroyed, and your Country deprived of
its Ancient Liberties: And if it pleases God to bless the Prince's Endeavors
with Success, as I don't doubt but he will, consider then what their Condition
will be that oppose him in this so good a Design, where the greatest Favor
they can hope for, is, their being suffered to end their Days in Misery and
Want, detested and despised by all good Men.

It is therefore, and for many more Reasons too long to insert here, that I, as
a true Englishman and your Friend, exhort you to join your Arms to the Prince
for the Defense of the Common Cause, the Protestant Religion, and the Liberties
of your Country. It is what I am well assured the major and best part of the
Army as well as the Nation will do so soon as convenience is offered. Prevent
them in so good an Action whilst it is in your Power, and make it appear, That
as the Kingdom has always depended on the Navy for its Defense, so you will
yet go further by making it, as much as in you lies, the Protection of her
Religion and Liberties; and then you may assu^^ your selves of all Marks of
Favor and Honor suitable to the Merits of so great and glorious an Action.
After this I ought not add so inconsiderable a thing,, as that it will for ever
engage me to be in a most particular manner,

Your faithful Friend, and humble Servant, AR. HERBERT.
Abord the Leyden, in the Gooree.
AN ENGAGEMENT OF THE Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen at EXETER, to Assist
the Prince of ORANGE in the defense of the Protestant Religion, Laws and
Liberties of the People of England, Scotland and Ireland.
WE do engage to Almighty God, and to his Highness the Prince of Orange, and
with one another, to stick firm to this Cause, and to one another in the
Defense of it, and never to depart from it until our Religion, Laws, and
Liberties are so far secured to us in a Free Parliament, that we shall be no
more in danger of falling under Popery and Slavery. And whereas We are engaged
in the Common Cause under the Protection of the Prince of Orange, by which
means his Person may be exposed to Danger, and to the desperate and cursed
Designs of Papists, and other Bloody Men, We do therefore solmnly engage to God
and to one another, That if any such Attempts be made upon Him, We will pursue
not only those that made them, but all their Adherents, and all we find in Arms
against Us, with the utmost Seve^^ty of just Revenge in their Ruin and
Destruction; and that the executing any such Attempt (which God of his Infinite
Mercy forbid) shall not deprive us from pursuing this Cause which we do now
undertake, but that it shall encourage Us to carry it on with all the Vigor
that so barbarous Approach shall deserve.

The Declaration of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty at the Rendezvous at
Nottingham, Nov. 22. 1688.
WE the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of these Northern Counties assembled
together at Nottingham, for the defense of the Laws, Religion, and Properties,
according to those freeborn Liberties and Privileges, descended to us from
our Ancestors, as the undoubted Birthright of the Subjects of this Kingdom of
England, (not doubting but the Infringers and Invaders of our Rights will
represent us to the rest of the Nation in the most malicious dress they can put
upon us) do here unanimously think it our Duty to declare to the rest of our
Protestant Fellow Subjects the Grounds of our present Undertaking.

We are by innumerable Grievances made sensible, that the very Fundamentals of
our Religion, Liberties, and Properties are about to be rooted out by our late
Jesuitical Privy Council, as has been of late too apparent. 1. By the King's
dispensing with all the Established Laws at his pleasure. 2. By displacing all
Officers out of all Offices of Trust and Advantage, and placing others in their
room that are known Papists, deservedly made inc^pable by the Established Laws
of our Land. 3. By destroying the Charters of most Corporations in the Land. 4.
By discouraging all persons that are not Papists, preferring such as turn to
Popery. 5. By displacing all honest and conscientious Judges, unless they
would, contrary to their Consciences, declare that to be Law which was merely
arbitrary. 6. By branding all Men with the name of Rebels that but offered to
justify the Laws in a legal Course against the arbitrary proceedings of the
King, or any of his corrupt Ministers. 7. By burthening the Nation with an
Army, to maintain the Violation of the Rights of the Subjects. 8. By
discountenancing the Established Reformed Religion. 9. By forbiding the
Subjects the benefit of Petitioning, and construing them Libellers; so rendering
the Laws a Nose of Wax, to serve their Arbitrary Ends. And many more such like,
too long here to enumerate.

We being thus made sadly sensible of the Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government
that is by the Influence of Jesuitical Counsels coming upon us, do unanimously
declare, That not being willing to deliver our Posterity over to such a
condition of Popery and Slavery, as the aforesaid Oppressions inevitably
threaten; we will, to the utmost of our Power, oppose the same, by joining with
the Prince of Orange (whom we hope God Almighty has sent to rescue us from the
Oppressions aforesaid) will use our utmost Endeavors for the recovery of our
almost ruined Laws, Liberties, and Religion; and herein we hope all good
Protestant Subjects will with their Lives and Fortunes be assistant to us, and
not be bugbear'd with the opprobrious Terms of Rebels, by which they would
fright us, to become perfect Slaves to their tyrannical Insolences and
Usurpations; for we assure our selves, that no rational and unbyassed Person
will judge it Rebellion to defend our Laws and Religion, which all our Princes
have sworn at their Coronations: Which Oath, how well it has been observed of
late, we desire a Free Parliament may have the consideration of.

We own it Rebellion to resist a King that governs by Law, but he was always
accounted a Tyrant that made his Will the Law; and to resist such an one, we
justly esteem no Rebellion, but a necessary Defense; and in this Consideration
we doubt not of all honest Men's Assistance, and humbly hope for, and implore
the great God's Protection, that turns the Hearts of his People as pleases
him best; it having been observed, That People can never be of one Mind without
his Inspiration, which has in all Ages confirmed that Observation, Vox Populi
est Vox Dei.

The pesent restoring of Charters, and reversing the oppressing and unjust
Judgment given on Magdalen College Fellows, is plain, are but to still the
people, like Plums to Children, by deceiving them for a while; but if they
shall by this Stratagem be fooled, till this present storm that threatens the
Papists, be past, as soon as they shall be resetled, the former Oppression will
be put on with greater vigor: but we hope in vain is the Net spread in the
sight of the Birds; For (1.) The Papists old Rule is, That Faith is not to be
kept with Heretics, as they term Protestants, though the Popish Religion is the
greatest Heresy. And (2.) Queen Mary's so ill observing her promises to the
Suffolk-men that helped her to her Throne. And above all, (3.) the Popes
dispensing with the breach of Oaths, Treaties, or Promises at his pleasure,
when it makes for the service of Holy Church, as they term it. These, we say,
are such convincing Reasons to hinder us from giving Credit to the aforesaid
Mock-Shews of Redress, that we think our selves bound in Conscience to rest on
no Security that shall not be approved by a freely Elected Parliament, to whom,
under God, we refer our Cause.

His Grace the Duke of NORFOLK's Speech to the Mayor of NORWICH on the First of
December, in the Marketplace of Norwich.
Mr. MAYOR,
NOT doubting but you and the rest of your Body, as well as the whole City and
Country, may be allarmed by the great Concourse of Gentry, with the numerous
Appearance of their Friends and Servants, as well as of your own Militia, here
this Morning, I have thought this the most proper place, as being the most
public one, to give you an account of our Intentions.

Out of the deep sense we had that in the present unhappy Juncture of Affairs,
nothing we could think of was possible to secure the Laws, Liberties and
Protestant Religion, but a Free Parliament; WE ARE HERE MET TO DECLARE, that we
will do our utmost to defend the same by declaring for such a Free Parliament.

And since His Majesty has been pleased (by the News we hear this day) to
order Writs for a Parliament to sit the 15 th of January next, I^ can only add
in the Name of my Self and all these Gentlemen, and others here met, That we
will ever be ready to support and defend the Laws, Liberties and Protestant
Religion: And so GOD SAVE THE KING.

To this the Mayor, Aldermen, and the rest of the Corporation, and a numerous
Assembly did concur with his Grace, and the rest of the Gentry.

His Grace at his lighting from his Horse, perceiving great numbers of Common
People gathering together, called them to him, and told them, He desired they
would not take any occasion to commit any Disorder or Outrage, but go quietly
to their Homes; and acquainted them that the King had ordered a Free Parliament
to be called.

TO THE KING's Most Excellent Majesty, The Humble Address of GEORGE Lord
DARTMOUTH, Admiral of Your Majesty's Fleet for the present Expedition, and the
Commanders of Your Majesty's Ships of War now actually at the Spitehead in Your
Majesty's Service under his Lordships Command.
Most Dread Sovereign,
THE deep sense we have had of the great Dangers your Majesty's Sacred Person
has been in, and the great Effusion of Christian Blood that threatened this your
Majesty's Kingdoms, and in probability would have been shed, unless God of his
infinite Mercy had put it into your Majesty's Heart to call a Parliament, the
only means, in our opinion, under the Almighty, left to quiet the Minds of your
People; We do give your Majesty our most humble and hearty Thanks for your
gracious Condescension, beseeching God to give your Majesty all immaginable
Happiness and Prosperity, and grant that such Counsels and Resolutions may be
promoted, as conduce to your Majesty's Honor and Safety, and tend to the Peace
and Settlement of this Realm both in Church and State, according to the
Established Laws of the Kingdom.

Dartmouth. Berkley. To. Strickland. I. Berry. Io. Beverley. John Leake. George
S. Lo. John Lacon. Fr. Wicell. Will. Davis. John Munden. Tho. Leg. Tho.
Leighton. St. Akerman. W. Cornwall. W. Ienning. Ioh. Clements. Io. Ashby. Rob.
Wiseman. John Ieniper. Will. Booth. Tho. Coal. R. D'Lavall. Tho. Johnson. M.
Aylmer. Fr. Frowde. Tho. Skeleton. Ab. Potter. A. Hastings. Io. Montgomery. M.
Tennant. Clo. Shovell. E. Dover. R. Weston. W. Botham. I. Tyrrel. St.
Fairborne. Henr. Botler. William Pooley. Io. Fraseby. Ba. Wild.

On board the Resolution, at Spitehead, December. 1. 1688.
FINIS.
A THIRD Collection of Papers Relating to the Present Juncture of Affairs in
England. VIZ. I. The Expedition of the Prince of Orange for England; giving an
Account of the most Remarkable Passages thereof, from the Day of his setting
Sail from Holland, to the first Day of this Instant December. II. A further
Account of the Prince's Army, in a Letter from Exon, November. 24. III. Three
Letters. 1. A Letter from a Jesuit of Liege, to a Jesuit at Friburg, giving an
Account of the happy Progress of Religion in England. 2. A Letter from Father
Petre to Father La Cheese. 3. The Answer of Father La Cheese to Father Petre.
IV. Popish Treaties not to be relied on: In a Letter from a Gentleman at York,
to his Friend in the Prince of Orange's Camp. Addressed to all Members in the
next Parliament.


Licensed and Entered according to Order.

London printed, and are to be sold by Rich. Ianeway in Queen's-head Court in
Paternoster Row, 1688.

THE EXPEDITION Of His HIGHNESS the Prince of ORANGE For ENGLAND. Giving an
Account of the most remarkable Passages thereof, from the Day of his setting
Sail from Holland, to the first Day of this instant December, 1688.
HIS Highness the Prince of Orange set Sail from Holland with 51 Men of War, 18
Fireships, and about 330 Tenders, being Ships hired of Merchants for the
carriage of Horse and Foot, Arms, Ammunition, etc. The Fleet stood out at Sea
to the Norward, which met with horrid Storms for two Days and two Nights
together, in which bad Weather there were lost above 500 Horse, and a Vessel
parted from the Fleet, wherein were 400 Foot, supposed to be lost, but now
known to be arrived safe at the Texel, but grievously shattered and torn by the
Storms; two of the Prince's principal Men of War were forced to new Rigg at
Helversluse.

The Prince immediately, on his return back, informed the States of the
condition of the Fleet, (which was not so damnified as was represented by the
Vulgar and Ignorant) who thereupon, to lull a great Man asleep, the States, or
some one employed by them, ordered, That the Harlem and Amsterdam Courantier
should make a dismal Story of it, by representing to the World, that the Prince
returned with his Fleet miserably shattered and torn, having lost nine Men of
War, and diverse others of less Concern; 1000 Horse ruined; a Calenture among
the Seamen; the loss of Dr. Burnet, and the chief Ministers under the Prince;
the ill Opinion the States had of the Expedition: In short, that a 100000 l.
would not repair the Damage sustained; and, almost next to an impossibility,
that the Prince should be in a condition to pursue his Design till the Spring.
And yet at the same time all hands were at work to repair the damaged Ships,
which were inconfiderable; so that in eight days time they were all re-fitted.
The Signal being given by the discharge of a Gun, all the Fleet immediately
weighed Anchor and stood out at Sea, steering their Course Norward all that
Night; next day, upon Tide of Ebb, they made a Stretch, and made a Watch above
a League, and then stood Westward, and lay all Night in the same posture, not
making two Leagues of Watch.

In the middle of the Night, an Advice-Boat brought us an Account, that the
English Fleet, consisting of 33 Sail, lay to the Westward of ours. Upon which
the Prince fired a Gun, which caused a great Consternation in the whole Fleet,
we having a brisk Easterly Wind, concluded themselves to be all ruined: But the
small Advice-Boats crusing for a more certain Account of the English, brought
us back word, That instead of the English Fleet, which the former Advice had
alarmed us with, it was Admiral Herbert with part of our Fleet, which had been
separated some hours from the Body of the Fleet: Upon whose arrival, great
rejoicing was among us all, and a Signal of Joy was given for it by the Prince.

In the Morning, about Eight, the Prince gave a Signal, that the Admirals
should come aboard him: Immediately after the whole Fleet was got into the
North-foreland, upon which the Prince gave the usual Sign of Danger, (according
to the printed Book) and ordered that the Fleet should all come up in a Body,
some fifteen or sixteen deep, his Higness leading the Van, in the Ship Brill,
(in English, Spectacles): His Flag was English Colors; the Motto impailed
thereon, is, THE PROTESTANT RELIGION, AND LIBERTIES OF ENGLAND; and underneath,
instead of Diu and Mon Droit, AND I WILL MAINTAIN IT.

The Council of War, from aboard the Prince, sent three small Frigates into the
Mouth of the Thames, viz. the Porpus, Postilion, and Mercury; who on their
return, brought us word, That the English Fleet lay in the Buoy of the Nore,
consisting of 34 Sail, and three more which lay in the Downs. The Wind
continuing at E. N. E.

The Prince immediately thereupon, gave another Signal of stretching the whole
Fleet in a Line, from Dover to Callis, twenty five deep: So that our Fleet
reached within a League of each place; the Flanks and Rear were guarded by our
Men of War. This sight would have ravished the most curious Eyes of Europe.
When our Fleet was in its greatest splendor, the Trumpets and Drums playing
various Tunes to rejoice our Hearts; this continued for above three hours.

Immediately after the Prince gave us a Sign to close, and we sailed that night
as far as Beachy, and commanded us to follow the Signal by Lights he had hung
out to us, viz. all the small Sail should come up to him by morning.

By the morning-day we espied the Isle of Wight, and then the Prince ordered
the Fleet to be drawn into the same posture as before related: yet not
stretching above half Channel over in this place. About five in the morning we
made the Start, the Wind chopping about to the Westward; upon which we stood
fair by Dartmouth, and so made for Tor-bay, where the Prince again ordered the
whole Fleet into the same posture as at Dover and Callis.

Upon his arrival at Tor-bay, the People on Land, in great numbers, welcomed
his Highness with loud Acclamations of Joy.

Immediately after the Prince gave two Signals, that the Admirals should come
aboard him, which they did; and then ordered, that the whole Fleet should come
to an Anchor, and immediately Land; and further ordered, that the Admirals
should stand out at Sea as a Guard, as well as the smaller Men of War to Attend
and Guard their Landing; and also ordered six Men of War to run in to Guard
Tor-bay.

The Prince then put out a Red Flag at the Misen-yard-arm; and provided to land
in sixty Boats, laid ready for that purpose: Upon which the Prince signified,
that General Mackay with his six Regiments of English and Scots should first
Land; and also, that the little Porpus with eighteen Guns should run a-ground
to secure their Landing: But there was no Opposition; for the People bid us
Heartily Welcome to England; and gave us all manner of Provisions for our
Refreshment.

The fifth of November (a Day never to be blotted out of the English-man's
Heart) the Prince caused to be landed about 2000: The Country bringing in all
manner of Provision both for Man and Horse, and were paid their Price honestly
for it.

The Prince the same Day commanded Captain M -- to search the Lady C -- 's
House, at Tor-Abby, for Arms and Horses; and so all other Houses which were
Roman Catholics. The Lady entertained them civilly, said her Husband was gone
to Plymouth: They brought from thence some Horses, and a few Arms, but gave no
further Disturbance to the Lady or her House. Nor shall it be forgotten, what
was faithfully acted at this Lady's House, immediately on our arrival at
Torbay: There was a Priest, and some others with him were upon a Watchtower to
discover what our Fleet was, whether French or Dutch: At last they discovered
the White Flags on some of our Men of War; the ignorant Priest concluded
absolutely we were the French Fleet, which with great impatience they had so
long expected; and having laid up great Provisions for their Entertainment, the
Priest ordered all to the Chapel to sing Te Deum for the arrival of their
supposed Forces; but being soon deceived, on our Landing, we found the benefit
of their Provisions; and instead of Vostre Serviture Monsieur, they were
entertained with Yeen Mijnheere, Can you Dutch spraken? Upon which they all ran
away from the House, but the Lady and a few old Servants.

Presently after the Prince of Orange's Landing, he sent a Quince to the Earl
of Bath, which was supposed to intimate his coming in to him.

The whole Army, to the best of my knowledge, consisted of about 30000 Horse and
Foot, Volunteers, etc. The News of the Prince's landing was brought to the City
of Exeter by several Expresses to the Earl of Bath: they landed all their Horse
first of all, and after that the Foot, all the Army being ashore by Tuesday
Three of the Clock in the Afternoon, all their Baggage, Provisions, and
Ammunition being sent about for Topsham, where they were brought up by Water to
this City, there was abundance landed with the Prince at Torbay for present
Service in case they should need it. The Wednesday, being the 7 th current, one
Captain Hicks came to Town (who is the Son of that worthy Divine Mr. John Hicks
the N. C. deceased) and as soon as he came, the Mobile in very great numbers
flocked to him to list themselves in the Service of the Prince of Orange, which
the Mayor hearing of, sent for him and questioned with him, whether he had a
Commission for what he did? but he would produce none, nor give any account of
the Prince's Design, upon which he was committed to Prison; but the Concourse
of People was so great about the Guild Hall, that they would not suffer him to
be carried away, so he remained there till next day in the Custody of two
Constables, and was very nobly provided for by the Mayor; Thursday the Lord
Mordant with three or four Troops of Horse came to Town, and Dr. Burnet with
him, and when they came to the Gate of this City it was shut against them, upon
which the Lord Mordant commanded the Porter to open the Gate on pain of Death,
which was presently set open, and being open, required him on the same Penalty
not to shut it again: as soon as they were entered, the Lord M. went to the
Hall, and set Captain Hicks at liberty, and inquired of his Usage, who gave the
Lord M. a very large Character of the Mayor's Civility and Respect to him, upon
which there was a Guinea given those that waited on him; that Afternoon the
Lord M. and Dr. Burnet waited on the Mayor to know if he would meet the Prince
at the Gate, and govern the City under him? which he excused, and told them he
was under the Obligation of an Oath to his Majesty, and therefore desired the
Prince would lay no Commands on him that should be prejudicial to his
Conscience, and after some debate of the Matter they departed, all the Thursday
they kept coming to Town; the Friday the Prince came with his Guards, and were
marching into, and some through the City to places adjacent about three hours
without ceasing, and more or less they came in still until Night; Men better
horsed I never saw in all my Life.

The Prince's Entry was in this manner:

1. The Right Honorable the Earl of Macklesfield with 200 Horse, the most part
of which were English Gentlemen richly mounted on Flanders Steeds, (managed and
used to War) in Head-Pieces, Back and Breast, bright Armor.

2. 200 Blacks, brought from the Plantations of the Netherlands in America,
having on Imbroider'd Caps lined with white Fur, and Plumes of White Feathers,
to attend the Horse.

3. 200 Finlanders or Laplanders, in Bears Skins, taken from the Wild Beasts
they had slain, the common Habit of that cold Climate, with black Armor, and
broad flaming Swords.

4. 50 Gentlemen, and as many Pages to attend and support the Prince's Banner,
bearing this Inscrption, GOD and the PROTESTANT RELIGION.

5. 50 Led-Horses, all managed and brought up to the Wars, with two Grooms to
each Horse, and two Coaches of State.

6. After these Rid the Prince on a Milk-white Palfrey, armed Cap-a-Pee, a Plum
of White Feathers on his Head, all in bright Armor, and forty two Footmen
running by him.

7. After his Highness followed likewise on Horseback 200 Gentlemen and Pages.

8. 300 Switzers with Fuzees.

9. 500 Volunteers, each two led-Horses.

10. His Captain and Guards 600 armed Cap-a-Pee. The rest of the Army brought
up the Rear.

Saturday most part of the day, and Sabbath Day, and Monday, and Tuesday the
main Body of the Army came, and most of them, only some few Regiments of Foot,
marched to Tiverton, Collumpton, Honiton, etc. and to the Neighboring
Parishes, and the Foot to Clist-beath, where they encamped and pitched their
Tents. The Bishop fled, and is come for London, and we hear is made Archbishop
of York; the Dean likewise withdrew, whose House the Prince took for his
Lodgings. The Lord's Day Dr. Burnet preached at the Cathedral on the last Verse
of 107 th Psalm, wherein he observed the wonderful Providence of God toward
them in the whole Conduct of Affairs in this Undertaking, and how they intended
to have landed the 4 th of November if it had been possible, it being the
Prince's Birthday, and the Day of his Marriage to the Princess, but they could
not possibly make the Land, and so could not get the Shore till the 5 th, that
England's Deliverance might be begun on the same Day that it was formerly
designed for Ruin and Destruction. On Monday all the Canons that were in Town
were summoned to appear in the Quire, and likewise the Singing-Men, when after
they had sung Te Deum, Dr. Burnet read the Prince's Declaration, and after the
Declaration, a short Prayer for the Success of the Prince, and so departed.
There was not one of the Canons appeared; and when the Declaration was reading
the Singing-Men went away, they being commanded in the Service to forbear
praying for the Prince of Wales. Monday Captain Burrington, who lives by
Crediton, came to the Prince and offered him his Service, who was very kindly
received by Him; after that every day the Gentry from all parts of Devonshire,
Somersetshire, etc. flocked to him in great numbers, it would take up too much
time to name them, few absenting themselves, and those that did, there is great
notice taken of them; they have entered into an Association to stand and fall
with the Prince; several Lords came to him while here, as the Lord Colchester,
the Lord Abbington, the Lord Cornbury, the Lord Shrewsbury, etc. It is
incredible to tell you what they have brought with them, except you saw it,
there being 200 of their Ships come into the River of Topsham. Plymouth Fort is
surrendered to the Prince by the Lord of Bath, and the Lord Huntington, and the
Popish Officers that were therein with Father Turner are seized and secured,
and the Popish Soldiers discharged; and coming hither and owning themselves
such, are committed by Mr. Seamour, who is made our Governor, and one Major
Gibson Deputy Governor. Here are several thousands of Soldiers that have
listed themselves, and many thousands more would have done the same, but the
Marschal de Schomberg told the Prince there was no need of them, so were
dismissed again. They have a vast Treasure with them, I am certainly informed of
50 Wagons loaded with Cash. They have landed about 120 Field-Guns, several of
which remain still here, the other are gone with the Prince. The last News we
had was, that the Prince was at the Earl of Bristol's, which is by Sherborn,
where we are informed that Prince George, the Duke of Grafton, the Lord
Churchill, and Colonel Trelawny met him, and that the Prince saluted them in
the words of David to the Men of Judah and Benjamin, 1 Chronicles. 12.17. If ye be
come peaceably unto me to help me, mine Heart shall be knit unto you; but if ye
be come to betray me to mine Enemies, seeing there is no Wrong in my Hands, the
God of our Fathers look thereon, and rebuke it. And they replied in the words
of Amasai in the 18 th Verse, Thine are we, David, and on thy side, thou Son of
Jesse: Peace, Peace be unto thee, and Peace be unto thine Helpers, for thy God
helps thee. Then David received them, and made them Captains of the Band. The
Prince at his going from hence, gave the Mayor this Character, That he was
worthy to be trusted, for being faithful to his Trust.

A further Account of the Prince's Army, in a Letter* sent from Exon, dated
Nov. 24.
HAD I not insensibly over-slipt my Time the last Post, you had received this
then: When I came here, I endeavored to inform my self, after the best manner
I could, as to the Number and Quality of the Prince's Army, and all generally
concluded them to be about 30000, all picked Men, and many of them personally
present at the Siege of Buda. This I am certain of, that they appeared to be
Men resolute, well Disciplined, and Stout, and of an extraordinary Stature, and
their Arms suitable, Muskets, Swords, and Pikes, being far larger than ever I
yet saw; and notwithstanding the Streets were thronged, almost as thick as
yours on a Lord-Mayor's Day, yet was it even a rarity to see one of them
shorter than six Foot, and some of them were, I am confident, six foot and a
quarter, if not six foot and an half in Height: So that were it lawful to trust
in an Arm of Flesh, they might have some cause to presume; but the tenor of
their words were otherwise, their civil deportment, and their honesty of paying
for what they have, (and the strictness of their Discipline hinders them from
being otherwise) winning not a little the Affections of the Countrymen, who
daily resort hither, forty or fifty in a Gang, to be Listed. My Lord Mordent's
Regiment was soon completed, which with two others, was raised and maintained
at the Charge of the Gentry in this County, of which Edward Seymour Esquire is by
the Prince made Governor. During his Highness stay here, which was till last
Wednesday, there appeared a Court most splendid, composed, not only of Foreign,
but of many of the English Nobility and Gentry, which came hither to wait on
his Highness since his Arrival, of both Ranks, upwards to the number of Sixty,
all mighty Gallant in their Equipage, each striving thereby to add to the Glory
of their Design. The Gentry of these Parts first seemed slow in their Advances
to serve the Prince; but as soon as the Ice was broke by Capt: Burrington, the
majority soon followed his steps, and have entered into an Association. It is to
admiration to consider the vast Magazine of all Warlike Utensils brought hither
by the Prince's Army, their Baggage having for a Fortnight together been
continually Landing, and yet not fully ended: Were it not for the badness of
the Roads, as I was informed by a private Sentinel, they could draw into the
Field an Artillery of above 200 Pieces: But the greatest Curiosity I yet saw,
was a Bridge of Boats, such as I conceive the Imperialists use to pass over the
Danube and Save with, which was for the speedy conveyance of their Carriages,
laid over the River in two or three Hours, and afterward as soon removed; not
to mention a Smith's Shop or Forge, curiously contrived in a Wagon; or another
Contrivance the Foot carry with them to keep off the Horse, which in their
manner may well yield the Service of a Pike.

There has been lately driven into Dartmouth, and since taken, a French Vessel
laden altogether with Images, and Knives of a very large proportion, in length
nineteen Inches, and in breadth two Inches and an half; what they were designed
for God only knows.

THREE LETTERS.
I. A Letter from a Jesuit of Liege, to a Jesuit at Friburg, giving an Account
of the Happy Progress of Religion in England.
IT cannot be said what great Affection and Kindness the K. has for the
Society, wishing much Health to this whole College by R. P. the Provincial, and
earnestly recommending himself to our Prayers. The Provincial, Alexander
Regnes, being come back for England, the K. was graciously pleased to send for
him; (several Earls and Dukes waiting his coming at the hour appointed) the Q.
being present, the King discoursing familiarly with him, asked him, How many
young Students he had, and how many Scholasticks? To which (when the Provincial
had answered, That of the latter he had Twenty, of the former more than Fifty)
he added, That he had need of double or treble that number to perform what he
in his Mind had designed for the Society; and commanded that they should be
very well exercised in the Gift of Preaching; for such only (says he) do we
want in England.

You have heard, I make no doubt, that the K. has sent Letters to Father Le
Cheese, the French King's Confessor, about Wadden-house, therein declaring,
that he would take in good part from him, whatsoever he did or was done for the
English Fathers of the Society. Father Clare Rector of the said House going
about those Affairs at London, found an easy access to the King and as easily
obtained his Desires. He was forbid to kneel and kiss the King's Hand (as the
manner and custom is) by the K. himself, saying, Once indeed your Reverence
kissed my Hand; but had I then known you were a Priest, I should rather have
kneeled and kissed your Reverences hand.

After the Business was ended, in a familiar Discourse, the K. declared to this
Father, That he would either Convert England, or die a Martyr; and that he had
rather die to morrow, that Conversion wrought, than reign fifty Years without
that in Happiness and Prosperity.

Lastly, He called himself a Son of the Society, the Welfare of which, he said,
he as much rejoiced at as his own: And it can scarce be said how joyful he
showed himself when it was told him, That he was made partaker, by the most
Reverend Father N. of all the Merits of the Society; of which number he would
declare one of his Confessors: Some report R. P. the Provincial will be the
person, but whom he designs is not yet known. Many do think an Archbishopric
will be bestowed on Father Edmond Petre, (chiefly beloved) very many a
Cardinals Cap, to whom, (within this Month or two) that whole part of the K.
Palace is granted, in which the K. when he was Duke of York used to reside;
where you may see I know not how many Courtiers daily attending to speak with
his Eminency, (for so they are said to call him) upon whose Counsel, and also
that of several Catholic Peers, highly preferred in the Kingdom, the K.
greatly relyes, which way he may promote the Faith without violence. Not long
since some Catholic Peers did object to the K. that he made too much haste to
establish the Faith, to whom He answered, I growing old, must make great steps,
otherwise, if I should die, I shall leave you worse than I found you. Then they
asking him, why therefore was he not more sollicitous for the Conversion of his
Daughters, Heirs of the Kingdom? He answered, God will take care for an Heir;
leave my Daughters for me to Convert; do you by your example reduce those that
are under you, and others to the Faith. In most Provinces he has preferred
Catholics; and in a short time we shall have the same Justices of the Peace
(as they are called) in them all. At Oxford we hope Matters go very well; one
of our Divines is always Resident therein; a public Catholic Chapel of the
Vice-Chancellor's, who has drawn some Students to the Faith. The Bishop of
Oxford seems very much to favor the Catholic Cause: He proposed in Council,
Whether it was not expedient, that at least one College in Oxford should be
allowed Catholics, that they might not be forced to be at so much Charges, by
going beyond Seas to Study? What Answer was given, is not yet known. The same
Bishop inviting two of our Noblemen, with others of the Nobility, to a Banquet,
drank the King's Health to an Heretical Baron there, wishing a happy Success to
all his Affairs; and he added, That the Faith of Protestants in England, seemed
to him to be little better than that of Buda was before it was taken; and that
they were for the most part mere Atheists who defended it. Many do embrace the
Faith, and four of the chiefest Earls have lately posfessed it publicly.

The Reverend Father, Alexander Regnes, Nephew to our Provincial, to whom is
committed the Care of the Chapel of the Ambassador of the most Serene Elector
Palatine, is whole days busied in resolving and showing the Doubts or Questions
of Heretics, concerning their Faith, of which number you may see two or three
continually walking before the Doors of the Chapel, disputing about Matters of
Faith amongst themselves.

Prince George, we can have nothing certain what Faith he intends to make
profession of.

We have a good while begun to get footing in England. We teach Humanity at
Lincoln, Norwich, and York. At Warwick we have a public Chapel, secured from
all Injuries by the King's Soldiers. We have also bought some Houses of the
City of Wigorn in the Province of Lancaster. The Catholic Cause very much
increases. In some Catholic Churches, upon Holy Days above 1500 are always
numbered present at the Sermon. At London, likewise, things succeed no worse.
Every Holy Day, at preaching, People so frequent, that many of the Chapels
cannot contain them. Two of ours, Darmes and Berfall do constantly say Mass
before the King and Queen, Father Edmund Newil before the Queen Dowager, Father
Alexander Regnes in the Chapel of the Ambassador aforesaid, others in other
places. Many Houses are bought for the College in the Savoy (as they call it)
nigh Somerset House, London, the Palace of the Queen Dowager, to the value of
about eighteen thousand Florins, in making of which, after the Form of a
College, they labor very hard that the Schools may be opened before Easter.

In Ireland shortly there will be a Catholic Parliament, seeing no other can
satisfy the King's Will to Establish the Catholic Cause there. In the Month of
February, for certain, the King has designed to call a Parliament at London:
1. That by a Universal Decree, the Catholic Peers may be admitted into the
Upper House. 2. That the Oath or Test may be annulled. 3. Which is the best or
top of all, That all Penal Laws made against Catholics, may be Abrogated;
which that he may more surely obtain, he desires every one to take notice, that
he has certainly determined to dismiss any from all profitable Employments
under him, who do not strenuously endeavor the obtaining those things; also
that he will Dissolve the Parliament: with which Decree some Heretics being
affrighted, came to a certain Peer to consult him what was best to be done: to
whom he said, the Kings pleasure is sufficiently made known to us; what he has
once said, he will most certainly do: if you love your selves, you must submit
your selves to the Kings Will. There are great preparations for War at London,
and a Squadron of many Ships of War are to be fitted out against a time
appointed; what they are designed for is not certain. The Hollanders greatly
fear they are against them, and therefore begin to prepare themselves. Time
will discover more.

Liege, 2. Feb. 1688.
II. A Letter from the Reverend Father Petre, Jesuit, Almoner to the King of
England, written to the Reverend Father la Cheese, Confessor to the most
Christian King, touching the present Affairs of ENGLAND.
Translated from the French.
Most Reverend Father,
IF I have failed, for the last few days, to observe your Order, it was not
from want of Affection, but Health, that occasioned the neglect; and for which
I shall endeavor to make amends by the length of this.

I shall begin where my former left off, and shall tell you, That since the
appearing of a Letter in this Town, written by the Prince's Minister of
Holland, which declares the Intentions of the Prince and Princess of Orange,
relating to the Repealing the Test, or to speak more properly, their Aversion
to it: This Letter has produced very ill Effects among the Heretics; whom, at
the return of some of our Fathers from those Parts, we had persuaded, that the
Prince would comply with every thing relating to the Test that the King should
propose to the next Parli^ment, in case he should call one; to which I do not
find his Majesty much inclined. But the coming of this Letter (of which I have
enclosed a Copy) has served for nothing but to encourage the Obstinate in their
aversion to that Matter. The Queen, as well as my self, were of Opinion,
against the sending of any such Letter to the Hague upon that Subject, but
rather that some Person able to discourse and persuade, should have been sent
thither: for all such Letters, when they are not grateful, produce bad Effects.
That which is spoken Face to Face, is not so easi^y divulged, nor any thing
discovered to the People, but what we have a raind the Vulgar should know: And,
I believe, your Reverence will concur with me in this Opinion. This Letter has
extremely provoked the King, who is of a temper not to bear a refusal, and who
has not been used to have his Will contradicted: And, I verily believe, this
very affront has hastened his Resolution of re-calling the English Regiments in
Holland. I showed his Majesty that part of your Letter, that relates to the
Opinion of his Most Christian Majesty, upon this Subject, which his Majesty
well approves of. We are interested to know the Success of this Affair, and
what Answer the States will give. The King changes as many Heretic Officers as
he can, to put Catholics in their places; but the Misfortune is, that here we
want Catholic Officers to supply them: And therefore, if you know any such of
our Nation in France, you would do the King a pleasure to persuade them to come
over, and they shall be certain of Employments, either in the old Troops, or
the New that are speedily to be raised; for which, by this my Letter, I pass my
Word.

Our Fathers are continually employed to convert the Officers; but their
Obstinacy is so great, that for one that turns, there are five that had rather
quit their Commands. And there are so many Malcontents, whose Party is
already but too great, the King has need of all his Prudence and Temper to
manage this great Affair, and bring it to that Perfection we hope to see it in
ere long. All that I can assure you is, That here shall be no neglect in the
Queen, who labors night and day with unexpressible Diligence for the propation
of the Faith, and with the Zeal of a holy Princess. The Queen Dowager is not so
earnest, and Fear makes her resolve to retire into Portugal* to pass the
remainder of her days in Devotion: she has already asked the King leave, who
has not only granted it, but also promised that she should have her Pension
punctually paid; and that during her Life, her Servants that she leaves behind
her, shall have the same Wages, as if they were in waiting. She stays but for a
proper Season to imbark for Lisbon, and to live there free from all Stories.

As to the Queen's being with Child* that great Concern goes as well as we
could wish, notwithstanding all the Satirical Discourses of the Heriticks, who
content themselves to vent their Poison in Libels, which by night they disperse
in the Street, or fix upon the Walls. There was one lately found upon a Pillar
of a Church, that imported, That such a day Thanks should be given GOD for the
Queen's being great with a Cushion. If one of these Pasquil-makers could be
discovered, he would but have an ill time on it, and should be made to take his
last Farewell at Tyburn.

You will agree with me (most Reverend Father) that we have done a great thing,
by introducing Mrs. Celier to the Queen: this Woman is totally devoted to our
Society, and zealous for the Catholic Religion. I will send you an account of
the progress of this Affair, and will use the Cipher you sent me, which I think
very admirable. I can send you nothing certain of the Prince and Princess of
Denmark; he is is a Prince with whom I cannot discourse about Religion; Luther
was never more earnest than this Prince. It is for this reason that the King
(who does not love to be denied) never yet pressed him in that matter, his
Majesty thinking it necessary that the Fathers should first prepare things,
before he undertake to speak to him. But this Prince, as all of his Nation, has
naturally an Aversion to our Society; and this Antipathy does much obstruct the
progress of our Affairs; and it would be unreasonable to complain hereof to the
King, at present to trouble him, tho he has an entire Confidence in us, and
looks upon our Fathers, as the Apostles of this Land. As for Ireland, that
Country is already all Catholic; yea, all the Militia are so. The Viceroy
merits great Praise; we may give him this Honor, That he is a Son worthy our
Society; and I hope will participate of the Merits of it. He informs me, he has
just writ to your Reverence of these matters, how things go there. Some
Catholic Regiments from those parts will speedily be sent for over for the
King's Guards; his Majesty being resolved to trust them, rather than others;
and may do it better in case of any popular Commotion, against which we ought
to secure our selves the best we can. His Majesty does us the Honor to visit
our College often, and is most pleased when we present him some new
Convert-Scholars, whom he incourages with his gracious Promises. I have not
Expression sufficient to let you know with what Devotion his Majesty
communicated the last Holy Days; and a Heretic cannot better make his Court to
him, than by turning to the Catholic Faith. He desires that all the Religious,
of what Order soever they be, make open Profession as he does, not only of the
Catholic Religion, but also of their Order; not at all approving that Priests,
or Religious should conceal themselves out of Fear; and he has told them, That
he would have them wear the Habit of a Religious; and that he will take care to
defend them from Affronts. And the People are already accustomed to it; and we
begin to celebrate Funerals with the same Ceremony as in France; but it is
almost a Miracle to see that no body speaks one word against it, no not so much
as the Ministers in their Pulpits; in so good order has the King managed these
Matters. Many English Heretics resort often to our Sermons; and I have often
recommended to our Fathers to preach now in the beginning, as little as they
can of the Controversy, because that provokes; but to represent to them the
Beauty and Antiquity of the Catholic Religion, that they may be convinced,
that all that has been said and preached to them, and their own Reflections
concerning it, have been all Scandal: For I find (as the Apostle says) they
must be nourished with Milk, not being able to bear strong Meat. Many have
desired me to give them some of our Prayers, and even the holy Mass in English:
which I mean to do, to satisfy the meanest sort, of which the greatest part do
not understand Latin, but not to take away from the new Converts their
Testaments, which is a matter of moment; and, that we may not disgust them at
the beginning, we must permit them to have them for a time, till they part with
them of themselves. I had need of C. H's Counsel upon this Point, and not in
this only, but also in a great many other matters that daily press me: for you
may easily believe, that I have often more business than I can well dispatch;
and we must work with so much Circumspection and Precaution, that I have often
need of your Paternity's wise Counsel. But the Lord and the good Virgin do
strengthen me as there is occasion.

The Bishop of Oxon has not yet declared himself openly; the great Obstacle is
his Wife, whom he cannot rid himself of: His design being to continue Bishop,
and only change Communion; as it is not doubted but the King will permit, and
our holy Father confirm: tho I do not see how he can be farther useful to us in
the Religion in which he is, because he is suspected, and of no esteem among
the Heretics of the English Church: nor do I see that the-Example of his
Conversion is like to draw many others after him, because he declared himself
so suddenly. If he had believed my Counsel, which was to temporize for some
longer time, he would have done better; but it is his Temper, or rather Zeal
that hurried him on. There are two other Prelates that will do no less than he;
but they hold off alike, to see how they may be serviceable to the Propagation,
and produce more Fruits, while they continue undiscovered.

That which does us most harm with the Lords and great Men, is the apprehension
of a Heretic Successor: For (as a Lord told me lately) assure me of a
Catholic Successor, and I will assure you, I and my Family will be so too. To
this happy purpose, the Queen's happy Delivery will be of very great moment.
Our zealous Catholics do already lay two to one that it will be a Prince: God
does nothing by halves; and ever day Masses are said upon this very occasion.

I have gained a very great point, in persuading the King to place our Fathers
in Madalen-Colledg in Oxon; who will be able to tutor the young Scholars in the
Roman Catholic Religion. I rely much on Father Thomas Fairfax, to whom I have
given necessary Instructions how to govern himself with the Heretic People;
and to take care in the beginning, that he speak not to them any thing that may
terrify. And, as I tell you, a Religious has need here of great Prudence at
this time, that the King may hear of no Complaints that may displease him; and
therefore we dare not at present, do all we shall be able, and bound to do
hereafter, for fear of too much haring the Mobile.

I like well that Father Hales goes to stay some time at the Hague incognito,
on pretense of soliciting for a Place, which is not soon to be got there; and
I have given him a Letter to some of that Court: Father Smith that is there
now, by reason of his great Age, not being able to do all he ought and wishes
to do, and is also too well known there. And I shall often impart to you what I
shall learn from those Quarters: from whence I shall weekly receive something
of moment, so long as the two Courts are in so bad Intelligence together, as at
present they are. For my part, to speak freely on this Topic to your Reverend
Fatherhood, I am of opinion, we should rather endeavor to moderate, than
aggravate the Difference between them; tho I know I do not in this matter
altogether concur with the Sense of the French Ambassador, who considers only
his Master's Interest: But we are necessitated to take other Measures, and such
as perhaps may not always agree with the Interest of France in this matter.

And I think aggravating this Breach at present, to be also prejudicial to the
Catholic Religion it self. The great Design we have so long aimed at, is
applying to the King of France to take from the Heretics all hopes of a Head,
or any other Protection, than what they must expect from their own King;
whereby they finding themselves exposed to his Pleasure, will the more readily
subscribe to his Will. But this misunderstanding between us, will occasion an
opportunity to the Heretics to set up the Prince of Orange for their Chief:
And let me assure you not to deceive your selves, The Religious of England, as
well as the Presbyterians themselves, regard the Prince of Orange as their
Moses; and his Party is already so powerful in both these Kingdoms, that it
will appear terrible to any thinking Person, should things come to extremity;
as may never happen, if matters are not pushed on too far, but managed with
Moderation. And I desire therefore, with great deference to you better
Judgment, that this matter might be hinted to his Most Christian Majesty, as
opportunity shall serve, and am sensible it must be done with very great
caution.

I can tell you nothing at present concerning the certainty of calling a
Parliament; it requires so many things to be considered of, and measures to be
taken, that his Majesty ought to be well assured of the success, before he
convenes them together. I am not of opinion with many other Catholics, who
say, That by calling them the King hazards nothing; for, if they will not
answer his Ends, he need only prorogue them, as is usually done: But it is my
Opinion, and the Sense of many others, That his Majesty hazards much; for if it
should unfortunately happen, that they should in their Assembly refuse to
comply with his Majesty's Desires, it may be long enough ere he compass his
Ends by way of a Parliament, and perhap^ never: and then there rests no
Expedient, or other Means but by Violence, to execute the Orders of his secret
Council, which must be supposed by his Army; who, upon a pretense of Incamping,
may be called together with the less Jealousy or Suspicion. So, you may see
(most Reverend Father) that we do not want work in these Quarters; and I must
be supported by your Prayers, which I beg of you, and from all those of our
Society.

His Majesty is so desirous that things may be done in order, and upon a sure
Fund, so as to be the more lasting, that he makes great application to the
Shires and Corporations, to get such Persons chosen f^r the Parliament, as may
be favorable to his Ends, of which he may be sure, before they come to debate:
And the King will make them promise so firmly, and exact such Instruments from
them in writing, that they shall not be able to go back, unless they will
thereby draw upon themselves his Majesty's utmost Displeasure, and make them
feel the weight of his Resentment. And I have here enclosed some Effects of his
Majesty's Endeavors in this matter, which is an Address which the Mayor,
Sheriffs and Burgesses of New Castle in the County of Stafford, have presented
to the King [see the Gazette, where this Corporation, as well as Gloucester and
Teuxbury, and others, in their Addresses, promise to choose such Members as
shall comply with his Majesty's Desires.] If all Towns were in as perfect
Obedience as these, we should certainly have a Parliament called, which the
Catholics and Nonconformists expect with great Impatience. But since this
cannot be said of many of them, the King's secret Council think good to wait
for the Queen's Delivery, that they may see a Successor, who may have need of
the whole Protection of the Most Christian King to support him, and maintain
his Rights. And, by the Grace of God, we hope, that that Prince, treading in
his Father's steps, may prove a worthy Son of our Society, like his Father, who
thinks it no Dishonor to be so called.

As to other things (most Reverend Father) our Fathers with me, as well as
generally all the Catholics, with what grief do we hear of the Disunion that
arises between his Holiness and the Most Christian King! How does my Head, in
imitation of the Prophet's, become a Spring of Tears to lament night and day
the Schism that I fores^e coming into the Church! Is is possible that our holy
Society should not stand in the Breach, and prevent the Mischiefs that this
difference may occasion in the Church? And that no body can reconci^e Levi and
Judah, the Priesthood and the Scepter, the Father and the Son, the eldest Son
of the Church with the Vicar of Christ upon Earth? And what a Desolation, and
what Advantage to the Heretics must this occasion? They begin already to bid
us convert the Children of the Family, before we begin to convert Strangers.
And I must with grief confess, they have but too much reason for what they say;
and if there does not come some present Assistance from above, I foresee this
Affair will occasion great Prejudices in the North: Nor have we any hope that
his British Majesty will interpose herein openly, he receiving so little
Satisfaction from his Holiness in some Demands made by his Ambassador at Rome,
which (morally speaking) ought not to have been denied so great a King, who
first made this step (which his Predecessors for a long time were not willing
to undertake) in sending his Ambassador of Obedience to Rome: And yet for all
this our holy Father had not any particular Consideration of this Submission
and Filial Obedience: so that I dare not mention this matter but by way of
Discourse, daily expecting that of himself he will be pleased to make some
Proposal therein. I doubt not (Reverend Father) of your constant Endeavor to
accommodate this matter, thereby to take away from the Heretics, especially
the Hugonots of France, this occasion to laugh and deride us: and we should
think the Ch^nge much for the worse, if, instead of the French King's going to
Geneva, he should march to Rome: What may not all this come to? especially
since the Marquess de Lavardin has been so passionate in his Discourse to the
Cardinal-Chancellor, as to call him Impertinent; and so far to forget his Duty
and Reverence toward our Holy Father, the Pope himself, as to say he Doted: as
the Heretics do confidently discourse in these parts. I have caused some
Masses of the Holy Ghost to be said, That God would please to inspire the
discontented Parties with a Spirit of Peace and Concord. You did acquaint me
some time since, That Madam Mainteron did take upon her the Title of Daughter
of the Society; by virtue whereof, you may command her, by virtue of Obedience,
to use her Credit and Eloquence with the King, to incline him to an
Accommodation in this matter. In the mean time, I hear that at Rome, many
eminent Persons endeavor the same with his Holiness, who says, He cannot, nor
ought not to recede from what he has done; otherwise it were in effect to
submit to the Articles made in France by the Clergy in 1682, and consequently
of too great moment to recant: and therefore Submission ought to come from the
Son, and not from the Father. I recommend my self (Reverend Father!) to your
Prayers and Blessing, desiring you would continue to assist me with your
Salutal Counsels, and rest for ever.

Yours, etc.
St. Iame's, Feb. 9.
III. The Answer of the Reverend Father la Chese, Confessor to the Most
Christian King, to a Letter of the Reverend Father Petre, Jesuit, and Great
Almoner to the King of England, upon the Method or Rule he must observe with
His Majesty, for the Conversion of His Protestant Subjects.
Most Reverend Father,
WHen I compare the Method of the French Court (which declares against all
Heresies) with the Policy of other Princes, who had the same Design in former
Ages; I find so great a difference, that all that passes now a days in the
King's Council is an impenetrable Mystery: and the Eyes of all Europe are
opened to see what happens; but cannot discover the Cause.

When Francis the First, and Henry the Second his Son, undertook to ruin the
Reformation, they had to struggle with a Party which was but beginning and
weak, and destitute of Help; and consequently easier to be overcome.

In the time of Francis the Second, and Charles the Ninth, a Family was seen
advanced to the Throne by the Ruin of the Protestants who were for the House
of Bourbon.

In this last Reign many Massacres happened, and several Millions of Heretics
have been sacrificed, but it answered otherways: and his Majesty has showed (by
the peace and mild ways he uses) that he abhors shedding of Blood; from which
you must persuade his Britannick Majesty, who naturally is inclined to
Roughness, and a kind of Boldness, which will make him hazard all, if he does
not politickly manage it; as I hinted in my last, when I mentioned my Lord
Chancellor.

Most Reverend Father, to satisfy the desire I have to show you by my Letters
the Choice you ought to make of such Persons fit to stir-up, I will in few
words (since you desire it) inform you of the Genius of the People of our
Court, of their Inclinations, and which of them we make use of; that: by a
Parallel which you will make between them and your English Lords, you may learn
to know them.

Therefore I shall begin with the Chief: I mean our Great Monarch. It is
certain he is naturally good, and loves not to do Evil, unless desired to do
it. This being so, I may say, he never would have undertaken the Conversion of
his Subjects, without the Clergy of France, and without our Societies
Correspondence abroad. He is a Prince enlightened; who very well observes, that
what we put him upon, is contrary to his Interest, and that nothing is more
opposite to his Great Designs, and his Glory; he aiming to be the Terror of all
Europe. The vast number of Malcontents he has caused in his Kingdom, forces
him in time of Peace to keep three times more Forces, than his Ancestors did in
the greatest Domestic and Foreign Wars: which cannot be done without a
prodigious Expense.

The Peoples Fears also begin to lessen, as to his aspiring to an Universal
Monarchy: and they may assure themselves he has left those Thoughts; nothing
being more opposite to his Designs, than the Method we enjoin him. His Candor,
Bounty, and Toleration to the Heretics, would undoubtedly have opened the
Doors of the Low Countries, Palatinate, and all other States on the Rhine, and
even of Switzerland: whereas things are at present so altered, that we see the
Hollanders free from any fear of danger; the Switzers and City of Geneva,
resolved to lose the last drop of their Blood in their Defense; Besides, some
Diversion we may expect from the Empire, in case we cannot hinder a Peace with
the Turks, which ought to hasten his Britannick Majesty, while he can be
assured of Succors from the most Christian King.

Sir, his Majesty's Brother is always the same; I mean, takes no notice of what
passes at Court. It has sometimes happened, that the King's Brothers have acted
so, as to be noted in the State; but this we may be assured will never do any
thing to stain the Glory of his Submission and Obedience: And is willing to
lend a helping-hand for the Destruction of the Heretics; which appears by the
Instances he makes to his Majesty, who now has promised him to cause his Troops
to enter into the Palatinate the next Month.

The ^auphin is passionately given up to Hunting, and little regards the
Conversion of Souls; and it does not seem easy to make him penetrate into
Business of Moment; and therefore we do not care to consult him which way, and
how the Heretics ought to be treated. He openly laughs at us, and slights all
the Designs, of which the King his Father makes great account. The Dauphiness
is extremely witty, and is, without doubt, uneasy to show it in other Matters
besides Complements of Conversation. She has given me a Letter for the Queen of
England; wherein after her expression of the part she bears of the News of her
Majesty's being with Child, she gives her several Advices about the Conversion
of her Subjects.

Most Reverend Father, She is undoubtedly born a great Enemy to the
Protestants, and has promoted all she could with his Majesty, in all that has
been done, to hasten their Ruin; especially having been bred in a Court of our
Society, and of a House whose hatred against the Protestant Religion is
Hereditary, because she has been raised up by the Ruin of the German Protestant
Princes, especially that of the Palatinate. But the King having caused her to
come to make Heirs to the Crown, she answers expectation to the utmost.

Monsieur Louvois is a Man who very much observes his Duty, which he performs
to admiration; and to whom we must ack^owledg France owes part of the Glory it
has hitherto gained, both in regard of its Conquests, as also the Conversion of
Heretics; to which latter I may say, he has contributed as much as the King:
he has already showed* himself Fierce, Wrathful, and Hardhearted in his Actions
toward them; though he is not naturally inclined to Cruelty, nor to harrass
the People. His Brother, the Archbishop of Rheims, has Ways which do not much
differ from those of his Soul; and all the difference I find between them is,
That the Archbishop loves his own Glory, as much as Monsieur de Louvois loves
that of, his Majesty. He is his own Idol; and give him but Incense, and you may
obtain any thing. Honor is welcome to him, let it come which way it will. The
least Thing provokes this Prelate; and he will not yield any thing derogatory
to his Paternity. He will seem Learned; he will seem a great Theologian, and
will seem to be a good Bishop, and to have a great care of his Diocese; and
would heretofore seem a great Preacher. I have hinted in my last, the Reasons
why I cannot altogether like him; which are needless to repeat.

The Archbishop of Paris is always the same, I mean, a gallant Man; whose
present Conversation is charming, and loves his Pleasures, but cannot bear any
thing that grieves or gives trouble, though he is always a great Enemy of the
Iansenists, which he lately intimated to Cardinal Camus. He is always with me
in the Council of Conscience, and agrees very well with our Society, laying
mostly to Heart the Conversion of the Protestants of the three Kingdoms. He
also makes very good Observations and Designs, to give some Advice to your
Reverence, which I shall convey to you. I do sometimes impart to him what you
write to me.

My Lord Kingston has embraced our good Party: I was present when he Abjured in
the Church of St. Denis; I will give you the Circumstances some other time.

You promised to send me the Names of all Heretic Officers who are in his
Majesty's Troops; that much imports me, and you shall not want good Catholic
Officers to fill up their places. I have drawn a List of them who are to pass
into England, and his most Christian Majesty approves thereof: Pray observe
what I hinted to you in my last, on the Subject of the Visits, which our
Fathers must give to the Chief Lords, Members of the next Parliament; those
Reverend Fathers who are to perform that Duty, must be middle-aged, with a
lively Count^nance, and fit to persuade. I also advised you in some of my other
Letters, how the Bishop of Oxford ought to behave himself, by writing
incessantly, and to insinuate into the People the putting down the Test; and at
the same time calm the Storm, which the Letter of Pentionary Fagel has raised.
And his Majesty must continue to make vigorous Prohibitions to all Booksellers
in London, not to print any Answers; as well to put a stop to the Insolency of
Heretic Authors, as also to hinder the People from reading them.

In short, you intimate to me, That his Majesty will follow our Advice: It Is
the quickest way, and I cannot find a better, or fitter, to dispossess his
Subjects from such Impressions as they have received. His Majesty must also, by
the same Declaration, profess in Conscience, that (if complied with) he will
not only keep his Word, to maintain and protect the Church of England; but will
also confirm his Promises by such Laws, as the Protestants shall be contented
with. This is the true Politic way; for by his granting all, they cannot but
consent to something.

His most Christian Majesty has with great success experienced this Maxim: And
though he had not to struggle with Penal Laws and Tests, yet he found it
convenient to make large Promises, by many Declarations; for, since we must
dissemble, you must endeavor all you can to persuade the King it is the only
Method to effect his Design.

I did also in my last, give you a hint of its Importance, as well as the ways
you must take to insinuate your selves dexterously with the King, to gain his
good Will.

I know not whether you have observed what passed in England some Years since;
I will recite it, because Examples instruct much.

One of our Assisting Fathers of that Kingdom, (which was Father Parsons)
having written a Book against the Succession of the King of Scots to the Realm
of England. Father Creighton, who was also of our Society, and upheld by many
of our Party, defended the Cause of that King, in a Book Entitled, The Reasons
of the King of Scots, against the Book of Father Parsons: And though they
seemed divided, yet they understood one another very well; this being practiced
by order of our General, to the end, that if the House of Scotland were
Excluded, they might show him who had the Government, the Book of Father
Parsons; and on the other Hand, if the King happened to be restored to the
Throne, they might obtain his good Will, by showing him the Works of Father
Chreighton: So that which way soever the Medal turned, it still proved to the
advantage of our Society.

Not to digress from our Subject, I must desire you to read the English Book of
Father Parsons, Entitled, The Reform of England; where, after his blaming of
Cardinal Pool, and made some observations of Faults in the Council of Trent, he
finally concludes, That suppose England should return (as we hope) to the
Catholic Faith in this Reign, he would reduce it to the State of the Primitive
Church: And to that end all the Ecclesiastical Revenue ought to be used in
common, and the Management thereof committed to the care of Seven Wise Men,
drawn out of our Society, to be disposed of by them as they should think fit.
Moreover, he would have all the Religious Orders forbidden on Religious
Penalties, not to return into the Three Kingdoms, without leave of those Seven
Wise Men; to the end it might be granted only to such as live on Alms. These
Reflections seem to me very judicious, and very suitable to the present State
of England.

The same Father Parsons adds, That when England is reduced to the True Faith,
the Pope must not expect, at least for Five Years, to reap any benefit of the
Ecclesiastical Revenue; but must leave the whole in the hands of those Seven
Wise Men, who will manage the same to the Benefit and Advancement of the Church.

The Court goes this day for Marli, to take the Divertisements which are there
prepared: I hope to accompany the King, and will entertain him about all
Business; and accordingly as he likes what you hint to me in your Letter, I
shall give you notice.

I have acquainted him with his Britannick Majesty's Design of building a
Citadel near Whitehal; Monsieur Vauban, our Engineer, was present: After some
Discourse on the Importance of the Subject, his Majesty told Monsieur Vauban,
that he thought it convenient he should make a Model of the Design, and that he
should on purpose go over into England to see the Ground.

I have done all I could to suspend the Designs of our Great Monarch, who is
always angry against the Holy Father; both Parties are stubborn: the King's
natural Inclination is, to have all yield to him; and the Pope's Resolution is
unalterable.

All our Fathers most humbly salute your Reverence. Father Roine Ville acts
wonderfully about Nismes amongst the New Converts, who still meet,
notwithstanding the Danger they expose themselves to.

I daily expect News from the Frontiers of the Empire, which I shall impart to
your Reverence, and am with the greatest Respect,

Yours, etc.
Paris, March 7. 1688.
Popish Treaties not to be relied on: In a Letter from a Gentleman at York, to
his Friend in the Prince of ORANGE's Camp. Addressed to all Members of the next
Parliament.
THE Credulity and Superstition of Mankind has given great Opportunities and
Advantages to cunning Knaves to spread their Nets, and lay their Traps in order
to catch easy and unwary Creatures; these being led on by Ignorance or
Stupidity, they by Pride or Ambition, or else a Vile and Mercenary Principle;
therefore seeing we are in this State of Corruption, bred up to believe
Contradictions and Impossibilities, led by the Nose with every State
Mountebank, and Monkish Iugler, moved like Puppets by Strings and Wires; it
seems high time to vindicate Human Nature, and to free her from these Shakles
laid upon her in the very Cradle; for Man (who ought to be a Free and Rational
Animal) in his present State is only an Engine and Machine, contrived for the
Vanity and Luxury of Priests and Tyrants, who claim to themselves, and seem to
monopolize the Divine Stamp, tho we are all made of the same Materials, by the
same Tools, and in the same Mould, equal by Nature, met together and linked in
Societies by mutual Contracts, placed by turns one above another, and entrusted
for some time with the Power of executing our own Laws, and all by general
consent for the Public Good of the whole Community; this is the genuine Shape
and Figure of Primitive and Sound Government, not distempered and fatally
infected with the monstrous Excrescences of Arbitrary Power in one single
Member above all the Laws of the whole; Infallibility, Divine Right, etc.
started by Knaves and Sycophants, believed by Fools, who scarce ever heard of
the Greek and Roman Histories, and never read their own. I shall therefore give
some Examples (out of an infinite number) of People ruined and utterly
destroyed by their easy Credulity, and good Nature, matter of Fact being a
stronger Proof, and better Rule to steer Mankind, than the empty Notions of the
Schools, invented only to perplex and confound our Ratiocination, lest it
should discover the naked Truth of things. The present Letter will confine it
self only to Public Promises, Oaths, and Solemn Contracts, scandalously
violated by the Roman Catholics, not with Heathens and Heretics only, but
amongst themselves: We will begin with the more remote Countries.

The Spaniards and Portugueses have acted so treacherously with the Africans,
and the Natives of both Indies, that the Cruelty of the History would be
incredible, if it was not related by their own Historians; their Leagues and
Treaties (the most sacred Bonds under Heaven) were soon neglected, and the
Spirit of their Religion broke all before it; how many Millions of those
innocent Creatures were murdered in cold Blood, and for Pastime sake, with all
the variety of Torments that the Devil could inspire into them; how soon were
the vast Regions of Mexico, New Spain, Peru, Hispaniola, Braseel, etc.
depopulated, above twenty Millions of the poor harmless Inhabitants being put
to death in full Peace, and they the best natured People in the World, and very
ingenious; tho they may seem Savages to a sort of Men, who think all Barbarians
that differ from them in Habits, Manners, Customs, Diet, Religion, Language,
etc. not considering that all wise Nature has contrived a different Scene of
things for various Climates; Nay, such is the Inhumanity of these Catholic
Nations here at home, that they will frequently bring Strangers (settled
amongst them by the Laws of Commerce) and their own Fellow Subjects into the
Inquisition, especially if they are Rich, upon a pretense of some Heretical
Opinion, tho they themselves at first protect and license the Opinion; as in
the case of Molino, whose Book had received an Imprimatur from most of the
Inquisitors of Spain and Italy, and even from the Infallible Head of the
Church, yet afterward it was burnt, and he himself together with many of his
Followers miserably tortured; the Pope scarce escaping the Punishment. The
Generous Marshal Schomberg (driven out of France for his great Services) who
had won many Battles for the Portugueses, and s^v'd their C^untry, could not be
suffered to end his Old Age amongst them, but was forced in the midst of Winter
to commit himself to the Sea, and fly to an inhospitable Shore.

The present French King renounced all his Pretenses on Flanders, concluded the
Pyrenean Treaty, and swore at the Altar not to meddle with that Country: but
how well he observed that Sacred Covenant, Baron D'Isola will best inform you
in his Bouclier d'Etat, for which he was thought to be poisoned. Neither has
the French Monarch been contented to break all Faith and Measures with the
Spaniard, but he has gone about to deceive and ruin the Pope, Emperor, and
all the Princes and Electors of the Empire, the Prince of Orange, Duke of
Lorrain, the Switzers, the Dutch, and the English, and not only these his
Neighbors and Allies, but his own Protestant Subjects, who had all the
Security that Solemn Edicts, Oaths and Promises could afford them, besides many
other Obligations upon the Crown for bringing the King to the Throne; yet all
of a sudden they found themselves oppressed and destroyed by his Apostolical
Dragoons, their Temples razed, their Wives and Children taken away, their Goods
and Estates confiscated, themselves cast into Prisons, sent to the Galleys, and
often shot at like Birds: His seizing of Lorrain, France, Compte, Alsace,
Strasburgh, Luxem^urgh, the Principality of Orange, the County of Avignon,
Philipsbourg, the whole Palatinate, the Electorates of Mentz, Treves, and
Cologn, his building of Cittadels in the Empire and in Italy, etc. are so
contradictory to National Agreements, and Public Treaties, that scarce a
Jesuit or a Frenchman can have Impudence enough to defend them; a Banditto, a
Pyrate, or a Pick-pocket would be ashamed of such Actions; and an ordinary Man
would be hanged for a Crime a Million times less. His seizing upon Hudson's
Bay, and leading the English into Slavery; the French Treachery in the
Engagement at Sea between us and the Dutch, their frequent seizing of our
Ships, are light things, not worthy our Resentment, being under the Conduct of
a Monsieur whom the World so justly vilifies and despises.

The Emperor can have no good Pretense to condemn the King of France, or any
other Catholic Prince for breach of Common Faith and Honesty, since he himself
has played the same Game with his Protestant Subjects, inviting some of the
Chief of the Hungarian Nobility to Vienna, under the color of Treaty and
Friendship, and then cutting off their Heads, seiz^ng their Estates and
Properties, destroying their Pastors and Churches, and extirpating the whole
Reformed Religion, after he had promised and stipulated to protect and give
them the Liberty of their Consciences. The Parisian Massacres were carried on
and executed under a Mask of Friendship, all the principal Protestants of
France being invited to the Healing-Marriage, to revel and caress, were
barbarously butchered in their Beds at the Toll of a Bell, when they dreamed
they sl^p securely. The Irish Massacre of above 200000 Protestants was no less
treacherous, it was a Copy of the Spanish Cruelty i^ the West Indies, to whom
the Irish are compared by Historians for their Idleness and Inhumanity, tho not
for their Wit.

The Persecutions of the Protestants in the Valleys of Piedmont, are another
instance of Popish Immanity and Baseness; they were under the common shelter of
public Pactions and Treaties, and had been solemnly owned by the Dukes of
Savoy, to be the most Loyal and the most Courageous of their Subjects. The
present Duke, who undertook this last Persecution, was not content to destroy
them with his own Troops, but called in the French to assist at the Comedy, to
shoot them off the Rocks, to hunt them over the Alps, and to sell the strongest
of them to the Galleys, that the very Turkish Slaves themselves might deride
and insult over them. Catholics, who have not Power or Opportunity to execute
the same things, seem to condemn the Conduct in Public, but sing Te Deum in
Private, and as soon as ever they have got a sufficient Force, commit the like
Barbarities, so essential to their Religion, that all the Instinct of Nature
cannot separate them. The Holy Father at Rome (tho he sets up for a moderate
and merciful Pontificate) ordered Te Deum to be sung up and down, for the
extirpation of Heresy out of France and Piedmont; and our English Catholics
have given us (as their Army and Interest increased) several Proofs how well
they can juggle and disguise themselves; setting up Courts of Inquisition,
turning Protestants out of all Employs, and even out of their Freeholds,
dispensing with Laws, Ravishing Charters, packing Corporatione, etc. and all
under a notion of Liberty or a Divine Right; they with their Accomplices
defended illegal Declarations, and set up an Authority above all our Laws,
under the Cloak of a sham Liberty of Conscience, racking at the very same time
the Consciences of the Church-of- England-men, and undermining the Foundation
of our State. If Mr. Pen and his Disciples had condemned the unlawfulness of
the Declarations and the Dispensing Power, when they wrote so fast for Liberty
of Conscience, they had then showed a generous Zeal for a just Freedom in
Matters of Religion, and at the same time a due Veneration to the Legislative
Power ( King, Lords, and Commons) but the secret of the Machine, was to
maintain and erect a Prerogative above all Acts of Parliament, and consequently
to introduce upon that bottom Tyranny and Popery; yet, notwithstanding all this
uncontrollable Power, and show of ^randeur, an Easterly Wind, and a Fleet of
Fly-Boats, would cancel and undo all again. Our Monkish Historians relate of
King John, that being in some distress, he sent Sir Tho. Hardington, and Sir
Ralph Fitz-Nicholas, Ambassadors to Mirammumalim, the great Emperor of
Morocco, with offers of his Kingdom to him, upon Condition he would come and
aid him, and that if he prevailed, he would himself turn Mohammedan and renounce
Popery.

I will not insist upon the Violations of Laws and Treaties in the Low
Countries, or the Spanish Tyranny over them, because the Spaniards have got so
much by that Persecution and Cruelty, that they might be tempted to practice
the like again; for by forcing the Netherlanders to take up Arms for their
Defense, and by necessitating Queen Elizabeth to assist and preserve them, they
have set up a Free and Glorious State (as they themselves have called them in
some Treaties) that has preserved the languishing Monarchy of Spain, and the
Liberty of Christendom.

The base and cowardly Massacre of that great Hero William Prince of Orange, of
the Renowned Admiral Coligny, and the Prince of Conde; the many Bloody
Conspiracies for the Extirpation of the whole Race of the House of Orange; the
Murders of Henry the Second, and Henry the Fourth, are all Records and
everlasting Monuments of Popish Barbarity; what incredible Effusions of Blood
has been occasioned by the frequent Revolts of the Popes against the Emperors,
by the Image Worship and the Holy Wars? What Treachery in the Bohemian
Transactions and Treaties? What Inhumanity in burning Jerome of Prague, and
John Hus? when they had the Emperor's Pass, and all other public Securities
from the Council it self, that put to Death those two good Men.

The Reign of Queen Mary is another Scene of the Infidility and Treachery of
the Church of Rome; what Oaths did she take? What Promises and Protestations
did she make to the Suffolk Men who had set the Crown upon her Head, and yet
they were the first that felt the strokes of Persecution from Her? Read her
History in Fox's Martyrs, and Dr. Burnet's History of the Reformation.

The many Conspiracies to destroy Queen Elizabeth and King James, the
Gunpowder-Plot, the Counsels carried on in Popish Countries to take off King
Charles the First, and the many late Popish Plots are a continued Series and
Thread, carried on by the Church of Rome, to break through all Laws both of God
and Man, to erect an Universal Monarchy of Priestcraft, and to bring the whole
World under their Yoke. The Swedes have taken an effectual and commendable way
to keep Popish Priests and Jesuits (those Boutefeus and Disturbers of
Societies, the declared Enemies to the Welfare of Mankind) out of their
Countries by Gelding them, and consequently rendering them incapable of
Sacerdotal Functions, tho the Priests have found out a Salvo, and will say Mass
and Confess, if they can procure their Testicles again, and carry them in their
Pockets, either preserved or in Powder: In Aethiopia, China, and Iapan, the
Romish Priests have been so intollerably turbulent, and such extravagant
Incendiaries, that they have been often banished and put to Death; so that now
they disguise themselves all over the Eastern Nations, under the Names and
Characters of Mathematicians, Mechanics, Physicians, etc. and dare not own
their Mission to propagate a Faith which is grown ridiculous all over Asia.

The long and dreadful Civil Wars of France; the many Massacres and
Persecutions, and lastly, the Siege of Rochel, are living Instances how far we
may rely upon Engagements and Laws, both as to the taking of that Bulwark, and
the promised Relief from hence. The Protestant Defenders of it, refusing to
rely any longer upon Paper Edicts; and the Word of a Most Christian King, had
this City granted them as a Cautionary Town for their Security; for before they
had always been deluded out of their Advantages by fair Promises, insignificant
Treaties, and the Word of a King; yet Lewis the 13 th following the vicious
Examples of Treacherous Princes, fell upon this Glorious City, which, upon the
account of their Laws and Privileges, made a Resistance and brave Defense,
(having never heard of Passive Obedience amongst their Pastors) thinking it
more lawful to defend their Rights, than it was for Lewis to invade them.

As for the late and present Reign here in England, they are too nice and
tender Things for me to touch; whether the Transactions of them are consistent
with the Coronation Oaths, the many Declarations, Protestations, public and
solemn Promises, I am no fit Judge; they are more proper for the Gravity of an
Historian, or the Authority of a Parliament to handle, than for a private
Gentleman in a Letter to his Friend. The Bishops Papers, and the Prince of
Orange's Declarations, are the best Memoires of them; but they only begin where
the two parts of the History of the growth of Popery and Arbitrary Government
left off, and how far we may trust to Catholic Stipulations, Oaths and
Treaties, the Facts of past and the present Age are the best Criterions and
Rules to guide and determine us; for what happens every day, will in all
probability happen to morrow, the same Causes always produce the same Effects;
and the Church of Rome is still the same Church it was an hundred Years ago,
that is, a Mass of Treachery, Barbariety, Perjury, and the highest
Superstition; a Machine without any Principle or settled Law of Motion, not to
be moved or stopped with the weights of any private or public Obligations; a
Monster that destroys all that is Sacred both in Heaven and Earth, so Ravenous
that it is never content, unless it gets the whole World into its Claws, and
tears all to pieces in order to Salvation; a Proteus, that turns it self into
all shapes; a Chameleon, that puts on all Colors according to its present
circumstances, this day an Angel of Light, to morrow a Beelzebub. Amongst all
the Courts of Christendom where I have conversed, that of Holland is the freest
from Tricks and Falsehood; and tho I am naturally jealous and suspicious of the
Conduct of Princes, yet I could never discover the least Knavery within those
Walls, it appeared to me another Athens of Philosophers, and the only Seat of
Justice and Virtue now left in the World. As for the Character of the Prince of
Orange, it is so faithfully drawn by Sir William Temple, Doctor Burnet, and in
a half sheet lately printed, that I, who am so averse from Flattery, that I can
scarce speak a good word of any Body, or think one good thought of my self,
will not write any further Panegerick upon his Highness, only that he is a very
Honest Man, a Great Soldier, and a Wise Prince, upon whose Word the World may
safely rely.

A late Pamphleteer reviles the Prince, with breaking his Oath when he took the
Stat-holder's Office upon him; not considering that the Oath was imposed upon
his Highness in his Minority by a French Faction, then jealous of the aspiring
and true Grandeur of his Young Soul; that the States themselves (to whom the
Obligation was made) freed his Highness from the Bond; and that the Necessity
of Affairs, and the Importunities of the People forced that Dignity upon him,
which his Ancestors had enjoyed, and he so well deserved, that he saved the
sinking Commonwealth, (their Provinces being almost all Surpised and Enslaved
by the French) compared to the gasping State of Rome after the loss at Cannae;
His Highness was no more puffed up with this Success, than he had been daunted
with Hardships and Misfortunes; always the same Hero, Just, Serene, and
Unchanged under all Events, an Argument of the vastness of his Mind; whereas on
the contrary, Mutability (sometimes Tyrant, sometimes Father of a Country,
sometimes Huffing, other times Sneaking) is oftentimes a Symptom of a Mean and
Cowardly Soul, vile and dissolute, born for Rapine and Destruction.

As for the Princess, she may without any flattery be styled the Honor and
Glory of her Sex; the most Knowing, the most Virtuous, the Fairest, and yet the
best Natured Princess in the World; beloved and admired by her Enemies, never
seen in any Passion, always under a peculi^r sweetness of Temper, extremely
moderate in her Pleasures, taking delight in Working and Study; humble and
affable in her Conversation, very pertinent in all Questions, charitable to all
Protestants, and frequenting their Churches. The Prince is often seen with her
at the Prayers of the Church of England, and ^he with the Prince at the
Devotion of his Church. She dispences with the use of the Surplice, bowing to
the Altar, and the Name of Jesus, out of Compliance to a Country that adores
her, being more intent upon the Intrinsic and Substantial Parts of Religion,
Prayer and Good Works. She speaks several Languages even to Perfection;
entirely obedient to the Prince, and he extremely dear to her. In a word, She
is a Princess of many extraordinary Virtues and Excellencies, without any
appearance of Vanity, or the least mixture of Vice; and upon whose Promise the
World may safely depend. As for the many Plots and Conspiracies against this
Royal Couple, a short time may bring them all to light, and faithful Historians
publish them to the World.

Lastly, We may observe that whereas it has been the Maxim of several Kings,
both at home and abroad of late Years, to contend and outvie each other in
preying upon and destroying not only their Neighbors, but their own Protestant
Subjects, by all methods of perfidiousness and cruelty; the only way to
establish Tyranny, and to enslave the natural Freedom of Mankind, being to
introduce a general Ignorance, Superstition, and Idolatry; for if once People
can be persuaded, that Statues and Idols are Divinities and adorable, and tha^
a Wa^er is the Infinite God, after two or three ridiculous words, uttered by a
vile Impostor and impudent Cheat, then they may easily be brought to submit
their Necks to all the Yokes that a Tyrant and a Priest can invent and put upon
them; for if once they part with their Reason, their Liberty will soon follow;
as we behold every day in the miserable enslaved Countries where Popery
domineers.

On the contrary, it has always been the steady and immutable Principle of the
House of Orange to rescue Europe from its Oppressors, and to resettle
Governments upon the Primitive and Immortal Foundation of Liberty and Property;
a Glorious Maxim, taken from the Old Roman Commonwealth, that Fought and
Conquered so many Nations, only to set them Free, to Restore them wholesome
Laws, their Natural and Civil Liberties; a Design so Generous; and every way
Great, that the East groaning under the Fetters and Oppressions of their
Tyrants, flew in to the Roman Eagles for Shelter and Protection, under whose
Wings the several Nations lived Free, Safe and Happy, till Traitors and
Usurpers began to break in upon the Sacred Laws of that virtuous Constitution,
and to keep up Armies to defend that by Blood and Rapine, which Justice would
have thrown in their Face, and punished them as they deserved; the Preservation
and Welfare of the People being in all Ages called the Supreme Law, to which
all the rest ought to tend.

From the foregoing Relation of matter of Fact, it appears most plain, that the
Roman Catholics are not to be tied by Laws, Treaties, Promises, Oaths, or any
other bonds of Humane Society; the sad experience of this and other Kingdoms,
declares to all Mankind the invalidity and insignificancy of all Contracts and
Agreements with the Papists, who notwithstanding all their Solemn Covenants
with Heretics, do watch for all Advantages and Opportunities to destroy them,
being commanded thereunto by their Councils and the principles of their Church,
and instigated by their Priests.

The History of the several Wars of the Barons of England, in the Reigns of
King John, Henry the Third, Edward the Second, and Richard the Second, in
Defense of their Liberties, and for redressing the many Grievances (under which
the Kingdom groa^'d) is a full representation of the Infidelity and Treachery
of those Kings, and of the Invalidity of Treaties with them; how many Grants,
Amendments, and fair Promises had they from those Princes, and yet afterward
how many Ambuscades, and Snares were laid to destroy those glorious Patriots of
Liberty; what Violations of Compacts and Agreements, and what havoc was made
upon all Advantages and Opportunities, that those false Kings could take! Read
their Histories in our several Chronicles.

FINIS.
A FOURTH Collection of Papers Relating to the Present Juncture of Affairs in
England. VIZ. I. The Prince of Orange's first Declaration from the Hague,
October. 10. 1688. With his Highnesses Additional Declaration from the Hague,
October. 24. 88. Corrected by the Original Copy printed there. II. The Bishop of
Rochester's Letter to the Ecclesiastical Commissioners. III. The Prince of
Orange's Speech to the Gentlemen of Somersetshire and Dorsetshire, coming to
join his Highness at Exeter, Nov. 15. 88. IV. A true Copy of a Paper delivered
by the Earl of Devonshire to the Mayor of Darby, Nov. 20. 1688. V. An Address
of the Mayor, etc. of Lyn-Regis in Norfolk to the Duke of Norfolk; And the
Duke's Answer, December. 6. 88. VI. A Declaration of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal in and about the City, assembled at Guild hall, December. 11. 1688. VII.
A Paper delivered to the Prince of Orange, by the Commissioners sent by his
Majesty. VIII. The King's Letter to the Earl of Feversham on his Majesty's
leaving White Hall: with the Earl's Answer. IX. A Declaration of the Prince of
Orange, to the Commanders in Chief of the Dispersed Regiments, Troops and
Companies, to keep them together in Order. X. An Address of the Lieutenancy of
London to the Pr. of Orange. XI. An Address of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and
Common Council of London to the Prince of Orange. XII. A Speech of Sir G. Treby
on delivery of the City Address.


Licensed and Entered according to Order.

London printed, and are to be sold by Rich. Ianeway in Queen's-head Court in
Paternoster Row, 1688.

THE DECLARATION Of His HIGHNESS William Henry, By the Grace of God, PRINCE of
ORANGE, etc.
Of the Reasons inducing him to appear in Arms in the Kingdom of England, for
preserving of the Protestant Religion, and for restoring the Laws and Liberties
of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
IT is both certain, and evident to all Men, that the Public Peace and
Happiness of any State or Kingdom, cannot be preserved, where the Laws,
Liberties, and Customs established, by the Lawful Authority in it, are openly
Transgressed and Annulled: More especially where the Alteration of Religion is
endeavored, and that a Religion which is contrary to Law is endeavored to be
introduced: Upon which those who are most immediately concerned in it, are
indispensably bound to endeavor to preserve and maintain the established Laws,
Liberties, and Customs; and above all, the Religion and Worship of God that is
established among them; and to take such an effectual care, that the
Inhabitants of the said State or Kingdom, may neither be deprived of their
Religion, nor of their Civil Rights. Which is so much the more necessary,
because the Greatness and Security, both of Kings, Royal Families, and of all
such as are in Authority, as well as the Happiness of their Subjects and
People, depend in a most especial manner, upon the exact observation and
maintenance of these their Laws, Liberties, and Customs.

Upon these Grounds it is, that we cannot any longer forbear to declare, That
to our great regret, we see that those Counselors who have now the chief
Credit with the King, have overturned the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of
those Realms; and subjected them in all Things relating to their Consciences,
Liberties and Properties, to Arbitrary Government; and that not only by secret
and indirect ways, but in an open and undisguised manner.

Those Evil Counselors, for the advancing and coloring this with some
plausible Pretexts, did invent and set on foot, the King's Dispensing Power, by
virtue of which they pretend, that according to Law, he can Suspend and
Dispense with the Execution of the Laws, that have been enacted by the
Authority of the King and Parliament, for the Security and Happiness of the
Subject, and so have rendered those Laws of no effect: Though there is nothing
more certain, than that as no Laws can be made, but by the joint concurrence of
King and Parliament; so likewise Laws so enacted, which secure the Public
Peace and Safety of the Nation, and the Lives and Liberties of every Subject in
it, cannot be repealed or suspended but by the same Authority.

For though the King may pardon the Punishment that a Transgressor has
incurred, and to which he is condemned, as in the Cases of Treason or Felony,
yet it cannot be with any color of Reason inferred from thence, that the King
can entirely suspend the Execution of those Laws relating to Treason or Felony:
Unless it is pretended, that he is clothed with a Despotick and Arbitrary
Power, and that the Lives, Liberties, Honors and Estates of the Subjects,
depend wholly on his good Will and Pleasure, and are entirely subject to him;
which must infallibly follow, on the King's having a Power to suspend the
Execution of the Laws, and to dispense with them.

Those Evil Counselors, in order to the giving some credit to this strange and
execrable Maxim, have so conducted the Matter, that they have obtained a
Sentence from the Judges, declaring that this Dispensing Power is a Right
belonging to the Crown; as if it were in the Power of the Twelve Judges to
offer up the Laws, Rights and Liberties of the whole Nation* to the King, to be
disposed of by him Arbitrarily and at his Pleasure, and expressly contrary to
Laws enacted, for the Security of the Subjects. In order to the obtaining this
Judgment, those Evil Counselors did beforehand examine secretly the Opinion
of the Judges, and procured such of them as could not in Conscience concur in
so pernicious a Sentence, to be turned out, and others to be substituted in
their Rooms, till by the Changes which were made in the Courts of Judicature,
they at last obtained that Judgment. And they have raised some to those Trusts,
who made open profession of the Popish Religion, though those are by Law
rendered incapable of all such Employments.

It is also manifest and notorious, that as his Majesty was, upon his coming to
the Crown, received and acknowledged by all the Subjects of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, as their King, without the least Opposition, though he made then
open profession of the Popish Religion, so he did then promise, and solemnly
swear, at his Coronation, That he would maintain his Subjects in the free
enjoiment of their Laws and Liberties; and in particular, that he would
maintain the Church of England as it was established by Law: It is likewise
certain, that there have been, at diverse and sundry times, several Laws enacted
for the preservation of those Rights, and Liberties, and of the Protestant
Religion: And among other Securites, it has been enacted that all Persons
whatsoever, that are advanced to any Ecclesiastical Dignity, or to bear Office
in either University, as likewise all other, that should be put in any
Imploiment, Civil or Military, should declare that they were not Papists, but
were of the Protestant Religion, and that, by their taking of the Oaths of
Allegiance, and Supremacy, and the Test; yet these Evil Counselors have in
effect annulled and abolished all those Laws, both with relation to
Ecclesiastical and Civil Emploiments.

In order to Ecclesiastical Dignities and Offices, they have not only, without
any color of Law, but against most express Laws to the contrary, set up a
Commission of a certain Number of Persons, to whom they have committed the
Cognizance and Direction of all Ecclesiastical Matters: In the which Commission
there has been, and still is, one of his Majesty's Ministers of State, who
makes now public profession of the Popish Religion, and who at the time of his
first professing it, declared, That for a great while before, he had believed
that to be the only true Religion. By all this, the deplorable State to which
the Protestant Religion is reduced is apparent, since the Affairs of the Church
of England, are now put into the Hands of Persons, who have accepted of a
Commission that is manifestly Illegal; and who have executed it contrary to all
Law; and that now one of their chief Members has abjured ^he Pro^estant
Religion, and declared himself a Papist, by which he is become incapable of
holding any Public Emploiment. The said Commissioners have hitherto given such
proof of their submission to the Directions given them, that there is no reason
to doubt but they will still continue to promote all such Designs as will be
most agreeable to them. And those Evil Counselors take care, to raise none to
any Ecclesiastical Dignities, but Persons that have no Zeal for the Protestant
Religion, and that now hide their unconcernedness for it, under the specious
pretense of Moderation. The said Commissioners have suspended the Bishop of
London, only because he refused to obey an Order that was sent him to suspend a
Worthy Divine, without so much as citing him before him, to make his own
Defense, or observing the common Forms of Process. They have turned out a
President, chosen by the Fellows of Magdal^ne College, and afterward all the
Fellows of that College, without so much as citing them before any Court that
could take legal cognizance of that Affair, or obtaining any Sentence against
them by a competent Judge. And the only Reason that was given for turning them
out, was, their refusing to choose for their President, a Person that was
recommended to them by the i^^^igation of those Evil Counselors; Though the
right of a free Election belonged undoubtedly to them. But they were turned out
of their Freeholds contrary to Law, and to that express Provision in Magna
Charta, That no Man shall lose Life or Goods, but by the Law of the Land. And
now these Evil Counselors have put the said College wholly into the Hands of
Papists; though, as is above said, they are incapable of all such Imploiments,
both by the Law of the Land, and the Statutes of the College. These
Commissioners have also cited before them all the Chancellors and Archdeacons
of England, requiring them to certify to them the Names of all such Clergymen
as have read the King's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, and of such as
have not read it; without considering that the reading of it, was not enjoined
the Clergy, by the Bishops who are their Ordinaries. The illegality and
incompetency of the said Court of the Ecclesiastical Commissioners, was so
notoriously known, and it did so evidently appear that it tended to the
subversion of the Protestant Rel^^ion, that the most Reverend Father in God,
William Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England,
seeing that it was raised for no other end, but to oppress such Persons as were
of eminent Virtue, Learning, and Piety, refused to sit or concur in it.

And though there are many express Laws against all Churches or Chapels, for
the exercise of the Popish Religion, and also against all Monasteries and
Convents, and more particularly against the Order of the Jesuits: yet those
Evil Counselors have procured Orders for the building of several Churches and
Chapels for the Exercise of that Religion. They have also procured diverse
Monasteries to be erected; and in contempt of the Law they have not only set up
several Colleges of Jesuits in diverse places, for the corrupting of the Youth,
but have raised up one of the Order, to be a Privy Counselor, and a Minister
of State. By all which they do evidently show, that they are restrained by no
Rules or Law whatsoever, but that they have subjected the Honors and Estates
of the Subjects, and the Established Religion, to a Despotick Power, and to
Arbitrary Government: In all which they are served and seconded by those
Ecclesiastical Commissioners.

They have also followed the same Methods with Relation to Civil Affairs: For
they have procured Orders to examine all Lords-Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants,
Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, and all others that were in any Public
Employment, if they would concur with the King in the Repeal of the Test and
Penal Laws; and all such whose Consciences did not suffer them to comply with
their Designs, were turned out, and others were put in their places, who they
believe would be more compliant to them, in their Designs of defeating the
Intent and Execution of those Laws, which had been made with so much Care and
Caution for the Security of the Protestant Religion. And in many of these
places they have put professed Papists, though the Law has disabled them, and
warranted the Subjects not to have any regard to their Orders.

They have also invaded the Privileges, and seized on the Charters of most of
those Towns that have a right to be represented by their Burgesses in
Parliament, and have procured Surrenders to be made of them, by which the
Magistrates in them have delivered up all their Rights and Privileges, to be
disposed of at the pleasure of those Evil Counselors, who have thereupon
placed new Magistrates in those Towns, such as they can most entirely confide
in; and in many of them they have put Popish Magistrates, notwithstanding the
Incapacities under which the Law has put them.

And whereas no Nation whatsoever can subsist without the Administration of
good and impartial Justice, upon which Men's Lives, Liberties, Honors, and
Estates do depend; those Evil Counselors have subjected these to an Arbitrary
and Despotick Power: In the most important Affairs they have studied to
discover beforehand the Opinions of the Judges, and h^ve turned out such as
they found would not conform themselves to their Intentions, and have put
others in their places, of whom they were more assured, without having any
regard to their Abilities. And they have not stuck to raise even professed
Papists to the Courts of Judicature, notwithstanding their Incapacity by Law,
and that no Regard is due to any Sentences flowing from them. They have carried
this so far as to deprive such Judges, who in the common Administration of
Justice, showed that they were governed by their Consciences, and not by the
Directions which the others gave them. By which it is apparent they design to
render themselves the absolute Masters of the Lives, Honors and Estates of the
Subjects, of what Rank or Dignity soever they may be; and that without having
any regard either to the Equity of the Cause, or to the Conscience of the
Judges, whom they will have to submit in all things to their own will and
Pleasure; hoping by such ways to intimidate those who are yet in Employment, as
also such others as they shall think fit to put in the rooms of those whom they
have turned out, and to make them see what they must look for, if they should
at any time act in the least contrary to their good liking, and that no
failings of that kind are pardoned in any Persons whatsoever. A great deal of
Blood has been shed in many places of the Kingdom by Judges governed by those
Evil Counselors, against all the Rules and Forms of Law, without so much as
suffering the Persons that were accused, to plead in their own Defense.

They have also, by putting the Administration of Justice into the hands of
Papists, brought all the matters of Civil Justice into great uncertainties;
with how much Exactness and Justice soever that these Sentences may have been
given. For since the Laws of the Land do not only exclude Papists from all
places of Judicature, but have put them under an Incapacity, none are bound to
acknowledge or to obey their Judgments; and all Sentences given by them, are
null and void of themselves: so that all Persons who have been cast in Trials
before such Popish Judges, may justly look on their pretended Sentences, as
having no more force than the Sentences of any private and unauthorized Person
whatsoever. So deplorable is the Case of the Subjects, who are obliged to
answer to such Judges, that must in all things stick to the Rules which are set
them by those Evil Counselors, who as they raised them up to those
Employments, so can turn them out of them at pleasure, and who can never be
esteemed lawful Judges; so that all their Sentences are, in the Construction of
the Law, of no Force and Efficacy. They have likewise disposed of all Military
Employments in the same manner; for tho the Laws have not only excluded Papists
from all such Employments, but have in particular provided that they should be
disarmed; yet they, in Contempt of these Laws, have not only armed the Papists,
but have likewise raised them up to the greatest Military Trusts both by Sea
and Land, and that Strangers as well as Natives, and Irish as well as English,
that so by those means, having rendered themselves Masters both of the Affairs
of the Church, of the Government of the Nation, and of the course of Justice,
and subjected them all to a Despotick and Arbitrary Power, they might be in a
Capacity to maintain and execute their wicked Designs by the assistance of the
Army, and thereby to enslave the Nation.

The dismal Effects of this Subversion of the established Religion, Laws and
Liberties in England, appear more evident to us, by what we see done in
Ireland: Where the whole Government is put into the Hands of Papists, and where
all the Protestant Inhabitants are under the daily Fears of what may be justly
apprehended from the Arbitrary Power which is set up there; which has made
great numbers of them leave that Kingdom, and abandon their Estates in it,
remembering well that cruel and bloody Massacre which fell out in that Island in
the Year 1641.

Those Evil Counsellous have also prevailed with the King to declare in
Scotland, that he is clothed with Absolute Power, and that all the Subjects are
bound to obey him without Reserve: upon which he has assumed an Arbitrary
Power, both over the Religion and Laws of that Kingdom, from all which it is
apparent what is to be looked for in England, as soon as matters are duly
prepared for it.

Those great and insufferable Oppressions, and the open Contempt of all Law,
together with the apprehensions of the sad Consequences that must certainly
follow upon it, have put the Subj^^ts under great and just Fears, and have made
them look after such lawful Remedies as are allowed of in all Nations; yet all
has been without Effect. And those Evil Counselors have endeavored to make
all Men apprehend the loss of their Lives, Liberties, Honors, and Estates, if
they should go about to preserve themselves from this Oppression by Petitions,
Representations, or other means authorized by Law. Thus did they proceed with
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other Bishops, who having offered a most
humble Petition to the King, in terms full of Respect, and not exceeding the
number limited by Law, in which they set forth in short the Reasons for which
they could not obey that Order, which, by the Instigation of those Evil
Counselors, was sent them, requiring them to appoint their Clergy to read in
their Churches the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, were sent to Prison,
and afterward brought to a Trial, as if they had been guilty of some enormous
Crime. They were not only obliged to defend themselves in that pursuit, but to
appear before professed Papists, who had not taken the Test, and by Consequence
were Men whose Interest led them to condemn them; and the Judges that gave
their Opinion in their Favors were thereupon turned out.

And yet it cannot be pretended, that any Kings, how great soever their Power
has been, and how Arbitrary and Despotick soever they have been in the exercise
of it, have ever reckoned a Crime for their Subjects to come in all Submission
and Respect, and in a due Number, not exceeding the Limits of the Law, and
represent to them the Reasons that made it impossible for them to obey their
Orders. Those Evil Counselors have also treated a Peer of the Realm as a
Criminal, only because he said that the Subjects were not bound to obey the
Orders of a Popish Justice of Peace; tho it is evident, that they being by Law
rendered incapable of all such Trusts, no regard is due to their Orders. This
being the Security which the People have by the Law for their Lives, Liberties,
Honors and Estates, that they are not to be subjected to the Arbitrary
Proceedings of Papists that are contrary to Law, put into any Employments Civil
or Military.

Both We our selves, and our Dearest and most Entirely Beloved Consort, the
Princess, have endeavored to signify in terms full of Respect to the King, the
just and deep Regret which all these Proceedings have given us: and in
Compliance with his Majesty's Desires signified to us, We declared, both by
word of Mouth to his Envoy, and in writing, what our Thoughts were touching the
repealing of the Test and Penal Laws; which we did in such a manner, that we
hoped we had proposed an Expedient, by which the Peace of those Kingdoms, and a
happy Agreement among the Subjects of all Persuasions might have been settled;
but those Evil Counselors have put such ill Constructions on these our good
Intentions, that they have endeavored to alienate the King more and more from
us; as if We had designed to disturb the Quiet and Happiness of the Kingdom.

The last and great Remedy for all those Evils, is the calling of a Parliament,
for securing the Nation against the evil Practices of those wicked Counselors;
but this could not be yet compassed, nor can it easily be brought about. For
those Men apprehending that a lawful Parliament being once assembled, they
would be brought to an account for all their open Violations of Law, and for
their Plots and Conspiracies against the Protestant Religion, and the Lives and
Liberties of the Subjects, they have endeavored under the specious Pretense of
Liberty of Conscience, first to sow Divisions among Protestants, between those
of the Church of England and the Dissenters: The Design being laid to engage
Protestants that are all equally concerned to preserve themselves from Popish
Oppression, into mutual Quarellings; that so by these, some Advantages might be
given to them to bring about their Designs; and that both in the Election of
the Members of Parliament, and afterward in the Parliament it self. For they
see well that if all Protestants could enter into a mutual good Understanding
one with another, and concur together, in the preserving of their Religion, it
would not be possible for them to compass their wicked Ends. They have also
required all Persons in the several Counties of England, that either were in
any Employment, or were in any considerable Esteem, to declare beforehand,
that they would concur in the Repeal of the Test and Penal Laws, and that they
would give their Voices in the Elections to Parliament only for such as would
concur in it: Such as would not thus preingage themselves, were turned out of
all Employments, and others who entered into those Engagements were put into
their places, many of them being Papists. And, contrary to the Charters and
Privileges of those Buroughs that have a Right to send Burgesses to
Parliament, they have ordered such Regulations to be made, as they thought fit
and necessary, for assuring themselves of all the Members that are to be chosen
by those Corporations; and by this means they hope to avoid that Punishment
which they have deserved, tho it is apparent, that all Acts made by Popish
Magistrates are null and void of themselves; so that no Parliament can be
lawful, for which the Elections and Returns are made by Popish Sheriffs and
Mayors of Towns; and therefore, as long as the Authority and Magistracy is in
such hands, it is impossible to have any lawful Parliament. And tho according
to the Constitution of the English Government and immemorial Custom, all
Elections of Parliament Men ought to be made with an entire Liberty, without
any sort of Force, or the requiring the Electors to choose such Persons as shall
be named to them; and the Persons thus freely elected, ought to give their
Opinions freely upon all matters that are brought before them, having the Good
of the Nation ever before their Eyes, and following in all things the Dictates
of their Consciences, yet now the People of England cannot expect a Remedy from
a free Parliament legally called and chosen: But they may perhaps see one
called, in which all Elections will be carried by Fraud or Force, and which
will be composed of such Persons, of whom those Evil Counselors hold
themselves well assured, in which all things will be carried on according to
their Direction and Interest, without any regard to the Good or Happiness of
the Nation. Which may appear evidently from this, that the same Persons tried
the Members of the last Parliament, to gain them to consent to the Repeal of
the Test and Penal Laws, and procured that Parliament to be dissolved when they
found that they could not, neither by Promises nor Threatenings, prevail with
the Members to comply with their wicked Designs.

But to crown all, There are great and violent Presumptions, inducing us to
believe, that those Evil Counselors, in order to the carrying on of their ill
Designs, and to the gaining to themselves the more time for the effecting of
them, for the encouraging their Accomplices, and for the discouraging of all good
Subjects, have published that the Queen has brought forth a Son; tho there
have appeared both during the Queen's pretended Bigness, and in the manner in
which the Birth was managed, so many just and visible grounds of Suspicion,
that not only We our selves, but all the good Subjects of those Kingdoms, do
vehemently suspect that the pretended Prince of Wales was not born by the
Queen. And it is notoriously known to all the World, that many both doubted of
the Queen's Bigness, and of the Birth of the Child, and yet there was not any
one thing done to satisfy them, or to put an end to their Doubts.

And since our Dearest and most Entirely Beloved Consort the Princess, and
likewise We our Selves, have so great an Interest in this Matter, and such a
Right as all the World knows to the Succession to the Crown: Since also the
English did in the Year 1672. when the States General of the United Provinces
were invaded in a most unjust War, use their uttermost Endeavors to put an end
to that War, and that in opposition to those who were then in the Government;
and by their so doing they run the hazard of losing both the Favor of the
Court, and their Employments: And since the English Nation has ^ver testified a
most particular Affection and Esteem, both to our Dearest Consort the Princess,
and to Our Selves, We cannot excuse our selves from espousing their Interests
in a Matter of such high Consequence, and from contributing all that lies in us
for the maintaining both of the Protestant Religion, and of the Laws and
Liberties of those Kingdoms, and for the securing to them the continual
Enjoyment of all their just Rights. To the doing of which we are most earnestly
solicited by a great many Lords both Spiritual and Temporal, and by many
Gentlemen and other Subjects of all Ranks.

Therefore it is that we have thought fit to go over to England, and to carry
over with us a Force sufficient, by the Blessing of God, to defend us from the
Violence of those Evil Counselors. And We being desirous that our Intentions
in this may be rightly understood, have for this end prepared this Declaration,
in which as We have hitherto given a true Account of the Reasons inducing us to
it; so we now think fit to declare that this our Expedition is intended for no
other Design, but to have a free and lawful Parliament assembled, as soon as
possible; and that in order to this, all the late Charters by which the
Elections of Burgesses are limited, contrary to the Ancient Custom, shall be
considered as null and of no force; and likewise all Magistrates who have been
injustly turned out, shall forthwith resume their former Employments, as well
as all the Buroughs of England, shall return again to their Ancient
Prescriptions and Charters: And more particularly that the Ancient Charter of
the great and famous City of London, shall again be in force; and that the
Writs for the Members of Parliament shall be addressed to the proper Officers,
according to Law and Custom. That also none be suffered to choose or to be
chosen Members of Parliament but such as are qualified by Law; and that the
Members of Parliament being thus lawfully chosen, they shall meet and sit in
full Freedom; that so the two Houses may concur in the preparing such Laws as
they, upon full and free debate, shall judge necessary and convenient, both for
the confirming and executing the Law concerning the Test, and such other Laws
as are necessary for the Security and Maintenance of the Protestant Religion;
as likewise for making such Laws as may establish a good Agreement between the
Church of England and all Protestant Dissenters, as also for the covering and
securing of all such who will live peaceably under the Government as becomes
good Subjects, from all Persecution upon the account of their Religion, even
Papists themselves not excepted; and for the doing of all other things which
the two Houses of Parliament shall find necessary for the Peace, Honor and
Safety of the Nation; so that there may be no more danger of the Nations
falling at any time hereafter under Arbitrary Government. To this Parliament we
will also refer the Enquiry into the Birth of the pretended Prince of Wales,
and of all things relating to it, and to the Right of Succession.

And We for our part, will concur in every thing that may procure the Peace and
Happiness of the Nation, which a Free and Lawful Parliament shall determine;
since We have nothing before our Eyes in this our Undertaking, but the
Preservation of the Protestant Religion, the covering of all Men from
Persecution for their Consciences, and the securing to the whole Nation the
free Enjoyment of all their Laws, Rights and Liberties, under a just and legal
Government.

This is the Design that We have proposed to our Selves in appearing upon this
occasion in Arms: In the Conduct of which, We will keep the Forces under our
Command, under all the strictness of Martial Discipline, and take a special
care that the People of the Countries through which we must march, shall not
suffer by their means; and as soon as the State of the Nation will admit of it,
We promise that We will send back all those Foreign Forces that we have brought
along with us.

We do therefore hope that all People will judge rightly of us, and approve of
these our P^oceedings; but We chiefly rely on the Blessing of God for the
Success of this our Undertaking, in which We place our whole and only
Confidence.

We do in the last place invite and require all Persons whatsoever, all the
Peers of the Realm, both Spiritual and Temporal, all Lords-Lieutenants,
Deputy Lieutenants, and all Gentlemen, Citizens, and other Commons of all
Ranks, to come and assist us in order to the executing of this our Design,
against all such as shall endeavor to oppose us, that so we may prevent all
those Miseries which must needs follow upon the Nations being kept under
Arbitrary Government and Slavery; and that all the Violences and Disorders
which have overturned the whole Constitution of the English Government, may be
fully redressed in a FREE AND LEGAL PARLIAMENT.

And We do likewise resolve, that as soon as the Nations are brought to a State
of Quiet, We will take care that a Parliament shall be called in Scotland, for
the restoring the Ancient Constitution of that Kingdom, and for bringing the
Matters of Religion to such a Settlement, that the People may live easy and
happy, and for putting an end to all the injust Violences that have been in a
course of so many Years committed there.

We will also study to bring the Kingdom of Ireland to such a State, that the
Settlement there may be religiously observed; and that the Protestant and
British Interest there may be secured. And we will endeavor by all possible
means to procure such an Establishment in all the three Kingdoms, that they may
all live in a happy Union and Correspondence together, and that the Protestant
Religion, and the Peace, Honor and Happiness of those Nations may be
established upon lasting Foundations.

Given under our Hand and Seal at our Court in the Hague, the Tenth day of
October, in the Year 1688. WILLIAM HENRY, PRINCE OF ORANGE. By His Highnesses
special Command, C. HUYGENS.

His Highnesses Additional Declaration.
AFter We had prepared and printed this our Declaration, we have understood,
that the Subverters of the Religion and Laws of those Kingdoms, hearing of our
Preparations to assist the People against them, have begun to retract some of
the Arbitrary and Despotick Powers that they had assumed, and to vacate some of
their unjust Judgments and Decrees. The sense of their Guilt, and the distrust
of their Force, have induced them to offer to the City of London some seeming
Relief from their great Oppressions, hoping thereby to quiet the People, and to
divert them from demanding a Secure Reestablishment of their Religion and Laws
under the shelter of our Arms. They do also give out, that we intend to Conquer
and Enslave the Nation; and therefore it is that we have thought fit to add a
few words to our Declaration.

We are confident, that no Persons can have such hard Thoughts of us, as to
imagine that we have any other Design in this Undertaking, than to procure a
Settlement of the Religion, and of the Liberties and Properties of the Subjects
upon so sure a Foundation, that there may be no danger of the Nation's
relapsing into the like Miseries at any time hereafter. And as the Forces we
have brought along with us, are utterly disproportioned to that wicked Design
of Conquering the Nation, if we were capable of intending it; so the great
Numbers of the principal Nobility and Gentry, that are Men of Eminent Quality
and Estates, and Persons of known Integrity and Zeal, both for the Religion and
Government of England; many of them being also distinguished by their constant
Fidelity to the Crown, who do both accompany Us in this Expedition, and have
earnestly solicited Us to it, will cover Us from all such Malicious
Insinuations: For it is not to be imagined, that either those who have invited
Us, or those that are already come to assist Us, can join in a wicked Attempt
of Conquest, to make void their own lawful Titles to their Honors, Estates and
Interests. We are also confident, that all Men see how little weight there is
to be laid on all Promises and Engagements that can be now made, since there
has been so little regard had in Time past to the most solemn Promises. And as
that imperfect Redress that is now offered, is a plain Confession of those
Violations of the Government that we have set forth; so the defectiveness of it
is no less Apparent; for they lay down nothing which they may not take up at
pleasure: and they reserve entire, and not so much as mentioned their Claims
and Pretenses to an Arbitrary and Despotick Power; which has been the root of
all their Oppression, and of the total subversion of the Government. And it is
plain, that there can be no Redress nor Remedy offered but in Parliament, by a
Declaration of the Rights of the Subjects that have been invaded, and not by
any pretended Acts of Grace, to which the extremity of their Affairs has driven
them. Therefore it is that we have thought fit to declare, that we will refer
all to a Free Assembly of the Nation in a Lawful Parliament.

Given under our Hand and Seal, at our Court in the Hague, the 24 th day of
October, in the Year of our Lord 1688. William Henry, Prince of Orange.
By his Highness special Command, C. HUYGENS.

To the Right Honorable My Lords of his Majesty's Commission Ecclesiastical.
IMost humbly Entreat your Lordships Favorable Interpretation of what I now
Write, That since your Lordships are resolved to Proceed against those who have
not complied with the King's Command, in Reading His Deelaration. It is
absolutely impossible for me to Serve His Majesty any longer in this
Commission: I beg leave to tell your Lordships, that though I my Self did
submit in that particular, yet I will never be any way Instrumental in
Punishing those my Brethren that did not. For, as I call God to Wittness, that
what I did, was merely in a Principle of Conscience; So I am fully satisfied
that their forbearance was upon the same Principle. I have no Reason to think
otherwise of the whole Body of our Clergy, who upon all Occasions have
signalized their Loyalty to the Crown; and their Zealous Affections to His
Present Majesty's Person, in the worst of Times. Now, my Lords, the safety of
the whole Church of England, seeming to be exceedingly concerned in this
Prosecution; I must declare, I cannot with a safe Conscience, Sit or Judge in
this Caufe, upon so many Pious and Excellent Men, with whom (if it be God's
Will) it rather becomes me to Suffer, than to be in the least an Occasion of
their Sufferings. I therefore earnestly request your Lordships, to interceed
with His Majesty, that I may be Graciously dismissed from any further
Attendance at your Board: And to assure him, that I am still ready to Sacrifice
what ever I have to His Service, but my Conscience and Religion.

My Lords, I am your Lordships, most Faithful and Obedient Servant, ROCHESTER.
This Letter, as also the foresaid Declaration, should have been in the first
Collection, but were forgotten till this.



The Speech of the Prince of Orange, to some Principle Gentlemen of
Somersetshire and Dorsetshire, on their coming to Ioyn his Highness at Exeter
the 15th of Nov. 1688.
THO we know not all your Persons, yet we have a Catalogue of your Names, and
remember the Character of your Worth and Interest in your Country. You see we
are come according to your Invitation and our Promise. Our Duty to God obliges
us to protect the Protestant Religion; and our Love to Mankind, your Liberties
and Properties. We expected you that dwelt so near the place of our Landing,
would have joined us sooner, not that it is now too late, nor that we want your
Military Assistance so much as your Countenance and Presence, to justify our
declared Pretensions; rather than accomplish our good and gracious Designs. Tho
we have brought both a good Fleet, and a good Army, to render these Kingdoms
happy, by rescuing all Protestants from Popery, Slavery, and Arbitrary Power;
by restoring them to their Rights and Properties established by Law, and by
promoting of Peace and Trade, which is the Soul of Government, and the very
Lifeblood of a Nation; yet we rely more on the Goodness of God and the Justice
of our Cause, than on any Humane Force and Power whatever. Yet since God is
pleased we shall make use of Humane means, and not expect Miracles, for our
preservation and Happiness; let us not neglect making use of this gracious
Opportunity, but with Prudence, and Courage put in Execution our so honorable
Purposes. Therefore, Gentlemen, Friends and Fellow-Protestants, we bid you and
all your Followers most heartily Well come to our Court and Camp. Let the whole
World now Judge, if our pretentions are not Just, Generous, Sincere, and above
Price; since we might have even a Bridge of Gold to Return back; But it is our
Principle and Resolution, rather to dye in a Good Cause, than live in a Bad
one, well knowing that Virtue and True Honor is its own Reward, and the
Happiness of Mankind Our Great and Only Design.

The True Copy of a Paper delivered by the Lord Devonshire to the Mayor of
Darby, where he quartered the One and twentieth of November, 1688.
WE the Nobility and Gentry of the Northern Parts of England, being deeply
sensible of the Calamities that threaten these Kingdoms, do think it our Duty,
as Christians and good Subjects, to endeavor what in Us lies, the Healing of
our present Distractions, and preventing Greater: And as with Grief We
apprehend the sad Consequences that may arise from the Landing of an Army in
this Kingdom from Foreign Parts; So We cannot but deplore the Occasion given
for it, by so many Invasions, made of late years, on our Religion and Laws. And
whereas We cannot think of any other Expedient to compose our Differences, and
prevent Effusion of Blood, than that which procured a Settlement in these
Kingdoms, after the late Civil Wars, the Meeting and Sitting of a Parliament,
freely and duly Chosen, We think our Selves obliged (as far as in Us lies) to
promote it; And the rather, because the Prince of Orange (as appears by His
Declaration) is willing to submit His own Pretensions, and all other Matters,
to their Determination: We heartily wish, and humbly pray, That His Majesty
would Consent to this Expedient, in order to a future Settlement; And hope that
such a Temperament may be thought of, as that the Army now on foot, may not
give any Interruption to the proceeding of a Parliament. But if to the great
Misfortune and Ruin of these Kingdoms, it should prove otherwise, We further
Declare, That We will, to our utmost, defend the Protestant Religion, the Laws
of the Kingdom, and the Rights and Liberties of the Subject.

A Letter from a Gentleman at Kings-Lyn, December. 7. 1688. to his Friend in
London.
SIR,
THE Duke of Norfolk came to Town on Wednesday Night, with many of the chiefest
of the County; and yesterday in the Marketplace received the Address
following, which was presented by the Mayor, attended by the Body, and many
hundreds of the Inhabitants.

To his Grace the most Noble HENRY Duke of Norfolk, Lord Marshal of England.
My Lord,
THE daily Allarums we receive, as well from Foreign as Domestic Enemies, give
us just Apprehensions of the approaching Danger which we conceive we are in;
and to apply with all earnestness to your Grace as our great Patron, in all
humble Confidence to succeed in our Expectations, That we may be put into such
a posture by your Grace's Directions and Conduct, as may make us appear as
zealous as any in the Defense of the Protestant Religion, the Laws and Ancient
Government of this Kingdom. Being the desire of many hundreds, who most humbly
challenge a Right of your Grace's Protection.

His Grace's Answer.
Mr. Mayor,
I Am very much obliged to you, and the rest of your Body, and those here
present, for your good Opinion of me; and the Confidence you have, that I will
do what in me lies to support and defend the Laws, Liberties, and Protestant
Religion, in which I will never deceive you.

And since the coming of the Prince of Orange has given us an opportunity to
declare for the defense of them; I can only assure you, that no Man will
venture his Life and Fortune more freely for the Defense of the Laws,
Liberties, and Protestant Religion, than I will do; and with all these
Gentlemen here present, and many more, will unanimously concur therein; and you
shall see that all possible Care shall be taken, that such a Defense shall be
made as you require.

AFter which the Duke was, with his Retinue, received at the Mayor's House at
Dinner, with great Acclamations; and his Proceedings therein have put our
County into a Condition of Defense, of which you shall hear further in a little
time, our Militia being ordered to be raised throughout the County.

Our Tradesmen, Seamen, and Mobile, have this morning generally put Orange
Ribbon on their Hats, Ecchoing Huzza's to the Prince of Orange and Duke of
Norfolk.

All are in a hot Ferment: God send us a good issue of it.

Lyn-Regis, December. 10. 1688.
SIR,
BY mine of the 7 th Instant, I gave you an Account of the Address of this
Corporation to hi^ Grace the Duke of Norfolk, and of his Grace's Answer
thereto. Since which his Grace has sent for the Militia Troops, and put them in
a posture of Defense, as appears by the ensuing Speech.

The Duke of Norfolk's Second Speech at Lynn.
I Hope you see I have endeavored to put you in the posture you desired, by
sending both for Horse and Foot of the Militia, and am very glad to see such an
Appearance of this Town in so good a Condition. And I do again renew my former
Assurances to you, that I will ever stand by you to defend the Laws, Liberties,
and the Protestant Religion, and to procure a Settlement in Church and State,
in concurrence with the Lords and Gentlemen in the North, and pursuant to the
Declaration of the Prince of Orange.

And so God save the King.
The Declaration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in and about the Cities
of London and Westminster, Assembled at Guildhal, Dec. 1688.
WE doubt not but the World believes that, in this Great and Dangerous
Conjuncture, We are heartily and zealously concerned for the Protestant
Religion, the Laws of the Land, and the Liberties and Properties of the
Subject. And We did reasonably hope, that the King having Issued His
Proclamation, and Writs for a Free Parliament, We might have rested Secure
under the Expectation of that Meeting: But His Majesty having withdrawn
Himself, and, as We apprehend, in order to His Departure out of this Kingdom,
by the Pernicious Counsels of Persons ill Affected to Our Nation and Religion,
We cannot, without being wanting to Our Duty, be silent under those Calamities,
wherein the Popish Counsels which so long prevailed, have miserably involved
these Realms. We do therefore Unanimously resolve to apply Our Selves to His
Highness the Prince of Orange, who with so great Kindness to these Kingdoms, so
vast Expense, and so much hazard to his own Person, has Undertaken, by
endeavoring to Procure a Free Parliament, to rescue Us, with as little
Effusion as possible of Christian Blood, from the imminent Dangers of Popery
and Slavery.

And We do hereby Declare, That We will, with our utmost Endeavors, assist his
Highness in the obtaining such a Parliament with all speed, wherein Our Laws,
Our Liberties and Properties may be Secured, the Church of England in
particular, with a due Liberty to Protestant Dissenters, and in general the
Protestant Religion and Interest ov^r the whole World may be Supported and
Encouraged, to the Glory of God, the Happiness of the Established Government in
these Kingdoms, and the Advantage of all Princes and States in Christendom,
that may be herein concerned.

In the mean time, We will Endeavor to Preserve, as much as in Us lies, the
Peace and Security of these great and populous Cities of London and
Westminister, and the Parts Adjacent, by taking Care to Disarm all Papists, and
Secure all Jesuits and Romish Priests, who are in or about the same.

And if there be any thing more to be performed by Us, for promoting His
Higness's Generous Intentions for the Public Good, We shall be ready to do it
as occasion shall Require.

W. Cant. Tho Ebor. Pembroke. Dorset. Mulgrave. Thanet. Carlisle. Craven.
Ailesbury. Burlington. Sussex. Berkeley. Rochester. Newport. Weymouth. P.
Winchester. W. Asaph. Fran. Ely. Tho. Roffen. Tho. Petribtrg. P. Wharton. North
and Gray. Chandos. Montague. T. Iermyn. Vaughan Carbery. Culpeper. Crewe.
Osulston.
WHereas His Majesty has privately this Morning withdrawn himself, We the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal whose Names are Subscribed, being assembled at
Guild Hall in London, having Agreed upon, and Signed a Declaration, Entitled,
The Declaration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in and about the Cities of
London and Westminister, Assembled at Guild Hall, 11 December. 1688. Do desire
the Right Honorable the Earl of Pembroke, the Right Honorable the Lord
Viscount Weymouth, the Right Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop of Ely, and
the Right Honorable the Lord Culpeper, forthwith to attend his Highness the
Prince of Orange with the said Declaration, and at the same time acquaint his
Highness with what we have further done at that Meeting. Dated at Guild Hall
the 11 th of December, 1688.

A Paper delivered to his Highness the Prince of Orange, by the Commissioners
sent by his Majesty to Treat with Him. And his Highnesses Answer.
WHereas on the 8 th of December 1688, at Hungerford, a Paper signed by the
Marquess of Hallifax, the Earl of Nottingham, and the Lord Godolphin,
Commissioners sent unto Us from His Majesty, was delivered to Us in these Words
following, viz. SIR,
THE King commands us to acquaint You, That he observes all the Differences
and Causes of Complaint alleged by Your Highness seem to be referred to a Free
Parliament.

His Majesty, as He has already declared, was resolved before this to call
one, but thought that in the present State of Affairs it was advisable to
defer it till things were more composed.

Yet seeing that His People still continue to desire it; He has put forth His
Proclamation in order to it, and has Issued forth His Writs for the calling of
it.

And to prevent any Cause of Interruption in it, He will consent to every thing
that can be reasonably required for the Security of all those that shall come
to it.

His Majesty has therefore sent Us to attend Your Highness for the adjusting
of all Matters that shall be agreed to be necessary to the Freedom of
Elections, and the Security of Sitting, and is ready immediately to enter into
a Treaty in Order to it.

His Majesty proposes that in the mean time the respective Armies may be
restrained within such Limits, and at such a Distance from London, as may
prevent the Apprehensions that the Parliament may in any kind be disturbed,
being desirous that the Meeting of it may be no longer delayed than it must be
by the usual and necessary Forms.

Signed, Hallifax, Nottingham, Godolphin.
Hungerford, Dec. 8, 88.
We, with the Advice of the Lords and Gentlemen Assembled with Us, have, in
Answer to the same, made these following Proposals.
I. THat all Papists, and such Persons as are not qualified by Law, be
Disarmed, Disbanded, and Removed from all Employments, Civil and Military.

II. That all Proclamations which Reflect upon Us, or any that have come to Us,
or declared for Us, be recalled; and that if any Persons for having so
Assisted, have been committed, that they be forthwith set at Liberty.

III. That for the Security and Safety of the City of London, the Custody and
Government of the Tower be immediately put into the hands of the said City.

IV. That if His Majesty shall think fit to be at London, during the Sitting of
the Parliament, that We may be there also, with equal Number of Our Guards. Or
if his Majesty shall please to be in any place from London, at whatever
distance he thinks fit, that We may be at a place of the same distance. And
that the respective Armies do remove from London Thirty Miles, and that no more
Foreign Forces be brought into the Kingdom.

V. That for the Security of the Citiy of London and their Trade, Tilbury For^
be put into the hands of the said City.

VI. That to prevent the Landing of French, or other Foreign Troops, Portsmouth
may be put into such hands, as by Your Majesty and Us shall be agreed upon.

VII. That some sufficient part of the Public Revenue be Assigned Us, for the
Maintaining of our Forces, until the Meeting of a Free Parliament. Given at
Littlecott, the Ninth of December, 1688.

W. H. Prince of Orange.

The KING's Letter TO THE EARL of FEVERSHAM, Upon his leaving Whitehall.
Together with the Earl of Feversham's Letter to his Highness the PRINCE of
Orange, after the King's departure. Whitehall, December. 10. 1688.
THings being come to that Extremity, that I have been forced to send away the
Queen and my Son the Prince of Wales, that they might not fall into my Enemies
Hands, which they must have done, if they had staid, I am obliged to do the
same thing, and to endeavor to secure my self the best I can, in hopes it will
please God out of his infinite Mercy to this Unhappy Nation, to touch their
Hearts again with true Loyalty and Honor. If I could have relied on all my
Troops, I might not have been put to the extremity I am in, and would at least
have had one Blow for it; but though I know there are many Loyal and brave Men
amongst you, both Officers and Soldiers, yet you know, that both you and
several of the General Officers and Men of the Army told me, it was no ways
advisable for me to venture my Self at their Head, or think to fight the
Prince of Orange with them; and now there remains only for me to thank you, and
all those both Officers and Soldiers who have stuck to me, and been truly
Loyal. I hope you will still retain the same Fidelity to Me, and though I do
not expect you should expose your selves by resisting a Foreign Army, and a
poisoned Nation, yet I hope your former Principles are so enrooted in you, that
you will keep your selves free from Associations, and such pernicious things.
Time presses, so that I can say no more.

I. R.
I must add this, That as I have always found you Loyal, so you have found me a
kind Master, as you shall still find me to be.



The Earl of Feversham's Letter.
SIR,
HAving receiving this Morning a Letter from His Majesty, with the unfortunate
News of his Resolution to go out of England, and that he is actually gone, I
thought my self obliged, being at the Head of his Army, having received His
Majesty's Order to make no opposition against any body, to let your Highness
know, (with the Advice of the Officers here) so soon as it was possible, to
hinder the misfortune of effusion of Blood; I have ordered already to that
purpose all the Troops that are under my Command, which shall be the last Order
they shall receive from, etc.

By the Prince of Orange, a DECLARATION.
WHereas We are Informed, That diverse Regiments, Troops and Companies, have
been Encouraged to Disperse themselves in an Unusual and Unwarrantable Manner,
whereby the Public Peace is very much Disturbed: We have thought fit, hereby
to Require all Colonels and Commanders in Chief of such Regiments, Troops and
Companies, by Beat of Drum, or otherwise, to call together the several Officers
and Soldiers, belonging to their Respective Regiments, Troops and Companies, in
such Places as they shall find most Convenient for their Rendezvous, and there
to keep them in good Order and Discipline. And We do likewise Direct and
Require all such Officers and Soldiers, forthwith to Repair to such Place as
shall be Appointed for that Purpose by the respective Colonels or Commanders in
Chief, Whereof speedy Notice is to be given unto Us, for Our further Orders.

Given at Our Court at Henly, the Thirteenth Day of December, 1688. W. H.
Prince of Orange.

Guild Hall, London. December the 11th, 1688. By the Commissioners of
Lieutenancy for the said City. Ordered,
THat Sir Robert Clayton, Knt. Sir William Russel, Knt. Sir Basil Firebrace,
Knt. and Charles Duncomb, Esquire be a Committee from the said Lieutenancy to
Attend His Royal Highness the Prince of Orange, and present to His Highness the
Address agreed by the Lieutenancy for that purpose: And that they begin their
Journey to Morrow Morning.

By the Commissioners Command, Geo. Evans, Cl. Lieut. London.

To His Highness the Prince of Orange. The Humble Address of the Lieutenancy of
the City of London.
May it please Your Highness,
WE can never sufficiently express the deep Sense we have conceived, and shall
ever retain in our Hearts, That Your Highness has exposed Your Person to so
many Dangers both by Sea and Land for the Preservation of the Protestant
Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom; without which
unparalled Undertaking we must probably have suffered all the Miseries that
Popery and Slavery could have brought upon us.

We have been greatly concerned, that before this time we have not had any
seasonable Opportunity to give Your Highness and the World a real Testimony,
that it has been our firm Resolution to venture all that is Dear to Us to
attain those Glorious Ends which Your Highness has proposed for restoring and
settling these Distracted Nations.

We therefore now unanimously present to Your Highness our just and due
Acknowledgments for the Happy Relief You have brought to us, and that we may
not be wanting in this present Conjuncture, we have put our selves into such a
Posture, that (by the Blessing of God) we may be capable to prevent all ill
Designs, and to preserve this City in Peace and Safety till your Highness's
Happy Arrival.

We therefore humbly desire that your Highness will please to repair to this
City with what convenient speed you can, for the perfecting the Great Work
which Your Highness has so happily begun, to the general Joy and Satisfaction
of us all.

December the 17 th, 1688. THE said Committee this day made Report to the
Lieutenancy, that they had presented the said Address to the Prince of Orange,
and that His Highness received them very kindly.

December the 17 th, 1688. By the Lieutenancy.
Ordered,
That the said Order and Address be forthwith Printed.

Geo. Evans.





To His Highness the Prince of ORANGE: The Humble ADDRESS of the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen and Commons of the City of London, in Common Council assembled.
May it please Your Highness,
WE taking into Consideration your Highness's fervent Zeal for the Protestant
Religion, manifested to the World, in your many and hazardous Enterprises,
which it has pleased Almighty God to bless you with miraculous Success. We
render our deepest Thanks to the Divine Majesty for the same: And beg leave to
present our most humble Thanks to your Highness, particularly for your
appearing in Arms in this Kingdom, to carry on and perfect your Glorious
Design, to rescue England, Scotland and Ireland, from Slavery and Popery, and
in a Free Parliament to establish the Religion, the Laws, and the Liberties of
these Kingdoms upon a sure and lasting Foundation.

We have hitherto looked for some Remedy for these Oppressions and Imminent
Dangers We, together with Our Protestant Fellow Subjects, labored under, from
His Majesty's Concessions and Concurrences with Your Highness's Just and Pious
purposes, expressed in Your Gracious Declarations.

But herein finding Our Selves finally disappointed by His Majesty's
withdrawing Himself, We presume to make Your Highness Our Refuge: And do in the
Name of this Capital CITY, implore Your Highness's Protection; and most humbly
beseech Your Highness to vouchsafe to repair to this CITY, where Your Highness
will be received with Universal Joy and Satisfaction.

The Speech of Sir GEORGE TREBY, Knight. Recorder of the Honorable City of London,
to his Highness the Prince of Orange, Dec. 20. 1688.
May it please your Highness,
THE Lord Mayor being disabled by Sickness, your Highness is attended by the
Aldermen and Commons of the Capital City of this Kingdom, deputed to
Congratulate your Highness upon this great and glorious Occasion.

In which, laboring for Words, we cannot but come short in Expression.

Reviewing our late Danger, we remember our Church and State, overrun by
Popery and Arbitrary Power, and brought to the Point of Destruction, by the
Conduct of Men (that were our true Invaders) that brake the Sacred Fences of
our Laws, and (which was worst) the very Constitution of our Legislature.

So that there was no Remedy left but the Last.

The only Person, under Heaven, that could apply this Remedy, was Your Highness.

You are of a Nation, whose Alliance, in all Times, has been agreeable and
prosperous to us.

You are of a Family most Illustrious, Benefactors to Mankind. To have the
Title of Sovereign Prince, Stadtholder, and to have worn the Imperial Crown,
are among their lesser Dignities: They have long enjoyed a Dignity singular and
transcendent, viz. To be Champions of Almighty God, sent forth in several Ages,
to vindicate his Cause against the greatest Oppressions.

To this Divine Commission, our Nobles, our Gentry, and among them our brave
English Soldiers, rendered themselves and their Arms upon your appearing.

GREAT SIR,

When we look back to the last Month, and contemplate the Swiftness and
Fullness of our present Deliverance, astonished, we think it miraculous.

Your Highness, led by the Hand of Heaven, and called by the Voice of the
People, has preserved our dearest Interests.

The Protestant Religion, which is Primitive Christianity, restored.

Our Laws, which are our ancient Title to our Lives, Liberties, and Estates,
and without which this World were a Wilderness.

But, what Retribution can We make to your Highness?

Our Thoughts are full-charged with Gratitude.

Your Highness has a lasting Monument in the Hearts, in the Prayers, in the
Praises of all Good Men amongst us. And late Posterity will celebrate your
ever-glorious Name, till Time shall be no more.

Chapman Mayor. Cur' special' tent' die Iovis xx. die Decemb' 1688. Annoque R
R. Iacobi Secundi Angl' etc. quarto.
THis Court does desire Mr. Recorder to print his Speech this day made to the
Prince of Orange at the time of this Court's attending his Highness, with the
Deputies of the several Wards, and other Members of the Common Council.

Wagstaffe.

FINIS.
A FIFTH Collection of Papers Relating to the Present Juncture of Affairs in
England. VIZ. I. The hard Case of Protestant Subjects under the Dominion of a
Popish Prince. II. An Answer to a late Pamphlet, entitled, A Short Scheme of
the Usurpations of the Crown of England, etc. III. An humble and hearty Address
to all English Protestants in the Army. Published by Mr. Johnson in the Year
1686. IV. Several Reasons against the Establishment of a standing Army, and
Dissolving the Militia. V. A Discourse of Magistracy; of Prerogative by Divine
Right; of Obedience, and of the Laws. VI. The Definition of a Tyrant, by Abr.
Cowley: With several Queries thereupon proposed to the Lawyers. VII. A Letter
to the King, inducing him to return to the Protestant Religion. VIII. Ten
Seasonable Queries, proposed by an English Gentleman at Amsterdam to his
Friends in England.


Licensed and Entered according to Order.

London printed, and are to be sold by Rich. Ianeway in Queen's-head Court in
Paternoster Row, 1688.

The hard Case of Protestant Subjects under the Dominion of a Popish Prince.
A Prince putting himself and his Dominions under the Authority of the Pope,
and admitting (as he must unavoidably) the Laws and Decrees of the Romish
Church, all his Protestant Subjects being, by the Judgment and Sentence of that
Church, Heretics Distinct. 19. cap. a Cause. 25. q. 1. cap. 11.
, do forthwith lie under the Penalty which those Laws and Constitutions will
have inflicted upon Heretics; Heresy Cap. Vergent. de Hereticis.
being the highest degree of High Treason, called therefore by them, Laesae
Crimen Majestatis Divinae: So the English Protestant must be a Traitor, and the
worst of Traitors, and exposed to the Penalties of High Treason.

The Laws and Decrees of the Romish Church against Heretics.
Heresy Cap. Infam. 6. q. 1. p. 297.
is denounced Infamous, and the Heretic must be dealt with as such; which is
many Penalties in one.

First, Whereby they are deprived of all Nobility, Jurisdiction and Dignity,
and debarred from all Offices, and public Councils, Parliaments and others;
being made incapable of choosing, and being chosen: So that it reaches all
sorts Suar. de Fide disp. 12.. 9. n. ^. l. 2. c. 29.
of Clergy, Laity, Noble and Ignoble; which is extended to their Children also.
For, they say, The Issue of Traitors, Civil and Spiritual, lose their Nobility.
And all that owe any Duty to such Infamous Persons, are discharged and exempted
therefrom, as Subjects Cap. de Haer.
from their Prince, Servants A^zo^. Tom. 1. l. 8. c. 12. q. 7.
from the^r Masters, Children Cap. 2. Sect. fin. de Haer. in 6.
from their Parents, whom they also may lawfully kill.

Whereby we may see a little, to what condition the Admission of the Papal
Authority would reduce us, expelling both Nature and Humanity, and making the
dearest Relatives unnatural and barbarous to one another; it would leave no
Protestant either Dignity or Authority, either Safety or Liberty; Nobles are
sentenced to Peasants, and Peasants to Slaves.

Secondly, Another Penalty to which Heretics are condemned by their Law, is
Confiscation of Goods and Estate; and this they incur ipso jure, and ipso
facto; that is, immediately as soon as they show themselves Heretics, before
any legal Sentence have passed: For which there is an express Decree in the
Canon Law; Cap. cum secundum Legis de Haer.. Inno III. cap. de Vergentis.
Bona Haereticorum ipso jure discernemus confiscata; We decree the Goods of
Heretics to be confiscate by Sentence of Law. The Effects of this
Confiscation, wherein they all agree, makes the Severity of the Law apparent,
viz. First, All the Profits made of the Estate from the first day of their
Guilt, is to be Vasque in Suar. disp. 22. S. 4. n. 11.
refunded. Secondly, All Alienations S. 1. n. 5.
by Gift, Sale, or otherwise, before Sentence, are null and void; and all
Contracts for that purpose Cap. Vergent. de Haer.
rescinded. Thirdly, Children, Heirs of Heretics, are deprived of their
Portions; yea, tho they be Papists.

Whereby it appears, that as soon as the Papacy is admitted, all Title and
Property is lost and extinct among us: And therefore we must not think that
Pope acted extravagantly, who declared, That all his Majesty's Territories were
his own, as forfeited to the Holy See for the Heresy of Prince and People. Not
only Abby-Lands are in danger, who ever possess them; but all Estates are
forfeited to his Exchequer, and legally confiscated: All is his own which
Protestants in these three Nations have or ever had, if he can but meet with a
Prince so wise as to help him to catch it; whose process follows them beyond
their Grave, and ruins their Children, and Children's Children after them. And
when they have stripped the Heretic of his All, they provide that no other
shall relieve him, viz. That none shall receive him into their Houses, nor
afford him any Help, nor show him any Favor, nor give him any Counsel. We are
here in England zealous for Property; and all the reason in the World we should
so be: But we must bid adieu to this, when we once come under the Pope's
Authority; for as soon as this is admitted, all the Protestants in these
Nations are Beggars by Lrw, viz. by the Laws of that Church, which will then be
Ours, divesting us of all Property and Title to whatever we account our own.

Thirdly, Another Penalty which their Law inflicts on Heretics, is Death Cap.
ad abolendum de Ha^r. Su^r. Dis. 23. Bull. Vrb. 4. and Inno. 4.
, which is the Sentence of the Canon Law; and which is so absolute, that no
Secular Judge can remit, and which is the Judgment of all the Doctors, Ita
docent omnes Doctores: And from which Penalty, neither Emperors nor Kings
themselves are to be freed or exempt. And the Death they inflict is burning
alive: No Death more tolerable, or of less exquisite Torture will satisfy the
Mercy of that Church. The Canon says thus; Decernimus ut vivi in conspectu
hominum comburantur; We decree, that they shall be burnt alive in the sight of
the World. So our last Popish Successor, Queen Mary, practiced upon near three
hundred Persons, without regard either to Age, Sex, or Quality: the Scripture
they urge for it, is John 15.6. Jac. de Gra. decis. l. 2. c. 9. n. 2.
If any one abide not in me, Men gather them and cast them into the Fire, and
they are burnt.

So that as soon as the Papal Authority is admitted among us, all the
Protestants in these Nations are dead Men in Law; being under a Law that has
sentenced us to be burnt alive, and under a Power that has declared it
necessary that no one of us escape with Life.

Fourthly, Where legal Penalties cannot take place, by reason of opposite
Strength, they hold War necessary, and lawful to chastise Heretics: For which
we might give you diverse Authorities; Bonacina Diano. Castro Molanus, etc. Car.
Allen. ad mon. to Nobl. and Peop. p. 41.
but let Cardinal Allen, our Countryman, suffice; who asserts it is not only
lawful, but necessary: His words are these: It is clear (says he) what People
or Persons soever be declared to be opposite to GOD's Church, with what
Obligation soever either of Kindred, Friendship, Loyalty, or Subjection I be
bound unto them; I may, or rather must take up Arms against them; and then must
we take them for Heretics when our lawful Popes adjudg them so to be. And
which (says Cardinal Pool) is a War more holy than that against the Turks.

Fifthly, To destroy them by Massacres is sometimes held more advisable than
to run the hazard of War, and which ( they say) is both lawful and meritorious,
for the rooting out a Pestilent Heresy, and the promoting the Roman Interest.
This set a-foot the Irish Massacre, that inhuman bloody Butchery, and so much
from the Savageness and Cruelty of their Nature, as the Doctrines and
Principles which directed and encouraged it; as also that of Paris, than which
nothing was more grateful and acceptable to their Popes, as their ^riess of P.
G. 13. and Clem. 8.
Bulls make manifest, and the picturing it in the Pope's Chamber; and for
which, as a most glorious Action, Triumphs were made, and public Thanksgivings
were returned to God. So in Savoy, and elsewhere, both in former and latter
Times. And this was that which the late Conspirators aimed at so fully
intending a Massacre. Those that escaped a Massacre, says 5. Ies. Trial, p. 28.
Dugdale, must be cut off by the Army. And Col. Lr. ^o the Intern^ncio.
Coleman tells the Internuncio in his Letters; That their Design prospered so
well, that he doubted not in a little time, their Business would be managed to
the utter Ruin of the Protestant Party: The effecting whereof was so desirable
and meritorious, that if he had a Sea of Flood, and an hundred Lives, he would
lose them all to carry on the Design. And if to effect this, it were necessary
to destroy an hundred Heretical Kings, he would do it Prance 's Nar. p. 4.
. Singleton the Priest affirmed, That he would make no more to stab forty
Parliament Men, than to eat his Dinner. Gerard and Kelley, to encourage Prance
to kill Sir E. B. G. told him, It was no Murder, no Sin, and that to kill
twenty of them was nothing in that case; which was both a charitable and
meritorious Act. And Cause. Ep. p. 189.
Grant, one of the Massacring Gunpowder Traitors, said, upon his Execution, to
one that urged him to repent of that wicked Enterprise, That he was so far from
counting it a Sin, that on the contrary, he was confident, that that noble
Design had so much of Merit in it, as would be abundantly enough to make
Satisfaction for all the Sins of his whole Life. See Everard Digby speaking to
the same purpose also; the Provincial Garnet did teach the Conspirators the
same Catholic Doctrine, viz. That the King, Nobility, Clergy, and whole
Commonalty of the Realm of England (Papists excepted) were Heretics; and, That
all Heretics were accursed and excommunicated; and That no Heretic could be a
King, but that it was lawful and meritorious to kill him, and all other
Heretics within this Realm of England, for the advancement and enlargement of
the Authority and Jurisdiction of the Pope, and for the restoring of the Romish
Religion. This was that Garnet whom the Papists here honored as a Pope, and
kissed his Fee^, and reverenced his Judgment as an Oracle; and since his Death,
given him the Honor of Saintship and Martyrdom Five Ies. T^i^ls, p. 2^.
. Dugdale deposed, That after they had dispatched the King, a Massacre was to
follow.

But surely, it may be supposed, that the Temper of such a Prince, or his
Interest, would oblige him to forbid or restrain such violent Executions in
England. Yea, but what if his Temper be to comply with such Courses? Or his
Temper be better? Wh^t if it be overruled? What if he be persuaded, as other
Catholics are, that he must in Conscience proceed thus? What if he cannot do
otherwise, without hazard of his Crown and Life? For he is not to hold the
Reins of Government alone, he will not be allowed to be much more than the
Pope's POSTILLION, and must look to be dismounted, if he act not according to
Order. The Law Caput Offi^^^m*
tells us, That it is not in the Power of any Civil Magistrate to remit the
Penalty, or abate the Rigor of the Law. Nay, if the Prince should plight his
Faith by Oath, that he would not suffer their Bloody LAWS to be executed upon
his Dissenting Subjects, this would signify nothing: For they would soon tell
him, That Bon^ci^^a d^ prin^. prat. Disp. 3. q. 2.
Contracts made against the Common Law are invalid, though con^irmed by Oath;
And, That he is not bound to stand to his Promise though he had sworn to it:
And, That Faith is no more to be kept with Heretics, than the Council of
Constance would have it. So that Protestants are to be burnt, as Io. Huss and
Ierom of Prague were by that Council, though the Emperor had given them his
safe Condu^t in that Solemn manner, which could secure them only (as they said)
from the Civil, but not Church-Process, which was the greatest. For it is their
General Rule, That Faith is either not to be given, or not kept with Heretics.
Therefore, says Simanca, That Faith engaged to Heretics, though confirmed by
Oath, is in no wise to be performed: For, says he, if Faith is not to be kept
with Tyrants and Pirates, and others who kill the Body, much less with Heretics
who kill the Souls. And that the Oath in favor of them, is but Vinculum
Iniquitatis, A Bond of Iniquity. Though Popish Princes, the better to promote
their Interest, and to ensnare the Protestant Subjects, to get advantage upon
them, to their Ruin, have made large Promises, and plighted their Faith to
them, when they did not intend to keep it. As the Emperor to John Huss and
Ierom; Charles the Ninth of France to his Protestant Subjects, before the
Massacre; the Duke of Savoy to his Protestant Subjects, before their designed
Ruin; and Queen Mary, before her burning of them. But if there were neither Law
nor Conscience to hinder, yet in point of Interest, he must not show favor to
Heretics, without apparent hazard, both Parson 's Philop. p. 109.
of Crown and Life, for he forfeits both if he does. The Pope every Year does
not only curse Heretics, but every Favourer of them, from which none but
himself can absolve. Becan. Cont. Aug. p. 131, 132. In Fowlis, p. 60.
Becanus very elegantly tells us, If a Prince be a dull Cur, and fly not upon
Heretics, he is to be beaten out, and a keener Dog must be got in his stead.
Henry the Third, and Henry the Fourth, were both Assassinated upon this
Account, because they were suspected, to favor Heretics. And are we not told
by the Discoverers Oats 's Nar. p. 4. N. 5, etc.
of the Popish Plot, That after they had dispatched the King, they would depose
his Brother also, that was to succeed him, if he did not answer their
Expectations, for rooting out the Protestant Religion.

But may not Parliaments secure us by Laws and Provisions restraining the Power
which endangers us? Not possible, if once they secure and settle the Throne for
Popery: For, First, They can avoid Parliaments as long as they please; and a
Government that is more Arbitrary and Violent, is more agreeable to their
Designs and Principles* It being apparent, that the English Papists have lost
the Spirit of their Ancestors, who so well asserted the English Liberties,
being so generally now fixed for the Pope's Universal Monarchy, sacrificing all
to that Roman Moloch, being much more his Subjects than the King's; and though
Natives by Birth, yet are Foreigners as to Government, Principle, Interest,
Affection and Design; and therefore no Friends to Parliaments, as our
Experience has told us.

But, Secondly, if their Necessity should require a Parliament, there is no
question but they may get such a one as will serve their turns: For so have
every of our former Princes in all the Changes of Religion that have been
amongst us: As Henry the 8 th, when he was both for and against Popery; Edward
the 6 th, when he was wholly Protestant; Queen Mary, when she was for Burning
Alive; and Queen Elizabeth, when she ran so Counter to her Sister. And the
Reason is clear, that he who has the making of the public Officers, and the
Keys of Preferment and Profit, influenceth and swayeth Elections and Votes as
he pleases. And by how much the Throne comes to be fixed in Popery, the
Protestants must expect to be excluded from both Houses, as they have excluded
the Papists: For as Heretics and Traitors, they, as ignominous Persons, etc.
you have heard, forfeit all Right, either to choose, or be chosen in any Public
Councils: And then all Laws which have been made for the Protestants, and
against the Popish Religion, will be null and void, as being enacted by an
incompetent Authority, as being the Acts of Heretics, Kings, Lords, and
Commons, who had forfeited all their Rights and Privileges.

But, Thirdly, suppose our Laws were valid, as enacted by competent Authority,
and such good and wholesome Provisions, as were those Statutes made by our
Popish Ancestors, in those Statutes of Provisoes in Edward the I. and Edward
the III. Time, and that of Praemunire in Richard the II. and Henry the IV. for
Relief against Papal Encroachments and Oppressions: Yet being against the Laws
and Canons of Holy Church, the Sovereign Authority, they will be all
superseded: For so they determine, That when the Canon and the Civil Laws
clash, one requiring what the other allows not, the Church-Law must have the
observance, and that of the State neglected: And Constitutions (they say) made
against the Canons and Decrees of the Roman Bi^hops, are of no moment: Their
best Authors are positive of it. And our own Experience and Histories testify
the Truth thereof: For how were those good Laws beforementioned, defeated by
the Pope's Authority, so that there was no effectual Execution thereof till
Henry the 8 th's Time, as Dr. Burnet Hist. Ref. p. 110.
tells us? And how have the good Laws, to suppress and prevent Popery, been
very much obstructed in their Execution by Popish Influence?

An Answer to a late Pamphlet, Entitled, A Short Scheme of the Usurpations of
the Crown of England, etc.
THE World may very justly wonder at several Passages in this ill-designed, and
as ill-writ Pamphlet, which the Author has taken the pains to collect from some
petty Grubstreet Chronicle. Henry II. is called an Usurper ( page 4.) because
he accepted of the Crown of England in his Mothers Lifetime; though by her not
opposing his Claim, it may very reasonably be concluded, that she freely
consented to his Promotion, as the most effectual means to secure the Crown to
her Posterity.

But we are told, That a Crown is no Estate to be made over in Trust: If our
Author's meaning is, that a Crown is an Estate which the Possessor cannot
divest himself of by a voluntary Resignation; both Reason, and a multitulde of
Examples in several Ages, and ^ations, prove that the Principle our Author has
laid down, is founded on a gross Mistake. Therefore if our Author designs to
publish any more Schemes of Usurpation, let him first inform us what it is, and
how far it extends, lest the World should accuse him of having as notoriously
usurped to himself the Title of a Writer, as any of our Princes ever did the
Crown of England. He would persuade his Readers to believe, that God punished
King Edward III. and King Henry V. for their Usurpations, with frequent and
unexpected Victories; in the acquisition of which, though there was some English
Blood shed, (as it was impossible it should be otherwise) yet the Enemies paid
an excessive Price for it; after the defeat of their great Armies, and the
Imprisonment of their King, they being forced to buy their Peace upon such
Terms, as our conquering Usurpers pleased to impose. Nor did ever any
well-wisher to the English Nation deny, that these Two Princes were the Glory
of their Age, and of our British History. If I should reckon up all the evident
Mistakes and false Inferences in this Libel, it would be too tedious, since a
careless Eye cannot easily overlook them.

If the Pamphlet finds so undeserved a Reception in the World, as to need a
Second Impression, the Author is desired to add to it this Postscript; which
being founded on the Principles asserted by him, will show the World that he
has wilfully, and perhaps partially, forborne to speak of as notorious an
Usurper, as any that are mentioned in his Scheme.

Queen Mary, the Offspring of an Incestuous Marriage, had no other
unquestionable Divine Right to the Crown of England, than what was given her by
an Act of Parliament, made in her Father's Reign, and the common Consent of the
Nobility and People after the Death of her Brother King Edward VI. whose
disposal of the Crown, by Letters Patents under the Great Seal, being directly
contrary to the former Entail of it, limited by a higher Authority; His Sister,
the Lady Mary, was acknowledged Queen. Therefore, according to our Author's
abstruse Notions, She (as well as her Grandfather Henry VII.) must be reckoned
among the Usurpers of the Crown of England. Let us now see what success
attended her, and whether the Nation was happy under her Government. As soon as
She saw her self fixed in the Throne, She imprisoned and deprived several of
the Protestant Bishop^, contrary to the then Established Laws of the Realm: She
intruded Popish Bishops into the Sees, thus declared vacant; the small
remainder of the Protestant Bishops, who had be^n called to Parliament by Writ,
were, nevertheless, violently thrust out of the Parliament House, for refusing
to worship the Mass. The Members of the House of Commons, in her First
Parliament, were chosen by force and threats: the Freeholders were hindered by
violence from exercising their Right of choosing Representatives: false Returns
were made; and those who were for the Reformed Religion, though duly elected,
were by force expelled the House. So that we cannot wonder at the Statues made
in this pretended Free Parliament; which was in every Thing influenced by the
Court-Party. Shortly after, her Marriage with the haughty jealous Spaniard (of
which She her self felt the ill Consequences) was justly disliked by the
Nobility and Commonalty. Her base Design of setting up a Supposititious Child
for Heir to the Crown, was not only happily defeated, but deservedly exposed to
the Censure of the Nation: Her Design to erect the Spanish Inquisition in
England was disappointed. Calais (after having belonged to the Crown of Engl^nd
about two hundred and eleven Years, and which was gained with great difficulty,
after eleven Months Siege) was, in the depth of Winter, lost in a Weeks time:
And quickly after, all the English Territories were, with small difficulty,
recovered by the French. We must not forget how exactly She put in practice the
base, treacherous, and destructive Principles of the pretended Catholic
Religion, in these remarkable Particulars. She barbarously used her only
Sister, the Lady Elizabeth, and designed to have taken away her Life, for no
other Cause, but her firm adherence to the Protestant Religion. She imprisoned
and burnt Archbishop Cranmer, who had formerly sheltered her from her Father's
Fury. She deprived and imprisoned Judge Hales, who alone resolutely opposed King
Edward the Sixth's Will: and preferred Judge Bromley to be Lord Chief Justice,
though he had, without any reluctance, prepared the Letters Patent for her
Exclusion. The Inhabitants of Norfolk and Suffolk, who were the first that took
up Arms for her, (upon her Promise to permit them the Exercise of their
Religion) were the first that suffered Persecution under her. And after she had
put to death near three hundred Persons, (without respect to Quality, Age, or
Sex) it pleased God to put an end to the Romish Cruelty and Idolatry, by her
unexpected and unlamented Death. Nor is her Memory preserved from Oblivion by
any thing, but her repeated Acts of Cruelty and Injustice. This was the Success
that attended her, this the Happiness, the Liberty, the Religion established in
the English Nation, during her sive Years Tyranny.

That I may not detain the Reader any longer, I will conclude this Advice to
our Learned Pamphleteer; That for the future he do not so positively ascribe
all unhappy Accidents, as frequent Wars and Rebellions, the Effusion of English
Blood, the unfortunate End of some of our Princes, to the Divine Vengeance upon
them, for the Usurpations he accuses them of; since, if he will consult our
Historians, he may find that Edward II. Richard II. and the Incomparable
Prince, King Charles I. though their Title from William the Conqueror is
indisputable, were far unhappier than any of the Usurpers he mentions. That in
Edward the Fourth's, and Henry the Eighth's Reign, a great deal of English
Blood was shed both at Home and Abroad, though their Right was unquestionable,
and universally acknowledged. And that as to the promiscuous good or ill
Success of all Affairs in this lower World, the observation of the Wisest of
Princes, and of Men, is very often exactly verified; There is one Event to the
Righteous and to the Wicked: To the Prince who ascends the Throne by an
unquestionable Right, and to him that ascends it by Violence and Usurpation. To
the Prince that religiously performs the Solemn Oath taken at his Coronation,
and to him that wilfully breaks through all the Obligations he is under, and
endeavors by the most base Methods to dissolve the Established Government.

The following Paper was published by Mr. Samuel Johnson in the Year 1686. for
which he was sentenced by the Court of King's Bench, (Sir Edward Herbert being
Lord Chief Justice) to stand three times on the Pillory, and to be whipped from
Newgate to Tyburn: Which barbarous Sentence was executed.

An Humble and Hearty Address to all the English Protestants in this present
Army.
GENTLEMEN,
NEXT to the Duty which we owe to God which ought to be the principal Care of
Men of your Profession especially, (because you carry your Lives in your Hands,
and often look Death in the Face). The second Thing that deserves your
Consideration, is, The Service of your Native Country, wherein you drew your
first Breath, and breathed a free English Air. Now I would desire you to
consider, how well you comply with these two main Points, by engaging in this
present Service.

Is it in the Name of God, and for his Service, that you have joined your
selves with Papists; who will indeed fight for the Mass Book but burn the
Bible, and who seek to Extirpate the Protestant Religion with Your Swords,
because they cannot do it with their Own? And will you be Aiding and Assisting
to set up Mass-Houses, to erect that Popish Kingdom of Darkness and Desolation
amongst as, and to train up all our Children in Popery? How can you do these
Things, and yet call your selves Protestants?

And then what Service can be done your Country, by being under the Command of
French and Irish Papists, and by bringing the Nation under a Foreign Yoke? Will
you help them to make forcible Entry into the Houses of your Countrymen, under
the Name of Quartering, directly contrary to Magna Charta, and the Petition of
Right? Will you be Aiding and Assisting to all the Murders and Outrages which
they shall commit by their void Commissions? Which were declared Illegal, and
sufficiently blasted by both Houses of Parliament, (if there had been any need
of it) for it was very well known before, That a Papist cannot have a
Commission, but by the Law is utterly Disabled and Disarmed. Will you exchange
your Birthright of English Laws and Liberties for Martial or Club-Law, and
help to destroy all others, only to be eaten last your selves? If I know you
well, as you are English Men, you hate and scorn these Things. And therefore be
not unequally yoaked with Idolatrous and Bloody Papists. Be Valiant for the
Truth, and show your selves Men.

The same Considerations are likewise humbly offered to all the English Seamen,
who have been the Bulwark of this Nation against Popery and Slavery ever since
Eighty Eight.

Several Reasons for the Establishment of a Standing Army, and Dissolving the
Militia.
1. BEcause the Lords Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, and the whole Militia,
that is to say, the Lords, Gentlemen, and Freeholders of England, are not fit
to be trusted with their own Laws, Lives, Liberties, and Estates, and therefore
ought to have Guardians and Keepers assigned to them.

2. Because Mercenary Soldiers, who fight for twelve Pence a Day, will fight
better, as having more to lose than either the Nobility or Gentry.

3. Because there are no Irish Papists in the Militia, who are certainly the
best Soldiers in the World, for they have slain Men, Women, and Children, by
Hundreds of Thousands at once.

4. Because the Dragooners have made more Converts than all the Bishops and
Clergy of France.

5. The Parliament ought to establish one standing Army at the least, because
indeed there will be need of Two, that one of them may defend the People from
the other.

6. Because it is a thousand pities that a brave Popish Army should be a Riot.

7. Unless it be Established by Act of Parliament, the Justices of Peace will
be forced to suppress it in their own Defense; for they will be loath to forfeit
an hundred Pounds every day they rise, out of Complement to a Popish Rout. 13.
H. 4. c. 7.2. H. 5. c. 8.

8. Because a Popish Army is a Nullity. For all Papists are utterly disabled
(and punishable besides) from bearing any Office in Camp, Troop, Band, or
Company of Soldiers, and are so far disarmed by Law, that they cannot wear a
Sword, so much as in their Defense, without the allowance of four Justices of
the Peace of the County: And then upon a March they will be perfectly
enchanted, for they are not able to stir above five Miles from their own
Dwelling House. 3. Iac. 5. Sect. 8, 27, 28, 29.35. Eliz. 2.3. Iac. 5. Sect. 7.

9. Because Persons utterly disabled by Law are utterly Unauthorized; and
therefore the void Commissions of Killing and Slaying in the Hands of Papists,
can only enable them to Massacre and Murder.

A Discourse of Magistracy; of Prerogative by Divine Right; of Obedience, and
of the Laws.
CHAP. I. Of MAGISTRACY.
I. RELATION is nothing else but that State of Mutual Respect and Reference,
which one Thing or Person has to another.

II. Such are the Relations of Father and Son, Husband and Wife, Master and
Servant, Magistrate and Subject.

III. The Relations of a Father, Husband, and Master, are really distinct and
different; that is, one of them is not the other; for he may be any one of
these who is none of the rest.

IV. This distinction proceeds from the different Reasons, upon which these
Relations are founded.

V. The Reason or Foundation, from whence arises the Relation of a Father, is
from having begotten his Son, who may as properly call every old Man he meets
his Father, as any other Person whatsoever, excepting him only who begat him.

VI. The Relation of an Husband and Wife is founded in We^lock, whereby they
mutually consent to become one Fle^h.

VII. The Relation of a Ma^ter is founded in that Right and Title which he has
to the Possession, or Service of his Slave or Servant.

VIII. In these Relations, the Names of Father, Husband, and Master, imply
Sovereignty and Superiority, which varies notwithstanding, and is more or less
absolute, according to the Foundation of these several Relations.

IX. The Superiority of a Father is founded in that Power, Priority, and
Dignity of Nature, which a Cause has over its Effect.

X. The distance is not so great in Wedlock, but the Superiority of the Husband
over the Wife, is like that of the Right Hand over the Left in the same Body.

XI. The Superiority of a Master, is an absolute Dominion over his Slave, a
limited and conditionate Command over his Servant.

XII. The Titles of Pater Patriae, and Sponsus Regni, Father of the Country,
and Husband of the Realm, are Metaphors and improper Speeches: For no Prince
ever begat a whole Country of Subjects; nor can a Kingdom more prop^rly be said
to be married, than the City of Venice is to be Adriatic Gulf.

XIII. And to show further, that Magistracy is not Paternal Authority, nor
Monarchy founded in Fatherhood; it is undeniably plain, that a Son may be the
Natural Sovereign Lord of his own Father, as Henry the Second had been of
Ieffe^y Plantagenet, if he had been an Englishman; which, they say, Henry the
Seventh did not love to think of, when his Sons grew up to Years. And this Case
alone is an eternal Confutation of the Patriarchate.

XIV. Neither is Magistracy a Marital Power, for the Husband may be the
obedient Subject of his own Wife, as Philip was of Queen Ma^y.

XV. Nor is it that Dominion which a Master has over his Slave, for then a
Prince might lawfully sell all hi^ Subjects, like so many Head of Cattle, and
make Money of his whole Stock when ever he pleases, as a Patron of Algiers does.

XVI. Neither is the Relation of Prince and Subject the same with that of a
Master and hired Servant, for he does not hire them, but as St. Paul says,
They pay him Tribute, in consideration of his continual Attendance and
Employment for the Public Good.

XVII. That Public Office and Employment is the Foundation of the Relation of
King and Subject, as many other Relations are likewise founded upon other
Functions and Administrations. Such as Guardian, and Ward, etc.

XVIII. The Office of a King is set down at large in the 17 th Chapter of the
Laws of King Edward the Confessor, to which the succeeding Kings have been
sworn at their Coronation: And it is affirmed in the Preambles of the Statutes
of Prout Regalis Officii exposcit utilitas.
Malbridg, and of the Statute of Quo Warranto, made at Sicome le profit de
Office Demand. The Kingly or Regal Office of this Realm, Mar. Sess. 3. cap. 1.
Gloucester, That the calling of Parliaments to make Laws for the better Estate
of the Realm, and the more full Administration of Justice, belongs to the
Office of a King. But the fullest account of it in few words, is in Chancellor
Fortescue, Chap. XIII. which Passage is quoted in Calvin's Case, Coke VII. Rep.
Fol. 5. Ad Tutelam namque Legis Subditorum, ac eorum Corporum, and bonorum, Rex
hujusmodi erectus est, and ad hanc potestatem a populo effluxam ipse habet, quo
ei non licet potestate alia suo populo Dominari. For such a King (that is, of
every Political Kingdom, as this is) is made and ordained for the Defense or
Guardianship of the Laws of his Subjects, and of their Bodies and Goods,
whereunto he receives Power of his People, so that he cannot govern his People
by any other Power.

Corolary, A Bargain's a Bargain. CHAP. II. Of Prerogatives by Divine Right.
I. GOvernment is not matter of Revelation; if it were, then those Nations that
wanted Scripture, must have been without Government; whereas Scripture it self
says, that Government is the Ordinance of Man, and of Human Extraction. And
King Charles the First says of this Government in particular, That it was
molded by the Wisdom and Experience of the People. Answ. to XIX. Prop.

II. All just Governments are highly beneficial to Mankind, and are of God, the
Author of all Good; they are his his Ordinances and Institutions. Romans 13.1, 2.

III. Plowing and sowing, and the whole business of preparing Bread Corn, is
abs^luely necessary to the Subsistence of Mankind; This also comes forth from
the Lord of Hosts, who is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in Working. Isa.
28. from 23 d to 29 th Verse.

IV. Wisdom says, Counsel is mine, and sound Wisdom; I am Understanding, I
have Strength; by me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice: By me Prinees
rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth. Prove. 13.14.

V. The Prophet, speaking of the Plowman, says, His God does instruct him to
Discretion, and does teach him. Isa. 28.26.

VI. Scripture neither gives nor takes away Men's Civil Rights, but leaves them
as it found them, and (as our Savior said of himself) is no Divider of
Inheritances.

VII. Civil Authority is a Civil Right.

VIII. The Law of England gives the King his Title to the Crown. For, where is
it said in Scripture, that such a Person or Family by Name shall enjoy it? And
the same Law of England which has made him King, has made him King according to
the English Laws, and not otherwise.

IX. The King of England has no more Right to set up a French Government, than
the French King has to be King of England, which none at all.

X. Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, neither makes a Caesar,
nor tells who Caesar is, nor what belongs to him; but only requires Men to be
just, in giving him those supposed Rights, which the Laws have determined to be
his.

XI. The Scripture supposes Property, when it forbids Stealing; it supposes
Men's Lands to be already butted and bounded, when it forbids removing the
Ancient Landmarks: And as it is impossible for any Man to prove what Estate he
has by Scripture, or to find a Terrier of his Lands there; so it is a vain
thing to look for Statutes of Prerogative in Scripture.

XII. If Mishpat Hamelech, the manner of the King, 1 Samuel 8.11. be a Statute of
Prerogative, and prove all those Particulars to be the Right of the King, then
Mishpat Haccohanim, the Priests custom of Sacrilegious Rapine, Chap. 2.13.
proves that to be the Right of the Priests, the same word being used in both
places.

XIII. It is the Resolution of all the Judges of England, that even the known
and undoubted Prerogative of the Jewish Kings, do not belong to our Kings, and
that it is an absurd and impudent thing to affirm they do. Coke 11. Rep. p. 63.
Mich. 5. Iac. Note, Give us a King to judge us, 1 Samuel 8.5, 6, 20.
upon Sunday the Tenth of November, in the same Term, the King, upon Complaint
made to him by Bancroft, Archbishop of Canterbury, concerning Prohibitions,
was informed, That when Question was made of what matters the Ecclesiastical
Judges have Cognizance, either upon the Exposition of the Statutes concerning
Tithes, or any other thing Ecclesiastical, or upon the Statute 1 Eliz.
concerning the High-Commis^ion, or in any other case, in which there is not
express Authority by Law, the King himself may decide it in his Royal Person;
and that the Judges are but the Delegates of the King, and that the King may
take what Causes he shall please to determine from the Determination of the
Judges, and may determine them himself. And the Arch^bishop said, That this was
clear in Divinity, That such Authority belongs to the King, by the Word of God
in Scripture. To which it was answered by me, in the presence, and with the
clear consent of all the Justices of England, and Barons of the Exchiquer, That
the King in his own Person cannot adjudg any Case, either Criminal, as Treason,
Felony, etc. but this ought to be determined and adjudged in some Court of
Justice, according to the Law and Custom of England. And always Judgments are
given, Ideo consideratum est per Curiam; so that the Court gives the Judgment
--. And it was greatly marvelled, that the Archbishop durst inform the King,
that such Absolute Power and Authority, as is aforesaid, belonged to the King
by the Word of God.

CHAP. III. Of OBEDIENCE.
I. NO Man has any more Civil Authority than what the Law of the Land has
vested in him; nor is he one of St. Paul's Higher Powers any farther, or to any
other purposes, t^an the Law has empowered him.

II. An Usurped, Illegal, and Arbitrary Power, is so far from b^ing the
Ordinance of God, that it is not the Ordinance of Man.

III. Whoever opposes an Usurped, Illegal, and Arbitrary Power, does not oppose
the Ordinance of God, but the Violation of that Ordinance.

IV. The 13 th of the Romans commands Subjection to our Temporal Governors,
because their Office and Employment is for the Public Welfare; For he is the
Minister of God to Thee for good. Verse 4.

V. The 13 th of the Hebrews commands Obedience to Spiritual Rulers, because
they watch for your Souls. Verse 17.

VI. But the 13 th of the Hebrews did not oblige the Martyrs and Confessors in
Queen Mary's Time, to obey such blessed Bishops as Bonner, and the Beast of
Rome, who were the perfect Reverse of St. Paul's Spiritual Rulers, and whose
Practice was murdering of Souls and Bodies, according to that true Character of
Popery, which was given it by the Bishops who compiled the Thanksgiving for the
Fifth of November; but Archbishop Laud was wiser than they, and in his time
blotted it out.

The Prayer formerly ran thus: To that end strengthen the Hands of our Gracious
King, the Nobles and Magistrates of the Land, to cut off these Workers of
Iniquity (whose Religion is Rebellion, whose Faith is Faction, whose Practice
is murdering of Souls and Bodies) and to root them out of the Confines of this
Kingdom.

VII. All the Judges of England are bound by their Oath, and by the Duty of
their place, to disobey all Writs, Letters, or Commands, which are brought to
them, either under the Little Seal, 18 Edw. III. 20 Edw. III. Cap. 1, 2.
or under the Great Seal, to hinder or delay common Right. Are the Judges all
bound in an Oath, and by their Places, to break the 13 th of the Romans?

VIII. The Engagement of the Lords attending upon the King at York, June 13.
1642. which was subscribed by the Lord Keeper, and thirty nine Peers, besides
the Lord Chief Justice Banks, and several others of the Privy Council, was in
these words.

We do engage our selves not to obey any Orders or Commands whatsoever, not
warranted by the known Laws of the Land. Was this likewise an Association
against the 13 th of the Romans?

IX. A Constable represents the King's Person, and in the Execution of his
Office is within the purview of the 13 th of the Romans, as all Men grant; but
in case he so far pervert his Office, as to break the Peace, and commit
Murder, Burglary, or Robbery on the Highway, he may and ought to be resisted.

X. The Law of the Land is the best Expositor of the 13 th of the Romans here;
and in Poland, the Law of the Land there.

XI. The 13 th of the Romans is received for Scripture in Poland, and yet this
is expressed in the Coronation Oath in that Country: Quod si Sacramentum meum
violavero, Incolae Regni nullam nobis Obedientiam praestare tenebuntur. And if
I shall violate my Oath, the Inhabitants of the Realm shall not be bound to
yield me any Obedience.

XII. The Law of the Land, according to Bracton, is the highest of all the
Higher Powers mentioned in this Text, for it is Superior to the King, and made
him King, ( Lib. iii. cap. xxvi. Rex habet Superiorem Deum, item Legem, per
quam factus est Rex, item Curiam suam, viz. Comites and Barons) and therefore
by this Text we ought to be subject to it in the first place. And according to
Melancthon, It is the Ordinanee of God, to which the Higher Powers themselves
ought to subject. Vol. iii. In his Commentary on the fifth Verse, ( Wherefore
ye must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake.) He
has these words. Neque vero hac tantum pertinent ad Subditos, sed etiam ad
Magistratum, qui cum fiunt Tyranni, non minus dissipant Ordinationem Dei, quam
Seditiosi. Ideo and ipsorum Conscientia fit rea, quia non obediunt Ordinationi
Dei; id est, Legibus, quibus debent parere. Ideo Comminationes hic posite etiam
ad ipsos pertinent. Itaque hujus mandati severitas moveat omnes, ne
violalationem Politici status putent esse leve peccatum. Neither does this
place concern Subjects only, but also the Magistrates themselves; who when they
turn Tyrants, do no less overthrow the Ordinance of God than the Seditious; and
therefore their Consciences too are guilty, for not obeying the Ordinance of
God, that is, the Laws, which they ought to obey. So that the Threatenings in
this place do also belong to them; wherefore, let the Severity of this Command
deter all Men from thinking the Violation of the Political Constitution to be a
light Sin.

Corolary. To destroy the Law and-Legal Constitution, which is the Ordinance of
God, by false and Arbitrary Expositions of this Text, is a greater Sin than to
destroy it by any other means: For it is Seething the Kid in his Mothers Milk.

CHAP. IV. Of LAWS.
I. THere is no natural Obligation, whereby one Man is bound to yield Obedience
to another, but what is founded in Paternal or Patriarchal Authority.

II. All the Subjects of a Patriarchal Monarch are Princes of the Blood.

III. All the People of England are not Princes of the Blood.

IV. No Man who is naturally free can be bound, but by his own Act and Deed.

V. Public Laws are made by Public Consent, and they therefore bind every
Man, because every Man's Consent is involved in them.

VI. Nothing but the same Authority and Consent which made the Laws, can
repeal, alter, or explain them.

VII. To judge and determine Causes against Law, without Law, or where the Law
is obscure and uncertain, is to assume Legislative Power.

VIII. Power assumed without a Man's Consent, cannot bind him as his own Act
and Deed.

IX. The Law of the Land is all of a piece, and the same Authority which made
one Law made all the rest, and intended to have them all impartially executed.

X. Law on one side, is the Back-Sword of Justice.

XI. The best things when corrupted are the worst; and the wild Justice of a
State of Nature, is much more desirable than Law perverted and overruled, into
Hemlock and Oppression.

This Discourse of Magistracy, etc. and the former Reasons, were written by the
foresaid Mr. S. Johnson.

The Definition of a TYRANT, by the Learned and Loyal Abraham Cowley,
(published by the present Lord Bishop of Rochester) in his Discourse concerning
the Government of Oliver Cromwell.
I Call him a Tyrant, who either intrudes himself forcibly into the Government
of his Fellow-Citizens, without any Legal Authority over them, or who, having a
just Title to the Government of a People, abuses it to the destruction or
tormenting of them: So that all Tyrants are at the same time Usurpers, either
of the whole, or at least of a part of that Power which they assume to
themselves, and no less are they to be accounted Rebels, since no Man can usurp
Authority over others, but by rebelling against them who had it before, or at
least against those Laws which were his Superiors.

Several Queries proposed to the Sages of the Law, who have studied to Advance
the Public, equally with, if not more than their own private Interest.
Q. I. WHether the Legislative Power be in the King only, as in his Politic
Capacity, or in the King, Lords, and Commons, in Parliament assembled? If in
the latter, then,

Q. II. If the King grants a Charter, and thereby great Franchises and
Privileges, and afterward, the Grantees obtain an Act of Parliament for the
Confirmation hereof, is this the Grant of the King, or of the Parliament? If
the latter, as it seems to be, because it is done by the whole, and every part
of the Legislative Power: then,

Q. III. To whom can these Grantees forfeit this Charter? And who shall take
Advantage of the Forfeiture? If the King; then an Act of Parliament may be
destroyed without an Act of Parliament? If the Parliament only can call them to
an Account; then,

Q. IV. Of what Validity is a Judgment pronounced (under a color of Law) in B.
R. against a Charter granted by Parliament? If it be of any force, then the
King's Bench is Superior to the Legislative Power of the Kingdom: If not, then,

Q. V. What Reason can be assigned, why it is not as safe to Act pursuant to an
Act of Parliament, notwithstanding a Judgment entered in the King's Bench, as it
was to Act against an Act of Parliament, before the Judgment was entered? And
then,

Q. VI. Whether they that did the latter, were not downright Knaves? and
whether they that refuse to do the former, be not more nice than wise?

A LETTER TO THE KING, When DUKE of YORK, Persuading him to return to the
Protestant Religion, wherein the chief Errors of the Papists are exposed, and
the Tendency of their Doctrines to promote Arbitrary Government, proved.
By an Old Cavalier, and Faithful Son of the Church of England, as Established
by Law.
Illustrious Sir!
WHEN I look up to the Greatness of your Quality, and down on my own meanness,
I cannot but tremble to make this Address, so liable to be censured as
presumptuous, and obnoxious to variety of Misconstruction* But since my Pen is
guided by an Heart filled with profound Loyalty, and Veneration toward all the
Royal Family, and a sincere respect, and most passionate desires for the
particular Prosperity. (Temporal and Eternal) of your Royal Highness, I cannot
refrain discharging what I apprehended my Duty; and therefore with good Esther,
finding not only my Country, but your Highness also, in such apparent (I wish
it may not prove inevitable) hazard of Ruin, am resolved to adventure forth,
and cast my poor weak Sentiments at your feet; and, If they perish, they perish.

It Is generally reported, That you are long since turned Papist; and so far
believed, That every day many hundred thousand Protestants are melted into
Tears and Horror merely on that Consideration, and lament the same, as one of
the greatest Calamities that has happened in our Age. I must do my self so much
Justice as to decla^e, That I am none of those fanatical Spirits, that either
raise, or lightly credit Rumors to the prejudice of my Superiors. But besides
what has been sworn by Persons, whose Evidence none have hitherto been able to
invalidate by any substantial Reasons, or Incoherence in their Depositions;
your Highnesses Conduct, and Deportment for many years past, your absenting
from the public Worship of our Church, Refusing legal Oaths and Tests, your
countenancing, retaining an in^imate Correspondency with Roman Catholics; and
many other Reasons not fit, at least unnecessary here to be mentioned, do all
loudly speak it: And for those who would go about to deny it (as some wretched
Pamphlet-scriblers, and unthinking Health-drinkers have done*) besides the
folly of the attempt, they unwarily cast a greater load of Ignominy and
Dishonor on your Highness, whilst they pretend to vindicate you.

For is it imaginable, That a Prince of your Generosity and Prudence would so
far suffer the Affairs of your Royal Brother to be imbroil'd, His Councils
discomposed; all the Protestants in the World swallowed up with Astonishment,
and almost despair, your own Honor fullied, your Interest impaired, and these
Three Kingdoms put into a deplorable Distraction, merely upon a false
supposition, without rectifying in all this time their mistake by some real
Demonstrations to the contrary? If such a Capricio should sway with your
Highness, what were it but to render you the worst Subject, the most unkind
Brother, the most Impolitick Prince, and the maddest, or most monstrous Man in
the World?

I shall therefore take it for granted, and consequently must, though with all
Humility, and a Sorrow inexpressible, direct my Discourse to your Highness as
an Apostate from the Protestant Faith; and if I am mistaken, it is your Highness
has led not only me, but almost all the World into that Error.

I am not insensible of my own weakness, and how unfit I am to argu^ matters of
Religion with your Highness, and those subtle Sophisters (the Pest of Europe,
and shame of Christianity) which are always croaking about Persons of Quality,
whom they have perverted to their Idolatries; being my self but a
Lay-Gentleman, of little Learning, and in the course of my Life more conversant
with the Sword, than the Pen: And I must wonder with Regret, if none of the
Right Reverend Fathers, my Lords the Bishops, or some of our other Learned
Divines have not vigorously made Applications to your Highness, even in a
public Manner, to regain you to the Protestant Communion: If they have not
charged you, as they are God's Ambassadors, to show some Reasons, why you have
broke the League (your Baptismal vows) with his Church, and joined your self to
the Tents of his Enemies. If they have not adjur'd you in the Name of our Lord,
to show on what offense taken amongst us, and for what Beauties observed in the
Church of Rome, you quitted the true Spouse of Christ, to follow the
Enchantments of a Strumpet, whose shameless Adulteries have long since caused
an utter Divorce between Her and the Blessed Jesus: If they have not solemnly
called Heaven and Earth to Record, that they are ready to satisfy all your
scruples, to answer all your objections; and to show, That it is not through
any default in them, for want of Endeavors, nor in our Church for want of
Truth; but that your defection must be wilful, as well as unreasonable, whereby
to render you either convicted, or inexcusable.

Nor do I doubt, but several of those Glorious Lights of our Church, may
accordingly have discharged without fear of flattery their Functions herein, in
private discourses: But certainly a matter of that inestimable importance, as
wherein not only the Soul of one of the Bravest Princes of the Earth, but also
the whole Protestant Interest in the World, especially within these Three
Nations, is so deeply and dangerously concerned, might require, since I am sure
it deserves a Public and General Application: Nor ought any, though the
meanest of Men, to be blamed for contributing modestly^* his help to prevent a
disaster of such universal influence: And therefore who knows but that Almighty
Providence, who overthrew Iericho's proud Walls of old, not with Battering
Engines of War, but with the blast of contemptible Rams-Horns, and is often
pleased to make use of the weakest Instruments to effect mighty Works; may give
a Blessing to these poor u^polish'd, inartificial Lines, which have nothing but
the Power of Truth, and the Honesty of a sincere Intention to recommend them to
your Princely Consideration?

That you were educated in Protestant Principles, is notorious. I beseech your
Highness therefore to satisfy the World what could induce you to a change. I
shall not mention your Royal Grandfather, whose Learned Pen baffled all the
Conclave, nor shall I insist on that Curse which he solemnly pronounced on any
of his Posterity that should turn Papist: I shall only say, Had you not the
Example, and the Commands too of a most Indulgent, Pious Prince, your Royal
Father, for perseverance therein; who, though barbarously murdered by vile Men,
yet continued steadfast, and even with his last breath discharged and ^lear'd
the Doctrine of the Reformed Religion from having any share in their Crimes?
What Impiety is it, if you should dare to profess your Fathers Blessed Soul to
be eternally damned! and yet, if you are a Papist, you can do no less; for you
cannot be such without believing, That there is no Salvation out of the Pale of
the Church* and that there is no Church but that of Rome; and I am confident
none can have the Impudence to suggest, that He died in the Communion of that
Church: What follows then? or how will you answer this Horrid Scandal on his
Sacred Memory, when you shall meet his glorified Spirit at the last dreadful
Judgment-day? Nor can the keenest Jesuit blunt the edge of this Argument by a
Retortion from the Consideration of your Highnesses Illustrious Mother: For
though Papists are so audacious, as to place the Keys of Heaven at the Pope's
Girdle, and uncharitably doom us All to unquenchable flames, not affording us
so much as a Room in Purgatory: yet Protestants are not so unchristian (but
according to Scripture) leave secret things to God, and allow grains for
Education, Prepossessions, Ignorance, etc. which is yet no more a Reason for
any Man to turn Papist, than it is for him that stands safe on the shore to leap
off into a Vessel so rotten and leaky as just ready to sink, upon a presumption
that still some of those that are in her may escape the danger: Or to choose an
impudent Quack, who boasts he only can cure him; and refuse a Learned
Physician, who modestly grants he may peradventure be healed by the other,
though very improbably; but withal, that it is a Million to one, but the
Patient, under such hands, miscarries; and that in this case, eternally.

But quitting this Argument, which is only Personal, I beseech your Highness to
tell us, how you, or any Man of sense can so far forget, not only his Education
and Interest, but his very Reason, as to embrace POPERY, frightful, detestable,
ridiculous Popery, that Chaos of Superstition, Idolatry, Error and Imposture,
that has no foundation but a Cheat; No Ends but to gratify Pride and Avarice;
no solid Argument to promote and maintain it, but Impudence and Cruelty.

Popery, That depends wholly upon nice and poor uncertainties, and unprovable
supposals: As 1 st. That Peter was Bishop of Rome. 2 dly. That He left there
one to be Heir of his Graces and Spirit, in a perpetual unfailable Succe^sion.
3 dly. That He so bequeathed his Infallibility to his Chair, as that whosoever
sits in it, cannot but speak Truth; so that all who sit where he sat, must by
some secret Instinct, say as he taught; that what Christ said to him
absolutely, without any respect to Rome, must be referred, yea tied to that
place alone, and fulfilled in it. 4 thly. That Linus, Clements and Cletus the
Scholars, and supposed Successors of Peter, must he preferred (in the Headship
of the Church) to John the beloved Apostle then still living. 5 thly. That He
whose Life is often times monstrously debauched, his Judgment childishly
ignorant, cannot yet, when in his Pontifical Chair, possibly err. 6 thly. That
the Golden Line of this Apostolical Succe^sion, in the confusion of so many
long desperate Schisms, shamefully corrupt Usurpations and Instrusions, and
confessed Heresies, yet neither was nor can be broken.

Popery, That teaches Men to worship Stocks and Stones, and painted Clouts,
with the fame Honor as is due to our Creator; and lest that practice should
appear to her simple Clients too palpably oppo^ite to God's Law, most
sacrilegiously stifles one of the Ten Commandments in their vulgar Catechisms
and Prayer-Books.

Popery, That utterly confounds the true Humanity of Christ, while they give
unto it Ten thousand places at once, and yet no place; Flesh, and no Flesh;
several Members without distinction; a substance without quantity, and other
Accidents; or Substance and Accidents, that cannot be seen, felt or perceived;
so that they make a Monster of their Savior, or nothing.

Popery, That utterly overthrows the Perfection of Christ's satisfaction; for
if all be not paid, how has he satisfied? If Temporal Punishments in Purgatory
be yet due, how is all paid? And if these must be paid by us, how are they
satisfied by him?

Popery, That has made more Scriptures than ever the Holy Spirit dictated, or
the Ancient Church received; and those which it does make, Imperiously obtrudes
upon the World; and while it thunders out Curses against all that will not add
these Books to God's, seems to defy the Curse pronounced by God himself to
those that add unto his Word, Rev. 22. 18.

Popery, That erects a Throne in the Conscience to a mere Man, and many times
rather a Monster than a Man; and gives him absolute Power to make a sin of that
which is none; and to dispense with that which is; to create new Articles of
Faith, and to impose them upon Necessity of Salvation; to make wicked Men
Saints, and Saints Gods; for even by the Confession of Papists, lewd and
undeserving Men have leaped into their Calendar; yet being once installed
there, they have the Honor of Altars, Temples and Invocations; some of them in
a style sit only for their Maker.

Popery, That robs the Heart of all sound Comfort, whilst it teaches us, That
we neither can, nor ought to be assured of the Remission of our sins, and of
present Grace, and future Salvation; that we can never know whether we have
received the true Sacraments of God becausewe cannot know the Intention of the
Minister, without which they are no Sacraments.

Popery, That racks the Conscience with the needless torture of a necessary
shrift, wherein the virtue of an Absolution depends on the fullness of
Confession; and that upon Examination; and the sufficiency of Examination is so
fu^l of scruples (besides infinite Cases of unresolved doubts in this feigned
penance) that the pour soul never knows when it is clear.

Popery, That under pretense of Religion plays the Bawd to sin, whilst both in
practice it tolerates open stews, and prefers Fornication in some cases before
honorable Matrimony, and gently blanches over wilful Violations of God's Law
with the favorable title of Venial Crimes.

Popery, That makes Nature vainly proud, in joining her as Copartner with God
in our Justification, Salvation, and idly putting her up with a conceit of her
Perfection and Ability to keep more Laws than God has ^ade, whence their
Doctrines of Merit and Supererogation, etc.

Popery, That requires no other Faith ^o Justific^tion in Christians, than may
be found in Devils themselves; who, besides ^ confused Apprehension, can assent
to the Truth of God's revealed Will, and Popery requires no more.

Popery, That instead of the pure Milk of the Gospel, has long fed her starved
Souls with such idle Legends, as the Reporter can hardly deliver without
laughter, nor their Abettors be told of without shame and disclamation; so that
the wiser sort of the World read these Stories on Winter Evenings for sport,
which the poor credulous Multitude hear in their Churches with devout
astonishment.

Popery, That requires nothing but mere Formality in our Devotion; the work
wrought suffices alone in Sacraments, and in Prayers; if the number be repeated
by Rote, no matter for the Affection; as if God regarded not the Heart, but the
Tongue and Hands; and while he understands us, cared little whether we
understand our selves.

Popery, That has been often dyed in the Blood of Princes, that in some cases
teaches and allows Rebellion against God's Anointed; and both suborneth
Treasons; and excuses, pities, honors and rewards the Actors.

Popery, That overloads Men's Consciences with heavy burdens of infinite,
unnecessary Tradit^ons, far more than ever Moses Commented upon by all the
Jewish Rabbis; imposing them with no less Authority, and exacting them with
more Rigor, than any of the Royal Laws of their Maker.

Popery, That cozens the vulgar with nothing but shadows of Holiness in
Pilgrimages, Processions, Offerings, Holy Water, Latin Services, Images,
Tapers, rich Vestures, garish Altars, Crosses, Censings, and a thousand such
like, fit for Children and Fools, robbing them in the mean time of the sound
and plain Helps of true Piety and Salvation*

Popery, That cares not by what wilful Falsehoods, Equivocations, Perjuries and
Abominations it propagates it self, and maintains its credit: And therefore
being conscious of her own Villainies, goes about to falsify and deprave
Authors, that might give Evidence against her, to outface all ancient Truths,
to foist in Gibionitish Witnesses of their own forging, and leaves nothing
unattempted against Heaven and Earth that might advance her Faction, and
disable her innocent and just Accusers.

This, this is the true figure of Popery, through whatever false Optics your
Highness may have viewed it: This is that for which you are resolved to hazard
a Crown of Glory, and three temporal Diadems to boot; and to which you
sacrifice both your own Fortunes, and the Tranquillity of many Millions of
Souls*

What then can the World, that kno^s the clear light of your Highnesses
Elevated Understanding, imag^^^ can be the Cause of your Revolt? Will they not
be apt to conceive, that you have not espoused this Mock Religion purely for
its own sake, but for some promised Dowry of an Absolute Monarchy, or Arbitrary
Power, which she might pretend to bring one day with her to your Embraces? But
as this is far below the Justice and Generosity of your Highness, so it is
unworthy the thoughts of any considerate Politician. For suppose any Prince, to
whom the British Scepter may hereafter devolve, intoxicated with the Tinsel
Glories of the French Monarch's blustering Grandeur, should be so vain, as to
hope to subjugate the English Liberties, and destroy the Constitution of the
best Established Government on Earth, by assuming to himself the whole
Legislative Power, raising Money, and draining his Subjects at Pleasure without
their common Consent in Parliament, etc. and should be so extravagantly
enamored on this fatal Project (fatal I say, because for above Five hundred
years it has shipwrack'd all that coasted that way,) as to be content to shift
his Religion, and exchange his Faith, and turn Papist, on a presumption, that
the same might facilitate and accomplish his Enterprise: As King John, it is
said, resolved once to embrace Mahumetism, rather than not to be revenged of
his Barons, claiming their just Liberties. Suppose I say all this should be,
and that the present Papists, to get their Religion publicly established,
should comply with his Designs; yet still is it not most reasonable to believe.
That having once gained their Point therein, they, or their Posterity, will
soon recall to mind their Birth rights and Privileges due to them as
Englishmen; and will they not then be perpetually tugging and struggling to
regain them, whence continual disturbance will ensue, and a standing Army must
be kept on foot to support this ill acquired Grand^ur? For those Subjects that
contended with King John and King Henry the Third, etc. though they were Papists,
and of the same Religion with those Princes, could not brook it, to be Slaves
to their Arbitrary Pleasures in their Civil Rights: Besides, what a waking
dream is it for any King, that is free from the Roman Yoke, to think to make
himself more Absolute by involving himself and his Kingdoms in Thraldom to the
Church of Rome; wherein not only the Pope pretends a Right to domineer over
him, but every Ecclesiastic esteems himself wholly exempt from his
Jurisdiction, and all his People will be but half his Subjects, viz. in
Temporals; for in Spirituals, and in ordine ad spiritualia (a monstrous draw
net, that may include almost all the Actions of Humane Life,) they are wholly
to be Conducted by his Holiness and his Subordinate Ministers. How therefore
can your Highness, if a Roman Catholic, complain of the late successive Houses
of Commons for pressing a Bill to exclude you? Is it any Disloyalty to
endeavor to preserve the Imperial Crown of England from a truckling and
shameful Servitude to a Foreign Usurper's Power? Or is it any such unheard of
thing to debarr a Prince from a Throne, that has obstinately disabled himself?
Certainly, above all Men, the Roman Catholics ought not to murmur at this; for
did not the Pope issue forth a Bull to exclude your Grandfather, King James,
unless he would turn Papist? And did not the Romanists, though they
acknowledged the Title of your other Grandfather, Henry the Great, to the
French Diadem; yet refuse to pay him any Obedience, because a Protestant, and
on that only score fought against him, as long as he continued so, and thought
it no Rebellion? Your Highness perhaps will say -- What though they did so,
true Protestants, and the Church of England do not own such Principles? Well
then, if the Protestant Principles be better than those of the Church of Rome,
what Madness is it in your Highness to abandon the first, and choose the latter?

I am a dutiful and hearty Lover of Monarchy, and when established on such an
Equi-pois'd Basis of Wisdom as ours is, shall ever assert it to be the best
Form of Government in the World, and most agreeable to the Genius of
Englishmen: But that lineal descent is so sacred a thing, that the Heir
presumptive can for no default or crime whatsoever be debarred from the Crown
by an Act of Parliament, or public Decree of State, I do not understand; For I
am sure the practice in all Ages, both at home and abroad in almost every
Nation in the Earth, has run contrary: And as to Right; those that pretend
such Succession in all Cases to be Iure Divino, would do well to show in what
Texts of Scripture the same is prescribed; till then, they do but talk, not
argue; and if a Candidate to the Crown, for any Reasons whatsoever, may without
offense to the Law of God or Nature, be Excluded by an Act of King, Lords and
Commons; Then the Iune-divino-ship vanishes, and nothing is left to be
considered: But whether such next Heir have done such Acts, or is so qualified,
that in Prudence it be necessary for the Tranquillity of the Public to Exclude
him. Now I believe there are but few of the Church of England, but if the Bill
had passed the Lords, and his Majesty had given his Royal Assent to it, would
have acquiesc'd therein, and consequently they do not believe the Exclusion to
be simply unlawful by the Law of God or Nature, for against either of them no
Humane Ordinances ought to prevail.

But all true Loyalists do not despair, but your Highness may yet prevent all
Occasions of such Disputes by opening your eyes; or rather that God (in whose
hands are the Hearts of Princes) may irradiate your Royal Understanding, and
let you see the horrid Blackness of those Men who have endeavored to seduce
you, and of those Principles to which they would have inveigled you, on purpose
to have made your Highness a Property to their Ambition and Avarice, and that
under the shadow of your Illustrious Name they might one day Tyrannize at
Pleasure over these Three Kingdoms.

If Heaven shall be pleased to work such an happy Inclination in your Highness,
you shall presently see the whole British Empire echoing with Praises and
Acclamations, and instead of murmurs of Seclusion, every good Subject shall
erect you a Throne in his heart.

But the grand difficulty will be to satisfy the prejudiced World of your
sincerity herein; for if your Highness (which God forbid) should declare your
self a Protestant only to serve a present turn, and use the Sacred Name of our
Religion but as an Engine to advance the design of our bloody Enemies, you
would act at once the most dishonourably and (in the end) most prejudicially to
your own Interest, in the world, and must certainly expect the blasts of
Heaven, and curses of Earth on all your future proceedings; for Hypocrisy is
odious to God and Man, nor is there any Monster so abominable to serious Men of
both sides, as a Church-Papist.

Your Royal Highness, I hope, will excuse our fears, for we are not ignorant of
the Arts and Craft of Rome, that she esteems no means unlawful to obtain her
ends. How shall any Oaths be sufficient Tests, when a private dispensation may
at once allow the taking, and warrant the breaking of them? Or what signifies
the participation of our Sacraments to one that is taught, We have no true
Ministers of Christ; if so, no consecration, consequently nothing but an
ordinary Breakfast of common Br^ad and Wine, and who shall lose the hopes of
three Crowns rather than not taste such harmless viands? Not that I dare
imagine your Highnesses Understanding would suffer you to believe the
lawfulness, or your Princely Generosity permit you to practice these lewd
dissimulations; yet since such Doctrines are daily taught in the Roman Church,
how shall Protestants be assured they have no Influence on your Conduct? I must
therefore with all humble freedom assure your Highness, that after so general
an Opinion of your Highnesses having been a Roman Catholic, though you should
go never so duly to Church, receive the Sacrament a thousand times, and take
Oaths all the way from Holy-rood House to St. James's, yet the People would
scarce believe the reality of your Conversion, unless withal they see it
accompanied with some other Demonstrations. For as Faith without works is dead,
so Profession of a Religion, without agreeable endeavors to advance it will be
vain. If his Royal Highness, will the People say, be a good Protestant, he will
undoubtedly discourage all Papists, the sworn inveterate Enemies of our
Religion, he will not suffer a Popish Priest to approach his Person or Palace.
If he have had any intimation of any ill designs, if any have been tampering to
reconcile him to Popery (which is no less than Treason) he will presently
detect those mischievous Instruments, that they may be brought to condign
Punishment, and applaud the Justice that has been done on Coleman, the five
Jesuits, Godfrey's Murderers, etc. thereby stopping the Mouths of that brazen
Tribe who would make the World believe they died innocently. He will declare
(...) all Arbitrary Designs, detest those who by sneaking flatteries would
un^^ng^ the ancient and most wise Constitution of our Government. He will
heartily recommend Parliaments to his Sacred Brother as the wisest and safest
Councils, and even thank the late Houses of Commons for their zeal against him,
whilst they apprehended him as an Enemy to his King, and the Religion and
safety of the Kingdom. He will vigorously by his Counsels and Interests oppose
the growing greatness of the French, which at this day threatens all Europe
with Chains, and immediately tends not only to the decay of Great Britains.
Trade and Glory, but also to the diminution, oppression, and (if it lay in
humane Power) utter subversion of the Reformed Religion throughout the World.

These and the like Noble Fruits, will the People not unreasonably expect from
your R. H. when ever you shall please to declare your self a Protestant; which
that you may speedily do, not Politickly or Superficially, but with that
sincerity, as so serious a matter (of infinite more value than the Three Crowns
you are Presumptive Heir to) is the Prayer of all good Men, and particularly of

Your Royal Highness 's Most Humble and Faithful Servant, Philanax Verax.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Richard Ianeway, 1688.

Ten Seasonable QUERIES, Proposed by an English Gentleman in Amsterdam, to his
Friends in England, a little before the Prince of Orange came over.
I. WHether any Real and Zealous Papist was ever for Liberty of Conscience? it
being a fundamental Principle of their Religion, That all Christians that do
not believe as They do, are Heretics, and ought to be destroyed.

II. Whether the King be a Real and Zealous Papist? If he be, Whether he can be
truly for Liberty of Conscience?

III. Whether this King in his Brother's Reign did not cause the Persecution
against Dissenters to be more violent than otherwise it would have been.

IV. Whether he does not now make use of the Dissenters to pull down the Church
of England, as he did of the Church of England to ruin the Dissenters, that the
Papists may be the better enabled in a short time to destroy them both?

V. Whether any ought to believe he will be for Liberty any longer than it
serves his Turn? and whether his great eagerness to have the Penal Laws and
Test repealed be only in order to the easy establishing of Popery?

VI. Whether if these Penal Laws and Test were repealed, there would not many
turn Papists that now dare not?

VII. Whether the forcing of all that are in Offices of Profit or Trust in the
Nation, to lose their Places, or declare they will be for Repealing the Penal
Laws and Test, be not Violating his own Declaration for Liberty of Conscience,
and a new Test upon the People?

VIII. Whether the suspending the Bishop of London, the Dispossessing of the
Fellows of Magdalen College of their Freeholds, the Imprisoning and
Prosecuting the Seven Bishops for Reasoning according to Law, are not
sufficient instances how well the King intend to keep his Declaration for
Liberty of Conscience, wherein he promises to protect and maintain all his
Bishops and Clergy, and all other his Subjects of the Church of England in
quiet and full enjoyment of all their Possessions with any molestation or
disturbance whatsoever.

IX. Whether the Usage of the Protestants in France and Savoy for these three
years past, be not a sufficient Warning not to trust to the Declaration,
Promises or Oaths in matters of Religion of any Papist whatsoever?

X. Whether any Equivalent whatsoever under a Popish King, that has a standing
Army, and pretends to a Dispensing Power, can be as equal Security as the Penal
Laws and Test, as affairs now stand in England?

FINIS.
A SIXTH Collection of Papers Relating to the Present Juncture of Affairs in
England. VIZ. I. Five Letters from Scotland, giving Account of expelling Popery
from thence. II. The Prince of Orange's Speech to the Scots Lords and Gentlemen
met at St. James's. With their Advice to the Prince, to take upon him the
Administration of the Affairs of Scotland. With his Highness's Answer. III. A
Letter to a Friend, advising in this Extraordiry Juncture, how to Free the
Nation from Slavery. IV. The Application of the Bishop and Clergy of London to
the Prince of Orange, Sept. 21. 1688. V. An Address of the Nonconformist
Ministers of London, to the Prince of Orange. VI. The Address of the City of
Bristol to the Prince of Orange. VII. A Word to the Wise, for Settling the
Government. VIII. A Modest Proposal to the present Convention. IX. An
Historical Account touching the Succession of the Crown. X. A Narrative of the
Miseries of New England, by reason of an Arbitrary Government erected there.


Licensed and Entered according to Order.

London printed, and are to be sold by Richard Ianeway in Queen's-head-Court in
Paternoster Row, 1689.

Advertisement.
Whereas there is a sixth and seventh Collection of old Papers with new
Title-Pages (remote from the present Juncture of Affairs) published by R.
Baldwin; The Reader is desired to take notice that the Person that collected
the first five Parts, will continue them from time to time as often as matter
occurs, in which he will take care not to impose any thing but what is new and
genuine, and worth the Reader's Money. To be sold by Richard Ianeway in
Queen's-Head Court in Paternoster Row, who sells the former five, and so all
that shall follow.

Five LETTERS From a Gentleman in Scotland, to his Friend in LONDON. Being a
True Account of what Remarkable Passages have happened since the Prince's
Landing; The manner of the taking of the Chancellor, and his Lady in Man's
Apparel; The burning of the Pope, Demolishing of the Popish Chapels, etc. with
the total overthrow of the Roman Catholics.
Edinburgh, December. 3. 1688.
THE Students of the University here, designed some time ago to burn the Pope's
Effigies; but that was not more zealously desired to be prevented by some, than
to be done by others: Notwithstanding all the imaginable Care taken to prevent
it, yet it was done about Ten Days ago, after daylight gone, at the Cross, and
blown up with Art, that seems to have been beyond their Invention, above four
Stories high. Two Days thereafter they went to the Parliament House, at
midday, passing by the Guards, crying, No Pope, No Papist: And being got into
the Parliament House, (after they had required the Guards to be present at the
Sentence) and having got upon the Bench, they Arraigned his Holiness before his
Judges, and gave the Jury their Commission, who brought him in Guilty;
whereupon, he was sentenced to be burnt publicly at the Cross the Twenty Fifth
of this Instant; and withal declared, and protested for a Free Parliament.

On Sunday last, Advertisement was given by a Papist, to a Gentlewoman, to
remove her self out of this City, and to carry out her Husband's Papers
forthwith, because that Night there should be here a hot Wakening, such as had
not been heretofore; and advised her to give the same Advice to any of her
Friends she pleased.

Your Friend Mr. M. being acquainted with this, he revealed the same to several
of our Magistrates, (which, as is alleged, was not regarded) he went
thereafter and acquainted the Guard of our Trained-Bands therewith; whereupon
Captain Patrick Iohnstone (Hilton's Brother) caused to beat the Drums, and the
Noise having gone abroad, and several Persons having ordered their Arms, and
People flocking together to consider what was fit to be done, the Magistrates,
with the Council, convened for the same purpose. A great many Boys met also,
and went through the whole Town, crying aloud, No Pope, No Papist, No Popish
Chancellor, No Melfort, No Father Peter's. But the Gates were shut, the
Magistrates went along the Streets for the keeping of the Peace; and nothing
more was done that Night, except the breaking of three or four Glass-Windows of
Papists Houses, and that some of the Boys got up to the Cross, and proclaimed a
Free-Parliament, and offered Two Thousand Pounds for Melford's Head; so that
Night past over, when all People here were in fear of some ill Designs, and the
rather, because of their certain knowledge that there were lying in the Suburbs,
a great many Hundreds of Highland-m^n, (or rather Thousands) and that all that
day the Abbey Gates were exactly kept by Soldiers, Commanded by Captain
Wallace a Papist, and none admitted to enter except Papists or Highland-men.

On Monday, about midday, the Chancellor parted thence and went toward the
Highlands, by Advice of several of the Privy Council and his Friends, and took
a good Guard with him. At Night the Students went (without Arms) to the Abbey,
to condemn the Pope, and to Proclaim a Free Parliament, and perhaps to burn
what was contained in the Chapel, but without asking Questions, were repulsed
by a shower of Ball, whereby several were wounded, and some since dead of their
Wounds; which coming to the Privy Councils Knowledge, (which was then sitting)
they called the Town Council (then also met) and Captain Grahame; desired them
to see to the preservance of the Peace, and sent Six Heralds with an Order to
Captain Wallace and his Men, to lay down their Arms, render themselves
Prisoners, and deliver their Guards to the Magistrates, but they were answered
by Ball; which being reported to the Privy Council, they forthwith ordered
Captain Grahame and his Company, Trained-Bands and Militia, to fall upon them,
which they did; Wallace and his Men fled, several of them were taken, and some
wounded, as were some of Captain Grahame's Men. The Rabble were so incensed
upon the firing, and supposition that it was Boys were killed, that they burnt
all that was contained in the Chapel, the Jesuits College, the Popish
Printing House, the Abbey Church, the Chancellor's Lodgings; and generally, all
that was contained in the Houses of Papists, in the Town and Cannon-gate,
excepting what was taken away by some People who designed Plunder.

They had Fires in the Abbey-Court, and at the Cross, all the Night, and spared
nothing they got in Papists Houses. Some few Houses were spared at the
intercession of some Protestants their Friends, and after true enquiry, I heard
the Loss is called greater than it is. None of the Papists themselves were
killed or wounded; they met with few of them, those they got they carried into
the Guard.

In some of the Popish Houses, they found Arms and Barrels of Powder, which
provoked to a more narrow search. All this time the Castle never fired one Gun,
which is more attributed to the Duke of Gordon, than to any other inferior
Officer. I am told, the Council sent and discharged an Execution from the
Castle. Some of the Boys are dead of their Wounds. Traquair (a Popish Lord) and
several others went to, and continue in the Castle for their security. The
Council ordered the searching for Ammunition and Arms in some Popish Houses in
the Country, and this day committed a Warrant for the restoring of what was
plundered out of the Papists Houses.

I had forgot to tell you, that on Monday last the Privy Council disbanded Six
Hundred Men, taken on the Friday before, and commanded all the Highlanders
forthwith to depart upon pain of Death; and yesterday ordered all Gentlemen to
depart out of the Town, excepting such as should give account of their Business
to some of the Privy Council. I am credibly informed, that this day in the
Privy Council, was voted an Address to be made to his Majesty for a Free
Parliament; there are several Noblemen and Gentlemen gone from hence into
England, and more to follow, but it is suspected they are going to the Prince of
Orange.

Edinburgh, December. 20.
WHen the Chancellor went away privately from the Abbey for Castle Drummond, he
gave strict Command to Captain Wallace to preserve the Chapel, etc. The Rabble
having gathered and procured Links, without any Firearms, about Six at Night
went to the Abbey, and were denied access; whereupon, some pressing forward,
Wallace commanded his Soldiers to fire, which they did, and killed and wounded
about Twenty, whereof one half died shortly after. The Rabble retired to the
City with a great Noise, toward the Entry to the Court of the
Parliament House, where some of the Lords of the Privy Council were sitting.
There some West-Country Gentlemen encouraged them to prosecute a Revenge, and
got the Provost of the City to go to the House of Lords, and told them, if they
would not give a Warrant to assault Wallace, and force him from the Abbey, they
would do it without it. The Lords being alarmed with the Slaughter, and a
Report that several Gentlemen's Sons were killed, and some of their own; they
ordered a Herald at Arms, with sound of Trumpet, to command Wallace in the
King's Name to give up his Guard at the Abbey to the City: And the Company
under the Cities Pay marched first, commanded by Captain Grahame, and after
them all the Train'd-Bands and Militia, to force him in case of refusal;
several Gentlemen accompanying Grahame, and the Magistrates attending, Wallace
refused the Herald, and fired upon Grahame, and the rest behind, wounded some
Gentlemen and a few Soldiers: But Grahame marched quickly down a Lane on the
South Side of the Porch of the Abbey-Court where Wallace was posted, and by a
back way entered the Court, came upon Wallace's Rear, and the Town Companies
fronting him; after the first Fire he and all his Men fled, only a few of them
were taken, the most part escaping under the Darkness of the Night. The City
being thus Master of the Abbey, the Rabble immediately, without opposition,
went first to the Chapel, forced the Doors, broke all to pieces, and carried
several parcels in Triumph up to the Cross, and burnt them there.

The next day strong Guards were set through the whole City and Suburbs, in
convenient places, to repress any farther Tumults; and so all was quiet, and
continues so.

This Morning there was coming into Leith a Boat from Burnt-Island, with eighty
Men aboard, being a part of two or three hundred which had been sent for by the
Duke of Gordon from the North to reinforce the Castle, and the rest to follow.
But the Bailiff of Leith having notice beforehand of their coming, sent on
Board and discharged their coming into the Harbor, and desired to speak with
their Commander, who came ashore, and owned the Design, being believed to be
all Papists: He was seized, and the Men commanded back to the other Shore,
under the highest Pains.

The Lords of the Treasury have called in all Commissions given to Papists, for
collecting His Majesty's Revenue.

Edinburgh, December. 22.
THE Chancellor thinking, as Affairs stood, he was not secure at home, resolved
for France; and with all the Privacy imaginable, he in Woman's and his Lady in
Man's Clothes, got aboard a Vessel bound from this Firth the 20 th instant,
being Thursday; which set Sail, the Wind being fair: But a certain Person on
Horseback, riding by Kircaldie, where the Seamen use to walk, called to them
and told them, there was a good Prize in that Ship under Sail, namely, the
Chancellor of Scotland. Whereupon, about thirty six common Seamen, commanded
by one Wilson, that had been a Bucaneer in America, which had Guns or Muskets,
managed a light Boat, and without any Provision save a little Brandy, or any
Order from a Magistrate, set Sail immediately, and came up with the Ship that
Night, boarded her, inquired for the Chancellor, whom they denied to be aboard;
but after search, found him and his Lady clothed as aforesaid, brought the
Ship back, and carried the Prisoners, with Mr. Nicolson (a Priest, late Regent
in the College of Glasgow) ashore to Kircaldie Talbooth (or Prison.) The
Chancellor wrote Letters yesterday to several of the Privy Council, complaining
of the Injury done him. The Council have ordered him to be carried by the Earl
of Mar, and a Company of the Militia, to Sterling-Castle.

The Duke of Gordon has been desired by the Council to lay down his Charge of
Governor of the Castle, but he still declines it; alleging, that seeing he
has his Commission immediately from the King, and to be accountable to none
else, he cannot in Honor lay it down till he has His Majesty's Command for it,
and says he had sent a Gentleman expressly to know His Majesty's Pleasure upon
that point fourteen days ago, and expects his return every day: And in the mean
time, has assured the Council by Letters, and this day the Provost and
Magistrates of the City, whom he sent for to speak with, that he will upon his
Word and Honor be a good Neighbor, and not do them or the City any Prejudice.

Two days ago his Captain put an Oath to the Soldiers, whereby they bound
themselves to be faithful to His Majesty, and their Superior Officers, and to
defend the Protestant Religion, which being refused by twenty or thirty,
whereof five were Papists, they were turned out.

There was a Pink arrived at Leith on Thursday, sent by His Majesty. The
Searchers seized two Boxes in it directed to the Chancellor, etc. and being
brought to the Council, there were found in them several Precepts upon the
Treasury for payment of certain Sums to Papists, and some Commissions; in
particular, a Commission to one Peter Winste (a Papist) to be Major of the
Gates of the Castle, and have Power of all the Keys, without being accountable
to the Lieutenant (who is a Protestant) but only to the Duke, and his Deputy,
who is a Papist too.

Edinburgh, December. 25.
THis Day the Students burnt the Pope solemnly at the Cross before Thousands of
Spectators; our Privy Counselors and Magistrates were Spectators, and no
Inconveniences followed. The Students were divided according to their Classes,
(that is, their Years of standing) each Class with its Captain. They advanced
orderly, with Swords in their Hands, and Hoitboys before them; the College Mace
was carried before them by the under-Janitor in his Gown, and bare.

We have many Reports here of the Landing of Irish-men, but false; the whole
Country is in Arms, and Apprehends the Papists; and at Dumfriese they have
taken and imprisoned the Provost, with some other Papists and Priests, and
guard their Town with Six Companies a-night; and have planted Cannon (taken
from their Ships) at the Cross and Ports, and recovered their Ammunition which
was sent to Carlavorock Castle.

Edinburgh, December. 27.
OUR Council has sent an Address to the Prince of Orange, at least it may go
hence on Saturday next. At Glasgow the Prince of Orange was Proclaimed the
Protestant Protector. The whole Country is up for the Prince, or at least under
pretense for their Safety against Papists; but there is no fear of them in this
Kingdom, unless it be in Nithisdale and Galloway; and I think neither there:
However, there were some long Knives, or Bagonets, of a strange shape, taken at
Kirkudbright.

His HIGHNESS the PRINCE of ORANGE his SPEECH to the Scots Lords and Gentlemen.
With their Advice, and his Highness's Answer. With a True Account of what
past at their Meeting in the Council Chamger at Whitehal, January 7. 1688/9.
His Highness the PRINCE of Orange having caused Advertise such of the Scots
Lords and Gentlemen as were in Town, met them in a Room at St. James's, upon
Monday the Seventh of January, at Three of the Clock in the Afternoon, and had
this Speech to them.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE only Reason that induced me to undergo so Great an Undertaking, was, That
I saw the Laws and Liberties of these Kingdoms overturned, and the Protestant
Religion in Eminent Danger: And seeing you are here so many Noblemen and
Gentlemen, I have called you together, that I may have your Advice, what is to
be done for Securing the Protestant Religion, and Restoring your Laws and
Liberties, according to my Declaration.

As soon as his Highness had retired, the Lords and Gentlemen went to the
Council Chamger at Whitehall; and having chosen the Duke of Hamilton their
President, they fell a consulting, what Advice was fit to be given to his
Highness in this Conjuncture: And after some Hours Reasoning, they agreed upon
the Materials of it, and appointed the Clerks, with such as were to assist
them, to draw up in writing, what the Meeting thought exp^dient, to advise his
Highness, and to bring it in to the Meeting the next in the Afternoon.

Tuesday, the Eighth Instant, the Writing was presented in the Meeting: And
some time being spent in Reasoning about the fittest way of Coveening a General
Meeting of the Estates of Scotland. At last the Meeting came to agree in their
Opinion, and appointed the Advice to be writ clean over, according to the
Amendments. But as they were about to part for that Diet, the Earl of Arran
proposed to them, as his Lordship's Advice, that they should move the Prince of
Orange, to desire the King to return and call a Free-Parliament, which would
the best way to Secure the Protestant Religion and Property, and to Heal all
Breaches. This Proposal seemed to dissatisfy the whole Meeting, and the Duke of
Hamilton their President, Father to the Earl, but they presently parted.

Wednesday, the Ninth of January, they met at three of the Clock in the same
Room, and Sir Patrick Hume took notice of ^he Proposal made by the Earl of
Arran, and desired to know if there was any there that would second it: But
none appearing to do it; he said, That what the Earl had proposed, was
evidently opposite and inimicous to his Highness the Prince of Orange's
Undertaking, his Declaration, and the Good Intentions of preserving the
Protestant Religion, and of Restoring their Laws and Liberties expressed in it;
and further, desired that the Meeting should declare this to be their Opinion
of it. The Lord Cardross seconded Sir Patrick's Motion: it was answered by the
Duke of Hamilton, President of the Meeting, That their Business was to prepare
an Advice to be offered to the Prince; and the Advice being now ready to go to
the Vote, there was no need that the Meeting should give their Sense of the
Earl's Proposal, which neither before nor after Sir Patrick's Motion, any had
pretended to own or second; so that it was fallen and out of doors; and that
the Vote of the Meeting, upon the Advice brought in by their Order, would
sufficiently declare their Opinion: This being seconded by the Earl of
Sutherland, the Lord Cardross, and Sir Patrick did acquiesce in it; and the
Meeting voted una^imously the Advice following.

To His HIGHNESS the PRINCE of ORANGE.
WE the Lords and Gentlemen of the Kingdom of Scotland, Assembled at your
Highness's desire, in this Extraordinary Conjunction, do give your Highness our
humble and hearty Thanks for your Pious and Generous Undertaking, for
Preserving of the Protestant Religion, and Restoring the Laws and Liberties of
these Kingdoms.

In order to the Attaining these Ends, our humble Advice and Desire is, That
your Highness take upon You the Administration of all Affairs, both Civil and
Military; the Disposal of the Public Revenues and Fortresses of the Kingdom of
Scotland, and the doing every Thing that is necessary for the Preservation of
the Peace of the Kingdom, until a General Meeting of the States of the Nation,
which we humbly desire your Highness to Call, to be holden at Edinburgh the
Fourteenth day of March next; by your Letters or Proclamation, to be published
at the Market-Crosses of Edinburgh, and other Head-Boroughs of the several
Shires and Stewartries, as sufficient Intimation to All concerned, and
according to the Custom of the Kingdom: And that the Publication of these your
Letters or Proclamation, be by the Sheriffs, or Stewart Clerks, for the
Freeholders, who have the value of Lands, holden according to Law, for making
Elections; and by the Town-Clerks of the several Buroughs, for the meeting of
the whole Burgesses of the respective Royal Buroughs, to make their Elections
at least Fifteen Days before the Meeting of the Estates at Edinburgh; and the
Respective Clerks to make Intimation thereof, at least Ten Days before the
Meetings for Elections: And that the whole Electors and Members of the said
Meeting at Edinburgh, qualified as above expressed, be Protestants, without any
other Exception or Limitation whatsoever; to Deliberate and Resolve what is to
be done for securing the Protestant Religion, and Restoring the Laws and
Liberties of the Kingdom, according to Your Highness's Declaration. Dated at
the Council Chamger in Whitehal the Tenth Day of January, 1689.

This Address being Subscribed by 30 Lords, and about 80 Gentlemen, was
presented in their presence at St. James 's, by the Duke of Hamilton their
President, to his Highness the Prince of Orange, who thanked them for the Trust
they reposed in him, and desired a Time to consider upon so weighty an Affair.

Upon the Fourteenth of January, his Highness the Prince of Orange* met again
with the Scots Lords and Gentlemen at St. James 's; And spoke to them as
follows.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
IN persuance of your Advice, I will, until the Meeting of the States in March
next, give such Orders concerning the Affairs of Scotland, as are necessary for
the Calling of the said Meeting, for the Preserving of the Peace; the applying
of the Public Revenue to the most pressing Uses, and putting the Fortresses in
the Hands of Persons, in whom the Nation can have a just Confidence: And I do
further assure you; That you will always find me ready to concur with you in
every Thing that may be found necessary for Securing the Protestant Religion,
and Restoring the Laws and Liberties of the Nation.

The Earl of Crawfourd desired of his Highness, That himself, the Earl of
Louthian, and others, come to Town since the Address was presented, might have
an opportunity to subscribe it; which was accordingly done: His Highness
retire^, and all showed great Satisfaction with his Answer.

A LETTER to a Friend, advising in this Extraordinary Iuncture, how to free the
Nation from SLAVERY for ever.
SIR,
I Doubt not but the Wisdom of the Nation will take the most effectual way to
secure our Religion, our Liberties and Property. However, being a Lover of all
these, I cannot forbear communicating my Thoughts unto you with an assurance
you will consider them.

God has done great things for us, and yet the greatest thing is not yet done;
there are many Difficulties in the way, and many more will be thrown into it.
Slavery is most to be dreaded at this time: What is done must be chiefly to
guard against it. How to do it, is the principal business of the Great Men in
the next Convention. To know where we are, is the first step to be taken. Is
the Government dissolved, or only under some Disorders? If the latter; Are the
Disorders such as must be laid to the Charge of the King, or to his Ministers,
or both? If to the King; Are they sufficient to depose him? If that be done,
Are we more secure from Slavery than now? Will there be more than a Change of
Persons in the Throne? A Child for a Father, a Protestant for a Papist? And in
a few Years the Succession may fall to the Queen of Spain, or Duchess of
Savoy, both Roman Catholics, and we in as great, or greater danger of Popery
and Slavery than we were the other day; the Constitution remains the same, the
Iura Majestatis, viz. the Militia; the Power to make War or Peace; the choosing
Judges, Sheriffs, etc. still in the Person of the King; or if only by one
Parliament restored to the People, another Parliament may give them the King
again. Leges Posteriores priores abrogant. And who can tell what Contests there
may be about the Right of the Crown. The Deposed Prince is alive, and his Right
by Sword will be disputed, etc.

If the Government be dissolved, the Power devolves on the People; no one can
claim the Crown; the Royal Family is as it were extinct; the People may set up
what Government they please, either the old, or a new; A Monarchy absolute, or
limited; or an Aristocracy or Democracy. If a Monarchy limited, supposing it
mostly suited to the temper of the English, they may choose what Family they
please to sit in the Throne: They may settle it on the Princess of Orange,
Princess Ann, the Prince of Orange, and for want of Issue, on whom else they
think meet. These hold not by virtue of an old Right, but by reason of the
People's placing it upon them, and the Monarchy may be thus, de Novo, made
Hereditary, and the King and Prince of Wales gone, having lost their Right by
the Dissolution of the Government. The Iura Majestatis, the Militia, the Power
of War and Peace, or the Power of the Sword, with the Power of making Judges,
Sheriffs, etc. may be lodged where now the Power of Legislation is, viz. in
King, Lords, and Commons, which will necessitate frequent Parliaments, and make
it impossible for the Monarch to enslave us. There are but two ways by which
Slavery can be brought on us, viz. Force or Injustice. The Militia, or Power of
the Sword, being in the People, we are secured from the mischief of Force. The
Power of making Judges and all the Ministers of Justice being also in the
People, they cannot be ruined by Injustice.

But we must do no Evil that Good may come of it. Is our Government dissolved,
or is it not? If there be a Dissolution, Is it of the Constitution, or only of
the Form of Administration? I confess my self not Statesman enough to be
acquainted with the Fineness of the Politics, but am apt to run the old Road,
and please my self with an old Distinction, All Power is Originally, or
Fundamentally in the People, Formally in the Parliament, which is one
Corporation made up of three Constituent Essentiating Parts, King, Lords and
Commons, so it was with us in England. When this Corporation is broken, when
any one Essentiating Part is lost or gone, there is a Dissolution of the
Corporation. The Formal Seat of Power, and that Power devolves on the People.
When it is impossible to have a Parliament, the Power returns to them with whom
it was originally. Is it possible to have a Parliament? It Is not possible. The
Government therefore is dissolved.

If what is essential to our Constitution be invaded or ravished from us, the
Constitution is broken. I will instance in two things essential to the
Constitution. That the People choose their own Representatives. And that their
Representatives have such an Interest in the Legislation, that no Laws be made
or abrogated without their Consent. The destroying one or both of these,
subverts the Foundation of our Government.

The Government being dissolved, what must the People do? C^re must be taken
that the Government to be erected by such as will perfectly secure us from
Slavery; and be a Fence inviolable to the Liberty and Property of the People:
And the Rights of Majesty must be therefore lodged with the Parliament; this
will be grateful to the People. The way of doing it must be Great, Awful, and
August, that none may be able to quarrel it. A National Convention made up of
the Representatives of the Community: That the Convention may be truly
National, and represent the Community, it must be larger than a House of
Commons ordinarily is. It Is this Convention that sets up what kind of
Government they please. If they will have a Parliament made up of King, Lords and
Commons, it is sufficient that this Convention is so pleased. The Power of this
Convention must be absolute and uncontrollable, accountable to none but God. It
gives Laws to Kings, yea to the whole Parliament, and sets bounds unto it; it
shall go so far, and no further. No Act of Parliament can be strong enough to
move the Foundation laid by this Convention. The Convention therefore, as it
has more Power than a Parliament, and is it is Creator, it must have a larger
Body. What think you therefore if the first thing done by the approaching
Convention be the increasing their Number. What if they double it? Whether by
ordering every Market Town to send up their Representatives, or every Hundred,
Wapentake, etc. or by some other way; according to the proportion of People,
and public Payments, as the wise Men of this Convention shall judge most
practicable, that it may be the Grand Council of the Nation. I have unburdened
my self, and am

Your Humble Servant.
Ian. 5. 1688.
Some Account of the Humble Application of the Pious and Noble Prelate, Henry
Lord Bishop of London, with the Reverend Clergy of the City, and some of the
Dissenting Ministers in it, To the Illustrious Prince William Henry, the Prince
of Orange, on Friday, September 21. 1688.
HE declared in Excellent Words, That they came to pay him their Humble Duties
and most Grateful Respects for his very great and most hazardous Undertakings
for their Deliverance, and the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, with
the Ancient Laws and Liberties of this Nation.

He adds, That they gave up daily many Thanksgivings to Almighty God, who had
hitherto been graciously pleased so wonderfully to preserve his Person, and
prospe^ and favor his good Design. And they promised the continuance of their
ferventest Prayers to the same God, and all Concurrent Endeavors in their
Circumstances, for the promoting yet further that Work which was so happily
begun, and also for the perfecting of it, not only in this Kingdom, but in
other Christian Kingdoms.

He likewise suggested to the Good Prince, That some of the Dissenting
Ministers, and their Brethren, were there present, who having the same sense of
his Coming hither, with themselves, had joined themselves with them by him, to
render Him their Humblest and most Grateful Resentments.

His Highness was pleased to declare, That he thanked them for their
Attendance, and acquainted them very briefly with the chiefest Ends of his
Difficult and Chargeable Expedition: That indeed it was to Preserve and Secure
the Protestant Religion (his own Religion and their Religion) and assuring them
he should not think any thing (not Life it self) too dear to hazard in
promoting and perfecting so good a Work. Also he offered up (with great
Devotion) his solemnest Acknowledgments to Almighty God for his Presence with
him, and Blessing upon his Endeavors and Arms hitherto; and asked the
Continuance of all their Prayers to God for him. --

The Address of the Nonconformist Ministers (in and about the City of London)
to his Highness the Prince of ORANGE.
WEdnesday, January 2^^ diverse of the Dissenting Ministers in and about London,
that go under the Denominations of Presbyterial and Congregational, to the
Number of Ninety, or upwards, attended his Highness the Prince of Orange at St.
James's, being introduced by the Earl of Devonshire, the Lord Wharton, and the
Lord Wiltshire. Their Sense was represented by one of those Ministers to this
effect, viz.

That they professed their grateful Sense of his Highness's Hazardous and
Heroical Expectition, which the Favor of Heaven had made so surprizingly
prosperous, etc.

That they esteemed it a common Felicity, that the worthy Patriots of the
Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom, had unanimously conc^rred unto his
Highness's Design, by whose most prudent Advice, the Administration of Public
Affairs was devolved in this difficult Conjuncture, into Hands which the Nation
and World knew to be Apt for the greatest Undertakings, and so suitable to the
present Exigency of our Case.

That they promised the utmost Endeavor, which in their Stations they are
capable of affording, for the promoting the excellent and most desirable Ends,
for which his Highness had declared*

That they added their continual fervent Prayers to the Almighty, for the
Preservation of his Highness's Person, and the Success of his future Endeavors
for the Defense and Propagation of the Protestant Interest throughout the
Christian World.

That they should all most willingly have chosen, That for the Season of paying
this Duty to his Highness, when the Lord Bishop, and the Clergy of London
attended his Highness for the like purpose, (which some of them did, and which
his Lordship was pleased condescendingly to make mention of to his Highness)
had their notice of that intended Application been so early, as to make their
more general Attendance possible to them at that time.

That therefore tho they did now appear in a distinct Company, they did it not
on a distinct Account* but on that only which is common to them and to all
Protestants.

That tho there were some of Eminent Note, whom Age or present Infirmities
hindered from coming with them, yet they concurred in the same grateful Sense of
our common Deliverance.

His Highness was pleased very favorably to receive this Application, and to
assure them, That he came purposely for the Defense of the Protestant Religion;
and that it was his own Religion, wherein he was Born and Bred, the Religion of
his Country, and of his Ancestors; That he was resolved by the Grace of God
always to adhere to it, and to do his utmost Endeavors for the Defense of it,
and the promoting a firm Union among all Protestants.

The Speech of the Recorder of Bristol to his Highness the Prince of Orange,
Monday, January the 7 th, 1688. The Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and Commons of
the Principal Citizens of the City of Bristol, waited upon the Prince of
Orange, being introduced by his Grace the Duke of Ormond, their High-Steward,
and the Earl of Shrewsbury: Where the Recorder spoke to this Effect:
May it please your Highness,
THE Restitution of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, and the Freeing us from
that Thraldom which has rendered us for many Years useless, and at last
dangerous to the Common Interest of the Protestant World, by your Highness's
singular Wisdom, Courage, and Conduct, are not only a Stupendous Evidence of
the Divine Favor and Providence for our Preservation; but will be, and ought
to be an Everlasting Monument of your Highness's Magnanimity, and other the
Heroic Virtues which Adorn your Great Soul, by whom such a Revolution is
wrought in this Nation, as is become the Joy and Comfort of the Present, and
will be the Wonder of all Succeeding Ages,

In the Contrivance and Preparation of which Great Work, your Highness (like
the Heavens) did shed your propitious Influences upon us, whilst we slept, and
had scarce any prospect from whence we might expect our Redemption.

But as since your happy Arrival in England, we did amongst the first,
Associate our selves to assist and promote your Highness's most Glorious
Design, with our Lives and Fortunes; so we now think our selves bound in the
highest Obligation of Gratitude, most humbly to present to your Highness our
humble and hearty Thanks, for this our Deliverance from Popery, and Arbitrary
Power; and likewise, for declaring your Gracious Intentions, That by the Advice
of the Estates of this Kingdom, you will Rectify the late Disorders in the
Government, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, according to the known Laws. The due
and inviolable Observation of which, will in our poor Opinion, be the only
proper Means to render the Sovereign Secure, and both Sovereign and Subject
happy.

To which his Highness returned a most Gracious Answer.
A Word to the Wise, for Settling the Government.
IT is an Universal Truth, That no Nation can subsist without some Government;
and the Wisdom of this Nation has framed their Government, to consist in a
King, the Lords, and the Commons.

In these three Conjunct, wholly resides the Power of making and altering Laws,
for the Common Good of the whole; and i^ called the Legislative Power.

The King alone is entrusted with the due Execution of these Laws, for the
Preservation, Protection, and Comfort of the People, both in Church and State;
and this Trust and Power is called the R^gal Power.

If then this Nation, being Protestant, and under Protestant Laws, have a King,
who shall declare h^mself a Zealous Roman Catholic, and put himself under the
Power and Conduct of the Papal Jurisdiction, admitting the Pope's Supremacy,
Nuntio, Bishops, Appeals, etc. And to his power endeavor to Establish the
Popish Religion in the Realm*

Quest I. Whether such a King has not thereby made himself Incompetent, and
incapable to Govern a Protestant Church, and a Protestant People, by their
Protestant Laws? and notoriously Abdicated or Renounced the Government?

II. If a King, entrusted with the Regal Power, ut supra* shall Subvert the
Fundamental Laws; Dispense with Statutes; Destroy Colleges and Corporations;
Erect High and Illegal Courts; Invade the Peoples Freeholds, and Free Elections
to Parliament; put the Ports and Power of the Nation into Enemies hands;
Protect and Promote Traitors; and turn the Protective Power of the Nation to
the Ruin and Destruction of the People, their Laws and Religion: Whether by so
doing, such a King does not, in Fact, declare, That he will not Rule the
Kingdom by its Laws and Constitutions, but by his own Absolute Will and
Pleasure?

III. If a King so entrusted with the Regal Power, ut supra, shall, and do
voluntarily depart the Realm, with the Signals of Government, without any
provision for the Public Administration, and so deserting both the People,
Place and Power; Whether such a King has not Divested himself of that Trust
and Regal Power?

IV. If so, and the Lawyers Rule be true, ( Quod non est haeres Viventis) Then
whether this Regal Power be Descended, so long as the King is Living?

V. If the Regal Power be Fallen, and yet not Descended; whether of necessity
it must not fall to its Center, or Root from whence it Sprang, which is the
whole Nation, now consisting in Lords and Commons, as it must have fallen, if
the King had died without Heir?

VI. If the Regality then be not Descended, but thus Lapsed to the People, and
that this most Excellent Government, is therein become Defective; whether it be
not of necessity, that this defect be supplied by a speedy Constituting some
Person to that Office, Power, and Trust, to complete the Government?

VII. If that be so; Then what Person, in this present Juncture of Affairs, is
most proper to be therewith Invested? Whethe^ one, who at the Nations charge,
at all Times, and upon all Occasi^ns, and to the utmost Extremities, has given
undeniable Evidence to the World, of his constant Resolution and endeavors to
Subvert the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of his People; Or one, who at his own
Charge, and at the peril of his own Honor, Life, and Fortune, has Rescued and
Delivered the Nation from that deplo^able Condition and Danger; and whose
Wisdom, Virtue, Courage, and Conduct, is an Honor to the Age, the Joy of all
good Men, and the Fear of Bad, both here and abroad, and who must adorn that
People, over whom he shall preside?

VIII. If then the Crown be thus fallen, and must be placed de novo; Whether it
was ever more necessary than now, to settle and limit the Succession thereof
(as it has been often done) by Parliament; in regard there are but Three
Persons of the Protestant Religion an^ o^ the Royal Blood viz. his Highness,
and the Two Princesses* not much different in Age, beyond whom the Descendants
are many, and all Roman Catholics?

IX. Whether then it may not be advisable it be limited to the Prince for
Life; the Remainder to his Princess, and the Heirs of her Body; the Remainder
to the Princess Ann, and the Heirs of her Body; the Remainder to the Prince,
and the Heirs of his Body: In Default of such Issue, to such Person and
Persons, as the Lords and Commons, then last sitting in Parliament, shall
Declare and Appoint?

X. Whether such Limitation will not avoid all Questions which may at present,
or hereafter arise, touching the Title of the Crown, either near, or remote,
and settle and preserve the Peace of the Nation for ever?

XI. Whether so doing will not prevent any scruple her Highness may have, of
accepting the Crown in her Father's Lifetime, as did ar^se in the Son of King
Edward the Second?

XII. Whether thereby the Nation will not in some measure express its Duty and
Gratitude to his Highness, who (under God) has ^redeemed and Delivered it from
Popery and Slavery, and raised his own Merit above the level of a Subject?

XIII. Whether this Great Prince, whom God has advanced for the Conduct and
Safety of the Protestant World, will not be the steer to accomplish those
Glorious Ends?

XIV. Whether the Two Royal Daughters, cons^dering such his Highness's securing
their Right and Succession to the Crown of these Realms, against all Popish
Endeavors to hinder the same, will not see just Cause to promote the
Limitations aforesaid?

XV. And lastly, Whether the Wisdom and Interest of the Nation does not oblige
all good Men to concur with his Highness, and his most Noble Declaration, and
Gracious Designs, To Establish their Religion, their Liberties and Properties,
beyond all Humane Power of Violation, or Subversion for the Time to come?

A Modest PROPOSAL to the present CONVENTION.
THE thing that ofiers it self in this great Conjuncture is, to have a Grand
Committee of Lords and Commons (Forty at least from each House) to be as a
Privy Council, or Council of State, or Governing Senate.

It were to be wished, that Twenty of each Forty might be for Life; and the
other Twenty Biennial, Ten going off every Year. Or half might be changed
Annually.

Each Senator or Counselor to have for his Salary or Maintenance, a Thousand
Pounds a Year. This would be such an Advancement to the Nobility and Gentry, as
England never saw. And the Charge is a Trifle. There is more sp^nt in some
Monarchies, upon Hawks, Hounds, and Whores.

The Prince to preside in this Council or Senate (or such Person as he shall
appoint in his stead) and to have Ten Votes at least. He must also be General
and Admiral; and must have such further Powers, and such a Maintenance or
Revenue, as his Great Merits require. But withal, such as are consistent with
the Government he designs for us. The Prince's Maintenance should equal, or
exceed, that of all the Senators put together.

All that are of this Council, and all that hope to be, (that is, all the
Considerable Men of the Nation) will by this means be firm to the Prince. And
so will those others who have the great Privilege of Choosing them, whereby
they may have Confidence in their Administration. And this one thing will give
the Prince so strong an Interest, that he needs fear no Pretension that can be
against him. It will be better than a Standing Army: The necessity whereof
nothing can prevent, but such a Standing Council.

The Parliament to be Chosen Triermially, and to meet Annually.

It is believed that such a Constitution as this, would effectually Secure us
(according to the Princes good Intentions) from Popery and Tyranny. And the
Prince will be the glorious Author of the Britannick Liberty, as his Great
Grandfather was of the Belgic. The Genoeses to this day adore the Memory of
Andrew Doria, who chose rather to make them a Free State, than to be their
Prince. Barely to change our Master, would but revive the Feuds of York and
Lancaster, and involve us in the like Calamities.

These things to continue but during the Life of the King, and not to prejudice
a Protestant Successor.

A Short Historical Account touching the Succession of the CROWN.
IN the Heptarchy, there was no sixth Hereditary Right; one King tripping up the
Heels of another, as he had Power, till one got all.

Afterward no sixth Hereditary Right; for Althestan, the Great King, was a
Bastard; and so were several others; why by then Courage and Policy got the
Crown; so that a Law was made, under the Saxon Monarchy, de Ordinatione Regnam,
that directed the Election of Kings, prohibiting Bastards to be Elected.

Edward the Confessor was not King, Iure Haereditario.

William the First (called the Conqueror) had no Right, bu^ from the Peoples
Election.

William Ruffus was Elected against the Right of his Elder B^oth^^.

Henry the First came in by the same way.

King Stephen was Elected, a Clero and Populo, and Confirme^ by the Popo.

Henry the Second came in by Consent, yet he had no Hereditary Right, for his
Mother was living.

Richard the First was charged before God and Men by the Archbishop, upon his
Coronation, that he should not presume to take the Crown, unless he resolved
faithfully to observe the Laws.

King John, his Brother, because his Elder Brother's Son was a Foreigner, was
Elected a Clero and Populo, and being Divorced from his Wife, by his new Queen
he had Henry the Third.

Henry the Third was Confirmed, and Settled in the Kingdom, by the General
Election of the People; and in his Lifetime, the Nation was Sworn to the
Succession of Edward the First, before he went to the Holy Land.

Edward the First being out of England, by the Consent of Lords and Commons,
was declared King.

Edward the Second being misled, and relying too much upon his Favorites, was
Deposed, and his Son was declared King in his Lifetime.

Richard the Second, for his evil Government, had the Fate of the Second Edward.

Henry the Fourth came in by Election of the People, to whom Succeeded Henry
the Fifth, and Henry the Sixth, in whose time Richard Duke of York claimed the
Crown; and an Act of Parliament was made, that Henry the Sixth should enjoy the
Crown for his Life, and the said Duke after him; after which, King Henry raises
an Army, by Assistance of the Queen and Prince; and at Wakefield, in Battle,
kills the Duke; for which, 1 Ed. 4. they were all, by Act of Parliament,
Attainted of Treason; and one principal Reason thereof, was, for that the Duke
being declared Heir to the Crown after Henry, by Act of Parliament, they had
killed him.

Edward the Fourth enters the Stage, and leaves Ed. 5. to Succeed, to whom
Succeeds Richard the Third, Confirmed King by Act of Parliament, upon Two
Reasons: First, That by reason of a Precontract of Edward the Fourth, Edward
the Fifth, his Eldest Son, and all his other Children were Bastards. Secondly,
For that the Son of the Duke of Clarence, second Brother to Edward the Fourth,
had no Right, because the Duke was Attainted of Treason, by a Parliament of Ed.
the 4 th.

Henry the Seventh comes in, but had no Title; First, Because Edward the
Fourth's Daughter was then living: Secondly, His own Mother, the Countess of
Richmond, was then living.

After him, Henry the Eighth wore the Crown, who could have no Title by the
Father; in his time the Succession of the Crown was Limited several times, and
the whole Nation Sworn to the Observance.

Sir Thomas Moor declared, That the Parliament had a Power to bind the
Succession, which was declared to be Law, by 13 Eliz. cap. 1. and made a
Praemunire to hold the contrary.

Edward the Sixth succeeded, but his Mother was married to King Henry, while
Ann of Cleve, his Wife, was living.

Queen Mary was declared a Bastard; and by Virtue of an Act of Parliament of
Henry the Eighth, she Succeeded; which Act being Repealed in the First of her
Reign, and the Crown being Limited otherwise by Parliament, all the
Limitations of the Crown in King Henry the Eighth's Reign were avoided; so that

Queen Elizabeth, who was declared a Bastard, by Act of Parliament in Henry the
Eighth's time, and limited to Succeed, in another Act in his time, and that
Act repealed by Queen Mary, became Queen in the force of her own Act of
Parliament, which declares her Lawful Queen.

The Crown was Entailed in Richard the Second's time; again, in the time of
Henry the Fourth; again, in the time of Henry the Sixth; again, in the time of
Edward the Fourth; again, in the time of Richard the Third; again, in the time
of Henry the Seventh; Thrice in the time of Henry the Eighth.

And upon the Marriage of Queen Mary to King Philip of Spain, both the Crowns
of England and Spain were Entailed; whereby it was provided, that of the
several Children to be Begotten upon the Queen, one was to have the Crown of
England, another Spain, another the Low Countries; the Articles of Marriage to
this purpose, were Confirmed by Act of Parliament, and the Pope's Bull.

So that it was agreed by the States of both Kingdoms, and the Low Countries,
and therefore, probably, the Universal Opinion of the Great Men of that Age,
That Kings and Sovereign Princes, with the Consent of their States, had a Power
to Alter and Bind the Succession of the Crown; and never denied to be Law till
the Reign of King Charles the Second.

True it is, that this Doctrine does not go down well with those that do
pretend to Prerogative, 1 Iac. 1. cap. 1.
added (as they say) by the Act of Recognition made to King James; and the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, which do make so much talk conce^ning
Inheritance and Heirs: But let these Gentlemen consider, that the Act of
Recognition made no Law for the future; nor does the same cross the Statute of
13 Eliz. nor does it take away the power of the Parliament from overruling the
Course of the Common Law for after-Ages. Nor do the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy hold forth any such Obligation unto Hei^s, otherwise than as
supposing them to be Successors, and in that Relation only. And therefore, was
no such Allegiance due to Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, or Queen Elizabeth,
until they were actually possessed of the Crown, as may appear by the Oath forced
by the Statute of H. 8. touching their Succession. 35 H. 8. cap. 1.
Nor did the Law suppose any Treason could be acted against the Heirs of Ed. 6.
Queen Mary, 6 E. 6.11.1, 2, 3. Om. 10.
or Queen Eliz. until these Heirs were actually possessed of the Crown, and so
were Kings and Queens, as by the express words in the several Statutes do
appear. Nor did the Recognition, by the Parliament made to Queen Elizabeth, 1
El. 6.
declare any engagement to the People to assist, and defend Her and the Heirs
of Her Body, otherwise than with this Limitation, being Kings and Queens of
this Realm; as by the Statute in that behalf made does appear. 1 El. 3.
Moreover, had these Oaths been otherwise understood, the Crown had by virtue
of them been preingaged, so as it could never have Descended to Queen Mary,
Queen Elizabeth, or King James, but must have remained to the Heirs of Edward
the Sixth for ever.

A Narrative of the Miseries of New England, by reason of an Arbitrary
Government Erected there.
THat a Colony so considerable as New England is, should be discouraged, is not
for the Honor and Interest of the English Nation; in as much as the People
there are generally Sober, Industrious, Well-Disciplin'd, and apt for Martial
Affairs; so that he that is Sovereign of New England, may by means thereof
(when he pleases) be Emperor of America: Nevertheless, the whole English
Interest in that Territory has been of late in apparent danger of being lost
and ruined, and the Miseries of that People by an Arbitrary Government erected
amongst them, have been beyond Expression great.

The original of all which has been the Quo Warranto's issued out against their
Char^ers; by means whereof they have been deprived of their ancient Rights and
Privileges.

As for the Massachusetts Colony (whose Patent bears date from the Year 1628.)
There was in the Year 1683, a Quo Warranto; and after that in the Year 1684, a
Writ of Scire Facias against them, and they were required to make their
appearance at Westminster in October, which they knew nothing of till the month
before, so that it was impossible for them to answer at the time appointed; yet
Judgment was entered against them.

Plymouth Colony, after they had enjoyed their first Government above
threescore years, (without so much as a pre^ence of Misgovernment alleged) had
all their Privileges at once taken from them. There was a Quo Warranto against
Conecticot Colony (whose Charter was granted to them by King Charles the
Second) only Letters were sent to them in the King's Name, signifying, that (in
case they did resign their Charter) they should take their choice of being
under New York or Boston. Several of the Magistrates there returned a most
humble and supplicatory Answer, praying, That their former Government might
still continue; but that if it must be taken from them, they had rather be
under Boston than New York: This was by some at Court interpreted a Resignation
of their Charter, and a Commission sent to Sir Edmond Andross, who went with
some armed Attendants to Hartford (their principal Town) and declared their
Charter and former Government to be void. As for Road-Island, they submitted
themselves to His Majesty's pleasure.

Before these Changes happened, New England was of all the Foreign Plantations
(their Enemies themselves being Judges) the most flourishing and de^irable.

But their Charters being all (one way or other) declared to be void and
insignificant, it was an easy matter to erect a French Government in that part
of the King's Dominions, (no doubt intended by the Evil Counselors) as a
Specimen of what was designed to be here in England, as soon as the times would
bear it. Accordingly Sir Edmond Andross (a Gernsey-man) was pitched on as a fit
Instrument to be made use of; and a most Illegal Commission given him, bearing
date June 3, 1686, by which he, with four of his Council, (perhaps all of them
his absolute Devotees) are empowered to make Laws and raise Moneys on the Kings
Subjects without any Parliament, Assembly, or Consent of the People.

It was thought by Wise Men, that the Remembrance of Dudley and Empson, who
were in the days of King Henry the Eighth executed for acting by a like
Commission, would have deterred them from doing so; But it did not, for Laws
are made by a few of them, and indeed what they please: nor are they printed,
as was the Custom in the former Governments, so that the People are at a great
loss to know what is Law, and what not. Only one Law they are sensible of,
which does prohibit all Town-Meetings, excepting on a certain Day once a Year;
whereas the Inhabitants have occasion to meet once a Month, sometimes every
Week, for relief of the Poor, or other Town-Affairs. But it is easy to
penetrate into the Design of this Law, which was (no Question) to keep them in
every Town from complaining to England, of the Oppression they are under: And
(as Laws have been Established) so Moneys have been Raised by the Government in
a most Illegal and Arbitrary way, without any consent of the People. Sir Edmond
Andross caused a Tax to be leavied of a Penny in a Pound on all the Towns then
under his Government: And when at Ipswich and other places, the Select Men (as
they are there styled) voted, That inasmuch as it was against the Common
Privileges of English Subjects, to have Money raised without their own Consent
in an Assembly or Parliament; That therefore they would petition the King for
liberty of an Assembly before they made any Rates; the said Sir Edmond Andross
caused them to be Imprisoned and Fined, some 20 l. some 30 l. and some 50 l. as
the Judges, by him instructed, should see meet to determine; Yea, and several
Gentlemen in the Country were Imprisoned and bound to their Good Behavior,
upon mere suspicion, that they did encourage their Neighbors not to comply
with these Arbitrary Proceedings. And that so they might be sure to effect
their Pernicious Designs, they have caused Juries to be picked of Men who are
not of the Vicinity, and some of them mere Strangers in the Country, and no
Freeholders: which actings are highly Illegal. One of the former Magistrates
was committed to Prison without any Crimes laid to his Charge, and there kept
half a Year without any Fault; and tho he petitioned for a Habeas Corpus, it
was denied him. Also inferior Officers have extorted what Fees they please to
demand, contrary to all Rules of Reason and Justice. They make poor Widows and
Fatherless pay 50 s. for the Probate of a Will, which under the former easy
Government would not have been a Tenth part so much. Six Persons who had been
illegally imprisoned, were forced to give the Officers 117 l. whenas upon
Computation, they found that here in England their Fees would not have amounted
to 10 l. in all. And yet these things (tho bad enough) are but a very small
part of the Misery which that poor People have been groaning under, since they
have been governed by a Dispotick and Absolute Power. For, their new Masters
tell them, that their Charter being gone, their Title to their Lands and
Estates is gone therewith, and that All is the Kings; and that They represent
the King; and that therefore all Persons must take Patents from them, and give
what they see meet to impose, that so they may enjoy the Houses which their own
Hands have built, and the Lands, which at vast Charges in subduing a
Wilderness, they have for many Years had a rightful possession of, as ever any
People in the World had or can have: Accordingly the Governor ordered the Lands
belonging to some in Charlestown to be measured out, and given to his
Creatures, and Writs of Intrusion to be issued out against others: And the
Commons belonging to several Towns have been given to some of the Governors
Council, who begged them, to the impoverishing, if not utter ruining of whole
Townships. And when an Island belonging to the Town of Plymouth was petitioned
away from them by one Nathaniel Clark (whom Sir Edmond Andross made his
Property) because the Agents of the said Town obtained a voluntary Subscription
to maintain their Title at Law, they were compelled to come not only out of
their own Country, but Colony, to Boston, to answer there as Cri^inals at the
next Assizes, and bound to their good Behavior: The Officers in the mean time
extorting 3 l. per Man for Fees. These were the miserable Effects of
New-England's being deprived of their Charters, and with them of their English
Liberties: They have not been altogether negligent, as to endeavors to obtain
some relief in their sorrowful Bondage; for several Gentlemen desired Increase
Mather, the Rector of the College at Cambridge in New England, to undertake a
Voyage for England, to see what might be done for his distressed Country, which
Motion he complied with* and in June the 1 st 1688, he had the favor to wait
on the King, and privately to acquaint him with the enslaved and perishing
E^tate of his Subjects in New England. The King was very gracious and kind in
his Expressions; then, and often after promising to give them ease as to their
Complaints and Fears: Amongst other things the said Mather caused a Petition
from the Town of Cambridge in New England to be humbly presented to His
M^jes^y; which because it does express the Deplorable Condition of tha^ People,
it shall be here inserted.

To the King's Most Excellent Majesty. The Petition and Address of John Gibson,
aged about 87, and George Willow, aged about 86 Years; as also on the behalf of
their Neighbors the Inhabitants of Cambridge in New England.
In most humble wise shows,
THat Your Majesty's good Subjects, with much hard Labor and great
Disbursements, have subdued a Wilderness, built our Houses, and planted
Orchards, being encouraged by our indubitable Right to the Soil by the Royal
Charter granted unto the First Planters, together with our Purchase of the
Natives; as also by sundry Letters and Declarations sent to the late Governor
and Company, from His late Majesty Your Royal Brother, assuring us of the full
enjoyment of our Properties and Possessions, as is more especially contained in
the Declaration sent when the Quo Warranto was issued out against our Charter.

But we are necessitated to make this our Moan and Complaint to Your Excellent
Majesty, for that our Title is now questioned to our Lands, by us quietly
possessed for near sixty Years, and without which we cannot subsist. Our humble
Address to our Governor Sir Edmond Andross, showing our just Title, long and
peaceable possession, together with our Claim of the benefit of Your Majesty's
Letters and Declarations, assuring all Your good Subjects, that they shall not
be molested in their Properties and Possessions, not availing.

Royal Sir, We are a poor People, and have no way to procure Money to defend
our Cause in the Law; nor know we of Friends at Court, and therefore unto Your
Royal Majesty, as the public Father of all your Subjects, do we make this our
humble Address for ^elief, beseeching Your Majesty graciously to pass Your
Royal Act for the Confirmation of Your Majesty's Subjects, here in our
Po^sessions to us derived from our late Governor and Company of this Your
Majesty's Colony: We now humbly cast our selves, and distressed Condition of
our Wives and Children, at Your Majesty's Feet, and conclude with the saying of
Queen Esther, If we Perish, we Perish.

Thus that Petition.

Besides this, Mr. Inc. Mather, with two New England Gentlemen, presented a
Petition and humble Proposals to the King, wherein they prayed that the Right
which they had in their Estates before the Government was changed, might be
confirmed; And that no Laws might be made, or Moneys raised, without an
Assembly, with sundry other particulars; which the King referred to a Committee
for Foreign Plantations, who ordered them into the Hands of the
Attorney General to make his Report. The Clerk, William Blathwait sent to the
Attorney General a Copy, wherein the Essential Proposal of an Assembly was
wholly left out. And being spoke to about it, he said the Earl of Sunderland
blotted out that with his own Hand; likewise a Soliciter in this Cause related
that the said Earl of Sunderland affirmed to him, that it was by his Advice
that the King had given a Commission to Sir Edmond Andross to raise Moneys
without an Assembly, and that he knew the King would never consent to an
Alteration, nor would he propose it to His Majesty. When of late all Charters
were restored to England, it was highly rational for New England to expect the
like; for if it be an illegal and unjust thing to deprive good Subjects here of
their Ancient Rights and Liberties, it cannot be consistent with Justice and
Equity to deal so with those that are afar off; Applications therefore were
made to the King, and to some Ministers of State. It was urged, that if a
Foreign Prince or State should, during the present Troubles, send a Frigate to
New England, and promise to protect them, as under their former Government, it
would be an unconquerable temptation; yet no Restoration of Charters would be
granted to New England, which has opened the Eyes of some thinking Men. Thus
has New England been dealt with: This has been, and still is the bleeding
state of that Country.

They cannot but hope that England will send them speedy Relief; especially
considering that through the ill Conduct of their present Rulers, the French
Indians are (as the last Vessels from thence inform) beginning their cruel
Butcheries amongst the English in those parts; And many have fears that there
is a design to deliver that Country into the Hands of the French King, except
his Highness the Prince of Orange, whom a Divine Hand has raised up to deliver
the O^pressed, shall happily and speedily prevent it.

FINIS.
A SEVENTH Collection of Papers Relating to the Present Juncture of Affairs in
England. VIZ. I. Proposals humbly offered in behalf of the Princess of Orange.
II. The Heads of an Expedient proposed by the Court-Party to the Parliament at
Oxford, in lieu of the Bill for Excluding the Duke of York. III. An Account of
the Irregular Actions of the Papists in the Reign of King James the Second,
with a Method proposed to rid the the Nation of them. IV. The Present
Convention a Parliament. V. A Letter to a Member of the Convention. VI. An
Answer to the Author of the Letter to a Member of the Convention.


Licensed and Entered according to Order.

London printed, and are to be sold by Richard Ianeway in Queen's-head-Court in
Paternoster Row, 1689.

Proposals humbly offered in behalf of the Princess of Orange, Jan. 28.
IT is a Maxim of the Law of England concerning the Government, That there is
no Interregnum. Of necessity there must be a Change in the Person, yet there is
a Continuation of the Government. Which shows the Prudence and Perfection of
the Constitution, in preventing that, which of all things is most Deplorable, a
Failure of Government. This Rule is therefore of that Importance, as not to be
given up upon the trivial Saying of Nemo est haeres viventis.

It Is true, the common and ordinary cause of a Change in the Person that is
invested with the Royal Authority, is Death.

But we are now in a rare and extraordinary Case, where the King is living, and
yet may be said to be divested of the Royal Office, as having by his
Encroachments upon the Peoples Rights, provoked them to resort to Arms; and
being vanquished by that Force, followed with a total Defection from him, and
his Relinqui^hing the Kingdom thereupon, without providing any ways for the
Administration of the Government.

This seems to be a Cesser of this Government, and may in Civil and Politic
Construction amount to as much as if he had died.

But because this is a Cess of that nature that requires a Judgment to be made
upon it, it seems necessary to have a Convention of the Estates of the Nation,
to make a Declaration thereupon (for it is not for private Persons to determine
in the Cases aforesaid, how or when the King has lost his Government) and till
such Authoritative Declaration made, the King may be supposed in some kind of
possession of the Kingly Office.

B^t after the Judgment made and declared, there seems to be no d^fference in
the consequence and result of the thing, between such an extraordinary case of
the Cesser of the Royal Dignity, and the case of Death or voluntary
Resignation; or as if the King had been prosest, and made himself a Recluse in
a Religious House.

Then it must devolve upon the next Heir, her Royal Highness the Princess of
Orange.

As to the pretended Prince of Wales, if there had been no Suspicions as to his
Birth, (as there are many violent ones) yet his being conveyed into unknown
Places, by Persons in whom no credit can be reposed, and at an Age which
exposes him to all manner of Practices and Impostures, touching his Person;
then can there hereafter be no manner of Certainty of him, so as to induce the
Nation ever to consider any Pretense of that kind.

These things being considered;

First, Whether will not the declaring her Royal Highness Queen of England, as
next in Succession, be the surest and bent Foundation to begin our Settlement
upon; rather than upon a groundless Conceit of the Government being devolved to
the People, and so they to proceed to Elect a King?

Secondly, If that Conceit of devolving to the People be admitted, Whether must
we not conclude, that the Misgovernment of King James the Second, has not only
determined his Roylaty, but put a period to the Monarchy it self? And then it is
not only a loss as to his Person, but to the whole Royal Family.

Thirdly, Whether those Persons that have started this Notion, upon pretense of
giving the Nation an opportunity of gratifying his Highness the Prince of
Orange, in proportion to his Merits (which it must be acknowledged no Reward
can exceed) if they were searched to the bottom, did not do it rather to
undermine this Ancient and Hereditary Monarchy, and to give an Advantage to
their Republican Principles, than out of any Affection and Gratitude to his
Highness? For if the latter was that they had the chief respect to, would it
not be the more proper way to declare her Royal Highness Queen, which will
immediately put the Nation under a regular Constitution and posture of
Government? Then it will be capable of expressing its Gratitude to the Prince
of Orange, in matters touching even the Royal Dignity it self, without making
such a Stroke upon the Government, as the Electing of a King, or making any
other immediate Alteration in the right of the Monarchy (before the Parliament
is completed and constituted in all its parts) must amount unto.

The Heads of the EXPEDIENT proposed by the Court-party to the Parliament at
Oxford, in lieu of the Bill for excluding the Duke of York.
I. THAT the Duke of York be banished during his Life, five hundred Miles from
England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories to them
belonging.

II. That the whole Government, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, shall upon the
demise of the King, be vested in a Regent, for such time as the Duke of York
shall survive.

III. That the Regent be the Princess of Orange, and in case of her Decease
without Issue, or with Issue in Minority, then the Lady Ann.

IV. That if the Duke have a Son educated a Protestant, then the said
Princesses respectively shall succeed in the Regency, during the Minority of
such Son, and no longer. Which obviates an incurable Absurdity in the former
Bill of Exclusion.

V. That the Regent nominate the Privy Council, and they to be, or not to be
approved in Parliament, as shall be judged safest upon directing the drawing up
of this intended Act.

VI. That notwithstanding these Kingdoms (out of respect to the Royal Family,
and Monarchy it self) may be governed by the said Regent, in the Name and Style
of James the Second, etc. yet it shall by this intended Act be made Capital for
any to take up Arms on his behalf, or by a Commission not signed by the said
Regent, or not granted by lawful Authority, derived from and under such Regent;
or to maintain an Opinion, that the retaining the said Name and Style, shall in
this case purge the disabilities imposed by this Act, or elude the force
thereof.

VII. That Commissioners be forthwith sent to the Prince and Princess of
Orange, to take their Oaths that they will take upon them the execution of this
Act, and that their Oaths be here recorded.

VIII. That all Officers, Civil and Military, forthwith take Oaths to observe
this Act, and so all others from time to time, as in the Act for the Test.

IX. That his Majesty would graciously declare to call a Parliament in
Scotland, in order to the passing the like Act there, and recommend the same;
and the like to be done in Ireland if thought necessary.

X. That in case the said Duke shall come into any of these Kingdoms, then he
shall be ipso facto, totally excluded, and shall suffer as in the former Bill,
and the Sovereignty shall be forthwith entirely vested in the Regent, upon such
his coming into any of these Kingdoms.

XI. That all considerable Papists be banished by Name.

XII. That their fraudulent Conveyances be defeated.

XIII. That their Children be educated in the Protestant Religion.

By these means these three Kingdoms will be united in defense of the
Protestant Religion, his Majesty's Person and Government, and a sure Foundation
laid of an effectual League with Holland, and consequently with the rest of
Christendom, in opposition to the growing Greatness of France. 'Twas thought
fit to reprint this Expedient, that the Reader may compare it with the Bill of
Exclusion, (which may be seen at large in the Debates of the House of Commons,
lately published) and judge which was the greatest Evil of the two, viz. that
which would have set the Duke aside, and given him liberty to live where he
pleased, or that which would have stripped him of all Power, and banished him
500 Miles off, and left him only the Name of a King. An Excellent Expedient
indeed!

An Account of the irregular Actions of the Papists in the Reign of King James
the Second: With a Method proposed how to rid the Nation of them.
By a Person of Quality.
THE dreadful Revolutions, Plots and Conspiracies, which have been promoted by
the Roman Catholics in England since the Resormation, are of that nature, and
have caused such fearful Convulsions in our Church and State, that it is a
great Argument of the Goodness and Providence of God, that we have been able to
bear so many Shocks, and to avoid so many deep Designs as have now twice within
the memory of Man brought us to the brinks of Ruin.

We must be very impious or very stupid if our last Deliverance has not been
able to make us adore the boundless Goodness of God toward us his sinful and
unthankful Servants; he, having defeated the Hopes, and totally overthrown the
Contrivances of that restless, implacable, persidious Faction, when they seemed
to be in such a Condition that they need fear nothing, but the Almighty Power
of God, miraculously exerting it self, as in the case of Sennacherib, which
they neither feared nor suspected.

The Non-resisting Doctrine had so tied the hands of the Church of England Men,
that they thought they might saf^ly in^^l over us, and ridicule the Bond that
bound us to our good Behavi^ur. The Dissenters were, as they thought, so
obliged by the Liberty of Conscience, and the fulsom Applications they had made
to them in many ill writ pieces, and by the Favors ^e^^owed on Pen and Lob,
the two Patriarchs, as they would have been thought of that Party: That they
not only suspected no oppositions from them, but really conceived they would
have been more than Scaffolds in the ruining Design they had then on foot. The
Gentry were reduced to the utmost degree of Contempt, and the Nobility, who
only were capable of putting a stop to such notorious and impolitick
Encroachments on our Birthrights and Liberties, were not only closeted,
examined, re-examin'd, turned out of their Stations, brow-beaten, ridiculed at
Court, and in short, driven into the Country; but they were also by all the
Arts that were possible rendered odious to the Crown, contemptible to one
another, and of no use to their Inferiors.

The Army, which was the next great Engine to bring about their Design, was
managed with more Art than is commonly considered; for first there was a Party
of Roman Catholics mixed with the Common Soldiers, to be as it were Spies and
Tempters, to creep into all the places of their resort, to observe their Words,
Looks and Actions, and to take the opportunity of all their Needs, Crimes,
Vices and Follies, to pervert them, and draw them over to the Church of Rome;
and in the mean time to secure them from contriving any thing that might
interrupt their Projects upon us. Secondly, They punished all who deserted the
Service with the utmost Rigor and Severity to keep up ^h^ir numbers. And
thirdly, They sent them to quarter in those places that had in any degree
refused to comply with their Wills, and not only suffered, but encouraged them
to outrage, and sometimes to murder their Hosts; but to be sure in all places
they very much impoverished those that entertained them, and in the Interim
they kept all in awe and quiet, whilst the State-Mountebanks practiced upon
their Lives, Consciences, Liberties and Properties.

A People thus harassed and beset, one would have thought had been consigned to
Ruin and Destruction; for where could our Deliverance begin? The Parliament,
which is our last resort, was at the same time practiced on with all the Art
and Address that the Wi^ of Men or D^vils could invent; and he must be of a
deep Reach, or a Sanguine Complexion, who in the beginning of September last
could hope to see a ^ree and a quiet Parliament meet and sit one Month, to
represent with any degree of Liberty, our deplorable State and Condition, much
less to redress any of our Grievances.

We had one Hope, which if they had left us still, we had certainly been as
quiet and pati^nt as Job himself, and that was, that the Princess Mary of
Orange would, when God thought fit, succeed his Majesty, and then we promised
our selves a Day of Redemption from all our Calamities and Oppressions; so that
our Posterity would at worst see better days. To deprive us of this remote
Comfort, that Scene was laid, and the Lady of Loretto solicited to procure a
Prince of Wales to reduce us to an utter Desperation of any Redress for ever.
And now they thought they were so secure of the Day, that they might attack the
Heretical Bishops, and the whole body of our Clergy at once, and make them eat
their own Dung in the Faces of their respective Congregations; if they had
complied, the whole Nation would have abhorred them, as a parcel of Cowards; if
they did not, the Ecclesiastical Commission was to have mowed them down by
whole sale; and when the People had been once deprived of their faithful and
learned Shepherds, the Wolves in Sheeps-clothing hoped to have had much better
Success than hitherto: but the Bishops interposing so, united the inferior
Clergy, that this Design proved abortive, and the declaring the Bishops
Petition a Seditious Libel, and so much the more dangerous because penned with
great Modesty and Humility, so far opened the Eyes of all Men, that the most
Ignorant saw nothing less than the Extirpation of the Protestant Religion was
aimed at.

The Army however, which was the great Wheel in this most dreadful Machine, was
for the most part Protestant, and had expressed so much Joy at the acquittal of
the Bishops, in the Camp at Hownslow-Heath; that they clearly saw, till it was
new-modell'd, it could not b^ relied on; and therefore the French and Irish
were to be invited over, and the Companies changed by degrees: and when six of
the O^ficers at Portsmouth had with the greatest Humility imaginable, only
desired leave to fill up their Companies with such Men of this N^tion as they
judged most serviceable to the King, or otherwise that they might be permitted,
with all imaginable Duty and Respect, to lay ^own their Commissions; for this
Offense they were brought up Prisoners to London, and it was given out they
should be hanged, as perhaps they had been, if Monsieur de Avaux's Memorial
given in at the Hague, had not come in that very Post to enlighten our little
Statesmen, and show them their approaching Danger, and yet after all, the 10 th
of September last they were cashiered at Windsor.

And when the Storm from Holland seemed unavoidable, with what Insolence did
they treat the Eleven Proposals made by the Bishops, and the Petition presented
the 17 th of November last, by the Bishops and Peers about the Town? So that
till the Army began to go over to the Prince of Orange, and the greatest part
of the Nation had declared for him: No Parliament was to be thought of, and the
Dispensing Power was the most Sacred of all the Prerogatives of the Crown.

That we may not imagine all this was undertaken, and entered upon without good
Consideration of the Difficulties the Roman Catholics were to met with, I
would desire the Reader to peruse a small Piece by them published in the Year
1685, during the first Session of Parliament of James the Second, styled, Salus
Britannica, or the Safety of the Protestant Religion, against all the present
Apprehensions of Popery, in Folio. The Design of which, as the Author himself
tells us, is to examine what National Operation or Influence a Real Popish
Crowned Head can have over the Lives, Liberties, or Estates of Englishmen as
now enjoyed, and the Religion of the Kingdom, as at present Established, and by
confuting even the most substantial of their imagined Dangers, to dissipate
those false fears of Popery, etc. page 1. And in truth I believe no Man can
deny but he has very effectually proved, that it is utterly impossible for a
Popish Prince, who has none but these Three Kingdoms, to set up Popery in this
Nation, and that all he can gain by the Attempt, will be the Ruin of himself.
And certainly they could not but apprehend this might possibly, if not
probably, be the Event; yet after all, King and Kingdom was at last to be
sacrificed to the holy See of Rome; and on they went when they had proved it
impossible to succeed.

I need be the less exact in setting down what they have done, it being within
the space of four Years last past, that they have had the management of
Affairs, and so all things are as fresh in all Men's Memories, as if they had
been acted but yesterday: I think then, that I may from these Premises safely
conclude, that a more daring, restless and implacable Faction never appeared
under the Sun than this is; And that it is the Interest of every true English
Protestant, of what Persuasion soever he be, to do his utmost to free this
miserable Nation from the Danger and Fear too (if it be possible) of ever
feeling again the dire Effects of Popish Zeal, or rather Fury.

Our wise Ancestors, for above these three hundred Years, have been laboring
to restrain this Demon^ick, by Laws, Oaths and Tests; and when all the Methods
of Severity failed, we have tried the Charms of Kindness, Trust, Friendship and
Reliance: We set up a Prince of their Communion, and opposed all those that
would have Excluded him, with a Zeal which made us look a little too much in
love with one who seemed designed to be our Scourge by Heaven it self. When he
had declared his Religion, and some of his Party, amongst whom Nevel Pain was
one, had given us clear Indications of their Rage against us; yet we in
Parliament, not only attainted, and thereby ruined the late Duke of Monmouth
and his Party, but when some Gentlemen proposed to have the Security of the
Protestant Religion taken into Consideration, the House declared they would
entirely rely upon his Majesty's Promise for the Security of their Religion,
which they valued more than their Lives. And before this, when Charles the
Second, the 30 th of April 1679, to avoid the Exclusion-Bill, proposed very
advantageous Restrictions of the Authority of a Roman Catholic Prince, the
Church-of-England-men rejected them, for fear they should too much weaken and
expose the Regal Authority, not to mention the Favors shown to all the whole
Roman Catholic Party, during the fierce Prosecution of the Popish Plot in that
Prince's Reign: Well, what could have been done more than was, to oblige Men or
Christians to treat us like Friends, when they had an opportunity to express
their Gratitude? No, stay you there Gentlemen, we Roman Catholics have but one
Friend in this World, and if you are not for him too, stand off; expect nothing
from us but Ruin and Desolation. Will you Repeal the Penal Laws and the Tests?
Why I cannot betray my Religion: Then make room for one that will, Turn out,
Ite Procul, Ite Profani. And we all know what followed, and I suppose no body
in this Generation will have so little wit as to pretend any more to oblige a
Roman Catholic by any of these things.

Well, will Oaths bind them? No, they have a Pope, and a Maxim that will
frustrate that Ligament, when ever it is for their convenience to be free. And
of this we have seen and felt too much already. Will Laws? If you catch and
hang the Priest, the Traitor, the Cutthroat, he is made a Martyr, his Crime's
denied, palliated, excused, or it may be justified and defended as occasion
serves, and yet after all, they shall have the Satisfaction of clamouring
against you for a persecuting Church, and a bloody Nation.

Well, what is to be done? Why, for my part, I can see but one possible Method
to quiet the Nation, and that is once for all to clear it of these Monsters,
and force them to transplant themselves, not out of the English Dominions, but
out of this Island: As long as they continue amongst us, they neither can nor
will be quiet; Priests they must and will have, and that Ferment will suffer
nothing near it to be at rest. The remembrance of what is past will irritate
the Minds of Men, and make them jealous of future Evils, so that no care of the
wisest and best Governors can long keep the Nation in Tranquillity and Peace,
if these Men-catchers are suffered to nestle amongst us. But then I would have
this extended only to England and Scotland, because Ireland would be laid
desolate by such an Expedient, and if the English Nation, which has not above
40000 Roman Catholics, were once cleared, it would very easily suppress and
revenge any Attempt could be made in that Kingdom.

Besides this, all Feme Coverts, all Persons above sixty or fifty years of Age,
all Day-labourers and Handy-crafts-men might be excepted; these can maintain no
Priests, nor much imbroil the Peace of the Nation, or at least for no long
time; but then all the Nobility, Gentry, Merchants and rich Tradesmen of that
Religion, I think ought to be sent packing, and for the future a Law be made to
disfranchise them, and make them incapable of possessing, purchasing,
inheriting or transmitting any Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, to the value
of forty Shillings per Annum, or upwards.

To make this the more easy, yet it were fitting that every individual Person
should be asked whether he had rather leave Country, or his Religion? and all
that would promise the latter upon Oath, to be excused, but so as to forfeit
their Estates if they relapsed after the Oath so taken, or brought up their
Children in that Religion.

Secondly, To allow all that would transplant themselves the full value of
their Estates, both Real and Personal, their Debts being first paid and
deducted. This would enable them to live in as great or a greater Equipage and
Grandeur in our Plantations, as they ever had here in England; and if they
removed into Germany or France, Italy or Spain, their Estates would make their
Lives easy, and their Banishment honorable. The World is wide, and if I were
one of them I should never stay for an Act of Parliament, but would certainly
sell what I had and be gone, that I might enjoy my Religion and my Estate in a
warmer Climate.

But, alas, they love their Country too dearly to leave it: what is it in
England they love? The Civil Liberties they had brought to the utmost limits of
Destruction: The Religion of England they hate above all other; the Earth is
not more Fruitful, and the Air is much colder than that of other Countries, and
I am confident the English Humor is so far exasperated against Popery, that
half a hundred Years will not allay the Fever the last four Years have raised
in the English Blood against Popery; so that they have nothing to attach them
to England, but the sullen hopes of being a Plague and a Terror to us.

But it will be said, The transporting so much Wealth out of the Nation will
too much impoverish us: This ought well to be considered, and a true Estimate
made both of the Estates and Debts of the Roman Catholics, and of the Methods
of returning their Effects beyond the Seas, and then perhaps it would rather
increase our Trade than abate our Wealth. And as for the weakening us by the
taking off so many of our People, this I am sure is a mere Chimera, two or
three thousand Persons would be the utmost that we should lose: And those who
bought their Estates would be better Subjects and Neighbors than ever they
will be as long as they continue Roman Catholics.

It is not to be imagined, that all or any considerable Part of this Wealth
will be transported in English Money in specie, but in Merchandise, Bills of
Exchange, etc. So that I am confident we have more sent away to the Jesuits
College beyond the Seas in seven Years, than would be carried out in specie on
such an occasion; and hereby we should at once rid our selves of one of the
greatest Plagues that any Nation ever struggled so long with.

Nor would it be only Profitable but Just. They have given us the greatest
Provocation that ever was given by Men, to Men. Did ever 40000 Men in any other
part of the World ever before endeavor to do what they themselves had proved
to be impossible? Did ever such an handful of Men before, by Fraud and
Violence, design to enslave a Free, to impoverish a Rich, to subdue a Valiant
and Generous Nation? What could they mean by the Force they in Print, and in
common Discourse intimated, that was, to compel us to give up our Laws, if fair
Means would not do, but a Massacre, or a French Invasion? Let them consider how
they have treated thofe of our Religion in France and Piedmont; and then tell
me, and all the World, if we have treated them in the same manner, when we have
sent them away with all they can justly call their own, only that we might not
be forced to ruin them by a flower Prosecution.

The Facility is equal to the Justice of this Method; they are few in number,
hated by all the rest of the Nation; and besides all their former
Misdemeanors, have, by the late Attempts upon the Religion and Liberties of
England, so far increased the Aversion of all degrees of Men amongst us, that
they will find very few to pity them, and not many to speak for them.

The only Objections I can foresee, are, first, That it will impoverish England
to suffer them to carry away their Estates, and look too like Popish Cruelty,
to turn them out despoiled of what they have, or of a great part of their
Fortunes. Now this Objection must be considered in Parliament, because no one
Man can make any thing near a true Estimate what the value will be, their Debts
being deducted, till a true Account is given of their Estates and Debts, and
then I verily believe it will be found much less than it seems at first.

The second Objection is, That it will weaken us and strengthen our Enemies, to
lose so many of our People. To this, I say, it is apparently otherwise; For if
those Estates were in the Hands of Protestants, they would much more contribute
to the Union and Strength of England, than the Persons of these Roman
Catholics do, of whom we can make little or no use in Civil or Military
Affairs, at Home or Abroad, in Peace or War. And if they were added to any
other Country, the Peace and Union they would leave us in, would infinitely
overbalance the loss of their Persons, and, as I believe, of their Estates
too.

But now, on the contrary, if they be continued still amongst us, we must still
struggle with all those Inconveniences, which have necessitated our Ancestors
to make so many Laws against them, and the Severities which must be used to
keep them under, will, by degrees, when the Memory of the late Transactions is
worn off, beget compassion, and that will grow greater, as they grow fewer and
less dangerous, and yet at last one single Jesuit may destroy the best of our
Princes, and two or three Gentlemen of Estate, may disquiet and enjealous a
whole County; and when all is done, no hopes is left that any las^ing Peace can
be made with them; so that as long as there is any of that Religion in England,
there is a Ferment in the Veins of the Nation, which will cause dreadful
Paroxims.

Their Emissaries will also sow Dissentions between us and the Dissenters, and
exasperate the Parties against each other; so that the good Correspendence
which is now between us and them, will, in short time, be turned into Hatred on
both sides, if all the Care imaginable be not taken on both Sides of these
Incendiaries, which will never be wanting whilst we have a Popis^ Nobility and
Gentry, how small soever it is in Number.

The Seminaries at St. Omers, Doway, etc. are kept up by the Nobility and
Gentry of that Communion, and tend very much to the imbroiling and weakening
England, and the advancing the Interest of France; but would soon^d windle away
if they had no Supplies from England, as they could have little if we had no
Popish Nobility or Gentry, and the Lands of England were only in the Hands of
Protestants.

The retiring of His late Majesty into France, is another strong Inducement: as
long as He or the Child is living, they will have a pretense to Plot and cut
Throats, and they will have some to pity, and others to applaud them; so that
if there were no other Reason, this alone were sufficient to determine the
Question, unless we are resolved to show our selves as careless of a Protestant
Prince, as we have been over-fond of a Roman Catholic, which will be an ill
Recompense for our Deliverance.

The Present CONVENTION, A PARLIAMENT.
I. THat the Formality of the King's Writ of Summons is not so essential to an
English Parliament, but that the Peers of the Realm, and the Commons, by their
Representatives duly elected, may legally act as the great Council and
representative Body of the Nation, though not summoned by the the King,
especially when the Circumstances of the time are such, that such Summons
cannot be had, will (I hope) appear by these following Observations.

First, The Saxon Government was transplanted hither out of Germany where the
meeting of the Saxons in such Assemblies was at certain fixed times; viz. at
the new and full Moon. But after their Transmigration hither, Religion
changing, other things changed with it; and the times for their public
Assemblies, in Conformity to the great Solemnities celebrated by Christians,
came to be changed to the Feasts of Easter, Pentecost, and the Nativity. The
lower we come down in Story, the seldomer we find these general Assemblies to
have been held; and sometimes (even very anciently) when upon extraordinary
Occasions, they met out of Course, a Precept, an Edict, or Sanction is
mentioned to have issued from the King; But the times, and the very place of
their ordinary Meeting having been certain, and determined in the very first
and eldest times that we meet with any mention of such Assemblies, which times
are as ancient as any Memory of the Nation it self; hence I infer, that no
Summons from the King can be thought to have been necessary in those Days,
because it was altogether needless.

Secondly, The Succession to the Crown did not in those Days, nor till of late
Years, run in a course of lineal Succession by right of Inheritance: But upon
the Death of a Prince, those Persons of the Realm that composed the then
Parliament, assembled in order to the choosing of another. That the Kingdom was
then Elective, though one or other of the Royal Blood was always chosen, but
the next in lineal Succession very seldom, is evident from the Genealogies of
the Saxon Kings, from an old Law made at Calchuyth, appointing how, and by whom
Kings shall be chosen; and from many express and particular Accounts given by
our old Historians, of such Assemblies held for electing of Kings. Now such
Assemblies could not be summoned by any King; and yet in Conjunction with the
King that themselves set up, they made Laws, binding the King and all the Realm.

Thirdly, After the Death of King William Rufus, Robert, his elder Brother,
being then in the Holy Land, Henry, the youngest Son of King William the first,
procured an Assembly of the Clergy and People of England, to whom he made large
Promises of his good Government, in case they would accept of him for their
King; and they agreeing, that if he would restore to them the Laws of King
Edward the Confessor, then they would consent to make him their King: He swore
that he would do so, and also free them from some Oppressions, which the Nation
had groaned under in his Brothers and his Fathers time. Hereupon they chose him
King, and the Bishop of London, and the Archbishop of York set the Crown upon
his Head; which being done, a Confirmation of the English Liberties passed the
Royal Assent in that Assembly, the same in Substance, though not so large as
King John's, and King Henry the thirds Magna Charta's afterward were.

Fourthly, After that King's Death, in such another Parliament, King Stephen
was elected, and Mawd the Express put by, though not without some Stain of
Perfidiousness upon all those, and Stephen himself especially, who had sworn in
her Father's Lifetime, to acknowledge her for their Sovereign after his Decease.

Fifthly, In King Richard the firsts time, the King being absent in the Holy
Land, and the Bishop of Ely then his Chancellor, being Regent of the Kingdom in
his Absence, whose Government was intolerable to the People for his Insolence
and manifold Oppressions, a Parliament was convened at London, at the Instance
of Earl John, the King's Brother, to treat of the great and weighty Affairs of
the King and Kingdom; in which Parliament this same Regent was deposed from his
Government, and another set up, viz. the Archbishop of Roan in his stead. This
Assembly was not convened by the King, who was then in Palestine, nor by any
Authority derived from him, for then the Regent and Chancellor must have called
them together; but they met, as the Historian says expressly, at the Instance of
Earl John. And yet, in the Kings Absence, they took upon them to settle the
public Affairs of the Nation without him.

Sixthly, When King Henry the 3 d. died, his eldest Son, Prince Edward, was
then in the Holy Land, and came not home till within the third Year of his
Reign; yet, immediately upon the Father's Death, all the Prelates and Nobles,
and four Knights for every Shire, and four Burgesses for every Borough,
assembled together in a great Council, and settled the Government till the King
should return; made a new Seal, and a Chancellor, etc.

I infer from what has been said, that Writs of Summons are not so essential to
the being of Parliaments, but that the People of England, especially at a time
when they cannot be had, may by Law, and according to our old Constitution,
assemble together in a Parliamentary way without them, to treat of and settle
the public Affairs of the Nation. And that if such Assemblies so convened,
find the Throne vacant, they may proceed not only to set up a Prince, but with
the Assent and Concurrence of such Prince, to transact all public Business
whatsoever, without a new Election; they having as great Authority as the
People of England can delegate to their Representative.

II. The Acts of Parliaments not formal nor legal in all their Circumstances,
are yet binding to the Nation so long as they continue in force, and not liable
to be questioned as to the Validity of them, but in subsequent Parliaments.

First, The two Spencers, Temp. Edvardi Secundi, were banished by Act of
Parliament, and that Act of Parliament repealed by Dures and Force; yet was the
Act of Repeal a good Law, till it was annulled 1 Ed. 3.

Secondly, Some Statutes of 11 Rich. 2. and Attainders thereupon were repealed
in a Parliament held Anno 21. of that King, which Parliament was procured by
forced Elections; and yet the Repeal stood good, till such time as in 1 Henry
4. the Statutes of 11 Rich. 2. were revived and appointed to be firmly held and
kept.

Thirdly, The Parliament of 1 Hen. 4. consisted of the same Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses that had served in the then last dissolved Parliament, and those
Persons were by the King's Writs to the Sheriffs commanded to be returned; and
yet they passed Acts, and their Acts tho never confirmed, continue to be Laws
at this Day.

Fourthly, Queen Mary's Parliament that restored the Pope's Supremacy, was
notoriously known to be packed, insomuch that it was debated in Queen
Elizabeth's time, whether or no to declare all their Acts void by Act of
Parliament. That course was then upon some prudential Considerations declined;
and therefore the Acts of that Parliament, not since repealed, continue binding
Laws to this Day.

The Reason of all this, is, Because no inferior Courts have Authority to judge
of the Validity or Invalidity of the Acts of such Assemblies, as have but so
much as a Color of Parliamentary Authority.

The Acts of such Assemblies being entered upon the Parliament-Roll, and
certified before the Judges of Westminster Hall, as Acts of Parliament, are
conclusive and binding to them; because Parliaments are the only Judges of the
Imperfections, Invalidities, Ille^^lities, etc. of one another.

The Parliament that called in King Charles the second, was not assembled by
the King's Writ, and yet they made Acts, and the Royal Assent was had to them;
many of which indeed were afterward confirmed, but not all, and those that had
no Confirmation, are undoubted Acts of Parliament without it, and have ever
since obtained as such.

Hence I infer that the present Convention, may, if they please, assume to
themselves a Parliamentary Power, and in Conjunction with such King or Queen as
they shall declare, may give Laws to the Kingdom as a legal Parliament.

A LETTER to a Member of the CONVENTION.
SIR,
I Hear you are elected a Member of this next Convention, and therefore expect
to see you very suddenly in Town; but I ca^ tell you my mind more freely in
Writing, and you may think better of it when you see it before you; and
therefore I have rather chose to give you the trouble of this Paper, than to
leave all to a personal Conference at our next Meeting.

I will not dispu^e with you about what is past, or what is to come; it is too
late to do the first, and as for the second, whatever becomes of other
Arguments, Interest is most apt to prevail, and therefore all that I beg of
you, is to take care that you do not mistake your own and the Nations Interest
in a matter of such high Concernment.

There is no less Affair before you than the Fate of Princes, and of three
Kingdoms, which requires the most calm, mature, and deliberate Advice; and yet
when you come to London, you will find such Distractions and Divisions in Men's
Counsels, that all the threatening Dangers of Popery were not a more formidable
prospect to Considering Men, all old Animosities are revived, and new ones
fomented every day; some are visibly acted by Ambition, others by Revenge; the
Dissenter is very busy to undermine the Church, and the Commonwealths Man to
subvert Monarchy, and the Lord have Mercy upon us all. I doubt not but you will
readily confess, that it is the common Interest to have things settled upon
such a bottom, as is most like to last, and then, I am sure, you must consult
both Law and Conscience in the matter, and keep to your old Establishment as
near as you can; for when there are so many Distempers in Men's Minds, and such
contrary Interests, it is no time to innovate, it is no time to lay new
Foundations, when there are frequent Earthquakes, which will not give them time
to settle: The Revolutions of State have been so quick and sudden of late, that
all prudent Men will be cautions how they try Experiments, which are commonly
dangerous and uncertain, but especially in matters of Government, which depend
on the good liking of free and moral Agents, and when so many Hundred Thousands
are to be satisfied, you can never guess at the prevailing Opinion, by the
major Vote of a Convention.

Let us then consider, what is most likely to give the most general
satisfaction to the Nation, for that, I am sure, is most likely to be lasting,
and because you may be a Stranger to these Matters yet, I will give you an
Account of the different Projects now on foot, as well as I can learn them.

Some are for sending to the King, and Treating with him to return to his
Government, under such Legal Restraints, as shall give security to the most
jealous Persons, for the preservation of their Liberties, Laws, and Religion;
and if he will not consent to this, to make the next Heir Regent. Others are
for declaring the Crown forfeited or demised, and proclaiming the Princess of
Orange. Others will have the Government dissolved, and begin all de novo, and
make the Prince of Orange King, or Crown him and the Princess together, and
postpone the Title of the Princess Ann, till after the Prince's Death, if he
survive the Princess. I shall not pretend to tell you, which of these I should
prefer, were it Res integra; for the Question is not, which you and I should
like best, but which will be the firmest Foundation for the Peace and
Settlement of these Kingdoms.

1. As for the first, though it be horribly decried, and such Men foolishly
exposed as Friends to Popery and Arbitrary Power; yet I could never meet with
any Man yet, who had the face to reject all Treaty with the King upon any other
pretense, but that it was in vain, that it is impossible he should give any
Security to the Nation that he would Govern by Law; which is so ridiculous a
pretense, that it will satisfy no Body, but those who are resolved, that he
shall never return. For, as little as I am versed in this matter, I could frame
such Laws, as should put it utterly out of the King's Power to invade our
Liberties or Religion: However, I am sure we should have thought our selves
very secure, would the King have called a Free Parliament, and given them
liberty to have made what Laws they please^ and that which would have given
such general satisfaction before, had it been granted, I suspect, should it be
now granted, and refused that would give as general dissatisfaction; nay* the
very refusal to Treat, will be thought such a scandalous neglect of our Duty to
a Sovereign Prince, and give such Jealousies to People, that those who oppose
it, are only afraid that the King should comply, as will be the foundation of
universal Discontents, which will show themselves upon the first occasion. It
is certain, would the Convention Treat with the King, either they would agree,
or they would not agree; if they could not agree upon the proposal of
reasonable Securities, this would satisfy Multitudes of People that they had
tried; if they did agree, this would give universal satisfaction, and there
were an happy end of all our Troubles.

But now let us suppose, that part of the Convention should prevail which is
against Treating with the King, and for deposing or setting him aside without
more ado; let us consider what is like to be the most probable Consequence of
this.

I^ is certain, this fundamental Change in the Government cannot be made by any
Legal Authority; for the Convention will not pretend to any such Legal Power,
and there can be no Parliament without a King; and a King whose whole Authority
depends upon a Convention that has no such Authority, is but in a weak state as
to Civil Right: No Man will think himself bound in Conscience to obey him, and
when every Man's Conscience is free, let such a Prince beware of Epidemical
Discontents. And let you and I calmly consider, what Discontents may probably
arise upon such a Juncture.

1. First then, All those who think themselves bound by their Oath of
Allegiance to defend the King's Person, Crown and Dignity, who wonder at Men of
Law, who talk of a Forfeiture or Demise of the Crown while the King lives, and
flies out of his Kingdoms only for the safety of his Person, and because he
will not trust himself in the power of his Enemies; I say, all such Persons
will be greatly discontented at Deposing the King, and will never own any other
King* while their own King, to whom they have sworn Allegiance lives* and tho
you should suppose such Conscientious Men to be very few, yet if these few
should happen to be Persons of Character, of known Prudence and Abilities,
Integrity and Honesty, in Church or State, their Examples would give a terrible
Shock to such a new tottering Government, tho they were never so Tame and
Peaceable, void of Faction and Sedition themselves.

And yet let me tell you, you must not judge of the Numbers of ^hese Men by the
late general defection. The whole Nation, I confess, was very unanimous for the
Prince, great numbers of Gentlemen, nay, of the King's own Soldiers went over
to him, very few but Papis^s offered their Service to the King; but the reason
of this was very evident, not that they were willing to part with the King, and
set up another in his room, but because they were horribly afraid of P^pery,
and very desirous to see the Laws and Religion of the Nation settled upon the
old Foundations by a Free Parliament, which was all the Prince declared for;
but many who were Well-wishers to this Design, will not renounce their
Allegiance to their King; and now they see what is like to come of i^, are
ashamed of what they have done, and ask God's pardon for it, and are ready to
undo it as far as they can.

2. Besides a thousand occasions of Discontent which may happen in such a
Change of Government as this, which no Body can possibly foresee, and yet may
have very fatal Consequences, there are some very visible occasions for it
besides the sense of Loyalty and Conscience.

How many Discontents, think you, may arise between the Nobility and Gentry,
who attend the new Court? Every Man will think he has some Merit, and expect
some marks of Favor to have his share of Honor, and Power, and Profit, and
yet a great many more must miss, than those who speed, and many of those who
are Rewarded, may think they have not their Deserts, and be disconternted to see
others preferred before them; and those whose expectations are disappointed,
are disobliged too, and that is a dangerous thing when there is another, and a
righful King to oblige; for Duty and Discontent together, to be revenged if a
new King, and to be reconciled to an old One, will shake a Throne which has so
sandy a Foundation: The like may be said of the Soldiery, who are generally Men
of Honor and Resentment, and have the greater and sharper Resentments now,
because they are sensible of their mistake when it is too late; yet as they
ought not to have Fought for Popery, nor against the Laws and Liberties of
their Country, fo neither ought they to have deserted the defense of the King's
Person and Crown, but have brought the Prince to Terms, as well as the King.

Thus you easily foresee what a heavy Tax must be laid upon the Nation, to
defray the Charge of this Expedition, and I believe the Country would have paid
it very cheerfully and thankfully, had the Prince res^ored to them their Laws,
and Liberties, and Religion, together with their King* but you know Men are apt
to complain of every thing, when Money is to be paid, and it may be it will be
thought hard to lose their King* and to pay so dea^ for it too: And tho what
the Convention does is none of the Prince's fault, no more than it was his
design, yet angry People don't use to disti^guish so nicely.

But there is a greater Difficulty still than all this: There are no
Contentions so fierce as those about Religion; this gave Life and Spirit to the
Prince's Design, and had the main stroke in this late Revolution: And though
Popery were a hated Religion, yet most Men are as zealous for their own
Religion, as they are against Popery. Those of the Church of England are very
glad to get rid of Popery, but they will not be contented to part with their
Church into the Bargain, for this would be as bad as they could have suffered
under Popery. The several Sects of Dissenters are glad to get rid of Popery
also; but now they expect glorious Days for themselves, and what they expect
God Almighty knows, for I am confident they don't know themselves. Now consider
how difficult it will be, for any Prince, who has but a crazy Title to the
immediate possession of the Crown, to adjust this matter so, as neither to
disgust the Church of England, nor the Dissenters, and if either of them be
disobliged, there is a formidable Party made against them.

This being the Case, should the King be deposed, and any other ascend the
Throne, it will be necessary for them to keep up a standing Army to quell such
Discontents; for where there are and will be Discontents without any tie of
Conscience to restrain Men, there can be no defense but only in Power; and this
will raise and increase new Discontents; for it alters the frame of our
Constitution, from a Civil to a Military Government, which is one of the great
Grievances we have complained of, and I believe English People will not be
better pleased with Dutch, or German, or any foreign Soldiers, than they were
with their own Countrymen; and I believe English Soldiers will not be
extremely pleased to see themselves disbanded, or sent into other Countries to
hazard their Lives, while their Places are taken up by Foreigners, who live in
ease, plenty, and sasety: And when things are come to this pass, which is so
likely, that I cannot ^ee how all the Wit of Man can prevent it; I will suppose
but one thing more, which you will say is not unlikely, that the King return
with a foreign Force to recover his Kingdoms, how ready will the Men of
Conscience, and the Men of Discontent be to join him, nay to invite him Home
again; and if he returns as a Conqueror, you will wish, when it is too late,
that you had treated with him, and brought him back upon safe and honorable
Terms.

Secondly, Let us suppose now, that all this should be over-voted (for I am
sure it can never be answered) and the Convention should resolve to proclaim
the next Heir.

1. You must be sure to examine well who is the next Heir, that is, you must
thoroughly examine the Pretenses of the Prince of Wales; and yet if you have not
good Proofs of the Imposture, you had better let it alone. For tho the Nation
has had general presumptions of it, yet a Male Heir of the Crown is mightily
desired, and People would be very fond of him, if they had one, and seem to
expect some better Proofs than mere Presumptions against him* because common
Fame has promised a great deal more, and if you should either say nothing to
it, or not what is expected, it would be a very plausible pretense for
discontented People to quarrel.

2. Suppose the Princess of Orange should a^pear to be the next Heir, what if a
Lady of her eminent Virtue should scruple to sit upon her Father's Throne,
while he lives? Or what if she should scruple it hereafter, and place her
Father in his Throne again? This is not impossible; for Virtue is greater than
a Throne. For my part, I think you will put a very hard thing upon so excellent
a Lady, and I pray God give her Grace to resist the Temptation. A Regency is
more tolerable, because a Nation must be governed, and none so proper to govern
it as the next Heir; but I should think, none who expect to wear a Crown,
should countenance Subjects in deposing their King, nor accept of a Crown upon
such Terms, as to take it off of a Father's Head: It is a dangerous thing for a
Prince who has a Title to the Crown, to own that the Crown may be forfeited or
demised by such a withdrawing; if this be not so, the Princess has no Right to
the possession of the Crown yet; and if it be so, her Crown is worth a great
deal less than formerly it was, especially if she own this Secret by accepting
the Crown* which her Ancestors always concealed, and which the best Subjects of
England would not believe before; what they may do after this, I know not.

Thirdly, The next Design (I verily believe without the knowledge or thought of
the Prince, who has too great a Mind to think of any thing, which in the
opinion of any wise Man could stain and fully his Glory) is to give the Crown
to the Prince of Orange, for it must be a Gift, if any thing; for he has no
immediate Title to it, that I know of: This is upon a pretense, that the
Government is dissolved, and therefore we must begin de novo, which is very
ridiculous, when the King is still alive, and the Laws in as full force as
ever, only the Regular Administration of Government at present interrupted by
the King's absence; but this is not the worst of it, for it is a dangerous
pretense too, especially to Men of Quality and Es^^tes, as you are; for if the
Government be dissolved, our Laws are dissolved, and Honor and Property
dissolved with them, and then I doubt the Mobile will come in for their share
in the new Division of the Lands, and set up for Men of as good Quality as any;
for if our Laws are gone, we return to a state of Nature, in which all Men are
equal, and all things common; this I believe you will not be for, for the
Reason abovementioned.

If then the Laws continue, the Government is not dissolved, and the Crown is
not a Gift, but an Inheritance still, as much as your Estate is; and then the
Prince of Orange cannot have it in his own Right, because his own Princess, and
the Princess Anne are before him; consider then what the consequence of this
Project would be.

1. This alters the essential Constitution of the English Government, by
changing an Hereditary into an Elective Monarchy, a thing which I know some Men
are very fond of; for then the next occasion they can find to quarrel with
their Prince, they may with as much ease turn it into a Commonwealth; for when
the Crown is at the Peoples disposal, they may if they please keep it to
themselves.

2. This will entangle all Men of Conscience in new Difficulties; for the Oath
of Allegiance does not only bind us to the King, but to his Heirs and
Successors, which must be understood of the next lineal Heir, where there is no
Authority to alter it; and whatever a Parliament may be thought to have with
the Authority and Consent of the King, no Man pretends, that a Convention of
the Estates has any Legal Authority to do it. I should be as heartily glad as
any Man, to see the Prince of Orange legally seated on the English Throne; but
these are Difficulties I cannot break through. Thus I have given you my hasty
Thoughts, and pray God to direct you.

I am Yours.
POSTSCRIPT.
THere is one thing more, I would beg of you, that the Story of French League
to cut Protestants Throats in England man be w^ll examined* for this did more
to drive the King out of the Nation* than the Prince's Army, and if this should
prove a Sham, as some, who pretend to know, say it is, it seems at least to be
half an Argument to invite the King back again. In short, remember you are a
Convention, not a Parliament, and therefore nothing can give Authority to what
you do, but the good liking of the People; and as Necessity only can justify
your meeting without the King's Writs, so I hope you will take care to do
nothing but what will justify it self to God, the King, and your Country.



An ANSWER to the Author of the LETTER to a Member of the CONVENTION.
Reverend Sir,
YOur Name, your Quality, your Religion, and your Design in Publishing this
Letter are wholly unknown to me, but the confident Assertion, page 3.6.16. That
you are sure it can never be Answered; sounds so like a Son, or rather a Father
of the Infallible Church, that it has provoked me, if not to answer, yet at
least to reflect upon some Passages in this Magisterial Composure.

. 2. Whatever becomes of other Arguments, Interest is most likely to prevail.
You, Sir, suppose your Parliament Man, in these words, to be one who will
regard no Arguments from Justice, Reason, Religion, or the Laws of God or Man;
Interest is the only thing which is likely to prevail; an excellent Complement
to a Parliament Man; but it goes higher yet, and takes in the Majority of the
States, for no one Man shall ever determine these great things.

. 3. You tell him, That All the threatening Dangers of Popery were not a more
formidable Prospect to considering Men, than the present Distractions and
Division^. Now surely this is a very bold and daring stroke; but that I am
certain these pensive thoughtful Men are not either very numerous, or very
considerable; otherwise, the few of the Church of England that are
overthoughtful in this Point, deserve much Compassion, because they disquiet
themselves and others out of pure tenderness of Conscience, and an overgreat
Loyalty; but then there is no danger to be apprehended from them; and they will
in time satisfy their own Scruples, and in the interim, I doubt not, infinitely
more Men dread the Dangers of Popery, even to this Day, than all the
Common-wealth-Men, Dissenters ambitious and revengeful Wretches, which you have
so artfully mustered up to fright the Country Esquire with, can overbalance.
Strange it is in the mean time, that the Dangers of Popery, which last October
appeared so formidable, should in so short a time vanish, or rather dwindle
into nothing: But God, by the Ministry of the Prince of Orange and his Friends,
has brought this about. In the rest of that Section I agree with you, and
approve of it.

The two next Sections being only a representation of the different Parties of
Men now upon the Stage, I leave as I find them.

. 6. Though the Opinion of those who are for sending to the King, and treating
with him to return to his Government, under such legal Restraints, as shall
give security to the most jealous Persons for the preservation of their Laws,
Liberties, and Religion i^ horribly decryed, etc. yet the only Reason against
it is, because it is vain. Now, Sir, that Reason is so very good, that it may
perhaps justily that dreadful Consequence you so shrink at; for though I do not
doubt but you are a wonderful Legislator, yet if Twenty wiser Men than you were
joined with you to frame these new Laws, yet let but a Popish Prince have the
Supreme Executive Power and the Legal Prerogatives, and he will break through
all your Restrictions with wonderful Facility, as we have seen by Experience.
But then if you leave him the Name, and take away the Power of a King, you set
up a Commonwealth immediately, which will not end with your Popish Prince, but
there will be stickling to keep all things in the same State in the following
Reign, of what Religion soever the Prince is, which was the Reason why the
Limitations offered by Charles II. in 1679, were rejected.

[And let it be remembered also how well that Prince, that was supposed to be a
Protestant, kept his Word, and the Solemn League and Covenant, which he
solemnly with Hands and Eyes lifted up to Heaven, swore to observe in Scotland,
etc.]

Well, but we would have thought our selves very secure if the King would h^ve
called a Free Parliament; Yes, Sir, if he would have called it Freely, so that
it had been the production of his Will without Force; but Sir, it is notorious,
he was resolved the Parliament should either not be free, or not meet; and if
your Memory will not serve you to recall the virulent Reflection on the humble
Petition presented by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal the 17th of November
last, in which the Author tells us, That the summoning a Parliament (...), is
so far from being the only way (to prese^ve His Majesty and the Kingdom) that
it will be one of the principal causes of much Misery to the Kingdom, etc. and
nothing would do then* but driving the Prince of Orange out of the Kingdom with
Force and Arms. Now I say, Sir, If you cannot remember this, you shall never be
trusted to frame Laws, if I can help it.

There is another and a better Reason to refuse a Treaty, than the fearing the
King should comply. Suppose that he should grant all that you can ask, bating
White Hall, the Reve^^e, the Title of King, and the Right of calling
Parliaments, and making Peace and War: What Security have we that he will
acquiesce in this low restrained Estate? Oaths, Laws, and Promises we had
before, but what did they signify? Who shall be Guarantee? what shall we do if
he break out again? In short quis eustodiet Custodes* So that the many who
desire a Treaty, are desired to read the Enquiry into the present State of
Affairs, that they may not come into the Discipline of the severe Lady, who has
taught the Protestants in France and Piedmont a Lesson which England too must
have gone through with, if God and H. W. P. O. had not saved us.

But if the Convention should refuse to treat, and Depose the King, it would
act without a Legal Power,. 8. Why Sir, here is no occasion to talk of a
Deposition, the King is gone of his own accord freely; and they are only to
consider whether we shall perish in a State of Anarchy, re^al him, and suffer
over again all that is past, and all that was intended, but prevented; or
whether they shall recognize the next immediate Heir, and enquire who that is?
Well, but the next Heir, it seems, shall have small joy of it, his whole
Authority depending on a Convention that has no Authority: In good time! Will
the Authority of this Prince, when acknowledged, depend on the Authority of the
Convention? Did Queen Elizabeth or King James I owe all their Authority to the
Parliaments which recognized their respective Rights? But no Man will think
himself bound in Conscience to obey this Heir. Have you, Sir, the keeping of
all Men's Consciences; or the knowledge of their Thoughts? I can assure you mine
is not in your custody.

. 9. All those who think themselves bound [still] by their Oath of Allegiance
to defend the King's Person, his Crown, and Dignity, etc. will be greatly
discontented. Why Sir, then they may go over into France, and be admitted into
his Guards, and perhaps the generous Allowance given him by the French King,
will maintain them, if their Heresy do not overbalance their Loyalty, and
turn it into a Crime, as it happened to the H^gonots. Well, but they will never
own any other whilst their own King lives: Assuredly this is a wonderful Man,
if he could but as certainly inform us of the number, as he can of the Thoughts
and future Actions of these Loyalist's.

Well, but if they should happen to be Persons of known Prudence, Abilities,
Integrity, Honesty, though they were never so few and never so tame, it would
give a terrible stroke to this To^t^ring Government. Why, Sir, all or the
greatest part of such Men in the Nation, were a dreadful Body, tho they were
and ever will be few, but Sir, there must be a considerable Body of such Men
first satisfied in the Convention, a number without Doors are already
satisfied, and more will when the States have passed their Resolves* and the
remainder of the Men of this High Character, who will still remain
Discontented, if they are any thing Peaceable, though not over Tame, will never
be able to shock the most T^^tering Government in the World by their Examples,
how well soever he thinks of them.

Yet,. 10. He endeavors to show the number will not be small, because many who
joined with the Prince, are ashamed of what they have done, and ask God pardon
for is, and are ready ^o undo it as far as they can. Well, Sir, how many such
do you know besides your self? A List of these Men were worth the having, and
may perhaps be easily taken, if one knew how to separate them from the rest;
however, I should not fear greatly the terrible Shock of these wonderful Men,
till I had better information of their Numbers than you can possibly give us.
They were not willing to part with the King, tho they were horribly afraid of
Popery. Why, Sir, has the King changed his Religion in France? or are those
Gentlemen so fond of the King, that they would now be contented to suffer all
that Popery threatened so lately? Or are they become as weary of their Delivery
as they were before of Popery? Or, will they sacrifice their Laws, Religion,
old Foundations, and Free Parliaments to their Allegiance to their King? If you
say, Yes, I have done; if no, then you would have what was not to be had, and
will not be contented with what may be h^d; and if the Number of these Men is
great, farewell to the Liberties, Laws, Religion; and Privileges of England,
and its Wealth and Inhabitants too, and what is left you may be pleased to
divide amongst your Men of Character.

To all this he assures us,. 10. There will be a Thousand Occasions of
Discontent: Ju^^ a Thousand, neither one more or less, besides those springing
from the sense of Loyalty and Conscience: Strange, that these Two should be so
troublesome, as to equal, if not exceed the whole Thousand that went before.

He that had been before so liberal of his Informati^n, now sets us to guess
in. 10. How many will be discontented in the new Court for want of Preferment?
Why, Sir, If you please to inform me how many days in February shall be clear,
and how many shall be cloudy, I will fall a guessing how many in the new Court
shall be pleased, and how many shall be dissatisfied; but when I have done, it
will not be worth the while, because this ever happens, and Courtiers have an
old way of keeping these Malcontents in hope, till they fall off or gain what
they desire; and so if there should happen to be a Thousand of them, they will
not be able to shock the Government, if there is no other cause of Discontent
than that.

Well, but here Duty and Discontent will mix, because they are sensible of
their Mistake when it is too late: For as they ought not to have fought for
Popery, nor against the Laws and Liberties of their Country; so neither ^ught
they to have deserted the defense of the King's Person and Crown, but have
brought the Prince to Terms as well as the King: Why, Sir, Nemo tenetur ad
impossibilia. The King was never brought to Terms, nor perhaps never will: So
that if they (...) Fought at all, it must have been for Popery, and against
both our Laws and Liberties. Sir, show when and where the King offered us or
the Prince any Terms, and I will pass my word you shall be employed to frame
Laws for the Convention, which is certainly a good Employ for one that is so
expert at it as you pretend to be.

Well,. 13. A heavy Tax must be laid upon the Nation, to defray the Charge of
this Expedition: Why, Sir, Are you of the Privy C^uncil to the Prince? Surely
he will be able to find some other Cause, or not make the Tax so very heavy.
But Men will be very sorry to lose their King, and pay so dear for it too. Yes
doubtless, a Gracious King is a great Loss; but if he will be gone, and in^olve
us in a War too, Taxes must be p^id, yea, heavy Taxes to support the Charge of
it, or Louis will in a short time teach us what the Prince's Expedition was
worth, whatever it cost.

But this is not all, we must part with our Church too, the crazy Title will
require the giving the Church to the Dissenters,. 14. The Dissenters have or
late acted very well; and perhaps if a wise Man has the mannaging of them; and
the Popish Emissaries be carefully looked after, we may compound the Quarrel
better cheap than the parting with our Church. Sir, I am well assured a great
deal less will for the present content them, and the King is not Immortal, and
whenever he Dies, the Crazy Title will be So^^red again, if no Body be to blame
for giving it another terrible Shock.

. 15. Should the King be Deposed, or any other ascend the Throne, it will be
necessary to keep a standing Army to quell such Discontents. You may be a good
Law-framer for ought I know, but I will swear you are no Statesman; this whole
Section is mere Whimsey borrowed from the Dutch Design Anatomized, who had the
folly to talk of Governing England by an Army of Dutch and Germans; but why,
God knows, except it were because a few were brought over to deliver us, and
cannot presently be returned back to Holland. The Prince is both a wise and a
good Prince, and knows the Consequence of keeping those Forces long here,
better than a Thousand such Law-framers.

Suppos^ the King should return with a Foreign Force to recover his Kingdom,
how ready will the Men of Conscience be, and the Men of Discontent to join with
them, nay, to invite him Home again. This looks so like a Roman Catholic Zeal,
that if I were not assured he is a Church of England-Man, I could not believe
but it was a Disciple of St. Omers: But will the Conscientious Men invite the
King home again, with all his Apostolic Vicars, Jesuits, Ecclesiastical
Judges, Dispensing Power, and a round Army of French Dragoons to teach us the
French Faith after the French Fashion? Are these the Men of Character,
Prudence, Ability, Integrity, or of Conscience either? Would one of the
Primitive Christians have talked thus, have stood for a Licinius against a
Constantine? Well, if the King comes in a Conqueror, we shall wish we had
Treated. Truly I shall not; I had rather be forced than deceived, for then I
know what I have to trust to; and I would not willingly be accessory to my own
Ruin.

Well, suppose this unanswerable stuff is over-voted,. 17. We are to bring good
proof the Prince of Wales is an Imposture, or else we h^d better let it alone.
Very good; the Negative is to be proved; we may guess by this what kind of Laws
you, Sir* would frame. Well, but if this be not done, the Discontented Men will
have a plausible pretense to quarrel: What the Conscientious Men will do we
must guess, but in all probability they will not be better quali^ed.

What if the Princess of Orange be a Lady of that eminent Virtue that she
should scruple to sit upon her Father's Throne whilst he lives? Well, his
Majesty has deserted his Throne and Kingdom when he needed not, except he had
pleased; and some Body must sit upon his Throne, though he is yet Alive: Now if
it be her Right after his Death, why not now? Our Author is at his Prayers,
that God would give her Grace to resist the Temptation; and I at mine, That the
Author may never be one of her Chaplains till he is better informed. The rest
of that Section is not unanswerable, but not worth answering.

He has all along supposed the Prince of Orange Crowned, yet in the 19th
Section he proves he can have no Right to it, neither by Descent nor Gift; and
truly I am of the same mind for many Reasons, and especially for the sake of
the Three alleged by him, Sect. 20, 21, 22. and for some others too of as
great weight, which may be found in the Lord Virulam 's History of Henry VII.
And yet our Case now before us has three Difficulties that had not, 1. A King
living. 2. A Prince of Wales true or false. 3. A Nation divided in Religion; to
which I might perhaps add the Excessive Power of France, and the Excessive Zeal
of this Generation to preserve the Descent of the Crown in the Right Line, and
in the Legal Steps and Degrees. And this being done, I am persuaded nothing can
divide the English Nation, or lessen their Zeal and Affection to the Prince of
Orange, who has deserved the Crown, if it were ours to give him.

The Postscript, which is an Huy and Cry after the French League to cut our
Throats, I leave to the Convention: And if I durst be so bold as to ask a
Favor of them, it should be to enquire what the To. Catholic meant by that
Threat of theirs, so frequently printed and spoken by them, If fair means would
not obtain the Repeal of our Penal Laws and Tests, foul should.

Now for a Conclusion, I would desire you, Sir, to propose your method of
Restoring the King, and Securing our Laws and Religion, and it shall go hard
but I will show you it is impracticable, or impossible, that it will never be
granted; or if it be, never observed: And if you please to bless the World with
a Receipt of an Obligation that will bind the Conscience of any other Roman
Catholic so fast that neither Jesuit and Pope can break or untie it, I assure
you I will join with you in a Petition to the Convention, for a Treaty
forthwith, without any other Terms to be proposed than the giving us that
Security, whatever it is. And in the Interim, I am,

SIR, YOURS.
Ian. 24. 1688/9.
FINIS.
The EIGHT Collection of Papers Relating to the Present Juncture of Affairs in
England. VIZ. I. Proposals to the present Convention for Settling the
Government. II. Several Queries relating to the present Proceedings in
Parliament. III. A Protestant Precedent offered for the Exclusion of King James
the Second. IV. Reasons offered for placing the Prince of Orange singly in the
Throne during his Life. V. A Breviate for the Convention, represented to the
Lords and Commons of England. VI. King James the First his Opinion of a King,
and of a Tyrant; and of the English Laws, Rights and Privileges. VII.
Proposals to the present Convention, for perpetual Security of the Protestant
Religion, and Liberty of the Subjects of England.


London printed, and are to be sold by Rich. Ianeway in Queen's-head Court in
Paternoster Row, 1689.

PROPOSALS Humbly offered To the Lords and Commons in the present CONVENTION,
for Settling of the Government, etc.
My Lords and Gentlemen;
YOU are Assembled upon Matters of the highest Importance to England and all
Christendom; and the result of your Thoughts, in this Convention, will make a
numerous Posterity Happy or Miserable. If therefore I have met with any Thing
that I think worthy of your Consideration, I should think my self wanting in
that Duty which I owe to my Country and Mankind, if I should not lay it before
You. If there be (as some say) certain Lineaments in the Face of Truth, with
which one cannot be deceived, because they are not to be counterfeited; I hope,
the Considerations which I presume to offer You, will meet with your
Approbation: That, bringing back our Constit^tion to its first and purest
Original, refining it from some gross Abuses, and supplying its Defects, You
may be the Joy of the present Age, and the Glory of Posterity.

FIrst, It Is necessary to distinguish between Power it self, the Designation of
the Persons Governing, and the Form of Government. For,

1. All Power is from God as the Fountain and Original.

2. The Designation of the Persons, and the Form of Government, is eirther,
First, immediately from God, as in the Case of Saul and David, and the
Government of the Ievs; or, Secondly, from the Community, choosing some Form of
Government, and subjecting themselves to it. But it must be noted, that though
Saul and David had a Divine Designation, yet the People assembled; and in a
General Assembly, by their Votes, freely chose them: Which proves, that there
can be no orderly or lasting Government, without Consent of the People Tacit or
Expressed; and God himself would not put Men under a Governor without their
Consent. And in case of a Conquest, the People may be called Prisoners or
Salves (which is a State contrary to the Nature of Man) but they cannot be
properly Subjects, till their Wills be brought to submit to the Government: So
that Conquest may make Way for a Government, but it cannot constitute it.

Secondly, There is a Supreme Power in every Community, essential to it, and
inseparable from it; by which, if it be not limited immediately by God, it can
form it self into any kind of Government. And in some extraordinary Occasions,
when the Safety and Peace of the Public necessarily require it, can supply the
Defects, reform the Abuses, and re-establish the true Fundamentals of the
Government; by Purging, Refining, and bringing Things back to their first
Original: Which Power may be called, The Supreme Power Real.

Thirdly, When the Community has made choice of some Form of Government, and
subjected themselves to it, having invested some Person or Persons with the
Supreme Power: The Power in those Persons may be called, The Supreme Power
Personal.

Fourthly, If this Form be a mixed Government of Monarchy, Aristocracy and
Democracy; and, for the easy Execution of the Laws, the Executive Power be
lodged in a single Person; He has, A Supreme Power Personal, quoad hoc.

Fifthly, The Supreme Power Personal of England, is in Kings, Lords, and
Commons; and so it was in Effect agreed to, by King Charles the First, in his
Answer to the nineteen Propositions; and resolved by the Convention of Lords
and Commons in the Year 1660. And note, That the Acts of that Convention, tho
never confirmed by Parliament, have been taken for Law, and particularly by the
Lord Chief Justice Hales.

Sixthly, The Supreme Power Personal of England fails three Ways.

1. It Is Dissolved: For two Essential Parts fail. 1. A King. 2. A House of
Commons; which cannot be called according to the Constitution, the King being
gone, and the Freedom of Election being destroyed by the King's Encroachments.

2. The King has forfeited his Power several Ways. Subjection to the Bishop of
Rome, is the Subjection against which our Laws cry loudest: And even Barclay
(that Monarchical Politician) acknowledges, That if a King alienate his
Kingdom, or subject it to another, he forfeits it. And Grotius asserts, That if
a King really attempt to deliver up, or subject his Kingdom, he may be therein
resisted: And that, if the King have part of the Supreme Power, and the People
or Senate the other part, (the King invading that part which is not his) a just
Force may be opposed, and he may lose his Part of the Empire. Grotius de Bello,
etc. Cap. 72. But that the King has subjected the Kingdom to the Pope, needs no
Proof; That the has usurped an absolute Power superior to all Laws, made the
Peoples Share in the Legislative Power impertinent and useless, and thereby
invaded their just Rights, none can deny. 'Twere in vain to multiply Instances
of his Forfeitures: And, if we consider the Power exercised by him of late, it
will most evidently appear to all who understand the English Constitution, that
it admits of no such King, nor any such Power.

3. The King has deserted,

(1.) By incapacitating himself by a Religion inconsistent with the
Fundamentals of our Government. (2.) By forsaking the Power: the Constitution
allowed him, and usurping a Foreign one: So that tho the Person remained, the
King was gone long ago. (3.) By Personal Withdrawing.
Seventhly, The Supreme Power Real remains in the Community; and they may act
by their Original Power: And tho every Particular Person is, notwithstanding
such Dissolution, Forfeiture, or Desertion, subject to the Laws which were made
by the Supreme Power Personal, when in Being; yet the Communities Power is not
bound by them, but is paramount all Laws made by the Supreme Power Personal:
And has a full Right to take such Measures for Settling the Government, as they
shall think most sure and effectual, for the lasting Security and Peace of the
Nation. For we must note, that it was the Community of England, which first
gave Being to both King and Parliament, and to all the other Parts of our
Constitution.

Eighthly, The most Renowned Politician observes, That those Kingdoms and
Republics subsist longest that are often renewed, or brought back to their
first Beginnings; which is an Observation of Self-evident Truth, and implies,
That the Supreme Power Real has a Right to Renew, or bring back. And the most
ingenious Lawson observes (in his Politica) That the Community of England, in
the late Times, had the greatest Advantage that they or their Ancestors had had
for many Ages, for this purpose; tho God hid it from their Eyes: But the
wonderful Concurrence of such a Series of Providence, as we now see and
admire, gives ground to hope; That the Veil is removed, and the Nation will now
see the Things that concern their Peace.

Ninthly, The Acts done and executed by the Supreme Power Personal (when in
Being) have so modeled the Parts and Persons of the Community, that the
Original Constitution is the best, justest, and the most desirable. The Royal
Family affords a Person that both Heaven and Earth point out for King. There
are Lords, whose Nobility is not affected by the Dissolution of the Government,
and are the subject Matter of a House of Lords; And there are Places, which by
Custom or Charter have Right to choose Representatives of the Commons.

Tenthly, There are are inextricable Difficulties in all other Methods. For,

1. There is no Demise of the King, neither Civil nor Natural.

2. There is consequently no Descent.

3. The Community only has a Right to take Advantage of the King's Forfeiture
or Desertion.

4. Whatever other Power may be imagined in the two Houses, as Houses of
Parliament, it cannot justify it self to the Reason of any, who understand the
Bottom of our Constitution.

5. By this Method all Popish Successors may be excluded; and the Government
secured, in case all the Protestants of the Family die without Issue: And this
by the very Constitution of England. And the Question can never arise about the
Force or the Lawfulness of a Bill of Exclusion.

6. The Convention will not be obliged to take Oaths, etc.

Eleventhly, If these things be granted, and the Community be at Liberty to act
as above; it will certainly be most advisable, not only for the Security and
Welfare of the Nation, but (if rightly understood) for the Interest of their
Royal Highnesses, to limit the Crown as follows: -- To the Prince of Orange
during his Life (yet with all possible Honor and Respect to the Princess,
whose Interests and Inclinations are inseparably the same with his) Remainder
to the Princess of Orange, and the Heirs of her Body; Remainder to the Princess
of Denmark, and the Heirs of her Body; Remainder to the Heirs of the Body of
the Prince of Orange; Remainder as an Act of Parliament shall appoint.

This will have these Conveniences among others.

1. Husband and Wife are but one Person in Law, and her Husband's Honor is
hers.

2. It puts the present Kingly Power into the best Hand in the World; which
(wit^out Flattery) is agreed on by all Men.

3. It asserts the abovesaid Power in the Community.

4. It will be some Acknowledgment to the Prince for what he has done for the
Nation: And it is worthy Observation, that before the Theocracy of the Jews
ceased, the manner of the Divine Designation of their Judges, was by God's
giving the People some Deliverance by the Hand of the Person, to whose
Government they ought to submit; and this even in that time of extraordinary
Revelations. Thus Othniel, Gideon, Iephthah, Samson, and others were invested
by Heaven with the Supreme Authority: And though Joshua had an immediate
Command from God to succeed Moses, and an Anointing to that purpose, by the
laying on of Moses's Hands: Yet the Foundation of the People's Submission to
him was laid in Jordan. And I challenge the best Historians to give an Instance
(since that Theocracy ceased) of a Designation of any Person to any Government,
more visibly Divine than that which we now admire. If the Hand of Providence
(miraculously and timely disposing Natural Things, in every Circumstance to the
best advantage) should have any Influence upon Men's Minds; most certainly we
ought not here to be insensible. If the Voice of the People be the Voice of
God, it never spoke louder: If a Nation of various Opinions, Interests and
Factions, from a turbulent and fluctuating State, falls into a serene and quiet
Calm, and Men's Minds are strangely united on a sudden; it shows from whence
they are influenced. In a word, if the Hand of God is to be seen in Human
Affairs, and his Voice to be heard upon Earth; we cannot any where (since the
ceasing of Miracles) find a clearer and more remarkable Instance, than is to be
observed in the present Revolution. If one examines the Posture of Foreign
Affairs, making way for the Prince's Expedition by some sudden Events and
Occurrences, which no Human Wisdom or Power could have brought about; if one
observes that Divine Influence which has directed all his Counsels, and crowned
his Undertakings, notwithstanding such innumerable Dangers and Difficulties,
with constant Honor and Success: If one considers how happily and wonderfully
both Persons and Things are changed in a little time, and without Blood: It
looks like so many Marks of God's Favor, by which he thinks fit to point him
out to us in this extraordinary Conjuncture.

I will trouble you but with one Consideration more; which is, That the two
things most necessary in this Affair, are Unanimity and Dispatch: For without
both these of your Counsels will have little Effect. In most things it is good
to be long in resolving; but in some it is fatal not to conclude immediately:
And presence of Mind is as great a Vertte, as Rashness is a Vice. For the turns
of Fortune are sometimes so quick, that if Advantage be not taken in the
critical hour, it is for ever lost. But, I hope, your Lordships, and all those
Gentlemen who compose this August Assembly, will proceed with so much Zeal and
Harmony, that the Result of your present Consultations may be a lasting and
grateful Monument to Posterity, of your Integrity, Courage and Conduct.

SEVERAL QUERIES Relating to the present Proceedings in Parliament; More
especially recommended to the Consideration of the BISHOPS.
I. HOW the House of Commons can answer it to those People whom they Represent,
if now they have an Opportunity, they do not settle the Government upon such a
Foundation as will be likely, not only to preserve the Nation from Foreign
Enemies, but also from falling into the like unhappy Circumstances which it is
but just now escaped out of, and which in a great measure have proceeded from a
want of a right Settlement of Public Affairs at the Restoration of King
Charles the Second.

II. Whether this can be done without altering the Succession, since the Birth
of the Prince of Wales is not proved supposititious, (though perhaps no Body
doubts but it is so)? And supposing it proved so, Whether it would not be more
feasible to make a President now, than to try the Experiment first, when the
next Right of Succession is claimed by the Infanta of Spain; or perhaps some
Prince her Heir, too strong to resist without the Assistance of the Prince of
Orange, especially if there happen to be such Divisions amongst Us as are at
this Time?

III. Whether it can be immagined to be worth the Prince of Orange's while to
leave Holland, where he is the chief Man, and become a Subject in England; nay,
and have such an uncertain Interest in his stay here, that if his Wives Life
chance to drop, perhaps he may be banished in a Years time, and not have a
Place, as things may happen, to put his Head in? For his Interest in Holland
must necessarily fall into other Hands; And no Body knows what fallings out may
happen betwixt Us and the Dutch, or what other Contingencies may happen that
may give cause of Disgust.

IV. Whether (considering the present State of Affairs) the Strength of the
King of France, and the Irish Rebellion, (to say nothing of the Effects which
the Entreaties, and subtle Insinuations of a Father must necessarily have upon
any one that is good natured) it be safe to trust the Administration of Affairs
to a Woman, though never so virtuous? And whether we shall be able to protect
our selves against all these formidable Enemies, and bring things to a due
Settlement, without the Assistance of the Prince of Orange, whose Foreign
Alliances are such as we can never hope to obtain if we confer the Crown upon
any other?

V. Whether it would be a greater real Kindness to the Princess of Orange to
make her sole Queen, after such a manner as she will be likely to be turned out
again; or to make her and her Husband joint King and Queen during their two
Lives? I say, her Husband, who is a Prince, not only able to defend her and her
Kingdom from all the Dangers that may happen, but also to take all the Trouble
which may occur in the Administration of Affairs off her Hands, so that she
will enjoy all the Pleasure of being Queen without any thing of Trouble: And we
may add to this, that if it had not been for him, she had never enjoyed the
Crown, nor the Nation their Freedom?

VI. Whether the Terms the Parliament shall make with one that can pretend no
Right to the Crown but what they give him, will not be more likely to be kept
by him, than by one that pretends a Title, and will be flatter^d up, both by
Lawyers and Divines, (I mean, the Scum of them) with Notions of a Right jure
Divino, and a Prerogative which cannot be parted with or abolished, though by
the King's Consent, or Act of Parliament?

VII. Whether the House of Commons, upon these Considerations, and diverse
others too long to mention, will not think it necessary that the Prince and
Princess of Orange be crowned King and Queen for their two Lives? And whether
it can be imagined, that the Commons should so far betray their Country as to
recede from this Point (so necessary for its Preservation) notwithstanding all
the Disturbances which the Bishops shall make in the House of Lords, and though
they do not meet with the Concurrence of that House so soon as in reason might
be expected?

VIII. Whether the House of Lords will suffer themselves any longer to be
imposed upon by the Bishops in a thing that will be so injurious to the Nation,
as it will be not to comply with the House of Commons in this great Point;
which must necessarily put such a damp upon Trade, that it will certainly be
the Ruin of many hundreds of Families in the Nation whose dependence are upon
Handy-Craft-Trades, to say nothing of the Disadvantages which may accrue by
such a Delay to the poor Protestants in Ireland? and admitting they should,
whether the Circumstances of Affairs would not in a little time force them to a
compliance with the House of Commons?

IX. Whether the Prince of Orange will not show himself one of the unkindest
Men in the World if he does not stick by these People, till he sees them
secured, that have ventured their Lives and Fortunes for Him and their Country
in confidence of his Protection? and whether he as Head of the Protestant
Religion, be not obliged to stand by the 48 Protestant Lords, and House of
Commons, that have served their Country so faithfully?

X. Whether it would not be Prudence in the Bishops (supposing their Designs be
good, as I would hope they are) to show their readiness to assist the Nobility
and Gentry in carrying on this great Work, whereby they might settle the Church
upon the surest Foundation, the Laws of God and of the Land, and continue
themselves in the Affections of the People?

XI. Whether all the Protestant Blood which shall be spilt in Ireland by reason
of these long Delays, will not be justly laid at the Bishops doors, if they
proceed after the same manner they have begun?

And lastly, To answer the great Objection, that we shall lose the Kingdom of
Scotland if we make the King Elective for this Turn.

Whether the Scots can choose any body that will be more agreeable to their
Interests than the Prince of Orange? and supposing they can, Whether it be not
madness to imagine, since they have a different Parliament, different Laws, and
a different Original Contract (so that the King may commit a Forfeiture there,
when he has committed none here, or a Forfeiture here, when he has committed
none there) that they will not place the Crown upon him without any respect to
what is done here, whether we make it a Forfeiture, or only a bare Demise?

A Protestant Precedent offered to the Bishops for the Exclusion of K. James
the Second.
IF Necessity, which is a great Branch of the Law of Nature, did not press us
at this time, to come to some speedy and pertinent Determinations, as to the
business, especially, of settling the Government, that Nicety, which seems to
be promoted and set afoot in all our Counsels, might, considering the
Weightiness of the business in hand, rather claim the just Commendation and
Applauses of every good Man, than, as it seems now, fall under their Censure;
and I may say Indignation. If the matter debated were extraneous, and the
Kingdom within it self peaceably and firmly settled; if the Circumstances of
our Affairs were ordinary and usual, and could admit of an unlimited time for
their Decision; if we were secure from injurious Resolutions of our Enemies
abroad, or from the private Machinations of disaffected Persons at home: If
these things were so, it were worthy the Wisdom of those, who by their
unseasonable Scruples (so generally resolved against, and now again by them
started) may seem either ignorant of the desperate languishing condition of
these Kingdoms at present, or prejudiced and disaffected to the E^ace and
Settlement of them for the future; I say, it were then worthy the Wisdom of
these Men to dissect every particular of so important an Affair, before they
made any Determination of the General. As we all acknowledge the extraordinary
Circumstances of this Juncture, so they themselves have not been a little
contributing to this happy Revolution: The Prince's first Declaration tells us,
he had the Invitation of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal. Was it Justice and
agreeable to Conscience then, to call for Foreign Arms to assist us against our
own King, in the recovery of those Rights, Liberties and Properties, which,
contrary to Law, he had invaded and taken from us? And is it now become a
Scruple in those same Consciences, to be confirmed in those Rights, etc. by the
same Arms and Power? Is that pretended, absolute, unlimited Power, which in
their Prayers and Sermons they have so often nibbled at, and endavoured to
retrench, now in its just Debasement become so Inviolable and Sacred, that it
must become a Point of Faith entirely to submit to it? Has this small fit of
Fear and Discouragement in our implacable Enemies, so well secured us from any
future Enchroachments, that we need not be careful of any further Assurance?
Has these Men's Re-embellish'd Honors so obliterated the Memory of the Dangers
some of them so lately have escaped, and the rest justly feared, as to free
them from all Apprehensions for the future? What is it these Gentlemen would be
at? what do they fear? Is it without Reason, without Justice, without
Precedent, that we desire to be everlastingly secured from Popery and Slavery?
Not without Reason; for when we have seen many of our fairest Branches lopped
off, many of our Liberties invaded, many of our Laws perverted, and the Axe at
last laid to the Root of our Government, it is high time then, I say, to provide
for our our Safety, and to put a stop to that Current which would have quickly
overrun and drowned us: Not without Justice, for where my Life and Property is
hunted after, and assaulted, I may, by the Law of God and Man, ^epel the
Injury, and stand in my own Vindication: Not without Precedent, even in
Protestant Kingdoms, (not to mention the Romanists, who both teach and practice
the Deposing of evil and wicked Magistrates) and though in England we may
perhaps think the Changes we have very lately seen among our selves admit of no
Precedent, it may easily be proved that which has been done of late in this
Nation, has been in great part formerly presented and allowed of upon Foreign
Stages; yea, and not many Years out of the Memory of some yet living, if we
would but look into the Actions of other Regions, and those too wherein the
Reformed Religion is professed, we shall find that they, by their public
Records, acknowledged that in case of Tyranny and Oppression, it was lawful not
only to defend their Lives and Liberties against all Assaults, but reduce and
declare the Persons so offending, incapable of holding the Government.

A lively Example of this, and almost exactly parallel with ours, was the Case
of Sigismond the Third, Hereditary King of Sweden, who by a Convention of the
States of that Kingdom, was Excluded, even with his Heirs, (a Severity, which
both the Honorable Houses of Parliament here have, with great Justice and
Wisdom, declined) from that Crown for ever: Some of the Articles drawn up
against him were these; First, For swerving from their received Christian
Religion; as also, from his Oath and Promise, and Solemn Engagement made to his
People at his Coronation, to preserve their Rights and Privileges; as also,
their Holy Reformed Religion Inviolated; For departing the Country without the
Consent, and unwilling to the States and Orders of the Realm; For exporting
several Acts of great Concernment out of the Cancellarie; For prosecuting such
as would not embrace or favor the Romish Superstition; For contemning, and
endeavoring to undermine and annul those laudable Institutions and Laws made
for the Security of the Realm, and the Establishment of the Protestant Reformed
Religion; For raising up what Enemies he could against his Native Country,
thereby to involve his Subjects in a Deluge of Blood, which he intended, and
had almost effected* For inhumanely designing and suborning Russians and
Villains, to Murder and Assassinate one of the chief Nobles, for no other
Reason, but that out of Conscience and Duty, he would have persuaded him from
those Irregularities and notorious Breaches of the known Laws of the Land. For
these, and many more Causes, as the sending his Son out of the Land, without
the Consent of the States, and causing him to be brought up and educated in the
Romish Superstition, did the Swedes (submitting the same to the Judgment of all
sincere and candid Arbitratours) justify their Abdication for ever, of King
Sigismond the Third, and his Heirs, from the Crown of Sweden, etc. and
proceeded strait to the Constituting and Electing of Charles Duke of
Sudermannia; vid. Spanheim 's Hist. of Sweden, etc. And in conclusion, they
pray for, and doubt not of a candid Construction, a benign and favorable
Acceptance, from all Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes, States, etc. of this
their Legitimate Defense, and to vindicate them and their most equal Cause from
all Calumny, or e^il Interpretation whatsoever. The Circumstances relating to
this present Juncture in England, bear so near a resemblance almost in all
these Grievances objected against the said Sigismond, that our late King, by a
sort of (...), seems to have breathed his Soul, rather than to have copied
after him, though indeed in some Cases he has plainly outdone the Original,
especially in relation to his supposed Son. And as our King thought fit to Copy
a King of Sweden, I cannot apprehend how it can lessen our Judgments or
Integrity, our Piety, or our Loyalty, to follow the Example of the Swedes,
excepting in the case of the Lawful Heirs (whom every good Englishman and
Protestant, to their utmost Danger and Peril, are ready to defend and maintain)
to take such Measures for our future Security, and lawful Establishment, as
shall not by any Humane Art or Endeavor, be liable to Interruption.

But as Precedents are least satisfactory, or least confronting to obstinate
Opposers; where they make only for one party: A Popish Sigismund deposed for
Maladministration in a Protestant Kingdom, may not perhaps be allowed to
carry its sufficient Justification with the Romanists; and therefore the Tables
ought to be turned, and the Balance made by Parallels of their own side; the
most prudent way of combating, and securing a Victory in this matter, being to
lay the Scene of War in the Enemies Country.

To confute therefore, and silence all the Romish Pretensions of Disgust and
Murmur, against the Injustice of such a Deprivation, from Examples of Popish
Deposals of Male-administring Protestants; we'll begin with Henry of Navarre,
afterward Henry the Fourth of France.

The famous Holy League entered into by the Pope himself, and so many potent
Allies; together with all the Romish Subjects of Fran^e, against that undoubted
Heir of the Crown of France, and at that time by succession the rightful King,
is so notoriously known to the World, that all the tedious Particulars of the
History, would be impertinent.

Let it suffice, here was a Prince, the unquestioned Inheritor of the Crown of
France, actually by all Open and Hostile Means (and all such Hostility avowed
and abetted, and his very Birthright fore-closed by the Pope himself) opposed
and denied his Accession to the Throne, for no other Unqualifications, but be a
Hugonot; that is, of a Persuasion contrary to the Established, and Regnant
Romish Religion in France; being in all other Respects acknowledged a most
excellent Prince: Insomuch, that after all other ineffectual Endeavors of
recovering his Birthright; he had no means left to repeal his Exclusion and
Debarment from the Throne, but by his Abjuration of the Reformed Religion, and
return to the Romish Worship.

This Case of Henry the Fourth, instead of a Parallel to ours, does not come up
to half the Justification of the present Measures of England. For here was a
Sovereign Prince under Deprivation, for no other Default, but his mere
Religion: for this Henry the Fourth being then but in his Entrance to the
Empire (if truly that) was consequently yet at least (whatever they might fear)
under no Dilemmas of the least breach of Compact with his People, no
Forfeitures for Maladministration, or Violation of the Laws of the Land, or
Rights of his Subjects; their Dangers as then being only Apprehensions. If
therefore the mere private Opinion of a Crowned Head, different from the
Established Religion of the Land, has been of weight enough (it self alone) in
their own Scales to oversway the Birthright of Princes, and make a Bar to
Empire; and that too, so solemnly confirmed and ratified, even by the Sanction
Apostolic, the Decretals of Rome it self: What Objections or Allegations can
our Romish Disputants, whether Foreign or Domestic, make against the like Bar
in Empire, after so notorious an actual Maladministration, in the present
Case of England, such too visible Ruptures of the Laws of the Land, and in
defiance of all Obligations of Engagements, Covenant, Word, Honor, or OATHS
themselves?

The next Example I shall point them to, is, that of the late Portuguese King,
who by the Ordinance of the States of Portugal, ratified by the Pope's Assent,
was dethroned, and his Brother invested with the Sovereignty; and not only
that, but his Queen too taken from him, Divorced, and by a Dispensation married
to his Brother. The Grounds of this Deposal being only this, that the King was
sometimes taken with Delirious Fits.

If such a Personal Infirmity was ground sufficient to displace the Crown: Have
not the People, or Community of England, in Convention assembled, as much Right
on their Side, for the Deposal of a King* for a far greater Infirmity, (of the
two a more violent Madness) his long tried and radicated Incapacity of being
held, either by the Bonds or Ties of Honor, Laws, or Oaths: There being this
infinite Difference between the Outrages of the one and the other, as that a
Prince so bigoted, resolved for the Introduction, right or wrong, of his own
Religion, is the more Dangerous Frantic. For his Superstitious Frency may push
him to Violences that will hurt whole Nations, whereas the Outrages of the
other can be only Personal. And if the Hands of the Lunatic Portuguese were
thought Just to be tied up with no less Shackles, than taking both his Kingdom
and Queen away from him; who shall Arraign the Wisdom of the English, for
depriving their King of his Kingdom, (much good may do him with his Queen)
under an infinite larger Capacity, and more dangerous propensity to Mischief.
And for so doing, what Warrant shall they want, when the present unforced
Desertion of the King, and quitting the Helm, has put the Power of Decision in
that Point into their own Hands, and lost him all Right of Appeal against the
Alienation.

I shall venture to add one last Consideration, viz. The Bull of Pope Pius
Quintus, against Queen Elizabeth; by which the Pope deprives her of all Title
to the Imperial Crown, and all Dominion, Dignity, and Privilege whatever;
declaring, that all the Nobility, Subjects, and People of England, and all
others which have in any sort sworn unto her, to be for ever absolved from any
such Oath; and all manner of Duty of Dominion, Allegiance, and Obedience, etc.
and all forbidden to obey her, or her Motions, Mandates, or Laws, upon pain of
Anathema. Vide Bishop of Lincoln's Brutum Fulmen, p. 6.

I recite this unjust Deposal of a Lawful Queen, by the pretended Authority of
the Pope, no other, than to let the World know, that the Romish Party have the
least Reason in Nature, to complain of the Deprivation of Princes. They, whose
Infallible Guides can so insolently and arbitrarily place or displace Crowned
Heads (not to mention the Illegality of the Pope's Interposition, in the Affair
in any kind) for only acting by Law, in Matters of Religious Changes, for such
were all Ecclesiastic Alterations of that Queen, by the unquestioned Authority
of Acts of Parliament; can be but ill furnished with Arguments, against the
present Deprivation, enacted by the whole Community of England, for such
violent Measures and Foundations, already formed and begun, for the subversion
of Church and State against all Law.

Reasons humbly offered, for placing his Highness the Prince of Orange, singly
in the Throne during his Life.
I. IT will be a clear Assertion of the Peoples Right, Firm Evidence of a
Contract Broken, and a sure Precedent to all Ages, when, after a most Solemn
Debate, the Estates of England Declare, That the King having Abdicated the
Government, and the Throne thereby Legally Vacant, They think fit to Fill it
again with One who is not Immediate in the Line.

II. It will be a Caution to Succeeding Kings, of what Fatal Consequence a
general Derogation from the Laws may be, when they find, by this Instance, the
Exercise of the Kingly Office in Danger, not only with Reference to Themselves,
but Precarious to their Family by the Misgovernment. And Generations to come
shall praise our Conduct, when reading the History of this Day, it appears we
understood our Case; had Honor and Honesty to maintain it, and Wisdom enough
to transmit it Perfect to our Posterity.

III. It will be the highest Obligation upon the Two Princesses that can be
expected from a sensible People; when, next to Asserting our own Right, by a
Fact (which is absolutely necessary, and above all other humane Arguments) they
see themselves of Inestimable Value with Us, by Recontinuing the Line in
Remainder; And that their own strict Adherence to the Protestant Religion and
Interest, out-weighs the Demerits of their Unhappy Father.

IV. The Princess of Orange will share in all the Glory of a Crown, without the
Trouble of it: Easy from Popish Reflection, That She sits in her Father's
Throne while he lives. And it concerns the Kingdom, as well as the Princess, to
take care, That She be at Rest from those Solicitations on the Behalf of
Papists, which, under the Countenance of Her Father will perpetually assault
Her tender Breast. Nor is there any room for the Princess of Denmark to think
Her self Neglected; The Exchange being attended with many Advantages, such as
it would be lost Time to repeat, they are so very Obvious, and likewise too
many for the Compass of this Paper.

V. If the Prince of Orange be not King in His own Right, His Interest cannot
be entirely Ours; For though His Gallantry be an Assurance of Sincerity to Us;
yet, if there remain any Probability of His Returning to Holland, as upon the
Death of His Wife, if She only be Sovereign, his Interest must be divided: Nor
will it, according to the Art of Government, become the Prudence of any Nation
to open the Secrets of their Policy to One, whom they may be so Unfortunate as
to part with into a Country that may possibly interfere with Us.

VI. It is dangerous to the Government it self to vest the Exercise of the
Sovereignty in Both, for they may differ in Sentiments of things: and if there
be a possibility of Division, it would be an unancountable Weakness, and great
Oversight, not to secure our selves in so Important a Point.

VII. It is Repugnant to grant the Crown to Both, and fix the Administration in
One; For the Administration is an Incident Inseparable from the Sovereignty. To
be a King, or Queen, and not to have the Exercise of King, or Queen, is a
Contradiction: a Departure from all the Rules that were ever laid down in
Government, unless in case of Personal Incapacity, and therefore below a
Masculine way of Reasoning.

Lastly. It supports the noble Maxim, That a neighboring Nation may take Arms
to assist the Rescue of a People oppressed by Tyranny. And Foreign Princes will
be apt to look into themselves, when they hear, by our Example of Gratitude,
That they are no longer Safe, than Just to their Subjects.

Good Advice before it be too Late: Being a BREVIATE for the CONVENTION: Humbly
Represented to the Lords and Commons of England.
WHereas we cannot but be made very apprehensive by those several efficacious
Papers, such as Dr. B's, Mr. F's, A Word to the Wise; and another as close,
Four Questions Debated, and the like; which go about, left the swaying part of
the Nation should be so much intent upon One Thing, as that Others be
neglected; or lest they be so taken up with putting the Crown upon an Head most
deserving it, as that they forget what is to be done first; which is, The
Consideration of the Constitution of the Realm, and the declaring that
Constitution, before any Person be admitted into actual Regiment; it being
common for those that look but on one Thing, to be too sudden. We therefore
judge it meet, That this ensuing Paper, which was in a few Copies given to some
Members of the Houses, for preventing that Evil, should also be made public,
to go abroad with such Papers as those of the former Nature. For, as it is wise
in a People when they make any Compact, whether with their Rulers, or others,
that though they believe the Party they deal with to be the best in the World,
to treat with him for all that, and be as punctual upon the Terms to make all
secure, as if they were dealing with the worst: So it is also honest for them,
in seeking the Good of their Country, to deny Self-interest, and to prefer the
benefiting a Nation, before the magnifying any single Person whatsoever.

The BREVIATE.
THE People of this Nation are by Birth a Free People, who are born to a
Liberty of Person and Propriety in their Goods and Lands; and therefore England
is rightly called a Free State.

To understand the Government, we must know that these two Things are always to
be distinguished, the Constitution, and the Administration.

The Constitution of a Government does lie in the Original Agreement of the
People, which they make between themselves, or with their intended Governor,
or Governors, before the Government be set up, whether there be none before,
or the Former at an end.

When the People are in such a State, while there is no Order of Superiority,
or Inferiority introduced, it is called a Community: When a Ruler is chose, so
that there is a Ruling and Ruled Part, it is a Society, or called a
Commonwealth.

Let us suppose a Company of Families, that having no dependence on one
another, nor any one having Power over the other, yet living near each other,
do find it convenient to join together in a Society, for mutual Defense against
some Foreign Enemy, or for the reaping several Advantages which they shall
receive by it. The Heads or Representatives of these Families assembled, are to
consider what is to be done in order to these Ends.

Three Things more especially they must consult upon;

1. What Government (as to the Sort or Kind) is best for them?

2. Who shall be Governor or Governors?

3. And by what Laws or Rules they shall govern, who are entrusted with the
Supreme Power?

And more particularly, in relation to what Measure of it they will allow them
to have over their Persons and Estates, to use them as they have Occasion, for
the Public Good. For when they are yet free in both, the Governor can have
Power so far, but no farther than they at first consent. Whatsoever
Reservations of Liberty the People make in their Agreement, these are to be
looked upon as their Rights by the Laws of the Constitution, and essential
thereunto, and consequently inviolable by any of these Governors whom they set
up for the Administration; the very Laws of the Administration being void, so
far as they interfere with any of these of the Constitution.

The Constitution and Laws thereof being agreed upon, and it being impossible
for Humane Prudence to foresee all Accidents, which must be provided for;
therefore as they arise, the Administration necessarily must lie in these two
Things: The making farther Laws (subordinate still to those forepriz'd) as
occasion requires, and seeing them executed, that is, in Legislation and
Judgment. The One is the Business of the Supreme Authority; the Other of the
Inferior Magistrates or Officers, and Executioners of the same, according to
that Fundamental Agreement made by the People.

Our Government now, as constituted in order to this Administration, is, we
know, a mixed Government. A Government is known to be pure or mixed, by the
placing the Supreme Authority. If the People place it singly in the King, or
singly in the Nobles, or singly in the People, then it is a pure Monarchy,
Aristocracy, or Democracy: But when it is placed in all Three, it is a mixed
Government, as Ours is, where there are no Laws in the Administration made but
by King, Lords, and Commons.

These Things I pursue only so far as is necessary, to the reaching my main
Purpose; and the leading me to a right discernment of the present Condition
into which we are now brought in regard to this said Government.

The Supreme Power of the Nation being placed in a Parliament, which is a
Corporation of King, Lords, and Commons, that is, the Supreme Authority
residing in King, Lords and Commons, as One Corporation, there does appear, at
this Conjuncture, a Dissolution of the Government; A Dissolution manifestly, as
to the Exercise of it. This Appearance does arise from the opening of the last
Scene. For the King being now gone, gone from his People, and departing from
his Government, that One Corporation (we speak of) is broke; so that there
remains now no subject for that supreme Authority; It being evident, that a
Parliament, wherein an Essential point of our Constitution does consist, cannot
now be Assembled: And the Providence of God it self has extraordinarily
determined our Case. If a King dies, he has a Successor, and the Right
devolves upon Him; but whilst the King lives, he has no Successor, and the
Right remaining in Him and no Other; and he being divided from his Lords and
Commons, the Subject of the Supreme Power, or this One Corporation (whereof the
King is a Chief, Essential, and Constituent Part) does perfectly cease, and
must necessarily cause a Dissolution.

I choose not to found this upon what does more convince Others, which comes to
this Account: The King, by his frequent Malversation in the Government, and
rooted Design of subverting our Religious and Civil Rights, for the
Introduction of Arbitrary Power and Popery, which being aggravated by such an
Endeavor, as the destroying that Share in the Government, which every Commoner
has, that has Right to choose his Representative in Parliament, by his
Garbling Corporations, and so evacuating this Liberty in effect; and by such an
endeavor also, as the exterminating his Protestant Subjects; seeing that
Religion which he would have introduced, is such, as by the Principles of it,
if it comes into Domination, must do so to all Heretics; and thereupon may he
be looked on no longer as Rex, but Hostis, and Hostis Publicus: Besides, the
subjecting us to a Foreign Jurisdiction, and the very changing the Government,
by that indefinite Dispensing Power over the Laws, as was carved to him by his
Judges, from Regal to Despotical: It is judged by them, that he is fallen
thereupon from his Royal Dignity; and that the Universality thereby have
Warrant not only to defend themselves against him, but by Virtue of that
Sanction, which is tacitly employed in the Laws of the Constitution, to proceed
on to take the Forfeiture He has made of his Government, and Depose Him: For
it is a fond thing, (think they) to imagine any Laws without a Sanction; and
impossible there should be any other Sanction in Treaties between Free Nations,
or between a Free People, and the Governor they set over Themselves, than
Force to be used by the Parties concerned; there being no Third Party on Earth
to appeal to, in such Cases.

However this be, it being taken for granted, That the Government is dissolved,
and I suppose upon that preceding Account, of the One Corporation (I say) being
broke, the Supreme Authority that lay before in the Three as united in One,
does escheat, or fall to the Community; who must therefore choose a new Subject
for that Power; and it lies at their Discretion to place it in what Subject
they please: They may lodge it in the Lords and Commons alone, without a King,
if they think that Government best; the matter lies altogether upon their
Agreement, and Consent. I suppose it most likely, that they will agree to place
it again in a Monarch, Lords and Commons (the Person only left at Choice, and
Care had to prevent all Danger of Law in the Case) according to the Ancient
Constitution; Though what Man can know the Mind of a Nation, when once come
together, if he knows his own Mind?

There is one thing we have now Opportunity to obtain, which we can never
recover again, if it be lost; and that is, what His Highness the Prince of
Orange has made one of his two Designs, The Delivery of the People from
Slavery; which can never be done effectually, and radically, but upon this
Advantage. The delivering us from Popery, is contained in the settling our
Religion; and that being a Work of great length, is the business more properly
of a Parliament; but this is a thing must be done by the Community, and
consequently by thofe that are the Representatives of it, a Convention, so
called (in regard to a higher Capacity hereunto) and not a Parliament; for that
represents the People, not as in a Community, but as in a Commonwealth, where
there is pars imperans, as well as subdita, which now is not. A Parliament
makes Laws for the Administration, but the People as in a Community make Laws
for the Constitution.

I would therefore humbly offer it to the Consideration of those, who shall
meet as Members of this Convention, That, in order to the Effect premised, they
do but agree and pitch upon this one certain Point of good Policy, that where
they place the Supreme Authority, they lay also the Rights or Properties of it;
that is, the Iura Majestatis (Majestas being Maxima Potestas) all together.

The Rights of Majesty, or the Supreme Power, are mainly these: The first is
Legislation, or making Laws; and this undoubtedly lies in a Parliament. The
next, is the Power of raising Arms, or Armies, or the Militia, the Power of
making Peace and War, or the Power of the Sword, which is necessary to maintain
those Laws. The third is a Power over our Estates, or the Purse, or raising
Money, which must maintain the Sword. A fourth, is the Power of choosing
Magistrates to rule Us according to these Laws; such as Judges and Sheriffs, to
name no other. A fifth, is the last Appeal. Now let but the Power of the
Militia and choosing Magistrates, be laid where Legislation is, and we shall be
fundamentally delivered from all Slavery for ever in the Nation.

If we be enslaved or oppressed by any Prince for the time to come, it must be
either by Force or by Injustice. We cannot be oppressed by Force, because no
Forces then can be raised by Him, but by a Parliament. He cannot rule by an
Army, or by Violence; for the Militia is in the Lords and Commons, as well as
in Him, and they will not let him do so: We cannot be oppressed with Injustice;
for the Judges and Officers entrusted with the Execution of Justice, shall be
chosen also by them, and they will look to that.

It is true, while no Parliament sits, the King by Virtue of the Executive
Power lying in him, may raise Arms, and put in Officers and Magistrates as
there i^ need; but both these are to be done under the Control of the next
Parliament (which are therefore to sit often by ancient Statutes) there being
no War to be levied, nor Magistrates confirmed, without their Approbation.

Let us remember the State we are in, a State that puts the Supreme Power in
the Hands of the People, to place it as they will: and therefore to bound and
limit it as they see fit for the public Utility; and if they do it not now,
the Ages to come will have occasion to blame them for ever. When the Supreme
Power is upon the disposing, if they do not take this Item, as part of their
proper Work, To bind the Descent of it to a Protestant, I shall blame them: But
I shall do so much more, if after the Danger we have been in, of Arbitrary
Domination and Popery, by the King's raising Arms, and putting Judges in and
out at his Pleasure, they do not take more care of the Supreme Power, to lay it
and its Rights better together: Especially, seeing nothing can indeed be that
in Nature, which it is, without its Properties. This is uniform (I must
persist) to the Nature of Government; that where the Supreme Authority is,
there must be its Prerogatives; and where the chief or principal Rights of it
is, there should all the rest which depend upon, and belong to it, be placed
also: Where Legislation is lodged, there should the Militia, there should the
Power of making Judges, to name nothing more than serves my turn, be lodged
also. It is this has been the great Declension, Fault, or Defect of our
English Commonwealth, that the People have suffered these Rights of
Sovereignty, to come to be divided, arising (we must conceive) from the
Administration, that is, Maladministration, as appears, for Example, in the
Militia, which upon the fresh coming in of the late King, was in two or three
hot Acts, declared now and ever to have been in the King; when both the
Assertion was gross Flattery, and such Acts void, as fundamentally repugnant to
the Constitution.

There is one Difficulty to be thought on, and that is, the Negative Voice of
the Prince in his Parliament. The Lords and Commons may agree upon some Law for
the public Benefit, and the King alone may refuse to pass it. If he be
obstinate, this is a great Evil, and might really make one think, it would be
better therefore (for the preventing this Inconv^nience) to place the Supreme
Power in Lords and Commons only, without a Controler. Unto which may be added,
the Power of Calling and Dissolving Parliaments at pleasure; by virtue whereof,
our Kings hitherto have pretended a Power predominant over them. But forasmuch
as these Prerogatives may be disputed, and the Negative Voice has been denied
by many Judicious Men, who have pleaded the Obligation of former Princes to
confirm those Laws, quas vulgus elegerit; it is to be hoped that the Wisdom of
the Nation will be able to find out some Expedient or Salve for this
Difficulty, and for more than that also; so long as they have the Golden
Opportunity, to bring a Crown in one Hand, with their Terms or Conditions in
the other.

As for the several Grievances that need Redress, and many good Things that are
wanting to complete the Happiness of our Kingdom; there may be some Foundation
laid happily, or Preparations made in order thereunto by this Convention; but
as belonging to the Administration, and being Matters of long Debate, they are
the Work more properly of an ensuing Parliament. Only let not the Members of
this present Great Assembly forget, that they having so unlimited a Power, and
the Nation such an Opportunity, which, as the Secular Games, they are never
like to see but once, they are more strictly therefore bound in Conscience, and
in Duty to their Country, to neglect no kind of thing, which they judge
absolutely necessary to the public Good. I care not if I commend three or four
such Particulars against the time to Consultation, which shall be these: A
Regulation of Westminster Hall: A Provision against buying or selling of
Offices: A Register of Estates: A Freedom from Persecution (by a Bill for
Comprehension and Indulgence) in the business of Religion: A Redemption of the
Chimny Money, which bringing the King to be Lord of every Man's House, is
against Property; and an Overbalance in the Revenue, is against the Interest
of the Nation.

THE Breviate bing ended, we cannot but reflect upon the King; there being so
much Concern in the Minds of many, about their Allegiance to Him, though He be
gone: But such Persons as these should look a little more to the Bottom, That a
People is not made for the King, but the King for the Peole: And though He be
greater than them in some Respects; yet, quoad finem, the People are always
greater than Him: That is, If the Good of the one, and the other, stand in
Competition, there is no Comparison, but a Nation is to be preferred before one
Man. (As appears by the Opinion of King James the First, hereto annexed.) If
the Being of them be inconsistent one with another, there is no doubt, but it
is better that a King cease, than that a whole Nation should perish. And upon
such a Supposition as this, all Obligation as to Duty must cease likewise.
There are some tacit Conditions in all Oaths, as the best Casuists tell us
(such as Rebus sic stantibus, for one) that we must steer our Consciences by in
these Cases; He is the Minister of God for our Good, says the Scripture: And if
any Prince therefore be under those Circumstances, as that it cannot be for the
Peoples Good that he should rule over them; we do look upon such a Ruler to be
bound in Conscience to give up his Government, as being no Minister of God upon
that Account: And so, having no Authority from God for that Office, the Peoples
Obligation to be subject to Him, is at an end with it. If they obey him longer,
it is for Wrath, not for Conscience sake. If his Majesty now of Great Britain,
out of some deep Sense, that he, being a Roman Catholic, cannot rule, and be
true to his Religion, (which he may suppose does oblige him to an Establishment
thereof by all the ways and means of his Church, though never so destructive to
ours (but it will be to the Hurt, not Good of us who are Protestants) has been
pleased to withdraw himself from his Government, to make us more quiet and
happy; We are in all Gratitude to acknowledge his Piety, Goodness, and
Condescension to be so much, as very few of his Subjects could ever have
suspected: But if it be out of another Mind he has done it, We have still more
Reason to bless Almighty God, who does often serve his Providence by Men's
Improvidence; and cutting off Men's Ends from their Means, he uses their Means
to his own Ends, when he is pleased to work Deliverance for a People; as he
has at this Season, so graciously and wonderfully done for Us, that there is
nothing more needful, even to the most scrupulous Conscience, than an humble
and awful Acquiescence in the Divine Counsel, to give Satisfaction in this
Matter.

King JAMES the First his Opinion of a KING, of a TYRANT, and of the English
Laws, Rights and Privileges. In two Speeches; The First to the Parliament
1603, the Second 1609.
In his Speech to the Parliament 1603, he expresses himself thus:
I Do acknowledge that the special and greatest Point of difference that is
betwixt a Rightful King and an Usurping Tyrant, is in this: That whereas the
proud and ambitious Tyrant does think his Kingdom and People, are only ordained
for satisfaction of his Desires, and unreasonable Appetites; The Righteous and
Just King does by the contrary acknowledge himself to be Ordained for the
procuring of the Wealth and Prosperity of his People; and that his great and
principal worldly Felicity, must consist in their Prosperity. If you be Rich, I
cannot be Poor; if you be Happy, I cannot but be Fortunate: And I protest, your
Welfare shall ever be my greatest Care and Contentment. And that I am a
Servant, it is most true, that as I am Head and Governor of all the People in
my Dominion, who are my natural Subjects, considering them in distinct Ranks:
So if we will take in the People as one Body; then as the Head is ordained for
the Body, and not the Body for the Head, so must a Righteous King know himself
to be ordained for his People, and not his People for Him.

Wherefore I will never be ashamed to confess it my principal Honor to be the
great Servant of the Commonwealth; and ever think the Prosperity thereof to be
my greatest Felilicity, etc.

In his Speech to the Parliament, March 21. 1609, he expresses himself thus:
IN these our Times we are to distinguish betwixt the State of Kings in the
first Original, and between the State of settled Kings and Monarchs, that do at
this Time Govern in Civil Kingdoms: For even as God, during the Time of the Old
Testament, spoke by Oracles, and wrought by Miracles; yet how soon it pleased
him to settle a Church, (which was Bought and Redeemed by the Blood of his only
Son Christ) then was there a Cessation of both: He ever after governing his
Church and People within the Limits of his revealed Will. So in the first
Original of Kings, whereof some had their beginning by Conquest, and some by
Election of the People, their Wills at that Time served for a Law; yet how soon
Kingdoms began to be settled in Civility and Policy, then did Kings set down
their Minds by Laws, which are properly made by the King only; but at the
Rogation of the People, the King's Grant being obtained thereunto; and so the
King came to be Lex loquens, a speaking Law, after a sort binding himself by a
double Oath to the Observation of the Fundamental Laws of his Kingdom: Tacitly,
as by being a King, and so bound to protect, as well the People, as the Laws of
his Kingdom; and expressly by his Oath at his Coronation: So as every just King
in a settled Kingdom is bound to observe that Paction made to his People by his
Laws, in framing his Government agreeable thereunto, according to that Paction
which God made with Noah after the Deluge: Hereafter, Seed-time and Harvest,
Summer and Winter, Cold and Heat, Day and Night shall not cease, so long as the
Earth remains. And therefore a King Governing in a settled Kingdom, leaves to
be a King, and degener^tes into a Tyrant, as soon as he leaves off to rule
according to his Laws. In which Case the King's Conscience may speak unto him
as the poor Widow said to Philip of Macedon, Either Govern according to your
Law, aut ne Rex ^is, or cease to be King; and tho no Christian Man ought to
allow any Rebellion of People against their Prince, yet does God never leave
Kings unpunished when they transgress these Limits. For in that same Psalm
where God says to Kings, Vos Dii estis, Ye are Gods; He immediately thereafter
conclude, But ye shall die like Men: The higher we are placed, the greater
shall our Fall be; Vt casus sic dolor, as the Fall, so the Gri^f, the taller
the Trees be, the more in danger of the Wind; and the Tempest beats sorest upon
the highest Mountains. Therefore all Kings that are no Tyrants, or Perjured,
will be glad to bound themselves within the Limits of their Laws; and they that
persuade them the contrary, are Vipers and Pests, both against them and the
Commonwealth. For it is a great difference betwixt a King's Government in a
settled Estate, and what Kings in their Original Power might do in Individio
vago. As for my part, I thank God I have ever given good proof that I never had
Intention to the contrary: And I am sure to go to my Grave with that Reputation
and Comfort, That never King was in all his Time more careful to have his Laws
duly observed, and himself to govern thereafter, than I.

That Just Kings will ever be willing to declare what they will do, if they
will not incur the Curse of God. I will not be content that my Power be
disputed upon, but I shall ever be willing to make the Reason appear of all my
Doings, and rule my Actions according to the Laws.

And afterward speaking of the Common Law of England, which some conceived he
contemned, says to this purpose; That as a King, he had least cause of any Man
to dislike the Common Law; for no Law can be more favorable or advantageous
for a King; and extends further his Prerogative than it does; and for a King
of England to despise the Common Law, is to neglect his own Crown. It is true,
that no Kingdom in the World, but every one of them has their own Municipal
Laws agreeable to their Customs, as this Kingdom has the Common Law. Nay, I am
so far from disallowing the Common Law, as I protest that if it were in my Hand
to choose a new Law for this Kingdom, I would not only prefer it before any
other National Law, but even before the very Judicial Law of Moses, for
convenience to this Kingdom at this Time, tho in another respect I must say,
both our Law, and all Laws else are very inferior to that Judicial Law of God;
for no Book nor Law is perfect nor free from Corruption, except only the Book
and Law of God. And therefore I could wish that some Corruptions might be
purged and cleared in the Common Law, but always by the Advice of Parliaments;
for the King with his Parliament here are Absolute, in making or forming any
sort of Laws.

First, I could wish that it were written in our Vulgar Language; for now it is
an old mixed corrupt Language, only understood by Lawyers: Whereas every Subject
ought to understand the Law under which he lives; since it is our Plea against
the Papists, that the Language in God's Service ought not to be in an Unknown
Tongue, according to the Rule in the Law of Moses, That the Law should be
written in the Fringes of the Priests Garment, and should be publicly read in
the Ears of all the People; so me thinks ought our Law to be made as plain as
can be to the People, that the excuse of Ignorance may be taken from them for
conforming themselves thereunto.

Next, our Common Law has not a settled Text, being chiefly grounded upon old
Customs, which you call Responsa Prudentum -- I could wish that some more
certain were set down in this case by Parliament: for since the Reports
themselves are not are not always so binding, but that diverse times Judges do
disclaim them, and recede from the Judgment of their Predecessors: It were good
that upon a mature deliberation, the Exposition of the Law were set down by Act
of Parliament, and such Reports therein confirmed, as were thought fit to serve
for Law in all times hereafter, and so the People should not depend upon the
bare Opinions of Judges, and uncertain Reports.

And lastly, there be in the Law contrary Reports and Precedents; and this
Corruption does likewise concern the Statutes and Acts of Parliament, in
respect there are diverse cross and cuffing Statutes, and some so penned as they
may be taken in diverse, yea contrary Senses. And therefore could I wish both
those Statutes and Reports, as well in the Parliament, as Common Law, to be
once materially reviewed and reconciled.

And that not only Contrarieties should be scraped out of our Books, but that
even such Penal Statutes as were made but for the use of the time (for breach
whereof no Man can be free) which do not now agree with the condition of this
our time, might likewise be left out of our Books, which under a tyrannous and
avaricious King could not be endured.

And this Reformation might, we think, be made a worthy Work, and well deserves
a Parliament to be set of purpose for it, etc.

And as to the Point of Grievances, tells them, That there are two special
Causes of the Peoples presenting Grievances to their King in time of Parliament.

First, For that the King cannot at other times be so well informed of all the
Grievances of his People, as in time of Parliament, which is the Representative
Body of the whole Realm. Secondly, The Parliament is the highest Court of
Justice, and therefore the fittest place where diverse Natures of Grievances may
have their proper Remedy, by the establishment of good and wholesome Laws:
Wherein he addresses himself especially to the Lower House, who as representing
the Body of the People, may, as it were, both Opportune and Inopportune, in
Season, and out of Season; I mean, either in Parliament as a Body, or out of
Parliament as private Men, present your Grievances unto me. --

I am not to find fault that you inform your selves of the particular
Grievances of the People: Nay, I must tell you, ye can neither be just nor
faithful to me, or to your Countries that trust and employ you, if you do not;
for true Plaints proceed not from the Persons employed, but from the Body
represented, which is the People. And it may very well be, that many Directions
and Commissions justly given forth by me, may be abused in the execution
thereof upon the People, and yet I never receive Information, except it come by
your means at such a time as this is.

Proposals to this present Convention, for the perpetual Security of the
Protestant Religion, and the Liberty of the Subjects of England. Humbly Offered
by the Author of the BREVIATE.
AFter the Great Blessings that seem designed for the whole Nation, from the
happy Agreement between the Two Houses, in that great Point before them, the
Vacan^y of the Throne; I cannot but crave Pardon and leave to put the
Representatives of the Nation in remembrance, that though this Vacating of the
Throne opens so large a Door to our Great and many Deliverances, yet our
lasting Security is not entirely completed here; and that therefore they baulk
not the next Point, which is as stoutly to be asserted, viz* That the Power now
of settling the Government, and filling the Vacancy, is reverted to the
Community, whereof they are the Representatives. This is an opportunity we are
like never to have again in the World; and a Precedent ought to be made for the
Ages to come. It is not to be thought, after an Agreement on the first Point,
but that this Convention is willing to invest the Prince of Orange with the
Government, during his Life; (for they say, both the Princesses are willing it
should be so, and no prejudice to either:) But how this can be orderly done,
until the Power be asserted; let the Wisdom of the Nation consider, and lay it
well to Heart.

There is One main objection. If the Convention choo^e a King and Queen at this
Time, then will the Government be for ever Elective. But this is a great
Mistake: for, we must know it is the Constitution of a Government, which makes
it Elective or Hereditary, and not One Actual Choice, or single Precedent. This
being (note that well) by a Convention, not a Parliament* whilst in the present
Juncture, that Vacancy in the Throne (which may never happen again to the End
of the World,) leaves us no other Expedient of reestablishing our Government,
then by Electing Our Governor.

When an Hereditary Kingdom is set up that was none before, the Person on
Necessity must be by Election at first; though at the same time, the Compact of
Obedience to the Person so Elected, and to his Heirs in Succession after him,
may be such, that what at first was in the peoples Power and Right to give,
after submission paid, will never lie in their Power to resume back. The Case
is the same here* And if we understand then, when it is resolved, that the
Throne is vacant, or Government dissolved, (which is all one) the meaning is
not, that the Constitution of the Government is dissolved (for therefore is it
so warily express) Su^^ the Government (...) the Administration. It is
Essential to Government to have (...) Imperans, and pars subdita; and the pars
Imper^^ failing (as in our Case) the Government is (...); I that is, it is
dissolved so, as there can be no Exercise of it, (...) it be settled again*
Nothing that the King can do, or (...) can do, can vacate the Constitution. It
is That they both Derive from and bold by. Only the Commu^ity being those, as
firsts made it, (it must be confessed) they can dissolve it, or Change it, if
they think fit. The King has not yet dissolved it, but the Convention (being,
upon the Dissolution of the Government, in the Exercise called this together,
as Deputies of the Community, to set that up,) may do so: or what is better;
they may confirm the Fundamental (...) of it, and mend the rest, as they see
good. It were then Advisable; both for the Honor and Safety of the Nation,
That the Convention did agree and declare, that the Government of England be
still an Hereditary Li^i^ed Monarchy; with this change only, that the Descent
of the ^^own, be found to a Protestant. This (...) Objection for ever.

Be it agreed and declared again, that the Government be still a (...)
Government* and that the Supreme Legislative Power with all the Rights and
Properties of it* do, and shall lie in a Parliament.

For Gods sake and Your Countries, use your present Advantage; lest you (...)
for the loss of so favorable an offered Opportunity never to be regained.

The Constitu^ion (I say) of the Gov^^nment should be considered and declared,
and the Power of this Convention to dispose of New Gove^^ours be asserted,
before the actual Inve^titure of Any be concluded, if we resolve to be true
Subjects of England, or have any Regard to Our Selves, on our Posterity, in a
Concern for valuable, as Generations to come shall reap the Blessing of it, and
acknowledge the Founders.

FINIS.
A NINTH Collection of Papers Relating to the Present Juncture of Affairs in
England. VIZ. I. A Dialogue between two Friends, wherein the Church of England
is vindicated in joining with the Prince of Orange in his Descent into England.
II. His late Majesty's Letter to the Lords and others of his Privy Council.
III. Some Remarks on the late King's pretended Letter to the Lords, and others
of his Privy Council. IV. Reasons for Crowning the Prince and Princess of
Orange King and Queen jointly; and for placing the Executive Power in the
Prince alone. V. A Lord's Speech without Doors to the Lords, upon the present
Condition of the Government. VI. Reflections on a Paper, called, A Lord's
Speech without Doors. VII. The Bishops Reasons to Queen Elizabeth for taking
off the Queen of Scots: offered to the Consideration of the present Sect of
Grumbletonians.


With an Advertisement of the Learning and Rhetoric of the late Lord
Chancellor Iefferies.

London printed, and are to be sold by Richard Ianeway in Queen's-head-Court in
Paternoster Row, 1689.

A DIALOGUE between two Friends, wherein the Church of England is Vindicated in
joining with the Prince of Orange in his Descent into England.
A Dialogue between a Churchman and a Dissenter.
Churchman.
OH! Neighbor, I am heartily glad to see you; I have long desired to have an
hour's Discourse with you, that I might know your Sentiments of the Present
Conjuncture.

Dissenter. Sir, I thank you for my kind Reception, and shall endeavor to make
my Visit as agreeable as I can.


Chapter Well, Neighbor, what do you think of the Times now?


Diss. Why, to tell you the truth, I cannot but be pleased with the Humor of a
Gentleman, who died lately, and injoined his Relations to bury him with his
Face downward, saying, That in a short time the World would be turned
upsidedown, and then he should be the only Person who lay decently in his Grave.


Chapter Why, I must confess there has been a considerable Revolution, but I hope
we Churchmen have still kept up our Reputation.


Diss. Ay to be sure; but I hear Hue and Cry has lately been sent after your
Doctrines of Passive Obedience, Non-Resistance, Iure Divino-Monarchy, etc. And
they say some Roguish Fellow has packed them up, and run with them back as far
as Forty one.


Chapter Indeed our Passive Obedience and your Addresses have been the two great
Supporters of the King's Hopes; but he has now found, to his Sorrow, that we no
more designed to obey Arbitrary Commands, than you Addressed for Establishment
of Popery: But here is the Mischief of it, you Dissenters will still Be
condemning us before you have heard us either Explain our Doctrines, or
Distinguish the Times.


Diss. Come, come, don't tell me of Explaining or Distinguishing, Honesty is
Uniform, and needs no such Shifts: Why did you not Explain and Distinguish
while the Court smiled, and you had the Whip in your hands? As for our
Addressing, it is plain to all the World we only designed to return the King
Thanks for that Common Liberty and Ease we had from your Severities.


Chapter 'Pray' Neighbor, be not so warm; you know the Complement was attended
with the Promise of Lives and Fortunes, but not to be too nice upon your
Good-Breeding in the Case; lend me but a little Patience and I Will demonstrate
to you that the Proceedings both of our Clergy and Laity in this late
Revolution have been consonant to their former Doctrines, Reason it self, and
the Constitution of this Kingdom.


Diss. Well, I commend you at least for fair Promises, I wish you perform them
better than a Great Man before you has performed his.


Chapter That I shall leave to the Judgment of the Impartial: But first of all I
must crave leave to tell you, That I shall not here undertake to defend the
extravagant Notions of every Upstart, who, through Prospect of Advantage, might
flatter the Court with his own Chimaera's: But, by the aforesaid Doctrines, I
mean those generally preached up by the Learned and unbiased Clergy, and
approved of by all the thinking Men of our Church.


Diss. I must confess I cannot expect you should defend the Excesses of every
Novice; but I can by no means reconcile these late Proceedings to those
Doctrines which were Asserted by the most Learned of your Clergy.


Chapter Which therefore of our Doctrines would you insinuate to me?


Diss. Why* in short, to see a Company of People up in Arms, and joining with
an Invader, who had so Zealously Asserted Passive Obedience, Non-Resistance,
etc. and had taken several Oaths, disabling them upon any Pretense whatsoever
to take up Arms without the King's Order, etc. This I say is a Riddle to me.


Chapter Your Objection I confess is weighty, though obvious and the common talk;
but being prepared by many Premeditations on this Subject, if you please to
lend me a little Attention, I shall endeavor to satisfy your Difficulties.


Diss. It Is what my Charity much desires.


Chapter First, therefore, to deal ingenuously with you, I confess, at the
beginning of this Revolution I was under a very great Surprise: I, who have
been in Arms for His Majesty, a warm stickler for the Church of England, puffed
up with all the Bravado's and Excesses of an Oxford Loyalty, must needs be
Alarmed to hear our Nobility and Gentry beating up for the Prince of Orange,
even in the Bowels of our Country. But when I came more seriously to reflect
upon the Foundations of our Government, as well as those antecedent Obligations
which God Almighty has reserved as his own inviolable Prerogative, I began to
regulate my Zeal by calmer measures. And making a more impartial and strict
Inquiry into the Opinions of Learned Men concerning the Regal Power, I found
this most generally agreed upon; viz. That the Obedience and Disobedience of
Subjects must be measured by the peculiar Constitutions of every Kingdom,
without respect either to the Jewish Polity, where things were determined by
God Almighty's special Command, or the Behavior of the Primitive Christians,
who had few or no Legal Rights to Assert.


Diss. Ay, but you Churchmen flattered the Court so long, till our
Constitutions were all swallowed up in the Abyss of Prerogative.


Chapter I must confess while Kings are a Protection to Liberty, Property and
Religion, the World is naturally prone to flatter them; neither would it be
good Breeding to make too nice Inquiries into the Limits of a Prince while he
does not exceed them; but when Distress comes impetuously upon a Nation, when
Life and All that is Sacred to us lies at Stake, then the Inquiry is not only
just; but necessary.


Diss. What Conditions therefore will you Churchmen at length confine your
Prince too?


Chapter Why, I shall present you with a short, but impartial view of the
Constitutions of this Kingdom, as I find them most faithfully and ingenuously
represented by the Royal Martyr in his Answer to the Nineteen Propositions, in
these Words, viz. There being Three kinds of Government among Men, Absolute
Monarchy, Aristo^racy and Demo^racy, and all these having their particular
Conveniences and Inconveniences, the Experience and Wisdom of our Ancestors
has so molded this out of a mixture of these, as to give to this Kingdom the
Conveniences of all Three, without the Inconveniences of any one, as long as
the Balance hangs even between the Three Estates, and they run jointly on in
their proper Chanel, etc. In this Kingdom the Laws are jointly made by a King,
House of Peers, and House of Commons, chosen by the People, all having free
Votes, and particular Privileges, etc. And in this Kind of Regulated Monarchy,
that the Prince may not make not use of his Power to the Hurt of those for
whose Good he has it, and make use of the Name of Public Necessity for the
Gain of his private Favorites and Followers, to the detriment of his People;
the House of Commons (an excellent Conserver of Liberty) is solely entrusted
with the Levying of Monys, and the Impeaching of those, who for their own Ends,
though countenanced by any surreptitiously gotten Command of the King, have
violated that Law which he is bound to protect, etc. Since therefore the Power
Legally placed in both Houses, is more than sufficient to Prevent and Restrain
the Power of Tyranny, etc. Our Answer is, Nolumus Leges Angliae mutari. So far
this Royal Author. And indeed what could a generous Prince acknowledge, or a
Priviledg-asserting Subject desire more? Therefore, upon the whole, it appears
by the Confession of the best of Men, as well as the wisest of Princes, that we
are under a Government so well appointed for Society and the Exigencies of
Humane Kind, that nothing but Folly can think of Establishing a better, and
nothing but a Jesuit disturb it: The Scriptures themselves seem to have meant
it when they tell us that Caesar's Prerogative must never come in Competition
with that of God Almighty, and that Governors shall be a Terror to evil Works.
Here King and People have each their Territories, and all the Provision
imaginable made against those Distractions which either Interest or Passion
should attempt. From all which what can be more naturally inferred, but that we
in this Kingdom are by no means obliged to resign up our selves to Violence and
Oppression, but that Passive Obedience has its Limits, and the Oath of
Allegiance its Restrictions: A regulated and conditionated Monarch can expect
no Obedience from me but what is Conditional too; and what an Absurdity does it
seem, that by a Legal Oath I should swear an absolute Obedience to that
Authority which is not Absolute? Besides, those Subsidies which were granted by
the Clergy in several of Queen Elizabeth's, Parliaments for the Relief of the
French, Dutch and Scotch Protestants, against their Oppressors, plainly show
that it was all along the Opinion of the Church to Resist in case Rights and
Religion were Invaded: Neither am I persuaded that the learned and unbiased
Clergy of our present Church ever meant any other Obedience than an active
Conformity to the Intent of the Law, or a Passive Submi^sion to the Penalties
of it. Therefore though upon the Foundations of our Government, an impatient
Spirit might with a great show of Reason establish a very extensive Latitude,
in asserting the Subjects Right; yet in Favor of Monarchy, which I Reverence,
and with Respect to the Present Conjuncture, I shall only now trouble you with
these four Propositions, supposing a mixed Government; 1. That Suspicions and
Jealousies of a Prince's sinister Designs are no sufficient Grounds for
Subjects violently to assert their Rights, but in this Case the Event of things
mu^t be left to Providence. 2. That though one Man, or a greater number of Men
receive manifest Injuries by the Abuses of Government, yet while they are but
an inconsiderable part of the Community, they are in Duty bound rather to
submit to Oppression, than interrupt the common Peace: But, 3. When Dangers
become demonstrable, when Religion it self, and the very Foundations of
Government are so undermined by the Insinuations of an inconsiderable party,
who have obtained the Ear of their Prince, that its unavoidable Ruin must
necessarily follow. In this Case I cannot see any Reason why Right may not be
as^erted. But, 4. When a Foreign Prince with a considerable Army Invades a
Nation, upon pretense of putting a stop to such violent Proceedings, besides,
perhaps some just Causes of a War; I say in this Case, That the whole Nation
may and ought to rise and put themselves in such a Posture, that they may be
able to return him Thanks acording to the Merits of his Favors, without being
jealous of his Greatness. And indeed our present Case is so circumstantiated,
that I Question whether it may be paralle'd in History; and let any Man tell me
where the Subjects of a Limited Monarchy, tired out with the Abuses of
Government, did by sighting for their King encourage Oppression by the Blood of
Thousands, when they might effect a Treaty in all probability with little or no
Bloodshed, by joining with a Prince of their own Interest, who, perhaps, can
show more just Causes of a War than one?


Diss. I must confess what you have said seems to carry a great deal of Reason
and Moderation with it, which I must allow.


Chapter Let but a moderate Papist lend me one grain of his own Principles, and I
am confident he cannot but be of my Mind; for may we but modestly measure the
King's future Proceedings (had we trusted him with Victory) by those we had
already seen, how dismal would the Prospect be? Should we but recollect how
barefacedly he has been striking at the Northern Heresy ever since the Oxford
Parliament; what Mercy could we expect? How far some of the Protestant Nobility
were engaged in an Association to assert their Rights, I shall not here pretend
to determine, but this we may modestly presume, That all their Crimes were seen
through a Popish Magnifying-Glass, and no Artifice neglected to ruin them. An
ingenious Gentleman was deservedly applauded for his Rhetorical Colors in the
Narrative of that Conspiracy, and I was well pleased with a Gentleman's Fancy,
who imagined another Interest would now engage him to atone for his unhappy
Continuance in the High Commission Court, by Writing what he observed of the
Popish Designs, during his stay there. Another eminent Instance of those
Violences which were Encouraged above, was the Presenting Two and fifty Persons
in the County of Northampton as disaffected to the Government, and branding
them with all the Scandals imaginable; many of which I personally know to be as
Faithful to the Crown, and in all Respects as honest and worthy Gentlemen as
any in the Kingdom. But to come nearer the Present Conjuncture, how were our
Law, Properties, and all, prostituted by a few Dispensing Gentlemen, some of
them perfectly incapable of any Place of Trust, and all of suspected Integrity.
How surprising was it to see persons of the most contemptible Character placed
among our Bishops; and all the sacred Authority lodged in a Court which was
erected against an express Act of Parliament? What a Riddle was it that our
learned Prelates (hitherto the great Supporters of the Crown) should be
Imprisoned for acting according to their Consciences, in refusing to Read that
which pretended to establish the greatest Liberty of Conscience? Could any one
that saw Six hundred Scholars up in Arms, and cheerfully demonstrating their
Loyalty in the Western Rebellion, ever think to see the Fellows of Magdalen
College ingratefully turned out like Dogs, and perhaps one of the finest
Foundations in Europe, become a Kennel for Miscreants, who were more unworthy
to be Members of an University, upon the account of their Insufficiency, than
they were incapable of it by Law? It seemed almost a Jest to me to see in
Christ-Church persons of that eminent Character and Learning, superintended by
a Wretch not fit for common Converse. In which Society there is a Person in
whom the Gentleman and the Scholar do very eminently meet, and who for his
happy Conduct and great Care to maintain the Repute of that College during
these Violences, has certainly now all the Title to the Deanery that either
merit, or the common Rules of Gratitude can afford him. But to proceed, I say
to see how all Freedom of Elections to Parliament was in a manner taken away;
how the Poll at Northampton was like to be Regulated by Powder and Bullet, and
the whole Government managed by Father Petre, Pen, Lob, and a few more such
mercenary Wretches; and all this to introduce a Religion contrary to Scripture,
and destructive of all Society, for which we expected great things would have
been said while the Asserters of it had Command of the Press, and the
Countenance of a Prince, yet nothing was produced but Fallacy and Nonsense:
These, I say, (not to mention the subverting Succession, a League with France,
and those horrid Murders laid to the Court) are Provocations too great even
for Primitive Obedience: But seeing these Violences have in all probability
found their period, and the Betrayers of God and their Country are now coming
to Answer for themselves, I shall leave further Reflections to a free and
unbiased Parliament.


Diss. Ay, but what was it that encouraged these Violences? Was it not your
unseasonable Zeal for an unlimited Obedience? your Oxford Decree, and such like
Monuments of the Heats of that Age?


Chapter Why, to tell you sincerely my Opinion in the Case; I am persuaded there
were Two Parties in the Nation undermining the Government; the one by more
secret and mysterious Methods endeavored to introduce Popery; the other by
more evident and barefaced Proceedings, attempted the Extirpation of Monarchy:
Therefore the Generality of the Churchmen being more sensible of the Designs of
the latter, endeavored to stand like Moses in the Gap with those you term
unseasonable Doctrines, which I also take to be the Occasion of the Oxford
Decree; for though in my own private Opinion I never approved of it, but wished
it might have perished in the same Rogus with the Books it condemned; yet I am
so well satisfied of the Learning and Integrity of those worthy Gentlemen who
were chiefly concerned in it, that I do really believe it was only promoted for
the Preservation of the Government.


Diss. Ay, you Churchmen have such a way of Respecting one another, that you
had like to have fooled us, and your selves out of all; neither could I ever
find you were sensible of the approaching Calamities, till Oppression touched
your own Copy-holds.


Chapter What you object to us in this Case seems to redound to our greatest
Honor: for by our Principles we had always such a Reverence for Monarchy, that
we were willing to connive at the failings of a Prince as long as we could; but
having our Rights established by Law, we knew when we came to be oppressed: The
very Foundations of our Government were assaulted, and so we were forced to
make Enquiry into our Constitutions.


Diss. So then at length you will acknowledge the Prince of Orange not only to
be a great, but a just Deliverer.


Chapter Since I have been better acquainted with the horrid Designs of our
Adversaries, and found the Contest to be only between Papist and Protestant, I
am not only highly sensible of the Prince's Generosity, but have inserted the
Justice of his Cause from the mavelous Providence when have wrought his
Success: It is certainly part of his Character, that as his first Pretenses
were modest, so Fortune has not tempted him to exceed them; and we have still
all the Reason in the World to imagine that he only generously designed to
relieve us from Oppression, without any sinister Intent of making himself
Great: The Noble Cause he has undertaken is the Protestant Interest, and I
doubt not but the Lord of Hosts will fight his Battles. Indeed the Success of
this his first Enterprise has been so wonderful and surprising, that it will
make an Annal suspected, and seem a Fable to Posterity: For who will believe
that a King, who, had he acted agreeably to the true Interest of Himself and
People, might have been almost the Balance of Christendom, who was prepared
with a standing Army, and always Remarkable for his Conduct in War, should be
invaded by a near Neighbor, Son, and Nephew; and now in a Months time so
generally deserted by his Nobility, Gentry, and Military Forces, as to choose,
before the Sword was drawn, to fly for Refuge to a Prince whose Title he and
his Ancestors had long disputed? This, I say (as the Learned Dr. Burnet Argues
at large) was the Lords doing, and ought to be mavelous in our Eyes.


Diss. It was indeed an unparall'd Act of Providence; but now our Deliverance
is so far Completed, what are you Churchmen willing to do toward an
Accommodation, and to the Healing of those Differences which in a great measure
have contributed to the Growth of Popery?


Chapter Though it be far above my Character to dictate what is fittest to be done
at so great and difficult a Conjuncture, yet my humble Wishes, are, that the
Guardians and Supporters of our Church may resolve upon such Condescentions as
may satisfy reasonable Men, and prevent any longer Dissensions amongst us: Yet
this I would advise you and your Party, i. e. to stay till you are Invited, and
not to thrust your selves into our Church: We are now in the hopeful Crisis of
our Fever; and therefore you ought to take care left by tampering too much, you
disturb Nature in those methods she has took to digest her Humors, and so
ruin all. I am not ignorant that at the beginning of the Reformation when a
Church was to be made out of a Church, several Ceremonies were retained in
Compliance to that Age, which a violent; Alteration would have too much
surprised; but now, the Humors of Men being changed, may justly be laid aside.
On the other hand, I am persuaded with the Author of Foxes and Firebrands, that
Rome has all along been industrious to foment our Divisions, by sending us
Emissaries, who could artificially dissemble a tender Conscience, and make
credulous People believe that all the Decencies of our Worship were nothing but
^oppery, Superstition, and the Remainders of Popery: Therefore I say my Wishes
are, that a Free and Unbiased Parliament will tread the middle path, bearing
an equal Respect to the Decenies of our Church, and the tender Consciences of
reasonable Men.


Diss. Well, Neighbor, I am heartily glad to see these happy effects of our
Calamities; and, as I think, there can be no Government so perfectly appointed
as to satisfy all, yet I approve so well of your Temper and Wishes, that I hope
we may all Unite upon such or the like terms.


Chapter Therefore to end our Dispute, I shall only now detain you with my hearty
Prayers, that the Result of this ensuing Convention on Ian. 22. may be happily
to settle the Crown; and that in the succeeding Parliament, the management of
these Difficulties may fall into the Hands of such Wise and Unbiased Persons,
that Peace and Truth may be established upon everlasting Foundations, and no
sinister Interest interrupt so great a Design.


Diss. Sir, you have infinitely encouraged me to wait upon you oftener, we being
I think now either both Churchmen, or both Dissenters.


Chapter Sir, The Design of this Conference was to tell you freely my Sentiments,
and I intend ere long to make it more public, being willing to provoke some
more learned and judicious Pen to perfect what I have here weakly attempted.


Farewell.

His Majesty's Letter to the Lords and Others of his Privy Council.
JAMES R.

MY Lords, When we saw that it was no longer safe for Us to remain within Our
Kingdom of England, and that thereupon. We had taken Our Resolutions to
withdraw for some time, We left to be communicated to you and to all Our
Subjects, the Reasons of Our withdrawing: And were likewise resolved at the
same, time to leave such Orders behind Us to you of our Privy Council, as might
best suit with the present state of Affairs: But that being altogether unsafe
for Us at that time; We now think fit to let you know, that though it has been
Our constant care since Our first Accession to the Crown, to govern Our People
with that Justice and Moderation, as to give, if possible, no occasion of
Complaint; yet more particularly upon the late Invasion, seeing how the Design
was laid; and fearing that Our People, who could not be destroyed but by
themselves, might by little imaginary Grievances, be cheated into a certain
Ruin: To prevent so great Mischief, and to take away not only, all just
Causes, but even Pretenses of Discontent; We freely, and of our own accord
redressed all those things that were set forth as the Causes of that Invasion:
And that we might be informed by the Council and Advice of our Subjects
themselves, which way we might give them a further and a full Satisfaction, We
resolved to meet them in a Free Parliament; And in order to it, We first laid
the Foundation of such a Free Parliament, in restoring the City of London and
the rest of the Corporations to their ancient Charters and Privileges; and
afterward actually appointed the Writs to be issued out for the Parliaments
meeting on the 15 th of January: But the Prince of Orange seeing all the Ends
of his Declaration answered, the People beginning to be undeceived, and
returning apace to their ancient Duty and Allegiance; and well foreseeing that
if the Parliament should meet at the time appointed, such a Settlement in all
Probability would be made, both in Church and State, as would totally defeat
his ambitious and unjust Designs, resolved by all means possible to prevent the
meeting of the Parliament: And to do this the most effectual way, he thought
fit to lay a restraint on Our Royal Person; for as it were absurd to call that
a Free Parliament, where there is any force on either of the Houses, so much
less can that Parliament be said to act freely where the Sovereign, by whose
Authority they Meet and Sit, and from whose Royal Assent all their Acts receive
their Life and Sanction, is under actual Confinement. The hurrying of Us under
a Guard from Our City of London, whose returning Loyalty We could no longer
trust, and the other Indignities We suffered in the Person of the Earl of
Feversham when sent to him by Us; and in that barbarous Confinement of Our own
Person, We shall not here repeat, because they are We doubt not by this time
very well known; and may, we hope, if enough considered and reflected upon,
together with his other Violations and Breaches of the Laws and Liberties of
England, which by this Invasion he pretended to restore, be sufficient to open
the Eyes of all our Subjects, and let them plainly see what every one of them
may expect, and what Treatment they shall find-from him, if at any time it may
serve his Purpose, from whose Hands a Sovereign Prince, an Uncle, and a Father
could meet with no better Entertainment. However, the sense of these
Indignities, and the just Apprehension of further Attempts against Our Person,
by them who already endeavored to murder Our Reputation by infamous Calumnies
(as if We had been capable of supposing a Prince of Wales) which was
incomparably more injurious, than the destroying of Our Person it Self;
together with a serious Reflection on a Saying of Our Royal Father of blessed
Memory, when He was in the like Circumstances, That there is little distance
between the Prisons and the Graves of Princes (which afterward proved too true
in His Case) could not but persuade Us to make use of that which the Law of
Nature gives to the meanest of Our Subjects of freeing Our selves by all means
possible from that unjust Confinement and Restraint. And this We did not more
for the Security of our own Person, then that thereby We might be in a better
Capacity of transacting and providing for every thing that may contribute to
the Peace and Settlement of Our Kingdoms: For as on the one hand, no change of
Fortune shall ever make Us forget Our Selves, so far as to condescend to any
thing unbecoming that High and Royal Station, in which God Almighty by Right of
Succession has placed Us: So on the other hand, neither the Provocation or
Ingratitude of Our own Subjects, nor any other Consideration whatsoever, shall
ever prevail with Us to make the least step contrary to the true Interest of
the English Nation; which We ever did, and ever must look upon as Our own. Our
Will and Pleasure thereof is, That you of Our Privy Council, take the most
effectual care to make these Our Gracious Intentions known to the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal in and about Our Cities of London and Westminster, to
the Lord Mayor and Commons of our City of London, and to all Our Subjects in
general; and to assure them, that We desire nothing more, than to return and
hold a Free Parliament, wherein We may have the best Opportunity of undeceiving
Our People, and showing the Sincerity of those Protestations We have often made
of the preserving the Liberties and Properties of Our Subjects and the
Protestant Religion; more especially the Church of England as by Law
established, with such Indulgence for those that dissent from Her, as We have
always thought Our selves in Justice and Care of the general Welfare of Our
People bound to procure for them. And in the mean time You of Our Privy
Council, (who can judge better by being upon the place) are to send Us your
Advice, what is fit to be done by Us toward Our returning and the
accomplishing those good Ends. And We do require you in Our Name, and by Our
Authority, to endeavor so to suppress all Tumults and Disorders, that the
Nation in general, and every one of Our Subjects in particular, may not receive
the least Prejudice from the present Distractions that is possible. So not
doubting of your Dutiful Obedience to these Our Royal Commands, We bid you
heartily Farewell. Given at St. Germans on Lay the 4/4 January 1688/9. And of
Our Reign the fourth Year.

By his Majesty's Command. MELFORT.
Directed thus, To the Lords, and Others of our Privy Council of Our Kingdom of
England.
Some Remarks on the late Kings pretended Letter to the LORDS, and Others of
his Privy Council.
IT begins thus, My Lords, When we saw that it was no longer safe for us to
remain within our Kingdom of England, etc.

His Majesty would have given great Satisfaction to the World in discovering
where the Danger lay in tarrying here; from whom, and for what cause.

He is pleased to say farther: We now think fit to let you know, that though it
has been our constant care since our first Accession to the Crown, to govern
our People with that Justice and Moderation as to give, if possible, no
occasion of Complaint, etc.

I do not understand why his Majesty would not let us know these his Gracious
Intentions before, when they might have done Himself and Us Good.

But quid verba audiam cum facta videam, to what purpose are Words when we see
Facts? And as to his Moderation, I appeal to the Pope himself, or the French
King, who chiefly blame him for his Rashness and want of Temper; and as for his
Justice, among a thousand public Instances to the contrary, he should remember
his discountenancing and turning out of their Employments all such as would not
enter into his Idolatrous Worship, and comply with his illegal and arbitrary
Designs. Besides, what Justice can Heretics expect from a Prince, who is not
only a Papist, but wholly devoted to the Order of the Jesuits, and values
himself for being a Member of those Reverend Cutthroats? Yet more particularly
upon the late Invasion, seeing how the Design was laid, and fearing that our
People, who could not be destroyed but by themselves. The Design was to
preserve the Nation from falling under the cruel Dominion of the French, and to
keep our selves from being dragged by the Hair of the Head to Mass, and from
undergoing all those Miseries which those of the same Religion, and for the
same Cause, have endured now lately in France and Savoy. To prevent so great a
Mischief, (that is to say, destroying our selves,) and to take away not only
all just Causes, but even Pretenses of Discontent: We freely and of our own
accord, redrest all those things that were set forth as the Causes of that
Invasion. I appeal to the common Faith of Mankind touching the Insinserity of
these Words, whether if this Invasion had not been, these and worse Grievances
had not followed. And that we might be informed by the Counsel and Advice of
our Subjects themselves, which way we might give them a further and full
Satisfaction; We resolved to meet them in a Free Parliament, etc.

The late Kings of England have been as desirous of a Parliament as Popes of a
Free and General Council; there being nothing they have more studiously
avoided, and greatlier feared.

But the Prince of Orange seeing all the Ends of his Declaration answered, the
People beginning to be undeceived, and returning apace to their ancient Duty
and Allegiance, resolved by all possible means to prevent the meeting of the
Parliament, etc.

How far the Prince of Orange has been from preventing the meeting of a
Parliament, we need only consult our senses.

The hurrying us under a Guard from our City of London, whose returning Loyalty
we could no longer trust, and the other Indignities we suffered in the Person
of the Earl of Feversham, when sent to him by us, and in that barbarous
Confinement of our own Person, we shall not here repeat.

Does any Man think the Prince of Orange would have had the same gentle
Treatment from the King, had he been in like manner under his Power? And as to
the Kings concernment for the unheard of Suffering of the E. of F. I do not
wonder at it, having ever had so little Affection, or rather so great an
Antipathy to his English Subjects.

This will be sufficient to open the Eyes of all our Subjects, and let them
plainly see what every one of them may expect, and what Treatment they shall
find from him, if at any time it may serve his Purpose, from whose Hands a
Sovereign Prince, an Uncle, and a Father could meet with no better
Entertainment.

All wise and good Protestants are so certain of happy times under the
Government of this most excellent and incomporable Prince, that they have
nothing left to fear or desire, but that God would preserve him from the
Hellish Fury of the Papists And as to all these Relations of a Sovereign
Prince, an Uncle, and a Father: The King would have done well to have acquitted
himself to the Prince as became all these Relations.

However the Sense of these Indignities, etc. And as if we had been capable if
supposing a Prince of Wales.

I believe and know that the Conscience of a Popish Prince, wholly under the
Conduct of the Jesuits, will find no Difficulty in consenting to so pious a
Fraud, provided it can be carried on with all prudent Cautions.

For as on the one hand, no change of Fortune shall ever make us forget our
selves, so far as to condescend to any thing, unbecoming that High and Royal
Station, in which God Almighty, by right of Succession has placed us. So on the
other hand, neither the Provocation or Ingratitude of our own Subjects, nor any
other Consider^tion whatsoever, shall ever prevail with us to make the least
step, contrary to the true Interest of the English Nation.

His Majesty's sincere Friend the French King, with whom he now enjoys a nearer
Converse, will also concur with him in this good Design of promoting the true
Interest of England. And as to his Majesty's Inclinations to Mercy, and passing
by Provocations, we need mention no other Instances, but those in the West,
where the Cruelties exercised on those unfortunate People, cannot be paralleled
in any History of Barbarians.

Our Will and Pleasure therefore is, that you of our Privy Council, take the
most effectual care, to make these our gracious Intentions known to the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and to all our Subjects in general, and to assure them
that we desire nothing more, than to return and hold a Free Parliament, wherein
we may have the best Opportunity of undeceiving our People, and showing the
Sincerity of those Protections of preserving (especially) the Church of England
as by Law established.

A Man would wonder any Prince that overlooks what his Secretary writes, should
suffer such apparent and palpable Untruths to pass: For it is not manifest to
all the World; That the late King, through the Jesuits Counsel, did all that
was possible to weaken and overturn (especially) the Church of England, as well
by open Declarations and Practices, as by more secret Ways and Contrivances,
inciting one part of his Protestant Subjects to destroy the other, and then
immediately after exposing them for it, and encouraging and inspiring these
later with a Spirit of Revenge and Retaliation*

And thus having briefly ran over whatever seems material in this Letter, I
shall desist from Repetitions, and insisting on mere words of Course, and
Matters of form, seeing this would be to tire to Reader's Patience, and a
lesning of his Judgment.

Reasons for Crowning the Prince and Princess of Orange King and Queen jointly;
and for placing the Executive Power in the Prince alone.
WHereas the Grand Convention of the Estates of England, have asserted the
Peoples Right by declaring, That the late King James the Second, having
endeavo^red to Subvert the Constitution of the Kingdom, by breaking the
Original Contract between King and People: And by Advice of Jesuits, and other
wicked Persons, having Violat^d the Fundamental Laws: And having withdrawn
himself out of this Kingdom, has Abdicated the Government, and that the Throne
is thereby Vaca^t. For which Misgovernment He has forfeited the Trust of the
Regal Inheritance of the Executive Power, both in Himself, and in His Heirs,
Lineal and Collateral; so that the same is devolved back to the People, who
have also the Legislative Authority; and consequently may of Right Give and
Dispose thereof, by their Representatives, for their future Peace, Benefit;
Security, and Government, according to their good Will and Pleasure. And
forasmuch as it is absolutely Necessary, that the Government be speedily settled
on sure and lasting Foundations, and consequently, that such Person or Persons
be immediately placed in the Throne, in whom the Nation has most reason to
repose an entire Confidence: It therefore now lies upon Us to make so Judicious
a Choice, that we may, in all Humane Probability, thereby render Ourselves a
Happy People, and give Our Posterity cause to Rejoice, when they shall read the
Proceedings of this Wise and Grand Convention. Who is it therefore that has so
highly Merited the Love and good Opinion of the People, the Honor of Wearing
the Crown, and Swaying the Scepter of this Land, as His Illustrious Highness
the Prince of Orange? who with so great Expense, Hazard, Conduct, Courage, and
Generosity, has happily Rescued Us from Popery, and Slavery; and with so much
Gallantry Restored Us to Our Ancient Rights, Religion, Laws, Liberties, and
Properties: for which Heroic Action, we can do no less, in Prudence, Honor,
and Gratitude, than Pray Him to Accept Our Crown.

II. It is better to settle the Exercise of the Government in One who is not
immediate in the Line, than in One that is; (1.) Because it is a clear
Asserting of a Fundamental Right, that manifests the Constitution of the
English Government, and covers the Subjects from Tyranny and Slavery. (2.) It
cuts off the Dispute of the pretended Prince of Wales. (3.) The old Succession
being legally Dissolved, and a new one made, the Government is secured from
falling into the Hands of a Papist.

III. The making the Prince and Princess of Orange King and Queen jointly, is
the Nation's Gratitude and Generosity: and by re-continuing the Line in
Remainder, is manifested the inestimable Value the People have for the two
Princesses, notwithstanding the Maladministration of the Unhappy Father.

IV. The present State of Europe in General, and of these Kingdoms in
Particular, require a Vigorous and Masculine Administration. To recover what is
lost, rescue what is in danger, and rectify what is amiss, cannot be effected but
by a Prince that is consummate in the Art both of Peace and War. Tho the Prince
and Princess be King and Queen jointly, and will equally share the Glory of a
Crown, and we the Happiness of their Auspicious Regin: yet the Wisdom of the
Grand Convention is manifested,

First, In placing the Executive Power in One of them, and not in Both; for two
Persons, equal in Authority, may differ in Opinion, and consequently in
Command; and it is evident no Man can serve two Masters.

Secondly, It Is highly necessary and prudent, rather to vest the Administration
in the Husband, than in the Wife.

(1.) Because a Man, by Nature, Education and Experience, is generally rendered
more capable to Govern than the Woman.

Therefore, (2.) the Husband ought rather to Rule the Wife, than the Wife the
Husband, especially considering the Vow in Matrimony.

(3.) The Prince of Orange is not more proper to Govern as he is Man, and
Husband only, but as he is a Man, a Husband, and a Prince of known Honor,
profound Wisdom, undaunted Courage, and incomparable Merit; as he is a Person
that is naturally inclined to be Just, Merciful and Peaceable, and to do all
Public Acts of Generosity for the Advancement of the Interest and Happiness of
Humane Societies, and therefore most fit under Heaven, to have the sol^
Executive Power.

A LORD'S Speech Without Doors, To the Lords upon the present Condition of the
Government.
My Lords,
PRay give me leave to cast in my Mite at this time upon this great Debate; and
though it be with an entire dissent to some Leading Lords, to whom I bear great
reverence, it is according to my Conscience, and that is the Rule of every
honest Man's Actions.

My, Lords, I cannot forbear thinking, that a greater Reproach can hardly come
upon any People, than is like to fall upon us Protestants, for this
unpresidented usage of our poor King: We feared the security of our Religion
because of Him, and are now like to Violate a great part of it by forfeiting
our Loyalty toward Him; Religion is the Pretense, but some fear, a New Master
is the Thing: This I take to have been to Business of to Day; for,
notwithstanding we see how feeble a thing Popery is in England, that it is
beaten without Blows, and routed so effectually, that it can never hope, nor we
justly fear, it should return upon us, and consequently our Religion pretty
secure, yet I don't see that this satisfies us, unless the King goes also: He
must be turned away, and the Crown change its Head; for if the Crown be not the
Quarrel more than Property, and his Majesty's Person than his Religion; Why did
not the Prince stop, when he heard a Free Parliament was calling by the King's
Writs, (where all Matters, especially that of the Prince of Wales, might have
been considered) or at least, where his Majesty's Commissioners of Peace met
^im? Who advised him ^o ad^ance, and give his Majesty that apprehension of ^is
own insecurity; and if any thing but a Crown would have served him, Why was a
Noble Peer of this House clapped up at Winsor, when his Majesty sent him on
purpose to invite the Prince to St. James's? a Message that affected all good
Men's Hearts more then any thing, but his Majesty's return, it looked so Natural
and Peaceable. But it seems, as if it had been therefore affronted, for the
Invitation could not have been received without the King's remaining King; and
who was there that did not lately say, it should be so? I and who is there now
that does not see it is not so?

We can, my Lords, no longer doubt of this, if we will remember that the same
Night the Prince should have answered his Majesty's kind Message, The King's
Guards were changed, and at midnight the Prince's Guards were clapped upon hi^
Majesty's Person; and which is yet more extravagant to accomplish the business,
Three noble Lords, in view, were sent to let him know, It was not for his
safety, or the Princes honor, that he should stay in his own Palace. A strange
way, my Lords, of treating ones own King in his own House. I cannot comprehend
how it was for the Prince's Honor the King should go against his Will; or how
it was against his Honor that his Majesty should be safe in his own House: I
leave it with your Lordships to think who could render the King's stay unsafe
at White Hall after the Dutch Guards were posted there?

My Lords, this I confess is the great Iniquity that sticks with me, and
deserves our severest Scrutiny and Reflection; that after driving our King
away, we should offer to ^ddress our selves to any Body to take the Government
as if he had formally disserted it: It becomes us rather to ask* Where the King
is? how he came to go? and who sent him away? I take the Honor of the Pe^rage
of England to be deeply engaged, both at Home and Abroad, to search but this
Minor, and especially those who are now present, most of whom owe their share
i^ that noble Order to his Majesty, his Brother, Father, or Grandfather. It is
not unreasonable to believe the King had not gone at first, but upon some
Messag^ sent, and Letters received, to take care of his Person, for that
nothing less than the Crown was intended; but being not out of his own
Territories, and therefore no Dissertion, Abdication, or Remise, as the
Critics of the Conjuncture we are under pretend, (for the King may be where ^e
will in his own Kingdom:) we ^ee while it was in his choice to go, he returned,
and by as good as our advise too; so that we cannot in truth say his Dissertion
is the cause; for it is plainly the Effect of our late extraordinary
proceedings. If any should say, He needed not have gone now: it is a great
mistake, for ^ King ought to go, if he cannot stay a King in his own Kingdom,
which Force refused to let him be: And to stay a Subject to another Authority,
had been a meaner forfeiture of his Right, then can in justice be charged upon
his Retirement: Wherefore his going must and will lie at their Doors that set
him an hour to be gone out of his own Palace,

Many are angry (and yet pleased) that he is gone for France; but where, my
Lords, should he go? Flanders dared not receive him: Holland, you could not
think he should go to; and Ireland you would have liked less; and when we
consider how far a League with France has been made the cause of his Misfortune
(though to this day it is in the Clouds) what other Prince had the same
Obligation to receive and succor him: Therefore whatever Arts are used to
blacken his Retreat, we cannot, with any show of Reason, imagine that he could
think himself safe with us, that had exercised Sovereign Power without him our
Sovereign Lord, and under the protection of a Foreign Prince and his Army;
though at the same time, we had Sworn Allegiance to him, and that it was
unlawful for us to take up Arms against him under any Pretense whatever.

My Lords, if this be not virtually and in effect to pull the Crown off his
Head, and dethrone him unheard, I am to learn my Alphabet again. This is short
warning to give Kings, for us at least, my Lords, that boast of Loyalty, and
were brought to these Seats by the favor of the Crown. What can other Nations
think of the Nobility of this, if we come not to a juster temper? God defend
us, and our Children after us, from the ill Consequences of what has been done,
and prevent the rest. Had we embraced the happy Providence of his Majestyes
return, we might have improved it, that the Children unborn should have blessed
us: Then we had reformed safely, for by joining Title to our Actions, we had
made them legal: This we should have had from his Majesty, or a plain denial,
which would in some measure have excused so rare and unusual an Enterprise: Nor
can I comprehend which way it is possible to guard the Prince's Honor, but by
doing his Majesty Rights, for your Lordships may please to remember, that in
the Memorial of the States, that was printed among us, which they gave to all
the public Ministers at the Hague, to justify their lending the Prince their
Forces upon this Expedition, they do expressly say, It was upon condition not to
dethrone the King, or alter the Succession; and in my Opinion we are in the
high way to both.

My Lords, we are Protestant Christians, as well as Peers of the Realm; and are
now upon our Religion and Conscience, as well as Honor, to do right: Let us so
act as we can answer it to God and Man, and not stumble at Straws and leap over
Blocks: Errors cannot be corrected by committing greater; nor one part of the
Government be mended, by beating out another to do it. I need not tell your
Lordships, that by our Laws, Kings cannot err, and therefore they are not
accountable, but their Ministers are, without whom a King cannot perform any
Act of Government, which is the reason of the Maxim; and therefore let them be
punished that the Law only makes guilty. This our wise Ancestors contrived to
save the Head of the Government whole, and to prevent the Confusion and
Disorder that might otherwise be apt to attend the Form of it; nor is it indeed
a thing that ought to be endured by us Peers, to suppose that he that raised us
so high, could be for any Reason thrown by us so low.

My Lords, Let us limit the King if you please, but not renounce Him; there is
a difference between restraining and destroying Him. What need of such
extraordinary Remedies, since that which secures the Government under one King,
will do it under another? Popery it self can never come in but over the Bridge
of Despotick or Absolute Power; and if we can secure our selves from that, we
are as safe against Opinion as against Ambition; and till we are so by an
Amendment of our Constitution, we are exposed to the mere good Nature of the
Prince in Possession who^ver he be. And to render what I have said to your
Lord^hips not unreasonable, and what I have to move your L^rdships to, in the
close of my Speech, not ungrateful* ^ beseech your Lordships that we may cast
up our Account and see how our Loss and Gain stands, so far as we have gone in
our late Change.

^e have lost a lawful King, and got an unlawful Protector, as our Law stands;
we have missed a Legal and a Free Parliament, and have got a Convention that
cannot make Laws, nor call a Parliament that can, but what will need a
Confirmation from a better Authority.

We have lost the Reputation of keeping our Faith with Heretics, by breaking
our solemn Oaths with our King, in the time of his Extremity, because we
thought him such, though he gave us leave to lay down our Commissions, that we
might not have the Temptation or occasion to betray Him; But we have got the
Reputation of good Protestants by it; though I fear, not of good: Men, in that
some of us have not only not shown our selves religiously concerned for our
Religion, but in some respect, not honestly; that besides a thousand personal
Immoralities, could press Advance Money from the King overnight, to bear the
charges of disserting Him next day, against our warm and repeated Vows, to take
his Fate, and d^e at his Feet? and that any of us should be sainted for this
Treachery, and numbered among the Heroe^ for our running away, cannot surely be
the Lords doing, let Dr. Burnet say what he will, and yet it is very mavelous
in some Men's Eyes for all that. These are the Sparks, my Lords, that hunt the
poor Kings Blood, though we know they had hardly had any in their Veins but for
his Bounty and yet are the Favorites of the Reformation. For Christ's sake, my
Lords, let us not at this rate christan Villainy, and rank Dishonesty among the
Graces. Popery it self could not have done more, and it is certain, we are even
with the Papists now to all Intents and Purposes.

This is not all our Loss, we have rebelled against the fifth Commandment also,
Honor thy Father; and though we have got that of leaving Father for the sake
of Religion, we could have but little Religion to do it in such a manner, to so
affectionate a Father; nor did it lessen the Error, to have a Church of England
Apostle to be Captain of her Lifeguard, in his blew Coat, and Iack-Boots, and
an arrant tempora^. Sword in his Hand, to defend natural Affection and passive
Obedience. This was an odd sort of Compliance with our Savior's Command, to
put up his Sword, as one of St. Peter's Successors. My Lords, I m^st not stop
here; we thought we had been rid of (...) Soldiers, but find we have got as
many Papists in our Dutch, we had in our English Army: Now it is plain, that
either all ^^pists are not alike, and then the Danger we have apprehended from
Papists, is not universal, as we have affirmed, but that they are to be lived
with, since we are to be saved and guarded from the Danger of Popery by them;
or we have ill luck to think we can be safe from that Religion by those that
are of it, because they are Dutchmen. My Lords, I am sorry we can take such
Pleasure to see Strangers tread our Courts, pray God it does not show the way
to other Countries to take their turns. But that a Dutch Papist should be so
harmless a thing with us, that though no Papists could be so, shows our
Contradictions to a Madness. I know not how well our Soldiers like to give way
to Dutchmen, that though they had purchased a Preferance to Strangers at a
dear rate; but it is the justest thing in the World upon them, that the Prince
should distrust those to guard him, that had betrayed their own Master that
loved them to a fault; they may serve to be sent for Holland, to be knookt on
the Head in the Dutch-mans quarrel, but never to be trusted at home, though
they have given up their Quarters with their King to Foreigners, so that the
Proverb is true upon them, they have hereby brought their Noble to Nine-pence.
Yet to be just, I must confess it is a Reproach due to their Officers, and not
all of them neither, and time may give those the Opportunity to retrieve the
Credit they have lost by other Men's Faults.

We were also very apprehensive of the ill Consequences of the dispensing
Power, especially in the case of Sr. Edward Hales; but it seems the Common
Council of London are forbid to take the usual Oaths, and yet required to act,
which is an unqualified Capacity. We were in hopes we had lost a rude Army, but
we have found a ruder; twenty places cry out of them; and Kingstone certainly
with great Justice, that in two Nights time was two hundred Pounds the worse
for them. And for Closseting we have got Questioning, that they that will not
enter into Associations to protect the Prince of Orange, without one of our
King, is to have no Employment; so that if the Prince should take the Crown, I
am bound to defend him against my own King, and my sworn Allegiance though he
come in the right of his Crown. Believe me, my Lords, it is the boldest bid
that ever Men made; I see Forty one was a Fool to Eighty eight; and that we
Church of England Protestants shall cancel all the Merits of our Fathers,
overthrow the Ground and Consequence of their most exemplary Loyalty to King
Charles the first and second, render their Death, the Death of Fools, trample
their Memories and Blood under our Feet, subject our selves to the just
Reproach of the Phanaticks, whose Principles and Practices we have outdone,
even to that King that we forced upon them, and by our Example had brought them
to live well withal. God help us, this my Lords makes me say, that either we
must turn from being Church-of- England-Men, or steer another course, for it is
but too plain that Presbytery is leading us out of our ancient way; and whether
we believe it or no, our Church sinks, and will more, for that is the Interest
that suits best with a Dutch Humor and Conjunction; and be sure, if we are so
base to leave our King, God will be so just as to leave us; and here, my Lords,
I shall leave you, with this humble motion, that we make an humble Address to
his Majesty to return home to us, that we may act securely, and not go out of
the good old way, which may intail Misery upon us and our Posterity. I should
think we have had enough of sending our Princes abroad, in that much of the
Inconveniency we have lain under since their Restoration, has been chiefly
owing to it: We have driven him where we would not have him go, and do what we
can to provoke that League we have been afraid of; and made a great part of the
reason of this strange Alteration in the Kingdom. Some tell us, it is too late,
but I cannot comprehend the good sense of such an Objection; Is it at any time
too late for a King and his People to agree? after bloody Battles it has not
been thought so, in all times and Nations; and why it may not be without them,
I never heard a good reason yet: If his going was unreasonable, it has hurt him
more than us, since we may thence hope for the better terms; if it was not a
Fault to go, it will be a great one in us, if we can have him home upon good
terms, and will not; for if I may with leave speak it, his return is as much
our Convenience as his Advantage.

The offensive part of Him is gone, that is to say, the Power of Popery, and
what remains is our great Interest to keep and improve to our own Benefit and
Safety; I mean, my Lords, His undoubted Title and Kingship. And whatever some
hot Men say, that are more governed by private Avarice and Revenge, then the
public Good of these Kingdoms, I cannot but renew my motion to your Lordships,
that we may send a Duke, an Earl, a Viscount and a Baron, and two Spiritual
Lords to invite his Majesty home, upon the Constitution of the Government. And
my Lords, forgive me if I say, that if we can but get our Iuries, Sheriffs,
Judges, High Courts of Chancery and Parliaments settled as they ought to be; the
Army at least reduced, the Militia better regulated, and a due Liberty of
Conscience established to all Protestant Dissenters, and so far to Papists
only, as the Law against Conventicles does admit, we may yet be happy; and upon
these terms, my Lords, and no other, will his Highness the Prince of Orange
become truly meritorious with the English Nation.

Reflections on a Paper called a LORD'S Speech without Doors.
THIS Noble Lord would have done ingenuously in letting the World know his
Name, and whether he be a Lord or not; for one cannot gather it from his
Liberality, of casting in a mite at this time, when mean People, such as
Tradesmen, have more generosity, and effectually contributed to the public
Peace and Honor of the Nation. And as to his dissenting to some leading Lords
on the account of Conscience; we are in the dark as to what sort of Conscience
his is, whether Papist or Phanatick Conscience, or indeed whether it be any
Conscience at all, which makes him differ from some leading Lords; for the
making of Speeches within or without Doors, is no infallible Mark of either.

But he says, He cannot forbear thinking that a greater Reproach can hardly
come upon a People, than is like to fall on us Protestants. Ah, good Soul,
what is the matter? Are the Protestants at length found to be the Firers of
their own City, or Sr. Edm-B. Godfrey, and the Earl of Essex's Murderers? etc.
Why no, O its this unpresidented Usage of our poor King. A good tenderhearted
Jesuit i will warrant thee, that has entered (with Campian) into an Holy League
and Covenant to destroy all Protestant Kings and Princes, unless they become as
bigoted to the Society as the poor King was. But let me take the Boldness to
ask your Honor one Question; Is there no time when compassion is due to the
Country? Religion is the Pretense, but some fear a new Master is the thing. And
is it any wonder if a new Master be desired, when the old one will not let me
serve him, but will destroy me, and perhaps himself too; this being a clear
case, and evident to all Orders and Degrees of Men among us.

We see how feeble a thing Popery is in England: and it is, I do not doubt,
your Lordships great Grief that your old Master may not be let in again, to
strengthen and revive her drooping and almost decayed Spirits.

But why did not the Prince stop, when he heard a Free-Parliament was calling
by the Kings Writs, where all matters, especially of the Prince of Wales, might
have been considered, etc. As to a Free-Parliament, is it not evident to all
the World that the King could not bear it? Besides, who told his Lordship, that
his old Master would abide by the Decisions of a Free-Parliament, touching the
Legitimacy or Spuriousness of his Prince of Wales?

The Kings Guards were changed, and at Midnight the Prince's Guards were clapped
on his Majesty's Person. And I pray what harm befell him from this change?

It seems he might, notwithstanding, dispose of himself as he pleased. And was
it decent, when his own People forsook him, that he should be left at the
Discretion of the Rabble?

It becomes us too to ask where the King is? how he came to go? and who sent
him away? A notable Question indeed, and which every Apple-woman, or Broom-man
can resolve.

But many are angry, and yet pleased. This is Nokes all over: Why then, angry
and pleased is one and the same thing with your Lordship.

That he is gone for France: but where, my Lords, should he go? Flanders dared
not receive him. Good your Honor why? is not his Catholic Majesty as zealous
and hospitable as the most Christian King? Ay but the Spaniard had no private
Leagues of assisting each other to root out the Northern Heresy, and other
Intimacies which every Body must not know of.

Holland you could not think he should go to. Yet there was a time when Holland
was more kind to him and his Brother than France, and he has rewarded the
former very well for it.

Therefore we cannot, with any show of Reason, imagine that he could think
himself safe with us, that had exercised Sovereign Power without him our
Sovereign Lord.

Sure I am, no Man of Sense could think himself safe under his Power, that was
unwilling to part with his Religion and Property.

And under the protection of a Foraign Prince and his Army. And without his
Protection, what would have become of us?

Though at the same time we had sworn Allegiance to him, and that it was
unlawful for us to take up Arms against him under any Pretense whatever.

I would know of your Lordship, Whether the Oath, in your Honor's sense, does
not make our Lives and Estates to depend on the Prince's mere Will and Pleasure?

My Lords, let us limit the King, if you please, but not renounce him. Did he
tell your Reverence he would be limited? And was he not limited before?
Besides, a Prince of his Humor, and in his Circumstances, must needs be very
easy, and his Subjects very secure, under these Chimerical Limitations.

But we had lost a Lawful King; and gotten a more Lawful, and infinitely Better
in his room.

Against our warm and repeated Vows, to take his Fate, and die at his Feet. I
know not of whom the Gentleman speaks, unless it be of Addressers, whose
Dissimulation and deceitful Courtship I have ever more abominated than himself.

And that any of us should be numbered among the Heroes for our running away,
cannot surely be the Lord's doing, let Dr. Burnet say what he will. This
Gentleman does very well to put himself among the Run-aways; but its' more
likely his Reverence would have bin Sainted, and made an Hero by staying behind.

For Christ's sake, my Lords, let us not at this rate christen Villainy, and
rank Dishonesty among the Graces.

A Man would take his Lordship now for some Lincoln's Inn- Fields Mumper from
his Cant; but he beggs in earnest, who is All is at Stake; I know your Honor's
Necessity, the State of who is Case is briefly this; The Papists, and especially
the Jesuits in their Consults, both at Home and Abroad, for the setting up of
Popery, and extirpating the Protestant Religion in England, have come to this
decisive Conclusion, that it is impossible to effect this but under a Popish
King.

But says he further, This is not all our loss, we have rebelled against the
5th Commandment also, Honor thy Father; and though we have got that of leaving
Father of the sake of Religion, we could have but little Religion to do it in
such a manner, to so affectionate a Father.

Here his Reverence, I find, is not serious, but jokes on his poor King; for
give me an instance where his Paternal Affection appeared, unless his Fatherly
care of dragging us up in his own Religion be one?

Nor did it, says he, lessen the Error, to have a Church-of-England Apostle to
be Captain of her Life Guard, etc.

I would ask my Noble Sir here one Question, (for the Jesuits are wont to be
excellent Casuists) Whether a Churchman, observing his own, and his Neighbors
Houses a going to be fired by Rogues, he may not use another Sword besides that
of the Spirit, to drive them away?

Now he is troubled, and in great conflicts of Spirit, how our Soldiers are
like to give way to Dutchmen.

The Dutch Soldiers have behaved themselves with that Civility and Moderation,
wherever they come, as may make others of that Profession blush at a
Comparison in this point. However, let not this Matter much afflict your
Honor, or Reverence. There will be care taken that our Soldiers shall not give
way to Foreigners, nor to every Irishman, who you know were the Sparks and
Darlings of the last Reign.

But now it is but too plain, that Presbytery is leading us out of our Ancient
Way. Never fear it, good Father, for there is no danger of either that, or
Popery, being the National Religion in England. And having satisfied you so
far, I am not willing to tire my self with writing Replies to every Word of
your Speech without Doors.

The Bishops Reasons to Queen Elizabeth, for taking off the Queen of Scots,
taken out of Sir S. D Ewes Iournal: offered to the Consideration of the Present
Sect of Grumbletonians.
FOR that they had a long time, to their intolerable Grief, seen by how
manifold most dangerous and execrable Practices, the said Queen of Scots had
compassed the Destruction of her Majesty's Person, thereby not only to bereave
them of the Sincere and True Religion of Almighty God, bringing them and this
Noble Crown back again into the Thraldom of the Romish Tyranny, but also
utterly to ruinate and overthrow the happy State and Commonweal of this most
Noble Realm; to banish and destroy the Professors and Profession of the True
Religion of Jesus Christ, and the Ancient Nobility of this Land, to bring thi^
whole State and Commonweal to Foreign Subjection, and to utter Ruin and
Confusion; which Malicious Purposes would never cease to be prosecuted by all
possible Means, so long as the said Queens Confederates, her Ministers and
Favorites had their Eyes and Imaginations fixed upon the said Queen, the only
Ground of their Treasonable Hopes and Conceits, and the only Seed plot of all
Dangerous and Traitorous Devices and Practices against her Majesty's Sacred
Person. And for that, upon advised and great Consultation, they could not find
any possible means to provide for her Majesty's Safety, but by the just and
speedy Execution of the said Queen, the neglecting whereof might procure the
heavy Displeasure and Punishment of Almighty God, as by sundry severe Examples
of his great Justice in that behalf left us in Sacred Scripture, does appear;
and that if the same were not put in Execution, they should thereby (so far as
Man's Reason could reach) be brought into utter Despair of the Continuance
amongst them of the true Religion of Almighty God, and of her Majesty's Life,
and of the Safety of all her Subjects, and of the Good Estate of this
flourishing Commonweal.

For that she (the said Queen of Scots) had continually breathed the Overthrow
and Suppression of the Protestant Religion, being poisoned with Popery from her
tender Youth, and at her Age joining in that false termed Holy League and had
been ever since, and was then a powerful Enemy of the Truth.

For that she rested wholly upon Popish hopes, to be delivered and advanced,
and was so devoted, and doted in that Profession, that she would (as well for
the satisfaction of others, as for the feeding her own Humor) supplant the
Gospel where and whenever she might; which Evil was so much the greater, and
the more to be avoided, for that it slays the Soul, and would spread it self
not only over England and Scotland, but also into all Parts beyond the Sea,
where the Gospel of God is maintained, the which cannot but be exceedingly
weakened, if Defection should be in these two most violent Kingdoms.

For that if she prevailed, she would rather take the Subjects of England for
Slaves than for Children.

For that she had already provided them a Foster-father and a Nurse, the Pope
and King of Spain; into whose hands if it should happen them to fall, what
would they else look for but Ruin, Destruction, and utter Extirpation of Goods,
Lands, Lives, Honors and all?

For that as she had already by her poisoned Baits, brought to Destruction more
Noblemen and their Houses, and a greater multitude of Subjects, during her
being here, than she would have done if she had been in Possession of her own
Country, and armed in the Field against them; so would she be still continually
the cause of the like spoil, to the greater loss and peril of this Estate; and
therefore this Realm neither could nor might endure her.

For that her Sectaries both Wrote and Printed, that the Protestants would be
at their Wits end, Worlds end, if she should outlive Queen Elizabeth; meaning
thereby, that the end of the Protestant World was the beginning of their own;
and therefore if she the said Queen of Scots, were taken away, their World
would be at an end before its beginning.

For that since the sparing of her in the Fourteenth Year of Q. Elizabeth's
Reign, Popish Traitors and Recusants had multiplied exceedingly: And if she
were now spared again, they would grow both innumerable and invincible also:
And therefore Mercy in that case would prove Cruelty against them all: Nam^st
quaedam crudelis m^sericordia; and therefore to spare her Blood, would be to
spill all theirs.

And for God's Vengeance against Saul, for sparing the life of Agag, and
against Ahab for sparing the life of Benhadad was most apparent, for they were
both by the just Judgment of God deprived of their Kingdoms, for sparing those
wicked Princes, whom God had delivered into their Hands. And those Magistrates
were much conmmended, who put to Death those mischeivous and wicked Queens,
Iezabel and Athaliah.

And now I would desire our Grumbletonians (especially they of the Clergy) to
consider how extremely they have degenerated from the good and laudable
Principles of their Forefathers. They may see how urgent the Bishops, and
others, in Queen Elizabeth's days, were to have the Queen of Scots removed, (as
above said) and how they encouraged the Queen to assist the Dutch against their
Sovereign Lord, when he attempted them in their Religion and Laws; but now they
that first opposed One that has broken the Original Contract between King and
People, and done horrid things, contrary to the Laws of God, Nature, and the
Land, yet when God, out of his merciful Providence, and singular favor to us
all, has inclined him (being sensible of his own Guilt) to leave the Throne,
these Very Men that first withstood him (as I said) begin to pity him, plead
for him, and extol him; and continually, both in Pulpit, (for one of them
lately said there, That a parcel of Attoms could as soon make a World, as a
Convention make a King) and also in Coffee-houses, mutter and grumble against
the Proceedings of the great and Honorable Convention of the Kingdom, and are
busy in sending out* and privately scattering their puling Pamphlets, under the
Titles of Mementoes, Speeches, and Letters, empty of ought else, but the spleen
of a foolish and frustrated Faction. Good God! what inconstancy, folly, and
madness possesses the Breasts of these Men? to what a miserable slavery would
they lead us, and how fond and eager do they seem to have him rule over Us, who
(like the Stork in the Fable) has, and would make it his greatest delight, to
devour the best of freeborn Subjects? But, I hope, that in a little time they
will know the Things that belong to the Kingdom's Peace, and dutifully pray for
(tho at present there is no uniformity in their Pulpits save in the Dissenters)
and submit cheerfully and thankfully to him whom God has made the Glorious
Instrument of our Deliverance from Popery and Slavery.

God save King William and Queen Mary.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately published the Trial of Mr. PAPILLON, by which it is manifest
that the then Lord Chief Justice Iefferies, had neither Learning, Law, nor good
manners, but more Impudence than ten Carted Whores, (as was said of him by King
CHARLES II.) in abusing all those worthy Citizens who voted for Mr. PAPILLON
and Mr. DUBOIS, calling them a parcel of Factious, Pragmatical, Sneaking,
Whining, Canting, Sniveling, Prickear'd, Cropear'd, Atheistical Fellows,
Rascals, and Scoundrels, etc. as in p. 29. and other places of the said Trial
may be seen. Sold by Richard Ianeway, and most Booksellers.

FINIS.
A TENTH Collection of Papers Relating to the Present Juncture of Affairs in
England. VIZ. I. Reflections upon our late and present Proceedings. II. Some
short Notes on a Pamphlet, entitled, Reflections upon our late and present
Proceedings. III. The Scots Grievances: or, A short Account of the Proceedings
of the Scottish Privy Council, Justiciary Court, and those commissioned by them,
etc. IV. The late Honorable Convention proved a Legal Parliament. V. The
Amicable Reconciliation of the Dissenters to the Church of England: being a
Model or Draught for the Universal Accommodation in the Case of Religion, and
bringing in all Parties to her Communion.


London printed, and are to be sold by Richard Ianeway in Queen's-head-Court in
Pater-^oster-Row, 1689.

Reflections upon our Late and Present Proceedings in England.
THO no Man wishes better to the Protestant Religion in general, and the Church
of England in particular, than I do; yet I cannot prevail with my self to
approve all those Methods, or follow all those Measures, which some Men propose
as the only Security both of the one and the other.

Never perhaps was there a more proper time wherein to secure our Religion
(together with our Civil Liberties) than now offers it self, if we have but the
Skill and Honesty rightly to improve this critical Opportunity; but if we shall
either let it slip, or abuse it, we may in vain hereafter wish that we had been
wise in time; and have cause to repent of our Error, when it will be too late
to correct it.

What we do now will transmit its good or ill Effects to after-Ages, and our
Children yet unborn, will in all probability, be happy or miserable, as we
shall behave our selves in this great Conjuncture. They are likely to enjoy
their Religion, Laws and Liberties, according to the old English Standard, if
we shall now take the right course to secure them.

But if we do engage in wrong Counsels, and build upon false Foundations,
instead of a Blessing we may leave a Curse to our Posterity, and entail upon
them Popery, Slavery, Arbitrary Power, and all the miserable Consequences of a
divided Kingdom, which (as sure as the Word of God is true) can never stand.

Let us not therefore be too hasty, but pause a while; let us make a stop, look
about us, and consider, First, What we have done. Secondly, With what Intent we
did it. Thirdly, What it is that some Men would be at. And, Fourthly, Whether
we can in Honor and Conscience join with them in the Designs now in hand.

I shall confine my self to these Heads: But here before I enter upon any of
them, I shall take it for granted, that the Prince of Orange has done a great
thing for us, and (under God) has wrought such a Deliverance for the Nation,
as ought never to be forgotten, and can never be sufficiently requited. He must
be mentioned with Honor and Gratitude, so long as the Protestant Name shall be
remembered: He came not as the ancient Romans and Saxons, to conquer, and lead
in Triumph after him our Religion and Laws, our Lives and Liberties; but to
defend, preserve and secure us in them all. To this end he undertook this
dangerous and chargeable Expedition, which has hitherto proved as much to our
Advantage, as it will be to his lasting Reputation: What he has done argues,
that he is moved by an higher Principle than any this World affords, and can
overlook his own Ease and Security, when the Public Good, and the Concerns of
Christianity require his seasonable Assistance. I could easily make a
Panegyric upon his Virtues, and equal him to the most famous Grecian or Roman
Captains; but I need not set forth his Praises, which do so loudly, and yet so
silently speak for themselves. I need not draw any tedious Parallels betwixt
his Highness and the Worthies of other Ages, since I am, I question not, herein
prevented by all who have read the History of former Times, and are Witnesses
of what he (with so much Courage, Mildness and Prudence) has done in this.

1. Things prospered so well under his Conduct, that all of us were ready to
submit our selves to his Direction, and come under his Protection, as the
Tutelar Genius of the Nation. The Effects of his Enterprise have been so
strange, so wonderful and surprising, that had we not seen, we should scarce
have believed them.

As soon as the Prince was landed, with what Joy and universal good Wishes was
the News received? How forward were all sorts of People to declare for his
Highness? How willing were they to lend him an helping Hand for the
accomplishing his great Work? How did we all generally concur and unanimously
agree to forget our Obligations to our Sovereign, and assist the Prince rather
than the King against our selves, and his own true Interest?

Nay, the Army it self soon began to go over, choosing rather to he under the
imputation of Cowardice and Disloyalty (which yet a true Englishman had rather
die than really deserve) than to be instrumental in enslaving their Native
Country, and bringing it again under the Papal Yoke.

In short, all Orders of Men, Ecclesiastic, Civil, and Military, had their
Eyes fixed upon the Prince of Orange, as their Common Deliverer, were resolved
to espouse his Cause; and accordingly (after the King was withdrawn) did put
the Regal Administration into his Hands.

2. So far we have gone; this we have done; and we hope that (the case being
extraordinary, and Necessity giving a Dispensation) the Intent of our
proceeding, will at least excuse, if not justify us, if we have not kept our
selves within the Common Laws of Action.

For let every Man lay his Hand upon his Heart, and seriously ask himself, for
what Reason, and with what Intent he became a Party in this general Defection?
Was it utterly to ruin the King and subvert the Government? Was it because he
was displeased with the ancient Constitution, and had a mind to mould and
fashion it to his liking? Was it because he had an Intent to shake off the
Government (that easy, equal, and well-poised, and never-enough to be commended
Government, as King CHARLES I. calls it) of the English Nation? Was it any
honest Man's meaning to subvert this Government, to make way for his own Dreams
of some Poetical Golden-Age, or a Fanciful Millenium?

Was it (let me ask again) to divest the King of all Power to protect his
Subjects, and then to pronounce roundly, that all the Bonds of Allegiance to
him are dissolved? Was the end of our uniting together, to bind his Hands, and
then prick this Doctrine upon the points of our Swords: Protection and
Allegiance are Duties so reciprocal, that where the one fails wholly, the other
falls with it?

Was it to frighten the King out of his Dominions, and then to vote that he
has Abdicated his Government? Was this the Intent, and were these the Reasons
of our Declaring for the Prince of Orange? No, certainly, whatever some
obnoxious and ambitious Men might aim at, all good Christians and worthy
Patriots had other Intentions, and were led on by other Motives.

They were sensibly concerned for the Preservation of their Holy Religion, in
the first place; their Lives, their Laws, and Liberties in the next. After the
way, which some call Heresy, so were they desirous still to worship the God of
their Fathers: And after that manner which some might say was Rebellion, so
they thought themselves obliged to stand up for the Laws and Liberties of their
Forefathers.

For these Ends, and for bringing about these worthy Purposes, they withdrew
themselves from the Kings personal Service, that they might be the better
enabled to serve his real Interest. They hoped by this means to deliver him
from his evil Counselors, and secure both him and his Subjects from the evil
and pernicious Practices of some wicked and unreasonable Men.

3. These and such like were the Inducements which prevailed with all
well-affected and honest Men, to withdraw from his Majesty, and suspend the
actual Exercise of their Allegiance for the present, that they might afterward
exert it according to the fixed and stated Rules of Law, Conscience, and right
Reason.

But now, how contrary is this to those new Models, which some politic
Architects are proposing to, or rather imposing upon the Nation? What is it
they would be at? And what are the Ends they are driving on? Are they just and
good? Are they generous and honorable? Or are they not rather such as would
undermine the Government both in Church and State, and reduce us to a state of
Nature, wherein the People are at Liberty to agree upon any Government, or none
at all?

Plainly, they would reduce us to the Dutch, or some other foreign Measures
(which how well soever they may agree with that Country, where they are settled
and confirmed, partly by Custom, and partly by the peculiar Necessity of their
Affairs) can never be well received in England, till an Act be passed to
abolish Monarchy, Episcopacy, and all the Fundamental Laws established by Magna
Charta, and all succeeding Parliaments ever since.

The Enquixy into the Measures of Submission to the Supreme Authority, is a
Treatise calculated for the times; but surely it is not written according to
the Principles and Practice of the Church of England, in the time of the
renowned Queen Elizabeth: I am apt to think, that some regard was then had to
the Passages which we find in the Scriptures (especially the Old Testament)
relating to the Measures of Submission. But these Examples weigh nothing with
our Author, because they are not for his purpose, page 5, 6. I am also apt to
suspect that Queen Elizabeth would not have thanked any Politician for vending
this as a certain and fundamental Principle, That in all Disputes between Power
and Liberty, Power must always be proved, but Liberty proves it self; the one
being founded only upon a positive Law, and the other upon the Law of Nature,
page 4. She, I persuade my self, on the contrary, would have challenged any
such Statesman to have proved his Liberty; as for her Power (she would have
answered) it was ready to prove it self against all who should presume to
question it. But what is the meaning of Power being founded only on a positive
Law, and Liberty upon the Law of Nature? Is not a Father's Power founded (as he
grants) upon the Law of Nature? and is not all Power, even of the greatest
Princes, (as far as it is just and honest, and for the Benefit of the Subject)
derived from this Paternal Authority of the Father over his Son? Besides, does
not the Law of Nature prescribe the Necessity of putting Power into the Hands
of one or more for the Benefit of the whole, which otherwise would be in danger
of destroying it self by intestine Divisions? In short, If Liberty be founded
upon the Law of Nature, so is all just and lawful Power, since the end of it is
only to regulate our Liberty, and in truth to make us more free. Liberty in
general is a right to use our Faculties according to right Reason; and the Law
in particular tells us which are those Rules of right Reason by which we must
govern our selves. And what is Law, but the Commands of the Supreme Power
(wherever it is lodged, in the hands of the Prince, the Senate, or the
People, or of all of them together) ordering what we are to do or avoid, under
the Sanction of particular Penalties?

I beg the Learned Author's Pardon for questioning his Measures: in my Judgment
they are not taken from the English Standard, and therefore I hope I may
without Offense use my Liberty in refusing them (a Right which proves it self)
till he can prove his Power to impose them.

The Enquiry into the present State of Affairs, is a Discourse which seems (by
its bold strokes) to resemble the former. I will say no more of it but this, If
what he there lays down for a certain Truth be really so, then all that follows
must be granted, as reasonable Deductions from this fundamental Principle: but
if this be false, all that he has said falls to the Ground, for want of a firm
and solid Foundation to support it.

Now the Position, which (like a first Principle in Mathematics) he takes for
granted, is this, It is certain (says he, page 1.) that the reciprocal Duties
in Civil Societies, are Protection and Allegiance; and wheresoever the one
fails wholly, the other falls with it. This is his Doctrine which I have
mentioned before, but shall now consider a little more particularly.

It Is indeed most fit and reasonable, that Protection and Allegiance should
always go together, and accompany one another; but that they do not do so, is
but too plain in the present case of England: but does it follow, that because
the King is not in a Capacity to protect his Subjects, therefore he is no
longer to be looked upon as a King? And if he be a King, does not this suppose
that he has some Subjects? And if so, I would gladly know what kind of
Subjects they are who owe no Allegiance?

But let this Question be ruled by his own Instance, The Duty betwixt Father
and Son. Suppose my Father to be so destitute that he cannot, and so perverse,
that he will not protect and sustain me; suppose him as churlish as Cain, and
as poor as Job; yet still he is my Father, and I am his Son; that is, he still
retains all that Power which (by the Law of Nature) a Father ought to have over
his Child: still the Relation holds betwixt us, and whilst it does so, the
Father's Faults or Necessities cannot evacuate the Duty of a Son; which is
founded not in the Fathers good Will or Abilities to defend him (though it must
be confessed they are chiefly considered) but in that fixed and immutable
Relation which God and Nature have established betwixt them, not to be
dissolved but by Death. So that if this learned Author will yield (as he seems
to do) that Kingly Power is nothing else but the Paternal, consigned (by the
common consent of the Fathers of Families) to one Person, upon such and such
Conditions, (specified in the Contract;) I cannot see how this Relation betwixt
King and Subject can any more be utterly dissolved, than that betwixt a Father
and his Son.

I shall say no more to this Discourse; and if what I have already said do
offend either against the Principles of Reason, or the Law of England, I am
willing to be corrected, and acknowledge my Error.

There is another little Paper which yet gives such a great stroke to the
Government, that it ought not to be passed over without some Animadversion. The
Sheet which I mean is, that which is called Advice before it be too late, or A
Breviate for the Convention. This Paper bespeaks its Author to be of the same
Complexion and Principles with him who writ the Word to the Wise, and the four
Questions debated. They do all of them suppose, that the Government is fallen
to its Center, or Root from whence it sprang, that is, to the People (as the
Word to the Wise expresses our present case.) I know not what can be a more
effectual Answer to these Pamphlets, and take away the Foundation upon which
they argue, than that Maxim in our Law, received by all honest and learned
Lawyers, The King of England never dies. For if so, how is the Government
lapsed? And if it be not lapsed, how can the Throne be said to be vacant? And
if the Throne be not vacant, we are still a Body Politic, (consisting of Head
and Members) though much distempered and out of order, by reason of the
Infirmities of the Head. We still live, tho we are not in good Health; and our
Case does not require the Sexton to make our Grave, but calls for the Physician
to apply proper Remedies to cure our Disease. If the King can dye, it is such a
defect in our Government as does strangely disparage it, and further supposes,
that (which hitherto we are all to learn) the Crown is not Successive.

Now if it be successive, it cannot be disposed of by the Will of the People,
but only by the Will of God; who in that very moment calls the lawful Heir to
the Crown, wherein he is pleased to put a Period to the Life of his
Predecessor. If he be said that the Voice of the People is the Voice of God, I
believe that (should this be granted) it will not do their Business: for I
doubt not, but that if the Pole was taken, and the Question put to all People
who are of Years of Discretion; the Answer would be, That they have still a
King, and that they are as willing to keep him, as they are desirous to exclude
Popery for ever; that which has made both him and them so unhappy. This, I do
not much question, would be the Answer, if we should appeal to the sense of the
People in general; who yet (if the Government be fallen to them) must be
allowed to have a right of Suffrage, and a Liberty to speak their Minds as
freely as other Commoners in this great Convention.

Further still, If the King never dies by our Law, how can he be lawfully
deposed? For by Deposition the Throne necessarily becomes void for some time.
There must be some Interstice, some space of time, before they who deposed a
King can set up another; and till the King in Designation be actually invested
with the Regal Office, there must of Necessity be an Interregnum; that is, The
King (contrary to the Mind of our Law) may dye.

The Government of England always supposes a Monarch regulated by Law, and
therefore it is presumed that he can do no wrong; that is, though he may err, as
well as other Mortals, yet the Law, of which he is the Guardian, brings no
Accusation against him, but only against his evil Ministers. If therefore the
King has erred, (as doubtless he has very much) in God's Name let his
Ministers be called to an account; but why must the Government be dissolved,
and the King arraigned, condemned, and deposed, to make way for any new Scheme
of Government whatsoever, whether French, Italian, or Dutch?

Our History indeed affords two Examples since William the First's time; that
of Edward the Second, and the other of Richard the Second: but they did both of
them actually resign; and besides, what they did, or was done to them, ought to
preclude the right of no succeeding Prince. These Examples ought no more to be
urged than the stabbing King Henry the Fourth of France, or the murdering King
CHARLES the First of England.

The Historian, in the Life of Richard the Second, gives no very good Character
of that Parliament, which passed the Vote for this Deposition: The Noblemen
(says he) partly corrupted by Favor, partly awed by Fear, gave their Voices;
and the Commons (commonly are like a Flock of Cranes) as the first fly, all the
Followers do the like. Continuat. Dan. Hist. p. 46.

Let it be here observed, that I do not dispute whether the King, together with
his Parliament, may not regulate and entail the Succession, as shall by them be
thought fit; but only whether whilst the King lives, whether the Throne can be
vacant, and the Government be truly said to be lapsed? This we deny: But
however, supposing that these things may be so, who can make so fair a Claim
(and so generally satisfactory to the People) as the next Heir by Proximity of
Blood; I mean (if the Prince of Wales be proved supposititious) that
incomparable Lady, the Princess of Orange?

These Reflections I have thought fit to make upon some new Notions of our
present Statesmen, by which we guess what they would be at. In my Opinion, I
think it is but too evident, that they are taking Advantage of our present
Fears and Distractions, to run us into those Extremes which the State (as well
as the Church) of England has always carefully avoided, and taken particular
care to provide against.

4. In this Design can we in Honor and Conscience go along with them; whom yet
we cannot but highly esteem and value for their Learning and Parts, and more
especially for their happy and successful Labors, in rescuing us from those
gross Corruptions of Christian Religion, and human Nature, Popery and Slavery?

But shall we run into Popery, and perhaps Slavery too, when we have been so
long stri^ing against both, and are now (Thanks be to God) in a great measure
freed from the Danger of either? And is not the Deposing a Popish Doctrine? And
is it not as Antichristian for any Assembly to put it into Practice, as it was
for the Council of Lateran at first to establish it?

And as for Slavery, must not a standing Army be necessarily kept up, to
maintain a Title founded only upon the consent of the fickle and uncertain
People (granting that the major part of them are willing?) And in such a case
must we not be beholden to the Goodness of the Prince, rather than the
Protection of our Laws, if an Arbitrary and Despotick Power be not again
introduced?

We have, as yet, no Law which wholly disables and excludes a Popish Successor
from the Throne; and till we have one (which I question not but we shall have
soon) I do not see how we can disanul the King's Title, or vacate his Regal
Capacity, howsoever his Power may be restrained. Innovations without former
Precedent, are always dangerous, especially those of this Nature. It will be
much more wise, as well as safe, to bear with some Inconveniences, than bring
upon our selves those Mischiefs, which such unparalled Proceedings may
produce.

The Prince of Orange in his additional Declaration has these Words: We are
confident, that no Persons can have such hard Thoughts of us, as to imagine
that we have any other Design in this Undertaking, than to procure a Settlement
of the Religion, and of the Liberties and Properties of the Subjects upon so
sure a Foundation, that there may be no danger of the Nations relapsing into
the like Miseries at any time hereafter.

How far some Persons may extend this Clause [that there may be no Danger of
the Nations relapsing into the like Miseries for the future] I cannot tell; but
for any one to understand it so, as if his Highness meant, that there could be
no Security against the Nations Relapse, if the King be not deposed, and he
himself put into Possession of the Throne, is (I am sure) an Interpretation
very disadvantageous to his Honor, and looks more like a Jesuitical
Equivocation, than that Candor and Christian Sincerity, which has brightned
and rendered illustrious all the Actions of his Highness, both at home and
abroad.

The Answerer also to the Reflecter upon (his Highness's Declaration, will not
permit us to harbor any such Suspicions, as if a Crown was the End of this
Expedition. All such (says he, page 23, 24.) as believe the Prince of Orange
has brought this Army, and intends to make War upon England, and subdue it to
his mere Will and Pleasure, trample all Laws both Divine and Human under feet;
dethrone his present Majesty, and make himself King; they will stay and fight
for him ( sc. the King) or at least to the best of their Power, in some manner
assist and help him: On the contrary, such as believe that the Prince's meaning
is nothing of all this, etc.

Here, you see, that this Author (who, it is to be supposed, was not
unacquainted with the Prince's Intentions) utterly rejects it, as a false
Imputation, that his Highness came to dethrone his present Majesty, and make
himself King. Nay, he thought himself obliged so fully to declare against this
scandalous Report, that he seems to have encouraged all those who believed it,
To stay and fight for the King; or at least, to the best of their power, in
some manner assist and help him. So far was this Gentleman from entertaining
any such thoughts of the Prince's Expedition; which some Men, nevertheless, do
now so industriously labor to make the effect of it.

There is another thing which makes well-meaning Men apt to suspect the present
management, and with holds them from closing with it so fully, as otherwise,
its probable they might do. That Paper which goes under the Title of the
Prince's Third Declaration, is (as I am credibly informed) none of his, and is
disowned by the Prince himself. Now this pretended Declaration (coming out when
the Army was in such a dubious Condition, and fluctuating betwixt the King and
the Prince) did more harm to the King's Affairs, than all the other Papers (I
believe) published at that time.

And if this was no real, but a sham Declaration, and yet was permitted without
Contradiction, it is plain that Sophistry and Tricks are made use of, as lawful
Polices, and that any kind of means are permitted, if they will but do the
business, and serve the present turn. This makes plain and honest Men, who have
no Ends to serve, but what are just, and are willing to use no kind of Means
but what are so: This makes them shie and cautious of engaging too far in those
Designs, which they see carried on by crafty and deceitful Artifices working
under a Military Power and Force ready to defend them.

I might mention the great number of Papists in the Dutch Army, as another
disswasive from venturing our selves in this bottom: We are afraid of Papists
of all sorts and of all Country, German and Dutch, as well as French and
Irish; the Constitutions of the one may be more harmless than of the other; but
the Principles of both (we know) are equally destructive; and when occasion
serves, who knows but that the Principle may prevail over the Constitution, and
the Papist get the better of the Dutchman? It Is ill trusting Popery in any
shape: This is a Root, which wherever it is planted, can bring forth no good
Fruit. The Bogs of Holland cannot (we think) make it less malignant, than those
of Ireland.

To come to a conclusion, there remain several things to be cleared, before we
can altogether comply with what is now prosecuted with so much Zeal.

That the Prince of W. is a supposititious Child: That a League was made by our
King with the King of France for the Destruction of his Protestant Subjects,
and rooting out our Religion, under the Notion of the Northern Heresy: That the
late King was poisoned; and that the Earl of Essex was murdered. These things,
we desire, may be proved; and then we cannot but agree, that nothing can be too
bad for the guilty Authors.

These are such damnable Villainies, such horrid Crimes, that both the
Principles and Accessories ought to be esteemed, and treated no better than
Tories and Banditti, Men of seared and profligate Consciences, forsaken of God,
and Enemies to Mankind.

But then seeing these are such heavy Accusations and grievous Charges, they
ought certainly to be well proved before they be believed, and produced as
Arguments against the Life, Honor, and Estate of any Person: for si satis
esset accusasse, etc. If it be enough to accuse, where should we find an
innocent Person?

If these dreadful things can be made out, it would, I believe, not only
confirm Protestants in their deserved Detestation of Popery, but create even in
the minds of honest Papists themselves, an Aversation to their own Religion,
when they shall see it contriving and executing such cruel and unnatural Works
of darkness.

To see a Father setting up a pretended Son against the Interest of his own
undoubted Children; to behold a King bargaining for the Destruction of his own
Subjects; to represent to our Minds one Brother preparing the deadly Cup for
the other, who yet ventured his Crown rather than he would exclude him from the
hopes of it in Reversion; to look upon the same Royal Person plotting and
managing the Assassination of a Captive and helpless Peer. These are such
dismal Sights and melancholic Scenes, so full of Horror and barbarous Cruelty,
that they must needs make sad Impressions upon the Hearts even of the boldest
Spectators; insomuch, that if they were proved, they would most effectually
prejudice all Men against the Author of such monstrous Barbarities, and go near
to extinguish all Obligations of Duty which otherwise they might owe to his
Person and Authority.

We must therefore call again for the Proof of these things, or else we cannot
(because we ought not to) believe them upon bare Surmise and Hearsay. If these
Accusations be cleared once, who can reverence the Person guilty of them, as
the Father of his Country, and not rather avoid and fly from him as the worst
of Tyrants?

But if these things be still kept in the Clouds, and wrapped up in uncertain
Ambiguities, all wise Men will think that it would have been better, if they
never had been mentioned; because this does but raise the Peoples Zeal for the
present, which (if not kept up by real Evidence) will be apt to turn to the
other Extreme, and commiserate the Cause which before it prosecuted with so
much violence. The higher Men's Resentments are raised by objecting the most
notorious Crimes, the lower will they fall, if Truth and plain matter of Fact
does not back and maintain them. And this is an Advantage which I would not
have us give our Adversaries in these things, no more than we have done in the
matters of Dispute betwixt them and us. Here we have proved all our Charges
against their Religion; let us therefore prove, or else not so eagerly insist
upon these Accusations brought against their Persons.

I shall add nothing further, but my real Wishes, That I could (tho with the
loss of all that is dear to me in this World) contribute to the utter Exclusion
of Popery by all lawful means; and I do, and shall always pray for a Blessing
upon their Designs, who sincerely endeavor to procure a Settlement of the
Religion, Liberties and Properties of the Subjects, upon so sure a foundation,
that there may be no danger of the Nations relapsing into the like miseries at
any time hereafter.

Some short Notes on a Pamphlet, entitled, Reflections upon our late and
present Proceedings in England.
A Man must read much of this Author's profound Work, before he can fathom the
Depths of it, and find what his Design is, or whether indeed he has any Design
at all, unless it be that of making a Book.

He tells us at length after much Struggling, and a tedious Repetition of what
every body knows (perhaps) better than himself, That all Orders of Men,
Ecclesiastic, Civil, and Military, did put the Regal Administration into the
Prince of Orange's Hands, and that the Intent of our Proceedings will at least
excuse, if not justify us. I would have this knowing Gentleman inform the World
into what Hands the Regal Administration could be better put? And if the Nation
could not do better, whether this their Action does not justify it self? But
says he a little above, How did we all generally concur, and unanimously agree
to forget our Obligations to our Sovereign. And in Page 4, he tells us, That
the Prince of Orange has done a great thing for us, and wrought such
Deliverance for the Nation as ought never to be forgotten, and can never be
sufficiently requited. I do not at all doubt but this Gentleman can more easily
write half a dozen such Books as this is, than reconcile these notable
Passages. He acknowledges we have been rescued out of the Hands of him that
hated us, and would have destroyed us without a cause, and yet reproaches us
with forgetting our Obligations to our Sovereign.

In Page 5. he has this sharp Question, Let every Man ask himself, for what
reason he became a party in this general Defection? Was it to divest the King
of all Power to protect his Subjects? etc. To repeat these Absurdities is a
sufficient Answer to them.

And then again in the next Page, That whatever some obnoxious and ambitious
Men might aim at, all good Christians had other Intentions. They were sensibly
concerned for the Preservation of their Holy Religion, in the first place:
Their Lives, their Laws* their Liberties, in the next: And after the way which
some call Heresy, so were they desirous still to worship the God of their
Fathers; and after that manner which some might say was Rebellion, so they
thought themselves obliged to stand up for the Laws and Liberties of their
Forefathers. What measures of Obedience this Man is for, and what he would have
us to do, or not to do, I am not able to divine from his Book, for he seems to
dislike in one place, what he approves in another. But he tells us in Page 6,
and 7 of his Fears of the Government being undermined both in Church and State,
and that he shall be reduced to the Dutch or some other foreign measures, which
can never be well received in England till an Act be past to abolish Monarchy,
Episcopacy, etc.

If this Gentleman's Distractions be not so great as to hinder him the use of
his two chief Senses, he may now perceive that his Fears are as vain, as others
perceive his Reasoning to be.

But in Page 8. he states a notable Question, for he supposes his Father to be
as churlish as Cain, and as poor as Job, and yet maintains he is his Father.

O admirably put! But what is this to a King's apparent Design of ruining and
enslaving a People, who have the same both Natural and Civil Right to their
Lives and Liberties, as he has to his?

But shall we run (says he) into Popery, and perhaps Slavery too? and is not
the Deposing a Popish Doctrine? p. 11. and as for Slavery, Must not a standing
Army be necessarily kept up to maintain a Title founded only on the consent of
the fickle and uncertain People?

If the Lords and Commons of England are this fickle and uncertain People; I
know not where our Author will find more substantial Folks, unless he fancies
they are to be met with amongst the Mobile. And as to the Popish Deposing
Doctrine, I have already showed our case comes in no sort near it; for the late
King's Religion did not hinder his possessing himself of the Throne, neither
was that the Cause of his leaving it, for he might have enjoyed it and made the
best of it, as to himself, in all Freedom, but he thought it beneath him to
stop here, and not impose his false Worship on all his Subjects, trampling all
the Laws of the Kingdom under his Feet, and thereby claiming not only an
absolute Empire over the Bodies, but the Minds of his Subjects.

Our Author likewise shows himself a notable Well-wisher to our Religion and
Liberties, when he represents a standing Army ( page 11.) in the present
Exigency of Affairs, to be such a Grievance, and that too under a Prince, who
has not been only born and educated in the greatest Aversion to Popery, and the
only Prince uncorrupted by the French King, but whose Genius and Interests do
every ways so answer the Necessity of our Nation, that we have no other cause
of Fear or Trouble, but at the sense of our own Unworthiness of so great a
Blessing.

He seems in p. 12, and 13, to be in great Labor, left the Prince of Orange
should make himself a King contrary to the express Terms of his Declaration,
and Pretenses of coming over here. To which may be answered, that he has in no
sort violated that Declaration, for he did not thrust himself into the Throne;
and as to his being so now, both de jure and de facto, this being a matter
decided by the Justice, Wisdom and Supreme Authority of the Nation, it is
foolish Presumption, and no less conceited Ignorance for any private Person to
argue it.

Our wise Author seems to be moreover concerned and greatly troubled at the
Effects produced by the third Declaration, for he says, It did more harm to the
King's Affairs, than all the other Papers published at that time; whence he
concludes its plain that Sophistry and Tricks are made use of, if they will but
do the Business. What would this Man have? would he have both to succeed, when
he elsewhere acknowledges, that the late King's Design was to ruin us, and the
Prince's to prevent it? As to Tricks and Sophistry, I detest them as much as
any Man, yet think such harmless Guides (whoever was the Author) less
pernicious and destructive than force and bloodshed.

This Gentleman who s^ily pleads all along for the Popish Interest, is now for
sooth much scandalized at the Dutch-Papists in the Princes Army* but at this he
need not take Offense, seeing they are going over whence they came, to serve
the States against the most unchristian Usurper or both Popish and Protestant
Countries.

But before this worthy Author can come to a Conclusion of his Book, he must
have several things proved to him: to wit, That the Prince of Wales is a
supposititious Child; that a League was made by our King with the King of
France, for the Destruction of his Protestant Subjects, and rooting out our
Religion under the Notion of the Northern Heresy; that the late King was
poisoned; and that the Earl of Essex was murdered. These things we desire may
be proved, and then we cannot but agree* that nothing can be too bad for the
guilty Authors. This Gentleman cannot but know the Unreasonableness of his
Demands, and that what he desires, is not only unseasonable, but impracticable,
till the Government be settled, when, and at what time, (perhaps to his great
Confusion) these and many other Deeds of Darkness will be brought to light.
Moreover the Astonishment he expresses at the mention of these vile Practices,
seems to arise in him, rather from some crafty Design, than mere Ignorance of
what has been done (oftener than once) in Neighboring Courts. To conclude then
in my Authors own Words; If these Accusations be cleared once, who can
reverence the Person guilty of them, as the Father of his Country, and not
rather avoid and fly him as the worst of Tyrants.

The Scot's Grievances: Or a Short Account of the Proceedings of the Scottish
Privy Council, Iusticiary Court, and those Commissionated by them, whereby the
Consciences of good Men have been Tortured, the Peace of the Nation these
several Years past exceedingly Disturbed, and Multitudes of Innocent People
cruelly Oppressed, and inhumanely Murdered.
IN the Tract of these Years, although Informing was a Trade more encouraged
than in the Reign of Tiberius, yet they arraigned Multitudes without Informer
or Accuser; and whosoever appeared not upon their Summer Citation (which often
times was impossible) were treated as Criminals.

They seized many of all Ranks, and detained them Months, and Years, without
any Signification of the cause of their Imprisonment; and seldom liberate any
such without Exorbitant Bail: but if they could find the least Shadow to
prosecute any suspected to mislike their Arbitrary Courses, they precipitated
their Process, not allowing them time or means to vindicate their Innocence.

They sent their Inquisitors through their Prisons and Citizens Houses, to
examine whom they pleased, upon most intricate Questions of Church and State
Government, and made their refusing to answer, or dissatisfactory Answers, the
Foundation of their Indictments; others seized in the Crowd at Executions, and
some when visiting the imprisoned, were condemned and executed, for refusing to
justify their Severities against their Brethren, and disowning their Dagon of
Nor resistance.

They frequently sent out Spies to Prisons, Cities and Country, under Disguise,
who by simulating their Dissatisfaction at the Exorbitances of the Government,
and Zeal for persecuted Piety, might draw Words from the most wary, sustaining
such and other Informers as habil Witnesses to the taking away the Lives of
many Innocents, notwithstanding of one Express Act of Parliament to the
contrary.

They often prosecuted without a Libel: and when they formed Libels, they
seldom restricted themselves to the Points therein contained, holding them, as
confessed who refused to answer their captious and extraneous Questions.

They not only employed Emissaries, but Judges themselves were active to suborn
Witnesses against the Lives, Estates and Honors of Peers and worthy Patriots
(a palpably gross Management of such an Intrigue, having qualified a Person for
a chief Seat in their High Court of Justice) and when they could not find such
Execrable Russians to serve their turns, they forced Pannals to answer de super
Inquirendis, in the most Criminal Cases. They have often sustained Jurors and
Witnesses, who could not purge themselves of Prejudice or partial Counsel.

They have Indicted, Tried, Condemned and executed Persons in one day; and when
Intercession has been made for some time to prepare for Death, it has been
answered, They shall have no time to prepare for Heaven, Hell is too good for
them. They have kept some in Expectation of Reprieves and Pardons, till the
very Day and Hour of their Execution; others they have hanged early in the
Morning, thereby preventing the Peoples seeing their Cruelty, and hearing the
dying Persons last Words, and too palpably designing by such Surprizals the
Ruin of their Souls. They frequently beat Drums about the Scaffolds, their
Cause being such as could not bear the Words of dying Christians. They searched
several, when removing them from the Prison to the Scrffold, seized their
Testimonies, that so they might not come to public.

They would have their Laws to reach Thoughts as well as Actions, and many
against whom they could charge no matter of Fact, they sought to reach their
Lives for their Thoughts, asking them, What think you of the Government, etc.?
Some they have wheedled to Confession, by promising to favor their Ingenuity,
upbraiding them for Dissemblers if they would not speak freely, and by
mock-Expostulations; viz. Are ye ashamed of your Principles? Are ye afraid to
give a Testimony, etc? and forced them to subscribe their Confessions before
the Council, which they produced as Witness against them at the Criminal Court,
whereupon they were Sentenced and Executed.

When any refused to give Categorical Answers, then could they extort all by
Torture, with their Engines of Cruelty, the Boots, fired Matches betwixt the
Fingers and Thumkins; and after torturing, hanged several, though thereby they
could extort nothing.

When some had answered all their Questions, and cleared themselves of all
charged against them, yet would they not pass them so, but impose some of their
wicked Oaths, which they concluded they would not take, and according to the
measure of Tenderness they discovered in any, they apportioned the Oaths; to
the stricter the more smooth; to the laxer the more harsh, such as once their
own Natural Consciences did fear at.

They required not only to have their Laws obeyed, but subscribed also, holding
it not sufficient that People transgress them not, but likewise own the Justice
of them, and the Lawfulness of the Authority enacting them, and swear to
maintain them; and yet when some have complied to all they sought, yet would
they not discharge them, but upon Bond to answer again when called.

Not only Extrajudicial Confession will sustain with them, but when they have
given the public Faith, the King's Security, the Act and Oath of Council, that
such Confession should not militate, yet they have brought it in as Evidence,
and given it upon Oath, when their former Act and Oath was produced in open
Court in Demonstration of their Perjury.

They used frequently to pack Juries, picking out such as they thought any
thing tender, and not bloody enough, and sometimes listed some who they
concluded would not concur, that thereupon they might get occasion to exact
their Fines.

Sometimes when the Jury has brought in their Verdict in Favor of the Pannal,
they have made them return and resume the Cognition of the Process again, and
threatened them with an Assize of Error if they did not bring him in Guilty, yea
frequently the Advocate theatned them under most peremptory Certifications if
they found not the Impannalled Guilty; so that their using Juries was but for
the Fashion.

They have sentenced innocent Persons twice, once to have their Ears cut off
and banished, and after the lopping of their Ears, they have re-examined them,
and sentenced them to Death.

They used to stage several together, of whom they knew some would comply, to
tantalize others with the sight of their Liberty, thereby tempting them to bite
more eagerly at their snaring Baits, to wound the Conscience.

They have not only Murdered many innocent Christians in taking their Lives,
but also endevou^ed to Murder their Reputation and the Cause they owned,
loading it with most reproachful Epithets, which was their peculiar Policy, to
bring the Heads of Suffering to Points most obnoxious to common Censer, and
most Extrinsick to Religion, cutting off the Faithful Professors of Religion,
and true Lovers of Liberty, under the odium of Enemies to Government.

Some they arraigned whom they could neither reach by adducing many Witnesses
against in Trial, nor by their Examination with their cruel Torture of the
Boots, yet has had their whole Estate seized, and also been sent to P^ison in
a Rock within the Sea, without being convicted of any Crime.

They finding their means and motions under Color of Law; and Trials were too
slow and troublesome to acquire their designed Cruelties and that the public
Executions tended more to confirm and multiply the Lovers of Religion and
Liberty, than to diminish and deter, took a more compendious way of sending out
their Soldiers empowered to challenge and examine whom they pleased; and to
tender Oaths required by no Law, and to punish such by present Death who
refused to swear, or scrupled to answer their ensnaring Q^estion, which bloody
Commissions were so faithfully Executed, that within few Weeks above fifty
innocent Persons were cruelly murdered in cold Blood, without either T^yal or
Conv^^^^on, or respe^t to Age or Sex.

Although the Multitudes of Famil^es ruined by Exorbitant Fining^, Forfeitures,
Banishments, Imprisonments, Free qua^terings and Plunderings of Souldier^, and
Barbarities of their Highland Host: the many cruel Edicts and Proclamations
they have published, the unlawful Bonds, and wicked self-contradicting Oaths
imposed and pressed, the many Exactions whereby they have impoverished the
Country, the many open Oppressions, horrid Tortures and Cruelties practiced
upon Innocents, the multitudes of Persons Male and Female, whom they have
Murdered, Persecuted, Oppressed and Destroyed, are so many and various that
they cannot be collected: Yet some have been at no small pains to gether as
much of these, as when published in a Martyrology of these times, (which is
purposed to be done with all convenient speed) will give the World to know as
well the Faithfulness, Patience, Courage and Constancy of these who suffered,
together with the Equity of their Cause, as the Inhumanity, Illegality and
Severity of their Cruel and Bloody Persecutors.

The Late Honorable CONVENTION proved a Legal PARLIAMENT.
I. THE necessity of a Parliament agreed by the Lords and Commons Voting that
the Throne is Vacant; for there being a Vacancy, there follows an immediate
necessity of settling the Government, especially the Writs, being destroyed,
and the Great Seal carried away, put a period to all public Justice, and then
there must be a supply by such means as the necessity requires, or a failure of
Government.

II. Consider the Antecedents to the calling the Convention; that is, about
three hundred of the Commons, which is a majority of the fullest House that can
be made, above sixty Lords, being a greater number, than any part divided
amounted to at this great Meeting, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council
of the City of London, by application to His then Highness the Prince of
Orange, desired him to accept of the Administration of P^blick Affairs,
Military and Civil, which he was pleased to do, to the great satisfaction of
all good People; and after that His Highness was desired to Issue forth His
Circular Letters to the Lords; and the like to the Coroners, and in their
absence to the Clerks of the Peace, to Elect Knights, Citizens and Burgesses;
this was more than was done in Fifty nine, for the calling a Parliament in
April 1660. for there the Summons was not real, but fictitious, ( i. e.) in the
names of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, a mere Notion set up as a
Form, there being no such Persons, but a mere Ens rationis, impossible really
to exist: so that here was much more done than in 1659, and all really done
which was possible to be invented, as the Affairs then stood. Besides King Chapter
the 2d. had not abdicated the Kingdom, but was willing to return, and was at
Breda, whither they might have sent for Writs, and in the mean time have kept
their form of Keepers of the Liberties, etc. But in the present case there was
no King in being, nor any style or form of Government, neither real, or
notional left; so that in all these respects, more was done before, and at the
calling of this Great Convention, than for calling that Parliament (for so I
must call it) yet that Parliament made several Acts, in all thirty seven, as
appears by Keebles Statutes, and several of them not confirmed; I shall
instance but in one, but it is one which there was occasion to use in every
County of England; I mean the Act for Confirming and Restoring Ministers, being
the 17 th of that Sessions; all the Judges allowed of this as an Act of
Parliament, though never confirmed, which is a stronger case than that in
question, for there was only fictitious Summons, here a real one.

III. That without the Consent of any Body of the People; this at the Request
of a Majority of the Lords; more than hal^ the number of the Commons duly
chosen in King Chapter the 2 d's time, besides the great Body of the City of London
being at least esteemed a 5 th part of the Kingdom, yet after the King's
Return, he was so well satisfied with the calling of that Parliament, that it
was Enacted by the King, Lords and Commons As^embled in Parliament; that the
Lords and Common; then Sitting at Westminster in the present Parliament, were
the two Houses of Parliament, notwithstanding any want of the Kings Writs or
Writ of Summons, or a^y defect whatsoever and as if the King had been present
at the beginning of the Parliament, this I take to be a full Judgment in full
Parliament of the case in question, and much stronger than the present case is,
and this Parliament continued till the 29 th of December next following, and
made in all thirty seven Acts, as abo^e mentioned.

The 13 Caroli 2. chap. 7. (a full Parliament called by the Kings Writ) recites
the other of 12 Caroli 2. and that after his Majesty's return they were
continued till the 29 th of December, and then dissolved, and that several Acts
passed; this is the plain Judgment of another Parliament.

1. Because it says they were continued, which shows they had a real being
capable of being continued; for a Confirmation of a void Grant has no effect,
and Confirmation shows a Grant only voidable so the continuance there showed it
at most but voidable; and when the King came, and confirmed it, all was good.

2. The dissolving it then, shows they had a being, for, as ex nihilo nihil
sit, so super nihil nil operatur, as out of nothing nothing can be made, so
upon nothing nothing can operate.

Again, the King, Lords and Commons, make the great Corporation or Body of the
Kingdom, and the Commons are legally taken for the Freeholders, Inst. 4. p. 2.
Now the Lords and Commons having Proclaimed the King, the defect of this great
Corporation is cured, and all the Essential parts of this great Body Politic
united and made complete, as plainly as when the Mayor of a Corporation dies,
and another is chosen, the Corporation is again perfect; and to say, that which
perfects the great Body Politic should in the same instant destroy it, I mean
the Parliament, is to make contradictions true, simul and semel, the
perfection, and destruction of this great Body at one instant, and by the same
Act.

Then if necessity of Affairs was a forcible Argument in 1660, a time of great
peace, not only in England, but throughout Europe, and almost in all the World;
certainly it is of a greater force now, when England is scarce delivered from
Popery and Slavery; when Ireland has a mighty Army of Papists, and that Kingdom
in hazard of final destruction, if not speedily prevented; and when France has
destroyed most of the Protestants there, and threatens the ruin of the
Low Countries, from whence God has sent the wonderful Assistance of our
Gracious, and therefore most Glorious King; and England cannot promise safety
from that Foreign Power, when forty days delay, which is the least can be for
a new Parliament, and considering we can never hope to have one more freely
chosen, because first it was so free from Court-influence, or likelihood of all
design that the Letters of Summons issued by him, whom the great God in
infinite Mercy raised to save us, to the hazard of his Life, and this done to
protect the Protestant Religion and at a time when the people were all
concerned for one Common interest of Religion, and Liberty, it would be vain
when we have the best King and Queen the World affords, a full house of Lords,
the most solemnly chosen Commons that ever were in the remembrance of any Man
Living, to spend Money and lose time (I had almost said to despise Providence)
and take great pains to destroy our selves.

If any object Acts of Parliament mentioning Writs and Summons, etc.

I answer, the Precedent in 1660 is after all those Acts.

In private cases as much has been done in point of necessity; a Bishop
Provincial dies, and sede vacant a Clerk is presented to a Benefice, the
Presentation to the Dean and Chapter is good in this case of Necessity; and if
in a Vacancy by the Death of a Bishop a Presentation shall be good to the Dean
and Chapter, rather than a prejudice should happen by the Church lying void;
Surely a fortiori -- Vacancy of the Throne may be supplied without the
formality of a Writ, and the great Convention turned to a Real Parliament.

A Summons in all points is of the same real force as a Writ, for a Summons and
a Writ differ no more than in name, the thing is the same in all Substantial
parts; the Writ is Recorded in Chancery, so are His Highnesses Letters; the
proper Officer Endorses the Return, so he does here, (for the Coroner in defect
of the Sheriff is the proper Officer;) the People Choose by virtue of the Writ,
so they did freely by Virtue of the Letters, etc. and quae re concordant parum
differunt, they agree in Reality, and then what difference is there between the
one and the other?

Object. A Writ must be in Actions at Common Law, else all Pleadings after,
will not make it good, but Judgment given may be Reversed by a Writ of Error.

Answ. The case differs, first, because Actions between party and party, are
Adversary Actions, but Summons to Parliament are not so, but are Mediums only
to have an Election.

2. In Actions at Law the Defendant may plead to the Writ, but there is no plea
to a Writ for electing Members to serve in Parliament; and for this I have
Littleton's Argument, there never was such Plea, therefore none lies.

Object. That they have not taken the Test.

Answ. They may take the Test yet; and then all which they do will be good, for
the Test being the distinguishing Mark of a Protestant from a Papist, when that
is taken, the end of the Law is performed.

Object. That the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy ought to be taken, and that
the new ones are not legal.

Answ. The Convention being the Supreme Power, have abolished the old Oaths,
and have made new ones; and as to the making new Oaths, the like was done in
Alfreds time, when they chose him King; vide Mirror of Justice. Chap. 1. for
the Heptarchy being turned to a Monarchy, the precedent Oaths of the seven
Kings could not be the same King Alfred swore.

Many Precedents may be cited, where Laws have been made in Parliament, without
the King's Writ to summon them, which for brevity's sake I forbear to mention.

For a farewell; the Objections quarrel at our Happiness, fight against our
Safety, and aim at that which may endanger Destruction.

The Amicable Reconciliation of the DISSENTERS to the CHURCH of ENGLAND: being
a Model or Draught for the Universal Accommodation in the Case of Religion, and
the Bringing in all Parties to Her Communion.
Humbly presented to the Consideration of Parliament.
WHereas there are several parties of Christians in the Nation, who must and
will ever differ in their Opinions about the Church and Discipline of it, in
the Question which is of Christ's Institution; it is not our Disputes about the
Church ^s Particular (which are rather to be mutually forborne, and every party
left herein to their own Persuasion) but a common Agreement in what we can
agree and that is in the Church as National, must heal our Breaches.

The Catholics are for one Universal Organical Church throughout the World,
whereof the Pope is Head, according to some; and the Bishops Convened in a
General Council, according to others.

That there is a Catholic Church Visible on earth as well as invisible,
whereof CHRIST is Head, who was on Earth, and is now Visible in Heaven, is past
doubt also with Protestants* But that this Church is Organical, and under the
Government of a Monarchy by the Pope, or of an Aristocracy by a General
Council, it seems a thing not possible in nature; because neither can any
Oe^umenical Council ever be Called, or any One Man he sufficient to take on him
the Concernmen^s of the whole World.

A Political Church, is a Community of Chris^^ans brought into an Orber of
Superiority and Inferiority by an Head and Members, organized for the Exercise
of that Government which is proper to it; but the whole Earth is not capable of
any such Order: And Councils therefore which are gathered out of several
Countries, or of Bishops belonging to more Dominions than of one Supreme Power,
may behad for mutual Advice and Concord, but not for Government.

A Nation, Empire, or Kingdom, which consists of one Supreme Magistrate and
People, who are generally Christians, are capable of such an Ecclesiastical
Polity, and a National Church Political in England is to be asserted and
maintained.

The Church of England then is a Political Society of all the Christians in the
Land, united in the King as Head, and organized by the Bishops, for the
executing those Laws or Government which he chooses for their spiritual Good
and the public Peace.

There is this difference between a Church National, the Church Catholic, and
Particular Churches: The two latter-are of Divine Right and Essential
Consideration, but the former is and can be only of Humane Institution, for it
is manifestly Accidental to the Church of Christ that the chief Magistrate and
the whole People should be Christian.

Distinguish we here of the Government of the Church as Internal belonging to
the Spirit, and External which belongs to Men: And of the External Regiment
thereof, which is either Formal belonging to the Ministers, or Officers of
Christ; or Objective, belonging to the Magistrate: the one being only by the
Keys, the other by the Sword. Whether the Community now of Christians in
England may be accounted a National Church in respect to any Formal Government
of it, we leave for dispute to others; let them judge according to the foregoing
Definition of a Political Church: But that the main Body of the Nation are, or
may be constituted a proper Political Church National in respect to that
External Objective Regiment, which is, or should be exercised by the Bishops as
the proper Organs thereof under the King, is what we hold reasonable, and would
lay as the Foundation-Stone of Peace, in the matter of Religion between all
Persons in the Kingdom.

Let the Parliament therefore we have, be heartily for the Public Good, and
thriving of England, which must and can be only by an entire Liberty of
Conscience in opposition to the narrow Spirit of any single Party or Faction,
and when such a Parliament as this shall set themselves about the Business of
Union to purpose, a Bill should be brought in, Entitled, An Act for declaring
the Constitution of our Church of England.

A Parliament is the Representative of the whole Nation, and no doubt but by
Consent and Agreement they might (upon the account mentioned) Make a new
Constitution, and much more may they Declare the Constitution of it.

It should be declared then in such a Bill or Act that the Church of England
consists of the King as the Head, or pars Imperans, who is to give Laws
thereto, and all the several Assemblies of Christians which he shall tolerate,
as the pars subdita, or Body.

Some Discrimination between the Tolerable and Intolerable is indeed never to
be gainsaid by any wise and good Man; unto whom there is no Liberty can be
desirable, which is not consistent at least with these three things, the
Articles of our Creed, a Good Life, and the Fundamental Government of the
Kingdom.

It is not for any private persons, but a Parliament, to prescribe the Terms of
National Communion: But we would have all our Assemblies that are Tolerable, to
be made Legal by such an Act (and thereby parts of the National Church) as well
as the Parochial Congregations.

The Church here therefore must come under a double consideration, as the
Church of Christ, and as the Church of England. Take the Church as the Church
of Christ, and there must be (as we have said at first) endless Controversy
about this point, who are the true Members of it: but take it under the
consideration as National, and there will be none at all, for those must be
Memb^rs whom the Head by a Law does allow to be parts of the Body, and the King
under this notion only is made Head of the Church by the Stature, that is, as
it is called Ecclesia A^glicana.

The Protestant Dissenter^ of all sorts, as well as the Conformists, will
acknowledge the King to be Supreme Coercive Governor over all Persons, and in
all Causes, Ecclesiastical and Civil, throughout his Dominions; And will not
those who are Roman Catholics do the like? Did they not do so in Henry the
Eight's time, when they were generally such? Again, the Dissenters of all
sorts, even the Congregationalists of every Sect, are ready to submit to any
power legally derived from the King and upon such an account will admit of a
superintendency of the Bishops, as Ecclesiastical Magistrates under him, when
they cannot own any Authority that they have over other Ministers from Jesus
Christ; and will not Papists also be subject to all Authority that is exercised
legally in his Name, howsoever they may question the Spiritual Title of the
English Clergy and their succession?

We would have the Bishops then ( qua Bishops, as distinct in Office from
Priests) declared no other than the King's Officers* whose power is but
Objectively Ecclesiastical, and to act Circa Sacra only, by Virtue of his
Authority and Commission.

As Iehoshaphat did commit the Charge incumbent upon him as Supreme Magistrate,
in regard to all Matters of the Lord, unto the care of Amariah, being Chief
Priest, and in regard to the King's Matters unto Zebadiah, being as the Chief
Justice of the Realm: so should the Diocesian Bishop be in our Ecclesiastical,
as the Judges are in Civil Matters the Substitutes altogether of His Majesty,
and execute his Jurisdiction.

This is indeed at State point which was thoroughly canvased by Henry the Eight,
whose Divines did agree on two Orders alone, Priest and Deacon, to be of Divine
Appointment, and that the Superiority of a Bishop over a Presbyter, or of one
Bishop over another, was but by the Positive Laws of Men only, as appears in
that Authentic Book then put out, entitled, The Necessary Eru^ition: And
consequently, that the Bishop could not have, or exert any Jurisdiction over
the Subject unless warranted and derived from the King, without danger of a
Praemunire, which made Bonner (wi^h others) hold his Bishopric by Commission.

Upon this ground, if it should please His Majesty to choose some persons of the
Dissenters to this Office, authorizing them to it no otherwise, than by a like
Commission (which they should also hold, with the Judges, quam di^ se ben^
gesse^un^) As none of them could scruple then the acceptance, so must a Union
from that day forward commence in England, especially if he would not leave
filling up the Vacancies that fall, with such, till they in some measure equal
the Conformists.

We are sensible unto what Distress the Ministers of a Particular Congregation
of all sorts may be brought in the exercise of Discipline over some potent,
turbulent, and refractory Members, and what relief he might find in such an
external Ecclesiastical Officer as this: We are sensible how many inconvenices
of Congregational Episcopacy may by this means only be saved.

Their work in general should be to supervise the Churches of all parties in
their Diocesses, that they walk according to their own principles, in due
Order, agreeable to the Gospel, and the peace of one another: And more
particularly in the observance of all Laws and Limitations, Rules or Canons,
which the King, as Supreme Head, shall by advice of a Convocation, o^ the
consent of his three Estates in Parliament, make on purpose, and impose, upon
them, with respect both to the public Emolument, and the safety of his own
Person, Dignity, and Dominions.

For example, suppose this to be one Canon or Injunction, That no Novice, but
such as are Grave Men only among the Sects, be admitted to be Teachers.
Another, this, That the doors be kept open in all Conventi^les for any that
will to come in and hear, that no Sedition be there hatched or broached. There
are such, and many the like Impositions may be found, very fit to be laid on
some Persons, not needful for others, and it is Time, and the Trial, and
Experience which must be the Mother to bring them forth, and cultivate them
after, to their best advantage.

To the making such Canons, we humbly motion a third Clerk for the Convocation,
to be added to the two in every Diocese, and chose out of the Dissenters with
indifferent respect to all sorts of them, that mutual Satisfaction and Concord
my thereby be prosecuted with unanimity of Heart and Good will throughout all
the Churche^: And the two Provinces of Canterbury and York should unite in this
Convocation for the making them one National Church, and not two Provincial
ones in a diverse Assembly.

By this means shall one Organ more be added to this great Political Society
for deriving an influence from the Head to these parts of the Body as well as
others, which now seem neglected, and to have no care taken of them.

The more especial business of such an equally Modeled Convocation should be
the revising the Book of Canons for the reversing the main body of them, having
been fitted to that narrow scantling which is unworthy the Church of England,
and for the leaving only those, and making new (as we have exemplified in one
or two for instance-sake even now) which do, and will suit to that larger
Constitution thereof intended by this Paper.

And having now said thus much for Explanation of this Design, we must say some
little also in favor of it.

The Design of such an Accommodation as this, shall advance not lessen the
outward power and honor of the Bishop, extending it over those who before had
no conscientious regard for their Function: while yet it would ease them of the
tremendous burden of such a Cura Animarum they take on them otherwise, as must
be of impossible performance.

This Design (which is supposed to find us in our Divisions, and not to make
any) shall by little and little (with God's blessing on it) cool Animosities,
and enkindle Charity and Holiness among all parties, which now is so much
wanting, while those that are Catholics, and those that are Protestants, and
much more those that are Conformists, and those that are Nonconfrmists, do
agree in the substance of one Christianity, having the same Scriptures, the
same Articles of Faith in the three Creeds, and the same Rule of Manners in the
Decalogue, There is one Body, one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism.
They cannot indeed have both Communion in the same External Worship, but they
can have it in the Internal Adoration of the same blessed Trinity, and in One
Hope of our calling unto eternal Life through Christ Jesus. They must separate
into several Congregations, but there shall be no Schism in the Body by this
means for all that.

For as while the Supreme Power allows only the Parochial Meetings, as
established by Law, it has bin accounted Schism to go to Separate Assemblies:
So if the Scene be altered, and these Separate Congregations be also made
Legal, this Schism, or Men's being called Schismatics, in that regard, must
vanish and be at an end. Indeed these diverse Congregations will Accuse one
another as guilty of Sin and Schism before God, for each separating from the
others Communion, and threaten his Judgment: but so long as there is no
separating from the Church, whereof the King is Head, while he tolerates the
Meetings of both, and makes them parts of it as National, there shall be no
prosecution of Law against any, but all quiet, as Fellow Members upon that
account.

Only, as to the Roman Catholics, it is not indeed for them to imagine that a
Protestant King and Parliament should allow of their Mass in Public, as they
do of the Service Book. This were not to tolerate the Papists, but to set up
Popery; whereas the Determining what is to be permitted to one Party, and what
to another, so as no Detriment may be brought to the Church or State, and no
Sin or Guilt upon the Nation by that permission, is a nice thing, and the
business of this Parliament.

There is one Motion farther should be added, and that is for another Bill also
to be brought in to take away Pluralities, (which is the Pest of our present
Conforming Clergy) I mean both of Livings and Dignities impartially, to this
end, that the King may have wherewithal to engage those he receives into the
Church thus enlarged, and consequently restores to their Labors, by this
Accommodation; for that is a thing will make the favor indeed significant to
such persons.

I will conclude with one Argument for what I have proposed. There is no power
given upon Earth for any Man to command that which he in his Conscience does
judge to be Sin. Non datur potestas ad malum. But to conform in all things to
the present Church according to Law, is Sin in the judgment of Dissenters,
Catholics and others; and the Late King was a Dissenter of one sort himself.
The King therefore that was so lately, could not really put the Catholics upon
Conformity; and if he would appear equal to all his People, he could not put
any other Dissenters on it neither, for the same Cause. That which the Law
requires was both in his Conscience and in theirs, a thing prohibited of God.
He could not therefore put the Laws in Execution being against God. And if He
could not do it acting only but as an honest Man that abides by his Principles:
we have no reason to apprehend that so good a King and Queen as we have now,
should be ever brought to do it, maugre all the Enticements of the Church of
England, or Frowns of the Church of Rome.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A Third Volume of Sermons Preached by the Late Reverend and Learned Thomas
Manton, D.D. In Two Parts.

The First containing LXVI Sermons on the Eleventh Chapter of the Hebrews. With
a Treatise of the Life of Faith.

The Second containing a Treatise of Self-Denial. With Several Sermons on the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, And other Occasions. With an Alphabetical-Table
to the Whole.

Sold by Thomas Parkhurst, and Jonathan Robinson.

ELEVENTH Collection of Papers Relating to the Present Juncture of Affairs in
England and Scotland. VIZ. I. An Answer to the Desertion Discussed, being a
Defense of the late and present Proceedings. II. Satisfaction tendered to all
that pretend Conscience for Non-submission to our present Governors, and
refusing of the New Oaths of Fealty and Allegiance. III. Dr. Oats his Petition
to the Parliament, declaring his barbarous Sufferings by the Papists. IV. An
Account of the Convention of Scotland. V. A Speech made by a Member of the
Convention of the Estates in Scotland. VI. The Grounds on which the Estates of
Scotland declared the Right of the Crown of Scotland Forfaulted, and the Throne
become Vacant. VII. The Opinion of two eminent Parliament Men, justifying the
Lawfulness of taking the Oaths of Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary.


London printed, and are to be sold by Richard Ianeway in Queen's-head-Court in
Paternoster Row, 1689.

AN ANSWER TO THE DESERTION DISCUSSED.
IF many of our Long-Rob'd Divines, pust up with a Conceit of their own Parts,
would but keep closer to their Texts, and their Duties, most certainly our
Peace and Union would be much firmer, and more assured then it is. For being
swayed by Interest and Profit, they are more afraid of losing the Advantages of
Earthly Preferment, then the Treasures of Heavenly Felicity. Unless they swim
in their own Wishes and Desires, all Things are out of Order. The Church is in
danger, they cry; here are Sharers coming in among Us: And by an odd kind of
Ecclesiastical Policy, seem rather inclinable to return under the Yoke of
Popery, then to endure the Equality of a Dissenting Protestant; rather to be at
the check of a Pope's Nuncio, then suffer the Fraternity of a Protestant
Nonconformist. They said nothing to the late King, till he began to touch their
Copy-holds: then they called out for Help; and now they are angry with their
Relief, because they are afraid of well they know not what. And this is their
Misfortune, that if all things answer not the full Height of their
Expectations, they are the first that should be last dissatisfied. If all
things go not well, as they imagine, they presently grow moody and waspish; and
while they insinuate their empty Notions into others, who admiring the fluency
of their Pulpit Language, either out of Ignorance, or Laziness, allow them a
Prerogative over their Understandings, the whole Nation must be embroiled by
their Surmises and Mistrusts.

Else what had that Gentleman, who wrote the Desertion Discussed, to do to busy
his Brains with a Subject, neither appertaining to his Function, nor proper for
his Talent? Why should he be setting himself up against the voted Judgment of
^he chiefest and greatest part of the Kingdom? A Man of his Profession would
have doubtless better employed himself, in contemplating the Story of the Three
Murmurers against Moses; and there have learned a more sanctified Lesson, then
to exalt his Sophistry against the Debates of a Solemn Assembly contriving the
Public Preservation. For certainly never was a fairer Prospect then now, since
the many Revolutions under which the British Monarchy has labored, of its
being restored to its ancient Grand^ur and Renown, and of enjoying the
Advantages of Peace and Prosperity in a higher measure then ever. So that it
must be looked upon as the Effect, either of a most pernicious Malice, or a
strange distraction of Brain, for such Discussers as these, to be throwing
about the Darnel of their nice and froward Conceptions, on purpose to choke the
Expectations of so glorious a Harvest. For they must be Men that want the
government of right Reason within themselves, as being enslaved either to
vicious Custom, or partial Affection, or else they would never run themselves
and others with so much precipitancy, into the shame and ignominy of upholding
the subvertors of National Constitutions. And all this to blacken and defame
the noble Endeavors, and prudent Counsels of those renowned Patriots that
pursued the only means to rescue a languishing Monarchy from impending Thraldom
and Ruin.

He does not wonder, he says, that a Man of so much sense and integrity as his
Friend is, should be surprised at the Thrones being declared Vacant by the
Lower House of Convention. For how, says his Friend, can the Seat of the
Government be empty, while the King, who all grant, had an unquestionable
Title, is still living.

But the Discusser here forgot, that it had been the resolved Opinion of two
Parliaments already, That there was no Security for the Protestant Religion,
the King's Life, or the established Government of the Kingdom, without passing
a Bill for disabling the Duke of York to inherit the Imperial Crown of England
and Ireland; and that unless a Bill were passed for excluding the Duke of York,
the House could not give any Supply to the King, without Danger to his Person,
the Hazard of the Protestant Religion, and Breach of the Trust in them reposed
by the People. Upon which a Bill did pass the Commons, and was sent up to the
Lords for their Concurrence, by which James Duke of York was excluded and made
for ever incapable to Inherit, Possess or Enjoy the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, etc. and he adjudg'd Guilty of High Treason, and to suffer the Pains and
Penalties as in Case of High Treason, if after such a Time he should claim,
challenge, or attempt to possess or exercise any Authority or Jurisdiction, as
King, etc. in any of the said Dominions. It Is true, the Lords did not pass this
Bill, for Reasons well known; yet was it such a mutilation to the Duke's Title,
to be disabled from succeeding in the Kingdom, by the whole Body of the
Commons, who are the Representatives of the Nation, that it can never be said,
that all Men granted his Title unquestionable, as the Discusser imposes upon
the World. Besides the many Instances in History, of several Princes who have
forfeited their Succession, and consequently their Title to the Crown, for
revolting from the Established Religion of the Realm.

But, says the Discusser, for I look upon his Friend and Him to be all one;
(and that he does but put the Question with one side of his Mouth, and answer
it with the other) I had thought our Laws, as well as our Religion, had been
against the Deposing Doctrine.

That Is not the Question; but whether a Prince may commit those Miscarriages in
Government, whether he may not so far, peccare in Leges and Rempublicam, as to
incur the Forfeiture of his Regal Power? and whether a Prince may be allowed to
subvert the ancient Constitutions and Religion of a Nation, and yet be said to
be the Lawful King of that Realm? These are the Questions: For the^ it is not
the Law that deposes him, nor the Religion that justifies it. But it is He that
deposes Himself: it is the bad Advice of Evil Counselors to which he Listens,
and which he follows to the ruin of the Kingdom, contrary to the Original
Contract between Princes and People, grounded upon the Foundations of all
Original Government; I say, it is that Adhering to Evil Counsel which deposes a
Prince by degrading him from a Lawful King to an Unlawful Tyrant, and renders
him Liable to the Animadversion of the Law, and the impeachments of the
oppressed and injured People. To assert otherwise were to deprive all National
Law and Religion of their self Defense; which is against all the Law and
Religion in the World. I am apt to believe that Christ himself had no very good
Opinion of the lawfulness of Herod's Regality, when he sent him that Message,
Go tell that Fox, Herod: Which I look upon as a Deposal and Degrading of that
Arbitrary Prince by the Founder of our Religion, in his own Breast and
Judgment, though he forbore the Execution of his Celestial Power. And therefore
it is not the Error of Religion, but the Fault of those that do not well
distinguish, that Religion suffers in her Doctrines. For only he who governs
according to Law is a King, he that endeavors to subvert the Law, is none. Nor
is every rambling and precipitate Brain to be Judge of this neither, but the
Solid Law, and fundamental Constitutions of the Realm. So that the Country
Gentleman was mistaken in his Thoughts, both of our Laws and our Religion.
However the pretended Scrupulous Country-Gentleman desires the Discusser to
expound the State-Riddle of the Vacancy; and to give him the Ground of the late
extraordinary Revolution.

To which the Discusser gives no direct answer at present, but desires his
Friend to take notice, That the Gentlemen of the Convention, who declared a
Vacancy in the Government, laid the main Stress of their opinion upon the
King's withdrawing himself. For that since the Story of the French League, and
the Business of the Prince of Wales were passed over in silence, most Men
believed that the pretended Breach of that which they called the Original
Contract was no more then a popular Flourish.

All which is such an imperfect piece of Incoherence, that none but a madman
would have thrust in by Head and Shoulders, as the Discusser has done. For how
can it be inferred that the Breach of the Original Contract, should be a
Popular Flourish, because the Clandestin League, and the False Birth are
hitherto passed over in silence? As for the surreptitious Birth, one would
think it was sufficiently dilated upon in the Declaration of the Lords; and why
it is not farther brought upon the Stage, there may be several Reasons given;
and among the rest, because it may be thought that the Imposture will vanish of
it self, and so there will be no need of casting an Eternal Blot upon the
memory of them that contrived and owned it. Then for the Clandestin League, it
Suffices that there is apparent Proof of it in Bank. But to call the Breach of
the Original Contract pretended, and a Popular Flourish, is a yerk of Malicious
Reflection, which only serves to expose the Discusser to Public censure. For
as there is nothing more certain, then that there is an Original Contract
between the King and People of England, the Breach of which has cost the
Effusion of so much Blood; so is it as certain that that Original Contract was
never so infallibly broken then it was of late. Which as it is allowed by all
the Laws of God and Man, to be a sufficient ground to seek a Remedy; so was
nothing more vigorously urged by the Convention. Which might have convinced the
Discusser, that they did not pretend it for a popular Flourish.

But now, lest the Country Gentleman should be shogg'd by seeing the Votes of
so considerable a Meeting, debated by a private Hand; the Discusser reminds
him, That a Parliament and a Convention are two different Things. The latter,
for want of the King's Writs and Concurrence, having no share in the
Legislative Power.

But the Discusser forgets, that it was only a Convention of Lords that sent to
Richard the Second to meet them at Westminster; which the King at first
promised to do; but upon altering his Mind, sent him another peremptory
Message, that if he would not come according to his Promise, they would choose
another King; and then proceeding farther, according to that Power they had,
expelled against the King's Will several of his chiefest Favorites from the
Court; constrained others to put in Sureties to appear at the next Parliament,
and caused several others to be arrested and committed to several Prisons. If a
Convention could do this where the King was present, what signified the Writs
and Concurrence of an absent Prince. Nor did they contend for Legislative
Power, but only met in a kind of embodied Dictatorship to take care of the
present Necessity of Affairs.

But this, says the Discusser, was not justifiable, for that the Nenessity
which they pretended, was either of their own making, or of their own
submitting to, which is the same Thing. But this is all Nonsense. For if the
Necessity was of their own making, then were the Lords and Commons the Authors
of all the Miscarriages which they laid to the late King's Charge; If of their
own submitting to, then would they never have called out for succor and craved
Relief from their Oppressions. No -- They were those crying Grievances sum'd up
in the Declaration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons assembled at
Westmister presented to their Present Majesty's upon the Twelfth of February
Last; which when the late King could not justify them by force of Arms, but
fled for it, not being able to answer his endeavors to subvert and Extirpate
the Protestant Religion and the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, put them to
that necessity of assembling after an Unusual Manner, to provide for the Common
Safety.

How ever the Discusser will have it a Necessity of their own creating, tho
never so false. For, says he, if the King had either not bin driven out of his
Dominions, or invited back upon honorable Terms, they needed not have had
recourse to such unusual singular Methods of proceeding. And thus the Discusser
rambles out of one Untruth into another. For he fled from offered Treaty,
forsook the defense of his own Forces, and left them to be disbanded in Arrears
and without Payment; slipped from his own Council by Night, after he had
appointed to meet them in Consultation the next Morning. Nor could he justly
suspect, that any Violence would have been offered to Him in particular, being
so well assured as he could not choose but be, of the Generous Inclination, and
profound Respect which the Prince had to his Person. But if the Guilt of
peculiar Miscarriages hastened his Departure, or oversway'd him toleave the
He^m of Rule without any Form or Face of Government: That could never be called
an Expulsion out of his Dominions. And therefore when a certain Gentleman
waiting on him at Feversham besought him to return to London, he gave the
Person this Reply, That he was an honest Gentleman, but knew not what he knew.
And when he had once abandoned the Kingdom all forlom without either Head or
Conduct, without Council, or any Countenance of Authority, then according to
the Judgment of the Commonwealth of Venice in reference to the Succession of
Henry the 4 th. it belonged to the Nobility and chief Persons of the Land, as
they are the chief Defense of the Royal Authority, to take care of the Public
Safety, whether by usual or unusual Methods of proceeding it matters not; and
they have both the Authority of Law and Necessity to justify their Proceedings.

As for his being invited back upon Honorable Terms, it is well known how he
returned back, and went through the City on the Sunday Night, attended by his
own Guards, and lodged in White Hall, and this most certainly in order to an
Accommodation. Only because the Prince was coming to Town, he was sent to, and
for the avoiding any Disturbance that might be prejudicial to his Person, was
humbly desired to retire to Ham-House, with Liberty to make choice of what
Persons he thought fit to attend him. Which he promised to do; but recollecting
himself, and desiring to know whether he might not return back to Rochester,
word was sent him the next Morning that he might do as he pleased. All this
while here was no Constraint put upon him; so that he could not be said to be
driven out of his Dominions, but that it was his own Choice to forsake it.

Notwithstanding all this, The Discusser will undertake to prove, That the King
before his withdrawing had sufficient Grounds to make him apprehensive of
Danger, and therefore it could not be called an Abdication.

But through the whole Pursuit of his Argument, the Discusser most wretchedly
mistakes the Point, quite mistaking the Effects for the Causes. For, says he,
Had not the King great Reason to retire to secure his Person and his Honor,
when he had met with so many unfortunate Disappointments, with so many
surprising and unparalled Accidents? When part of the Army was revolted, and
the Remainder too apparently unserviceable; When the People had such fatal and
unremoveable Prejudices against his Service? When there were such terrible
Disorders in the Kingdom, and all Places were either flaming or ready to take
Fire? What should a Prince do when he had scarce any thing left him to lose but
himself, but consult his Safety, and give way to the irresis^able Evil?

These are very great Disappointments and evil Accidents indeed to befall a
Prince. But the Discusser forgets to tell ye, That the Prince brought all these
Inconveniences upon himself. The Discusser tells ye that part of the Army
revolted, but he omits to tell ye, that it was out of a Generous Principle, for
that being Protestants, they would not embrue their Hands in the Blood of their
Fellow-Protestants and Countrymen, nor be Instruments to enslave the Nation.
He tells ye of terrible Disorders in the Kingdom; but does not tell ye, it was
time for the People to be in Disorder, when they saw such Encroachments upon
their Ancient Franchises, such Inundations of Popery flowing in upon their
Consciences, and such a rapid Violence of French Thraldom tumbling in upon
their Necks. He complains that all Places were either flaming or ready to take
Fire, but forgets to tell you who were the Incendiaries.

These therefore, with several others of the same Nature, being the true Causes
that drew the foresaid Inconveniences upon the King, it follows, that tho the
Secondary Constraint of his withdrawing might be occasioned by the Effects, yet
the Primary Cause of his withdrawing proceeded from the First Causes which
produced the Effects. Consequently such a Retiring was voluntary and not
forced; because he may be justly said to fly from something of dreaded
Punishment, rather then pursuing Danger, from which he was always at a distance
^ar enough off, but dubious what would become of him as to the Former.

The Discusser makes many other grievous Complaints to justify the King's First
withdrawing (for hitherto he is altogether upon that) but when he comes to sum
up all. In short, says he, when the Forts and Revenue were thus disposed of;
when the Papists were to be disbanded, and the Protestants not to be trusted;
when the Nation was under such general and violent Dissatisfactions; when the
King in case of a Rupture had nothing upon the matter but his single Person, to
oppose against the Princes Arms, and those of his Subjects; when his Mortal
Enemies were to sit Judges of his Crown and Dignity, if no farther; when
Affairs were in this tempestuous Condition, to say that a Free and Indifferent
Parliament might be chosen, with the Relation to the King's Right as well as
the People's, and that the King had no just visible Cause to apprehend himself
in Danger, is to outface the Sun and trample upon the Understandings, and
almost upon the Senses of the whole Nation.

As for the Fortified Towns, it was but Reason that his then Highness the
Prince of Orange, who came over to rescue the Nation from Arbitrary Violence
and Oppression, should demand them to be put into his Power, well Knowing them
to be then in the Hands of Irish Papists and Cutthroats, of whom the People
stood in Perpetual Fear, and who were rather a Consternation then Security to
the Kingdom. And the same reason holds in Relation to the Revenue. For all the
World knows, what Vast Sums had been Squandered away by the late King, when
Duke, to keep off the sitting of Parliaments, and to buy off the Members when
they Sat; and when that Money was spent so much to the Detriment of the Realm,
what Solicitations were made to the French King for more, to carry on the
Popish Cause and Interest. It was as well known how the Revenue had of late
Years been Embezl'd to keep up a standing Army of Irish Ragamuffins; as if
England were now in its Turn to have been conquered by Ireland, as formerly
Ireland had been conquered by England. From which fears when his present
Majesty had delivered the Nation, it was but reason that his Army should be
paid out of the Public Stock for their happy Toil and labor. For the Public
Revenue of all Kingdoms and States was ever Originally intended for the
Preservation, and not the Destruction of the People.

Upon the Disbanding of the Papists, the Discusser makes a special Observation,
That no Test-Acts nor any Others could bar the King from Listing them as
Common Soldiers. This perhaps may be true; that is to say, that a Protestant
Prince may list Papists, and a Popish Prince Protestants, to follow him in a
lawful War. But when a Popish Prince in a Protestant Nation had made his
chiefes^ Levies of Popish Common Soldiers to over-aw his Protestant Subjects,
and put his sole Confidence in them for his known and open Designs and manifest
Endeavors to introduce Popery into a Protestant Kingdom, contrary to the Law,
'twas time then to think of disbanding such Vermin, and ridding them out of the
Land. And the reason why the Protestants could not be trusted was as certain.
For if the King would not trust his Protestants, nay disarmed them, when
Papists were both armed and Employed, what reason had the Protestants to trust
the King. And this was that which among other Things created and fostered those
General and Violent Dissatisfactions in the Nation. For Men have naturally a
general and violent Antipathy against having their Throats Cut if they can help
it. And therefore since the Kingdom by a Miraculous Providence had obtained its
Redemption, it is to be wondered the Discusser should imagine 'twas ever
intended that the late K. should be in a Condition again to oppose either his
own or the persons of any others against the Arms of the Prince or those of his
own Subjects. And whereas, he says, that the King's Mortal Enemies were to be
the Judges of his Crown and Dignity, the Discusser should have done well before
he had made his Reflection upon so many Eminent Patriots, to have consulted
Grotius, l. 1. c. 4. Par. 8. and the Example of Pausamias King of L^cedaemon
there cited. Certainly there was no such Impossibility but that a Free and
Indifferent Parliament might have been chosen to deal equally between the King
and the People. For tho the King perhaps might be conscious that he could not
so well rely upon the Kindness of those to whom he had always had such an
inveterate Antipathy, yet he might have relied upon the Justice of so many
Great and Worthy Personages. So that it is the Discusser himself who out-faces
the Sun and tramples upon the Understandings and Senses of the whole Nation,
who makes these little Rhetorical Flourishes to palliate and obscure the Truth,
and to insinuate among the People, as if Wrong and Injustice had been done,
where nothing was acted but what was a due debt to Self-Preservation. And with
the same Brazening the Discusser out-faces the Sun, and tramples upon the
Senses of the Nation, to assert that a Desertion of the Government, after such
Proposals, which were rather Assurances of his Safety, was no Desertion. He had
been safer in the Affection of the People, when all his evil Counselors had
been removed from about him; he had been safer from the Importunities of his
Priests and Jesuits; He had been more secure from running himself into farther
danger, and safer in the Enjoyment of his Royal Dignity. But he who had so
Solemnly sworn to Establish Popery in England or die in the Attempt, thought
himself no where safe perhapps, but where he might be procuring his future
Bliss, by the Performance of his Vow.

The Discusser now advances to the King's second withdrawing, and puts the
Question, what the King had done to incur a forfeiture by his first Retirement?
Indeed what had he not done? If the Discusser ^orgot in his Discussing Heat,
the Declaration presented to their Present Majesty's would have rubbed up his
Memory. Among the rest there was one, That he had endeavored to Subvert and
Extirpate the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom,
by raising and keeping a Standing Army in the Kingdom in time of Peace, without
Consent of Parliament, and quartering Soldiers contrary to Law; and by causing
s^veral of his good Subjects to be Disarmed at the same time when Papists were
both Armed and Employed. Now to what purpose was all this, but to Subject the
Kingdom to the Tyranny of the Pope? In such a case Barclay cited by Grotious,
l. 1. c. 4. per. 10. gives this for his Opinion, Si Rex regnum alienet, aut
alij Subjiciat, amitti ab eo Regnum. To which Grotius himself adds, Si Rex
reipsa tradere regnum aut Subjicere molliatur, quin ei resisti in boc posse non
dubite. Aliud est enim Imperium, aliud habendi modus; qui n^ mutetur, obstare
po^est Populus.

After all this, it cannot be imagined that the King returned the second time
with an intention to govern; unless he might govern at his own will and
Pleasure as he did before. But that would not be suffered him; for they who had
now avoided the Yoke so near putting about their Necks, would never endure it
should come so near their shoulders again. Therefore all the Probality in the
World is on this side, That the King perceiving, that by taking the Government
upon him again, he should not be able to attain those Ends which he had made
the Business of his whole Reign, resolved to relinquish it altogether. At which
time being at liberty to go or stay, his Departure must of necessity be
accounted Voluntary, and consequently an Absolute Abdication.

Lastly, it is impossible that the King could be frighted out of his Dominions,
by the making of two or three Addresses to his then Royal Highness the Prince
of Orange; for it was no more than rationally he could expect would be done;
more especially from the City to the Person, who next under God had delivered
them from their Continual fears of Fire and Sword. Nor by the denying him a
little Gold to Heal with; which looks like an improbable Story of the
Discusser's own framing. These are Motions so inconsiderable for a King to
forsake his Dominions, that the Discusser seems to have Conjured them up merely
to degrade the Courage of the Absenting Monarch, and to mortify his own
Discussion. But after all, the Question may be fairly put, whether Withdrawing,
in the Construction of our Law, does not rather imply a Guilt, than an
Apprehension of Danger, unless it be that of being called to an Account, since
the Query always propounded to the Jury is, Did he fly for it? Which indeed
ought to be the Legal Determination of this Dispute.

However the Discusser goes on, and tells us, We are to observe, that to
abdicate an Office always supposes the Consent of him who quits. And this he
affirms to be the meaning of the Word out of Salust, Tully, Livy and Grotius.
But both the Supposal, and the Asseveration are false. For Consent implies,
that the Question must be put, Whether the Person will Abdicate or no? Which
never was put to any Abdicator in this World. Upon a forced Resignation it has.
But a forced Resignation is no Abdication. Certain it is that Abdicare
signifies to renounce, forgo, or abandon. And the Motives to this Abdication
are various, and generally prevailing upon the Reason of the Person that
Abdicates himself, according to the Condition of Affairs and the Circumstances
he is under. And therefore tho a Magistrate may abdicate with the consent of
others, yet he rarely does it out of a natural Inclination. Thus it cannot be
imagined that Lentulus, one of the Conspirators with Catiline, abdicated the
Pretorship, with the Consent of his own Will, for he was one of the most
aspiring Men in the Universe; but because he found himself so obnoxious that he
could hold it no longer: Thus Sylla abdicated the Dictatorship out of a
Vainglorious Opinion of Felicity that attended him, and to show that he had
such an awe over the Romans, that tho he were a Private Person, no body durst
call him to an Account for the Cruelties he had committed. History tells us,
that Dioclesian abdicated the Empire, for madness that he could not have his
Will of the Christians. How does the Discusser know, but that King James
abdicated the Government because he could not have his Will of the Protestants?
Charles the V th abdicated the Empire, because he found his wonted Good Fortune
had left him. Bernard Rasfield Bishop of Munster finding himself between two
Grindstones, the Persecution of the German Priests, for going about to deprive
them of their Concubines, and the Pope's Excommunication, if he did it not;
abdicated his Principality and Bi^hoprick, that he might be at quiet. Lastly,
to show that Abdication does not always imply Consent, Brutus compelled
Tarquinius Collatinus to abdicate the Consulship, only because his Praenomen
was invisum Civitati. And then as for what the Discusser adds out of Grotius,
That a Neglect or Omission in the Administration of Government, is by no means
to be interpreted a Renunciation of it; there is no Body censures the late King
for any Omission or want of Diligence in the Administration of his Government,
for he was too diligent indeed; and that Diligence was the main Grievance which
disgusted the People; his Diligence to extirpate the Protestant Religion; his
Diligence to subvert the Laws and Liberties of the Ringdom; and his Diligence
to introduce Popery. And this Diligence, it is to be feared, was one of the main
Causes of his Abdication: Had he omitted more, he would have had less reason to
have abdicated. And therefore it is a Vanity to infer that there can be no
Pretense for an Abdication; because the Word, as he says, always, that is very
rarely, or never, supposes the Consent of him that quits. For that it is not in
the Nature of Man to abdicate Empires, Kingdoms, Wealth and Honors, but there
must be some compul^ive Reason within that moves them to it. When Princes find
the Times and Constitutions of the Kingdom will not bear their Government; when
Emperors grow stiff and stark with Age, and begin to feel the Lashes of
ill-Fortune; when Ambitious Aspirers perceive they must take other Measures to
compass their Designs, then they swallow a self-denying Ordinance, and think it
convenient to retire from the Cares of the World, or out of Harms way.

The Discusser says, We have but two Instances with us which look like an
Abdication since the Conquest, which are in the Reigns of Edward II. and
Richard II. both which were unjustly deposed by their Subjects. It Is true, they
were so far from looking like Abdications, that they were no Abdications at
all. For both those Princes being under a strict Confinement, it was impossible
for them to abdicate, unless they could have made their Escapes. Therefore they
were forced Resignations, and consequently formal Deposals. Nor had the Queen
or Henry of Lancaster any cause to declare the Throne Vacant, as having already
taken care to fill it themselves: And whether those Princes would have resigned
or no, it would have signified little to them that were by Claim in Possession.
But the Discusser has overslipp'd one Instance of a Perfect Abdication since
the Conquest, which the King would have certainly felt to his Cost, had not the
Pope and the Poictovins been his true Friends: and the Case was much the same
as at this Time. For the Lords and Barons of the Realm in the Reign of King
John, having often desired the King to restore them their Ancient Rights and
Liberties, and finding nothing but Delusions, resolve no longer to be abused
but betake themselves to Arms. The King then lying at Windsor, and perceiving
himself too weak for the Lords, thought it no good way to proceed by Force but
rather by Fraud, and therefore sends to the Lords, that if they would come to
Windsor he would grant their Demands. Thither the Lords repairing, tho in a
Military Manner (sor they durst not trust the King's Word) he saluted them all
kindly, and promised to give them Satisfaction in all they demanded: And to
that Purpose in a Meadow between Stains and Windsor, called Running-Mead, he
freely consented to confirm their former Charters; and was content that some
Grave Personages should be made choice of to see it confirmed. But the next
Day, when it was to be done, he withdraws himself privately to South-Hampton,
and thence to the Isle of Wight: Where it was concluded that he should send to
the Pope, acquaint him with the Mutiny of his Lords, and require his Holinesses
help. In the mean time the King lay sculking up and down for three Months
together in Corners, that no Body knew where to find him; or which was worse,
as some write, roving and practicing Pyracy upon the Neighboring Seas.

Whether the Lords and Barons did in Words declare this to be a Vacancy of the
Throne, is not material to enquire. Perhaps they were not so curious in those
Days: But what they did in Deeds, amounted to the same as if they had done it
in Words. For perceiving themselves thus eluded, they swore upon the Holy Altar
to be revenged. And what Revenge that was likely to have been is easy to
conjecture, by their swearing Allegiance afterward to Lewis the French King's
Son, and bearing Fealty to him till the Death of the King. Whence it may be
inferred, That if a Prince in Hostility with his Subjects deserts his Kingdom,
upon any Account, They who are next to the Government are not to hesitate as
King John's Barons did, in expectation of the King's Return, but immediately to
take care of the Common Safety, lest they should bring the same Ruin upon the
Kingdom, as those Barons did by their Delay.

Lastly, If the Discusser will not be convinced by what has hitherto been said,
Let him examine the King's own words, and try whether he can pick out any
better Construction out of them then that which I shall make.

Says the late King in his Letter to the Earl of Feversham, Things being come
to that Extr^mity, that I have been forced to send away the Queen, and my Son
the Prince of Wales, that they might not fall into my Enemies hands, I am
obliged to do the same thing, and to endeavor to secure my self the best I
can, etc. Expres^ions of a disponding Mind, and only full of Grief for the
Disappointment of the Popish Career. The King was afraid of the Queen, and his
Son the Prince of Wales as he calls him, and therefore deeming it convenient to
send Them out of the way, believes himself obliged to follow them. It Is true,
there might be some Reason perhaps for him to send Them away; but none to send
away himself, not being under the same Circumstances. For let it be Paternal or
Conjugal Affection, or both together; What could be a greater Desertion than
this, for the sake of a Wife and a Son to leave three Kingdoms at six and
sevens? He speaks of securing himself as well as he can, but mentions nothing
of Danger; only leaves it to the Lord Feversham and others to presume the
Causes of his Fears. But certainly the apprehension of Danger can never excuse
a Sovereign Magistrate from the Desertion of his Dominions, at the same time
striving and struggling under the Pangs of the Dissolution of Government. If
such a Desertion of his Territories in that forlorn and languishing Condition,
to accompany the Tribulations of a Wife and a Son, be not a perfect Abdication
of his Territories, the Words relinquish, desert, forgo, abandon, abdicate,
have lost their Signification. Thus Lysimachus in Plutarch, de sera vindicta
Dei, after he had surrendered his Person and Dominions to the Getae, for a
Draught of Drink, in the extremity of a parching Thirst, when he had quenched
his Thirst cried out, O pravum Hominem! that for so small a Pleasure have lost
so great a Kingdom. He would be thought very unfit to be the Master of a Ship,
that should throw himself into the Sea, when his Vessel and Cargoe were almost
ready to perish. And I will appeal to the Lord of Wemm himself, whether if he
were to try an Abdicating Prince upon this Point, with the same Huffing and
Domineering as he did Inferior Offenders, he would take it for a good
Justification to say, I had thought, or I apprehended my Person to be in
Danger. Rather it becomes a Prince at such a time to exert his Courage, and
contemn his own, when the public Security lies at stake, especially when the
Remedy propounded was so easy as the Convoking of a Free Parliament. But to
withdraw at such a perilous Conjuncture from the Application of his desired,
nay almost implored Assistance; What can the Discusser think of himself to deny
so plain an Abdication?

And this I take to be the Opinion of the late King's Abdication, intimated by
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal assembled at Guild Hall, December. 1688. where
they are pleased to say, That they did reasonably hope that the King having
sent forth his Proclamation and Writs for a free Parliament, they might have
rested secure (as doubtless the King might also have done) in that Meeting. But
his Majesty having withdrawn himself, etc. they did therefore unanimously
resolve to apply themselves to his Highness the Prince of Orange, etc. That is
to say, The King having withdrawn himself from the Cure of the Grand Distempers
of the Nation, and consequently Abdicated the Government, they resolved to
apply themselves to a more Skilful, at least a more Willing Physician. Which
had the Discusser more considerately discussed, when he wrote his Discussion,
would have saved him a great deal of trouble and expense.

Thus much for the Reasons which the Discusser brings to prove that the King,
before his withdrawing, had sufficient Grounds to make him apprehensive of
Danger, and that therefore it cannot be called an Abdication. That which
follows, being altogether grounded upon certain Statutes and Laws of the Land,
to the knowledge of which the Discusser seems to be a great Pretender, is
answered in a Word, That they who pronounced the Throne Vacant, understood the
Latitude of their Power, and the Intent and Limits of the Laws and Statutes of
this Realm to that Degree, that if nothing else, the Consideration of that
might have deterred the Discusser from the Presumption of appearing so vainly
and scandalously in the World. Nor would I be thought so impertinent to
transgress the Bounds of my own Understanding as he has done. For indeed, to
tell ye the Truth, if the Discusser should come to a Trial at Westminster Hall,
I am afraid the Lawyers will certainly inform him that he has very much either
mistaken or misquoted his Authors.

FINIS.
SATISFACTION tendered to all that pretend Conscience for Nonsubmission to our
present Governors, and refusing of the New Oaths of FEALTY and ALLEGIANCE.
In a LETTER to a FRIEND, By R. B. late Rector of St. Michael Querne, London,
And now Rector of Icklingham All Saints, Suffolk.
SIR,
I Cannot but admire at the Stiffness, not to say Obstinacy of some, in not
complying with the present Government, considering the late danger of Popery,
and that an Arbitrary Power was exercised amongst us by our late Rulers, in
asserting their Dispensing Power, by the Mercenary Judges declared to be Law.

You may remember in our late Conference upon this Subject, you pleaded in
Defense of your selves, and others, the Obligation you lay under to the Oath of
Allegiance, with your Subscription to the Doctrine of the Church of England,
contained in the 37 th Article, and the First Canon of the Church: but if it
appear that all this is rather grounded upon Mistake, than any solid Reality, I
will not question your ready Submission.

Oaths I confess are very strong Ties upon Men of Conscience, and they are to
be tenderly dealt with until that Prejudice be removed; give me leave therefore
with Sobriety and Meekness to enquire, Whether that Oath be still in Force,
with the Obligation to it? if not, that Plea must vanish and disappear.

And here first, let me remind you of the occasion of imposing the Oath of
Allegiance; it was enjoined to distinguish betwixt Church and Court, Loyal and
Disloyal Papists, upon that horrid Gunpowder-Treason, which has left a Stain
of Villainy and Cruelty upon that Religion, never to be wiped off: Read over the
Anatomy of that Oath, made by K. James the First in his Book of the Defense of
it; And what is there in if that can stick upon any Protestant? except that
Clause of denying all Foreign Jurisdiction, Prince, or Potentate: And this you
seemed to hint at, when you said the Prince of Orange was a Foreign Prince.

Will you be pleased in answer to this, to fix your Thoughts upon that of the
great Apostle St. Paul, he is excepted that put all things under him. So here,
without Question, the King may divest himself of all Authority and Power, and
when this is done the Obligation cease, as if he were really Dead. The
Preface to the New Oath is not an authoritative Abdication; but rather a
Declaration of Matter of Fact, that the late King James has abdicated. So that
in fine the main of the Controversy lies here, Whether the late King did
abdicate? For, if he did, without all Question the Obligation of all Oaths
taken unto him is ceased. In confirmation of the Affirmative, I shall endeavor
to make it clear that any King may, And secondly, That the late King did
abdicate.

That Kings may denude themselves of their Princely Power and Sovereignty,
appears from what was done by Charles the Fifth, Emperor of Germany, and King
of Spain at the same time, who did abdicate both; and his Subjects took new
Oaths of Fealty to other Princes. Some of those Times might question his
Courage, but none did ever except against the Validity of it.

May it not seem something unjust to deny this Liberty to Princes, when they
find themselves overcharged with the Weight of Government, to retire into a
Privacy for the better enjoyment of their inward Peace and Quiet? But I presume
no Man will deny this Hypothesis. It remains to prove the Thesis, That the late
King did abdicate.

1. I will not dwell upon what was done by the Metropolitan, and other Lords of
the Council, upon his first withdrawing; they came into the City, and with the
Lord Mayor sent for the Lieutenant of the Tower, seize upon the Keys,
dispossess the Soldiers, place a new Garrison there, and desire the Prince of
Orange to assume the Regency; Why all this, if he had not Abdicated? Upon what
other ground durst they raise Arms, seize upon his Royal Fort? Or how can they
excuse themselves from formal Rebellion and breach of Oaths, if this be not
granted, and is not unpresidented, That Princes shall take up their Scepters
again, when they have laid them down. But to pass by this.

2. I would willingly be resolved by any Thinking Man, whose Judgment and
Testimony is most authentic in this Particular; Whether I am to resolve my
self into the Judgment of the whole Nation, in a full and clear Representation
in Parliament, or into the private Francies or Opinion of a few Men? I remember
what you once replied to this, That every Man's Conscience is to judge for
himself in point of Practice. But do you not know when, and by whom this
Principle was exploded, whilst some were prosecuted for mere Matters of
Worship? And shall this be pleaded by those Men who so vigorously have acted
against it, when in its own Nature it is so destructive of the Civil Peace? A
Line and a Line is an Abomination.

Did ever any Government upon the Pretense of Conscience dispense with
Disobedience in Things necessary to its Establishment? And can any Man expect
to be excused from taking the Oaths, which is the only Moral Security the
Government can expect or require; and upon this very Pretense, which if
allowed, all Kingdoms must dissolve into Anarchy and Confusion; Religion and
Conscience being the Common Pretentions of all Malcontents. This may suffice
to satisfy any sober Rational Man, that is not resolved to maintain the
Conclusion, be the Premises never so weak.

Some there are that presume their Subscription to the Doctrine of the Church
of England, in her Book of Articles, will not permit them to yield their
Obedience to these Alterations. But if this shall prove a Mistake, and our
Obedience shall be conformable to our Principles, will it not rather be
esteemed Peevishness than Conscience?

To discover the Mistake, let us consider when, and by whom, the Articles were
composed; and refer the Practices of those Times to the Articles, as an
authentic and clear Interpretation of them, and this also will vanish like
Smoke.

1. The Articles were made, or at least confirmed, in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, who was a constant asserter and maintainer of this Maxim, That it is
lawful for a neighboring Prince to relieve and defend the Subjects of another,
when invaded in their Laws, Liberties, and Religion. Who was it that protected
and assisted the Hugonets in France, against the Tyranny and Violence of their
Princes? Was it not this Gracious and Heroic Queen? And who was it that
protected the Netherlands against the Violence and Usurpations of the Spanish
Monarch? And was all this contrary to the avowed Doctrines of our Church, of
which she was the Defender? Was not this defended, or at least allowed of, by
the Churchmen of those Times? must it be now inconsistent with the Principles
of our Times? Do they bind our Hands, so that if we are invaded we may not
crave the like Protection? Let any sober scrupulous dissatisfied Person give a
sober Answer and Resolution to these Queries. The Dutch Netherlands erected a
new Model of Government under her Protection, after they had shaken off the
Spanish Yoke.

2. Let it be granted, what ought not to be denied, That the late King did
abdicate, and that the Government did devolve upon the People, and these in a
full Representative of the whole Nation, whether in Parliament, or in a
Convention, (it matters not which, whilst that was a free and fair Choice) have
constituted these to be our Governors; Are we not to pay and swear Obedience
unto them, as well as their Predecessors? And if this were rightly weighed,
would answer an Objection from that Declaration, in the Act of Uniformity, I
abhor that Traitorous Position, etc.

If after all this Men will fix all upon a Ius divinum, and fly to Scriptures,
let them give plain positive Texts, for a general Form, with Rules universally
relating unto, and obliging all Places and Men. If they cannot, let them
confess that God has left all Nations and People, to be ruled by that
Government and those Laws, which are most suitable to the Constitution and
Temperament of the People; and this I lay down for a Foundation not to be
overthrown. But to Answer: those places which are so much insisted upon, that
of our Savior's, St Paul's, and St Peter's, we need to make use of that absurd
Assertion of some of the Romanists, That this was only enjoined and to be
performed until they had opportunity to make a Resistance.

This would stain the Glory of the Primitive Martyrs. Not a forced, but a
voluntary Martyrdom deserves the Crown; however this gives a taste of the
Loyalty of these Men and their Religion, to the maintaining of which the Popish
Princes sacrifice all their Power and Policy.

But for a more Substantial Answer, by way of Satisfaction to these Scruples,
let it be duly considered, that the Primitive Christians and we were under
different and distinct Administrations; they lived under absolute Monarchs,
their Grandeur was won by the Sword, and confirmed by a pure Despotick Power;
and therefore their Resistance had been unlawful, contrary to the Rule and
Force of their Government: but it is quite otherwise with us. We are settled
upon a Gothic Model, our Princes make no Laws without our own Consent; they
are obliged to the excution of Laws made by our selves with their Consent; they
have no Power to dispense with the breach of them by others, nor to invade them
themselves. This was owned by the seven Bishops, declared by former
Parliaments; so that no Man is bound to pay their Allegiance any further, Let
Caesar have what is Caesar's, and the Subjects what is theirs, their Laws,
their Birthright. In some cases Moral positive Duties are superseded by what
is naturally Moral, as in the Duties of the fourth Command, so here. Tho
Government in general be founded upon Nature, yet this or that Form is but
positive; and if it be not consistant with the end of Government,
Self-preservation, Why should not it be either altered, or fixed in those who
will prosecute the right end, the Preservation of the public Peace and
Liberties of the People?

To what has been said, let me add, ex abundanti, the late King's retiring
into France; if it amount not to an Abdication, it comes near unto a
Forfeiture, and no Prince or State can have less Reason to endeavor to restore
him to his Crown and Dignity, than that Monarch. Whence has he his Claim but
from Hugh Capet, and he from the Election of the great Men of the Kingdom? and
why did they pretend to lay aside Charles Duke of Lorrain, whose Right it was
by Succession, but merely upon this ground, He had joined himself to the
Enemies of the Kingdom? and so they transfer the Crown unto another Family,
that of the Capets. And does not all Christendom in general, and the English
Nation in particular, look upon that great Man of France as a Common Enemy?
shall not that which may hinder Succession, justify in part a translating of it
unto another? But (blessed be God) all these are cleared in an Abdication, and
that asserted by the Representative Body of the whole Nation.

And now, good Sir, be persuaded to lay aside all Prejudice, submit your
Sentiments to the Judgment of your Superiors, yield your Obedience and Fealty
in taking the Oaths; this you see is your Duty, and not only so, but your
Interest. It is not long since we were apprehensive of Popery, and the
Church-of- England-Men did set themselves in direct Opposition against it, and
all the Accesses toward it; for which the Generations to come shall call them
blessed. But whence come these Apprensions to be lessened? can we expect a
perfect Freedom from these Fears, should he be readmitted to his Authority? It
is not possible a Popish Sovereign should keep Promise with his Heretical
Subjects, as they style us; their words and Oaths, if Roman Catholics, bind no
further then stands with the Interest of their Religion, and we know who both
can, and will dispense with Oaths and Promises made to Heretics.

Would you fetter him by Laws? these have been, like Sampsons Cords, easily
broken: Would you place him under Tutors and Governors? He is no minor, cannot
submit; aut Caesar, aut Null^s. Men are but Men at the best, and Time, and
Preferment may alter their Judgments. However these would make him a Prisoner,
and no King. Should we submit in hopes of another Opportunity; Would he not
settle a Correspondence with Malcontents at Home, and Foreign Princes Abroad?
and if he prosper in the Design, has that Common plea, That his Promises are
Void, because made by him when under Restraint? And then, What will become of
all that is dear unto us, Religion, Lives, Liberties, and Estates? This is
prevented by an Abdication; so that if he return, it must be by Conquest, and
then he will rule by the Sword, we shall all be in the same Condition, lie
under the charge of Heretics, Rebels and Traitors; the Government changed from
a regulated Monarchy into an absolute Tyranny, our Religion abrogated; we shall
be sold as Slaves, or burnt as Heretics. If Men love Bonds and Imprisonments,
Rapine and Sequestration, Racks and Tortures, Fire and Faggots, let them
continue this Humor and Aversation; but if none of these be lovely, as indeed
they are not, let us bless God who has redeemed us from the Hand of our
Enemies, and the Hand of all that hate us. Let us join issue with the Divine
Providence (which has delivered us from all these Evils) in submitting and
yielding our Obedience to our Sovereign Lord and Lady, by whose Conduct and
Courage we are brought into a state of Freedom and Peace. Be not affrighted out
of this by the false Rumors and Reports, spread abroad by evil-minded Men, but
let us unite in our Submission to our present Rulers, that thereby we may
strengthen their Hearts and Hands in our common Defense.

There remains one Prejudice, but no Objection arising from the vain Fears of
some Men, that the Church begins to be shaken in her Authority, whilst matters
of Religion fall under a Dispute, and no Convocation consulted with. But this,
if fully considered, would swell a private Letter into too great a Bulk. Let me
for the present desire you to consider, there is nothing designed in
Doctrinals, but mere Matters of Ceremony, and a relaxation of some Laws, not
consistent with the greatest Interest of the Nation in this present Juncture,
the Union of Protestants. And out of experience, that the severity of those
Laws never reclaimed one Dissenter, but rather did drive others out of the Pale
of the Church; it is not unworthy of, but highly becoming the Wisdom of those
worthy Patriots to find out a Method, whereby all Protestants of every Form may
be brought into an easy Condition. This Subject, if this Letter find a candid
Reception, may be more fully considered of, by

Your very Friend, Servant, and Brother, R. B.

To the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, And to the
Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in this present PARLIAMENT
Assembled; The Humbletition of TITUS OATS, D. D.
Most Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioner in the Year 1678, discovered a horrid Popish Conspiracy
for the Destruction of the late King Charles the Second, His Present Majesty,
and the Protestant Religion within these Kingdoms; and proved it so fully, that
several Parliaments, and Courts of Justice, before whom he gave his Testimony,
declared their Belief of it by public Votes, and the Condemnation of several
of the Conspirators. For which Reason, and because your Petitioner would not be
terrified by their Threats, nor seduced by their Promises of great Rewards
(with both which Temptations they often assulted him) to desist in his
Discovery; the Jesuits and Papists pursued him with an implacable Malice, and
endeavored to take away his Fame and Life, by suborning Witnesses to accuse
him of Capital Crimes: but being defeated in that Villainous Attempt, they first
procured King Charles the Second to withdraw that Protection and Subsistence
his Majesty had, at the Request of several Parliaments, allowed to your
Petitioner; and then instigated his Royal Highness the Duke of York to
prosecute your Petitioner in an Action of Scandalum Magnatum, for speaking this
notorious Truth, viz. That he the said Duke of York was reconciled to the
Church of Rome; and that It is High Treason to be so reconciled: wherein a
Verdict and Judgment for one Hundred Thousand Pounds Damages were obtained
against your Petitioner, and your Petitioner was committed to the King's
Bench-Prison.

After this, the same Popish Party obtained leave from King Charles the second,
to prefer two several Indictments against your Petitioner, for two pretended
Perjuries in his Evidence concerning the said Conspiracy, which they brought on
to Trial in the Reign of King James the second; and your Petitioner was upon
the Evidence of those very Witnesses, who had confronted him in three former
Trials, and were disbelieved; and through the Partial Behahaviour of the Chief
Justice Ieffreys, in brow-beating his Witnesses, and misleading the Juries,
convicted of the said Pretended Perjuries, and received this inhumane and
unparalled Sentence following, viz. [To pay two thousand Marks to the King:
To be divested of his Canonical Habit: To be brought into Westminster Hall with
a Paper upon his Head, with this Inscription, Titus Oats convicted upon full
Evidence of two horrid Perjuries: To stand in and upon the Pillory two several
days, for the space of an Hour: To be whipped by the comman Hangman, from
Aldgate to Newgate on Wednesday, and to be whipped again on the Friday following
from Newgate to Tiburn: To stand in and upon the Pillory five times in every
Year of his Life; and to remain a Prisoner during his Life.] Which Sentence
being intended, as your Petitioner has just reason to believe, to murder him,
was accordingly executed with all the Circumstances of Barbarity; he having
suffered some thousands of Stripes whereby he was put to unspeakable Tortures,
and lay ten Weeks under the Surgeons Hands. Neither did their Cruelty cease
here, but because your Petitioner, by God's Mercy miraculously supporting him,
(and the extraordinary Skill of a Judicious Surgeon) outlived that Bloody
Usage, some of them afterward got into your Petitioner's Chamber whilst he was
weak in his Bed, and attempted to pull of the Plasters applied to cure his
Back, and threatened to destroy him: And that nothing within their Power or
Malice might be wanting to complete your Petitioner's Misery, they procured him
to be loaded with Irons of excessive Weight for a whole Year, without any
Intermission, even when his Legs were swollen with the Gout; and to be shut up in
the Dungeon, or Hole of the Prison, whereby he became impaired in his Limbs,
and contracted Convulsion Fits, and other Distempers, to the great Hazard of
his Life. All which illegal Proceedings, and barbarous Inhumanities, your
Petitioner humbly conceives were not only intended as a Revenge upon him, but
likewise to cast a Reproach upon the Wisdom and Honor of four successive
Parliaments who had given him Cre^it, and upon the Public Justice of the
Nation. And your Petitioner humbly hopes that since the Papists themselves have
verified and confirmed his Evidence by their late open and avowed Violations of
our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, this Honorable House will vindicate the
Proceedings of former Parliaments, and discharge your Petitioner from those
Arbitrary and Scandalous Judgments, and the unjust Imprisonment he lies under.

Your Petitioner does therefore most humbly beseech your Lordships and your
Honors, to take his deplorable Case into your g^nerous and tender
Consideration, and to give him such Redress ^herein as to your Lordships and
your Honors great Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness, shall seem meet: And your
Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

An Account of the Convention of SCOTLAND.
THE Convention of Scotland met the 14 th of March, 168^, in Obedience to the
Prince of Orange's Letters; They choice the Duke of Hamilton their President,
after which they had several Debates about the Duke of G^rdon, a Papist, who
keeps the Castle notwithstanding many offers of Surrender, does still keep it
for King James.

They read a Letter from the King of England, in which he exhorts them to lay
aside all Animosities, and Factions, and mind the Public Good in securing the
Protestant Religion, and the ancient Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom on sure
and lasting Foundations, particularly that they would endeavor a Union between
both Kingdoms, as one of the best Means for the Happiness of both, especially
at this time, when the common Enemy is restless to procure the ruin of
Britain, and the Protestant Religion everywhere.

After which a Letter was read from King James, requiring them to support his
Royal Authority; by many Threats and Promises, which made no Impression on
them; but after some time they drew up, and sent a Letter to King William, full
of dutiful Respects, promising to do that which may be acceptable to him, and
suitable to the Genius of the Nation.

After settling the Militia and other State-Matters, and having resolved the
Power into themselves; they appointed a Committee of 24, made up of all the
Estates, to settle the Government: Which Committee have provided for the full
Meeting of the Convention Grounds and Reasons on which they have declared the
Throne Vacant.

A SPEECH made by a Member of the Convention of the States in SCOTLAND.
WE are now called together by his Highness the Prince of Orange, to Consult
and Deliberate, what Methods will be most proper to secure Our Religion, Laws
and Liberties, in order to which, the first thing that will fall under our
Consideration, is the settling the Sovereign Power.

I take for granted that you are fully convinced, that King James the Seventh,
by his many Violations of the Fundamental Laws, by his endeavoring to
establish a Despotick and Arbitrary Power, and introduce Popery, (tho he
himself had confirmed all the Laws that were enacted in Favor of the
Protestant Religion) has thereby subverted the Constitution, and (that our
Miseries might have no Redress from him) has left us in a time when we needed
his Protection most. The Eyes of all Europe are upon us, and it is in our Power
to make our Selves, and our Posterity either Happy or Miserable, by making a
choice, either to call back the same King James, and hazard once more all that
Men account dear, to his Mercy; or to settle the Government on some other,
under whom we may live Quiet and Peaceable Lives, without the perpetual Terror
of being swallowed up by Popery and Arbitrary Government, which all good Men
hoped were now banished, and yet behold a new Offspring is sprung up, which
plead eagerly for both, tho under the mistaken Names of Duty and Allegiance:
It Is strange that any Man can so far degenerate, as to prefer Slavery to
Liberty, and that they should be so much in love with Chains, that when they
were fairly shaken off, they should run furiously to be Fettered again; as if
the Ottoman and French Government were so charming in our Country, that we
cannot live without it, tho we have so lately groaned under the dismal Burden
of it: And it might have been supposed that even these, who had been
Instrumental in Enslaving their Fellow-Brethren, and were grown Fat with
Sucking the Nations Blood, would have taken another Method to Reconcile
themselves, than by persuading us to purchase their Safety, at so vast an
Expense as the Ruin of more than three Parts of the Nation will necessarily
amount to.

If we do but a little reflect on the Motives which these Men (blinded by
Self-Interest) make use of, to delude the Nation into a Security that wanted
very little of proving Fatal to it, and compare them with the strong Reasons,
we have to dissuade us from being so imposed on, they will be found so Weak and
Impertinent, that we must judge it next to Impossibility, to suffer our selves
to be twice Deceived. But if the Experience of our former Miseries, so lately
hanging over our Heads, (the very Thoughts of renewing which, make all good Men
to tremble) has not made us Wiser, and be not of Efficacy enough, to deter us
from venturing another Shipwreck, and exposing all again to the Discretion of
Roman Catholics: It Is more than probable that GOD has abandoned us, and given
us up to believe strong Delusions.

First, They will endeavor to persuade us, that Kings are eximed from
Punishments here on Earth, and nothing they do can be quarrelled by their
Subjects, which indeed might with some Reason be urged among the Turks, who
reserve nothing from the Power of their Sultans, and where it is Death to
dispute his Commands, tho never so Arbitrary and Tyrannical: But with what
Impudence can such Stuff be imposed on us, who never admit our Kings to the
Government, till they swear to rule us according to Law, and no otherways? The
Laws are the only Security we have for our Lives and Properties, which if our
Sovereign subvert, Subjects cannot be blamed, for making use of the ordinary
means to preserve them, and since that cannot be done without withdrawing
Obedience from such a Magistrate as goes about to destroy them, such an Act
cannot properly be said to punish him, (because we take nothing from him to
which he has a just Claim, but do only shun the occasion of making our selves
miserable. The Speculative Doctrine of Passive Obedience, has done too much
mischief among us, and what has befallen the King may be justly imputed to it,
for the believing that without Opposition he might do what he pleased,
encouraged him to take such measures as have drawn all these Misfortunes on him.

Secondly, Others are so Fond as to believe, that we may be Secure in calling
the King back, provided they so Limit him, that it will not be in his power to
hurt us. These Men do not consider, how small a Complement this is to a Man of
the Kings Temper, from an an Absolute Prince, as he was pleased to fancy
himself, to content himself with the bare Title of a King; and how
insupportable the Charge must be, if from being Master of all, he must force
himself to comply with a thousand Masters, and see his Throne become his
Prison. But how airy is it to fancy, that any Restrictions of our Contrivance
can bind the King? For 1 st, It Is most certain they can never be Voluntary, and
what is constrained and done by Force, is by Law declared to be Void and Null;
to whose Assistance the Popes Dispensing Power being joined, would quickly blow
off these Sampson Cords, and the Royal Power would again revive with all its
Vigor and Luster.

Thirdly, The King is of a Religion that has in a famous Council decreed, That
no Faith is to be kept with Heretics, much less with Subjects whom he looks
upon as so many Rebels, and will not miss to treat them as such, whenever they
give him the Opportunity of doing it; for his greatest Admirers do not run to
that height Idolatry, to imagine him so much Angel, as not to take all methods
to revenge so great an Affront, and secure himself at our Cost from such a
Treatment for the future; the apprehensions of which Resentments will strike
such terror in Men's minds, that nothing will be capable to divert them from
offering up All for an Atonement, and Popery and Slavery will be thought a good
Bargain, if they can but save their Lives. Then we may lament our Miseries, but
it will not be in our power to help them; for a Prince of Orange is not always
ready to rescue us, with such vast Expense and so great hazard to his Person;
and if our Madness hurry us so far, we deserve rather is pity than his
resentment.

Fourthly, What Arguments has the King given since he left us, to persuade us
he will be more faithful in observing his Words and Oaths, than hitherto he has
been? Does he not in a Letter lately printed here, expressly say he has ruled
so, as to give no occasion of complaint to any of his Subjects? Is not the same
Letter signed by one who sacrificed both Conscience and Honor to Interest,
who^e pernicious and headstrong Counsels has posted him to his Ruin, though all
that has been done cannot make Him sensible of it? Sure the re- Heretics to
the Sea of Rome is not less Meritorious than before, nor King James the
Seventh, by breathing the French Air, become less Bigot: It were a Dream to
fancy it. For so long as the Vatican thunders Excommunications against all such
as do not use their utmost endeavors to extirpate Heresy, a Roman Catholic
must have no Religion at all, if they be not terrible to him.

The fourth Argument they made use of to persuade such as are and shall be
chosen Members of the Convention, That their Interest to call back the King,
is, That the Peace and Happiness of the Nation cannot be otherwise secured, nor
Factions or Divisions extinguished. But what Factions do you observe, but such
as they themselves do foment, on purpose to disturb our Harmony? all which
would immediately die, if the Government were once settled on those who deserved
it best: for then, if these Fops continued still fond of Popery and Tyranny,
they would be chastised, as Disturbers of the Public Peace. The Argument may
very justly be retorted; for if the King return, we will burst out into a
flame; and England, which has already declared, will quickly be on our Top, an
Enemy too Potent and too Numerous for us, though we were all united, besides the
Danger to which such a Procedure will expose us, we cut off all hopes of an
Union with that Nation, and thereby deprive our selves of an unspeakable
Advantage, which would redound to all sorts of People, and would be the only
means to support an impoverished and sinking Nation. Neither is this the only
Inconveniency, though it be a very great one; for if we state our selves in
opposition to England, by Restoring the King whom they Rejected, it is not to
be doubted but he will use his uttmost endeavor to recover that Kingdom, the
loss of which is so considerable. Now, seeing it were vain to suppose that the
Scots alone were able to second his desires, he must needs have recourse to the
French and Irish, whose Religion will procure a more entire Confidence than His
Majesty can repose in any others. These therefore must be received into our
Bosom; and because Scotland is the most proper place for Invading England, it
must be the Scene of all the Blood and Confusion that this melancholy Thought
gives us a Prospect of. And what treatment can such Sham-Protestants expect
from these, who otherwise would have become their Friends and Allies? And what
Figure will they pretend to make, when they set up for a separate Interest from
all the Confederate Protestants in the World besides?

The happy Success the PRINCE his Enterprise has met with, has made a
considerable Alteration in the Affairs of Europe; for that great Enemy of the
Protestants, and even of Christianity it self, who had proposed nothing less to
himself than an Universal Monarchy, whom the Strictest Leagues and Contracts
cannot bind, but without regard to GOD or Man, threatens all his Neighbors
with utter Destruction; by the Scene's being changed among us, is so far
humbled, that from a Proud and Insulting Enemy, he is become a Supplicant for
Peace; well foreseeing, that if Britain join with those other Princes, whom his
Insolence, Cruelty, and Avarice, has so justly Armed against him, his Ruin is
Inevitable: So that if we have not Soul enough to enjoy this great Blessing,
and can easily part with the Glory of being once more the Arbiters of Europe,
let us at least have so much Christian Love and Charity for the Neighboring
Nations of our own Persuasion, as not to expose them to a necessary
Participation of these Plagues, which our Common Enemies are preparing for us,
and which will certainly Terminate in all our Destructions.

Lastly, I beseech you to consider what Persons they are who would Instill this
Poison in you, and you will find them of three kinds. First, those who
Postponing the Common Good of the Nation, are wholly acted by Self-Interest,
considering that in a Government where Justice and Mercy equally Flourish,
Virtue and Merit, not Villainy, will be rewarded. Secondly, They who are
ignorant of the Nature of Government, and were never at the pains to inform
themselves what Measures the Law of Nature and Nations have set to men's
Obedience, but are angry at every thing that thwarts their wild Notions, and
will admit of nothing, tho never so reasonable and convincing, if their dull
Capacities cannot reach it. The third sort are such as have been instrumental
in the inslaving their Country, and are afraid if they be called to an Account,
they may be brought to suffer Condign Punishment; if such cannot succeed in
their Design, they at least hope to be overlooked in a General Confusion, so
they have nothing unessayed that may tend to their own safety; and if Heaven
fail them, they summon Hell to their Aid; not that Love to their Prince, but
mere Ambition and Interest, drives these Criminals to such Attempts; neither
are they much to blame, if they are at such pains to sow Divisions among us.
But no Person of Wit and Judgment, nor any Good Man that is truly Protestant,
and minds the good of his Country, will suffer himself to be so grossly imposed
on by such Firebands, who would build their Furture Imaginary Greatness on the
Ruin of Our Religion, Laws, and Country.

The Grounds upon which the Estates of Scotland Declared the Right of the Crown
of Scotland FORFAULTED, and the Throne become VACANT.
I. BBcause King James the Seventh is a Professed Papist.

II. That the said King James did assume the Royal Power, and acted as King
without ever taking the Oath required by Law.

III. That he has by the Council of evil Men invaded the Fundamental
Constitution of the Kingdom, and changed it from a limited Monarchy to an
Absolute and Despotick Power.

IV. Which Power he has employed to the Subversion of the Protestant Religion,
and the Violation of the Rights of the Subject. And thereby,

V. Has inverted all the Ends of Government.

The Opinion of two eminent Parliament Men, justifying the lawfulness of taking
the Oaths of Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary.
I. FIdelity and Allegiance sworn to the King, is only a Fidelity and Obedience
as it is due to him by the Law of the Lands, for were that Faith and Allegiance
more than what the Law requires, we should swear our selves Slaves, and the
King Absolute; whereas by the Law we are free, notwithstanding these Oaths.

II. When therefore by the Law Fidelity and Allegiance cease; then our sworn
Allegiance cease: for if Allegiance might be due by the Oath to one Person,
whilst by the Law it cease to him and becomes due to another Person, the Oath
then would oblige Men to transgress the Law, and become Traitors and Rebels,
whereas the Oath is part of the Law, and therefore ought to be so interpreted
as may consist with it.

III. Fidelity and Allegiance are due by the Law to King William, and not to
King James: for the Statute of 25 of Edward 3 d, which defined all Treasons
against the King, and is the only Statute to that purpose; now that Statute, by
the King, understands not only a King de jure, but also a King de facto, tho
not de jure, against whom those Treasons Lie: whence the Lord Chief Justice
Hales, in his Pleas of the Crown, p. 12. discoursing of that Statute, tells us,
that a King de facto, and not de jure, is a King within that Act, and that
Treason against him is Punishable, tho the Right Heir get the Crown: and that
this has been the common Sense of the Law, Sir R. S. (upon application to him
about it) has assured us. And according to another Statute, 11 Hen. 7. chapter 1.
It is declared Treason to be in Arms against a King de facto, such as Richard
the 3 d was, tho it was in behalf of a King de jure.

So then by the Law of the Land, all things are Treason against King William,
which have been Treason against former Kings, therefore the same Fidelity,
Obedience and Allegiance, which was due to them, is due to him, and by
Consequence may be Sworn to him by the Law of the Land.

Allegiance and Protection are always Mutual, and therefore when King James
ceased to Protect us, we ceased to owe him Allegiance by the Law of the Land;
and when King William began to Protect us we began our Allegiance to him.

These Considerations, are in our Opinion, sufficient to remove the Grand
Scruple about the Oaths. If the dissatisfied Party accuse the Convention, for
making the Prince of Orange King, it is not my Duty to judge those above me,
therefore I shall only say that if they have done ill, Quod fieri non debuit
factum valet; and they of the Clergy ought not to censure their Superiors, but
obey according to the Law and Doctrine of Passive Obedience.

FINIS.
The TWELFTH and Last Collection of Papers (VOL. I.) Relating to the Present
Juncture of Affairs in England and Scotland. VIZ. I. The Secret League with
France proved. II. The Reasons why the late King James would not stand to a
Free and Legal Parliament. III. The Reason of the Suddenness of the Change in
England. IV. The Judgment of the Court of France concerning the Misgovernment
of King James the Second. V. The Emperor of Germany his Account of the late
King's Unhappiness in joining with the King of France. VI. A full Relation of
what was done between the Time the Prince of Orange came to London, till the
Proclaiming him King of England, etc. VII. The Declaration of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons of England, concerning their Grievances;
presented to King William and Queen Mary: With their Malesties Answer. VIII.
The Declaration of the States of Scotland, concerning their Grievances. IX. The
Manner of Proclaiming King William and Queen Mary at Whitehal, and in the City
of London, Feb. 13. 1688. X. An Account of their Coronation at Westminster,
Apr. 11. 89. XI. The Scots Proclamation, declaring William and Mary King and
Queen of England, to be King and Queen of Scotland. XII. The manner of their
taking the Scottish Coronation Oath at Whitehal, May 11. XIII. The Coronation
Oaths of England and Scotland.


London printed, and are to be sold by Richard Ianeway in Queen's-head-Court in
Paternoster Row, 1689.

The Secret League with France proved.
1. BY the Treaty managed by the Duchess of Orleans between Charles II. (her
Brother) and Lewis XIV. 1670, published by the Abbot Primi, in his History of
the War with Holland, with the privilege of the French King: This Treaty
expressly tells us, That the French King did promise Charles II, to subject his
Parliament to him, and to Establish the Romish Religion in his Kingdom. But
before this could be done, the said Duchess told him, the Haughtiness and
Power of the Hollander must be brought down.

2. By the Current of the Design throughout all Coleman's Letters, which
contain nothing else but the Conspiracy of the Duke of York, and the Jesuits,
against the Government and the Protestant Religion; For you know, says he (in
his Letter to Sir W. Throgmorton, Feb. 1. 1674/5.) "when the Duke (the late
King James) comes to be Master of our Affairs, the King of France will have
reason to promise himself all things that he can desire, etc. Both he and the
two Royal Brothers being closly joined together to destroy the Northern Heresy,
as he in his Letter to Monsieur La Cheese assures us.

3. Which Friendship with the French Court, is further confirmed by a French
Author, who wrote the Life of Turene, in which he brings in the Duke of York
lamenting the Death of that great Marshal of France, after this manner; Alas!
(says the Duke) the "loss is great to me, in that I am greatly disappointed in
those great Designs I have been long meditating upon, if ever I come to the
Crown of England. For the sake of which Passage, the then Secretary of State of
England, forbad the printing of that Book which was then translated and
prepared for the Press.

4. The French Ambassador at the Hague, in a Memorial to the States General,
Sept. 9. 1618, peremptorily declares, there was such an Alliance between the
King his Master and King James II, as to oblige him to succor him, etc.

5. Both King Charles II, and King James II, were so engaged with the great
Nimrod of France, that though several Parliaments of England strugled hard to
break the Friendship, and gave a vast Sum of Money in order thereunto, yet all
in vain: And King James II, was so eager to follow the French Measures, that
after the Defeat of Monmouth, he declared to the Parliament, that for the time
to come he would make use of Popish Officers, as well as keep up a standing
Army contrary to Law.

6. We have had sufficient Evidences of his Designs, by the care he took to
fill his Army with Irish Papists, at the same time that he disbanded all the
Protestants that served him in Ireland, that he might always have an Army at
hand in that Kingdom ready to promote his Popish Designs in England; which
could not be done without a Secret League with France, and without a very
express assurance of being vigorously supported from thence when the nick of
time should come.

7. His flying to France, and secret conspiring with the great Levi^t^an there,
and bringing French Aids with him into Ireland are no other than the putting
the Secret League into Execution.

Many more Proofs may be produced, but what has been said, may convince any
rational unprejudiced Protestant. As for those Pharisees that wilfully shut
their Eyes, of whom we may say, That seeing they see and do not peeceive,
because they are resolved not to yield to the most convincing Evidences that
this Affair is capable of, (for the Parties concerned will hide it as much as
they can) I bewail their Condition, and believe they are so obstinate, that
only the French Dragoons (those booted Apostles) can convince them, when they
come with the League in their Hands, to put the Popish Penal Laws in Execution
on their Backs, from Ne^ga^e to Tyb^^n.

The REASONS why the late K. James would not stand to a Free and Legal
Parliament; proposed to those that are fond to have him again.
WHEN the Prince of Orange (now our Gracious King) his Glorious Expedition, was
first made known to the late King, he resolved to have a Parliament, upon the
Belief that he should have been entirely Master of the Lower House, by Reason
of the Regulations he had made in Corporations, in order to his Popish Designs.
But when he was forced to take other Measures, (as he told the Dissenters when
he sent for them in the time of his Distress) in restoring the Charters, the
Bishop of London, the Fellows of Magdalen-Colledg, etc. He dreaded nothing more
than a Parliament on the old Foundations, to which the Prince in his
Declaration had referred all; for he knew several things would have been done
by such a Parliament, that he chose rather to perish than submit to.

1. The first thing is; The Examination of the Birth of the Prince of Wales (as
he is called) the questioning of which was a Stab at his Heart, as appears by
his last Letter. And the Reflections on the Bishops Petition, mentioning That
as a Business not fit to be referred then to a Parliament.

2. The next thing was; That Justice would certainly have been demanded against
the Evil Counselors, whom he had pardoned, and was in Honor bound to protect
them, having himself forced them to be Criminals.

3. The third was; The consenting to the entire Ruin of Popery in England, by
hanging many of his Priests and Jesuits, and banishing all the rest; and
pulling down all the Schools and Chapels they had erected all over England, (a
sure Sign they were built upon an Immortal Prince of Wales) though this was
done before by the unaccountable Zeal of the Mobile.

4. He foresaw such a Parliament would not only damn the Ecclesiastical Court,
(that Beast with seven Heads) and the Dispensing Power, but would in all
probability lessen his Revenue, and bind up the Prerogative; which his great
Spirit could not bear.

5. The Prince, he foresaw, would have demanded some Forts to be put into his
Hands and the Parliament, for their Security; so said he, If I stay, I shall be
but a Nominal King of England, and only be an Instrument to ruin my Religion,
my ^riends, the Monarchy, and the Child also.

At first he alleged, That the Disorders the Preparations to repel the
Invasion caused, would not suffer a Parliament to meet. Secondly, After the
Prince was landed, that all the Countries he had under him would not be free.
Thirdly, That all that had joined with him, ought not to sit: but when he saw
the whole Army and Nation (the Roman Catholics excepted) of the same mind,
mere Force drove him to consent to Call a Parliament; and when he had again
considered the Consequences of it, he at last resolved to throw up the Crown
and Government all at once, rather than to submit to all these Hardships.

He seems to have had at the same time a fluttering hope, that (1.) We should
never be able long to agree, after he had made it impossible for us to have a
Legal Parliament, by burning the Writs. (2.) That the Church of England
Principles would, when the fear and disorder was over, form for him a potent
Army in the Nation. And (3.) That the French King would lend him potent Forces,
and good store of Money; and if he recovered the Throne by force, he should be
freed of all these Miseries, and have what he only wanted before, a Popish
Army, to insure the Slavery of England for ever.

Now I would desire those Protestants, who pretend, now too late, to be so
zealous for him, to consider, whether what I have said would not have been
expected from him by them, for their Security; and what they would have done
had he called a Parliament, and refused them all these things, and have
insisted, That they should have taken his Word as to the Birth of the Prince of
Wales, have suffered him to have been educated in France, and have suffered the
Army, the Prerogative, the Ministers, and the Revenues to have continued
entirely as they were, upon a Promise, He would have used them better for the
future?

If they say No; They would have had the best Security that Law or Reason could
have required. Then all the hard things I have mentioned must have been granted
them, and I much question, whether he would now return to the Throne on those
terms.

If they say, We ought however to have treated with him, have offered him
terms; I say, it would have come to a separate Treaty; and the Church, the
Liberties of the Nation, and the Government, would have been ruined that way;
and when all had been done, no Bond (that he could have broken) would have held
him longer than the Necessity had continued.

The only Advantage we could pretend to have by the coming over of the Prince
of Orange with an Army, was to force the King to what he would never have
yielded without that Force. Now when he had accordingly passed his Word to the
Nation, in the Proclamation of the Thirtieth of November, That there should be
a Free Parliament; and to the Prince of Orange, in his Message by the three
Lords, That he would consent to every thing that could reasonably be required
for the Security of those that come to it; and yet without any Provocation
would burn the Writs, and resolve to withdraw his Person before these Lords
could possibly return him any Answer (for he promised the Queen to follow her,
who went away the day before him.) I say, this breach of his Word so solemnly
made and given both to the Nation and the Prince, show that he was not Master
of himself, but turned about by others whither they pleased.

Now suppose the Prince had suffered him to continue at White^al, and to call a
Third Parliament, what a^surance could he have given, that in the end of
another forty days we should not have the same trick played us, and then in
March or April have been left in the same state of Confusion we were in in
December, to the certain Ruin of these three Kingdoms, and Holland into the
bargain. And when all had been done, the Scruples would have been the same they
are now, the Obligations of the Oath of Allegiance the same, and the sin of
Deposing a Lawful Prince, who resolved to do the Nation no Right, would have
been much greater and more scandalous, than barely to take him at his Word; and
since he had left the Throne empty, when he needed not, to resolve he should
ascend it no more.

Lastly, Suppose the Prince had been Expelled by the King, Would the King have
then granted us what he would not grant us now? Would he not have Disbanded his
Protestant Army, and have kept the Irish Forces in Pay, and have every day
increased them? What Respect would he ever after this have shown to the English
Laws, Religion or Liberties, when he had no longer any thing to fear? The
memory of what happened after the Monmouth defeat, (though effected only by
Church of England Men) will certainly never be forgotten by others, whatever
the Bigots of this sort of Loyalty may pretend or say.

That Expression of the Lord Churchil's, in his Letter, [ That he could no
longer join with Self-interested Men, who had framed Designs against His
Majesty's true Interest, and the Protestant Religion, to give a pretense by
Conquest to bring them to effect] ought to be seriously considered by all the
Protestants of the Nation: This one Argument prevailed upon him, when he ran
the hazard of his Life, Reputation and Fortunes; and now they are all on the
other side, I should consider very se^iously, if I were one of them, what
Answer I could make to this turned into a Question in the Day of Death and
Judgment, before ever I should Act the dire^t contrary to what he has done.

For my part I am amazed to see Men scruple the submitting to the present King:
for if eve^ Man had a just cause of War, he had; and that creates a Right to
the thing gained by it: the King by withdrawing and disb^nding his Army,
yielded him the Throne; and if he had, without any more Ceremony, ascended it,
he had done no more than all other Princes do on the like occasions; and when
the King after this was taken and brought back by force, he was no longer then
bound to consider him, as one that was, but as one that had been King of
England; and in that capacity he treated him with great Respect and Civility,
how much soever the King complained of it, who did not enough consider what he
had done to draw upon himself that usage.

But when all is said that can be said, there may possibly be some Men to whom
may be applied the Saying of Ioab, Thou love thine Enemies, and hate thy
Friends; for thou have declared this day, that thou regardest neither Princes,
nor Servants; for this Day I perceive, that if Absalom had lived, and all we
had died this Day, then it had pleased thee well. Had the Protestant Religion,
the English Liberties, the Nobility and Gentry of this Nation, been all made an
Holocaust to their Reputations and Humors, their Scruples and School-niceties,
and the Prince of Orange perished, or returned Ruined or Inglorious into
Holland; we should then have had the Honor of cutting up our Religion, our
Laws, and our Civil Rights, with our own Swords; and we should have been the
only Church under Heaven that had refused a Deliverance, and Religiously and
Loyally had Destroyed it self. In truth, the Men would have purchased Popery
and Slavery so dear, ought to have enjoyed both to the End of the World.

The REASONS of the Suddenness of the Change in England.
THE true Reasons of the Swiftness of this Change may easily be assigned by
showing the Temper and Designs of James the Second; the Temper of William the
Third, our Present Sovereign; and the Nature of the English Nation, and of the
Times, all concurring with Wonderful Harmony to produce this wonderful Effect.
For had James the Second undertook any thing but the subjecting England to
Popery, and the Exercise of Arbitrary Power to that end, his vast Revenue, his
great Army, and the Reputation he had gained at Home and Abroad by the defeat
of the Monmouth-Invasion, would have gone near to have effected it: and after
all this, if he had in the beginning of October frankly granted all the Ten
Proposals made by the Bishops, and suffered a Parliament to have met, and given
up a considerable Number of his Ministers to Justice, and suffered the
pretended Prince of Wales his Birth to be freely debated and determined in
Parliament; It would in all probability have prevented or defeated the then
intended Invasion. But whilst he thought to save the Pretended Succession, the
Dispensing and Suspending Power, and the Ecclesiastical Commission, to carry on
his former Design with, when he had baffled the Prince of Orange; the Nation
saw through the Project, and he lost all.

Had a Prince of less Secresy, Prudence, Courage and Interest than the Prince
of Orange, undertaken this business, it might probably have miscarri^d: but as
his Cause was better, so his Reputation, Conduct, and Patience infinitely
exceeded theirs; he would not stir till he saw the French Forces set down
before Philipsbourgh, and then he was sure France and Germany were irrevocably
engaged in a War, and consequently he should have no other opposition than what
the Irish and English Roman Catholics could make against him. For no English
Protestant would fight his Country into Vassalage and Slavery to Popish
Priests, and Italian Women, when a Parliament sooner or later must at last have
determined all the things in Controversy, except we resolved once for all to
give up our Religion, Laws, Liberties, and Estates to the will of our King, and
submit for ever to a French Government.

A Nation of less sense than the English might have been imposed upon, of less
bravery and valor might have been frighted; of a more servile temper, might
have neglected its Liberties, till it had been too late to have ever recovered
them again: But none but a parcel of Jesuits bred in a Cloister, and
unacquainted with our Temper as well as Constitution would ever have hoped to
have carried two such things as Popery and Abitrary Power, both at once upon so
jealous a Nation as the English is, which hates them above any other People in
the World.

The cruel slaughter they had made of the poor wretches they took after the
defeat at Bridg-water ought to have made them for ever despair of gaining any
credit with the Dissenters, who rarely forgive, but never forget any ill
treatment. Yet these little Politico's had so little sense as to build all
their hopes on the Gratitude and Insensibility of these Men; as if they should
for Liberty of Conscience, arbitrarily and illegally granted, and consequently
revocable at the will of the Granter, have sold themselves to everlasting
Slavery.

They were equally mistaken in their carriage toward the Church of England
party, for when some of them had pursued both Clergy and Laity with the utmost
obloquy, hatred, oppression and contempt to the very moment they found the
Dutch storm would fall upon them. Then all at once they passed to the other
extreme, the Bishops are presently sent for, the Government entirely to be put
into their hands, and all Places, Presses and Papers filled with the Encomiums
of the Church of England's Loyalty and Fidelity, who but three days before were
Malcontents, if not Rebels and Traitors, for opposing the Kings Dispensing
Power, and the Ecclesiastical Commission. And which was the height of folly,
the same Pen which had been hired to defame and blacken the Church of England
(the Author of the Public Occurrences truly stated) was ordered to magnify its
Loyalty. By which they gained nothing but the entire and absolute disobliging
the whole Protestant party in the Nation, so that for the future no Body would
serve or trust them.

To complete their folly and madness they persuaded the King to throw up the
Government, and retire into France, pretending we would never be able to agree
amongst our selve^, but would in a short time be forced to recall him, and yield
to all those things we had so violently opposed; or if not, he might yet at
least force us to submit by the Succors he might gain in France, without ever
considering how possible it was we might agree, and how difficult it would be
to force us by a French Army, which was equally contrary to the Interest of
England, and all Europe besides, and to all intents and purposes destructive of
the Interest of that Prince they pretended thus to exalt and re-establish.

Had France been now in Peace, there might yet have been same color for this;
but when all Europe was under a necessity to unite against him for its own
preservation, then to persuade the King of Great Britain to desert his Throne,
and fly thither for succor, upon hopes of recovering his Kingdoms again by the
assistance of the French (the mortal and hereditary Enemies of the English)
this was so silly a Project, that there seems to have been something of a
Divine Infatuation in it.

However certainly no rational Man will think that all the Princes of Europe
would sit still and suffer the French King to conquer Britain, under pretense
of restoring James the Second to that Throne which he had abandoned, because he
could not bring the Prince of Orange (their Allie) and all his Protestant
Subjects to his own Terms.

And yet if none of them should interpose but the Hollanders alone, the English
and Dutch Fleets being united would render the landing a French Army so
difficult and uncertain, that it would be next door to madness to trust one to
their Navy, which is so much inferior to either of the others singly taken.

So that all things considered, either James the Second ought to have stayed at
home and have made as good terms as he could with the Prince of Orange, and his
own Subjects: Or if he would have abandoned his Kingdoms, he ought to have
despaired of any restitution, and have betaken himself to a private Life as
Christina Queen of Sweden did.

But we have now certain Intelligence that James the Second Landed the 12 th.
of March at Kingsale in Ireland, so that now it cannot be doubted but that he
hopes to recover England and Scotland by the help of the Irish; as well as the
French. His succeeding in this Design laying us at the Mercy of an Irish-French
Roman Catholic Army; whose Civility and Kindness to our Nation we may learn
from our Countrymen, who after having lost all but their Lives, have been
forced to flee over to us for Shelter and Protection. I shall not add any other
consideration to persuade my Countrymen to defend their King, Queen, and the
whole Protestant Succession, their Lives, Liberties, Privileges and Religion,
because this alone is sufficient.

The Judgment of the Court of France, concerning the Misgovernment of K. James
the Second.
THE Author (who is a Papist) that wrote that smart Treatise, called A Letter
from Monsieur to Monsieur, concerning the Transactions of the Times, etc.
writes thus concerning the late King James, viz.

King James ought to learn what he has to expe^t from France, into whose Arms
he has thrown himself. France already knows all his Faults, and publishes them.
For this Composure issuing immediately from that Court, owns;

1. "His whole Conduct was very little judicious.

2. That he has followed blind Counsels, and such as are very pernicious to his
own Repose and Security.

3. That he has unadvisedly affected to pull down the Protestant Religion,
which was that of the State.

4. That he has used an imprudent Rigor, as well to the Bishops as to the
Universities.

5. That he was unwise in going about to take off the Test and Penal Laws,
which the English look upon as the Sanctuary of the Kingdom.

6. That his Gust and Fondness for the Court of Rome, and the Monks whom he
meant to restore, was ridiculous and whimsical.

7. That his going about to give Imploys to Catholics, by taking them away
from Protestants, gave but two much reason to all the Members of the State to
complain.

This is exactly the Judgment passed by the Court of France upon the late K.
James of England; I leave him to think what Succors he is like to expect from
a Court that values him so little, and that without any more ado, speaks of him
at this rate; would he have more? It roundly declares to him, That the
restoring the King of England, is not an Enterprise easy to be executed by a
King, how great soever he may be, against whom all the Powers of Europe are
preparing to make War. This is a Hint broad enough of Conscience, and King
James ought to be satisfied that he knows the French Courts mind.

The Emperor of Germany's Account of K. James's Misgovernment in joining with
the King of France, (the Common Enemy of Christendom) in his Letter to King
James. viz.
LEOPOLD, etc.

WE have received your Majesty's Letters, dated from St. Germans the sixth of
February last, by the Earl of Carlingford, your Envoy in our Court: By them we
have understood the Condition your Majesty is reduced to; and that you being
deserted after the landing of the Prince of Orange, by your Army, and even by
your Domestic Servants, and by those you most confided in, and almost by all
your Subjects, you have been forced by a sudden Flight to provide for your own
safety, and to seek Shelter and Protection in France: Lastly, that you desire
Assistance from us for the recovering your Kingdoms. We do assure your Majesty,
that as soon as we heard of this severe turn of Affairs, we were moved at it,
not only with the common sense of Humanity, but with much deeper Impressions
suitable to the sincere Affection which we have always born to you. And we were
heartily sorry that at last that was come to pass, which (though we hoped for
better things) yet our own sad thoughts had suggested to us would ensue. If
your Majesty had rather given Credit to the Friendly Remonstrances that were
made you, by our late Envoy, the Count de Kaunitz, in our Name, than the
deceitful Insinuations of the French, whose chief aim was, by fomenting
continual Divisions between you and your People, to gain there by an Opportunity
to insult the more securely over the rest of Christendom. And if your Majesty
had put a stop, by your Force and Authority, to their many Infractions of the
Peace, of which by the Treaty at Nimegen you are made the Guarantee, and to
that end entered into Consultations with us, and such others as have the like
just Sentiments in this matter; We are verily persuaded that by this means you
should have in a great measure quieted the Minds of your People, which were so
much exasperated through their aversion to our Religion, and the public Peace
had been preserved as well in your Kingdoms as here in the Roman Empire. But
now we refer it even to your Majesty, to judge what condition we can be in to
afford you any Assistance, we being not only engaged in a War with the Turks,
but finding our selves at the same time unjustly and barbarously Attacked by
the French, contrary to, and against the Faith of Treaties, they then reckoning
themselves secure of England. And this ought not to be concealed; that the
greatest Injuries which have been done to our Religion have flowed from no
other than the French themselves; who not only esteem it lawful for them, to
make Presidious Leagues with the sworn Enemies of the Holy Cross, tending to
the destruction both of us and of the whole Christian World, in order to the
checking our Endeavors which were undertaken for the Glory of God, and to stop
those Successes which it has pleased Almighty God to give us hitherto; but
further have heaped one Treachery upon another, even within the Empire it self.
The Cities of the Empire which were surrendered upon Articles, signed by the
Dolphin himself, have been exhausted by excessive Impositions; and after their
being exhausted have been Plundered, and after Plundering have been burned and
razed. The Palaces of Princes, which in all times, and even in the most
destructive Wars, have been preserved, are now burnt down to the Ground. The
Churches are robbed, and such as submitted themselves to them, are in a most
Barbarous manner, carried away as Slaves. In short, it is become a Diversion to
them to commit all manner of insolences and Cruelties in many places, but
chiefly in Catholic Countries, exceeding the Cruelties of the Turks
themselves: which having imposed an absolute necessity upon us to secure our
selves and the Holy Roman Empire, by the best means we can think on, and that
no less against them than against the Turks; We promise our selves from your
justice ready assent to this, That it ought not to be imputed to us, if we
endeavor to procure, by a just War, that security to our selves which we could
not hitherto obtain by so many Treaties; and that in order to the obtaining
thereof, We take measures for our mutual Defense and Preservation, with all
those who are equally concerned in the same Design with us. It remains that we
beg of God that he would direct all things to his Glory, and that he would
grant your Majesty true and solid Comforts under this your great Calamity; we
embrace you with tender Affections of a Brother.

At Vienna the 9 th of April 1689.
An Account of what was done between the Time the Prince of Orange came to
London, till the Proclaiming him King of England, 1688.
IN December last, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and all the Members of the
three last Parliaments of King Charles the Second, with the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen, and several of the Common Council of London, were summoned by the
Prince in that extraordinary Conjuncture, when the late King had deserted the
Government, to consult what was fit to be done: And they, the said Lords and
Commons, did desire the Prince to take upon him the Administration of Public
Affairs both Civil and Military, and the disposal of the Public Revenue, for
the preservation of our Religion, Rights, Laws, Liberties and Properties, and
of the Peace of the Nation; and that he would take into his Care the Condition
of Ireland, till the Meeting of a Convention of Lords and Commons; which he was
entreated, by his Circular Letters, to summon to meet on the 22 d of January.
The Prince accordingly accepted the Administration, and issued out his Letters
for a Convention to meet on the 22 d of January, as aforesaid.

The Prince then (on December the 30 th) issued out his Proclamation for the
Continuance of the Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and other Officers and
Ministers (not being Papists) to act in their respective Places till the
Meeting of the Convention, or other Order to the contrary, etc.

On the 2 d of January, He put out a Declaration for the better collecting of
the Public Revenue.

On the 5 th of January he put forth an Order for all Military Officers, with
their respective Companies, to march out of the Quarters where any Elections
should be (the several Garrisons excepted) the day before the same be made, to
the next adjoining Town, or Towns, being not appointed for any Elections; and
not to return to their first Quarters, till the said respective Elections be
made and fully completed, that so the Election of Members for the intended
Convention may be free, and without any color of Force or Restraint.

On the 7 th of January the Scottish Nobility and Gentry waited on the Prince:
what was done by them, see the 6 th Collection, page 9, 10, 11, 12.

On the 8 th day his Highness put out a Declaration against Quartering of
Soldiers in private Houses. He found the Treasury very empty of Cash, it being
said to be but 40000 l. Whereupon he desired the City of London to advance a
Sum for his present Occasion, and on the 10 th of January they agreed to lend
100000 l. But it being raised by Subscription, it amounted to above 150000 l.

On the 16 th of January, He put out a Declaration to assure the Mariners and
Seamen of their Pay.

The two Houses met on the 22 d of January, 1688/9; the Lords chose the
Marquess of Hallifax for their Speaker; and the Commons chose Henry Powle Esquire
for theirs. After which a Letter was read in both Houses from the Prince of
Orange, on the occasion of their Meeting, to this Effect.

That he had endeavored to perform what was desired from him for the Public
Peace and Safety during his Administration; and that it now lay on them to lay
a Foundation of a firm Security for their Religion, Laws and Liberties. That he
did not doubt but that by such a full and free Representative of the Nation,
the Ends of his Declaration would be attained.

He recommended to them the dangerous Condition of Ireland, and also of the
States of Holland, both which required large and speedy Succors; and told
them, That since it had pleased God hitherto to bless his good Intentions with
so great Success, he trusted in him, that he would complete his own Work, by
sending a Spirit of Peace and Union to influence their Counsels, that so no
Interruption may be given to a happy and lasting Settlement.

The first Thing the two Houses took care of, was, by mutual Consent, to make
an Address to the Prince; in which they acknowledged him the Glorious
Instrument, under God, in the great Deliverance of the Kingdom from Popery and
Arbitrary Power. They acknowledged also his great Care in the Administration,
and entreated him to continue it till further Application; and that he would
take into his Care the State of Ireland.

Then the Houses ordered that Thursday, Ian. 31. be a Day of Thanksgiving in
the City of London, and places adjacent, within ten Miles; and the 14 th of
February throughout the whole Kingdom.

Then the Lords ordered, that no Papist, or reputed Papist, should presume to
come into the Lobby, Painted Chamber, Court of Requests, or Westminster Hall,
during the Sitting of the Convention.

And after several Days Debates in both Houses about the Abdication of the
Government, and the Vacancy of the ^hrone. On the 12 th of February, the two
Houses at last fully agreed all Things in Dispute between them, in the
following Declaration.

The Declaration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons Assembled at
Westminster; Concerning the Misgovernment of King James, and filling up the
Throne. Presented to King William, and Queen Mary, by the right Honorable the
Marquess of Hallifax, Speaker to the House of Lords. With His Majesty's most
gracious Answer thereunto.
WHEREAS the late King James the Second, by the Assistance of diverse Evil
Counselors, Judges, and Ministers employed by Him, did endeavor to Subvert
and Extirpate the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of this
Kingdom;

By Assuming and Exercising a Power of Dispensing with, and Suspending of Laws,
and the Execution of Laws, without Consent of Parliament.

By Committing and Prosecuting diverse Worthy Prelates, for humbly Petitioning
to be Excused from concurring to the said assumed Power.

By issuing, and causing to be executed, a Commission under the Great Seal, for
erecting a Court called, The Court of Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Causes.

By Levying Money for and to the Use of the Crown, by pretense of Prerogative,
for other time, and in other manner, than the same was granted by Parliament.

By raising and keeping a standing Army within this Kingdom in time of Peace,
without Consent of Parliament; and Quartering Soldiers contrary to Law.

By causing several Good Subjects, being Protestants, to be Disarmed at the
same time, when Papists were both Armed and Employed contrary to Law.

By violating the Freedom of Election of Members to serve in Parliament.

By Prosecutions in the Court of King's Bench for Matters and Causes cognizable
only in Parliament; and by diverse other Arbitrary and Illegal Courses.

And whereas of late Years, Partial, Corrupt, and Unqualified Persons, have
been returned and served on Juries in Trials, and particularly diverse Jurors in
Trials for High Treason, which were not Freeholders.

And Excessive Bail has been required of Persons committed in Criminal Cases,
to elude the Benefit of the Laws made for the Liberty of the Subjects.

And Excessive Fines have been imposed.

And Illegal and Cruel Punishments inflicted.

And several Grants and Promises made of Fines and Forfeitures before any
Conviction or Judgment against the Persons upon whom the same were to be levied.

All which are utterly and directly contrary to the known Laws and Statutes,
and Freedom of this Realm.

And whereas the said late K. James the 2 d having abdicated the Government,
and the Throne being thereby vacant.

His Highness the Prince of Orange (whom it has pleased Almighty God to make
the Glorious Instrument of Delivering this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary
Power) did (by the Advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and diverse
principal Persons of the Commons) cause Letters to be written to the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, being Protestants, and other Letters to the several
Counties, Cities, Universities, Buroughs, and Cinque Ports, for the Choosing of
such Persons to represent them, as were of Right to be sent to Parliament, to
Meet and Sit at Westminster upon the 22 d Day of January in this Year 1688, in
order to such an Establishment, as that their Religion, Laws and Liberties,
might not again be in danger of being Subverted: Upon which Letters Elections
having been accordingly made;

And thereupon the said Lord's Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, pursuant to
their respective Letters and Elections, being now Assembled in a Full and Free
Representative of this Nation, taking into their most serious Consideration the
best Means for attaining the Ends aforesaid, do in the first place (as their
Ancestors in like Case have usually done) for the Vindicating and Asserting
their Ancient Rights and Liberties, Declare,

That the pretending Power of Suspending of Laws, or the Execution of Laws, by
Regal Authority, without Consent of Parliament, is Illegal.

That the pretended Power of Dispensing with Laws, or the Execution of Laws, by
Regal Authority, as it has been assumed and exercised of late, is Illegal.

That the Commission for erecting the late Court of Commissioners for
Ecclesiastical Causes, and all other Commissions and Courts of the like Nature,
are Illegal and Pernicious.

That levying of Money for or to the Use of the Crown, by pretense of
Prerogative, without Grant of Parliament, for longer time, or in other manner,
than the same is or shall be granted, is Illegal.

That it is the Right of the Subjects to Petition the King, and all Commitments
and Prosecutions for such Petitioning, are Illegal.

That the raising or keeping a standing Army within the Kingdom in time of
Peace, unless it be with Consent of Parliament, is against Law.

That the Subjects which are Protestants may have Arms for their Defense
suitable to their Condition, and as allowed by Law.

That Election of Members of Parliament ought to be Free.

That the Freedom of Speech, and Debates or Proceedings in Parliament, ought
not to be impeached or Questioned in any Court or place out of Parliament.

That Excessive Bail ought not to be required, nor Excessive Fines imposed, nor
cruel and unusual Punishments inflicted.

That Jurors ought to be duly empannell'd and returned, and Jurors which pass
upon Men in Trials for High Treason ought to be Freeholders.

That all Grants and Promises of Fines and Forfeitures of particular Persons
before Conviction, are Illegal and Void.

And that for redress of all Grievances, and for the amending, strengthening
and preserving of the Laws, Parliaments ought to be held frequently.

And they do claim, demand, and insist upon all and singular the Premises, as
their undoubted Rights and Liberties; and that no Declarations, Judgments,
Doings, or Proceedings, to the prejudice of the People in any of the said
Premises, ought in any wise to be drawn hereafter into Consequence or Example.

To which Demand of their Rights they are particularly encouraged by the
Declaration of His Highness the Prince of Orange, as being the only Means for
obtaining a full redress and remedy therein.

Having therefore an entire Confidence, that his said Highness the Prince of
Orange will perfect the Deliverance so far advanced by Him, and will still
preserve them from the Violation of their Rights, which they have here
asserted, and from all other Attempts upon their Religion, Rights, and
Liberties;

The said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons assembled at Westminster do
resolve,

That William and Mary, Prince and Princess of Orange, be, and be declared,
King and Queen of England, France, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, to hold the Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and
Dominions, to them the said Prince and Princess, during their Lives, and the
Life of the Surviver of them; And that the sole and full Exercise of the Regal
Power be only in, and executed by the said Prince of Orange, in the Names of
the said Prince and Princess during their joint Lives; and after their
Deceases, the said Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and Dominions
to be to the Heirs of the Body of the said Princess; and for default of such
Issue, to the Princess Ann of Denmark, and the Heirs of Her Body; and for
default of such Issue, to the Heirs of the Body of the said Prince of Orange.

And the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, do pray the said
Prince and Princess of Orange to accept the same accordingly.

And that the Oaths hereafter mentioned be taken by all Persons, of whom the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy might be required by Law, instead of them;
and that the said Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy be Abrogated.

I A. B. do sincerely promise and swear, That I will be faithful, and bear true
Allegiance to their Majesty's King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.

So help me God.


I A. B. do swear, That I do from my Heart Abhor, Detest, and Abjure, as
Impious and Heretical, this Damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes
Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of Rome,
may be Deposed or Murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I
do declare, That no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, has,
or ought to have, any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preeminence, or
Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within this Realm.

So help me God. Io. Brown, Cleric' Parl.


Die Veneris 15 Feb. 1688. His Majesty's Gracious Answer, to the Declaration of
both Houses.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THis is certainly the greatest proof of the Trust you have in Us, that can be
given, which is the thing that makes us value it the more; and we thankfully
Accept what you have Offered. And as I had no other Intention in coming hither,
than to preserve your Religion, Laws and Liberties; so you may be sure, That I
shall endeavor to support them, and shall be willing to concur in any thing
that shall be for the Good of the Kingdom, and to do all that is in my Power to
advance the Welfare and Glory of the Nation.

Die Veneris 15 Februarii 1688.
ORdered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Assembled at Westminster, That
His Majesty's Gracious Answer to the Declaration of both Houses, and the
Declaration, be forthwith Printed and Published; And that his Majesty's
Gracious Answer this Day be added to the Engrossed Declaration in Parchment, to
be Enrolled in Parliament and Chancery.

Io. Brown, Cleric' Parliamentorum.

The Declaration of the Estates of Scotland concerning the Mis-government of
King James the Seventh, and filling up the Throne with King William and Queen
Mary.
THat King James the 7 th had acted irregularly.

1. By His Erecting public Schools and Societies of the Jesuits; and not only
allowing Mass to be publicly said, but also inverting Protestant Chapels and
Churches, to Public Mass-houses, contrair to the express Laws against saying
and hearing of Mass.

2. By allowing Popish Books to be Printed and Dispersed, by a Gift to a Popish
Printer, designing him Printer to his Majesty's Household, College and Chapel,
contrair to the Laws.

3. By taking the Children of Protestant Noblemen and Gentlemen, sending them
abroad to be bred Papists, making great Funds and Donations to Popish Schools
and Colleges abroad; bestowing Pensions on Priests, and perverting Protestants
from their Religion, by Offers of Places, Preferments and Pensions.

4. By disarming Protestants, while at the same time he employed Papists in the
Places of greatest Trust, Civil and Military, such as Chancellor, Secretaries,
Privy Counselors, and Lords of Session, thrusting out Protestants, to make
room for Papists, and intrusting the Forts and Magazines of the Kingdom in
their hands.

5. By Imposing Oaths contrair to Law.

6. By giving Gifts and Grants for exacting of Money without Consent of
Parliament, or Convention of Estates.

7. By Levying and keeping on foot a Standing Army in time of Peace, without
consent of Parliament; which Army did exact Locality, free and day Quarters.

8. By Employing the Officers of the Army, as Judges through the Kingdom, and
imposing them where there were held Offices and Jurisdictions, by whom many of
the Leiges were put to Death summarily without legal Trial, Jury or Record.

9. By imposing exorbitant Fines to the Value of the Parties Estates, exacting
extravagant Bail, and disposing Fines and Forfaulture before any Process or
Conviction.

10. By Imprisoning Persons without expressing the Reason, and delaying to put
them to Trial.

11. By causing pursue and forfault several Persons upon stretches of old and
obsolete Laws, upon frivolous and weak pretenses, upon lame and defective
Probations; as particularly the late Earl of Argyle, to the scandal and
reproach of the Justice of the Nation.

12. By Subverting the Right of the Royal Boroughs, the Third Estate of
Parliament, imposing upon them not only Magistrates, but also the whole Town
Council and Clerks, contrair to the Liberties and express Charters, without the
pretense outher of Sentence, Surrender, or Consent: So that the Commissioners
to Parliaments being chosen by the Magistrates and Councils, the King might in
effect alsweel nominate that entire Estate of Parliament; many of the said
Magigrates put in by him were avowed Papists; and the Burghs were forced to pay
Money for the Letters, imposing these illegal Magistrates and Council upon them.

13. By sending Letters to the Chief Courts of Justice, not only ordering the
Judges to stop and desist sine die, to determine Causes, but also ordering and
commanding them how to proceed in Cases depending before them, contrair to the
express Laws: And by changing the Nature of the Judges Gifts, ad vitam aut
culpam, and giving them Commissions ad been placitam, to dispose them to
compliance by Arbitrair Courses, and turning them out of their Offices when
they did not comply.

14. By granting Personal Protections for Civil Debts, contrair to Law.

All which are utterly and directly contrair to the known Laws, Freedoms and
Statutes of this Realm.

Therefore the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, find, and declare. That King
James the Seventh, being a professed Papist, did assume the Regal Power, and
acted as King, without ever taking the Oath required by Law; and have by advice
of Evil and Wicked Counselors invaded the Fundamental Constitution of the
Kingdom, and altered it from a Legal, limited Monarchy, to an Arbitrair and
Despotick Power; and has exercised the same to the subversion of the
Protestant Religion, and the violation of the Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom: Inverting all the Ends of Government, whereby he has forfaulted the
Right to the Crown, and the Throne is become vacant.

And whereas his Royal Highness, William, then Prince of Orange, now King of
England, whom it has pleased the Almighty God to make the Glorious Instrument
of delivering these Kingdoms from Popery, and Arbitrary Power, did, by advice
of several Lords and Gentlemen of this Nation, at London, for the time, call
the Estates of this Kingdom to meet the Fourteenth of March last, in order to
such an Establishment, as that their Religion, Laws and Liberties might not be
again in danger of being subverted. And the said Estates being now assembled,
in a full and free Representative of this Nation, taking to their most serious
consideration, the best means for attaining the Ends aforesaid, Do in the first
place, as their Ancestors in the like cases have usually done, for the
vindicating and asserting their Ancient Rights and Liberties, declare,

That by the Law of this Kingdom no Papist can be King or Queen of the Realm,
nor bear any Office whatsoever therein; nor can any Protestant Successor,
exercise the Regal Power, until he or she swear the Coronation Oath.

That all Proclamations asserting an Absolute Power, to cass, annul and disable
Laws; the erecting Schools and Colleges for Jesuits; the inverting Protestant
Chapels and Churches to public Mass-houses, and the ^llowing Mass to be said,
are contrair to Law.

That the allowing Popish Books to be printed and dispersed, is contrair to Law.

That the taking the Children of Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others, sending, and
keeping them abroad to be bred Papists: The making Funds and Donations to
Popish Schools and Colleges; the bestowing Pensions on Priests, and the
perverting Protestants from their Religion by offers of Places, Preferments and
Pensions, are contrair to Law.

That the disarming of Protestants, and employing Papists in the Places of
greatest Trust, both Civil and Military; the thrusting out Protestants to make
room for Papists, and the entrusting Papists with the Forts and Magazines of
the Kingdom, are contrair to Law.

That the imposing Oaths without Authority of Parliament, is contrair to Law.

That the giving Gifts or Grants for raising of Money without the Consent of
Parliament, or Convention of Estates, is contrair to Law.

That the employing Officers of the Army as Judges through the Kingdom, or
imposing them where there were several Offices and Jurisdictions, and the
putting the Leiges to Death summarily, and without legal Trial, Jury or Record,
are contrair to Law.

That the imposing extraordinary Fines, the exacting of exorbitant Bail, and
the disposing of Fines and Forfaultures before Sentence, are contrair to Law.

That the Imprisoning Persons, without expressing the reason thereof, and
delaying to put them to Trial, are contrair to Law.

That the causing pursue and forfault Persons upon Stretches of old and
obsolete Laws, upon frivolous and weak Pretenses, upon ^ame and defective
Probation, as particularly the late Earl of A^gyle, are contrai^ to Law.

That the nominating and imposing Magistrates, Councils and Clerks upon Burg^s,
contrair to the Liberties and express Charters, is contrair to Law.

That the sending Le^ters to the Courts of Justice, ordaining the Judges to
stop or desist from determining Causes, or ordaining them how to proceed in
Causes depending before them; and the changing the Nature of the Judges Gifts
ad vitam aut culpam, unto Commissions. Durante been placito, are contrair to
Law.

That the granting Personal Protections for Civil Debts, is contrair to Law.

That the forcing the Leiges to depone against themselves in Capital Crimes,
however the Punishment be restricted, is contrair to Law.

That the using Torture without Evidence, or in ordinary Crimes, is contrair to
Law.

That the ^ending of an Army in a Hostile manner upon any part of the Kingdom,
in a peaceable time, and exacting of Locality, and any manner of Free Quarter,
is contrair to Law.

That the charging the Leiges with Law-burroughs at the King's instance, and
the imposing of Bands without the Authority of Parliament, and the suspending
the Advocates from their Employments for not compearing when such Bands were
offered, were contrair to Law.

That the putting of Garrisons on private Men's Houses in a time of peace,
without the consent of the Authority of Parliament, is contrair to Law.

That the opinion of the Lords of Session in the two Causes following, were
contrair to Law ( viz.) 1. That the concerting the demand of a Supply for a
Forfaulted Person, although not given, is Treason. (2.) That Persons refusing
to discover what are their private thoughts and Judgments in relation to points
of Treason, or other Men's actions, are guilty of Treason.

That the fining Husbands for their Wives withdrawing from the Church, was
contrair to Law.

That Prelacy, and Superiority of any Office in the Church above Presbyters, is
and has been a great and unsupportable Grievance and Trouble to this Nation,
and contrair to the Inclinations of the Generality of the People ever since the
Reformation, they having Reformed from Popery by Presbyters; and therefore
ought to be abolished.

That it is the Right and Privilege of the Subjects to protest for remead of
Law to the King and Parliament, against Sentences pronounced by the Lords of
Session, providing the same do not stop execution of the said Sentences.

That it is the Right of the Subjects to Petition the King, and that all
Imprisonments and Prosecutions for such Petitions are contrair to Law.

That for redress of all Grievances, and for the amending, strengthening and
Preserving of the Laws, Parliaments ought to be frequently called and allowed
to sit, and the freedom of Speech and Debate secured to the Members.

And they do claim and demand and insist upon all and sundry the Premises, as
their undoubted Right and Liberties, and that no Declarations, Doings or
Proceedings to the prejudice of the People in any of the said Premises, ought
in any ways to be drawn hereafter in consequence and example, but that all
Forfaultures, Fines, loss of Offices, Imprisonments, Banishments, Pursuits,
Persecutions and Rigorous Executions be considered, and the Parties seized, be
redressed.

To which demand of the Rights, and Redressing of their Grievances, they are
particularly encouraged by his Majesty the King of England his Declaration for
the Kingdom of Scotland of the day of October last, as being the only means for
obtaining a full redress and remead therein.

Having therefore an entire Confidence, That his said Majesty the King of
England will perfyte the Deliverance so far advanced by him, and will still
preserve them from the Violation of the Rights which they have here asserted;
And from all other Attempts upon their Religion, Laws and Liberties;

The said Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland do resolve, That William and Mary,
King and Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Be and Be Declared King and
Queen of Scotland; to Hold the Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdom of
Scotland, to them the said King and Queen during their Lives, and the longest
Liver of them; and that the sole and full exercise of the Royal Power, be only
in, and exercised by him the said King, in the Names of the said King and
Queen, during their joint Lives: And after their deceases, the said Crown and
Royal Dignity of the said Kingdom, to be to the Heirs of the Body of the said
Queen* Which sailing, to the Princess Ann of Denmark, and the Heirs of her
Body: which also sailing, to the Heirs of the Body of the said William King of
England.

And they do pray the said King and Queen of England to accept the same
accordingly.

And that the Oath hereafter mentioned be taken by all Protestants of whom the
Oath of Allegiance, and any other Oaths and Declarations might be required by
Law instead thereof. And that the said Oath of Allegiance, and other Oaths and
Declarations, may be Abrogated.

I A. B. Do sincerely Promise and Swear, That I will be Faithful and bear True
Allegiance to Their Majesty's King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.

So help me God.

The manner of the Proclaiming of King WILLIAM, and Queen MARY, at White Hall,
and in the City of London, Feb. 13. 1688/9.
ABout half an hour past Ten in the Morning, the Lords and Commons came from
Westminster to White Hall in their Coaches, and alighted at the Gate, went up
into the Banqueting House, where they presented the Prince and Princess of
Orange with an Instrument in Writing, for declaring their Highnesses King and
Queen of England, France, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories
thereunto belonging, desiring them to accept the Crown, pursuant to the said
Declaration, which their Highnesses accepting accordingly, the said Lords and
Commons came down again to White Hall gate, preceded by the Speakers of their
respective Houses, each attended with a Sergeant at Arms; where they found the
Heralds of Arms, the Sergeants at Arms, the Trumpets, and other Officers, all
in readiness, being assembled by Order^ from the Duke of Norfolk, Earl-Marshal
of England. And Sir Thomas St. George Knight Garter, Principal King of Arms,
having received a Proclamation, and an Order from the Lord* House to the Kings
Heralds and Pursuivants of Arms, for Publishing or Proclaiming the same
forthwith: The Persons concerned, disposed themselves in Order before the
Court-gate, for making the said Proclamation: And the Trumpets having founded a
Call three several Times, the last of which was answered by a great Shout of
the vast Multitudes of People there assembled. The Noise ceasing, the said
Garter, King of Arms, read the said Proclamation by short Sentences or Periods,
which was thereupon proclaimed aloud by Robert Devenish Esquire York Herald, being
the Senior Herald, in these words:

WHereas it has pleased Almighty God, in his great Mercy to this Kingdom, to
vouchsafe us a Miraculous Deliverance from Popery and Abitrary Power, and that
our Preservation is due, next under God, to the Resolution and Conduct of His
Highness the Prince of Orange, whom God has chosen to be the Glorious
Instrument of such an inestimable Happiness to us and our Posterity; and being
highly sensible and fully persuaded of the Great and Eminent Virtues of Her
Highness the Princess of Orange, whose zeal for the Protestant Religion will no
doubt bring a Blessing along with Her upon this Nation; And whereas the Lords
and Commons now Assembled at Westminster have made a Declaration, and presented
the same to the said Prince and Princess of Orange, and therein desired them to
Accept the Crown, who have accepted the same accordingly; We therefore the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons; Together with the Lord Mayor and
Citizens of London, and others of the Commons of this Realm, Do, with a full
Consent, Publish and Proclaim according to the said Declaration, William and
Mary, Prince and Princess of Orange, to be King and Queen of England, France,
and Ireland, with all the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging; who
are accordingly so to be owned, deemed, accepted, and taken by all the People
of the aforesaid Realms and Dominions, who are from hence-forward bound to
acknowledge and pay unto them all Faith and true Allegiance. Beseeching God, by
whom Kings Reign, to bless King William and Queen Mary with long and happy
Years to Reign over us.

God save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. Jo. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum.


Which being ended, and the Trumpets sounding a Flourish, was answered by
several repeated Shouts of the People.

And Directions being given to proclaim the same within Temple Bar, in
Cheap Side, and at the Royal Exchange, the Proceeding marched in this manner:

First, the several Beadles of the Liberties of Westminster; Next, the
Constables of the said Liberties, all on Foot, with the High-Constable on
Horseback; After them, the Head-Bailiff of Westminster, and his Men, all with
white Staves, to clear the Way, on Horseback; Then the Knight-Marshal's Men
also on Horseback; Next to these a Class of Trumpets, Nine in all, viz. 2, 2,
2, and 3 followed by the Sergeant-Trumpeter, carrying his Mace on his Shoulder,
all likewise on Horseback; Then a Pursuivant of Arms single: Then a Pursuivant
and a Sergeant at Arms; Another Pursuivant and a Sergeant at Arms; Then four
Heralds of Arms, one after another, each with a Sergeant at Arms on his left
Hand, the Heralds and Pursuivants being all in their Rich Coats of the Royal
Arms, and the Sergeants at Arms, each carrying his Mace on his Shoulder, and
all on Horseback; Then Garter King of Arms, in his rich Coat of Arms, carrying
the Proclamation, accompanied with Sir Tho. Duppa Knight. Gentleman Usher of the
Black Rod, in his Crimson Mantle of the Order of the Garter, and his Black Rod
of Offi^e, likewise on Horseback.

These immediately preceded the Marquess of Halifax, who executed the Place of
Speaker in the House of Lords, in his Coach, attended by Sir Roger Harsnet,
eldest Sergeant at Arms, with his Mace. Then followed Henry Powle Esquire Speaker
of the House of Commons, in his Coach, attended by John Topham Esquire Sergeant at
Arms to the said House, with his Mace. After the two Speakers of the Houses,
followed the Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal, and Primier Duke of England, in his
Coach, with his Marshals Staff in his Hand; And next to him all the Peers in
order in their Coaches; And last of all, the Members of the House of Commons in
their Coaches.

In this Order they proceeded toward Temple Bar; and being come as far as the
Maypole in the Strand, two of the Officers of Arms, with a Sergeant at Arms,
and two Trumpets, went before to Temple Bar; and the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Sheriffs, being by this time arrived there, and having ordered the Gates to be
shut, the Herald at Arms knocked thereat; whereupon the Sheriffs being on
Horseback, came to the Gate; and the said Herald acquainting them, That he
came by Order of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal assembled at Westminster, to
demand Entrance into that famous City, for the Proclaiming of William and Mary,
King and Queen of England, France, and Ireland, and the Dominions and
Territories thereunto belonging; and therefore required their speedy Answer.
The said Sheriffs ordered the Gates to be opened. Whereupon leaving the
Head-Bayliff, Constables, and Beadles of Westminster without the Bar, the rest
of the Proceeding entered, where they found the Lord May^r, Aldermen, Recorder,
and Sheriffs, all in their Formalities, and on Horseback, except the Lord
Mayor who was in his Coach, attended by the Sword Bearer, and other of his
Officers, who joyfully receiving them, they made a stand between the two
Temple-Gates, and Proclaimed their Majesty's a second time. From whence they
marched toward Cheap Side, a Class of the City Trumpets, and the Lord-Mayors
Livery-men leading the Way, and the said Aldermen and Lord Mayor falling into
the Proceeding: And near Wood-street end (the place where Cheap-side-Cross
formerly stood) they made another stand, and Proclaimed their Majesty's a third
time. And arriving at the Royal Exchange about Two of the Clock, they
Proclaimed them a fourth time; and at each Proclamation, the vast multitudes of
Spectators who thronged the Streets, Balconies and Windows, filled the Air with
loud and repeated Shouts and Expressions of Joy. Within Temple Bar, and all
along Fleet Street, the Orange Regiment of the City Militia, lined both sides
of the way, as did the Green Regiment within Ludgate and St. Paul's
Churchyard; the Blew Regiment in Cheap Side, and the White in Cornhil.

The Coronation of their Sacred Majesty's King WILLIAM and Queen MARY was
performed at Westminster in manner following, April 11, 1689.
THeir Majesty's being come from Whitehal to Westminster, and the Nobility,
etc. being put in Order by the Heralds, They came down in State into
Westminster Hall, where the Swords and Spurs were presented to them.

After which the Dean and Prebendaries of Westminster, having brought the
Crowns and other Regalia, presented them severally to their Majesty's, which,
with the Swords and Spurs, were thereupon delivered to the Lords appointed to
carry them.

Then the Procession began in this manner. Drums and Trumpets; Six Clerks in
Chancery, two abreast (as all the rest of the Proceeding went;) Chaplains
having Dignities; Aldermen of London; Masters in Chancery; Solicitor, and
Attorney General; Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber; Judges.

Children of Westminster, and of the King's Chapel; Choir of Westminster, and
Gentlemen of the Chapel; Prebends of Westminster; Master of the Jewel-house;
Privy Counselors not Peers.

Two Pursuivants, Baronesses, Barons, Bishops; A Pursuivant, a Vicountess,
Vicounts; Two Heralds, Countesses, Earls; A Herald, a Marchioness; Two Heralds,
Dutchesses, Dukes; Two Kings of Arms, The Lord Privy Seal; Lord President of
the Council; Archbishop of York; His Royal Highness Prince George of Denmark;
Two Persons representing the Dukes of Aquitain and Normandy.

Next the Lords who bore their Majesty's Regalia, viz. The Earl of Manchester
St. Edward's Staff; and the Lord Gray of Ruthin the Spurs; The Earl of Clare
the Queens Scepter with the Cross, and the Earl of Northampton the King's; The
Earls of Shrewsbury, Derby, and Pembroke, the 3 Swords. Next, Garter King of
Arms between the Usher of the Black Rod, and the Lord Mayor of London; The Lord
Great Chamberlain Single; The Earl of Oxford with the Sword of State, between
the Duke of Norfolk Earl Marshall, and the Duke of Ormond Lord High-Constable
for that Day; then the Earl of Bedford with the Queens Scepter of the Dove, and
the Earl of Rutland with the King's; the Duke of Bolton with the Queen's Orb,
and the Duke of Grafton with the King's; the Duke of Somerset with the Queen's
Crown, and the Earl of Devonshire, Lord Steward of his Majesty's Household, who
was made Lord. High Steward of England for that Day, with the King's: The
Bishop of London with the Bible, between the Bishop of St. Asaph with the
Paten, and the Bishop of Rochester with the Chalice.

Then the King, supported by the Bishop of Winchester, and the Queen by the
Bishop of Bristol, under a Canopy born by Sixteen Barons of the Cinque Ports;
His Majesty's Train born by the Master of the Robes, assisted by the Lord
Eland, Lord Willoughby, Lord Landsdowne, and the Lord Dunblaine; and Her
Majesty's Train by the Duchess of Somerset, assisted by the Lady Elizabeth
Pawlett, Lady Diana Vere, Lady Elizabeth Cavendish, and the Lady Henrietta Hyde.

After the King, a Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and two Grooms of the
Bedchamber; and after the Queen, a Lady of the Bedchamber, and two of Her
Majesty's Women.

Lastly the Captain of His Majesty's Guard, between the Captain of the Yeomen
of the Guard, and the Captain of the Band of Pensioners; followed by the
Officers and Band of Yeomen of the Guard. The Sergeants at Arms going on each
side of the Regalia, and the Gentlemen Pensioners on each side of the Canopy.

Thus Their Majesty's in Their Robes of Crimson Velvet, the King with a Cap,
and the Queen a Circlet on her Head, All the Nobility in Crimson Velvet Robes,
with their Coronets in their Hands, and the rest of the Proceeding in their
proper Habits, marched on foot upon Blew Cloth to Westminster-Abby, all the Way
and Houses on each side being Crowded with vast Number of Spectators,
expressing their great Joy and Satisfaction by loud repeated Acclamations.

Being Entered the Church; and all duly seated, the Bishop of London, who
performed this great Solemnity, began with the Recognition, which ended with a
mighty Shout. Then Their Majesty's Offered, and the Lords who bore the Regalia,
presented them at the Altar. The Litany was sung by two Bishops, and after the
Epistle, Gospel, and Nicene Creed, the Bishop of Salisbury Preached on this
Text, 2 Samuel 23. 3, 4.

After Sermon Their Majesty's took the Oath, and being Conducted to their Regal
Chairs placed on the Theater (that they might be more Conspicuous to the
Members of the House of Commons, who were seated in the North Cross) were
Anointed, and presented with the Spurs and Sword, and Invested with the Palls
and Orbs, and then with the Rings and Scepters; and at Four of the Clock the
Crowns were put on their Heads. At sight whereof the People shouted, the Drums
and Trumpets sounded, the great Guns were discharged, and the Peers and
Peeresses put on their Coronets.

Then the Bible was presented to Them, and after the Benediction They
vouchsafed to Kiss the Bishops. Being Inthroned, first the Bishops, and then
the Temporal Lords did their Homage, and Kissed their Majesty's left Cheeks;
while the Treasurer of the Household threw about the Coronation Medals.

Next followed the Communion; And Their Majesty's having made their second
Oblation, received the Holy Sacrament. Then the Bishop Read the final Prayers,
and Their Majesty's retiring into St. Edward's Chapel, and being new Arrayed
in Purple Velvet, returned to Westminster Hall, wearing Their Rich Crowns of
State, and the Nobility their Coronets.

The Nobility, etc. being seated at their respective Tables, which were all
ready furnished before their coming in; The first Course for Their Majesty's
Table was served up with the proper Ceremony, being preceded by the great
Officers, and the High-Constable, High-Steward, and Earl-Marshall; And before
the second Course Charles Dymoke Esquire Their Majesty's Champion, between the
High-Constable and the Earl-Marshall, performed the Challenge: After which the
Heralds proclaimed Their Majesty's Styles.

Dinner being ended, and the whole Solemnity performed with great Splendour and
Magnificence, About Eight in the Evening Their Majesty's returned to White Hall.

A Proclamation declaring WILLIAM and MARY King and Queen of England, to be
King and Queen of Scotland. Edinburgh, April 11. 1689.
WHereas, the Estates of this Kingdom of Scotland, by their Act of the Date of
these Presents, have Resolved, That William and Mary, King and Queen of
England, France, and Ireland, Be, and Be declared King and Queen of Scotland,
to hold the Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdom of Scotland, to them
the said King and Queen, during their Lives, and the longest Liver of Them; and
that the Sole and Full Exercise of the Regal Power, be only in, and Exercised
by the said King, in the Names of the said King and Queen, during their joint
Lives. As also, the Estates having Resolved and Enacted and Instrument of
Government, or Claim of Right, to be presented with the Offer of the Crown, to
the said King and Queen. They do Statute and Ordain, that William and Mary,
King and Queen of England, France and Ireland, be accordingly forthwith
Proclaimed King and Queen of Scotland, at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, by the
Lion King at Arms, or his Deputs, his Brethren Heralds, Macers and Pursevants,
and at the Head-Burghs of all the Shires, Stewarties, Bailliaries, and
Regalities within the Kingdom, by Messengers at Arms. Extracted forth of the
Meeting of the Estates, by me.

J A. DALRYMPLE, Cls.
God save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
The Manner of the King and Queen taking the Scottish Coronation Oath.
May 11. 1689.
THis day being appointed for the public Reception of the Commissioners, viz.
the Earl of Argyle, Sir James Montgomery of Skelmerly, and Sir John Dalrymple
of Stair younger, who were sent by the Meeting of the Estates of Scotland, with
an Offer of the Crown of that Kingdom to Their Majesty's, they accordingly, at
3 of the Clock, met at the Council Chamger, and from thence were Conducted by
Sir Charles Cotterel, Master of the Ceremonies, attended by most of the
Nobility and Gentry of that Kingdom, who reside in and about this place, to the
Banqueting House; where the King and Queen came attended by many Persons of
Quality, the Sword being carried before them by the Lord Cardrosse, (and Their
Majesty's being placed on the Throne under a rich Canopy) they first presented
a Letter from the Estates to His Majesty; then the Instrument of Government;
Thirdly, a Paper containing the Grievances, which they desired might be
Redressed; and Lastly, an Address to His Majesty for turning the Meeting of the
said Estates into a Parliament: All which being Signed by his Grace the Duke of
Hamilton, as President of the Meeting, and read to Their Majesty's, the King
returned to the Commissioners the following Answer.

When I engaged in this Undertaking, I had particular Regard and Consideration
for Scotland, and therefore I did emit a Declaration in relation to That as
well as to this Kingdom, which I intend to make good and effectual to them. I
take it very kindly that Scotland has expressed so much Confidence in and
Affection to Me; They shall find Me willing to assist them in every thing that
concerns the Weal and Interest of that Kingdom, by making what Laws shall be
necessary for the Security of their Religion, Property, and Liberty, and to
ease them of what may be justly grievous to them.

After which, the Coronation Oath was tendered to Their Majesty's, which the
Earl of Argyle spoke word by word distinctly, and the King and Queen repeated
it after him holding Their Right Hands up after the manner of taking Oaths in
Scotland.

The Meeting of the Estates of Scotland did Authorize their Commissioners to
represent to His Majesty, That that Clause in the Oath in relation to the
rooting out of Heretics did not import the destroying of Heretics; And that
by the Law of Scotland no Man was to be persecuted for his private Opinion; And
even Obstinate and Convicted Heretics were only to be denounced Rebels or
Outlawed, whereby their Moveable Estates are Confiscated. His Majesty at the
repeating that Clause in the Oath, Did declare, that He did not mean by these
words, That He was under any Obligation to become a Persecutor. To which the
Commissioners made Answer, That neither the meaning of the Oath, or the Law of
Scotland did import it. Then the King replied, That He took the Oath in that
Sense, and called for Witnesses the Commissioners and others present; And then
both Their Majesty's Signed the said Coronation Oath.

After which the Commissioners and several of the Scottish Nobility kissed Their
Majesty's Hands.

The Coronation Oath of England.
The Archbishop or Bishop shall say,

WIll You solemnly Promise and Swear to Govern the People of this Kingdom of
England, and the Dominions thereto belonging, according to the Statutes in
Parliament agreed on, and the Laws and Customs of the same?

The King and Queen shall say,

I solemnly Promise so to do.

Archbishop or Bishop. Will You to Your Power, cause Law and Justice in Mercy
to be Executed in all Your Judgments.


King and Queen. I Will.


Archbishop or Bishop. Will You to the utmost of Your Power Maintain the Laws
of God, the true Profession of the Gospel, and the Protestant Reformed Religion
Established by Law? And will You Preserve, unto the Bishops and Clergy of this
Realm, and to the Churches committed to their Charge, all such Rights and
Privileges as by Law do or shall appertain unto them, or any of them?


King and Queen. All this I Promise to do.


[After this, the King and Queen laying His and Her Hand upon the Holy Gospels,
shall say,]

King and Queen. The Things which I have here before Promised, I will Perform
and Keep. So help me God.


[Then the King and Queen shall kiss the Book.]

The Coronation OATH of Scotland.
WE William and Mary, King and Queen of Scotland, Faithfully Promise and Swear,
by this Our solemn Oath in presence of the Eternal God, that during the whole
course of Our Life, we will serve the same Eternal God, to the uttermost of Our
Power, according as he has required in his most holy Word, revealed and
contained in the New and Old Testament, and according to the same Word shall
maintain the True Religion of Christ Jesus, the Preaching of his Holy Word, and
the due and right Ministration of the Sacraments, now Received and Preached
within the Realm of Scotland; and shall abolish and gainstand all false
Religion contrary to the same, and shall Rule the People committed to our
Charge, according to the Will and Command of God, revealed in his aforesaid
Word, and according to the Landable Laws and Constitutions received in this
Realm, no ways repugnant to the said Word of the Eternal God, and shall
procure, to the utmost of Our power, to the Kirk of God, and whole Christian
People, true and perfect Peace in all time coming. That we shall preserve and
keep inviolated the Rights and Rents, with all just Privileges of the Crown of
Scotland, neither shall we transfer nor alienate the same; That we shall forbid
and repress in all Estates and Degrees, Reif, Oppression, and all kind of
wrong. And we shall Command and Procure that Justice and Equity in all
Judgments be kept to all Persons without exception, as the Lord and Father of
all Mercies shall be merciful to u^. And we shall be careful to root out all
Heretics and Enemies to the true Worship of God, that shall be Convicted by
the true Kirk of God of the aforesaid Crimes, out of Our Lands and Empire of
Scotland. And we faithfully affirm the things above written by Our Solemn Oath.

God save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
FINIS.

