A COLLECTION Of Curious PICTURES, VIZ. Paintings and Limnings, By the Best
MASTERS.

With many other Curiosities, and Artificial Rarities.

Will be sold by Auction, for the Diversion and Entertainment of the Gentlemen,
Ladies, etc. at Tunbridge-Wells, at the Auction Coffee-House, by the Lower
Walks, near the Wells, on Monday the 4th of this instant August, 1690.

The Sale beginning in the Morning at Eight, and continues till Twelve in the
Forenoon (except Prayer time.)

By Edward Millington.

Catalogues of the Paintings and Limnings, etc. are given to all Gentlemen,
Ladies, etc. at Mr. Pett's, Mr. Brett's, Mr. Westley 's, Apothecaries, at Mr.
Samuel Rose's Shop, over against the Music on the Walks, at Mr. Thompson's
Tavern near the Walks, and at the above mentioned Auction Coffee-House the
place of Sale. 1690.

Conditions of SALE.
I. THat he who bids most is the Buyer, and if any Difference arise which the
Company cannot Decide, then the Painting, etc. shall be Exposed to Sale again.
II. That the Money for the Paintings, etc. so bought, is to be paid at the
place of Sale within three Days after the Sale is ended, but for the
Convenience of such as desire them sooner, constant Attendance for delivery
will be given every Afternoon at the said Place. III. That all Gentlemen,
Ladies etc. after the buying any Painting or Limning, will be pleased to give
in their Names and Lodgings, at the Wells, otherwise to pay the third part of
the Price, or the whole Money presently for them, where upon payment of the
remainder within the time limited the Paintings Limnings, etc. shall be
delivered to them or their Order. IV. That for the Accommodation of such
Gentlemen and Ladies, etc. as shall desire to receive the Paintings, etc. in
London, the Undertaker will deliver them at any place they shall appoint in
London, Southwark, or Westminster* the Buyer paying 1 s. per Pound for every 20
s. so bought. V. That no Person is to bid less than six pence a time, for any
Lot exposed to Sale. VI That for the further Encouragement of all Gentlemen,
Ladies, etc. that live in the Country, the Undertaker proposes for the safer
Conveyance of any Paintings etc. they shall buy, they shall be carefully packed
up at his own proper Charge. VII. That the Paintings, Limning etc. may be
viewed every Forenoon before the Afternoons Sale, by any Persons that please to
repair to the place of Sale.
This Sale will begin on Monday the 4th of August, 1690. at the Auction
Coffee-House, by the lower Walks, near the Wells, from the Hours of 8 to 12 in
the Forenoon (except Prayer time) and will be continued daily the same Hours,
till all the Paintings, Limnings, etc. are Sold.

PAINTINGS and LIMNINGS.
1 A Hanch of Venison 2 a fine sketch in a black frame 3 Tyrconnels Dog finely
done 4 -- another, Ditto 5 a piece of Neptune and Venus 6 a flower-piece 7 a
Landscape with a Fountain 8 a Snow-piece in a gilt frame 9 a Parrot well done 10
-- another, Ditto 11 a fine Head of King William 12 a Woman's head in a gilt
frame 13 a Buck-hunting 14 -- another, Ditto 15 an Old man's head 16 -- another,
Ditto 17 Venus, Cupid and Satyr, finely painted 18 a Young man's face finely
done 19 Martin Luther rarely done 20 King William curiously done 21 a Dogs Head
well done 22 King James rarely done 23 a small head 24 a Vanity piece 25 a
piece with a Flute 26 a Clowns head 27 The destruction of Troy, by Albert Durer
28 St. Coecilia on copper, by Van Baalen 29 a very fine Landscape of Henny 30
Prince Casimir of Friezland, by David Willibord 31 The Duchess of Grafton, by
a Dutch master 32 The Woman of Samaria on copper, by Van Frank 33 a fine piece
with the Bird of Paradise, by an Ital. 34 Tarquin and Lucrece, by Frederick Van
Colbet 35 a Crucifix on copper, by Van Harp 36 a Battle between the Spaniard
and French, by Van Spaline 37 a Satyrs head well done 38 a Blackamoors head, by
the same 39 a Droll in Limning, finely painted 40 a neat piece of Fencers 41 a
Landscape well painted 42 a piece of the taking our Savior 43 a piece of
flowers in water colors 44 a piece of Nativity on copper 45 a neat Limning in
a black and silver frame 46 a head neatly done on copper 47 a piece of Fruit,
curiously done by Guilman 48 a Landscape in water colors 49 a Dog Teacher
neatly done 50 a piece of the Nine Muses 51 a piece of Apes in water colors 52
Abraham and Isaac, by Lemence 53 Count Teckly 54 Solomon's Wisdom, or the
deviding of the Child 55 The Holy Family 56 a fine Landscape 57 a piece of Fish
58 a Mince-pye and Gold Plate 59 Men a fighting, by Haemskirk 60 Diogenes of
Noa 61 a small piece of Fish and Fruit 62 -- another small piece of Fish and
Fruit 63 a piece of the Virgin and Savior, on copper 64 a piece of Honor,
well done 65 Venus and Adonis finely painted 66 The glory of David, rarely done
by an Italian 67 St. John Preaching in the Wilderness 68 Bishop Cranmer rarely
done 69 a piece of Pigeons 70 an Old man's head well done 71 a piece of
Trophies, neatly done by Gaysborow 72 a Carpet and China pot, painted by a
great master 73 a Landscape with Beast, finely painted by a Dutch master 74 The
Offering of Hannibal finely done 75 a fine piece of Still-life, with a Violin,
rarely painted 76 a Madona, finely done in watercolors 77 Virgin Mary and our
Savior, in watercolors 78 Mary Magdalen, finely done in watercolors 79 a
flower-piece after Bougdan 80 -- another, by the same 81 a piece of Vanity
finely done 82 a delicate piece of Fish and Fowl, by Robinson 83 Abraham
Offering Isaac, finely done by a great master 84 a piece of Still-life, with a
Carpet and Jugg, finely done 85 a Landscape finely painted on board 86 a
Fruit-piece curiously painted by Guilman 87 Mutius Scaevola the Roman Soldier,
after Rubens 88 Susanna and the two Elders, well done 89 a Merry-making, in
water colors 90 a Madona curiously done on copper 91 a Nose-gay of Artificial
flowers 92 a sprig of Roses of the same 93 a Paiw of Twiser, in a Tortershell
case 94 a Snuff box of Ivory, with K. Williams picture in silver 95 Four
Artificial flowers 96 a neat Limning, in a silver fiilligreen frame 97 a
Landscape curiously done on copper 98 a Sea-piece upon copper 99 a Droll neatly
done 100 Four neat Closet-pieces in black frames 101 Four Idem, Ditto 102 Our
Savior after Meradaulke 103 a naked Venus and Satyr 104 a Landscape by a good
master 105 a Night-piece by a Dutch master 106 Diana and her Nymphs, by a great
master 107 a Landscape finely painted on board 108 -- another, Ditto 109 an Old
man's head 110 a Hand with a Truncheon, finely painted 111 a Droll-piece finely
done 112 an Head, by a great master 113 a Woman's head well done 114 a Man's
head, by a Dutch master 115 a piece of flowers after Bugdan 116 a Landscape
finely done 117 a Head after Van Dyck 118 a Landscape by a Dutch master 119 a
Landscape by a good hand 120 a Turks Head well done 121 a Flogging piece, by a
good hand 122 St. Jerome finely painted on copper 123 a Head finely painted 124
a delicate Church of Antwerp, done by de Neeve 125 a Man smoking curiously
done 126 a Sea-piece, curiously painted by Peter's 127 a Dutchwomans head finely
done 128 a Droll-piece done in Watercolors 129 a Monkey with Fruit, well done
130 a Swedish Generals Head, finely done 131 a Fools Head, with an Owl, by a
good hand 132 a Man and a Horse at an Inn, on board, by a Dutch master 133 a
Roman History in small, by a Dutch master 134 St. Jerome finely done by Abraham
Blomaert 135 a Carpet with Still life, by Jo. Mars 136 a curious History of K.
Solomon, and Q. of Sheba, by Du Wit, on board 137 an old Head well done 138 a
man a Smoking well done 139 a Droll in Limning finely done 140 a Landscape
neatly done, on copper 141 a man whiping a Child's posteriors, 142 Abraham
offering up his Son Isaac, neatly done 143 a Sketch of the V. Mary, with
several other fig. 144 Two neat closet pieces by a goodhand 145 a Head in
armor 146 a Drinking piece, in water colors 147 St: Ignatius Head curiously
done on copper 148 Our Savior taken from the Cross well done 149 Venus and
Adonis well done 150 a star-Gazer by a good Master 151 The offering of the
three Kings on copper 152 a Landscape finely painted on copper, by a Dutch
master 153 an Italian piece of Fish, rarely painted 154 a Landscape with fine
Buildings, curiously painted by an Italian hand 155 a three quarter Turkey-work
Carpet, finely painted by a great master 156 a Battle-piece incomparably
painted by a Dutch master 157 a Head of K. James the First, curiously painted
on board 158 a fine Turkey-work Carpet and Jugg, rarely painted 159 a Battle of
Wike 160 a Mathematical Study 161 a Winter-piece 162 a piece of Ruins 163 an
Old man kissing his Maid 164 a ruinated Temple 165 Death's head 166 an Old man's
head 167 a small Hunting 168 St. Jerome 169 a Landscape finely painted by Van
Deist 170 a sketch of Christ curing the Lame after Rubens 171 Italian fruit, by
Segnior Daporet of Rome 172 The Duke and Duchess of Austria, done at Rome 173
a Friar hearing confession, by old Haemskirk 174 Frederick Henry Prince of
Orange, a great curiosity 175 Daphnis and Apollo, of Van Deceoyse 176 Van
Dyck's Mistress curiously painted 177 a Land-storm, finely done by Van Deist
178 a Boar-piece by Brower 179 Nathan reproving David, by Ferdinando Quintine
180 a Dog and Teacher, by a good hand 181 Harry and Doll in two pictures 182 a
Story of Aeneas out of Ovid, by a great master 183 a Landscape by a French
master 184 The Lysians transformed into Frogs, a story of Ovid 185 The Countess
of Kent, and Dowager of Darby 186 Rubens Wife, thought to be done by himself
187 The Lady Jean Lane by Wesop 188 a piece of Dogs well done on copper by
Snyders 189 a piece of Goats by the same Master on copper 190 a man with a cock
in Limning, neatly done 191 a piece of flowers, Ditto 192 a Nosegay of
artificial flowers 193 Four flowers of the same 194 a pair of Torter-shell
Twesser 195 a neat Limning in a Filligreen frame 196 Two Japan cups 197 an
Indian Rattle of Ivory 198 Four neat closet pieces 199 a piece of Maskartadoes
in Limning 200 Two patch boxes in, Lignum Vitae Wood 201 One neat head on
Copper 202 Two neat closset pieces 203 a piece of Lions after Snider 104 a Wolf
and Dogs 205 a Bare-baiting 206 -- another, Ditto 207 a Hare finely painted 208
a Bull-baiting 209 a Boar-hunting 210 Monkies smoking Tobacco 211 -- another,
Ditto 212 Two Guinea Piggs 213 a Dog after Lasuliere, in a gilt frame 214 --
another, Ditto 215 a piece of Salmon, and other fish 216 King William and Queen
Mary, in fine frames 217 a piece of King Charles the Second 218 a Landscape
neatly done on board 219 The entrance into the Emperors Garden 220 a Landscape
with a Ruin, by a good hand 221 a Head eatch'd of Van Dycks, in a gold frame
222 a Landscape with a Bridge 223 a Glass of Wine and Oysters 224 a Bridge
curiously painted 225 The 5 Senses in several pictures, by Jacob Van Somer 226
a China Basin with flowers, by a Difciple of Van Helen 227 a Fruit-piece with a
Glass of Wine 228 a Ruin after Griffere 229 a fine Landscape of the River Rhine
230 Jan Vanthelin the great Flower-painter, by Tison 231 a Man at Confession,
by Haemskirk, on copper 232 a very fine Building 233 a Woman at Confession, by
Haemskirk, on copper 234 a very fine Landscape on board, by Breughel 235 Christ
and the Virgin, by an Italian 236 a Flower-pot by Jan Vanthelen 237 Our
Saviors head, by a very fine master 238 an old man's head, by a good hand 239
The Ascension of our Savior, done by Frank 240 a crucifix by the same hand 241
a Friar and a naked woman painted on board 242 a Droll very well painted 243 a
piece of Birds by a good hand 244 a Droll in Limning 245 Four pieces of the
four seasons in black frames n46 a Jesuits head curiously done on copper 247 a
piece of flowers finely done in water colors 248 a Landscape, Ditto 249 a Lady
a whole length on copper 250 a Sea-piece on copper neatly done 251 a Droll
curiously done 252 a piece of fruit rarely pone by Guilman 253 a Landscape of
Hunting, neatly done, by a Dutch master 254 a curious piece of our Savior
going to be Crucified, incomparably painted on copper, and full of figures 255
a piece of Boars a Dancing, finely done on copper 256 a Turkey-work'd Carpet
and Book, 5 foot long, 2 and a half deep, rarely painted by a Dutch master 257
a Fruit-piece with a Lemon, neatly done by a Dutch master 258 Part of the Royal
Family, after Van Dyck 259 a Flower-piece on copper, by Father Segers the
Jesuit 260 Jupiter and Calista finely painted by an Italian 261 Three Cardinal
Virtues on Pannels, by Goltzius 262 a fine Landscape of Wicke 263 a Company of
Monkies on board, by Teniers 264 Perseus and Andromeda after Titian 265 Charon
Ferrying to the Elysium Shades 266 a Lap-dog by Peter Lemence 267 a fine piece
with Grapes, and other Fruit 268 The old Prince of Orange 269 an amorous Fool
of Howsmans 270 St. Peter by a great master, finely painted 271 a Ruin finely
painted, with a prospect of Griffere 272 a man taking a Stow from a Datchwoman,
by Van Gore 273 The Salutation in Limning, by a Disciple of Gibson 274 a
Bawdy House of Haemskirk 275 a fine Landscape of the River Rhine 276 a piece of
Still-life with a Biturn 277 a piece of Flowers rarely done 278 a naked Diana
by a good hand 279 a Still-life curiously painted 280 a Hunting-piece well done
281 a piece of Plate by a good master 282 a Landscape finely painted 283 --
another by the same 284 a piece of flowers well done 285 a delicate Landscape
286 a piece of Fowls finely painted 287 a curious Landscape by a greatemaster
288 a piece of card players by Van Pena 289 an Alchimist incomparable well done
by Teniers 290 a piece of Nativity on copper by Van Balen 291 a neat piece of
flowers on copper by Van Hessen 292 -- another on copper by the same hand 293 a
pot of curious artificial flowers 294 -- another Ditto 295 Four flowers of the
same 296 a pair of fine Twissers in Torter shell 297 Two patch boxes in Ivory
with K. W. and Q. Mary's pictures in silver 298 a neat Limning in a Black and
Silver frame 299 a D^oll in Limning 300 a Head neatly painted on copper 301 a
Madona in Black and white 302 a fine head by a good hand 303 a Droll-piece
finely painted on board 304 a small Landscape, by a good hand 305 Christ and the
Virgin Mary with Joseph, well done 306 a Squiril finely painted 307 a Landscape
finely painted on board 308 a fine piece of Jarrs, finely done by Dobson 309 a
Fisherman finely painted on board, by a Dutch master 310 a Fisherwoman by the
same hand 311 a Man fishing, by a great master 312 Two small Landskips neatly
painted 313 a Droll-piece by a Dutch master 314 a piece of stone-work neatly
painted 315 a Head of King Charles the second finely painted 316 a small
Bacchanal, by a Dutch master 317 a flower-piece curiously painted 318 a piece
of a Gammon of Bacon, by a great master 319 a Dutch Landscape, finely painted
320 The heads of the Reformers by a good hand 321 a Landscape with a Shepherd
and Shepherdess, finely done 322 Christ upon the cross, curiously painted by a
Dutch master 323 a fine Landscape with a stone figure 324 a Carpet curiously
done by J. Mars 325 a rare piece of Boors a fighting, by a Dutch master 326 a
Droll by old Haemskirk, on board 327 an Old man's head, finely done by
Raembrant, on board 328 a fine piece of a Man a smoking, by Honthoist 329 a
Madona, curiously done by Abraham Bloamert 330 a Hanch of Venison, by a great
master 331 a Fruit-piece, very finely done 332 a Boy with a Jacknapes, by a
Dutch master 333 William Summers, Je^^er to Harry the 8th, by a good master 334
Marsenello Fisherman of Naples 335 a Folly of Youth, by a Dutch master 336 a
Pigg and Neats-Tongue, neatly painted 337 Two Landskips, by a Dutch master,
after Griffere 338 a Woman's head finely painted 339 a Droll in Limning 340 a
neat Closet piece 341 a Boy with a Sword, curiously done 342 a Droll well
painted 343 a neat Limning, in a black and silver frame 344 a Madona curiously
painted on copper 345 a flower-piece, curiously done in Limning 346 a Drinking
piece, Ditto 347 a Landscape in the same 347 Father Moz the Jesuit, that was
Executed in K. Charles I. time 348 a Droll-piece finely done 349 a curious
piece of Hawking 350 a Dutch Doctor by Le Creeque 351 a Landscape neatly done on
copper 352 a piece of Fruit with a Squiril and China Dish, finely painted by
Guilman 353 a large Sea-piece, finely done by a Dutch master 354 a piece of
Still-life, with a Turky-work'd Carpet and Book, by a great master 355 Pyramus
and Thisbe, finely painted on copper 356 a piece of a Book and a Medal, finely
done 357 a Landscape finely painted on copper 358 King William finely painted by
a Dutch master 359 Jupiter and Diana, by Gulielma Rosate 360 a House on Fire,
by Shadanas 361 King William and Queen Mary, by a Dutch master 362 a Young man's
head, on board, by a Dutch master 363 a Woman lighting a Candle, by Bloamert
364 a Landscape with Evening Song, by Streeter 365 a Tiger with Whelps, by Lucas
Snyers 366 a Hare-hunting, by Hondius 367 King James the First of England 368
St. Jerome by Mr. Castro 369 a Ballad-singer, by the same Master 370 a Landscape
curiously painted after Loten 371 -- another by the same hand 372 a Shepherd
and Shepherdess finely done, silver Snuff Box 373 a Snuff Box finely painted
with Plenty 374 a Patch-box finely wrought in silver 375 a Ladies Head finely
done in Limning, by a great master 376 a Collation-piece curiously painted 377
a Droll finely done on copper, by Haemskirk 378 a Sea-storm finely painted on
board 379 a fine piece of Prospective, of the Palace of Venetia, by an Italian
master, on board 380 a rare piece of our Savior setting in Glory, by an
Italian master, on board 381 Queen Elizabeth by a Dutch master 382 a
Droll-piece of Ballad-singers, by Mr. Castro^ 383 Four Flower-pieces in
Watercolors 384 a piece of Dogs and Birds, done by Griffiere 385 a Witch
raising the Devil by salt Leven 386 a Droll in Limning 387 a Snuff Box finely
done in limning 388 Ditto in silver 389 a Nosgay of artificial flowers 390 a
delicate basket of artificial flowers and fruit 391 4 artificial flowers 392 4
more Ditto. 393 4 neat Closet pieces 394 4 more Ditto 395 a fine Head 396 a
fine piece of Still-life 397 6 ^eat Closet pieces 398 6 more Ditto 399 a Droll
well done, by a good master 400 a Woman Piping, after Brower 401 a head of the
present Queen Mary, finely done 402 Cleopatra by a great master 403 Doctor
Faustus by a Dutch master 404 a piece of Beast, by a Dutch master 405 a
Bating-piece, by a Dutch master 406 a Watch and Pomegranate, finely painted 407
a Flower-piece after Bogdan 408 a Ruin after Polinbourg 409 a head of K.
Charles I. finely painted on copper 410 a small Vanity-piece well painted 411 a
piece of Seals and Medal finely done 412 a piece of Pigeons curiously painted
413 Two pieces of Grapes in the same 414 Cleopatra in small, finely done in
Limning 415 a curious Dutch Lady, with a Dog and Parrot 416 -- another Lady
with Music, by the same 417 a curious piece of burning Towns, finely done 418
a Dead Christ, with the V. Mary, and other figures 419 a Man smoking Tobacco,
by Mr. Castro 420 a Comical Fellow with a Cup 421 a curious Snuff Box, with the
offering of the 3 Kings, in silver 422 -- another, with the picture of K.
William and Q. Mary, in the same 423 a fine Patch-box finely painted, with a
Madona in the same 424 -- another fine Patch-box, with a Roman story, in the
same 425 St. Jerome finely painted 426 a small Landscape, by a good master 427
-- another by the same master 428 a Droll-piece, viz. Supernaculum 429 a
curious Fruit-piece of Montingo 430 The Day of Judgment, finely painted on
copper 431 an Old man's head finely done by Haemskirk 432 William the first
Prince of Orange, curiously done by a Dutch master 433 a Madona, finely painted
by a Dutch master 434 a curious Sea-piece, by the old Vander Velden 435 A
Sea-piece finely done by Fooket 436 a neat limning 437 a church finely painted
438 a landscape neatly done 439 Van Dikes Head finely painted 440 a laughing
head finely painted 441 a neat sea-piece 442 Our Savior before Pilate on board
443 a neat limning in a black and silver frame 444 Salutation well done on
copper, by young Frank 445 a Ladies head neatly painted on silver 446 a neat
limnning in a silver filligreen frame 447 a piece of Fruit finely done by
Guilman 448 a Venetian Palace curiously done 449 a Sea-piece finely done by
Capello 450 Hagar and the Angel finely done on copper 451 The Ruins of Julius
Caesar's Palace, finely done by Paulus de Vaux 452 Mary Magdalen rarely done by
Oliver 453 a true draught of Smyrna, by the famous Griffere 454 a piece of
Pigeons by Vander Hagen 455 an incomparable Landscape done by Van Deist 456 a
curious Italian Landscape, supposed to be done by Salvator Rosa 457 an
incomparable Landscape, done by Van Deist, the figures and buildings by
Griffere, fit for a Hall or Staircase 458 Don Scotus. by Lemott 459 a curious
piece of Flowers, by Montingo 460 a Sea-Triumph, in Watercolors 461 a
Landscape, by a good hand 462 St. Paul, rarely done, by an Italian master 463
Four Caesar's Heads, in small, with Glasses 464 K. William and Q. Mary, by a
good master 465 Two Ballad singers, by Mr. Castro 466 a Lady in her Chamber the
Drapery, finely done 467 a Sea-piece, neatly painted with Fish buyers 468 K. W
and Q. Mare, in silver finely done 469 Solomon and the Queen of Sheba well
painted 470 a fruit piece finely painted by Guilman 471 a Landscape finely
painted by a Dutch master 472 a night piece with a Conjurer neatly done 473 a
fruit piece with a Loaf well painted, by a Dutch master 474 a piece of
still-life with a carpet delicately painted 475 a sea-piece finely painted on
board 476 a small Battel-piece, finely painted 477 a piece of Still-life, by
Robinson 478 a Landscape, finely painted by a Dutch master 479 a piece of fruit,
with a Lobster, by a great master 480 a Landscape by a good hand 481 -- another,
by a great master 482 The Virgin Mary and St. Ann, finely done on copper by Van
Baulue 483 A curious Landscape finely done on copper 484 Perseus and Andromoda,
delicately done in Limning, in a Gold Frame, by Taxess 485 A Bask^t of
Artificial Flowers and Fruit 486 Four Artificial Flowers 487 A piece of
Tortoiseshell Twezers 488 Mary Magdalen curiously done on copper 489 A neat
Limning 490 2 Patch-boxes in Lignum Vitae 491 4 ueat Closet-pieces 492 4 more
Ditto 493 a neat Sea-piece 494 An old Head 495 A neat Kloset piece
FINIS.

