A WORD IN SEASON TO ALL IN AUTHORITY. WITH Weighty CONSIDERATIONS what
PERSONS, PRACTICES and THINGS, does chiefly cause DIVISION and CONTENTION,
RENDING of KINGDOMS, and DISTRESS of NATIONS.

AS ALSO, A Plain DISCOVERY of those THINGS and that MINISTRY, that will bring
BLESSINGS and UNITY, with Deliverance from BONDAGE, into LIBERTY; and instead
of STRIFE, WARS and FIGHTINGS, RIGHTEOUSNESS, RECONCILIATION and PEACE in the
Land of our Nativity.

Published by a Lover of Truth and the Kingdoms Peace, J. C.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the sign of the Black-Spread-Eagle, and
Windmill in Martins near (...).

A Word in Season.
YOu Rulers and Chief in Authority, I have Written this unto you, that you
might* Read and understand, what and who is the cause of Strife, and War, and
Division, and Rending of Kingdoms, Governments and Commonwealths, and causing
Distraction amongst people, and Heart-burning, and Murder, and Revenge one
Brother against another, and one Neighbor against another. And farther that no
Ruler not Governor, nor Government can be Established, nor firmly settled,
until these things are removed, which is the Ground of Unsettledness, and which
has unsettled Kings and Parliaments, and divided them and dashed them one
against another.

Now they that Preach for Hire, and Divine for money, whose maintenance does
depend upon their Office, and their Office does depend upon Persons, and Forms,
and Times; so that if their Office be taken away, their Maintenance fails; and
if their Form be disliked, their Office comes in question, and their
Maintenance in danger; and through these Men, and these Things have been the
cause of all the late War, and expense of Blood and Treasure. And all People
who have trusted in them, have been deceived by them, and cheated, and
betrayed, and brought to misery, whilst they have feasted and been ready to
turn with all Times to serve themselves.

For now consider, that before the Wars, when Idolatry and Superstition grew
amongst people under Episcopacy, (so called) and profaneness, and
licenciousness became tolerated by that generation, and all the conscientious
zealous people for God became persecuted, and hated and made a prey, so that it
were a hard matter for any man to live without suspicion of (...) dangerous,
who made Conscience of any thing, especially in the worship of God; But they
who were Lovers of Pr^de and wantonness, letters up of May-poles,
Bull-baitings, Revels. Wakes, and such like; by which many people did assemble
together to be drunk, and to Riot and Blaspheme the Name of the most Holy God.
And if the Spirit of the Lord was grieved in any to see these things committed,
and a Testimony borne against it by any) How were such made a reproach, their
goods spoiled by the Officers of the then called Spiritual Courts? and that
kind of Ministry that tolerated and partaked in such wickedness, they were
the men set up, countenanced and entrusted, and bore all the Rule amongst
people every where; and many years was the Spirit of the Lord grieved, and his
righteous Soul vexed with these abominations, and often called them to return,
but they would not hear; but hardened their hearts in their wickedness, and went
on in their Rebellion against God, until his w^ath waxed hot against them, and
the Contest began between the King and the Parliament, and increased until a
great War began, as is well and b^ woeful experience unto many to this day
remembered; and the Bishops being near unto the KING, and well discerning that
if by force they were not able to uphold their Office they must fail, and their
great yearly Revenue, which depended upon their Office would be lost, and they
not doubting their strength, because of the KING, and the greatness of their
number, forgot God, who saves, not by many, nor by few; and then they preached
up the KING, and their Office, their Form of their Service, upon (...) of
Damnation to all that should resist them, calling them Rebels, and Traitors,
and Heriteks that should oppose.

Another sort of Clergymen, who were then something more refined, and were
indeed many of them more zealous and conscientious, they prayed against the
prosperity of the KING, and his Party, and against the Bishops, with the rest
of their Train, and so when one Blessed, another Cursed; and so men according
to their affections sided, and both were upon pain of damnation, and here the
Leaders of the people caused them to err, and many thousands that were thus
led were destroyed; and with great difficulty did the War go on for a long
season, and the victory inclining to neither; But the Army of the King and his
party grew numerous, and still they who were called the Ministers, ceased not
on either part to Preach up the interest they had undertaken, though never so
much blood might be shed in the prosecution thereof, until the King and that
party was worsted and overthrown: And then some began to see that it was not
honesty, but interest that made them so eager; So then they called Ministers of
the Parliaments part, many of them seeing that their gain was in danger by
reason of that prevailing party which then had overthrown the King and his
Army, they (to wit the Ministers so called) began to drive on new designs, so
that they can never cease fomentinng of division, except their interest be at
top and they themselves always divided amongst themselves, by reason of their
great number, that some of them always wants room, so that they have leisure
and liberty, ability and opportunity to devise new stratagems to carry on new
devisions, that they may supplant one another to make room.

But then when the Army had gotten the upper hand, and that the General begins
to appear as if he might be at the Stern, and that he countenanced those who
at that time the Lord had opened their eyes, and they discovered the rottenness
of them called Ministers, then they set themselves as it were wholly against
him by all manner of means; Laboring by Plotting, Preaching, and Printing
against them, believing in their minds, that if he should once be at rest, and
in full power, he would certainly have plucked down their Tithes: So from time
to time, the fear of loosing their great income on the one side, and the Pride
and Ambition of the other side, they never in no time want matter wherewith to
blow the ^ire of contention, still crying out against one or other sort of
people that stand in their way, and so laboring to remove them out of their
way by cruelty toward them, having time and opportunity to fill peoples hearts
and minds with evil, by Preaching up the wickedness of their own hearts,
laying it upon others whom they will not suffer to answer for themselves, by that
means laying such loads of bitter Persecutions upon people, that have forced
many to be Enemies to those against whom they had no thought of evil, for who
is there but will stand for his life? So in that time when the then General
had subdued them all, and brought them into subjection, how soon did they Court
him with Flatteryes, endeavoring to promote him to the highest honor, and so
blinded his judgment, and he suffering them to breath a while, and not
executing judgment speedily, their hearts had another mischief to devise, and
so then preaching up his Government as Jure divino, and then both they that had
joined with the King, and stirred up people to fight for the King, and for the
Service Book, and the rest of that stuff, and them also who had fought against
the King and Service Book, they soon became one, and they preach up Oliver to
be Protector, and they all make use of his Authority, they took the Engagement
against King or House of Lords, and so then he was the only man, and this was
the only Government; But still there was a few people, who still saw their
deceit and Treacherous dealing with all sorts, and these could not cease to
make mention of it, their souls being grieved with their abominable deceit, and
then they make it their whole business in all places to stir up the Rulers and
especially the Protector to cut off such from the earth; and they labor to
create Parliaments to their mind, and all sorts of Rulers to their mind, never
ceasing by all means to cut off this people: But Oliver the Protector being by
the Righteous hand of God cut off, because he had not executed the thing for
which the Lord raised him up, but suffered the people of the Lord to be sorely
afflicted, and the same oppression to remain upon the free people of this
Nation as before. His Son Richard he came in his stead, how then did the men
called Ministers hasten with their addresses from their several Towns and
Corporations to congratulate the young Protector, and to give unto him the
greatest style that could be thought upon? so that to some he was the Orient
Star that was risen to give them light, and such like; and so having lifted up
the young man's heart, they then thought themselves secure, and then they with
him call a Parliament according to their own hearts desire, whom they thought
were fitted to do the work which they long had desired, but when they had as it
were brought that work to maturity, that was to have cut off all those from the
earth) which would not bow to their Image, the Lord overturned their Counsels
in one The old Parliament.
day, and brought up another people in their stead, into whose hands the Lord
delivered them; for that they (many of them) had long cried against the
Protectors Oppression, and Usurpation, and had promi^ed to execute the judgment
which God expected should be done upon those who had kept his people in
bondage; but they likewise forgot the day of their adversity, in which they
cried unto the Lord, and he heard them; and they likewise began to lay more
heavy Yoaks upon Gods people, Voted up Tithes,
and the Lord overturned them likewise, and set up another sort; The Committee
of Safety.
but their hearts being not right in the sight of God, and had no mind to
execute his judgment upon these who still held the people of God in bondage,
the Lord gave them no rest, but brought in their Enemies upon them as a flood,
his long-suffering being at an end, and the measure of their transgression
finished, he has now delivered them into the hands of their Enemies; that as
the Lord sent his Servants to cry unto them, and to wa^ne them, and they had no
regard unto the sufferings of his people, yet the Lord often warned all sorts
of them of the evil day that is now come upon them, and they would not hear,
nor regard the cry of the Oppressed; but the men called Ministers, they preached
peace unto them, and said no evil should happen unto them, and they cried that
the Lord had not sent these men, but they were deluded, until sudden
destruction came upon them, as is seen, even pain as upon a Woman in Travel.

And now what is become of these men called Ministers who (as I said) before
the war, and in the war, Preached and Prayed against the King? who made it as
it were their work, and the Cause of God, to f^ght against the King; the same
men against the Protector, and for the Protector, who were so zealous for the
Government of the Protector, that they imprisoned, and whipped, and cried out
in the ears of Magistrates where ever they came, against a poor despired
people, that they were Enemies to the Government, and were suspected that they
met together to plot against the Government (of the Protector I mean,) and
stirred up the Rulers and they got Soldiers, and they (called Ministers) with
the Soldiers and rude people brake their meetings, and accused them as being
dangerous to the Government, having a design against the Government, and so
cast into prison, and all this in Zeal to the Government of the Protector, and
these were Ministers (so called) of all sorts, as well of them who had been
formerly for the King, and those who had likewise been against him, were become
one for the government, and one against the people of God, which discovered
their deceit, and the Protector, as its well known, and his government, was the
only Man, and Government that stood in opposition both to the Person and
Government of the King; yet all this, and much more that might be said, was
then done by that sort of men in behalf, and by virtue of that Government, and
these are the men that now (as it were with one heart, and with one consent,)
Preach up, and cry up the King.

O you that are now Rulers; Are these men to be trusted? Are these men to be
followed as leaders? Are these men to be regarded as to teach the way to
eternal life? Are they not guilty of all the bloodshed in these Nations? Can
any Government be secure whilst they are the men set up, and their ways upheld
after such a manner as now it is? Did not the King and that party follow them,
and were guided by them in their Council, and had their blessing, and were
taught by them, that they were in the Truth, and that they should prosper? And
did they not prove false Prophets unto them, and were deceived by them, and led
into destruction? Whereas on the contrary, if the King had removed the Yoke off
from the Consciences of people, and had set peoples Consciences free, and have
had his ear open to have heard the cry of them who were afflicted by the
Cruelty of the then Bishops, and their Courts and Clergy, and had eased the
burden from off their shoulder; why then might not the King have lived in
peace, and ruled over the people, and gone to the grave in peace? And again,
after, if the Parliament had not fought to inslave this people, and have
brought a greater yoke upon the Consciences of those who sought after God in
sincerity of heart, might not they have remained, and their names been
honorable, and they gone to their graves in peace? and likewise the Protector,
if he had done the thing he promised and engaged for, and had broken the Yoke
of the Oppressor, and removed the Oppression, to have taken away Tithes, and
set the consciences of all people in their Worship to God free; might not his
Kingdom been established, and his Name been perpetually honorable? For now
consider, that it was never Names, as Kings, or Judges, or Elders, or such like
that the Lord owned, not the name of the thing one more then another, but the
thing it self, that is to say, the Ruler called by what name he would; he that
ruled for God, neither the right as by succession, or not so, if he ruled for
God, he established him; as Saul whom the Lord chose, yet when he did not obey
the voice of God, the Lord rent the Kingdom from him, and gave it unto his
Neighbor, for it is Righteousness and just Judgment, and the breaking the
staff of the Oppressor, it is this that establishes the King and the
Kingdom, and that King whose heart is wholly set to seek the Lord in
sincerity, and to establish judgment and Justice in the earth, and to remove
oppression, It is he and his Kingdom that shall be Established, and this
cannot be done, as long as the men called Ministers are thus set over the
people, and can exact by force so large a maintenance from them, for there is
no sort of people whatsoever that can carry on Plots and designs to overturn
Governments as they can, for they being scattered over all the Nation in every
Parish, having so large a maintenance, they have leisure, and know the minds
of every person in the Parish, how they stand affected, and to whom, and they
themselves under pretense of Fasting and Praying have opportunity to meet, and
by that know the minds of every one amongst themselves, how they stand
affected, and by this means they can Poison a whole Nation, and leaven them
with malice, against whom they please; for as is the Priest so is the People,
or the most of them, who are their followers, and so then if their interest be
upheld, they will uphold them that uphold it, whatsoever they are, they will
preach peace unto them, and promise them prosperity, though the judgments of
the Lord be at the door, and their interest are so differring one unto
another, that they one stand in the destruction of the other, for the Old
Protestant so called, he cannot stand with the Papist, nor the Presbyter with
the Protestant, nor the Independent with either, and the pride of their hearts,
and the greediness of their gain, that causes them that they always envy one
another, for because of the greatness of their profit and pride of life, and
the ease of their flesh, there is so many that seek after it, and so this
blinds the minds of them, (the God of us World) and so they cry up that man and
that Government that will stand for them, and uphold their gain though to the
destruction of all others besides themselves.

So it is altogether inconsistant with the safety of the people, and the well
being of the Ruler or Rulers, the upholding and maintaining a Ministry by a
forced maintenance, It oppresses the poor, burtheneth the Conscience, stirs
up strife and Contention, brings Gods wrath upon people, and that is the reason
that so many of the worst of People get to be Ministers, because whether they
be good or bad, if they love Pride and Wantonness, and Lust, and Pleasure and
Luxury, here if they can but use a means, either directly or indirectly to get
the place, they know their strength, whatsoever they are, or whatsoever they
do, they are sure to be provided for, having a Law to enforce it; and so many
people where there is any fear of God (though they are such as follow that kind
of Ministry, yet when they see such a one loose and profane) they grieve and
murmour in their minds, and Gods Witness in their Conscience testifies both
against them and their Minister, and troubles them, and so here is fear and
doubt, and then they seek abroad for satisfaction, then the Ministers (so
called) rages and he stirrs up the rest of the people against the man who is
not satisfied in his Conscience under the Ministry of (it may be) such an
Ignorant, Blind, Profane, Covetous, Proud, Unruly, Wanton Wicked man (as a
Minister) who they believe can never lead them, or reach him the way to Heaven,
who himself never went a step therein, but is in the broad way to eternal
destruction, and so if the blind lead the blind (he knows) both must fall
together: So then the man called Minister, he pre^ches to the rest of his
ignorant profane Congregation, and he sets their minds on fire of hell
against him, and then he complains of him to Authority, and he has enough to
join with him to be evidence against him the poor man, and then under the
Notion of an Heretic, or a dangerous person or principle to the Government,
they proceed against him, and rack and torture him; and then all them in whose
hearts there is any feeling or compassion or honesty, they conclude this man
does not deserve this, and that both Ruler and Minister has not dealt well to
punish after such a manner such an Innocent man, and say in their hearts, if
this be their Law, how shall we live amongst them? And here division arises
and increases, and the bond of peace is broken; but if the Magistrate be such
a one as has any zeal or tenderness toward God, and will not join with the
Minister (so calledt) o invent a way, and wrest a Law to punish the poor
dissatisfied man, but perceives the Minister to be such a one as rather
deserves punishment, Then the Minister rages in his mind against him, and he
secretly devises mischief against him, and goes to others whose ears he thinks
will be open, and he leavens their hearts against the other Magistrate, and
then what one will punish, or who one of them will punish, another will uphold
and in time seek a remedy, and complains one against another to him or them
that are over them, and here the bond of Government is broken and here begins
strife, division and contention, and heart-burning, and waiting for iniquity
one against another, and so into rents, and parties, and siding and still the
Ministry blows the fire, and drives on furiously, and it may be, get such a
one to be cast out, and then he is dissatisfied, and many more, they see it is
but for doing justice that he is so dealt withal, and then people fear how
they shall live or be governed, when honest men are cast out of favor, and
then whosoever is found to question such things, and the Minister (so called)
hear thereof, he begins to threaten again, and here is a Yoke which cannot be
borne, but people will break it, though they break themselves with it; And
after this manner have Nations, Countries, Kingdoms, and Governments, been
plucked up; and now I appeal to any unbiassed-man, whose understanding is any
thing open, whether these things, and much more that might be spoken of this
nature be not true? and whether the men called Ministers be at any time with
any Government all satisfied? and whether their siding do not lead people to
side? and whether there has been any war in a Nation and the Ministry (so
called) had not the chief hand in it? and whether after one party is worsted,
they are not the first that comply to that person or Government which before
they might preach it damnable to join with? and whether they be not the most
Treacherous, Perfideous, Changable, Deceitful people of any sort of men? and
whether the ground of all this be not the large maintenance which is settled
upon the Office, and so a Law to force it? This makes them afraid on the one
hand, lest such a Party will pluck it down, and so stir, up strife amongst the
other, because they will hold it up; and when that Party can hold no longer,
then they are the first that turn to the other, because they may be by them
held up; for if they may be held up, there is no fear but to make them, or the
most of them of any Religeon that the Powers will establish; as was manifestly
seen in the time of Edward the 6th. and Queen Mary and Elizabeth, where many
turned from being Protestants to Papists, and from Papists to Protestants; and
in our days from the Common Prayer to the Directory, and from the Directory to
the Common Prayer; and this is well known, The same that Preached up a King for
a Maintenance, Preached up a Commonwealth for a Maintenance, and a Protector
for a Maintenance, and now a King for a Maintenance: And so I say again, It is
altogether inconsistant with the safety of the people, and wel-being of the
Ruler, or Rulers, the upholding or maintaining a Ministry by a forced
Maintenance.

So then the way to preserve the people in Peace and safety, and the Government
in security from danger, and to establish it, is this, To give unto every
judgment (so called) tolleration in the matter of his Worship toward God.

And that every Society, Congregation, or judgment among themselves maintain
their own Ministry, in and after what manner themselves can or shall agree
amongst themselves, and maintain their Places of Worship themselves amongst
themselves; so no one sort of people should be burdened, nor their spirits
grieved and vexed by another: But this, in this particular fulfils the Law and
the Prophets, in doing as they would be done by; for the conscience of every
individual man and woman ought to be free unto God, and none to have or claim
Lordship over another conscience, and so that Government that settles this,
the people under it (every one) watches for the good of them or him that
governs; because by him, or them, they are kept in peace, and their consciences
free, and so this, every sort of people, if they did but once taste a while,
all people would delight therein; especially those who fear God, and cannot be
injurious, nor seek the hurt of their Neighbors; and here every one might sit
under his own Vine, and under his own Fig Tree, and this is so reasonable a
thing, and so agreeable to the Scripture of truth, and to the Law of God
written in the heart, that if it were put in practice, all mouths would be
stopped, and envy durst not open her mouth, and strife would cease, and love
and unity amongst people would grow and increase, and the Revengeful Murderous
nature amongst people would be starved and die within them; because they would
want the matter, which is the Law, which forces the conscience to feed it. And
all they that now mind earthly things, that serve not the Lord Jesus Christ,
but their own bellies, would be stopped, and have nothing to do, but to seek
some honest calling, in which they might labor, and be serviceable in the
Creation: And here, none but such who in conscience and zeal toward God would
be Ministers; for there is many who are now called by a great maintenance would
then be without a call to Preach; for this sort of men do no good at all to
people, who labor for their Bellies. Who do they turn from the evil of their
ways? But on the contrary they are so perfideous and changeable, Preaching up
so much Faction and Division, according to their several Fancyes, that they
cause people to be Truce Breakers; for whatsoever Government comes that will
serve their interest, and will do what they will have them, kill whom they
would kill, and save alive those whom they would save alive, that is preached
up: But if any sort or faction of them be not countenanced, as that they cannot
be, for one must go down, if the other go up; then they set themselves against
that Authority, and secretly begins to smite, and so the same Government which
they preach up, and all Traitors and Rebels which shall deny it, in a little
time they Preach, and cry all Traitors and Rebels that hold it up: And thus the
people under them, are carried by them.

For now, were it not that there is so large a maintenance settled upon them by
a Law, which yet depends upon Authority; they would not be such Medlers with
Authority, and cause such Rents and Divisions amongst people; but because they
are still in fear of losing that, or that Authority will countenance those whom
they fear, but if the Law were taken away that forces the Maintenance, then
they that Preach, would Preach the Kingdom of God to people, and turn people
toward god, that their hearts might be opened toward the Lord, and to his
truth, that they that minister, might seek that which is lost, and which is
driven away, and not seek the Fleece, and seek to kill and destroy; and so when
people were brought to God, and returned from their lost estate, they who were
the Lords Messengers need not fear a maintenance, For the Lord cares for
Sparrows, and feeds the Ravens; and so these have little faith who cannot
believe him, and cast their care upon him.

And have they not proved false Prophets, Antichrists, Deceivers, to all ^o t^
of Powers that has been within these few years? Did not they Prophecy Peace
and Prosperity to the King and his Party, and did they not deceive him? And
when they were overthrown, and the King suffered, and his Friends; did not they
start aside and preach Peace unto the Parliament against the Army, calling them
Rebels; and did they not deceive them likewise? And then did not they turn to
the Army and Protector, and Preached Peace and Prosperity to them, and deceived
them likewise? And now are they not turned to the King, and Preach Peace unto
Him, and set all their old servants at naught? Surely there is not a more
dangerous thing to the settling of a Government, then the setting up of a forced
Maintenance; and that is the thing that the Lord expected should long since
been done away: The continuance of which Oppression, and the many corrupt Laws
made and continued to infringe the LIBERTIES of the CONSCIENCES of the free
people of this Nation in their Worship toward God, has been the Cause of so
many, and so great Overturnings; neither can there be any true peace and
settlement in these Nations, until these things are removed out of the way.

For if a people were left free in their consciences to worship God according
unto that which God makes manifest, then all occasion of strife touching
Religeon were ended, and every one that fears God satisfied, and the breach
made up: And likewise, if all forced Maintenance of Ministers were taken off,
then both People and Ministry were free, and so that occasion of strife would
cease, and that breach made up, and here every one would watch for the good of
him or them that govern.

And so such a one, on whom the Lord laid a necessity to preach, would preach,
but they that preach only for a maintenance, who are not Servants of Christ,
but serve themselves which are the cause of Strife, Debute, Division, and
Contention, as is before showed, their work would be ended, and then people
would be turned from the evil of their ways, because they that preach would be
in Gods Counsel, and in his power; for now what ever people do imagine, they
that will not preach without a maintenance provided and settled by a Law, these
preach for a maintenance, and so they preach themselves and not Christ Jesus
the Lord, neither are they his Servants, nor Ministers, nor sent of Him,
neither serve they Him but their Bellys, and never can teach the way to life,
or bring people into the way, but keep people out of the way, though they may
have many enticing words which man's wisdom teaches; for every one that enters
into Gods Kingdom must be borne again of the Spirit, and he that is borne
again must be begotten by the immortal living Word; now he that preaches for
a maintenance, serves himself, and is not Christ's Servant, not entrusted with
his Message, but goes in his own Message, and abuses his name for a
maintenance, and the living mortal word he has not, which begets the birth
that enters into Gods Kingdom, because he never sent him, and so people are
not profited, but are kept out of the way to life by them, which has the
letter to get a maintenance, but has not the spirit which gives life.

And now I have not instanced the several Governments and overturnings, either
to justify or condemn persons, or to meddle with that, as in relation to the
great transactions which has been in these few years; But this that they who
now are in Power, who have seen and felt what has been brought to pass that
they might understand what the Ground and Cause is why these things has been
thus brought to pass, that so if the Lord give them understanding, they may not
split themselves upon the same Rock, which others has; for I do not look unto
men, who have been the instruments, but unto the Lord, who has all power in
his hands, who in his Righteousness and judgment for his own glory, has
brought about these things; for I do believe that the judgments of the Lord are
Just and Righteous altogether, and therefore, because of the multitude of
trangressions of this Nation, and because the King and his party lightly
regarded the cry of the oppressed, whose Consciences (which is the Lords
^rerogative alone) was oppressed, and greater Yoaks preparing by cruel Laws; I
say because of these things was the hand of the Lord stretched out against
them, and the party, who chiefly opposed him, being in their hearts no better
than the other; therefore they both long were a scourge one unto another, and
to the Nation; therefore did the Lord raise up another party, whom both the
other hated, who were contemptible and inconsiderable, who as Instruments in
the hand of God did Wonders, and overcame both, as is well known: But afterward
they forgot the Lo^^ likewise, and turned against him, and did not perform the
Vows and Premises which they had made into the Lord in the day of their
Distress, but corrupted themselves with the same abominations with which they
were corrupted, whom the Lord cast out before them, and suffered many of those
corrupt Laws to continue in force, which they had many times (in their
distress) promised the Lord, that they would take out of the way: To wit, That
they would set the Consciences of all people free toward God, and remove the
great oppression of a forced Maintenance for Minister; Which whilst they did in
any measure persist in, the Lord wonderfully delivered them, and cut off those
that rose up against them: But when power was put into their hands, and they
did not do those things, but became corrupt, and oppression, and Pride, and
vanity, superstition, and Idolatry grew and increased; yet the Lord sent his
Messengers, calling them early, and sending them often, warning them in the
peril of their lives; but they regarded them not, but ill rewarded the Lords
Messengers by many cruel and hard Imprisonments, and by making yet heavier
Yoaks for their consciences: Yet the long-suffering of the Lord remained
toward them, and not any of those Powers which the Lord overthrew, but he has
sent this Messengers to warn them, and to tell them in plain words what he was
about to do; which things are in great measure come to pass, that all might
know that the Lord has a Prophet in the Land, and likewise that they might
hear and fear, and learn Righteousness.

And now thus far has the Lord wrought, and wonderfully brought those things
to pass, that every eye might see, that his own hand has done it, that he has
not suffered the sound of the weapons of war to be heard, what is it that the
Lord does now requite of the men of this Generation? Friends, I beseech you in
the fear of the Lord, consider whether that the things which are now wrought
amongst you principally and most of all be that which the Lord expects, or
whether he has brought you up over your Enemies, because you are more
Righteous then they? or because of their unrighteousness the Lord has
delivered them into your hands, that you might execute his judgments upon them
for their Treachery toward him and his people? and whether the same God has
not still reserved all power in his own hands, and can at his pleasure cast you
down, as well as lift you up? for this I say unto you in the fear of God, think
not that these whom the Lord has del^vered into your hands, were greater
sinners then you, but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Do you
believe that the Lord takes delight in setting up of May-Poles, and for so many
thousands to gather together in so many places, with whooping, shouting,
drinking, cursing and swearing, and all manner of Wantonness and
Licentiousness? Is the Lord God honored by these things? is the King honored
by any of this? Consider, has not the Lord visited in judgment this Nation, as
I have before showed, and overturned the workers thereof in former days, and
do you think he now approves of it? Do not deceive your selves, God is not to
be mocked; and do you think now since the Lord has overturned those who
formerly has afflicted us, as he had promised, and is rewarding them according
to their works? Do you think that you do God service to kill us? Take heed of
bringing any of our innocent blood upon you.

And therefore this I say unto the King, who is now proclaimed, and that party
who has been for him constantly, I say unto them, that we ought to be
protected under him in peace and safety, and in equity to have these just
things granted which we stand for; for now ever since the death of his Father,
we have been as well as him and them sufferers under the powers that has been
set up, and that especially in the days of the Protector, since the name of
Quaker was given unto us: Who was there amongst the many ten thousands that can
now cry with their mouths, and their lips, a KING a KING, make Bonefires and
such folly that durst open their mouths when he ruled to bear a testimony
against his oppression? but joined with him in his Government, and did partake
with him in his oppression, and cried against* us in his ears, and caused more
cruel Laws to be made against us then before, not a Prison I believe in this
Nation free, but some or other of us have been committed, and many of us as
being dangerous to his Government, and yet these men I say, many ten thousands
of them that have thus done, are the only men to cry up a KING to destroy us as
dangerous likewise to his Government, thus endeavoring to cover their own
unrighteousness by rendering us evil, never ceasing to seek our blood. For this
let it be known unto you, that we are not for Names or Titles, or for these
names to set them up above the nature of the thing, for it is the Magistrate
that rules for God, that executes true judgment and justice in the earth, who
has his ear open to the cry of the oppressed, and is ready to break the
staff and strength of the oppressor. It is such a one whom God will honor,
and whose Kingdom the Lord will establish.

Therefore friends do not hearken unto flatteries, and they who for their own
advantage speaks fair, for they may deceive you, but let your ears be open unto
reproof, for that cannot hurt you: and be not offended at any time with those
that speak the truth? How many thousands have erred and perished by flatterers,
but whoever that did hearken to reproof did amiss? for now the things that we
are against is every appearance of evil, and the things that we are for, is
Righteousness and just judgment, and unto this shall we stand whatsoever may be
our Portion, for why now may not we as justly expect to be eased by the KING
now the Righteous hand of God has removed them, by which both HIM and US were
sorely afflicted, and since we both together suffered under them, why is it not
just that we with him should enjoy our Liberty? for indeed we cannot flatter
with any, yet this we say, that there is no people, nor no principle amongst
people professed, that does tend more, neither so much to the true honor of the
King as we do, for now it is they that fear the Lord, that truly honor the
King, for for (as I have said) the King is not honored where the fear of God
is wanting; But where the Subjects in a Nation walk in the fear of God, and
know Christ the King of Righteousness to rule in their hearts, by which the
Lust (which is the ground of wars and strife) which War in the Members comes
to be destroyed and subdued, such can by no means be otherwise, but to the
honor of the King, for if the King rule for God, and lays the Sword upon the
evil doer, and praise such who do well, which is Gods Ordinance: then such who
are in the Fear of God, and walk in Gods Covenant, the Law written in the
heart, these are the strength of the King; for his Sword is against the evil
doer, and the evil doer is not his strength; for God who is the higher Power,
has ordained him to be a terror unto the evil doer, and to praise such who do
well; so the well doer is his strength.

For what is it that we desire, which ought not to be granted in reason and
equity? The Thing that we desire (as to our selves) is no more then this, That
under him we may live peaceably, and Gods Spirit in us may have the exercise of
our Consciences toward God in all things; That no Law be laid upon us to force
that from us which is our own; and in that case, both by the Scripture of
Truth, and the Law of God written in the Heart ought to be at our own dispose;
to wit, to maintain a Minister which we cannot own, or a Worship we cannot own,
for the exercise of the Consciences of people, is Gods Prerogative alone, and
whoever meddles with that to exercise Lordship over another Conscience, he is
a Usurper and intrudes into another right, and he falls upon the Rock that
will grind him to powder; and which has done so by many, and if Gods Spirit
have the exercise of the Conscience in all things, whose Spirit is a Sword to
cut down the Lust that wars against the Soul inwardly, and destroys that in man
which causes war and strife without, and keeps the conscience void of offense,
both toward God and toward man, whether such ought not to be protected, and
cherished, and have the Magistrates praise? And no otherwise do we desire
Protection, but as we live peaceably in the exercise of a good Conscience;
neither do we desire these things only for our selves; but likewise, that all
others who desire to live peaceably in all godliness, and honesty might enjoy
Freedom and Protection; for a greater abomination or Idolatry cannot be
committed, then for people to be forced to Worship that for God, which they
believe is no God, or to Worship in the Way which they believe in their hearts
is contrary to God, or in which God is not to be worshipped; for we do not
desire, but that others (such as I have said) that will live peaceably may
every way partake of the same Liberty, which we desire or expect. He that has
a Gospel to preach, let it be free like unto the Gospel of Peace, not for money
or filthy lucre, that so people may be turned from their evil ways, and be
brought from under the power of Satan into the Power of God, that Righteousness
and just Judgment, may run through the Nation as a mighty stream; That so him
or them whom God shall set up over this Nation, may have his Throne
established, which cannot otherwise be established; for, for want of these
things has the wrath of God been revealed, and his indignation poured out
against these, who in the day of his wrath, after the Lords Long-suffering was
over, is now justly manifested: And so now this is written in short to no other
end, but that these things may be taken out of the way, which Gods Wrath and
Vengeance is against: That so the Wrath of God may be turned away from this
Nation, and that the Ruler or Rulers thereof, might be firmly established; and
this is the true end, and no other for which it is done.

And now unto all those who is honesty of heart shall read this, let them
honestly consider, that those who are now set up, who were of late Sufferers,
exiled and banished, that what deliverance is now wrought is no way the price
of their blood; for whilst they strove that way, they were continually
overthrown from time to time; but that the Power and the Glory might be the
Lords, and that all might be returned unto him; the Lord has made bare his own
Arm, and has brought this thing to pass, that he himself might have the Glory,
and whether as well for our sakes, whose innocent bloodshed in the time of
Peace within these last seven years, many Goals and other places can testify,
besides the many beatings, flockings, whippings, and cruel imprisonments of us,
for nothing but for crying against sin and oppression in Rulers, Magistrates,
Priests and People. I say whether from those multitudes of cruel wrongs done
against us by those late Powers, we may not now justly expect ease, and the
redress of our grievance likewise, as well as others, who then by the same
powers were made sufferers? since it is so just and so reasonable a thing, that
we do desire; we seek no high Places, Promotion, nor Worldly glory amongst men:
We seek no revenge as to our selves, upon any Person or People, but that we may
be protected in the exercise of our Consciences, (which is the Lords
Prerogative) in our Worship toward God; and that we may be freed from all
unjust Laws that blinds the Consciences of Gods free people, that he has
bought with his own blood, that as Sojourners in our own Nation, we might dwell
in safety as to our outward man, as long as we live peaceably, in all godliness
and honesty. And since the Lord has visited you, and has returned your
Captivity, and is setting your Feet upon the Neck of your Enemies, thus much
does the Lord require of you, That you deliver His people, and unloose their
Bonds, and break every Yoke that oppresses them; for this is all that we
desire, that we may walk in the way of our God.

And take heed unto your selves how you set up, or go about to establish that
which Gods wrath has been made manifest against, and has plucked down, both it
and them that did uphold it; for the Lord he is God and changes not, and his
fury and his anger is against it still, and take heed how you continue that, or
suffer it to stand, which is not yet cast down, which the Lords wrath has been
of late manifest against the upholders of, whom he sent his servants unto, and
warned and testified from time to time, what it was the Lord required, and what
it was his judgment was against if they disobeyed, which is fulfilled and
fulfilling; and now it is your time to work whilst you have the day to labor
in, before the night; If there be a Heart amongst you to do any thing for the
Lord, and for his people, in return of the large love of God made manifest unto
you, for the day of deliverance draws near, and all sorts have had a day, and
a price put into their hands, but had not hearts to use it, And the Lord has
smote them in his wrath, and vexed them in his sore displeasure* And the day of
your Trial is come, and a time you may have now, (...) the Lord has driven you
away, and chastised you with his Rod for your former Idolatrous Vain
Superstitions, and for your Pride, Vainglory, and many other great
abominations which feigned amongst you: and if upon your return you forget the
day of your distress, and so set up these things again and remain in your
former sins, and drink in quity with greediness, what can you think will be
your end, but that shame and confusion must cover you, and if you will force
people to any Form of Worship, and bind them to that, so that Gods fear shall
be taught by men's Precepts, the Lord will proceed as formerly, to wo^k wonders,
Even to destroy the wisdom of the wise, and to bring to nothing the
understanding of the prudent; and when Counsel and Understanding is hid, then
you will grope as in the dark, and seek the way, but shall not find him: and so
misery will come upon you, as upon them that went before you: Therefore be wise
in time and take Counsel, and advise amongst your selves; for you may see that
these which conquered you with the Sword, are now conquered without a Sword;
Consider whereby they conquered, and whereby they fell.

The Lord is now come to Challenge His own Heritage of the Children of Men,
that is, the exercise of the peoples Consciences which is his Throne and
Dominion: and he will caft out, destroy and lay waste all Usurpers, that has
or shall Usurp Authority in His Kingdom; for it is his own, and if he by his
own strength give unto others their Right, he will undoubtedly take his own
Kingdom to himself, and if men will keep him out, if those to whom he has let
his Vineyard beat his servants and kill his Son, and think the Inheritance
shall be theirs; yet the Lord of the Vineyard will come at a time when they are
not aware, and all these who would not deliver up the Vineyard must be brought
out, and slain before his Face as his Enemies.

And so as one who desires with my whole heart, that the breaches of this
Nation (my Native Country) might be healed, and might come to enjoy true rest,
and might be the glory of all the Nations, that the blessing of the God of
Heaven might be upon it, day and night, to water it, that the Rulers thereof
might be established, and their seed after them, that they may be honorable in
their Life, and renowned in their death unto Posterity; that ignominy and shame
may not follow them, I have cast in my Mite according to the ability which God
has given me, to that very end in the sincerity of my Heart, well knowing,
that until Judgment and Justice be established, and the Yoke of Oppression
and Cruelty be broken in pieces, and the oppressed set free, the Land cannot
enjoy her Sabbaths: neither can the Righteous rejoice, until which time there
shall be nothing firm nor lasting, but heaps of Confusion and tossing to and
fro, as a Ship driven with a tempest which has lost her Rudder, and so fear,
and despair, an distrust will be amongst the Inhabitants, and one devour
another, until they are devoured one of another: and so the Lord sweep them
away with the B^some of destruction, and give them their Portion amongst the
Workers of Iniquity, in the Lake that burns with fire and Brimstone for ever.

The Conclusion.
THe Lord will thresh the Mountains, and come down, that the Inhabitants of the
earth shall tremble thereat. For it is his determination to purify the Sons of
Levi, and to purge and cleanse the house of Judah and Jerusalem, that they may
be a Royal Priesthood, a peculiar people, a chosen Generation to the Lord for
ever, the people of his praise, the Glory of Nations, the Subjects of Christ's
Kingdom, which shall be established in Righteousness on the top of all the
Mountains of the earth, which now are risen up against the Lamb and his
followers, whole government in truth shall stand over all the Heathen round
about; for it is his right to reign, and he will not give his Kingdom to
another; Glory to our God for evermore, who has chosen the weak things of the
earth to confound the strong, by things that are not to bring to naught things
that are, that the Wisdom of the Wise shall be confounded yet more and more,
and the understanding of the prudent turned backward. That all Nations may see
that there is no confidence in Princes, nor in the Arm of Flesh, which is but
as grass before the Lord God Almighty, who is exalting his only begotten Son
CHRIST JESUS, the light of the world to be King of the Nations, who is worthy,
God over all, blessed for evermore, the King of Saints, whose Kingdom is not
of this world, but in Righteousness and truth over all: In which he with his
followers the redeemed ones of the earth make war, not against flesh and blood,
but against principalities and powers, and spiritual wickedness in high places
which leads men to destruction, going on Conquering, and to conquer, until all
his enemies are subdued, that he alone may rule and reign in the earth, whose
right it is to have the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of
the earth for his possessions, the earth being the Lords and fullness thereof,
though other Lords have had dominion, whose right it is not to reign; But the
high and lofty ones that are exalted above the fear of the Lord, they shall be
brought down, overturned and broken to pieces, and the meek of the earth they
shall be exalted, who have chosen the foolishness of the Cross of Christ before
an earthly Crown which perishes and comes to nothing; and all the greatness
and glory of Kingdoms shall fade as grass before the presence of the Lord and
the Lamb, who is come, and coming in flames of fire to be revealed, to consume
and burn up the wicked before him; for he has determined a speedy Consumption
in this Nation of all Powers, Things, and Governments that are set up, and
stand not by the Authority of his eternal spirit, which is the rule of Saints,
the heirs of Gods Kingdom: And blessed are they whose names are written in the
Lambs book of life, that are faithful and true to the testimony of Jesus, the
Lamb^ followers they only shall reign. And all likenesses and false Coverings
of Antichrist shall be stripped off and confounded, and no longer hide him and
his followers from the wrath of the Lamb, whose day is come in which his fierce
wrath shall be known against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men
whatsoever, under what form or notion soever without the life and power of
God, in which his Kingdom consists, which indureth and abides for ever, in
which our peace and safety is; though the Heathen rage, and the people imagine
a vain thing, yet they shall know that the Lord God omnipotent rules and
reigns in the Kingdoms of men, and gives them unto whomsoever he will; The
time is come, and for the Elects sake, he will cut short the work in
Righteousness, and terrible shall that day be which is nigh at hand, wherein
the Lord will sweep the Land of evil doers, and execute his fierce Wrath and
Vengeance upon the Workers of Iniquity, of which the Land is full, that the
Lords Spirit is weary to bear them.

The Lords decree is gone forth, and he will fulfill it, That a King shall
reign in Righteousness, and all they that will not have him to reign over them,
shall be brought forth and slain before him, the Vials of his wrath are made
ready to be pouered our upon this wicked Generation of men, who reject Christ
Jesus the light of the World to be their King and Lawgiver, he is come a light
into the world, that men through him might believe and be saved, but they would
none of his Counsel, Power, nor Kingdom, but have hardened their hearts,
stiffened their necks, and have chosen their own ways, and the Lusts and
imaginations of their own hearts have they followed, which are evil
continually, the Counsel of the wicked have they embraced, which leads down
to the Chambers of death, and Hell, where their Portion shall be for ever,
unless they repent and turn from darkness to the light, against which all the
world combines, and make strong the bonds of the wicked, because it shows men
the evil of their ways, and bring the sinner and ungodly to judgment.

How foolish and unwise is the people of this generation, to neglect so great
Salvation as the living truth of our God, and choose to themselves a thing of
rought, dumb Idols, that can neither see, nor go, nor speak, unto which the
Beast and false Prophets with their fellows fall down and worship, for whom the
Lake of fire is made ready, into which they shall be cast alive; the Bed of
Torment is ready made for Babylon and her Merchants, and the Kings of the earth
shall mourn, who have traded on her Merchandise, and drunk the cup of her
Fornications. A day of bitter lamentation and howling is at hand, for that
great Whore the Mother of Harlots that has drunk the blood of the Saints: And
the Priests and false Prophets of this Nation shall be known and made manifest
to be of the chiefest of her Merchants under the deepest coverings of
Antichrist, who have long stolen the words of the true Prophets, Christ and the
Apostles, and sold them for unjust gain with the divinations of their own
brains, that by their lies and lightness the people have perished (under the
highest form of words) for want of the knowledge of God and of Christ, whom to
know is eternal life, without which they are dead in sins and trespasses.

This painted Harlot, great are her sins, and great shall be their Plagues and
Judgments from the Righteous hand of the Lord God, who will have the Nations
know that he is become the Teacher of his people himself, and will send forth
Pastors after his own heart, in the power of his eternal spirit, to make war
with the Nations, before whom the Heathen shall be confounded, and the powers
of the earth broken to pieces, as a Potters Vessel. A day of Trial is at hand,
and judgment begins at the house of God that the Lambs followers may be
known, who are chosen faithful and true, that deceit and Hypocrisy (the
mystery of iniquity) may be made manifest, that they that are called Jews, and
are not, may be discovered, that such as have a name that they live, yet are
dead under the Covering of the profession of truth, yet out of the life and
power, may be made naked and bare before the Lord, who hates Hypocrisy as a
most abominable thing, and loves and requires truth in the inward parts, and
with such he delights to dwell for ever, who in faithfulness follows the Lamb
whithersoever he goes, who does the will of God, in whom the Father is well
pleased, on whom the Government is laid, which shall stand sure and firm for
ever, against which, neither the powers of darkness, nor the gates of Hell
shall prevail, and blessed are they who are made Subjects of his Government*
who rules and reigns in Righteousness; for they shall find (...), and a sure
Rock of defense in the time of storms and bitter Calamity which is coming
upon the wicked, who drink iniquity as water, and hasten to fulfill their
measures, raging in the fires of their Lusts, the smoke whereof is ascended up
even to Heaven, that the Lord God is provoked with this wicked and adulterous
Generation, who wallow in their iniquityes, and have not God in their thoughts,
that his soul is weary to bear them, his spirit is grieved, and his patience
and long suffering is almost at an end toward the people of this Nation, that
have rejected the Lord and his ways, and have chosen lies and vanities, by
reason whereof, the Land mournes, and the ^^p of the Lords wrath is full ready
to be poured forth upon this Rebellious and gainsaying people, who will not
repent and return, but run on in the broad way that leads to destruction, death
and hell being ready to receive them, against whom the fire of the Lords wrath
and indignation is kinded, and shall not cease until they be utterly consumed,
Tophet is prepared for them of old that repent not and give Glory to God.

And the Nations shall know that he that was dead is alive, and behold he
lives for evermore to execute Righteous judgments upon the workers of
iniquity, for which he is come into the world, even for judgment, through which
Sions Redemption is to be known, the place of Gods Habitation, the Temple made
without hands, pure and undefiled, the Spouse, the Lambs Wife, which brings
forth that which is begotten of God to his praise and glory for evermore. And
blessed are they that are found so doing, which are the remnant that shall be
saved by the Lord, when the overflowing scourge of destruction shall come upon
the wicked. Oh England, England! thou who killest the Prophets, and stonest
them with stones, how often would the Lord have gathered thee, even as a Hen
gathers her Chickens, but thou would not! and how glorious might thou
have been in the sight of all the Nations, if thou had considered and known
the things of thy peace in the day of thy visitation, wherein the Lord has
visited thee with the day springing from on high, with his rich and living
mercyes, and thou might have been the first fruits of Faith and Reformation
unto God of the whole earth. But as thou have rejected and refu^^^ to drink the
Cup of Gods Salvation, so thou may as the (...) of the Nations, expect to
drink the bitter cup of Gods wrath and Indignation, that the Inhabitants of the
Earth may learn Righteousness, and fear and tremble before the mighty God of
Jacob.

27th day of the third month. 1660, J. A.

THE END.

