A LETTER WRITTEN FROM OXFORD BY Mr. Stephen College To his Friends in LONDON,
etc.
Written by himself, Immediately after his Condemnation.
Gentlemen,
I Believe you are in pain (and well you may be so) to have a just account of
this my second Expedition to Oxford; which proves indeed so little to my
Satisfaction, that I am afraid it will not prove much to yours: However
considering that Suspense and Anxiety are so very near of Kin to real and
present Evils, and that my Story must needs at last come to your Hands, though
by other means; I have thought fit to write it my self, and acquaint you with
some things, which being well and seasonably weighed, may (I hope) have a
particular influence upon your future Conduct and Success.

On the way thither it was my Fortune to encounter a Gentleman and his man:
When we came close together, says the Gentleman to his Servant, Ride on you
Dog, for here is such a Stink would poison the Devil. As soon as they were
past, I could hear the man ask his Master, what that Company might be, or what
they carried that Stunck so? To whom his Master replied, that they were
well-wishers to the Colleges, and were carrying that tall Gentleman there to
the University. What to do, says the man? For in my mind he looks as if he were
too old to Learn. Away, away, Robin, says his Master, do not thou remember
the Old Proverb, Live and Learn. Ay Master, says the man again, But the
Latter-end is, be Hanged and forget all.

When I Arrived at Oxford, I found all the Streets, Windows and Balconies
filled, as if it had been at a Coronation. I believe if I had but a Shilling
from every body that asked, Which is He? I might with more reason then I could
ever hither pretend to, leave off Joining and turn Statesman.

Methought at first, it looked Great, and I was well enough pleased with their
pointing: But when I considered the occasion, and remembered that men might be
much talked of, that were no Saints, I fell into a deep fit of Melancholy, for
fear that after-Ages should mention me with Herostratus the Ephesian Dissenter.

Among other Passages, I took notice of an Old Country-Fellow, which had his
Basket of Eggs broke all to pieces in the Crowd; That wished heartily I had
been Hanged the last time I was there: And a Rogue of a Bed-maker to some of
the Colleges that stood by, answered him in two words, which I believe was
half the Latin he had, Nunquam sera, that is to say, (says he) All in good
time.

The Ladies were all very Fine, and I believe had most of them their Best
Clothes on; and I could not perceive above two or three Mourning Gowns among
all that Throng of Students.

There were some that Shook their Heads, some cried 'twas Pity, and some said
it was a Proper Fellow, and became a Horse well; to which a Hopeful Youth, with
a little Bit of Red-Ribband in his Hat, replied, (what e're he meant by it) I
hope shortly to see him become one better.

There was an Honest Stoic, that had seen me there the last Parliament upon my
Charging Horse, and considering earnestly my present Equipage cried out pretty
Loud, and with a great astonishment, Quantum mutatus? Which the next to him
(who I dare Swear was no Whig) made this English of it; So fare all that hate
us.

As soon as I Lighted from my Horse, (as if Fate had resolved to pursue the
Humor) I was Conducted to one of the Strongest and Securest Lodgings in the
City, and whither she will have me next, God knows, but I am of Opinion I shall
go near to stay there, almost as long as I live.

And yet I may tell you that I am not such a retired Anchorite, but that I
Visit the Great-Hall now and then, and am as much looked upon, as any man there.

One day I would fain have made them a Set Speech, but the Auditors had no
Patience, but minded me of some other little Trivial business, I had there to
do; and urged me to leave that to the University Orator.

But now methinks it begins to be time to be in good Earnest, and in this
Humor let me advise all those that love the Good Old Cause, and Stephen
College, to continue Firm and Obstinate in their Opinion, and stand by it with
their Lives and Fortunes, which for ought I can see, I am like to do very
shortly, even in the Literal Sense.

For not to Mince the matter with you, I think I shall shortly be Translated
into the number of he Child-Vnborn-Martyrs; for which I would have you rather
Prepare then Grieve, always having before your Eyes the old Motto, Hodie mihi
Cras tibi.

To give you then in two words an account of a long business, which I know you
have no Mind to hear: I have had a very Fair Trial (as they say;) But I found
my Jury here so different from that in London, that I cannot find that they
agree in any thing in the World, but only in the Name.

There is here and there they tell me a Censurer, that thinks those Gentlemen
knew too Little; but I am sure these know too Much.

I cannot for my Life tell, where the Secret Lies; whether it be in the Air, or
in the Soil, or in the Will, or in the Understanding; but certain it is (I
speak it with Grief) that an Oxford Jury have made a shift in a little time,
and with little Trouble, to find a Bill against me (as Dead-doing as that of a
Watchman's after midnight) which a London Jury could not for their Lives tell
where to look for.

Gentlemen, receive my Last Salutes with as upright and good Hearts, as I send
them, and tell Mr. J -- y, that if it were in my Power to appoint, no body
should have leave to Print my Story but Himself, as well for His sake, as my
own: For if any such Fellow as N. T. should Transmit my Memory to Posterity, I
shall scarce be Named twice in a Page, without the Appellation of Traitor.

And now Gentlemen to make an end, whatever the Law says, (for I know you look
not much upon the Dead Letter) I hope you will believe that I Die like a Good
Protestant, and an Honest-Common-Wealths-Man, and that for this only reason,
that when the Case comes to be your own, Charity may think her self bound in
Honor obliged to find some, that may then believe well of you, as you (in
despite of Sense and Reason) do now of the

Protestant Joyner.

LONDON, Printed by N. T. Anno Dom. 1681.


