Dr. SHERLOCK's CASE OF ALLEGIANCE CONSIDERED WITH SOME REMARKS UPON HIS
Vindication.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXCI.

TO THE READER.
THERE has been lately, as I am informed, several considerable Treatises
published against Dr. Sherlock's Case of Allegiance; and though I have perused
none of these Answers, excepting the Author of the Postscript; yet, from the
general Reputation they have gained, I have reason to conclude, they are likely
to give the Reader satisfaction, and the Dr. Diversion enough, if he intends a
Reply. So that had not the following Papers been almost finished before I
understood there were so many Pens drawn upon him, I think I had neither put my
self, nor any body else, to any Trouble upon this Subject. However, since the
Dr. has hung out the Flag of Defiance, sent us a general Challenge, and seems
desirous to charge a whole Party, he of all Men has no reason to be disobliged,
for being attacked from all Quarters. Indeed, this Circumstance, besides its
compliance with his Inclinations, must do him a Kindness, let things happen how
they will: For, if he is obliged to quit the Field, it affords him the Excuse
of being Oppressed with Numbers. If he succeeds, the Forces of the Enemy must
add to the Glory of his Triumph.

I shall apply my self to the Consideration of the Body of his Book, without
making any large Animadversions upon his Preface; his Business in these
preliminary Pages being not to argue upon the Controversy, but only to report
Matters of Fact with reference to his late Behavior, and to draw up an History
of his Integrity. Which Design of the Dr's, how necessary soever it might be to
undertake, is, in my Opinion, but odly pursued: For, he has shown an open
Partiality in his Conduct before his Compliance, and made large Steps toward
the Revolution, when he was convinced of its being the wrong side. Pref.
He calls it Faction to appear with Heartiness and Concern in Defense of the
Old Oaths, though we believe them to remain in full Force. He prayed in the
Royal Style for the present Possessors, as early (one Week excepted) as the
most forward. He gives hard Language to those of the Church of England, who
absent themselves from the public Communion since the Late Alterations in the
Service, which, in their Judgments, are both sinful in the Matter, and
defective in the Authority. He seems sollicitous, lest the Rightful Government
should Recover, and declares, Id. p. 3.
his Inclinations were engaged against it. It Is true, he prayed heartily to
God, that if he was in a Mistake, he might discover it, and comply: But he does
not tell us he spent any of his Devotions the other way. He does not say, that
he prayed for Constancy and Perseverance, provided he was already in the right:
That he desired the Divine Assistance, to stand firm against Interest, and
Noise, and Numbers, and be neither bribed nor frightened out of his Duty.

Now, to act in this manner is a much more difficult Performance than the
other; and therefore the Preparatory Dispositions ought to be begged of God
Almighty with the greater Earnestness. A little praying is sufficient to
incline a man to consult his Ease, and preserve his Fortune, but to hazard or
part with them both, is a Piece of Discipline very unacceptable to Flesh and
Blood, and requires a more than ordinary degree of Courage and Resignation to
undergo it. These things considered, Pref. p. 5.
the Dr. had reason to call the Reader his Confessor, for I am much mistaken,
if he has not frankly discovered his Failings to him. p. 3.
However, the Dr. assures us, he has received that Satisfaction he desired.
Which is not unlikely; but whether it was the Return of his Prayers, or not,
will be best understood by examining his Principles.

I have nothing farther to add by way of Introduction, but only to desire it
may be observed, Pref. p. 6.
That the Dr. all along supposes the Revolution unjust and illegal, and argues
upon a Case of Usurpation. And therefore, if the Reader meets with any
unexpected Freedoms in this Discourse, he may please to charge it upon the
Nature of the Dispute, and thank the Dr. for giving the Occasion.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Laws relating to the present Controversy vindicated, from the Exception
of Obscurity. Page 3. Several Consequences drawn from the Dr's Principles, by
which the Danger and Unreasonableness of them is made apparent. p. 5. Bishop
Overall's Convocation-Book, no Favourer of the Dr's Opinion. p. 11. This proved
from the Convocation's maintaining several Propositions, inconsistent with the
Dr's Principles p. 12. His Citations from the Convocation-Book unserviceable to
his purpose. p. 18. The Authority of the Aramites, Moabites, and Egyptians
unexceptionable. p. 21, 22. The Four Monarchies all Legal Governments. p. 23.
The Case of Jaddus considered. p. 27. A brief Account how the Romans came by
their Government over Judea. p. 35. The Dr's Notion of Settlement inconsistent
with it self. p. 41. The 13th. of Romans 1, 2. concerns only Legal Powers, proved
from 1st, the Doctrine of the Scriptures, p. 44. 2dly, From the Testimony of the
Ancients. p. 51. 3dly, From the general Sentiments of Mankind at and before the
Apostles times. p. 53. The pretended Difficulties of this Interpretation
removed p. 55. The Dr's Argument from Matthew. 22.21, answered. p. 59. His
Doctrine concerning Providence and Events, considered. p. 62. The Abettors of
his Opinion in this point, produced. p. 65. Amos 3.6. recovered from the Dr's
Interpretation. p 67. Hobbism proved upon the Dr. p. 73. The Insignificancy of
Legal Right upon his Principles p. 82. His Doctrine concerning the different
Degrees of Submission, etc. examined. p. 85. Intruding Powers have no Right to
a qualified Obedience, nor to the Royal State. p. 86. The Original of
Government easily accounted for, without the Assistance of the Dr's Scheme. p.
90. The Objections raised by the Dr. defended against his Answers. p. 94. The
first Objection, That his Doctrine makes a King lose his Light by being
notoriously injured, made good. Ibid. The Injustice of deserting a Prince upon
the score of Religion; and the Sophistry of this pretense discovered. p. 96.
Allegiance bound unconditionally upon the Subject, by the Laws of Nature, and
of the Land. p. 97. All Subjects, upon demand, bound to hazard their persons in
defense of their Prince; proved from the Resolution of the Judges, etc. p. 97,
etc. The Dr's Distinction of the Parts of the Oath of Allegiance, ill founded,
and misapplyed. p. 99. The King's Authority entire, after dispossession. p.
101. The Pretenses for a King de facto confuted. p. 102. To Maintain in the
Oath of Allegiance, implies an endeavor to Restore. p. 103, etc. Treason may
be committed against a King out of Possession. p. 107. The Dr's Assertion, That
the Oath of Allegiance is a National Oath, etc. untrue and dangerous. p. 111.
The Objection, That his Doctrine makes it impossible for an injured Prince to
recover his Right, defended. p. 115. The Case of private Robbers and Usurpers
the same. p. 117. No difference between an Human and a Divine Intail, as to the
Firmness of the Settlement. p. 125. The Object. from Hosea 8.4. defended; with
some Remarks upon the Jewish Theocracy. p. 130. His Doctrine not founded upon
the same Principle with the Doctrine of Passive Obedience. p. 133. His
Objection, That the disowning Illegal Powers limits the Providence of God in
Governing Kings, etc. answered. p. 134. His Argument drawn from the Necessity
of Government, considered, and Counter-Principles set up against him. p. 136,
etc. The Relation between Government and Allegiance examined. p. 144. The Dr's
Objections against an immovable Allegiance unsatisfactory. p. 145. The
Usurpation under the Rump and Cromwell, and had Divine Authority by the Dr's
Principles. p. 148. Absalom a providential Monarch. p. 155. The Insufficiency
of the Dr's Plea from a National Submission, and the consent of the Estates. p.
157.
ERRATA.
PAGE 4, Line 28, after nullum dele in, p. 8. l. 23. after the add Dr's, p. 9.
l. 5. after were add a, p. 10. l. 26. aft. owned add. p. 11. l. 36. for these
r. those, p. 14. l. 9. for fall r. fell, p. 17. l. 7. del. by, p. 17. Marg. for
Heb. 12, r. Heb. 11. p. 28. l. 40. aft. Canon add. p. 31. l. 27. for uncouttly
r. uncourtly, p. 37. l. 32. for there r. here, p. 42. l. 24. for any r. an, p.
46. l. 27. after disallow add it, p. 50. l. 14. for these r. there, p. 51. l.
28. for of r. and, p. 53. l. 36. Marg. for Sept. r. Lept. Ibid. l. 37. for
Aritogiton r. Aristogiton, p. 54. l. 17. for Valena r. Valeria, p. 59. l. 36.
aft. answer dele, Ibid. add, after which, p. 61. l. 20. for has r. was, p. 62.
l. 35. after State add. p. 68. l. 15. for imploys r. implies, p. 69. l. 11.
aft. Dr. add may, p. 71. l. 29. for King r. Kings, p. 73. l. 12. aft. we add
can, p. 83. l. 15. for the sea r. see the, p. 88. l. 4. for Crowned r. owned,
ibid. l. 32. aft. and add the, p. 93. l. 26. aft. would de^, p. 99. l. 24. for
asserting r. assisting, ibid. l. 25. for Possession r. Profession, p. 101. l.
28. del. other, p. 104. l. 31. for from r. for, p. 114 l. 35. aft. seek add it,
p. 115. l. 4. for them r. him, p. 118. l. 19. for Disputet r. Disputes, ibid.
l. 28. for remains r. remain, p. 119. l. 17. for draws r. draw, ibid. l. 18.
for translates r. translate, p 121. l. 28. for returning r. recurring, p. 124.
l. 30. aft. Laws del. and, p. 125. l. 2. for them r. him, p. 151. l. 4. for of
r. and, p. 153. l. 16. for Countries r. Counties, p. 156. l. 3. for Goth r.
Gath.

Dr. SHERLOCK's CASE OF ALLEGIANCE Considered, etc.
THat we may not be surprised with the Doctors Novelties, he very frankly at
first acquaints us what we are to expect from him. He makes no Scruple to aver,
That the intermixing the Dispute of Right with the Duty of Obedience, Alleg. p.
1.
or making the Legal Right of Princes the only Foundation of Allegiance, is
that which has perplexed the Controversy. His Reason is, because Allegiance can
only be paid to Government, (he means Force) and therefore it can be due to no
other Title. From whence it is plain, That Illegal Violence is preferable to
Legal Right, i. e. a Man ought not to pay his Debts to his Creditor, but to
atturn to the next Highway-Man he meets. I wonder the Doctor, Page 17.
who seems so much concerned for Good Manners, should set the Constitution
aside with so little Ceremony. For if Legal Right must always give place to
Unjust Power, the Privileges of Law signify nothing, except they could make a
Man invincible, which I fear is a Task somewhat difficult. If you enquire why
the Author has such a mean Opinion of Right, he will tell you, Because all
Arguments from this Ground serve only to confound the Cause, Page 2.
and the Conscience, and to lead Men into dark Labyrinths of Law and History.

First, As for History, in an Hereditary Kingdom it is no doubt a difficult
Point to find out the Royal Family. To distinguish a King's Son from his
Daughter, and the Next in Blood from Jack Cade, or Wat Tyler. And at this rate,
except matters of Fact clear up, if we pretend but to know our Right hand from
our Left, we may be carried into a Labyrinth. And,

Secondly, As for the Laws, they are as dark, it seems, as if the Parliaments
met only to propound Riddles, and proclaim unintelligible Jargon to the Nation.
And if the Case stands thus, those Gentlemen who have endeavored to justify
the Legality of the present Establishment, were certainly out in the management
of the Dispute. For if Right and Wrong are not distinguishable; if Good and
Evil are of the same Color; if it is unsafe to make any Enquiries into such
Niceties as these, for fear of wildring our Understandings; then I confess all
Revolutions are alike to us, and ought to be complied with. However the Doctor
might have been a little kinder to his own Party, who no doubt did their best,
and not have told the World that they engaged in an unnecessary Argument, which
it was both unfit to dispute, and impossible to manage to satisfaction; Page 1,
2.
and that their Performances, how well soever meant, have served only to
confound the Cause. I perceive if the Doctor had not gone in to their Relief,
all had been lost* and therefore he is resolved to make them sensible of his
Assistance, and not to allow them the least share in the glorious Defense of
the Revolution. But if they are contented with this Character, I have no more
to say. To return to the Laws, which the Doctor avoids as so many Rocks and
Shelves in Dispute, fit only to wrack Conscience upon. Now this Character, as
its far from a Complement to the English Constitution; so its somewhat
surprising to one who remembers that this Gentleman has formerly been of
another mind. In his Case of Resistance, he does not complain that the Laws
which settle the Rights of the Crown were so mysterious, and hard to be
understood; (and yet this is not that one Principle which he says he has only
renounced in that Book) There he asserts the Prerogative, Case of Resist. Page
107, 111, 191, 196.
and maintains Non-resistance from the Constitution, as well as from any other
Topic.

I wonder he should lose his Law, after almost seven Years improvement of Study
and Conversation. After all, the Doctor owns that the Laws, setting aside their
Obscurity, are good things; and were they easily understood, he would willingly
cast the Cause upon this (Issue);If we could readily find where the Seat of
Government is fixed; who is our King, and what are the great Lines of
Prerogative and Subjection; If we could attain to this perfect Skills in the
Government, Page 2.
he plainly intimates, That the Law would then be a clear and safe Rule of
Conscience. From whence it follows, That where the Laws speak out, there is no
need to recur to Events and Providence: For wherever the Constitution is
plain, it ought to carry it. So that the Doctor's Fundamental Principle of
Divine Right, (or Power) upon which his whole Scheme is erected, falls to the
ground. For by his own Concession, Providence is but a secundary Rule of
Conscience, and only to take place where the directions of Law are defective
and unintelligible.

It will not be improper therefore to cite some of the Laws, for possibly they
are not so intricate and obscure, as the Doctor represents them.

The 24 H 8. c. 12. Begins thus: By sundry old and authentic Histories and
Chronicles, it is manifestly declared and expressed, (without Labyrinths) That
this Realm of England is an Empire, and has been so accepted in the World,
governed by one Supreme Head and King, unto whom a Body Politic, compact of
all sorts and degrees of People -- been bounden and owen a natural and humble
Obedience, he being instituted and furnished by the goodness and sufferances of
Almighty God with plenary, whole, and entire Power, etc. 5 El. c. 1. And be it
further Enacted, That every Person which shall hereafter be elected or
appointed a Knight, Citizen or Burgess, etc. for any Parliament or Parliaments,
hereafter to be holden, shall from henceforth, before he shall enter into the
said Parliament House, or have any Voice there, openly receive and pronounce
the said Oath, (the Oath of Supremacy) before the Lord Steward for the time
being. -- And that he which shall enter into the Parliament House without
taking the said Oath, shall be deemed no Knight, Citizen, Burgess, etc. for
that Parliament; nor shall have any Voice. In 3 Iac. 1. c. 4. there is this
remarkable Paragraph: And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
Person or Persons -- shall put in practice to absolve, persuade, or withdraw,
any of the Subjects of the King's Majesty, or of his Heirs or Successors of
this Realm of England, from their natural Obedience to his Majesty, his Heirs
or Successors, or move them, or any of them, to promise Obedience to any other
Prince, State, or Potentate; That then every such Person, their Procurers,
Counselors, etc. be to all Intents judged Traitors -- And being thereof
lawfully Convicted shall have Judgment, suffer, and forfeit, as in Cases of
High Treason. The 7 th Iac. 1. c. 6. concerning the Oath of Allegiance, Enacts,
That all and every Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, etc. of the Commons House of
Parliament, at any Parliament, or Session of Parliament, hereafter to be
assembled, before he or they, shall be permitted to enter the said House, shall
make, take, and receive a Corporal Oath (of Allegiance) upon the Evangelists,
before the Lord Steward for the time being, etc. In 14 Car. 2. c. 3. it is
declared, That within all his Majesty's Realms and Dominions, the sole and
supreme Power, Government, Command, and Disposition, of the Militia, and of all
Forces by Sea and Land; and of all Forts and Places of Strength, is, and by the
Laws of England ever was, the undoubted Right of his Majesty, and his Royal
Predecessors, Kings and Queens of England; And that both, or either Houses of
Parliament cannot, nor ought to pretend to the same; nor can nor lawfully may
raise, or levy any War, offensive or defensive, against his Majesty, his Heirs
or lawful Successors. To these may be added 13 Car. 2. c. 1. 12 Car. 2. c. 31.
25 Ed. 3. c. 2. not to mention any more. Now I believe most People will
conclude that the meaning of these Statutes is not very hard to come by: And
that a moderate Share of English and common Sense is sufficient to understand
them. I shall insert two or three Maxims relating the same Subject. The

First tells us, The King never dies. The second, The King can do no wrong. The
third affirms, Nullum in tempus occurrit Regi, that is, No length of Usurpation
can prejudice the King's Right. And least the Doctor should take these for no
more than to many quaint Sentences, he may please to observe from a very
Authentic Authority, That Maxims are one of the Grounds of the Law; that they
need no Proof, but are sufficient Authority to themselves; that they are
Equivalent to a Statute; Doct. and Stud. cap. 8. p. 16.
and that all Inferences from them are of the same Force with the Principle
from whence they are drawn.

Having shown that the Laws with respect to Allegiance and Prerogative are not
full of Mystery and Labyrinth, as the Doctor would suppose, but are plain, easy
and unperplexed, in these great Points; (indeed were they otherwise it would be
no ordinary Misfortune and Reproach to the Government;) I shall proceed to
examine the Doctor's Scheme, which he owns may startle some Men at first, Page
3.
because it looks Paradoxically, and carrys the Face of Singularity. However
it is so much for the ease and safety of Subjects, etc. that every one has
Reason to wish it true. Ibid.
How much his Principles are for the ease of Society will be disputed
afterward. But allowing them this Advantage, his Inference is by no means
conclusive, nor proper for his Character. For if we are to wish every Thing
true that makes for our Ease, than we ought to wish the Christian Religion
false; because there is so much Mortification and Self-denial enjoined by it.
Which made the Gnostics, from an inward Principle of Self-preservation, abjure
it in Times of Persecution. Soul take thine Ease, is so far from being good
Divinity, that a generous Heathen would scorn such Advice; if he found it
prejudicial to Justice and Honor.

But before I enquire more particularly into the Truth of the Doctor's Scheme,
I shall briefly represent some of the Consequences which follow from the
supposal of its being true. By which we may be in some Measure able to guess
how much the Doctor has obliged the World by his Discovery.

1. If Power (as he affirms, Page 15.) is a certain Sign of God's Authority;
if, by what means soever a Prince ascends the Throne, he is placed there by God
Almighty; Page 13.
and the Advantages of Success are always to be interpreted the Gifts of
Providence, then the best Title may be defeated, without either antecedent
Injury, Consent, or an express Revelation from God. And if so, the Nature of
Property is perfectly destroyed, and all Dominion is resolved into Occupation;
and no one has any Right to any Thing any longer than he can keep it. This
Doctrine condemns a Man to Poverty, for being ill used; and makes a Prince
forfeit, for no other Reason but because his Subjects were disloyal. If its
said, that an unjust Seizure of a private Estate extinguishes no Title; but for
the Peace of Mankind God has so ordered it, that whosoever possesses himself of
a Government is immediately the proper Owner. That its not thus ordered, I
shall prove more large afterward. At present I only desire to know, Whether
God loves Peace more than Justice? Whether he delights to see Men Brethren in
Iniquity, and combine for the support of Violence? Besides, Is it for the Peace
of Mankind, that great Thieves should be rewarded, and little Ones punished,
That a Man that steals a Horse must suffer as a Felon, but he that steals a
Kingdom, and flies at nobler Quarry, must be worshipped and obeyed, though the
right Owner is still claiming, contesting, and in view? What is this, but to
encourage universal Violence, to animate ill Men to more towering Flights of
Ambition, and to make them enlarge their Projects of Wickedness? A Man need
little skill in Inferences to see what an admirable Expedient this is likely to
prove for the Quiet of the World* The Doctor was sensible of this
Inconvenience, and endeavors to avoid it, by saying, That ambitious Spirits,
without a great dose of Enthusiasm, cannot make this Construction of his
Doctrine. For unless they can flatter themselves that God has ordained them to
be Kings, their Attempts according to his Principle will be checked. And why
should they not believe God has ordained them to be Kings, if they find
apparent Symptoms of Weakness and Decay in a Government, If they perceive the
Inclinations of the People for them, If they can form a strong Party, and have
a probable Prospect of Success? A moderate share of Enthusiasm, with some
Principles, would be apt to make ambitions Men to interpret such Accidents and
Advantages to be broad Intimations of the Favor of Heaven. That God was
designing some great Revolution, and calling them to Crowns and Scepters. And
as for Enthusiasm, its no wonder to find the World overdosed with that;
especially at a time when Men pretend to understand Prophesies almost as well
as those who wrote them; when they can expound St. John's Visions upon Piedmont
and Savoy; and point out the Time and Geography of a Mystery*

2. This Doctrine supposes there is no such Thing as Usurpation after
Possession; which is not only* contrary to the Language of our Laws, 1 E. 4. c.
1 etc. but to the common Sense of Mankind; it being generally agreed by those
who have any Notion of common Justice and Morality, That what is unlawful to
take away, its unlawful to keep. Which must be allowed to be true, unless
Violence and ill Usage are valuable Consideration for the conveying of
Property. Whereas by these Principles, let a Man come into his Power never so
unjustly; Let there be never so fair a Claim continued against him, yet if bare
Possession gives him a Divine Right, it is as much his Property as if he had the
clearest and most uncontested Title in the World. The Doctor endeavors to get
clear of this consequence, by coining a distinction between Legal and Divine
Right. But this will do no execution upon the difficulty. For if Possession
always conveys a Divine Right, all legal Claim must immediately determine. I
suppose the Doctor will not deny that God can repeal a Human Constitution. Now
when God transfers any Property from one Person to another, it is certain he
must null the first Title. For to explain this Matter; Providence either
conveys the Right with the Thing, or it does not. If not, then the Right
remains where it was, and the Thing is wrongfully transferred; which I believe
no one will be so hardy as to affirm. If Providence does transfer the Right
with the Thing* then the Legal Claim must be extinguished; otherwise this
Absurdity will follow, viz. There will be a Human and Divine Law, contradictory
to each other, in Force at the same time. And since Human Laws when duly
circumstantiated are confirmed by Heaven, God's Authority must be engaged on
both Sides, and by consequence opposed to it self.

3. This Principle destroys the Nature of Repentance, by which it is generally
understood that every one is bound to restore that which he has unjustly taken
away. But if we pursue the Doctor's Reasoning to its just Consequences this
Doctrine will not hold. For if Possession, though never so unjustly gained, has
always God's Authority to confirm it, one would think there should be no
obligation to Restitution. For why should a Man restore that which he is vested
in by a Divine Right? And yet I doubt not but the Doctor will grant that
Injustice cannot be forgiven without Repentance, nor Repentance practiced
without Restitution; so that by this Gentleman's Scheme a Man is both allowed
and forbidden the same Thing; and has a Divine Right to keep that, for which he
will be damned if he does not restore it, which certainly is something more
than ordinary.

4. The Doctor's Principle puts it in the Subjects Power to depose their Prince
when they please, I don't say it makes it Lawful for them to undertake it* that
would be to misrepresent him; but when it is once done, his Notion of Power and
Settlement confirms their Injustice, and ratifies their Treason, and by
consequence makes a standing Army necessary.

5. It cantonizes Kingdoms, and removes the Boundaries of Dominion. For if
Power be a certain Sign of God's Authority, then we ought to submit to every
one who challenges the Name of a King, though for never so small a Precinct;
if he has but force to back his Pretensions: And by consequence every Parish
may set up for an Independent Government; and we may be obliged to swear
Allegiance to a Constable. It Is to no purpose to say, That the Kingdom has not
agreed to such a Division. For the Limits of Kingdoms are founded upon nothing
but Legal Right, and Human Constitutions, and therefore they ought not to
oppose God's Authority, which is always visible in Power. Seas, and Rivers, and
Mountains, the usual Barrieres of Empire and Jurisdiction, ought not to hinder
Divine Right from taking place; nor shut Providence out of the World.

6. This Doctrine gives Thieves and Robbers a good Title to whatever they can
steal and plunder. The Doctor was sensible of this Inconvenience, and
endeavors to remove it, but without success: He offers to show a disparity
between common Thieves and Usurpers. That the Scripture tells us Kingdoms are
disposed by God, and that all Power is of God: but no Man pretends that Thieves
have God's Authority. It Is not pretended; but if the Principles hold, it will
be very difficult to disprove it. For if Power is a certain Sign of God's
Authority, Page 15.
it follows, That he who is strong enough to take a Purse must have a Divine
Right to keep it. Page 12.
If Providence orders and disposes all Events, and there be no Evil in the City
which the Lord has not (barely permitted but) done; then why this Divinity
should not hold upon Salisbury Plain, or Newmarket Heath, as well as upon any
other occasion, will be no easy Question to resolve. The Scriptures which he
alleges, that Kingdoms are disposed by God, do not come up to his point. For
we are likewise told, That private Estates are under the disposal of
Providence, 1 Samuel 2.7. Prove. 22.2. Therefore if Possession gives a Divine
Right in one case, why not in the other? This Reasoning may be further improved
by the Doctor's Logic; P. 14. Prop. 4.
where putting out the Word Kings, I argue thus in the Doctor's Expression, All
Possession is equally Rightful with respect to God: For those are rightful
Owners who are put into Possession by God. And its impossible there should be a
wrong Possessor, unless a Man can make himself Master of his Neighbors
Fortune, whether God will or no. Farther it will not be denied but that the
Sabeans who took away Job's Cattle, ( Job. 1.15.) were Company of Robbers; and,
which is worse, they committed their Rapine by the Instigation of the Devil.
And yet, Ver. 21. it is said what was stolen by them, was taken away by the
Lord. Which according to the Doctor's method of Interpretation will go a great
way toward the proving their Divine Right. He urges Romans 13.1. That all Power
is of God. But this Text makes against him, as he is pleased to expound it; i.
e. that it is meant of Power, as Power, without any respect to Right. For his
former Interpretation of Legal Power he has solemnly Recanted in his Preface.
Now if all Power be from God without regard to Law, and Human Justice, why a
Captain of Moss-troopers, who is an Usurper in little, may not come in for his
share of Prerogative, I cannot imagine. For an Usurper, and his Adherents, are
as much combined* against Justice as any private Robbers* They offer Violence
to the Constitution, they outrage all those who oppose their Rapine; and
muster all their Force and Cunning to keep honest Men out of their own. So on
the other hand, Thieves are generally formed into a Society. They have their
Articles of Confederacy, their Original Contracts, and Fundamentals, as well as
other People. And therefore they must not be refused the Privilege of
Usurpation, upon the Score of being Out-lyers. Upon the whole, Why inferior
Thieves should be denied Divine Right any more than Usurpers is unimaginable.
Unless the Bigness of a piece of Injustice is a Circumstance of Advantage: And
a Man ought to be encouraged by Providence for Robbing in a greater Compass
than his Neighbors. These, with some others of a resembling Nature, are I
conceive evident Consequences from the Doctor's Scheme of Government. Which
besides that they prove the insufficiency of his Principles; (for nothing but
Truth can follow from Truth) They show us at the same time that they are by no
means so much for the good of Mankind, as he insinuates: And that we ought not
to be so fond of them as he would make us; Page 3.
nor so glad to see them well proved. How much Honor he has done the
Scriptures, and the Convocation-Book, by making them the Abettors of such
Doctrine as this, may easily be guessed. I hope therefore it may be no hazardous
Undertaking to join issue with the Doctor upon this point; nor over-difficult
to disengage these Authorities from seeming to give any Assistance to his Cause.

SECT. II. Bishop Overall's Convocation-Book no Favourer of the Doctor's
Opinion.
BEfore I enter upon this Part of the Argument, I must observe to the Reader,
Vid. An Answer to a late Pamphlet, Entitled, Obedience and Submission, etc.
demonstrated from Bishop Overall's Convocation Book.
That it has been managed with so much Advantage against the Doctor already,
that it might have been very well omitted here, were it not possible that these
Papers may fall into some hands that may not be so fortunate as to meet with
other Satisfaction. However I shall venture to be shorter upon this Head, than
otherwise I should have been. Where I must

1. Premise, That supposing the Convocation was unquestionably on the Doctor's
side, he would be far from gaining his Point. For Allegiance is a Duty which
arises from our Subjection to the Temporal Power; and therefore the Laws of
each respective Kingdom, must be the Rule of our practice in this Case. A
Synod, though it may deliver its Opinion upon such a Point, has no Authority to
determine against the State. The Church, as She did not give Princes their
Crowns, so there is no reason. She should pretend to take them away. If She
will be a Judge, and a Divider in these Matters, She claims a greater Privilege
than our Savior owned, I hope the Doctor will not say, Luke 12.14. John 18.36.
an Ecclesiastical Canon can set aside the Common Law, and repeal an Act of
Parliament. This, besides other Inconveniences, of which the Doctor might be
made sensible, would be no other than graffing the Roman Pretenses upon a new
Stock; and translating the Supremacy from St. Peter's to St. Paul's. But that
this Convocation should maintain such Doctrine as this is unimaginable, since
the great Design of their Book is to prove the Independency of Princes; to
vindicate their Rights against Church-Encroachments; and to show that
Ecclesiastics are as much their Subjects as the Laity.

2. If we consider the Time in which this Convocation sat, we shall find it
very improper to fix the Doctor's Principles upon them, without the clearest
and most convincing Evidence in their Writings.

For they met the first of King James I. when the Act of Recognition was passed
in Parliament, where the Bishops of this Convocation were present, and gave
their Votes for the Bill. In which they Recognize and Acknowledge (being
bounden thereunto by the LAWS of GOD and Man) the King's Right to the Crown by
inherent Birthright, and undoubted Succession. And oblige themselves, their
Heirs and Posterity for ever, to submit to (or stand by) this Right, until the
last drop of their Bloods be spent. And would these Reverend Prelates concur to
the making a Law, drawn up with such Clearness and Solemnity of Expression, and
go presently and contradict it in their Synod? Was it their way to make the
Bishop vote against the Lord; and not only clash with the State, but with
themselves? What! Declare themselves bound by the Laws of God and Man, to stand
by the Succession to the last drop of their Bloods; And at the same time lay
down Doctrine, which will help us to as many Governments in a Year as there are
Moons; and (as has been smartly observed) make Captain Tom the most Sovereign
and Divine Thing upon Earth. Those who can believe the Convocation guilty of
such Singularities as these, must have a mean Opinion of them; and ought to lay
very little weight upon their Authority.

Having premised these Observations, I shall proceed to examine the Sense of the
Convocation as to the Point in hand. And

1. I agree with the Doctor, That Usurped Powers, when thoroughly settled, Can.
28.
have God's Authority, and are to be reverenced and obeyed; i. e. These Princes
who, as the Canon speaks, got their Authority unjustly, and wrung it by Force
from the true and lawful Possessor; are to be submitted to as God's Ministers,
when the legal Claim is either surrendered or extinguished. For where there is
no other Title, Possession is sufficient; in which Men ought to acquiesce for
the peace of Society. But that mere Possession in relation to Government, ought
to overruled Law; and that Might, can turn itself into Right; and give a
through Settlement in the Sense of the Convocation, this, though the Doctor
affirms, I must deny. And in order to the Disproof of what he alleges, I shall
1. Endeavor to show, That the Convocation maintains several Propositions
inconsistent with the Doctor's Opinion. 2ly. I shall give a distinct Answer to
the Passages cited by him.


1. I shall endeavor to show, the Convocation maintains several Propositions
inconsistent with the Doctor's Opinion.

Convoc. p. 84. Page 86.
For Instance they assert, That Adam and Noah, while they lived, were chief
Governors under the Son of God, over all their Off spring. That God committed
the Government of all their Descendents to them during their Lives. Page 86.
Now if these two persons had a Right to govern during their Lives, then
certainly Possession could not give it to another; which is a Contradiction to
what the Doctor makes these Gentlemen maintain. For according to him, if Cain
by Calumnies, or any other Artifice, could but have alienated Adam's Children
from him. If he had set up a Title against his Father, Alleg. p. 9.
and got the Majority on his side* If the whole Administration had been in his
hands, and he had been able to have crushed those who would not submit. If the
new Interest could have advanced thus far, his Government had been settled as
the Doctor Expounds the Convocation; And then by consequence Cain would have
had a Divine Right to have governed his Father. And to call him to an account,
if he had refused to comply. And which is somewhat harder, Adam if he could not
have made his escape, had been obliged in Conscience to have resigned, and
sworn Allegiance upon demand, to his Son Cain. And though the Doctor tells us,
Case of Resist. p. 204.
That there was a time when Fathers had the Power of Life and Death over their
own Children; (which one would think if ever, was the time we are speaking of)
And that under this Dispensation it was never allowed by the most Barbarous
Nations for the Son to kill his Father, though in his own Defense. But by this
new principle, Cain might lawfully have killed Adam purely for refusing to
submit to his Settlement. For he who has a Divine Right to govern, has
certainly the same Divine Right to dispatch those who will not be Governed by
him. And thus we have not only made the Convocation fall soul upon it self; but
have given an admirable account of Paternal Authority into the bargain. Here
the Doctor's usual Evasion of an Entail can stand him in no stead, there being
no such privilege upon Record in reference to Adam.

2ly. The Convocation asserts, That upon the Death of Alexander, Page 66.
the Jews were as free from the Macedonians as any of their bordering
Neighbors. By which words they must mean they were Free de jure. If you
enquire the reason of this Freedom: They immediately give you a very remarkable
one, viz. Because none of Alexanders Captains had any Lawful Interest, or Title
to Judah. No lawful Title! why so? Had they not Power and Possession on their
side? But this is not sufficient in the Opinion of the Convocation to give them
a Divine Right. And to oblige the People to obey them for Conscience sake. And
therefore the Doctor's Inference That those Princes who have no Legal Right to
their Thrones may yet have God's Authority; Page 5.
is a direct contradiction to the reasoning of the Synod. The Doctor tells us,
and grounds himself upon the Synod; Alleg. p. 15.
That since Power will govern, God so orders it by his Providence as never to
entrust Sovereign Power in any hands without giving them his Sovereign
Authority. The Gentleman of the Convocation are quite of another Opinion: And
affirm that the Jews were free, and under no Ties of Subjection; to any of
Alexanders Captains; notwithstanding any claims they could make from Providence
and Possession. And by consequence they suppose that God's Authority is always
conveyed in a Legal Chanel; where there is not express Revelation to the
contrary. I cannot foresee what the Doctor can object against this Instance,
excepting that the Macedonians were not in Possession of Judea. Now this
Objection depending upon matter of Fact may easily be answered from Josephus,
and the Maccabees. To shorten the Dispute, I conceive the Doctor will not deny
that Alexander dyed seized of the Kingdom of Judea. That he governed it by his
Viceroys, and Lieutenants, as he did the other Provinces of the Persian
Empire; as fast as they submitted. And therefore some of Alexanders Officers
were in Possession of Judea when their Master dyed. Now that the Jews
dispossessed the Macedonians, and recovered their Liberty, though for never so
small a time, is not in the least hinted by the Convocation: Now these
Gentlemen who have been so punctual in giving an account of all the successive
Changes of the Jewish State, from the first Formation of their Commonwealth.
They who have so particularly taken Notice of their Theocracy, their Government
by Kings, their Captivity, and the variety of Masters they fall under, would
not have omitted one would think so remarkable an interval of Liberty if there
had been any such. But instead of this they plainly suppose the contrary in
their Historical Account; And pass the Jews immediately from Alexander, into
the Hands of the Egyptian, and Syrian Kings. Now it is the sense of the
Convocation, not the truth of History which we are Disputing about: Page 66,
68. Convoc.
So that since we have gained their Opinion the Argument must hold good against
the Doctor though they should prove mistaken in matter of Fact. But that this
Learned Assembly followed the generally received Opinion uncontradicted by any
Historian cannot be denied.

And to put the matter beyond all Dispute: Let us consider the case of
Antiochus Epiphanes, against whom as the Convocation observes, Mattathias made
open Resistance. Which they suppose was lawfully done because the Government of
that Tyrant was not then either generally received by submission or settled by
continuance. Convoc. p. 67.
Whence it will appear that the Doctors Notion of a Settlement, and the
Convocations, are by no means the same. According to him, Antiochus was as well
settled as a Man would desire. For as for Power, the Infallible sign of Divine
Authority, that he wanted not; 1 Maccab. c. 1. Joseph. Antiq. Jud. lib. 12.
cap. 6, 7.
but was absolute Master of Judea, as is evident from the Maccabes and
Josephus. So that we may be assured the Administration of Affairs was entirely
in his Hands. As for the great Body of the People they were his own in an
extraordinary manner, and complied not only with his Government but with his
Religion too. Joseph. ib. c. 7.
Jason and Menelaus the two High Priests the Convocation informs us, Convoc. p.
69. Joseph. ib. c. 15
made all the Interest for him they could. And the latter, as Josephus reports
it, was the occasion of the Defection of the whole Nation of the Jews from
their Religion. It Is true, as it happens in some other Revolutions, they did
not all submit to a Man, and I conceive the Doctor will not insist upon the
Necessity of this Condition. But those who stood out Antiochus was well able to
crush, and did it to a very severe purpose. As for the Time of his Government
it held no less than three Years; 1 Maccab. 1.57. compared with cap. 4.52. and
2 Maccab. 10.5. Joseph. Antiq. Jud. lib. 12. cap. 7, 11.
which the Doctor must own is long enough in all Conscience to justify a
Compliance. These Arguments for Submission are as strong as the Doctor's
Principles can require* And yet we see the Convocation dislike Antiochus his
Settlement; and allows of Mattathias his Resistance. So that nothing is more
plain than that these Reverend Divines did not believe that the Concurrence of
the Majority of a debauched Nation: A full and uncontrolable Possession of
Power, lengthened out to three Years of Government, were Advantages sufficient
to infer a Divine Authority, and to change a bad Title into a good one. Page 48.
I know the Doctor urges, That Antiochus his Governmert was not owned by any
public National Submission; which is both more than the Convocation says, or
the Doctor can prove. For if by a National Submission he means a Recognition of
his Title in a public Meeting of Persons of Condition; he might probably
receive such an Acknowledgment. It Is not unlikely that Jason and Menelaus who
were so forward in making their Court, being Persons of the first Quality,
might engage the Nobility to render their new Allegiance in a solemn and
public Manner* However the Business of Form is not Material* It Is certain from
Josephus, that the generality of the Jews complied; and when a Nation submits,
one would think there was a National Submission. Indeed why should they not
submit? Here was most certainly Power in a very large and irresistible
Proportion, which is a thing we are told will Govern; and therefore God always
seconds it with his Authority. I hope the Doctor does not believe Antiochus
could make himself King of Judea whether God would or no: And if not, How could
these Jews have the Liberty to stand out against Providence, and oppose a
Divine Right?

3. To give a farther Instance that the Convocation did not agree with the
Doctor in his Notion of Power and Settlement. We are told, Can. 17.
That if any Man shall affirm that the Jews might have withstood any of their
Kings, who claimed by Succession, without Sin; and opposing themselves against
God, or that the Kingdom of Judah by God's Ordinance going by Succession; when
one King was dead; his Heir was not in Right their King, (however by some
Athaliah he might be hindered from enjoying it) or that the People were not
bound to obey him, as their Lawful King, He does greatly Err. Now for an
Assembly to affirm, That where a Succession is established the People cannot
withstand it without opposing themselves against God; that a Person who is Heir
Apparent, is immediately upon the Death of his Predecessor their Lawful King;
and ought to be obeyed as such; notwithstanding the Usurpation of some
Athaliah; I say for them to affirm all this, and at the same time to make Force
a certain Sign of Divine Authority; and that we ought to obey it from what
point soever it rises; To put it in the Subjects power to break all the Links
of Succession, and to give away an Hereditary Prince's Right by a National
Submission, or Treason, as often as they please; these are such rank, such
staring Contradictions, that they are beneath the Inadvertencies of common
Sense, much more the Judgment of that Venerable Assembly. If the Doctor
replies, that the Canon is to be restrained to a Succession which was settled
by God's Ordinance, or express Appointment, and consequently to be understood
only with Relation to the Kings of Judea, which had their Grown entailed by a
particular Revelations* To this I answer,

1. That to take the Canon in this Sense is to make it insignificant, and
foreign to their Design. Whereas it is evident their Book (the first
especially) was written to assert the Right of Princes, and to state and fix
the Duty of Subjects. But if the Examples they allege, and the Doctrine they
maintain, are not to be drawn down to application and practice, what are we the
better for them? If their Precedents and Conclusions hold only for the Kings of
Judah, to what purpose are they brought? If we are unconcerned in them, why are
they couched into Canons and Principles, and reported with that particularity
and exactness? We are not now to expect any express Orders from Heaven for the
regulating Successions; and therefore if the Convocation is to be understood
only of Entayles by Revelation, they might have spared their Pains, for we are
not likely to be the wiser for their Determination; as they might easily
perceive.

2. I answer, That Succession founded upon Humane Right, is of equal Force with
that which is supported by Revelation, and requires as strong an Authority to
defeat it. It Is true, God in reward to David's Piety, enntayled the Crown upon
his Posterity by special Designation: And no doubt it was no small Satisfaction
to Him to be assured that his Family should reign as long as it continued, 2 Samuel 7.
and not be set aside by God's express Order to make room for another Line, as
that of Readiness was for himself. But if, by by the Fundamentals of the State,
the Crown was before Hereditary; I cannot conceive what additional Strength
could accrue to the Title from an Entayl by Revelation; Eventually stronger I
grant it might make it, by refreshing the Peoples Minds, and conveying an
awful Impression by the Solemnity of the Declaration, but their Obligation to
preserve the Descent was the same before. For all Humane Provisions stand upon
a Divine Bottom; for which Reason the Apostle commands us to submit to every
Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake. 1 Pet. 2.13.
The Laws of a Kingdom when the Authority is competent, and the Matter just,
are as much, as to the Ground of the Obligation, the Laws of God, as those he
gave upon Mount Sinai: And Kings are his Representatives as well as Angels, by
whose Disposition that Law was given. Act. 7.
Therefore those who pretend a Divine Repeal ought to bring Miracles and
Revelation in one case as well as in the other. These are such obvious Truths,
that the Convocation could not possibly overlook them; and therefore could not
lay any of that stress upon a Scripture Entayl, upon which the Doctor insists:
But must suppose Compliance with Athaliah would have been as unaccountable in
any other Country not governed by Revelation as it was in Judea, provided her
Title was illegal.

To urge this Argument a little farther upon the Doctor; If that which he
phraseth Providence and Settlement* is sufficient to null the Constitution tho
never so clear and unquestionable; then a great part of the Ceremonial Law was
abrogated under Antiochus Epiphanes, and the Jews were bound in Conscience to
eat Swines Flesh; and forbear Circumcision, because they were so commanded by
the King, who had the actual Government of their Country, and sufficient power
to crush them upon their Refusal. From whence it follows, That those Men of
Resolution, who were tortured for their Noncompliance, and whom the Apostle is
supposed so highly to commend, Heb. 12.
threw away their Lives when they ought to have kept them, and were
Self-Murtherers instead of Martyrs. He cannot say these Precepts they were
commanded to transgress, carried any moral Obligation in them; He must
therefore recur to his Distinction between Humane and Divine Laws; but this
Expedient will not do his Business: for I have proved that both of them as to
their Authority are equally Divine. Now as to the Matter in dispute, it is
granted that God as universal Lord may alter the Seat of Property and Dominion;
and transfer one Man's Right to another: but we ought not to conclude he has
done it, except we can prove our new Claim by the Course of Humane Justice, or
express Revelation.

Having shown from the Principles of the Convocation, that they cannot
understand Providence and Thorough Settlement as the Doctor does, without the
plainest Inconsistency with themselves.

I shall proceed to give a distinct Answer to the Passages cited by him:

1. To prove that Princes who have no Legal Right may have God's Authority;
Page 6.
He tells us the Convocation teach, That the Lord in advancing Kings, etc. is
not bound to those Laws he prescribes others, Conv. p. 46.
and therefore commanded Iehu, a Subject, to be anointed King. From whence the
Doctor infers, That what God did by Prophets in Israel by express Nomination,
Ibid.
he does by his Providence in other Kingdoms, without any regard to Succession,
or Legal Titles. This he affirms as the Doctrine of the Convocation, and
attempts to prove it from their saying, That the Lord both may and is able to
overthrow any Kings, Conv. p. 57.
notwithstanding any Claim or Interest which they can challenge. In answer to
this we may observe,

First, That upon Iehu's being anointed by the Prophet, he is called the lawful
King of Israel; Id. p. 46.
and Ioram his Master is said to be his Subject. Now if Ioram was Iehu's
Subject, it was Treason for him to attempt the Recovery of his Kingdom, and
consequently he could have no Legal Right after Dispossession. For if Iehu was
Lawful King, then Ioram the dispossessed Prince had no Right to recover; unless
two opposite and contesting Claims, can have a Legal Right to the same Thing;
which certainly is a Contradiction in Law. From hence one (if not both) of
these Conclusions must necessary follow.

1. Either that his Distinction of Legal and Divine Right which he coined to
answer an Objection, is Chimerical, Alleg. p. 26.
and then the Difficulty he proposed remains unanswered. Or,

2. If there was any singular Advantage in Iehu's Case, because he was anointed
by God's immediate Designation, then it follows that Revelation about the
Disposal of Crowns, is a much safer Warrant, then that which the Doctor calls
Providence; and that we cannot argue with the same Authority from the one as
from the other, though the Doctor is pleased to affirm the contrary, viz,
Alleg. p. 6.
What God did by Prophets in Israel, etc. he does by his Providence in other
Kingdoms. Where by Providence we must understand the Doctor means Success. Now
that the Convocation does not suppose Revelation, and Success equivalent, to
justify Alterations in Government, but makes a wide Difference between them,
will appear from the Consideration of the Place before us. They teach us in the
instance of Iehu, That God in advancing Kings is not bound to those Laws which
he prescribes others. Which is a plain Intimation that where Governors are not
changed by God's express Order, Allegiance ought to be paid according to the
Direction of each respective Constitution. For those Laws of Subjection which
God is here said to prescribe others, can be no other than the Laws which
establish the Rights of the Crown in each particular Country; which Laws
according to the reasoning of this Passage are to be inviolably observed, where
God does not expressly interpose to the contrary. And therefore in their Canon
upon this Place they determine, That if any Man shall affirm that any Prophets,
Can. 25 p. 47, 48.
Priests, or other Persons, having no direct and express Command from God;
might Lawfully imitate the said Fact of Elizeus, (who caused Iehu to be
anointed) in anointing Successors, to Kings, which had otherwise no just
Interest, Title, etc. to their Kingdoms; or that it is Lawful for any Captain
or Subject, high or low, whatsoever, to bear Arms against their Sovereign, etc.
by the Example of Iehu (except it might first plainly appear that there are now
Prophets sent extraordinarily from God, with sufficient and special Authority
in that behalf) he does greatly Err. And since the Convocation condemns the
removing of Princes, without particular Orders from Heaven; It Is plain they
could not believe that every effectual Revolution had God's Approbation. For if
they did believe that God does that by his Providence now, which he did
formerly by his Prophets; i. e. If they did believe his Will is to be
interpreted by Events, and that he approves and acts in all Revolutions which
are successful; Why do they pronounce all Practices of this Nature Unlawful,
except they are warranted by express and immediate Authority from Heaven?
Certainly they could not declare that Unlawful, which they believed to be God
Almighty's doing. What is the Reason they tell us, No Man must imitate the
Example of Iehu, tho, like him, he should be chosen by the Captains of the
Army; 2 Kings 9.
and have Power, and the Consent of the People to dethrone the Lawful Prince:
If they thought Revelation and Success, Principles of equal Certainty; If it
was their Opinion that Providence was always on the prevailing side; and that
Kings had no Right to govern any longer than the major part of their Subjects
were willing to obey them? Conv. p. 53.
The Doctor's Instance to prove that Providence or Success is a certain
Manifestation of the Divine Approbation, is clearly against him. For tho the
Lord may, and is able to overthrow Kings, notwithstanding any Claim, Title,
etc. Yet it is evident by this Example, and the Canon made upon it, that the
Convocation did not think this was ever done, without God's particular
Commission. For it is positively affirmed by this Reverend Synod, that Ehud and
Othoniel, the Deliverers mentioned in this place, Page 52, 53.
Were raised up by God Almighty with a full Assurance of their lawful Callings,
and made Judges immediately by Him; without which Prerogatives it had been
altogether unlawful for them to have done as they did. -- Because that God
foresaw what Mischief private Men (as all Subjects are in respect of their
Prince) might do, Page 53.
under the Color of these Examples. Now if it is unlawful for any Person to
step out of his private Sphere, and to act counter to the Laws of Subjection,
and common Justice, without an especial Dispensation from Heaven; then, when
such irregular Measures are taken, we must not affirm they have the Countenance
of God Almighty, and are brought about by the Conduct of his Providence. To say
this, is by the Principles of the Convocation to make God the Author of Sin;
and to prompt Men to those Actions, they will be damned, for doing. In a word,
If, as these Gentlemen inform us, those who disturb and overthrow Governments
without an express Commission from God, do that which is altogether unlawful;
then certainly they cannot plead God's Authority for what they did. And if so,
Success and Revelation are not Principles equally warrantable, unless that
which is lawful and unlawful be the same. And by Consequence it is a great
Mistake to say that Victorious Force is as clear an Evidence of a Divine
Interposition, as the most unquestionable Inspiration. Or, to use the Doctor's
Words, That what God did by Prophets in Israel, by express Nomination of the
Person, he does by his Providence in other Kingdoms. So that to fasten such a
meaning as this upon the Convocation, is to interpret them contrary to the
obvious Construction and Scope of the Passage, and to make them inconsistent
both with Truth and themselves. To give an Instance in a lower Case. There is
no doubt but God can dispose of private Property as well as Crowns,
notwithstanding any Title to the contrary; As we know he gave the Egyptians
Gold and Jewels, to the Israelites; but now if any Man should run away with a
Sum of Money he had borrowed of his Neighbors, and plead Providence for his
Knavery, in all likelihood he would not have gotten a Verdict from the
Convocation.

To go on; the Doctor tells us, That the Moabites and Aramites could never have
a Legal Right to the Government of Israel, and yet the Convocation asserts,
Page 6.
That it was not lawful for the Israelites to take up Arms against those Kings.
But why could those Princes never have a Legal Right over the Israelites? The
Convocation, I Am sure, says no such thing. The Doctor may please to observe,
that at this time there was no King in Israel. There was no Royal Line
established by Succession; no Governors set up by Divine Appointment. This
Conquest of the Aramites, etc. happened before the date of the Jewish Monarchy,
and in the Interval of the Judges. And since the Israelites were under no
Preingagements to a dispossessed Prince, what should hinder them from ranging
themselves under the Obedience of a Foreign Governor, when they were in no
condition to resist? In this Case their Submission gives away no Man's Right,
nor does any Injury to a third Person. And thus being at Liberty to make over
their Subjection, when they had once actually submitted; The Kings to whom they
gave up their Liberty, had a Legal Right to govern them, though they might
acquire it by unjustifiable Methods. But when People are under a former
Obligation to a Prince, who insists upon his Right, and demands their
Obedience, there their Hands are tied up, and they cannot acknowledge any new
Master without breach of Duty to their old One.

Conv. p. 83.
Our Author proceeds with the Convocation to the Kings of of Egypt and Babylon,
where he says, They teach that Submission was due to these Princes who never
had a Legal Right to govern Israel: And the like it seems they affirm of the
four Monarchies, which were all violent Usurpations. But

1. The Doctor misreports the Convocation; (it is hoped out of inadvertency;)
For They neither affirm that the Kings of Egypt, and Babylon, had never any
Legal or Natural Right to govern Israel; nor any Thing like it. Or that any of
the Monarchies stood upon Usurpation, when the Jews were bound to submit to
their Authority. As for the King of Egypt, They make no Exception to his Title,
Page 58.
They only say, He oppressed the People very Tyrannically; which all Men know
may be done by a Lawful Prince. And that the Kings of Egypt were such to the
Israelites, will appear if we consider in what condition the Children of Israel
were when they went into Egypt. Now the Scripture informs us, They were driven
thither partly by Necessity and Famine. They were but one single Family. And
being in these Circumstances, we cannot imagine that Jacob set up for Monarchy
in Egypt; or indented with Pharaoh for Independency. It Is very unlikely that
Prince would suffer a few indigent Persons, who came for Bread and Protection,
to set up a distinct Kingdom in the midst of his own Dominions. Such Pretenses
and Proposals as these to one of the most powerful Monarchs in the World, would
have looked very extravagantly from a poor distressed Family. And to take
Things at the lowest, we must acknowledge that the first Generation of the
Israelites, owed Pharaoh a Local Allegiance. Coke's Reports lib. 7.

Calvin's Case.


For thus much Sir Ed. Coke and others agree is due to those Princes into whose
Country we travel; notwithstanding our Subjection remains still uncancelled to
our Natural Prince. But Jacob, as appears from the History of Scripture, was
not under the Jurisdiction of any of the Princes of Palestine, and therefore it
was in his Power to make himself and Family entirely Pharaoh's Subjects. And
that he did so, needs not be disputed any farther. For I suppose it will be
granted of all hands, that the Israelites were far enough from reigning in
Egypt. And since there was no Prince of Palestine that could claim any Right
over the Israelites; all those who were born in Egypt, which were no less than
three Generations, were Pharaoh's Natural Subjects; and he by consequence their
Natural and Legal-Prince. Of this Truth the Convocation seem very sensible, as
may be collected from their saying; It may not be omitted, Conv. p. 58.
when God himself sent Moses to deliver them from that servitude; he would not
suffer him to carry them thence, till Pharaoh their King gave them License to
depart. This is a pregnant Proof what a mighty Regard the Convocation thought
God Almighty had to the Legal Rights of Princes; That he is so far from giving
them away to Blind Events, to Treachery and unjustifiable Force, that
Revelation and repeated Miracles are scarce thought sufficient to disengage
Subjects from their Allegiance, without the Consent of their Prince. If any one
Questions the reasoning of the Synod in this point, I am not bound to make it
good; their Opinion is sufficient for my purpose. I shall now proceed to the
Kings of Babylon, and prove against the Doctor that They likewise had a Legal
Right to govern Israel; both before, and after the Captivity. I suppose it will
not be denied, That when a Prince either submits himself, or is expressly
commanded by God to resign, there his Sovereignty ceases, and the Legal Right
is transferred to the Resignee: If the latter Case be questioned, I desire to
know whether God has not the Supreme Dominion of the World? If he has, he may
extinguish any Man's Right, and dispose of it as he pleases. And thence it
follows, that when he has given it away by express Grant, the former Possessor
has no longer any Right; and if not any, no Legal one. Farther, If a Legal
Right should continue after God has expressly given it away, this absurdity will
follow, That God cannot repeal a Humane Law, and consequently has a lesser
Authority than Men. I have already proved that Revelation and Success are quite
different Principles; and that we have no manner of reason to infer God's
Approbation from the latter, as from the former; and therefore the Doctor can
take no Advantage from this way of Reasoning. To return to the Kings of
Babylon, whose Title may easily be made out from the Scripture. For first
Iehoiakim submitted to Nebuchadnezzar, and became his Servant, 2 King. 24.1. 2 Chronicles. 36.
and was afterward deposed by him for his Revolt.

After him Nebuchadnezzar being Sovereign Paramount, sets up Iehoiachin Son to
Iehoiakim, who was afterward carried away Captive, and his Uncle Zedekiah made
King by the Babylonian Monarch. 2 Chronicles. 36.10, 11.
Thus we see the Kings of Judah, who only had the Right to govern that Nation,
became Vassals to the King of Babylon, held their Crowns of him, and were
contented to reign durante Beneplacito. And though Nebuchadnezzar might
possibly oblige them by unjust Force to these Conditions, yet after they had
submitted their Act was valid, and obliged to Performance. This is sufficient
to make Nebuchadnezzar a Legal Monarch: But this is not all; For Moab, Ammon,
Tire, Sidon, etc. are expressly given to him by God himself, and all those
Princes, together with Iehoiakim and Zedekiah, Jer. 27.2, 3.11, 12.
are commanded to come under the Protection, and to own the Authority of the
King of Babylon. And destruction is denounced against those who refused to
comply. That Nation and Kingdom which will not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar
King of Babylon; Ibid. v. 8.
and that will not put their Neck under the Yoke of the King of Babylon, that
Nation will I punish, says the Lord, with the Sword, and with the Famine, and
with the Pestilence, till I have consumed them by his hand. Thus we see the
Kings of Babylon reigned Dei Gratia with a Witness; They had their Charter for
Government signed and sealed in Heaven, and delivered to Notice and public
View, by Authentic and Unquestionable Hands. This certainly is enough in all
reason to make Nebuchadnezzar a Rightful Prince. If the Doctor has any Thing of
this Nature to justify the present Revolution, the Cause is his own* Therefore
if he knows of any Prophets he would do well to produce them: Let them but show
their Credentials, and prove their Mission, and we have done. But if he has
none of this Evidence, Dan. 4.17.
the places cited by the Convocation, that God takes away Kings, and sets up
Kings, are foreign to his purpose. It Is true, when God speaks from Heaven all
Humane Laws ought to give place, and be silent. But then we must consider, that
Revelation, and the Doctor's Notion of Providence, are widely different; the
the one is an infallible Direction, the other will lead us into all the
Labyrinths of Confusion and Injustice: And make us Abettors of all those
unaccountable Practices which ungodly Power has the Permission to act. If any
Man will be of this Opinion he ought not to make the Convocation his Voucher.
Do they not say then that God removes, and sets up Kings? Not just in the
Doctor's Words: They affirm, That God has ever used the Ministry of Civil
Magistrates in other Countries as well as in Judea, etc. And may not all this
be done without giving his Authority to Usurpers? It Is true, they instance in
Nebuchadnezzar, But this Prince had both the Submission of the Kings of Judah,
and the immediate Appointment of God; either of which were sufficient to make
his Title unquestionable. And since his Authority was thus fortified, it is no
wonder that the Convocation pronounces that the Jews were bound to obey him. So
that in their Sense God is said to take away Kings, and set up Kings, either

1. By express Nomination: This way, if there was no other, the Babylonian and
Persian Monarchies may be defended. The former has been spoke to already; And
of the latter it was foretold by Isaiah long before the Birth of Cyrus; That he
should be a Conqueror, Isa. 45. v. 1, 4, 13.44. v. 28.
that God had holden his right Hand, or strengthened him, to subdue Nations:
And that he should restore the Jews to their own Country; which could not be
done without the Destruction of the Babylonian Empire.

2. God is said to take away and set up Kings, when he suffers one King to
conquer another; and the right Heir is either destroyed, or submits. And since
we are not to expect new Revelations, we are to conclude, God removes Kings no
other way but this: Alleg. p. 37, 38
Which is no Limiting the Providence of God in governing Kings, and protecting
injured Subjects, as the Doctor supposes. For God can, when he sees it
convenient, either turn their Hearts, or take them out of the World, or incline
them to Resign. These are all easy and intelligible Expedients, and don't bring
any of those Difficulties of Providence upon us, Page 32.
as the Doctor has entangled himself with. This keeps the ancient Boundaries of
Right and Wrong unremoved; and settles the Duty of a Subject upon a Legal
Basis. Indeed where Revelation fails, what is so reasonable a Direction to
steer by, as the Constitution; which is confirmed by the Laws of Nature, and
the Authority of God? Is not this a much more accountable Method, than to
resign up our Consciences to Violence, and impetuous Accidents, and to make
Treason our Oracle? Now setting aside the Scripture-right the Babylonian and
Persian Monarchs had to their Empire; it is easy to conceive that these
victorious Monarchs either destroyed those Kings they dispossessed, or made
them submit their Claim, as Edgar Atheline did to William the Conqueror. That
this practice of dispatching them was usual to settle the new Conquests, and
prevent Competitors, is very probable. Upon this account it was that
Nebuchadnezzar slew Zedekiah's Sons, and all the Nobles of Judah. And at the
fall of the Babylonian Empire Belshazzar was slain, as we may learn from Daniel
and Xenophon. And how kindly the Romans used their Royal Captives may be
guessed, without other Examples, by the Treatment of Perseus, and his Family.
Now where the right Owner of the Government is destroyed, though never so
wickedly, the Usurper becomes a Lawful Prince: For Possession is a good Right,
where there is no better. These Observations are sufficient to justify
Submission to the four Monarchies, without having recourse to the Doctor's new
Scheme.

I am now to attend the Doctor to Alexander the Great, whom he gives a hard
Character, and thinks any Prince who gets the Throne may pretend as much Right
as he. Whether the Ground of Alexander's War was defensible, or not, is not
material to the point^ However he insists very much upon the Justice of his
Cause, and tells his Soldiers they were engaged in a Holy War; and that his
Design was to revenge the Injuries done to Religion, by Darius and Xerxes Kings
of Persia; who made a barbarous Descent upon Greece, Curt. lib. 3.
and violated all Laws, Humane and Divine. And in his Letter to Darius he sets
forth, by way of Declaration, how the Grecian Colonies in Ionia, and about the
Hellespont, had been oppressed and harassed by his Predecessors. How Greece was
overrun with Fire and Sword; And besides other terrible Articles of Accusation
he tells him, That his Father Philip was assassinated by some Persian's
Instigation: Id. lib. 4.
And at last appeals to the Gods with a great deal of Assurance. Now I don't
find Darius ever offered to purge himself, and therefore the Charge might be
all true, for ought appears to the contrary. And if so, I hope the Doctor will
be kinder to Alexander's Title, and not Censure such a Religious Expedition;
especially where Liberty and Property were so much concerned. And if this will not
do, there are several other considerable Circumstances after Darius his Death,
to allege in behalf of Alexander's Legal Right.

1. We don't find Darius his Son who was taken with his Mother at the Battle of
Issus, outlived his Childhood; and therefore it may be taken for granted, he
never put in his Claim.

2. Alexander married Statyra Darius his Eldest Daughter, Diodor. Sic.
which made him at the lowest a Matrimonial King. And no doubt this Lady would
not contest the Administration of Affairs with him at that time. And for fear
the Doctor should find out a Salick Law in Persia; it may be observed in the

Third place, Curt. lib. 7.
That Oxatres, Darius's Brother submitted to Alexander, and rid in his Guards.
And now for ought I see his Title is clear on all sides.

But the Doctor attempts to prove from the Authority of the Convocation, Alleg.
p. 8.
that the Jews were bound to submit to Alexander, Can. 31.
when he summoned Iaddus the High Priest and the rest of them to surrender,
though it cannot be denied that Darius was then living. In Answer to this I
shall prove,

First, That this Assertion is a manifest Misconstruction of the Convocation.

Secondly, That considering the Condition Darius was then in, such a Submission
as the Doctor contends for, must be unlawful by his own Principles.

First, The Doctor misrepresents the Convocation. It Is true, the Convocation
asserts, The Jews were the Subjects of Alexander after his Authority was
settled among them. But then they plainly suppose that Alexander's Authority
was not settled while Darius lived. For,

1. They inform us, Conv. p. 64.
That Iaddus sent Alexander word that he could not lawfully violate his Oath of
Allegiance to Darius, whilst that Prince lived. Now in reporting this Answer
of Iaddus, they don't add the least mark of Censure or Disapprobation. Whereas
it is their Custom throughout their whole Book, when they relate any
unwarrantable Passages of History; to show their dislike, and to condemn the
Fact. This Method as it was necessary to declare their Opinion, and make their
Narrative instructive: So there never was a more important occasion to pursue
it, than in the place before us. For if they were of the Doctor's mind, they
must have thought Iaddus was wonderfully to blame, for giving Alexander such a
categorical peremptory Denial. And therefore they ought to have censured, and
exposed such a dangerous Mistake for fear of the malignity of the Precedent.
Not submit to Alexander while Darius lived! What a mortal Obstinacy was this?
No less in the Doctor's Divinity, than a direct standing out against
Providence, and opposing a Divine Right. And would the Convocation, who are
wont to take notice of lesser Failings, suffer an Error of such a pernicious
Consequence to pass without the least stroke of Correction? This if the
Doctor's Sentiments and theirs had been the same, would have been an
unpardonable Omission* A Negligence that common Honesty, and Discretion, could
never have been guilty of.

But to show they were of a different Opinion, we find Iaddus's Behavior
justified by the Authority of their Canon, where we have these remarkable
Words: Can. 30. Page 65.
If any shall affirm that Iaddus having sworn Allegiance to King Darius, might
lawfully have born Arms himself against Darius; or have solicited others,
whether Aliens or Jews thereunto, he does greatly Err. They tell us in the
foregoing Chapter, Page 64.
(out of which this Canon is drawn, that Alexander desired Iaddus to assist him
in his Wars against the Persians) and in the Canon which is nothing but the
Historical Part formed into Doctrines and practical Truths* They assert that
it is a great Error to say that Iaddus might have born Arms against Darius, i.
e. that it was unlawful for Iaddus to have assisted Alexander, and by
consequence, that his refusing this Prince, was a commendable Instance of
Loyalty. And yet after all this Evidence, Alleg. p. 8.
the Doctor is pleased to say, That the Convocation in their Canon takes no
Notice that Jaddus could not submit to any other Prince while Darius lived. No
Notice! Do they not say it was unlawful for Iaddus to have born Arms, or to
have solicited any others to a Revolt? Which is as plain a Justification of his
Incompliance with Alexander's Demands; and as full an evidence that Success,
does not transfer Allegiance as is possible. And is all this nothing? But the
words whilst Darius lived; are not transcribed from the History into the
Canon, it is granted. However this Omission upon which the Doctor founds himself
is not at all material: For

1. The Sense of the Canon concerning the unlawfulness of Iaddus's taking Arms
against Darius is indefinitely expressed; and by the Rules of reasoning ought
to be understood without any limitation of time, unless the subject matter
requires it; which it is far from doing to the Doctor's purpose in the Case
before us. For the Canons being but an Abridgment of the History of the
Chapters, drawn into practical Propositions; They ought to be taken in the same
Sense, and understood in the same comprehensive Latitude with the History;
unless there is a plain Exception to the contrary. For unless the Chapters and
Canons are to be understood alike; to what purpose is the History premised in
the one, and repeated in the other? Since the Chapters are the Body from whence
the Canons are extracted, they ought to regulate their Meaning, and explain
their Ambiguities, if there should happen to be any. Besides, it is the Custom
of Conclusions of this Nature, to be contracted into a lesser Compass than the
Principles from which they are inferred. All unnecessary lengths of Expression
being industriously avoided upon such occasions. What wonder is it then to find
the Canons less wordy than the Historical Chapters?

2. Unless the Canon holds out the full meaning of the Chapter, the Sense must
be uncertain, and uninstructive. They tell us it was unlawful for Iaddus to
have taken up Arms against Darius. But how long was this Allegiance to last?
Why according to the new Interpretation no longer than an armed Enemy, or a
company of Revolters should order him to break it, and put him upon a Dedition.
Alleg. p. 8.
So that the meaning of the Canon it seems amounts only to this, That Iaddus
ought not to have invited Alexander into Judea; nor to have run after him, as
soon as he heard he had taken the Field against Darius. But when the new Prince
came once near him, he was immediately to go out in his Pontificalibus, and
surrender without any farther dispute; though Darius was still living, Master
of a prodigious Army, and had by far the greatest part of his Empire in his
possession. This no doubt is an admirable direction for the Loyalty of future
Ages, and fit to create an entire Confidence between Prince and Subject! If
every Man may transfer his Subjection when his Prince is in danger, and himself
is Judge of that danger, Allegiance is no more than a ridiculous and arbitrary
Relation, contrived only to impose upon the Credulity and good Nature of
Princes, without giving them any tolerable Security. For when they have most
need of their Subjects they may go look them. So that the principal Design of
the Oath centers in the convenience of the Subjects. A Man swears that he will
be sure to take care of one, and never rebel, when he believes his Prince too
strong for him, and that he must be hanged at home for his pains. In this
extravagant meaning the Canon explains itself, if we do not take it in
Connection with the foregoing Chapter, and extend it to the words of the
History, viz. That Iaddus was not to bear Arms against Darius, whilst Darius
lived. Which Construction is unforced, and natural, avoids all the former
Inconveniences; and makes the Canon a very intelligible and useful Direction
for the Subject.

3. Let the meaning of this Passage be restrained to a less Extent than
Darius's Life; it will not come up to the Doctor's purpose; for both the Canon
and Chapter are point blank against him. He cites them to prove that Iaddus's
Submission to Alexander (though an Usurper) was lawful; whereas they say the
direct contrary. They relate the History of Iaddus's Noncompliance in the
Chapter. And to recommend his Example with the more advantage; Conv. p. 64.
They fortify it with their own Authority: and immediately decree in their
Canon, That if any Man affirms that Iaddus might lawfully have born Arms
against Darius, he does greatly Err. Well, but Iaddus did not mean this by it,
Alleg. p. 8.
for he immediately submitted to Alexander as soon as he came to Jerusalem. He
did so: however, under favor, this is foreign to the Argument. For we are not
disputing Iaddus's Practice, but the Sense of the Convocation. Now they don't
make the least mention of Iaddus's Submission, and therefore the Doctor ought
not to insist upon it, at least not amongst his Convocation-Proofs.

The Reason of their Silence no doubt was either because they thought Iaddus's
Submission to Alexander unlawful, or they believed, as Josephus reports, that
he had Inspiration to justify him. Which because it is not now to be expected,
the Convocation waves the Relation; for fear Enthusiasm, and Religious
Imposture might take occasion from thence to unsettle Kingdoms, and lead Men
into Rebellion. The Doctor in his Case of Allegiance takes no Notice of this
Revelation, which was the only ground of the Jews Submission; Page 20.
but in his Vindication he attempts to prove from Josephus, That Jaddus never
questioned whether it was lawful to submit to Alexander in these Circumstances.
L. 11. c. 8.
And therefore when God is said to appear to them in his Dream, he answered, no
Question, about the Lawfulness of submitting to Alexander; but directed him how
to do it in such a manner as might prevent the threatened danger.

In Reply to this I must observe, that this Relation about Iaddus's Dream, does
not affect the Sense of the Convocation; For they take no manner of Notice of
it, but by necessary Implication commend him for his resolute Answer to
Alexander. I shall therefore undertake this Answer of the Doctors as an
Argument of his own, independent of the Convocation Book. Having premised this,
I Reply by way of Enquiry, Is the Doctor certain that Iaddus never questioned
whether it was lawful for him to submit to Alexander, when he was coming with a
great Force against Jerusalem? If the Case be thus, What is the Reason of his
sending word that he could not submit as long as Darius lived? Was Iaddus
assured that Alexander could not march his Forces to Jerusalem as long as
Darius was living? He could not suppose Darius thus Invincible, since he was
lately defeated, and retired toward Babylon; what made him then return
Alexander such an untoward Excuse, Romance against his own Interest, and give
such an Uncouttly and Impolitick Answer? One would almost think the Doctor owed
Iaddus a spite, he makes him so ridiculous upon all occasions. If he had
thought it Lawful to submit, why did he not do it before? What made him delay
it to the last minute, and give a needless Provocation to the Conqueror? It Is
plain from Josephus, that Iaddus did not submit till he had received direction
from God. Now if he was at such perfect Liberty to transfer his Allegiance, one
would imagine he should have sent a tender of it to Alexander, before things
had come to this extremity. But of this the Historian makes not the least
mention. He tells us, that Alexander threatened Iaddus that he would be with him
shortly, and instruct him better in the Doctrine of Oaths; That Iaddus
notwithstanding kept his Point, and his Gates shut; That the Macedonians
expected Jerusalem would be sacked, and that Iaddus would pay dearly for his
Obstinacy: which is a Demonstration there had been no Overtures of Submission.
It likewise appears from Josephus, that when Iaddus had his Oracular Dream,
Alexander was within a days march of Jerusalem. Now if he was so entirely
satisfied about his new Master, why did he risque his Affairs at this rate, and
stand off till Alexander was just in view? This was an early Submission indeed,
and likely to atone for his former Contumacy! Vind. Ib.
So that if a Man may conclude any thing, his deferring to surrender thus long,
is a pregnant Proof he believed it unlawful. But possibly he was sure of
Assistance and Direction from God when ever it was desired. How could that be?
There was neither Urim nor Thummim after the Captivity; and Prophecy ceased
with Malachy. Besides, what need was there of a supernatural Direction for the
Resolution of a plain Case? Yes, though the matter of the Action was clear,
there was a difficulty in the manner of doing it. Ibid.
Whose Fault was that? If Iaddus had gone in sooner, his own Discretion though
but ordinary, would have been sufficient to have managed his Submission. For
Alexander was known to be a more generous and prudent Prince, than to insist
upon unreasonable Rigors, especially at the beginning of his Fortunes. Well!
But Iaddus possibly did not think it lawful to submit till Alexander was just
upon him. And what made him think so then? Why could not he stand a Siege as
well as the Jews had formerly done against Nebuchadnezzar? Why did he fall
short of the Resolution of Tire, and Gaza, and be out done by mere Heathens in
point of Loyalty? Or does the Doctor believe it lawful for a Governor of a Town
to surrender as soon as he hears the Enemy is approaching? If he does, he would
make an excellent Garrison Divine. But does not Josephus say, Iaddus was
extremely concerned how he should meet the Macedonians? Meet them! In what
manner? In a submissive petitioning way? No such matter. The word (...), will
bear a hostile Signification; and the Series of the History requires such a
Construction. For Alexander was very angry, and his Army expected the plunder
of the Town, and the Jews stood upon their Guard; which are strong Arguments
that there had been no Treaty, or Signs of a Surrender. Besides, the Doctor is
mistaken, in saying that God answered no Question about the Lawfulness of
submitting to Alexander. For God bid him open his Gates, Vind. Ib. Joseph. l.
11. c. 8.
which is a clear Proof that Iaddus stood upon his Defense; and kept the
Countenance of an Enemy; and thought himself obliged so to do, till he had a
Dispensation from God Almighty.

This I conceive is a sufficient Reply to the Doctor's Answer concerning
Iaddus's Revelation. And if there was any additional strength wanting, it will
be fortified in the next Paragraph as the Reader may observe. To return to his
Case of Allegiance, to which I answer

4thly, That the Doctor does not only argue against the Sense of the
Convocation, but against himself. For considering the condition Darius was in,
when Iaddus was summoned by Alexander, the High Priest ought not to have
submitted by the Doctor's Principles. For when Alexander is supposed to have
come to Jerusalem, Ralegh. Hist. etc. Page 583.
he had conquered nothing but the Proconsular Asia, Phoenicia, and Syria: which
probably was not much more than the tenth part of the Persian Empire. It was
before the great Battle at Arbela, and not long after that at Issus. Where
though Darius had the disadvantage, yet he was so far from being discouraged by
the Defeat, that he writes to Alexander at a very magnificent rate, Curt. lib.
4.
treats him as his Inferior; and demands, rather than desires the Liberty of
his Queen and Children. Now the Doctor owns, Alleg. p. 17.
That when the dispossessed Prince has such a formidable Power as makes the
Event very doubtful, (which Darius unquestionably had) the Revolution is
incomplete, and we cannot yet think the Providence of God has settled the new
Prince in the Throne. And therefore we ought not in such a Case so much as to
pray against the dispossessed Prince. Ibid.
And if so, certainly not to swear to another Master, which according to his
reasoning is a much greater Submission. And though he tells us, (and would fix
the Doctrine upon the Convocation) that Jaddus had sinned if he had refused
Alexander an Oath of Allegiance when he received his Summons. Alleg. p. 8.
Yet here he grants by undeniable Consequence, Page 17.
that Iaddus had sinned if he had sworn. For then he must have had more than
one King at a time, Page 14.
and been bound to two opposite and contrary. Allegiances: which is a
Contradiction to the Doctor's 6th Proposition, and indeed to Reason itself. The
truth is Iaddus, as our Author represents him, makes a very odd Figure. He
solemnly professes, that he could not submit to Alexander while Darius lived.
And yet, Conv. p. 64.
like a wary Man, his meaning, if we believe the Doctor, was no more but this:
That having sworn Allegiance to Darius, he could not make a voluntary Dedition
of himself, Alleg. p. 8.
etc. But when he was in Alexander 's power, (to which he resigned himself
without the least Resistance) he made no Scruple to become his Subject. Which
is in effect as if he had sent Alexander word, Sir, Though our Preingagements
of Allegiance to King Darius hinder us from surrendering at your Summons, yet I
hope your Majesty will not take us for Men of an obstinate and incurable Loyalty.
If you please to march your Army to Jerusalem, you will find the Behavior of
the Jews not ungreeable. For though in point of Conscience we are bound not to
run in quest of new Governors, yet any Body may have us for the fetching. And
were not Iaddus and his Countrymen admirable Subjects at this rate? Don't they
deserve to be commended by Ptolomeus Lagi, and Antiochus Magnus, for their
Fidelity to Darius, and to be entrusted with places of strength upon this
account, Antiq. Jud. l. 12. c. 1, 3.
as Josephus reports? These Jews, no doubt, were fit to make any Town
impregnable. They would defend it against all Mankind but an Enemy. But if he
had once appeared they were ready to open their Gates, and their Arms to
receive him. Indeed as this Historian represents them, their Loyalty was
considerable; because though they were threatened to be attacqued by a powerful
and victorious Army, yet nothing could persuade them to change their Prince,
but an express Command from God himself. But as their Behavior is described by
the Doctor, they have very little Reason to value themselves upon their
Constancy.

And now it may not be improper to go on to the Roman Empire. In behalf of
which the Convocation is again cited by the Doctor to prove, Alleg. p. 7.
That the Jews were bound to pay Tribute to Caesar, to pray for him, and give
him the Security of an Oath. Can. 33, 34.
Why the Doctor quoted these Passages, except he thought the Reader would not
consult the Original, I cannot imagine. For not only the 32 Chapter, but these
very Canons stand in direct opposition to his Opinion. They all along suppose
the Roman Government was Legally established: And condemn the Noncompliance
and Resistance of the Jews upon that Account. The 33 Canon in the Beginning,
which the Doctor took care to omit, plainly affirms, That the Royal Assamonean
Family, which only had a Right to the Sovereignty of their Nation, had resigned
their Crown, and owned the Romans for their Masters. Their words are. That
Aristobulus, and his two Sons Alexander and Antigonus, had all of them
submitted themselves to the Government of the Romans. And then its no wonder
that the Canon decrees. They Sinned in Rebelling against them. The Submission
of these Princes is no doubt the Reason why the Jews are said to have wilfully
drawn the Tyranny of the Romans upon their Heads. Can. 33.
And to make the matter plain beyond all Contradiction, the very Passage quoted
by the Doctor, calls the Romans their Lawful Magistrates. Ibid.
A Man must be very sharp-sighted to spy out any Countenance given to
Usurpation by these Authorities. I confess I am almost amazed to find them
alleged by one of the Doctor's Sense.

Now though I am only concerned to vindicate the Convocation from the Doctor's
Construction; yet possibly a brief touch of the History may not be unacceptable
to the Reader. We are to observe then, that about the year 65, before the
Incarnation, the two Royal Brothers, Hyrcanus and Aristobulus happened to dispute
the Sovereignty of Judea. In which Contest Hyrcanus, though the eldest, was by
Misfortune and Duress, compelled to resign. Joseph. Antiq. Jud. l. 14. c. 1.
And the Articles between his Brother and him, for the more Solemn Ratification
were agreed to in the Temple. However this Resignation being forced, Id. cap.
2, 3.
made Hyrcanus uneasy; who for remedy applies himself first to Aretas King of
Arabia, and afterward to Pompey the Great. Who, glad of the Invitation,
marches his Army into the Country, takes Jerusalem, and makes Judea a part of
the Roman Empire. Hyrcanus is contented to receive the High Priesthood from his
Patron Pompey; Ibid. cap. 7, 8.
and Aristobulus is sent Prisoner in Chains to Rome, with his Children. After
several Varieties of Fortune he was enlarged by Caesar, Ibid. cap. 13.
and had the Command of two Legions under him. And the next News of him is,
that he was poisoned by some of Pompey's Faction, and his eldest Son Alexander
beheaded by Scipio. The younger Antigonus recovers Jerusalem by the help of the
Parthians, cuts off his Uncle Hyrcanus's Ears to unqualifie him for the
Priesthood; Ibid. cap. 25, 28.
and afterward submits to Sosius and Herod, who commanded for the Romans, and
is Beheaded by Mark Antony. Upon this Herod, who was some time since made King
of Judea by the Romans, goes on with his Project to dispatch the Royal Line.
And to color his Design the better, he invites Hyrcanus, who was in Parthia,
to his Court; and gets him into his power. Then he makes Aristobulus, Son to
Alexander abovementioned, and Brother to Mariamne, High Priest; and soon after
procures him to be drowned in a Canal. And, to make sure work, Id. l. 15. c. 2,
3.
he proceeds to the Murder of Mariamne his Queen, and Hyrcanus her Mother's
Father. And thus we see how the Romans came by their Title to Judea, L. 15. c.
9, 11.
which though they might introduce by Stratagem and Force, yet it soon improved
into an unquestionable Authority. For first they had the Submission, and
afterward the Extinction of the Royal Family; either of which were sufficient
to support their Claim, and make them a Lawful Magistracy.

By this time I suppose it is sufficiently apparent, that this Convocation is
far from teaching, That Princes who have no Legal Right to their Thrones,
Alleg. p. 8.
are either placed there by God, or vested with his Authority.

But before I conclude this Argument, I must consider what the Doctor has
lately advanced to fortify his Opinion, that the Moabites, Aramites, and
Egyptians, could not have a Legal Right to govern Israel. Deuteronomy. 17, 15.
For by the Constitution of the Jewish Commonwealth. They could not give the
Power of the Government to a stranger. The four Monarchies likewise were
erected with the most manifest Usurpation. Vind. p. 11, 12.


In Answer to this Objection. I shall endeavor to prove that these Governments
were all free from the Charge of Usurpation; both from the sense of the
Convocation; and likewise by Arguments independent of their Authority.

1. In Answer to the Text of Deuteronomy, 17, 15. Upon which the Doctor relies.
We may take notice, That every Breach of a Constitution does not make a
Governor an illegal Prince* Solomon Multiplied Wives and Horses contrary to the
express Command in this Chapter, and several others of the Israelitish Kings
were guilty of greater Errors: Yet these miscarriages did not in the least
disoblige their Title; or make them cease to be Legal Princes.

2. We may observe there were some Things the Jews were forbiden to do: Which
when they were once done, their Act was valid and firm, and they were bound to
maintain it. For Example, the Jews were expressly prohibited intermarrying with
the Seven Nations, Deuteronomy. 7.3.
of which the Hittites are first named. However we read that Bethsheba a
Jewess, Daughter to Eliam the Son of Achitophel, 2 Samuel 11.3. Id. 23.34.
was Married to Uriah the Hittite. But notwithstanding this Obstacle, the
Marriage was undoubtedly lawful, as appears from Nathan's application of the
Parable, 2 Samuel 12.
and the aggravation of David's Sin.

To give another instance. 2 Samuel 21.2.
The Gibeonites were a remnant of the Amorites, which the Isralites were
Commanded to destroy; but after they had received them into their protection,
Deuteronomy. 20.17.
they became their natural Subjects, whom they were bound to preserve. By
parity of reason, though the Jews were forbidden to Elect a stranger for their
King. Yet when they had once made choice of him, (provided they were not
preingaged to another) he becomes their Lawful Prince, and ought to be
acknowledged as such.

3. Either these Foreign Governors the Doctor excepts against were Lawful
Princes, or Usurpers, the latter they were not. For as to their Authority they
neither Usurped upon the Right of the People or the Crown; for either the
People submitted, that is, consented to be Governed by them, when their was no
King in Israel. Or else they had a Resignation from the Royal Line. Now if the
Doctor knows any mean between Usurpers, and Legal Kings, he would do well to
acquaint the World with it, for it will be a perfect Discovery. Having premised
this, I shall proceed to a more particular Consideration of the Doctors
Defense, and examine his Monarchies accordingly as they fall in order of Time.

To begin with the Egyptian Kings. And there I need not repeat what I have
urged already to prove, that they had a Natural and Legal Right to govern
Israel. Its sufficient to observe that the Doctor's main. Objection does not
affect them. For the Israelites were under their Government before the Delivery
of the Mosaical Law, by which they were enjoined not to choose a Foreign
Prince. So that Deuteronomy 17.15. cannot be alleged against the Legality of
Pharaoh's Title; because this Text was wrote long after the Children of Israel
came out of Egypt. This the Convocation must needs know, and therefore could
not reckon Pharaoh an illegal Prince with respect to the Israelites.

2. The Kings of the Aramites and Moabites are called Tyrants by the
Convocation; not with respect to their Title, but their Government.

God gave them Judges to save them from the Tyrants that oppressed them. For
that they were no Usurpers (in continuance, whatever they might be at first)
appears.

Conv. p. 52.
1. From the Comparison the Convocation makes between Ehud and Iehu, Ioram and
Eglon. They expressly tell us, That the case of Iehu was like unto this of Ehud.
Conv. p. 53.
Now to make the case Parallel, the Kings that were removed must have the same
Title to their Government. And since the Doctor must allow that Ioram was a
Lawful Prince of the Israelites, it follows that Eglon was so too. For the
Convocation mentions them without any manner of Distinction, and requires the
same extraordinary Commission from Heaven to enterprise any thing against
either of them.

2. By their general conclusion, which they make immediately after the recital
of these cases; it plainly appears, They believed Eglon to be a Lawful Prince
with respect to the Israelites. Their words are as follow.

Both these Examples (of Ioram and Eglon) do make it known to us, that the Lord
may overthrow any Kings, etc. notwithstanding any Claim, Right, Title, or
Interest which they can challenge to their Kingdoms. Now this Inference cannot
be drawn from the premises, unless Eglon had a good and unexceptionable Right
to the Government of Israel; For if Eglon's Title was defective in any point,
it could not be a ruled Case against those Princes who had a better. But the
Convocation affirm that from these Examples of Ioram and Eglon, its evident
that God can overthrow any Kings, notwithstanding any Claim; Right, Title, etc.
which reasoning supposes that Eglon had all the Right, and Claim, Title, etc.
which was requisite, and by consequence was a Legal Prince: From whence it
appears, Page 55.
that the Convocation does not mean a King de Facto, in opposition to one de
Iure, (for the Examples before them, gave them no occasion for such a
distinction) but only a Prince in actual Administration of the Government,
without any reflection upon his Title.

3. I have proved above, that the Babylonian Monarchy was legally established
over Judea: The Jews being expressly commanded by God himself to submit to the
King of Babylon. Now though the Jews were not allowed out of their own
voluntary motion to choose a Foreign Prince, Jer. 27.
especially when they had one of their own; yet without question, they might
accept of one of God's choosing. God doubtless has the liberty to dispense with,
or repeal his own positive Laws. And as the Government of the Babylonians over
Israel was unquestionable; so likewise was that of the Persians, who succeeded
to the Right of the former. Thus the Convocation affirm,

That the Kings of Persia continued a Supreme Authority over the Jews by God's
appointment. Page 61.
And that Nehemiah and Zorobabel were lawful Princes. Page 62.
Which they could not have been, unless the Kings of Persia were such, because
they acted by their Deputation.

4. As to Alexander the Great, the Convocation declares that the Jews were as
much his Subjects, as they had been before the Subjects of the Kings of Babylon
and Persia. And if they were as much his Subjects, his Title to command them
must be as good as that of the preceding Kings. Besides I have already made it
appear that the Jews submitted to him by God's particular direction.

Lastly, The Convocation affirms, That it was unlawful for Aristobulus the
Father, Can. 33.
or either of his two Sons Alexander, or Antigonus, having all of them
submitted themselves to rebel against the Romans. This is a clear Argument that
this Reverend Assembly believed the Right of the Crown of Judea translated by
the Submission of the Royal Line; and that the Romans by consequence were their
legal Governors. And to make their Testimonies demonstrative, they expressly
pronounce that the Romans were the Jews lawful Magistrates. Page 82.
And what Countrymen were the Romans? Were they not Foreigners? The Doctor sure
does not think the Convocation took them for native Jews. And if not, they
could not understand Deuteronomy. 17.15. in his Sense.

Farther. To argue with the Doctor independently of the Convocation: Deuteronomy.
17.15.
As this command in Deuteronomy, was not given till after the Egyptian
Monarchy, so the force of it expired under the Roman: For after the coming of
Shiloh, the Scepter was to depart from Judah. Now the command of choosing a
King of their own Nation could not extend to a Time in which it was foretold by
Sacred Writ that their State should be dissolved, and there was no more Kings
of Judah to be expected. So that after the Messiah appeared, it was Lawful for
the Jews to submit to a Foreign Power notwithstanding the Text of Deuteronomy,
or else they were obliged to live in Hobs's State of Nature. For if they might
not submit to Foreign Princes they must break up Society, and be independent of
all Government* For Jacob's Prophecy had barred them from having any Governors
of their own. Genesis 49.
Which latter supposition all Men will grant to be impracticable and absurd.
But if the Jews might Lawfully submit to a Foreign Power; then those they
submitted to were their Lawful Governors. Besides at the Death of our Savior,
all the Mosaic Law unless the Moral part of it was cancelled. So that the
Roman Emperors were as much the Natural Princes of the Jews; as the Kings of
Portugal and Spain are over their Posterity who now live in those Dominions.
From whence it follows that when St. Paul wrote the 13. to the Romans upon which
the Doctor* so much insists: He could not suppose the Roman Authority could
receive the least blemish from Deuteronomy. 17.15. which I desire may be remembered*
against another Time. In short the meaning of this last. Text appears to be no
more than this, That the Jews were not permitted out of Levity to make a
voluntary choice of a Foreign Prince: But when they were under hard
circumstances and injured none but themselves by their submission; They were at
Liberty to consult their advantage, this as to the main is the Opinion of
Grotius, and has been the Doctor's too. Who seems to wonder the Pharisees could
not distinguish upon the Prohibition; Case of Resist. p. 50.
but took it in too unlimited a sense? So that its in vain for the Doctor to
reply, that if Force dissolves the Obligation of a positive Divine Law; a mere
human one cannot hold* out against it. For the command we see does not reach a
case of Force; but points at circumstances of Liberty, and Inclination.

And what is farther very remarkable. It does not follow that because the
Israelites might submit to prevent hard usage, when they were in their own
Power. When they were unengaged to any Prince of their own. I say it does not
follow from hence, that they had any Authority to desert their Prince in his
Distress; and to give away his Right to save themselves harmless. These two
Cases are extremely different. In the first, a Man resignes nothing but what
belongs to him; and is at his disposal. But the other confounds the nature of
property, makes a Man forfeit without consent, or provocation given: And puts
it in the Subjects power to translate their Allegiance without their Princes
allowance; and to depose them when they please.

I shall now proceed with his Book of Allegiance; and before I take leave of
the Chapter I was examining, Alleg. p. 8.
I shall just observe, how inconsistent the Doctors Notion of Settlement is
with it self; and of what incoherent parts its compounded. He tells us, when
the whole Power of the Nation is in the Hands of the Prince; when the Estates
of the Realm, and the great Body of the Nation has submitted to him; and those
who will not submit can be crushed by Him; when all this is done (and I suppose
not before) he concludes the Settlement complete. By which definition he
plainly makes Force, and Consent, Power, and Law, essential to a Settlement,
and by the same Logic, he might have compounded it of Fire, Alleg. p. 15.
and Water. If Power will govern and is a certain sign of God's Authority, to
what purpose are the States convened? Cannot Providence dispose of Kingdoms
without their Leave? Or does a Divine Right depend upon humane Forms and
Solemnities? In short either Power implies a necessary Conveyance of Divine
Right or not: If not, then its no certain sign of God's Authority; and so the
Doctor's Fundamental Principle is out of doors. If it does; then there is no
need of the Submission of the Estates to perfect the Settlement. But since the
Doctor has called them together, I desire to know whether they are Legal, or
Illegal Estates, if Illegal, they had better have kept at home, than meet to
break the Laws. If they are a Legal Body, let this be proved.

And thus, at last, we must be brought to debate the Legality of a Revolution,
which, the Doctor tells us, is an unnenecessary, unfit, Alleg. p. 1, 2.
and impracticable Undertaking? However, as the Doctor has ordered the matter,
the Estates can have nothing to do with it; And therefore I cannot imagine what
he brought them in for, unless it were for a Varnish. It Is likely he thought
naked unornamented Violence, would make but an untoward Figure; and that People
would be too much frighted, to spell out its Divine Authority. For this Reason
he has dressed up his Power in the habit of Justice; and supplied the defect of
Law, with Pomp and Pageantry. But he seems not well pleased, because his
definition of Settlement is not allowed him; and would gladly hear a good
Reason why the general Submission of the People cannot settle the Government,
Page 9.
unless the Prince submit also. I hope it is no bad Reason to say the Submission
of the Prince is necessary in this Case, because no Man can lose his Right
without Forfeiture, or Consent; Nay, Forfeiture itself supposes a conditional
Right, and implies Consent at a remoter distance.

The Doctor himself acknowledges, That Consent is necessary to transfer a legal
Right. From whence it follows, That where the Princes legal Right is not
transferred by his own Submission, Ibid.
it still remains in him, unless Kings are in a worse condition than other
People; and lose the common Privilege, by being God's Representatives. Now one
part of the King's Right is to govern his Subjects; and if he has a Right to
govern, they must of Necessity be under any Obligation to obey him. And that
must needs be a firm Settlement, which all People that make it are bound to
unsettle again. As for his Distinction between Legal and Divine Right, I have
shown the Vanity of it already.

To conclude this Section; If the Doctor is resolved to persist in his new
Opinion, That all Sovereign or Usurping Powers have God's Authority, and that
Subjection is due to those who have no legal Right; He must look out for some
other Supports, Page 9.
for that of the Convocation, and Church of England, will be sure to fail him.
Now that the Reader may not think him unprovided with Abettors, I shall show by
and by, from what Quarter he may receive a considerable Assistance.

SECT. III. The Doctor's Arguments from Scripture and Reason examined.
HAving done with the Convocation, I must go on with the Doctor to Scripture
and Reason, from both which intermixed with each other, he attempts to prove,
That all Sovereign Princes, (that is, every one that has Force to crush the
dissenting Party, Prince* Massianello not excepted) who are settled in their
Thrones, are placed there by God, and invested with his Authority. That is,
Alleg. p. 10.
in plain English, they must be obeyed as God's Ministers, though they have no
legal Title; and the People know they have none. This, in so many words, he
knew would sound harshly: and therefore has given the Expression a turn of
Advantage. To come to his Proofs: Which he has reduced into Propositions. Among
these,

His first Proposition, That all Authority is from God, is undeniable. Page 10.


Second Proposition, That Civil Power and Authority is no otherwise from God,
Ibid.
than as he gives his Power and Authority to some particular Person or Persons
to govern others.

This is likewise granted him: But what use he can make of it I cannot imagine.
For though no Man can govern by God's Authority, unless God gives it him; it
does not follow from hence, that God gives his Authority to Usurpers. The
Doctor knows God did not give it to Athalia, and why other Usurpers should be
in a better Condition, he has not yet offered any satisfactory Reason. Force,
and Authority, (though our Author confounds them) have always been looked upon
as Things vastly different. The first is nothing but Violence and
Irresistibility. The other (Authority) is a moral Capacity to do an Action, and
always implies a Right. So that they who pretend to God's Authority, must make
good their Title either by the ordinary Plea of humane Laws, or by the
extraordinary one of Revelation. They must prove they have a Right distinct
from their Power, otherwise they contradict the Sense of Mankind, and destroy
the very Being of Morality. Page 11. Romans 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13.
However the Doctor thinks it plain from St. Paul and St. Peter, That all those
who exercise Supreme Power are set up by God, and receive their Authority from
him, notwithstanding they have no other Title but the Sword.

In order to the removing this Mistake, I shall endeavor to prove, that by the
Higher Powers, the Apostle meant only Lawful Powers.

1. Because we have a Rule in the Scripture to interpret the Apostle in this
Sense. Alleg. p. 19.
For the Distinction between Lawful and Usurped Powers, is not unknown to
Scripture, as the Doctor pretends.

2. This Interpretation is supported by the Authority of the ancient Doctors of
the Church.

3. Its agreeable to the Sentiments the Generality of Mankind had of a
Usurpation. At, and before the Apostles Time.

1. We are warranted by the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to conclude
that by the Higher Powers, are only meant those who are Lawfully Constituted as
appears.

1. From the Instance of Athaliah. Who though she had Power and Settlement in
as ample a manner as can be desired; yet she had no Divine Authority, nor any
Right to the Peoples Obedience as is plain from the History. The Doctors
Solution of this difficulty from the Entail of the Crown upon David's Family, 2
Kings 11.
has been shown insufficient. I confess the Doctor has offered something
farther lately in defense of his Notion; Vindic. p. 40. etc.
though I think much short of his point. However the Learned Author of the
Postscript being particularly engaged in this Case; and having managed it with
so much Advantage, I shall forbear to insist any farther upon it.

2. Another Argument from Scripture, that by the Higher Powers are meant only
Lawful ones. May be taken from 1 Pet. 2. v. 14. The next verse to that which
the Doctor Quotes for a contrary Opinion. In which place the Apostle Commands
us to submit to the King, as Supreme; and unto Governors, as unto them who are
sent by him. Now if we are bound to submit to Subordinate Governors, by virtue
of their Delegation; because they are sent by the King, or Supreme Power: It
follows that when they are not sent by him; but Challenge our submission upon
the score of independent Right, they are not to be obeyed. Suppose then the
Emperor's Procurator of Judea had set up for himself in the Apostles Time, and
brought over the Sanedrim and the Majority of the Jews to his Party, and
possessed himself of the Civil and Military Power of that Nation; were the Jews
bound to submit to the Procurator or not? By the Doctor's rule undoubtedly they
were. For here is nothing less than his Through Settlement; and by consequence
Providence and Divine Authority; to oblige them to acquiesce. But on the
contrary St. Peter's Doctrine, teaches us to look upon this Procurator as a
Treasonable Usurper, and to have nothing to do with his Settlement. For we
cannot suppose him acting in his Masters Name, when he Rebels against him;
unless we can imagine the Emperor would grant a Commission to fight and destroy
himself. If therefore the reason of our submission to inferior Magistrates, is
founded in their Subordination; in their being sent by the Supreme; as is
evident by the Apostles Argument: Then certainly we are not to obey them how
successful soever they may be, when they act upon their own pretended
Authority; and against him that sent them.

I cannot foresee what the Doctor can reply; excepting that Judea was but a
small part of the Roman Empire; and therefore a general Revolt in that Country
alone, could not plead God's Authority from their Success, nor oblige the
Noncomplying Subject to Obedience.

To this I answer; That if we are to obey the Higher Powers, i. e. those who
can crush us without respect to the Legality of their Title. If Sovereign
Force, and Sovereign Authority, are the same, then we ought to obey them as far
as their Power reaches: For so far their Divine Authority must extend. If the
Revolt be general, and the Power undisputed, the Largeness of Dominion is not
at all material: For, as has been observed, the Boundaries of Empire are of an
inferior Consideration. They depend only upon Pacts, and Humane Laws; and ought
not to stand in competition against Providence, and hinder the exercise of a
Divine Right. God, without question, can change the Limits, as well as the
Governors of a Kingdom; (and ought not to be confined in this respect no more
than in the other.) And since Settlement and Success is a certain Sign of
Divine Authority, we ought, according to the Doctor* to submit to every
Subdivision of Power, though never so illegally Cantonized; as long as they
keep distinct, and unsubordinate to each other.

3. That the Distinction between Lawful and Usurped Powers, is not unknown to
Scripture, will be manifest from the consideration of Hebr. 13.17. There the
inspired Author commands the Hebrews to obey those who have the Rule over them,
and submit themselves. I grant the place is to be understood of
Church-Governors: but it is as plain by universal Practice, that this Submission
is to be paid to none, but Lawful Spiritual Powers. For if any Bishop should
offer to govern another's Diocese, and Usurp his See; such intrusions have been
always condemned by the Church; and the People obliged to adhere to their first
Bishop. And since this Scripture concerning Ecclesiastical Rulers, has been
always understood of those who are Lawfully and Canonically set up; though
these words are not expressly in the Text; why the Higher Powers should not be
restrained to Magistrates Legally Constituted, Romans 13.1.
is somewhat hard to imagine: What reason have we to suppose God should Confirm
an intrusion upon the State; and disallow in the Church? Why should he give his
Authority to Temporal Usurpers, and deny it to Spiritual? Are not Bishops de
Facto as good as Kings of that Denomination? To put the Case more home, and to
draw it into a narrower Compass. Let us suppose, according to St. Cyprian's
Principle, every See independent of each other; and that a lawful Bishop is
deposed by his People, and another chosen and consecrated by the Presbytery,
(who are the Spiritual Estates;) and nothing of the usual Solemnity omitted.
Now I desire to know whether the New Man is a Bishop, and has a Divine Right to
govern the Diocese? If the Doctor says Yes, he contradicts the Universal
Church, and destroys the Episcopal Authority. If he says, No; I would gladly
hear his Reason. The Person we are speaking of, is generally submitted to, and
called Bishop, and wears the Episcopal Habit; and had all the Ceremonies
performed at his Consecration; and is disowned by none but a few obstinate
People, and what would you have more? If you say the Clergy were under Ties of
Canonical Obedience to their former Bishop; that neither They nor the Laity,
have any Power to depose their Bishop, or to ordain a new One; that such
Proceedings are contrary to the Fundamental Laws of Church Government, and
subversive of its Monarchical Constitution. This is all Truth I grant; but am
afraid it will disoblige the Doctor's Argument. For, under Favor, are not the
States bound by natural and sworn Allegiance to their King? What Right have the
Members to depose the Head, and Inferiors to displace their Supreme? And what
Law is there to choose a Prince in an Hereditary Kingdom? By what Authority do
they these things? Matthew. 21.23.
And who gave them this Authority? I put these Questions to the Doctor, because
I hope he will be so kind as to take them for no more than Enquiries.

Farther, By the Doctor's Assistance it may be urged. That in the first Ages of
Christianity, Bishops were nominated by the Holy Ghost, Alleg. p. 6.
( as Kings were in Israel) and Elections apparently governed by Miracles and
Inspiration; as we may learn from Clemens Romanus; Ep. ad Corinth.

Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. Hist. Alleg. p. 6.


And as it happened afterward in the Case of Fabian Bishop of Rome. But now
since Miracles are ceased, God does that in the Church by his Providence, which
he did at first by express Nomination. Therefore though one Layman should
consecrate another, his Episcopal Character ought to be acknowledged, (against
the Canonical Bishop) provided the great Body of the Diocese has submitted to
him; and the whole Administration of Ecclesiastical Government is in his hands;
Id. p. 9.
and every thing is done in his Name; and those who will not submit can be crushed
by him. And if any one objects against this Bishop de Facto, I hope the
Doctor's parallel Reasons will satisfy him! For first, Here is as good a
spiritual Settlement according to our Author's interpretation of that word, as
a Man would wish. To go on. No Man can make himself a Bishop any more than a
King, Alleg. p. 14.
whether God will or no. God is then said to set up a Bishop, Id. p. 12.
when by his Providence he advances him to the Episcopal Throne, and puts the
Spiritual Authority into his hands. Ibid.
All Events are directed, and determined, and overruled by God; So that it is
plain, that all Elections of Schismatical and Heretical Bishops, were
overruled by Providential Appointment. Besides, Ibid.
if there was any distinction between God's Permissions and Appointments; yet
we ought in reason to ascribe the Advancement of Bishops, to God's Decree and
Council, because it is one of the principal Acts of Providence, and which has so
great an Influence upon the Government of the Church, Ibid.
and the Salvation of Men's Souls. And if he decrees any Events, certainly he
peculiarly orders such Events as will do most good or most hurt to the Church.

From the Absurdity of this way of Reasoning, it evidently follows, that the
Author to the Hebrews must be interpreted of Lawful Rulers, though the
distinction is not expressed. And since the Scripture, by undeniable
Consequence, teaches us not to submit to those who govern in the Church without
Right, we ought to conclude our Duty the same with relation to the State. It Is
in vain to urge that this Epistle was written after that to the Romans; and
therefore St. Paul could have no reference to it. This Objection must vanish
before those who own the New Testament written by the Holy Ghost. For whatever
is dictated by Inspiration, must be coherent and uniform; especially when
Duties of a moral and unalterable Obligation are delivered. So that unless the
Doctor can show a disparity between Church and State, such a one I mean as
destroys all proportion of Reasoning from the one to the other, he must grant
that those Higher Powers mentioned by St. Paul, Romans 13.1.
are to be understood only of those who are Lawfully such.

Vindic. p. 57.
I now perceive by the Doctor's Vindication (which I did not before remember)
that the Author of the Postscript has touched upon this Argument. And since I
am somewhat concerned in the Vindicator's Answer, I shall beg leave of the
abovementioned Author to make a short Reply. For as the Doctor has ordered the
Matter a few Words will serve.

Ibid.
He says the Cases mentioned. Romans 13.1. and Heb. 13.17. are by no means
Parallel. And that the Apostle to the Hebrews had no reason to make any such
Distinction, which it was necessary for St. Paul to have done, Romans 13. if he
intended to be understood only of Lawful Powers. This he endeavors to prove
from the Universality of the Expression. Because St. Paul gives a general
Charge to be subject to the Higher Powers, and generally affirms that all Power
is from God. To this I answer, That the Text to the Hebrews is as comprehensive
as that to the Romans. Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the rule over you, is an indefinite Proposition, which he
knows is equivalent to a Universal. St. Paul it is true affirms all Power is
from God: And does not the Author to the Hebrews say, with relation to
Spiritual Jurisdiction, Heb. 5.4.
that no Man takes this Honor to himself, but he that is called of God as was
Aaron? Besides, if all Power is from God, then all Spiritual Power is from him,
which makes way for Heretical Intruders, and is a Contradiction to the 13th. of
the Hebrews by his own Concession. But if the Words all Power are to be
restrained to a particular Sense, the Universality the Doctor contends for is
gone. If they must be confined to Temporal Powers, why are they not capable of
a farther Limitation? Why should they not be understood only of Lawful Temporal
Powers, as well as the Rulers mentioned by the Author to the Hebrews, though
with the same extent of Expression, are meant of none but those who are
Lawfully ordained?

But the Apostle to the Hebrews knew who had the Rule over them at that Time;
and that they were Lawful Ministers; and had he added any such Distinction ( i.
e. expressly commanded them to submit only to Lawful Rulers) he might have made
the Hebrews jealous about the Title of their Church Governors, Vind. ibid.
and spoiled his Exhortation of obeying them. In answer to this I observe,

First, That this Inconvenience which the Doctor imagines might easily have
been avoided without omitting this Distinction. For the Apostle might have
added a Clause, that he did not question the Authority of their present
Governors, but only gave them a Caution not to be led away with every
pretending Heretic for the future.

Secondly, I observe that the Doctor grants that if the Apostle, or the
Hebrews, had known that either Nullity, or Forfeiture, could have been truly
objected against the Authority of their Spiritual Rulers, there would neither
have been Submission enjoined by the one, nor Obedience given by the other.

Thirdly, I have already proved, and shall do farther, that the Roman Emperors
at the writing of St. Paul's Epistle were Legal Princes; and if so, St. Paul
(or the Spirit he wrote by) must know it. And as for the Romans, they had as
good an Opportunity of being satisfied about their Temporal Governors as the
Hebrews had about their Spiritual. And therefore by the Doctor's reason St.
Paul might forbear adding the Word LAWFUL to Higher Powers, because he knew the
Emperor's Title to be good, and for fear of making his Subjects jealous by such
a Distinction. But

Fourthly, Is the Doctor sure that the Apostle to the Hebrews knew that their
Spiritual Rulers were all Lawfully constituted? The Doctor concludes this
Apostle to be St. Paul. Now St. Paul complains that these was Schisms and
Heresies in the Church in his Time; Romans 16.17. 1 Cor. 11.18, 19. 2 Cor. 11.13.
Tit. 3.10. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. lib. 1.
yet there was false Apostles who transformed themselves into the Apostles of
Christ. And is he certain the Hebrews were troubled with none of these? He may
please to remember that the Ebionites, Gnostics, Nicolaitans, and Cerinthians,
sprung up in the Age of the Apostles; and most, if not all of them, in
Palestine.

Fifthly, Granting the Apostle knew the present Church of the Hebrews was free
from unlawful Governors: He likewise knew that other Churches were not; and
that even this would not be always in so good a Condition* Now if the Apostle
wrote for the Instruction of all Ages and Countries, (and I hope the Doctor will
not limit the Authority and Usefulness of the Scriptures to a particular
Climate or Country) he could not suppose the Church had always Lawful Pastors;
and by consequence the Doctor's reason why he omitted the Distinction must
necessary fail. For when their Governors were unlawful they ought to think them
so, and not be barred up by any Scripture Expressions from a reasonable Enquiry.

Sixthly, I would gladly know the Doctor's reason why Title and Legality must
always be expected in Sacred, but not in Civil Authority? Why God allows
Usurpers to represent him in the State, and denies this Privilege to those of
the same Character in the Church? And what Arguments he has to prove that the
Jurisdiction of Kings ought to be more precarious, and uncertain, than that of
Bishops.

2. This Interpretation of Romans 13.1. which I am contending for; is supported
by the Authority of the Fathers* I shall produce some Testimonies from them.

St. Chrysostom upon the place puts the Question (...), Is every Governor
chosen and set up by God Almighty? To this he Answers in the Apostles Name; I
affirm no such thing* For I am not now Discoursing of every particular Prince;
but of Government it self. The Constitution of Magistracy does indeed proceed
from the Divine Wisdom, to prevent Confusion and Disorder. Therefore the
Apostle does not say, that there is no Prince of God: But that those Powers
that be, are ordained of God. Prove. 19.14. 70 Interpr.
Therefore where the wise Man tells us, that it is God who joins a Woman to a
Man ((...)) He means no more then that God instituted Matrimony. Not that every
one who lives with a Woman, is joined to her by God. For we see many cohabit
sinfully; and not according to the Laws of Marriage. Which is by no means to be
attributed to God Almighties doing. This Comparison without the rest of this
Father's Testimony, is sufficient to show that he was far from believing that
Power, and God's Authority, always went together. For as a Man and a Woman
cannot be joined together by God, though they receive each other with never so
much Freedom, unless the Essentials of Matrimony are premised: especially when
either of them are preingaged. So an Usurper though he may debauch the Subjects
with presents of Flattery, from their former Obligations; yet the whole
commerce is no better then civil Adultery, and therefore must not pretend to be
Authorized from Heaven.

The next Testimony shall be taken from Theodoret, who affirms, Theod. in Loc.
That the Power of unjust Men (as all Usurpers are) does not proceed from God's
Choice, but only the Dispensation of Government in General. Now if unjust
Powers, or Usurpers, are not chosen, or delegated by God, then they can have
none of God's Authority. Alleg. p. 13.
For no Man can have God's Authority, but he to whom it is given: Bare
permission to Govern, (as the Doctor goes on) will not do. And yet this is all
Theodoret allows to such unqualified Persons.

In Loc.
Occumenius, and Theophylact, express themselves to the same purpose with St.
Chrysostom. Only they add, That all kinds of Power whatsoever are Orderly, (as
Theophylact has it,) Ordained by God. Whether it be that of a Father over his
Children, or a Husband over his Wife, etc. Now these two Jurisdictions of
Father and Husband, are on all hands granted to be unexceptionable; and founded
in the Laws of Nature, and Revelation. And since these Fathers have made their
instance only in Powers confessedly Lawful. We have Reason to believe they
understood the Apostles Higher Powers, in this sense; had they given us no
other Argument which it is evident they have.

These Testimonies of the Fathers, not to mention others, together with the
concurrent Sense of our own Divines, the Doctor is pleased to call a Common
Evasion; And tells us, he knows not what they mean by Civil Authority, Alleg.
p. 11.
unless it be that God intended that Mankind should live under Government. And
is not this a sufficient meaning? No. This does not prove that all Power is
from God, unless those who exercise this Power (which he must mean by
Authority) receive it from God. Right! And is the Doctor offended at this? Is
he angry because they don't contradict themselves, which they must have done,
if they had asserted Successful Violence had a Divine Commission to act by.
Their maintaining Civil Authority to be of Divine Institution with an Exception
to particular Persons, proves that all Legal Power is from God; and that they
took Power, not for mere Force, (as the Doctor does) but under the Notion of
Right and Authority.

If the Doctor is resolved to stick so very close to the Letter, I am afraid it
will carry him to a Construction he will not approve. What does he think of the
Kingdom of Satan, is not that called the Power of Darkness? Luke 22.53. Ephesians.
6.12.
Will the Doctor say, these Powers are ordained by God? I hope he is not so
much straightened for Government, as to make the Devil a Magistrate.

3. The interpreting the Text in dispute only of Lawful Powers, is agreeable to
the Sentiments the generality of Mankind had of Usurpation at, and before the
Apostles time.

I shall give some Instances out of the most famous Governments in the World,
by which it will appear that Mankind has always had a very unkind Opinion of
Usurpers. And notwithstanding their Success, they have not thought them so much
the Favorites of Providence; nor their Calling so Divine, as we are lately
made to believe.

To begin: Astartus, Contemporary with Rehoboam, recovered the Kingdom of Tire,
after it had been held twelve Years by Usurpers, Ralegh. Hist. p. 295.
as Sir Walter Ralegh informs us. It seems these Tyrians knew nothing of the
Divine Right of Possession, from whence I conclude it is no innate Principle.

The same Author observes, Id. p. 298.
that the ten Tribes did never forbear to revenge the death of their Kings,
when it lay in their Power, (of which he gives some Instances) nor approved the
good Success of Treason, unless Fear compelled them. So that it is plain when
they did comply, it was Interest, not Duty which engaged them. From whence it
follows, that they were as much unenlightned as to this Point, as the
Heathenish Tyrians.

To continue the Argument, the counterfeit Smerdis was in possession of the
Empire of Persia for some Months: who after he was understood to be an
Impostor, the Princes of the Blood immediately removed him; which practice of
theirs is mentioned by Justin with Commendation. Just. l. 1.
And the just odium which Usurpation lay under, was probably the Reason why
this Usurper's Government is pretermitted, Scaliger de Emend. Temp. p. 403.
Animad. p. 90.
and not reckoned by itself in the Chronological Accounts; but added to the
Reign of Cambyses, as the Misrule of Cromwell was to that of King Charles II.

From Persia, Demost. adv. Sept. p. 382. Gell. Noct. At. l. 9. c. 2.
let us travel homewards into Greece, and to the most polite part of it Athens;
where we shall find the Memories of Harmodius and Aritogiton honored, and
their Families exempted from paying Taxes, for delivering their Country from
the Tyranny of Hippias, Thucid. l. 6. p. 450. Just. l. 2.
who broke in upon their Government, and was expelled by the Athenians after
several years Usurpation.

The learned Bodin gives us the Sense both of the Greeks and Romans, in this
matter as fully as can be desired.

1. He defines a Tyrant (or Usurper) to be one who unlawfully seizes upon the
Government. And then adds: Such a Person the Laws, Plut. in Arat. and Timol.
and Writings of the Ancients, command to be slain; and propound the highest
Rewards to those who can dispatch him. Neither in such a Case are the Qualities
of the Person considered, or any distinction made between a kind, and a cruel
Usurper. -- Let this therefore be laid down as an undoubted truth; That
whosoever in a Monarchy shall wrest the Government from the Lawful King, or
shall set himself up for a Prince, where the Supreme Power is by the
Constitution in the People, may be lawfully killed by all, Bodin de Repub. L.
2. c. 5. p. 207.
or any Person of the Community. And for this Conclusion he Quotes the Lex
Valena among the Romans. And Solon's Law at Athens; which was not much
different from the other. And that this Doctrine concerning Tyrants might not
be prejudicial to Rightful Governors, under pretense of Maladministration. He
takes care to subjoyn. That Lawful Princes, where they are Supreme in their
Government: Such as they are in France, Spain, England, etc. Are not to suffer
in their Dignities, Fortunes, or Lives, whether by Force, or Formality of
Justice; Id. p. 210.
though they are never so flagitious, and oppressive. These passages I have
cited from the Greeks, Romans, etc. not that I approve of their expedient of
Assassination, but to show what an Aversion they had to Usurpation. Alas! They
were perfectly to seek in the modern Doctrine of Possession. They never dreamed
that Violence, and Right, were words of the same signification. Or that the
continuation of an injury, could give an Improvement of Title, and supply the
defect of the first Injustice. They believed that the property of Crowns, and
Scepters, was at least as well fixed, as that of private Persons, and that it
was not in the Power of Violence and Treason to take it away. These
Observations are sufficient to prove, that unless we will make St. Paul clash
with St. Peter; and contradict other plain^ Texts and Inferences from
Scripture. Unless we will Expound the Text contrary to the Fathers; run counter
to the Sentiments of Mankind in general; and debase Christianity below the
Justice and generosity of Heathenism; we must understand St. Paul's all Power,
Romans 13.1.
of all Legal Power: And therefore I think there was as little Reason as
Decency, in the Doctor's making so bold with the Apostle; as to say, That he
ought (i. e. God ought) to have made an express distinction between Legal and
Illegal Powers; Alleg. p. 19.
otherwise no body could reasonably have understood him that he meant only the
first. As to the difficulties which he imagines will follow from this
Interpretation, viz. It will be necessary for Subjects to examine the Titles of
Princes, Ibid.
and to be well skilled in the History and Laws of a Nation.

I Answer,

1. That all these Inconveniences (as the Doctor reckons them) the Jews were
liable to, under the Family of David. Upon which he owns the Crown was so
firmly entailed, that it could not be defeated by Usurpation. This Entail was
made by God's Appointment. And does God put his own People upon all these
intolerable Inconveniences? Did his infinite Wisdom fix the Government upon
the most incomprehensible Basis? Does God use to oblige Men to determine
Disputes above their Capacity; Ibid.
to lead them into Labyrinths of History, and Perplexities of Conscience? I
suppose the Doctor does not imagine the Jews were all inspired with the
knowledge of David's Family, and of the elder Branches of it; and yet we don't
read they were ever at a loss about it, but found the right way to their
Sovereign easily enough: And so doubtless they may do in other Countries,
without the Doctor's Assistance. It requires no great reach of Understanding to
resolve all the Questions incident to this matter. A Man needs not be any great
Lawyer to tell whether he lives under a Monarchy, or a Commonwealth. It Is no
difficult matter to distinguish the King from a Subject, especially in a
Country where the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy are almost universally
taken. There are very few People with us so ignorant, as not to know that it is
Treason to take up Arms against the King. And as for the Right Heir to the
Crown, he is generally as easily known, as the Louvre, or Whitehall. One would
have thought that since God, by immediate Designation, has given the Royal
Authority to a particular Family; and tied the Obedience of the Subject to
Legal Right, the Doctor would have concluded that an Adherence to Legal Right
was most for the Advantage of Society. And not have given us Reasonings which
reflect upon the Divine Model; and which suppose the Seat of Authority much
more unaccountably fixed in the Jewish Government, than in those of mere humane
Contrivance. Alleg. p. 19.
But the Legality of Princes Titles, is a great Dispute among Learned Men; and
how then should Unlearned Men understand them?

1. He may remember that himself, and the generality of the Learned in this
Kingdom, had not long since very different Thoughts of the present Controversy,
from what they now have; and whether their Improvements in Learning, or some
other Reasons, have altered their Opinion, is a great Question.

2. Can Unlearned Men understand nothing about which the Learned differ? Then
without doubt they are not bound to understand the Creed. For there are, and
always have been a great many Learned Jews, and Heathens, and Heretics, who
dispute about these Things. Nay, why should they believe any Religion at all,
since there are several Learned Atheists who deny it? What he adds concerning
the Title of the Roman Emperors, Page 20.
which for many Ages together were either stark naught, or the very best of
them very doubtful, is of the same Complexion with the rest; For

1. The Emperors Titles when St. Paul wrote this Epistle to the Romans, (which
is the time pointed at by the Doctor and the Controversy) could not be stark
naught for many Ages together, because at the time of the Apostle's writing,
the Empire itself was little more than One hundred Years standing.

2. What Authority does the Doctor bring to show the Emperor's Titles
defective? Why none but his own: Indeed he had no other; for if we consult the
Historians who treat of this Argument, we shall find the matter quite otherwise
than our Author represents it.

The Reader may be satisfied from Tacitus, Tacit. Annal. lib. 1. Ed. Lips.
that Augustus and Tiberius were chosen by the Consent of the People and
Senate. The Consuls, Ibid, p. 7.
Senate, Army, and People, swore an Oath of Allegiance to Tiberius. If part of
this Author's Works had not been lost, we might no doubt have received the same
Testimonies from him concerning the Titles of Caligula and Claudius. For Dion
Cassius, an Historian of unquestionable Credit, speaks home to all four. Dion.
Cass. lib. 53. p. 503.
He tells us, That the whole Senate pressed Augustus, by earnest Entreaties, to
take the Sovereign Authority of the Empire to himself. Id. lib. 57. p. 602,
603, 606. Id. lib. 59. p. 640 lib 60. p. 664, 665.
Tiberius was likewise made Emperor by the Importunity of the Senate, and
Consent of the People. Caligula and Claudius had the same Charter for their
Authority: For as the same Author informs us, They received the Empire by the
Choice of the Senate, and Army. I might cite Suetonius, who is full to the same
purpose, were not what is already alleged sufficient for the Point in hand.
However there is one thing in Cassius very remarkable, which shows how
comprehensive and absolute the Emperor's Power was. For all other great
Branches of Authority which lay before dispersed in several Offices of State,
were annexed to the Imperial Dignity. Id. lib. 57. p. 507, 508, 509.
The Emperors used to be Consuls, Tribunes of the People, Highpriests,
Censors; and out of the Jurisdiction of the City, they are called Proconsuls,
and are Legibus Soluti, i. e. above the Punishment of the Laws. Now if the
Senate and People, who had the Right to dispose of the Roman Government,
resigned themselves and their Authority into the Emperor's hands, what should
hinder the Title of these Princes from being unquestionable? Nothing can be
plainer than that as Bodin affirms, The People may give away all their Right to
govern if they please. Bodin. de Rep. l. 1. c. 8. p. 82.
And adds agreeably to the foregoing Testimonies, that the Lex Regia was
understood in this Sense.

This is so evident that the Doctor himself is forced to confess it, though in
lame imperfect Language. The Emperors he grants did gain some kind of Consent
from the Senate. And if their Consent was once gained, it is to no purpose to
Object the indirect Methods of obtaining it; for allowing it was extorted by
Fear, Alleg. p. 21.
or Flattery, or other Arts; this is not sufficient to null the translated
Authority. That when once resigned is past recall. It being than too late to
plead that a Man was wheedled, or frighted out of his Consent. This the Doctor
very well understood, Ibid.
and therefore tells us that the Romans themselves were great Usurpers; and
therefore I suppose had no Right to translate. But this Objection I have
already answered in the Dispute concerning the Convocation-Book. And since the
then present Powers were Legal Powers, the Apostles Direction was very
significant to Christians of other Ages; Ibid.
from which they ought by parity of Reason to conclude it was their Duty to
submit to none but Lawful Governors.

What he urges from Scripture of the Jews being bound to submit to the four
Monarchys has been considered in the foregoing Section: As for his saying they
were Manifest Usurpations; Page 20.
and yet set up by the Council and Decree of God; and foretold by a Prophetic
Spirit: This comes short of the Case, unless he has any Prophesies to produce
in behalf of the Revolution. Besides his Argument proves too much; which is a
sign it is of kin to the Emperor's Titles stark naught. For our Blessed
Savior's Passion was decreed by the Counsel of God, and foretold by Prophecy;
and yet I conceive the Doctor is not so hardy as to affirm, the Jews and Romans
had a Divine Right to crucify him.

Alleg. p. 21.
But we have no Example in Scripture that any People were ever blamed for
submiting to the present Powers, whatever the Usurpations were. To this it may
be Answered.

1. There are a great many Actions in the History of the Scriptures
unquestionably unlawful; which notwithstanding are mentioned without any
Censure upon them. Thus neither Noah, nor Lot, are blamed for their
Intemperance; nor Rebeckah, for teaching Jacob to gain his Father's Blessing by
Deceit: And to come nearer the point, Absalom is not directly blamed for
Rebelling against David; and will the Doctor conclude from hence, that lie did
well in it? The Reason why the Scripture does not condemn every irregular
practice is, because it supposes Men endowed with Principles of Natural
Religion and Morality: which teach them to distinguish between Good and Evil;
and that they are to take their Measures of Virtue and Vice, from the Rules of
Reason and Revelation; not from Precedent and Example.

2. We may Observe, that in the Usurpation's upon the Kingdom of the Ten
Tribes, it was the Custom of the Usurpers to destroy the Family of their
Predecessor: And when there is no Competition from a Legal Claim, Possession is
a good Title. And therefore it is no wonder the Israelites were not blamed for
submitting to the present Powers; for in that Case they were Legally
Established. And as for the House of David it was never set aside by Usurpation
till the Time of Athaliah. Now after Iehoiada had discovered that their Legal
Sovereign Ioash was living; I desire to know of the Doctor whether the Jews
were bound to submit to Athaliahs Government, or not. If he says, yes. He not
only condemns Iehoiada for Deposing Athaliah; but makes the Divine Entail upon
David's Family, upon which he lays so much stress, signify nothing. If he says,
no; he gives up the Argument: For then we have undoubted Principles of
Scripture; which condemn a Submission to Usurpation; which are much safer
Rules, than Examples for Conscience to rely upon.

The Doctor proceeds to prove that Obedience is due to Usurpers when they are
seized of the Administration of the Government; from our Saviors Answer to the
Pharisees and Herodians concerning Tribute Money, Matthew. 22.21.
Render to Caesar the Things which are Caesar's.

Before I give a distinct Reply to this Objection, it will not be improper to
consider the occasion of the Text: Now we are to observe that the Pharisees and
Herodians, enquired of the Lawfulness of paying Tribute to Caesar, not out of a
desire of Instruction from our Savior but to entrap him. They proposed an
ensnaring Question concerning Tribute; a plain Catagorical Answer, to which
they knew must of necessity provoke either the Roman, or the Pharisees Party
against him. This our Blessed Savior calls an Hypocritical tempting of him.
And since the Time of his Passion was not yet come; we may conclude he intended
to avoid the danger of the Question; not by declining it, but by giving an
Answer of an Obscure and uncertain Sense. Upon which no Charge could be
grounded, because of its Ambiguity. This the Proposers well understood; They
knew they could not fix any determinate meaning upon our Savior's Words, which
made them Marvel at the prudence of his Answer, and leave him: Whereas had he
plainly resolved the Question either way, they had gained their intended
advantage upon him: And since there was a designed obscurity in our Savior's
Answer, as being most proper to secure himself; and to discourage the Malice of
those who came to entangle him; it is unreasonable to draw any Conclusions about
Government from thence; especially such, which not only contradict other plain
places of Scripture, but are repugnant to the Notions of common Justice and the
sense of Mankind. Having premised this I Answer,

1. That the Doctor by this Argument of Tribute should have come in to the
Revolution when the new Money was first Coined; as he has been told already.

2. Caesar as I have proved was the Lawful Prince of Judea; and the right
Owners of the Sovereignty, as well as the Jewish Nation, had submitted to him.
And since he was not only possessed of the Government but of the Title to
Govern, the Right of Coinage belonged to him; and when this Prerogative of
Royalty was produced by the Pharisees, it is no wonder to find his Right to
Tribute inferred from thence. The Doctor urges, That our Savior's Argument
relies wholly on the Possession of Power. Alleg. p. 21.
And if this be a good Reason, it is good in all Cases of Possession. Say you so
Sir! Then Athaliah ought to have been obeyed notwithstanding Ioash his Title;
if she could have kept the Mint, and the Power in her Hands. Now if this be not
true, as the Doctor must grant, then our Savior's Argument does not rely
wholly on Possession, but upon Right to Possession. For that the Divine Entail
of the Crown upon David's Family does not make the Case exempt, and particular,
has been shown already.

3. We are to observe, That our Savior left the Civil Rights of Society in the
same State he found them. He did not intend to alter the Laws of Common
Justice, to weaken the Titles of Princes, and put them into a worse condition
then private Men. So that if according to the Principles of Reason, and the
Laws of particular Kingdoms, whoever has a Right to the Crown; ought to have
the Obedience of the Subject; we cannot conclude our Savior's Answer has made
any alteration in the Case.

4. If the Royal Image and Superscription always supposes Possession, and
infers Obedience, His Majesty at St. Germains is still the Doctor's Sovereign;
And he ought to have continued his Submission to him, till his Money had been
cried down. And which is more surprising, the Subject must be bound to two
opposite and contrary Allegiances as long as the Coin of the two Contesting
Princes is current among us; Alleg. p. 14.
which the Doctor owns to be an impracticable Absurdity.

What he observes concerning the Prophesy of the Four Monarchies not being at
an End, Page 22.
is somewhat surprising. All People agree, that the Roman Monarchy has the last
of the Four, and that has had its Period long since. Now it is a little strange
that Events should be foretold concerning Things that are not; And that the
Prophesies concerning the Four Monarchies should extend to greater lengths of
Time, than the Monarchies themselves. But what if the Four Monarchies were not
at an End? Must we comply with all successful Disorders, under pretense of
fulfilling Prophesies, though we neither know their Meaning, nor the Time of
their Accomplishment? Does God need the Wickedness of Men to bring his own
Counsels to pass? Doubtless he who has Omnipotence in his Hand, can change
Times, and Seasons; set up Kings, and remove Kings, as in his Wisdom he thinks
fit; without obliging the Subject to break the Laws of their Country, and to
fail in their Allegiance when it is most needed. God, in whose Hand are the
Hearts of Kings, who has the disposal of Life and Death, of the Passions and
Tempers of Men, may change his Representatives as often as he pleases; without
pitching upon such Methods which without a Revelation, must of necessity in a
great measure confound the Notions of Right, and Wrong; encourage Violence, and
weaken the good Correspondence; and mutual Securities between King and People.
But the continuation of the Doctor's Reason for Compliance, is still more
extraordinary, viz. Under the Fourth Monarchy the Kingdom of Antichrist is to
appear, Ibid.
and the Increase and Destruction of the Kingdom of Antichrist is to be
accomplished by great Changes. And are we obliged to comply with every
Revolution, to swim down every Tide of State, for fear the Kingdom of
Antichrist should not increase fast enough? Are we as much bound to support
Violence, and clap Justice under Hatches; Ibid.
as the Jews were to obey the express Orders of the Prophet Jeremiah; only
because the Doctor fancies, the Prophecy of the Four Monarchies is not at an
End? If this be not Enthusiasm, which the Doctor denies; pray God it be not
something worse.

But to consider his Argument more fully, I must go back to his 12th Page,
where he gives in his Reasons to prove, That now God governs the World, Page 12.
removes Kings, and sets up Kings, only by his Providence. By which he means
nothing but Force and Success; let the means by which they are gained be never
so unaccountable. These Advantages though they come from Hell, are always
attended with Divine Authority, and draw the Allegiance of the Subject along
with them. And because Sovereign and rampant Wickedness sounds but harshly, and
is very unlikely to have the Entail of all these Privileges, he gilds it over
with the pompous Name of Providence. This, he says, is God's Government of the
World by an invisible Power: whereby he directs, determines, and overrules all
Events; in distinction from his more visible Government, Ibid.
by Oracles, Prophets, etc. So that now it seems neither Scripture, nor Law,
nor Reason; signify any thing toward the stating the Right of Kings, and the
Obedience of Subjects. No: We must submit to the Infallibility of the Sword,
which is the only proper Judge to decide all Controversies of State, (and why
not of Religion too.) We must conclude, that all Civil Confusions, all Public
Injustice, though never so horrid, is directed by God Almighty. And all Events,
how impious soever they may be in their Causes and Consequences, are determined
and overruled by his Providence. To fortify this extraordinary Position, he
attempts to make God's Permissions and Approbations the same, as to Events:
Though the Distinction between these two, is both necessary, and generally
acknowledged. But to make God, Ibid.
as the Doctor does, the Author of all the Good or Evil which happens either to
private Persons, or public Societies, is an untrue, and dangerous Proposition.
For First, It Is a Contradiction to plain Scripture. Secondly, It makes God the
Abetter and Maintainer of Sin. Thirdly, It destroys the Notion of his Patience.


1. It Is a Contradiction to plain Scripture. For though the Doctor affirms,
Ibid.
That the Scripture never speaks of God's bare Permission of Events; these
following Citations, not to mention any more, will show he is mistaken. For
don't we read that the Devils besought our Savior that he would suffer them to
enter into the Herd of Swine, Luke 8.32.
and he suffered them? Now by the Doctor's Principle, our Savior must either
have forced the Devils into the Swine, or at least have raised their
Inclination to enter, and concurred with it. But the Scripture speaks no such
Language. It affirms no more than a bare Permission of the Devil's Malice.
Another Proof to confirm the Distinction between what God does, and what he
permits, as to Events, may be taken from Acts 13.18. where God is said to
suffer the Manners of the Israelites forty Years in the Wilderness. He did not,
as the Doctor's Proposition supposes, direct them in the making of the Golden
Calf: He did not determine their Idolatries, nor over rule them into all their
Murmurings and Disobedience.

Farther, Was not the destroying Job's Cattle and Servants, and the afflicting
his Person, an Event? And will our Author say, That all this was brought to
pass by the Influence and Direction of Providence? And that the Devil would not
have used Job thus hardly, if he had not been over ruled by God Almighty? I am
sorry the Doctor should support his new Scheme of Government with such Divinity
as this.

2. To suppose no Distinction between what God permits, and what he does, with
respect to Events, destroys the Notion of his Patience. For Patience supports
Aversion or Dislike, to Things or Persons: But no omnipotent Being can be said
to suffer, or be displeased, with those Events which he promotes, and brings to
Maturity and Effect. It Is unintelligible Sense to say, God bears with his own
Decrees; and suffers those Things which he determines and overrules.

3. This Opinion makes God though not the first Contriver, yet the Abetter and
Maintainer of Sin; as will appear if we consider the plain English of
directing, determining, and overruling an Event. To direct an Event, is to put
it into the road of Success. And he that does so is an Accessory to it, and a
Party to the Quality of the Action. To determine an Event, must be nothing
less, even in the Author's Sense, than a Divine Decree that such Things shall
come to pass by the help of fixed, and particular, Means and Circumstances. And
therefore the Commendation or Blame of the Action must belong to him by whom
they are appointed. Lastly, By overruling an Event, the Doctor must mean a
Change, either in the Circumstances or Success of the Action; by which it is
diversified from what it would have been, had it been left to the Conduct of
inferior Agents. And then by consequence if the Event is accomplished by ill
Means, the Over-ruler is accountable. For his Interposal has distinguished the
Kind of the Event; and given Life, and Form, and Complexion to it. God indeed
does sometimes overruled Events; i. e. he restrains the Wickedness of Men, and
hinders them from doing so much Mischief as they would do otherwise: But to
affirm, That he prompts them to the Violation of his own Laws, and inspires
them with Courage and Conduct to be successful in Disloyal and Treasonable
Enterprises, is very singular Doctrine; and has been seldom thought proper to
explain any part of the unsearchable Wisdom of Providence, Ibid.
till the Disturbances under King Charles the I. and Cromwell's Usurpation. I
confess in those Times this Doctrine of Providence was very much in Vogue. And
that the Doctor may not seem to argue without Precedent, I shall quote some of
the Learned in Rebellion for his Opinion.

1. The Prentices and Porters (as Palmer has it) were stimulated and stirred up
by God's Providence to Petition the ( rebellious) Parliament for speedy Relief.
Palmer to the Earl of Essex, Epist. Ded. 1644.


Cockain, in his Sermon to the Commons, discoursing concerning the King of
Syria's coming against Israel, and being taken Prisoner, Cockain's Sermon. Nov.
29. 1648.
makes this Inference; viz. That the Mind of God was (which he discovered only
by that present Providence) that Justice should have been executed upon him.
This passage he applies to encourage them to the Murder of the King, who was
then in their Hands.

Some Persons (says the Sufferers Catechism) may be stirred up to do some
Things, Page 32.
which are not in themselves so just and seemingly Warrantable, (at least in
all Circumstances) which yet the Overruling hand of God may be in; as in Moses
killing the Egyptian.

The next Testimony is Dr. Owen's, which to give its due is very moving, and
had without doubt a considerable Effect upon the Army Saints.

Where is the God of Marston-Moor, Dr. Owen's Ebenezer, p. 13.
and the God of Naseby, was an acceptable Expostulation in a Gloomy day. O what
a Catalogue of Mercies has this Nation to plead by in a Time of Trouble! God
came from Naseby, and the Holy One from the West. Selah.

Ienkins in his Petition, is no less full to the Doctor's purpose; For, without
mincing the matter, he does not stick to affirm, That a Refusal to be subject
to this Authority, Jenkins's Petit. 1651.
( i. e. to the Rump and Cromwell) under the pretense of upholding the Title of
any one upon Earth, is a Refusal to acquiesce in the wise and righteous
pleasure of God. The same Doctrine you may find, P. 2. 1651.
in his Conscientious Queries.

Milton, in his (...), speaking in Justification of the King's Murder, tells
us, That God has testified by all propitious and evident Signs (that is, by
overruling Events) whereby in these latter Times (instead of Oracles, Alleg.
p. 12.
Prophets, or express significations of his Will) he is wont to testify what
pleases him; that such a solemn, and formerly unexampled Act of due Punishment,
(...). p. 237.
was no mockery of Justice, but a most grateful and well-pleasing Sacrifice.

Let Ienkins speak once more for the Cause. He delivers himself thus: Petit.
Oct. 1651.
God's Providence, that is, his permission of Events, and Success, are
antecedent Declarations of his good Will, and Approbation. Which comfortable
Doctrine he applies to the Commonwealth.

To conclude. Saunders is admirable in his Descant upon Romans 13.1. where within
the compass of one single Question, he determines the great Dispute on the
Doctor's side, Sermon at Exeter to the Judges. March 23 1650. Page 24. Dan.
2.21.4.17. Saunders. Ib. p. 13, 16, 19.
There is no Power but of God. Is not, says he, the late King, with his Heirs
and Successors, dispossessed by God? Besides, he has several other choice
Observations. For he founds Authority in providential Power. He answers the
Objection concerning Athaliah the Doctor's way. He quotes his Texts of
Scripture to the same purpose. And presses Obedience to the Commonwealth, from
their having the Administration and Force of the Kingdom in their hands.

Thus I have given a small Catalogue of the Doctor's Worthies; These are the
Chariots of his Israel, and the Horsemen thereof. And were I not reasonably
assured that the Doctor is both well inclined, and furnished, for this
Argument; I should suspect he had borrowed some of his Artillery from the
Authors abovementioned, their Thoughts, and even their Expressions being so
like his own.

What the Doctor urges upon this occasion in pursuit of his Point, is as
remarkable as any thing we have had yet, viz. God permits Men to do wickedly,
Alleg. p. 12.
but all Events which are; for the good or evil of private Persons, or public
Societies, are ordered by him. He permits Men to do wickedly, etc. Now one
would think we had gained a distinction of the usual Latitude from the Doctor,
between what God does, and what he permits. For Permission signifies a liberty
of Action. And where there is such a Freedom, it is a Contradiction to say, the
Agent is determined by any Superior Power. And if the Agent is free, the Action
or Event must be so too. For an Event is nothing but an Execution and Train of
Actions. No: The Doctor will tell you, That Events* notwithstanding are ordered
and overruled by Providence. That is, though God permits them to do wickedly,
yet all Events, i. e. every thing they do is overruled by him. Which is in
other words, to affirm that Liberty, and Force, or Necessity, are the same
things. If the Doctor meant nothing more by God's ordering Events, then that by
his Wisdom he draws Good out of Evil; and makes the Wickedness of Men tend to
the promoting his own Glory, and the happiness of his Servants. This
Construction would be Orthodox and Intelligible; but then it will do him no
service. This Sense will give no Divine Right to Rapine and Robbery. Nor set
Providence at the Head of every Usurpation. This the Doctor knew very well; and
therefore enlarges his Principle accordingly. But with what Reason, and
Consistency the Reader may judge. As for the Text which he cites from Amos,
Amos. 3.6.
shall there be Evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? This place is
meant only of the Evil of Affliction, and therefore is foreign to his point. It
does not make God the Patron of Injustice; nor imply his overruling Men into
wickedness. If we had no Authority on our side, common sense ought to make us
avoid such an unaccountable interpretation. For the Scriptures ought not to be
so expounded as to contradict the natural, and unquestionable Notions of the
Divine perfections. This is the Reason those expressions are counted Figurative
which attribute Hands, and Eyes, and other Corporeal parts and Affections to
God Almighty. Now Men had better degrade him to the Littlenesses of Body; than
make him a party in unjust undertakings. For natural Imperfections are a far
less blemish to a rational being, than those which are Moral,

And though the forementioned sense is sufficiently confirmed from the Reason
of the Thing; it may not be improper to produce the concurrence of some of the
Ancient and Modern Interpreters.

St. Hierom tells us: In Am. 3.6.
That the Evil which the Lord does in the City, is not contrary to Virtue, but
imports Affliction and Calamity; in which sense we read, sufficient for the day
is the Evil thereof. i. e. The Hardship and Tribulation. Let us take an
instance from the Prophet Jonah. Jonah 3.10.
And G^d saw their Works that they turned from their evil way; and God repented
him of the Evil that he said he would do unto them. Whereby Evil is only meant
the threatened destruction of Niniveh: not any thing which carries an opposition
to probity, and virtue.

St. Cyrill of Alexandria Speaks to the same purpose. By these words we are to
understand some Evil in the City proceeding from God Almighty; Comment. in
Amos, Tom. 3. p. 279.
but not with any resemblance to wickedness. God forbid! No. The Phrase is to
be expounded of Afflictions; and the Judgments of God; which he sends for the
Reformation of Sinners.

To come nearer our own Times. Drusius observes That Evil imploys the Evil of
punishment, In Loc.
as the Schoolmen speak, and signifies Vexation, Trouble, and Calamity; in
this sense God is said to create Evil. Isa. 45.7.
Calamity is in it self no Evil, but is so called because it seems such to
those who undergo it; or because that which is against the Grain of a Man's
Inclination may be called Evil.

Episcopious agrees with Drustus, his words are these. As touching Physical
Evils, Episcop. Inst. l. 4. p. 305.
which are only misfortunes or inconveniences to particular Persons, these in
strict speaking are no Evils: And therefore they may without doubt be the
objects of God's will; so that he may either send them himself, or suffer them
to be inflicted by others. -- And afterward toward the close of the Argument
he cites Amos 3.6. in Confirmation of what he had said.

If the Doctor Replys upon these Expositors, that, Afflictions are not only
sent by the immediate hand of God, but occasioned by wicked Men; who often cut
off Malice, Covetousness, or Ambition; Defame, Circumvent, and oppress their
Neighbors; from whence it will follow that if God is the Author of all the
Evil of Affliction, a great many immoral Actions must be overruled by him in
the Doctor's sense.

To this the Answer is plain: Those Calamities which are inflicted by wicked
Instruments, Providence is no otherwise the Author of, than by permitting
them. He may be said in a Qualified, Figurative Sense to do that, which he does
not hinder by his Omnipotence: But to affirm more than this, that he either
excites ill Men to engage in unlawful Enterprises; or assists them in the
Execution; is to charge him with unrighteousness; and makes him partaker of
their Sins. And if such Assistance is never given; it is neither true, nor over
Pious, to say that all Events though begun and prosecuted by never so much
Villainy, are determined, ordered, and made successful by him.

Well! Though the Doctor have lost this Point, he has another Reserve behind.
Alleg. p. 12.
For, says he, If there were any such Distinction as this, that some Events God
permits only; and some he orders and appoints: yet we ought in Reason to
ascribe the Advancement of Kings to God's Decree and Counsel, because it is a
principal Act of Providence; and if he decrees and orders any Events, he
peculiarly orders such Events, as will do most good, or most hurt in the World.
To this I answer:

1. That God does not chain up the Liberty of Mankind with respect to any Sin;
but permits them to do wickedly one way as well as another. And therefore it is
no wonder to see Rebellion succeed sometimes. But then we must no more impute
such wickedness as this to his Decree, then private Murder, or Adultery.

2. Since Kings are God's Ministers, as the Doctor observes, and their
Advancement is a principal Act of Providence, we may conclude that God has not
put them into worse Circumstances than other Men: That he does not allow
Violence to divest them of their Authority. That he has secured their Royalty
to them; not only by the common Laws of Justice and Property, but by the
indispensible Ties of Allegiance. And not left them to the Courtesy of their
Subjects, to be set aside according to the Discretion and Conscience of
Phrenzy, Atheism, and Ambition. Such a Liberty as this would make the Doctor's
great Wheels of Providence jolt into disorder, like those of Phaeton's Chariot,
and be ready to set the World on Fire at every motion. As for his saying, God
must order those Events which will do most good or harm in the World. I will
only ask him, What he thinks of the Rebellion in Heaven? That was a very
memorable Event, and the occasion of as much good and harm in the World, as any
he can almost imagine. Now did God raise a Commotion in his own Kingdom? Did he
order and decree the Revolt of those glorious Spirits, and overruled them into
damnation? However we cannot but think God will exercise a particular Care in
appointing his great Ministers. Alleg. p. 13.
Right! But Usurpers are not his Ministers. A bare Advancement to the Throne
invests a Man with God's Authority no more, than taking a Purse gives him a
Right to the Money. None can have God's Authority but by legal Claim, immediate
Designation, or vacancy of Right. And therefore God neither gives his Authority
to Usurpers, nor permits them to take it. The Doctor goes all along upon a
Mistake, as if Force and Authority were the same. He might as well have said,
there is no difference between Violence, and Justice; between Reason, and a
Whirlwind. Does the Authority of a Father last no longer than the Children are
pleased to obey him? And have they a Right to his House as soon as they can
turn him out? Is a Wife bound to entertain an Husband de Facto? Now if the
Privilege of Fathers and Husbands holds in Case of Dispossession, why not that
of Kings? Why should Public Authority, upon which the common Security depends,
have a less firm Establishment than that of single Families? If private
Disobedience cannot challenge a Divine Right to govern upon Success, why should
a National Rebellion pretend to it?

Alleg. p. 13.
He goes on to acquaint us; That to give Authority to a Man does not signify to
permit him to take it. And that no Man can have God's Authority, but he to whom
it is given. By which it is plain, he means that no Person can be vested with
God's Authority, barely by his permissive Will; but that Consent and
Approbation is always implied. But this Proposition is not only Foreign to his
Point, (because Usurpers have no Authority from God either one way or other,)
but is likewise untrue and dangerous. For suppose an Eldest Son Murders his
Father privately; in this Case it must be granted he has God's Authority to
possess his Estate, and to govern the Family, For he who has a Legal Claim, has
by consequence a Divine one; all Humane Laws being ultimately resolved into the
Divine Warrant and Appointment. But then I conceive the Doctor wont say this
unnatural Murderer has God's Authority in the Family any other ways than by
bare Permission. God indeed suffered him to Murder his Father, as he suffers
all other Wickedness. And because the Murder was secretly committed, the
Villainy turns to Advantage, and the Party becomes Master of his Father's
Fortune. But to say that he had God's consenting Authority in this Matter,
would sound very harshly; and amounts to no less than God's Approbation of
Parricide. For he who absolutely approves the End, without any regard to the
Lawfulness of the Means, must consent to the Means though never so Unlawful.
And to apply this Remark: An Usurper, when the Royal Line is either Extinct or
Surrenders, comes by God's Authority the same way with the forementioned
Murderer. The next rub the Doctor casts in the way is, that unless we take our
Governors as they rise, Ibid.
without minding their Titles, we shall not be able to distinguish those God
permits only, from those he appoints. Now this Difficulty is easily removed:
For the Constitution of each particular Country will inform us who governs by
Permission, and who by Appointment from God Almighty. The Laws of Succession,
etc. were made for this purpose, and to prevent Usurpation. So that there is no
need of the Doctor's Expedient to teach us to distinguish between God's King,
and those who would be so, of their own making. We need not be at a loss whom
we must obey out of Conscience, and whom we must not obey; for we have the
Direction of Law ready to inform us: The same Direction which there is in
private Cases, to know the right Owner from an Intruder. He comes on with the
Repetition of his former extraordinary Doctrine; That by what means soever a
Prince ascends the Throne he is placed there by God as truly as if he had been
nominated by him, and anointed by a Prophet. So that Cromwell was as much God's
Vicegerent as David; and if so, our Laws are very much to blame for attainting
him of Treason, and exposing him to Ignominy after his Death. Ibid.
However the Doctor is sure God never suffers a Prince to ascend the Throne but
when he sees fit to make him King. No! Does God suffer nothing but what he sees
fit to be done? Does he not suffer all the Wickedness which is committed, for
no Man can do an ill Thing whether God will or no? And will the Doctor take the
freedom to say, that God sees it fit and convenient that men should be Unjust,
and Lewd, and Atheistical; that they should disturb the World, and damn
themselves? Such Practices as these certainly can never gain the Approbation of
the Divine Wisdom, nor seem agreeable to his Goodness.

His fourth Proposition gives us another admirable Piece of Politics; Page 14.
viz. All Kings are equally rightful with respect to God. Why so? Because it is
impossible there should be a wrong King, unless a Man could make himself King
whether God would or no. Nay then farewell all Property! For by the help of
this Logic I will prove there can be no such Thing as Cheating, Stealing and
Oppression in Nature. The Argument lies thus; All Possession is rightful with
respect to God, for it is impossible there should be a wrong Possessor, unless a
Man could make himself Master of his Neighbor's Goods whether God will or no.
This is comfortable Doctrine for the Gentlemen of the Highway; and were it
admitted, would serve to plead off their Indictment* But if this Plea should
fail, which is not likely, the Doctor can reinforce them with another. For he
has told us, Page 12.
That all Events which are for the Good on Evil of private Persons are ordered
by Providence. Now is not the taking a Purse, or stealing a Man's Clothes, an
Event? Doubtless it is; and sometimes very much for the Evil of him who looses
them. Such Events as these have been very frequent since the Doctor's Book came
out. But why he that stole these Goods should be bound to make Restitution,
except in point of Generosity, is past my Skill to understand. For if God
orders a Man a Sum of Money, it is certainly Lawful for him to keep it.

Page 14.
His fifth Proposition affirms, That God is not bound by Humane Laws. True: But
if Men are, it is sufficient for our purpose. For we are not disputing about
God's Prerogative, but the Duty of Subjects. However, may not God make whom he
pleases King without regard to Legal Rights? No doubt he may: But then we are
to observe, that every Thing which is done is not of God's doing. And the
apparent Injustice of an Action, is a very bad Argument to prove the Righteous
God had a hand in it. It Is true, God is the chief Proprietor of all Things; but
it does not follow from hence that whatever a Man can catch is his own. If the
Doctor has no supernatural Credentials to produce, he must be contented to let
the common Laws of Justice take place: Unless he has a mind to cut the Sinews
of all Property; and in a great Measure to destroy the Nature of Right and
Wrong.

His sixth Proposition says, We have but one King at a Time; which is a good
Hearing, were it not misapplied in his Seventh, where he affirms, That King is
the Name of Power, not of mere Right. Which Assertion is not only contrary to
the common Notion or Justice, but to the Language of our own Laws. In which the
Lancastrian Princes, who though for Kings de Facto had several peculiar
Advantages; such as a Formal Resignation of the Legal King; a long Silence and
Interruption of Claim in the Right Line, which must occasion perplexity of
Title when revived; yet these Princes are called pretended Kings; and Henry the
VI. though the third Monarch by successive Descent, Cotton's Abridgment, fol.
670.671. Baggot's Case. 9 E. 4.
is called an Usurper; and said to be rightfully amoved from the Government. So
little was our Author's Doctrine of Providence and Events understood in those
days. There is something behind in this Proposition which is worth the having,
and that is this; He who has a Legal Right to the Crown, but has it not; ought
by the Laws of the Land to be King, but is not. The Laws of the Land are the
Measure of all Property; so that whatever Estate, Title, or Jurisdiction the
Laws give any Man, they ought to be acknowledged his own. He that has a clear
indisputable Title to an Estate, is nevertheless a Proprietor* for being
disseized: And all Persons concerned ought to endeavor to give him Possession.

The Doctor's next Business is to avoid the Charge of Hobbism, which he had
Reason to apprehend would be objected against him: Let us see how he clears
himself from this Imputation. Why he says Mr. Hobbs makes Power, Alleg. p. 15.
and nothing else, give Right to Dominion. And pray does not the Doctor do the
same? I am much mistaken if this be not the design of his whole Book. No, the
Doctor will tell you, that Mr. Hobbs found God's Right to govern the World in
his Omnipotence: Whereas he makes him natural Lord of the World, because he
created it. Under Favor, we are not disputing God's Title to govern, but Man's;
which I Am sure the Doctor grounds solely upon Power, as much as Mr. Hobbs.
However I desire to be resolved this Question, Would God have a Right to govern
the World if he was not Omnipotent? If he would, then Right ought to carry it
against Power; which is the thing I am contending for. If he would not, then
his Dominion depends upon his Omnipotence; and so the Doctor and Mr. Hobbs are
perfectly agreed. The Connex^on of the Doctor's Consequences are somewhat
remarkable in this Paragraph* God has a Right to govern the World, Ibid.
because he made it No Creature has a Right to govern any part of it, but as he
receives Authority from God. Thus far all is well, but observe what follows.
Therefore since Power will Govern; God always gives Sovereign Authority to the
Man who has Sovereign Power. Therefore since Power will govern. Wherefore will
Power (humane Power) Govern? Because God made the World. These two Propositions
will want a great deal of Cement to fasten them into any Coherence. What! will
Power govern whether God will or no? That were hard indeed. Will it govern
Right or Wrong? Most certainly. And since it is such a righteous Quality, God
always rewards it with his Authority. That is, since ambitious Men will usurp
upon their Neighbors Dominions* Since there will be sometimes a general Revolt
from Lawful Governors, and a Prince has not personal Strength enough to manage
his Rebellious Subjects, therefore that such unjust and treasonable Enterprises
might not be disturbed in their Success, God always gives the Engager his
Authority to settle and confirm them; which is no doubt an extraordinary
Encouragement. And by parity of Reason may we not say, that since God knows Men
will Steal, and commit Adultery* therefore if they are strong enough to get
their Neighbors Goods and Wives into their Possession, they have a Divine Right
to keep them: For why a lesser Sinner should be denied the security of God's
Authority, when its granted to a greater, is somewhat difficult to understand.
For all this the Doctor will have it that Power does not give Right and
Authority to govern; Though his Reason for this Assertion is a demonstration of
the contrary. For he affirms that Power is a certain sign that God has given
the Authority where he has placed the Power. Ibid.
Now, if Power be a certain sign of God's Authority, then God's Power and
Authority are inseparable; and we may infallibly conclude the former from the
latter. And if Power be an invincible Argument to prove the Concurrence of
God's Authority; then Right if God's Authority can give any; may be
demonstrated from Power: And if a Right to govern is demonstrable from Power,
Alleg. p. 48.
then Power must give a Right to govern. It Is true the Doctor denies Power this
Privilege in the Case of Antiochus; but this proves no more than a
Contradiction of himself. But because the Doctor seems somewhat shy of Mr.
Hobs's Company: I shall endeavor to make them a little better acquainted.

First, They both agree, as we have seen, that Dominion is founded in Power;
which is a fair step toward a good Correspondence. To go on.

Mr. Hobs owns, Leviath. p. 174.
That the Right of the Sovereign is not extinguished by a prosperous Invasion,
or Rebellion; yet the Obligation of the Members (the Subjects) is. And does not
the Doctor say the same in other Words? That notwithstanding the legal Right of
the dispossessed Prince continues, Alleg. p. 14, 15.
our Allegiance is only due to him who has the actual Administration of
Sovereign Power.

Mr. Hobs says, Leviath. p. 114.
The Obligation of the Subject to the Sovereign, is understood to last as long,
and no longer than the Power lasts, by which he is able to protect them. Now it
will be hard to find any difference between this Maxim, and that which follows
of the Doctors. The preservation of human Society (Right or Wrong, for he takes
care not to distinguish upon the Means) is the ultimate end of Government;
Alleg. p. 40.
and will justify whatever it makes necessary. Page 29.
And elsewhere; I believe no Man in his Wits would take an express Oath, to
follow his King into Banishment, or venture being hanged at Home.

Again, Leviath. p. 174.
Mr. Hobs pronounces, that he Who wants Protection; may seek it any where, and
when he has it is obliged to protect his Protection, as long as he is able. And
what does the Doctor come short of this Liberty, Alleg. p.
in averring, That we ought in Duty to swear to live peaceably under an
unlawful Government. That we ought to give him whom we believe to be an
Usurper, the Title of King. To pay him Taxes, and pray for him, because we owe
the secure Possession of our Estates to his Government.

And can the Doctor find in his Heart to quarrel with Mr. Hobs after all this
harmony in Opinion? I hope the Moral resemblance between them, will make him
kinder for the future.

After the Doctor has argued thus vigorously for Power; one would think he
might give up his Notion of legal Right. However he is resolved to keep it
against a rainy day; and attempts to answer an Objection against its
significancy upon his Principles. He tells us, Legal Right bars all other Human
Claims. No other Prince can Challenge the Throne of Right. Alleg. p. 15.
(which, by the way, is a great Commendation of him that keeps it wrongfully.)
The Doctor's legal Right puts me in mind of Epicurus's Deities; whom, for
Fashion sake, he supposed to exist; but gave them such a slender Constitution,
that it was impossible for them to hold out against the least rencounter of his
Atoms. Just so kind is the Doctor to a Prince, whose Title stands upon the
Fundamentals of the Government. For what does this legal Right signify? Are
the Subjects bound to restore him? No. This would oblige them to Two opposite
Allegiances. Are they at Liberty to stand neuter? Page 14.
Not that neither. Page 15.
For Allegiance signifies all that Duty which Subjects owe to their King. And
if this, as the Doctor affirms, falls all to the share of him who has the
actual Administration of Government. I Am afraid there will be but little left
for the other.

Alleg. p. 53. Page 57, 58.
And as if all this was not sufficient to Mortify his legal Prince; he Musters
the Laws, and Lawyers against him: And says, its a very wise Constitution which
obliges us to pay our Allegiance to a Prince who is not the legal Heir, i. e.
to an Usurper. And the Reasons and Order, and Necessity of Government require
it. The Reason and Necessity of Government is a very serviceable Principle to
the Author; whether he does not misapply and overstrain it, shall be farther
examined afterward. At present I shall only desire to be informed of the
Doctor, Whether it is any part of the business of Reason to do an unreasonable
Thing, what necessity there is to destroy Justice, and establish a Revolt?
Indeed if there was a Law that a King should forfeit his Kingdom, as soon as
the Disobedience of his Subjects should oblige him to retire; though the
singularity of such an Act would be amazingly Remarkable; yet it would not be
absolutely unintelligible. But this is not the Case: For both the Doctor and
the Dispute, supposes that the King's Right continues after he is Dispossessed.
Now this is that which makes it superlatively Wonderful: His Right continues in
full Force; and, yet as far as the Laws can provide, he is barred from all
possible means of Recovery. For, it seems, the Subjects are bound to stand by
the Usurper; and to distress, and fight the King de Iure, if he offers to
regain that which they own belongs to him. He has a Right it is granted as much
as ever; say you so? Then, I hope, it is to govern; and if so, his Subjects are
bound to re-establish him. Hold there, cries the Doctor! They are bound to
stand by the Usurper. I confess I always thought, that if a King had a Right to
the Crown, the Subjects were obliged to pay him Allegiance. Right one would
think should relate to something: For to have a Right to nothing, is to have no
Right. But the sea improvements of Time! Here we have a Right without a
Property; a King without a Subject. One who has a legal Right to govern; and
yet all the Kingdom has a legal Right, and a legal Duty to kill him if he goes
about it. Thus the Doctor makes the Laws fall foul upon each other: And gives
the People a legal Right to oppose a legal Right in the Crown. Which is
somewhat a plainer, though not a truer Contradiction, than his bringing in a
Divine, and a Legal Right, clashing with each other. For here the repugnancy
lies in the Constitution, so that the Word Providence, which uses to be so
serviceable, can give him no Assistance. In short, to tell a Man he is a King,
and yet to assign all his Subjects over to another, and to bar him all
possible means of Recovery; is such a Jest of Iniquity, and supposes the
Legislators so incomprehensibly Singular and Unreasonable, that for the Credit
of our Country we ought not to interpret the Laws in such a wild Sense. If the
Doctor had a mind to turn St. Stephen's into Bedlam, and make the Nation Mad by
Representation; he could scarcely have gone a more effectual way to work. To
conclude this business; if the Subjects are obliged to defend an Usurper in
Possession, as much as if he was their rightful Prince; I would gladly know
what privilege the one has above the other? I grant the Doctor allows the
Dispossessed legal Prince a Right to make War upon the Usurper. Alleg. p. 26.
But then as he has ordered the Matter, he can have none of his Subjects to
help him, but those he brings along with him: Besides this Principle gives two
contending Parties a Right to the same Thing; and makes a War justifyable on
both sides; which is something more than usual.

Page 16.
In answer to a Second Objection, he observes, That an Oath of Allegiance can
oblige no longer than the Regal Character continues; which is most true. But
his Inference concerning the Grounds of the Oaths being removed, is altogether
inconclusive. For where the Crown is settled upon Hereditary Right; and
fortifyed by irresistible Authority: There the King must necessarily continue
in Being, as long as the Man: Because the Subjects can have no Power to call
him to an Account, or displace him.

Ibid.
The Doctor encounters a Third Objection, but with the same Success. The
Objection is, That we swear to defend the King's Right, and the Right of his
Heirs, etc. To which he returns. That we don't swear to keep them in the Throne.
Right! For some Men's practices would make one believe we swore to throw them
out, as soon as we had an Opportunity. But the keeping our Prince in the Throne
is sometimes impossible for us to do against a prosperous Rebellion. Ibid.
Does it therefore follow that we must join such a prosperous Rebellion; and
support it with our Interest? Is it the Meaning of the Oath, that we should
desert our Prince in his Distress, and refuse him when he has most occasion for
our Service? If Subjects should swear with such Declarations as these, there
are few Princes would thank them for their solemn Security. I grant it is
sometimes impossible for us to keep our Prince in Possession, against a
Rebellion. But certainly we ought not to follow a Multitude to do Evil. We
ought to stand upon the Reserve, and not fortify the Rebels by our Revolt.
Soldiers don't swear, That they will always get the Victory; for that may be
out of their Power. But if they endeavor to debauch the Fidelity of the Army,
and make seditious Harrangues to defame the General, they very much misbehave
themselves: Much less is it agreeable to change their sides upon the loss of a
Pass, or a Battle. It Is true, upon the Prospect of an Exchange, they may
sometimes submit to be made Prisoners of War: But if their Surrender will not
be accepted, without translating their Allegiance; they ought rather to carry
their Honor and Honesty into the other World, than take their Life upon such
scandalous Conditions. To this Firmness in Loyalty, not only Christians, but
Heathens, upon whom Virtue and Bravery had made any considerable Impression,
always thought themselves obliged. What the Doctor adds in this place,
concerning his Providential Kings, has been sufficiently taken notice of
already. Thus I have done with his Propositions; which, tho I think some of
them a great deal too plain, yet I cannot perceive they carry any Evidence with
them to the Author's Advantage.

His Doctrine, Page 17.
That different Degrees of Settlement require different Degrees of Submission;
is such a Masterly Stroke in Politics, that I think in this Paragraph he may
be said to have outdone himself.

Such a Posture of Affairs seems to require, at least to justify, such a
qualified Submission. But,

1. This is a needless Distinction. For such a limited Compliance cannot be
justified, unless it is required, i. e. unless it is a Duty to comply. The Reason
is, because no Subject is independent of the Constitution. He is not at liberty
to qualify his Allegiance at his Discretion, and to choose to submit to what
Governor he pleases. Such a Latitude would make Subjection an Arbitrary
Relation; which the People might throw off at their pleasure. For if their
private unauthorized Will is sufficient to translate part of their Allegiance,
the whole must, by the same Reason, lie at the Mercy of their Inclinations.
Thus much is granted by the Doctor himself: For though at present he seems to
make these Degrees of Submission no more than politic Provisions, and a little
Ceremony to an approaching Revolution; yet when he comes to state the Business,
he calls them Duties, and carves out several Branches of Allegiance, such as
Praying, Paying Taxes, etc. under the notion of an Obligation; which is a
sufficient Argument they are required to be done.

2. His proportioning Submission to the Degrees of Settlement, seems in plain
English no less than a License for Men to turn, as the Tide does; to shake off
all sense of Honor and Justice, when they are likely to prove expensive; and
to make an Idol of Interest. As if a Man should say thus,

Look ye, Gentlemen, things are so kindly ordered, and so fair an Allowance is
given; that when you find a Government going down, you may draw in your
Loyalty, and sink your Allegiance. But pray take care you do it by Degrees; for
if you are too quick, the King may recover, and you may live to repent it. So
on the other hand, when you see Rebellion in a thriving Condition, and to have
gotten the better of the Laws, you must be sure to comply with the Success as
fast as it rises; and follow it step by step, as it gets ground. By this means
you will not fail to keep pace with Providence. To sleep in a whole Skin, and
enjoy the secure Possession of your Estates. And if the new Interest gains
farther, and increases into a full and plenary ( i. e. into a twice full)
Possession; and looks vertically upon you. (at least as you fancy; and if you
are out, you must look to that.) If it will not give you leave to stand between
Two Governments any longer, but presses you to a final Declaration, under
considerable Forfeitures, than you must come in with a full Tide of Duty, and
fall to Swearing as fast as you can. If the Reader can make any other Sense of
this Passage, I shall be glad of it: But, for my part, I think it Paraphrased
naturally enough.

I shall now briefly touch upon the Duties, (and the reasons of them) which the
Doctor says we ought to pay such a Prince, whom we cannot think the Providence
of God has settled in the Throne, i. e. whom we must believe, an unlawful
Prince. And here the Doctor is very Liberal. For,

First, We must Promise, Swear, or give any other Security, upon demand to live
quietly, and peaceably under his Government.

Page 17.
But why his Government? When the Doctor supposes he has no Title either from
Law, or Providence? What reason has an Usurper, who has neither Humane nor
Divine Authority, to make himself a Judge, and a Ruler over Men? And if by the
supposition the Government does not belong to him, and he has no Authority over
the Subjects; Upon what account are they bound to enter into Engagements, and
to give him Security to establish his Violence? Can the Doctor deny that
Subjects are bound to assist their Prince in all just Quarrels? If he cannot,
By what Law are they at Liberty to swear a Neutrality to the Usurper, and to
make themselves as useless to their Prince, as if they were Dead? If they may
renounce their Active Obedience, Why not their Passive too? Why may they not
attack their lawful Sovereign in the Field; draw their Sword against
acknowledged Justice; and fire upon God Almighty? But what if the Usurper will not
let the Subjects have the Privilege of their Country without these
Conditions? Why then I desire to know whether they are not bound to follow
their King into Banishment; or, if that Liberty is denied, to suffer whatever
shall be put upon them? A

Second Branch of Duty to an Usurper (who by his name has a Right to nothing)
is Paying of Taxes. For, it seems, These are due for the Administration of
Government, Ibid.
i. e. for meddling with that which he has nothing to do with; for seizing upon
the Revenues, and Power, and Jurisdiction, which the Doctor grants belongs to
another. This is great Liberality in the Doctor: However, it appears by what I
have already proved, that he might have spared citing Romans 13.6. to this
purpose. But, it seems, it is his way to bring in the Apostles, as he does his
Kings right or wrong. There is another Reason behind, viz. Because we owe the
secure Possession of our Estates to the Protection of the Government, let the
Government (the Usurpation) be what it will, Ibid.
we ought to pay for it. That is, though Lucifer were at the head of it, we
ought to give him Provender, and bring our Money in the Sacks Mouth? we ought
to give a Man Money to secure our Estates, though we know he intends to levy
Men with it against the Decalogue, and buy Powder and Ball to shoot our
Parents. The Primitive Christians chose rather to lose their Lives, than be at
any Expense toward the Furnishing out the Heathen Worship: And if Parricide,
and Regicide be not as bad as the worst Idolatry, I have no more to say. If
People may take this Liberty to secure an Estate; I think they need not be very
scrupulous how they get it.

Ibid.
Thirdly, We must give the Title of King to an Usurper when we live in the
Country where he is Crowned: Because this is a piece of good Manners. It Is
somewhat strange that the Doctor, who in so many Passages of his Book, has used
a certain Prince at such an uncourtly rate, should be thus full of Ceremony;
though, after all, I much question whether it is any part of Manners to give the
King's Title to an Usurper, when we believe him to be such. An Usurper, who has
no Right to the Crown, can have none to the Title of King; for this is one of
the Crowns Prerogatives. The Royal Style is for very good Reasons an
incommunicable indivisible Right; and cannot be given to another, without
taking it from the true Owner: And if Stealing is Breeding, it is time to have
done. Nov. Org. l. 1.
This puts me in mind of what my Lord Bacon observes, concerning the giving
wrong Names to Things which he terms Idola Fori, which he tells us, is one of
the principal Causes that Sciences are so often disturbed; and the
Understandings of Men so much perplexed. And doubtless where the Matter relates
to Conscience and Morality, the dressing up an uncreditable Character, in the
Habit of Reverence and Dignity, is very apt to draw a false Idea upon the Mind,
and disorder the Practice of the Generality.

And if the Doctor pleases to look into the Statute Book, and Parliament Rolls,
he will find our own Legislators of the same Mind. For there the Three Henrys
of Lancaster, though they had considerable Advantages above other de Facto Men,
are called pretensed Kings, Print. Stat. 1 E. 4. c. 1. Rot. Par. 1 E. 4. L.
Bacon. Vit. H. 7. p. 1004. 1 Mar. Sess. 2. c. 17.
and their Reigns Usurpations; and Henry the Fourth is Styled Earl of Derby.
The same cautiousness of Expression we shall find in the Case of Richard the
Third, and Lady Jane Gray; who, notwithstanding their Possession of the Crown
are attainted of High Treason; and mentioned in the Style of Subjects.

And if we consult the Scripture we shall find the Royal Style never given to
Usurpers. For though Asa's Mother, and Ester are called Queens, notwithstanding
the first was but Dowager, and the other had no more than a Matrimonial
Royalty: 1 King. 19.13.
Yet Athaliah with her Six years Mis-rule is never allowed this Title, either
in holy Writ, or by Josephus.

I grant Hushai, in his Salutation of Absalom, was a very mannerly Person, and
cried, God save the King, God save the King: 2 Samuel 16.16, 18.
And told him moreover, That he was a Providential Monarch, and chosen by the
Lord, and all the People of Israel. But then we are to observe, That Hushai
acted the part of a Deserter all this while, and spoke the Language of
Rebellion: But in all other places, where the History speaks the Words of the
inspired Writer, Absalom is never called King; though David is mentioned, as
such, when his Fortunes were at the lowest Ebb. If it is Objected, That Absalom
was not sufficiently raised for this Title: I shall prove afterward (which at
present, I desire the Reader would take for granted) that Absalom had more
Advantages, than the present Dispute requires: That he did not only Administer
the regal Power, but was likewise Settled upon the Doctor's Principles; and
ought to have been entirely obeyed. Judges 9.
If it is said, That Abimeleck is called King. I answer, That there was at that
time no lawful Prince Dispossessed, and Claiming against him: And therefore,
though he unjustly seized the Government; yet since there was no rightful
Competitor, Possession gave him a Title both to the Name, and Thing.

But to support an Usurper in his Majesty, Alleg. p. 17.
the Doctor says, He is King indeed while he administers the Regal Power. How
can that be, when it is supposed in the Dispute, That he has neither Legal nor
Divine Authority?

Fourthly, We must Pray for an Unsettled Prince; (that is an Usurper in his own
Sense) under the Name and Title of King: Ibid.
Why so? Because the Doctor has lead the the way? I wish that is not the main
Reason. However he gives Two others.

1. Because we are bound to pray for all in Authority; which is more than an
Usurper, especially in this Condition, can pretend to: For to give him legal
Right, is a contradiction in Terms. And as for Divine Authority, the Doctor can
allow him none of that, till he is thoroughly Settled. His

2. Reason why we should pray for him as King, is because he has Power to do a
great deal of Good, Ibid.
or a great deal of Harm. Now upon this Score we might pray for many more
Kings, than Julius Caesar found in Kent. There is a certain Person that shall be
nameless, (for whom, I hope, the Doctor does not pray under the Title of King,)
who has it in his Power to do a great deal of Good, and in his Will a great
deal of Harm; as the Indians are very sensible, and order their Devotions
accordingly. Vid. Caution against Inconsistency.
As for his Direction, That we must take care to do it in such Terms, as not to
pray against the Dispossessed Prince; it is contradictious and impracticable.
For,

First, This dividing our Prayers between Two contesting Princes, is to split
our Duty into halfs, and obliges us to Two opposite Allegiances; Alleg. p. 14.
(which he condemns.) For certainly Prayers for the King are one part of the
Subjects Duty, especially of those of the Doctors Function.

Secondly, His Advice is impracticable. For the Proclaming him King to the
People is a great injury to the Dispossessed Prince. Page 62.
And as the Doctor well observes, His very Possession of the Throne; and every
Act of Authority he does, is against the Interest of the King de Iure. And
therefore such a Prayer cannot be Justified, unless we pray to be rid of him.

Thus I have considered his main Principles. The remainder of his Book, being
most of it consequences from these intermixed with Repetitions, and naked
Affirmations, will go off with less trouble.

He observes, Page 23.
That the taking away the Distinction between Rightful and Usurped Powers,
gives the most intelligible account of the Original of Government. This he
attempts by Induction; and endeavors to prove that Government take it which
way you will, is not to be Explained upon a Foundation of legal Right. He
begins with Paternal or Patriarchal Authority. And says, That no Man had
Authority, either to give it away, or usurp it. I easily agree with the Doctor,
Ibid.
That no Man had Authority to usurp Paternal Power, or any other: But why it
might not be fairly parted with, is not altogether so plain. The Doctor knows
Emancipation was frequently practiced among the Romans, and allowed by their
Laws. This was no other than a Resignation of Fatherly Authority into the hands
of the Child. Indeed, to chain a Man thus inseparably to his Right, is in
effect to take away the Advantage of it: For it bars him the Liberty of
disposing of his own; and makes him a Slave to that, of which he should be
Master. But suppose a Father cannot give away his Authority; I hope the Doctor
will permit him to leave it behind him, when he dies. Now this is sufficient
for the Patriarchal Scheme: For by this Hypothesis, Adam, and the other
Patriarchs, who had Sovereign Dominion from God, left their Jurisdiction to go
by Descent to their Heirs; who were Lords, Genesis 27.29.
not only of their immediate Brethren, but of all the remoter Branches of the
younger Families. So that here is no need of the Resignation of Paternal Power:
For the successive Conveyance of Original Authority, to the Heirs, or reputed
Heirs, of the first Head, is as much as this Hypothesis requires. This is the
Substance of Sir Robert Filmer's Opinion; and because the Doctor has said
nothing to confute it, I shall vindicate it no further.

His next business is to show how impracticable and precarious a Government
would be, if it was settled upon the Choice of the People. Alleg. p. 24.
Now, tho I don't pretend to understand the Doctrine of Original Contracts, yet
upon Supposition any Kingdom was fixed upon this Foundation, I cannot perceive
it would be so sandy as is pretended. Yes; If Subjects give Princes their
Authority, they may take it away again when they think fit. That is to say,
after they have solemnly parted with their Freedom, and resigned themselves up
to the Disposal of another, they may break their Oaths and Promises to God and
Man, and Enfranchize themselves whenever the Humor takes them. This is to
outdo Mr. Hobs, who obliges his Common wealthsmen to stand to their Pacts,
when their Words are once past. But there can be no irresistible Authority
derived from the People. Ibid.
Why so? May they not transfer their Right to Resistance, without any
Limitation of Conditions? This cannot be denied; and if their Liberty to Resist
is thus absolutely conveyed away, one would imagine they should be obliged to
Performance of Articles. If Securities depend only upon the Inclinations of
those that make them, the Philosophers and Divines have very much misinformed
us. At this rate no Man ought to trust another any farther than he can throw
him; and all Society and Intercourse must grow impracticable. The Doctor
pursues his point, and discovers, That a Government must be Res unius Aetatis:
For there can be no Hereditary Monarchy upon these Principles of Choice;
because one Generation can choose for none but themselves: For what Right had
my Ancestors to choose a King for me? Ibid.
It Is well for the Doctor's Ancestors, he did not ask them what Right they had
to be his Ancestors? Such a Question, for ought one knows, might have brought
Difficulties along with it. But, in Answer to the Doctor's Demand, I desire to
know of him, whether our Ancestors have not a Right to Govern us? If they have,
why may they not assign over their Jurisdiction, and choose a Governor for us?
By the Doctor's Logic, we may refuse Obedience to any Law which was made
before our own time: For if our Ancestors could not possibly have any Right to
choose us Kings, they could have none to choose us Laws. His saying, one
Generation cannot bind another, is a manifest Mistake, as the Settlement of
Inheritances will inform him: I think he needs go no farther than a Bond for
his Satisfaction. To come nearer the point, all the Reverend Judges, in
Calvin's Case, affirm, That every Subject, Coke's Rep. part 7. Calv. Case.
as soon as he is born, owes, by Birthright, Ligeance and Obedience to his
Sovereign. And if he owes this Duty by virtue of his Birthright, one would
think it should be upon the Score of his Relation to his Parents, whose Act he
is bound to stand by; unless we can suppose he consented to the Constitution in
the State of Preexistence. To put the matter beyond Dispute, I shall produce a
remarkable Instance from Scripture. It Is the Case of the Gibeonites; who, Josh.
9.15*
notwithstanding they overreached the Children of Israel into a Treaty, by a
false Relation of their Country, yet after the League was once made, the then
Israelites, and their Posterity, were bound to observe it. And when Saul, 2 Samuel 21.1, 6.
out of a Zeal for the Interest of his Kingdom, made a Slaughter of the
Gibeonites, God punished this Breach of Faith with three Years Famine; and the
Gibeonites had Satisfaction given them.

We are now to examine Conquest; which he tryes to unsettle, by saying, if
Conquest gives a Right, Alleg. p. 24.
then the most unjust Force is Right; and every one who is stronger than his
Neighbor, has a natural Right to Govern him. I confess these are sad Stories,
if they were true: But who may we thank for them, but the Doctor and Mr. Hobbs;
who by founding Dominion in Power, Page 15.
have as much as in them lies brought these Consequences unavoidably upon us.

His Speculation about Submission is somewhat surprising: This he calls a
forced and after Consent to own him, Page 24.
who has made himself King. And affirms, by Implication, That we might disown a
Prince who has thus Scared us into Subjection, were it safe to do so. That is,
Oaths and Promises are not to be kept, though the Matter be never so Lawful, if
we are put upon them against our Will. This is strange Casuistry, and if
allowed would make wild Work. For if an unwilling Consent (if one may speak so)
is a sufficient Dispensation, it is easy to pretend it in all Cases; which
Liberty would, in a great Measure, destroy the Securities of Trust and Commerce
between Man and Man.

His last Effort upon legal Government, is in these Words. The continuance of
an Usurpation can never give a Right, Ibid.
etc. A bad Title can never improve into a good one, though it remains after
the right Heirs are Extinct; which is as great a Paradox as any of the rest.
For all Mankind have hitherto agreed, That Possession alone is a good Title,
when there appears no better.

The reason of this Universal Maxim is plain.

First, Because no Man ought to be molested in what he enjoys, excepting upon
the Plea of Right: For he that disturbs a Man without Right, disturbs him
without Reason. But by the state of the Case, no Person has any Right to molest
the forementioned Possessor, in regard the legal Heirs are supposed no longer
in Being.

Secondly, The practice of this Maxim, is necessary to the Peace of Society,
which would be very much disordered, if a long continued Possession might be
disturbed without any Pretense of Right. Now where there is no third Person
injured, nor no Injustice done, those Principles which tend most to the Peace
of Society ought to carry it. Thus the Doctor has made it his Business (with
what Success the Reader must judge) to disparage and unsettle all Legal Titles,
to make way for his Leviathan Model, which resolves all Government into
Providence, that is into Power.

The Doctor now proceeds to Objections; and in Answer to one, concerning the
Injustice of adhering to an Usurper against a lawful Prince, Page 26.
he replies, That the Right of a Lawful Prince is to administer the Government;
and not to obey him when he does not, and cannot Govern, is to deny no Right.
But on the other hand, if a Prince has a Right to administer the Government,
certainly he ought to have this Right; and the People are bound to help him to
the Administration of this Right, when it is forcibly detained from him: For if
he has a Right to the Administration of the Government, he has a Right to
command his Subjects; and consequently they are bound to reserve their Duty for
him only, and to range themselves under his Obedience as soon as may be. To
acknowledge a Right, and at the same time to deny the Duties consequent upon
it, is to say that we are resolved not to render to all their Dues,
notwithstanding the common Reason of Mankind, and the Apostles Command to the
contrary. But he (the legal Prince) does not, and cannot Govern: If that is none
of his own Choice, it ought not to be alleged to his Prejudice. If nothing but
the Disobedience of his Subjects hinders him from Governing, it is unreasonable
for them to plead their own Crime in Discharge of their Allegiance, and to make
a Privilege of Rebellion.

His next Answer has nothing new in it, Page 27.
excepting an Admonition to all Princes, to be upon their good Behavior. For
they must take some care to preserve their Crowns by good Government; i. e.
they must govern as the Doctor and the rest of their Loyal Subjects think fit.
Which Courtly Advice must end in an Appeal to the judicious Mobb, and make the
Vulgar the last Resort of Justice: For these, being the Majority, ought not to
be denied the common Privilege of examining the Actions of their Sovereign. But
what is the Penalty the Doctor lays upon Princes, if they don't give
Satisfaction? Why, then their Subjects are allowed to stand Neuter, and not to
maintain them, so much as in Possession. Just now the Doctor told us, That the
Duty of the Subject was to obey the Laws of the Prince in Possession. Some of
which Laws provide expressly for the Defense of his Person, Crown, and Dignity.
Now to allow this Privilege to an Usurper, and deny it to a lawful Prince in
Possession, amounts to little less then asserting, That Justice ought to be
Discountenanced; and that a bad Title is better than a good one. But is the
Doctor sure the People are at Liberty, not to assist a Prince when he does not
please them? Are they not bound to defend a Divine Right, which he grants is
never parted from Possession? Is not God's Authority in a bad Prince (supposing
he was really such) as much as in a good one? If not Dominion is founded in
Grace; and so we are gotten off from Thomas Hobs, to John of Leyden and
Knipperdolling. And though the Doctor, was not very sure the Subjects are bound
to defend an unacceptable Prince in his Throne; yet a little time has better
informed him: For ( Page 29.) he grants it is Reasonable enough to venture our
Lives and Fortunes to defend the King's Person and Government while he is in
Possession. This I mention, that the Doctor may have the Honor to confute
himself; Neu quisquam Ajacem possit superare nisi Ajax. However, at present, he
will not be thus Liberal: For if the Subjects have a bad Prince, Page 27.
who notoriously violates their Rights; What follows? Then to be even with him
they may be bad Subjects, and notoriously violate his Rights. In such a Case,
if he cannot defend himself, and fight an Army singly, Let him go; though we
are bound to support him, by the Fundamental Laws of Government in General, and
of the Constitution in Particular. Ibid.
But what if he Strikes at Religion? If he does, it is able to bear the Blow
without any Damage. A Man might as well undertake to stab a Spirit, as to
destroy Religion by Force. We can never lose our Faith, unless it is thrown away
by Negligence, or surrendered by Treachery. Religion is out of the reach of
Injury; and invulnerable, like the Soul, in which it is seated. For it is not in
the Power of Violence to rifle our Understandings, or ravish the Freedom of our
Wills. Religion, instead of being Weakened, rises, upon an Opposition, and grows
more Glorious by Sufferings; as is manifest from the History of the Primitive
Christians. I don't mention this as if we lately either felt, or indeed had any
reason to fear any thing like a Persecution; but only to show the Sophistry of
the Doctor's Argument.

For if the Religion of the Subject be out of the Prince's Power to alter; it
ought not to be pretended as a Reason of Deserting him. Besides, to pretend
Religion for the breach of Oaths, and Natural Allegiance is the greatest
Reproach we can lay upon it; and makes one part of it to contradict and destroy
another. Ibid.
And though the Doctor says, It Is a little too much for the Subjects to venture
their Lives to keep a Prince in the Throne to oppress them: That is a Prince
the People are not pleased with; for if they don't fancy him, they will either
say he is, or will be an Oppressor. Now if Allegiance depends upon the
Qualities of the Prince, and his Subjects were made Judges of his Behavior, as
the Doctor will have it; it is impossible for any Government to continue. At
this rate the Ignorance and Levity of some, the Disgust and Ambition of others,
would soon argue themselves into Liberty, and the State into Confusion. And
therefore Obedience is unconditionally bound upon us by the Laws of Nature;
which are part of the Constitution of this Realm, as the Judges agree in
Calvin's Case: Cok^'s Rep. 7 part Calv. Case.
This Faith and Ligeance of the Subject is, as they observe, proprium quarto
modo to the King, omni, soli, and semper; and by consequence forecloses all
Objections against Rigor and Maleadministration. Allegiance, as all the Judges
resolve it in the Case of the Post nati, Moore's Rep.
follows the natural Person of the King; and by consequence must continue as
long as his natural Person is in being, without any respect to his Moral
Qualifications.

But a Subject and a Soldier are two things; Alleg. p. 27.
and a Man may be the first, without any Obligation from the Laws of God or
Man, of being necessarily the latter.

To this I answer, That though every Subject needs not be a Soldier by
Profession, yet whenever his Prince is in danger, and requires his Service, he
is bound by the Laws of God and Man to fight for him. I doubt not but the
Doctor is so far of Sir Edward Coke's Opinion, Calvin's Case, fol. 13.
That the Duty of the Fifth Commandment extends to the King, who is Pater
Patriae. Now one part of the Duty we owe our Parents, is to defend their
Persons from Violence: Which Assistance seems due a fortiori to the Father of
our Country, who has the Jurisdiction over all private Families, and from whom
both our selves and our Parents have received Protection. Solomon tells us
where the Word of a King is, there is Power. And if the Subject is bound to
give a general Obedience to his Prince, then certainly he is not at Liberty to
decline his Service, when his Crown and Person are concerned, The same
Conclusion is plainly implied in our blessed Savior's Answer to Pilate; S.
Joh. 18.36.
If my Kingdom were of this World, then would my Servants fight, that I should
not be delivered to the Jews. From which Words this Proposition naturally
follows, That Subjects, as Subjects, are bound to hazard their Persons in
Defense of their Prince. Indeed this Doctrine stands in little need of the
Support of Authority, it being sufficiently evident from the Reason of the
thing. For,

First, every Subject receives Security and Protection from the King; and
therefore ought to protect his legal Protector: For as all Persons receive the
common Benefits of Government, so they ought to join in a common Defense of it.

Secondly, all Persons are born equally Subjects; from whence it follows, That
the essential Duties of Subjection (of which, Defense of the King is one chief
Branch) must necessarily extend to them all.

Thirdly, all Persons are obliged to venture their Lives for the public
Safety, and to appear against the Enemies of their Country: But the direction
of this Affair belongs solely to his Management, who is vested with the Power
of the Sword, and has the Prerogative of making Peace and War. Those whom he
declares the public Enemies, are to be accounted such, and no others. To him
only it belongs to judge of the bigness of the Danger, to proportion the
Preparation for War, to appoint the time and place for Battle. By virtue of
which Privilege, all his Subjects are bound to comply with his Appointment, and
to bring their Persons into the Field upon demand.

If we look into the Laws of our own Country, we shall find them clear and
decisive against the Doctor.

Moore's Rep. fol. 798. etc.
In the famous Case of the Post nati, argued before the Lords and Commons in the
Painted Chamber, 4 Iac. 1. all the Judges agreed that Allegiance extends as far
as Defense, which is beyond the Circuit of the Laws; That is, the Subjects are
bound to defend the King, in what place soever he resides, whether in his
Dominions, or elsewhere. For, as these Reverend Judges go on, Every King may
command every People to defend any of his Kingdoms, this ( i. e. Defense) being
a thing incident to the Allegiance of all his Subjects. Now, if the Defense of
the King's Person and Kingdoms is a thing incident to the Allegiance of all his
Subjects, or necessarily implied in the Notion of Subjection, then every Man is
obliged to be a Soldier, whenever his Prince shall think fit to employ him in
that manner. This is no more than the Resolution of all the Judges in Calvin's
Case; Fol. 14.
who declare, That every Subject is by his natural Ligeance bound to obey and
serve his Sovereign. And since this Obligation of the Subject is thus general
and comprehensive, it must certainly hold in Cases of greatest Necessity and
Importance.

The Duty of an English Subject is more particularly described in the old Oath
of Ligeance, mentioned by Britton; which, as Sir Edward Coke adds, is yet
commonly in use to this day, in every Leet, and in our Books: The Tenor of it
runs thus;

You shall swear, That from this Day forward you shall be true and faithful to
our Sovereign Lord the King, Calvin's Case, fol. 6.
and his Heirs; and Truth and Faith shall bear of Life and Member and terrene
Honor, Instit. part 1. fol. 69.
etc. This Oath, as Sir Edward Coke observes elsewhere, is to be taken of all
above twelve Years of Age.

The Oath of Allegiance, made 3 Iac. 1. c. 4. takes in the same Compass of
Duty: For there the Subject swears To bear Faith and true Allegiance to his
Majesty, his Heirs, etc and him and them will defend to the uttermost of his
Power, against all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever. This, if it were duly
performed, were enough in all Conscience, and as much as can be expected from
any Soldier; unless the being listed obliges a Man to Impossibilities.

Now this Oath every Person of the Age of Eighteen years is bound to take, 7
Jac. 1. c. 6.
if required by Authority.

Lastly, That the extent of Allegiance reaches to the assisting the King in the
Field, we may learn from 11 H. 7. c. 1. where we are told that The King calling
to mind the Duty of Allegiance of his Subjects, that by reason of the same they
are bound to serve their Prince -- in his Wars, against every Rebellion, Power
and Might, reared against him, etc. This Statute we may observe does not found
the Subjects Duty of asserting their Prince in his Wars, upon their Military
Oath and Possession, but upon their Allegiance; and therefore since all
Subjects owe a Natural Allegiance to their King, they ought to defend him in
the Field, when, and where he shall command their Service. And thus, if the
Judges and Laws may be allowed to determine the Case, the Doctors fine
speculations about Non-assistance, Alleg. p. 50.
must come to nothing.

His distinction of the Parts of the Oath of Allegiance into the Natural Duty
of Subjects, Page 67.
and an Obligation superinduced by Law, is both ill founded, and misapplyed.

First, This distinction has no Foundation either in Reason or Law. Our Oath of
Allegiance does not extend our Obedience (as Bishop Sanderson well observes)
and make us more Subjects than we were before: It only gives a new Security, by
the Solemnity of the Action, for the performance of that to which we were
antecedently obliged. The Oath finds us Subjects, (otherwise we might refuse
it) it does not make us such. And therefore those who have not Sworn such an
Allegiance, are bound to all the Duties of Subjection contained in it. This
Sworn Obedience is enjoined by Authority, only as a Recognition of our Natural
Duty; to which it adds nothing, but the Enforcement of a Religious
Circumstance: Which is agreeable to the Judges Resolution in the forementioned
Case of the Post nati; That Allegiance was before Laws. Moore's Rep. fol. 798.
etc. Calvin's Case, fol. 5.
And in Calvin's Case it is averred, That a True and Faithful Ligeance, and
Obedience, (which is all we are sworn to) is an incident inseparable to every
Subject as soon as he is Born.

Secondly, As the Doctors distinction is Chimerical; so the Application of it
is Mistaken and Unreasonable. Alleg. p. 28.
He says, Natural Allegiance is due only to him who has the actual
Administration of the Government. Natural Allegiance, under Favor, can be due
to none but him who is our our Natural Prince, no more than Filial Obedience
can be challenged by any, excepting our Natural Parents. But Possession
abstracted from Right, does not make any Man our Natural Prince, no not in the
Doctor's Opinion. Alleg. p. 6.
For he elsewhere tells us, That the Kings of Egypt, and Babylon, never had a
Legal and Natural Right to govern Israel. By which Words it is plain, he makes a
Legal and Natural Right to be the same. But bare Possession does not give a
legal Right, and by consequence not a Natural one.

Thirdly, Natural Allegiance is due to him who is King by the Laws of Nature;
but he who can prove his Title by nothing but the Administration of Government,
is no King by the Laws of Nature; For Nature, i. e. right Reason does not found
Dominion in Power, nor gives any Countenance to Injustice. And if an Usurper
has no Prerogatives of Royalty from the Laws of Nature, then Natural Allegiance
cannot be challenged upon this Score. For a Principle which gives a Man no
Right to govern, cannot lay an Obligation upon any Persons to obey him. The Laws
of Nature enjoin us Obedience to our Kings. But they don't tell us, That every
powerful Pretender ought to be acknowledged as such: But refer us to the
Constitution for Satisfaction. For Authority and Jurisdiction is as much a
Property as Land; and therefore the Measure of it ought only to be taken from
the Laws of each respective Country, which brings me to the Doctor's
Application of legal Allegiance; which he affirms, Alleg. p. 28.
is Sworn only to a King in Possession. And by his reasoning he lets us plainly
understand, that this Allegiance is due no longer than the Possession
continues. To this I conceive the Doctor's Arguments will afford a sufficient
ground for a Reply: For he explains Legal Allegiance by Maintenance, or
Defense; and says, Ibid.
it signifies no more than to maintain and defend the King in the Possession of
the Throne, as having a legal Right to it. If it signifies thus much, its
sufficient. For if we are sworn to maintain and defend the King in the
Possession of the Throne, because he has a Legal Right to it; we ought to
defend him as long as this Legal Right continues: For as long as the Grounds of
Allegiance remain in full Force, the Consequent Duties ought to be performed.
Now the Doctor grants a Prince's Legal Right remains after his Dispossession;
and that he may insist upon his Claim, Alleg. p. 15.26.
when he finds his opportunity.

He argues farther, That we can legally take this Oath only to a King in
Possession, because it must be Administered by his Authority. To this I Answer,

First, That from hence it follows, that whenever a lawful Prince has been
possessed of the Government; those who Swore to him during his Possession, are
bound to perform the Contents of their Oath; for then by the Doctor's Argument
it was lawfully Administered.

Secondly, To put the Matter beyond Dispute, we are to observe, That the King's
Authority continues after Dispossession: This, waving other Authorities, I
shall prove from the Two other famous Cases of the Post nati, above mentioned,
reported by Sir Francis Moore, and Sir Edward Coke; in both which we have the
Resolution and Concurrence of all the Judges. In the First, among other Things,
it is affirmed as unquestionable Law; That Allegiance follows the Natural Person
of the King; Moore's Rep. fol. 798. etc.
not the Politic. For Instance, Si le Roy soit expulse per Force, and auter
Usurp, uncore le Allegiance nest toll; comment que le Ley soit toll. That is,
If the King is by Force driven out of his Kingdom, and another Usurps;
notwithstanding this, the Allegiance of the Subject does not cease, though the
Law does. Secondly, Allegiance extends as far as Defense, which is ( sometimes)
beyond the circuit of the Laws. For every King may command every People to
defend any of his Kingdoms; this being a Thing incident to the Allegiance of
all his Subjects, without respect to the extent of the Laws of that Nation,
where they were born; whereby it manifestly appears, that Allegiance follows
the Natural Person of the King. From this Resolution of the Reverend Judges
these Inferences necessarily follow.

1. Since Allegiance follows the natural Person of the King, it must be due to
him as long as his natural Person is in being, i. e. as long as he lives: So
that Possession or Dispossession does not alter the Case. It Is true they make a
change in the King's Fortune, but the Allegiance of the Subject remains the
same.

2. When the Prince is ejected by force, the Laws are said to cease, or expire:
From whence it follows that the Usurper has no Authority to execute Justice, or
administer any part of the Government; which overthrows all the Pretenses for a
K. de Facto.

3. Allegiance extends as far as Defense, and does not, as the Judges observe,
depend upon the Formalities of Law; but is founded in natural Subjection. And
as a King may command his Subjects of one Kingdom, to defend him elsewhere,
though they are obliged by no express Provisions to travel with, or transport
their Allegiance into another Country; so by Parity of Reason all Subjects, in
virtue of their general Allegiance, are bound to defend their Prince in their
own Country, tho there should be no particular Laws assigned to bring them upon
Duty; which is more than the Doctor will allow.

Alleg. p. 31.
4. If Allegiance reaches as far as Defense, then without question it ought to
be paid to the King, when dispossessed; for then it is, he has the greatest
need of his Subjects Assistance.

5. If Allegiance follows the natural Person of the King, and is due to him out
of Possession; then it cannot be due to an Usurper in Possession: For this
would oblige us to two opposite Allegiances, which, Alleg. p. 14.
as the Doctor observes, is absurd, and impossible.

6. If Allegiance follows the King's natural Person, his Royal Authority must
do so too. For an Obligation to obey always supposes a Right to command; and if
the Sovereign Authority always attends upon the Person of the King, then a
Commission granted by a King out of Possession, must be a valid Commission. And
thus the Doctor's great Question, Alleg. p. 31.
which he was not Lawyer enough to decide, is answered against him.

Calvin's Case is full to the same purpose; which because I have already
mentioned, I shall cite the less of it now. In this solemn and deliberate
Determination, it is resolved by the Reverend Judges,

First, That Allegiance and Faith are due to a King by the Law of Nature. They
must mean a Rightful King: For the Law of Nature does not encourage Injustice
and Usurpation.

Secondly, Calvin's Case. fol. 12.
they affirm, That the Law of Nature is part of the Law of England; and cite
Bracton, Fortescue, etc. for this point. And,

Thirdly, That the Law of Nature is immutable.

From whence I infer, That if Allegiance is due to a Rightful King by the Law
of Nature, if this Law is incorporated into our English Constitution, and of an
immutable Obligation; from hence it necessarily follows, That as long as we
have a Rightful Prince, our Allegiance is part of his Right, and ought to be
exerted for his Service.

Secondly, they observe, That in the Reign of Edw. 2. the Spencers, Father and
Son, to cover the Treason hatched in their Hearts, invented this damnable and
damned Opinion, That Homage, and the Oath of Ligeance, was more by reason of
the King's Crown, ( that is his Politic Capacity) than by reason of the Person
of the King. Ibid. fol. 11.
Upon which Opinion they inferred execrable and detestable Consequents. 1. That
the King might be removed for Maleadministration. 2. That he might be reformed
per Aspertee. 3. That his Lieges were bound to govern in aid of him, and in
default of him.

Now if it is such an impious and unreasonable Assertion to maintain that
Homage and Ligeance, is tied to the King's Politic Capacity: Then it must
follow his Natural Person; which makes the Resolution of this Case the same
with the former. And though I don't pretend to know what the Doctor is hatching
in his Heart; yet I Am afraid he has slipped into this damnable and damned
Opinion of the Spencers; for he has ventured to affirm, Alleg. p. 62.
with great assurance, That the Diminution of the Crown, and the Personal Right
of the King, are very different Things. Now if they are so very different it is
because they are separable from each other. And if the Crown may be diminished
without injuring the Personal Rights of the King; then the Rights of the Crown
are not tied to the King's Person. That is in the Spencer's Language,
Allegiance the great Prerogative of the Crown, follows the King's Politic
Capacity, not his Personal; and is due not to any Hereditary Advantage of
Blood, but may be challenged by Possession and Power; especially if the
Administration be cast into a Monarchical Figure.

From these Observations, it is evident, That to maintain and defend the King's
Person, Crown and Dignity, implies an endeavor to restore him. For not to
repeat what has been said already; the Crown is in construction of Law the Ius
regnandi: So that to swear to maintain his Crown, imports an Obligation to
defend his Right, which is inseparably annexed to his Person, and runs parallel
with his Life, unless he resigns. From whence I conclude, Alleg. p. 29.
Saunders Sermon. before the Judges at Exeter, 1650. p. 23.
against the Doctor, and Republican Saunders, That in the Sense of the Oath, to
restore, is necessarily included in Maintaining. But possibly we are not aware
what a monstrous Contents the Oaths of Allegiance will be big with, if
restoring is included in maintaining: For then besides several other terrible
things, which I shall consider afterward, We swear, it seems, to disturb all
Governments, and raise Rebellions if we can, to restore our King; which are
such absurd and unreasonable Engagements, Alleg. p. 29.
That had they been expressed in the Oath, no Man in his wits would have taken
it. I think so too, as the Doctor has represented the Matter. But then before
he drew such tragical Inferences, it had not been amiss for him to have proved,
that there is any Government to disturb under a Usurpation. For, by way of
Quere, I would gladly know, how there can be a Government without any Authority
to administer Acts of Government? And how a Man can have any Authority, who has
no Right to ground it upon; or to give him a public Character? If Allegiance,
as we have seen, is inseparably tied to the Person of the King, one would think
there was no danger of a Crime in the performance of it: Unless we should
stretch it beyond the duration of his Person; and appear from him after he was
dead. If the asserting the Laws, and supporting the Constitution, and engaging
in the Cause of Justice, Is a raising of Rebellion; the Names of things are
very much altered of late; and if the things are not so too, some Persons, I
fear, are in no good Condition. But to insist upon this no farther: I believe
the Doctor forgot that this extravagant Oath of Allegiance cannot be refused by
any Person (except Women Covert) of the Age of Eighteen Years, 7 Jac. 1. c. 6.
without incurring a praemunire. Now by the Judgment of a praemunire, Coke's
Instit. part 1. l. 2. fol. 129, 130.
a Man is thrown out of the King's Protection: And his Lands and Tenements,
Goods and Chattels are forfeited to the King: And his Body is to remain in
Prison at the King's Pleasure.

Now a Man, though he had no higher aim than Self-preservation, might better
venture the inconvenience of following his King into Banishment; and run the
risque of the rest, then have this Act executed upon him. For these are present
and severe Punishments, whereas the other are but contingent and remote
Misfortunes at the worst. So that no Man in his wits, who considers the danger
of declining this Oath, would scruple the taking it, though it was drawn up
with all that Strictness of Loyalty which startles the Doctor. And though he
has dressed up this Oath in frightful Colors, and given it an unkind parting
Blow; which looks like a sign that there was more of Convenience, than
Inclination in their former Correspondence; yet if we take off the disguise,
and wipe off the marks of the Doctor's hard usage, we shall find it of a
Complexion agreeable enough, that it obliges us to no more than what was our
Duty before, and implied in our natural Allegiance; and that the Contents of it
are both reasonable and necessary to the Support of Government.

The Dr. proceeds to remove another Difficulty contained in the Oath of
Allegiance, Alleg. p. 29.
viz. we swear to the King's Heirs and lawful Successors, who are not in actual
Possession; and therefore that must signify to give them Possession. Right! If
the King dies Possessed of the Crown, we must swear to maintain the Succession,
otherwise it seems not. But,

1. I cannot conceive what Security this construction of the Oath can give to an
Hereditary Monarchy: Yes, very much says the Doctor. For if the King dies
Possessed, we swear to maintain the Succession, and to own none but the true
Heir. But how long is this Maintenance and Owning to last? Truly no longer then
his Sword can challenge it. Page 30.
If he gets Possession, we are for him; and so we are for any body else. For if
Jack Straw steps before him, and proves lucky in his Events, the true Heir must
be contented to live upon the Metaphysical Diet of legal Right, without any
Subjects to support him. And thus the Oath of Succession, when prudently
interpreted, resolves it self into this kind Interpretation, That we solemnly
swear to be unalterably true to our own Ease and Convenience, and to adhere
Religiously to the nimblest and strongest Party. And for fear this should not
satisfy the lawful Successor, we swear moreover, if you please, not to make it
our Act to set up any Prince, who is not the right Heir. True! For there may be
danger in doing otherwise; especially when the King dies possessed: For then
the Posse of the Kingdom is usually conveyed immediately to the right Heir, and
his Interest is much the strongest. We ought therefore to be faithful to him,
when it is unsafe for us to desert; and assist him as long as he is able to live
without us. It Is granted, we are not to be too busy at first in setting aside
the Succession, for fear of burning our Fingers; But if any ambitious Person is
strong enough to make a Break in the Line, we may lawfully comply with the
Intrusion. So that it seems we must not form an unjust Interest, nor set out
with it at first; for possibly it may sail us: But when it has gathered
Strength by the Conjunction of more Wickedness, and improved into a thriving
Condition, we may fix and support it fairly enough. I perceive some people, out
of a tenderness to Society, will not give us leave to break our Fast with Rebels,
for fear we should ruffle our Concerns, and miscarry before Noon; but when the
day is once their own, we have Liberty to come in at the Evening, and sup with
them; and may wipe our mouths after all, with the same good Conscience the
Woman did in the Proverbs. But truly I think those who will not venture to ride
the Chase, ought not to be admitted to the eating of the Venison. However, if
we examine the matter critically, it is hard to tell which sort of Revolters,
the early or the later, ought to be preferred. They have each of them their
peculiar Excellencies: The one has more Courage, the other more Caution, and
both the same Staunchness of Principles. Ambition is predominant in the first;
Fear and Covetousness in the latter, who is such a flexible apprehensive
Creature, that whoever can command his Interest, may likewise command his
Actions, and fright him out or into any thing, at their Pleasure. I observe,

2. That this Construction of the Doctor's determines against K. Charles II. as
fully as is possible. For he was driven into Banishment, before he could gain
his Right: And the Rump and Cromwell mounted the Seat of Government: And the
King his Father dyed dispossessed of the Crown. So that by the Doctor's
Reasoning, the People were not only disingaged from the Successionary part of
the Oath, but were bound to stand by the Commonwealth, and oppose the
Restoration. If any one questions K. Charles I. his being dispossessed at his
Death, he may please to consider, That this Prince was not only Defeated in the
Field, and made Prisoner by his Rebellious Subjects; But there was a High Court
of Justice erected to try him for Treason. The Supreme Power and Authority was
declared to be in the Commons of England: And Monday 29. Ian. 1648. (the Day
before his Majesty's Martyrdom.) The Commons in the Name of the present
Parliament enact, That in all Courts of Law, Justice, etc. And in all Writs,
Grants, etc. instead of the Name, Style, Test, or Title of the King, heretofore
used; that from thenceforth the Name, Style, etc. of Custodes Libertatis
Angliae shall be used and no other. In short, the King's Name was enacted to be
struck out in all judicial Proceedings, in the date of the Year of our Lord, in
Juries, in Fines, Walkers Hist. of Independency, part 2. p. 100, 110.
in Indictments for Trespass and Treason. From these unquestionable Matters of
Fact it is manifest, beyond contradiction, That the King had not so much as the
Shadow of Authority left him; but was perfectly out of Possession before he
lost his Life. I shall draw one Advantage more from this Citation, and so
dismiss it. The Inference is this, That Treason lies against the King, though
out of Possession. For the Regecides who were not comprehended in the Act of
Indemnity, were excepted, for Sentencing to Death, or Signing the Instrument of
the horrid Murder, or being Instrumental in taking away the Life of King
Chales I. 12 Car. 2. c. 11.
For this Reason, They are left to be proceeded against, as Traitors to his
late Majesty, according to the Laws of England.

If the Doctor desires another Instance, that Treason may be committed against
a King out of Possession; he may receive Satisfaction from the first 12 Years
Reign of King Charles the Second. Ibid.
For in this Act of Indemnity, it is said, That by occasion of great Wars, and
Troubles, that have for many Years past been in this Kingdom, diverse of his
Majesty's Subjects are fallen into, and be obnoxious to great Pains, and
Penalties. And to the intent, that no Crime committed against his Majesty, or
Royal Father, shall hereafter rise in Judgment, or be brought in Question
against any of them, to the least Endamagement of them, either in Lives,
Liberties, or Estates; his Majesty is pleased that it may be Enacted, That all
Treasons, Misprisions of Treasons, acted or done since the 1. Ian. 1637. to the
24. of June, 1660. -- shall be Pardoned, Released, etc.

From this Act we may observe,

1. That though the King was newly restored at the making of this Act, it is
said, notwithstanding Diverse of his Subjects, (not his Fathers) had for many
Years past been obnoxious to great Pains and Penalties, etc. which is a plain
Argument, that as his Reign was dated from the Death of K. Chapter I. so they
looked upon the People of England as his Subjects from that time; and that his
Authority to punish, was entire, during his Dispossession; otherwise they could
not have been obnoxious to great Pains and Penalties, for acting against him.

2. The King pardoned all Crimes committed against Himself, Which would have
risen up in Judgment, and Endamaged his Subjects in their Lives, Liberties, or
Estates: Some of which Crimes, as they can amount to no less than Treason, so
they must relate to the time of the Usurpation; because the King was but very
lately entered upon the actual Administration of the Government. Neither do we
read of any Treasons committed against the King from the 29 th. of May to the
24 th. of June; which was the utmost term to which the Pardon extended.

3. All Treasons, Misprision of Treason, etc. (excepting those excepted) are
Pardoned from January 1. 1637. to June 24. 1660. Now if Treason did not lie
against a King though out of Possession; this Pardon should have reached no
farther then 1648. because then K. Charles I. was Murdered, and his then
Majesty deprived of his Kingdoms, till the Year 1660. The General Pardon, I
say, ought to have stopped at 1648. unless we can imagine the King intended to
rank those among Traitors, who appeared for his own Interest; and to pardon the
Treasons committed against Cromwell and the Rump, which is a Supposition
sufficiently Romantic, especially if we observe, That the pretended
Indictments of High Treason against any of the usurped Powers, are considered
by themselves in the next Chapter, and pronounced null and void: And the Styles
of the Usurpation, Keepers of the Liberties of England, Protectors, etc.
notwithstanding their plenary Possession, are declared to be most Rebellious,
Wicked, Traiterous, and Abominable, and Detested by this present Parliament.
And why all these hard Words? Because these Names of Authority when misplaced,
12 Car. 2. c. 12.
Were opposite in the highest Degree to his Majesty's most just and undoubted
Right. That the Doctor may not complain for want of Evidence in this Matter, I
shall cite him a Proclamation of both Houses, for Proclaiming King Charles the
Second, Dated May 8. 1660. It begins thus, Although it can be no way doubted,
but that his Majesty's Right and Title to his Crowns and Kingdoms is, and was
every way COMPLETED, by the Death of his most Royal Father, etc. without the
Ceremony, or Solemnity of a Proclamation: Yet since the Armed Violence of these
many Years last past has hitherto deprived us of any such Opportunity, wherein
we might express our Loyalty, and Allegiance to his Majesty; We therefore, etc.

Now if the King's Right was every way Completed at his Fathers Death, and the
Allegiance of the Subject was due to him before his Restoration, than Treason
was committable against him; for Treason is nothing but a high Breach of
Allegiance. But this Proclamation is so plain, that there needs no farther
Comment upon it. And thus I have made it appear from the Resolution of all the
Judges in two distinct and celebrated Cases; by Proclamation, and Acts of
Parliament, that Treason lies against the King, though out of Possession: Which
performance the Doctor is pleased to call Proving the Point; Alleg. p. 60.
and looked upon it as an impossible Undertaking.

The Doctor's next Observation begins very obligingly for the Crown: And seems
to insinuate, that the Subjects need not disturb themselves with Fears and
Jealousies: For in case a Prince should be inclined to stretch his Prerogative,
He cannot hurt them, Alleg. p. 30.
unless they will betray their own Liberties, and venture to be Hanged for it.
And who would venture an Execution only for Robbing himself? There is no fear
the Majority of the English Nation especially should ever be guilty of such an
Extravagance: So that now, one would think, all was safe enough: But it happens
quite otherwise. For the Doctor flies out unexpectedly against Arbitrary Power,
makes indecent Reflections; and gives all Princes a Second Admonition to take
warning. And after this sit of Schooling is over, he argues thus, That if the
Oath of Allegiance does not oblige Subjects to defend a Prince in the Exercise
of an Arbitrary Power; Ibid.
He thinks it much less obliges them to restore such a Prince. To this granting
the Doctors supposition, for Disputes sake, I answer; That notwithstanding the
Subjects are not to act for the promoting of Arbitrary Power; yet they are
bound to support an Arbitrary Prince, supposing they have one. This the Doctor
must grant, unless he will maintain, That a Sovereign, and unaccountable Power,
may be Forfeited by Maladministration; which, I think, is a Contradiction. For
all Forfeitures imply a Legal and Superior Court, to take Cognizance of the
Cause, and pronounce Sentence; which cannot be supposed in this Case, without
making a Superior to a Supreme. And if Sovereign Power is Unforfeitable, than
the Right of him, who is vested with it, must always remain: And if so, the
Subjects are bound to support him in the Exercise of it, though it may be
sometimes over-strained into Rigor.

Let us try the Doctor's Argument once more. The Subjects are not obliged to
defend a Prince in the Exercise of Arbitrary Power. They are not bound to
maintain the Excesses of a Prince's Prerogatives; therefore they may deny him
his just Rights. They are not bound to give him more than his Due; therefore
they may give him less, or take all away from him. It Is a fault to break the
Laws in Favor of the Crown; therefore we may break them for Rebellion; Where
lies the Equity and Logic of these Propositions? A less Master of Thinking
than the Doctor would have found out the Distinction between Arbitrary and
Regal Power, and concluded that our Obligations not to promote the one, did not
discharge us from supporting the other.

Alleg. p. 31.
His Inference, That the making and receiving Addresses of Lives and Fortunes,
is supposed to signify some other Defense than the Oath of Allegiance obliged
the People to, is not Mathematically drawn. For may not Men make a Recognition
of their Duty, and give fresh Assurances to perform that which they were
obliged to before? What is more common in Religion, and Civil Conversation,
than to renew former Engagements, by repeated Promises, and Solemnities of
Action? These Addresses of Loyalty refresh the Obligation of the Subject, and
the good Opinion of the Prince: And therefore it is no wonder they are kindly
received, though they present him with nothing but his own: I don't mean that
the People have no Property in their Lives and Fortunes; but only that they are
bound to expose and resign them to the Public, i. e. their Prince's Interest,
when Occasion requires.

The Doctor remarks farther, That the Oath of Allegiance is a National Oath,
and therefore the Defense or Maintenance we swear is National; that is, to join
with our fellow Subjects in defending the King's Person and Crown. -- But in
case the body of the Nation absolve themselves from these Oaths, and depose
their King, and drive him out of his Kingdom, and set up another Prince in his
room; it is worth considering, whether some private Men are still bound by their
Oath. And immediately concludes, certainly this was not the Intention of the
Oath; for it is a national, not a private Defense, we Swear. I confess the
Doctor has stated the Matter of Fact notably enough, Alleg. p. 31, 32.
about, Absolving, Deposing, Driving out, Setting up, etc. But the Consequence
he infers from thence I cannot understand, for these following Reasons.

First, because there is nothing in the Form of the Oath to countenance this
Interpretation; but the contrary. For by the Oath of Allegiance every Person
Swears to bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty and his Heirs, etc. and
him and them will defend to the uttermost of his Power. Whence I observe,

1. That the Swearing in the Singular Number, and without Conditions of
Assistance, is an Argument that every individual Person is bound to unalterable
Fidelity to the Crown; without any Relation to, or Dependence upon, the
Behavior of his fellow Subjects.

2. He that runs in to a Majority of Revolters, does not defend the King to the
uttermost of his Power: For the King has neither his Counsel, the Reserve of
his Person, nor the Example of his Constancy; some or all of which might have
been serviceable in their way, and were in his Power to give him. Nay, he is so
far from defending the King to the utmost of his Power, that he consigns
himself and all his Power into the hands of the Usurper, to be employed against
his lawful Sovereign; which is as direct a Contradiction to the Words and
Intention of the Oath as can possibly be imagined. Farther, the Oath declares,
I do believe, and am in Conscience resolved, That neither the Pope, nor any
Person whatsoever, has Power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereof.
But the Doctor is of another mind, and concludes, That when the great Body of
the Nation has absolved themselves, their Neighbors are absolved too. I
suppose the Doctor will not quibble upon the Word Person, and argue that though
the Pope, nor any other Person, has any Power to absolve us, yet the People
may; because they imply another Number, and include a Plurality of Persons. If
he objects in this manner, the latter end of the Sentence is sufficient to
disappoint him. For there we renounce all Dispensations to the contrary: Which
Clause is levelled against Popular, as well as Papal Plenitude of Power, and
comprehends the VVestminster-Infallibility, as much as that of Rome. Lastly,
all these things are sworn according to the express Words spoken; and according
to the plain and common Sense and Understanding of the same Words; and without
any Equivocation, or Mental Evasion, or Secret Reservation whatsoever.

But to swear with this private supplemental Sense, That we will bear Faith and
true Allegiance to the King, provided the Majority of his Subjects will do so
too; if this is not a plain wresting of the common Sense and Understanding of
the Words; if this is not a Mental Reservation to purpose, I despair of seeing
any such in the Jesuits Morals.

Secondly, This Construction of the Oath makes Government very uncertain, and
precarious. The Dr. frequently flourishes with the Body of the Nation; I hope
he does not think the Nation is all Body. By this great Body I suppose he must
mean the Majority of the Kingdom. Now if a Government lies at the Discretion of
the Multitude, it must needs be admirably provided for! If a King must go to
the Poll for his Sovereignty; and and we are obliged to tell Noses, to know
whether our Allegiance continues, or not; we are likely to enjoy the Blessings
of Peace and Order at a great rate. The generality of Mankind formerly don't
use to be over*burthened either with Prudence or Conscience; and I don't
perceive that this Age has much mended the matter: Which makes me wonder why
the Dr. should give them such an unbounded Privilege; to pull down and set up
Kings; to dispense with Oaths and other Commandments; to repeal Laws; to
transferr Titles, and turn the World topsy turvy, at their pleasure. But which
way does the Great Body of the Nation absolve themselves from these Oaths? By
Law? No. They are not the Legislative Power. 13 Car. 2. c* 1.
The Parliament it self cannot pretend to this Privilege without the King. This
Great Body are Subjects like other People when they are separate, and
dispersed. Whence then comes the sudden Alteration? Can they rendezvous
themselves into Independency? Can a Crowd give a man a Dispensation purely by
the Magic of their numbers, and the Disorder of their Meeting? This makes the
Composition work incredibly beyond the virtue of the simple Ingredients. Who
would live alone, if Company can do all these Wonders? Well! Possibly the Dr.
means, This Great Body cannot absolve themselves from their Oath lawfully; but
when they have once done it, their Act must stand. Can they not do it Lawfully?
Then certainly not at all: For in these cases id tantum possumus quod jure
possumus. Who ever heard, that unlawful Absolving, or a Dispensation against
Authority and Right, signified any thing? However, this is the Dr's meaning,
which makes him still more incomprehensible. For,

3 dly. This Construction confirms the highest Breaches of Law, and gives Force
and Authority to the most irregular Proceedings. It does not warrant the
Deposing Act, it is true; but when it is over, it gives it a Blessing, and
pronounces it valid. The Pope sometimes pretends to depose Princes by a
Privilege of Right: But this Doctrine scorns to be beholden to a Color of
Justice, but does the same thing by a Privilege of Wrong. It sets Violence in
the place of Law, and gives Treason and Authority the same effect.

And how the difference between Good and Evil can consist with such a Latitude,
is somewhat difficult to understand. But what can the minor part of the
Subjects, perhaps but a little handful, P. 33.
do toward the restoring their King? Why, they can show an exemplary Firmness
and Resolution, which may probably increase their numbers, and awaken the
better-meaning part of the People into right Apprehensions of their Duty. They
can wait God Almighty's leisure, retain their Integrity, and save their Souls:
And is all this nothing?

Ibid.
The Dr. has a farther Reserve, and that is, An Oath to fight for the King, does
not oblige us to fight against our Country, which is as unnatural as to fight
against our King.

As unnatural; then it is unnatural to fight against our King; which is worth
the observing. To go on, and,

1. As the Oath of Allegiance does not oblige us to fight against our Country,
so neither does it to sight against our King: If it did, it has been well kept.
Besides, I would gladly see a reason why we ought to prefer the Country to the
King. Did we swear Allegiance to the Country, or has it any Authority over us
independent of the King? If not, why should we esteem Multitudes above Justice,
and side with the Subject against the Sovereign?

2 dly. We are to remember, That the Dr. disputes upon a Supposition of
Usurpation; and therefore the Assistance of our Country does not belong to his
Plea: For those who appear for the Rightful Prince, for the Laws and
Established Government of the Country; they, and no other, are properly
speaking the Friends of the Country. If the Dr. takes the Country on any other
notion, he must make it a Wilderness of Disorder, or a Den of Thieves. And to
carry on the Dr's Supposition; To fight against Revolters, is not to fight
against our Country. They have no Country to lose, but have forfeited the
Privileges of their Birth and Industry, by their defection: And though they may
find Favor if they seek in time, yet they can challenge none. The Dr. was
apprehensive, that this Post was scarcely tenable, and therefore after a little
skirmishing, retires to the main Fort, his pretended Disposal of Providence:
And after all, he grants, That Subjects must have Regard to Legal Right. And if
they pull down a Rightful King, and set up a King without Right, Ibid.
they greatly sin in it. Most certainly. And therefore one would think, when
they have set up a pretended King without Right, they ought to pull them down
again, and not persevere in the Breach of their Duty.

What the Dr. adds by way of Parenthesis, That Subjects ought not to remove or
set up Kings without Legal-Right, unless the Constitution of the Government
should in some cases allow it; Ibid.
is somewhat unintelligible. It Is true, some people would make us believe,
though without Reason, That the Constitution does acknowledge an Illegal
Prince, after he is once set up and established: But that it should allow the
setting him up in any case, I suppose was never heard of till now. If the
Constitution allows of its own Violation, and the Laws grow lawless, and give
Men Authority to break them, it is time to look out for some other Government. I
can guess what the Dr. would have called such disputing as this is, if he had
catched an Author at such a disadvantage.

The Dr. proceeds to another Objection, Ibid.
viz. This Doctrine of his makes it impossible for an injured Prince to recover
his Right. This is a severe Charge; How does he purge himself? Surprizingly
enough. He tells you, It may be called a Difficulty in Providence, if you
please; but it is no Difficulty to the Subject, unless a passionate Affection
for the dispossessed Prince makes it a Difficulty. Otherwise it will rub off
easily enough: For, it is but yielding to Necessity, and leaving every thing
else to Providence, and there is an end of that business. But what if the
Subject has a passionate Affection for Justice, as well as for his Prince, and
cannot draw his Sword against the Laws with any manner of satisfaction? What if
he is afflicted to see a brave, a generous, and good-natured Prince so deeply
injured? What if he has an aversion to Violence, and hates to strengthen the
Workers of Iniquity? If he has not command enough of his Conscience to conquer
all these Scruples, what Relief can the Dr. give him? Very little that I know
of. And as for his calling it a Difficulty in Providence, he must either mean,
That it is a Difficulty to God Almighty, or else, That it is to human
Understandings an incomprehensible way of proceeding; for Providence to bar a
good Prince of his Right, only for having treacherous Subjects, and bad
Neighbors. And if this be his meaning, I agree with him, unless we had a
particular Revelation to clear the point. But then I must add, That the Dr's
Scheme bearing thus hard upon the Attributes of God, is but a bad Argument to
conclude the reasonableness of it. He says, No man could have foreseen how Chapter
the Second should have returned, who had a powerful Army against him; or J. the
Second be driven out of his Kingdom at the Head of a powerful Army, without
shedding of Blood. Alleg. p. 33.
Now, the reason why the latter instance of this Mystery was so difficult to
penetrate, is given by the Prophet: Because the Heart is deceitful, and
desperately wicked, who can know it? Jer. 17.9.
However, according to the Dr's Application, Providence was as much concerned
in the one as in the other; as much engaged to incline Men to desert and betray
their Prince, as to return to their duty to him. He goes on to inform us,
Alleg. ibid.
That all the Plots and Conspiracies of the Loyal Party were vain, and had no
other effect, but to bring some worthy and gallant men to an unhappy End. All
the Plots, etc. That is, the Loyal Party plotted to restore the Government, and
conspired against Rebellion. This is somewhat oddly expressed; but new
Language, and new Notions, do well together. I perceive the Dr. is resolved to
furnish out Cloth and Trimming too, for one bout. But after all these fine
words, if his Doctrine holds true, these Gallant Worthy Men were no better than
Men Worthy, and Traitors to God and the Commonwealth.

Some People will likewise wonder, since he had bestowed such Commendations
upon the Royallists, why he should tarnish their Character, by saying they came
to an Unhappy End. If he means it with respect to their Friends, it might be
so: If in relation to themselves, it is utterly denied: For, is it in earnest a
Misfortune to sign our Loyalty with our Blood, and to dye in defense of the
Laws? Is it an Unhappiness to value our Honor and Integrity above our Lives,
and to expire in Constancy and Greatness? If the Case be thus, the Martyrs came
to an Unhappy End: But I shall dismiss this Argument. The Dr. is at last
apprehensive, lest this Doctrine should prove inconvenient and dangerous to
Princes; and answers the Objection, by saying, Ibid.
The contrary Doctrine is much more dangerous to Subjects: Whose Interest, it
seems, must be preferred, though their Behavior be never so monstrous and
irregular. I shall afterward endeavor to show, That the Security of the
Subject is better provided for, upon the old Principles, than by this new
Scheme. But why is the contrary Doctrine so dangerous to the Subject? Ibid.
Because it is a Folly to believe any Princes will endure those who are obliged
by Principles of Conscience to oppose and disown their Government. Is it Folly
to think any Prince will endure such things? Then it is Folly, it seems, for him
to endure them.

Here the Dr. has given us a Cast of his good Nature, and shown what a kind
Advocate he is for his Brethren the Non-Swearers! But why will he not endure
them? Does the Dr. think no Prince will endure a Man that has any Principles of
Conscience? Not when they are turned against him. Why not, if there is no
Malice in the Opposition? Why should any Power persecute People to the death,
merely because they are willing to go Heaven, and are afraid of being damned?
An intruding Prince, if he has any Spark of Honor or Generosity in him, if his
Temper be not as ill as his Title, will not sacrifice such Persons to Rage and
Resentment: Not only because such sort of Revenges look uncreditably and mean,
but because he knows his Interest is not declined out of Humor or Animosity,
but upon the score of Principles and Duty.

The Dr. undertakes another Objection, which lies against his Doctrine of
Providence, Alleg. p. 34.
viz. That Pirates and Robbers have as good a Title to his Purse, as an Usurper
has to the Crown.

What he has brought in answer to this in his Case of Allegiance, I have
already considered. But he has since endeavored to support himself upon some
new Reasons in his Vindication, and therefore these must be likewise examined.
Before I enter upon this matter, it may not be improper to take notice, That
the Dr. was forced to make use of such extensive Principles in his first Book,
that, like a large Town, they are much the weaker for their Compass: Which
makes the defense of them at all Quarters utterly impracticable. I am mistaken,
if that which I have formerly alleged, together with the obvious Consequences
which result from it, does not contain an Answer to what the Dr. has lately
produced: For if, as he maintains, Alleg. p. 15.34.
all Power, whether Legal or Illegal, is from God, and a certain sign of his
Authority; if Providence orders all Events which are for the Good or Evil of
private men, as well as public Societies; Alleg. p. 12.
if there is no difference between the Divine Permissions and Approbations;
Ibid.
no Evil in the City which the Lord has not (barely permitted, but) done. If
all this be true, I confess I cannot understand why a Robber's Title is worse
than a Usurper's. However, since the Dr. continues of another mind, the Grounds
of his Dissent shall be considered.

Now he endeavors to show, That private Robberies and Usurpations have not the
same Effect and Confirmation from Providence. Because all private Injuries are
reserved by God himself, to the redress of public Government, therefore his
Providence has no Effect at all upon such Personal Rights. -- But such Disputet
which are too big for a legal decision, for the decision of which God has
erected no Universal Tribunal upon Earth, He has reserved to His own Judgment;
such as the correction of Kings, and the transferring of Kingdoms. And here the
final determination of Providence, in settling Princes upon their Thrones,
draws the Allegiance of the Subjects after it. Vind. p. 46.
It Is granted, That Government is appointed by God for the redressing private
Injuries; but it is likewise as true, That all Injuries of this kind are not
actually redressed. There are very many Irregularities committed by the
Subjects, toward each other, which remains uncensured and unrectified by the
Courts of Justice; and therefore, why should not Providence interpose by way of
Supplement, and determine private Property by Events, as well as the Dominions
of Princes? Subjects, by their Immoralities and Mismanagement, deserve
oftentimes to be chastized, and dispossessed of their Fortunes: Why therefore
should there not be a Court of Events set up to assert the Sovereignty of
Providence, and to supply the defects of Human Justice in one Case, as well as
in the other?

But Providence has no Effect upon such Personal Rights. Is it because they are
Personal? Then it can have no Effect upon the Crown; for that surely belongs to
the King's Person. The Dr. cannot deny, that God is supreme Lord of private
Estates, as well as of Kingdoms; and that He disposes them according to his
pleasure: And since He orders all Events which are for the Good or Evil of
private Persons, it follows, by inevitable consequence, that whatever any man
can catch, is God Almighty's Gift, and then surely there is no reason to
question the Title. God in erecting Courts of Judicature, did not intend to
make the Subjects, any more than the Prince, independent of his own
Jurisdiction; or to exclude Himself from any part of the Government of the
World. And therefore, if all public Changes and Revolutions of Kingdoms are
certain Signs of God's Approbation, and fortified with his Authority, we ought
to conclude the same with respect to inferior Concerns. If the Successes of
Violence always draws Allegiance after them, and translates the Authority from
the Rightful Prince to the Usurper, I see no reason why they should not have
the same consequence upon private Property; for, that Cause which can produce a
greater Effect, may, no doubt, produce a less of the same kind. If Providential
Events can unsettle the Crowns of Princes, it is strange they should not have an
equal Jurisdiction over things of an inferior value. If this Principle is
sufficient to overturn the Fundamental Laws of a Kingdom, and to transferr the
Prerogatives and Royalties of Government, I wonder how any petty private Rights
can stand before it. Have private Rights a firmer Establishment than the
public? And is the Property of Crowns more precarious, and slenderly guarded
than that of a Cottage? If Events can give an Island or a Continent, to every
Victorious Usurper, why should a more modest Robber, who makes himself Master
of a small Sum of Money, be denied the same Privilege of his Industry or
Courage? This is great Partiality, and by the Dr's Reasoning, Alleg. p. 25.
a Confining Providence with a witness, and fettering it with Courts of Human
Justice: So that God cannot dispose of the Property of the Subject, unless the
Judges and Jury are pleased to consent to it. The truth is, the Dr. has made
the Condition of Princes very lamentable. As for Subjects, when they are
injured by Theft or Intrusion, their Property remains entire, and they have the
Remedy of Law to relieve them: But Princes must not pretend to these
Securities, when they are once disseized, though never so unaccountably; their
Authority is out of doors, and they must sit down by their Misfortune without
Redress: They are to Govern only durante been placito, no longer than the Sense
and Conscience of the People will give them leave; two Qualities which seldom
fall to the share of the majority: And which is an harder Consideration than
all the rest, it is their Honorable Relation to God Almighty which puts them
into these circumstances of disadvantage: Had they not had a Commission from
Him, their Right had been fenced, as well as those of other Men; but their
being His Ministers, to Rule the World, has cut them off from the common
Privilege. This must needs be a mortifying Consideration to Princes, and make
their Charge a very dangerous Undertaking. Who, that could live any other way,
would wear a Crown at this rate? Who would change the Title of Private
Property, and throw himself out of the protection of the Law, for such a
glittering Uncertainty? Who would quit a certain and solid Interest, and expose
himself to all the Humors and Accidents, the Wickedness and Extravagance of
Human Nature is capable of producing? It Is certainly much more eligible to have
the Security of stated Justice, than to stand to the Courtesy of Events, and
lie at the Mercy of Ambition, and the Madness of People.

But, Such Disputes which are too big for a Legal Decision, for the decision of
which God has erected no Universal Tribunal upon Earth, He has reserved to his
own Judgment. What sort of Dispute does the Dr. mean, and between whom does it
lie? Is it between the Lawful Prince and the Usurper? If so, the very Names of
the Parties are sufficient to end the Controversy. For certainly there is no
need of disputing, whether Right is Right, or Wrong is Wrong. The Dr. I fear to
perplex the Argument, seems to perplex the Title, and disputes, as if it was
equally doubtful on both sides; and then, I confess, Events, i. e. Possession
might determine it. But this cannot be supposed, without altering the state of
the Question: For the Dr. has put the Case at the worst, and reasoned upon the
Supposition of Usurpation; Pref. to the Case of Alleg.
and owns, That his Principles oblige him to do so: And would our Author have a
Universal Tribunal erected, to overthrow Universal Justice; to dispossess and
exterminate Lawful Princes, and determine the Cause in Favor of Violence?
Well! Possibly the Dr. means, this Dispute is between God and the Lawful
Prince. It Is for the Correction of Princes, and the Transferring of Kingdoms.
Touching the transferring of Kingdoms, there are several ways, as I have
already observed, of maintaining the Divine Sovereignty in this point, without
making any Difficulties in Providence, and sapping the Foundations of Common
Right. And as for the Correcting of Princes, God does not stand in need of
Injustice and Rebellion for this purpose; He can execute this Discipline
without the necessary Wickedness of the Subject: He can afflict Princes in
their Families, and in their Persons: He may likewise suffer them to be
overrun by Violence, without giving any Approbation or Authority to the
Oppression. As he suffers the Devil to do a great deal of Mischief, though He
neither gives him a Commission, nor ratifies his Acts. Besides, there will be
an Universal Tribunal erected at the last day, where Princes must appear as
well as meaner persons; and where mighty Men, if they have done amiss, will be
mightily tormented. Thus we see Kingdoms may be transferred, Princes punished,
and God's Prerogative asserted, without returning to the Doctrine of Events.
These Expedients are plain, and lie easy upon the Understanding, and answer
all the Difficulties objected by the Dr. without running us upon greater. Thus
Kings, who are only less than God, are left to his Sentence and Correction.
Whereas the Dr's Scheme puts them in the Power of the People; and gives a
Rebellion, when it is grown General, a Privilege to cancel the Regal Authority,
and to absolve the People from their Allegiance. Now, for Subjects to sit
Judges upon their Prince, and Inferiors upon their Undisputed Supreme, is the
greatest Affront both to Decency and Duty imaginable. The Dr's Remark, That the
final Determination of Providence, in settling Princes ( i. e. Usurpers) draws
the Allegiance of the Subject after it; is worth considering: For what sort of
Determinations are these? They are against Law and Human Right. When do they
commence, and what Signs have we to distinguish them by? Why, when Wickedness
is in its Exaltation, and Rebellion is grown Invincible, then it is that
Providence determines the point for Usurpation, and gives it a Divine
Authority; then God, it seems, discharges the People from their former
Engagements, and gives them leave either to Choose or Submit to a new Power. The
Dr. thought to clench the business by the word Final, but, as ill Luck would
have it, it has spoiled all: For the Dr. in his Case of Allegiance, has
observed, That the Usurpers being placed in the Throne at present, and the
Lawful Prince removed, does not prove, that it is God's Will it should always
be so. Alleg. p. 26.
And upon this Argument he founds the Ejected Prince his Legal Right. Now, if
this Determination is of an uncertain continuance, it cannot be termed Final;
for Providence may reverse it in a short time, for ought we know to the
contrary. Farther. Either this Determination is final, or not; if it is, then
God cannot restore the Rightful Prince, nor dispossess the Intruder: And is not
this to confine Him to Events, i. e. to Human Actions, and to hinder him from
the free disposal of Kingdoms? If this Determination is not final, then it
signifies nothing; for by Implication from the Dr's Argument, it draws no
Allegiance after it. Besides, the Reader may please to take notice, that I have
proved above, That Events are no Declarations of the Will of God, nor any good
Grounds for Practice; especially when they are neither agreeable to the Rules
of Justice, nor warranted by express Revelation.

The Dr's next Argument for a Disparity between Usurpers and Robbers, runs
thus. Kings must be thoroughly settled in their Government before it becomes
unlawful for Subjects to dispossess them. Therefore to make the Case parallel;
he who seizes another Man's Estate, must be thoroughly settled in it, before it
becomes Unlawful to dispossess him: But that no private man can be, who is
under the Government of Laws, and has not the Possession of his Estate given
him by Law. Vind. p. 47.
Under favor, I conceive the Case is exactly parallel. For instance; If a Man
picks my Pocket, and runs away with the Money, it must, by the Dr's Principles
be his own; for the Event is clearly on his side: He has Possession as well as
an Usurper, and the same Countenance of Law for keeping it. He has moreover the
Consent of the Great Body of Pick-pockets, who all submit to his Success, and
acknowledge the Justice of his Title; and, Who can now deny his being thoroughly
settled in the Money? If the Dr. replies, he may be punished, and obliged to
refund, provided he can be seized.

I answer. So doubtless may an Usurper be served, if the Lawful Prince can
catch him. But then it follows, that so long as he remains undiscovered, he is,
I cannot say a Legal, but a Providential Proprietor, and therefore not bound to
Restitution. However, to give the Dr. entire satisfaction, I shall not insist
upon his Concealment, but bring him into open view; which may be done without
disturbing his Settlement; for it often happent, that Thieves, with a Guard of
their own Persuasion, retire into Boggs and Mountains, where, though the true
Owners know their Retreat, there is no coming at them. Now, as long as they
remain in these impregnable Circumstances, together with the Advantages I just
now mentioned, I cannot see the least Color of Reason from the Dr's Principles,
why they should not have a Divine Right to all their Booty.

Lastly, The Dr. to prove these two Cases unparallel, apprehends a great
difference between a Legal Right to the Crown, and the Legal Rights of Subjects
to their Estates. Vind. p. 54, 55
-- In settling Estates there is nothing more required, but a mere Human Right:
But to make a Legal King, besides an Human Right to the Crown, he must have
God's Authority; for a mere Human Right cannot make a King. This the Dr. urges,
to obviate an Objection, That it is as wicked and unjust for Subjects, Id. p.
54.
whatever their Circumstances are, to own any other Prince, but the L^gal Heir,
as it would be for Tenants to pay their Rent to any but their true Legal Lord.

But his Answer is by no means satisfactory. For,

1. I have proved, That an Usurper has neither Human nor Divine Right; and
therefore I desire the Dr. would not bring him in for his Share of Privilege,
among Legal Landlords, and Legal Kings, till those Arguments are answered; for
certainly, he that has no Right or Authority, ought not to have the same
Treatment and Duties paid those with those that have.

2 ly. If a private Landlord, who, it seems, has no more than a mere Human
Right to his Estate, does not forfeit his Title by being unjustly disseized,
Why should a Prince be in a worse condition, who Claims under greater
Advantages, and has the Laws of man, and the Authority of God to secure him? If
a single Legal Right is able to hold out against Force and Intrusion, one would
think it should improve by being doubled, and not grow weaker by having Divine
Authority superadded to it. Now the Dr. grants, That every Legal Prince is
fortified with Divine Authority; and therefore, if Violence cannot extinguish a
private Right, it must be, if possible, less prepared to do any execution upon
a Crown.

3 ly. To take away the difference the Dr. apprehended between private and
public Property, I answer, That if he means by mere Human Right, an Authority
from Men, only as Men, without any higher original; then there is more required
for the settling an Estate than a mere Human Right. For, Men abstracting from
the Commission they receive from God, and the Subordination He has placed in
the World, are all equal, and have no Authority to make Laws and and bind
Property; they have no superiority of Nature over each other; they have no
Prerogative from Creation, from Preservation, from Omniscience and Omnipotence;
they have neither Heaven nor Hell at their Command, and therefore have no
reason to claim a Jurisdiction over their Fellow Creatures in their own Right.
If their Laws had not their Sanction from a Superior Authority, it would be no
Sin to break them, for every one might take his Measures as Humor or Interest
should direct them: Therefore, to keep the World in order, God has confirmed
Human Laws with his own Authority, and threatened to punish the Violations of
them with no less than Damnation. From whence it follows, That whoever has an
Human Right to an Estate, has likewise a Divine Authority to secure it; for we
are commanded to obey the Ordinances of Man, by God himself, and Property is of
his appointment: So that as long as the Human Right to an Estate continues, the
owner enjoys it, by God Almighty's Order and Appointment (unless he declares
expressly to the contrary) which, doubtless, carry his Authority along with
them. It Is true, private Proprietors have not a Divine Authority for the same
great purpose with Princes; they have it not to Govern, and make Laws; to
represent the Majesty and Sovereignty of God; but they have it to fix the
Bounds of Meum and Tuum, no less than Princes have to assure their Government.

Farther. If Kings, as the Dr. grants, are made by a Divine Authority, their
public Acts, particularly their Laws, must have the same privilege: For those
Acts which are but Executions of the Royal Office, and for which the Office it
self was intended, must have the same Authority with the Office; and if the
Laws of Kings have a Divine Authority, the Estates which are settled by those
Laws, must partake of the same Advantage, and have more than a mere Human Right
for their Security. Thus I have considered what the Dr. has urged for a
Disparity between Usurpers and private Robbers, and unless he has something
farther to say in his defense, the Consequence I have drawn upon this Head must
stand in full force against him.

The next Objection which the Dr. endeavors to remove, is the Instance
concerning Ioash and Athaliah, which, he says, was a peculiar Case, Alleg. p.
34, 35
because God had entailed the Kingdom of Judah on the Posterity of David.

I have made it appear above, that there is no difference between an Human and
a Divine Entail, as to the Strength and Firmness of the Settlement, because
they are both founded upon God's Authority. But since the Dr. has endeavored
to reinforce his Answer in his Vindication, I shall briefly consider what he
has there alleged.

First, Vind. p. 42.
The Dr. grants, that Princes have their Authority of Government, and
consequently of making Laws from God. But yet we are to think Divine Political
Laws much more sacred and universally obligatory than mere Human Laws. It Is
confessed, That Divine Laws are to be preferred to Human upon several accounts,
but this difference does not in the least affect the Obligation of the Subject,
and therefore is nothing to the Dr's purpose. However, it may not be improper
to point out the Circumstances of Advantage: By the way we may remember, That
we are not now disputing about Moral Laws, but only those which are positive
and political. Now, the preference which Divine Laws of this nature ought to
have above those which are merely Human, depends upon these following Reasons.

1. Because of the Solemnity of their Publication, they are delivered in a more
majestic manner, proclaimed by miraculous and extraordinary appearances of
Nature. These Advantages of Promulgation exhibit the Authority of God as it
were visibly to the Senses of the People, and make a more reverential and
lasting Impression upon their Minds, than any Human Grandeur and Magnificence
can do.

2. Divine Laws oblige the Conscience by a direct and immediate Authority, Jam.
4.12.
for God is that one Lawgiver, who has an original and independent Authority
over us. As for the Ordinances of Men, they do not bind in virtue of their own
Right, but only upon the account of a delegated Power, because God has
commanded us to submit to them for his sake, 1 Pet. 2.13. Romans 13.4.
because they are made by those who are his Ministers, and act in his Name.

3. Divine Laws are preferrable in regard of the Excellence of their Matter;
they are the Results of Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, and exactly proportioned
to the Circumstances and Convenience of those for whom they are made: There is
nothing of Oversight, Passion, or private Design in them, to which
Imperfections Human Laws are liable. Upon these three accounts, the Laws which
are of God's own making, ought to be more highly esteemed than those published
by Human Governors. But then these Advantages have no relation to the
Sanction, nor hinder the Obligation to obey, from being the same in both; for
where the reason of Obedience is the same, the Duty must be so too. Now Human
Laws being confirmed by God's Authority (which is the Ground of our Obedience)
as much as those which are called Divine, our Consciences must be equally
engaged to both. It Is true, the Divine Authority is somewhat more remotely
conveyed in Human Laws than in the other; but this distance does not make the
Obligation less obligatory, nor give the Subject any Liberty to dispute; for,
as the Orders of a Prince are to be obeyed, though delivered by inferior
Magistrates, so God expects our Submission and Compliance, as much when he
commands by his Representatives, as when He does it more immediately by
himself. And therefore, what the Dr. observes concerning Divine Political Laws,
that they are more universally obligatory than any mere Human Laws, is not
always true; and when it is so, it does not proceed from the Kind of the Law,
but the Privilege of the Legislator. I say it is not always true; for the
Mosaic Ceremonies were Divine Laws, but these Laws were in force only in
Palestine, and among the Nation of the Jews, and therefore the Obligation to
obey them could not reach so great an extent by far, as an Edict of the
Babylonian or Persian Monarchs, whose Empire was much larger. It Is true, a
Divine Political Law may be more universally obligatory than a mere Human one,
because God is universal Lord, and has a Right to govern all Mankind; which,
it is likely, no one Prince will ever have. But this Disparity, if it should
happen, does not proceed from the unequal Authority of the Laws, but from the
different Jurisdiction of the Lawmakers: The one, it is granted, may Command
farther, but the other within its proper Precints is equally valid.

The Dr. affirms, That the Dispute between Divine and Human Laws, Vind. ibid.
and a Divine and Human Entail of the Crown, are of a very different nature.
But here he makes a distinction without a difference; for, are not all Entails
grounded upon Law, Divine upon Divine, and Human upon Human Laws? Therefore in
disputing the Entails above mentioned, we must debate the Nature of Human and
Divine Laws, because these are the Basis upon which the respective Settlements
are supposed to stand: From whence it will follow, that if the Authority of
Divine and Human Laws is the same, the Entails depending upon either of them,
must have an equal firmness. This Consequence it is likely the Dr. foresaw,
which made him run out into a Mystical Discourse about Providence; which
Principle I have already undertaken, and proved, That Providence, as the Dr.
understands it, is no Rule of Practice: However, I shall consider the Remainder
of this Paragraph a little farther. Now, the Dr's Reason why a Divine Entail is
stronger than a mere Human one, is, Because the first is founded upon express
Revelation; the later has nothing more than a providential Settlement of the
Crown, upon such a Family; Vind. p. 43.
but Providence is not to be expounded against the express Revelation of God's
Will. To this I answer, That an Human Entail has a great deal more to plead
than the Dr's Notion of Providence. It has a Legal Right to support it is Title,
which gives it an equal firmness with a Claim made from Divine Designation: For
we have plain Texts of Scripture to submit to the Constitution of our
respective Countries, 1 Pet. 2. Romans 13.
and to look upon our Lawful Governors as God's Ministers. And since a Legal
Right is fortified with express Revelation, it must have an equal privilege
with a Divine Entail, and carry it against all Providential Pretenses, by the
Dr's own Argument.

He goes on, and attempts to prove the difference between Divine and Human
Laws, as to their Force; because in the first Case the Authority of God gives
an immediate Divine Authority to the Laws made by God; Vind. ibid.
in the other Case, the Authority of God terminates on the Person, and does not
immediately affect his Laws. To this it may be replied,

1. That according to the Dr's description of a Divine Law, there are few or
none of this Character to be found, either in the Old or New Testament; for the
Mosaic Law was given by the disposition of Angels; Acts 7.
and the Gospel was delivered by the Apostles. It Is true, those Precepts given
by our Savior, may be said to proceed from a Supreme and Sovereign Power. But
then we are to consider, that his Humanity was the Organ of their Conveyance:
So that by our Author's Reasoning these practical Manifestations of the Will of
God, are but Human or Angelical Laws at the highest: For, not being delivered
by the Deity Himself, the Authority of God must be conveyed at a distance, and
terminate on the Person of the Minister who represents Him; and by consequence
cannot immediately affect his Laws. Now, this Immediate Conveyance is the Dr's
distinguishing Privilege, which he makes essential to the Character of a Divine
Law: And therefore I would gladly know why an Entail, grounded only upon a
Prophetical or Angelical Law, may not be overruled by Providential Events, as
well as an Human Legal Settlement; For Angels have no original Immediate
Authority, any more than Kings, and Kings are called Elohim, Psalm. 82.
Gods, as well as the other* and have as ample, and I may add, a more standing
Authority to Govern Mankind, than any of the Heavenly Hierarchy. Now, if
Providence, understood in the Dr's sense, ought to have the same effect upon
those Laws, which were given by Angels or Prophets, as upon others, which are
merely Human, as by his Argument it must have, then Ioash's Entail was cut off
by Athaliah's Possession, and Iehojada was guilty of Treason for deposing her.

2 dly. It Is not at all material as to the Dispute in hand, Whether the Divine
Authority affects the Laws of Princes immediately or mediately? As long as we
are certain of the thing, the manner of its Conveyance is no abatement of the
original Virtue. The Dr. grants, That Princes have God's Authority to make
Laws. Now God's Authority to make Laws, implies a Right to make them: And
since, Vind. p. 6.
as the Dr. observes, there are no Degrees of Right, there can, for the same
reason, be none of Authority; and therefore it must be full and perfect
wherever it is. If the Divine Commission of an Human Lawgiver is certain and
unquestionable, we need enquire no farther; for God's Authority receives no
prejudice by being delivered to His Representatives: So that provided the truth
of the thing is secured, the way of its coming to us, whether by Removes, or
not, signifies nothing; for in this Case the distance of the Conveyance does
not in the least weaken the Force of the Operation.

Vind. p. 44.
What the Dr. adds concerning Divine Laws, That they have (...) Superior
Authority to all Human Laws, is true, but foreign to his purpose; for God can
null his own Laws, as well as those which are purely Human, as He has actually
done in the Mosaic Dispensation; so that the possibility of a Divine Repeal
does not make any difference between Human and Divine Laws, they being both of
them equally liable to such an alteration. Besides, we are to observe, that
though God can repeal the Laws made by Himself, or his Representatives, yet we
are by no means to suppose, that Events and Providence, as the Dr. takes it,
are any Authentic Declarations of the Divine Will.

Ibid.
His Instance in the By Laws of a Corporation, is likewise unserviceable; for
these private Laws, within the Precincts of the respective Towns, have the same
Force with the more general Laws of the Kingdom, provided their Charter is
comprehensive and full, and granted by those who have the entire Legislative
Power; which last Privilege cannot be denied to God Almighty; and therefore his
Authority must be as strong in the delegation as in its more immediate exercise.

The Dr. in his Case of Allegiance, to which I am now returned, endeavors to
gain a Text in Hosea, from the usual Interpretation, and make it consistent
with his Principles. Here, as the Dr. observes, God expressly charges Israel
with making Kings without him; They have set up Kings, but not by me; they have
made Princes, but I knew it not. To this the Dr. replies, That this was not
true, as to all the Kings of Israel, after their separation from the Tribe of
Judah. If it was true of some of them, it is sufficient to justify the objected
Exposition against him. This Answer therefore being perfectly inoffensive, I
shall pass to his Second, in which he argues, That Baasha slew Nadab the Son of
Jeroboam, and made himself King without God's express nomination. And yet God
tells him, I have exalted thee out of the Dust, 1 Kin, 15.27.16.2.
and made thee Prince over my People Israel.

Now, if there were any difficulty in this Text, the Dr. has effectually
removed it in his Case of Resistance; p. 130.
the Passage is not only well managed, but stands unrecanted. And thus it is. 1
Kings 14, 10, 11.
God having threatened to destroy Jeroboam' s whole Family, Baasha fulfills this
Prophecy, by the traiterous Murder of Nadab, ( who succeeded his Father
Jeroboam in the Kingdom) and usurped the Government himself, and slew all
Jeroboam' s House. 1 Kings 15.28, 29.
This Murder and Treason is numbered among the Sins of Baasha; for which God
afterward threatened to destroy his House, Chap. 16.7.
as He had done the House of Jeroboam. And yet he having usurped the Throne,
and got the Power into his hands, and no Man having a better Title than his,
God is said to have exalted him out of the Dust, and made him Prince over his
people Israel. -- All which plainly shows, that where there is no regular
Succession ( i. e. where the Kingdom is not Hereditary, or the Royal Line is
extinct) to the Kingdom, there Possession of Power makes a King. From whence it
follows, that where there is a Regular Succession established, and an undoubted
Title, there mere Possession of Power does not make a King. If the Dr. can
confute this Reasoning, he may remember it is his own. But in my opinion it is
unanswerable; and so I shall leave it, and proceed to the

3 d. Which he calls the True Answer to this Text of Hosea; by which Character
we may understand what he thought of his two former. In this Answer he affirms,
That Israel was originally a Theocracy, (he must mean, after the Revolt of the
Ten Tribes) as well as Judah; and though God at their request allowed them to
have Kings, yet He reserved the appointment of them to himself, and appointed
Jeroboam to be their first King: Therefore the fault the Prophet taxes them
with, is, their omitting to consult God for his Nomination, after Jeroboam 's
and Jehu 's Line were cut off; Alleg. p. 36.
for these were the only Kings named by God. But by the Dr's Argument the Ten
Tribes should have consulted God about a new King, immediately after Ieroboam's
death, because his Line was cut off; 1 Kin. 11.38.
for the Crown was promised to his Posterity, upon condition of his own good
Behavior; which Condition was notoriously broken by him. Vid. Hos. 1.
I might likewise observe, that it is very unlikely the Prophet Hosea, who lived
so many Generations after Jeroboam and Nadab his Son, should charge the
Children of Israel with an Omission at so great a distance of Time, which no
Mortal then living could possibly beguilty of.

But to come closer to the Dr. The Theocracy was determined when Baasha made
himself King; as the Learned Dr. Spencer has proved to satisfaction: Dissert.
de Theoc. Jud. l. 1. c. 4. Sect. 2.
The Theocracy (says he) was mightily weakened, and in a manner expiring under
Saul and David, but was quite as it were extinguished under Solomon. When the
Kingdom was made successive, and the Ark fixed in the Temple, and the Vrim
supposed to be no longer Oracular, -- Then it was plain, God had given up the
Government, and resigned the political Supremacy to the Kings of Israel. If the
Reader is desirous to see this Argument managed at length, he may consult the
Author; for to avoid tediousness, I have cited him but briefly. Indeed, I need
not make much search after Authorities, for the Dr. in his Case of Resistance,
P. 19.20.
speaks as home as one would desire; he there observes, That after Saul was
chosen King, the Government ordinarily descended not by God's immediate choice,
but by the Right of Succession, (though now he is pleased to contradict it.)
And having given an account how the Face and Motions of the Government were
changed, and that the Jewish Monarchs, in their Councils, in their State, and
Defense, were conformable to their Neighbors. He adds, Therefore the
Government of Israel by Kings was like other Human Government, liable to all
the defects and miscarriages which other Governments are; whereas, while the
Government was immediately in God's Hands, the Administration, as He goes on,
was under a quite different management. So that we see the Dr. has given up the
Theocracy rather sooner than the Learned Author I quoted before.

Now, if the Theocracy was determined before Israel and Judah were parted into
two Kingdoms, we have farther Reasons to believe it had its period after their
division, especially in the Kingdom of Israel; for in that Kingdom there was
neither Tabernacle, nor Temple, nor Ark; there was no regular authorized
Priesthood; no Vrim and Thummim, no Symbols of God's Presence, excepting the
Calves at Dan and Bethel, which were unacceptable to Him. It Is true, they had
Prophets sometimes sent them; so had the Ninevites, and other neighboring
Nations; where they were very far from being under God's immediate Government.
And therefore though the Theocracy should have continued till this time in the
Kingdom of Judah, we have no reason to believe the Ten Tribes in the same
condition; for they wanted the Signs of the Theocratical Superintendency, the
Organs of Inspiration, and the Ministers, by which God was wont to execute his
Orders, and direct the State. Now, what does the Dr. bring to confute himself,
and the Reverend Dean, and the Inference I have drawn from them? Why, nothing
but that Jeroboam and Iehu were made Kings by God's immediate Designation: But
this Remark does not come up to the point; for Nebuchadnezzar had several
Countries given him, by God's express Designation, Jer. 27.
and yet the Babylonian Monarchy was never taken for a Theocracy.

The Dr's next Essay is, to prove, Alleg. p. 36.
That this Doctrine of Allegiance to the present Powers, is founded on the same
Principle with the Doctrine of Non-Resistance and Passive-Obedience, and
therefore both must be true, or both false. This Argument he knows some men
will not like: Which is no wonder, for I am pretty sure it is no good one; as
will appear by examining his Proof. He tells us, Passive-Obedience is founded
on this Principle, That God invests Kings with his Authority. True; God does
invest them with his Authority* when they are either appointed by his immediate
Designation, or claim their Sovereignty by the Constitution of the Country; for
God declares, That the Higher Powers are his Ministers; and commands us to
submit our selves to every Ordinance of Man, Romans 13.
for his sake; 1 Pet. 2.13.
and confirms Human Laws with his own Authority. So that where the Laws make it
Treason to resist the Prince, there the Gospel makes it Damnation. And upon
this Bottom the Doctrine of Non-Resistance stands. But it does not follow from
hence, that Illegal Powers are vested with God's Authority: Alleg. p. 36.
Yes, says our Author, this Principle equally proves, that all Kings who have
received a Sovereign Authority from God, and are in the actual Administration
of it, must be obeyed, and not resisted. But here the Dr. takes the matter in
dispute for granted; he supposes a King and an Usurper to be Terms equivalent;
he confounds the Notion of Authority and Force, and inferrs a Divine Right from
the actual Administration of Power.

Now I have made it appear, that King is the Name of Right, not of mere Force;
that Authority and Power are things vastly different; that Usurpers have no
Authority from God, neither sovereign nor unsoveraign; and that their actual
Administration of Government is no more an Evidence of a Commission from
Heaven, than any other Success of private Injustice: Therefore, unless he can
disprove what I have urged upon these Heads, there is no danger of his making
Passive-Obedience dependent upon his new Scheme. To the remainder of this
Paragraph I have given an Answer already, which needs not be repeated.

Alleg. p. 37.
He complains, the Old-Church-of- England Principles limit the Providence of God
in governing Kings, and protecting Injured Subjects; for, it seems, God has no
way to do this, but either to turn the Princes Hearts, or to take them out of
the World.

Very well! And is not their Reformation a sufficient Redress of the Peoples
Grievances? Or are they not punished if they are damned for oppressing their
Subjects? Besides, there are other Expedients, as I have shown, by which
Providence may correct Princes and relieve the Subject; and if there were not,
those Remedies I have just now mentioned are much more intelligible than what
the Dr. prescribes; for what can be a greater Reflection upon an All-wise and
Almighty Being, than to make him stand in need of the Sins of his Creatures? As
if the Course of Providence must be stopped, unless it were releived by
Perfidiousness and Rebellion: As if God could not govern the World without
setting it on fire; nor work any deliverance without involving whole Nations in
Guilt, and Blood, and Ruin. If this is not confining Providence with a Witness,
I am much mistaken. And though the Dr. seems to lament the Subject's Misfortune,
because the Old Principles deny them the Liberty to own an Illegal Prince,
though he would be never so kind to them; Alleg. p. 38.
yet I conceive, he will have no reason upon second Thoughts, to be dejected at
this Consideration: For People are sometimes very liberal in disposing that
which does not belong to them, and bribe high, at least in Promises, to gain
their designs: But if every one might engage with those who would be kind to
them, without any regard to Virtue and Honor, private Families would be very
much disordered, and the Dr. might possibly be a Sufferer by this Latitude
himself. And why must that Usage be put upon Princes, which, if it was offered
a private Person, would be thought a great Injury? Since the Duties of
Subjection are bound upon the Conscience, as strictly as any domestic
Relation, we ought, doubtless, to take our Lot, for better for worse, and not
be governed by our Inclinations in these matters. However, it seems hard that
we must refuse our Deliverance, and not allow God to deliver us unless he do it
by Law. Ibid.
But waving the familiarity of this last Sentence, I answer; That we have no
reason to believe any Deliverance comes from God, unless it is managed in a
regular defensible way: To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not
according to this, Isa. 8.
it is because there is no Light in them. He whose Character it is to still the
Madness of the People, we may be sure, will never authorize and encourage it.
The righteous God of Peace always speaks in the still Voice of Law and Justice,
and is never to be found in popular Commotions, nor in the Tempests of
Rebellion. But if this Argument fails, he has another, which is more
considerable at hand, P. 38, 40, 41, 44.
viz. The necessity of Government, to preserve Human Societies; for Human
Societies must not dissolve into a Mobb; or Mr. Hobbs's State of Nature,
because the Legal Prince has lost his Throne, and can no longer govern, -- The
preservation of Human Societies does of necessity force us to own the Authority
even of Usurped Powers. -- I believe it will be hard to persuade any
considering men, That that which in such Cases (in Revolutions) is necessary to
preserve a Nation, is a Sin. -- For the end of Government is the preservation
of Human Societies, -- and the great Law of all.

In answer to this Argument, I shall endeavor to prove these Three things upon
the Dr. I. That he over values the Preservation of Societies, which ought not
to be maintained by irregular and unjust Actions. II. There is no reason to
apprehend, the Strictness of the Old Principle should dissolve a Country into a
Mob. III. If this Event should sometimes happen it would turn to the general
Advantage of Society.


1. Society ought not to be upheld by Acts of Injustice. Since God does not
allow private Persons to preserve themselves by injuring their Neighbors, why
should we imagine He grants this Liberty to Great Bodies of People? Unless the
universality of an Evil Practice can change its nature, and correct its
Malignity. Does God hate Injustice in private Persons, and permit it at the
same time to whole Communities? It Is somewhat strange, a Multitude should not
be bound to the Common Laws of Justice and Humanity; and that Sinners should
grow Saints, merely by crowding together. And if this Supposition is absurd,
then certainly Justice and Moral Honesty are to be preferred before the
Concerns of Society. Now, to deny any person his Right, much more to break the
Fundamental Laws of a Kingdom, is certainly Injustice, and therefore the number
of Adherents cannot alter the Quality of the Action, though they may aggravate
the Crime. It Is true, Self-preservation is a good thing, but as some People
order the matter, we shall have little left worth the preserving. When we talk
of preserving our selves, we should comprehend the whole Interest of Human
Nature, especially the nobler part of it, and not confine our Notion to the
Satisfactions of Epicures and Atheists. We should take care to preserve our
Integrity, as well as our Wealth; our Reputation, as well as our Ease; and our
Souls, as well as our Bodies. Which cannot be done, unless the Measures we go
by are regular and defensible. To illustrate this general Discourse by an
Instance, Let us suppose a whole Country or Nation reduced to such streights,
that they have no other way to save their Lives, but by turning Turks or
Heathens; What is to be done in this Case? Have they the Liberty to comply, or
must they submit to the Penalty? Matt. 16.24, 25. Mar. 8.34, 35.
If they may comply, the Evangelists were mistaken, and the Martyrs
Self-Murtherers. If they may not, it follows, that some things may be necessary
to the Preservation of a Society, which are notwithstanding utterly unlawful.
And, that the general danger of refusing to comply with an Imposition, does not
make the Compliance warrantable; Cic. Lib. 1. de Offic.
Tully, though a Heathen, could say, That there some things so lewd and
flagitious, that a wise and virtuous man would not be guilty of them, though his
Country lay at stake. And elsewhere he tells us, That to take away that which
belongs to another, and to enrich our selves at the disadvantage of our
Neighbor, is a greater Contradiction to Nature (and by consequence ought to be
more avoided) than Death, Id. Lib. 3. de Offic.
than Poverty or Pain; and in short, than all the Accidents which can happen to
Life or Fortune.

Again. Ibid.
The Law of Nations, which stands both upon an Human and Divine Authority, does
not suffer us to make our selves Rich or Powerful with the Spoils of others.

The same Author cites several noble Precedents (as he calls them) where the
Public was concerned, in which Honor and Honesty were valued above the
Considerations of Security and Power.

Amongst other Instances, he gives one concerning Themistocles, who told the
Athenians at a public meeting, That he had something to propose very much to
the Advantage of the State, which was not convenient to mention in that place,
and therefore desired they would assign him a proper person, to whom he might
communicate it. They ordered Aristides to attend him. Themistocles tells him,
That the Lacedemonian Fleet, which was laid up at Gytheum, might be burnt,
provided the matter was managed with Secrecy; which Loss must of necessity
ruin the Lacedaemonians. Upon the hearing of this, Aristides comes into the
Assembly, and makes his Report in general terms; That Themistocles's Proposal
was indeed useful, but by no means fair and equitable: The Athenians
understanding this, and not believing that any thing which was dishonest could
be really serviceable, damned the whole Project upon Aristides's Authority,
Ibid.
without so much as hearing it.

In this Discourse he likewise observes, That the Stoics had such an Esteem
for Justice and Generosity, that they positively pronounced, That nothing which
was mean and dishonest could be really profitable. The Peripateticks, another
famous and numerous Sect of Philosophers, though they held, That Honesty and
Interest might sometimes be separated, yet they owned at the same time, That
the first was always to be preferred to the latter.

I wish these Heathens don't rise up another day, and condemn some Generations
of Christians, who with all their Advantages of Revelation fall so
unfortunately short of Natural Religion and Pagan Virtue; who startle at the
mere Idea of Justice, and cannot bear the Confinements of Honesty so much as in
the Theory; whose Principles and Practices tend to no other point, but to
debauch and debase Men's Spirits, to make them mean and mercenary, and
indifferent to Right or Wrong.

In short, Government had better be dissolved than upheld by unlawful means.
God never intended Society should be made a Sanctuary for Vice, and serve only
to promote the Ends of Injustice; People had better live singly and dispersed,
than incorporate for Mischief, and be tied together with the Bands of Iniquity:
If Men cannot be honest in Company, let them break up and retire into Solitude.
There is a necessity for a Man to keep his Faith unbroken, and his Honor
untarnished; but it is not necessary to live either in Towns or Villages, or
indeed any where else, when Life must be bought at the expense of Virtue and
Conscience. If Ease, and the regaling our Senses are to be preferred to Truth
and Justice, it is time to resign up the Privileges of Human Nature; instead of
pretending to these things, we ought rather to go down upon all four, and
resemble the Shape and Posture, as well as the Qualities, of Irrational
Creatures. Is it not much more eligible, to be dissolved into Mob, than to
range our selves in order, for the support of Injustice, and to play Tricks in
Mood and Figure? Let us rather choose to wander in Deserts and Mountains, Heb.
11.31.
in Dens and Caves of the Earth, than combine, like the Men of Sodom, for
Lewdness and Violence; for the Pretense of a Community is no good Plea for
Immoral Actions, nor any Shelter against Fire and Brimstone. Fiat justitia and
ruat mundus; Better no World than no Honesty. But

2. There is no Reason to apprehend the Strictness of the Old Principle should
dissolve a Nation into Mob; for, the Usurper's Interest will be sure to keep up
the Face of a Government; there seldom wants Complyers in such cases, to supply
the Courts of Justice, and to take care of public Administrations. A Lawful
Prince is never dispossessed without a powerful Faction, who will be
sufficiently vigilant to nurse up their New Settlement, and to throw their
Irregularities into the usual form. And therefore, as we have no warrant, so
neither have we any necessity to own a Pretended Authority, or to engage in the
Business of Government; for there is no fear, but that there will be Ambition,
Covetousness, Cowardice, and other ill Principles enough, to fill up the vacant
places, and to manage the Concerns of this nature. But*

3. Supposing this Event the Dr. is so careful to provide against, should
happen by disowning the Usurpation, it would produce very good Effects. For,

1. Such a general Disorder would disappoint the Revolters of the Advantage
they designed. Now, if their Expectations were always baulked, this would be a
mighty Check to Faction and Ambition, and we should seldom see any Wickedness
of this nature attempted. If Men had no Prospect of building up another
Government in the room of that which they pull down, nor any hopes of thriving
by their Rebellion, the World would not be plagued with Incendiaries and
Traitors so often as it is. If Confusion, and a kind of Civil Chaos, was the
necessary Consequence of a Defection; and there was no likelihood an Usurpation
should ever settle into any Order and Consistency; there would seldom be Madmen
enough in a Nation to overturn the Constitution; for the worst of People don't
love Danger for Danger's sake: It Is true, they have no regard to Conscience,
but they have a tender sense of every thing which is offensive to their Ease,
and prejudicial to their Temporal Concerns, and will no more do an ill Action
than a good one, when it looks so frightfully upon them, and is apparently
against their Interest.

2 dly. When an Usurpation is actually on foot, the best Expedient to
re-establish the dispossessed Prince, is, to let the State fall into Disorder;
for, if the Illegal Powers were generally disowned, if their Commissions were
refused, their pretended Courts neglected, and the places of Government
unsupplied; if all things were thus disjointed and out of frame, it would
introduce an Happy Change, and Justice would soon recover her Jurisdiction. The
making a Lawful Government essential to the Peace and Being of Society, will
mightily refresh the Allegiance of the People, recommend the Doctrines of
Loyalty, and incline the Subjects to return immediately to their Duty: If for
no other reason, yet because they see they cannot live tolerably without it:
And when the Majority of a Nation agree in a Desire, they are seldom long
before they are Masters of their Wishes. In short, whatever Maxims render an
Illegal Possessor unacceptable; whatever shocks the general Security, and
throws the State into Convulsions, must by consequence promote the Recovery of
the Lawful Prince; whereas a Principle of Latitude, which contrives an
Usurpation regular and easy, is the way to fix it, and to make the Subject
acquiesce, and grow indifferent, whether the Title is good or bad; for many
People are too much governed by Secular Regards, and don't love their Concerns
should be ruffled, and their Pleasures interrupted for the best Cause whatever.

3 dly. A general Disorder would effectually discover the Wickedness and Danger
of an Usurpation, and create a proportionable Aversion. Such Confusions would
make men abhor the Thoughts of Disloyalty, and start from it as from an
Apparition. They would go with the same Forwardness and Concern to suppress a
Rebellion, as they would to put out a Fire, or stop a Sea-Breach: A Rebel then
would be looked on as a Monster of Mankind, and hooted from Conversation and
Day. Now, such Apprehensions as these must contribute very much to the
Establishment of Justice, and the Peace of Society: And though the Disowning an
Illegal Power might possibly for a little time dissolve a State into its first
Principles, yet, like Ore, it would improve by melting, and be refined into a
more shining and solid Body. This would prevent the frequent Returns of
Usurpations, and make them much more impracticable and uncommon.

Now, the design of Government is, to provide for the general Advantage of
Mankind; and that State is best contrived which is liable to fewest
Miscarriages; and therefore it is a Maxim with us, That the Law will rather
suffer a Mischief than an Inconvenience; i. e. It Is much better for a Kingdom
to have particular Persons, or Times, exposed to Hazard and Misfortune, than to
be made up of Principles of Ruin, and have Mala stamina in its Constitution.
And though the Justice and Regularity of the Mobile are no desirable things,
yet a Civil War, raised by Rebellion, is a more terrible and lasting Evil, and
occasions more Bloodshed and Desolation.

Farther. It Is not amiss to ask upon whose account the Appearance of Government
is to be secured under an Usurpation? Would the Dr. have all this Care taken
for the sake of Revolters? Must the Laws be broken, and Justice be banished,
that people may live at ease in their Sins, and enjoy the Advantages of
Rebellion? Must they not be disturbed, left they should repent and be saved,
and for fear Honest Men should have their own again? If this be the Dr's aim,
he seems Indulgent to an Excess; for Government was never intended to be a
Protection for Wickedness: And as Revolters don't deserve that Affairs should
be put into this easy posture, so those who are truly Loyal don't desire it.
They know it is their Duty, and the main design of their Allegiance, to stand by
their Prince, when he is under a Disadvantage: They are willing to be governed
by those Maxims by which the Crown may be most effectually served; which
promote the most comprehensive and lasting Interest of Government, and tend to
the Support of Justice. They know it is decent and reasonable the Subjects
should suffer under a Rebellion, as well as the Prince. Besides, since, as I
have proved, Allegiance is due to the King out of Possession, and the Subjects
are bound to assist him in the Field upon demand, it follows by parity of
Reason, that they are bound to run the same Hazards any other way, rather than
renounce their Sovereign; for the same Allegiance which obliges them to venture
their Lives in the Field, does likewise oblige them to stand the shock of the
Mob, or of a more settled Usurpation. The Pretenses of Hazard and Disadvantage
are uncreditable and unjustifiable Motives to desert the Crown, and ought to be
overruled by Decency and Duty. It would be counted an odd Remonstrance, if an
Army, upon their being ordered to fight the Enemy, should tell their General,
That his Orders and Interest was to give place to the Security of his Troops:
That the design of their being listed, was only to be disciplined, and receive
their Pay; but as for Fighting, there was a great deal of danger in that. They
knew well enough, that a Battle could not be managed without some-bodies coming
short home: And since Death would certainly light somewhere, it was every
Person's Concern to avoid it: For their parts, Alleg. p. 44.
they were an innocent and conscientious Army, and therefore it is very
unreasonable to press them to lose their Lives and their Baggage, upon the
account of any Cause or Engagements whatsoever; for, it can be no good
Principle to expose such Honest Men as they are to the greatest Sufferings.
Ibid.


Now this is but an untoward Excuse, but would be a very good one, if the
Consideration of danger, or the Virtue of the Subject, was sufficient to null
the Obligation of Oaths and Allegiance.

These Observations I have set up as Counter-Principles to the Dr's. and must
leave it to the Reader to judge, Whether those Principles which discourage
Rebellion, and press hardest upon Usurpation; which assure the Fidelity of the
Subject upon all Emergencies, and create a good Understanding between Prince
and People, do not Answer all the Ends of Government, better than those other
Doctrines, which assert the Divine Authority of Power; Alleg. p. 15.
that different Degrees of Submission are to be paid proportionably to the
Growth and Success of an Usurpation; That the Oath of Allegiance is a National
Oath, p. 17. p. 31.
and that the Minor Part may be absolved by the Majority: And that the
Preservation of Societies, though they are no better than that of Romulus, p.
41.
is the great Law of all.

Now one would think it required no great depth of Understanding, to determine
the Case; a Moderate Proportion of Unbyassed Reason will inform us, That those
Principles which have the forementioned Advantages, which promote the
Improvement of Humane Nature, which oblige us to Good Faith, and Gratitude; and
give Life to Generosity and Honor, are much to be preferred to others, (in
point of Security) which have a quite contrary Effect.

The Dr. observes, Alleg. p. 47.
That Self-preservation is as much a Law to the Subjects, as to the Prince; (he
means the Subjects have the same Privilege by it) and He is as much Sworn to
Govern his Subjects, as they are to Obey him: And if the Necessities of
Self-preservation absolve Him from his Oath of Governing his People, the Dr.
desires to know why the same Necessity, will not absolve Subjects from their
Oaths to their Prince.

Now I think, this Question is easily Answered: For Self-preservation is
allowable, where the Means are Lawful, and not otherwise Now there is no Law
which bars a Prince from Visiting a Foreign Country, or from Traveling from
one part of his Dominions to another. The Coronation Oath does not bind Him to
Impossibilities, nor oblige him to Govern those who bid him Defiance, and will
not be Governed. It Is none of the Duties of a King to sight whole Armies
singly, or to stay amongst his Rebellious Subjects, to be Outraged in his
Person and Honor. But on the other hand, it is not impossible for Subjects to
stand off from an Usurpation, and to reserve themselves for their dispossessed
Prince; and that their Natural and Sworn Allegiance obliges them so to do, has
been proved already. It Is in vain therefore to insist upon the Plea of Danger,
when we are under these Solemn Pre-engagements: If self-preservation will
absolve us from our Oaths, and justify our Breach of Faith, we may excuse any
other Apostasy upon the same Score.

Ibid.
But Government and Allegiance, it seems, are such Relatives, That the one
cannot subsist without the other; if the Prince cannot Govern, the Subjects
cannot Obey, and therefore, as far as he quits his Government, he quits their
Allegiance.

The Dr. talks of quitting the Government, as if there had been a Resignation
in the Case, and the Subject had been discharged under Hand and Seal. Now
certainly there is a great difference between the King's throwing up the
Government, and the Peoples throwing up their King. Yes, the Dr. grants he may,
Alleg. p. 33
notwithstanding his dispossession, have a Legal Right to Allegiance, and the
Crown; and from whom is this Right due? From the People; then sure they ought
to give it him, and by Consequence the Relation continues. No such Matter, says
our Author, the Subjects cannot pay him their Allegiance, without his being
Restored. Let them stay then till they can; If a Man ows a Sum of Money, and
cannot pay it at the day, is this either a Legal, or an Equitable Discharge of
the Debt? Is there any Reason the Creditor should forfeit, for the
Insufficiency or Knavery of the Debtors? An Honest Man, if he cannot give full
Satisfaction at present, is willing to pay as far as he is able: Above all
things he will avoid assigning over his Estate into such Hands, which he knows
will not only defraud the Right Owner, but employ his Money against Him. The
Dr. both here, Vind. p. 38.
and in his Vindication, goes upon the Old Mistake, That mere Actual Dominion,
and Sovereign Power make a King, and complete the Royal Part of the Relation:
But this is begging the Question, as the Dr. seems sensible, by the Objection
he raises in his Adversary's behalf, which with a little improvement, will
contain an Answer to what he has further urged. It is to this purpose: The
Relation between King and Subject must continue as long as the fundamentum
relationis, or, the Ground of the Relation continues; which Ground being built
upon Legal Right, while this Right remains, the dispossessed Prince is still
King, and the Subjects owe him their former Allegiance. And what has the Dr. to
say to all this? Truly as little as a man would desire. Vind. p. 39.
He tells you, That a Legal Hereditary Right is not the Fundamentum Relationis,
the Foundation of that Relation which is between Prince and Subjects; for then
there would be no Foundation for such a Relation in any but Hereditary
Kingdoms, which is a mistake.

But, pray who says Hereditary Right is the only Ground of the Relation between
King and Subject? The Dr's Adversaries affirm no such thing; they say, That
this Relation is founded upon Right in general, according to the nature of the
Constitution; in Hereditary Kingdoms, upon Hereditary Right; in Elective
Kingdoms, upon Elective Right; and where the Person is nominated by God, the
Ground of this Relation is a Right from Revelation. Neither do these different
Foundations, as the Dr. calls them, (which are nothing but diversified Right)
affect the Authority consequent upon them; the different ways of acquiring
Sovereignty, does not work any change upon the Royal Prerogatives, Ibid.
nor hinder the Relation between King and Subjects from being the same.

The Dr. foresaw it would be objected, That an immovable and unalterable
Allegiance is the best Principle to prevent all Revolutions, and to secure the
Peace of Human Societies; as, I think, has been made good already. Now, his
Answer to this Objection is (were the Subject less important) entertaining
enough. For (says he) if this Principle would prevent all Revolutions, it is a
Demonstration against it, that it is a bad Principle, a mere Human Invention,
Alleg. p. 44.
which cannot come from God. It seems then we are all ruined, if we have
nothing but Peace and Quietness amongst us. If there is not care taken for the
Returns of Rebellion, to destroy and debauch Mankind, the World in a little
time would be insufferably over-stocked with Honesty and Numbers. I will say
that for the Dr. he has provided against this Inconvenience as well as any
Author living. But in earnest, Cannot God remove and set up Kings, unless the
Sins of the People help Him; nor exercise His Sovereign Prerogative, without
damning His Creatures? I hope I have made it appear, That a Being of infinite
Perfections has no necessity to take such measures, or make use of such
Instruments as these: I wish those Principles which imply such Consequences as
these, and several others of the same extraordinary Tendency, are not something
worse than a mere Human Invention. The Dr. urges farther, against the
Sufficiency of this immoveably-loyal Principle, That it has not Force enough to
attain its End; and though it was too strong in the last Objection, yet now, it
seems, it is grown too weak; Ibid.
for it cannot prevent the Revolutions of Government, for there have been such
Revolutions in all Ages. And what follows? Are such Revolutions occasioned by
those Principles which condemn them? Or, by the People, who desert or break in
upon their Principles? Don't Men frequently ruin their Health and their
Fortunes, and make themselves miserable, by their Vices? And ought we therefore
to conclude, that God's Laws, which provide against these Mischiefs, are either
defective or unreasonable? I suppose not.

But, Those Principles which expose the most Innocent and Conscientious Men to
the greatest Sufferings, Ibid.
without serving any good end by them, cannot be True. And, Is not the
Maintenance of Right and the Defense of the Constitution, the Trial of
Integrity, and the giving a noble Example, a very good End? I Am sorry if the
Dr. does not think it is worth a Man's while to suffer upon these Accounts: What
he subjoins, That its no true Principle which obliges honest men to lose their
Lives in opposition to the Government; is a Misrepresentation of the Case; for
Non-complyance with an Usurpation is no Opposition to the Government; for there
can be no Government without Authority, nor any Authority without Right; but
Right and Usurpation are Contradictions in Terms. Farther: To oppose the
Government, is to oppose the Laws of the Government, which cannot be done by
adhering to a Lawful Prince, without destroying the very Supposition, unless
opposing and defending are the same thing. But if the Dr. or any body else,
should mean in general, That a Principle which obliges Honest Men to lose their
Lives, etc. is not True, then by the same reason; Christianity is false; for a
great many Honest men have lost their Lives by suffering for this Religion, and
were obliged by their Principles so to do. Now, we are as much bound to the
performance of Justice, and the other Duties of the Second Table, as to defend
the Articles of our Creed: Nay, the latter were revealed on purpose to enforce
the Practice of the former, Tit. 2.12, 14.
to teach us to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World, and
to make us a peculiar People, zealous of good Works. What he mentions
concerning the Scripture, has been considered above. At last the Dr. is pleased
to own, Alleg. p. 45.
That we must choose rather to suffer than to sin; but then we must be very
sure, that it is our Duty, that it is expressly enjoined us by the Laws of God
or Nature, before we venture to suffer for it. What if it is enjoined us by
undeniable Consequence, is not that sufficient without a plain Text? I perceive
the Dr. is resolved to be a favorable Casuist. Farther. I would gladly know
what the Dr. means by being expressly enjoined by the Laws of Nature: Has the
Dr. any of Nature's Volumes by him? I confess, I thought Nature's Laws had been
written upon the Minds of Men, and never heard that her Works were Books, till
now. But to end this Dispute, the Dr. may please to take notice, that whatever
is expressly enjoined us by the Laws of the Land, (provided the Matter of it is
not sinful) is likewise enjoined us by the Laws of God and Nature; for we are
bound by the Laws of God and Nature to obey the Constitution. The Dr's
Harangue, in his next Paragraph, upon the Being of Societies, and the Safety
and Preservation of Subjects, has been answered already.

I shall now proceed to examine the Answer he gives to the famous Instance of
the Loyal Nobility, etc. during the Exile of King Charles the Second, who
thought themselves bound in Conscience to oppose that Usurpation, at their
utmost peril. This the Dr. calls a great Prejudice, Alleg. p. 46.
but no Argument: For, if his Principles are true, they might have complied
with those Usurpations. Might they so? Then doubtless those brave Persons, who
chose rather to lose their Estates and their Lives, than own that pretended
Authority, 1 Timothy 5.8.
were worse than Infidels in St. Paul's Sense, and guilty of Self-murder,
because they did not provide for their Families, nor preserve their Lives, when
it was lawful for them to do it. The Comparison the Dr. draws from the two
Revolutions of 48 and 88, and his Inferences from them, are, I think, the
slenderest Performance in his whole Book, and in which he has given an
Adversary the plainest Advantage. The Dr. himself seems very sensible, that
this part of the Argument had no good Coloring, and therefore has touched it
over again in his Vindication; where he tells us, That they are two very
different Questions, When it is Lawful to submit to Usurping Powers; and, When
it becomes a Duty to do it? It Is Lawful to submit when we are under such a
Force as can compel us; Vind. p. 66.
it is our Duty to submit when the Government is Thoroughly Settled. In answer to
this, I shall endeavor to prove, 1. That if it was Lawful for the Nobility,
Gentry, etc. to submit to the Commonwealth and Cromwell, it was their Duty so
to do. And, 2. That by the Dr's Principles they were obliged to submit to this
Usurpation.


1. If it was Lawful for them to submit to the Commonwealth, etc. it was their
Duty so to do. For,

First, As I have proved above, Subjects must own some Authority or other, and
are not allowed to live independently of all Government. This Proposition may
likewise be made good, from the Dr's Principles; for he elsewhere asserts, That
Subjects, when their Government is violently changed, are at liberty to submit
to the new Government; Vind. p. 13.
for Force will justify Submission. Now, though this Principle is untrue, and
rank Hobbism; yet since the Dr. will have it, he must stand by the
Consequences. I argue therefore, That if Force or Conquest cancels the Subjects
Obligation to the vanquished Prince; then they must always become the Property
of Victory, and be immediately passed into the Hands of a new Master; for all
Advantages of Conquest ought to accrue to the Conqueror. In a word, Either
Conquest transferrs Allegiance, or not: If it does not, it is not Lawful for the
Subjects to comply with a new Government, because their former Obligations are
still in force: If it does, it must transferr it to the Conqueror, and then it
follows, that the People are not at Liberty to submit, or not, at their
pleasure.

Secondly, The Dr's Argument for his Opinion is very surprising; for, What is
the reason the Subjects are thus turned loose, and enfranchized from all
Service and Authority on the sudden? Has the Prince Resigned or given a
Discharge under the Broad Seal? Or, does the nature of Subjection leave them at
Discretion, and bind no longer* than they see convenient? Not so neither.
Whence comes it to pass then they are so perfectly sui juris, without a
Release? Why, its Force and Irresistible Power, which puts them into this
Masterless condition; its Necessity, it seems, which has enlarged their
Freedom; if they had not been conquered, they must have been Slaves to their
old Master for ever: But now, since they are fallen into the Enemies hands, and
the Sword's point is at their Throat, they may do what they list, and are as
Independent on all Mankind as Adam. I confess this is a wonderful Privilege,
and as wonderfully proved.

Thirdly, If upon a Revolution, the People have the Liberty to submit, or not
to submit, then if they should all insist upon their Privilege, and cry out for
a state of Nature, we must dissolve into a Mob, (which the Dr. will not allow) and
which is worse, all Government must be lost, only for the Peoples humor.

Fourthly, By Submission in this Case, we must understand an Acknowledgment of
the Right of the Power we submit to. If the Dr. takes the word in any other
sense, he does but play with it. Now, if the Loyal Party might submit to
Cromwell's Commonwealth in this sense, they must own their Government: But all
Government supposes Authority, which the Commonwealth could not have, by the
Dr's Principles, unless they had either a Legal or a Divine Right, to ground it
upon: A Legal Right they had not by the Supposition, therefore it must be a
Divine one. Now, if they had a Divine Right, and acted upon God's Authority,
the People were undoubtedly under an Obligation to obey them, and had not the
Liberty to comply or stand off, as they thought fit.

Fifthly, Vind. p. 65.
The Dr. affirms, That neither the Doctrine of our Church, nor the Laws of the
Land, pronounce it absolutely unlawful to submit to a Prince (an Usurper)
possessed of the Throne. It Is true, both these Propositions are great Mistakes;
as I have shown from the Laws, and from the Convocation-Book: And as to the
Doctrine of the Church, the Reader may have farther satisfaction; if he pleases,
from the History of Passive Obedience. However, since the Dr. maintains the
contrary, I shall argue from his own Tenants against him; That if neither the
Constitution of the Church or State suppose it unlawful to submit to an Usurper
in Possession, then we are under an Obligation to submit, rather than disoblige
our Interest by Non-complyance: For the Dr. is sure the Scripture teaches us*
to suffer patiently in Obedience to Government, Alleg. p. 44.
but not to suffer in Opposition to it. And for fear we should use our selves
too hardly, he tells us, Before we expose our selves to Suffering, we must be
very sure that it is our Duty, that it is expressly enjoined us by the Laws of
God and Nature, Id. p. 45.
before we venture to suffer for it. But its impossible the Loyal Party could
have any of this Assurance for suffering under Cromwell, if, as the Dr. affirms,
neither the Laws of Religion, nor of the Land, declare it unlawful to submit to
an Usurpation. And therefore I think the Great Body of the Nobility, Gentry,
and Clergy, have reason to take it ill from the Dr. for making their
Forefathers a Company of Madmen, who, notwithstanding they had all imaginable
Authority and Obligation from Human and Divine Laws, to acquiesce, and consult
their own Safety; yet out of a Romantic Notion of Loyalty, chose rather to
hazard their Souls, and Bodies, and Estates, than submit to the Determinations
of God Almighty, who is always supposed to set up a Governor when by His
Providence He puts the Sovereign Power into his Hands. Alleg. p. 12.


2. By the Dr's Principles, it was not only Lawful to submit to Cromwell's
Usurpation, but the People were directly obliged to it. For,

1. It Is well known, that the Commonwealth of Cromwell were absolute Masters of
the Three Kingdoms, and entirely possessed of the Government. Now, the Dr. has
solemnly told us, That since Power will Govern, God so orders it by his
Providence, as never to entrust Sovereign Power in any Man's Hands, to whom he
does not give the Sovereign Authority. Id. p. 15.
This Usurpation therefore having Sovereign Power, in an high and irresistible
degree, could not be disowned without rejecting God's Authority, which
certainly no man can have any Privilege to dispute.

2. The Dr. expressly averrs, That the Preservation of Human Societies does of
necessity force us to own the Authority even of Usurped Powers. Id. p. 41.
And if we are under a necessity of owning their Authority, one would think we
could not have the liberty to refuse them.

3. The Dr. observes, That our Savior's Argument for paying Tribute, relies
wholly on the possession of Power, (without any mention of Consent) and inferrs
from thence, That if this be a good Reason, it is good in all other cases; that
we must submit to all Princes who are possessed of the Sovereign Power, and are
in full Administration of Government. Id. p. 21.
And can the Dr. deny these Advantages to the Usurpers upon K. Charles II? No:
There was not so much as the least Garrison which held out against them. And as
for the Administering part, all Affairs, Civil, Military, and Ecclesiastical,
were managed solely by their direction.

4. If we were unprovided of other Proofs, a few Questions in the Dr's words
would decide the Controversy. I desire to know therefore, Whether God Rules in
a Kingdom while an Usurper fills the Throne. Vind. p. 59.
Particularly, did God Govern in England, Scotland, etc. from 1648, to 1660? If
He did, who was it He governed by? Not by K. Charles II. for he was
dispossessed: It must therefore be by the Commonwealth and Cromwell, to whom
the Government was disposed by God's own Will and Counsel: For, to allow no
more than a Divine Permission, is, in the Dr's Opinion a great Error: For, Will
any man say, That God Governs such a Kingdom, as is not governed by His
Authority and Ministers? Does Providence and Government signify only His
Permission? -- To resolve Providence into a bare Permission, especially in
matters of such a vast consequence as the disposal of Crowns, Ibid.
is to deny God's Government of the World. Now, if Cromwell, etc. did not Rule
these Kingdoms barely by the Permission of Providence, but had God's positive
Authority, and bore the Character of his Ministers, then their Right was
unquestionable, and their Persons sacred, and it was great Wickedness to resist
or disobey them. And since the Dr. has laid down such Notions as these,
concerning Providence, and given such Prerogatives to Power, it is too late for
him to recall his Liberality to the Rump and Cromwell, he must not think of
unsettling them again, Vind. p. 67.
for want of a National Consent, unless he has a mind to recant the Main of
both his Books: For, if they had God's Authority on their side, the People,
whether willing or not, were bound in Conscience to obey them. However, I shall
briefly consider what the Dr. offers to disprove the Settlement of the
forementioned Usurpation.

He tells us, The Convocation all^dges two ways whereby a Government, unjustly
and wickedly begun, may be thoroughly settled, viz. By a general Submission,
Ibid.
or by Continuance. I have proved above, That the Convocation does not take
Settlement in his Sense; and that he has no reason to make use of their
Authority for illegal Proceedings: But, granting his own Supposition, I cannot
perceive what Service it can do him; for, if General Submission or Continuance,
without Legal Right, are either of them sufficient to complete the Notion of
Settlement, it will be difficult to find an Objection against the Rump's and
Cromwell's Authority. For,

1. As for Continuance the Rump held the Government from 1648, to 1653; and
Cromwell was the Supreme Power from 53 to 58: And if Five Years of Sovereign and
Uncontested Power is not sufficient to make a Through Settlement, I doubt the
Dr. has been too quick in his late Compliance. But,

2 dly. Though after a Continuance of this length, the Rump and Cromwell, by the
Dr's Principles, had no need of any National Consent and Submission, to perfect
their Settlement; yet it does not appear, that the Dr. has disproved their
Title so much as in this point. As for Submission, it was generally paid them.
There was not so much as the Face of an Enemy in the Field: Their Courts were
frequented, their Coin was current, and their Authority undisputed in all Posts
of Government; but there was no National Consent, Vind. p. 67.
because the greatest part of the Representatives were slung out of the House,
excepting a few Rumpers.

1. How does the Dr. know, but that the Rumpers had a National Consent for
secluding these Members? The Consent of Silence and Submission they certainly
had; for the Nation neither offered to restore these Members by Force, nor
showed any public Dislike of their being expelled.

2 dly. Does the Dr. think there can be no National Consent testified any other
way, than by the Peoples choosing a few Men from Towns and Countries to
represent them. If the matter stands thus, the Four Monarchies had no National
Consent, nor any Through Settlement; for there was no such things as
Parliaments in those Times and Countries. But, before we take leave of these
Rumpers, the Dr. may remember, that they were summoned by the King's Writs, and
had his Royal Assent to sit as long as they pleased: If some People had such a
Color of Authority, they would flourish with it at no ordinary rate.

3 dly. The Dr. objects against Cromwell's Parliaments, Ibid.
That they had no National Consent, etc. because they were not chosen according
to the Ancient Customs and Vsages of the Nation. Some People will not be sorry
to hear, that a National Consent cannot be given by Representation, unless the
Representatives are legally chosen, and the Ancient Customs of the Constitution
observed. I wonder how this Reason dropped from the Dr. for it overthrows the
design of his Books, and puts him upon a Necessity of proving the Legality of
the present Establishment. He urges farther, That these pretended Parliaments,
under Cromwell, were not the Representatives of the Nation, but of a prevailing
Party. If they were elected by a prevailing Party, Ibid.
it is a sign they represented the Majority. And if the Dr. will not be
satisfied, unless every individual Person agrees to an Election, he is not
likely to see a National Consent in haste. Well: But some part of Cromwel' s
second Parliament published a Remonstrance, for being denied Admittance: Vind.
p. 69.
So did the Parliament in the beginning of the Civil Wars, publish several
Remonstrances, of an higher nature against the Government of K. Charles the
First. And yet, I suppose, the Dr. will allow, that these Oppositions did not
un settle his Authority, nor discharge his Subjects from their Allegiance. And
thus I have proved, that the Rump and Cromwell had as fair an Authority, and as
Through a Settlement, in all points, as the Dr's Principles require.

Alleg. p. 46.
As to the Villainies of those days, which the Dr. insists upon, they don't in
the least affect the Obligation of the Subject; for, granting the Dr's
Revolution was more agreeable than that of 48. Yet since, by the Dr's
reasoning, the one had God's Authority as much as the other, it ought to have
been equally submitted to; for, in such a case, no Rigor of Administration can
discharge the People from their Obedience. Ibid.
The Dr's Remark upon the Bishops being turned out, and the Alienation of their
Revenues under Cromwell, is not calculated for the whole Island. He forgot, I
conceive, the flourishing Condition of the present Church of Scotland, when he
drew up this part of the Parallel, -- Iam proximus ardet Vcalegon.
But this Dispute being not material to the Argument, I shall insist upon it no
farther.

Alleg. p. 48.
What the Dr. mentions concerning Antiochus's Right to the Government of Judea,
has been considered. However the Dr. has something remarkable in this
Paragraph, which must not be overlooked, viz. Though Force requires a long
Continuance to settle a Government, yet a National Consent settles a Government
in a short time. Thus the Submission of Jaddus, and the Governing part of the
Nation, to Alexander, settled his Government in a few days.

The Case of Alexander and Iaddus has been argued above, and needs not be
repeated. I might likewise observe, that Consent, how general soever, without
Authority, signifies nothing, as has been made good already, and shall be
farther confirmed by and by; but at present, I shall grant the Dr. his
Assertion, and draw an Inference from it against him. For, supposing a National
Consent will settle a Government in a few days, then Absolom's Government was
sufficiently settled, and all the People of Israel were Bound in Conscience to
obey him; and which is more, they were bound to fight his Father David, (who
had taken Arms against Absalom.) the reason is, Because, as the Dr. affirms,
God's Authority is always to be preferred to Legal Right, and the Subjects
cannot be bound to Two Opposite Allegiances. That Absalom was sufficiently
possessed of the Kingdom, Alleg. p. 14.
will appear by comparing his Circumstances and David's together.

Now David's Condition was so low, that he was forced to quit his Capital City
Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 15.14.
and encamp in the Fields and Deserts, with not many more than 600 of his
Guards, as Sir Walter Raleigh observes; from thence he retires over Jordan,
Raleigh. Hist. etc. p. 281.
and leaves Absalom Master of more than Nine Tribes and an half of the Twelve;
and not thinking himself secure at this distance, he continues his Retreat to
Mahanaim, which was upon the Borders of his Kingdom, toward Ammon. Hither
Absalom pursues him, and encamps near Gilead, 2 Samuel 17.26.
which was a Fronteir Town, as we may learn from Josephus. Nay, Anti Jud. l. 7.
c. 9. 2 Samuel 19.9.
he is said to have abdicated all his Dominions, and to have fled out of the
Land for Absalom. That David was very weak, and unlikely to recover, appears by
Shimei's throwing stones and cursing him at the Head of his Troops. Besides,
12000 Men, 2 Samuel 16.5, 6
after he had reinforced himself, were enough to have beaten him; as is plainly
intimated in the Scripture. 2 Samuel 17.14.
We have likewise reason to conclude that Number was sufficient for this
purpose, by Achitophel's Proposal, who was too wise a man to have ventured his
Person and Fortunes with so small a Body, unless he had been morally assured of
Success. And therefore Josephus tells us, Ant. Iud. l. 7. c. 9.
That Hushai understood that David might have been easily destroyed this way
which Achitophel proposed; which was the reason he gave contrary Advice.
Joseph. ibid.
The same Author informs us, That David had but 4000 Men, notwithstanding by
Hushai's dexterity he had time given him to raise them: Which was a poor
Remnant in a Kingdom which was able to muster 1300000 fighting men. 2 Samuel 24.9.


Lastly. To show how lamentably King David, though a man after God's own Heart,
was deserted by his Subjects; we may observe, that this small Army consisted in
a great measure of Foreigners. The Gittites, who marched with him, were
certainly Citizens of Goth; as appears from the Scripture, especially from the
Translation of the Septuagint. 2 Samuel 15.18.
The Cherethites and Pelethites are likewise supposed to be Philistines; Grot.
in 2. ^ Reg. c. 8. v. 18. 2 Samuel 15.18.
which is very probable, since the Gittites are mentioned with them. To these
we may add the Assistance he received from Shobi Son of Nahash, 2 Samuel 17.27.
formerly King of Ammon, who came in to him at Mahanaim.

On the other hand, if we take a view of Absolom's Affairs, we shall find them
as firm and flourishing as can be desired. This made Hushai congratulate his
Success, 2 Samuel 16.18.
and tell him, That the Lord, and all the People, had made choice of him. And
who can now deny him the Title of a Providential Monarch? If any one suspects
Hushai's Salutation to be no more than a Piece of Ceremony, the Scripture will
convince him of the contrary; for, Absalom had every thing but God and Justice
on his side; all the Men of Israel were at his Command, from Dan to Beersheba,
as the Sand of the Sea for multitude: 2 Samuel 17.11. Antiq. Jud. l. 7. c. 8. 2 Samuel 19.10. 2 Samuel 17.4.
He was, as Josephus observes, saluted King by unanimous and universal
Acclamations: He was anointed by the men of Israel; and all the Elders, the
Estates and Governing part of the Nation, submitted to him. Here was a National
Consent with a witness, and by consequence, as good a Settlement as the Dr. can
demand, unless he will retract his own Definition. How many Months or Years
Absalom was possessed of this general Submission, is not material to enquire;
for the Dr. roundly affirms, that a few days is sufficient to do the business.

The Dr. goes on to the other part of the Comparison, and pretends, Alleg. p.
49.
that some extraordinary methods taken by the Crown, helped some men easily to
absolve themselves from the Obligation of their Oaths. Right: But, under
Favor, did they do well or ill in absolving themselves? Why the Dr. will not
dispute the Legality of all this, Ibid.
I suppose, for fear of disobliging our great Patrons of Liberty. Nay, he is so
far from condemning such singular Casuists, that he seems to argue in
Justification of them; For, They (says he) could not think that Oaths, which
were made and imposed for the Preservation of a Protestant Prince, and the
Protestant Rights and Liberties of Church and State, could oblige them to
defend and maintain a Prince in his Usurpation, as they thought, Ibid.
upon both. The Dr. by his wording it, would almost make an ignorant man
believe, that the Protestant Religion was the Supreme Power in England, and
that we were Bound to support it in the Field against the King: But those who
will take the pains to peruse the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, will see,
they oblige us to bear True Faith, etc. to the King, and to defend him and his
Heirs and Lawful Successors, without making any Enquiry into their Creed. It
was never known, that the Kings of England held their Crowns by the Tenure of
Religion: If their Claim had not been wholly founded upon Birthright, and
Proximity of Blood, there had been no Pretense for the late Bill of Exclusion.
But such Absurdities as these are too gross to deserve any farther
Consideration. And since we are indispensably Bound to serve and defend our
Prince, without any regard to his Persuasion, it must be a very bad Religion,
which teaches us to desert or oppose him. There cannot be a greater Reproach
cast upon the Reformation, than to make it give Countenance to such horrid and
treacherous Practices as these. What our Author means by the Protestant Rights
and Liberties of the State, Ibid.
is hard to understand; for the Rights of the State are purely Secular and
Civil: He may as well call a Farm a Protestant Farm, as give that Epithete to
the Rights of the State; but the word Protestant must be crammed in, otherwise
the Charm will not work.

The Dr. once more lays a great stress upon a National Submission and Consent,
Alleg. p. 50.51.
and makes it necessary to the introducing a Settlement: Now I have shown, that
this Expedient must be altogether unserviceable to our Author upon his own
Principles; for if by whatsoever means a Prince, Id p. 13, 15.
ascends the Throne, he is placed there by God's Authority, of which, Power is
a certain sign; To what purpose is the Consent of the People required? Have
they the Liberty to refuse Submission to God's Authority, when it produces such
infallible Credentials, and appears in such a demonstrative manner? Besides, as
has been already hinted, his making Submission a necessary Assistant of Power,
is not only a Contradiction of himself, but likewise brings a farther
Inconvenience along with it, and makes that Absurdity which he endeavors to
throw upon Hereditary Principles, return upon his own; for, if God's Authority
is not given to any Prince before a Through Settlement, and this Settlement
cannot be completed without a National Submission, then God, as well as men,
is confined by Human Laws (or by Human Inclinations, which is as bad) in making
Kings; which is to say, that the Right of Government is not derived from God,
Alleg. p. 25.
without the Consent of the People. How the Dr. will disengage, is best known
to himself. Farther, I must ask him the old Question over again; Whether this
National Submission must be Legal or Illegal? If an Illegal Submission will
serve his turn, this is no better than plain Force, under the Disguise of a new
Name; it is a violent Combination against the Laws and Rightful Governor, and
resolves it self into the Principles of Power. If the Submission ought to be
Legal, he must not only prove it such, but be obliged to give up the main
design of his Books, and dispute a point which he has declared is nothing to
his present purpose. Alleg. p. 50.
However, I must follow him through all the Windings of his Discourse. He says,
Though some men dispute, whether a Convention of the Estates, not called by the
King's Writs, be a Legal Parliament; yet all men must confess they are the
Representatives of the Nation, Id. p. 50, 51.
etc. I suppose, very few People besides the Dr. will dispute, Whether a
Convention is a Legal Parliament, or not, if they consider that the King's
Writs are necessary to empower the People to make and return Elections. And,
supposing they had the advantage of this Preliminary, yet unless the Members
take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, all their Proceedings are declared
null and void, 7 Jac. I. 30 Car. II.
by express Statutes. Now, if a Convention is no Legal Assembly, their
Deputation from the People signifies nothing; it only makes them the Mouth of
public Disorder and the Illegal Representatives of the Nation. And how the Dr.
can oblige them by such a Character, I cannot imagine.

But the Nation can have no Representatives but such, when there is no King in
the Throne. Ibid.
To make this Argument good, the Dr. should have proved, That the Throne is
immoveably fixed at Whitehall; That the King was Legally ejected by his
Subjects; That after this Retirement they sent to entreat him to return, and
promised a more agreeable Behavior; That upon these Submissions he refused to
engage any farther, and resigned up the Government into their Hands: The Dr.
should have proved, that all this was either done, or else unnecessary, before
he set the Nation a Representing at all Adventures. As for his Flourish with
the word Estates, I question whether it will do him any service; for, Who made
them Estates? Does their Number and Quality make them such? Then they are
Estates in the Intervals of Parliament, in their own Houses, in a Tavern, as
well as at other times and places. Does the Choice of the People, though
altogether Illegal, give them the advantage of this Character? If so, I would
gladly be informed, whether every Riotous Meeting may not furnish out their
proportion toward a Body of Estates, to be completed by the general
Distraction of the Nation? I perceive, I must enquire farther; I desire
therefore the Dr. would tell me, whether the Parliament House has any peculiar
Virtue, to raise private Persons into a public Character? If it has, great
care ought to be taken who comes into it. Besides, it is worth the knowing,
which way this mysterious Privilege is conveyed. Have we any Legislative Brick
and Stone? Or, does the House work by way of Steams and Exhalations, Plut. de
Def. Orac.
as the Oracle at Delphos is said to have done? The Dr. I perceive, does not
trouble himself with these Scruples, but is resolved to go on with his
Submissions, etc. and tells us, That the Consent and Submission of the
Convention, Alleg. p. 51.
especially when confirmed by subsequent Parliaments, is a National act.

Therefore I must ask him a few more Questions, How a Convention can sublimate
it self into a Parliament; i. e. How a private and illegal Assembly can give it
self the Privilege of Authority and Law? Now, a National Act, without and
against the Authority of the Constitution, is, to speak softly, no better than
a National Disorder: But, the Generality of the Kingdom have willingly and
cheerfully submitted. Ibid.
So much the worse; unless they had the Liberty to do so. What if they should
willingly submit to the setting up the Alcoran? What if they have an
Inclination to Murder, or Adultery, does the Universality of the Consent make
such Practices innocent and warrantable? Does not the Dr. know, the Generality
have frequently a mind to do those things which they ought not, and will he
thence infer, that we must follow a Multitude to do evil? Ibid.
Well! but they have Bound their (new) Allegiance by Oath. If they have, can
they not keep it as well as they did their former one? However, by the way,
it is not amiss to consider, whether Oaths are powerful enough to transferr
Titles, without the Owner's Consent, and to alter the Seat of Authority?
Whether a man can swear away another's Right without asking his Leave? If he
can, Justice and Property are very precarious, uncertain things, and not worth
the regarding.

I should now have proceeded to a more particular Examination of the Law-part
of his Book, but having considered his most Material Objections from that
Topic already, I suppose it needless to dispute this Branch of the
Controversy any farther.

I shall therefore take Leave of the Dr. And, if he thinks I have used him with
too little Ceremony, I desire he would remember the Unnecessary Provocations he
has given; and when he considers how freely he has Reflected, Censured,
Challenged, and Contemned, he will have no reason to be disobliged with his
Brethren, for an abatement of their Esteem. However, after all, I have no
manner of Quarrel to the Dr's Person; but to his new Principles I am, and ever
hope to be, an Enemy.

THE END.

