Miscellanies UPON MORAL SUBJECTS.

The Second Part.

By Jeremy Collier, M. A.

LONDON: Printed for Sam. Keeble at the Turks-head in Fleet street, and Io.
Hindmarsh at the Golden-Ball over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1695.

THE CONTENTS.
OF Fame, page 1 Of Music, p. 17 Of the Value of Life, p. 27 Of the Spleen, p.
34 Of Eagerness of Desire, p. 40 Of Friendship, p. 45 Of Popularity, p. 66 A
Thought, p. 72 Of the Entertainment of Books, p. 92 Of Confidence, p. 96 Of
Envy, p. 100 Of the Aspect, p. 114 Against Despair, p. 121 Of Covetousness, p.
126 Of Liberty, p. 141 Of Old Age, p. 147 Of Pleasure, p. 178
TO THE READER.
I Easily foresee some People will be disobliged with the Freedom of these
Papers, and think themselves treated with too little Ceremony; But unless they
can disarm their pretended Adversary, and confute his Arguments, I would desire
them by all means to smother their Resentments: For as bad as the World is, to
appear in defense of Pride, and turn Advocate for the Devil, looks like an
untoward sort of an Employment. However, to sweeten this Humor as much as may
be, they may please to consider that there was no good to be done in this Case
without plain Dealing: This Malady of all others must be well examined,
otherwise it is in vain to expect a Cure. It Is to no purpose to declaim in
general against a Proud Man, and to give him a great many hard Names; for
unless you point directly upon his Vice, distinguish its Nature, and discover
the Weakness of that which he builds upon, every one will be sure to avoid the
Charge, and parry against the Application. Farther, to abate their Censure I
think it not improper to acquaint them that here are no particular Characters
attempted, nor is there the least Intention to provoke or expose any Person
Living. Besides when a Piece like this is drawn from so many different Faces;
the mixing of Features and Complexions, will keep the Originals from being
discovered. In short, the Design of this small Discourse is only to make Men
more useful and acceptable to Society, and more easy to themselves than they
generally are: And that those who overtop their Neighbors upon any
considerable Account; may manage their Advantage with that Modesty and good
Humor, that none may have any just Occasion to wish them less.

OF FAME. IN A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Philalethes and Philotimus.
Philal. YOur Servant. I Am afraid I may disoblige your Business: You seem to
sit in a Posture of Thinking.


Philot. I am so: And without more Ceremony for that Reason am glad to see you:
For it is in your Power to assist me in the Argument I am upon.


Philal. I dare not say so. But pray what is it?


Philot. I was considering the Shortness of Life, and what ill Husbands we are
of so slender a Fortune. We manage at that rate of Sluggishness and Neglect, as
if we had a thousand Years for Leisure and Improvement. The greater Part enter
only like Mutes, to fill the Stage. Sure they think themselves born to show
their Insignificancy: Why else do they make the Voyage of Life to so little
Purpose, and spend their Taper in smoke and smother?


Philal. Look you! All Metals will not shine alike. Besides, the Generality
want opportunity to brighten and burnish. They are disabled by Labor and
Indigence, and cannot distinguish themselves with that Advantage you seem to
expect.


Philot. However if they would put on, they might be remarkable in their own
way. Glowworms will shine though under a Hedge; and when the Wine is generous
the least drop will sparkle. But, like Beggars, People are willing to dissemble
their Ability, and charge their Sloth upon their Impotence: Whereas if they
would rowse their Spirits, and awaken their Vigor, they might probably in a
short time command the Force of Nature, reduce their Business to the Art of
Clock-work, and make it strike of its own accord. For if you observe, the
Drudging part of Life is chiefly owing to Clumsiness and Ignorance; which
either wants proper Tools, or Skill to use them. But this is not all: For in my
Opinion the Credit of the Improvement would exceed the Convenience.


Philal. If every Body did their Best, and strained to the Extent of
possibility, I grant you Things, and Persons, would be really valuable, and
Admiration an Argument of Worth: But now, considering the Degeneracy of
Mankind, the common Cry signifies not much. If a Man does well, let him think
so, and reward himself. To creep after Applause, is a servile and precarious
Satisfaction.


Philot. Without Reflection; those who despise Fame seldom deserve it. We are
apt to undervalue the Purchase we cannot reach, to conceal our Poverty the
better.


Philal. What if it is held too high, or I don't need it; Is it any harm to say
so?


Philot. It argues a Tincture of Conceit; for we cannot lessen the common
Opinion, without preferring our own.


Philal. You know I am not singular; but if I were, I might modestly enough
appeal from Numbers to Reason; for there the Cause must be tried at last.


Philot. I am willing to cast it upon that Issue. And to my Thinking the
general Desire of Fame, if we had nothing more for it, proves it reasonable.
People of all Conditions have a Regard for public Esteem, and are willing to
be remembered as long, and to as much advantage as may be: Now Nature does not
use to spread an Inclination so wide but for significant Purposes. It seems to
be given for an Incitement to Industry, a Ferment thrown into the Blood to work
it up to Action. It reconciles Men to Labor and Hazard, supports their
Constancy, and helps them to shake off Sloth and Despair. And as there are few
unaffected with it in some measure, so it takes the firmest hold of generous
Minds. It Is a Spark which kindles upon the best Fuel, and burns brightest in
the bravest Breast. Wealth and Pleasure are vulgar Aims, but it is Glory which
is the Ambition of a Hero. And when Honor has once gained the Affections, they
scorn to admit a Rival. Ease, and Luxury, and Love and all, must give way to
the Favorite Desire. The Man is not to be engaged by any Diversions, excepting
those which second his Passion, and serve him in his Design. And it must be
granted the World has not been a little obliged this way: The famous Generals,
Historians, Poets, and Painters of Antiquity, whence were they produced but
from this generous Principle? This was the Passion that pushed on Themistocles
and Brasidas, that raised the Style of Thucydides; that formed the Greatness of
Philip and Alexander. This is that which gives the Heart and the Head their
last Improvement; sharpens the Invention, and the Sword; and shows us all the
Wonders of Art, of Conduct, and Courage. Had it not been for this noble Ardour.
Men would have stopped at bare Convenience: The Growth of Science and Ingenuity
had been checked, and Life not graced with so much Ornament and Magnificence.
The Rhodian Colossus had been lost; the Carian Mausoleum, and the Egyptian
Pyramids unbuilt. Now why a Quality thus beneficial may not be cherished and
admired, is past my Understanding.


Philal. After all your magnifying of Fame, I Am afraid 'twill not hold up to
your Standard. It Is a rich Soil I grant you, but oftener covered with Weeds
than Grain. You say it produces Heroes; so much the worse. 'Twas well if there
were fewer of them: For I scarcely ever heard of any, excepting Hercules, but
did more Mischief than Good. These overgrown Mortals commonly use their Will
with their Right hand, and their Reason with their Left. Their Pride is their
Title, and their Power puts them in Possession. Their Pomp is furnished from
Rapine, and their Scarlet dyed with human Blood. To drive Justice, and Peace,
and Plenty before them, is a noble Victory; and the progress of Violence goes
for Extent of Empire. To mention some of your own Instances: Pray how did
Philip's glorious Humor discover it self? Why mostly by debauching, outraging,
and murdering his Neighbors. It Is true, the Man was brave; and had been
severely handled by showing it. He had fought himself almost to the Stumps, but
still he went on: And had rather have neither Limbs, nor Senses, than Greece
should have any Liberty. And am I to admire a Man because he will use himself
ill, to use me worse? And as for Alexander, what extent of Country did he
Ravage, and how many Thousands were sacrificed to his Caprice? What Famine,
what Inundation, what Plague, could keep pace with him? Did he not burn the
Capital of an Empire in a Frolic? If his Power had been equal to his Ambition,
God could scarcely have made the World faster than he would have destroyed it.
If Wrecks, and Ruins, and Desolations of Kingdoms, are marks of Greatness; Why
don't we worship a Tempest, and erect a Statue for the Plague? A Panegyric
upon an Earthquake is every jot as reasonable, as upon such Conquests as these.
As for the active and pressing Industry of these Men, and the Hardships they
submit to; what is it, in plain English, but indefatigable Ill Nature, and
laborious Malice? And are we in love with a Wolf for his diligence, or a
Highway-man for being on the Road late, and in bad weather? But they have
Courage too. What then? Courage, when it is only a Second to Injustice, and
falls on without Provocation, is a Disadvantage to a Character. Is a Tiger to
be courted for its Fierceness? Does the Strength of a Poison make it the more
Glorious? Or is a Fire to be commended for being so bold as to burn a House
down? If you say they hazard their Persons, let them take what follows; that
will not mend the matter, unless their Quarrel was more defensible. He that
will venture the cutting his own Throat rather than not cut mine, shall never
be a Hero of my making, I promise you. In a word; This thirst after Glory often
transports Men into very dangerous Excesses, and makes them the Bane of the Age
they live in. It Is true, it helps to keep the World from being over-stock'd,
and if that be a Credit let them make their most on it. Your Improvement of Arts
and Sciences I grant deserves Commendation, provided they were labored to
oblige the World. But if Men beat their Brains only to be talked of; I think
their Skill can hardly exceed their Vanity* And as for those magnificent
Structures you mentioned, I conceive them but small Additions to Those who
built them. For what Connection is there between a great heap of Stones, and a
great Man? Or how can you infer the one from the other?


Philot. Certainly such a stupendous Pile bespeaks the Power of him that raised
it.


Philal. Yes. It proves a Prince had Men and Money in abundance; and is that
such a Wonder?


Philot. I thought the Nobleness and Curiosity of the Work had proved something
more.


Philal. It does so. But the Credit of that does not belong to the Monarch, but
the Mason.


Philot. However the Prince has the Name on it. Now methinks it is a glorious
Privilege to have one's Memory honorably handed down to after Ages; and to
stand upon Record to the latest periods of Time. To be contented with Three or
Fourscore years of Breath, looks like a vulgar Satisfaction.


Philal. As much Breath as you please: But pray let it come from my own Lungs,
not from the Trumpet of Fame, for that is too thin to live on.


Philot. It Is Life at second hand, and in some degree preferable to the first;
because it is freer from Envy, and lasts longer into the bargain.


Philal. A Man is longer Dead than Living; therefore it seems he had better be
the first. This Logic will not do. And as for your second hand Living, before you
depend too much upon it, you would do well to try it in a parallel Instance.


Philot. How is that?


Philal. Why by second hand Eating and Drinking, or doing it by Proxy. Be not
surprised, the Cases are plainly alike: For if another Man's Talking can give
me a Sort of Life, why not his Eating too, especially when it is done upon my
Account? Now if you please I will act for you in this later Business, and then
see how you will thrive upon the Representation.


Philot. Well! When you have said all* I would not have my Name thrown into my
Coffin, if I could help it. Oblivion methinks looks like Annihilation: And not
be Talked of, is almost not to Be.


Philal. Your Name! A Chimerical Advantage! I Am sorry you are so solicitous to
immortalize a Sound. What is Caesar the better for our knowing he was called so?
Was it worth his while to charge in Fifty Battles, only to leave a few Letters
of the Alphabet behind him? -- Si decora novimus vocabula,
Number scire consumptos datur?


A Name is but a weak Representation: And if the Piece was never so well
finished, what signifies that which is never seen?


You mean by him for whom it was drawn?


Philal. Yes. For supposing a Man's Memory never so honorably treated at Iapan,
if he was not to come there, nor receive intelligence of the Respect, what
could he make on it? Such an unknown Ceremony would signify just as much as
Adoration to a Statue: He that is insensible of the Fact, must be insensible of
the Pleasure.


Philot. Why cannot the Presumption of what is done give him some Satisfaction?


Philal. The Certainty of such an Advantage cannot be reasonably presumed. Many
a one dies and makes a large Provision for his Memory, and leaves it very rich
in Tombstones, Pictures, Records, and such other Chattels of Reputation: But he
is no sooner gone, but comes a Fire, a Deluge, or an Earthquake, sweeps away
all the Distinctions of Condition, and buries the Great and Small in a common
Obscurity. Now the Concern, for fear of such an Accident, must spoil the
Pleasure of your Presumption. Besides, take Things at the best, you must expect
your Memory will be much confined, and as it were banished from the greater
part of the World. You are absolutely lost to all the Ages before you. And as
for the rest, if you were a Prince, you would be farther unknown than known;
which makes your Obscurity greater than your Renown. What tribute of Honor had
the four Empires from China, or America? How many Nations have there been which
never so much as heard of the Roman Name? Alas! what can a private Man expect
at this rate? What a slender Portion must fall to his Share, and that without
Security? The Customs of his Country may be changed, the Notions of Honor
renversed, and the Language which should commend him worn out. Thus the
conquering Goths altered the State of Things, defaced the Monuments of
Antiquity, rifled the Living and the Dead, and suffered no Marks of Greatness
but their own.


Philot. These Casualties must be ventured; what may be, may be otherwise. Let
us overshoot the Grave as far as we can, and make the most of our Materials.


Philal. What are those?


Philot. They are those Advantages of Person, Fortune, or Improvement, which
every one values himself most upon.


Philal. Let Us see then how durable and shining they are. Now take them in
general, and you will find them no more than some little Progress in Art, some
Smatterings in Science, some Pretensions in Figure and Station; something
remarkable it may be in Eating, Dressing, or Diversions. These are the
Inclinations of no small Number: These are the Qualities they strive to excel
in; and this oftentimes is the true Inventory of their Glory. And can they
think it worth their while to be remembered by such Tokens as these? I Am sorry
they think their Understandings will be no better improved by Dying.


Philot. After all, there must be something more in the Matter: For every one
is striving to fortify against the Assaults of Time. You see Artificers, Men of
Learning and Fortune, get their Names wrought into their Works, and Estates, as
far as they can: And for this reason the Bulk of the Inheritance is cast upon a
single Person.


Philal. The Vanity of some Parents makes them unnatural, and act as if they
were of kin to none but the Eldest Son. It Is true, their Project of
perpetuating is common and ancient too. The Scripture (Psalm. 49.) mentions some
who called their Lands after their own Names, out of the same fanciful
Prospect: But mark what follows, This is their Foolishness, and yet their
Posterity praise their Saying; that is, they did as Foolishly too. Not that
it is a Folly for a Man to leave his Name upon his Estate: But to imagine that
this Provision will do him any service when he is Dead, There is the Weakness.
People may talk what they please of Titles for ever, and Fees Simple; but to
speak properly, there is none a Tenant longer than for Life. If this be not
Law, it is Sense, and that is as good.

To come closer. When People Dye, it is either very Well, or very Ill with them.
If they miscarry they will take but little Pleasure in the Ceremony and
Civilities of the Living. Then they will understand themselves too well to be
flattered. Pray what would the Respect of the Company signify to a Man
stretched upon the Rack? Alas! He is not to be relieved with such Fooleries.
All the Homage and Rhetoric in the World can never persuade him out of his
Misery. He that is contemned by the Wise, and punished by the Mighty; what
comfort can he receive by the Applause of the Little and Insignificant? The
Acclamations of an Infant, or a Parrot, would be a slender Satisfaction to one
that lay bleeding under the Sentence of his Prince; that was degraded and
stigmatized, tortured with pain and ignominy. Now this is the Fate of those who
raise themselves upon the ruins of Conscience, wrest their Figure from Law and
Justice, and seize a Greatness God never meant them. And as for those who land
on the right side of the Shore; they will have much bigger Company, much better
Entertainment, than this World affords. They Will leave their childish Fancies
behind them, out-grow the Stature of mortal Desires, and scorn those little
Amusements which pleased them here. All this is said on supposition that
departed Spirits have the knowledge of human Affairs, which is not very
probable. The other World, and this, seem too far asunder to be within Hearing.
And for the Liberty of returning incognito, I believe it is no common Privilege.
When we are once dead, in all likelihood the Scene of this World is wholly
withdrawn: And that we either have not the Curiosity, or the Power, to recover
it.


Philot. I must repeat, that this Earnestness for recommending the Memory to
Posterity, is an unexstinguishable Desire. It governs in all Places, Times, and
Conditions. And to think a little Philosophy can check the force and damm up
the current of Nature, is a fanciful Undertaking. You might as good attempt to
lay a Storm by Reasoning; and stop a Sea-Breach by proving the Water gets
nothing by overflowing.


Philal. There are several Diseases as universal as the Desire you mention, and
as much fixed in the Constitution; but because they are natural, it seems we
must not go about to cure them. --


Philot. One Word and I have done. I say then, To baffle the Expectations of
Fame is to discourage Desert. It strikes Industry almost dead, damps the
Spirits, and makes the Pulse beat lazily. If your Maxims should take Place,
Men's Understandings would grow downwards; their Courage and Capacity shrink up;
and a little time would return us into the unpolished Ignorance of the first
Ages.


Philal. No. Present Necessity, and Convenience, would prevent that
Consequence. And to silence your Fears more effectually, there are a great many
other Motives to Merit still remaining.

A Man may affect an Excellency for the sake of Improvement; for the
Satisfaction of Significancy. He may do it to excite an Emulation in others, to
oblige his Posterity, to serve his Country; and to furnish out Life to the best
Advantage. Discoveries of Truth, Defense of Justice, Examples of Courage, and
such other distinguishing Qualities, are allowed to entertain the Owner, and
reward him for the Expense of the Practice. We may please our selves by
considering that our good Deeds will survive us; and that the World is, and is
likely to be, the better for our coming into it.

And if this will not satisfy you, as indeed it ought not, you may carry your
Ambition to a nobler Height. I say, to a nobler Height; for I cannot help
reminding you that the Opinion of poor Mortals signifies not much. They
pronounce upon imperfect Views, shoot their Bolt at random; and want either
Strength or Steadiness to hit the Mark. Their Partialities spoil their
Judgment, and make them Praise and Censure without Reason or Measure. Like some
Spectators in a Play, they are apt to Laugh and Admire in the wrong Place: To
commend a Man for his Follies and his Faults; or for that which is not properly
his own. But to speak familiarly, There are great People in the other World:
For Rank, for Merit, and Sufficiency, extremely valuable. The Respect of These
I confess is worth the Working for. Their Commendation is a Title indeed;
enough to affect the most mortified Humility. But if we expect this Honor, we
must Live as it were under their Observation; and govern our Behavior by their
Maxims. Taking this for a Rule, That with them, there is no being Great, and
good for Nothing; no Possessing without Purchase; and nothing current, but
Honesty and Virtue.

Good night.


OF MUSIC.
I Shall say nothing concerning the Theory of Music: Those who have a mind to
inform themselves about it, may consult Boethius, Glareanus, Galtruchius, and
others, who have written upon this Subject. My Business shall only be to touch
a little upon the Antiquity, the Reputation, and the Force of this Science. The
Antiquity of Music reaches beyond the Flood: Iubal, Noah's Brother, is said to
be Father, or first Teacher, of those who handled the Harp, and the Organ. And
how far a Genius which lay that way might improve his Invention, in Seven or
Eight hundred years of Life and Vigor, is not easy to imagine. So that for
ought we know, an Antediluvian Air might as far exceed all the later
Performances of Greece and Italy, as that World is supposed to have done the
present. And how much soever This, as well as other entertaining Arts, might
suffer by the Flood, by the Shortness of Life, and the Necessity of Labor; it
was not long before it emerged again: As we may learn from the Song of Moses,
and the Timbrel of Miriam. Job likewise, who is supposed no less Ancient than
the other, mentions several Sorts of Musical Instruments, ( Cap. 21.) And which
is observable, neither of these Divine Authors speak of them as Things newly
invented. As for the Heathen, They did not forget to divert themselves this way
in those earlier Ages: Linus, and Amphion, and Orpheus, and Chiron, who all
lived before the Trojan War, were famous Musicians in their Times. Some of
these Heroes were at the Head of the Argonautick Expedition. And therefore I
cannot see why the Welsh Harp, if it was Dubbed, might not make as honorable a
Knighthood as the Golden Fleece; especially since they would have Apollo for
the Sovereign of their Order. To come a little Lower: Ho^er brings in Achilles
relieving his Melancholy with his Lute. And Tully tells us, that the Ancient
Grecians, the most polished Nation at that time, did not think a Gentleman well
Bred, unless he could perform his part at a Consort of Music. Insomuch that
Themistocles, though otherwise a great Person, was taxed for being defective in
this Accomplishment. It Is true, he turned off the Censure with a rough sort of
a Jest. He knew how to take a Town, he said; but as for Thrumming upon a
Fiddle, he left it to such Finical Sparks as they were. Music was anciently
used in the best Company, and upon the greatest Occasions. 'Twas the
Entertainment of People of Quality: It bore a part in the Magnificence of
Triumphs, and in the Solemnities of Religion. The Heathen Liturgy consisted
partly in Hymns, and their Sacrifices were offered up with Music, as Plutarch
informs us: The Jewish Service, though with a proper diversity, was likewise
thus regulated. And by the Scripture-Descriptions seems to be performed with
that Exquisiteness, as if nothing but the New Jerusalem could reach the Harmony
of the Old. The best Poets thought this Entertainment great enough for the
Elysian Fields. And St. John has brought it into Heaven, or into the Millennial
Paradisiacal Earth, which is next to it. ( Rev. 14.) Indeed Music, when
rightly ordered, cannot be preferred too much. For it recreates and exalts the
Mind at the same time. It composes the Passions, affords a strong Pleasure, and
excites a Nobleness of Thought. But of this more afterward.

The Manner of the Conveyance of Sounds, which is as it were the Basis of
Music, is unintelligible. For what can be more Strange, than that the rubbing
of a little Hair and Cat-gut together, should make such a mighty Alteration in
a Man that sits at a Distance? But this Wonder of Perception is not peculiar to
the Ear: For the Operations of all the Senses are in some respect
incomprehensible. The Sense of Hearing, as well as that of Sight, seems to be
of a Superior Order to the rest. It commands a Satisfaction at a greater
Distance, strikes a finer Stroke, and makes a single Object divide it self
without Lessening. For Instance: A Man may see the Light of a Candle, and hear
a Voice or Instrument, as well if there be Ten in the Room, as if he was there
alone. The Stream of Sounds, though cut into several Rivulets, comes as full to
the Ear as if it had but one Chanel to feed. The Taste and Touch are, if one
may say so, more narrow Spirited. They engross an Object to themselves, and
will not let the Company share with them. They take faster Hold it is true, but
then they do not Salute so Ceremoniously. They are, comparatively, a sort of
Robust, Peasantly Senses. And those who indulge them are, in reality, of the
lowest Rank of Mankind. The Force of Music is more wonderful than the
Conveyance. How strangely does it awaken the Mind? It infuses an unexpected
Vigor, makes the Impression agreeable and sprightly, and seems to furnish a new
Capacity, as well as a new Opportunity of Satisfaction. It Raises, and Falls,
and Counterchanges the Passions at an unaccountable Rate. It Charms and
Transports, Ruffles and Becalms, and Governs with an almost arbitrary
Authority. There is scarcely any Constitution so heavy, or any Reason so well
fortified, as to be absolutely proof against it. Ulysses, as much a Hero as he
was, durst not trust himself with the Sirens Voices. He knew, if he had not
waxed up his Ears, they would quickly have spoiled his Philosophy. I believe
the softer Music may be the more irresistible of the two; because the Soul has
a sort of Generosity in it, which loves rather to be Courted than Stormed.
However, the rougher Sounds are not without their Effect. Have you not observed
a Captain at the Head of a Company, how much he is altered at the Beat of a
Drum? What a vigorous Motion, what an erected Posture, what an enterprizing
Visage, all of a Sudden? His Blood charges in his Veins, his Spirits jump like
Gunpowder, and seem impatient to attack the Enemy. The Ancients were much our
Superiors in this Mystery. They knew how to Arm a Sound better, and to put more
Force and Conquest in it than we understand. To give an Instance or two:
Timotheus, a Grecian, was so great a Master, that he could make a Man storm and
swagger like a Tempest. And then, by altering the Notes, and the Time, he would
take him down again, and sweeten his Humor in a trice. One time, when
Alexander was at Dinner, this Man played him a Phrygian Air: The Prince
immediately rises, snatches up his Lance, and puts himself into a Posture of
Fighting. And the Retreat was no sooner Sounded by the Change of the Harmony,
but his Arms were Grounded, and his Fire extinct, and he sat down as orderly as
if he had come from one of Aristotle's Lectures. I warrant you Demosthenes
would have been Flourishing about such a Business a long Hour, and may be not
have done it neither. But Timotheus had a nearer Cut to the Soul: He could Neck
a Passion at a Stroke, and lay it a Asleep. Pythagoras once met with a Parcel
of drunken Fellows, who were likely to be troublesome enough. He presently
orders the Music to play Grave, and chop into a Dorion: Upon this, they all
threw away their Garlands, and were as sober and as shame-faced as one would
wish.

That the Music of the Ancients could command farther than the Modern, is past
Dispute. Whether they were Masters of a greater Compass of Notes, or knew the
Secret of varying them more artificially: Whether they adjusted the Intervals
of Silence more exactly, had their Hands or their Voices farther improved, or
their Instruments better contrived: Whether they had a deeper In-sight into the
Philosophy of Nature, and understood the Laws of the Union of the Soul and Body
more thoroughly; and from thence were enabled to touch the Passions, strengthen
the Sense, or prepare the Medium with greater Advantage: Whether they excelled
us in all, or in how many of these ways, Is not so Clear. However this is
certain* That our Improvements of this kind are little better than
Alehouse-Crowds, with respect to theirs.

It Is likely this Declension of Music has laid some Powers of the Soul
perfectly asleep, for want of an Occasion strong enough to call them up* But
possibly we are no great Loosers by it: For the Heathens often made an ill Use
of this Advantage. The Fathers declaim against their Theater Music, as Lewd
and Licentious. No doubt 'twas capable of being reformed to Manly and Religious
Purposes. And, on the other hand, it is no less probable we might have
misemploy'd it as much as they did.

And here it may not be improper to consider, whether there may not be some
Counter Sounds; which may give the Mind as high a Disgust, as the other can a
Pleasure. For the Purpose: I believe it is possible to invent an Instrument that
shall have a quite contrary Effect to those Martial ones now in Use. An
Instrument that shall sink the Spirits, and shake the Nerves, and curdle the
Blood, and inspire Despair, and Cowardice, and Consternation, at a surprising
Rate. It Is probable the Roaring of Lions, the warbling of Cats and
Schritch-Owls, together with a Mixture of the howling of Dogs, judiciously
imitated and compounded, might go a great way in this Invention. Whether such
Anti-musick as this might not be of Service in a Camp, I shall leave to the
Military Men to consider. To return.

Though the Entertainments of Music are very Engaging; though they make a
great Discovery of the Soul; and show it capable of strange Diversities of
Pleasure: Yet to have our Passions lie at the Mercy of a little Minstrelsy; to
be Fiddled out of our Reason and Sobriety; to have our Courage depend upon a
Drum, or our Devotions on an Organ, is a Sign we are not so great as we might
be. If we were proof against the charming of Sounds; or could we have the
Satisfaction without the Danger; or raise our Minds to what pitch we pleased by
the Strength of Thinking, it would be a nobler Instance of Power and
Perfection. But such an Independency is not to be expected in this World,
therefore we must manage wisely and be contented.

One word of Church-Musick, and I have done. The End of Church-Musick is to
relieve the Weariness of a long Attention; to make the Mind more cheerful and
composed; and to endear the Offices of Religion. It should therefore imitate
the Perfume of the Jewish Tabernacle, and have as little of the Composition of
common Use as is possible. There must be no Voluntary Maggots, no Military
Tattoos, no Light and Galliardizing Notes; nothing that may make the Fancy
trifling, or raise an improper Thought. This would be to Profane the Service,
and bring the Playhouse into the Church. Religious Harmony must be Moving, but
Noble withal; Grave, Solemn, and Seraphick. Fit for a Martyr to play, and an
Angel to hear. It should be contrived so as to warm the best Blood within us,
and take hold of the finest part of the Affections: To transport us with the
Beauty of Holiness; to raise us above the Satisfactions of Life, and make us
ambitious of the Glories of Heaven. And without doubt if the Morals of the
Quire were suitable to the Design of the Music, it were no more than
requisite. To come reeling from a Tavern, or a worse Place, into a Church, is a
monstrous Incongruity. Such irregular People are much fitter for the Exercises
of Penance, than Exultation. The Use of them disserves the Interest of
Religion: And is in effect little better than Singing the Praises of God,
through the Organ of the Devil.

OF THE VALUE OF LIFE.
TO quarrel with the present State of Mankind, is an ungrateful Reflection upon
Providence. What if the Offices of Life are not so fine, and great, as we can
fancy; they are certainly much better than we can challenge* What Pretense
could Nothing have to insist upon Articles? As long as the Conveniences of
Being may, if we please, exceed the Inconveniences, we ought to be thankful:
For the Overplus of Advantage is pure unmerited Favor. He that repines because
he is not more than a Man, deserves to be less: Indeed the very Complaint makes
him so. But the Errors on this hand are not so common: People are not so apt
to be too Big to Live, as too Little to Dye. They are much more frequently
over-fond of the World, than ashamed on it. Not that there is a perfect
Indifferency required. The Laws of Self-preservation, the long Acquaintance of
Soul and Body, the untried Condition of a Separation, and Respect to our
Friends, are sufficient Reasons not to turn our Backs upon Life out of an
Humor. The very uneasiness of taking Leave, is a fair excuse to stay, when it
may be done Handsomely: For Nobody is bound to put himself to pain to no
purpose. Now it is odds but that there will be a Pang at Parting. For though a
Man is born into this World with his Mothers Labor, yet it is his own that must
carry him to the other. Besides, He that does not go off with a good
Conscience, must expect a very bad Reception. This Consideration was overlooked
by most of the Heathen Philosophers. They thought Annihilation was the hardest
of the Case. That Death would make a Man Caesar aut Nullus, Happy or Nothing.
This Mistake made their Arguments bear up with a more negligent Romantic sort
of Bravery, than otherwise they would have done. But Religion, which gives us a
Prospect of Horror beyond the Grave, should make us careful how we go thither.
Life was given for noble Purposes; and therefore we must not part with it
Foolishly. It must not be thrown up in a Pet, nor sacrificed to a Quarrel, nor
whined away in Love. Pride, and Passion, and Discontent, are dangerous Diseases
to dye of. We are Lifted under Providence, and must wait till the Discharge
comes. To Desert our Colors will be of more than mortal Consequence. He that
goes into the other World before he is sent for, will meet with no good
Welcome. On the other side, a Man may be too backward, as well as too forward,
in Resigning. Life may be overvalued, as well as other Things; and he that buys
it at the Expense of Duty, purchases too dear. Some People seem resolved to
Spin out Life as long as they can: They are for going to the utmost Extent of
Nature: And will not venture a single Pulse upon any Consideration. But to dote
upon Breathing (for it is little more) at this rate, is to turn Slave to all
Sorts of Meaness and Vice. Fright such a one but with the Fear of Death, and
you may make him say or do what you please, though never so infamous or
ridiculous. And if his Cowardice is not tried thus far, yet this Lean Principle
will be sure to keep him Servile and Insignificant. He will never Touch at a
great Proposal; nor run any generous Hazards for his Friends, or Country. And
is it worth ones while thus to value Life, above the Ends and Purposes of
Living? The Resolution of Pompey was much more becoming; who when he was
dissuaded from embarking because the Weather was tempestuous, replied very
handsomely, Gentlemen, make no more Words on it. My Voyage is necessary, my Life
is not so.

The true Estimate of Being is not to be taken from Age, but Action. A Man, as
he manages himself, may dye Old at Thirty, and a Child at Fourscore. To nurse
up the vital Flame as long as the Matter will last, is not always good
Husbandry. It Is much better to cover it with an Extinguisher of Honor, than
let it consume till it burns Blew, and lies Agonizing within the Socket, and at
length goes out in no Perfume. If the Sun were not to rise again, methinks it
would look bigger for him to tumble from the Sky at Noon, with all his Light
and Heat about him, than to gain a Course of four or five Hours, only to
Languish and Decline in.

When a noble Occasion presents; An Occasion that will bear a cool Debate, and
stand the Test of Reason, and may be pleaded to Advantage in the other World;
When a Man is called upon to offer up himself to his Conscience, and to Resign
to Justice and Truth: In such a Case, one would think, he should be so far from
avoiding the Lists, that he should rather Enter with Inclination, and thank God
for the Honor of the Opportunity. He should then be more solicitous about his
Behavior than his Life. Then, Fortem posce animum and mortis terrore carentem.

Let him pray for Resolution to act up to the Height of the Occasion. That he
may discover nothing of Meaness, or Disorder; nothing that may discredit the
Cause, tarnish the Glory, and weaken the Example of the Suffering. There are
some Opportunities of going out of the World, which are very well worth ones
while to come in for. The last Act of Life, is sometimes like the last Number
in a Sum, Ten times greater than all the rest. To slip the Market when we are
thus fairly offered, is great Imprudence: Especially considering we must part
with the Thing afterward for Less. But is it not a sad Thing to fall thus
plumb into the Grave? To be well one Minute, and dead the next? Not at all! If
we are prepared, the shorter the Voyage is, the better. Is it not more eligible
to come In with a smooth Gale, than to be tossed at Sea with a Storm, and then
throwna Shore when the Vessel is wracked? Is it so desirable a Condition to run
through a long Course of Pain, to consume by Inches, and loose ones Blood by
Drops? A Deathbed Figure is certainly the most humbling Sight in the World. To
Set in so dark a Cloud, and to go off with Languor, Convulsions, and Deformity,
is a terrible Rebuke to the Dignity of Humane Nature. Besides, People are
frighted by Phantoms of their own raising, and imposed on by Words and Things
ill joined together. A Natural Death is generally the most Violent. An
Executioner does the Business more gently than a Disease. He that can conquer
his Imagination, may possibly dye easier of a Faggot than of a Fever. And had
better choose to have the Fire kindled without, than within him.

To say Flesh and Blood cannot be reconciled to this, is a Mistake. People have
sometimes too much Courage this way: How often does Revenge, and Poverty, and
Disappointment, make Men force their Passage into the other State? A Slave has
Stomach enough to kill himself: And he that is not Master of his Liberty, will
be Master of his Life. There is no Age nor Sex, no Passion or Condition, so
dispirited and low, but affords Instances of the Contempt of Death. The old
Goths, from whence the Saxons are probably Descended, were so hardy, that it
was part of their Discipline and Religion to scorn their Lives. If they were
afraid of any Thing, it was of dying in their Beds.

In Alexander's Time, the Indian Philosophers, when they were weary of Living,
used to lie down upon their Funeral Pile, without any visible Concern. And
afterward, about the Reign of Adrian, Lucian mentions one Peregrinus, who
jumped into a fiery Furnace at the Olympic Games, only to show the Company how
far his Vanity could carry him. At this day, the Heathen Women under the Mogul,
offer themselves to the Flames at the Death of their Husbands. It Is true, the
Mahumetans will not always let them have their Will: But they think they are
hardly dealt with, when refused; and make all the Interest they have for the
Honor. I need not mention the Primitive Christians, whose Fortitude was both
General and Extraordinary. Insomuch that Lactantius, and others, observe, That
the Women and Children did not show the least Signs of Complaint, either in
Looks, Voice, or Motion, when they seemed to lie under the Extremity of
Torture. But it may be replied, and that truly, That These were supported by
supernatural Strength. However, the former Instances may suffice to show, That
there is a Greatness in humane Nature not to be overawed by Death. The way to
be possessed of this Quality to purpose, is to live well. There is no such
Bravery as that of a good Christian. He that can look the other World in the
Face, needs fear nothing. But as for the Courage of Bullys and Town-Sparks, who
are so hardy as to risque Body and Soul, upon a point of pretended Honor,
There is no Language can reach their Extravagance. They are distempered beyond
the Lunacy of Bedlam, and should be taken care of accordingly.

OF THE SPLEEN.
THE Spleen is oftentimes nothing but a nice and exceptious Temper, which takes
check at every little Disappointment. A Tincture of Conceit, will make a Man
subject to this Distemper. Those who overvalue their Pretensions are apt, upon
every little Occasion, to think they are ill used. That Quality should grow
thus cheap, and Merit be thus overlooked! Who could have imagined People so
strangely stupid and unacknowledging? Well! I Will lock up my Face, and draw in
my good Humor, and do my self the Justice of a private Resentment. These
Expostulations in Words would be ridiculous, and therefore they are suppressed;
but they seem to be the Thoughts of some Persons. You need not provoke their
Spirits by Outrages, either in Fame or Fortune, or by any Injury of a greater
Size. A careless Gesture, a Word, or a Look, is enough to Disconcert them. Such
a supposed Neglect, spreads a Gloominess upon their Humor, and makes them grow
sullen and unconversable. And when they are disturbed only by their own
Weakness, and doing Penance for their Vanity, they lay the Fault upon their
Constitution.

It Is commonly said the Spleen is a Wise Disease, which I believe makes some
fond of catching it. It Is possible it may be the only Symptom of Sense they
have about them. But if a Man can show his Understanding no better way, than by
troubling himself and the Company, let him even pretend to it no longer; but
rather make it his Business to be a Fool. However, it must be granted that
these Fits of Chagrin proceed sometimes from natural Causes. The Fumes of
Indigestion, insensible Abatements of Health, sudden Changes of Weather, affect
the Brain, though they make no sensible Impression elsewhere. This disturbs the
Imagination, and gives a new and melancholy Complexion to the Appearances of
Things. Wise Thinking and good Humor, unless People look to it, are precarious
Advantages; a Cloud is enough to over-cast them; they rise and fall with the
Mercury in the Weather-glass. Some Men can scarcely talk Sense, unless the Sun
shines out. Understanding requires a kind Climate, as well as Plants. And if a
Man would make nice Remarks, he might almost tell in what Latitude, Season, and
Circumstances, a Book was writ in. Generally speaking, Northern and Southern
Wit differ almost as much as Fruits; by Consequence, Summer and Winter must
have a proportionable Influence. Ovid de Tristibus has nothing of the Air of
his Metamorphosis; and Tully offered to prove himself not depressed by a
Misfortune, by the Spirit he wrote with under it.

When outward Causes concur, the Idle, the Anxious, and the Unfortunate, are
soonest seized by this Infection. At such a time, a Man should awaken himself;
and immediately strike off into Business, or innocent Diversion. Next to
Religion, there is nothing like a vigorous Mind. Resolution, and Spirit, will
quickly repel the Malignity, and discuss the Humor. Now every one is bound in
Honor, as well as Interest, to do his Best. For to lie at the Command of so
many little Accidents, can be no pleasing Discovery. To lose the Comforts of
Life in a few Vapors, and to be smoked and smothered out of ones Reason, are
far from Circumstances of Credit. What wise Man would bring the Nightmare upon
his Fancy; and conjure up Apparitions to frighten himself? Who would double his
Misfortunes, and spoil the habit of his Body and his Mind, if he could help it?
The Evils of Necessity are numerous enough, without being multiplied by those
of Choice.

And as the Spleen has great Inconveniences, so the Pretense of it is a handsome
Cover for many Imperfections. It often hides a Man's Temper, and his Condition,
from breaking out to Disadvantage. For the Purpose: One Man is pressed with
unusual Poverty, and looks, as he has reason, somewhat odly upon it. What makes
this Alteration? Why his Blood is overrun with Melancholy; whereas if you
examine farther, you will find the Seat of the Distemper lies in the Pocket.
Another is severely mortified by some great Disappointment, but this must not
be owned: No. The Man is impregnable, he has his Mind in a String, but no body
can command a Constitution. He that has dispirited himself by a Debauch, drank
away his good Humor, and it may be raised his Conscience a little upon him,
has this Pretense to guard against Censure: A civil Guesser will believe him
Hypocondriacal, and all is well. If he is silent and unentertaining to a
Visiter, the Spleen is his Excuse, and conveys his Pride or Disaffection out of
Sight. In short, the Spleen does a great deal of Service in Conversation: It
makes ill Nature pass for ill Health, Dullness for Gravity, and Ignorance for
Reservedness.

The way to prevent this Distemper, and cure it when it lies in the Mind, is
not to be over Expecting. If we take it amiss that our Acquaintance are not
always ready to solicit our Business, to study our Inclinations, and to
compliment our Humor, we are likely to have work enough. To look for so
obliging a World as this comes to, is to miscalculate extremely. When all is
done, most People will love themselves best. Therefore we should not be
surprised when we see them prefer their own Interest, break a Jest at our Cost,
or raise themselves by our Depression. It Is possible they may only make
Reprizals, and return our own Usage upon us. However it is good not to build too
much upon the Fairness of others. More especially; those who would be Easy,
must not be Nice in trivial Matters, nor insist on Punctualities in Behavior,
nor be afflicted at the Omission of a little Ceremony. All People do not love
to be tied down to Forms, nor to walk in Trammels. If a Man values Regard, he
needs not ask the Company, he may give it himself if he pleases. These Disputes
commonly disorder none but Weak and Fantastic Minds, who have taken a Surfeit
of Prosperity: And since God has sent them no Crosses, they are resolved to
make some out of their own Indiscretion. To conclude: He that would live at
Ease, should always put the best Construction on Business, and Conversation. He
should not suppose there was Malice, or Contempt, meant him in every Action he
does not understand. To interpret up to this Rigor, will make him often
Mistaken, and always upon the Fret: And is the way neither to be just to
others, nor kind to himself.

OF EAGERNESS OF DESIRE.
DEsire is a conscious Emptiness, an unsatisfied Capacity: It implies Want in
the very Notion, and supposes the Absence of the Thing desired. Was our Power
equal to our Will, Desire would be a short-lived Passion; it would generally
begin and end at a single Thought. For then we should put our selves in
Possession, at the first Sight, of whatever we believed agreeable. Every
intelligent Being, if its Force was not limited, would soon be Master of all
known Perfections. And as Desires are the Consequence of Imperfection, so it is
likely they are naturally enlivened to awaken our Industry, and make us pursue
an Advantage. Did our Wishes keep a due Proportion to the Goodness of Things,
and not mount above the probability of Success, all were well enough. But Men
are apt to miscalculate, both upon the Value, and the Event: And then wrong
Judgments, and visionary Hopes, always produce extravagant Desires. And how gay
soever the Fancy may be made this way, yet there is great reason for Caution
and Reserve. To Desire with Eagerness is a beggarly Condition: It argues a keen
Sense of Want, and makes the Mind run strolling after foreign Objects, and grow
clamorous and importunate. And he that begs hard, is either very poor, or very
covetous. A wise Man should be satisfied with himself, and live upon the Fund
of his own Sufficiency. He should keep his Inclinations within the Compass of
his Power, and wish himself always just what he is. There is Freedom, and
Greatness, and Pleasure, in such a Management as this. But to over look the
Entertainment before him, and languish for that which lies out of the way, is
sickly and servile. To say, He must have such a Thing, is to say, he must be a
Slave. It lays him at the Mercy of Chance and Humor, and makes his Happiness
precarious. Now he that cannot give himself leave to be Easy, will hardly ever
be so long together. If we examine these violent Pursuits, we shall find they
have more of Heat than Light in them. The Object is over-flourished by the
Fondness of Fancy, which usually paints beyond the Life, and sticks in the
outward Varnish, without having either Leisure or Capacity to discover the
Coarsness underneath. How happy should I be, cries one, if I had such an Estate,
such a Place at Court, or Post in the Army? 'T would suit my Genius, and my
Humor exactly. Give me but That, and I have done Wishing for my Life time. You
have it already, Ten times finer than it is any where else. Make much of your
Imagination, for you will scarcely ever Pattern it. It Is not possible to build up
to the Model of the Brain: Nature does not Furnish so fast as we can Think. For
oftentimes the Scenes of Fancy are richer than those of Creation. Gold shines
no where so gloriously as in the Miser's Head: And Ambition makes a Crown
sparkle, more than the Jewels of the Indies. Nothing Draws so finely as
Affection: There must be some Coloring extraordinary to justify the Ardour,
and reconcile the Dotage to Sense. And thus Things are often half spoiled
before they are gained, and grow cheap under Use and Experiment. He that would
relish Success to purpose, should keep his Passion cool, and his Expectation
low; and then it is possible his Fortune might exceed his Fancy. Now an
Advantage always rises by surprise, and is almost doubled by being unlooked
for. Farther:

Strong Desires are commonly attended with Fears proportionable. The Man is
kept waking, and solicitous: He starts at the least check in Motion; every
Cloud over-casts him with the Spleen; and he is equally anxious both how to get
and secure. And what can be expected in this Region of Inconstancy, where
Accidents are so numerous, where Hopes appear and vanish like Phantoms, where
neither Things nor Persons continue the same long together?

Besides, To wish violently for Things, unless we understood our selves and
them better, is like running in the Dark; a Man may happen to justle a Post.
However, the Hurry of the Pursuit will make but a shuffling Pace, and spoil the
Gracefulness of the Motion. But the Luster of the Surface dazles the Sense, and
conceals the more inward Defects. People don't consider that the best Metal is
not without Alloy, and that there are Spots in the Sun. To this we may add,
That the Name of Misfortune is often misapplied: There are many Adventures
would Plague more than Please, if they were driven Home. And yet when Men are
rescued from the Danger of their own Choice, they commonly want the Discretion
to be either Easy or Thankful. But let the Event be never so lucky, the
Satisfaction will wither, and the Appetite wear off in Time. Diamonds grow dim,
by being long looked on: And Music may play till the Ears are almost grated.

To proceed: Strong Desires are Temptations to the Use of ill Means. In the
Tumults of Passion, Reason is seldom heard. He that will have a Thing, will
have it, Right or Wrong. When Covetousness or Ambition are in their full
Career, there is no stopping them with Notions. Si violandum est jus regnandi
causa, violandum est, and there is an End. Ahab could neither Eat nor Drink,
till he had the Vineyard. And therefore even left it to Iezebel's Conscience to
put him in Possession. And if the Pursuit were never so innocent, the Purchase
is not tanti: The Mind is over-proportioned to the Advantages of Life; they
will not hold out to the Length of Desire. And since they are not big enough to
satisfy, they should not be big enough to dissatisfy. Solomon tells us, All is
but Vanity, and vexation of Spirit. And does any Man think to make more of the
World than Solomon? Can he expect to command, or improve it farther than that
wise and mighty Prince? We do but disturb our Quiet, and mispend our Thoughts,
and make our selves Mean, by throwing away our Inclinations upon these Things.
To make short work on it: Let a Man Desire to be Wise: And if he has this Wish,
it is likely he may never be troubled with another.

OF Friendship. IN A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Philander and Sophronius.
Phil. SIr, you are welcome to Town. Methinks it is almost an Age since I saw you
last.


Soph. Sir, I thank you: I had been here sooner at your service, had I not been
detained by a Misfortune.


Phil. I am sorry for the Occasion: Pray what is it?


Soph. I have lost my old Friend, on whose Acquaintance you have heard me value
my self so much.


Phil. Is he dead? That is a Misfortune indeed! He was a most admirable Person,
by the Report of all that knew him.


Soph. Yes. His Character could scarcely be raised too much. Were I not well
assured he was removed to Advantage, I should pass my time extremely Ill
without him. But now I am almost ashamed to Grieve, because it looks more like
Self-love, than Friendship.


Phil. Truly, to be sorry a Friend is not with us, when he is better from us,
is a Sign we rate our Convenience highest; and mourn more for the Living than
the Dead. However, it is customary to do so; and it passes for Affection well
enough, and I believe is so in a less perfect Degree.


Soph. I am glad you have made me an Excuse; for I was carried off my
Philosophy a little at first, do what I could.


Phil. Be not concerned. A Sigh, or a Tear, just at Parting, is natural and
generous. But you have quickly conquered the common Infirmity, and resigned
your self to the Happiness of your Friend. I Am confident, he that acquits
himself so handsomely, must have a just Idea to form his Practice: And I
heartily wish you would please to lay it before me.


Soph. You are resolved to treat People in Mourning with Ceremony. I thank you
for your Civility, and for proposing so agreeable a Subject. Were I qualified to
describe the Offices of Friendship, none could undertake it more willingly.
Such an Employment would affect me to that Degree, that I should almost fancy
my Friend Alive again. But I think I had better decline the Task, than injure
the Argument. However, if you please to assist, and set me In: I will endeavor
to recollect my self for a short Conference, as well as I can.


Phil. To begin then, since you will have it so. I remember it is a famous Saying
in Aristotle, That he who is pleased with Solitude must be either a wild Beast,
or a God. This Sentence, though it favors what we are upon in the Application,
yet methinks it is a strange Paradox in the Position. But for the Credit of the
Author, if it can be made serviceable, I should be glad to see it.


Soph. I confess it looks somewhat surprising at first Sight; that Two such
different Natures should agree in any Disposition, or Branch of Life. But with
Submission, the Saying carrys a very significant Meaning: And imports, That
those Beings who can live without a Sociable Correspondence, are extraordinary
either in their Defects, or Perfections. They must be under the Standard of
humane Nature, or above it: And have something that is either Savage, or
Divine, in their Composition. The first is not generous enough to relish such a
Communication; the other is above the Use of it. That humane Friendships are
partly founded upon the Wants and Imperfections of Nature, may be said without
Disparagement to so noble a Relation. A Man has not every thing growing upon
his own Soil* and therefore is willing to Barter with his Neighbor. This
Exchange of Offices, when it is managed with Frankness and Fidelity, excites
native Generosity, and improves into Confidence and Affection. But God is all
Things to himself: He needs no foreign Commerce to furnish his Happiness. And
as he cannot receive an Advantage, so neither does his Satisfaction depend upon
giving one.


Phil. As to what you remark upon the Divine Nature, I agree with you. But for
the rest, if it is the Author's Meaning, I am not over-fond of it. To derive
Friendship from Indigence, is in my Opinion to mistake its Original, and assign
it too mean an Extraction. Inclination, and Esteem, and Generosity, seem more
creditable and likely Causes of so noble a Production. It Is Worth, and Bravery,
and good Humor, which engages one virtuous Person to another. These Qualities
excite Admiration, and Admiration improves into Love, and Love proceeds to
Intimacy and Union. And all this, without any little Expectations of Advantage.
To give Interest a Share in Friendship, is in effect to sell it by Inch of
Candle. He that Bids most, shall have it. And when it is thus mercenary, there
is no depending on it. 'Twill be always Shifting from one Point to another, and
desert upon Danger and Distress; and when a Man has most need of his Friend, he
may go look him.


Soph. Don't mistake me. I am far from giving Interest the Ascendant. I would
have Honor and Inclination manage the Affair, overruled the Choice, and govern
in the Progress. But after all, I must say a Prospect of Advantage may come
under a lower Consideration, without doing either Damage or Discredit. For why
should not a just Regard be allowed to that which betters my Condition? The
Appearance of Good moves the Will by natural Necessity: And that which excites
Desire, will have a Weight in Consultation, and help to determine for the
Design.


Phil. If Profit is at all concerned. I wonder those who have least need of it,
and seem most above it, should be most forward to engage? Are not the greatest
Men oftentimes strongly disposed for Friendship? Do they not invite Fairly to
it, and reward it Liberally? To give an Instance: What occasion had Laelius and
Africanus for Assistance? Persons of their Fortune and Quality could well have
stood upon their own Legs, and needed not to lay in for Countenance and
Support: And yet none closed more heartily, or carried their Friendship to a
nobler Height.


Soph. Under favor, Great Men want Supporters as well as others, and wise Men
will provide them. But allowing your Instance: I grant you Money, or
Protection, may not be always projected in Friendship. A Man may engage to
entertain himself with a wise and agreeable Acquaintance. Now Pleasure is an
Interest of the highest kind. It Is the last End of Action and Desire. Why does
any Man take Pains, but to live easier either in his Mind, or some way else?
Why is he fond of Wealth, of Power, or Company, but only to please himself? Now
it is almost impossible to live pleasantly without Friendship. Humane Nature is
imperfect. It has not Fund enough to furnish out a Solitary Life. Paradise,
barred from all commerce, would be in^upportable, and make a Man run mad with
his Happiness. But without a Friend a Man is almost alone in Company. Reserve,
and Suspicion, and guarding against Misconstruction, cramp the Freedom of
Strangers, and dilute the Entertainment. I may add, That Virtue it self is not
sufficient to attain its End single. A good Man often wants an Assistant to
direct his Judgment, and quicken his Industry, and fortify his Spirits.
Insomuch that the very Inclination to an intimate Correspondence, seems
contrived for Advantage.


Phil. As I take it, a Friend is called, Alter Idem. From whence I conclude the
Motives to Friendship and Self-love should be the same. Now a Man does not
expect to make a Penny of himself. It Is not the Prospect of Reward which makes
him affected to his Person, but stark Love and Kindness. And how then can we be
just to the Relation we are treating, unless our Inclinations go upon the same
generous Ground.


Soph. With Submission, your Objection goes upon a Mistake. For there is a
great deal of Interest in Self-love. A Man is considerably paid for his Pains.
The Case stands thus. Every one is more intimately sensible of Pleasure or
Pain, in his own Person, than in that of another. For this reason he will find
himself extremely concerned to cherish that, which entertains him so well. And
unless he takes care, will give him the greatest Disturbance. Now Interest lies
only in a Proportion of Loss, or Gain: And where these run highest, as they do
at Home, Interest is most concerned. From whence it follows, That Self-love, is
one of the most Mercenary Actions in Nature.


Phil. It Is the first time I have heard so. I perceive, you are resolved to
stick to your point of Interest: But since you have allowed it so moderate a
Share, refined the Notion, and corrected the Malignity, I shall even let it
pass. And before we go any farther, give me leave to add, That Conformity of
Judgment and Temper, seems no inconsiderable Motive to begin a Friendship.


Soph. Right. A Resemblance in Humor or Opinion, a Fancy for the same Business
or Diversion, is oftentimes a Ground of Affection: Men love to see their
Thoughts and Inclinations approved. This confirms them in the good Opinion of
themselves: And therefore they seldom fail of being grateful to the Occasion.
Nature, like Narcissus, is strangely Taken with its own Reflection. A Conformity
of Opinion and Desire, looks like a Multiplication of ones Self. A Man sees his
own Being, as it were, doubled and extended in his Friend; and then it is no
wonder if he loves him.


Phil. I think now, we may have accounted for the Ri^e of Friendship; I wish
you would run over the Means of Cul^ivating and Preserving it, the Extent of
the Offices, and the Advantages of the Relation. For now I have you engaged, I
shall leave you to your self.


Soph. Then briefly to observe your Order. There goes a great many
Qualifications to the completing this Relation. There is no small Share of
Honor, and Conscience, and Sufficiency, required. There will be Occasion for
Largeness of Mind, and Agreableness of Temper. For Prudence of Behavior; for
Courage and Constancy; for Freedom from Passion, and Self-conceit. A A Man
that is fit to make a Friend of, must have Conduct to manage the Engagement, and
Resolution to maintain it. He must use Freedom without Roughness, and Oblige
without Design. Cowardice will betray Friendship, and Covetousness will starve
it. Folly will be nauseous, Passion is apt to ruffle, and Pride will fly out
into Contumely and Neglect. Pride is so unsociable a Vice, and does all Things
with so ill a Grace, that there is no closing with it. A proud Man will be sure
to challenge more than belongs to him. You must expect him stiff in his
Conversation, fulsom in Commending himself, and bitter in his Reproofs. It Is
well if his Favors are not turned into Injury and Affront; spoiled either by
the Contemptuous way of doing, or by upbraiding after they are done. Such
Behavior as this frights away Friendship, and makes it stand off in Dislike
and Aversion. Friendship, though not nice and exceptious, yet must not be
coarsely treated, nor used with Distance or Disdain. A Correspondence managed
at this Rate, may be supported by Necessity, but never by Inclination. The Man
may be kept for some time, but the Friend is lost. Friendship, to make it true,
must have Beauty as well as Strength: Charms to endear, as well as Power to
supply. An obliging Air is a circumstance of great Moment. It Is a good Sign of
a benevolent Mind, which to speak properly gives the whole value to a Courtesy.
To improve the Relation, there must be a Willingness to receive a Kindness, as
well as to do one. He who always refuses, taxes the Profferer with
Indiscretion, and declares his Assistance needless.

An inoffensive Pleasantness is another good Quality for the same purpose. This
Talent enlivens Conversation, and relieves Melancholy, and conveys Advice with
better Success than naked Reprehension. This guilding of the Pill, reconciles
the Palate to the Prescription, without weakening the Force of the Ingredients.
And he that can cure by Recreation, and make Pleasure the Vehicle of Health, is
a Doctor at it in good Earnest.


Phil. Spare me a Word, or I shall lose the Opportunity of a Question. It Is
said, That Friendship either finds People equal, or makes them so: Do you think
it so much a Leveller as this comes to?


Soph. No. There is no more necessity for an Equality of Condition, than that
their Knowledge, or Stature, should be of the same Proportion. I confess where
the Difference is considerable, the Invitation must be the fairer. A Man must
stoop his hand for his Friend, and raise him up toward his own Ground. The
Advantage must be laid asleep. There must be no challenge of Superiority, or
discountenancing of Freedom, on the one hand: Nothing of Envy, or Repining, on
the other. In my Opinion, Disparity in Age, seems a greater Obstacle to an
intimate Friendship than inequality of Fortune. For the Humors, Business, and
Diversions, of young and old Men, are generally very different. So that if they
use a full Freedom, and let their Inclinations strike out, they will displease;
if they balk them, they will be uneasy. Besides, the Occasion of these different
Thoughts, is not to be removed. A wealthy Person may cure the Indigence of his
Friend, and make him as Rich as himself, if he pleases. But Age and Youth
cannot be made over, or adjusted. Nothing but Time can take away Years, or give
them. However, this Impediment does not always take place: Socrates and
Alcibiades may serve for an Instance. And old Laelius professes he had an
extraordinary Kindness for several young People.


Phil. Now if you please to the Extent of the Office. How far is a Man obliged
to serve his Friend?


Soph. As far as he is able, and the Interest of the other requires it. As far
as Opportunity, Discretion, and former Preingagements will give leave. To Break
upon the Score of Danger, or Expense, is to be mean and narrow Spirited.
Provided always the Assistance may be given without undoing a Man, or prejudice
to a third Person; without Violations of Conscience, or Honor. Where the Thing
is unlawful, we must neither Ask, nor Comply. All Importunities against
Justice, are Feverish Desires, and not to be gratified. Where Virtue is not
made the Measure of a Correspondence, it is no better than that of Thieves and
Pirates. It Is a scandalous Excuse to say, I murdered a Man, or betrayed my
Country, at the Instance of a Friend. When Principles and Duty lie thus at the
Mercy of a little Ceremony, we are likely to have a good Time on it! He that
would engage me unwarrantably, takes me for an ill Person. His Motion is an
Affront, and I ought to renounce him for the Injury of his Opinion.


Phil. I am perfectly of your Mind; and shall go on to another Question. Is it
fair to conceal any Thing from a Friend? Or must the Communication be entire,
and without Limitation? Are not Secrets in Reserve, ungenerous Suspicions; and
inconsistent with the Confidences of Friendship?


Soph. It Is possible some People have strained Courtesy in this point: And made
their good Nature overbalance their Caution. My Answer, since you are pleased
to ask it, is This: Whatever my Friend is concerned to know, I ought to
acquaint him with, and stand the hazard of the Discovery. But in other Cases, a
Man may be allowed to keep a Corner of his Soul to himself. While the Secret is
lodged at Home, it can never hurt me. For it is certain I shall always be true
to my own Interest, and have a Kindness for my self: But I cannot so well
Ensure the Constancy of another. And why then should I put my self in his Power
to no Purpose?

To dispatch the whole Point. As far as Prudence and Justice will permit, we
ought to use a Friend with all the Frankness and Generosity imaginable. There
must be no stinting of Inclination, no computing upon Favors, for fear we
should do more than we receive. This is to State Accounts, and looks more like
Merchandise than Friendship. Exactness, and Management, and Observation, is a
Sign of Indifferency and Distrust. It may do well enough among Strangers, but a
Friend should be treated at a nobler Rate; and used with more Confidence and
Affection. We should examine his Occasions, and prevent his Desires, and scarce
give him time to think he wanted an Assistance. A Forwardness to oblige, is a
great Grace upon a Kindness, and doubles the intrinsic Worth. In these Cases,
that which is done with Pleasure, is always received so.

To pass on to the Advantages of Friendship: Now these are so noble, and so
necessary, that Empire it self is insipid without it. Augustus, and Tiberius,
had Loftiness enough in their Temper, and affected to make a Sovereign Figure;
and had their Nature been more independent, would have liked a Solitary Pride
very well. But this Distance would not do their Business. They were glad to
part with the Singularity of their State in some Measure; to lay their Majesty
aside, and to purchase Freedom and Familiarity at the Expense of Prerogative.
Where they saw the Disposition agreeable, they made no Scruple to raise mean
Subjects to the highest Honors, to qualify them for Intimacy and Conversation.
They found the Satisfactions of Greatness imperfect, without the Additions of
Friendship. They thought themselves unsafe without the Supports of Trust, and
uneasy without the Permissions of Freedom. To appear in their Robes always,
would be a troublesome Piece of State. Unless they can be contented with the
Happiness of a Pageant, they must to some Persons at least condescend to the
Habit, and wear the Humor of other Mortals.

It Is somewhat Remarkable what Commines observes of Charles Duke of Burgundy:
This Prince was so very reserved, that he would impart his Secrets to Nobody;
especially those which troubled him most. Whereupon the Historian tells us,
That this Closeness did Impair, and a little Perish his Understanding. Pompey's
Ambition was as great as Cesar's; his Project was the same, but his
Over-reservedness undid him. He might have been Master of the Enterprise prize
before Cesar's Competition: But he was so Mysterious, that his Party knew not
what he would be at. And their having no Aim to direct and proportion their
Assistance, was the Cause of his Miscarriage. But besides the Disappointments
attending this Humor, the Uneasiness of it must be almost insupportable;
especially to those who are in Business, or Trouble. Those who have no Friend
to discharge their Cares, and their Grievances upon, are (if one may use so
hardy an Expression) a Sort of Cannibals to themselves, and prey upon their own
Vitals. A swelling Discontent is apt to Suffocate and Strangle, without
Passage. Whereas those who live within the Communication of Friendship, have a
Vent for their Misfortunes. They may safely go to the Bottom of the Matter,
report the nicest Case, and expose the affected Part to Cure and Compassion.
Friendship has a noble Effect upon all Accidents and Conditions: It relieves
our Cares, raises our Hopes, and abates our Fears. It doubles our Joys, and
divides our Griefs. A Friend who relates his Success, talks himself into a new
Pleasure. And by opening his Misfortunes, leaves part of them behind him.
Friendship, like some universal Medicine, works contrary ways, but always to
the Benefit of Nature. And as the Union of Bodies fortifies the Action at Home,
and weakens the Impressions of Violence, so there is a proportionable
Improvement from the Union of Minds.

Neither is Friendship only serviceable to heighten our Pleasures, and compose
our Passions: It Is likewise of Sovereign Use to the Understanding. The Benefit
of Conversation, if there was nothing else in it, would be no inconsiderable
Improvement. Discourse (without Enthusiasm) creates a Light within us, and
dispels the Gloom and Confusion of the Mind. A Man by tumbling his Thoughts,
and forming them into Expressions, gives them a new kind of Fermentation; which
works them into a finer Body, and makes them much clearer than they were
before. A Man is willing to strain a little for Entertainment, and to burnish
for Sight, and Approbation. The very Presence of a Friend, seems to inspire
with new Vigor. It raises Fancy, and reinforces Reason; and gives the
Productions of the Mind better Color and Proportion. Conversation is like the
Discipline of Drawing out, and Mustering; it acquaints a Man with his Forces,
and makes them fitter for Service. Besides, there are many awakening Hints and
Rencounters in Discourse; which like the Collision of hard Bodies, make the
Soul strike Fire, and the Imagination sparkle: Effects not to be expected from
a solitary Endeavor. In a word, The Advantage of Conversation is such, that
for want of Company a Man had better talk to a Post, than let his Thoughts lie
Smoking and Smothering in his Head.

Another Advantage of Friendship, is the Opportunity of receiving good Advice:
It Is dangerous relying upon our own Opinion. Affection is apt to corrupt the
Judgment. Men, like false Glasses, generally represent their Complexion better
than Nature has made it. And as they are likely to over flourish their own
Case, so their Flattery is hardest to be discovered. For who would suspect such
Treachery at Home? Who would imagine his Reason suborned against his Interest,
and that himself was guilty of putting Tricks upon himself? Now nothing is so
effectual to rescue a Man out of his own hands, as the plain Dealing of a
Friend. For Instruction from Books, strikes the Imagination more faintly, than
that which is delivered Viva voce. And observing resembling Miscarriages in
others, may mislead us by the disparity of the Instance. Besides, People are
not fond of searching after their own Faults. To lie poring upon their
Imperfections, and Deformities, is a dull Entertainment. A Man has no Pleasure
in proving that he has played the Fool: And therefore had rather go upon any
other Discovery. Accordingly we may observe, That they who are too Big, or too
Wise, for Admonition, do a great many ill, unbecoming, and ridiculous Things.
As for Business, the assistance of of a Friend is most useful; to form the
Undertaking, and secure the Steadiness of the Conduct. In matters of Moment,
our Hopes and Fears are commonly ill balanced. A Man is apt to be too eagerly
engaged, to make just Remarks upon the Progress and Probability of Things.
Nothing so proper as a judicious Friend in such a Case; to temper the Spirits,
and moderate the Pursuit: To give the Signal for Action, to press the
Advantage, and strike the Critical Minute.

Foreign Intelligence may have a Spy in it, and therefore should be cautiously
received. Strangers (I call all such excepting Friends) are often Designing in
their Advice, and make a Property of their Client. And though their
Inclinations are hearty, they may give wrong Measures, by mistaking the Case.
An old Friend has the whole Scheme in his Head. He knows the Constitution and
the Disease, the Strength and the Humor of him he assists: What he can do, and
what he can bear. And therefore none so fit to prescribe; to direct the
Enterprise, and secure the Main Chance.

Farther: Friendship is not confined to the consulting Part, it comes in
likewise at the Execution. Some Cases are so nice that a Man cannot appear in
them himself, but must leave the Soliciting wholly to his Friend. For the
purpose: A Man cannot Recommend himself without Vanity, nor Ask many times
without uneasiness. But a kind Proxy, will do Justice to his Merits, and
relieve his Modesty, and effect his Business; and all without Trouble,
Blushing, or Imputation.

These Considerations ought to make Friendship sacred, and guard off all Injury
and Misunderstanding. It Is great Folly, as well as Injustice, to break off so
noble a Relation; especially one which has stood the Test of a long Experience.
For Friendship is one of those few Things which are the better for the Wearing.
Alphonsus the Wise, King of Aragon, tells us, That all the Acquisitions and
Pursuits of Men, excepting Four, were but Bawbles; i. e. old Wood to Burn, old
Wine to Drink, old Books to Read, and old Friends to Converse with.

To part with a tried Friend without great Provocation, is unreasonable Levity.
It looks as if a Man's Spirits were turned Eager, and his good Humor worn out.
Such Inconstancy of Temper, seems to be governed by Caprice, and Curiosity; and
to turn more upon Interest than Affection. An ambiguous Expression, a little
Chagrin, or a start of Passion, is by no means enough to take leave upon. The
best People cannot be always Even, Awake, and Entertaining. No Person performs
at this rate of Exactness, and therefore should not require it. The Accidents
of Life, the Indispositions of Health, the Imperfections of Reason, ought to be
allowed for. A Paradisiacal Temper is not to be expected from Postdiluvian
Mortals. The bare inequality of the Seasons, is enough to give one the Spleen.
And therefore your Islanders ought to bear with their Friends, more than those
that live upon the Continent. A Man that would make the Best on it, must Live
under the Equator: And in that steady Climate, he may possibly find People
always in the Humor. To be serious: Nothing but plain Malevolence can justify
Disunion. Malevolence shown either in a single Outrage unretracted, or in
habitual Ill Nature. Such Behavior, I confess, is a notorious Breach of
Articles; it strikes at the Fundamentals, and makes a Correspondence
impracticable.

When the Engagement proves thus unlucky, the way is to Draw off by Degrees,
and not come to an open Rupture. Let the Acquaintance be decently buried; and
the Flame rather Go out, than be Smothered. For as Cato well observes, though
in the Phrase of a Tailor, Friendship ought not to be Unrip'd, but Unstitch'd.


OF Popularity.
POpularity, is a Courting the Favor of the People by undue Practices, or for
unwarrantable Ends. By the People, I mean those who are under the Government of
false Reasoning, or vicious Inclinations, let their Condition be what it will.
The Popular Man's Designs are Power, Wealth, Reputation, or all together. He
that is conscious how much his Vanity exceeds his Force, and that his Merit
will never carry up to his Ambition; if he gets but a favorable Juncture, and
a rising Ground, to Work he goes. He pretends a great Concern for his Country,
and a more than ordinary Insight into Matters. Now such Professions as these,
when they are set off with somewhat of Gravity and Figure, especially when they
are recommended by a Treat, are very proper to dispose an Audience to hear
Reason. So that now he ventures to acquaint them with the Secret of their
Privileges. That the People are the Original of Power: That Government is
always conveyed with an Implication of Trust, and Reservation: That Governors
are only the Executors and Administrators of the Peoples Will: That in strict
Reasoning, it is a nobler Prerogative to give a Crown than to wear it: That the
Pomp of Princes is nothing but the Livery of the Subjects Bounty; and that the
Greatness of their Wages, ought not to exempt them from the Condition of a
Servant. This, with a little Flourish about Miscarriages and Arbitrary Designs,
is strangely Taking. He that has such a burning Zeal, and springs such mighty
Discoveries, must needs be an admirable Patriot. What can a civil People do
less than resign themselves up to his Conduct, and present him with their
Understandings?

To come from the State to the Church: He that would be an Agreeable
Ecclesiastic, must survey the Posture of Things, examine the Balance of
Interests, and be well read in the Inclinations and Aversions of the
Generality. And then his Business will be to follow the Loudest Cry, and make
his Tack with the Wind. Let him never pretend to Cure an Epidemical Distemper,
nor fall out with a Fashionable Vice, nor question the Infallible Judgment of
the Multitude. Let him rather down with a Sinking Faction, charge a Straggling
Party, and hang upon a Broken Rear. Let him Declaim against a Solitary Error,
and Batter a Public Aversion, and Press the People upon those Extremes, ^o
which of themselves they are too inclinable. And when Fears and Jealousies
become clamorous, when Discontents run high, and All grows Mutinous and Mad;
Then especial Care must be taken not to dilate upon the Authority of Princes,
or the Duties of Obedience. These are dangerous Points, and have ruined many a
good Man, and are only to be Handled when there is least Occasion. There are
other nice, though inferior Cases, in which a Man must Guard, if he intends to
keep Fair with the World, and turn the Penny. For the Purpose: If he is in the
City, he must avoid haranguing against Circumvention in Commerce, and
unreasonable Imposing upon the Ignorance or Necessity of the Buyer. If you
Meddle with Diana of the Ephesians, you must expect to lose Demetrius's
Friendship. The Dues will come in but heavily at this Rate: But to be sure all
the Voluntary Oblations in Presents and Respect, are absolutely lost. We are a
Trading People, (say some of us) and must have no interfering between Business,
and Religion. If the Pulpits and the Exchange will not Agree, we must Live, and
there is an End on it.

To proceed: If his Cure lies among the Lawyers. Let their be nothing said
against Entangling Property, Spinning out of Causes, Squeezing of Clients, and
making the Laws a greater Grievance than those who break them. No Rhetoric
must be spent against Defending a known Injustice, against Cross-biting a
Country Evidence, and frighting him out of Truth, and his Senses. It Is granted
that Touching sometimes upon these Heads, is the only way to improve the
Audience: Such plain Dealing would either Recover, or Disarm them: Reform the
Men, or Expose the Practice. But then you will say, this Method goes too much to
the Quick. This Divinity may bring the Benchers upon the Preacher, and make him
fall under Censure and Discountenance. Now a Person of Discretion will take
care not to Embarras his Life, nor Expose himself to Calumny, nor let his
Conscience grow too strong for his Interest, upon any Account.

To speak generally. A Popular Man always swims down the Stream: He never
Crosses upon a Prevailing Mistake, nor Opposes any Mischief that has Numbers,
and Prescription on its Side. His Point is to steal upon the Blind Side, and
apply to the Affections: To flatter the Vanity, and play upon the Weakness of
those in Power, or Interest; and to make his Fortune out of the Folly of his
Neighbors.

Not that it is a Commendation to be of a Morose and Cynical Behavior; to run
counter to the innocent Humors and Customs of Mankind; to be Coarse or
Unseasonable in Admonition; or to avoid the good Opinion of People, by Rustic
Incompliance, by Peevishness or Singularity. But then neither ought a Man to
Please another to his Prejudice, to fortify him in an Error by an
Over-officiousness, and to Caress him out of his Safety, and Discretion.

And after all, the Success is no such mighty Matter. If one Considers, he will
find as little Credit as Conscience in the Purchase. For what sort of
Reputation must that be, which is gained by Methods of Infamy? To debauch Men's
Understandings in order to procure their good Word, is a most admirable
Testimony of our Worth! A blind Man must needs be a fit Judge of Proportions and
Color. These Patents of Honor, which are Granted thus by Surprise, are always
Recalled when the Party is better Advised. The Esteem gained this way, like a
Love-Potion, works more by the Strength of Charm, than Nature; and if ever the
Person Recovers, the Hatred will be much greater than the Affection.

The Truth is, if there was no Foul Play used, or the Artifice undiscovered,
there would not be much to Brag of. For a Universal Applause, is seldom little
less than two Thirds of a Scandal. A Man may almost Swear he is in the Wrong,
when he is generally Cried up. Either Incapacity or Prejudice, Negligence or
Imposture, disorders the Judgment of the Multitude. Their Understandings are
often too Weak, or their Passions too Strong, to Distinguish Truth, or
Pronounce upon the Right of the Case. If a Great Man happens to make a false
Step, and strikes out into a Sudden Irregularity, he needs not question the
Respect of a Retinne. How is an Exploit of this Nature celebrated by the Crowd,
and shouted Home with the Pomp of a Roman Triumph? In fine: To endeavor not to
Please, is Ill Nature; altogether to Neglect it, Folly; and to Over-strain for
it, Vanity and Design.

A Thought. IN A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Hylarchus and Lucretianus.
Hyl. I Have often thought what it is to Think; and the more I press the
Enquiry, the farther I am from Satisfaction. The Operations of the Mind are so
peculiar, so foreign to all the other Appearances of Nature, that it is hard to
assign them a proper Original. Without Thinking, we can have no Sense of Being;
and with it, we are we cannot tell what. So that the same Faculty seems to make
us acquainted with, and Strangers to our selves.


Luc. I am surpised to find you entangled in so slender a Difficulty. Thinking
every Body knows is the Work of the Brain: That is the Forge in which all the
Speculations of the Understanding, and the Appetites of the Will, are hammered
out.


Hyl. I confess Possibilities go a great way. But in my Opinion, the Brain has
a very unpromising Aspect for such a Business. It looks like an odd sort of Bog
for Fancy to paddle in. When I can see People tread Sense out of Mud, as they
do Eels, then I may be inclined to believe that Brains and Reasoning are of
Kin; in the mean time I desire to be excused.


Luc. I Am sorry your Conceptions are so Unphilosophical. You seem to forget
that the Brain has a great many small Fibers, or Strings in its Texture; which
according to the different Strokes they receive from the Animal Spirits, awaken
a correspondent Idea, and give us those Notices of Things which we call
Thoughts.


Hyl. A little clearer, if you please.


Luc. You must know then, that the Nerves, which have their Origin in the
Brain, are branched into a great many fine Subdivisions, and spread upon all
the Surface of the Body. These are the Channels in which the Animal Spirits
move: So that as soon as any foreign Object presses upon the Sense; those
Spirits which are posted upon the Out-guards, immediately take the Alarm, and
scowr off to the Brain, which is the Headquarters, or Office of Intelligence,
and there they make their Report of what has happened.


Hyl. I suppose they return laden like Bees, and disburthen themselves in the
Cells much after the same manner?


Luc. I have told you the Information is conveyed by striking upon the Fibers,
and giving them a particular Bent; which imprints the Character of the Object
upon the Mind.


Hyl. I should almost as soon imagine, that the striking a Viol with the Bow,
should entertain the Instrument with its own Music. But as I remember, some
say the Spirits Tilt so violently, that they make Holes where they strike;
which are no sooner open, but the Ideas run into them as fast as may be. And
after they have lain there a little while, grow as drowsy as Dormice, unless
they are rowsed by a new Summons. By the way, what are Animal Spirits; methinks
they perform strange Things?


Luc. They are a kind of little Pellets, wrought off the finer Parts of the
Blood.


Hyl. Then I perceive they are Bodies all this while.


Luc. Yes. But admirably furnished for Dispatch and Intelligence.


Hyl. Let them be as Sleek, and well Timber'd, as those Atoms Epicurus made his
Soul of; yet I Am afraid they are not altogether qualified for that Office you
have put them in. For supposing a Bird sits before me; these Mercurys
immediately run up to the Center of Sensation, to give an Account of what is
arrived. Now in doing this, either every single Animal Spirit must convey a
whole Representation, which would multiply the Object, if not over-load the
Carrier; or else they must divide the Image among them; and so lug off every
one his Share. This I confess is the more equal way: But then when they have
taken the Object to pieces, how they will set it toge-again, is hard to
imagine. For they cannot strike all upon one Point; and if they could, they
would jumble the Proportions, and run the Object all on heaps; where the later
Impression would go near to deface the former. But if they impinge upon
different Parts, and make every Part sensible with the Stroke; It Is true then
they have it among them, but which way the Whole should emerge, is still
incomprehensible. For supposing the Image was painted in Order, without any
Dislocation, vacant Intervals, or Interloping; yet the Parts of the Fibers
being distinct, and impregnated by distinct Spirits, they can account no
farther than their Share of Motion reaches: And therefore how they should club
their particular Informations into a common Idea, is inconceivable. For
Instance: If a Cake is broken among Twenty People, though there may be nothing
lost in the Division, yet 'twill be next to impossible for each Person, from
the View of a single Fragment, to understand what Relation either in Site, or
Magnitude, his proportion bears to the whole. Besides, if any of the returning
Spirits should happen to fall foul upon others which are outward Bound; (which
is not unlikely:) These Counter-motions would over-set them, or occasion a
later Arrival; either of which Accidents would maim the Image, and make it
imperfect.

These Rubs you see will lie in the way of Sensation: But then in the Business
of Imagination, the Difficulty is still greater. For here are no external
Impressions to begin the Motion. It Is true, outward Objects will make us
perceive them, whether we will or no. But the Exercises of Imagination are
oftentimes purely voluntary. When the Passions are not violent, we may check or
quicken, change or extinguish, the Operation as we please. Now I would gladly
know the main Spring of the Motion. What Power it is which opens the Scene, and
gives Direction to the whole Management; which chalks out the Course of the
Spirits, and limits their Commission, both as to Time, and other Circumstances
of Action?


Luc. I perceive you imagine a Mechanical Solution impossible. But if you
examined the exquisite Fineness of the Animal Spirits, and the exact Proportion
between them and the Fibers, to give and receive Impressions, I believe you
would alter your Opinion: Especially considering this Hypothesis is supported
by matter of Fact.


Hyl. We'll examine your matter of Fact afterward. At present let me tell you,
since both the Fibers, and Spirits, are Material; I think it impossible for
them to produce Effects, so much above the Vigor of the Cause. You may as well
expect that two Bowls should grow sensible by Rubbing, as that the Rencounter
of any Bodies, should awaken them into Perception and Reasoning. The whole
Force of Mechanism, consists in Matter and Motion. Matter is nothing but
Extention, that is, Length, Breadth, and Depth. And Motion implies no more than
a Change of Situation in the Parts of Matter. Now these two Ingredients, though
never so well mixed, will not rise into the Composition of a Spirit. Thoughts,
and Dimensions, are the most incompatible, unresembling Things in Nature. To
make the first out of the later, is a harder Metamorphosis than any is in Ovid.
Who ever heard of an Ounce of Pain, an Inch of Desire, or an Ell of
Contemplation.


Luc. I suppose you fancy if Matter and Motion can make a Thought; a Thought
may make Matter and Motion.


Hyl. Why not? What should hinder this Mercury from being fixed after
Sublimation, and thrown back into its former State? But as this will not do, so
neither will the other. Take a Body and run it through all Shapes, and Changes;
force it into all Climates, and b^ndy it through the Universe; yet, like some
young Travelers, 'twill come Home as dull, and unthinking, as it went out. For
all this bustle amounts to no more than making the Parts and Motion greater, or
lesser, than they were before; and giving them a new Neighborhood.


Luc. I should have fancied that when the Parts were broken fine, and curiously
filed, a brisk Touch of Motion would have quickened them into Thinking.


^^^Hyl. Motion make them Think! You may as well expect Discourse from a
Tempest, or Consgration. And as for the Fineness of Parts, if that signifies
any Thing, a Mite would have more sense than a Man. And to carry on the
Improvement: One would think we might beat Spice till it felt the Pestil; and
with a good Flint and Steel, strike Consciousness into a Tinder-box.


Luc. What makes you so positive against the Sensibility of Matter?


Hyl. Because it is nothing but Extension variously figured.


Luc. Do you know all the Affections of Bodies? If not, why do you confine
their Operations?


Hyl. If you ask me whether I know all the Effects which may result from all
the possible Combinations of Matter, and Motion: I answer, No; neither is it
necessary. But this I know, That all your Transmutations can never hunt a Body
out of Extension. You may divide, or consolidate; alter the Superficies, the
Bulk, or Place; quicken the Motion, or interrupt the Quiet; but after all
'twill have Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity, in spite of Fate. The
Consequence is, That all the Revolutions in Nature, can give it nothing more
than different Degrees of these Dimensions. And what affinity has Thinking with
such Attributes as these? No more than there is between a Syllogism and a
Yard-wand. In a word: If Thinking is Essential to Matter, than all Matter must
Think; and if so, Stocks and Stones will come in for their Share of Privilege.
But if all Matter does not Think, none can; for the Essence of all Matter is
the same.


Luc. Does it imply a Contradiction for Matter to Think?


Hyl. Truly, in my Opinion, as much as for a Man to be a Horse.


Luc. Why so? Does Thinking extinguish Extension?


Hyl. It extinguishes the Idea if you will; and that is sufficient proof it
does not belong to the Thing.


Luc. Because Extension and Cogitation are unallied in their Ideas, and this
later is not implied in the Notion of Matter, you conclude this Faculty does
not belong to it.


Hyl. Yes; and with good Reason. For how can the Distinction of Substances be
known, but by the different Proprieties and Operations which proceed from them;
and which way can these be discovered, but by the distinct Notions, and
Sentiments, we have of them?


Luc. Are you sure your Idea of Matter is complete?


Hyl. That the full Notion of Corporeity is comprised within the Three
Dimensions, is as clear as that Two and Two makes Four. To these Dimensions add
what Dose of Motion you please, and then you have raised the whole Posse of
Mechanism. And when you have disciplined it in all Postures, and Figures,
'twill be Matter and Motion still. For you may better suppose, That a Mouse may
produce an Elephant, than that Matter and Motion should propagate out of their
own Species. Now these two Principles fall vastly short of the Notion of
Consciousness; and are no more like Perception, than Colors resemble Sound.


Luc. You take the Differences of Ideas, for Demonstrations of Distinction in
Things; will that hold?


Hyl. Yes; or else we have nothing to trust to. If clear and distinct
Perception is not the infallible Mark of Truth, it is impossible to know any
Thing. For all Reasoning is at last resolved into Self-evident Principles: Now
these Magisterial Propositions don't dispute for Belief, but demand it. They
flash Conviction so powerfully that (...) there is no resisting them, unless
you will suppose our Faculties are false: And then it will be Madness to argue
about any Thing. To return: Don't you think the Whole is greater than any Part
of it?


Luc. I allow it an indisputable Axiom; what follows?


Hyl. Why as plain and as primary a Truth as it appears, it is but a Consequence
of what I mentioned before.


Luc. What, that a Distinction of Ideas infers a Distinction in Things?


Hyl. Yes. For do but attend, and you will find that the reason why you pronounce
the whole bigger than a Part; is because the first takes up a greater room in
the Notion, and includes a more comprehensive Reality, than the later.


Luc. It seems then the Functions of Life and Reasoning, proceed from an
immaterial Substance; and that the Body and Spirit, are perfectly distinct.


Hyl. Nothing more certain. And if a Spirit has no Extension, it can have no
Parts; from hence it becomes indivisible, and thence immortal.


Luc. I own these Consequences are very clear; but then they are embarrassed
with some appendant Difficulties which shock a Man's Understanding.


Hyl. Look you! We must not let go manifest Truths, because we cannot answer
all Questions about them. Objections are no good Evidence against positive
Proofs. This scrupulous way would make us deny our Senses: For there is
scarcely any thing we meet with, but puts our Reason to a stand, in some
Circumstance or other. But pray where does the Pinch lie?


Luc. Why, by this Scheme all Communication between Soul and Body is cut off;
and yet nothing is more certain than that These two maintain a large
Correspondence. You see we move our Limbs at our Pleasure, and receive various
Impressions according to the Objects of Sense, and the Habits of Constitution.
But how the Soul can move the Body, or be affected by it, without Extension, is
past my Comprehension. For all Motion is performed by Resistance, and
Resistance supposes Contact, and Contact requires a Superficies, and this
implies Extension; so that where Extension is absent, the other Requisites must
fail of Course. At this rate, a Soul may as soon push down a Church Steeple, as
stir a single Atom.


Hyl. I confess I cannot tell you how this Affair is managed. It Is possible the
Soul does not move the Body at all.


Luc. How then comes it to pass that Motion is so perpetually consequent to our
Will? For the Purpose: When I have a Mind to walk, the Muscles are immediately
put into a Posture of Traveling, and do their Office at the least Notice
imaginable.


Hyl. I believe this mysterious Correspondence depends on the Laws of the
Union; which by Sovereign Appointment are ordered to consist in a certain
Reciprocation of Thoughts and Motions, and so vice versa.


Luc. You mean, when I would move my Finger, God directs the Organ for such a
Performance: And on the other hand, gives me Ideas suitable to the Presence of
sensible Objects, and to the State of the Union.


Hyl. Right.


Luc. But why do you make use of this Supposition? Do you believe the Power of
Exciting Motion exceeds the Force of the Soul?


Hyl. It Is not improbable it may. For if this Privilege lay within our reach,
one would imagine we should know something more of the Manner of using it. But
I don't pretend to determine any Thing.


Luc. You don't think it impossible for a Spirit to move Matter?


Hyl. By no means: If it were, there would be no such Thing as Motion. For
Extension implies no Necessity of being Moved: It supposes no more than a bare
Capacity for such an Event. Now that Power which brings this Possibility into
Act, must be something distinct from Matter. Besides: The Regularity of Motion,
visible in the great Variety and Curiosity of Bodies, and the constant and even
Revolutions of some of them, is a Demonstration that the whole Mass of Matter
is under the Conduct of a Mighty Intelligence.


Luc. By your Reasoning, I conceive you believe that the Power of Motion, is
either an incommunicable Perfection of the Supreme Being, or else a sort of
Prerogative Royal, which he is pleased to keep in his Hands, that we may be the
more sensible of our dependence.


Hyl. I think that Opinion not improbable. You know the Apostle tells us, That
in Him we Live, Move, and have our Being: Which Words it is likely will bear a
more Literal Sense than is usually imagined.


Luc. May be so. But to return: If Matter be so incapable of Thinking, as seems
to have been proved; How comes it about that the Operations of Sense, and
Reason, vary so much according to the Disposition of the Organs? For if the
Music does not depend on the Instrument, what is matter whether it is in Tune,
or not? Now you know any considerable Degrees of Sickness, or Age, flat the
Senses, extinguish the Memory, and weaken the Understanding: So that the Vigor
of the Mind seems almost stifled under these Corporeal Oppressions.


Hyl. I grant the Powers of Sensation are contracted or enlarged, made keen or
languid, according to the Temper of the Body. But it is likely these
Circumstances are no more than occasional Causes of this Variety. My Meaning
is, That there is no natural Connection between Thought, and Matter and Motion:
Or that the Soul and Body do not act by direct Force upon each other. It Is
true, Sensations and Passions, seem to depend upon a particular Set of Motions:
And the Body, on the other hand, seems to fall into different Postures by the
Orders of the Mind; yet these Effects may not result from any mutual Agency,
but merely from the Will of a third Power. That this Supposition is possible,
needs no proof. 'That it is matter of Fact, seems likely; because the two
Parties are so essentially foreign and dissimilar, that they seem incapable of
entertaining any Commerce by virtue of their own Strength.


Luc. If the Operations of Life have no immediate dependence on the Quality of
the Organ; why are our Senses worn up with Age, and decay with the visible
Parts of the Body?


Hyl. When the common Period of the Union is almost expired, it is likely
Providence gives us notice of it by such sensible Declensions; that we may
disengage from the World by degrees, and prepare the better for so great an
Alteration.


Luc. Why does Pain follow from Obstructions, Dislocation, Discontinuity, etc.
and Pleasure from those Actions which support the Frame?


Hyl. To encourage us to keep the Body in repair, and to prevent Dissolution.


Luc. Your answering in the Final Cause, makes me believe you are at a Loss for
the Efficient.


Hyl. As to that, It Is probable the Divine Economy has settled such an
interchangeable Train of Thoughts, and Motions, between Soul and Body; that as
soon as the occasional Hints spring out, the other will as constantly follow,
as if they were produced by the most immediate Causality. For Instance: If I
cut my Finger, I shall as certainly feel Pain, as if my Soul was co-extended
with the Limb, and had a Piece of it Sawn through. So when I am disposed to
Strike, the Action will be performed with the same Force and Regularity, as if
it was conducted, and pushed on by the will, in the most corporeal Manner.

I mention this both to illustrate the Point, and to show that we ought to
guard upon both Parts of our Composition: That there may be nothing done which
is unbecoming, or disagrees with the Intendments of Providence.


Luc. If the Soul and Body have no intrinsic or essential Aptness to take or
receive Impressions from each other; why is the Structure of the later so
curiously Framed? Why is there such variety of Parts, and such admirable
Proportion? By your Scheme the Soul might have the same compass of Sentiment
and Perception, and do every jot as well, if it were united to a Clod.


Hyl. So it might, though it had never an Atom belong to it. However your
Question about the Curiosity of the Body, may be answered by saying, That it is
probably so framed to show the Wisdom and Power of the Architect, and to
heighten the Beauty and Dignity of the Creature.


Luc. Do you say the Soul may be as happy without a Body, as with it?


Hyl. I say it is possible to be so. Though God may order it otherwise, if he
pleases; as in Effect he has done with respect to the Resurrection. But let
this last Dispute lie undecided. And before I take my leave, I cannot but
observe to you, that there are a great many strange Appearances in Thoughts.
Methinks, if it might be, I would gladly understand the Formation of a Soul,
run it up to its Punctum Saliens, and see it beat the first conscious Pulse.
These Thoughts! whence do they arise? What Stuff are they made of? And what
Vigor is it that gives them such an Instantaneous Production? They are
conceived in full Maturity, and step into Perfection at first. They scorn the
Gradations of Bodies, and the heavy Successions of Motion. They gain the Race
at a Start, out-stretch the Speed of Gunpowder, and Distance Light and
Lightning.


Luc. If they come up in that Perfection, why are some Thoughts said to be
unfinished, and to require the working off with Labor and Time?


Hyl. I grant you Projects, Harangues, and Chains of Reasoning, are not so
quickly Wrought up. They include Multitude, and Order, and Choice; and
therefore must have some Leisure for Ranging, and Invention. But as to single
Ideas, Inconnexions, and slight Touches, my Observation holds good. For pray
what Time does it take to raise the Notion of a Mountain? Or to Think from
England to Iapan? A Man may set both the Poles together in his Head, without
trouble; and Clutch the whole Globe at one Intellectual Grasp, if he pleases.
To go on: Methinks the Conveyance and Disposition of Things in the Mind, is
very extraordinary. What Faculty is it which takes the Model of the largest
Objects, and draws the Picture in Little? That reconciles all disagreing
Qualities, and lodges Sympathy and Antipathy, Fire and Water, together without
disturbance? That contracts the Intervals of Space, unites the Distances of
Time, and draws Past, Present, and Future, into a single View? How comes it to
pass that such an infinite Number of Things are placed with such Order and
Distinction in the Memory; notwithstanding the Tumults and Confusions, Marches
and Counter-marches, of the Animal Spirits? What room is there for such variety
of Characters, and length of Records? What is the reason some remarkable
Passages will remain fresh and entire for Sixty Years together; when all the
Furniture of the Head has been often renewed in that Period?


Luc. I confess I cannot explain the How to you, unless the impregnated Fibers,
or Spirits, at their going off, deposit their Charge with those that remain.


Hyl. They are very just if they do so: But I am afraid this handing of Notions
from one Piece of Brain to another, is somewhat unintelligible. In short, If
you reflect upon the Liberty of Thought, the Extent, the Abstractions, and all
the Singularities of its Operations; you will be obliged to assign it a nobler
Original than Matter, and Motion.


Luc. I am satisfied with what you say; and upon a through View, I find the
System of a Mechanical Soul, wretchedly ridiculous.


Hyl. All the Branches of Skepticism are so. If the Success of our Hobbists
were no better than their Reasoning, they would have few Disciples. But some
People are willing to be imposed upon. For loose Practices must have supporting
Principles, otherwise there will be no Quiet.

Adieu.


OF THE ENTERTAINMENT OF BOOKS.
THE Diversions of Reading, though they are not always of the strongest Kind,
yet they generally Leave a better Effect than the grosser Satisfactions of
Sense. For if they are well chosen, they neither dull the Appetite, nor strain
the Capacity. On the contrary, they refresh the Inclinations, and strengthen
the Power, and improve under Experiment. And which is best of all, they
Entertain and Perfect at the same time; and convey Wisdom and Knowledge through
Pleasure. By Reading a Man does as it were Antedate his Life, and makes himself
contemporary with the Ages past. And this way of running up beyond ones
Nativity, is much better than Plato's Pre-existence; because here a Man knows
something of the State, and is the wiser for it, which he is not in the other.

In conversing with Books we may choose our Company, and disengage without
Ceremony or Exception. Here we are free from the Formalities of Custom, and
Respect. We need not undergo the Penance of a dull Story, from a Fop of Figure;
but may shake off the Haughty, the Impertinent, and the Vain, at Pleasure.
Besides, Authors, like Women, commonly Dress when they make a Visit. Respect to
themselves makes them polish their Thoughts, and exert the Force of their
Understanding more than they would, or can do, in ordinary Conversation. So
that the Reader has as it were the Spirit and Essence in a narrow Compass;
which was drawn off from a much larger Proportion of Time, Labor, and Expense.
Like an Heir, he is born rather than made Rich; and comes into a Stock of
Sense, with little or no trouble of his own. It Is true, a Fortune in Knowledge
which Descends in this manner, as well as an inherited Estate, is too often
neglected, and squandered away; because we do not consider the difficulty in
Raising it.

Books are a Guide in Youth, and an Entertainment for Age. They support us
under Solitude, and keep us from being a Burden to our selves. They help us to
forget the Crosness of Men and Things; compose our Cares, and our Passions; and
lay our Disappointments asleep. When we are weary of the Living, we may repair
to the Dead; who have nothing of Peevishness, Pride, or Design, in their
Conversation. However,

To be constantly in the Wheel has neither Pleasure nor Improvement in it. A
Man may as well expect to grow stronger by always Eating, as wiser by always
Reading. Too much over-charges Nature, and turns more into Disease than
Nourishment. It Is Thought and Digestion which makes Books serviceable, and
gives Health and Vigor to the Mind. Neither ought we to be too Implicit or
Resigning to Authorities, but to examine before we Assent, and preserve our
Reason in its just Liberties. To walk always upon Crutches, is the way to lose
the Use of our Limbs. Such an absolute Submission keeps us in a perpetual
Minority, breaks the Spirits of the Understanding, and lays us open to
Imposture.

But Books well managed afford Direction and Discovery. They strengthen the
Organ, and enlarge the Prospect, and give a more universal Insight into Things,
than can be learned from unlettered Observation. He who depends only upon his
own Experience, has but a few Materials to work upon. He is confined to narrow
Limits both of Place, and Time: And is not fit to draw a large Model, and to
pronounce upon Business which is complicated and unusual. There seems to be
much the same difference between a Man of mere Practice, and another of
Learning, as there is between an Empirick and a Physician. The first may have a
good Receipt, or two; and if Diseases and Patients were very scarce, and all
alike, he might do tolerably well. But if you enquire concerning the Causes of
Distempers, the Constitution of human Bodies, the Danger of Symptoms, and the
Methods of Cure, upon which the Success of Medicine depends, he knows little of
the Matter. On the other side: To take Measures wholly from Books, without
looking into Men and Business, is like Traveling in a Map; where though
Countries and Cities are well enough distinguished, yet Villages and private
Seats are either Over-looked, or too generally Marked for a Stranger to find.
And therefore he that would be a Master must Draw by the Life, as well as Copy
from Originals, and join Theory and Experience together.

OF Confidence.
COnfidence as it is opposed to Modesty, and distinguished from decent
Assurance, proceeds from Self-opinion, occasioned by Ignorance or Flattery.
When a Man over-rates himself by his own Folly, or the Knavery of others, he is
presently for falling to work with his Privileges; and takes care upon all
Occasions to do justice to his Merit. This Extravagance makes him over-forward
in Business, assuming in Conversation, sudden and peremptory in his Answers,
and afraid of nothing so much as to seem within the Possibility of a Mistake.
It Is true, it sometimes happens that People who have the Wit to know they are
good for little, set up notwithstanding for Men of Sufficiency. They are for
trying if they can serve a Turn upon the Weakness of the Company. But this
Trick seldom succeeds long together. For if a Man wants a good Opinion of
himself, and is not sincere in his Vanity, he will be apt to want Spirits, and
presence of Mind, to do his Business: A Diffidence of himself will make the
Paint fall off, sink his Figure, and betray his Meaness; especially when he
meets those who are his Superiors in Quality, or Sense. A Man must first put a
Cheat upon himself, before he can expect to do any Good with other People: For
he that is not conceited in his Conscience, is never likely to make a Coxcomb
worth a Groat. But when the Mind is thoroughly tinctured, the Face will hold the
same Color; and the Man will be proof against all Oppositions of Sense and
Difficulty. For as Malbranche observes, Peoples Opinions of themselves, are
commonly legible in their Countenances. Thus a kind Imagination, makes a bold
Man have Vigor and Enterprise in his Air and Motion. It stamps Value and
Significancy upon his Face, and tells the People he is to go for so much; who
oftentimes being deceived by the wash, never examine the Metal, but take him
upon Content. Not that Men are bound to look as Sheepishly as they can, for
fear of an Imputation: For sometimes a Consciousness of Worth; a Nobleness and
Elevation of Mind, together with Fineness of Constitution, gives Luster and
Dignity to the Aspect; and makes the Soul, as it were, shine through the Body.
But to return: A Man of Confidence presses forward upon every Appearance of
Advantage; and thinks nothing above his Management, or his Merit. He is not
easily discouraged by the Greatness of an Attempt, by the Quality of Rivals, or
the Frequency of Miscarriage. He is ready to rally after a Defeat; and grows
more troublesome upon Denial. Thus where his Force is too feeble, he prevails by
dint of Impudence: Thus People are stormed out of their Reason and
Inclinations; plagued into a Compliance; and forced to yield in their own
Defense. These Men of Forehead, are magnificent in their Promises, and
infallible in their Prescriptions. They love to ensure a Cause, and seldom talk
under Certainty and Demonstration. This Talent makes them often succeed against
modest Men of much greater Sufficiency, where the Competition is governed by a
popular Choice. For though there is Reason in many Cases to decide
Controversies by the Vote; yet it is no less true, on the other hand, that the
Majority of Mankind is seldom the Wisest. The Multitude are more smitten with
Appearances, than Things. The Noise, and Glitter, and Parade of a Pretender,
calls up their Attention; and flashes upon their Weakness, at an irresistible
Rate. It surprises their Imagination, and subdues their Judgment: So that a
bold Undertaker gains mightily upon the People, especially at his first Setting
out. Nay, wise Men are sometimes overborn, or imposed on this way, when they
are taken at a Disadvantage. Indeed this Faculty is of great Use to play a
Prize with, or carry on an Imposture; and therefore your Quacks,
Figure-flingers, Petty-foggers, and Republican Plotters, cannot well live
without it. It enables a Man to Flourish, Rail, and Romance, to Admiration. It
makes Impertinencies shine, Impossibilities seem credible, and turns Rats-bane
into Elixir Vitae. And when Matters are brought to a Pinch, and the Crowd drawn
out, in Expectation of something extraordinary; then if the Mountain will not
come to Mahumet, he will for once condescend to go to the Mountain. And thus by
entertaining the Company with a Jest; the Prophet's disengaged, and the Miracle
adjourned to a more convenient Season. However, these Spar^s meet with their
Mortifications: For when they happen to fall among People of Judgment, they are
looked through immediately; and then the Discovery spreads apace. For
Confidence is apt to expose it self; to over-grasp Business; to talk without
thinking; and to fail in the Decencys of Conversation. Now when a bold Man is
out of Countenance, he makes a very wooden Figure on it. He has no Hand at
Blushing for want of Practice: And acts Modesty with so ill a Grace; that he is
more ridiculous in the Habit of Virtue, than in that of Vice. To go on with him
a little farther: One of this Character, is like an Outlandish Show; most
admired at first Sight. He has Gloss, but without either Fineness, or
Substance. And therefore, like Cloth ill made, he looks better in the Shop,
than he wears in the Suit. In a word, He is the Jest of wise Men, and the Idol
of Fools: And commonly his Patent runs for his Lifetime.

OF ENVY.
ENvy is a Displeasure for some supposed Advantage in another. The Object of
this Passion is something Desirable. And though Excellency, precisely
considered, cannot occasion Dislike; yet Excellency misplaced may. The Envious
believes himself eclipsed by the Luster of his Neighbor. That which is good in
it self, becomes an Evil to him; which makes him wish it either Removed, or
Extinguished. The Discovery of the Rise and Unreasonableness of Envy, and the
way to prevent being either Active in it, or Passive under it, will comprehend
the Argument. To begin with the first. Envy lies mostly between Beings equal in
Nature, though unequal in Circumstances. We don't envy Brutes, though they
exceed us in many Respects not inconsiderable. No Body is angry with a Bird
because she can Fly. We are not offended with the Strength of an Elephant, or
the Speed of a Horse; or with a Dog, for having a better Nose than his Master.
These are all foreign Commodities, they are not looked on as the Growth of our
Soil; which makes them neither Expected, nor Desired. Besides, we excel these
Creatures in other Qualitys more valuable. So that upon the whole Comparison,
we remain their Superiors; which is sufficient to lay our Envy asleep. On the
other hand, Men are not subject to repine at the higher Condition of an Angel.
They know there is a comparative Disadvantage in their first Composition: The
Model of Humanity was Drawn less. Our Capacities, if they were all filled, are
not large enough to hold so much Happiness. To this I may add, That the
Angelick Grandeur is seldom seen. By being thus concealed, it does not awaken
our Poverty, nor mortify our Littleness so much, as if it was always displayed
before us. And lastly, our Hopes of rising to this Height hereafter, makes us
bear our present Inferiority well enough.

But where the Essential Properties are alike, Pretensions are apt to Mount,
unless seasonably checked. "I am (cries the Envious) of the same Nature with the
Rest, and why then should such a Man Top me? Where there is an Equality of
Kind, there should be no Distinction of Privilege. I am as near of Kin to God
Almighty as the Best; and he is certainly the Noblest Ancestor. I am cast in
the same Mould, made up of the same Matter, and stamped with the same
Impression; and why should I not pass equally in general Esteem? In taking Gold
and Silver, it is not enquired what Mines they came from, nor how long they have
been dig'd; If they answer the Qualities of the Metal, that is enough. Why then
should one Piece of human Nature be thought so much worse than another; since
it keeps within the Species, and shines true upon the Touchstone?"

In answer to this Expostulation; I shall only say, That though the Metal is
the same, yet the Figure, the Quantity, and the Fineness, is often different,
which makes a Difference in the Value. To proceed.

Those anciently possessed of Honor, are apt to envy others newly raised. The
reason is, This later Promotion takes away the former Difference between the
Persons. The Singularity of a Man's Greatness is in some measure destroyed. He
has fewer to look down upon than he had before: He has lost an Inferior;
which, without being well considered, will make him uneasy, like a Prince who
has part of his Dominions won from him. But this Practice how common soever is
unreasonable, where the later Rise is creditable. For all Quality that is good
for any thing, is originally founded upon Merit. Now when a Man purchases
Honor at as great an Expense of Deserving as my self; why should not his Title
be as good? And if so, why should I grudge him the Possession? To value Worth
in my self, or my Family, and overlook it in another, is plain Partiality; and
Partiality is always Injustice.

When Two start into the World together, he that is thrown behind, unless his
Mind proves generous, will be displeased with the other. For the Success of the
first, seems to press upon the Reputation of the later. For what will the World
say? Why could not he hold up? What made him come on so heavily, but that he
wanted either Management or Metal? With submission, this Inference is not good,
and therefore one should not grow Peevish about it. Success does not always
attend Desert. Sometimes Favor, and Opportunity, and Fortune, run most on one
Side. Sometimes a Man cracks his Conscience as a Horse does his Wind, by
straining up the Hill.

But if the Advantage was fairly gained, it is unbecoming to complain. If my
Friend charges in the Post of Honor, while I am sleeping in my Tent, it is
great Injustice to envy him the Reward of his Bravery. In all likelihood I
brought all my Limbs out of the Bed, which it is probable he has not done off
the Breach. And if he has, his Merit should not be lessened by his good
Fortune. He that hazards his Life upon an honorable Score, deserves the same
Regard as if he had lost it.

Envy among Persons of the same Trade, is common. The Competition of Interest
occasions this Malevolence. They Glean up Custom from their Neighbors; and so
what one gets, the other loses.

But why should I grudge a Man the common Advantage of his Employment? Why
should I desire more than my Share of Business, and be sorry to see another
thrive by his Industry? Here can be nothing but Covetousness at the bottom, and
that is never to be satisfied. However, it must be granted that all
Concurrences of this Nature, whether for Money, Favor, or Power, are in danger
of being displeased with a fortunate Rival. The Pinch lies here; The Matter in
competition is often Indivisible. An Office, or a Mistress, cannot be
Apportion'd out like Common, and shared among distinct Proprietors. The Case is
like a Lottery with one Prize, a single Ticket is only enriched, and the rest
are all Blanks. So that they will tell you, it is not so much ill Nature as
Disappointment, which Sowres the Humor. Where the Objects of Desire are more
Communicative, there is no Exceptions taken. People don't like a Prospect the
worse, because others have the Pleasure of it. They are seldom disturbed,
because their Neighbors hear the same Music, or smell the same Perfumes with
themselves. For here is enough for them all. The Satisfaction is so noble, that
it spreads without Lessening; it is not the thinner for being Beaten: But if
there was any interfering, if the Senses should engross, or balk one another,
as in the Case of Eating and Drinking, you would quickly see the Tables turned.
If a fine Object should tarnish by having a great many See it; or the Music
should run mostly into one Man's Ears, these Satisfactions would be made
Enclosure as well as the rest. Farther.

Those Advantages, which it is no Discredit to want, are not usually envied in
another. For Instance: He that does not pretend to Painting, is not Touched at
the Commendation of a Master in that Profession. A Woman does not envy a Man
for fighting Courage; nor a Man a Woman for her Beauty. An old Man is not
uneasy at the Strength and Activity of those who are younger; neither does
Youth envy the Knowledge and Experience of Age. In these Cases, Reputation is
unconcerned, and the Esteem of the Person is not sunk by being unfurnished. For
either the Advantage is foreign to the Condition of Life, or Sex; either we
have been possessed already, or have time enough to gain it afterward. The
Absurdity of this Passion has partly been discovered already, and may be
farther enlarged.

Envy is an ill-natured Vice; it is made up of Meaness and Malice* It wishes the
Force of Goodness restrained, and the Measure of Happiness abated. It laments
over Prosperity, and sickens at the Sight of Health. Had Envy the governing of
the Creation, we should have a sad World on it. How would it infect the Air, and
darken the Sun; make the Seas unnavigable, and blast the Fruits of the Earth?
How would the Face of Nature be over-cast? How soon would Peace be banished,
and Pleasure languish and expire? We should see Confusion without Settlement,
Madness without Intervals, and Poison without Antidote. Discord, and
Disappointment, and Despair, would then be the only Blessings and
Entertainments of Life. Could the Envious prevail, all noble Undertakings would
be crushed, and Invention nip'd in the Bud. Nothing extraordinary in Industry,
Sense, or Bravery, would be endured. Whatever was Shining would soon be
eclipsed. Beauty would be deformed, and Courage turned into Cowardice. To excel
either in Art or Nature would be a Crime: And none could be Safe, but the Ill,
and the Useless.

Emulation is a handsome Passion, it is enterprizing, but just withal: It keeps
a Man within the Terms of Honor, and makes the Contest for Glory fair and
generous. Here is nothing Malevolent and Insidious. The Advantage is gained by
Improvement, not by Injury. The Man strives to excel, but then it is by raising
himself, not by depressing another. But Envy oftentimes wants Spirit, as well
as Goodnature. Like a cold Poison, it benumns and stupifies. And thus as it
were conscious of its own Impotence, it folds its Arms in Despair, and sits
Cursing in a Corner. When Envy conquers, it is commonly in the Dark; by
Treachery and Undermining, by Calumny and Detraction. The Envious are always
ungrateful; they hate a noble Temper, though shown upon themselves. If you
oblige them, it is at your peril: They Will fly in the Face of a good Turn, and
Outrage where they ought to Reward. Has not many a brave Man been ruined, by
being overcharged with Merit? What banished Themistocles, and sent Belisarius
a begging, but doing too much for their Country? The comfort is, Envy is no
less foolish than detestable; it is a Vice which they say keeps no Holy Days,
but is always in the Wheel, and working upon its own Disquiet. Envy, strictly
considered, is a Mark of Inferiority. It supposes some Excellency in another
which is wanting in it self. This is a cruel Mortification; for the Envious are
generally Proud. It Is a strong Desire to be Above, which makes People uneasy
Beneath. Now to see a hated Person superior, and to lie under the anguish of a
Disadvantage, is far enough from Diversion. Envy is of all others the most
ungratifying and disconsolate Passion. There is Power for Ambition, and
Pleasure for Luxury, and Pelf even for Covetousness; but Envy can give nothing
but Vexation. It Is made up of Impotence and Malice; and where these two
Qualities are well compounded, there needs no other Ingredients of Misery. Envy
how carefully does it look? How meager and ill-complexioned? It preys upon it
self, and exhausts the Spirits: It Is a Disease in its Constitution, and every
Pulse is a Pain. Ease must be impracticable to the Envious: They lie under a
double Misfortune; common Calamities, and common Blessings, fall heavily upon
them: Their Nature gives them a Share in the one, and their Ill Nature in the
other. And he that has his own Troubles, and the Happiness of his Neighbors,
to disturb him, is likely to have work enough. Envy looks ill under every
Aspect. For if a Man be Good, he ought to be Loved; if Bad, to be Pitied. To
envy a Superior, makes the Odds more smarting, and the Distance more sensible.
To envy an Inferior, is to lose the higher Ground, and to set him upon a Level.
To grudge any Man an Advantage in Person or Fortune, is to censure the
Liberalities of Providence, and be angry at the Goodness of God.

And since Envy is so odious, and every way unlucky; and does so much mischief
to it self, and others, it may not be improper proper to offer something more
particular to prevent it.

First then let us consider, That Providence has given the least of us more
than we can pretend to. If we could make out a Title to more Privilege, to
complain were not unreasonable. But I suppose no one is so hardy as to say, God
is in his Debt; that he owed him a nobler Being, or a better Subsistence. For
Existence must be antecedent to Merit. That which was not, could not oblige;
and Nothing can claim Nothing. You Will say such a one is much better furnished
than my self. Besides, I want several Conveniences which I could mention. And
if I must not have them, I wish they had not come in my way. Look you! Are we
to cry, like ill-managed Children, for every Thing before us? If I give a
Beggar Sixpence, has he reason to grumble beause he has seen a Shilling, or
knows how to spend a Crown? Let him give me leave to be Master of my Charity,
and do what I please with my own. If bare Knowledge would give Possession, and
our Senses could Challenge all they lay hold of; there would be a strange World
quickly. But these are wild and impracticable Suppositions. There is neither
Justice, nor Convenience, nor Possibility, in such an Expectation. Let us
remember we are well dealt with; and then we shall not be troubled to see
another in a better Condition. To consider we have more than we deserve, will
help our Reason to silence our Murmuring, and make us ashamed to Repine. Just
Thoughts, and modest Expectations, are easily satisfied. If we don't over-rate
our Pretensions, all will be well. Humility disarms Envy, and strikes it dead.

Secondly, We should endeavor to improve our respective Abilities. Men
naturally desire to stand fair in the Opinion of others: And to have something
of Value to support them in their own Thoughts. When they are the worst of
their Way, and fixed in the Fag-end of Business, they are apt to look not kindly
upon those who go before them. He that can be reconciled to the Character of an
insignificant Person, has a mean Soul. To be easy, a Man should examine his
Genius, and exert his Spirits, and try to make the most of himself. It Is true,
every one cannot expect to distinguish himself in the highest Posts; To command
an Army, or ride Admiral in a Fleet, or be at the Head of Justice, or Religion:
(Neither is it material to the Point.) Notwithstanding there are few but may
Shine in their own Orb, and be Remarkable in their Station; so far at least as
to guard off Contempt, and secure a moderate Repute: And those that are easy at
Home, will not be envious Abroad. Those that are Good for something themselves,
will be contented that others should be so too. All Things considered, They
have their Share of Regard, and let who will take the rest.

Thirdly, The proportioning Reward to Merit, (which will be done Hereafter) is
a sufficient Expectation to remove Envy. The Persuasion of such a Regulation of
Honor, is certainly the most solid Principle for this purpose imaginable. For
this way all the seeming Partialities of Birth, and Fortune, are set aside. And
to speak familiarly, every one has a fair Turn to be as Great as he pleases.
Here all People are upon equal Terms of Advantage: The Temple of Honor stands
open to all Comers; and the Peasant has an Opportunity of being as great as a
Prince. Thus Station and Happiness lies in every ones Power: The Management of
the Will determines the Precedence. A slender Share of present Advantage, will
do no prejudice to future Pretensions. For Men will not be valued by the Size
of their Understandings, but their Honesty. Not considered by the Height of
their Character, but for the Decency of Personation. When the Scene of Life is
shut up, the Slave will be above his Master, if he has acted better. Thus
Nature and Condition, are once more brought to a Balance: And as all Men were
Equal at first, so they may be at last; if they take Care. This Consideration
digs up Envy by the Roots; because no Man can be less than another, without his
own Fault. The way

To prevent being Envied, (for that should be thought on too,) in a Privilege,
is to show it not undeserved. That it is either transmitted from worthy
Ancestors, or acquired by Qualities extraordinary. He that rises above a common
Performance, and goes far in an honorable Danger, may be thought to Earn the
Distinction of his Circumstances. In such Cases, People are more inclined to
commend the Merit, than repine at the Success: Especially if the Advantage be
civilly managed. Conceit, and Arrogance, and Ostentation, spoils all. Pride,
and ill Nature, will be hated in Spite of all the worth in the World. But he
that is obliging in his Exaltation, and makes a modest Use of his Superiority,
may sit secure, and have the Odds of good Wishes on his Side.

OF THE ASPECT.
THE Countenance seems designed not only for Ornament, but Information. The
Passions there displayed make way for Commerce and Communication; and help to
let one Man into the Sentiments and Affections of another. It Is true, the Soul
is not altogether Discovered. If the Thoughts lay open to Observation, there
would great Inconveniences follow. Many good Designs would be defeated: Many
improper Aversions and Desires would appear: The Business of Life would be
disturbed, and Conversation made almost impracticable. In such Cases, People
would choose to converse in the dark, rather than trust themselves with the
Sight of each other. However, though the Soul cannot be all forced into the
Face, yet there is no small part of it to be seen there; especially when it
comes of its own accord. Here the different Apprehensions of the Mind discover
themselves. I grant, they are not always fully distinguished in their Causes,
and their Kind. But though they are not drawn at Length, you have something of
the Color, and Proportion. Here Joy and Grief, Resolution and Fear, Modesty
and Conceit, Inclination, Indifferency and Disgust, are made legible. The
Character is fairest and best marked in Children, and those who are unpractised
in the little Hypocrisies of Conversation. For when Nature has learnt to put on
Art, and Disguise, the Forehead is not easily read. Now it is very Surprising to
see the Image of the Mind stamped upon the Aspect: To see the Cheeks take the
Dye of the Passions thus naturally, and appear in all the Colors and
Complexions of Thought. Why is this Variety of Changes confined to a single
Place? What is the Reason a Man's Arm will not Smile and Frown, and do all the
intellectual Postures of the Countenance? The Arm seems to have a finer Skin
than the Face: It Is less exposed to the Weather; the Veins are larger, and more
visible, and the Pulse beats stronger. In short, If Matter and Motion would do
the Business, the Arm, excepting the Eye, seems to have the Advantage, and
might put in for the Index and Interpreter of the Mind. And yet we see it is
strangely uniform and unaffected upon every Accident and turn of Thought; and
nothing but a Blow, or a Pinch, can make it change Color. But the Face being
designed to be unclothed, and in view, God has there fixed the Seat and
Visibility of the Passions; for the better direction of Conversation. The
sudden Alteration of the Countenance, is very remarkable. A forcible Object
will rub out the freshest Colors at a stroke, and paint others of a quite
different Appearance. A vigorous Thought, or a Surprise of good Fortune,
dispels the Gloom, and brightens the Air, immediately. To metamorphose the
Blood and Spirits thus extempore, is not a little Strange. It argues an amazing
Fineness and Curiosity in the Parts; that the least Touch of the Imagination
can alter them into almost what Appearances it pleases. The Strength of the
Representation, is another Circumstance worth considering. The inward Motions
and Temper, are sometimes drawn with wonderful Life. The Advantages of Youth
and Complexion, the particular Force of the Mind and Occasion, answer to the
Fineness of the Colors, and the Skill of the Painter. When all these Causes
meet, the Passions are marked with extraordinary Clearness, and Strength. What
can be more significant than the sudden Flushing and Confusion of a Blush;
than the Sparklings of Rage, and the Lightning of a Smile? The Soul is as it
were Visible upon these Occasions; the Passions Ebb and Flow in the Cheeks; and
are much better distinguished in their Progress, than the Change of the Air in
a Weather-glass. Some People have an Air of Dignity and Greatness, and an
unusual Vigor, in their Aspect. Others have a Sweetness and good Humor
printed upon them, which is very engaging: A Face well furnished out by Nature,
and a little disciplined, has a great deal of Rhetoric in it. A Graceful
Presence bespeaks Acceptance, gives a Force to Language, and helps to Convince
by Look; and Posture. But this Talent must be sparingly used, for fear of
falling into Affectation; than which nothing is more nauseous. Of all the
Appearances, methinks a Smile is the most extraordinary. It plays with a
surprising Agreableness in the Eye; breaks out with the brightest Distinction,
and sits like a Glory upon the Countenance. What Sun is there within us that
shoots his Rays with so sudden a Vigor? To see the Soul flash in the Face at
this rate, one would think might convert an Atheist. By the way, we may observe
that Smiles are much more becoming than Frowns: This seems a natural
Encouragement to good Humor. As much as to say, If People have a Mind to be
Handsome, they must not be Peevish, and Untoward.

Another Thing remarkable, is the Obsequiousness of the Aspect. It goes as true
to the Mind, when we please, as the Dial to the Sun. The Orders are published
as soon as given. It Is but throwing the Will into the Face, and the inward
Direction appears immediately. It Is true, a Man cannot command the standing
Features and Complexion; but the Diversities of Passion are under Disposal. The
Image of Pleasure is never seen, when Anger was intended. No. The Sentiments
are painted exactly, and drawn by the Life within.

And since it is in our Power not to give a wrong Sign, we should not pervert
the Intendments of Providence. To wash over a coarse or insignificant Meaning,
is to counterfeit Natures Coin. We ought to be just in our Looks, as well as in
our Actions; for the Mind may be declared one way no less than the other. A Man
might as good break his Word, as his Face, especially upon some critical
Occasions. It may so happen that we can converse no other way, for want of an
Interpreter. But though I cannot tell what a Man says, if he will be sincere, I
may easily know what he Looks. The Meaning of Sounds are uncertain, and tied to
particular Times and Places: But the Language of the Face is fixed, and
universal. Its Consents and Refusals, are every where alike. A Smile has the
same Form and Sense in China, as with us. If Looks were as arbitrary as Words,
Conversation would be more in the dark: And a Traveller would be obliged to
learn the Countenances, as well as the Tongues of Foreign Countries.

And as the Language of the Face is universal, so it is very comprehensive. No
Laconism can reach it. It Is the Shorthand of the Mind, and crowds a great deal
in a little room. A Man may Look a Sentence, as soon as Speak a Word. The
Strokes are small, but so Masterly drawn, that you may easily collect the Image
and Proportions of what they resemble.

Whether Honesty and Dishonesty are discernable in the Face, is a Question
which admits of Dispute. King Charles the Second thought he could depend upon
these Observations. But with submission, I believe an Instance might be given
in which his Rules of Physiognomy failed. It Is true, the Temper and inward
Disposition is sometimes visible in the Countenance. Thus Salust tells us,
Cataline had Rage and Defiance in his Looks, even after he was dead. However,
here the Impression was partly designed, and voluntary. He had a Mind no
question to appear as Fierce and Formidable as he could. But in Insincerity the
Case is otherwise; for no Man is willing to be known for a Knave. Whether Men,
as they say of Plants, have Signatures to discover their Natures by, is hard to
determine. Some People fancy an honest Man looks plain, and open, and all of a
Piece. And therefore when they see a shy and compounded Air, a remote and
absconding kind of Countenance, they conclude it Cain's Mark. This, in their
Opinion, is either a Caution given us by Providence, or the natural Effect of a
crafty and suspicious Mind. A Knave, say they, is apprehensive of being
Discovered; and this habitual Concern puts an Odness into his Looks. But

After all, no Man's Face is Actionable. These Singularities are interpretable,
from more innocent Causes. And therefore though there may be ground for
Caution, there is none for Censure.

AGAINST DESPAIR.
THE trouble of Despair always rises in proportion to the Evil that is feared.
By consequence, the greatest Agonies of Expectation, are those which relate to
another World. But I shall leave this Consideration to the Pulpits, and proceed
upon a lower Object. Now Despair, as it respects the Business and Events of
Life, is an uneasy and impolitick Passion: It Antedates a Misfortune, and
Torments a Man before his Time. It spreads a Gloominess upon the Soul, and
makes her live in a Dungeon beyond the Notion of Pre-existence. It preys upon
the Vitals, like Prometheus's Vultur; and eats out the Heart of all other
Satisfactions. It cramps the Powers of Nature, and cuts the Sinews of
Enterprise, and gives Being to many cross Accidents, which otherwise would
never happen. To believe a Business impossible, is the way to make it so. How
many feasible Projects have miscarried by Despondency, and been strangled in
the Birth, by a cowardly Imagination? If Things will not do of themselves, they
may let it alone; for he that Despairs is resolved not to help them: For who
would work upon an Impossibility? Such an Expectation, cries one, will never
come to pass: Therefore I Will even give it up, and go and fret my self. How do
you know that? Can you see to the utmost Limits of Nature? And are you
acquainted with all the Powers in Being? Is it an easy Matter to pronounce upon
all the Alterations of Time, and Accident? And to foretell how strangely the
Balance of Force and Inclination may be turned? Pray let us see whether 'twill
or no, before we grow too positive, and give Sentence against our Interest. A
very pretty Device you will say! For at this rate, a Man must never Despair while
he lives! And pray where is the Harm on it, if it should be so? Is Despair so
entertaining a Companion? Are the Pleasures of it so inviting, and rapturous?
Is a Man bound to look out sharp to plague himself? And to take care that he
slips no Opportunity of Being unhappy? As long as there is Life, there is Hope:
And if so, it is Prudence not to desert it. Hope is a vigorous Principle. It Is
furnished with Light and Heat, to Advise and Execute: It sets the Head and the
Heart on work, and animates a Man to do his utmost. And thus by perpetual
Pushing, and Assurance, it puts a difficulty out of Countenance, and makes a
seeming Impossibility give way. At the worst, if the Success happens to fail;
it is clear Gains, as long as it lasts. It keeps the Mind easy, and expecting;
and fences off Anxiety and Spleen. It Is sometimes so Sprightly and Rewarding a
Quality, that the Pleasure of Expectation exceeds that of Fruition. It Refines
upon the Richness of Nature, and Paints beyond the Life: And when the Reality
is thus out-shined by the Imagination, Success is a kind of Disappointment; and
to Hope, is better than to Have. Besides, Hope has a creditable Complexion. It
throws a generous Contempt upon ill Usage, and looks like a handsome Defiance of
a Misfortune. As who should say, You are somewhat troublesome now, but I shall
conquer you afterward. And thus a Man makes an honorable Exit, if he does
nothing farther. His Heart Beats against the Enemy when he is just Expiring,
and Discharges the last Pulse in the Face of Death.

But Despair makes a despicable Figure, and descends from a mean Original. It Is
the Offspring of Fear, of Laziness, and Impatience. It argues a defect of
Spirits, and Resolution; and oftentimes of Honesty too. After all, the Exercise
of this Passion is so troublesome, that methinks nothing but Dint of Evidence,
and Demonstration, should force it upon us. I would not despair unless I knew
the irrevocable Decree was past. Unless I saw my Misfortune Recorded in the
Book of Fate, and Signed and Sealed by Necessity. Indeed where the Act is
unmanly, or the Expectation immoral, or contradictious to the Attributes of
God; we ought to drop our Hopes or rather never entertain them. And therefore I
would neither Hope to play the Fool, or the Knave, or be Immortal. But when the
Object is defensible and fair, I would not quit my Hold, as long as it was
within the Reach of Omnipotence. What then, must we Hope without Means? Yes;
why not? When we cannot work them out of our own Industry. Pray what Means was
there to make the World with? There was neither Timber nor Tools to raise the
Building, and yet you see what a noble Pile it is. Why should we suppose a
Miracle so strange a Thing, since Nature herself was produced this way? He that
made Second Causes, can as easily work without, as with them.

-- Quicquid Dii voluere peractum est. To Will, and to Do, is the same Thing
with an Almighty Power. If we could Cure a Fever with a Wish, Decree up a
House, and make what we would, consequent upon Inclination: In such a Case, we
need not tie our selves to Application, and Materials. The bare Fiat of our
Will would give Birth to the Idea: And make it start out into Existence without
any more ado.

To use the Ministrations of subordinate Causes, looks like a Going about. For
where there is Matter and Motion, there must, in humane Apprehension, be
Succession of Parts, and Resistance, and Time, for the Performance. The Powers
of Nature seem too Heavy, to keep Pace with Thought, and to drive out an
Instantaneous Production: So that one would almost imagine, the Acting by
immediate Omnipotence, was the most disencumber'd, as well as the most
magnificent Method. But is it not extravagant to expect a Miracle? Not at all.
I believe we are assisted with many more Miracles than we are aware of. For the
purpose: A Man in a Storm prays that he may escape being Wreckt. I desire to
know, whether he thinks it possible for him to be the better for his Devotions.
If he does not, he is an impertinent Atheist for using them: If he does, he
must believe that Providence will interpose, and disarm Nature, or divert her
Violence. Now to check Second Causes in their Career, to change their Motion,
or lay them Asleep before they are Spent, is no less a Miracle than to Act
without them.

Let no Man therefore disquiet himself about the Future, nor quit a just
Undertaking, out of Despondency. Honest People ought to be cheerful, if it was
only for the Credit of their Virtue: Let us not grow Melancholic upon a
superficial View of Things; for that is as far as we can discover. It Is a much
better way to do our own Parts carefully, and rest the Event with God Almighty.

OF COVETOUSNESS. BETWEEN Demeas and Mitias.
Them. I Thought I should have Dined with you to Day; what made you fail your
usual Eating-house?


Mit. I ask your Excuse. I have been at a Miser's Feast: I went thither to
entertain my Curiosity rather than my Palate; for you know that is a Sight which
is not every day to be met with?


Them. And was it as great as the Proverb makes it?


Mit. Every jot. I have not had my Senses so regaled this long time: 'T was so
inviting, that I Am afraid the Founder has taken a Surfeit.


Them. You mean of the Expense. Fear it not, he will have a Lent after his
Carnival; that will cure him.


Mit. This Fit of Feasting comes upon him once a Year. If you did not know him,
you would think it was an Ague; he looks so desperately Pale, and Thin, for a great
while after. And now, as you say, he will go into a Course of Abstinence, but I
wish we could prevent the return of the Distemper; for in my Opinion, he is
well neither Full, nor Fasting. In short, The Disease lies in his Mind, and how
to reach it with a Recipe, I cannot tell; for Covetousness is generally
incurable.


Them. I own it is difficulty removed, and uncreditable into the bargain; and
therefore I hope you will not Report it upon any Person, unless the Symptoms
are very clear, and undisputed. Give me Leave to tell you, there are often
great Mistakes in this Matter. Some think to screen their own Profuseness from
Censure, by reproaching the Frugality of their Neighbors. And others pronounce
rashly out of Ignorance. With their good Favor, wise Men will look beyond
their Nose, and take care of the main Chance, and provide for Accidents and
Age. They know that Poverty is unfashionable, and Dependence uneasy, and that a
generous Mind cannot live upon Curtesy, with any great Relish. Besides some
People do not decline Expense out of Parsimony, but because they do not care
for the Trouble of a Figure. They do not care to be crowded with Visitors, to
have their Table pestered with Flies and Flatterers, and to be always yoked in
Ceremony. They don't believe any Master the more considerable by keeping a
great many idle People about him; or that any true Greatness can be made out of
that which is Little. And because a Man is willing to have his House and his
Head cool, and to keep his Time and his Liberty to himself, must he be called
Covetous upon this Account?


Mit. I have no Intention to condemn a just Value for Money. And if any Man has
more Sense and Sobriety than his Neighbors, I think it great Injustice to
burlesque his Prudence, or represent him in any Character of Disadvantage. But
then I must say, That some People have the Misfortune to fall into the
Extremes, and that Covetousness does not lie only in Satyr, and Speculation.


Them. I perceive you have a Mind to say something upon this Argument: With the
Precautions abovementioned, I am willing to hear you. Take your Method, and
draw out into what Length you please; you will have no Interruption, for at
present I am not in the disputing Humor.


Mit. To begin then. There is no need of giving a close Definition of this
Vice; 'twill be sufficiently discovered in the Description. Covetousness has a
relation to Wealth, or Fortune. Whether a Man has no more than a just Value for
this Advantage, is seen in his Getting, Keeping, and Using it. A short Survey
of the Mismanagement in these three Particulars, will take in the Compass of
the Case.

But least you may think this Method somewhat too loose, I shall come a little
nearer in a Word or two; and affirm, That he is Covetous who balks any part of
his Duty, for fear he should grow the Poorer; and chooses rather to save his
Money, than his Conscience. He that denies himself the Conveniences of Life,
without either Necessity or Religion. He that is anxious in Riches. He that
sets his Interest above his Honor; and values insignificant Gains, which hold
no Proportion with his Fortune,

As for the Getting part, a covetous Man never troubles himself with the
Niceties of Morality. His Business is to secure the End, not to distinguish
upon the Means. Let the Project be but Rich and Practicable, and he enquires no
farther. Honor and Conscience are fine Things, but they seldom fill the
Pocket. When They will Purchase any Thing, a good Manager can counterfeit them;
but to be tied down to a Set of Notions, is the way to be a Beggar. He that
resolves to Thrive, will not be discouraged by a few hard Names. His Industry is
not to be checked by Fancys, and common Mistake. He will scarcely believe
himself, when it makes against him. Inward Reluctance, passes for Spleen, and
Vapors; Shame, for an infirm Vanity that hangs too servilely upon foreign
Opinion; Generosity, is nothing but a ceremonious Prodigality; and Pity, a
foolish Tenderness. These Maxims remove the Difficulties of Business, and open
the way for Expedition and Success.

Reason and Religion it is likely will interpose sometimes, but the covetous Man
goes on for all that. And though he cannot command his Principles, he is Master
of his Practice. Sometimes a Man gets only to spend: In that case, Covetousness
is but a ministerial Vice; and serves under Luxury, or Ambition. But here I
shall consider it as having the Ascendant. Now to recount the Disorders of
Life, the Knavery, and little Practices that flow in upon us from this Spring,
were almost infinite. Whence comes all circumvention in Commerce, adulterating
of Wares, vouching and varnishing against all good Faith, and Honesty? It Is
Covetousness that Brews and Dashes; gives you false Lights, and false Language;
and shows many other Dexterities to get your Money. Now what can be Meaner,
than to make Overreaching a part of a Profession? And to impose upon the
Ignorance, or Necessity, of a Neighbor? Let an Apprentice be bound to a Miser,
and he might as good be Becalmed, or Besieged; for he is sure to be put to
short Allowance. One would think Hunger was put in his Indentures, he is so
constantly held to it. His Master will not let him grow to his Joints, nor Set
up, with all the Flesh and Bones which Nature designed him; but is resolved to
put part of his Limbs in his Pocket. What is the reason of racking of Tenants,
and rigorous Seizures, that the Rich oppress the Poor, and the Poor steal from
the Rich, but because they are not contented with their own?

Whence come Soldiers of Fortune, and Lawyers of Fortune; Men that will Fight
and be Fee'd of any Side, and sometimes of Both? What makes the Courtier
supplant his Friend, and betray his Master, and sell his Country? Why it is
oftentimes nothing but the Love of Money, which makes the Court, and the Camp,
and the Bar, thus Mean, and Mercenary. How many Trusts are abused, Wills
forged, Orphans and Widows robbed and ruined, upon this Score? Where Avarice
rules and rages, there is nothing of Humanity remaining. Hence it is that those
who recover from the Plague dye sometimes of the Nurse; that the Shipwreckt are
dispatched on Shore, that they may not claim their Goods; that Travelers are
murdered in the Houses of Protection and Entertainment. Things so bloody and
barbarous, that the Guilty are sometimes as it were discovered by Miracle,
prosecuted by Apparitions, and pursued by Hue and Cries from the other World.

To leave these Extremities of Wickedness, and proceed to Instances of a lower
Nature. What can be more ridiculously Little, than to see People of Figure, and
Fortune, weigh an Interest to the utmost Grain? Haggle away Time and Credit
about Trifles, and part with a Friend to keep a Shilling?

It Is not Unentertaining to see Men how they can make their State truckle to
their P^rsimony. How they will draw in their Figure upon the Road, sink their
Titles to save their Purse, and degrade themselves to lie cheaper at an Inn.
Covetousness is a most obliging Leveller; it mingles the Great and Small with
wonderful Condescension; and makes L -- ds, and Valets, company for one
another. But these are but petty Indecencies. Covetousness will sink much
lower, if there be but any Oar at the Bottom. It will solicit in the meanest
Office, and submit to any infamous Disguise. It turns Lions into Jack-calls;
engages Honor in the most scandalous Intrigues, and makes it under-pull to
Cheats and Sharpers.

And as the Drudgery of this Vice is mean, so it is constant too. It keeps a Man
always in the Wheel, and makes him a Slave for his Lifetime. His Head or his
Hands are perpetually employed: When one Project is finished, his Inclinations
roll to another; so that his Rest is only variety of Labor. This evil Spirit,
throws him into the Fire, and into the Water; into all Sort of Hazards, and
Hardships: And when he has reached the Tombs, he sits Naked, and out of his
right Mind. Neither the Decays of Age, nor the Approach of Death, can bring him
to his Senses, nor show him the Extravagance of his Passion; on the contrary,
his Folly commonly increases with his Years. Wolves, and other Beasts of prey,
when they have once sped, can give over and be quiet till the return of
Appetite. But Covetousness never lies down; but is ever Hungry, and Hunting.
It Is perpetually harrassing others, or it self, without Respit, or
Intermission. The Miser enlarges his Desires as Hell; he is a Gulf without a
Bottom; all the Success in the World will never fill him. Sometimes the
Eagerness of his Appetite makes him snap at a Shadow, and drop the Substance.
Thus Crassus lost himself, his Equipage, and his Army, by over-straining for
the Parthian Gold. Thus the Marshall Balagny was outed of the Sovereignty of
Cambray, by the Covetousness of his Lady, who sold the Spaniards the Stores
which should have maintained the Garrison. And thus the Bait of a cheap Bargain,
or a large Interest, often helps a Man to stolen Goods, and cracked Titles. And
if he has better Luck than he deserves, the possibility of a Miscarriage keeps
him uneasy. The Miser is seldom without Pain: The Shortness of humane
Foresight, and the Uncertainty of Accidents, and the Knavery of Men, haunt his
Imagination with all the Possibilities of danger. He starts at every new
Appearance, and is always waking and solicitous for fear of a Surprise. Like a
Night Sentinel, the least Noise alarms him, and makes him apprehensive of the
Enemy. And let a Man's Fright be never so visionary in the Cause, the Trouble
will be real in the Effect. But sometimes the Anxiety does not lie altogether
in a Romance, but comes out of Life and Business. And then you may be sure his
Fears will increase with his Danger. The Loss of a Battle, or the Revolution of
a Kingdom, don't affect him half so much, as the News of a Goldsmith's, or
Money Scrivener's, going aside. Here, though the Misfortune is remote, he is
not insensible. Indeed it is the only Sympathy he seems capable of. But then the
Agonies he lies under, when he comes to be Touched in his own Case! When a Bond
or a Mortgage fails, there is nothing can support his Spirits, or keep him
within the Compass of Decency. How passionately does he lament over the
Parchment Carcass, when the Soul of the Security is Departed? His Humor and
his Face is put into Mourning, and so would the rest of his Person were it not
for the Charge. However, a covetous Man is not easily baffled: He has a great
many Tools to work with. If Deceit makes for his purpose, he will use it to the
best of his Skill. If Cruelty will save a Penny, he will not stick to flay a
poor Debtor for the Price of his Skin. No Turn either in State or Religion can
Hurt him: He receives any Impression; and runs into any Mould the Times will
cast him. He is a Christian at Rome, a Heathen at Iapan, and a Turk at
Constantinople. What you will Without, and nothing Within. It Is a Jest in a
Miser to pretend to be Honest. To resolve against Poverty, is in effect to
forswear Justice and Truth. The Knavery of such People, is as indisputable as
an Axiom; and ought to be supposed as a Postulatum in Business. They are false
by necessity of Principle, and want nothing but an Occasion to show it.
Conscience and Covetousness are never to be reconciled: Like Fire and Water,
they always destroy each other, according to the Predominancy of the Element.

Now one would think he that takes such Pains for a Fortune, and purchases so
dear, should know how to use it. One would think the covetous Man had refined
upon the Satisfactions of Life; and discovered some unheard of Mysteries of
Epicurism. One would imagine his Appetites were more keen and lasting; his
Capacities enlarged; and that he could please himself faster, and farther, than
his Neighbors. For why should we put our selves to an uncommon Trouble, for a
common Advantage? But how can this be? How can Anxiety and Ease stand together?
Strong Pleasures and strong Fears are incompatible. A constant dread of Death,
makes Life insipid. And he that is always afraid of Losing, has little Leisure
to enjoy. Besides, a continual load of Cares depresses the Vigor of the Mind,
and dulls the Inclination, and clouds the Cheerfulness of the Spirits. Like a
Labourer worked down, he is too much tired for Entertainment.

But alas! were he never so much disposed, he has not the Courage to recreate
his Senses, and reward his Industry. No. He has more respect for his Wealth,
than to take those Freedoms. He salutes it at an humble Distance, and dares not
be too familiar with an Object of Worship. His Gold might as good have stayed
at Peru, as come into his Custody; for he gains nothing by Possession,
excepting the Trouble of looking after it. It Is true, he can command the Sight
on it this way; but if seeing an Estate would make one Rich, there is few but the
Blind would be Poor. He calls it his own too; but with great Impropriety of
Language. My own? What is my own? Why it is something that I eat, or drink, or
put on. Something which makes my Body, or my Mind, the better. Something with
which I serve my Friend, or my Country, or relieve the Poor. Property without
Application to advantage, is mere Cant, and Notion. The best Metals will rust,
by lying under Ground, and lose their Color, unless brightned by Use. But
where Covetousness governs, the Appetite is tied up, and Nature is put under
Penance. Like a Malefactor, a Man has just enough to keep him alive in Pain;
enough to Suffer with, but not to Please. The Covetous guards against himself,
as well as against Thieves loves to step short of Necessity, and hates
Convenience no less than a wise Man does Excess. And he that dares not Enjoy,
wants that which he has, as well as that which he has not. The increase of his
Fortune, is but an addition to his Trouble. The more he has, the more he has to
take Care for; and an Ass is as much enriched by his Burden, as such a one is
by his Estate. He may, like a Sumpter, carry Things of Value; but he never
Wears them. He is only tired, and galled, with his Furniture. Nothing is more
uneasy when it is on, nor looks more wretchedly when it is off. If a Man lays his
Meat upon his Shoulder instead of putting it in his Stomach, the Quantity may
load him if he will, but never nourish. And as it is easier, it would be more
reputable for the Miser to be poor. The Pretense of Necessity might cover a
narrow Soul. A Coward will pass, when there is little trial for Courage. Wealth
does but serve to expose Covetousness, and make it more ridiculous. For what
can be a more wretched Sight, than to see a Man mortify without Religion? To
submit to such voluntary Hardships to no purpose, and lose the Present, without
providing for the Future. But thus Covetousness revenges the Quarrels of others
upon itself, and makes a sort of Reprizals at Home. The truth is, if the
Covetous did not make their Neighbors some amends, by using themselves thus
ill, they were scarcely to be endured.

But they are generally fair enough to give Satisfaction this way. This Disease
sometimes rises up almost to Lunacy and Distraction: Sometimes it over-casts
them with Gloom and Melancholy; and sometimes breaks out in the Clamours of
Despair and Impatience. They are tortured with raging Fears of Want; and the
greatest Abundance is not able to keep them in tolerable Humor. To eat, or
wear any Thing, till it is past the Best, is Luxury and Profuseness. They must
have their Meat tainted, and their Bread moldy, and their Clothes moth eaten,
before they dare venture on them. It would be great Charity to take them out of
their own unmerciful Hands, and put them under Wardship. But it is likely the
Laws leave them to their Liberty for a Punishment. For as this Vice ought to be
severely corrected, so there is scarce any Discipline sharper than its own. And
if the Rigor should abate at Home, the Censures of the Neighborhood would
help to do Justice. The covetous Man is Homo illaudatus, A Man that you can say
no Good of. He abuses all his Advantages either of Person, or Fortune. His
Inclinations are ungenerous, his Understanding cheats, and his Power oppresses
his Neighbor. He is not Big enough to Love, to Pity, or Assist? Neither Blood,
nor Honor, nor Humanity, can take any hold, where Interest comes in
competition. So far from doing any Good, that he desires none. His Wishes are
often malevolent; for Blasting and Mildew, for Rots and Murrain, for Storms and
Shipwrecks; that he may put off his Stock, and his Stores the better. Upon
these Accounts he generally receives as little Kindness as he does, and finds
as few Friends as he deserves. Every one think themselves authorized to execute
his Credit, to palt and lash him; and make him either the subject of their
Anger, or their Scorn.

To sum up the Evidence. A covetous Man loves to be boring in the Earth, like
an Insect; and lives always in a creeping and inglorious Posture. His
Satisfactions are as Mean as his Figure. He has not the Heart to oblige any
Body, no not himself; and therefore is both hated and despised.


Them. Enough said. I think your Correction is neither Excessive, nor Misplaced.
If those concerned will not mend their Manners, they may even take it for their
Pains.


OF LIBERTY.
BY Liberty, I mean a Latitude of Practice within the compass of Law, and
Religion. It Is a standing clear of inferior Dependances, and private
Jurisdiction. He who is Master of his Time, and can choose his Business and
Diversions; He who can avoid disagreable Company, and be alone when his Humor
or Occasions require it; is as Free as he ought to wish himself. It Is true, as
the World stands, general Liberty is impracticable. If one had nothing but a
Soul to keep, he need not go to Service to maintain it. But a Body at present
is a very indigent sort of a Thing; it cannot subsist upon its own Growth, but
stands in want of continual Supplies. This Circumstance of Eating, and
Drinking, is a cruel Check upon many a Man's Dignities; and makes him hold his
Life by a Servile Tenure. However, he that lies under this Encumbrance should
make his best on it, and not quarrel with the Order of Providence. At the worst,
Death will knock off his Chain shortly: In the mean time his Business is to
play with it. But where the Necessaries of Life may be had at a cheaper Rate,
it is Folly to purchase them this way. He that will sacrifice his Liberty to his
Palate, and convey over his Person for Superfluities, is a Slave of his own
making, and deserves to be used accordingly.

Dependence goes somewhat against the Grain of a generous Mind, and it is no
wonder it should be so, considering the unreasonable Advantage which is often
taken of the Inequality of Fortune. The Pride of Superiors, and the wanton
Exercises of Power, make Servitude much more troublesome than Nature intended.
Some People think the Life of Authority consists in Noise and Imperiousness, in
Menacing and Executions. To let their Servants live easy, is in some measure to
make them their Equals: Therefore they love to be always brandishing their
Advantage, to part with nothing without a Stroke of Discipline; and to qualify
their Favors with Penance, and Mortification. But the being enfranchised from
Arbitrariness and ill Humor, is not the only Convenience of Liberty. This
State affords great Opportunities for the Improvement of Reason. It gives
Leisure for Reading and Contemplation; for an Acquaintance with Men and Things;
and for looking into the History of Time and Nature. He that has the Business
of Life at his own Disposal, and has no Body to account to for his Minutes but
God and himself, may if he pleases be happy without Drudging for it. He needs
not Flatter the Vain, nor be Tired with the Impertinent, nor stand to the
Curtesy of Knavery, and Folly. He needs not Dance after the Caprice of an
Humourist, nor bear a part in the Extravagance of another. He is under no
Anxieties for fear of Displeasing, nor has any Difficulties of Temper to
struggle with. His Fate does not hang upon any Man's Face: A Smile will not
transport him, nor a Frown ruin him: For his Fortune is better fixed, than to
flote upon the Pleasure of the Nice and Changeable. This Independance gives
Easiness to the Mind, and Vigor for Enterprise, and Imagination. A Man has
nothing to strike a Damp upon his Genius, to over-aw his Thoughts, and check
the Range of his Fancy. But he that is embarrassed in his Liberty, is apt to be
unassured in his Actions; palled and dispirited in his Humor and Conceptions;
so that one may almost read his Condition in his Conversation. It Is true, a
peculiar Greatness of Nature, or the Expectations of Religion, may relieve him;
but then every one is not furnished with these Advantages. The Reason why
Parmenio could not rise up to Alexander's Height of Thinking, was possibly
because he was under his Command. Longinus observes, That there were no
considerable Orators in Greece, after their Government was altered by the
Macedonians and Romans. According to him, their Elocution and their Freedom
seemed to languish and expire together. When they were once enslaved, the Muses
would keep them Company no longer. The Vein of Rhetoric was seared up, the
Force of Demosthenes spent, and no Sublime to be had for Love, nor Money.

Now though Freedom within a Rule is very desirable; yet there is scarcely any
one Thing has done more Mischief than this Word misunderstood. Absolute Liberty
is a Jest; it is a Visionary and Romantic Privilege, and utterly inconsistent
with the present state of the World. The Generality of Mankind must have more
Understanding, and more Honesty too, than they are likely to have as long as
they Live, before they are fit to be at their own Disposal. To tell People they
are free, is the common Artifice of the Factious and Seditious. These
State-Gypsies pick the Pockets of the Ignorant with this specious Cant, and
with informing them what mighty Fortunes they are all born to. And what is this
fine Freedom after all that these Sparks can help them to? Why they are free to
be out of their Wits, and to be undone, if they take their Advice; To lose
their Conscience, their Credit and their Money, and to be ten-times more pressed
than they were before.

There is still a more extravagant Notion of Liberty behind. Some People are
for Repealing the Laws of Morality, for throwing open the Enclosures of
Religion, and Leaving all in Common to Licentiousness and Violence. They are
for making their Inclinations the Rule, and their Power the Boundary of their
Actions. They hate to let any Opportunity slip, or any Capacity lie Idle: But
are for grasping at all Possibilities of Pleasure, and Playing their Appetites
at whatever comes in their way. To tie Men up from Enjoyment, and cramp them
with Prohibitions, is an Encroachment upon the Rights of Nature. These
ungenerous Impositions are it seems the Dotages of Age, the Results of Spleen
and Impotence; or at best the Pretenses of Designing Power, which lays an
Embargo upon some Branches of Trade, to engross the Advantages to it self. I
wonder why these Men don't improve their Principle farther. Why they don't
dance upon the Battlements of Houses, Vault down the Monument, and jump into a
Furnace for Diversion. To forbear these Things are great Restraints upon the
Liberties of Motion, and make many of the Faculties of Nature insignificant.
They ought to step in to the Rescue of Fevers and Phrensy, and not let their
Acquaintance lie under such an ignominious Confinement, especially when their
Spirits are up, and they are so well disposed for Satisfaction. Why do they not
draw up a Remonstrance against Goals, Pillorys, and Executions; What! have they
no Sense of the Grievances of their Fellow Subjects? Can they see their own
generous Principle suffer, their very Magna Charta violated, and do nothing
toward a Relief? They ask your Pardon; To embark in such Expeditions might
endanger their Interest, and come home to them at last. And to speak Truth,
they are for having this Arbitrary Privilege in no Hands but their own. For
Touch them in their Honor or Property, and you will find them sensible enough. A
small Injury to themselves seems intolerable, and fires them with a Zeal for
Justice and Restitution. Then the Laws are Defective, and give too little
Damages; And therefore though they venture their Necks for it, they must have a
Supplemental Satisfaction. Their own Case, one would think, might show them the
unreasonableness of their Scheme; And that a Liberty against Virtue and Law, is
only a Privilege to be Unhappy; And a License for a Man to murder Himself.

OF Old Age. IN A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Philebus and Eutropius.
Phil. YOur Servant, This Visit is very obliging. If so good a Friend as you
are can be more welcome at one time then another, you are so now. I was just
going to send to you, to Beg a little of your Conversation.


Eutrop. Sir I thank you, you are always contriving to give your Friends a
Pleasure, one way or other. But methinks you seem somewhat concerned. I hope no
Accident has happened?


Phil. Nothing but what I Am afraid you will smile at; and yet it sits pretty
hard upon my Spirits.


Eutrop. I Am sorry for that; pray what is the Matter?


Phil. Then without any farther Preamble, I must challenge you upon your last
Promise. You may remember we were talking about Old Age, and the Inconveniences
attending it. This Speculation has hung cruelly in my Head ever since. I think
my Fancy is grown quite Gray upon it.


Eutrop. If that be your Case, it is somewhat unlucky; I have no Receipt against
that Distemper. What would you be exempted from the common Fate, and have
Nature altered, for your single Satisfaction?


Phil. With all my Heart, if I knew which way. Not but that I could wish the
Advantage was Universal, as much as any Man. To be plain, I don't think my self
over-furnish'd, and should be glad to keep up my Person in Repair as long as it
lasts. In earnest, it troubles me to consider the greatest part of Life is no
better than a slow Consumption; That we must shortly sink into a state of
Weakness and Insignificancy, and grow unacceptable both to others, and our
selves. When our Limbs and our Memory, and it may be our Understanding too,
will fail us; when nothing but a Fever will warm our Blood; and all the lively
Perceptions are forced out of Pain. We begin Life with a slender Stock, and yet
it improves strangly. I wonder when we are wellfurnished we cannot hold it:
What! Turn Bankrupts when we have more Effects to Trade with, and more Skill to
manage? A Flame well kindled and supplied, will burn for ever. When a Man is
Rich, a little Care keeps him so. But Life, like an ill gotten Estate, consumes
insensibly, in despite of all imaginable Frugality. Infancy is a state of
Hope; and has the Tenderness of Parents, or the Compassion of Strangers, to
support it. Youth, like a Blossom, gives us Beauty in hand, and Fruit in
prospect. But Age grows worse and worse upon the Progress; sinks deeper in
Sorrow and Neglect, and has no Relief to expect but the Grave.


Eutrop. I think you are too Tragical upon the Occasion; Health, and Vigor,
and Sense, hold out sometimes to the length of a long Journey. Plato enjoyed
them all at 80. And so if, you will take his word for it, did Cato Major; and
reckons you up a great many more. Tully was more than 60 when he wrote his
famous Philippicks: In which his Rhetoric is not only more Correct, but more
moving and tempestuous, than in his younger Orations. The Poetic Fire, which
is soonest extinct, sometimes rages beyond that Period. Of this I could give
modern Proof, were it necessary. To go on; old Father le Moin writes now with
all the Force, and Spirit, and Pleasantness of 35. And a Gentleman of our own
Country, has the same Happiness. Now those that can Entertain others, are never
ill Entertained themselves.


Phil. One Swallow makes no Summer. One had need have a Body and Soul made on
purpose, to do these things you talk of. I am sure it is otherwise with the
Generality: And since Age seems a common Penance imposed upon Mankind, I could
almost wish we had it sooner; and that the sweet Morsel of Life was left for
the last.


Eutrop. That might engage your Appetite too much. What! you would be old when
you are young, would you?


Phil. No; it may be I would be young after I am old.


Eutrop. Not in this World if you please; all old People have had their Time,
they were young once, let that suffice.


Phil. Were young once! That is in plain English they have lost the Advantage;
a very comfortable Reflection! Were, serves only to trouble what we Are. Fuimus
may make a good Motto, but in Life it is stark naught.


Eutrop. If the whole Business was as bad as you represent it, there is no help
for it, therefore we should be contented.


Phil. Under favor, therefore we should not be contented. What! is Despair an
Argument for Satisfaction?


Eutrop. For Patience it is, when we have other Considerations to support us.
Besides; are no Favors valuable but those which last a Man's Life time? Does
nothing less than an Annuity, deserve Thanks? Certainly we ought to be of a
more acknowledging Temper than this comes to; especially where we have nothing
of Merit to plead. Upon the whole, I conceive the Consequence may be worked
another way to better Advantage.


Phil. How so?


Eutrop. Why, since we can avoid Old Age by nothing but Death; our business is
to make it as easy as may be. If you* ask me which way? My answer is, we must
Guard against those Imperfections, to which Old Age is most liable. By
Imperfections, I mean, Moral ones; for the other are not to be fenced off. In
the second place, let us consider, that Age is not altogether Burden and
Encumbrance. There are several peculiar Privileges and Dignities annexed to this
part of Life. A short View of the Reason of these Advantages, will help to
relieve us under the Decays of the Body.


Phil. I am glad to hear it; pray go on with your Method.


Eutrop. To begin then with the Imperfections. Not that they are as unavoidable
as Grey-Heirs; or to be charged upon Age without Exception. My meaning only is,
that without Care People are more in danger of them when they are old, than at
any other time. The first I shall mention, is a Forwardness to be displeased
upon little occasions; to take things by the wrong Handle; and to put severe
Constructions upon Words and Actions. This unhappy Temper may be assigned to
several Causes.

1 st. Old Persons, may be over-suspitious of being contemned. Long Experience
has taught them that the World is generally unbenevolent and narrow-spirited;
that Self-Love, and Ill Nature, are extremely extremely common, and that the
Pleasures of too many are drawn from the Misfortunes of their Neighbors. These
Remarks confirmed by repeated Instances, make no kind Impression. So that when
a Man is conscious of his own Decay, when he grows less active and agreeable,
when he can neither Oblige, nor Punish, with the usual Advantage: When this
happens, he is apt to fancy younger People are more ready to divert themselves
with his Declension, than to pity it. This Apprehension makes him interpret
with Rigor, conclude himself injured upon a remote Appearance, and grow
disgusted upon every Ambiguity.


Phil. By the way, is Mankind capable of such Barbarity as this Jealousy
supposes? Can they misapply their Passions at so scandalous a rate? Can they
insult an unavoidable Infirmity, and trample upon the Venerable Ruins of
Humane Nature? This Insolence is foolish, as well as unnatural. He that acts in
this manner, does but expose his own future Condition, and laugh at himself
beforehand.


Eutrop. You say well. But very ill Things are often done. And those who have
seen most of them, are most Apprehensive. On the other side, Those who are less
acquainted with the Vanity and Vices of the World* and have met with fewer
Disappointments, are inclined to a kinder Opinion.


Phil. A very charitable Ignorance! However I think your Remark not ill
founded, for I have observed an unusual Sweetness of Temper in Children. Nature
usually makes a very obliging Discovery of her self in them. They throw
themselves with entire Confidence upon Conversation. They act without Artifice
or Disguise; and believe others as kind and undesigning as themselves. But when
they once understand what a sort of World they are come into: When they find
that Easiness of belief betrays them, and that they are losers by the openness
of their Carriage; Then they begin to be upon their Guard, to grow cautious and
reserved, and to stand off in Jealousy and Suspicion. Like Birds that are shot
at, Nature grows wild by ill Usage; and neither Loves, nor Trusts, so much as
Before.


Eutrop. Most certainly, unless Care be taken. For this Reason, if a Man does
not use to reflect upon his Temper; if he does not shake off his Spleen, and
check his Disgusts; if he does not strive to sweeten his Blood, and refresh his
Generosity, his esteem of Mankind will abate too fast. This Humor, unless
prevented, will slide into Indifferency and Disinclination; and make him have a
kindness for nothing but himself. And because odd Discoveries, Ruffles and
Discouragements, increase upon him in his Journey, the farther he Travels, the
less he will like the Company. And since the World has lost his good Opinion, a
slender Presumption will be apt to awaken his Jealousy, make him suspect hard
measure, and put the worst Interpretation upon Things.


Phil. May nor this Forwardness to be disobliged, proceed from the Infirmities
of Age? The last part of Life is a perpetual Indisposition; you are seldom free
from the Pain or the Weakness of a Disease. The Fever of the Fit may sometimes
intermit, but then your best days are short of Health. Such uneasy Discipline
is apt to make the Spirits turn eager. When a Man is laden a Feather is felt,
and the least rub will make him complain.


Eutrop. I believe the difficulty of some Humors may be thus accounted for.
And where this Reason fails, I think I could assign another.


Phil. What is that?


Eutrop. With Submission; I Am afraid old Persons may sometimes over-rate their
own Sufficiency. It Is true, generally speaking, Knowledge is the Consequence of
Time, and Multitude of Days are fittest to teach Wisdom. But this Rule, like
others, has its Exception. For all that, People are apt to fancy their
Understandings move upon an Ascent, and that they must grow Wiser of course, as
their grow Older. Thus they often take their Improvement upon Content, without
examining how they came by it. As if the mere Motion of the Sun, or the running
of an Hourglass, would do the Business. Now a Mistake in this Case makes them
impatient of Contradiction, and imagine themselves always in the Right. To
argue the Point, and debate their Opinions is to injure them. Younger Men ought
to believe hard, and take Authority for the last Proof.

To proceed. Resting too much upon the Privilege of their Years, may be the
occasion of a second Imperfection; i. e. Incompliance with the innocent Demands
and Satisfactions of those who are Younger. Their Opinions are the Standard of
Truth, and their Desires the Measure of Agreeableness.

This Partiality of Thought, this indulging their own Inclinations, makes them
firm to Prepossession, and difficultly removed from those Customs which first
engaged them. The bare Novelty of a Thing is enough to cast it: They condemn
the prudent Alterations of the present Age, and are too kind to the Errors of
the former.


Phil. Under favor, I conceive this Method scarcely defensible. It Is true,
they are old when they maintain these Opinions, but were they not young when
they took them them up? And why should they prefer the Judgment of their own
Youth, to that of a later Generation? Is it such an advantage to stand first
upon the Roll of Time? Or does Sense and Understanding wear out the farther a
Line is continued? That a succeeding Age is born with the same Capacity with
the former, that it may use the same Industry cannot be denied: Why then should
we be barred the Privilege of our Fore Fathers? Why may we not Pronounce upon
the state of Truth, upon the Decency of Custom, and the Economy of Life, with
the usual Liberty? Is Humane Nature improved to the utmost, or was
Infallibility the Gift of those before us? If not, what harm is it to choose for
our selves? Why should we be servilely tied to their Reason, who used the
Freedom of their own? Those who come last, seem to enter with Advantage. They
are Born to the Wealth of Antiquity. The Materials for Judging are prepared,
and the Foundations of Knowledge are laid to their Hands; why then may they not
be allowed to enlarge the Model, and Beautify the Sructure? They View in a
better Light than their Predecessors, and have more leisure to examine, to
polish and refine. Besides, if the Point was tried by Antiquity, Antiquity
would lose it. For the present Age is really the Oldest, and has the largest
Experience to plead.


Eutrop. If you please I Will go on to a third Misfortune incident to Old Age,
and that is Covetousness. This, I confess, looks like so great a Paradox, that
nothing but matter of Fact could force me to believe it. I have less Time to
stay in the World, and less Capacity to enjoy it; therefore I must love it
better than ever: What sort of Reasoning is this? To what purpose should a Man
grasp so hard when he can take the least hold? Why should he make himself
uneasy with so ill a Grace? Who could imagine that Appetite should thus exceed
Digestion, and that the Age of Wisdom should make so preposterous a Judgment?
If there were any just fears of Poverty, or the Provision was moderate, 'twas
something. Foresight and Frugality are good Things. But alas! Covetousness in
old People is often unfurnished with these Excuses


Phil. Had you thought fit, I could have liked a Reason upon the Cause, as well
as a Declamation upon the Effect.


Eutrop. To satisfy you, I Will give you my Conjecture; You know Age is not
vigorous enough for Business and Fatiguing. It Is no Time to work up an Estate
in, or to repair a Misadventure. A strain in an old Man's Fortune, like one in
his Limbs, is seldom out-grown. And where Labor is impracticable, and Recovery
despaired of, Parsimony has the better Color. Old Persons are apt to dread a
Misfortune more than others. They have observed how Prodigality is punished,
and Poverty neglected: These Instances hang like Executions before them, and
often fright them into the other Extreme. They are sensible their Strength
decays, and their Infirmities increase; and therefore conclude their Supplies
should increase too. They are best acquainted with the Uncertainty of Things,
and the Deceitfulness of Persons. They know People will not do their Duty out of
mere good will, that Observance must be purchased, and that nothing Engages
like Interest and Expectation. Now the natural Diffidence, and Anxiousness of
Age, is apt to press the Reasons of Frugality too far, to be over-apprehensive
of an Accident, and guard with too much Concern. Their Blood grows cool and
dispirited; And unless they relieve themselves by generous Thinking, they will be
in danger of falling into excessive Cares, unnecessary Provisions, and little
Management. I have now laid the hardest of the Case before you. These are the
worst Diseases of Age; And yet not so formidable neither, but that Prudence and
Precaution may prevent them.


Phil. I hope so too. However your Inference from the decay of Constitution,
does not please me; Because, I doubt, there is something more in it than what
you mentioned.


Eutrop. Pray what do you mean?


Phil. Why, I Am afraid a Man may live so long till he wants Spirits to
maintain his Reason, and to Face an honorable Danger. Some People will
undertake to Bleed, or Fast a Man into Cowardice. Now if this may be done, the
Consequence may be untoward. For the disadvantages of Age seem no less than
either of these Experiments. This Thought has sometimes made me uneasy. For
what can be more wretched than to survive the best part of our Character, and
close up our Lives in Disgrace?


Eutrop. A Concern so generous as yours needs not fear the Event. Resolution
lies more in the Head than in the Veins. A brave Mind is always Impregnable.
True Courage is the Result of Reasoning. A just Sense of Honor, and Infamy, of
Duty and Religion, will carry us farther than all the Force of Mechanism. The
Strength of the Muscles, and the Ferment of the Humors, are nothing to it.
Innocence of Life, and Consciousness of Worth, and great Expectations, will do
the Business alone. These Ingredients make a richer Cordial than Youth can
prepare. They warm the Heart at 80, and seldom fail in the Operation. Socrates
was advanced to the common Period of Life at his Trial. But the Chilness of his
Blood did not make him shrink from his Notions. He acted up to the height of
his Philosophy, and drank off his Hemlock without the least Concern. Eleazar, a
Jewish Scribe, was an older Man than he, and yet behaved himself with admirable
Fortitude under Extremity of Torture. ( Maccab.) St. Ignatius and Polycarp were
Martyrs after 80, and as fearless as Lions. In Military Men Instances of this
kind are numerous; though I don't think Courage altogether so well tried in a
Field, as at a Stake.


Phil. The Reason of your Opinion.


Eutrop. Because in a Battle, the encouraging Music, the examples of
Resolution, the universal Tumult, will scarcely give a Man leave or leisure to
be a Coward. Besides, the hopes of Escaping are no ordinary Support. Of this we
have a famous Instance in Marshall Biron. No Person Living could be braver in
the Field than He. And when he was afterward Tried for Treason, his Spirit
seemed rather too big than otherwise. He used the King roughly, and out-raged
his Judges, and appeared fortified at a wonderful rate. But when Death came
near him, and he saw the Blow was not to be avoided, he sunk into Abjection;
and dyed much to the disadvantage of his Character.

Now as to outward Appearance, the Case of Martyrdom is the same with that of
the Duke of Biron's, and oftentimes much harder. Here is the certainty of
Death, the Terror of the Execution, and the Ignominy of the Punishment. And
besides all this, leisure and cool Thoughts to contemplate the Melancholy
Scene. In earnest, these are all trying Circumstances, and make the disparity
of the Proof very visible.


Phil. I cannot deny what you say. But though a Soldier cannot distinguish himself
so well as a Martyr, he may do enough to show himself no Coward. If you please,
let us have an Instance or two from the Camp, to the Point in hand.


Eutrop. That you may a Hundred, were it necessary. I shall mention a few. To
come to our own Times. The Basha of Buda, when it was last taken, was upwards
of 70. But this did not hinder him from any Military Function: Like Aetna, he
was Snow a Top, but all Fire within, For after a noble Defense he died fighting
upon the Breach. The late Prince of Conde, the Duke of Luxemburgh, and
Marshall Schombergh, were old Generals. For all that, upon occasion, they
would Charge at the Head of the Army with all the Heat and Forwardness of the
youngest Cavalier. In short, Courage is at no time impracticable. Providence
has dealt more liberally with Mankind, than to make any Action necessary, which
is Mean.


Phil. I am glad to hear it; You have reconciled me to Age much better than I
was before. To deal freely, Cowardice makes a Man so insignificant, and betrays
him to such wretched Practices, that I dreaded the Thoughts of it. If you
please now, let us go on to the Privileges of Honor, and examine how the Claim
is made out.


Eutrop. That Age has a peculiar Right to Regard, is past dispute: Nature
teaches it, Religion enjoins it, and Custom has made it good. And in my
Opinion, the Reasons of the Privilege are very satisfactory. For

First, Old Age is most remarkable for Knowledge and Wisdom. When we first come
into the World, we are unimproved in both parts of our Nature: Neither our
Limbs, nor Understandings, are born at their full Length, but grow up to their
stature by gradual Advances. --


Phil. So much the better: For if we were Infants in our Bodies, and Men in our
Souls, at the same time, we should not like it. The Weakness, the Restraints,
the Entertainment, and the Discipline of the first Years, would relish but
indifferently: A Spirit of Age could hardly bear such Usage. Methinks I should
be loath to Transmigrate into a Child, or lie in a Cradle, with those few
Things I have in my Head.


Eutrop. You are safe enough. But to return: For the Reasons abovementioned;
Those who have had the longest time to furnish and improve in, must be the
wisest People: I mean, generally speaking, where Care and other Advantages are
equal. Men of Years have seen greater variety of Events; have more
Opportunities of remarking Humors and Interests. Who then can be so proper to
draw the Model of Practice, and strike out the Lines of Business and
Conversation? The History of themselves is not unserviceable. The Revolutions
at Home will open the Scene in a great Measure. Thus they may trace their
Actions to the first Exercises of Reason. This will show them the Distinctions
of Life, and the Complexion of every Period: How Novelty pleases, and
Inclinations vary with the Progress of Age. And thus with some regard to the
diversities of Circumstance; with some Allowance for Custom and Government, for
Fortune and Education, for Sex and Temper; they may give probable guesses at
the Workings of Humane Nature: They may reach the Meaning, and enterpret the
Behavior, and Calculate the Passions of those they converse with. These Lights
will almost force a Prospect into the Heart, and bring the Thoughts into View.
This Advantage is of great Use, It helps us to Discover, and to Please; It
directs us in our Application, and often prevents us from doing, or receiving
an Injury. Farther; Old Persons have the best Opportunities for reviewing their
Opinions, and bringing their Thoughts to a second Test. For trying what they
took upon Trust, and correcting the Errors of Education. And thus their
Judgment becomes more exact: They may know more Things, and know them better,
and more usefully than others. This will appear farther by considering

A second Advantage of Old Age; and that is, freedom from violent Passions.
This Advantage is partly the effect of Conviction and Experience. The Danger is
considered better, and the Indecency more discovered than formerly. The
Constitution likewise contributes its Share. The Current of the Blood moves
more gently, and the Heat of the Spirits abate. This Change makes the Mind more
absolute, and the Counsels of Reason better regarded. The Object and the
Faculty are easier parted. And thus the excesses of Anger and Desire grow less
intemperate. Whereas younger People, as they are apt to contrive amiss, so they
often fail in the Execution. Their Prospect is too short for the one, and their
Passions too strong for the other. Either they are impatient to wait, or pursue
too far, or divert too soon: And thus the Design often miscarries. But Age
views the Undertaking on all sides, and makes fewer Omissions in the Scheme: It
computes more exactly upon Hopes and Fears, and weighs Difficulty and Success
with better Judgment. Now Men have Temper to stay for the Ripeness of Things;
they don't over-drive their Business, nor fly off to unseasonable Pleasure.
They can attend with Patience, and hold on with Constancy. In short, this is
the time in which the Mind is most Discerning and Dispassionate; furnished with
the best Materials for Wisdom, and best disposed to use them. For these Reasons
Men of Years have generally been thought the most proper to preside in
Councils, and to have the Direction of Affairs. Aristotle, as I remember,
observes, that odds in Understanding seems to give a natural Right to Command.
Corporal Force is a Ministerial Talent, and ought to be under Government. If
this Privilege needed Prescription; we have all the Advantage of Time and
Place. Age has set at the Helm so long, that the Name of Office and Authority
is derived from thence; Witness the Jewish Elders, the Spartan (...), the Roman
Senate, and the Saxon Aldermen. Not, but that younger People were sometimes
joined in the Commission. This Favor was sometimes earlier bestowed, either as
a Reward to extraordinary Merit, or indulged to Quality, for Discipline and
Improvement. Matters of Moment especially should be managed with Conduct and
Temper; brought under the best Regulation; and put into the wisest Hands. It Is
true, Order and Right must not be disturbed; but where there is Liberty to
choose, Age has the clearest Pretenses, and stands fairest for the Honor. There
is a great Deference due to the Judgment of Years; their bare Affirmation and
Authority should have its weight; especially when they Pronounce upon their own
Experience and Employment. Here the Incompliance of our Reason ought to be
suspected, and nothing but Evidence should make us dissent.

3 ly. Old Persons deserve a more than ordinary Regard, because their
Performances are supposed to have been more than ordinary: When nothing to the
contrary appears, Justice as well as Charity will Report kindly, and conclude
in favor of another. In such Cases we should presume People have understood
their Opportunities, and managed their Talent, and their Time to advantage.
Upon this equitable Supposition 'twill follow, That those who have lived
longest, have done most Good. And is it not reasonable that Returns and
Benefits should keep a Proportion; and that those who have obliged most, should
receive the fairest Acknowledgment? Old Persons have been upon Duty a great
while, and served the Public upon many Occasions. They are the Veterans of the
State, and should be particularly considered. The Reasons of Order and
Discipline, and Merit, require no less. And since Power must be kept in a few
Hands: Since Property will not reach a general Distribution; since They cannot be
all gratified with Offices and Estates, let them be paid with Honor.

Methinks their very Infirmities look not unhandsomly. They carry something of
Dignity in them, when well understood. They are not to be wholly attributed to
the Force of Time: But partly to their generous Labors, to that constant
Fatigue of Business, to that Expense of Thought and Spirits, for the Public
Advantage. Let not the Alterations in their Person be merely thrown upon Age,
and resolved into Decay. Let Us rather consider them as honorable Scars, Marks
of Hardship and repeated Action, in the Service of their Country. Under this
Notion they will shine upon the Understanding, and move more for Respect than
Pity. I might now assign a Reason of a lower kind to the same purpose. And that
is, mere Decency and Breeding, and good Nature, should make us respectful to
Age. An old Man must shortly take his final Leave, and imbark for a Foreign
Country; And therefore should be treated with the Ceremony of a departing
Friend. We should do something to show that we are loath to lose him, and wish
him happy in his Removal. Besides, something of Regard is due to his Condition:
We should divert the Sense of his Declension, support his Spirits by
Observance, and keep him easy by obliging Behavior.


Phil. I confess, I think you have done some Justice to Age: You have proved
its Privileges, and settled the Preference, upon Grounds not unsatisfactory.
But supposing the young People should not do us Right, cannot we relieve our
selves without standing to their Courtesy?


Eutrop. Yes; There are two Things will do us a Kindness. First we may
consider, that the Declensions of Age are commonly very gradual. Like the
Shadow of a Dial, the Motion is too slow for the Eye to take notice of. Could
the Decays in us be marked through all their Progress, Life would be more
uneasy. But a Man looks at Night, as he did in the Morning. He does not see
that when he is past his Prime; his Vigor is perpetually wearing off, that the
Blood grows less florid, and the Spirits abate: That no day comes but pairs the
Strength, and cramps the Motion, and tarnishes the Color, and makes us worse
for Service and Satisfaction than we were before. But our Senses are not fine
enough to perceive the Lessening, and so all goes tolerably well. If we were
thrown out of our Youth, as we are sometimes out of our Fortune, all at once;
it would sensibly touch us. To go to Bed at Thirty, and rise with all the Marks
of Eighty, would try one's Patience pretty severely. But we walk down the Hill
so very gently, that the Change of Situation is scarcely perceived, till we are
near the Bottom. This Advantage lies ready to our Hands, and wants little
Improvement. But the other which remains, and is the most considerable, depends
upon Conduct.


Phil. Pray let us hear it.


Eutrop. Why, if we would enter upon Age with Advantage, we must take care to
be regular and significant in our Youth. This is the way to make both the Mind
and the Body more easy. I say the Body, for Intemperance antedates Infirmities,
and doubles them. It revenges its own Excesses, and plunges us sooner and
deeper in the Mire, than otherwise we should fall. He that would have his
Health hold out, must not Live too fast. A Man should Husband his Constitution,
and not throw away till he has done Living, if he can help it. Not to provide
thus far is to betray our Senses, and prove false to the Interest of Ease and
Pleasure. And as to the Mind, a well managed Life will be of great Service.
Such a Person will be more disengaged from the Entertainments of Sense, and not
miss his Youth so much as another. He will not be troubled with impracticable
Wishes, but Strength and Desire will fall off together. The Powers of Reason
will improve by Exercise; and he that has governed a stronger Appetite, will
easily govern a weaker. In short, if we would be well provided we must begin
betimes. Habits of Virtue, and handsome Performances, are the best Preparatives.
Lets lay in a stock of good Actions beforehand. These will secure our Credit
without, and our Peace within. Are the spaces of Life not ill filled up? Is the
World the better for us? Have we any ways answered the Bounties of Providence,
and the Dignity of our Nature? These Questions well answered, will be a strong
Support to Age; they will keep off a great part of the weight of it; and make a
Man's Years sit easy upon him. The Mind has a mighty Influence upon the Body;
and operates either way, according to the quality of Reflection. The disorders
of Passion or Guilt, inflame a Distemper, envenom a Wound, and boil up the
Blood to a Fever. They often baffle the Virtue of Drugs and the Prescriptions
of Art. On the other-hand; When the Review pleases, when we can look backward
and forward with Delight; to be thus satisfied and composed, is almost a Cure
of it self. It Is true, a good Conscience will not make a Man Immortal. But yet the
quiet of his Mind often keeps him from wearing out so fast. It smooths his
Passage to the other World, and makes him slide into the Grave by a more gentle
and insensible Motion. And when the Body is shaken with Diseases, when it bends
under Time or Accident, and appears just sinking into Ruin; it is sometimes
strangely supported from within. The Man is prop'd up by the Strength of
Thought; and Lives upon the Cheerfulness and Vigor of his Spirit.

Even Vanity, when strongly impressed, and luckily directed, will go a great
way. Thus Epicurus in Tully tells us, that the pleasure of his Writings, and
the hopes of his Memory, abated the sharpness of his Pains, and made the Gout,
and the Stone, almost sleep upon him.


Phil. Epicurus had a strong Fancy: Though I must own that pleasant
Retrospections, and easy Thoughts, and comfortable Presages, are admirable
Opiates: They help to assuage the Anguish, and disarm the Distemper; and almost
make a Man despise his Misery. However I Am still a little concerned that I must
go less and less every day, and do the same things over again with abatements
of Satisfaction. To live only to Nurse up Decays, to feel Pain, and wait upon
Diseases, is somewhat troublesome and insignificant.


Eutrop. Pardon me there! Not insignificant, if it should happen so.

To bear Sickness with Decency, is a noble Instance of Fortitude. He that
Charges an Enemy does not show himself more brave, than he that grapples
handsomely with a Disease. To do this without abject Complaints; without Rage,
and Expostulation, is a glorious Combat. To be proof against Pain, is the
clearest Mark of Greatness: It sets a Man above the dread of Accidents. It Is a
State of Liberty and Credit. He that is thus fenced, needs not fear nor flatter
any thing. He that distinguishes himself upon these Occasions, and keeps up the
Superiority of his Mind, is a Conqueror, though he dies for it; and rides in
Triumph into the other World. And when we are engaged in these honorable
Exercises, and proving the most formidable Evils to be tolerable; are we
Insignificant all this while? Thus to teach Resignation and Greatness, and
appear in the heights of Passive Glory, is, I hope, to live to some purpose.
Other Performances, I grant, are more agreeable; but possibly none more useful.
Besides every one has not this Trial. Sometimes the Senses are worn up, and the
Materials for Pain are spent, and the Body is grown incapable of being pleased,
or troubled in any great degree. To relieve you a little farther; give me leave
to add, That the more we sink into the Infirmities of Age, the nearer we are to
Immortal Youth. All People are Young in the other World. That State is an
Eternal Spring, ever fresh and flourishing. Now to pass from Midnight into Noon
on the sudden: To be Decrepid one minute, and all Spirit and Activity the next,
must be an entertaining Change. Call you this Dying? The abuse of Language! To
fly thus swiftly from one Extreme to another; To have Life flow in like a
Torrent, at the lowest Ebb, and fill all the Channels at once; This must be a
Service to the Case in hand. For this Reason old People will go off with
advantage. At their first arrival they seem likely to bemore sensible of the
difference. They seem better prepared to relish Liberty, and Vigor, and
Indolence, than others. The Hardship of their former Condition rewards its own
Trouble. It burnishes their Happiness, and awakens the Mind to take hold of it.
Health after Sickness, and Plenty upon Poverty, gives double Pleasure.

In short, Philebus to be afraid of growing Old, is to be afraid of growing
Wise, and being Immortal. As if we could be happy too soon! Pray what is there
in this World to make us fond of? None yet were ever fully pleased with it. If
the the Public Interest was generally pursued, and Men did their best to make
each other happy, it would not do. Our Ideas of Satisfaction can meet with
nothing to answer them. And as long as Fancy outshines Nature, and Thoughts are
too big for Things, we shall always be craving. I could draw up a Scheme of
Happiness, if I could have it as easily, that should Mortify the most
fortunate Ambition; kill Alexander with Envy, and make Caesar pine away at his
own Littleness And do we imagine God would make an Appetite without an Object?
Must we be always wishing for Impossibilities, and languish after an
everlasting Nothing? No, Philebus, the Being of Happiness is more than a Dream.
There are Entertainments which will carry up to Desire, and fill up all the
Vacancies of the Mind. But these Things are not to be met with here. One would
think we should be glad to go upon a farther Discovery; and that Curiosity
should almost carry us into the other World. Happiness is sure well worth our
Enquiry. Who would not try the most unknown Paths in search of so noble an
Object? Who would not look into all the Regions of Nature; travel over the Sky,
and make the Tour of the Universe? And can we then be sorry to see our Voyage
fixed, and start back when we are just Embarking? This is to be overfond of our
Native Country, and to hang about Life a little too meanly.


Phil. I thank you. I perceive my Apprehensions were unreasonable. Age has no
such formidable Aspect, as I supposed. I am now convinced, that if the other
parts of Life have been well managed, this will prove tolerable enough.


OF PLEASURE.
THat Pleasure, precisely considered, is an Advantage, must be granted by the
most severe Philosophy: It Is the principal Intendment of Nature, and the sole
object of Inclination. Every thing Good, is so far desirable. And why is it so?
Because it affords a Satisfaction to him that has it. The only Reason why
Being, is better than Not Being; is because of the agreeable Perceptions we
have in the first, which are impossible in the latter. Without Pleasure either
in Hand, or in Remainder, Life is no Blessing, nor Existence worth the owning.
Were I sure never to be pleased, my next Business should be to unwish my self,
and pray for Annihilation. For if I have nothing which delights me in my Being,
the very Sense of it must be unacceptable; and then I had better be without it.
He that can prove himself Something, by no other Argument than Pain, will be
glad to be rid of the Conclusion. For the suppose that Misery is preferable to
Not Being, is, I believe, the wildest Thought that ever entered the Imagination.
A very short Fit of Torture, and Despair, would convince the most Obstinate:
Now though there are Degrees of Happiness or Misery, there is no Middle between
them. A Man must feel one or the other. That which some Philosophers call
Indolence, is properly a State of Pleasure. For though the Satisfaction may be
somewhat Drowsy, yet, like the first approaches of Sleep, it strikes smooth and
gently upon the Sense. To return; it is Pleasure, which is the last and farthest
Meaning of every reasonable Action. It Is upon this Score that the Husbandman
Labors, and the Soldier Fights; and all the Hazards and Difficulties of Life
are undergone. Wealth and Honor, and Power, as Topping as they seem, are but
Ministerial to Satisfaction. They are supposed to furnish a Man's Person, and
fix him in a Place of Advantage. They feed his Appetites, and execute his Will,
and make him valuable in his own Opinion, and in that of his Neighbor's. These
Services they promise at least, which makes them so earnestly desired: It Is
Pleasure which reconciles us to Pain. Who would submit to the Nauseousness of
Medicine, or the Torture of the Surgeon; were it not for the Satisfaction of
receiving our Limbs, and our Health? Pleasure is pursued where it seems most
renounced, and aimed at even in Self-denial. All voluntary Poverty, all the
Discipline of Penance, and the Mortifications of Religion, are undertaken upon
this View. A good Man is contented with hard Usage at present, that he may take
his Pleasure in the other World. In short, To dispute the Goodness of Pleasure,
is to deny Experiment, and contradict Sensation, which is the highest Evidence.

But there needs no more to be said in recommendation of Pleasure. The greatest
danger is, least we should value it too much. The Season, the Object, ahd the
Proportion, are all Circumstances of Importance: A failure in any of them
spoils the Entertainment. He that buys his Satisfaction at the Expense of Duty
and Discretion, is sure to over purchase. When Virtue is sacrificed to
Appetite, Repentance must follow, and that is an uneasy Passion. All
unwarrantable Delights have an ill Farewell, and destroy those that are greater.
The main Reason why we have Restraints clapped upon us, is because an unbounded
Liberty would undo us. If we examine Religion, we shall find few Actions
forbidden, but but such as are naturally prejudicial to Health, to Reason, or
Society. The Heathen Philosophers, excepting some few of the Cyrenaicks, and
Epicureans, were all agreed in the folly of forbidden Pleasure. They thought
the very Question scandalous; and that it was in effect to dispute, whether
'twere better to be a Man, or a Beast.

The general Division of Pleasure, is into that of the Mind, and the other of
the Body. The former is the more valuable upon several Accounts. I shall
mention some of them.

1 st. The Causes of these Satisfactions are more reputable than the other.
Corporeal Pleasures are comparatively Ignoble. They seem founded in Want and
Imperfection. There must be something of Uneasiness to introduce them, and make
them welcome. When the Pain of Hunger is once over, Eating is but a heavy
Entertainment. The Senses are some of them so mean that they scarce relish any
thing, but what they Beg for. But Rational Delights have a better Original.
They spring from noble Speculations, or generous Actions; from Enlargements of
Knowledge, or Instances of Virtue; from something which argues Worth, and
Greatness, and Improvement.

2 ly. The Satisfactions of the Mind are more at command. A Man may think of of
a handsome Performance, or a Notion, which pleases him at his leisure. This
Entertainment is ready with little Warning or Expense. A short Recollection
brings it upon the Stage, brightens the Idea, and makes it shine as much as
when 'twas first stamped upon the Memory. Thoughts, take up no Room. When they
are right, they afford a portable Pleasure. One may Travel with it without any
trouble, or Encumbrance. The Case with the Body is much otherwise. Here the
Satisfaction is more confined to Circumstance of Place, and moves in a narrower
Compass. We cannot have a pleasant Taste or Smell, unless the Object and the
Sense, are near together. A little Distance makes the Delight withdraw, and
vanish like a Phantosm. There is no Perfuming of the Memory, or regaling the
Palate with the Fancy. It Is true, we have some faint confused Notices of these
absent Delights, but then it is Imagination, and not Sense, which gives it. I
grant the Eye and Ear command farther, but still these have their Limits. And
besides, they can only reach an Object Present, but not make it so. Whereas the
Mind, by a sort of natural Magic, raises the Ghost of a departed Pleasure, and
makes it appear without any dependence upon Space, or Time. Now the almost
Omnipresence of an Advantage, is a Circumstance of Value; it gives opportunity
for Use and Repetition, and makes it so much the more one's own.

3 dly. Intellectual Delights are of a nobler kind than the other. They belong
to Beings of the highest Order. They are the Inclination of Heaven, and the
Entertainments of the Deity. Now God knows the choicest Ingredients of
Happiness; He can command them without Difficulty, and compound them to
Advantage. Omnipotence and Wisdom, will certainly furnish out the richest
Materials for its own Contentment. It Is natural for every Being to grasp at
Perfection, and to give it self all the Satisfactions within Thought and Power,
Since therefore Contemplation is the Delight of the Deity, we may be assured
the Flower and Exaltation of Bliss, lies in the Operation of the Mind.

To go no higher than the Standard of Humanity. Methinks the Satisfactions of
the Mind are of a brighter Complexion, and appear with a distinguishing
Greatness. There is a nothing of Hurry and Mistiness in them. The Perceptions
are all clear, and stay for Perusal and Admiration. The Scene is dressed up
like a Triumph, the Fancy is Illuminated, and the Show marches on with Dignity
and State. If the Senses have any Advantage, it lies in the Strength of the
Impression. But this point may be fairly disputed. When the Mind is well
awakened, and grown up to the Pleasures of Reason, they are strangly affecting.
The Luxury of Thought, seems no less than that of the Palate: The discovery of
a great Invention, may be as moving as Epicurism. The Entertainments of Plato
were as high-season'd, as those of Apicius. And Archimedes, by his Behavior,
seems to have passed his time as pleasantly, as Sardanapalus. The Charms of
Authority, made Cato aver, that Old Age was none of the most undiverting
Periods of Life. And in all likelihood the Victory at Pharsalia, transported
Caesar beyond all the Delights of the Roman Court.

The Senses seem not to be built strong enough for any great Force of Pleasure.
A sudden Excess of Joy has sometimes proved Mortal. It Is as dangerous as
Gunpowder, charge too high, and you split the Barrel. It flashes too hard upon
the tender Organ, and stupifies more than pleases. To look upon the Sun strikes
us blind. Thus a glorious Appearance from the other World, has often over-set
the best Men. Nature sunk under the Correspondence, and was too weak to bear
the Luster of the Object.

The Body was not made to be Master in this Affair. This may appear from
Self-denial, which has a mixture of something agreeable. It Is a Pleasure to
refuse one. To arrest an importunate Appetite, to silence the Clamor of a
Passion; and repel an Assault upon our Virtue, is a noble Instance of Force, a
handsome proof of Temper and Discretion. A brave Mind must be entertained by
surveying its Conquests, and being conscious of its Sovereignty. And thus by
frequent Resistance, and generous Thinking, the Forbearance grows an Equivalent
to Fruition. And that which at first was almost too big for Opposition, is at
last too little for Notice. These Satisfactions of Restraint, are a fair proof
of the Distinction of Soul and Body. And that we are made up of something
greater than Matter and Motion. For that Atoms should Discipline themselves at
this rate, check their own agreeable Progress, and clap one another under
Hatches; is very unconceiveable. Atoms don't use to be so cross as this comes
to. Pleasure, of what kind soever, is nothing but an Agreement between the
Object and the Faculty. This Description well applied, will give us the true
Height of our selves, and tell us what size we are of. If little Things will
please us, we may conclude we are none of the biggest People. Children are as
well known by their Diversions, as their Stature. Those Satisfactions which
require Capacity and Understanding to relish them, which either suppose
Improvement, or promote it, are of the better sort. On the other side: To be
pleased with Gawdiness in Habit, with Gingles and false Ornament in Discourse,
with antic Motions and Postures, is a sign that the Inclinations are trifling,
and the Judgment vulgar and unpolished. There should be some what of Greatness
and Proportion, and Curiosity in Things, to justify our Appetite. To be gained
by every little pretending Entertainment, does but show our Meaness.

It Is some what surprising to observe how easily we are some times engaged, and
one would think, when we were least in Humor. For the purpose. Here Is a Man
that has lately buried his only Son, and is embarrass'd with Debts and Disputes
in his Fortune: How comes it about that he is so airy and unconcerned on the
sudden? No longer ago than this Morning, he was extremely sensible of his
Misfortune; what has made him forget it in so short a time? Why nothing, but he
is just chopped in with a Pack of Dogs, who are Hunting down a Hare, and all
Opening upon the View. The Man needs no more to change his Passions. This Noise
has drowned all his Grief: He is Cured and made Happy Extempore. And if it
would last, 'twas something. But alas, it is quickly over. It Is a Happiness
without a Fond: It Is no more than a little mantling of the Spirits upon
stirring: A Childish Exultation at the Harmony of a Rattle. It proceeds not
from any thing rich or solid in Nature: It Is mere Levity of Mind, which
snatches him a little from his Misery. The Cause of the Intermission is
uncreditable. The Entertainment is not big enough for the Occasion. It Is true,
the trouble is removed, and so far the Point is gained. But then the
Satisfaction is so Fantastic and Feverish, that the Cure it self is an ill
Symptom, and almost worse than the Disease. Upon the whole, I think, we ought
to be concerned, that such Trifles can provoke our Appetite. And that we may be
tossed from one State to another, by so weak a Motion. The truth is, as we
manage the Matter, our Diversions are oftentimes more uncreditable than our
Troubles. However, since Health is kept up, and Melancholy discharged by these
Amusements, they may be tolerable enough within a Rule. But to pursue them with
Application, to make them our Profession, and boast of our Skill in these
little Mysteries, is the way to be useless and ridiculous.

(...)
