THE IMPROVABLENESS OF Water Baptism: OR, A DISCOURSE CONCERNING The Gravity
and Seriousness of the Action, AND THE Usefulness of the Sacred Institution of
BAPTISM. Instructing all Parents, how great a thing they do, when they bring
their Children to that Holy Ordinance. And all Persons, whether young or old,
what Obligations their Baptism has brought them under; what Wrath it has
exposed wicked and impenitent persons to; and what Use they may make of their
Baptism for Confirmation of their Faith, and quickening them to Repentance and
an holy Life. Discoursed from Romans 6. 3, 4. by way of SERMON. By JOHN
COLLINGES, D. D. Minister of the Gospel in NORWICH.

Gal. 3. 27. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ. Ambros. lib. de Sacr. Venisti ad sontem, ingressus es, considera, quid
videris, quid locutus sis diligenter -- Et alibi -- Non sanat Baptismus
perfidiorum, non mundat sed polluit, etc. London Printed by A. Maxwell and R.
Roberts, 1681.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader!
THE Age wherein we live has been so fruitful in good books of all sorts,
above all the Ages that have gone before us, that were it not for the former
part of that Prophecy, Isa. 11. 9. They shall not hurt, nor destroy in my holy
mountain (at which work we daily see Papists and Atheists yet very busy), We
should conclude this the very time there prophesied of, when the earth should
be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea. So as were
it not for some particular subjects, not yet so fully handled, and the vanity
of humane nature, rather to affect to read the same thing in a new book, and a
new style, than in one of ancienter date, there might a supersedeas be given to
the Press, that the world might contain the books of men.

Amongst other subjects, something (in my opinion) as yet too little discoursed
of, is this of Baptism. It has been discoursed by many Systimatically, and by
many Polemically, but by few Practically. The Papists, who for a thousand years
had held the far greater part of the Christian World in subjection to their
most erroneous Doctrines, and superstitious usages, attributed so great a
virtue to the work of Baptism done (whether by a Priest or a Midwife), and had
laid so much of their hay and stubble on this foundation, that men of sense and
Religion could by no means agree to them; and some on the other extreme began
to think, Baptism in the whole was but a needless Ceremony, because the Papists
had added so many idle ceremonies to it. Bellarmine reckons no less than
Twenty-two. 1. The propounding the name. 2. The scrutiny, whether the persons
were competent. 3. The Renouncing the Devil, and all his works. 4. A profession
of the persons faith. 5. The sign of the Cross. 6. Exorcisms. 7. Breathing on
the person baptized. 8. Salt put into the mouth. 9. Touching the Child's nose
and ears with Spittle. 10. Unction with Oil. 11. Laying the Priests hands on
the child to bless it. 12. Abstenence from wine and flesh. These he makes
Ceremonies necessary before Baptism. At Baptism, 13. The giving of the name to
the person baptized. 14. Sureties. 15. The Consecration of the water. 16.
Dipping thrice. 17. That it be at Easter or Whitsontide. After Baptism he makes
necessary, 18. An holy kiss. 19. An anointing the crown of the head with Oil.
20. Putting a lighted Wax-candle into the baptized persons hands. 21. Putting
upon him or her a white garment. 22. Giving the person baptized Milk, Honey, or
Wine. How vain does man become in his imaginations, as to sacred things, when
he leaves the word of God! Our Forefathers were employed in throwing out the
Popish rubbish, and restoring the Ordinance to the purity of its
Administration; and while they were doing that, they were troubled with the
Socinians (whose opinions in this the Quakers now espouse) making Baptism
needless; and with the Antipaedobaptists, denying its use as to Children: and
multitudes of books have been wrote on these Arguments. By this time another
generation appeared, maintaining Baptismal Regeneration, or rather real and
true Regeneration, as well as Justification upon Baptism. Some few books have
been wrote on this argument. And I persuade my self, that one great thing which
has led some Divines of note, to assert, that the baptized persons are
forthwith justified and regenerated, is because they have thought it absurd so
much as to imagine, that Christ should create an Ordinance that should have no
real effect or usefulness; and what effect they should ascribe to it less than
this, worthy of so great an Institutor, they could not tell: Besides, that this
notion excelently served the design of others, who without this discharge of
the guilt of Adam's, and Original sin, would have found it an hard task to have
maintained a power in man's will to what was spiritually good; or Justification
any other way, than by the imputed Righteousness of Christ. These controversies
have so employed the Pens of those great and learned men, who have wrote about
Baptism, that scarce any has wrote fully and practically upon it, to satisfy
the world of the usefulness of Baptism, or to instruct it concerning the
exceeding solemnity, gravity and seriousness of the Action. It is thirty years
since I (at that time a very young man) endeavored my own satisfaction in the
case, and then communicated my Meditations from the Pulpit, to the people to
whom God had at that time set me in relation. Lately I fell upon my Notes, and
revised them, adding some things from my maturer judgment: Discoursing them
privately, I was desired by a first, and a second person, who heard me, to give
them the Copies of them, they being persons whose Piety and Judgments I had
reason to value. I thought they might also be useful to others, and resolved to
give them both to them and others from the Press. Two fruits of this Discourse
I would hope for, and shall pray for; which if I obtain, I shall gain my great
end in the Publication of it.

First, That those Parents into whose hands it shall come, and to whom God
shall hereafter give Children, which they shall offer to God in Baptism, would
as sadly reflect upon their former perfunctory performance of their duties in
this grave and most solemn action, and their neglects in minding their children
when they have come to years, of this dedication, and of the solemn Oath to
God, in which they engaged them, and call upon them to remember it to fulfill
it: so that they would be more grave and serious in those actions for the time
to come, and not make Christnings (as they call them) merely times for
Compotations, Collations upon friends, and banquets. I did not think it
necessary; but I bless God, this Ordinance had always that awe upon me, that I
choose to baptize my Children on the Lords-days in the public Congregation, and
with very little company attending from the house to the Congregation, thinking
in that action I had something else to do than to entertain my friends with
ordinary discourses.

Secondly, That all persons baptized may from hence be instructed, how useful
their Baptism may be to them, if the fault be not in themselves, though it does
not actually justify, and wash away Original sin (which I durst not assert).
By this short discourse, Reader, thou may (if I mistake not) easily
understand the nature of Baptism, and of thy engagement to God in thy Baptism;
and know how to make use of an Ordinance of God, under which thou have been
brought, and which, it may be, has lain dead by thee many years, because thou
know not how to make a spiritual use of it. Such as the discourse is, it is
now tendered to thee; if it does thy Soul any good, pray for the Author, who is
a debtor to thee, and to all, in the business of the Gospel, and

Thy most affectionate Friend and Servant for thy Souls advantage, JOHN
COLLINGES.
Norwich, Dec. 13. 1680.
ROMANS VI. 3, 4. Know you not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus
Christ, were baptized into his Death?

Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into Death, etc.


THE great Apostle of the Gentiles, in this Epistle, has been vindicating the
same blessed Doctrine, concerning the Justification of the Soul before God by
the Righteousness of Christ (which Chap. 4. v. 6. he calls an imputing of
righteousness without works) received by faith, which we are at this day
contending for: A Doctrine which Luther was wont to call, The Article of a
standing or falling Church: A Church keeping, or losing its purity and
integrity, as it upholds, or loses this great truth. Of which we may say, as
one of the Ancients concerning that Text, 1 Timothy 1. 15. It is a faithful
saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to
save sinners. We could better want the Sun in the firmament, than this great
light in holy Writ. Or as David said of the Sword of Goliath, V. Lutheri Epist.
ad Eremitam, in Sculteti annal. in anno 1517.
There is none to it; without which it is impossible to relieve a soul in a
distress of Conscience, and under the violence of a temptation, as Luther
rightly judged upon his restoring of this great point in Germany, in the
beginning of that Reformation, of which God made him so blessed an instrument.
This is that great Doctrine which made St. Paul profess, Chap. 1. v. 16. that
notwithstanding all the opposition the Jews made to it, notwithstanding all
their scoffs and drolleries, he was not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it
is the power of God to salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first,
and also to the Greek: For (v. 17.) therein the righteousness of God is
revealed from faith to faith; and conformable to the Doctrine of the Old
Testament (the New Testament being, as Augustine called it, the Revelation of
the Old, as the Old was Occultatio novi, the New Testament in a Mystery), for
it was written there, Hab. 2. 4. The just shall live by faith. That text, Romans
1. 17. Luther tells us infinitely perplexed him, he was miserably tortured to
understand how the righteousness of God should be revealed from faith to faith;
for still he dreamed (having been all his lifetime before a Papist) of a
righteousness of his own; but at last he began to conceive that the
Righteousness of God might signify in a passive sense, not a righteousness in
which a man should walk before, and toward God, but the righteousness wherein
a man should appear before God as righteous; as the power of God, and the
wisdom of God, in some Texts signifies that power by which God makes us
strong, and that wisdom by which God makes us wise. Now as life and
immortality, so this righteousness was not first discovered, but brought to
light by the Gospel, fully and clearly there manifested. When Luther
apprehended this, he Jam quanto odio vocabulum. Justitia Dei oderam ante: tanto
amore dulcissimum istud vocabulum extollebam, ita miki iste locus Pauli fuit
vere Porta paradisi. Luth. Jenae. t. 1. op. in praefat.
tells us the Gospel looked upon him with quite another face. Now, says he,
look how much I before hated that word, The righteousness of God; so much now I
loved that most sweet word, and that place of St. Paul was to me the very gate
of Heaven. This Doctrine was but darkly revealed in the Old Testament in types
and prophecies, and dark sayings; but in the Gospel it is fully revealed, viz.
That the righteousness by which a soul is justified, and by which it must stand
righteous before God, is not a righteousness of Works, neither an obedience of
the law contained in Ordinances, which law is perished; nor yet our obedience
to the Moral Law, whether by works done before, or after conversion; but the
righteousness of Jesus Christ on Gods part imputed to us without works, on our
part received by faith, as it is expounded Phil. 3. 10. and in several other
places of the New Testament. The Apostle having laid down this Proposition in
Chap. 1. v. 16, 17. he confirms it by a very great variety of argument in the
remaining part of the first Chapter, and in Chap. 2, 3, 4, 5. In the first and
second Chapters he proves it by an Induction: If works will justify any, they
must either be the works of the Heathens, or the works of the Jews. As to the
first, he proves that the works of the Heathens could not, for they were
abominable, such as the wrath of God was revealed against, Acts of ungodliness
and unrighteousness. Chap. 2. He proves that the works of the Jews could not,
for they were imperfect, and they rested in some rituals, and external
privileges, which could never justify a soul. In the third and fourth
Chapters he proves it as by other arguments, so from the instances of Abraham
and David; the same way that Abraham the Father of the faithful was justified,
the same way must all believers (his children) be justified; and the same way
that David was justified, the same way also must we be justified; but Abraham
and David were both justified by an imputed righteousness. In the fifth Chapter
he argues from the sweet fruits which flow from justification by faith. In
that Chapter, v. 20. he had said, But where sin abounded, grace did much more
abound. The wise Apostle foresaw there would be that very clamorous objection
made, which we hear now made against this excellent Doctrine of the Gospel,
viz. That it opens a door to licentiousness, destroys any obligation to
good works, gives a license to sin, etc. He therefore in this Chapter
obviateth this silly, or malicious cavil, What shall we say then (says he)?
shall we continue in sin, that grace may bound? May we then neglect any good
works, because we are not justified by works, but by the aboundings of grace
freely imputing the righteousness of Christ to us?

1. He aversateth this, and rejects such a notion with utmost abhorrence and
detestation. God forbid (says he) far be it from us to assert any such thing,
or to lay down any position from whence any such thing can be reasonably
concluded. Then he proceeds to prove, that there can be no such conclusion
drawn from his premises: For (says he) how shall they who are dead to sin,
live any longer therein? The strength of the Argument lies in this Hypothesis,
That God at the same time that he discharges the soul from the guilt of sin,
and the obligation to death, under which sin lays it, does also renew and
sanctify the heart, and destroys the Souls appetite and love to sin; so that
sin has no longer a power and dominion over the Soul: and look as for a dead
man to live, is a contradiction; so it is no lesser contradiction for a
justified soul to live in sin; every justified soul has an heart dead to sin,
and so cannot any longer live therein; he may be overtaken with faults; he does
sin seven times in a day; and who knows how often he offends? But he
sins not as other men; he cannot live in sin, much less take an
encouragement to sin from the grace of God abounding toward his soul for the
justification of it.

2. In the Text which I have read to you, he proves it from our Baptism, Know
you not (says he) that so many of us as are baptized into Christ, are baptized
into his Death? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death. In the
words you have,

1. A Preface, Know you not? Which confirms the following Proposition, as a
Proposition of undoubted truth, and great Evidence, such as all good Christians
must be supposed to know; and it were strange if any understanding Christian
should be ignorant of so evident a truth.

2. A Proposition, in those words, So many of us as are baptized into Christ,
are baptized into his Death.

3. Here is the proof of this Proposition, or (if you had rather call it so) an
Inference upon this Proposition, We are therefore buried with him by Baptism
into death. What is necessary for the Explication of the words, you shall have
in the Explication of the Proposition; which for the advantage of your
memories, I shall deliver you in the words of the Text.

Prop. So many of us as are baptized into Christ, are baptized into his death,
and buried with him by baptism into death. The Proposition will only require
Explication and Application. In the first I have these Questions (which all of
them have their difficulty) to open to you.

Quest. 1. What this is to be baptized into Christ? Quest. 2. What it is to be
baptized into the death of Christ? and in what sense those who are baptized,
are baptized into the death of Christ? Quest. 3. How we are buried with Christ
by Baptism into death?
Quest. 1. What is this to be baptized into Christ?

I do not think that this is to be expounded by being baptized according to the
true form of Baptism, In the name of the Father, the Son and Holy Ghost. I can
easily allow that to be comprehended in this phrase, but I can by no means
allow it to exhaust the full sense of it; for I cannot understand how in that
sense a person baptized, can be said to be more baptized into Christ, than into
the Father or the Holy Ghost, (...) must certainly be more than (...). Ambrose
is (I think) a little critical, when to justify this restriction of sense
against the aforementioned obvious objection, he tells us, That in the name
Christ, is not only to be understood that person whom the name denotes (viz.
the second person in the Trinity), but the other two persons, qui mittit, he
who sends, who is the Father; and qui ungit, he who annointeth, who (says he)
is the Spirit, the third person in the blessed Trinity.

2. We often meet with phrases much akin to this in holy Writ, (...), in the
name of Jesus Christ, Acts 2. 38. In the name, (...), of the Lord Jesus; in the
name of Paul, (...), Acts 8. 16.
1 Cor. 1. 13. (...), into Moses, 1 Cor. 10. 3. We are baptized into one body,
(...), 1 Cor. 12, 13. Into Christ, Gal. 3. 27. (the only text in Scripture
fully parallel to this), Into the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy
Ghost, Mat. 28. 19. We translate it [in] in the Greek, it is (...). The phrase,
as it lies before us, may signify several things.

1. The term of the Action: So we may be said to be baptized Actus terminum.
into Christ, 1. As we are baptized into the Gospel of Christ: thus Origin. We
are not baptized into the Law, but into Christ; not into the Doctrine of
Justification by works, but by faith in Christ. Christ is so much the substance
of the Gospel, that his name is sometimes put for the Gospel: so we preach
Christ, i. e. the Gospel of Christ The Jews were baptized into Moses, into the
Cloud and the Sea, 1 Cor. 10. 3. We are baptized into Christ; they signified a
Christ to come; you are baptized into a Christ already come, who has died for
your sins, into a Doctrine that so teaches you.

2. Or secondly, Into the profession of the Gospel Paul tells the believers at
Ephesus, that John baptized with the baptism of Repentance, that they should
believe on him who should come after him, Acts 19. 3.
that is, on Christ Jesus: but now we are baptized into Christ, and into the
Baptism of Christ; That we should believe on him who is come, who has died for
our sins, and risen again for our justification: We are baptized into the
profession of this faith.

3. Or thirdly, Into Christ, that is, into the mystical body of Christ: thus
Pareus: and Estius, into the number of visible Saints, visible In populum Dei
adoptamur. Pareus.
Professors, etc. And thus it excellently agrees with that of our Apostle, 1
Cor. 12. 13. By the Spirit we are baptized into one body.

2. The phrase (secondly) may denote the nature of the Act of Baptism: and so
two things are spoken in it.

1. That in Baptism we are dedicated, and given up to the Lord Jesus Christ: By
Baptism (says Estius) we give up our Names to Regno. and grae. illius
assignari. Musculus.
Christ: We are assigned over to the Grace and Kingdom of Christ. This is the
very nature of Baptism, to give up, and assign the baptized person to the
service of Christ.

2. Nay there is not only in Baptism a dedication of the Soul to Christ, to his
Kingdom and Grace; but there is an initiation of the soul, and a solemn
adstriction, and binding over of the soul to the service and obedience of the
Lord Jesus Christ. There is a vow, and a Covenant in Baptism, as Circumcision
of old was the Lords Covenant, the sign and symbol of his Covenant with the
Jewish Children; so Baptism is the Lords Covenant with Children under the
Gospel. The soul of the Baptized person is not only given up unto the Lord, but
it is bound over to Christ, and enters a Covenant with him; and as the
Married woman upon her Marriage covenants with her husband, and loses her own
name, and takes that of her husband; so the baptized person covenanteth with
Christ, and there takes upon it the name of a Christian. Or as Soldiers upon
taking their Sacramentum (for that word properly signifies the Military-Oath
taken by Soldiers to their Commander in chief) are bound, and obliged by it to
the Obedience of their General; so the baptized person, upon receiving this
Sacrament, becomes obliged, and engaged unto Jesus Christ, and is sworn in
nomen imperationi coeti. Thus Bucer, Dickson, and Peter Martyr do expound the
phrase.

3. The phrase may signify the Exterior form of Baptism: as to Baptismi formam.
the Administration of it, it must be in the name of Christ; so we are baptized
into Christ.

1. According to the institution of Christ, he has commanded his Ministers,
saying, Mat. 28. 19. Go preach and baptize all Nations. This is mentioned by
Ambrose, Aquinas, Pareus, Justinian, Chrysostom, Beza and P. Martyr.

2. By a solemn invocation of the name of Christ. This Beza insisteth upon,
expounding Mat. 28. 19. Then the sense is no more than, so many of us as were
baptized in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, solemnly invoking the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Aquinas thinks this the whole sense of this
text, but that I cannot agree; I shall give you my reason for it anon.

4. The phrase may import something of the significancy of this Ordinance:
Every Sacrament is significative, a Sacrament is an outward and sensible sign.
Now what does Baptism signify? says the Apostle, We are baptized into Christ.

1. It is signum rei, a sign of the redemption of our Souls by the blood of
Christ, of that clean water with which he has promised to sprinkle the Souls
of his people, and which he has poured out for their sprinkling, even the
blood of that lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the world.

2. It is signum spei, A sign that our hope alone is in Christ Jesus, there
being no other name under heaven but his by which we can be Acts 4. 12.
saved, nor any salvation in any other. Thus Deodate seems to interpret it.

5. The phrase may signify the End of our Baptism: If any ask, To what purpose
are we and our Children baptized? the answer is, We are baptized into Christ,
to this end,

1. That we should bear a testimony to the death of Christ, and hold forth the
great truth of the Gospel to the world, that Jesus Christ is come into the
world to save sinners: That he was incarnate, has died, and is risen again
from the dead; that in and through him we might have remission, and forgiveness
of sins through his blood.

2. That we might bear witness that he is the alone object of our hopes, that
we rest upon him, and him alone for eternal life and salvation: This is the
very end why we are baptized.

3. That we might grow up in him: so Beza and Hemingius. We are by baptism, as
it were implanted, and ingrafted into Christ, and as the end of the
implantation, and ingrafting of a cien into a stock, or of a plant in any soil,
is that it might grow up in that soil, or in that stock: So the end for which
we are baptized into Christ, is, that we might grow up in Christ.

6. The phrase may be understood to signify the fruit of Baptism; lest any
should say, What good is there of this Sacrament? or what avails Baptism?
says the Apostle, We are baptized into Christ. This is the fruit of Baptism,
the Baptized person has an interest and relation given him to Christ, and is
become a member of Christ; Sacramentally so: Really so. All baptized persons
have a real relation to the Church, whose head is Christ.

7. But lastly, This phrase may be understood to denote the Perfection of
Baptism: As the Apostle distinguishes of Circumcision, Romans 2. 26, 27, 29.
telling us, there is a Circumcision in the letter, and of the flesh; and there
is a circumcision of the heart, in the spirit: So we must distinguish of
Baptism; there is a baptism of Water, and there is a baptism with the Holy
Ghost: There is a baptism of the letter, and upon the flesh; and there is a
baptism in the heart, and the spirit. Now this latter is the Baptism into
Christ; the other is in the name of Christ; but this most properly into Christ,
it signifies that we pass into Christ, says P. Martyr. So, as I think, there
is some difference, and that a great one, betwixt the phrase used here, and
Gal. 3. 27. Baptizing into Christ; and that used in many other Scriptures, of
being baptized in the name of Christ. I will shortly offer you my reason for my
opinion, as to this phrase, signifying thus much.

1. In the first place the Apostles phrase seems to me, to restrain the subject
of the Proposition: He does not say All of us were baptized into Christ, and so
into his death; but as many of us as were baptized into Christ, were baptized
into his death: As much as to say, Many are baptized in the name of Christ; but
some of us have not only been baptized in the name of Christ, according to the
sorm he has prescribed, with solemn invocation of his name; but we have upon
our baptism, truly believing, been ingrafted into Christ, and united to him.
Now so many of us as have been thus, not only been formally, but really
baptized into Christ, having with the sign received the thing signified, are
baptized into his death.

2. Again, Observe the Praedicate, As many of us (says the Apostle) as are
baptized into Christ, are baptized into his death. I am aware that that phrase
may be interpreted, and is by some (as I shall show you more by and by) into
the sign and symbol of his death; but I do not take that interpretation to be
comprehensive of the full of what that phrase imports. I think it is
interpreted, v. 6. Knowing that our old man is crucified with him, that the
body of sin may be destroyed: which cannot be understood of all baptized
persons, but such only as are baptized with the Holy Ghost; or according to the
phrase of this text, Baptized into Christ.

3. This phrase is but once more found in Scripture, Gal. 3. 27. where you have
another predicate affixed to the subject of this Proposition: There it is, As
many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. Now what it
is to put on Christ, the Apostle tells you, Romans 13. 14. But put you on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof, Ephesians. 4. 24. You read of putting on the new man: so Col. 3. 10. Now all
that are baptized, cannot be said to have put on Christ: Many of them make
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts there of: Many of them have not
put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and holiness.

For these reasons I do think, that to be baptized into Christ, signifies more
than to be baptized in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. I conclude
then my discourse in answer to this Question, thus.

1. There is an external imperfect Baptism, whereby, and wherein persons are
washed with water as a Religious rite, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, with invocation on the name of Christ. Those who are thus baptized, are
baptized into the Gospel-Doctrine, and the profession of it; into that one body
of which Christ is the Head; they are dedicated to Christ, and make a covenant
with him. They receive their Baptism as a sign, that Christ the Savior of the
World is come, has died and risen again, and that their only hope for
salvation is in and through him; they are baptized for this very end and
purpose, that they might bear a testimony to the Messiah his being come, having
died, etc. and that they might accept of him as their Savior; hope, and rest
in and upon him, and him alone, and growing up in him, etc. and their Baptism
is not fruitless, in case they do repent and believe in Christ; but is a sign
to them, that doing so, he will be their Savior.

2. But there is also a more perfect Baptism, when persons are not only washed
with water, but with the blood of Christ, regenerated and sanctified, baptized
with the Holy Ghost, and with fire: Now (says the Apostle) so many as are thus
baptized into Jesus Christ, are baptized into his death. And that brings me to
the second Question.

Q. 2. What is this to be baptized into the death of Christ?

This I shall answer in three things:

1. Into the image and similitude of his death: Thus Justinian and In
similitudinem, and imaginem mortis.
Gorran expound the phrase: And this is two ways.

1. The first more particularly respected the manner of Baptism in those hot
Countries, which was by dipping the whole body of the baptized person in water:
thus John baptized in Jordan. Ezekiel. 36. 25. Isa. 44. 3.
This is doubtless lawful, but we say not necessary, nor amongst us expedient:
Not necessary, for the grace of justification and remission, is as well in
Scripture expressed by sprinkling and pouring water: And you read of the
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, V. Aquinat. Esti. Piscat. Deodati ad
loc.
1 Pet. 2. 2. and we are said to be come to the blood of sprinkling, Heb. 12.
24. signified by the blood of sprinkling under the law, Heb. 11. 28. Not
expedient, or convenient; dipping a newborn Infant in water, in a probable way
would endanger its life. But I say, that custom had a fairer similitude of the
burial of Christ: persons buried are covered with Earth; so those baptized
persons were covered with water: but it is as true, Earth is sprinkled and
poured too upon persons buried, as water is upon the Child baptized.

2. But there is another similitude of far more value, expressed v. 6. of this
Chapter, Our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed. This must be understood, when the Lord with his internal grace is
pleased to concur with the Sacrament; Even as from that day, wherein Christ
cursed the figtree, it withered; so from that day that a person is baptized,
where Gods inward grace concurreth with the outward sign, the tree of lust and
corruption decays and withers.

2. Into his death, that may be into the faith, owning and profession of his
death; those who are baptized into Christ, do profess to believe, that Jesus
Christ died for sinners; the water poured and sprinkled on them, signifies the
blood of Jesus Christ; so that Christ has died: and their submission to that
rite, to receive Baptism, is a taking upon them the faith and profession of the
death of Jesus Christ.

3. Lastly, They are baptized into the fruit of his death: And this may be
taken in a double sense.

1. If they be only externally baptized, and receive no more than the outward
sign: yet it is, and shall be a sign unto them, that if at any time they shall
heartily repent and believe, the fruit and benefit, yea all the fruit and
benefit of the death of Christ shall be really and truly theirs.

2. If the Lord does with the external sign confer the inward grace, and give
the thing signified, then they are really and absolutely baptized into the
death of Christ, and made partakers of the benefits of his redemption, being
washed with the blood of the lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the
world. And thus much may serve to have spoken to the second Question; the third
follows.

Quest. 3. What it is to be buried with Christ by baptism into death, and how
the baptized person may be said to be buried with Christ by Baptism into death?

I Answer: A baptized person may be said to be buried with Christ by Baptism
into death,

1. Analogically; there being (as I said before) a great Analogy betwixt
burying of a dead body, and baptizing a person; the dead person was covered
with the Earth, the baptized person with Water. This was according to their
manner of baptizing by dipping; to which also the Apostle alludeth, Col. 2. 12.
And of old they used a trina immersio, a dipping the baptized person three
times, to signify Christ's lying three days in the grave: but this usage was
doubtless not so old as the Apostles times, nor was there any rule for it:
Others say, they dipped the person baptized thrice, to signify his being
baptized in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: Thus Aquinas,
Justinian, Chrysostom, Damascene, Theophilact and Gregory, interpret this
text: but I do not think that this takes up the whole of the sense.

2. We are buried with Christ by Baptism into death Symbollically, or
Sacramentally: Baptism signifies thus much to all, That if they live up to
that dedication of them unto God, unto that Covenant which they enter into in
Baptism, when they come up to years of discretion (if they be baptized in their
Infancy) repenting and believing, their sins shall come no more in Gods sight,
but be as much buried, and out of sight, as a person (who is baptized by
dipping in water) is out of our sight, during that instant. Thus the Apostle,
Col. 2. 12. says, We are buried with him in baptism. Baptism, wherein the
baptized person is buried with water, signifies the burial of the sins of that
soul with Christ, who shall truly repent and believe, and dye unto sin.

3. When the Lord, together with the external sign, conferreth his grace,
signified by that sign, The sins of that soul, are in that moment buried with
Christ, so as they shall appear no more, either to their Souls eternal
condemnation, or in their former power and dominion, as our Apostle afterward
speaks in this Chapter. Sin shall not have dominion over your mortal bodies;
because you are not under the law, but under grace. I have now done with the
Doctrinal part of my discourse; and the Proposition thus explained, amounts to
these two things:

1. That every person who has come under the Sacrament of Baptism, by virtue
thereof is dedicated to God, and stands obliged to believe the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and to make a profession of that faith, and is from that day made a
member of the mystical body of Christ (so far forth as it is visible), and has
received that holy sign, upon this trust, That he or she shall not be ashamed
of Christ and his Gospel, but shall accept of Christ, and the way of salvation
through him revealed to the world, and commit all its spiritual concerns unto
him, and rest upon him, and him alone for life and salvation; and grow up in
him, avoiding the pollutions of the world through lusts. And this Baptism is
both a sign to the soul commemorative of what Christ has done in dying for
sinners, and declarative of what he further will do in the application of his
redemption to them; and that every one baptized, walking up to his Baptismal
dedication and Covenant, shall certainly enjoy the benefits of Christ's death.
And all such as come not only under the Ordinance, but who are fully and
perfectly baptized with the Holy Ghost, are forthwith ingrafted into Christ,
and entitled to a present enjoyment of all the benefits of his death.

2. That all such as have come under the holy Ordinance of Baptism, ought to
look back upon their Baptism, as the Image of Christ's death, and upon
themselves obliged by virtue of it, to dye to sin, like as he dyed for sin: and
all such as are perfectly baptized into Christ, have their sins buried with
Christ, and their sins can no more rise up in judgment against them, than one
that is buried can rise up to do his former actions in the world; and the power
of sin is also dead in them, so as it is impossible they should any longer
serve sin; and therefore the plea of those against Justification of grace for
the righteousness of Christ imputed to the soul, must be vain; for that holy
Doctrine cannot possibly open a door to a licentious conversation, because all
such persons are baptized into Christ, and buried with Christ by Baptism into
death. This I take to be the full sense of the text, and the Proposition which
I have delivered in the words of the text. Let me now come to the Application
of this discourse.

Instruct. 1. This in the first place may (by way of Instruction) let us know,
That Baptism (considered as to the action) is a most solemn, serious action,
and ought to be so looked upon, both by the Administrator, and by those who
offer themselves or their children unto it; and considered as an Ordinance of
the Gospel, is a most useful Institution. I will dwell a little upon both these
branches, it being indeed my great design in this discourse, to recover to this
Ordinance the gravity and reverence that is due to it, and to make my hearers a
little better to understand the meaning and usefulness of it, than the most of
our people seem to do. The truth is, we are degenerated into such a careless,
slighty administration of this sacred Institution, as if the Baptizing of a
child were an action of no graver import, than washing its face, and an
opportunity (amongst the richer) to call friends together for a banquet, or
(amongst those of meaner rank) to call the richer together, to make them, or
their Midwives, or Nurses some small presents. Let me therefore evince to you.
1. That it is a most serious Action. 2. That it is a most useful Institution.

1. That it is a most serious Action. Two things in my former discourse will
evince this: 1. That in Baptism there is a solemn dedication of the person
baptized unto Christ. 2. That there is in it a solemn adstriction, or
stipulation, or engagement of the party baptized unto Christ.

1. I say first, There is in it a solemn dedication of the person There is in
Baptism a solemn dedication of the person baptized to God.
unto Christ. If the person baptized be adult, and grown up, he or she dedicate
themselves: If they be baptized in their Infancy, their Parents (whose they
are) dedicate them unto Christ. The grown person, that offers him, or her
self to Baptism, does in effect say, Lord, I am thy creature, the work of thy
hands; I have degenerated, and forgotten thee, my maker; other Lords have ruled
over me; I have been servant to Idols, a servant to the Devil, to the world, to
my own lusts. But, Lord! I am weary of that service, and from my heart renounce
it; I have heard that thou have sent Jesus Christ into the world to save
sinners. I desire to look upon it as a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance. Lord! I do here accept it, and of that thy way of salvation, and
do from my heart, this day, set my self apart unto thee, and solemnly offer up
my self unto thee. I am Christ's servant, O Lord, I am Christ's servant,
believing that is he who has loosed my bands.

Admitting a child to be baptized in its infancy, then the parents dedicate it.
Give me leave to allude to that of Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 27, 28. The good woman had
been praying for a child, v. 15. having obtained a child of the Lord, v. 22.
She names the child Samuel [asked of God], v. 22. She resolves when he was
weaned, to carry him, that he might appear before the Lord, and there abide for
ever. v. 26. she brings the child to the High Priest Eli, and says, Oh, my
Lord! as thy soul lives, my Lord, I am the woman that stood by thee, praying
unto the Lord: For this child I prayed, and the Lord has given me my petition
I asked of him; therefore also I have lent him to the Lord: as long as he lives
he shall be lent to the Lord. She meant it in a particular sense, that she had
dedicated him to the Priestly office. But there is no parent that brings a
child to Baptism, but says in proportion thus unto God:

O Lord! I am the person to whom thou have given this child; for it I prayed,
and thou have given me the petition I asked of thee. Therefore also I here
dedicate him to thee, O thou eternal Father! To thee, O most dear and blessed
Savior! To thee, O most holy Spirit! To the only living and true God! I here
dedicate my child; and my desire is, that thou would accept him, that as long
as he lives he may be the Lords. Is not here now a most grave and solemn
action, requiring all our thoughtfulness, seriousness, gravity and attention
imaginable? Was the dedication of an house to God so serious an action, that
Solomon at it offered a sacrifice of 22000 Oxen, and an 120000 Sheep, and kept
a feast seven days, and then a solemn assembly? Was the dedication of an Altar
so solemn an action, that it took seven days time? 2 Chronicles. 7. 8, 9. And can
the dedication of a child, a piece of our selves, flesh of our flesh, unto God,
be judged a slighty action, so as that there needs no more, than for parents,
without any praevious thoughts, on the sudden to send for a Minister, and he in
great haste to read over two or three prayers, and sprinkle water on it, saying
I baptize thee, etc. I wish this slighty kind of Administration of this sacred
Ordinance, flow not from that novel conceit of the necessity of Baptism to
salvation, or the certain effect of it, upon all that shall not afterward run
on the score with God, for the washing away of the guilt of Original sin.
Whatsoever it be which has encouraged such hasty and perfunctory
Administrations, I am sure they no way suit the grave nature of this solemn
Administration. Dedications, if they were of no more than wood and stone, and
other inanimate things, were wont to be more serious actions, and done in a
more grave and serious manner.

2. But there is in Baptism not only a solemn dedication of the A solemn
engagement of the Soul to God.
party baptized unto God, but also a solemn adstriction, or obligation of the
person to God. Circumcision of old, was called Gods covenant in their flesh,
Gal. 17. 13. Baptism under the Gospel succeeds into its place: It is Gods
Covenant in our flesh. We read in Scripture of three ways of making Covenants
betwixt parties.

1. By words only. Thus God made a Covenant with Abraham, saying, I will be thy
God, and of thy seed.

2. By words, and a ceremony or sign: Such a Covenant you read made of betwixt
Jacob and Laban, Genesis 31. 46.

3. By a Ceremony alone. Thus the Masters boring through the ear of his servant
with an Awl (the servant submitting to it), was a covenant; though at the time
the servant said nothing, yet he was by that submission obliged to be his
Masters servant for ever. Thus with us, the Soldiers taking Press-money, or the
Kings Colors, is an actual obligation upon him to keep to the Kings service,
and subjects him to death if he deserts it. Baptism is such a ceremony. The
person brought under it is by such submission actually engaged in the service
of Christ, no longer to live unto himself, nor to dye unto himself, but unto
him who has dyed for him, the sign of whose blood he has received, in the
sprinkling or pouring of water upon him. The man or woman that is baptized,
does in effect say, Let the blood of Christ, signified by this water, be a
witness against me: let is be upon me for ever to confound me, if I ever
apostatize from the profession of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Faith of
Christ, or wilfully and presumptuously live contrary to his law. Is not this a
most serious action, think we? Marriage is but a Covenant betwixt man and wife,
wherein God is no party, but only called in as a witness, in it the husband and
wife mutually bind themselves each to other, for the term of one of their
natural lives; yet it is a most grave and serious action. I have always
thought, that the most of men and women trifle a great deal too much with that,
and should be much more grave and serious than they are; and take many more
serious thoughts, before they give away themselves each to other, and put
themselves out of a power over their own bodies; and that the cursed
Atheistical lives of very many husbands and wives, their discontents and
breaches, and the perverse spirit mixed betwixt them, is but the effect and
just punishment of men and women's hasty, slighty, and inconsiderate engagements
in that Covenant: this is a Covenant of another nature, a Covenant betwixt the
great God, and the baptized person; where God is not a witness only, but a
party. Ought we not to be serious in such an action? O let this mind you that
hear me, to bring your Children to Baptism, and to attend the administration of
it with much more gravity and seriousness of thoughts than is usual. Believe
me, it is no light action to Dedicate a child to God; not to covenant with God,
that your child shall be his servant for ever. If afterward you direct it
otherwise, or show it an example to the contrary, or omit to instruct it, and
mind it of its duty, and to call upon it for the performance of it, or as much
as in you lies to hinder it from the contrary; the child shall perish for its
Apostasy, because the Oath of God was upon it; but its blood shall also be
required at your hands.

2. But I told you, that as the action is serious, so the Institution The
usefulness of Baptism.
is useful. There are too many who slight this great Institution, because they
cannot understand the usefulness of it. There are others that will make an
usefulness of it beyond what I can find in holy Writ, making it, upon the work
done, to wash away the guilt of Original sin, and to set the soul rectum in
curia, right in the Court of Heaven. I cannot allow this; but doubt not to
evince to you, That leaving this effect only to the blood of Christ sprinkled
upon the conscience, Baptism is a very useful thing, and that upon a fourfold
account.

1. To repel temptations to sin; and this, as it is a pre-ingagement To repel
temptations.
upon the soul. It is an excuse you often put men off with in your converses
with the world, when you have no mind to meet, or treat, or converse with them,
you tell them you are pre-engaged, you cannot meet with them, or deal with
them, or be for them, indeed (you tell them) you are pre-engaged: thus you look
often upon pre-engagements as very useful to you: You have this from your
Baptism to answer all tempters, all temptations to sin, be they from what
tempters they will, if Satan, if your own lusts, if the world solicit you to
Apostasy, either from the profession of faith which you have made, or from your
practice of holiness. When the Devil makes any such impressions upon your
souls, you can say to him, Satan! I am engaged. When the men of the world, the
sinful companions in it tempt you to cast in your lot with them, you can say to
them, Friends, I cannot, I am engaged. Every baptized person (as you have
heard) is an engaged person, because he is baptized into Christ. When (Nehem.
6. 2.) Sanballat and Geshem, thinking to do Nehemiah a mischief, sent to him,
saying, Come let in meet together in the Villages: he sent back messengers to
them, saying, I am doing a great work, so that I cannot come down, why should
the work cease? It was Nehemiah's advantage there, that he was engaged at that
time; every tempter to sin, intends to do the soul a mischief, and tempters are
ever and anon treating and sending to the best of souls. Baptism furnishes the
soul with a weapon to repel the fiery dart: The soul has this to say, I am
pre-ingaged in the service of my Lord and Master Jesus Christ: I am dedicated
to him; I am bound over to his service: Mark how Joseph resisted the temptation
of his Mistress, Genesis 39. 9. How shall I do this great Evil, and sin against
God? So should the soul say, I am baptized, I am listed in the service of
Christ: How should I do this thing and break my vow, break my engagement in
Baptism to be the Lords, steal away my self from God, to whom I long since was
dedicated?

2. A second thing which I shall insist upon, to show you the exceeding
usefulness of this sacred Institution is, the advantage the soul may have from
it, to quicken it in and to the exercises of some habits of grace, and the
performance of some duties. I shall instance in four.

1. The first I shall instance in, stedfastness in the faith of the Gospel: To
quicken the soul to the exercises of Grace.
It is an exercise of grace, very often called for in holy Writ. We have indeed
a liberty, and it is our duty to prove all things; but we must hold fast that
which is good My beloved brethren (says the Apostle) be you steadfast, 1 Cor.
15. 58. 1 Pet. 5. 9. Whom resist steadfast in the faith, and in many other
texts. Now I say, our Reflection on our Baptism must needs have a great force
in it to oblige us to this stediness; which it must needs have, if we consider
it as an Oath or solemn Covenant and engagement, under which it brings us to
God: Religion has little force upon that man or woman's conscience, whom an
Oath will not oblige to do that which he has sworn to do. It is said of Herod,
after he had sworn to give Herodias what she should ask; though she asked John
Baptists head in a Charger, which Herod had no mind to give her, nevertheless
for his Oath-sake he commanded it to be given her: It is true, in that case
Herod was under no obligation, for the Rule is, That an Oath cannot be a bond
of iniquity. But where the thing we have sworn to, or engaged for, is such,
that we may do, or are otherwise bound to do, an Oath lays a great hold upon
the conscience, and makes the soul to see a further obligation to it, than what
it before lay under to the doing of it. Hence you shall observe, that Paul,
both to the Churches at Corinth, Ephesus and Galatia, argues to stedfastness,
from this Topic. There were in the Churches of Corinth some giddy-headed
persons, of which one said, I am of Paul; another said, I am of Apollos,
another, I am of Cephas; How does St. Paul endeavor to reduce them? 1 Cor. 1.
13. Is (says he) Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were you
baptized in the name of Paul? I pray (says he) consider your baptism: Were you
baptized into the profession of my Doctrine, or into the profession of the
Doctrine of Christ? Are you under Temptations to waver in the profession of the
great Truths and Doctrines of the Gospel? Think with your selves, Into what
Doctrine, or into the profession of what Doctrine was I baptized? Was it not
the Doctrine of Christ? Does this appear to me from holy Writ to have that
stamp upon it? So in Gal. 3 2, 3. This only (says the Apostle) I would learn
of you: Received you the spirit by the works of the law, or by hearing of
faith. Some of that Church were at that time running away from their profession
of the Gospel, being seduced by those who in those days insisted upon
Justification by the works of the law. The Apostle is attempting to reduce
them; he does it by this argument, Received you the spirit (says he) by the
works of the law, or by the hearing of faith? I shall not dispute whether the
Apostle there intends by receiving the spirti, the receiving peculiar to those
times in the extraordinary gifts or manifestations of it: Or such a receiving
of the spirit, as is common to all believers; either of which were then
generally received, or appeared to be received about the time of their Baptism.
Now, says the Apostle, in all reason you ought to receive that Doctrine, upon
the embracing of which, you had such an eminent evidence of the truth of it,
that you received the spirit as a seal of it, and were baptized into Christ
upon your first profession and owning of it. So, as I say, our Baptism, and
reflections upon it, will and must engage us to stedfastness, unless it
evidently appears to us, that that Doctrine was false and erroneous.

2. A second thing which our Baptism is useful to quicken us to, is, The
keeping of the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. A Keeping the unity of
the spirit in the bond of peace.
duty mentioned in Ephesians. 4. 3. and mark by what argmments the Apostle
persuades it, v. 4 There is one body, and one spirit, as you are called in one
hope of your calling: One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism: There is but one body,
compare that with that, 1 Cor. 12. 10. For by one spirit are we all baptized
into one body: That one body is the universal Church, as appears by the next
words, Whether Jews or Gentiles: and upon this argument (which the Apostle
would not have used, if he had not judged there had been a force in it) the
Apostle persuades Unity; an unity of Doctrine and Affections; for an Unity in
words and syllables, and in rites and ceremonies, is a stretching of that text
beyond the staple, there having never at that time been such a thing in the
Church of Christ, and it being what can never be attained, nor was ever
commanded by the Apostle. But to persuade an unity in faith and love, he minds
them of the Oneness of their Baptism, by which they were united to the Church,
which is but one body: Those that you divide from, or quarrel with, are of the
same body with you, and you, as well as they, were baptized into one and the
same body. Divide not therefore, nor quarrel each with other; fall not out by
the way, for you are brethren. It will sometimes put us upon agreeing with, and
loving of one another, to consider that we are fellow Citizens and
Fellow Soldiers; so it ought to engage us to endeavor unity, that we are
fellow members of the same body, and fellow-Citizens of the same City. There is
but one body, and we were all baptized into that one body.

3. It is useful to quicken us both to the exercises of faith and To the
Exercises of faith, and of repentance.
repentance. The force of this lies in the solemn dedication of the person to
God, and the Souls solemn engagement in it to be the Lords: both which
inseparably attend this holy Institution. The soul thus reasons with it self:
I was by nature a child of wrath, a great sinner, blind, unbelieving; when I
was baptized, I was dedicated to God; I solemnly engaged my self to the service
of God; I cannot be the Lords, without repenting, and believing his word, and
also a receiving of the Lord Jesus Christ, whom God has revealed to be the
Savior of them that believe. Had I been an Heathen, I ought not to have been
baptized, until I had given an evidence of my repentance, my hearty embracing
the Doctrine of the Gospel, and as hearty closing with the Lord Jesus Christ,
as my hope, and my Savior. Now though I was baptized, when a child, in my
parents right; yet if I ever hope to be saved, this cannot excuse me from those
great duties of Repentance and Faith, which God has made inseparably necessary
to salvation: As Circumcision avails nothing to those who did not keep the
Law, so Baptism avails as little to those who perform not the terms of the
Gospel: Besides, when I was baptized (though an Infant) I could not indeed
engage for my self; but my parents engaged for me, that (so far as lay in them)
I should repent and believe; they have fulfilled their parts to me, in calling
upon me for it, and pressing these things upon me; or if they have not, yet the
Covenant of God is in my flesh: and I am engaged to do these things, not only
because they are the necessary terms of my salvation, but in regard I have
covenanted in Baptism to do it. It is true, it is not in my power, without the
special efficacious grace of God, to repent, or to believe; but I am under the
Oath of God, to do what in me lies to do it, to avoid those gross sins, which
it is in my power to avoid, by virtue of the common grace of God denied to no
man; Wherein I have offended, to set down, sadly to reflect on them, and to beg
of God a broken heart for them, to wait upon all holy Institutions, which may
be conducive to these ends, etc.

4. To name no more. It is useful to quicken us up to Holiness, and that part
of it especially which lies in the mortification of our To the exercise of
Mortification.
members; Why, because, says the Apostle, we are Baptized into his death, and
buried with him by baptism into death: We are not only baptized into a belief,
and a profession of a belief of his death, but into a fellowship with his
death; a part of which lies in a dying to sin, as he dyed for sin: For, says
the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 4. 1. He that has suffered in the flesh, has ceased
from sin, that he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh; to
the lusts of men, but to the will of God. Observe the words which go before, v.
2. For as much therefore as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your
selves likewise with the same mind, etc. From whence I infer, That our
fellowship with Christ's suffering in the flesh, lies in our cessation from
sin. Now I have showed you, that in Baptism a Sacramental representation of
Christ's suffering in the flesh, and our submission to that holy Institution,
engages us to a conformity to the death of Christ, and to a fellowship with
it, that is, to a ceasing from sin; For, says my text, we are buried with him
by baptism into death: and it follows, That like as Christ was raised up from
the dead by the glory of the father, even so we also should walk in newness of
life. And again, v. 6. Knowing that our old man was crucified with him, that
the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin:
For he that is dead, is free from sin. The meditation of this, is of great use
to engage us to Holiness; as there is in this Ordinance an engagement upon us
to dye unto sin, and to maintain that as well as other parts of the spiritual
fight. Thus I have showed you the usefulness of this Ordinance to quicken the
soul.

3. It is useful likewise to corroborate and strengthen the soul: Baptism, how
it is useful to help and strengthen the Soul.
and that both in the Exercises of faith, and of holiness. 1. In the exercises
of faith. Faith either respects the Proposition of the word, which faith
agrees to as truth: Or, 2. The person of the Mediator, who alone is the object
of saving, justifying faith, the primary, and more remote object, though the
promises of the Gospel be the proximate and mediate object, in and by which the
soul receives Christ; and by means of which, through the assistance of the
Spirit, the soul commits it self to him, as to all its spiritual concerns,
respecting eternal life and salvation. As to both these, Baptism is (if made
use of) a great help: Indeed all Sacramental signs are so, and given for that
end. I remember when God instituted the Jewish Passover, after the describing
the rise of it, Exodus 12. from v. 3. to v. 26. he adds v. 26, and 27. And it
shall come to pass, that when your children shall say unto you, What mean you
by this service? you shall say, It is the sacrifice of the Lords Passover, who
passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the
Egyptians, and delivered our houses. God foresaw, that that great deliverance
would in time be forgotten, or not believed, that God should show such favor
to a small oppressed number of people, as to bring them out of slavery; to slay
one in every family of the Egyptians, might be questioned (especially
considering the world was never very apt to believe stories of distinguishing
Grace or Providence), therefore God instituted the Passover, to continue the
memory, and revive the faith of so great a salvation. But how much greater a
salvation was here, For God to send forth his own Son (the Antitype to that
Paschal lamb) to take upon him our flesh, and to dye in our nature for sinners
upon the Cross? to agree to this, was like to be a much harder exercise of
faith: To revive the memory, and keep alive the exercise therefore of faith, as
to this miracle of salvation, God instituted two Sacraments of the New
Testament: ordained two sacred Actions to be done, that when our Children
should say to us, Father! or Mother! What is the meaning of this? We might say,
these are the Lords Sacraments, that you may believe what the Scripture tells
you, that the sins of souls are only washed out by the blood of Christ, here
signified and represented; and that if ever you will be saved, you must, as you
submit to this Ordinance, so also submit to the acceptance of him and his
righteousness, and look for salvation from him, and no other; and that you
might believe the Gospel is not a Romance, but a true History of what he, who
was the Son of God, did in dying for your sins, that you might not dye
eternally. And that when our own unbelieving hearts are overwhelmed in the
thoughts of these things, and saying, Surely such a thing could not be, the
mercy is too big for the grasp of our reason and comprehension; we might help
our selves by reflecting on our Baptism, and our frequent communicating at the
Lords table; and chide down those risings of unbelief, saying, If this were
not, What is the meaning of sprinkling persons with water in Baptism? or our so
often meeting at the Lords table to eat bread and drink wine, signifying the
flesh and blood of Christ? And as to that faith which is saving and justifying,
the object of which is the person of the Mediator; the soul is also helped in
that, as it is helped in the other faith: For the more the Soul is confirmed in
the Doctrine and Proposition of the Gospel, and the truth of that, the more
ground it sees to look for no other name under heaven by which it should be
saved, but to go out of it self unto him; as one, who because he was God, is
able to save to the utmost; and because he submitted to be made man, to dye
upon the Cross, to pay a price for lost man, evidenced his unquestionable
willingness, to seek and to save that which was lost, so as the soul has no
longer any pretense or color to doubt or question the sufficiency, or
willingness of this Savior. Thus this great Ordinance, if duly improved, is of
exceeding great use to us, to help our Souls in their exercises of faith: the
Soul, as it were here, reaches its hand to put into the holes of Christ's
side, and its fingers to lay in the print of the nails.

2. Nor is it less helpful to the soul in the exercises of holiness: And this
not only as it lays the soul under an engagement to it, of which I spoke
sufficiently before: but also in regard of the secret blessing of the Lord,
attending Baptism, where a Christian sets himself to fulfill the ends of it.

Object. 1. But some will say, We have been baptized, and we do not find such
fruits; we are full of doubts, and fears, and unbelief still; and we are very
unholy still; we find no such fruit of our Baptism. I Answer. 1. Possibly you
have not stirred up your Baptismal-grace. I remember St. Paul calls to Timothy,
to stir up the gift of God which was in him; and (1 Timothy 4. 14.) not to neglect
the gift of God, which was in him, by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands
of the Presbytery. I do not think that any saving-gift is given to any by
Baptism, more than there is to a Minister, by setting him apart to the
Ministry. But there is doubtless a gift given the Baptized person, conducive to
his salvation; if he will make a due and just improvement of it, he has a new
character put upon him, and is by it taken out of the Pagan World; he has a
new vow upon him; he has a new dedication. Now if men and women will never
seriously consider, and think on this; never revive the memory of it, or whet
it upon their souls; it is no wonder to hear them complain, that they find no
benefit, fruit, or advantage by it. A Scholar may be at a loss about a Notion
or Question, in which twenty books he has in his Study would resolve him; but
if he knows not how to use his books to that end, or will never take down a
book to look for any help from it; he may complain that none of all the books
in his Study will do him good in the case: The Question is, What they would do
if he looked into them, or knew how to use them?

Object. 2. But will some say, How many baptized persons are there, to whom
their Baptism is no help nor advantage; they, notwithstanding it, are
unbelieving, unholy, profane persons. To this I answer with Cyprian, To take
upon us Christ's name, Christi nomen induere, and non per Christi viam pergere,
quid aliud est quam praevaricatio divini nominis. Cypr.
and not to walk in his ways, is but to profane and abuse his most holy Name.
The Soldiers taking Press-money, or being listed, helps him, if he runs from
his Colors very little, unless it be to a shameful end of his life; but if he
keeps him to his colors, it helps him to his pay, and to his reward according
to his service.

A man may have in his Yard several pieces of Timber, which do him no service
at all: he may have great heaps of Stones that do him no good, but only annoy
and trouble his Yard: But if this man begins to build, then they help him,
every stone, every foot of Timber is useful to him. It is thus with our
Baptism, it lies by us of little use, till we begin the spiritual building; it
is a piece of timber, a stone cut out and squared for that: When a man begins
this work, then his Baptism helps. In short, the water of Baptism is much
like the water of jealousy: of which you read Numb. 5. 27. If the defiled
woman adventured to drink of it, it became bitter, and made her belly to swell,
and her thigh to rot, and the woman to be a curse amongst her people: but if
she were clean, it made her fruitful: So does the water of Baptism in a more
spiritual sense. If the baptized person, after it, lives an unbelieving, unholy
life, it causes a rot in him, and becomes a curse to him: But if a person
adhereth to the faith, and lives an holy life, in conformity to his
Baptismal-Dedication and Vow, and makes use of his Baptism; it makes him
fruitful, and helps him in every good work.

4. The last thing wherein I shall show you the usefulness of this sacred
Institution, is with reference to its confirming, sealing to, and assuring of
the soul.

1. It seals to us, assures us of, and confirms to us the truth Baptism is
useful to assure, confirm, and seal.
of the great Proposition of the Gospel. That this Rite was used in the
Apostolical Church, that it has been used ever since in the Church of Christ,
is out of doubt: Now what is the meaning of it? what does it signify, but that
Christ is come into the world to save sinners, and that our souls are washed
clean from their filthiness by the blood of Christ? So that either these things
must be true, undoubtedly true, or the whole Christian World in all ages has
been mistaken.

2. It seateth, and confirms this unto us, That if we truly repent, and
receive the Lord Jesus Christ, our sins shall be washed away with his blood,
and sin shall not have dominion over us: These are the two great promises of
the Gospel: and in Baptism there is a mutual stipulation, it is neither a
single promise on Gods part to us, nor a single vow on our part to God; but it
is a Covenant, Gods Covenant in our flesh, as God himself styled Circumcision;
to which Baptism succeeds, being a seal of the same Covenant.

3. It is a confirmation to us of our favor with God, liberty of access unto
God. In baptism we have the Name of God put upon us; the baptized person, like
the circumcised Jew, is called by Gods Name, In populum Dei adoptatur, he is
adopted into Gods family. It is very pleasant to see and observe what use the
servants of God have made of this being called by Gods Name, in their pleadings
with God, Jer. 14 9. Thou, O Lord, art in the midst of us, and we are called by
thy name; leave us not, Jer. 15. 16. I am called by thy name, O thou Lord God
of Hosts, Dan. 9. 18, 19. O my God, incline thine ear, and hear and behold our
desolations, and the City which is called by thy name. O Lord hear, O Lord
forgive, O Lord hearken, and do for thine own sake, O my God, for thy City, and
thy people are called by thy name. Shall not a Christian, that forgets not the
kindness of his youth, and the love of his Espousals, go to God, and say, Lord
leave me not, I was baptized into thy name? or, Lord help me, for I was
baptized into thy name? Mark how many Promises are made to those that are
called by the Lords name, 2 Chronicles. 7. 13, 14. If I shut up heaven that there be
no rain, etc. If my people, which are called by my name shall humble
themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways: then
will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land.
So Isa. 46. 6, 7. I will say to the North, Give up: and to the South, Keep not
back: bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the end of the earth; even
every one that is called by my name: for I have created him for my glory, I
have formed him, yea I have made him. Admitting a soul to live up to his
Baptismal-dedication and Covenant; his Baptism furnishes him with a great
argument to go unto God with, and with a great confidence and boldness in his
addresses to the throne of Grace by reason of the promises to persons under
those circumstances. Thus I have largely showed you the usefulness of this
sacred Institution, and finished this my first branch of Application. I now
proceed to further branches.

Instruct. 2. Observe from hence, how great the duty is which lies upon all
baptized persons. I will open it to you in three or four particulars.

1. There lies a duty upon them, to hold fast the profession of the faith of
the Gospel. Jude v. 3. exhorts, that we should contend earnestly for the
faith which was once delivered to the Saints. St. Paul, Phil. 1. 27. commands
us, together to strive for the faith of the Gospel. The Apostle to the Hebrews
calls to us, to hold fast our profession, Heb 4. 14. The profession of our
faith, Heb. 10. 23. This discourse will let you see the engagement which we
have to do it; we are baptized into it; we are striving for needless Rites and
Ceremonies, things of no value; and in the mean time forget this striving for
the fundamental truths of the Gospel. These are the things we are to strive, to
contend for, to be tenacious of; our Baptism lays an engagement upon us as to
this, for we are not baptized into Moses, but into Christ, that is, into the
public and steady profession of the Truths and Doctrine of the Gospel; and
whosoever apostatizeth from that profession, renounceth his Baptism, forgetting
both his own dedication in it, and his own Covenant and obligation by it.
Baptized persons have set to their seal, that God is true, and the Doctrine of
his Gospel is true, and that they will own it, and persevere in it.

2. Hence it appears, That all baptized persons are by their Baptism obliged to
the acceptance of Christ as their spiritual husband: I have (says the
Apostle) espoused you to one husband, that one husband is Christ; the contract
is made in Baptism; the espousals are upon the admission of the soul into the
fellowship of the Church, upon the visible evidence of his faith and
repentance. You know sometimes there are Contracts betwixt persons that are not
of age, for the consummation of Marriage; the contract is in verbis de futuro,
in words respecting the time that is to come: the Marriage is in verbis de
praesenti, in words obliging for the present. The differences are in those
words, I will take (which are the words of a contract), and I do take (which
are the words used in an actual Marriage). Every person in Baptism is
contracted to Christ. Every person is not of age for an actual Marriage, to
which Repentance and Knowledge are precedaneous: But every Baptized Infant
says, I will take Christ for my wedded husband and Lord. The Act in
Infant Baptism, is indeed rather the Act of the Parents, than the Child's, which
is not yet capable of a rational act: But be it so, the Parent has such a
right in the Child, that it stands bound to abide by the Act of its Natural
Guardian, unless the child grown up can show a sufficient reason to the
contrary. It is thus adjudged as to all legal Acts; what the legal Guardian
does, the Infant, and person in Nonage does: It holds much more in things
spiritual, where there is a precedaneous obligation to any humane Law, upon
every child to confirm and justify its Parents act: For every soul is bound to
this; and the Parent herein engages the child no further than was its
precedaneous duty in obedience to God: so as the Parents obligation, that the
child should accept of Jesus Christ as its Savior, and perform what God
requires of it, in order to its salvation, is really an obligation upon the
child to do what its spiritual Guardian has solemnly obliged for it; so as
every baptized person stands bound to believe in the Lord Jesus, and to live an
holy life.

3. It follows from hence, That there is a duty incumbent upon all good
Christians, even with their blood to maintain and defend the truth of the
Gospel. I would be rightly understood, not that all men are engaged in such
cases to take up Arms in the defense of the greatest Truths of the Gospel; that
requires a lawful authority to call them to it, and rests much upon the
establishment, or not establishment of the Doctrine of the Gospel by the Laws
of this or that place: But there is another way of defending the Truths of the
Gospel by our blood, and that is in a way of Martyrdom, patiently and
cheerfully suffering even death it self, rather than to deny the truths of the
Gospel: This is every Christians duty, by virtue of his Baptism. The very term
Sacrament originally signified an Oath that Soldiers took to their Prince, or
Captain General, to fight, or spend their blood under his Command and Conduct;
and the giving of this name to these two great Ritual Institutions, signifies
the duty of a Christian that is baptized, to fight under Christ's colors, and
to resist unto blood, fighting against sin.

4. Finally, There is a duty incumbent upon all baptized persons, to be
continually mortifying of sin, and keeping under their body, and making no
provision for the flesh, to obey it in the lusts thereof: For (says the Text)
as many of us as are baptized into Christ, are baptized into his death: and we
are buried with Christ by baptism into death. The import of both which phrases,
I have at large before opened to you, showing you, that they signify this
engagement laid upon us.

Instruct. 3. We may from hence infer, What dreadful, perjured, Apostate
wretches, the most baptized persons are; plain Renegado's from those colors
under which they were listed, in the day wherein they were baptized. Shall I
reckon them up to you, that you may see the difference betwixt Christians in
name, and Christians in deed.

1. What do you think of those who deny the Lord that bought them; that blow a
Trumpet, and say, What portion have we in David, or in the son of Jesse? What
will you say to them who deny that Christ is the Eternal Son of God, equal with
the Father; that have made shipwreck of their faith in Christ as God, or the
only Savior and Redeemer of the World? Was this the faith into which they were
baptized?

2. But how many more are there, who are not in this black bill of Heretics
and Apostates, but yet refuse to come to Christ, that they might have life; to
lay hold on him, and make application of his redemption? By their baptism they
were engaged when they should come to years of discretion, to say unto Christ,
Thou art our Lord, our Savior, and the guide of our youth; and we, as the
Ambassadors of the Lord Jesus, have besought them in Christ's stead, to be
reconciled unto God; and have not ceased from day to day, with all the
arguments we could use, and even with tears to entreat them to be reconciled
unto God; yet they live at enmity, and in open rebellion and disobedience to
the great Precept of the Gospel. They in their Baptism engaged that they would
take the Lord Jesus Christ to be their spiritual husband; they are now grown up
to years of discretion: One is married to his Lusts, another is married to the
World; many live in a total ignorance of the Gospel; many more in a desperate
unbelief of it, in a neglect, if not a contempt of Gods way of salvation: The
Lord makes a wedding-feast, he sends to invite men to it: One has married a
wife, and cannot come; another has bought five yoke of oxen, and has not
tried them, etc. Every impenitent sinner is maimed unto one lust or another.

3. How many are there, who by their Baptism are obliged to defend and maintain
the interest of Christ and his Gospel, whose work it is to persecute the Image
of Christ, wherever they see it, and set themselves in a direct opposition to
those Truths, Institutions, and persons who have any thing of the image and
superscription of Christ upon them?

4. Finally, What shall we say to those who live in the constant practice and
indulgence of those lusts, which by their baptism they were engaged to
mortify, and dye unto? In short, not only every person that is erroneous in
Doctrine, and a stiff maintainer of any Propositions contrary to the
fundamental Doctrine of the Gospel; not only persecutors and open enemies to
the Cross, and Gospel of Christ; but every one that abides and goes on in his
unbelief; or who indulgeth himself in any unmortified lust, is before God, by
reason of his Baptismal Dedication and Vow, a sacrilegious, perjured and
Apostatized person.

Instruct. 4. And from hence (in the next place) will the righteousness of God
appear, in throwing multitudes of baptized persons into that lake which burns
with fire and brimstone. The Jews of old were wont much to glory in two things:
1. That they had Abraham to their Father. 2. That they were of the
Circumcision, and looked upon others that were not circumcised as accursed. Our
Savior, John the Baptist, the Apostle Paul, Matthew. 3. John 8. Romans 2. (as you
will find) were put to take a great deal of pains, to beat them out of these
vain and empty confidences; I am afraid that we have too many that are apt to
flatter themselves with the name of Christ, and that they are called
Christians, and are baptized into the name of Christ. Luther complained that
there were many that did but crepare Christum, make a vain boast of Christ. --
Jactant fumos and nomina vana Catonum. What said John Baptist to the Jews?
Think not to say within your selves, We have Abraham to our Father, Mat. 39.
What does Christ say? John 8. 39. If you were Abraham's seed, you would do the
works of Abraham: But now you seek to kill me. -- This did not Abraham. What
says St. Paul to their boasting of Circumcision, Romans 2. 25. For circumcision
verily profits, if thou keep the law, but if thou be a breaker of the law,
thy circumcision is made uncircumcision. v. 28, 29. For he is not a Jew that is
one outwardly: neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh. But
he is a Jew who is one inwardly: and circumcision is that of the heart in the
spirit, whose praise is not of men, but of God: and Phil. 3. 2, 3. Beware
(says he) of the concision; he means the Jews, the circumcision; he calls them
the concision, because of the russle and rent they made in the Church of God;
For (says he) we are the circumcision which worship God in the spirit. Alas!
poor creatures, here will be your judgment, your condemnation will be
aggravated from this, That you were baptized, and so under a solemn dedication
to Christ under a solemn vow to be his disciples: and this vow of God you have
broken; this Oath you have satisfied; you were bound to God, and you are run
away, and brake your bonds, and cast the cords behind you. Shall the Master be
justified that sends his Covenant-servant that runs from him, or neglect his
business, to Bridewell? Shall the General be justified, which hangs up the
Soldier who runs from his colors? and shall not God be justified in
condemning thousands of baptized persons, whole lives are but a continued
apostasy? God would be justified in it as Creator, for your not living up to
the law of your Creation: but how much more when you have in Baptism dedicated
your selves to him, and made a solemn vow to be his servants?

Instruct. 5. From hence you may observe, That there is a great difference to
be put betwixt persons baptized: Some are Baptized with Water; others not with
water only, but with the Holy Ghost also, and with fire: some have been
baptized only with a Ministerial Baptism, others have been baptized also with a
true, effectual, spiritual Baptism: some have been baptized in the name of
Christ, or into Christ only in a large sense; others are baptized into Christ
in a true, spiritual and strict sense. And this brings me to a second Use.

Use 2. Which shall be of Enquiry, Whether we be baptized into Jesus Christ yea
or no? Multitudes (as you have heard) have been baptized, that in a true,
proper and spiritual sense have not been baptized into Christ. But you will
say, how shall we ever satisfy our selves in this point? I pray observe my
text, and the parallel text to it, Gal. 3. 27. In that text you will find these
words, As many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. In
this text you have it, As many of us as have been baptized into Christ, are
baptized into his death: We are buried with Christ by baptism into death. The
phrases of the text I have fully opened: but let me speak a word or two to the
other phrase, As many of us (says the Apostle) as have been baptized into
Christ, have put on Christ. We meet with the phrase in other texts, Romans 13.
14. But put you on the Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 4. 24. you read of putting on
the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and holiness: and Col.
3. 10. you have a phrase much like it: But put you on the new man, which after
God is created in righteousness and holiness: and Ephesians. 6. 11. you read of
putting on the whole armor of God. Christ and his Graces, in these texts, seem
to be set out to us under the notion of a garment, Rev 6. 11. you read of white
robes that were given to the Saints: and chap. 7. 9. of a great multitude, to
whom were given white robes, and palms. St. John, v. 13. asking what they were
who were arrayed with white robes? had answer, That they were those who had
washed their robes white in the blood of the lamb. In some conformity to this,
God speaks, Ezekiel. 16. 10. I girded thee about with fine linen. Now Rev. 19. 8.
the fine linen is the righteousness of the Saints; not our own righteousness,
which is of the law: but the righteousness which is of God, even the
righteousness which is of God through faith in Christ, Phil. 3. 10. and the
Church owns, that her righteousness was as a menstruous cloth, and as filthy
rags; but Jerem. 23. 6. he (Christ) is the Lord our righteousness. So then, to
put on Christ, is to put on the righteousness of Christ. This is put on,

1. For our Justification. It is the Righteousness of God (in the Gospel)
revealed from faith to faith, that is spoken of Phil. 3. 10.

2. For our Sanctification; not that we are to do nothing, but (as the Apostle
speaks) that we might be complete in him; and Romans 8. 3. that the Righteousness
of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after
the spirit. This now more generally, but more particularly: Does any one ask
me, Sir, how should I know whether I have put on Christ, or no? I answer.

1. If thou have put on Christ, thou have sometime before discerned thy soul to
be naked: It is Gods act to put us on Christ; and what God does of this nature,
is all in Charity: He has commanded us, Luke 14. 13. When we make a feast, to
call the poor, the maimed, the lame, and the blind; not our rich neighbors, v.
12. lest they bid us again, and make us a recompense: God will not be
recompensed for his acts of grace; he feeds the hungry, and cloatheth the
naked, the rich he sends empty away. The proud Pharisee is too well clothed in
his own opinion, for the Lord to put him on Christ, and his robes.

Again, Though the putting on Christ be Gods act as to Imputation of Christ's
righteousness, and the acceptance of us in the beloved: yet it is also our
Act, in respect of the exercise of our faith; no soul will wear the garment of
another, that has a fit and decent one of his own; we naturally scorn to be
beholden to any. God therefore first causes the soul to see that it is naked,
and to complain of its nakedness; then he puts Christ's robes upon it. Did
you ever discern that you were naked? Were you ever truly sensible, that you
wanted a righteousness, a garment of righteousness to appear in before God
another day, lest you at that day should walk naked, and men and Angels should
see your shame? if you did not, you may be confident, that you never yet put on
Christ, nor were in a strict spiritual sense baptized into Christ.

2. If you have put on Christ, you have put on him alone. The Children of God
shall never stand before him another day in a parti-colored coat: Christ's
robes will not go over another garment, nor be stitched together with our rags.
It is a piece of new cloth that must not, cannot be sown to an old garment:
This is the Papists vanity, they would stitch up their own works with the robes
of Christ's righteousness, and both together shall make up a righteousness for
them to appear before God. The good Christian may be resembled to one of you
Weavers, who are hard at work all the week long, but never put on a piece of
your own making. A good Christian is always hard at work, and working the work
of righteousness, praying, hearing, fasting, serving God in the works of his
general calling, and of his particular relation with his utmost diligence and
faithfulness: but when he has done, he says, Lord, let not this be my
clothing, I dare not appear before thee in these things! Lord, put me on
Christ! help me to put on Christ! Let me, says the Apostle, Phil. 3. 9. be
found in him, not having my own righteousness, which is of the law, but that
which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by
faith. He that has put on Christ, says (as Esau to his Brother) to all the
Angels and Saints, I have enough, my brethren, I have enough, keep what you
have unto your selves: nay, he says to his own Soul, I have been washed in
Jordan, I need not my own Abana and Parphar, he will see a need of his own
work, as to salvation, and the judicial discharge of him at the last day (if
men will call that Justification); but not as to remission of sins, or the
actual Justification and Acceptance of his Soul by, and before God, in this
life; he makes his boast of Christ, and rejoices in him, and has no
confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3 3. Thus much as to the putting on Christ as to
Justification. As for the putting on Christ, with reference to Sanctification,
let me add a few notes, by which we may judge of that.

3. He that has thus put on Christ, has put him on, not only for his upper,
but for his inward garment: He is not sanctified in body only, but throughout,
in mind, and in spirit; he does not only offer up his body as a living
sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God, but he is transformed through the
renewing of his mind; he has not only a demure countenance, an holy look, or
tougue, but his thoughts are in a great measure holy, his will, his affections
are holy, with allowance to such infirmities as attend even the best of Saints;
he (says the Apostle) is a Jew, that is one inwardly; so he is a Christian
that is one inwardly. St. Paul delights in the Law of God after the inward
man, Romans 7. 22. Many put on a face, and outward appearance of Religion: The
Pharisees, Luke 11. 39. made clean the outside of the cup and platter: but our
Savior tells them, that their inward part was full of ravening and wickedness.
So many are outwardly very fair and religious, but inwardly they are vain and
filthy; had you a window into their hearts, there you would see vain, and idle,
and sinful thoughts; and those not rare, and crowded in; but frequent,
constant, and feasting their Souls; A blind understanding, a will stubborn and
rebellious against the will of God, especially if cross to their natural bias,
and inclinations, and humors, or interest; sensual and carnal affections not
set on heaven and heavenly things, but merely feeding on earth, and earthly
things.

4. If you have put on Christ, you have put off what is contrary unto him. Romans
13. 12. Let us therefore (says the Apostle) cast off the works of darkness,
and put on the armor of light. Ephesians. 4. 22. And be you renewed in your mind,
that you put off, concerning your former conversation, the old man, which is
corrupt according to deceitful lusts. v. 25. Wherefore pntting away lying,
speak every man the truth to his neighbor. v. 26. Be you angry, and sin not.
v. 28. Let him that has stolen, steal no more, etc. v. 29. Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the use of
edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers. v. 30. Grieve not the holy
Spirit, etc. v. 31. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and
evil speaking be put away from you, with all malice, and be you kind one to
another, tender hearted, etc. Col. 3. 8. But now you also put off all these,
anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy communication out of your mouth v. 9.
Lie not one to another, seeing you have put off the old man with his deeds, and
have put on the new man, which is created in knowledge after the image of him
that created him. This is to be baptized into the death of Christ: This is the
picture of him who has put on Christ.

5. Who so has put on Christ, has put on both his robes, and his sackcloth,
and crown of thorns. As there is a dying to sin, so there is a living to
righteousness, in every soul that has put on Christ: As he puts off what I
mentioned before, so he also puts on, as one of the elect of God, holy, and
beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering; he for bears others, and forgives others, if he has a quarrel
against any, even as Christ forgave him: so also does he, he puts on Charity,
which is the bond of perfectness; the word of Christ dwells in him richly, in
all wisdom; he does all he does in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, whether
in word or deed, giving thanks to God, and the Father by him, Col. 3. 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16, 17. He puts on habits of universal righteousness, and holiness,
which the Apostle calls the Image of God; he puts on meekness and patience in
suffering; Being reviled, he revileth not again: he is led as a lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before the shearers, he opens not his mouth, etc.

6. He who has put on Christ, has put on the whole armor of God: It all goes
along with Christ to a soul; such a soul stands with its loins girt about with
truth, having on the breast plate of righteousness, and its feet shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace: He takes the shield of faith, whereby he is
able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked: he takes the helmet of
salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, etc.

7. Finally, If the soul has put on Christ, its face, its garments will shine:
That soul will look like Moses when he came from the Mount: Its light will
shine before men, that they shall see its good works. How beautiful must that
soul be, that is clothed with light, as with a garment? Its faith, its
holiness, its humility, its meekness, will be every where reported of. If now
you find these things in you in sincerity, and in some measure, though not in
the perfection of degrees, you may conclude you are baptized into Christ,
because you have put on the Lord Jesus Christ.

Use. 3. I shall stand once more on this foundation, and give you a few words
of Exhortation, with which I will conclude. I shall speak, 1. to you that are
Parents 2. To you that are Children, or who have been baptized while you were
Children. 3. To all in general, whether Parents, or Children.

First, I speak unto you Parents. I have two words to speak to you, upon
occasion of this discourse. 1. That you would be very grave and serious when
you bring your Children to this great Ordinance of God. It was indeed one of
the ends I proposed to my self, in undertaking this discourse, to correct that
woeful levity which I generally observe in this most grave and weighty action.
And here, were I in a Congregation proper for such a discourse, I would beseech
my brethren in the Ministry, to restrain that slightness, and desultory levity
that is so ordinary in this Administration, by their more grave and thoughtful
performance of this part of their Ministry. I persuade my self much of this
has been occasioned by that groundless fancy, That Baptism is necessary to
salvation; not only by a necessity of precept (as the fulfilling of every
command of God is necessary), and by a necessity of the mean; as it is a divine
mean, which in its season, and under due circumstances, we ought not to neglect
(we freely grant both these); but so necessary, that by it Original sin is
certainly washed away, and without it a child cannot be saved; which is that
which I call a groundless fancy, if not a Relic of Popery. It is true, we
have no certain time limited for Baptism. To give you my opinion in the case:
The best argument we have for Infant Baptism, is the Analogy betwixt
Circumcision and Baptism, they being both seals of one and the same Covenant of
grace, which is not straightened under the Gospel Dispensation. God prescribed the
Eighth day as a certain time for Circumcision, yet were not the Jews tied to
the eighth day under undue circumstances. All the while the people were
traveling in the Wilderness, which was forty years, there were no Children
circumcised, as you may read Josh 5. 5, 7. I would fain know how Baptism is
more necessary to the salvation of Christians, than Circumcision was to the
salvation of the Jewish Children? I am sure they were both seals of the same
Covenant: the contempt of an Ordinance of God, that is damnable; but the
omission of it, under undue circumstances (as suppose the sickness of the
child, etc.) is far from being so; it may be our duty, that the Ordinance of
God may be more gravely, and thoughtfully administered. But from that Popish
opinion of the absolute necessity of Baptism to salvation, and the efficacy of
it as a work done, have risen many abuses and prophanations of this holy
Ordinance of God. Hence came up the practice of Midwives baptizing, which held
amongst us till King James his time: hence the slighty and perfunctory
administration of this Ordinance by too many at this day. For my own part,
supposing other due circumstances to concur, I should not omit the baptizing my
child beyond the Eighth day: Nor on the other side sear, that if due
circumstances did not concur, the delaying of it longer. But this is but a
digression. Let me beg of you that are Parents, with all seriousness and
gravity, and due forethinking what you do, to bring your Children to this most
facred Institution. Remember that in it you present your Children before the
Lord; you dedicate your Children unto the Lord. What a great action this is!
What gravity, reverence, seriousness, deliberation is sufficient for such an
action! With what fear ought the Lord to be served in such an action!

2. The second thing which I would call to you for, shall be a faithfulness to
your children whom you have so dedicated to God. Your child knows not what is
done unto it; it knows not that it is baptized; that it is so dedicated to
Christ; that such an Oath of the Lord is upon it; it knows of no vow that it
has made; no Covenant with God in which it is engaged; you have brought it
under this engagement. If now you shall not tell the child its state, what you
have done as to it, under what a Vow and Oath of God you have brought it, but
it shall give up it self to the service of the Devil, and live contrary to its
most solemn engagements: your child shall perish, but shall not its blood be
required at your hands? When God fell upon Moses, and had like to have killed
him in the Inn, for not circumcising his child, it is said his wife Zipporah,
in a passion, cut off the child's foreskin, and threw it at Moses, saying, A
bloody husband have thou been to me, because of the circumcision. How many
thousand children hereafter, will throw the very coals of Hell at their
Parents, and say, Ah! Bloody Fathers, bloody Mothers, have you been to us,
because of our Baptism! you dedicated us to God, when we were Children; we
lived with you ten, twenty years, and you never told us of it, but let us run
into those sins which have brought us into these flames: you brought us under a
solemn Vow and Covenant to God in our Baptism, and never told us what you vowed
or engaged for us; we never heard a word from you of our Baptismal vows; if we
had, we should probably not have violated them, as we have done: Bloody,
damning Parents have you been to us! Thus much shall serve for what I have to
say to Parents.

Br. 2. I speak to you that are Children. That which I have to say to you, is,
Remember you have been baptized into Christ. That you have been by your Parents
dedicated to Christ, and are under a vow to be his servants: Remember that you
have vowed the profession and defense of his truth, the acceptance of him as
your Lord and Savior, an adherence to him, a living up to his law, being
baptized into his death, and buried with him by baptism into death. It may be
some of your Parents never minded you of this: I now tell you of it; and indeed
I have sometimes thought, that one end of Gods instituting us Ministers, has
been to supply the defects of Parents, and Masters of families, in this
debaucht and declining age of the world. Let all therefore hearken to me this
day; I suppose I speak to none but have been baptized into Christ, in the
larger sense, (...), into the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost:
And if so; If your Parents have forgot to tell it you, or neglected their duty,
I tell it you; you are all dedicated unto Christ, yea, and God has accepted
you; for he has bidden us, Go and baptize in the Name of the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost. We have baptized you in the name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. What follows hence? You are sacred persons, not sanctified in a
spiritual sense, but sacred in a ceremonial sense, in which sense all the Jews
were called an holy people: and the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 7. 14. our children
are not unclean, but holy; sanctified ceremonially, externally, ritually, that
is set a part for God; sanctified, as the Tabernacle, the Temple, the Vessels
of the Temple under the law were sanctified. I tell you again, that you are
under a Vow and Covenant, to own the profession of Christ, and to defend it, to
accept of Christ as the Savior of the World, as your Savior in particular; to
commit all your spiritual concerns unto him, to live to Christ, not to lusts,
not to the world: as to these things, you were buried with Christ by baptism
into death. Do not think to evade this, by saying it was none of your own act;
your parents did it, you did it not: It is in the power of parents to engage
you in a debt (by the laws of men), to which all the estate you inherit by
them, shall be liable for payment, though there be no antecedaneous obligation
upon you from the law of God, to pay such debts. It is in your parents power to
dispose of you in Marriage in your Nonage; and before God you will be bound,
when of age, so to dispose of your selves, unless you can give a sufficient
reason to the contrary. As to God, it is in your parents power to render you
obnoxious to his wrath and justice, so as for their sins, you shall answer as
far as your lives and estates go, though, indeed, they cannot withour a guilt
of your own, subject you to the eternal wrath of God: your prrents have, as to
this, dedicated you to God to be his servants; they have brought you under the
Vow and Oath of God, to be his servants, to own, profess and defend his Gospel,
and the truths of it; to accept of the Lord Jesus Christ as the Savior of the
World, as your Savior, and spiritual husband, to live unto him, in disclaiming
the service of lusts, and of the world. Take heed now of Sacrilege, Perjury,
and Apostasy. A loose lewd life, contrary to the Gospel, brings you under all
this guilt, and subjecteth you by the righteous God to be dealt withal as
sacrilegious persons; who being holy, have stolen away your selves from the
service of God, and robbed God of his right, as false and perjured persons, who
have sworn your selves unto God, and have violated the Oath of God upon you: As
Apostatized persons, who have put your hands to the Lords plow, and have drawn
it back again. There is yet a time for you to repent, and to remember the
kindness of your youth, and the love of your Espousals. O neglect it not: To
day, while it is called to day, harden not your hearts through Impenitency;
nourish not unbelief in your Souls: Return, you Shulamites, return. Remember
from whence you are fallen, and how the Oath of God presses you: Let no
baptized person go down to the pit, that will but add oil to the fire that
shall never go out. It will be more tolerable for an unbaptized Turk or Indian,
than for a baptized Christian, in the day of judgment, if he stands at the
Judges left hand in that day.

Br. 3. Lastly, I speak to you all, Men, Brethren, and Fathers, 1. Labor to
see your selves baptized into Christ: you are all baptized in the name of
Christ, but rest not here. Give your Souls no rest, until you find that you are
baptized into Christ, that you have put on Christ; how you may know that I have
showed you that you are concerned in it, will appear from the insignificancy
(as to your eternal state) of Water Baptism. O think not that the pouring, or
spirinkling of a little water upon your face, can wash away the sin of the
soul: Beg of God, that you may be born again of water, and of the spirit;
without which, our Lord has told you, you can never enter into the Kingdom of
God, that you may be baptized with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, burning up
the dregs and dross of lusts and corruptions, which Water Baptism leaves in
every soul. Nay, remember, your Water Baptism without this, will be but as the
Water of jealousy to the guilty woman, as Gods water of Witness, the more to
confound your souls to all eternity.

2. Let all persons reflect on their Baptism: Let the unconverted reflect upon
it, and study it, to engage them to faith and repentance, because of their Oath
and engagement in Baptism to do it. Let the converted reflect upon it, and
fetch strength from it, more to dye unto sin, and to live unto righteousness;
remembering, they were baptized into Christ, baptized into his death, and buried
with him by baptism into death. But this is enough to have spoken on this
argument. God give his blessing.

FINIS.

